"Covering Interactive & Multimedia Entertainment COMPUTER GAMING WORLD The #1 Computer Game Magazine ebruary 1994. Number 115 Simulations Issue Build Your Own Flight Sim With Dmark's Revolutionary Flight Sim Toolkit. PLUS Simcity 2000 E: IndyCar Racing Aces Over Europe EZA:18 Hornet : And More! $3.95 USA $4.95 Canadian 02 The Empire Strikes Back LucasArts Tie Fighter 2907412158 "


"Surar ul Distiny Wolfenstein 3D Graphic Adventure D IIIIIII I LLLLLLL HEALTH AN 9 FLOOR 8 SCORE UUES HEALTH ANNOT 4400 3 G367 23 FLOOR 5 SCORE 2900 LIVES 3 C HEALTH ARO 177 83 FLOOR 4 SCORE 2800 LIVES 3 3 80% 939 Virtual Reality!. Spear of Destiny brings virtual reality to the PC, hurling you into an intense battle between good and evil in which only you can save the world! A breathtaking musical soundtrack sets the mood, while amazing first person\" visual perspective and spectacular digital stereo sound effects give an experience like no other game you've ever played! Features! spectacular VGA virtual reality system breathtaking musical soundtrack for Adlib, Sound Blaster digitized stereo sound effects for Sound Blaster, Sound Source over 20 complete floors to cover 4 levels of play difficulty special extra challenges for advanced game players #saves multiple games in process What the Reviewers Say! the player is there' like no game I've ever played...\" \"the sound and the visual action, is frighteningly realistic...\" \"I can't remember a game making such effective use of perspective and sound and thereby evoking such intense physiological responses from its players.\" Game by id Software. Published by FormGen Corporation, Box 279, North Andover, MA, USA, 01845-0279 (800)263-2390 (416)857-4141 Fax: (416)857-4531 Circle Reader Service #64 "


"DETROIT IMPRESSIUKSL... Can You Change Automotive History? GRAKEN ROAD HOLD 2696 02 1 RSRTA EASTERN U.S.A. DONE COUNTRY SITY HIPS 39.000 TALK NEVE SCOTHODILE COST TO BUILD 3:5.000 COST TO TEST 18.000 TESTS TO RUNE INFRESSIONS AUTOS IMPRESSIONS AUTOS 1958 JUN 1958  DONES, SAVE CHANGES S C0.000 MARKETING CONCEPTS Design cars and put them through their paces with a variety of performance tests! Create unique marketing campaigns to blow away the competition! As your auto empire grows, open up new factories and sales offices around the world! Impressions\" Committed to Excellence in Strategy Entertainment  Impressions Software Inc IBM PC VGA Screenshots Impressions Software, Inc. 222 Third Street, Suite 234, Cambridge MA 02142 Circle Reader Service #72 "


"FEATURES COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 14 20 28 32 42 Tie Fighter pg. 20 46 SIMULATIONS SECTION Flight Sim Toolkit Bryan Walker Gets More Power From Domark's Latest Darth Vader Wants YOU! Chris Lombardi Takes A Walk On The Dark Side In Tie Fighter Aces Over Europe Heads For Home Tom Basham Reports Back On Dynamix' Latest The Keys To SimCity 2000 Johnny Wilson Visits SimCity After Its Urban Renewal The Learning Curve At 200 MPH Gordon Goble Takes The Pole In IndyCar Racing Feeling The Sting Of An F/A-18 Christopher Breen Gets Carriered Away On His Mac Jousting Jets In Combat Air Patrol David Moore And Paul Rigby Fly Psygnosis' Fighters Novalogic Goes Over The Edge A Flyby Of The New Maximum Overkill CD-ROM And Mission Disk Adding More Force To X-Wing Jeff James Flies Imperial Pursuit With A B-Wing Pilots, Grab Your Joysticks! CGW Presents A Gripping Survey Something Bright: Firefall Arcade Inline Software's Macintosh Arcade Addiction The Tour Guide To The Digital Highway CGW's Editor Becomes An Interactive Charles Kuralt The Mutant Wars Of Unnatural Selection Randall Black Explores Maxis' Jurassic Phase Aristocratic Appeal In The Patrician Tim Carter Learns Some Merchant Manners 50 52 54 68 Flight Sim Toolkit pg. 16 4 GC Sam & Max Hit The Road Charles Ardai Reviews LucasArts' Tour de Farce Sid & Al's Incredible Toons pg. 148 Thick As A Brix Allen L. Greenberg Builds On MicroLeague's Puzzler 94 Star Gazing: Big Time! Martin Cirulis Surveys The Year In Space War About The Cover-Bay Area freelance artist Ocean Quigley conspired with art director Terry Soohoo to blow up this X-wing for LucasArts. Quigley airbrushed stars, nebulae and the explosion on a stock star background. Darth's Image came from a photo promoting the original Star Wars motion picture. LucasArts artists supplied wire-frame objects for the ships, which Quigley then light-sourced and rendered in 3D Studio on his 486-66. He then composed all the elements using Adobe Photoshop. Rebel Assault pg. 176 "


"ARE YOU READY TO EXPERIENCE THE ULTIMATE IN SQUAD-LEVEL SPACE COMBAT? The sequel to the immensely popular Breach 2, Breach 3 puts you in command as Squad Leader of the Federated Worlds. Do you have what it takes to command your marines in 2012-ZW(IX dangerous missions against destructive enemy forces? All new features in Breach 3 include a unique combination of turn-based and real-time play; individual personalities for each marine; stunning 256-color VGA graphics; tree-structured campaigns containing up to 511 scenarios; support for all major sound cards; UCMQZW and modular terrain, objects and opponents. LOUJHUC The fate of the Federated Worlds is in your hands.. CELORO THIS SORTIME ETAB Agent Soon 4 CENTATION SITENTIS IMMISCEIPTION 2008 en TENSMIT OBITACK TARGET HEILIT ES EL LIBEL TILLSA11 LEE ISEL Choose from exciting missions or use the scenario builder to create your own! Watch marines carry out your orders according to their own unique personalities! Stop the graphically stunning combat at any time to change your orders! The latest module In Omaltrend's Interlocking Game System, Breach 3 allows you to interconnect with Breach 2 and Impressions Rules of Engagement 2! INTERLOCKOING GAME SYSTEM ZOMNITREND Impressions Committed to Excellence in Strategy Entertainment  1993 Impressions Software Inc. Impressions Software, Inc. 222 Third Street, Suite 0234, Cambridge MA 02142 Circle Reader Service #73 Screenshots may vary "


"110 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD Hard Vacuum Merit Software's Command Adventures: Starship  A Tart And Battery Charles Ardai Slips Into Metal & Lace QQP's Lucky's Casino Adventure When You're Odd, The Odds Are With You e be  144 148 152 Publisher Russell Sipe Associate Publisher Jonathan Lane Editor-in-Chief Johnny Wilson Editor Chris Lombardi On-Line Editor Alan Emrich Managing Editor Ken Brown Technical Editor Mike Weksler Assistant Editors Chuck Miller Terry Coleman Art Director Susan Zurawik Graphic Artist Jack Rodrigues Production Assistant Christine Kloss M.I.S. Manager Gene Allen Advertising Manager Lee J. Uniacke Advertising Sales Coordinator Kathy Garcia Contributing Editor (Adventure Games) Scorpia Contributing Editor (Wargames) Evan Brooks 156 The Verdict On Psygnosis: Innocent Until Caught Charles Ardai Skirts The Law To Pay The Taxman Role-Playing In A Box Bernie Yee Opens Imagination's Yserbius And Twinion Sid & Al's Incredible Toons Dynamix' Cartoon Construction Kit Sends Neil Harris To The Looney Bin The Hand of Fate Takes Hold Of Scorpia Westwood's Latest Outreach Attempt Sex And The Single Adventurer Taking Lessons From Leisure Suit Larry 6 Kids & Computers Software Reviews Brain Food For Growing Minds Rebel Assault Strikes Back On CD-ROM Paul Schuytema Paints LucasArts An Arcade Picture Dripping Onto The Bloodnet Doug Seacat Puts The Byte On CyberGothic Noir Expanding Your Fantasy Empires Sage Advice From King H. E. Dille 162 5 186 194 COMPUTER WARGAMING WORLD No Ejection Necessary: Flight Commander Alan Emrich Straps In For This Strategic Air Combat Game Scaling The Walls of Rome A Steep Climb For H.E. Dille 200 206 Global Domination, Anyone? Chuck Moss The Conqueror Gives His Impressions 8 Contents are copyrighted by Ziff-Davis Publishing Co., 1994, Subscription Rate: The subscription rate is $27.94 for a one year subscription (12 issues). Canada and all other countries add $11.00 for postage. Airmail subscriptions are $78.00 per year. Canadian GST registration number is R123669673. Payment must be in U.S. dollars made by check or money order drawn upon a U.S. bank. Visa. MasterCard, AMEX accepted. Subscription Services: For subscription service questions, address changes or ordering information, call toll free (800) 827-4450 within the U.S. and Canada. All other countries call (303) 446-9330 or fax to (303) 443-5080 (international subscribers only) or write to Computer Gaming World: P.O. Box 57167. Boulder, CO 80322-7167. Back Issues: For back issues (subject to availability). $6,00 per issue ($8.00 outside the U.S.), send check, money order or credit card information to Back Issues Dept., Ziff-Davis Publishing Co., PO, Box 53131, Boulder, CO 80322-3131. Psalms 9:1-2 CompuServe (76703,622) America On-Line: CGW Prodigy: EXPT40B GEnie: CGW Internet: 76703.622 @ compuserve.com Telephone: (714) 283-3000 Fax: (714) 283-3444 For advertising information only, call: Lee J. Uniacke (714) 283-3000 x41 66 DEPARTMENTS Editorial (Mea Culpas and 210 Opponents Wanted Culpability) 211 Advertiser's Index READ.ME (News) 212 Taking A Peek Scorpia's View (Dungeon Hack) 221 Hall of Fame Scorpion's Mail 222 Top 100 Games Letters From Paradise 224 What's Hot? Shareware Reviews 225 Patch File Over There (European 226 The Rumor Bag Software Report) (Baggus Pipus) CWW Editorial (Wargaming The Data Highway) 114 130 134 192 Printed in the U.S.A. Computer Gaming World (ISSN 0744-6667) is published monthly by Ziff-Davis Publishing Company, a division of Zift Communications Co., 130 Chaparral C. Suite 260. Anaheim Hills, CA 92808. Second-class postage paid at Erlanger, KY 41011 and additional mailing offices. Permit #672-910. Postmaster: Send address changes to Computer Gaming World, P.O. Box 57167. Boulder, CO 8032 "


"WHEN THINGS GET UGLY ON THE OTHER SIDE OF THE SCREEN... Circle Reader Service #62 BETTER HAVEA FALCON ON YOUR SIDE. Sestre property of their respective own If you need the fastest performance for your gaming, personal, or business application, you need to fly a Falcon! To Order Call: 1-800-258-6778 The Falcon MACH V: The Ultimate Gaming Machine IntelTM 486 DX-2/66 Processor VESA Local Bus Graphics 40+ VGA Frames Per Second VESA Local Bus Hard Drive Transfer Serious Hardware 4 Megabytes of RAM 1 2 & 1.44 Floppy Drives For 250 Megabyte 12 ms Hard Drive Serious Players. MPCTM Compliant 350 ms CD ROM Drive SoundBlaster DeluxeTM & Multimedia Speakers CH Flightstick PROTM and High Speed Gameport The MACH V Mini-Tower Case 14\" Super VGA Monitor, 28dp Is Complete 101 Key Keyboard, MS-DOS 6.0TM Mouse Including Shipping Upgrades are available! For Only $2,499 12 VISA & MasterCard Accepted Financing Available FALCON NORTHWEST COMPUTER SYSTEMS 63 South Bayshore Drive. Coos Bay, Oregon 97420 MACH V with optional 15\" monitor shown "


"EDITORIAL Mea Culpas And Culpability by Johnny L. Wilson tate of the Industry: As we go to press, Finally, I would like to draw an analogy CGW #114 seemed to be our prime issue Senators Lieberman and Kohl have held between the entertainment software industry for growing pains. A problem with an elechearings on Capitol Hall and warned and that of the comic book industry in the tronically transmitted file caused one page the video game industry to create a viable and early 1950s. The comic book industry of the out of an article on Domark's SVGA Harrier consistent ratings system or be ready to have past was considered \"primarily for kids\" to be printed in black and white. Most emthe government intervene. The issue was even just as the video and computer game industry barassing, however, was the inadvertent pubhot enough to interest \"Good Morning of the present is perceived Both the ghost of lishing of a rumor based on confidential America\" to host yours truly as an in-studio comics past and the spirit of industry present information. Industry insiders are very much guest to discuss the issue. For the record, have resorted to violence and gore as a gimaware of how CGW's staff prides itself upon CGW called for voluntary ratings on video mick to sell product. Both the former and the the discretion with which we handle \"off the and computer games in 1990. Our position latter have been accused of contributing to record\" and \"deep background\" information. was that games with profane language, excesviolence in our youth. Both the former and Unfortunately, a staff member tumbled to sive violence, sexual situations (or nudity, the latter have been the subject of U.S. Senate the knowledge of the formation of Excalibur near-nudity) and possibly, occult practices be hearings, Games and passed it along to the Rumor Guy marked with an L, V, S (or N) and O. We In the case of the comic book industry, they without letting old baghead know that one of without letting old baghead kr have since modified that system to state that were able to survive somewhat by appointing the principals in the new company had not there could be age gradings and combination an independent commission to consider each yet given notice to his former employer. Ruratings, so that the equivalent of an R rated comic against a common code of behavior. mor Guy had heard from a different source movie might be rated LVS-17. Artistic and narrative considerations no that the move was taking place and printed it Once such a rating system becomes standlonger held relevance. Indeed, many comics without realizing that he was printing confiard, it will allow purchasers and parents alike publishers opted to get out of the business dential material. He sincerely apologizes for to decide for themselves if there was a potenentirely, rather than be perceived as part of a embarassment and inconvenience caused by tial problem with a given game. How is this negative influence upon society. As a result, his overzealous publication of the news. different (and hopefully, preferable) to the the comic industry became somewhat stulti On another note, I wish to offer a public existing rating scheme introduced by Sega or fied in its treatment of the human condition. apology to Ed Fletcher and Doug Whatley of suggestions that the industry create a ratings We do not want to see a repeat of the Micro Prose. In a recent review of Coaches system similar to the film industry? First of \"Comics Code\" solution in computer and Club Football, I allowed Wallace Poulter s all, it is different from both existing systems video games. We believe that the voluntary assertion that the AI cheats to go unchalin that it provides actual information at a ratings system we have proposed would allow lenged. It is a well-known fact that many Als glance rather than a generic warning. An R for continued artistic freedom in the world of \"cheat\" (or, at least, \"fudge) in order to be rating for a film doesn't tell one if it earned computer and video games. able to keep up with human players. For said rating because of offensive language or example, Dani Bunten was once frontal female nudity. The same is true of asked how to play-balance a ratings that simply state that a product is for game. Her one word answer was \"Mature Audiences Only.\" \"Cheat.» Asked what to do if the gamers complained, she said, Further, we do not mean to advocate the \"Lie!\" The answer clucidated establishment of an independent panel to considerable laughter, since such review every game product according to an a tactic is a more common way inflexible set of guidelines. We would proto beef up an AI than most depose that software publishers (on whatever signers admit. So, when I saw platform) adopt an informative labeling sysQOLORIO that Poulter accused Coaches tem (with labels to be printed on the packag. Club of \"cheat\"ing, it provoked ing and displayed on the game's title screen) State of the Magazine: Remember this a \"So what's new?\" reaction in my mind. and that each publisher decide on the approbeautiful illustration from our console game priate rating. Knowing full well that there article in CGW #114. The credit for the Whatley and Fletcher were horrified at this could be abuses to the \"honor system\" of illustration was delered at our printer. This allegation, however, rightly asserting that a labeling, we suggest that an independent was particularly disconcerting to me as editor computer football game is not a real game if panel be named by the Software Publishers because it was painted at Continuity Studios, the artificial opponent doesn't have to Association that could review the ratings for the current home of legendary comic illustra\"guess\" what the human opponent is calling. games that receive complaints from consumtor Neal Adams. Adams has always been one Doug and Ed care far too much about comers or protests from competitors. In this way, of my favorite artists in the comic book genre puter games in general and football in specific marketing decisions would not have the final and it was with particular pride that we pubto settle for such an easy (and in their view, influence on all titles. lished this illustration. irresponsible) approach to the AI. CGW Page 8 Computer Gaming World "


"BUY THE BEST OF '93* And get the best of '91 & '92 FREE *As Chosen by Computer Gaming World & PC Games OVER 4.6 MILLION _WIZARDRY.. TRILOGY SOLD WIZARDRY V, VI & VII Winner of over 15 International Awards WIZARDRY, the game that pioneered first-person perspective & defined computer role-playing for more than a decade. Now, the award-winning WIZARDRY V, VI & VII are available in 1 complete package, at 1 incredible price. Three best selling games, with over 500 hours of engaging,replayable adventure, come to you with a savings of 25% off individual suggested retail prices. (Chony CRUSADERS of the DARK SAVANT ONSIT CRUSADERS OF THE DARK SAVANT REDEFINING ROLE-PLAYING FOR AN ENTIRE INDUSTRY 1993 ROLE-PLAYING GAME OF THE YEAR COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 1992 Fantasy Role-Playing Game of the Year PC Games 1992 Role-Playing Game of the Year Strategy Plus Magazine HILCO STORITELE | Mig C 1 T HEOUP HODE CARGO NOTRE (Llunangy. MTUJA BANE OF THE COSMIC FORGE PAVING THE WAY FOR THE SYSTEMS OF THE FUTURE 1991 Best Game of the Year Strategy Plus Magazine 1991 Best Role-Playing Game of the Year Strategy Plus Magazine 1991 Top Role-Playing Game, April 1991 Computer Gaming World EGA 10 are WIZARDRY.Y and Marian cants SOCORDI THE LEGACY OF HEART OF THE MAELSTROM BREAKING AWAY FROM THE WIZARDRY SYSTEM OF THE PAST and Oreater Denon appears! (Uzardry. SIR-TECH Ogdensburg Business Center, P.O. Box 245 Ogdensburg, NY 13669 (315) 393-6633 THE WIZARDRY TRILOGY FAX# (315) 393-1525 Scenarios I, II & III The original classics that set the trend in Available at a software retailer near you, or call: fantasy role-playing are now available at a new low price! Circle Reader Service #127 (800) 447-1230 "


"READ.ME THE LATEST NEWS FROM THE GAMING WORLD Sim Fans—Welcome To The Next Level ARTIST Graphics' 3GA Chip Feeds The Need For 3D Speed ARTIST Graphics, a Minneapolis-based hardware manufacturer, has announced a new graphics chip that may transform your work-a-day PC Three-Sixty Pacific into a high-performance graphics workstation. To Ink Pact Consider the current state of the art: IndyCar Racing, Papyrus' hot new game creates a very intense environment for simulated racing action. To do With Broderbund so, it pushes current technology to produce 12,000 flat shaded or 2,000 Hom Frisina, CEO of Three-Sixty texture-mapped polygons per second. But imagine how much richer, how Pacific, is relieved to report that much more intense, a simulation could be if it could process 12 million rumors of the software compaflat-shaded, or 30,000 texture-mapped polygons per second at a higher ny's demise are gravely exaggerated. screen resolution than standard VGA. While this might sound as far off as «Everyone knows,» the executive told Gibsonian cyberspace, ARTIST Graphics and their 3GA video processing CGW, «that we've been through some chips may well make such simulations a very real possibility in '94. tough times. Many know that the possibility of closing down the company] has ARTIST Graphics has been a manufac1280 x 1024 x 8 resolution on a 486/66 been a very near thing.\" As of press time, turer of graphics hardware used primarily PCI bus machine (an average local-bus Three-Sixty Pacific and Broderbund for Computer Aided Design since 1982. VGA video card at 640x480 yields 6 milhad reached an agreement in principle Their chips and video boards are used lion WinMarks). Games could be written where the latter would provide a tradiwidely by CAD professionals for applicato run with the 3GA from within tional distribution advance to the former tions that need heavy graphics horsepower. Windows, with the game's code written to in order to become the official distribuAdapting ARTIST Graphics' latest higheffectively bypass the Windows' graphics tor of Three-Sixty products. end graphics technology to the PC games routines. This would allow 3D intenThe traditional distribution marker is largely the result of a conversation sive games to run under Windows that took place in 1992 between Chris without degradation of performance. advance was proffered in order Taylor, senior software engineer at Broderbund to assure the completion of The 3GA chip's 64-bit wide local Electronic Arts, and Theodore Beale, Electronic Arts, and Theodore Beale, memory bus supports up to 4 Three-Sixty's Harpoon II \"trans-dimensional evangelist» at ARTIST (MS-DOS) and Victory at 1151 megabytes of VRAM and up to 8 Sea (Macintosh). Both Graphics. megabytes of products have aroused great \"Chris had called DRAM. The memoexpectations among comto find out about ry allows a game to puter gamers in the VESA support on load a huge portion wargaming niche, but some of our cards,\" of a game's graphic wargame sales are not norsaid Bcalc. \"We got to data directly onto the mally sufficient to excite distributors. talking games, and I swapped him a graphcard, thereby relieving the computer of a Broderbund's commitment to the ics board in return for a couple of EA huge burden. Additionally, the 3GA chip Macintosh and MS-DOS platforms, games. After playing with it for a few has an on-chip VGA architecture which however, make it possible for the comweeks, he suggested that we add a few feasupports standard VGA text and graphics pany to have assurance that they can tures to our next generation chip that modes, and VESA SVGA modes up to reach the optimal market for such niche would make it a really killer device for 3D 1024 x 768 resolution at 8 bits per pixel. products. simulators and action games. I went back to \"With this kind of technology,\" says our engineers and asked them about adding The distribution deal should bode Fred Savage, director at Origin Systems, well for Three-Sixty in the near future the features, and lo and behold, the 3GA.\" \"the limitations of the VGA architecture and Frisina indicated to CGW that the According to ARTIST, the chip is capaare removed. Anything that allows us to tentative distribution deal would make it ble of displaying up to 12 million flat-shadreduce the load on the CPU is going to let possible to complete other computer ed, two-hundred thousand Gouraud-shadus have a much larger scope for our PCwargame projects that have been hanged, or thirty-thousand texture-mapped based games.\" ing in the balance since the Fall of '93. polygons per second in a game. These ARTIST Graphics is currently working According to the tentative agreement, numbers approach RISC-based graphic on an OEM deal with a major video card Electronic Arts (Three-Sixty's former workstation performance. Simulated manufacturer. For more information, con distributor) will retain its circa 20% benchmark tests have yielded 90 million tact ARTIST Graphics at (612) 631-7800. interest in Three-Sixty and Broderbund WinMarks on the Win Bench 3.11 test at will not claim any ownership percentage. 3GA Page 10 Computer Gaming World "


"Crystal Dynamix Loves The Feel Of \"Growing Pains\" Kirk Cameron Stars In The Horde Tirk Cameron, teen star of ABC's \"Growing Pains,\" joins the growing number of TV and film actors with computer game credits. Cameron will play Chauncey, a young servant boy turned knight, in a wonderfully bizarre action/strategy game for 3DO, IBM DOS and IBM CD-ROM systems. Cameron, along with Michael Gregory (Total Recall, ROBOCOP, and The Lawnmower Man) and Michael McCarty (\"Sisters\" and \"Quantum Leap\"), will be featured in live-action video footage interspersed between the game levels of The Horde from Crystal Dynamix. The game play portions of The Horde are being developed by Games For Bob (Paul Reiche, Fred Ford and Ken Ford), a group known for high-intensity action/strategy hybrids. The Horde is an odd mix of SimCity, Populous, and an action game. The player, as Chauncey, is challenged to raise up a thriving farming community in harsh condition, battling both the elements and The Horde. The Horde is a race of ravenous creatures that will scarf anything and everything in their path. Chauncey will have to terraform land for farming, and protect the land from waves of Hordlings by building defenses with moats, walls, archers, and several ingenious Hordling traps. Chauncey will also take sword in hand to hack at the Hordlings in fast action sequences. The animation is superb and the humor twisted—not to mention the decent acting and quality set design. Look for Cameron and The Horde in late February of 1994. Gone, But Not Forgotten Twin Dolphin Flounders, But Forgotten Castle May Resurface In early December, Twin Dolphin high-end DOS games. Games officially ceased operation as an \"The release of its first two entertainment software publisher. The Windows products, Nanotank dream company, founded by former Atari and Smokin' Guns, failed to controller Stephen Ruszak and an anonymeet sufficient revenue mous investor, had intended to build upon expectations for continued the expertise of its product-oriented veterfunding of its very expenans (particularly Jim Jennings and Ken sive, and much delayed, Humphries, successful producers at Forgotten Castle game Strategic Simulations, Inc.) and its experiengine. The engine is a 3-D enced management team (largely comfirst person perspective posed of former video game executives) in toolkit that offers several techorder to target the Windows game market nological advancements in aliasand to capture the technological edge in ing, texture-mapping and special effects. Forgotten Castle itself was designed to be a centerpiece CRPG using the engine. According to Ruszak, the code and rights to Forgotten Castle are currently for sale on an \"as is\" basis. CGW has received several reports of companies looking at the product, but no word on an official purchase has been released. CGW February 1994 Page 11 "


"\"The best simulator I've ever seen!\" Rick Zalud, Computer Game Review TENR INTO ANEN REALITY! \"Makes the term 'virtual redundant!\" Dave Moskowitz, Video Games and Computer Entertainment \"Sets a totally new standard for helicopter simulations!\" Arnie Katz, Electronic Games \"Redefines the state-of-the-art in computer simulation graphics!\" Computer Gaming World GO MANCHE From NovalogicTM, the creators of WOLFPACK COMANCHEM WASIMUM OVERKILLTA ES the promise of his paulation action come true! Your commend the ultimate in 21st Century Attack Helicopters the Boeing Sikorsky RAH-G6 Comanche, not just over, but in and around ultra-realistic 3-D terrain. Can it be true? Absolutely! Thanks to Novalogic's radical new simulation environment VOXEL SPACE, which produces graphics 500 times more detailed than any of those tired old polygon graphic games. You'll dive from mountain peaks, dart through winding canyons, and roar through pulse-pounding combat in stunning cond-fillediskies. So get ready for awesome graphics, unprecedented speed, and sweat-dripping, teeth-clenching, white-knuckle excitement unlike anything you've ever experienced on a personal computer. Tear out to your nearest software dealer and tear into a new reality! Smoothies, riches Verrain faptics Over seen in a real-tima simulator First simulator with real-Time comols of RAH-66 Comanche w Unsurpassed speed and maneuverability Real-time fly-bys through actual terrain data One-minute leaming curve Superb musical score and sound LIGTE ACTUAL SCREENSHOTS COFF:22 FLARE 30 0144:22 FLARE FUE HELLIP For the/81P0386 SX ograr. 988/86 w lande gawe rw mogabvios of linear addressed powall Wolfpack. Comancho, Maximum Overkil VOXEL SPACE Novalogio, and the NovaLogic logo are rrademarks of Novalogia, Inc. 19570 Ventura Blvd. Ste. 200. Thrzana, CA 91386 7992 by Novalogic, Inc. All Rights Reserved Circle Reader Service #103 "


"TM WOLFPACK Now on CD-ROM! Since its release, WolfPackTM has set a new standard for submarine simulations. Winner of Tilt Magazine's Tilt D'Or award for best simulation, it has consistently topped the best seller charts, earning raves from the reviewing community: \"Wolfpack can only be classified as a genre buster, one of those rare games that sets a new standard for other releases in the same field to live or die by.\" Video Games & Computer Entertainment \"The graphics for Wolfpack are stunning.\" Wargamer Now Wolfpack is available on PC CD-ROM. The same compelling game play of the floppy version allows you to command either a WW2 submarine wolf pack or the surface fleet. Historically accurate, your weapons and instruments are precisely keyed to the war year that you choose to play. A full construction set is included to allow you to re-create actual battles. From NovaLogicTM, the creators of Comanche Maximum OverkillTM and UltrabotsTM Wolfpack CD-ROM also includes: 58 new missions, 70 total. Over 5 minutes of breathtaking animation sequences, Pick up a copy at your local software store and find out what underwater warfare is all about. NOVA LOUDS LOGIC Actual screen images. Circle Reader Service #104 "


"Those Magnificent Sims And Our "


"Computing Machines rom the earliest days of computer gaming, designers have done their best to create gaming experiences beyond what could be accomplished with game boards, dice, spinners, cards and booklets. Wargame designers tried various ways of providing limited intelligence, and role-playing designers gravitated toward graphic portrayals of encounters that had previously been limited to lead miniatures and cardboard counters on the tabletop. Yet, the true breakthrough for gamers came when computer games could put them in the seat of a vehicle and allow them to fly or drive from a first-person three-dimensional perspective. The first flight simulators used wire-frame filled graphics again. Although the ships that graphics to depict their worlds. These awkward were flown were basically polygon-filled vehicles and empty shapes were all that the limited 8-bit with bit-mapped overlays, the graphic result was machines were capable of. Veteran designer spectacular. Unfortunately for gamers with Damon Slye remembers showing the 8-bit verolder machines (of 286 vintage), this necessitatsion of Stellar 7 to his family and discovering ed more processing power than ever before. that they couldn't figure out what those shapes Successive releases like Strike Commander and were that he kept calling tanks. Here he thought Aces Over Europe have expanded the detail on he had performed a programming coup, and he the texture maps that cover the blocky polygon discovered that people didn't get it. Apparently, shapes and, once again, the technological ante best-selling author Tom Clancy got it. He has been upped. Now, gamers need 486s to reminded CGW of the glories of the wiredrive the latest and greatest simulators, whether framed Stellar 7 in a 1988 interview. the vehicles are on land, sea or air. Then, someone decided to create images out Will the drive toward more and more proof polygons. The same basic calculations cessing power ever stop? Not likely. As long as required to draw lines on the screen could be gamers demand more realism of their simulaused to draw shapes which, with a little extra tions, designers will be trying to fill that computing power, could be filled with colors. demand, pushing the envelope of technology, Now, the vehicles were blocky shapes with unreour hobby, and computing in general. alistic colors, but would-be pilots and drivers This issue, we cover a revolutionary product could tell what kinds of vehicles were being simthat allows you to design your own commercial ulated. By the late 1980s, MicroProse, Dynamix level flight simulations, Domark's Flight Sim and Spectrum Holo Byte were pushing the edge Toolkit. We also sneak a peek ar Tie Fighter. We of the envelope for polygon-based technology. review Aces Over Europe, Fighter Duel Pro, FIAOf course, the state-of-the-art cannot remain 18 Hornet, the Comanche: Maximum Overkill the state-of-the-art for very long in a fast-movCD, Combat Air Patrol and X-Wing expansion ing technological world, so along came a hybrid disks. For those looking for something different, piece of software that lurked in limbo somewe offer a review of the hot new racing simulawhere between a pure action game and a simution, IndyCar Racing, and a look at a familiar lation. That mighty mutant was Wing systems simulation in a new guise, SimCity Commander, and it raised the ante for polygon2000. Illustration by John Ball for F22 Interceptor (Sega), courtesy of Electronic Arts "


"REVIEW LET THERE BE FLIGHT! BETE IGRE Flight Sim Toolkit Gives Pilots The Power Of Creation by Bryan Walker FST WorldCESTITOPGUNLER World Terrain Qbject Path Help Elle Edit Grid \"Now for some REAL user power...\" — Jeff Bridges as hacker Kevin Flynn, from the movie TRON A s long as flight simulators have taxed the power of CPUs, gamers have I Lasked for more. No matter what the state of the art is, the insatiable flight simulator community has always whipped up wish lists that sent designers' heads spinning back to the drawing board. Now, Domark Software has turned the tables in dramatic fashion by offering Flight Sim Toolkit (FST). With FST, the players have the power to create their own unlimited aerial adventures. Sporting the core program of Domark's full-screen SVGA Harrier, FST's intent is to launch a surgical strike on the current state of the art, while appealing to the considerable creative urges of flight sim fans. Power To The People FST is one muscular program. Fortunately, all of this muscle power is casy to harness, thanks to an array of user-friendly tools that work within the Windows 3.1 environment. The World, Color, Shape, Model, and Cockpit editors of FST provide flight sim enthusiasts with far more creative power than any game construction set ever seen on a PC. It comes with two scenarios, Private Pilot and Top Gun, already built in. New players will find these adventures helpful in getting to know the FST world quickly, and these prefab scenarios are also excellent templates for carly experiments in customizing, Shaping Up The Shape Editor is easily the most powerful tool in the program. Working much like a full-blown computer-aided design (CAD) program, the Shape Editor allows the development of three-dimensional polygon objects, ranging from a human being to the Nimitz nuclear aircraft carrier. You can choose from FST's superb library of 3-D shapes for quick use or modification. You can also go hog-wild and produce nearly any shape imaginable from scratch. While new users might be a little intimidated at first x36 glance, the graphic interface and skillful inte7.74. COD 0000 x 23070 /70250 Select oblecul gration of the professional-quality utilities make working with complex 3-D polygons a With FST, you don't need faith to move mountains. simple point-and-click affair. The shapes can be viewed and rotated on any axis, scaled, cration processes, the landscape can be mafilled, flipped, mirrored, extruded, colored, nipulated to achieve very impressive visuals. and edited in ways nature never intended. Elevations can be raised or lowered with a Cut and Paste, along with hierarchical sweep of the mouse, forming lakes and Grouping functions make handling several mountains with a single pass. Zooming in or polygons at once a breeze. Even some highout gives the meticulous designer easy access dollar CAD programs don't handle 3-D to the smallest details. With enough attenshapes with FST's panache! tion, FST can build attractive terrain models Avor A very useful feature is the Parent/Child of up to 245 MILLION square kilometers. utility that enables you to develop a variety of With a little time, the realism of FST's terrain shapes representing a single object at various can rival or even surpass most flight sims on distances. At closer range, a highly detailed the market. Working in conjunction with the Flight Sim Toolkit World Editor, the Color Editor allows you to select TITLE: Flight Sim Toolkit the color palette of the terrain being detailed, makFLIGHT SIM REQUIREMENTS: 386SX or better, 2MB RAM, TOOLKIT VGA graphics, 8MB hard drive ing it possible to simulate space, Windows 3.1 or higher, mouse; supports Sound Blaster missions in many different sound cards, and VESA-compliant graphics accelerators geographical areas. Even PROTECTION: the wind and time of day DESIGNERS: Jonathan Newth and David Payne of SIMIS Software can be altered to put the PUBLISHER: San Mateo, CA last finishing touch on a (415) 513-8929 scenario. PRICE: SYSTEM: $89.95 IBM None Neato Neo Geos The World Editor allows you to quickly construct a surprisingly realistic and detailed terrain model. Nearly any geographical fcature can be produced and refined with the box of powerful tools that this Editor provides. Using a variety of unique fractal genDomark Software, Inc. Page 16 Computer Gaming World "


"113 22 be c! le BISSNias YOU'RE IN L.A. SHE'S IN CINCINNATI. AND WITHIN THE FIRST HOUR OF MEETING HER SHE'S STRAFED YOU, YOU'VE SPLATTERED HER, SHE'S SMEARED YOU WITH BOOGERS AND YOU'VE KISSED HER PASSIONATELY. SERE IADENIE NLB IT'S THE START OF A BEAUTIFUL RELATIONSHIP. Believe it or not, the above scenario is now a reality with ImagiNationthe world's first on-line multi-player games network. With your PC and modem, you can engage people in classic board and card games, an arcade-style action park (including the new INN 3-D Golf\"), fantasy role-playing games, NTN Trivia, or an adults-only casino. Join now and we'll give you a membership kit and five hours absolutely free (just pay $5.95 for shipping). After all, you haven't made a true friend until you've shot them first. IMAGINATION: Call 1-800-625-5353, ext. 530 now and receive your first five hours free. lo docx Il 0 HAOSTALE 2001a _ MAGINATION 1991 ImagiNation Netu ork. ImagiNation is a trademark of the ImagiNation Network Circle No. 50 on Reader Service Card "


"shape is the obvious choice. However, the way boxes gives that Object a finite Parent/Child utility can assign simpler shapes amount of damage points and the to be displayed at longer ranges, reducing the ability to launch aircraft. In the number of polygons that would otherwise be following Properties menu, the \"Fprocessed, and improving the frame rate of 14.fsd\" file could be selected to be the simulation. Designers with lower-speed the Nimitz's Aircraft Shape to proCPUs will find this feature makes a tremenduce. The choice of Flight Models dous difference when multiple objects are can range from user-designed to displayed in the simulation. one of several already provided in FST. If you desire, a couple of ObObjectionable Conduct ject Paths and their attributes can At the heart of any FST scenario are the be defined, allowing the Nimitz to world's Objects. The World Editor integrates slowly steam along one route while the placement, movement, Properties, and her F-14 fighter cover takes off and Classes of the numerous Objects FST can use. begins patrolling another route. An Object can be anything represented by a With only a little experience, an Ducks in a row-set up for a clean strating run. 3-D or 2-D shape, and each Object has a FST user can casily perform this Class, or function, in the FST world. Classes operation in 60 seconds. How's include Cultural window-dressing items that for power and flexibility? to certain abuses when you discover the extra along with navigational aids such as NDBs, performance \"more power\" can really proVORs and ILSs. You can define an aircraft Model Citizens vide! Plain and simple, the Model Editor is Class as an indestructible brick for high-speed remarkable, allowing you to quickly design The Flight Model Editor is the utility that exploration and resting, or as a military plane flight models ranging from the Wright Flyer flight sim veterans will enjoy most. Using this capable of carrying a variety of ordnance. to 21st-century jets. It's that versatile! InterEditor, FST players have the ability to quickly Air defense comes in two Classes, reprequickly esting possibilities also come to light esting possibilities also come to light when draw a silhouette of the aircraft they envision. sented by SAMs (Surface-to-Air Missiles) or one discovers that any 3-D shape can be or (Note that this has nothing to do with the IN AAA (Anti-Aircraft Artillery) guns. Any Obassigned any flight model. In other words, a 3-D Shape you can Sopwith Camel can have a high-performance select to depict this jet flight model. Things can get truly bizarre Flight simulators have always given aircraft.) This silwhen 3-D shapes such as the Bismarck batplayers tremendous powers of houette is then used tleship are given the power of flight and as a computational destruction. Now, Domark and SIMIS armed with heat-seeking missiles! As a beer model by FST to commercial asks, \"Wouldn't that be great?\" have given players the ultimate power determine some baCreation! sic performance Office Decor characteristics such Most players will find the cockpit graphics ject can also be designated as a Runway, an as top and stall included in FS7 to be more than satisfactory. aircraft-producing Hangar, or a Depot respeeds. This model can be further refined by Even so, FST has a dedicated editor that sponsible for dispatching resupply vehicles to using the Aircraft Properties menu, allowing allows you to design and configure your own damaged or depleted Objects. Many of the variables such as weight, wing efficiency, dicockpit. Functional gauges, lights, and indiproperties an Object may possess depends on hedral, control power, and inertia to be ea cators can be placed on any bit-mapped backthe Class you choose for it. For instance, modified to suit your tastes. Retractable landground. A heads-up display and \"Marconi\" SAMs can have their Detect Floor, Range, ing gear, Maps, and airbrakes are also some of type instruments can be easily integrated to and KP (Damage) ratings adjusted, with AAA the options that you can choose from. The simulate a modern cockpit. The useful ILS, guns having variable Burst Rate, Burst Time accompanying Engine menu may lend itself ADF, and VOR navigation instruments are and Reload Time values. All aircraft Objects also easy to place with this accomcan have their flight routes and flight permodating Editor. Digitized cockformance models selected by the user. Any pit photos from real aircraft or Object can also be designated as a Target, hand-designed graphics can be allowing you to determine how much damtouched up with any .BMP file age that Object can absorb before being deeditor and imported into FST. As stroyed. The Path menu allows you to define with nearly everything else in this a route for moving Objects, as well as the game, the possibilities are limited altitude and speed the Objects on that route EC only by your imagination. maintain. Owners of a Sound Blaster or Using these functions, creating a complex 100% compatible sound card can Object like a functional aircraft carrier is simtake advantage of a subtle feature ple. Using the mouse, an Object can be that allows you to replace the placed in the water. You can then select that game's digitized sound effects with Object's Class to be a Hangar, and its Shape any .WAV file. Some may overLevel ..2 (200M) Polygon count = 126 look this ability, but it became one to be the \"Nimitz.fsd» file from FST'S 3-D of my favorite touches for a custom shape library. Clicking the Target and Run Remember when you made these out of paper? EST Shopc. 114.ad Polygon Group Shape Grid Help Elle Edit ENDO CNCO BAN + 0.75M Select Polygon 0.00 0.75 2.00 10:45 (21) Page 18 Computer Gaming World "


"FST Model.myslim Elle Can Help Alrerat Properties AC Weight 6000 Ls Antrame Drag 3.000.5-10.0 Central Power 3.00 Rellinitis 1.50 0.1-10.0 0.1-10.0 Wing Dihedral 0.00 owners of less robust systems begin complishing the objectives. Second, the ento dial the Suicide Hotline, they emy planes and combat vehicles will attack should know that the normal only your aircraft, regardless of the proximity 320x200 VGA graphics are very of friendly buildings and vehicles. (Although smooth and realistic without bogit's not uncommon for the enemy AAA guns ging down a lower-end machine. to inadvertently level nearby objects while Testing the VGA mode on a engaging your aircraft.) Third, the combat AI 386SX-20 delivered a brisk frame of the enemy planes is very weak. Using horirate that will certainly please mostzontal maneuvers almost exclusively, they ofplayers. The shading, haze, and fer little challenge in a dogfight. Without a tracer effects are particularly nice in large numerical or performance advantage, either resolution, and definitely the enemy aircraft are barely more than nuiadd to the suspension of disbelief sances. Fourth, the weapons and avionics that all flight sims strive for. available to users are rather generic in their use and effects. For most players, this will be In-Flight Services An impressive example of what can be accomplished by fine. For Falcon 3.0 fans, it will be a definite scanning a photograph of a real fighter cockpit and then Actually flying in an FST scestep backwards. Finally, the Flight Models are adding instruments using Flight Sim Toolkit's Cockpit Editor. : nario is fairly simple. The streamentirely unaffected by weapons loads, detractscenario. There's a certain appeal to having lined control layour covers most of the indusing from the sense of realism. John Kavanagh Homer Simpson announce a missile launch try-standard commands and views, but is a far of Domark acknowledged most of these with a panicked scream that just can't be cry from the complexity of Falcon weaknesses while providing some technical found in other flight sims. A.WAV file editor 3.0. More akin to a less «serious\" isn't required to accomplish this, but might flight simulator like Chuck Yeager's help an ambitious designer really flesh out a Air Combat, flying experiences in pet project with wildly original sound effects. FST can range from leisurely jaunts to real hair-raisers, depending enThe Price Of Power tirely on the scenario and flight models involved. While I found UC Drag 1.50 0.2 10.0 Plich Inertio 1.000.1-10.0 Altbrake drag 2.00 While the process of creating can be at least putting around in a civilian aircraft 02-100 uc Retreats Biplane degrees half of the fun, FST couldn't be judged a to be pretty uninspiring, a military Flaps Taildrag Wing Incidence 1.50 degrees Ardities Elector success if the actual flight simulator portion mission could usually get my blood Wing Ellicency 3.000.3-3.0 of the program didn't perform. The \"Fly\" flowing. Stall Angle 15.00 degrees OK Cancel program in FST comes loaded for bear with Perhaps the greatest appeal of excellent full-screen SVGA visuals. UnfortuFST will lie in the ability to trade nately, the SVGA capability demands big3-D shapes, Flight Models, Terrain league power: a fasr PC and an accelerated Models, and even entire scenarios video card are absolute musts to enjoy the with other FST fans. It's a sure bet simulator in 640x480 resolution. Regardless that the major BBS networks will You don't need an engineering degree to tinker of the PC's CPU speed, non-accelerated or start seeing FST paraphernalia with a jet and its flight characteristics. 8-bit SVGA-capable video cards are too slow, within days after the game hits the with personal experimentation confirming shelves. The ability for you to show off your insight on them. Fortunately, he emphasized this in no uncertain terms. Domark recomcreativity and technical artistry will certainly that work on at least four upgrade disks for mends the ATI or S3 video cards, but a add to the ranks of the flight-simulator comFST is already under way. These disks will Diamond Viper VLB card delivered effortless munity and FST fans alike. expand the capabilities of FST to include a graphics performance on my 486-66. Before With so many strong points and realistic helicopter simulation, a CD-based EA ingenious features, FS7 deserves to terrain model of the entire U.S., modem play, Eile Edit Polygon Group Shape Grid Help attract some serious attention and space exploration. These disks will also BQ FST Viewer However, there are legitimate have patches aimed at improving the overall weaknesses that porential buyers play of FST itself. So, while the air combat should know about before menac portion of FST initially won't challenge dediing their piggy banks. cated fighter sims such as Falcon 3.0 and F-15 SE III, the future is certainly promising. Bolting The Trap Final Approach Though the ability to build elaborate Military missions may be While a few titles might outshine FST in FST's greatest strength, a number specific areas, no flight simulator on the of limitations may dilute the overshelves can boast the overall ease of use, 0.00M Select Group 15.00 0.00-16.00 all game-play value of these scenarpower, and potential of this superb effort. Level ..2 1200MJ Polygon count 176 ios. First, you will always fly solo Though FST's hardware requirements and An Anti-Aircraft missile launcher takes missions. There can be no wing. hefty price tag may cause some to shy away, shape in the Shape Editor. men or additional support in acthis game is definitely worth a close look. Cow Top 30 Shp83 890 0.00 FST Shape rapier.is OOOOXXXI aa TOASA NO February 1994 Page 19 "


"SNEAK PREVIEW Unclewadei Mants. YOU! SNEAK PRIVATE Games Dreamcon Join The Ranks Of The Fighter And Take A Walk On The Dark Side By Chris Lombardi \"Luke, I am your father. Join me and we'll Wars universe, to betray the many Rebels formation on your flanks. It's almost a rule the galaxy as father and son!\" who've given their lives to secure peace and reflex for an X-Wing player to pop off a T ans of George Lucas' Star Wars films freedom in the galaxy, and to betray the Xlaser volley and cleave the Imperial bastards X-Wing simulation Wing player's own efforts in the original in two. Of course, you'd best retrain your I may hear a faint echoing of Darth game and expansion disks. Vader's words when they confront the dark Most X-Wing fans won't box of TIE Fighter on the software shelves think twice. They'll plunge this Spring. Like Darth Vader standing as eagerly into TIE Fighter as over the defeated Luke Skywalker, extend young Luke plunged into ing his gloved hand and tempting Luke the void of the Cloud City with the promise of tremendous power, the to escape the same fate. After second major title in the Star Wars simulaall, X-Wing is a well-loved tion line reaches out a black, gloved hand game, and offering its playto players and offers them a career opportuers more opportunities to nity in the ranks of the Empire and the romp in its universe is to Dark Side of the Force. With its alluring invite a starving man ro screen shots, lists of new features, and ranfeast. What about the fact talizing promises of more hor space combat that they will be playing on in 35 to 40 new missions, the box will the Bad Guys' side? Well, not only does trigger finger: those bastards are now your attempt to seduce Star Wars fans to betray TIE Fighter afford a unique opportunity for buddies, and you'll need all the buddies everything they've come to value in the Star Star Wars fans to see another side of the you can get in the missions to come. Yes, universe, but it might also the first time your wing of TIE Fighters be a refreshing change of moves in on an X-Wing and you line up pace for the typically do your crosshairs on some young Rebel on a gooding computer gamer. damn fool idealistic crusade,\" you'll get the strong sensation-perhaps of a huge shift in Even if you have no the Force? —that you have ducked under qualms with joining the the curtain and emerged on the other side. Emperor and his band of merry fascists, you'll still feel What does the other side have to offer? odd the first time you peer A completely different perspective on the through the munifacered Star Wars saga. So far, we Star Wars fans eyeball of the TIE fighter. have only heard the tale from the Rebel's WHICOLO 2 When you roll to the right point of view. From them we hear of an on your first mission, you'll Empire that is oppressive, intolerant, see TIE Fighters flying in power-mad, and of a Rebellion that is fight100% 1 ORDISABLED Page 20 Computer Gaming World "


"Real Ordinary ReelMagic There's more to games than a mouth that sort of moves or tinny sound. Now there's a new way to play PC games that's just like sitting in a theater controlling the action with your joystick. It's ReelMagic,\" the new MPEG playback adapter. Available only from Sigma Designs. This incredible add-in board brings the next generation of CD-ROM games to your PC 256 VS. 32,768 COLORS Why settle for a mere 256 colors, offered by current PC games, when Reel Magic gives you theater-quality graphics with over 32,000? IIIIIIIII GRUNTS VS. CD-QUALITY AUDIO Get 16-bit CD-quality sound that plays Sound Blaster\" and Windows compatible software. The 8-bit audio you're used to just doesn't compare. POLICE WEST4 -M 5 FPS VS. 30 FPS Reel Magic-compatible games run at 30 frames per second, TRUE full-motion, so you avoid jerky. blocky images. Reel Magie bigger than life. Reel Magic 1/4VS. FULL SCREEN Now you Say adios to wimpy can get theater-quality video in a graphics. Herky-jerky full-screen image for a realistic, movie-like experience. movement. Bogus sound. And phony scenarios. ReelMagic pumps up the reality meter so you can crank up the fantasy. We've also included Activision's Return to Zork so you can experience the excitement of full motion video now. It's not real unless it's ReelMagic. Call 1-800-845-8086 ext. 324 for a dealer demo near you. Or you can stick with real ordinary. Oh joy! Discover the new generation of ReelMagic games from these manufacturers, and look for more exciting titles coming soon. ReelMagic Adapter PC Computing ACTIVISION SIERRA COMPTON'S NewMEDIA activation aris 1 3 9 D e READYSOFT Curis trilobyte ACCESS GAMES entertainment FINALIST Only ReelMagic Makes It Realm SIGMA DESIGNS 1992 Sono Dess, te The San Dogs logos argitud demark ond Reage is a trademark of Soma Design, Inc Alther brand names and products are trademarks or red trademarks of the picte holders Circle Reader Service #126 "


"the ship. There is also a new \"Threat Display\" that provides real-time information on a targeted ship's heading and its current objective, making it easier for you to keep tabs on that critical enemy craft. Missions Impeccable These new graphical improvements are nice, but the real strides have been made in the depth and structure of the missions. The most common complaint about XWing was the difficulty of its missions. Some of them were very tough and had to be played dozens of times. LucasArts' quick and dirty solution in the X-Wing expansion disks were quick and dirty on-line hints. These hints are gone in TIE Fighter, but so is the difficulty problem. Holland and Kilham have come up with several different ways to modulate mission difficulty while adding depth to the simulation world. As a gross solution, there are now three general levels of difficulty: casual gamers can set the game to a casual pace, and masochists can torture themselves with glee. ing for freedom, justice, and democratic perhaps even defending the Empire against In the subtler vein, the mission objective screen has been remodeled to allow objecrule. But are we getting the clearest of piccorruprion within. tives and hints to be doled out at various tures here? Might there be a bit of propalevels. While the cool animated mission ganda in this por? TIE Fighter explores You Say You Want An Evolution? these questions by turning over the Star computer is still a part of the game, you Wars coin, exposing for the first time the Though the story makes a 180 degree will no longer page through the laborious flop in perspective, X-Wing players will feel text descriptions of a mission. Now, there is side with the image of the Emperor, and right at home with the TIE Fighter game an officer in the mission room that you can rendering unto Palpatine what is system. Designers Larry Holland and Ed question with an adventure-style interface. Palpatine's. Kilham have taken both the basic program By selecting from a number of dialogue The Empire's story is not a completely and the lessons learned from X-Wing and choices, you can get mission information in sanitized version of the tale, though it's not made many small but significant refineas much detail as you desire. quite as black and white as the Rebels make ments to the design. The main interface There are also multiple objectives for it out to be. The Empire sees itself as restor screen, for instance, will feel very familiar. every mission. Along with the officer in the ing order to a region torn by wars since the After checking in at a front desk flanked by breakdown of the Alliance. It is ensuring a mission room, there is a mysterious cloaked two Storm Troopers, you'll enter the cenfigure as well. If you so choose, you can peace-albeit a cold and cheerless one-to tral corridor of an Imperial space station. a region that would otherwise destroy itself speak to him to find out about objectives The many sliding doors of the station offer that go above and beyond the basic military in facrious infighting. The Rebellion is seen well-known game options: the Pilot as a band of outlaws who would subvert the aims of the Empire. Through the cloaked Proving Grounds will allow new players to system established by the Empire and allow figure, you can become involved in a secret practice their skills on a timed obstacle such warfare to continue. society of elite pilots that moves behind the course, the Historical Combat missions Empire, shaping the outcome of the war to Sure, the Emperor has his own propaoffer combat scenarios in a virtual reality cality is its own mysterious ends. You can move gandists white-washing his blood-stained environment, the Blueprint Room displays Slueprint Room displays ih through the storyline by accomplishing the picker fence, but this is the world as the models of the different ship types, and the basic mission objectives, but you can also ba voung recruit knows it when beginning Tie Film Room enables pilots to view those take on more challenges and become more Fighter. As the story develops, and as you special combat Kodak moments. involved in the background story through rise through the ranks of the Imperial What's new on the scene? Well, the the secondary objectives. Navy, a more accurate portrayal of the graphics of the simulation have improved The designers have also taken small steps Empire and its problems will unfold, somewhat: a layer of Garoud shading has revealing tales of political intrigue, of detectoward reducing the linearity of the plot. been added to the ships, rounding out their Rather than enrolling in Tours of Duty and tions and opportunistic traitors, and of bodies and giving them more subtle colorcompleting cach mission in sequence, you us officers making political power ings. The targeting system has also been now choose one of four places to be staplays. If you so choose, you might even find changed. Whereas in X-Wing the targeting changed. Whereas in X-Wing the tar tioner tioned. Each station will have a series of yourself involved in covert missions for display showed a static display of the targetsecret organizations within the Empire, and connected battles linked to it. If you ed ship, it now shows a real-time image of become stuck on a mission at one station, Page 22 Computer Gaming World "


"you can relocate to another and try the misand there is continuity between the misFighters are still without shields and still sions there. There is still only one major sions. So, for instance, if you flame that very much the flying conferti eggs we know plotline that runs throughout the game's Rebel hotshot, Keyan Farlander, in the first them to be from X-Wing. Two shots from a planned 35-40 missions, but the ability to mission of a battle, he won't appear in the rebel ship with cross-linked lasers and relocate your character ensures that you remainder. Likewise, if you lose your wingyou've got a funeral with Storm Trooper don't get stuck on one mission and find man in the first battle, you can't expect his color guard. You'll learn the meaning of yourself unable to move any farther in the help in the second. Then again, if you find fear when you've got an X-Wing on your story. yourself in deep wookie dung on a mission, tail and you reach for the old rear deflector The missions themselves have been you can call back to HQ to request addishield button to find that you don't have given more complexity, and the simulator tional support. If there are ships available one! To deal with this basic imbalance, I (there may not be in some suspect that the missions with these fragile instances), a squad of ships craft will be less combat intensive and will will be dispatched. Using emphasize group tactics over individual this support feature will not bravado. I also imagine that the storyline have any adverse effects on will quickly move the player beyond the a mission's outcome, basic ships and onto those that have a little though your score and your more heft and firepower. rate of promotion may suf One of the most exciting possible addifer. tions—and I must stress possible—is a custom mission builder. Hollins and Killiam Secret Weapons Of have developed a very slick mission buildThe Empire ing tool for their own use, and they are Talk to Cloaked Figure considering cleaning it up and including it Some of the new ship types add depth to play as with TIE Fighter. This would allow creative well. There are dozens of players to develop their own devious misworld more depth. The AI has been new support ships, like space platforms, sions for others to enjoy. Again, they aren't improved to give computer controlled various supply vehicles, and medium-sized promising the custom mission builder, flight groups more complex assignments, so ships (as opposed to X-Wing's generic conthough they are considering it. We can only there are lots of flight groups racing around tainers\" and space tugs). Also, in addition hope. accomplishing their multiple objectives. to the standard Imperial craft that X-Wing Even without the custom mission Missions can now be much longer, with players know and love—the TIE Fighter, builder, X-Wing fans will have a lot to look multiple events, and can have more comTIE Interceptor, TIE Bomber, TIE forward to this Spring. In addition to more plex triggering conditions for their beginAdvanced, and Assault Gunboat—you will hot n' heavy space combat and more gornings and endings. There are new wingman also fly the TIE Deluxe. The TIE Deluxe is geous animated cut-scenes to flesh out the commands, and the wingmen will respond a new fighter that will be developed story, there are new ships, more involved more readily and accurately to them. throughout the course of the game. It is a missions, more flexibility with the game Fortunately, with all of this added complexvery powerful and flexible ship that can difficulty, and a whole new slant on the ity comes added case-of-use. The designers carry a shield system, stanhave gone to great lengths to provide more dard laser weapons, a traccombat information to the player and tor beam, and missiles with thereby improve his or her situational a variety of warheads. awareness. In addition to the new tracking Before flying a mission in a systems already mentioned, each mission \"TIE Deluxe, you will be has unique radio messages (as opposed to able to select its armament the generic kind in X-Wing) to help you load, and if you run out of keep tabs on the events, and the game will missiles during a mission, no longer keep you guessing if your mission you can fly back to a base has been a failure and cannot be completed and reload! (an annoying problem in X-Wing). If you felt like you were playing more of an advenWhile on the subject of ture game than a combat simulator in x ships, I'm sure there are Wing, you'll feel it even more so in TIE many X-Wing players wonFighter as these complex missions and their dering how LucasArts is multiple objectives unfold like self-congoing to handle the balance of combat, as Star Wars universe. The Dark Side becktained combat stories within a larger plot. ons, young Jedi, and it's allure is stronger far as the match up of Rebel and Imperial ships is concerned. In X-Wing any Rebel ebelthan ever. Indeed, at this point in TIE Not only are the missions more starfighter could crack a standard TIE Fighter's development it seems there will be involved, but the simulation universe has Fighter in half with two or three wellfew reasons to refuse. Even as you've read been fleshed out with greater detail. For placed shots. I would have guessed that the this, you may have felt your will weakening instance, the missions are grouped together designers would fudge the figures a bit and and your soul giving ear to that fan into Battles of three to five scenarios surgive the TIE Fighter a bit more strength. asthmatic baritone: \"Join me...\" Cow rounding a single engagement or objective, This doesn't seem to be the case. TIE BENUHBS BEE February 1994 Page 23 "


"REVIEW Aces Over Europe from Dynamix by Tom «KC» Basham I was performing a \"dirty dart,\" one of those nasty little maneuvers where you have superior altitude on the enemy, wait for him to reach the bottom of his dive, and then cut across and turn his six into metallic pasta. He must have spotted me, though, because he shot forward like his MW50 (methanol/water combination for an extra power boost) had kicked in. I grabbed the wire on my Spitfire's booster and screamed toward him again. He broke into a tight right turn and I managed to rock into a turn and fire a wing cannon. I was in a seesaw where the recoil of each shot would make my wing jerk back, but I kept rocking and kept firing. Suddenly, he explodes. Such is a paraphrase of an actual encounter between Jerry Collingsworth of the USAAF 31st Fighter Group and an Fw 190. The complete story can be read in James R. Whelan's Hunters in the Sky: Fighter Aces of WWII (Washingron: Regnery Gateway, 1991), but the experience can be encountered in Aces Over Europe, the long awaited sequel to Aces Over The Pacific. Ser late in the war (April 1, 1944 to May 7, 1945), players can fly missions for the RAF, USAAF, or the Luftwaffe in a wide range of aircraft, among them the Spitfire, Hawker Tempest, P-15 Mustang, Bf 109, Fw 190, and Me 262. With the switch from the Pacific Theatre to the European comes a few new mission types. You may be asked to attack radar sites, German V-l facilities, supply trains and tank columns in addition to the standard assortment of tasks found in AOTP. Depending on which air force you fly for, some missions become impossibly difficult. All missions in AOE take place after the DDay invasion of Normandy, by which time the strength of the Luftwaffe was severely waning. When flying for the Luftwaffe, some \"scramble» missions begin with Allied pilots strafing the very runway you must taxi down! A flight of four Fw 190s may be assigned to There aren't many new objects to see in AOE, intercept a bombing raid consisting of eight it's just that the objects previously used in B-25s escorted by four P-51s! Missions for AOTP look a lot better. The general landthe Allies are by no means simple, but survivscape in AOE is the same as its predecessor, a ing a tour of duty with the Luftwaffe is a flat world with few details. For the air-to-air respectable feat by any measurement. combat segments of the game, the texture of the planet doesn't really matter that much, Tally Ho, Bandits 3 O'clock H Tally Ho, Bandits 3 O'clock High! but the ground detail is sparse and uninspirAces Over Europe (AOE) uses the same basic ing in ground attack missions. Like AOTP, it game engincas Aces Over The Pacific (AOTP), is difficult to determine how far away the but has several enhancements in its graphics, ground is, forcing you to frequently look at your altimeter. In the middle of a dogfight at 300 feet, though, looking down at your instruments for even a second can get you a severe case of lead poisoning. The higher resolution comes with a price tag: more computer horsepower is needed to update those extra pixels at a reasonable rate. The graphics look very smooth on the testbed 486DX-50, but 386 owners may find their machines just don't pack enough punch for Tall Res, especially if they can't tolerate low frame rates to begin with. If you've got the horses under your hood, you'll find the Tall Res mode is a welcome improvement. flight modeling, and enemy artificial intelligence. The most noticeable advancement is Pushing It To The Tickle the new \"Tall Res,\" 320x400 pixel graphics mode. AOE supports the standard 320x200 The first question asked of a new flight resolution used in AOTP, but looks very awksimulator is almost always, \"how is the flight ward and \"blocky\" when compared to the model?\" AOE has good news and bad news in Tall Res modc. The higher resolution of Tall this department. First, the good news: stall Res makes both the static displays (the cockbuffer and spins have been added. Buffeting pit instrumentation) and the occurs as a wing approaches a stall. As the dynamic objects (other aircraft) look a lot better. Where bogeys Aces Over Europe previously were nothing more TITLE: Aces Over Europe than a few colored pixels in the PRICE: $69.95 ACES SYSTEM: distance, the actual bank of the IBM OVLAK REQUIREMENTS: 386DX or better, 4MB RAM wings can be discerned using VGA graphics, 6MB hard drive EUROPE space; supports Adlib, PAS, Tall Res. It's a welcome and Roland MT-32, Sound Blaster and Thrustmaster sound cards much needed improvement and WCS, FCS, and RCS flight control peripherals over the original AOTP graphPROTECTION: None ics. DESIGNER: Damon Slye PUBLISHER: Sierra/Dynamix Don't let the higher resoluCoarsegold, CA (800) SIERRAT tion mislead you, though. Page 24 Computer Gaming World "


"MORTAL KOMBAT KAP* FREE CYBORG BLASTING DINO-STOMPING SHADOW-KICKING RAT-BASHING ACTION FOR YOUR PC. NE HOW FOR THE KRUSTYS MOW FOR THE PC: SUPER FUN HOUSE A Dino Stomping Pc Oame for the Whole Family THE ARCADE GAME  FEATURING SIMPSONS! Aclaim Aclaim Aclaim Get ready to blow the lid off your PC. Because every game in Acclaim Entertainment's new line for the PC is a blast. Pick up any two before March 31, 1994, and we'll top you off with a FREE Mortal Kombat Kap!* Circle Reader Service #70 entertainment,in c. Send in 2 proofs of purchase with package coupon plus 54.00 for shipping and handling. See inside box for details. Offer expires 3/31/94. Please allow 6-8 weeks for delivery. Distributed by UltraTech AKlaim To order see your local retailer, or call 1-800-447-6543 (MC/VISA AMEX). These games are available for IBM/Tandy & 100% compatible PCs. The Simpsons & Characters &  1993 Twentieth Century Fox Film Corp. All Rights Reserved. MORTAL KOMBAT & TrogMare Trademarks of and Licensed from Midway Manufacturing Company  1992 All Rights Reserved. Used by Permission. TERMINATORTM 2: JUDGEMENT DAY, TERMINATOR, 12, ENDOSKELETON and Depiction of ENDOSKELETONM &  1993 Coroko Pictures Inc. All rights reserved. Distributed under license from Acclaim Entertainment, Inc. by UltraTech (212) 941-1224. "


"angle of attack increases, the airflow over the Aircraft in AOE also cannot descend unless no idea what. Many players have voiced diswing is disrupted, causing the aircraft to pointed at the ground. In the real world, as content with this system, and hopefully Dybounce and vibrate. If the disruption is severe airspeed decreases the wings generate less lift. namix will no longer use it. enough, the wing loses all lift and a stall If the amount of lift generated by the wings occurs. The point where the first barely nois less than the aircraft weight, you will deWhat About The Bugs? ticeable buffeting occurs is called «the tickle» scend, even if the nose is pointed up. Real AOE has proven to be very bug-free-quite and indicates the aircraft is flying at the edge aircraft land by keeping the nose level or a task in today's software market. No known of its performance envelope. Combat pilots above the horizon and decreasing speed until crash bugs exist. The screen shaking used to attempt to fly to the tickle knowing this is the the aircraft descends. This cannot be done in show stall buffer and buller impacts is caused maximum they can demand from their aireither AOTP or AOE. Realistic landings are by varying the video sync pulses. Some video craft. When the aircraft stalls in a turn, it stops not possible. cards have circuitry designed to prevent this, turning and flies in a straight line tangent to This isn't meant to imply that the flight leading to blank screens during flight. AOE the turn circle. When flying at the tickle, models in AOE are garbage. AOE actually ships with two utilities designed to address slight buffet can be felt, but the aircraft has presents a very nice feeling of flight. Relative this problem. One tries to make the shaking not yet stalled and continues to turn. Pulling motion in three dimensional maneuvering is effect work with the video hardware, the harder on the stick leads to severe buffet, the handled quite well. Energy management is other disables the shaking effect altogether to aircraft stalls, and stops turning. Demanding very important in AOE, and the effects of prevent annoying blank screens during flight. more from the aircraft usually results in a maneuvering on your energy state is quite Improvements in the artificial intelligence spin. Buffeting, therefore, is a valuable indi apparent during a dogfight. Although stalls has led to a few annoyances as well. Origicator to the pilot that the aircraft has reached may not be overly realistic, they are still quite nally, AOTP allowed computer-controlled the edge of its performance envelope. The dangerous and to be avoided by careful enpilots some \"leeway\" during flight to make up logical progression here is: normal flight, then ergy management. The point is, the tickle, buffet and stalling next, followed Scratch one Allied bomber! AOE has enough of the basics by a spin. (stalls, buffet, spins, and energy Now for the bad news. Stalls in AOE are not management) to be challenging, handled very well. Stalling during a turn can although the hard-core flight be seen in the original game, Aces Over The simulation crowd will find the Pacific, by flying over a fixed object (such as implementation of these items a a road). Reduce speed and make a hard turn little disappointing. Also, aircraft over the object. Use the scratch one Allied bomber! side view to look down your wing at the object and notice how it rotates as you turn. Increase your turn until you stall and notice for lack of intelligence. This leeway allowed what happens: the obNPCs to bend the rules of flight slightly and ject appears to move in gave them more ammo than human players a straight line showing to make up for their lack of skill. In an open that your aircraft has letter from Dynamix posted on CompuServe, 900 NP1290E stopped turning and is Dynamix admits that they improved the skill now moving in a of the NPCs, but underestimated how much straight line tangent to 133. 0 0253 leeway the NPCs were still being allowed. the original turn. UnThe end result is that NPCs are generally fortunately AOTP performance does vary with altitude, so it difficult opponents with more ammunition didn't have buffet or spins, progressing from behooves you to know where your aircraft than the human player. normal flight to a stall without warning, but best performs, and fight on your own terms. never departing into a spin. Perhaps the most annoying thing about Back At The Officer's Club AOE has taken a step backwards here, deAOE is the continued use of the \"teleporter spire the addition of buffer and spins. When autopilot.\" Like AOTP, the autopilot in AOE AOE is basically AOTP with a new suit. It you pull into a stall, the image on the screen bounces around simulating buffer like it magically transports you from waypoint to retains the successful elements of its predecesshould, but the aircraft continues to turn. waypoint, dropping you into tactical situsor while making many subtle improvements. Pulling further on the stick should lead to ations with no warning or preparation. You Its flight modeling is better than AOTP, but stronger buffet and a stall, but instead causes may suddenly appear 20,000 feet directly not perfect. It uses the same type of world as a spin. AOE basically progresses from normal above the shipyard you were assigned to AOTP, but makes it look a lot better with the flight to a severe tickle and into a spin without bomb, or appear in the middle of a pack of new Tall Res video mode. And it extends the ever really stalling. At first glance, this may enemy fighters. Rather than using a timeaircraft and mission types to include new and seem like a nit-pick; however, it leads to all compression scheme (as in Red Baron), Dyinteresting combar situations. On the whole, stalls and spins having a generic, canned, namix severely handicaps players with the Aces Over Europe is a significant step in the on/off feel to them, taking away a lot of the teleporter system. If the teleport disengages, Great Warplanes Series and a «must-have\" uniqueness and individuality of each aircraft. you know something is about to happen, but product for WWII air combat fans. CGW Page 26 Computer Gaming World "


"Prepare for Kombat on your PC! Experience all the action of the arcade sensation! MOOTAL KOMBAT Aklaim FREE Mortal Kombat Tattoos in every box. entertainment, Inc. Distributed by UltraTech To order see your local retailer, or call 1-800-447-6543 (MC/VISA/AMEX). Mortal Kombat is available for the Amiga and IBM/Tandy & 100% compatible PCs. Mortal Kombat  1992 licensed from Midway Manufacturing Company. All rights reserved. Distributed under license from Acclaim Entertainment, Inc. by UltraTech (212) 941-1224. Circle Reader Service #71 "


"REVIEW Sim-ply Irresistible: SimCity 2000 Maxis' Master Plan For Software Renewal by Johnny L. Wilson A cigyan Sep 1902 Jamestown $19.270 ENW20221 ELDEDARE 213 Samic Johnny L. Wilson is the author of The SimCity you hone in on specific problems, like attractSimCity 2000 can also be more difficult Planning Commission Handbook and co-author of ing new businesses or reducing crime through than was the original SimCity. To be sure, the The SimCity 2000 Planning Commission Handanti-drug education Easy mode (where the initial bankroll is book, both published by Osborne-McGraw Hill. The new game also features the ability to $20,000) is still basically a software toy-accity, according to Lewis Mumford's send police and fire-fighting forces directly to cessible enough that almost anyone can feel The City In History, serves as a structrouble spots, and allows you to designate successful from the beginning. At the Meture for the storage and transmission light and heavy industrial, commercial, and dium level (starting with the coffers at of valued goods (an economic purpose), a residential zones without having to use the $10,000) and Hard level (where the city berepository of information and arti gins $10,000 in debt because of floating a F File Speed Options Disasters Windows Newspaper ? facts from its cumulative social municipal bond), things are tougher. Not heritage (a socializing purpose); only do you have to handle the specific budgand a stable human environment etary issues, but you have to be able to handle through police and fire protection, NIMBY (Not In My Backyard) issues, as the modern equivalent of the walls well. Putting that prison near certain highand armies of the ancient world (a priced housing can cause a backlash among protective purpose). In short, the your citizenry. Not only do you have to plan urban or suburban environment for the road, freeway, and subway grid, you touches nearly every aspect of our also have to deal with the Mayor Koch Synlives. drome (the former NYC mayor says he used This may well explain why the to have nightmares about the city's waterlines original SimCity touched a nerve disintegrating) and deal with the underand had such wide-range appeal. ground water system. Nearly everyone could identify The easier a difficulty level is set, the easier with it, because even those who do it is for cities to sell their industrial products not live in cities have had to visit them for one bulldozing trick many of us used in the origito neighboring cities and expand the ecoreason or another, and nearly everyone thinks nal. Roads in SC2000 can be built diagonally, nomic base. Further, the harder difficulty no that they could do a better job of planning a so you no longer have to zig-zag your way levels increase the probability of a city facing city than their own local government offiacross the map in order to recreare Washinga disaster. Finally, some of the new scenarios, ton, D.C.or Paris. You can even connect your cials. acct your lile the Oakland Hills Fire are exrremely like the Oakland Hills Fire, are extremely cities to neighboring cities by building roads difficult. There are feelings of déjà vu when Urban Renewal to the edges of the map. playing SC2000, but this is not the same Stadiums (for baseball, football, soccer, or game. There are plenty of new challenges. SimCity 2000 (SC2000) offers the same cricket), recreational areas, and tourist attracfascination and potential satisfaction as the Finally, the new game also lets you decide tions can both customize a city's look and original SimCity, but it offers considerably on the start dare for the game. In turn, the improve its population and economy. Also, more tools with which to create an urban time period in which you begin has the addition of a utility to utopia. Now, SimCity 2000 contains built-in allow mayors to create an effect on whar power plants are SimCity 2000 an terrain editing functions to tweak the landcustomized signposts for scape without having to leave the City Wintheir cities is a very nice dow; subway and freeway options to help SIM CITY 2000 TITLE: SimCity 2000 touch. The Oakland Hills alleviare traffic congestion; and alternative $69.95 SYSTEM: Macintosh, IBM (early '94) Fire scenario makes excelREQUIREMENTS: LC, Performa, II, Centris, Quadra, power plants to help alleviate pollution. Color Classic, and Powerbook; There are now schools to help shape the lent use of this tool by in4MB RAM (2.5MB free), 8-bit color monitor, 4MB hard drive space, future of the city and help determine the dicating Lake Temescal, System 7.0 or higher types of industry that will dominate in that as well as the former home DESIGNERS: Fred Haslam and Will Wright PUBLISHER: Maxis future city. There are hospitals to increase the of designer Will Wright Orinda, CA life expectancy of your citizenry and pro-acthat burned during the (510) 254-9700 tive government spending options to help fire. PRICE: Page 28 Computer Gaming World "


"through a metropolis is not much different than a Godzilla-type monster; and a depressed economy in Flint, MI is the same as a depressed economy in Detroit. 'The main scenarios of distinction, with regard to play, are the Dullsville scenario where you must build a tourist attraction to build business and population, and the Oakland Hills Fire scenario where you must end the conflagration as swiftly as possible. The latter is not so different than the San Francisco Earthquake scenario in the original SimCity, but it plays differently because of the necessity of dispatching fire-fighters to the specific terrain squares where they must put out the fire. Public Opinion Poll Is SimCity 2000 a better program than the original SimCity? It is without question a superior program. Will Wright and Fred Haslam have addressed the wish lists of nearly every SimCity player that has contacted them. Is it more fun than the original SimCity. It is for me. With the additional depth in play and the proliferation of new options, SC2000 feels more realistic and offers more challenges. It's Sim-ply irresistible. CGW Fue Speed Options Disasters Windows Newspaper immediately available and what inventions terms of the way property is zoned in real life. are already in existence. A 1900 start date This provides for additional flexibility in usallows you to choose between three types of ing terrain features effectively and creating power plants (Coal, Hydroelectric and Oil); realistic neighborhoods. Unfortunately, it has allows no subways until 1910, buses until also meant that some SimCity fans do not feel 1920 or highways until 1930; and allows no like they can see what's happening in SC2000 water treatment plants until 1935 or arcoloas readily as they could in the original game. gies (self-sustaining cities in a single envelopAgain, I lamented the inability to build ing structure) until 2000. A 1950 start date freeways. Now, you can build them, but you adds gas-powered electric plants with nuclear must be able to cross an ordinary road at a 90 power plants only five years away, and also degree angle in order to do so. Then, you can build on-ramps to the raised highway that treatment plants. The year 2000 adds windwill serve as your expressway or freeway. If and solar-powered plants, as well as desalini you do not place the freeway sections at such zation plants and arcologies to the mix. The a stern angle, you will not get viable onand year 2050 adds microwave and fusion power off-ramps. Also, many novice mayors find plants to the energy pool. themselves frustrated because they cannot build on-ramps on triangular spline sections Report From The City Manager or at the end of one of the sections of freeways. With so much going for it, many migh Another problem introduced by the addithink that SC2000 is perfect. It isn't quite tional terrain possibilities has to do with there, yet. You would think that someone in crossing water. Many mayors are ma frustrated with their inability to change directions with raised wires. ED You must be certain that you can ERget straight to where you're going before you start crossing water. The Natale same holds true when building EC bridges. You cannot build circular, S-curve or T-intersection bridges. RE Another awkward design feature has to do with the customized signposts. Many novice mayors want to customize as much of their city as possible, but end up unhappy with the results. They forget that the sign is about three tiles in height my position would be able to proclaim the and a minimum of five tiles wide. new game to be everything SimCity fans could in the more dense areas of the city, placing have desired, since virtually every criticism I signs will obscure the topographical view of leveled at the game in The SimCity Planning the city and actually reduce, rather than enCommission Handbook was addressed in the hance, the enjoyment of the city's growth. design of SC2000. Yet, there are still awkward Fortunately, the game allows you to toggle off features. these signposts when they are obtrusive and For instance, I complained about the meaunsightly (unlike certain stretches of highway in real life). ger terrain features in SimCity. Now, there are multiple levels of terrain, complete with \"reOf course, once you have gotten used to the ticulating splines.\" This means that the for conventions used in SC2000, none of these mula which generates maps for SC2000 are problems that should significantly diminbuilds a series of curves and angles within the ish your enjoyment of the game. They are hillside terrain so that the map presents credsents cred simply factors that should be considered by sim ible geological structures. It also means that fans of the original game. there are lots of little triangular terrain tiles that cannot be improved by zoning or road, Tales of the City rail and/or on-ramp construction. The new scenarios are very similar to those I also noted that the original game locked in the original game. Charleston is essentially the player into a grid plan for city design. The equivalent to Rio, since flooding is the problarge square commercial, industrial and resilem whether caused by recurring high tides or dential zones virtually assured symmetrical recurring hurricanes; Hollywood is essentially grids where possible. SC2000 made the basic equivalent to Tokyo, since a movie prop zones smaller and, as a result, more realistic in monster that rampages out of control FER Backdraft How to stop the Oakland Hills Fire seems to be the most commonly asked question from those who know me and my love for both SimCity and SC2000. The sneakiest way to get the fire out in a hurry is to use the «Raise Terrain» tool to build up the terrain around the affected fire tiles and, as a result, isolate the fire. To those who insist that this is cheating, I insist that real fire-fighters use bulldozers to create fire breaks. I'm just exaggerating that effort. I also tried to isolate the fire by ringing it with water. The flames jumped the ring of water. Further, I tried to emulate those airplanes and helicopters bombing the fire with water drops by clicking the «Place Water» tool over the flames. This does not work, even though each click costs your city budget as much as if it did. February 1994 Page 29 "


"IF YOU'VE NEVER You're outgunned. On the run. Stalked by a relentless robotic assassin. You're desperately searchIng every dark corridor on a deserted spaceship for DNA keys that reveal how to destroy this mechanical killer. Because only then can you disarm the ship's weapons and save the universe before it's blasted into oblivion. The critics think this futuristic nightmare is a dream come true. New Media says it's \"more than a great game--it's sci-fi space opera and film noir at its best.\" Wired raves that \"Helix is a stunner.\" And that it has the \"gun-to-your-head urgency of an arcade game.\" So you know it's not another CD-ROM game that crawls. We like to think of Iron Helix as a futuristic hunting game. Only you're what's hunted. ABOUT CHASED, IRON HELIX For Windows and Macintosh on CD-ROM IRON HELIX Exclusively ABO on UBOID Created by Puished by I Available at your favorite retailer or call 1-800-695-GAME "


"NIGHTMARES . BEING YOU'RE UT TO. Iron Helite Drew Pictures. All rights reserved. Circle Reader Service #132 "


"REVIEW Out Of The Pits A New Front Runner In Racing Simulations-IndyCar Racing Photo by Larry Maloney by Gordon Goble TUELE CH Gordon Goble is a fanatical follower of both real struggle to grip the pavement. and simulated racing. He has been a member of a Caution must also be exercised at racing team and is a frequent contributor to On reduced speeds (such as under a Track and Formula magazines as a writer and phoyellow flag) as in real life, because tographer a car's high speed ground effects just won't work at such diminished Tn 1989 many of us were still playing velocity. games off of diskettes-only a few games In IndyCar Racing, the art of required installation-though we still drafting\" (following another car had a hard drive, or rather, many hard drives closely to use it as an energy-saving in Papyrus' Indianapolis 500 The Simula2000 wind break) has been presented tion. And drive we did, over and over and over 30 43 CAL 1989 like never before. Although the apagain, simply because the car we piloted came plication of this technique has been closer to simulating the actual feel and reDriving Experience, Car Set-Up Options possible in other sims, never have I pulled out sponses of a real race car than anything we'd Graphics, Audio, and something we'll call from behind the front-running vehicle and ever experienced. Indy 500 featured no gravOptions and Amenities. Like a pit mechanic felt such wicked turbulence. Trying this sort ity-defying loops, no jumps, no ray guns, just with a checklist, we'll look through each and of maneuver or involuntarily \"losing the tow» one simple oval track. Boring? Only to the see how the IndyCar sizes up. through any fast corner such as those found uninitiated. But to those patient folk that on oval tracks will produce undesirable, if not stuck with the simulation through its consid The Driving Experience disastrous results. The implementation of crable learning curve, then realized the exciteIn a word, «Wow!\" Computer racing design this drafting effect is a design masterstroke. ment that would stem from cutting just half guru David Kaemmer has outdone himself As can be expected from Papyrus, driving a second off their best lap time, there was no with IndyCar Racing the only current drivan IndyCar with a modicum of efficiency equal. ing sim where 180 mph feels To say that Papyrus' new IndyCar Racing like 180 mph. An IndyCar successfully mimics its predecessor would be machine screams down a gross understatement. The superb driving straights and may well drift TITLE: IndyCar Racing sensation of Indy 500 has certainly not been through INDYCAR PRICE: $59.99 corners. Sudden SYSTEM: IBM misplaced, only expanded upon. Yet there is bursts of acceleration (espeREQUIREMENTS: 386-25MHz or better, 4MB RAM, VGA graphics, 15MB hard drive much more to this IndyCar Racing storycially from a dead stop) or space; supports Adlib, PAS, welcome innovations, questionable calls, and Roland and Sound Blaster abrupt applications of the sound cards an advanced billing that the program has not braking mechanism will PROTECTION: Documentation look up DESIGNER: David Kaemmer of Papyrus quite lived up to. make for some suicidal hanDISTRIBUTOR: Virgin Games PAPIROS Irvine, CA Auto racing simulations can generally be dling and possible spins, (800) 874-4607 broken down into five basic elements: The then torn rubber, as tires Page 32 Computer Gaming World "


"ar 12 15 * 7 $ 9 10 11 mon 1UITE TV1 takes a great deal of experience and persistence. Yet, once the proper technique has been mastered, rewards are plentiful. You must remember that cars get lighter as fuel decreases, tires wear out, and car handling ebbs and flows. Finesse most often wins out over muscle on both this and the real-life IndyCar circuit, and it is genuinely surprising how such a powerful machine requires such a gentle touch. Surprising and brilliantly accurate. But getting fast on an open track is just part of the equation. Being good involves dealing with traffic, and while this too is difficult, it is a worthy challenge that offers a fairly accurate racing experience once mastered. Other drivers behave as they should, and slower vehicles will politely move out of the way of a fast approaching machine, while equally powered cars will, grudgingly, give ground. It also seems that certain drivers have been given some real life characteristics, and while no names shall be mentioned, one driver in particular appears to perform in a dependably erratic fashion. But at least he is consistently so. And now he can be erratic on a number of tracks, as IndyCar Racing offers rubber-burning action at a full compliment of racing venues. From the claustrophobic temporary street circuits of Long Beach and Toronto, to the sweeping beauty of Portland and Laguna Seca, or the fire-breathing ovals of New Hampshire, Michigan, Milwaukee and Nazareth, IndyCar Racing exposes the vastly different driving styles it takes to compete in an IndyCar season. The player will soon find that while the Milwaukee Mile is one thing, snaking through the walled streets of Toronto is downright frightening Apart from the curious omission of curbing, tracks appear faithful to their reallife counterparts, including the extreme changes in elevation at Laguna Seca, where a car will seem quite a bit lighter at the crest of a hill than at its base. the latter should sound akin to a garbage truck being dropped off the Empire State Building, but such is not the case. That racing's intrinsic viciousness is not brought forth to the ear will bring a tear to the eye of those who enjoy a little mass destruction with their speed. Overall, though, IndyCar Racing presents the closest imitation of the real life racing experience that has ever crossed a hard drive. MTURUT On my personal scorecard, the graphics earn ENGINE an «A». 5 18 18 Car Set-Up Options 4S 1.3 GAL 206F Plentiful and effective choices are at the The rest of the IndyCar circuit (with the ready for anyone who fancies having some exception of Indianapolis itself) is promised mechanical aptitude. Starting with one of as an add-on package within the next few three default set-ups (Easy, Fast, or Ace), you months. can then customize your machine. Variances The inevirable meering of mercle with mer in gear ratio, wing configuration, fuel load, the resulting in the meeting of metal with brake bias, and tire pressure, compound and metal will indeed bring about interesting vis-Sassa stagger are not uncommon in this quickly ual thrills. as smoke departing tires, and the evolving class of computer product, yet IndyCar delves a little deeper into the world of modification possibilities. Steering radius alterations (affecting the sensitivity of steering), and chassis roll compensations (adjustable from within the cockpit) are some of the fresh looks, but fuel mixtures and spark advance are not 0:00:08. II yet tinkerable (although originally expected). odd flash of flame are depicted on screen. Yet As in the real world, the driver/mechanic the Papyrus promise of superlative explowill never be fully satisfied with an InduCar sions, detached engines, and other assorted Racingvehicle set-up. Often, modifications to carnage is not part of the package. Sadly, too, one aspect of a car may nullify the advancethe audio burst of tire brushing gently againstments made in other areas. Also, a vehicle's wall is identical to that of car slamming into handling will change throughout a race, as end of pit wall at 170 mph. One would think will the unpredictable flow of events (high speed chases versus plodding, accident filled affairs). Educated guesswork before and during a race is a most valuable weapon, and nothing can replace a steady, opportunistic driver. Though missing a few features, the set-up modifications earn an \"A-\". SAMEWA Graphic Glory Papyrus is proud of their new graphical technology, and IndyCar Racing is the first racing simulation to join the flight simulators on the 3D texture-mapping bandwagon. From first sight, all other racing simulations are pur immediately to shame. Particularly 0:00: 17.04 February 1994 Page 33 "


"impressive are the cars themselves, riding for Options And Amenities IndyCar manual may become all too comthe most part with accurate colors (most cars The no-nonsense IndyCar interfaces and mon for some. are digital representatives of the real thing) menus belie the wealth of options presented The IndyCar control method options are and logos. On the sideline, towers, signboards, vegetation, and everything else is texwithin. Simple menus blossom into subvery powerful. Almost any key, joystick butmenus and branch out from there. This lack ton, or joystick axis can be configured to your tured, creating an illusion of depth and of interface fluff is welcome, as hard core input style. In addition, both linear or nonrealism. racers don't really want to see anything but linear steering is at the ready, as are rookie aids Under actual driving conditions, though, garage, pavement, other cars, an instrument such as automatic braking and shifting. Race this visual cornucopia does little to improve panel, and a checkered flag. realism is also variable, and elements like a driver's perception, and in certain weather, race length, and opponent strength instances, may detract from it. The will serve to keep even the most jaded auto \"ghostly\" presence that goes handjockey enthralled over the long haul. Oh yes, in-hand with the current state of modem play is indeed part of the package, but 3D texture mapping fails to draw as of publication time it was not yet working clear lines between on-track steeds. properly for all systems, and Papyrus-like a I found myself asking, «Is Tracy's LEFT REAR frantic pit crew—was working feverishly to car just inches away, or feet?\", or fix it. \"It sure didn't seem like we In the cockpit, constantly updated race touched \" until I figured out from STAGGER I 30 ff standings can be viewed at a glance with a experience what kind of buffer was M 30 IF 0 30 PF) mere flick of the Fl key, while tire temperarequired around my car. The sentures and fuel projections are accessed via F2. sation of depth provided by the 3D Pitting is an art unto itself, but a four wheel graphics can be deceiving, but But a certain inflexibility exists in IndyCar tire change and fuel replenishment will be these perceptive difficulties will cease to beRacing For instance, you cannot recalibrate completed as quickly as you can rap either a come a problem once you learn to trust your your joystick without exiting the race-track, forward cursor or \"Enter\" key. However, cauexperience, and not your eyes. returning to the main menu, performing the tion should be exercised to keep your joystick When taking into account little extras like operation, then reloading the track, and so consistently calibrated as more than once the the beauty of the IndyCar replay (including on. As there is no game saving feature in the program has failed to recognize that the car eight, count 'em, eight separate and stunning program, all accomplishments. program, all accomplishments to that point has come to a complete stop while in the pit camera angles), graphics rare a \"B\". will be lost, except as a replay, including any area. And, as we all know, a crew won't start spectacular qualifying results. Nor can you working on a moving car. print anything whatsoever or access statistics, With these specific reservations in mind, I An Earful Of Audio such as one's fastest lap, etc. give IndyCar Racing's Options and Amenities There's not much in the way of audio diOf greater consequence is the need for a fasta a \"C+\". C+ versity expected from an auto racing sim. A 486 in order to reproduce much of the new The Race Results clear engine note that varies when power is graphic quality, and 8MB worth of RAM just applied and when gears are changed, a graduto load the majority of tracks. On my 4MB IndyCar Racing is the purest driving game ated and precise tire squeal to warn when resting computer, a mere three tracks were ever let loose on the gaming public. Arriving rubber has reached its adhesion limits, the playable, with a maximum allotment of 14 just one year after World Circuit took the roar of approaching and receding traffic, and competitors in any given race. digital racing world by the arm and led it out of a rather glum situation, IndyCar Racing is an indication that your vehicle has met with A s for written material and helpful instrucsomething it shouldn't have are the necessary enough of a product to push simulations to a tion, IndyCar Racing has taken an odd ap new level. IndyCar doesn't deliver as comingredients. proach. Although the game manual is steeped plete a package as its advanced billing (and Arranging auto audio into a working arin information on the history of the Indy car my Sneak Preview) had lead us to expect, but rangement is a Papyrus specialty. Like Indy and hints on ways to squeeze more speed from it attempred a lot, and even in falling short it 500, IndyCar Racing provides informative a car, actual game details (what keys to hit and sets a new standard. and precise engine buzzes and tire screeches, when) are sparse and somewhat whimsical in And there is still hope that IndyCar will and the opposition is now heard in all its their presentation. Vainly leafing through the become all that it can be. On the Dopplerized glory. So far so good, but as side panel of the IndyCar Racing mentioned earlier, the sounds of contact are INCAR box is the phrase \"First in a Series neither varying nor believable. As well, the from Team Papyrus Racing,\" and digitized vocal strains of real-life IndyCar one would think this means Papyannouncer Paul Page would have been a nice rus is in this game for the long haul. addition in spots other than the program The development team also apintroduction perhaps announcing your pears to be working diligently on hard-fought podium ascent and the like. the production of updated verGiving full credit for accurate engine and sions, additions, patches, etc. tire sounds and that incredible Doppler efThese are good indications that a 0:00:04.OS fect, but subtracting points for contact solid future awaits this product and sounds, the audio earns a \"B\". its fans. CGW 1 WE Page 34 Computer Gaming World "


"Between The Devil And The Deep Blue Sea. 1942 CHALLENGE the enemy at the battles of Coral Sea, Midway. Eastern Solomons, Santa Cruz, and the Philippine Sea! THEY WERE DESPERATE, DARING AND DEADLY! The relentless gunfire of Japanese Zeros. GravityTHE PACIFIC AIR WAR\" twisting dive-bomb attacks. Dropping torpedo \"fish\" on unsuspecting carriers. There's no room for error when you're a naval aviator in 1942, The Pacific Air War, the ultimate simulation of air combat in the South Pacific. Taking on the same challenges that World War II fighter pilots faced, your tour of duty includes some of the most heroic battles ever fought. Battles that will have you chasing down Wildcats, Corsairs, and Zeros in death-defying dogfights. Performing high-speed dives upon heavily defended carriers. And pushing your skills to the limit as you master WW II air combat in an innovative virtual cockpit. The outcome of the war in the Pacific turns upon your actions. Your task force is depending on you. And the skies are yours to control in 1942, The Pacific Air War. COMMAND U.S. or Japanese forces! PILOT any of ten historically-accurate planes, each with its authentic cockpit and flight characteristics! SWEAT over the comprehensive strategy for all naval forces! EXPERIENCE the thrill of head-to-head dogfights with a friend via modem connection. MICROPROSE  1993 MicroProse. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. For IBM-PC/Compatibles. Circle Reader Service #94 "


"STRATEGY 200 taps to dory IndyCar Racing Strategy And Race Summary by Gordon Goble Photos by Larry Maloney 59 The IndyCar Racing default 5% race ing New Hampshire is the most straightforyou that adjustments should be made so as to distance will be a common undertakward of the IndyCar tracks, I knew it equalize the inside, middle, and outside teming for most computer racing buffs. wouldn't take much in the way of modificaperatures of each tire at the culmination of At this length, a complete race can be tion to secure a solid grid position several hot laps. IndyCar allows the experiwrapped up in no time, and with the full car First to the garage, where a quick drop in menting driver to monitor all tire temperadamage option engaged, a serious accident fuel supply from 40 to 3 gallons would still tures while in the cockpit by depressing the will mean the undoing of mere minutes, as ger me around for my two qualifying flyers. Fi key. opposed to hours, of arduous driving. The car load now lightened, an eight notch Various tire pressure and chassis adjustA journey into the realm of actual IndyCar decrease in wings (both front and back) ments brought about a little more harmony race distances is another matter. It is a daunthelped bring about a top speed of nearly 180 in the readings, and I believe this helped to ing proposition, but it is a matter of honor, squeak out an extra half secand an undertaking that all serious sim fans ond or so in my lap times. must eventually undertake. After all, it's really Incidentally, my new and imwhat the game is all about. A 100% race proved car asked for and redistance extravaganza will instill a total received a rethinking of my spect for the concentration, the decisions, and driving line until I got it just the frustrations facing a Paul Tracy or Bobby right. Again, this wasn't the Rahal, and it entails a complete modification ultimate car set-up (I was able to your driving style. With these thoughts in to turn a 180.2 mph lap in mind, I took to the pavement at New Hamprehearsals), but it would do shire with all of the switches thrown (Oppothe trick in qualifying—if the nent Strength 100%, Full Car Damage, No driver held up his part of the Driving Aids, Linear Steering through a CH bargain. Products Flightstick) and my ears pinned In the end, all the time I'd back. mph at the end of each straightaway, yet the spent perfecting a knife-edge setup meant car did not slow appreciably in the corners. very little in application, as my fastest qualiQualifying This wing adjustment meant that my enfying lap of 178.83 mph was 8 mph quicker gine was now topping out early in its current than any of my rivals. Paul Tracy came closest Being a proud Indy 500 addict for several gear configuration. Taller gears would repreat a 170.32, and I quite possibly could have years had familiarized me with the impressive sent a higher top end, and since a good lap at grabbed the pole with just a low fuel but and authentic car handling and modeling New Hampshire required only a perfect sixth otherwise stock \"Ace\" set-up. An unmodified that Papyrus has now incorporated and built gear, sixth gear was lengthened by two keyAce is what I would drive as I attempted the upon in IndyCar Racing. Although not recommended for rookie drivers, I chose the strokes. Now the engine warning light reared 211.6 miles of New Hampshire. latter of the three (Easy, Fast or Ace) default its ugly head for just a moment and only at set-ups. Accessing Qualifying from the menu, the end of a perfectly carved lap. The Race I realized that my opponents were recording On to where the rubber meets the road. The race was held on December 8, 1993 at good but not impossible times, and considerReal life Indy drivers and mechanics will tell Loudon, New Hampshire. The weather was Page 36 Computer Gaming World "


"IN CYBER STRIKE, ALL BEGINNERS WILL BE TREATED FAIRLY. 1993 The WINNER GAMING WORLD COMPUTER ON-LINE GAME OF THE YEAR. Computer Game Magazine AND THEN DESTROYED. Beaten all the boxed games? Done the arcades to death? Try CyberStrike,\" the wild new multi-player game on Genie where you hop into a two-legged CyberPod and battle it out against other real live humans for control of a virtual reality city. The action's fast and furious. But even if you're new in town, you won't get blown to Kingdom Come. Well, not right away at least. In fact, CyberStrike is so easy to learn, you might actually live long enough to waste someone else first. And best of all, it only costs three bucks an hour: So strap yourself inside a pod and come out shooting. You've got nothing to lose. Except your life. GEnie multi-player games 100% ORGANIC OPPONENTS SIGN UP NOW: 1. Set your modem for half duplex (local echo) at 300, 1200 or 2400 baud. 2. Dial toll free 1-800-638-8369. Upon connection, enter HHH 3. At the U# = prompt, enter JOINGENIE then press RETURN 4. At the key code prompt enter AMB423 5. Have a major credit card or your checking account number ready. For more information in the U.S. or Canada, call 1-800-638-9636. \"Here's the fine print. Genie multi-player games and support services are $3.00 an hour in nonprime time: 6 p.m. to 8 a.m. local time Mon.-Fri., all day Sat. and Sun, and selected holidays. There's also an $8.95 monthly subscription fee. Each month, you'll get credit for up to four hours of nonprime time usage. Any surcharges incurred apply to all hourly usage, including your first four hours. SIMUTRONICS Circle Reader Service #66 "


"set at default, and considering the the deft maneuvering I do in a 10-lapper, I odd time of year for a real event would remain in this traffic over the first five such as this, would not be a factor. circuits. But a driver by the name of Lyn St. My 486-33MHz machine with a James was about to discover two things: 1) A measly 4MB of RAM allowed for man can drive as well as a woman, and 2) just 15 entrants, so traffic would be drafting really works! I got a good run at her light. 2 down the front straight and set myself up diMy start was lousy, even though SID rectly on her rear. Just past Start/Finish I pulled I used my sneaky strategy: start into open air and hurtled past, safely ahead into from the back of the pack, hanging Turn 1. back for half the pace lap, and then With a little new-found confidence in my make a full speed run that will passing ability, I worked my way smoothly often put me at the front by the green flag. Dirty, yes, and the program through traffic and eventually passed fellow Canadian Scott Goodyear shouldn't really allow this sort of thing, yet I'll take any break I can. for third by Lap 10. I found myself suddenly stuck behind slow traffic. Fearful of pulling Dealing with backmarkers was next on the agenda, and geez!, some of these guys are painfully slow. Yet the good artificial intelligence of IndyCar drivers showed in a hurry as car after car, realizing what a hot shoe I was, moved aside to accommodate mc. Staying low in the corners, I began lapping traffic. If this had been a shorter race I would've been taking even more chances, but I'd now moved within six seconds of a front-running  Fittipaldi, and I wasn't about to crash out. Continuing to pause the race after key developments allowed me to feverishly scratch down some notes without losing much in the way of driving rhythm, and we'll go to my grammatically-wanting unedited diary for the remainder of this event. Lap 24: Decided to hit Fi Key and have current standings constantly displayed in the top left corner of screen. Lap 30: Clear crack for the first time today. Just put together three consecutive 170.5 mph laps, and Emmo's in my line of fire. Get Emmo! Lap 31: And he assumes the lead! Tires really biting now with dropping fuel load. Lap time: 171.4. I'm in front! Lap 53: First pit stop. Been running at full turbo boost, and while my half-lap lead is a definite plus, stopping now isn't. Pits are empty, and everyone else looks to be going a little further on down the road til stopping. Will turn boost down. Too nervous. Hit a couple of wrong You no longer have to imagine the experience. Because keys in pits and took ten seconds longer than I now you can live the dream. should have! Introducing G-FORCE, the high-tech flight yoke that lets you pitch, roll, bank, soar and never lose Lap 57: I've never, ever run this many laps in control. Activate dual fire buttons, throttle one go. I am one with the computer. control, and more! Lap 60: Everyone's pitted now and I'm runSo flexible, it even transforms ning second behind Goodyear who must have into a fixed-column steering wheel for had a hell of a stop since Fittipaldi is now behind driving simulations. Try G-FORCE. It's like me as well. Maybe he didn't change tires. Maybe a heavy dose of reality. I shouldn't have. Maybe I'm losing my mind. Lap 78: Up nearly a lap. Mario, you idiot! Should have steered clear of erratic Andretti. We The Hardware Advantage UNICUI for Entertainment Software touched, he crashed, I popped a front tire. LuckTECHNOLOGIES ily, it happened in Turn 4, close to pits. Up 6400 W. Gross Point Rd., Niles, IL 60714 against outer wall, I somehow got turned around 708/647-4040 and hobbled through a line of traffic into the pit FOR IBM AND COMPATIBLE PCs. Circle Reader Service #134 Page 38 Computer Gaming World So real, you may have to notify air traffic control. Screen shot of WORLD CIRCUIT by MicroProse.\" "


"From Those Wonderful Folks Who Gave You Gridlock, Blackouts and Runaway Taxes, Comes Raw Sewage, Yellow Journalism and the Subway at 3 a.m. Circle Reader Service #83 "


"area. Losing much time! Program told me to know if I have the guts to try the moves I must \"Press Esc\" and start again! Stupid program! make to win this thing. Crew knew better and fixed my car. Got fuel Lap 174: Went too wide in traffic, too. brushed wall, popped tire. Turn 4, next to Lap 80: Back on track, still under Mario's pits. Good thing! Out again in third, two laps yellow flag. Be careful running under the down to Goodyear and Emmo. yellow-ground effects don't work at slow Lap 180: Two cars out with engine failspeeds. It's real easy to lose control. ures. Unfortunately, not Goodyear or FittiLap 97: Still in second behind Goodyear. paldi, but lots of clear track for the hero. They're duking it our just one lap up and with Other cars very light Scott pulling away no boost back on 9, it's sprint time! matter what I do 16.2 second lead. But he will have to pit soon. I know he will. Lap 99: Halfway through. Saw and heard cars in pits. Checked standings from top to bottom while running. Raoul Boesel out with handling problems, Danny Sullivan with electrical. Lap 130: Everyone but me in and out of pits now. Goodyear took his time—tire change? And little ol' me, with turbo at 7, has a 10.3 second lead on Emmo. I'm running a lor lighter and quicker than anyone with my last unscheduled stop. Lap 138: Into pirs with 62 to go. Went in with one-lap lead, out five seconds behind. Can I go all the way without pitting? Lap 186: Fourteen left and Goodyear and Lap 152: Rahal suddenly caught behind Fittipaldi are going at it just 100 feet in front Jones. Road hog! Unexpectedly came down of me. If only I was on their lap. If I get on me in Turn 2, or was that 4? I don't know around them, I can always hope for yellow. anymore... Fittipaldi took the inside. I burst through the middle, inches to spare! Tight, Lap 190: Fittipaldi into pits! Comes out very tight. just four seconds ahead of me. When's Goodyear going to do that? Lap 164: I see Goodyear caught behind two of the slowest cars ever made. I'm now Lap 191: I pass Goodyear and am on his on his tail and I think we both have one more lap. He's not moving fast. Low fuel, Scott? quick stop for fuel. This far into it, I don't No fuel, Scott? Lap 198: See you later Emerson. I'm now in second, but Goodyear lives! If I crash out now, I won't give any interviews. Lap 200: I did not win. In most cases, second doesn't rate, but I feel fortunate to have made it this far. 13.6 behind the blue and silver machine of Goodyear (average speed of 156.7 mph), and two seconds ahead of Fittipaldi, who was at least two laps up on everyone else. Not bad for a rookie. Five cars did not finish. There was one caution period. Glancing at the clock in the bottom right corner, this race was one hour twenty-nine minutes in length. Post Race: Where can I find my fastest lap? Who can find my fastest lap? I know I set the fastest lap in the darn thing, so why can't I find out what it is? And while I'm at it, where is the printer support? Why can't I print this thing out! And why am I not standing on a podium somewhere? I finished second, didn't I? Is that it? Is that all there is? I've got questions! S MENAS After a cool Molson and some breathing exercizes, I regained composure and finally relaxed after this grueling ordeal. Though still a bit purturbed that my 200 commitment wasn't given due treatment by the program (1 would have been happy with just the fastest lap stat!), I have to admit that IndyCar Racing delivers the best racing experience this side of the crash wall. cow 10 Steps To A Smoking fast Indycar The following suggestions are not intended for use by amateurs. We will not be responsible for the consequences. The vehicle created as a result of these suggestions will not win any races, and is almost undriveable. Yet, if handled correctly, this machine (designed for oval tracks) will respond with one really ripping fast lap, and one only. If you think you've got what it takes to handle this monster, here's the , here s the Scoop: 1) Start with the program's default Ace car set-up and reduce the fuel level to 3 gallons, then lower the wing settings until the car becomes «nervous\" yet driveable in the turns (reduce front and rear proportionally). Front wings should be one-half to one full degree more than the rear. 2) Configure the shocks and sway bars into the upper ranges of stiffness settings (keep the fronts 30 to 50% stiffer than the rears). 3) Install a raller top gear until the over-rev light on the dash just blinks lightly at the end of straights. 4) Put soft compound tires on all four corners. 5) Adjust camber angles and tire pressures until even temperatures across each tire are seen at the halfway point of your first flying lap. 6) Double or triple the factory stagger settings. Keep an eye on the tire temps and repeat Step 5 if they change 7) Reduce wings further until you reach the trade-off point» where lap times become slow despite tremendous straightaway speeds. Alter top gear proportionally. 8) Fine tune the sway bars to assist \"point-in.\" Stiff front and soft rear will make the car loose or oversteer—the opposite will induce push or understeer. 9) This car is now extremely fast—save it to disk. If you do want to perform any additional customized tweaks, do so one at a time or you'll never know which change actually worked. 10) Practice Impress friends. Be a star. Thanks to professional crew chief, Rick Weaver, and driver, Andy Mahood, for their help in devising this ser-up. Page 40 Computer Gaming World "


"ES GUR som BC le RM ROIT KONow Entering SimCity 2000 Groundwork Laid for New City Beneath the polished facade realer. In it, you get multiple lies a seething cauldron of viewing angles. You get to angry taxpayers, broken water import your old SimCities. You mains and other chalget to terraform your More SimCity flavor-less salt. Take a byte out of crime. The desalinization plant pumps lenges that will take landscape. You get Build SimPrisons—along fresh water into pipes you lay in with SimHospitals, SimSchools the new underground level. you uptown, downtotal control of a suband other city SimServices. town, even underground. Now entering terranean web of water pipes and subSimCity 2000—the ultimate city simulator. Stop the presses! 2000 comes ways. And you get it all in gripping, complete with a daily paper that may have you wanting to eye-imploding 3-D. This long-awaited repeal the first amendment. follow-up to our software landSo pack up those old programs and move to SimCity mark, SimCity\" makes simulat2000. Everything that started the SimCity revolued real estate, in a word, tion. In a vivid new evolution. SIM CITY 2000 The Ultimate City Simulator. MAXIS Available for IBM PC & compatibles and Macintoshi. 1993 Sim-Business. All rights reserved. SimCity 2000 is a trademark of Sim Business. Maxis and SimCity are registered trademarks of Sim-Business. For product or ordering information, contact your local retailer or call 1-800-33-MAXIS Circle Reader Service #84 "


"REVIEW Mac Gamers Are Abuzz Over by Christopher Breen F/A-18 Hornet T he number of flight sims currently a predetermined course of exercises to honetance comes in the form of surface-to-air available for the Macintosh can be his abilities, there is nothing that keeps our missiles, anti-aircraft fire, and skillfully picounted on one hand and a couple of green warrior from, say, lobbing a BLU-107B lored MiGs. fingers. Unlike the minions of Big Blue who \"Durandal\" anti-runway bomb at Honolulu To begin the tour of duty, you select New could easily build a two-story home out of International or strafing the tourists on Pilot from the File menu. After a brief pause, their software boxes, Apple aficionados have Waikiki. Naturally, if this sort of mischief up pops the Pilor window which contains had to make do with a few scant offerings took place during an actual mission, these three folders marked Dossier, Briefing, and mostly ports of DOS products-that barely untoward actions would result in a courtMap. Dossier, the default folder, details the cover the major war machines. So, an amount martial and, in addition to blemishing our pertinent facts of our cager ensign: rank, call of excitement is understandable when a comrecruit's permanent record, would remove sign, number and type of enemy kills, status pany like Graphic Simulations, makers of the him from the active-duty roster. But for now, (active, MIA, court-martialed, dead), numoutstanding World War II era Hellcats Over anything goes. Once the pilot is comfortable ber of sorties and aircraft lost, score awards. The Pacific, trots out a fast and fluid simulawith flying, shooting, navigating, and dodgand a blank line for a user-assigned name. tion of the McDonnell Douglas F/A-18 Horing, he can clect to move from the tropical to Clicking on the Bricfing folder reveals the ner that is designed, expressly, for the Mac. the topical by choosing to fly the only curobjectives of that particular mission as well as The F/A-18 is a modern, multi-mission jet rently available theater of war: Kuwait. a hint or two regarding the kind of resisfighter and, as such, carries all the goodtance the pilot is likely to encounter. ies that one would expect from a pricey True to its name, the Map folder probir of military hardware. We're talking vides a low-detail map of the mission area two General Electric F404 engines, flyand waypoint locations. These navigaby-wire, Head-Up-Display (HUD), tion waypoints indicate the approximate AN/APG-65 radar system that employs position of primary and secondary tarfour air-to-air and two air-to-ground gets as well as friendly bases and carriers. modes, air-to-air weapons that include Prior to flying a mission, our pilot must the M61A Vulcan cannon and the AIMoutfit his fighter with a range of weap9 Sidewinder and AIM-120 AMRAAM onry. Although each mission carries a missiles, a variety of free-fall bombs and program-recommended load of weapelectro-optical missiles for air-to-ground ons, the pilot is allowed to overrule these attacks, defense mechanisms like chaff, recommendations and select the kind of flares, and ECM (Electronic Counter ... to the On tomm. firepower that he deems necessary for Measures), TACAN (TACtical Air success. Naturally, the pilot is limited to Navigation), ILS (Instrument Landing SysIn order to carn a ticket home from this armaments that are intended to fit on a partem), FLIR (Forward Looking InfraRed) sandy conflict, the pilot must successfully ticular weapons station. The only other limipod, RBGM (Real Beam Ground Mapping), complete a tour of auty made up of seven missions, spanning four levels of difficulty, other assorted acronyms that probably stand tation regards weapons that are not approved for something useful, and more lights and for use in a particular mission-no fair dropthat are selected by the program from a pool of 28. Successful completion of a mission is ping a B-57 tactical thermonuclear bomb on gauges than you could shake a Gravis defined as meeting the mission goals, returnthat pesky SAM site. In addition to weapons, Mouse Stick at. ing to friendly territory alive Whew! Surely you can imagine an aircraft (this doesn't mean that the F/A-18 Hornet lugging about this kind of technology would plane needs to be in pristine require a healthy amount of training by percondition or even recoverTITLE: F/A-18 Hornet PRICE: $79.95 spective pilots. Just so. Fortunately, that able). and not having deSYSTEM: Macintosh training is a simple \"Command-T away. stroyed REQUIREMENTS: 68020 or better, 4MB RAM, any friendly System 6 or higher The pilot in training is whisked off to the property along the way. The PROTECTION: Manual look-up. Access code is provided with retum of balmy environs of Hawaii, where he practices missions cover everything registration card. DESIGNER: Trey Smith such skills as airbase and carrier take-offs and from offensive and defensive Publisher: landings, navigation, and air-to-air and airstrikes to escort duties to esP.O. Box 797306 Dallas, TX 75379 to-ground combat. During this period, alcapes from enemy bases. In (214) 699-7400 though the young ensign is advised to follow cach mission, enemy resisLOR! mm ta NTRU VIDEO Graphic Simulations Page 42 Computer Gaming World "


"TATU FIN 190 TE Holi soos 2 GREE OOOOO til to IN MAN one has the option to load an extra fuel tank Douglass' Hornet owners manual speaks to mounted video image the second or two prior and an FLIR pod. their attention to detail. In most cases, this to immolation. Such is the world of F/A-18 Once the aircraft is fueled, it's off into the detail pays off in a great gaming environment, Hornet. bude the angular but at other times, one wishes that things had \"The key to survival in an unprotected Horbrown and blue—yonder. been fudged a bit. net (meaning you haven't invoked any of the Take the cockpit, for instance. Rather than included cheats that make your fighter invulFrom The Left Side of the Aircraft cram the necessary monitors, gauges, and innerable to attack) is flying low and keeping an You'll See... dicarors into an unrealistic single-screen view, eye on the radar screen. Here's where the the designers elected to provide two views: inconvenience of the Look Down View beAs with most flight simulators, the outside side The Cockpit View that incorporates the cancomes readily apparent. Because the current world is represented as trapezoidal mounversion of FIA-18 Hornet, in a tribtains, rhomboid seas, and quadrilateral deute to accuracy, offers no way to serts. Graphic Simulations has atrempted to automatically maintain an altitude add a bit of spice to the scenery by including below 100 feet-Auto Pilot, once the occasional oil field, jeep, and collection of engaged, thrusts the aircraft to palm trees and sand dunes. These graphic 1,000 feet, where the pilot becomes elements are present strictly as window-dressso much flying meat—the pilot ing and are not representations of \"real\" obmust hold the stick with a grip of jects that can have an effect on your well iron. In a low-altitude run when an being. To put it plainly, a willing pilot could electro-optical missile is required, blast through a grove of date palms ar an the pilot has to switch views, home altitude of eight feet and emerge with no in on the target using the missile's damage to fighter or flora. camera view in the MPCD, and Although the surroundings are less than hope that his hand has not strayed captivating, there are plenty of ways to view on the stick. At this point, one them. From inside the cockpit, the pilot has opy, HUD, and weapons and navigation wonders if the real thing wouldn't be easier to eight 45-degree lateral views around the airscreens; and the Look Down View that concraft as well as one above. A number of extertains the MultiPurpose Color Display nal views are also available. These include (MPCD), engine and fuel displays, and anaA pilot's first forays into Kuwait may reinperspectives from the enemy, nearest ground log gauges. The trade off of this split view is force this notion. Because the simulation is so viewpoint, wingman, and a four-position rothat although the integrity of the Hornet's complex and detailed, the initial learning tatable camera. For those CNN highlight films, Chase Weapon and Weapon-Eye views extremely inconvenient to take your eye extremely inconvenient to take your eyes off chooses to fly without the benefit of cheating can also be selected. These views are importhe road. This difficulty is compounded when the road. This can reasonably expect to lose dozens of pilors tant for more than gawking at the scenery: in you consider the kind of simulation we re before making the big breakthrough. Once some cases, there is no radar tracking of in dealing with. that breakthrough comes, though, everything coming missiles, and it's up to the pilot to Modern Warfare changes. It suddenly becomes clear that this spot telltale vapor trails. The F/A-18 Hornet is a modern jet fighter is a simulation of strategy as much as of flight. The Buzz on Hornet What previously seemed impossible is now that operates under modern wartime conditions. Graphic Simulations has incorporated only challenging. It's true that dog-fight enHornet sports the features found in the best these conditions into its model and has prothusiasts accustomed to drawing a visual bead of today's flight sims: Network Play (Appleduced a simulation that is very different from on their enemies may be disappointed by this Talk and Apple Remote Access support), the dog-fighting sims to which we've grown impersonal approach to warfare, but for those filmed replay of last mission complete with customed in the good old analoo days of pilots willing to move into the modern age of multiple views, determination of the compeflying by stick, we were allowed the luxury of air combat, F/A-18 Hornet provides an eyerence of your enemy and the lethalness of engaging our enemies at a reasonable altitude, opening and eminently flyable simulation. ground weapons, support for external conwithin sight of each other, machine to ma cow trollers such as the Gravis MouseStick and chine. No longer. Thrustmaster system, multiple monitors, and the ability to make your aircraft more or less Today, most air fighters might as susceptible to enemy attack. Admittedly, this well carry bumper stickers on their is a pretty powerful feature set, but all the tailpipes that state, \"If you can read features in the world don't mean diddley if this, I'm dead.\" A modern mission the plane flies like a brick or the scenery is comprised of listening for the strobes by. No worries here_Hornet feels tell-tale radar targeting beep that grear. There is absolutely no problem with indicates your enemy is as good as frame rate, the action is very fluid, and switchgone, unleashing your missiles, ing from one view to another is seamless. In and heading home for a warm supaddition to making the action smooth, Horper. As was revealed in the U.N.'s net's designers have taken pains to get the little latest conflict, the only way to get BILE things right. Everything from the interior of a decent look at your adversary is the cockpit to the inclusion of McDonnell to check his horrified, missileFebruary 1994 Page 43 "


".95 MACH, NINETY FEET ABOVE THE GROUND, BOTH SIDES TRYING TO SHOOT HIM DOWN. WOUNDED IN THE ARM, KAPITAN ALEXANDER ZUYEV GUIDED HIS MiG-29 TO FREEDOM LEFT-HANDED. COULD YOU? Turkish air defenses to land safely on a civilian airfield in Turkey. On May 20, 1989 MiG-29 pilot Alexander The pilot who wrote the book on the MiG-29, Zuyev began Alexander Zuyev, tells a desperate his harrowing story (including authentic plan to steal Soviet dogfighting tactics) in Fulcrum the Soviet from Warner Books. Union's most advanced combat aircraft and fly it to political asylum. THE FINEST TECHNOLOGY RUBLES CAN BUY The plane he flew is the MiG29 Fulcrum, the crowning achievement of Soviet aeronautics. Now, with NOTHING WAS LOST IN TH TRANSLATION The flight model was pa terned after actual Mikoya Gurevich (MiG) design speSo you can be sure th every system and eve control is painsta ingly accura all the wa 315 Ittir Arm s down the Russian-accent cockpit warnings. Shot in a life and death struggle with the sentry, Zuyev managed to take off. Then, flying dangerously low to avoid radar, he eluded pursuing fighters and deadly Soviet and MiG-29: Deadly Adversary of of Falcon 3.0,\" Spectrum HoloBytes add-on to Falcon 3.0, you can climb into the cockpit of the F-16's nemesis. IT'LL TEST YOUR SKILL AND YOUR PATRIOTISM Unlike the F-16, the MiGisn't a fly-by-wire aircraft, so For Visa/MasterCard orders call 24 hours a day, 7 days a week: (800) 695-GAME. For technical questions call (510) 522-1164 (M-F: 9AM-5PM Pacific Time). "


"Next time you have an F-16 glued to your tail, try the MiG-29 's \"Cobra\" maneuver: Now you can choose from multiple aircraft, multiple theaters, even which side of the conflict to fight on. And you can 3) You abruptly pitch the nose go head-to-head back to level flight. Now over a modem or you're on his with up to six six, with a little score to settle. 1) You pull up past a 90 2) Your alpha airspeed climb. drops rapidly; the F-16 zooms past. THE ELECTRONIC BATTLEFIELD SERIES: THE ULTIMATE CYBER-BATTLEFIELD EBS is the first series of interconnecting simulations. Each title works with the others to bring you closer to the real thing players over a network. It all begins when you add on MiG-29 to Falcon 3.0. Anything more realistic wouldn't be a simulation. AO aspin. INTRODUCING MIG-29 computer never imits your conrol inputs, whether nspired or foolish. ts twin Isotov RD-33 engines produce 36,600 bs. of thrust, to the F-16's 25,000. And superb aeroHynamics make it controlable at low speeds and nigh angles of attack that vould have enemy pilots The most fearSPECTRUM fightnt ing to sa human HEAD ne. With avoid EBS, up to sia layers can go ead-to-head. HOLOBYTE THEY WON'T EVEN KNOW WHAT HIT THEM Your MiG's IRST (Infrared Search and Track) system an track an F-16 without evealing your presence on his threat display. So you can get on his six o'clock before me even knows you're there. Once in range, you'll be able o lock on to the Falcon just by turning to look at him with the MiG-29's helmet mounted sight. Then call pusk\" (launch) as you fire nissiles or \"ogon\" (firing) as ou ventilate him with your computer-accurate 30mm cun. Either way, his plane will un. Either way, his plane will make a satisfying crunch vhen it hits the ground. OE NODTA MiG-29 Choose your weapon. The Falcon is lethal at long distances. The Fulcrum, deadly closein. Now you can fly for either side. FALCON READLOVERAVACON 30 Spectrum Malatyte Spretrum Holly MiG-29 add-on requires Falcon 30. Available on IBM compatibles. Spectrum HoloByte LIGITUR MiG-29 FALCON FALCON20 TRAINER ELECTRONIC BATTLEFIELD SERIES The fight of your life. Circle Reader Service #131 "


"REVIEW 30 SECONDS OVER BAGHDAD Psygnosis' Combat Air Patrol Locks Onto The Amiga by David Moore and Paul Rigby miga flight simulation enthusiasts The game plays very smoothly on a standThe weapons selection interface uses the time have always suffered from a lack of ard A500/600, but players with accelerated honored convention of dragging weapons I quality flight simulations. The PC has machines (such as 68030-based computers) onto the pylons of an aircraft seen from the basked in the glory of Falcon 3.0 and Accs of will encounter a rare problem in the flight sim head-on view. The weapons variety is quite the Pacific while the Amiga has had to endure world the game is unplayably fast! To remimpressive, particularly on the Hornet, which a serious \"sim-deprivation.\" Ever the chamedy this, Psygnosis has thoughtfully put a may choose from 15 different types of hardpion of Amiga gamers in the U.S. and abroad, constant speed option on the configuration ware. Psygnosis bas attempted to ride to the rescue menu that limits the speed of the game while One maior fault in the manual is that it does with the release of Combat Air Patrol. Al retaining frame rate. not offer enough information on the many The game is divided into three weapon types. One can't tell why one weapon sections Training, Single Misshould be used over another. (See Raiding the sions, and the Campaign. The Larder for more information on weapons.) Training option allows you to try This is a general reflection on the manual as out very tricky carrier landings a whole. While not bad, it is at best patchy (both day and night), air to air and does not compare with a standard Dyrefuelings (equally tricky), and banamix or Microprose flight simulation mansic air-to-air and air-to-ground ual. techniques. The two jet cockpits are very nicely renThe Single Missions option aldered, with the F-18 looking the more modlows such missions as attacking a ern of the two. There is an impressive range train, bridge-busting, airfield atof views, from full 360 internal view to a tack, SAM suppression and the range of dramatic external views including like. The final option, the Camone that enables you to follow a bomb or though Psygnosis's first attempt at a complex paign, challenges you with the job missile to its target. air combat simulator, they have nevertheless of removing the Iraqis from Kuwait and is the managed to come up with a few new twists real meat of the package. Here, a strategy can During flight, the aircraft handle well, with that should interest Amiga flight sim enthube devised, air attacks planned, and orders be devised, air attacks planned, and orders an appre an appreciable amount of inertia when magiven to coalition ground units. It neuvering. Also, speed is quickly lost when siasts. Combat Air Patrol (CAP) is set within the is easy to see that CAPis more than Combat Air Patrol Desert Storm air campaign of 17 Jan to 28 just a basic flight simulation. Feb 1991. More specifically, it simulates F-18 Before cach mission, you receive and F-14 missions from the USS Theodore information on friendly aircraft SAMBAT Combat Air Patrol Roosevelt (CVN-71) during this period. You flying with you, as well as a reconSYSTEM: have the choice of flying either attack misnaissance film of the target. It's sions in the F-18 Hornet or air defense and always nice to have a few Tomcats PROTECTION: Documentation look up reconnaissance missions in the F-14 Tomcat. in tow when flying an attack misPsygnosis Cambridge, MA Both aircraft will be in demand throughout sion in an F-18, or to have a few (617) 497-5457 the course of the game, so it is best to log into mental snapshots of your target IMG the game as two separate pilots. when going in for a bombing run. TITLE: PRICE: $49.95 Amiga REQUIREMENTS: IMB RAM Ed Scio DESIGNER: PUBLISHER: AUWA Page 46 Computer Gaming World "


"climbing or in tight turns. The sound effects dressed in brown. Both sides are are good, especially the digitized voices adviscomposed of five different types of ing the pilot of the next waypoint heading, units: Infantry, Mechanized Infanand there are some great visual effects. The try, Tank, Mobile Artillery and night flying is particularly atmospheric, with Supply. By clicking on an informatracers arcing up from the target and lights tion icon, the status of all units can twinkling in the distance. be seen. Each one has a rating in When a target has been hit, the mission can five categories: Strength, Morale, cither be ended, or you can fly back to the Supply, Arms and Fuel. Of course, carrier, which is, of course, what all \"real\" a unit's fuel decreases the further it pilots will do. The carrier landing is, in my travels, its strength is depleted by view, the best rendition yer seen on the battle, and its morale will be afAmiga, and the night landing is a real test offected by how successful the unit is coordination and nerve. Once back aboard in battle. For the Coalition forces, the carrier, the TARPS film of your target will cach of the categories is measured be shown and damage will be assessed-a very as a percentage, whereas the Iraqi forces just nice touch. have High, Medium or Low as a guide to an The ultimate challenge of the game is the assessment of their strength. Campaign. In this mode you act as both T o move friendly units around the map you combat pilot and coalition ground force comsimply click on the compass face to select a mander-a tall order in real life. When the direction and then click on the unit to move. Campaign is begun, the bricting room proWhen a friendly unit moves into an area vides details of the first target of the war. The occupied by an Iraqi unit, battle commences. first missions are identical to those in the What you actually see is the final combat resolution, as one of the symbols disappears and the victor remains with suitably depleted at tributes. Common sense needs to be applied in this strategic area in that an infantry unit is unlikely to fare well against a tank unit. When a unit's stock of fuel and weapons is low, supply units (especially captured enemy supply units), can help keep the war machine rolling, You can order artillery and tank units to barrage enemy units up to three cells away (a cell being the distance a unit can move in one turn). As for the real life Coalition, Single Mission flights, but there are one or your initial objective is the ejection of Iraqi two extras that will not have been seen before. forces from Kuwait. Afterwards, you can call There is a printer in the crew room that will a cease fire, as happened historically, or go on provide weather information for the target into Irag to defeat Saddam Hussein comarea, and a computer terminal that offers pletely, as some people wanted to happen. access to the TAMPS—Tactical Aircraft Mission Planning System. This gadget supplies a The interface between the flight simulator 3-D representation of the mission route toand the strategy game is provided in the gether with any threats. It allows the move\"War Room.\" Here, you can order air strikes ment of waypoints, the possibility to add or against enemy ground forces up to three remove waypoints, the repositioning of the targets per day—and you can select certain KC-10 refueling tanker to a preferable locatactical strikes against Infantry, Mech Infantion and so on. Although not a detailed mistry, Tanks, Supply and Artillery. Other tactision planner, TAMPS does add an extra cal missions, such as strikes against SAM sites, dimension to the game. AAA sites, road and rail convoys, and all Before the mission is flown, the War Room strategic strikes against airfields, bridges and can be visited where the ground phase of the factories are outside of your planning control. war is planned. A map of Kuwait can be seen The resultant mission make-up means that together with the surrounding areas of norththe missions that you have personally targeted ern Saudi Arabia and Southern Iraq. Occupywill be mixed in with missions that you have ing Kuwait are the Iraqi forces shown as blue, no control over. When a successful mission and opposing them are the Coalition forces has been flown against a target, you can see the effects of your strike on the War Room map. If it was a successful mission, the target's attributes will have been reduced, giving friendly ground forces an easier task, or the enemy will have disappeared off the map altogether allowing the Coalition forces to proceed unhindered. This method does give an impression of supporting friendly ground forces, but is not as successful as the troop support implementation in Domark's AV-8B Harrier enginc. Combat Air Patrol is a reasonable flight simulator with a few new twists, a sort of souped-up Interceptor tied to a rather basic wargame. It would have been vastly improved had all targets appeared on the map, allowing you to schedule all of the missions, possibly assigning targers for other aircraft. A much better manual is also needed. For instance, a lot of the points covered in this review regarding the Campaign and Weapons Delivery were not explained adequately in the manual. Overall, the game has much to like despite its flaws. What is disappointing is that CAP could have been greatly improved quite casily. Having said that, Combat Air Patrol is a good first effort from a company with no background in flight simulations. I only hope they keep plugging away at the genre. Problems With Protection The answers to the copy protection questions asked on boot-up can be found on the first page of every chapter. The manual does not tell you this, and the necessary data is very easy to miss. More than one reviewer has been fooled by this. None of the UK magazines managed to convey the solution to this problem, and Psygnosis released 5,000 games before the problem was brought to their attention. Inquiries to Psygnosis resulted in an assurance that an addendum sheer is now enclosed with the game to eliminate any possible problems. February 1994 Page 47 "


"Raiding The Larder The weapons available for the F-18 include: Vulcan M61 Cannon-used for close dogfighting and useful against soft targets such as infantry, trucks, trains AIMSM Sidewinder-close range air to air heat seeking missile AIM7 Sparrow-medium to long range air to air missile AGM 62 Walleye-TV guided glide bomb AGM 88 HARM—high speed anti-radiation missile AGM 65-infra red imaging air to ground missile AGM 84A Harpoon-anti shipping missile AGM 84E SLAM-Stand off Land Attack Missile Mk 82—500lb freefall bomb Mk 82—Snakeye high drag freefall bomb Mk 83—1000lb freefall bomb Mk 84-2000lb freefall bomb Paveway Laser guided bombs-based on Mk 83 or 84 Zuni Rockets-unguided rockets Laser Designator Pod-must be carried to use Paveway bombs The F-14 can carry the following: AIMSM Sidewinder AIM7 Sparrow AIM54 Phoenix-ultra long range air to air missile TARPS reconnaissance pod Use of the fire-and-forget weapons, during a mission is very simple, whereas Paveway and TV-guided weapons such as SLAMS and Walleyes require more operator intervention. When using Paveways (ideal for hardened aircraft shelters and bridges) you must fly towards the target at medium to high altitude. With Paveway as the selected weapon, select the Laser Designator Pod, first making sure that a straight and level attitude is adopted. Notice that the joystick now controls the movement of the Pod itself, not the aircraft. From here you can zoom in on a target and lock onto it. The Laser Pod automatically follows the selected target. When near the target, release the weapons (one Mk 84 will destroy a hardened aircraft shelter, but several may be needed to drop a bridge) and watch them sail down to the target, eerily like the FLIR/DLIR footage that became famous on the Gulf War news coverage. To use the TV-guided weapons, fly towards the target and select the weapon (SLAM or Walleye), go to the seeker head view and the viewpoint will change to that of the weapon. Once launched, the joystick movements actually affect the flight of the weapon, so the weapon can be flown right onto the target. CGW KDYBOARD) COMMAN TER CORTIS ONLY $19.95 PER SET! OK PREMIUM TEMPLATES NEW! FALCON & MIG COMMANDER UTILITIES\" Exciting new utilities for *Falcon 3.0: Operation Fighting Tiger and the new **MiG-29: Deadly Adversary of Falcon 3.0\"!! For one low price you get all six: FALCON COMMANDER OR + FALCCALC/MIGCALC 3.5: Superb campaign intelligence gathering tool. MIG COMMANDER UTILITIES Viewable/Printable theater map with detailed into on every site, ground forces all flight paths! Printable Fuel consumption, Waypoint timing, Strategic Tactical reports + F3 TEMPLATE and \"Kneeboard sheet\". FalcCalc even tells you the conditions for victory or defeat!! F3/MIG REQUISITION 1.5: Puts you in command of Falcon + 3.0 squacions. P ONLY $ 24.95!! L Customize squadron names and pilot's roster, including names, callsigns, skill ratings and status. Replenish supplies including F-16's! Sort/print roster by rank or skill, Sierra Hotel list and more! IMPORTANT AWFCU is compatible with Falcon 3.0: Operation Fighting Tiger only. **MCU is compatible with Falcon 3.02 and MIG-29: D.A.F. + 13 MAPPER 6.0: The famous Red Flag, Instant Action and HUD customizing Keyboard Commander Corps keyboard templates end \"Keyboard Confusion\" and let you concentrate utility! Change default theaters for Red Flag and Instant Action Customize and cleclutter on winning Our high-quality, full-color templates turn any AT107 keyboard into a realistic control HUD). Set delault view scale. Auto-generates Red Flag missions in any theater. New panel for your favorite sim and our standardized, color.coded layout flattens the learning curve! graphical map shows entire Red Flag theater, flight paths, enemy positions and more! SHOW13 2.1: Allows viewing of screen shots from F3's own secret screenR Tem capture program!! New interface makes viewing a snap New conversion feature saves screenshots to popular.GIF or PCX formals. Includes instructions for F3's hidden capture commands! Keyboard Commander Templates reduce confusion KCCMENU 1.1: Fantastic menu-shell that brings it all together! Use default menu increase one's gaming pleasure. -CGW or customize to user's preferences. Sub menus can be created and linked to add other sims DE ZOOM and games Completely unloads itseli from memory while running men selection! Falcon 3.0/3.01/MiG-29 Secret Weapons Luftwaffe 2 MS Flight Simulator 4.0 & 5.0 KCC'S COMBAT MISSIONS: All new gut wrenching action-packed Red Flag missions. Inclucles all type missions in different theaters. See if you've got what it takes to Strike Eagle Ill Jettighter I & II say \"Mission Accomplished to these volunteer only thriller! X-Wing B.17 Flying Fortress Gunship 20001&I Mon-Sat Comanche: Max. Overkill DISCOVER F117A Stealth To Order Call: 8:30-6:30 EST VISA Aces of the Pacific Megalortress  !! EER Template Special: 1. $12.95, Any 2$21.50 3 Any 3$30.00, Any 4 or more $9.25 each!! Strike Commander Tornado AT.P. CY Air Combat 1-800-228-7449, Ext. 522 All other inquiries to: keyboard Commander Corp. 4839 SW 143 Ave. 402. Davle, FL 33319 800-262-6066 * High-Quality, 3-D Graphics * Color-coded Layout * Laminated Stock * why Miller Mimmi Mike S M S . dome Fits all AT101 Keyboards Standardized Format Affixes to Keyboard * Circle Reader Service #77 Page 48 Computer Gaming World "


"PILOT THE NAYY'S FIRST LINE OF DEFENSE. FLEET DEFENDER The F-14 Tomcat Simulation! VIE| STT Their trade 59 ENNE OG Werther D. The formation Actual screens may vary. G ENE It's all up to you! The skies are swarming with bandits. Only you stand between the threat and your carrier battle group. Lock on your radar and launch the Navy's advanced weapons to destroy the most sophisticated enemy targets ever developed for a MicroProse simulation. Roll, turn, climb, and dive to out-maneuver enemy aircraft using an artificial intelligence developed right out of Soviet and Third World military doctrine. A computer-controlled wingman responds to your every command. And, you'll interact with strike packages that include F/A-18 Hornets, A-6 Intruders, A-7 Corsairs and E-2C Hawkeye AWACS. Featuring the latest in 3-D terrain technology derived from digitized information taken from LANDSAT geological surveys, you'll pilot your F-14 through actual locations. Fleet Defender from MicroProse. We brought you the F-15 Strike Eagle, now try the F-14 Tomcat featuring the most authentically modeled F-14 systems available anywhere outside of the Navy. MICROPROSE ENTERTAINMENT. SOFTWARE  1993 MicroProse Software, Inc. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. For IBM-PC/Compatibles. Circle Reader Service #95 To get our free catalog, call 1-800-879-PLAY Mon-Fri 8:30 am 5:00 pm EST ! or fill out the coupon and mail it to: MicroProse Software, Inc. 180 Lakefront Drive . Dept. DIO. Hunt Valley, MD 21030-2245 Name: Address: State: — Zip AAX City"


"REVIEW More Than Apache New Scenarios And New Features For 1 NovaLogic's Comanche by Bryan Walker Edge D eleased over a year ago, Nova Logic's and torch someone. Edge also introduces new 10 Operation Zephyr missions available only Comanche Maximum Overkill (CMO) friendlies to support and protect, including in CCD aren't worth the added cost of the still remains the undisputed chamM-1 Abrams main battle tanks and Red Cross CD-ROM version, but when the combined pion of helicopter flight sims. The legions of tents. cost of the mission disks are added in to the CMO fans, as well as gamers who haven't yer Wide-eyed gamers now faced with new teroriginal CMO, CCD is a very good value for had the pleasure of dashing through gorgeous rain and deadlier enemies might overlook gamers with only the original game, or CDVoxel Space graphics, will definitely be intersome of the more subtle refinements Edge ROM owners now thinking of purchasing ested in two new products that expand on the offers. NovaLogic's attention to detail has CMO. Players who already own CMO in original classic: the Over the Edge mission disk provided graphic refinements like beautiful addition to either MDI or Edge will not get and Comanche CD. reflections over water and an atmospheric the most bang for their buck with CCD. Sharpening The Edge haze, better response to the Thrustmaster Dereliction Of Duty Weapon Control System, and wind effects. The Edge expansion disk serves up 40 tough Arctic regions now have occasional snow While both Edge and CCD provide a great new missions and a rich variety of worthy storms, and the volcanic Hawaiian scenarios deal of challenge, many of the limitations I features. Unlike Mission Disk 1 (MDI), Edge feature sparks spewing from hilltops. Players noted in my review of the original CMO are doesn't pamper you with occasional milk with rudder-pedal accessories such as the still present. These include very limited flight Thrustmaster RCS will be delighted characteristics, small terrain models, wingwith the new ability to disengage the men reluctant to protect you from enemy main rotor/tail rotor control mixing, helicopters, and the lack of a legitimate cammaking precise yaw maneuvers in paign game. Though the state-of-the-art tight \"hover holes» much easier. The Voxel Space graphics and hair-raising action Altitude Hold feature can now be togmake CMO the best helicopter simulator for gled ofl, giving the more experienced the PC, it would be nice to see NovaLogic player manual altitude control. Glurproduce a chopper title on par with Falcon 3.0 tons for punishment can also turn the in the technical realism arena. And that's Comanche's stealth mode off, giving certainly within their capability. the enemy even better detection and Edge and CCD are the most well-rounded engagement abilities...as if they CMO-based products to date. These comneeded it! Though these improvemendable efforts may also be NovaLogic's ments may not seem significant at first last Comanche Maximum Overkill releases. ROCKETS glance, their effects add up quickly. While neither title provides a complete gameruns. Taking place in four new terrain modfour new terrain modComparing the original CMO to CMO with Comparing the original CMO to CMO with play overhaul, few fans of the original CMO els, the Silver Dove, Whirlwind, Over the the Edge expansion clearly shows the supe will be able to resist the extra action these Edge, and Terminal Velocity operations are riority of the new features and makes for a far products offer. A few of the new missions flat-out tough from the word \"go.» In fact, more enjoyable game. might be too much for some gamers, but many players are going to be banging their Silver Worth Gold? most sim fans are going to find that Over the heads against the wall trying to get through Edge and Comanche CD will definitely be some scenarios. Where all of the missions of Comanche CD (CCD) combines every featurning up the heat during the long, cold CMO and MDI could be finished in a few ture, mission, and improvement included in m winter! CGW days, completing all 40 of Edge's adventures CMO, MDI, and Edge, will be a much lengthier affair. along with 10 new misComanche Maximum Overkill: Edge gives the bad guys berter odds with sions and Over the Edge; Comanche CD impressive new vehicles, including the Soviet Osa and splash animations. With TITLE: Comanche Maximum Overkill: Lebed watercraft, as well as the OH-6 Cavue a total of 100 scenarios, COMANCHE Over the Edge: Comanche CD CCD will take even the Over the Edge: $49.95; light helicopter. The enemy has also been Comanche CD: $74.95 gulping down smart pills and is now capable hottest joystick jocks SYSTEM: REQUIREMENTS: Over the Edge: 386SX or greater, 4 MB of better tracking, more accurate fire, and the quite a while to finish. RAM, VGA adapter, 8 MB of HD spice, and original Comanche Maximum ability to actually lob rounds over obstacles The new demo and overOverkill. onto unsuspecting Comanches. The age-old view animations are simComanche CD: 1 MB HD space. CD-ROM drive tactic of patiently \"Shooting and Scooting\" is ply stunning, and are a PROTECTION: None the order of the day in the Edge. Fortunately, remarkable demonstraDESIGNERS: Kyle Freeman, John Garcia PUBLISHER: Novalogic, Inc. you now have improved cannon and rocket tion of the capabilities of Tarzana, CA effectiveness, making it easier to reach out CD-ROM. Frankly, the 4818) 774-0600 ER CHAFF:12 FLRRE:08 0052 D IT12 PRICE: IBM Page 50 Computer Gaming World "


"Connect A Joystick To Your Notebook With The Parallel Game Port.   Pan. Notebook computers are great except when it comes to playing simulation and action games. That's because they don't come equipped with a game port. Introducing the Parallel Game Port\" from Genovation. The PGP software turns your notebook into a gamebook by converting the computer's printer port into a \"virtual game port\". A part of the PGP package is an adapter which lets you connect a joystick, yoke or rudder pedals to any portable or desktop DOS computer. A port doubler cable is also available from Genovation, allowing the connection of two devices to the same adapter. The Parallel Game Port is an indispensable accessory for today's serious gamer Whether you fly combat, race a car, play football or wing along at 100 knots, the PGP's software features will enhance your play action. You can now take control of the game as the PGP allows you to program the joystick's keys and customize them for your specific needs. What's more, the Parallel Game Port eliminates the computer speed dependencies of some game ports. And it's easy to install, so you can be up and running in minutes. The Parallel Game Port is now compatible and comes with interfaces to more than 60 games. Including, most likely, every one of your favorites. And every month we add many more games to this list. Because we write our own game interfaces, they become available as soon as new games come to market and may be downloaded free of charge from our own BBS. Look for the Parallel Game Port in the software section of your nearest computer dealer. Or call us at Genovation (800) 8224333 Compatible with more than 60 games! GENOVATION Circle Reader Service #68 Genovation, Inc. 17741 Mitchell North Irvine, CA 92714 (714) 833-3355 FAX (714) 833-0322Sales: (800) 822-4333 Copyright 1823 Genovation, Inc. All product names are trademarks of their respectise companies, "


"REVIEW The Expanding Universe Of X-Wing TAN UNKNOWN . UTENOUN The Saga Continues With Imperial Pursuit And B-wing Add-ons by Jeff James A fter destroying the Death Star and somewhat, but the utmost of skill beating the pixelated stuffing out of and lots of luck are the only things 1 Lthe Empire in X-Wing, what does a that will get you through the self-respecting rebel fighter jock do next? Retougher missions. tire to a lush planet with his metals and B-Wing picks up where Imperial android servants? Not while there's Ultimate Pursuit leaves off, with the rebels Badness about, he won't! And more battles still looking for a new rebel base. with Ultimate Badness is what we have in B-Wing also introduces yet another LucasArts' two new expansion diskettes Imalphabetic rebel starfighter: the Bperial Pursuit and B-wing. Together they proWing. In addition to a new, 20vide a collection of new missions and mission Tour of Duty, B-Wing animated cut scenes continuing the X-Wing gives players the opportunity to saga. Both expansion disks require X-Wing to put this new heavy assault fighter SZEGEDEELNE XWINGS.A .M. operate, although they do not require each through its paces on the training will prefer the A-Wing or X-Wing; the Bgrounds and to fly the B-Wing in Wing performs best when allowed to fire six historical missions. The historilinked weapons at the broadside of an Impecal missions are a trifle disappointrial capital ship. ing; roughly half of them simply to the avid X-Wino disciple both arnan insert the B-Wing into older Y sion disks should be considered must-buy Wing or X-Wing missions. products. If you can only afford one expanIn flight, the B-Wing is a bizarresion disk, B-Wing is the better value. It offers looking beast. Beneath its eccentric more Tour of Duty missions (20 as opposed exterior, the B-Wing proves to be to Imperial Pursuits 15), includes a new stara potent vessel with impressive offighter, and offers additional historical and fensive capabilities. In addition to training missions. Star Wars mavens hoping three laser cannons and three ion for the chance to pilor the Millennium Falcon cannons, the B-Wing can carry up through an asteroid field or to blast Imperial other to function (i.e., playing B-Wing does to 12 proton torpedoes, making it AT-AT Walkers on the icy tundra of Hoth in not require that you already have Imperial the ideal craft to take out Imperial capital a rebel snowspeeder will have to wait and Pursuit installed). ships. When in flight, the B-Wing handles hope-neither craft is available for use in In addition to new missions and animated much like a quicker, more nimble Y-Wing, either expansion disk, and B-wing is the last sequences, both expansion disks include an even though the B-Wing has heavier weapof the planned X-wing add-ons. It seems that onry, shields and armor. I found the third in the Star Wars baton will be passed to Luon-line hint system to help you through the cannon on the B-Wing (located at the end of casArt's next project, the forthcoming Tie more difficult missions and a Top Ace pilot the S-foil under the cockpit) extremely diffiFighter. So, the next time we meet, we'll have that can be used to play any mission in the cult to target accurately, making it nearly ducked under the curtain and emerged on the original game, or as an experienced wingman impossible to hit small, fast-moving craft Dark Side. And I'm sure the Emperor has in the add-ons. with any consistency. Dog fighting daredevils some expansion plans of his own... The first of the X-Wing expansion disks, CGW Imperial Pursuit, picks up the story after the Imperial Pursuit and B-Wing destruction of the Death Star. Fifteen additional missions are included, beginning with TITLE: X-Wing Tour of Duty: Imperial Pursuit the player flying escort duty for rebel transX-Wing Tour of Duty: B-Wing $29.95 cach ports fleeing an Imperial armada heading toSYSTEM: IBM wards the rebel base on the Yavin. In terms of REQUIREMENTS: Original X-Wing game PROTECTION: Documentation look up mission difficulty, Imperial Pursuit appears to DESIGNERS: Lawrence Holland and share the same inconsistency of mission diffiEdward Kilham PUBLISHER: LucasArts culty found in X-Wing, with some missions San Rafael, CA 1-800-STAR-WARS being exceedingly easy and others virtually impossible. The mission hints seems to help DECT OK IMPERIO PRICE: Page 52 Computer Gaming World "


"Introducing FLIGHTSTICK PRO Flying The Best... Just Got Better. Look for CH Products' VIRTUAL PILOT FLIGHTSTICK, GAMECARD 3 AUTOMATIC, and our MACH series where you buy FLIGHTSTICK PRO. Fly The Best! FLIGHTSTICK PRO is the ultimate combat stick for total command of the skies. Made to endure the toughest missions, FLIGHTSTICK PRO gives you the winning edge to take on even the worst enemy. With top gun precision, you can view your surroundings, activate radar, blast missiles, thrust into mach speed ... all at your fingertips. FLIGHTSTICK PRO includes a four-way switch to control weapons, radar, and viewing for more advanced games plus all the best features of FLIGHTSTICK. Great with flight simulation, auto racing, and any game that uses a joystick. For all IBM compatible computers. FLIGHTSTICK PRO. The most intense joystick you'll ever fly. PRODUCTS 970 Park Center Drive. Vista, CA 92063. Phone: 619 598-2518 FAX: 619-598-2524 Circle Reader Service #45 "


"HARDWARE SURVEY Get I control 1F-117 Stealth Cockpit. Photo Courtesy Department of Defense BOOOOO BD00010.00 Peripherals for Power Players by H.E. Dille stick that really fills a gap in the market. The unit features a down-sized base TV T Thether playing the latest erohing, Shoe scrolling, shoot-em-up, or a state of the art combat simulator, computer gamers want their input to be taken seriously. The keyboard is no way for a Prince of Persia to rescue fair maidens, and a scrawny two-button joystick does no justice to the sophisicated fly-by-wire control of an F-15. Gamers want control, and control specialized to their gaming needs. Here, then, is a look at some of the various peripheral options available. One of the most innovative and thoughtful new additions to the joystick arena is undoubtedly Suncom's My Joystick. Realizing that most pre-school and primary age children have difficulty in manipulating a full size joystick, they designed a half-size that can either be held in the off hand or used on a desktop. Three over-sized control buttons are color coded for easy distinction berween them, and locared for equal access by right or left handed players. A signal selector switch also allows parents to change the functions of the various buttons to suit their child's preferences for the software in use. Rounding out the design is a short and stout control stick that is perfect for small hands to maneuver. (Suncom Technologies, (708) 647-4040). Triax Controls offers a PC version of their unique line of Turbo Touch video game pads. Unlike conventional pads that use mechanical rocker arms for directional control, the Turbo Touch uses capacitance to register motion. Underneath the blue My Joystick Page 54 Computer Gaming World "


"MATURE LEVEL Tuan Gwought Looks can be deceiving... CDE1 Blair the Ricb Girl Erin the Lawyer Fawn the Sales Rep Quinn the Anchorwoman Kellie the Psychologist An interactive CD-ROM social adventure. Circle Reader Service #137 Available at your local software dealer or order direct 1.800.644.9283 Mon noun is a trademark of Taunami Madinlar Alemd a 1002 "


"TRIAX octagonal touch plate are a series of sensors The Gravis Analog Pro is a conventional, than some of the other products discussed that register a change in capacitance when full size stick with several nice features. The here, the PC Raider should be viewed as an the player's finger passes over them. This unit is most suited to flight simulations, excellent starter stick for players who don't featuring a recessed throttle control dial, require some of the other special features. three stick mounted buttons (a front trigger (STD Entertainment, (410) 785-5661). TURBO and two thumb controlled weapons burrons TOUCH One of the boldest attempts to advance on the top of the padded stick), and two the state of the art in peripherals is other buttons on top of the base. Stick tenLogitech's Cyberman. This odd-looking, sion is adjustable to suit your preferences. multi-dimensional controller is designed Also, a \"throttle off\" feature eliminates the primarily for use with free-scrolling 3-D second joystick conflicts that occur in some worlds like Ultima Underworld, games. The unit is very durable during Shadowcaster, and Doom. Its unique design offers mouse-like «proportional control\" in two dimensions and yaw, pitch, roll, and vertical control in three dimensions. It also Turbo Touch 360 provides tactical feedback in the form of simple vibrations, so that in games like signal is transmitted into a directional comShadowcaster the device will vibrate when mand. The sensitivity of the pad is such your character takes a hit. Unfortunately, that little pressure is required to register a the execution of this great idea falls short of response. In fact, the application of pressure expectations. Control in 3-space can be actually degrades the controller's perforclumsy, cven in games that support the mance, because if the finger (yes it is now device specifically, the acrobatics required possible to control via the index finger if to use it can be tiring to the hand and wrist, desired, instead of just the thumb) flattens under pressure, it comes in contact with more than one sensor. As such, the controller actually trains players away from the \"death grip» that leads to hand fatigue and Analog Pro \"numb thumb\" syndrome. Further, the design offers the best diagonal and circular those high-G maneuvers that sometimes control on the market. The Turbo Touch snap the yokes of cheaper offerings. It is PC is a must for fans of action/arcade available as a stand alone purchase or bungames for home computers. (Triax dled with the Advanced Gravis Gamecard. Technologies, (800) 858-7429). (Advanced Gravis Computer Technology, (800) 663-8558). Another bundling deal is offered by Cyberman STD. Their PC Raider stick is an auto-centering two button desk top model that can and the vibrating feedback quickly losses its either be purchased separately or in connovelty. While a nobel attempt, it seems junction with a copy of F-19 Stealth Fighter the Cyberman will need to go back to the and their game port. Though less capable drawing board. (Logitech, (800) 7322935). CH Products offers two designs of interest to flight simulator fans, the Flightstick Pro and the Virtual Pilot. The PC Gamepad former is a multi-burton stick with independent trim controls and a top mounted Advanced Gravis also has an entry into \"coolie\" switch. You can eliminate a lot of the PC pad market. The Gravis PC keyboard interaction with these features, Gamepad features a diamond shaped four which allow you to view the surroundings, button control face and a conventional activate radar, arm and disarm weapons and rocker arm pad. The latter also boasts a so on, without ever having to take your removable joystick handle for precise finhand off the stick. The unit is shipped with gertip control. Other features include a special drivers for Microsoft's Flight selector switch for right or left hand control Simulator 4.0, which provide flaps, gear, and independent single shot or rurbo-fire brake and trim controls. All games may be options for the button array. Included in played with the stick, but some of the spethe purchase price is a premium coupon for cial features in each may not be controllable a free copy of one of seven PC titles, such without specific driver programs which as Prince of Persia or Lakers vs. Celtics. PC Raider must be obtained from CH Products. Page 56 Computer Gaming World "


"With All the Games Knocking at Your Door... ONLY ONE HAS THE POWER TORIP YOU APART (7ffff CASA ESE TUO 1913 DAS Lock the doors, roll up the windows and hold onto your seat-Jurassic Park for the PC has arrived. Ocean's exclusive 3D texture-mapping process puts you in intimate contact with more than 100 tons of REAL dinosaur meat-in two nerve-splitting perspectives. Scope out the island and let razorsharp overhead graphics drop you in the middle of stampeding Brachiosaurs and Triceratops. Then strap on your \"Night Vision\" goggles and venture 3D-deep into the maze-filled corridors of the Visitor's Center, where you'll come eyeball-toeyeball with both Raptors and Spitters. And if that's not enough to make you sweat, remember...somewhere out there a famished T-Rex awaits eager to show you a rip-roarin' good time. Ocea Ocean of America, Inc. 1855 O'Toole Ave. Suite D-102 San Jose, CA 95131 (408) 954-0201 ler we TM &  1992 Universal City Studios, Inc. & Amblin Entertainmen Inc. All rights reserved. Ocean Software Authorized User: Ocean is a registered trademark of Ocean Software Limited. "


"latter are not specifically designed to do so, they can be used to replicate the functions of the elevator and aileron trim tabs discussed previously. A column mounted lincar potentiometer acts as the throttle control. The G-Force Yoke is also equipped with dual fire buttons for left or right hand operation, as well as trigger-finger and thumb tip control. A center mounted selector switch allows the user to vary button functions for personal taste. ordered directly from the manufacturer. The Thunderseat Multimedia Chair is of general interest to all players. In essence, it is a padded cockpit seat mounted over a massive subwoofer. The unit may be used in conjunction with existing speakers for enhanced performance or hooked up directly to the output of any source, from a sound card to a VCR. The intent of the design is to translate sound, such as the whine and rumble of a high performance aircraft, to vibrations which increase the player's suspension of disbelief. Side consoles are available that allow convenient mounting of Thrustmaster's FCS and WCS, or any other sticks. A swing out keyboard holder is also available and, for those who want the full effect, rudder pedals and a strap-in harness may be had. For those whose interest in aviation extends beyond casual game play to include the pursuit of a private pilot license, Thunderseat Technologies is ready to meet your needs as well. The YM-2 Thunderflight Control is built with the same precision yoke ATC used in their 610 model, the Weapons Control System Flightstick Pro Their second unit, the Virtual Pilot, is a desk-mounted flight yoke that precisely controls ailerons and elevators, plus features a self-centering response that simulates actual flying conditions. For example, if you are flying straight and level at proper trim and change the pitch, roll or both, you need simply release the yoke to cause the plane to attempt to regain it's previous level flying position (provided, of course, the maneuver did not exceed the flight envelope and put the plane into a stall or spin). On the front face of the yoke is an elevator trim tab that may be used to trim the plane Thrustmaster Control Systems has recently released the Mark II versions of their venerable flight and weapons control systems (Flight Control System and Weapons Control System respectively). When operated in conjunction with their rugged rudder control pedals, the Thrustmaster system remains one of the most versatile, dependable series of flight simulations accessories on the market. (Thrust Master, (503) 6393200). 1637 Virtual Pilot YM-2 Thunderilight Control TRRENT CASTLE to climb, fly wings level, or glide when the fucl gage shows empty. Again, this feature has greater applicability to \"civilian» flight simulators like the Microsoft line than afterburner-based dogfighting products. The throttle control is a conventional \"T\" stick on top of the unit, but is not supported by all games. The unit is also very good for driving simulations. (CH Products, Pro Flight Control System (800) 624-5804). At the high end of specialization, The closest competitor to the Virtual Thunderseat Technologies is marketing an Pilot is the G-Force Yoke from Suncom. entire line of controllers and accessories Also best suited for driving and flying simuthat approach professional flight simulator lations, the unit features a spring loaded quality, but do so at a corresponding price self-centering yoke with both horizontal point. You won't find these products in and vertical trimmer switches. Though the stores, because each is built only when largest selling FAA approved IFR simulator in the world. The unit is heavy-duty steel construction and capable of supporting a monitor within the outer frame. An optional power grid mounts to the right side of the console for control of auxiliary functions like fuel mixture, cowl flaps, carburetor heat and others. Even more capable is the King Air Style Yoke, featuring an actual Beechcraft layout with functional dials and switches, as well as a separate radio stack. Though these designs may seem like overkill to a lot of players, the company's intent is to obtain FAA approval for the first home-based flight simulators at a cost of under $3000. If any of these high-end items are a \"must have» purchase, contact Page 58 Computer Gaming World "


"NO MORE TX You're finished with training... Had your fun and games. Now TAGGICAL FIGHTER EXPERIMENT it's time to face reality in the most sophisticated aerial combat simulation ever created for your PC-TFX: Tactical Fighter Experiment. Equipped with ASRAAMs, Mavericks, M615, laser-guided GBUs...you're fully loaded to tackle more than 200 «realworld\" campaigns, based on today's geopolitical realities. And to keep you sweating bullets, from Somalia to Sarajevo, the skies are swarming with Al-programmed bogeys that'll make you pay for your mistakes...with your life. Log on and engage in TFX. This time, you're not just playing games. Grab the controls of any of three USAF-spec flight models and spread democracy over five million square miles of topographically accurate landscape. P ocea a Ocean of America 1855 O'Toole Avenue, Suite D-102 San Jose, CA 95131 (408) 954-0201 TFXQ 1993 Ocean of America. All rights reserved. Ocean is a registered trademark of Ocean Software Limited. WIN the TFX Contest. \"Be A Real Fighter Pilot\" See Package for Details. "


"192 PRRALLEL GAME PORT GENOVATION Gameport 2000 Thunderseat for a catalog and more details. (Thunderseat Technologies, (310) 410Notebook Gameport 0022). been rectified by two different companies. Suncom's Gameport 2000 is a high perColorado Spectrum's Notebook Gameport formance peripheral for its diminutive askconnects to the serial port of the host unit ing price. First, it is fully responsive in all and provides a fully functional joystick speed ranges, from low end 286s to port, as well as a pass through serial mouse Pentium based 586s running at 80 MHz port. The second offering, Genovation's and beyond. In addition, it has a dedicated Parallel Gameport, converts a parallel port audio port that improves base PC sound. nd. to a 15-pin game port for use by a joystick, Although you shouldn't expect MIDI qualyoke, weapons system controller or even ity from this add on, it does represent the rudder pedals (it is currently compatible least expensive way on the market to with more than 60 games). They also manimprove sound quality while still enjoying ufacture a separate port doubler which the benefits of a premium game port. allows the connection of two such devices. Speaking of game ports, notebook and Both of these peripherals might also appeal laptop users have suffered without them for to desktop owners who need a gameport too long. Fortunately, this situation has but don't want to install a card or lack the Parallel Gameport available slots. (Genovation, (714) 8333355). As you can see, the preceding group of products has something to offer to virtually everybody. Fortunately, it is also the tip of an iceberg that gets bigger and better all the time. Expect to see expanded coverage of even newer products after the January Consumer Electronics Show.cow What Do PC Jet Jockeys Want? NEW PRODUCT NEW PRODUCT The Mark II WCST (Programmable Throttle; Also Allows you to Program your Joystick) Hair-Raising Sorties Death Defying Maneuvers Heroics Victory Realism HOTAS And. FCS (Joystick) thrustMaster Controls RCS (Rudder Pedals) 10150 SW Nimbus Ave. Portland, OR 97223-4337 PHONE (503,639-3200 FAX (503)620-8094 Circle Reader Service #135 Page 60 Computer Gaming World "


"THE HOTTEST 3-D ACTION SINCE WOLPENSTEIN LAKE STONE ALIENS OP GOLD PARENTAL WARNING GRAPHIC VIOLENCE Not Recommended for Younger Viewers Due to Realistic Depictions of Violence. Hedgagi AdLibTM music; Intense bound Blaster sound effects Terror has been unleashed! And now...the violence that plagues a distant research colony threatens the planet Earth. As British military agent Blake Stone you're thrust into deadly combat against the malevolence of a mad scientist and the insidious mutant army under his command. Dr. Goldstern, driven by his insanity and bent on the annihilation of mankind, won't rest until he rules the known universe. The forces of heroic good and villainous evil collide in this life-or-death struggle to control Earth's future. Sign up to fight as Agent Blake Stone. The fate of humanity is in your hands! Call Toll Free 1-800-GAME123 For the cost of shipping and handling, only $5.00, you'll receive Episode One, The Star Institute. Or download Episode One and pay no shipping and handling. Call the Software Creations BBS and check out the FREE Apogee file section. The BBS phone lines are:  (508) 365-2359: 2400 BAUD  (508) 368-7036: 9600-14.4K (508) 368-4137: 14.4-16.8K Episodes two through six are sold separately and can be purchased by calling Apogee's toll-free number, shown above. CREATED BY PUBLISHED BY 3-D texture mapping virtual reality in 256 colors Song Jake on dozens of vicious opponents in combat oh. APOGEE APOGEE SERWO Battle through 60 levels of \"heart-pounding terror! JAM PRODUCTIONS SOFTWAR P. O. BOX 496389 GARLAND, TX 75049 Blake Stone: Aliens of Gold requires an IBM or 100% compatible computer with 640K RAM, a VGA graphics card, and a hard disk drive. Extended memory (XMS), expanded memory (EMS), Joystick, mouse, Adlib, Sound Blaster or compatible cards are optional. Trademarks belong to their respective owners. Circle Reader Service #38 A001CGW "


"ampion's So FORGOTTEN REALITY DUNGEON HACK Viele Hackin' The Nights Away SSI's Dungeon Hack Slashes Role-Playing Down To Its Roots FOOD GRUDE very once in a while, even the most setting is for the truly hardy (or suicidal) k dedicated role-players long for somebecause once your character dies, that's it. thing simple. They long for a game that the save games go away, too, and there is NO doesn't require months of playing time, restore for this one. Your character has advenreams of notes, pages of hand-drawn maps; a cured for the last time. It's one way to add a game where they can just go out and let loose nail-biting thrill to the game play. with some primordial bloodlust hack-n-slash, For the first time, all the character classes never mind any convoluted plots or story from Advanced Dungeons & Dragons 2nd edilincs. tion—including the bard class—are available Until now, a game like that was hard to here. The only option missing is dual class for find. Especially one that you'd want to play humans; human characters must be single more than once. Now, however, there is SSI's class, but as usual they can choose any profesDungeon Hack. sion. Dungeon Hack is a single-player game that uses the same engine and graphics as Eye of BOH the Beholder III, only the graphics here are RED much better, especially the monster images. The \"plot\" is simple: wade through a dungeon full of nasty critters to retrieve a magical *XS orb. That's really all there is to it. That doesn't sound like a whole lot, and ordinarily it wouldn't be a whole lor. What makes Dungeon Hack interesting is that you can customize the dungeon to your own specific tastes. You have control over a majority CAIIPES of the physical and play factors, and you can create a dungeon however you want. Character creation is a simple process: pick The size of the dungeons can range from 10 gender, race, class and alignment. Stats can be to 25 levels. Monster strength varies from modified up to their maximums (always adwimp to supercritter. Treasure can be everyvisable), including 18/00 Strength for both where or hardly anywhere. Food can be readmale and female fighters of all races except ily available or difficult to find. Magical traps Halfling. Choose a picture for your character can be all over the place or nowhere. Characand enter a name. Most beginning characters ter magic spells can be potent or weak. Enestart at level 3, except triple-classed Halfmies can lurk behind every door or they can Elves, who start as 3rd level clerics and 2nd be out to lunch. Undead can be turned off so level in the other professions, pure Mages they don't appear at all (Yes! My favorite who begin at 5th, and pure Clerics who come feature!). The same is true for enemy spellcasin at 4th. ters. Most of these controls have ranges, so you can really fine-tune the dungeon exactly When that's finished, you move to the main dungeon creation screen. Here you can to your tastes. choose easy, moderate, hard or custom. The Death In The Afternoon first three are automatic settings; custom is where you make what you will of the dunPerhaps the most interesting feature of all geon and is likely to be your preference when is \"Character Death Real.\" This dungeon you start up. The important thing to keep in mind here is that each dungeon is created for a specific character, and once you move on from the dungeon creation screen, nothing can be changed again. This is the one and only dungeon for that character, and if you don't like it, you must create a new character and a new dungeon There are no puzzles, as such, in the dungeons. The closest thing might be finding keys for certain locks, discovering where the illusory walls are (if you have that feature turned on), and looking for buttons to open apparent dead-ends. Otherwise, the levels, however many there may be, are pretty straightforward. You can make it a bit more difficult by turning multi-level puzzles on, which means an item you need on level 5 will be found on some other level. That means dragging a lot of extra stuff with you, and while the inventory slots are generous (you can carry up to 54 items!), they can fill up rather quickly, especially if the treasure level is set high. preferred the high treasure setting, since most of the goodies you find are randomly generated each game, and there is no telling what will show up. A high treasure setting, however, doesn't mean Monty Haul. If you set it high and expect to find swords +5 and plate mail +3 all over the place, you will be sorely disappointed. Really good items are rare, whatever the setting. TITLE: PRICE: SYSTEM: REQUIREMENTS: Dungeon Hack $60.00 IBM 386 or better, 2MB RAM, VGA graphics 12MB hard drive space; supports Ad Lib, Roland and Sound Blaster sound cards Documentation look up Thomas Holmes, Chris Straka Strategic Simulations, Inc. Sunnyvale, CA (408) 737-6800 PROTECTION: DESIGNERS: PUBLISHER: Page 62 Computer Gaming World "


"A rift in the fabric of time and space, a deadly foe from the past and the judgment of all humanity await the crew of the Starship Enterprise. ... the five year mission continues.. TM JUDGMENT RITES Join Captain James T. Kirk and the crew of the U.S.S. Enterprise in all new episodes that place you in command. Beam down to alien worlds, communicate with new life forms and take the helm as you join the legendary crew of the Starship Enterprise in their continuing five year mission to explore the final frontier. plays Software D 1993 Interplay Productions, Inc. All rights reserved. Star Trek Star Trek is a registered trademark of Paramount Pictures. and O 1993 Paramount Pictures. All rights reserved. 17922 Fitch Ave. Irvine, CA 92714 (714) 553-6678 Circle Reader Service #76 "


"FOODS #EX BOZ Also, the treasure generator skews some of never see it. Using a different color on the the items toward character class. For example, map for that section of wall would have been my Paladin never came across any mage a great help in finding missed alcoves. scrolls, but for the Cleric/Mage and the Having gone through Dungeon Hack four Fighter/Mage, they showed up often. Simitimes to completion, twice to level 10, once larly, blade weapons appeared for the Paladin to level 15, and once to the 25th level and Fight/Magic User, but not for the (whew!), plus running other characters to Cleric/Mage, except for daggers. varying depths, I have concluded that a 10-15 This makes sense. Fighters can't use mage level dungeon is probably the best. scrolls, and mages can't wield swords, so why put them in the game? Typically then, anything RED you find will be usable by your character as one class or another (except perhaps those Bracers of Archery, which show up everywhere, even for pure Mages!). That doesn't mean you would want to use it, as a fair number of items happen to be cursed. A certain amount of care is necessary when handling newly-found ob CAJIP jects (keys and key-like objects are always safe, though). Saving the game is alFor one thing, 25 levels is a long way to go when you're just hacking through critters ways a good idea before trying on that new with no other objective than wiping them armor you just picked up. out. Sooner or later, the monsters begin to Mages and multi-classed mages have an repeat, and you end up fighting the same old casier time of it. They come with Improved stuff\" as you go further down. And let's face Identify in their spellbooks, which tells you it, 25 levels of plain killing can get boring after exactly what an item is. Non-mages, however, a while. must rely either on trial-and-error experiments, or finding the scrying glass that acts as an Identify spell. The glass is a random item, and may or may not show up. It has a limited DOC number of charges, so it needs to be used with some discretion. Typically, it is best used to identify rings and potions first, weapons second. out dexterity). Most of my fighters had to go down a fair way before something better than leather showed up, and even shields were often in short supply. Eventually, you do get your hands on some good armor, but it usually takes longer than it should. Mage scrolls seem weighted towards the more powerful showing up early. More than once, high-level scrolls such as Death Spell, Power Word, and Stun appeared on the first and second levels, while the more useful (at that point) 2nd and 3rd level spells were hard to come by. My Fighrer/Magic User who went the 25 levels, for example, never happened across a fireball scroll (she did have Lightning Bolt, though). As these scrolls are the only way for mages to learn new spells (no training halls in these dungeons), running a pure mage can be a difficult undertaking. Sad to relate, SSI decided to invoke the \"no mage spells in armor» rule of the 2nd edition AD&D rules. This really hampers spellcasting for multi-classed characters. Running around without armor is an excellent way to die an early death, especially once you get down to around level 4 where the monsters take a decided turn for the nasty. Until you have a decent selection of robe, bracers and protective devices, spellcasting will be either limited or dangerous in combat. Armor restrictions do not apply to Clerics, who can wear anything, nor to full Elves in Elven Chain Mail. On a positive note, I'm happy to say that the game ran very cleanly, No crashes, freezes or lockups; no weird things happened with the graphics. That's really quite amazing when you consider that the dungeon, and everything in it, is created anew each time you generate a character. The manual is good, providing all the necessary details on play and dungeon generation. Read the races section carefully so you know how far any race can advance in a given profession. There is, howcver, one omission in the list of monsters: somehow, the Living Muck was overlooked. This is a nasty critter that likes to ear metal weapons. Overall, in spite of some weak points, Dungeon Hack delivers what it promises: the chance to create your own, specially-designed, hack-n-slash paradise. Whatever you want, be it killer dungeon or easy romp or something in between, it can be yours with this program. So the next time that bloodlust urge strikes, don't take it out on the loved ones. Dungeon Hack it out of your system. CGW ADRE ET DANOS Getting Around Underground The game has a very nice auto-mapping feature, with dual maps. A small one in the left-hand corner is always on, showing your immediate location and changing as you move around the level. Clicking on this brings up the level map, showing the entire area. Naturally, those places you haven't seen yet are blank. Also detailed on the map are the locations of monsters (shown as red squares), stairs up and down, pits, illusory walls, doors, teleporters, and treasures lying on the floor (black es lving on the floor (black squares). Of course, these are only visible in areas you've already visited. In addition, the level map can be sent to your printer for a hard copy of the map. The only flaw in this otherwise excellent mapping system is that it doesn't show the locations of alcoves. These are small niches set into the walls at random places, usually hallways. It is all too easy to walk right by one and CARP The generators for monsters and treasure exhibit some anomalies. For example, in the 25-level dungeon I fully expected to run across all the monsters (except undead, which I had turned off). However, there were five types that never appeared at all, including, oddly enough, hobgoblins, which are staple monsters for the second and third levels, and had appeared in every other dungeon I crehad appeared in every other dungeon I created. A Measure Of Treasure Armor was often hard to come by in the dungeons, even mundane stuff (this at high treasure level, too). That's important for fighter types who start off with nothing better than ring mail (another good reason to max Page 64 Computer Gaming World "


"Play the best for less Legends OF FUTURE TIM PAST \"...A remarkably rich playground for modem-owning role-players.\" (Computer Gaming World, Aug. 1992) \"...no other game... captures the true essence of roleplaying like this one.\" (Computer Game Review, Oct. 1992) Now you can play the award-winning multi-player online game Legends of Future Past little as $1.80 per hour! Ureate your character and visit Andor, a world created solely through artistic prose and colored by shared imagination. Meet the exciting, intrepid and interesting people who populate these everexpanding lands. Become part of the community of adventurers who have found reward, riches even romance in the fantastic land of the Shattered Realms. New Lower Rates: $9.95 a month includes five (5) hours online time. Additional hours charged at $1.80 hour total via direct dial and Internet, or $3.60 hour total fee via CNS local dialups. No surcharge for connecting at 9600 baud or during daytime hours. If you are on Internet: telnet to novalink.com, or write info@novalink.com.  No special software required.  Toll free number customer service and technical support.  All adult: You must be eighteen (18) or older to use NovaLink.  American Express, Visa, MasterCard, Discover and Diners Club. ...and you can try it free! Live Game Masters: You'll explore a living world where professional game designers introduce new adventures and lands to explore on a continuing basis. Delve into the politics of the City State of Fayd, or take up a noble quest. Become a Champion of Justice or a Force for Darkness. Andor itself will change around you as you are drawn into the never ending plot of Legends of Future Past. Full Character Development: In Legends, you can assume the role of any character imaginable. Our skill-based system will enable you to develop the persona of your dreams. Be a powerful wizard, sly thief or valiant Knight or even a gentle weaver, a skilled weaponsmith or a miner. The possibilities for profession and character development are endless. NovaLink. Advanced Interactive Fiction: Legends was designed as a monumental work of fantasy and artificial intelligence. Not only will you interact with people just like yourself you will be in a realm that responds to your every action. There are no graphics, because only the power of the English language could capture the beauty of this world. Come try it for yourself. Circle Reader Service #74 MAKING THE WORLD A BIT SMALLER 800-274-2814 Voice 800-937-7644 Sign-up/Info P.O. Box 11, Shrewsbury, MA 01545 "


"MAIL 29 wwwvvwvvy Scorpia Offers Aid To Afflicted Adventurers Scorpion's Dark Sun Lands of Lore Ultima VII: Black Gate Ultima VII: Serpent Isle Hand of Fate Return to Zork Darkside of Xeen Ultima Underworld II Crusaders of the Dark Savant un o here we are in the mail room, which people have trouble, especially with the Spirit is overflowing as usual. What with the Snakes. The snakes are a spell cast by the holidays, new games, and distracting ghosts, so the quicker you kill off the ghosts, screams from the dungeon, we just haven't the less snakes you'll have to face and there had the chance to do any cleaning up. The is no way to kill the serpents themselves). dump trucks are supposed to arrive soon; I Remember ghosts can walk through walls, so sure hope they come, because I can barely fit keep moving while you re on the third level all of you in here. Meanwhile, hold your Ultima VII—The Black Gate: Letters still breath and think thin thoughts. show up from people having a hard time in Before we get to the good stuff, 1 have to the final dungeon on Avatar Isle-specifisay a few words about that dread condition, cally, in the area with the cells to the north Selective Dyslexia. It can strike anyone, anyand the locked door to the east. As you go up where, anytime. Among CGW readers, it genthe northern corridor, the second door is erally manifests as «Dear Scorpia, I read your supposed to retract into the floor, while the column in CGW every month and think it's first door rises behind, sealing off the corridor great. Now I need help with....\" and that's all and \"trapping» the party in the cell area. This * there is no all-imporentire sequence is triggered only by reading tant self-addressed, stamped envelope. the scroll in the Shrine of the Codex before before Somehow, people manage to read my entire you enter the dungeon at all (yes, it's bizarre, column, right down to the address...but that but that's how it is). If the door is not retractpart about «If you live in the US, enclose a ing as you approach it, restore to a save before SASE» doesn't come through. I get about five you went into the dungeon, read the scroll in letters per month from SD-stricken individuthe shrine, and then enter the dungeon. If als, so it's not a rare problem. Don't become that still doesn't help you, get in touch with a victim of Selective Dyslexia! Pur that SASE Origin for additional assistance. in there! And now, on to the mail! Ultima VII—Serpent Isle: Some readers Dark Sun: From Kevin C. in Malaysia (the have had strange things happen to them while mail seems to be working again) comes imtrying to use the serpent jawbone to travel via portant news about the endgame freeze after the serpent gates. The characters start to the final battle. If you hit the ESC key while freeze or the game hangs. This is usually the the post-battle graphics are being displayed, result of using an empty jawbone on the gate. you can bypass the whole thing (avoiding the Never do that. Every time you obtain a tooth, hang entirely) and get back to the game. put it into the jaw right away, because the Hitting the ESC key must be done before the thing only works properly when the teeth are sequence reaches the picking up the sword\" in place. section. This has been tested at SSI, and it Hand of Fate: Although the review for this works. If your game freezes after the final game is only showing up this issue, questions fight (or if you want to make sure that it have been coming in about it already. The doesn't), just use the ESC key and you'll be con-man octopus and his shell game seem to okay. be giving some people a hard time. Well, of Lands of Lore: In my article a few issues course. Didn't your mother ever tell you not ck. I mentioned that it was possible to to gamble with strangers? Heh. Anyway, you endlessly duplicate the Vaelen's cube. It have to be more than quick-eyed to win this turned out later that this was (ahem) a bug, game; you have to be lucky. With the right and you weren't supposed to be able to do item, you'll be a real shoe-in. that. This has been fixed in subsequent reReturn To Zork: Having made it down leases, and you can't do it anymore. A pity, river to West Shanbar, a number of players since those cubes came in very handy on level are having a hard time getting any further. three of the White Tower, where a lot of Some of them have figured out that the door under the mill leads to other places, but finding the key to it, that's another matter. Actually, getting the key isn't hard at all, if you give it some thought. I'll drink a toast to your Success (third time's the charm!). Darkside of Xeen: It wasn't too long that I gave a hint about getting the Chalice from the Tower of the Vowelless Knights, but people still keep asking about this one (hey, ya gotta re-read those old back issues!). It's such a simple answer, most tend to overlook the obvious. Remember the lessons from the lower level? Remember what you typed in as answers? That's what you need to do here, and you don't have to be elaborate; three letters are enough. Ultima Underworld II: It's not too hard to make a bottle of gin...ah, a Djinn bottle for yourself. There's someone in the Pits of Carnage who can give you complete directions about accomplishing that. And Nystul can tell you whether or not you've done it right (that hysterical laughter is a dead giveaway, heh). But filling the bottle with spirits, as it were, that's the tricky part. You don't want to go breaking anything until you're wellprotected and up close. protected and up close. Crusaders of the Dark Savant: Summoning demons for fun and profit is always an interesting experience. Of course, it helps if you have all the right ingredients before you make the attempt (kids, don't try this at home). Some players may find themselves without an essential part. It's usually the part from the basement of Orkogre Castle. Rations, anyone? Gick!) That's it for this look into the mailbag. Remember if you need help with an adventure, you can reach me in the following ways: On Delphi: Stop by the GameSIG (under the Groups and Clubs menu). On Genie: Visit the Games Round Table (type: Scorpia to reach the Games RT). By US Mail (enclose a self-addressed, stamped envelope if you live in the US): Scorpia, PO Box 338, Gracie Station, New York, NY 10028. Until next time, happy adventuring! CGW Page 66 Computer Gaming World "


"STEEL EEL The Ultimate in Classical Fantasy Role-Playing... DESPRE ACEEX Help save a richly detailed land from self-destruction. Unite the people of this ancient land and together you can defeat the evil horde that is gathering... growing... waiting... IZVKINS ***** Animated and detailed VGA graphics  3D first person\" view of dark dungeons and musty towers . Turn based overhead tactical combat Original musical compositions and sound effects to get your heart pounding! Open ended non-linear game play Elght disciples to control and develop  Over a hundred quests to complete . Conquer towns and cities, tax the people and raise vast armies. Available for IBM PC and compatibles (VGA, 80386 or better, 2 MB of Ram or more, sound support for Sound Blaster and compatibles.) VALOR PICKARD M MEGASOFT ENTERTAINMENT 137 West Bay Area Webster, TX 77598 1-713-554-7137 Circle Reader Service #87   6.94 IMMENSE TOS HIZVKINS NIMELE PICKARD "


"REVIEW CLOW UTTLE FIREWORM. Wir trick is to the ever preserment through uns, whild to maneuver anaugh barriers to all be Inline Designs Turns On The Bug Light At The Firefall Arcade by Richard Mulligan Tormally, I am unimpressed with Seekers, Shields, Double Shots for the guns, been destroyed. Be on the lookout for that; \"rwitch\" games of the arcade variety; Ghosters that allow movement through baryou'll either be quick or dead. n't hold my interest anyriers, and the ever present Extra Lives. The With such a simple and intuitive interface, more. But as my rictus grin and bear-up trick is to destroy enough barriers to allow Inline has wisely refused to load the game box fingers will attest, Firefall Arcade, Inline Softroom to maneuver and shoot the Fireworm down with a lot of unnecessary manuals. The ware's latest release for the color Macintosh while dodging the nasties and grabbing the documentation consists of one three-panel family, is a rare and welcome exception to the goodies. reference card that lists the keyboard comaction game realm. Designed and developed As each level of difficulty is complered, mands, point values of the game objects, and by Dave Triplett and Brian Greenstone, Firethere's a Bonus Round. Here, you are chalfallis a masterful blend of 256-color graphics, color pictures of the powerups with a short lenged with the task of destroying three comdescription of the function each performs. animation, sound effects and music that creplete Fireworms, with the bonus growing ates an exciting playing environment. The larger with each Fireworm destroyed. Nothing more is needed. game is near flawlessly executed and quite addictive. \"Zounds, I missed!\" \"WARNING!!! The interface is intuitive and trouble-free. Danger, Will Robinson!\" «Bugs, Mr. Rico! Zillions of 'em!\" You can use the mouse, keyboard or Gravis When Firefall was first installed on the Mac Taking its cue from the old Centipede arGamePad to move and fire. The player icon Ilcx test machine, it conflicted with Fifth cade game, the objective is to shoot and deis intentionally designed with a smooth-scroll stroy cach body segment of crawling nasties delay between movement of the mouse or Generation Systems' AutoDoubler compresarrow key and reaction by the icon, sion program. It conflicted so badly, in fact, but this is easily adjusted to and that the game installation failed and the AutoSCORE seamlessly adds to the challenge. Doubler control panel device was trashed and had to be reinstalled. If you use this compresThere are two play modes, Normal and Enhanced. The difference sion program, boot the control panel device LEVEL between the two is in the quality of for Auto Doubler and turn it off before installthe graphic animation and effects: ing the game. On the rest machine, AutoDonin Enhanced mode. the sounds and bler was turned back on after the Firefall music seem sharper, and the deinstallation and no other problems were exstruction of a barrier or nasty creperienced. The AutoDoubler problem was the ates an interesting \"firefall» effect only control panel or INIT conflict experi(hence the name of the game). enced, out of over 30 installed on the test However, the graphics, animation computer. and sound are excellent in both Firefall Arcade is a simple, elegantly renmodes. dered and enjoyable arcade game. The action called Fireworms. As the Fireworms creep left The Enhanced mode is designed ranges from the sedate to the furious and the and right around barriers, moving from the for high performance Macintoshes; the mananimation and sound are excellent. So, if you ual recommends a Centris 610 or better, top of screen towards the bottom, you must enjoy a good arcade interlude or have kids maneuver around the same barriers and keep meaning a system speed of 20 MHz or better. that do, Firefall Arcade is a must-have for your However, the game was tested on a 16 MHz a sharp eye out for death that drops from household. Mac Ilex and Enhanced mode above or rolls out from the sides of the screen. es of the screen. ran perfectly, if a tad slower than Firefall Arcade The designers have added a variety of weapNormal mode. In fact, for learnons, obstacles, difficulty levels and other ining the ins and ours of the game, triguing enhancements to keep your interest. Firefall Arcade FIREFALL me: I found the slower speed of EnThe better you get and the higher you rise in hanced mode to be a boon. I SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS: Mac LC or better, 256 colors, score, the more challenging the action. should warn you, though: En3MB RAM, 3.7MB hard drive space PROTECTION: None Not all that drops or rolls is a killer, howhanced mode play speeds up DESIGNERS: Dave: Triplett, Brian Greenstone PUBLISHER: ever; the astute player will identify and capdramatically and without notice Lakeville, CT 06039 rure a variety of advantage makers. These when a certain number of the 203-435-4995 powerups include such helpful items as Heat moving pieces in the game have CGW TITLE: PRICE: $49.95 Mac Inline Software, Inc. Page 68 Computer Gaming World "


"At the Summer Consumer Electronics Show, an incredible new game beat all the rest... COMAR 222 BEST OF SHOW Take off on the adventure everyone's talking about: Command Adventures: STARSHIP, You'll wage war in space and on planets of every description. Outwit devious pirates and www bloodthirsty aliens. And amass wealth, weapons and glory. All while revelling in bone-chilling sound effects, an incredible CD-quality soundtrack, and what PC Entertainment called the tremendous visual appeal of FUTURE 2 Merit Software\" \"VISION ray-traced graphics and beautiful cinematic sequences.\" No wonder Computer Game Review said STARSHIP must be seen to be believed!\" It's never the same game twice. And with over 50 worlds to conquer, isn't it time you got started? To order or for the name of your nearest dealer, call today! 1-800-238-4277 13707 Gamma Road  Dallas, Texas 75244  214-385-2353 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS 380SX 331Cor 100 compatible MB RAM with 575K Free LW RAM, and Dave VGA Graph Adapter with OK Video Memory Metrottor Compatible Mouse SOUND SUPPORT FC Internal Speaker Adlih Adlih Cold Sound Blaster Sund Blasterir Ato Spectrum 16 Roland MT-32 and Roland Sand Canvas 1993 Ment Software  Future Visionary Inc Future Vision Command Achentures Starship and Masters of the imagination Registered trademarks of Future Vis Inc ALL RIGHTS RESERVED Circle Reader Service #89 "


"Dista The Tour Book for the Future of Interactive Entertainment CAUTION COMPUTER CONTROLLED DO NOT INTERRRE by Johnny L. Wilson All Teched Up And Nowhere To Go However, if I thought LUDICS was too limited, I was really shocked by the new \"interactive\" device from Interactive Systems. Now, from the inventors of \"Sabre Rider and the Star Sheriffs,\" the animated series developed for Mattel Toys and Mery Griffin Enterprises, comes Toby Terrier toys. The toy dogs are electronic Terrier toys. The toy dogs are clect and respond to an invisible VEIL (Visually and respond to an invisible VEIL (Visual Encoded Intelligent Light) source which is broadcast along with the images and sounds of a television show. When the on-scro Toby asks if children and their simulated pets are ready to sing or play, the VEIL causes the dogs to yip, bark or nod. When the songs and dances are taking place onscreen, the dogs are signalled to bark in time with the music. Frankly, such a design seems to be moving the wrong direction in interactivity. Indeed, we could almost call it simulated interactivity. Rough RoadNext 6 Years t the recent InterTainment '93 confor a much lower threshold of interactivity ference in Santa Monica, California, than I am. I Lhere was a jarring juxtaposition of For example, Sami Saad of Info the present and future of interactive enterTelecom. a provider of interactive quiz tainment. Many companies are currently shows in three European countries, involved in providing interactive teledemonstrated his LUDICS convision games, locationtroller. This $20 handheld conbased amusetroller has four buttons for input ment park and a serial number encoded in experithe chip. Would-be trivia masters ences and register the serial numbers and on-line nerare able to play in up to 16 quiz work games per day. The player in the here sends encoded transmissions and now. Other compa\"If we leave interactive nies represented were speaking television in the hands of the merger about an industry that is yet to happen: widespread with something that will surpass Orwell's worst nightvideo-on-demand, interactive movies and multiplayer gaming experi ple, we might end up with something that will surpass ences via cable television. Conflicts between the present reality and visions -Paul McKellips of the potential future were inevitable, so the Director of Corporate Communications, conference served as Interactive Systems something of a reality check to people like myself. You see, I spend so much time looking of his or her answers by telephone. The sysat the games and technologies that are \"on tem works. The company is making their way\" that I sometimes fail to look at money, but every interaction is limited to the landscape around me. As a result, the four menued choices. In contrast, joysticks session on \"Interactive Television Today\" and video game controllers have more threw a lot of cold water on my hopes for directional choices than four. So, the the furure. The speakers who are involved potential for interactive experience seems in this business are certainly willing to settle entirely too limited. experts and media pundits, we will probably end up mare. If we leave it in the hands of the creative peoNTN's football play-calling game QB-1 foreshadows the future of interactive TV. Page 70 Computer Gaming World "


"GET REAL LIVE Soun ALTIYE Upgrade up to a Sound Blaster\" 16, and you've got PC audio as real as it gets. Real CD-quality, 16-bit stereophonic sound. Real built-in upgradability. And best of all, real 100% Sound Blaster compatibility. All of which may just be why we're the 16-bit PC audio standard. And why those other manufacturers spend so much time comparing themselves to Sound Blaster. But like the man says, Get Real. Because there's only one card that's \"as good as a Sound Blaster 16\" And that's a Sound Blaster 16. For information, call 1-800-998-5227. puno Sound Sound Bain Sound BLASTER CREATIVE THE 16-BIT SOUND STANDARD. CREATIVE LABS, INC. 2.PC2 U.S. Inquiries: Creative Labs, Inc. Tel: 1-800-993-5227 or 1-904-429-6610, International Inquiries: Creative Technology Ltd, Singapore. Tel: 65-773-4233, Fax: 65-77-0353. Sound Blaster, and the Sound Blaster and Creative logits are trademarks of Creative Technology Ltd. All other trademarks are the property of their tepective holders Copyright 1993 Creative Technology Ltd. All rights reserved Circle Reader Service #53 "


"It's The Interface, Stupid! \"General purpose computers will cease to exist.\" Howard Postman, President, Ideal Point, Inc. t the InterTainment -93 conference, the way for services far beyond movies ar as at most conferences on the new shopping. He even presented the vision of a I Linteractive frontier, there was much computerless society where the smart intertalk about the interface issue. Gary Louder faces of the future will meet each individuof ICTV, a Silicon Valley al's needs. However, he warned, \"There is corporation that specializes no way that a common interface is going to in interface development meet everyone's needs. Anything that is not for interactive television, an adaptive interface is not going to work.\" believes that the answer Obviously, I think Postman's vision of is in the software and the computerless society is about as unrealnot in the so-called setistic as the vision of a paperless office that top box. His ideal is to was so prevalent a little over a decade ago. build systems which Still, just as software drives today's harduse existing platforms ware platforms, it will be the smart filters and boxes. The guidand intuitive interfaces of the future that ing principle of his will empower \"everyman's\" computer, company is that \"Services have to whether that computer be keyboardless and look more like television than computers.\" voice-actuated through a fiber-optic netHoward Postman, President of consultwork or a keyboard/mouse configuration ing firm Ideal Point, Inc., went further. He tied into the home LAN and outside gateinsisted that interactive television will pave ways. One approach to interactivity that seems to hold a lot of promise, however, is that being taken by NTN Communications. NTN operates the trivia games that are available in hotels, bars and restaurants across the country. Competitors compete against players all over the country in their quest for high scores. Currently, NTN Trivia is not only available in these location-based venues, but is also offered via GEnie and soon, The Imagination Network. NTN also operates a football play-calling game called QB-1. Although the latter game requires a special input device called a Playmaker, it shows how interactivity can be piggybacked to existing programming. In this case, a football game is broadcast normally, but viewers who have the special input device can compete against other players (usually in sports bars, but occasionally on cable television networks). The installed base of Playmaker units is currently 1.5 million and the company translates that into 5 million gamers, since there are usually three persons gathered around each Playmaker. NTN expects to introduce a new sports application based on pari-mutual racing in the near future. The racing game will be for cable television and touches on another consideration, gambling. One service that could feasibly cause demand for the interactive highway to skyrocket is on-line gambling. Of course, given existing state-by-state jurisdiction over gambling, this will have some interesting obstacles for the cable industry or telephone companies providing interactivity to surmount. FINANCIAL KINGPINS STOP Sometimes said to be the most powerful man in Silicon Valley, Arjun Gupta (center) of venture capitalist giant Kleiner, Perkins, Caufield and Byers, spoke on the panel concerning finance for interactive ventures. He predicted that the interactive sollware business would end up in the hands of five or six big publishers, much like the hall-dozen book publishers that presently control that market. He believes Hollywood will continue to partner in interactive entertainment rather than purchase the market, since \"Everything in Hollywood is twenty times the return of either the best-selling CD or cartridge products. More ominously, he predicted a future bloodbath in specialized hardware systems before the market stabilizes on a standard. How Do They Do That? (Video On Demand) ellcore Labs has been working on a video cartridge) as the set-top box/player. array, the data is buffered to an delivery system for video-onAccording to this system, a huge file of intelligent line card which, in turn, demand (or, more accurately, near digitized film is stored on a tape drive. moves the movie data down to the viewer's video-on-demand, since there will always When a film is requested, it finds the file individual CD-I boxes. In turn, the CD-I's be a time lag) for some time. Currently, and downloads the movie at 1.5 MB per interface allows editing, windowing and they are experimenting with a system that second to a disk array capable of holding multi-lingual features which have not been incorporates Philips CD-I (with the digital up to 12 full length movies. From the disk available in pay-per-view until now. Page 72 Computer Gaming World "


"CASINO CASINO LADVENTURE KT 000 Welcome z CITY LIMITS Quantum Quality Productions, Inc. It is vacation time ... you can sit at home watching the grass grow or enter our world ... LUCKY'S CASINO ADVENTURE. This could just be your lucky break. Everyone can \"win\", but only the best can hold, out for the full three weeks. Travel between the many casinos, have a bite to eat and rest in the hotels. Nothing has been left out in this state of the art experience of a lifetime. Games Included: 5 Different Pokers, 8 Different Slots (all completely different), Paigow, Bingo, Keno, Baccarat, 3 Different Video Pokers, Money Wheel, Blackjack, Casino, Craps, Red Dog, Roulette, Caribbean Stud (ALL REAL CASINO QUALITY) Supports All Major Sound Cards 256 Spectacular Colors Tournament Play Scoring History 640 x 400 VESA VBE 1.2 Compatible Three Week Adventures to experience The \"Lucky's Casino Adventure\" computer game is for IBM PC. It can be obtained through your favorite retailer or call: 1-908-788-2799 or by writing to: QQP-495 Highway 202 Flemington, NJ 08822 Copyright 1993 Q.Q.P. All rights reserved. IBM is a trademark of International Business Machines. Circle Reader Service #113 "


"REVIEW The Galapagos Were Never Like This! Maxis' UnNatural Selection Sends SimLife to Boot Camp by Randall Black ZAA HAUITATE VIEW CENSUS DATABASE FIGHT MATC STR FIGHT WHITE MATE TUTTI ER SPEED IN THE STRENGTH STAMINA IN VISION VIRUS I Then Charles Darwin discovered Zips are speedy creatures, hulks possess level of radiation, which produces genetic that plants and animals owed their higher strength, and slugs have greater stamdiversity by inducing mutations in the aniV existence to a process he named ina. But all three body types are really variants mals' genes. Alas, the radiation also causes \"evolution by natural selection,\" he revealed of a basic theroid that has genes for eight harmless viruses to mutate into nasty X, Y and that life is a competition that awards survival characteristics. By selecting for fighting, matZ viruses that are spread during mating and only to the fittest. The SimFolks at Maxis ing, eating, speed, strength, stamina, vision inherited by offspring. The Y virus causes have succeeded in bringing the intensity of and momentum (the tendency of a creature blindness, the Z virus lowers the birth rate, the evolutionary contest, \"red in tooth and to travel in a straight line), you attempt to and the dreaded X gradually saps stamina in claw,\" to the computer screen. breed a theroid that can kick the tar out of its subsequent generations. In general, it's imUnNatural Selection combines the intricate wayward cousins. portant to eliminate infected theroids quickly simulation of life forms found in before viruses get a chance to spread throughSimLife with a knock-down dragout your entire breeding population. Howout strategy game. The heart of the cvcr, virus-laden theroids can be sequestered action can be found in the Secret in a pen of their own to later serve as the Missions, in which you take the vehicles of biological warfare against enemy role of scientist Dr. Ted Jackson. theroids. Jackson has been recruited to comThe most powerful tool on the DigiLife is bat ferocious \"theroids,\" genetithe database. The database can sort hundreds cally engineered beasts that have of theroids according to one or a combination overrun nine islands. He and coof many traits, allowing you to select the best researchers originally began the and move them to a separate pen, or grab the theroid research program in an atworst and zap them into oblivion. Although tempt to relieve world hunger. they reproduce sexually, all theroids are herNow we learn that six months ago, Jackson's fellow scientist, Dr. Ingrid Skinner, As the game progresses and new capabilities maphrodites, creatures equipped with both are added to the DigiLife-2000, the pocketmale and female reproductive organs. The disappeared with a number of theroid speciprotected Anderson interrupts rescarch to andifferent body types are capable of mating mens that have mutated into monsters. Jackson's job is to breed even tougher animals to nounce the lab's latest additions. Housed in with one another. Eventually zips seem to pens in the carrier's hangar deck, the theroids dominate the population simply because they take the islands back. are under control of the Neural Pattern Reguget around to mating faster, but they can Using digitized speech and a computer lator, which can put them into a state of acquire the strength and stamina of even the \"movie,\" the game introduces most of the frozen paralysis. The original best hulks and slugs. plot by way of one Franklin Griggs, a crusty, theroid breeding stock is, to put loud-mouthed colonel who ramrods the opit politely, genetically it ne chalUnNatural Selection cration and heaps abuse on Jackson when lenged. Jackson's job is to whip things aren't going well. The game begins these chromosomal weaklings UnNatural Selection SYSTEM: IBM when Jackson and Colonel Griggs arrive by into fighting trim. Using yet anPRICE: $49.95 helicopter aboard an aircraft carrier that will REQUIREMENTS: 386SX or higher, 330K EMS other device, the Synthetic RAM for sound, 15MB hard serve as Jackson's laboratory during the isNeural Injector, you can create drive space, mouse; supports land-hopping campaign against the theroids. Sound Source and Sound Blaster new, slightly less pathetic indiCentral to Jackson's lab and still being assemsound cards PROTECTION: viduals and plunge them into Jim Simmons, Peter Fokos, bled by Dr. Andy Anderson, a third scientist and consummate nerd, the DigiLifc AL-2000 the gene pool. PUBLISHER: console controls the unnatural selection of the console also comes (510) 254-9700 three types of theroids: zips, hulks and slugs. equipped with controls for the MOM VIRUS Title: SELEN None DESIGNER: Nick Corea Maxis Orinda, CA Page 74 Computer Gaming World "


"MECHAMANDER FUTURISTIC STRATEGY COMBAT SIMULATION FROM ER MINDCRAFT For a free playable demo of MECHAMANDER. Dial BBS 310-320-5196. Circle Reader Service #98 "


"RP23 MAN HATI OFF 500 WALLS FOOD FIGHT BOOK I TUTITETIT  CRT I SPEED LOR KIT? STRENGTH GO KID STAMINA 900K UISION 2001 256 MUTATION As you take the role of Jackson, feverishly of your theroids into stasis, rendering them sions, the Independent Research lab provides trying to breed a batch of theroids tough invulnerable to attack. Since theroids often a number of visualization options, including enough to take on Dr. Skinner's runaways, hit the ground in a shockingly low stare of two levels of close-up viewing and numerous the clock is ticking. At 0700 hours, Colonel stamina, a valuable strategy is to freeze them ways to examine genetic make-up and watch Griggs comes on the horn and announces in en masse with the NPR and then zap the weak behavior. In the extreme close-up you can his warmly dictatorial tone, \"It's showtime, sisters to boost stamina before turning off the actually see the creatures fight, mare, eat, and Jackson! Are you ready to go to battle stations, NPR to unleash your scaly horde. Sally horde. die in claymation action. These animated bits now?\" You can delay the attack, but at great Once Jackson's theroids take over the is add a cute dash of splash, but they become cost: Skinner's theroids get tougher in the land, it's back to the lab to continue refining irrelevant after the first few viewings. meantime. Stalling, in effect, sets the game to the remaining theroids before the next port Despite some creative departures from real expert level, significantly boosting the nuof call and Colonel Grigg's mellifluous call to science, UnNatural Selection offers a vivid merical values of the enemy theroids genes. battle stations. The smart player will have demonstration of several key principles unEven if you have a theroid deficiency, it's reserved the highest quality breeding stock for derlying Darwinian evolution. And, like berter to go paw-to-paw with the opposition the next round of mutation and selection. In orher rule-governed life simulators, the prosooner rather than later. fact, the relative calm of the aircraft loading gram gives rise to surprising \"emergent bedeck turns out to be an ideal haviors\" in which the organisms display place to continue selecting for unexpected trends in the ways they evolve. In DiGiLIFE stronger traits by shipping the bargain, UnNatural Selections database AL-2000 misfits off to their new island provides unprecedented control and insight home. While Jackson sweats into the forces driving its particular brand of to crank up his babies' genes, artificial evolution. Given the intuitive grasp the enemy theroids continue of genetic selection UnNatural Selection proto mutate, and each island is vides, not to mention its entertaining format, HABITRTIS VIEU EL CENSUS H UATA more challenging than the last. it would not be surprising if instructors began Through judicious mutation assigning the game as homework for collegeand selection, the true chamlevel courses in evolutionary biology. pions, body types called As a game, Un Natural Selection supplies a \"beasts,\" begin to emerge. The set of increasingly difficult challenges that 10 30 50 100 INJECT combative beast is difficult to will drive the obsessive personality to go withbreed because these hardout sleep. The last two Secret Missions reAs Jackson, you oversee the loading of fighting theroids have trouble mating. Alquire the toughest beasts, every trick in the theroids into three fast Sea Stallion helicopthough it's relatively easy to mutate a maxibook, and significant stamina on your part. ters, each holding up to 17 critters, and three mum gene value for fighting, the trair quickly The movie sequences, especially the friction slower Sea Knight choppers with room for becomes extinguished because 36. In addition to theroids, the helicopters theroids maxed out for fightcan carry boxes of cargo, a mixed armamening are too busy tangling to tarium of materiel to support the assault. rango. Even beasts at less than Cargo includes regular food along with spemaximum levels of fighting cial red \"rage\" chow and pink \"lust\" that make poor mothers and repro-26NAVY EGZ increase fighting or mating behavior. Another duce very slowly, making ZERT DEFE kind of food, \"bran,\" can be dumped on them poor candidates for coloenemy theroids to use up their eating drive nizing and holding territory. without providing nutrition (and presumably To take over an island it helps BRIEFING O SATCAM \"SATEEAM D RIRCRAFTE SCORE giving \"regular\" army a whole new meaning). to have an ample supply of A limited number of noisemakers let you better breeders. Still, by the NORMAL LUST RAGE BRAN DECOYS NOISE temporarily clear areas of creatures by frighttime you reach the ninth isD NI ening friend and enemy alike. Another type land, you also had better have 999 999 999 999 999 NO of cargo, «decoys,\" serve as combination some really bad mothers on punching bags and inflatable party dolls to board. between Griggs and Jackson, and the plot sap enemy fighting and maring drives. In Un Natural Selection is actually two proditself, stimulate interest without intruding on addition to the chopper fleet, a C-130 Herucrs rolled into one. To practice breeding and the game. The Secret Missions offer closure cules transport plane orbits the island, preassault tactics for the secret missions and expared to lay down a swath of regular food toplore the incredible sophistication of the lab to the plot and an interesting surprise with the conquest of the ninth and final island: Dr. hungry troops. and theroid variables, the game includes an Skinner's breeding pens. Overall, UnNatural Once Jackson's theroids are dropped on the \"Independent Research\" section with 15 biSelection offers up a slick, funny and memoisland, it's possible to aim a \"satellite beam\" zarre islands of its own. The designers have rable game combined with a fascinating artiat individual animals to increase stamina, provided a mind-boggling depth of control strength, speed, fighting, cacing or mating. over virtually every feature of laboratory setficial life laboratory Like the proverbial horseshoe nail that lost tings and theroid bodies. Also included are 16 A science writer for more than a decade, Ranthe war, the beam can make the difference \"textbook experiments» that explore everydall Black has written for such publications as between victory and defeat. Yet another conthing from cannibalism and carrion-eating to Smithsonian Air & Space, Wildlife Conservatrol is the NPR button, which puts every one theroid \"intelligence.\" As do the Secret Mistion, Science Digest and OMNI, CGW ALA UTEH 56.555. 5. 2 SEK COMMAND rang HARORARE CRRCO Page 76 Computer Gaming World "


"Dominion How long can you survive in a constantly changing world of alliance and intrigue? Will u b a minor player in the politics of the age, or push the limits of empire and dominance? Coming soon from Mindcraft. Circle Reader Service #99 "


"The Elder Scrolls \"I've played role-playing games since they first appeared on mainframes a decade ago. The Elder Scrolls: Arena is quite simply the most captivating, well-designed, realistic world available on home computers,\" Rugs Ceccola. Assaciate Editor \"The most impressive showing by any company...Bethesda's Fall line-up is one of the best going.» Computer Game Review Circle Red Service 141 Electronic tames BETHESDA SOFTWORKS TOU T LE Miegtic reserved dhithesda Sonworks and 11 "


"ITGEM IAATOR THE He's back. He's made a few friends ... ... and they're angry. 2. BETHESDA SOFTWURS Circle Reader Service #42 1984 Cinema '84. A Greenbeto Brothers Partnership. A tions Reserved Licensed by Herdale Film Corporation. THE TERMINATOR Te cotyright  1993 Bethesda Saltworks. The Terminator TM designates a trademark of Cinema 84. A Groenting Brothers Partnershin. "


"MERCHANT WRINCE op. Quantum Quality Productions. Inc Masters of the World EXPLORE THE WORLDI! Your family can rule the high seas, and crush the competition in this all out, global conquest game. You embark from your center of power, Venice, to seek your fortune. Find the hidden treasures In far off lands and establish trade routes. But, this is only the beginning. Your popularity is at stake as you Involve yourself with the church and state. The others In power say you can't do it. ... Do you have the strength?? Delve into the political power struggle, entrench yourself in the ruling establishment of the church, and trade in exotic commerce to become the master of the world..... \"THE MERCHANT PRINCE.\" Historical and Random World Maps (Billions) Four Players Modem Play Complete Scoring History Strong Artificial Intelligence  Both Land and Naval Trade Routes Build Your Own Road System Worldwide! Manipulate the Local Politicians Inspire the Church and People The \"Merchant Prince\" computer gamo for IBM PC. It can be obtained through your favorite retailer or call: (908) 788-2799 or by writing to: QQP-495 Highway 202 Flemington, NJ 08822 Copyright 1993 Q.Q.P. All rights reser IBM is a trademark of International Business Machines. Circle Reader Service #115 "


"THE RED CRYSTAL \"The Serpentese «The Seven Secrets of Life\" QOPQuantum Quality Productions, Inc. NOREM Seek out the seven secrets of life .... Can you forge through the evil that lurks in the depths of the eerie dungeons, the ominous castle towers and the savage countryside? Play alone or with a partner. Simply, one fine adventure and role playing endeavor. MODEM PLAY 1 OR 2 PLAYERS WORKING TOGETHER OR IN HEAD TO HEAD COMPETITION BREATHTAKING GRAPHICS FASCINATING ECONOMIC SYSTEM LARGE VARIETY OF MONSTER TYPES OVER 50 DUNGEON LEVELS AUTO-MAPPING FEATURE The \"Red Crystal: Seven Secrets of Life\" is for the IBM PC. It can be obtained through your favorite retailer or ordered directly by calling: 908-788-2799 1993 Q.Q.P. All rights reserved. IBM is a trademark of International Business Machines. Circle Reader Service #116 "


"REVIEW Or How To Buy Friends and Influence People in The Patrician by Tim Carter L h, to be rich. To acquire great fame League's military ventures, but the overriding less than helpful. To be fair, it is probably very and fortune, marry a beautiful wife, priority is money. informative in its original German, but the a nd buy one's way into political ofWhile only a successful political campaign English translation leaves much to be desired. fice. The dream, as we all know, of every will win the game, political campaigns cost The history that constitutes about half of the medieval European merchant. That's right, money. An unsuccessful merchant will never total manual is difficult to read and provides medieval Europe. Sorry, no knights in armor, succeed in politics; an ample purse is vital, little assistance to aspiring merchants. no large wars of conquest, only hoards of and this can only be obtained through a clever actual instructions range from clear to commoney and political power. So take off those economic strategy. pletely obruse, depending upon the topic. In general's stars and put on your best Donald some cases the manual is wrong, as in the Trump smile and take a look at The Patrician, Aristocratic Appeal names and descriptions of the various ships a German design distributed in North AmerThe Patrician is presented in an attractive available. It also discusses commodities that a ica by Readysoft. and pleasing manner. While not quite state do not exist and fails to accurately describe The Patrician is a game of medieval trade of the art, the graphics are very good, particuf the art, the graphics are very good, particuthe steps necessary to win the game. and political power. The game is set in 14th Jarly for a strategy ga larly for a strategy game. On my 486-50 the Surprisingly, however, this does not really century Europe, along the Baltic and North scrolling map was smoother than detract from the play value of the game. The any I have ever seen. On slower manual is not so bad that the mechanics of machines it was not quite as the game are obscured, and the interface is smooth, but it was still impressive. easy enough that, once I got going, I was able More importantly, the screen was to do just about everything without referring attractive and easy to understand, to the instructions. even on the black and white monitor of a laptop Merchant Manners The game interface is clean and At the heart of The Patrician is a trading logical. The game shifts from town simulation. The game revolves around the to town as ships arrive and depart. buying and selling of 18 commodities in 16 Each town has the a similar layout: a towns stretching from London to Novgorod. commercial screen (the waterfront). You can buy and sell anything from corn and a political screen the town square), fish to furs and pepper. With one exception and a construction screen (the ship(noted below) the commodities are transSea trade routes. You take the position of a yard). Clicking on the various build ported from town to town by ship, and so a lowly merchant in one of the towns that ings provides access to the offices inside, large, well organized fleet is viral to commerformed the Hanseatic League. The League where most of the activities take place. All cial success. Ships may be purchased at any was a powerful alliance of merchants in the commands may be given by town, however the supply of 14th century that dominated trade in the mouse, although a combinawood and other raw materials Baltic for almost 200 years. The objective of tion of mouse and keyboard the game is to rise through trade and politics commands works best, parTITLE: The Patrician to the head of the League. ticularly when entering numPRICE: $59.95 SYSTEM: Amiga, Atari ST, IBM IBM reviewed) While there is some conflict in The Patri-bers. REQUIREMENTS: Amiga: 1MB RAM, hard drive, mouse; supports RAM expansion cian, the central focus is definitely economic. The case and accessibility of IBM: 286 or better, VGA graphics DESIGNER: Triptychon You are required to fend off pirate attacks the interface is particularly PUBLISHER: Readysoft Richmond Hill, Ontario, Canada from time to time, and status and political important for The Patrician, (416) 731-4175 power can be gained from participating in the as the manual is somewhat The Patrician Page 82 Computer Gaming World "


"COM AdLib CHIPS &BITS 'AD LIB', the music synthesizer card that made the PC game industry stand up and listen is here to make your favorite action, ad. venture, role play. ing. arcade and simulation games come alive with sound. Features 11 different FM synthe sized voices and the greatest level of software support in the industry. S34 ht! 'THRUSTMASTER'S FORMULA T1' is the most realistic control for all of today's driving simulators. Features fully func tional steering wheel, brake and gas pedals and turbo boost gauge used in supporting games. $129 PO Box 234 Rochester VT 05767 Call 800-699-4263 Int'l 802-767-3033 Fax 802-767-3382 Source-10027 Mirnar Visa & MC Accepted. Checks Held 4 Weeks Money Orders Treated as Cash. COD $8. Campatability guaranteed. Shipping charges nonrefundable. Shipping times not guaranteed. Most items shipped same day. Price and availability subject to change. OVERNIGHT SHIPPING IN US $4 PER ORDER. Mail to Canada, PR HI. AK, APO, FPO 94 per order. 4-8 day Worldwide shipping $6 per item Including Kuala Lampur HANDLING S2 PER SHIPMENT \"MAN ENOUGH Five women and you. They want it all. But its not going to be easy. An interactive social adventure, Man Enough features almost an hour of live-action video stimulating dia logue, which comes to life through digitized speech and 320 x400 enhanced VGA graphics 545 'DREAM GIRL' Let your dream girl ask you intimate ques tions. The more you reveal to her, the more she reveals to you! This movie like video game features live video display. popular music stunning effects and amazing graphics. $32 IBM HARDWARE IBM HARDWARE IBM ADULT IBM ADVENTURE IBM ADVENTURE IBM ARCADE $27 Thrustmaster FCS Pro 599 Thrstmstr Fight Cntrl Sys$59 Thrustmster Game Card S27 Tmastr Rudder Cntl Sys 599 Tmastr Weapn Cntl Sys 594 Video Blaster $349 Virtual Pilot $61 Voice Blaster $52 $29 $27 IBM ADULT S36 $19 $29 Acoustic Research P22 $79 Acoustic Research P42$159 \\coustic Resch P570 $319 Acoustic Resrch P622 $239 AdLib Sound Card $34 Adlib Gold Sound Card 999 Adv Gravis Ultrasound $129 CH Weapons Cntrl Sys $44 Command Control Pad $17 Fighter Stick $79 Flight Stick $36 Flight Stick Pro $57 Jame Card 3 Automatic $28 abtec CS-150 Spkers $17 .abtec CS-550 Spkers $24 .abtec CS-700 Spkers $28 Maxx Cobra Flightstick $54 Maxx Control Yoke $54 Maxx Rudder Pedal FLT $38 Pilot Control Stand Pro Audio 16 Basic S118 Pro Audio Spectrum 16 $149 Pro Audio Spect Plus S129 Pro Audio Studio 16 S205 Teel Mag Mitmd Upgrd $399 Rudder Pedals Driving S39 jony SRS7 Speakers S9 jony SRS9 Speakers $14 ound Blaster 16 ASP $214 ind Blaster 16 Basic $129 jound Blaster Deluxe $82 ind Bist Discov CD 16 $399 ind Bist CD ROM Drv $299 ind Bistr Pwrd Spkers $24 ind Blster Pro Deluxe S124 nd Bistr Voice Assist S54 nd Galaxy BX2 WSpkr $65 nd Galaxy NX2 Wspkrs$79 ound Galaxy NXPRO S109 ind Galaxy NXPRO 165499 ind Glxy NXP 16WSCSI$139 id Glxy NXP Mitmd Kit $399 found Machine $94 $29 Secret of 7th Labyrinth $42 Shadow Caster $45 Shadowgate WIN $34 Simon the Sorcerer S32 Space Quest 1 VGA S16 Space Quest 4 VGA S24 Space Quest 5 VGA $36 Spellcasting 101 S19 Spellcasting 201 S36 Spellcast 301 Sprng Brk S34 Star Reach Star Trek 25th Anniv $35 Star Trek: Judge Rites $38 Starship $38 Stellar S21 System Shock S54 Teen Mutant Ninja Turt S25 Terminator 2029 $37 Term 2029 Oper Scour 519 Terminator Rampage $38 Terror of the Deep $36 The Dig Under a Killing Moon S43 Where Spce Carmen Dix $44 Where Time Carmen $32 Where USA Carmen Dlx $45 Where Wild Carmen Dix $52 Yserbius $36 Strip Poker 3 S29 Hired Guns $32 Strip Poker Professional S34 Hook $32 Strip Pker 3 Disk 1-6 ea $16 Inca $34 Strp Pker Pro Dsk 1-6 ea $16 Inca 2 $42 The Devil Mis Jones CD $34 Indy Jnes 4 Fate Atlantis$36 The Sexiest Women CD $22 Innocent Until Caught $36 Wick Q-Tme Movie CD $42 Isle of the Dead $38 Wmen Who Love Mn CD$26 Jack the Ripper $39 Women of Venus CD $27 Jagged Alliance $48 Jonny Quest $26 King's Quest 5 VGA $36 IBM ADVENTURE King's Quest 6 VGA $42 King's Ransom $38 Adv Willie Beamish $19 Kronolog : Nazi Paradox $42 Alone in the Dark $33 Laura Bow 2 $39 Alone in the Dark 2 $36 Leather Goddesses 2 $39 Altered Destiny S29 Legend of Kyrandia $32 Amazon S19 Leisure Suit Larry 1 VGA$19 Animation Classics S39 Leisure Suit Larry 5 $24 Award Bundle S46 Leisure Suit Larry 6 $42 Beverly Hillbillies $19 Loom $19 Bioforge S52 Lost Files Sherl Holmes $26 Bloodnet $42 Merchant Prince $39 Blue Force: Next of Kin S39 Metal Mutant Cstle Wolfst-Spear Dest $32 Mixed-Up Mother Goose $29 Companion of Xanth $34 Out of this World $36 Dark Seed S19 Police Quest 1 VGA S19 Day of the Tentacle $34 Police Quest 3 VGA S36 Dracula Police Quest 4 S42 Dragon Knight 3 $49 Prince of Persia $25 Dragon's Sphere $42 Prince of Persia 2 $39 Dreamweb Quest for Glory 1 $18 Elf $24 Return of the Phantom $34 Epic $32 Return to Zork $40 Eric the Unready $21 Rex Neb Master Ed $32 Flashback $32 Rex Neb Cos Gen Ben $36 Fourplay WIN $19 Riftwar Legacy VGA $37 Frd Phrkas Front Pharm $38 Ringworld $35 Gabriel Knight $36 Robocop 3 $32 Gateway $32 Sam & Max Hit Road S38 Gateway 2: Homeworld $34 Screen Antics WIN S 19 Hand of Fate Secret Monkey Island 2 $21 Heimdall $17 Secret Monkey IsleVGA$25 Circle Reader Service #46 101 Sex Postions 2 CD $44 Adult Reference CD $24 Advs of Brad Stallion CDS39 Animated Fant 1 or 2 CDS34 Busting Out CD $38 Busty Babes CD $32 $21 Creme de la Creme CD $29 Debby Does Dallas CD $38 Deep Throat CD $42 Digital Dancing $38 Dreamgirl Extreme Delight CD $22 Femme Fatale $26 Femme Fatal Dsk 1-6 ea $18 Girlfnend Suzie Or Teri $36 Hidden Obsessions CD $38 Insatiable CD $32 Jigsaw Pinups $19 Kama Sutra CD $44 Legends of Porn 2 CD $29 Lovely Ladies II CD $39 Metal & Lace NR13 $29 Mystic of Orient CD $29 Nightwatch Interact CD $36 Paradise Club CDS46 Penthouse Jigsaw PG $21 Penthouse Jigsaw XXX $24 Physical Therapy CD 519 Plyboy Electronic Datbk S42 Southern Beauties CD $26 $45 Galactic Conqueror $31 Galactic Empire Geekwad Gmes Glxy CDS21 Goblins VGA $18 Goblins 3 $29 Guy Spy $24 Highway Patrol 2 Incred Machine VGA $27 Incredible Machine 2 Incredible Toons $29 Infestation Innocent $38 Metal & Lace Night Breed $26 Pick'n Pile $19 Silverball Simpsons: Arcade Game$31 Space Ace $32 Space Ace 2 $34 Street Fighter 2 $39 Swamp Gas WIN $38 Take-A-Break Pinball $28 Teenage MNT Man Miss $31 Teen Mut N Turtles Adv $32 Teen Mutant Ninja Turtle S25 The Incr Machine 2 WIN S30 The Tinies S29 Titan Titus Fox Tristan Pinball Volfied Wild Streets $32 $34 IBM ARCADE $36 IBM BUNDLES 500 CC Race Bike S29 Aliens Ate My Babysitter S19 Aracnaphobia W Sound S19 Brt Simpson's Hse Weird$31 Cogito Windows $34 Drag L Esc Singe's Cast $34 Dragon's Lair $22 Dragon's Lair 2 or 3 $34 Eagle's Rider $29 Eight Ball Deluxe $38 Fire & Forget S24 ADD Collector's Ed 2 546 ADD Starter Kit S35 Air Combat Classics S42 Capstone CD Game Col $45 Combat Classics $24 Dynamix Bundle 1 $39 Eye of the Beholder Col $52 COW FEB 1 S34 "


"will greatly affect the price as well as the time of construction. For those in a hurry, ships may also be The Sioerdebeker purchased at periodic auctions, although the condition of most auctioned ships is not good, to say the least. The one exception to this system is the caravan route between Hamburg and Lubeck. These are two of the richest towns in the League, and players are well advised to consider either for their home. The caravan route allows you to ship large amounts of commodities by value, even if it is never shipped to another road between the two cities. Goods should be location. sent via the caravan route whenever possible as it reduces the wear and tear on ships and Becoming Pious And Mighty allows merchants to safely send very large Once an effective trade network is estabquantities of goods in a single shipment. lished and a number of ships are in operation, Trade revolves around the prices of the a political campaign can (and must be different commodities in each of the cities. mounted. To compete for the leadership of Obviously, the aim is to buy goods low and the League, it is necessary first to be elected sell high. Prices are determined by supply and mayor of one of the towns that make up the demand, and the difference in prices between league. towns can be great. This provides structural Election is based upon popularity with the advantages that should be exploited regularly. townspeople, which can be increased in a For instance, furs will always be cheap in number of ways. First, one needs to be a Novgorod and expensive in the West. At the successful and prosperous merchant. Second, same time, Fish Oil is usually very cheap in it is important to be sufficiently pious; there Scandinavia and scarce everywhere else. are church constructions to finance, poor Prices also fluctuate according to the season people to support, and, of course, indul(naturally, the supply of some goods declines gences to pay. Third, social status can be over the winter) and according to the stocks increased through membership in trade each town has built up through trade. guilds, through public feasts, and through a Because prices are sensitive to the activity of Socially socially successful marriage, including a prestraders, a diverse trading strategy is necessary. rigious and sufficiently grandiose wedding. Trading only in high value goods, such as Finally, contributions to the defense of your pepper and furs, will quickly deplete the cash home town and the military expeditions of of your home town, leading to economic (and the lea the league are crucial to the success of a thus political) ruin. In general, it is a good merchant's rise to power. They are also the idea to buy more from your home town than most expensive. Not only do military exyou sell there. This will keep the local merpenses draw cash away from trade, expedirions usually require heavily armed ships, chants and citizens happy and the town proswhich are then not able to ply the trade perous. routes. A smart trade strategy will benefit from the All in all, a political career is an immensely use of warehouses. These can be built in any town on the map and provide a number of advantages. If left empty, they supply rent and can be considered a form of long-term investment. More importantly, warehouses can be used to stock up on seasonal commodities during the harvest when prices are cheap. In addition, merchants can hire workers to develop raw materials into more valuable finished products. This is done by retraining workers in a particular town and then stocking raw materials in a warehouse in the same town. For instance, wool can be converted to 13781-thaler would be good more valuable cloth, greatly increasing its expensive undertaking. The nature of the economic model is such that expenses do not level off either, so that with increased expansion comes increased costs. Artisans and crew members must be paid, warehouses and ships maintained, and new ships purchased. Ships deteriorare over time, particularly if they carry heavy loads in rough seas. Every time a ship is repaired it loses carrying capacity. A well used ship will, over time, lose the ability to carry enough cargo to pay for itself. Therefore, there is no such thing as a complete fleet or a capital expense plateau: new investment is required constantly. Traders In Training While the interface is easy to learn, this does not altogether compensate for the failings of the manual. Almost no numbers or formulae are provided to explain how the economic model works. Absolute control freaks will not be able to stomach such an omission, while the rest of us would just like to know how much we are paying the crews of our ships and the staff at our warehouses. Furthermore, the number of commodities (18) and the number of different buying and selling prices for each (16) makes for a bookkeeping nightmare the first few times you play the game. An experienced player will come to know where each good can be obtained for the best price and where each can find the best market; however, for beginners, an on-line bookkeeping system would have been appreciated. Once the pricing system is understood, the trading element of the game becomes somewhat repetitive. As prices change constantly and special events alter the regular supply of a particular commodity there is still plenty to do, bur a smart merchant is virtually guaranteed to make money Finally, there are no levels of difficulty or options for an altered start. While it is possible to begin the game in a number of different towns, this does not alter the basic price structure that underpins the game. These limitations are unfortunate because underneath them is a 4 5 6 solid program and a fun game to boot. It has a limited scope, but 7 8-9 what it does it does well. The lack + + of options will ultimately reduce its replayability, but the game is sufficiently long that this shouldn't be a huge problem for casual strategists. Players looking for a strategy game with an interesting and less combat-oriented approach will find that The Patrician fits the bill nicely. CGW Page 84 Computer Gaming World "


"CHIPS &BITS CONTINUUM SAM & MAX HIT THE ROAD Freelance animal police partners Sam and Max team up to solve the mystery of the missing Bigfoot, Bruno. Explore America in a comic book world styled for adults Contains fullscreen graphics, full talkie introduction, over 12 US locals, a free activity book & built in mini games. $38 *THE C.H.A.O.S. CONTINUUM' is a fully interactive movie experience containing spectacular animation, and special effects. Titan Colony is being held captive by a vast, orbiting computer. Only you can find a way to stop it. Features innovative image control & random events to improve playability. $42 PO Box 234 Rochester VT 05767 Call 800-699-4263 Int'I 802-767-3033 Fax 802-767-3382 Source-10027 INM ACS ALLEGRO IIIIIIIIIIIN. EARTH INVASION' For Windows. On patrol in earth orbit you hear the first reports of a giant Cyborg Mothership. Only a few thousand miles from the planet, it has launched an attack on ground defense systems. Total surprise has rendered the planet helpless You're civili-zation's only hope. S24 'IRON HELIX CD You are out-gunned and on the run from a deadly defender robot with only your wits to prevent in tergalactic war. Your mission: destroy the doomsday weapon on board a derelict spaceship. Iron Helix combines fluid nonstop action with stunning photo realistic 3-D graphics and a dynamite soundtrack. $56 «UNDER A KILLING MOON' transports you to the vir tual world of the feisty detective Tex Murphy. New feature allows you to save and splice scenes together. Digitized voices & sound effects and amazing level of detail & freedom of movement make this game visually and aurally stunning. 543 or CD$48 INVASION IRON HELIX MULTIMEDIA ARCADE FOR WINDOWS 301 PRODUCTIONS INC. IBM BUNDLES IBM CD ROM IBM CD ROM IBM CD ROM IBM CD ROM IBM EDUCATIONAL World of Xeen Wrath of the Demon $42 $29 IBM EDUCATIONAL $37 $38 Eye Beholder Trilogy CDS52 Icn 3.0 WTmaster FCS$99 iame Pak 1 iateway Collection 182 $32 and Sea Air 2 $29 st Treas Infocam or CD$39 st Tres Infcom 2 or CD $29 ucas Classic Advs $36 Tax Pac S19 lax Overkill W Disk S45 legafortress Mega-Pak S38 erfect General Trilogy $34 Juarterdeck Game BundS62 icrt Weap Luftwaffe CD 542 ipce Quest Bundle 1-4 S42 pellcasting Bundle S34 pellcasting Bundle CD S32 sk Free 42/Red Storm $35 he Victory Pack S45 litima Trilogy S39 Iltima Trilogy 2 S48 Ving Com 1 Dix or CD 548 Vizardry Trilogy S32 Vizardry Trilogy 2 S32 $42 Campaign $35 Castles 2 $49 Chaos Continuum $42 Chessmaniac 5 Bill & 1 $35 Chessmaster 3000 $46 Chopper Pack Conan S26 Conq Robin Hood WIN $42 Conspiracy $44 Curse of Enchantia $26 Cyber Space Dark Seed $48 Darksun $52 Day of the Tentacle $45 Dinosaurs Dracula $48 Dracula Unleashed $49 Dragon's Lair $39 Dune $54 Dune OEM Jewel Case $34 EcoQuest Search Celus$42 Eric The Unready $36 European Racers $41 Eye of the Beholder 3 S48 Eye Behldr 3 Jewel Cse S24 F1178F15 SE 2 Jwl Cse$28 F15 Strike Eagle 3 S46 FA 18 Hornet $54 Fantasy Empires $45 Fascination $39 Fatty Bear's Funpack $34 Fatty Bear's Wrld Games$44 Fatty's Bears Bday Surp $38 Gabriel Knight Gateway 2 $34 Goblins 1 or 2 $30 Great Naval Battles S55 Gunship 2000 Jwl Cse S26 Guy Spy Hard Day's Night S29 Harrier Assault SVGA Hell Cab Hi-Tech Aircraft $43 Hypnotic Harp $36 Quest for Glory 1 VGA $39 Inca $39 Return To Zork Inca 2 $42 Retrn Zork OEM Jwl Cse$32 Indy Jones Fate Atlantis $42 Ringworld Interplay's 10 Yr Anthlgy $49 Scrabble Deluxe Iron Helix $56 Secret Monkey Island $39 Jet Pack $46 Shadow of the Comet S48 Jungle Book WIN $24 S Holmes Con Det 10r2 S36 Jutland $48 Sherl Holmes Con Det 3 S51 King's Quest 5 WIN $41 Shuttle S29 King's Quest 6 $45 Sim AntCity/Earth ea S48 King's Quest 6 Upgrade $24 Slater & Charlie S42 King's Ransom $38 Sitwre Toolwrks Refernc $79 Koshan Conspiracy $48 Space Quest 4 $37 Labyrinth of Time $48 Spce Qust 4 Jewel Cse S16 Lands of Lore $44 Spirit of Excalibur S26 Laura Bow 2 $39 Star Trek 25 Anniversary S55 Lawn Mower Man $45 Star Wars Chess S49 Legend of Kyrandia $39 Star Trek Nxt Generation $46 Leg Kyrandia Jewel Cse$24 Stellar 7 S42 Leisure Suit Larry 6 $46 Storm Troop $54 Loom $39 Stronghold $36 Lord of the Rings $45 System Shock $54 Lost in Time $39 Team Yankee 2 $29 Mad Dog Mcree $32 T2 Chesswars $27 Magic Death $26 Terror of the Deep $36 Mantis Exp Fighter $46 Tetris Gold $32 Mario Teaches Typing S48 The Journeyman Projct $48 Mario is Missing S44 Tony La Russa BB 2 $46 Microcosm $49 Tornado S42 Microsoft Golf $48 Trump Castle Collection $14 Mosaic Magic $34 Ultima 9 or 10 $54 Multimedia: Vivaldi WIN $24 Ultima Underworld 1 & 2 $59 Myst $64 Under a Killing Moon $48 NFL Coaches Club Fball $32 Video Cube Omar Sharif Bridge DLXS46 Where in World Deluxe $59 Patrician S38 Where Wrld is Dix OEM$24 Phantasmagoria S59 Who Killed Sam Rupert $21 Police Qust 4: Opn Seas $42 Wing Commander 3 S54 Protostar Wing Command Ultima 6$57 Putt Putt Goes to Moon $44 Wing Command UltUW $55 Putt Putt Joins Parade S48 Wolf Pack $12 Putt Putt's Funpack $34 World Circuit $34 Circle Reader Service #46 Reader Rabbit 3 $32 Read Rab Rdy Letrs 35 $37 Rodney's Funscreen $32 Scooter's Magic Castle $32 Secret Isle Dr. Quandry $38 Slater&Charlie Camping $29 Snapdragon $29 Speedreader WIN $30 Stickybear Opposites $23 Stickybear Parts Speech$32 Stickybear Reading $24 Stickybear Read Comp $30 Stickybear Read Tutor $31 Stickybear Shapes S29 Stickybear Spellgrabber $32 Stickybear Spell Tutor $32 Stdent Writing Cntr WIN $32 Super Munchers $29 Spr Solver: Mid Resc 35 $30 Spr Slver: Gizm&Gadge $26 Treasure Cove $29 Treas Math Storm WIN $32 Treasure Mountain $39 TreeHouse $39 Under Sea Adventure $39 Video Jam Wacky Funster Ancient Empire $25 Auto Map $39 AutoWorks S49 Boom Box $19 Castle of Dr Brain EGA $25 Castle of Dr Brain VGA $19 Children's Write & Publ $42 Civil War S57 Clock Works S19 Cuckoo Zoo $32 Discoveries of the Deep $37 Dyno-Quest $36 Eagle Eye Mysteries $32 Easy Street $36 EcoQuest 2 Lst Sct RainS34 EcoQuest VGA $32 Fatty Bear's Bday Surp $32 Island Of Dr. Brain VGA $29 Mario Teaches Typing $26 Marvin the Moose Vol 1 $30 Mavis Beacn Typing 35 $29 M Beacon Typing WIN35$34 Metrognomes Music $26 Mozart Magic Mus Mchn $18 Munchers Bundle $29 Orbits:Voyage Solar Sys $39 Pet Pan Story Paint Adv S34 Play Room $35 Print Shop Deluxe S49 Print Shp Dix Bus Graph S29 Putt Putt Goes to Moon S42 Putt Putt Joins Parade $32 Putt Putts Fun Pak $19 Quarky Quaysoo Trb Sci $29 Read Rab1: Erly Read35$32 Reader Rabbit 2 $37 Reader Rabbit 2 WIN $29 IBM CD ROM IBM HINT BOOKS $45 th Guest th Guest 2:11th Hour $65 th Gst OEM Jewl Case $35 dvs of Willie Beamish $39 egis: Guardian of Fleet $54 lone in the Dark S48 rctic Baron S29 17 Flying Fortrs w SS2 S37 ackroad Racers S43 arn Bear Goes to Schl S23 arn Bear Goes to Spce S23 attle Chess WIN&DOS $19 loodnet ilue Force: Next of Kin $39 luzz Aldrin Rce Space $59 A-Train $16 Advent Willie Beamish $10 Bard's Tale 1,2 or 3 ca $10 Blue Force: Next of Kin $10 Buck Rogers Countdown $10 Castle Wolfenstein 3D $10 Castle of Dr Brain S10 Champions of Krynn $10 Civilization S16 Codename Iceman $10 Colonel's Bequest $10 Conquests Robin Hood $10 CGW FEB 2 S29 "


"REVIEW HIT the ROAD, MAX LucasArts Takes To The Highway With Sam & Max by Charles Ardai am and Max, readers of Steve Purcell's comic strips will know, are a couple of weird-looking, sarcastic, gleefully subversive guys who have roughly as much respect for cows of the sacred variety as Beefsteak Charlie has for the ordinary sort. They delight in puncturing pomposity, exposing the tacky underbelly of our fine nation to the ridicule it both invites and deserves, and generally behaving like a pair of willfully malicious imps. They remind me of my friends. They are also, respectively, a laconic, suit-wearing dog and a hyperactive, misshapen rabbit. In this regard they do not resemble my friends. My friends are not laconic. If I like my friends, it would seem to follow that I must also like Sam and Max, and probably the new LucasArts game in which they make their software debut, Sam & Max Hit the Road and, in fact, I do. However, I have to admit to liking it measurably less than LucasArts' previous foray into cartoon-inspired comedy, Day of the Tentacle. Tentacle felt like an old Looney Tunes short, complete with pratfalls, goofy gags, and scads of silliness. Sam Max has its share of pratfalls, too, but it feels less like a Warner Brothers cartoon and more like an underground comic book. To begin with, the art is more edgy and raw. (Sam is a closer cousin to Matt Groening's \"Bongo\" from the \"Life In Hell» strip than to Bugs Bunny.) The music is quietly unnerving jazz instead of rousing calliope schtick. Some of the plot material the game introduces is chancier than a maincalculated to entertain rather than to disconstream cartoon would permit, the images cert. more scabrous, the jokes more adult. (\"Every For the sake of comparison, consider the time I catch enough fish to fill my net,\" one field of professional magic. More people like character complains, \"a helicopter swoops David Copperfield than Penn & Teller, a duo who resemble Sam and Max in many ways. Why? Because even if you enjoy their style and appreciate that they are less conservative and predictable than Copperfield, Penn & Teller can be hard to take after a while. Self-referential jokes, sneering remarks, deadpan derision, sarcasm, and ridicule can all be funny, but only to a point. Push the point too far and you can give the impression of the party guest trying too hard to be \"on,\" the comedian who doesn't know when to let up, or the teenage boor with a wisecrack for down and carries the fish off...It's like being e being every situation. every stuck in a Norman Mailer novel.\") It is probably not very useful to psychoanaWhile, on the whole, I believe that the lyze cartoon characters, bur Sam and Max are designers should be commended for taking a a pair of aggressive little buggers who vent chance with material that is certain to appeal to a Sam & Max Hit the Road smaller audience than they might have reached with TITLE: Sam & Max Hit the Road PRICE: $59.95 something easier or more SYSTEM: REQUIREMENTS: 386-33MHz or better recommended, accessible, it is a gamble 2MB RAM recommended, VGA that does not always pay graphics, 16MB hard drive space supports Ad Lib, Sound Blaster (Pro/16), off. There is a reason that PAS, Roland and General MIDI mainstream is more popusound cards PROTECTION: Documentation look up lar than underground, no DESIGNERS: Sean Clark, Mike Stemmle, Steve Purcell, and Collette Michaud matter what field you are PUBLISHER: LucasArts discussing: it is more fun San Rafael, CA (800) 782-7927 and less \"in your face\"; it's IBM Page 86 Computer Gaming World "


"AL Score: 75 Ker's Court November 9. 729 AM CHIPS &BITS A VENICE FAX  mom a PC John Neil states that he discovered the body of Polly Nichols a few minutes ago. He states that he believes that the murder was committed Den Of In GWZEYT MU T UAN PO Box 234 Rochester VT 05767 Call 800-699-4263 Int'l 802-767-3033 Fax 802 767-3382 Source-10027 JACK THE RIPPER' A mystery 100 years in the making with multiple solutions that offer new challenges replay after replay. Features a unique windowing system and supports Ad-Lib. Soundblaster and Gravis UltraSound boards. $39 THE MERCHANT PRINCE' Explore the world! Can you seek & explore the old world and find new worlds with their own prospering ports of call? Find advantageous trade routes. Historical & random maps. Up to 4 players. Modem play $39 THE COST TIME WE HAVE AGTUALLY ESPERIENCED FEAR FOR WATENIRO A COMPUTER GAME. GABRIEL KNIGHT: SINS OF THE FATHER Gabriel Knight is a horror writer and rookie private investigator. Your skill, logic and and courage will help him solve a series of ritual voodoo murders Includes 'Gabriel Knight\" graphic novel and features 3-D highresolution graphics. CD 545 'STAR WARS: REBEL ASSAULT Take control of a Star Wars vehicle in challenging piloting & combat scenarios. Hone flight & combat skills to defend Tatooine against Imperial at tack, challenge the menacing walkers of planet of Hoth and combat the Empire in intense deep Space battles. CD 548 AMAZON' recaptures the fun of the 1950's drive-in movies Travel to regions of the Ama. zon, fight 10 foot ants, and find emeralds stolen by Cortez. Amazing cinematic effects such as multiple camera angles, flashbacks, pans. and fades. Fea tures fully digitized voices & sound eltects $19 A SUPERNATURAL PSYCHO-THRILLER GABRIE KNIGHT SINS OF THE FATHERS. SIERRA IBM HINT BOOKS IBM HINT BOOKS IBM HINT BOOKS IBM ROLE PLAYING IBM ROLE PLAYING IBM SIMULATIONS $24 Conquests of Camelot S10 Curse of Azure Bonds S10 Dark Queen of Krynn S10 Darklands $14 peath Knights of Krynn $10 Dungeon Master $10 Dynamix Grt War Planes $16 Elvira 2 Jaws Cerberus $10 Elvira Mistress Dark $10 Eye of Beholder 1or 3 $10 Eye of the Beholder 2 S12 Erd Pharkas Fron Pharm S8 Gateway Savage Fron $10 Globe Conq Book w/disk $21 Goblilins $10 Gold Rush $10 Gunship 2000 $16 farpoon $16 Heart of China $10 Hero's Quest $10 mmortal $10 ndi Jnes 4 Fate Atlantis $10 King's Quest 1-6 ea $10 aura Bow 2 HintBook $10 Les Suit Larry 1.2.0r3ea $10 eisure Suit Larry 5 $9 emmings /disk $18 Loom $10 Lord of the Rings V1 $10 Lord of the Rings V2 S6 ost Files Sherl Holmes $10 LucasArts Adv Book S16 LucasArts Air Comb Gde$16 Magic Candle 2 S10 Magic Candle 3 S 10 Manhunter NY or SFran $10 Maniac Mansion $10 Martian Dreams $13 Matrix Cubed $10 Might & Magic 1 & 2 $10 Might & Magic 2 $12 Might & Magic 3 $16 Agt&Mag 4 Clouds Xeen$16 Might & Magic 5 $16 Off Bk Leis Suit Larry 2 S14 Off Book Ultima 2nd Ed S16 Off Gd Rog Witc Spc Ad S14 Off Gde King Quest 3 edS16 Off book of Police Quest $12 Pepper's Adventure Time S8 Planet's Edge S 16 Police Quest 1.2 or3 ea 510 Pool of Radiance S10 Pools of Darkness S12 Populous 1&2 Strat Bk S16 Power Monger Strategy S16 Powermonger $10 Protostar $8 Quest Clues 2.30r4 ea $21 Quest Clues 5 Bk Orbs $16 Qust Clue 6 Man Swrds $16 Quest for Glory 30r4 ea $10 Quest Glory Strat Gde $19 Questbusters: Bk Clues $18 Railroad Tycoon $12 Realms of Arkania S14 Return to Zork Return to Zork Adv Gde $16 Rex Neblr Cos Gen Ben $14 Rise of the Dragon $10 Savage Empire S10 Secret Monkey Isle 10r2 S10 Secret Silver Blades $10 Shadow Caster Shadow Sorcerer $10 Simlife Official Strategy S16 Space Quest 1-4 ea S10 Spellcasting 101: Off Bk S14 Spellcasting 201 BK S10 Star Trek 25th Aniv $9 Starflight for 2 ea $10 Strike Commnder Off Bk $14 Summoning $16 Tales Magic:Proph Shad $12 Treasures Savage Front $10 Tunnels & Trolls $16 Ultima 4-6 ea S10 Disciples of Steel $29 Ultima 7 S12 Dungeon Hack $42 Ultima 7 &Underworld BKS16 Dungeon Master $31 Ultima 7.5 Balnce ScalesS16 Dungeon Master 2 $36 Ultima Avatar Advs Book S16 Dusk of the Gods $16 Ultima U Stygian Abyss S12 Elvira 2 Jaws Cerberus $29 Uit Underworld Lab Book$12 Eternam $19 Warriors Etern Sun H BKS14 Eye of Beholder 1 or 2 S19 Wizardry 6 Cos Forge S12 Eye of the Beholder 2 S38 Wizardry 7 S16 Eye of the Beholder 3 $21 Yeager Air Comb Hndbk S16 Forgotten Castle $48 Yserbius $10 Gateway Savage Front S32 Gods $26 Interactive Movie 1 $52 IBM ROLE PLAYING Lands of Lore $34 Legacy: Realm Of Terror S39 Access Super Bundle $40 Legend $31 S19 Legend of Valor $39 Arborea Journ Inn Sanct $34 Lord of the Rings V1 S32 Arena: Elder Scrolls $44 Lord of the Rings V2 S37 Bard's Tale 3 Loremaster $39 Bard's Tale Construction $27 Lost Tribe S29 Black Crypt $32 Lure of the Temptress $37 Bloodstone S27 Magic Candle 1 S24 Bloodwych $15 Magic Candle 2 or 3 $19 Celtic Legends $32 Martian Dreams $37 Challenge of 5 Realms $39 Mega Traveller.Zhodani $19 Champions S37 MegaTraveller S24 Champions of Krynn Might & Magic 3 $36 CHARACTER EDS $16 Mght&Mag 4 Clds Xeen $39 Cobra Mission $39 Mght&Mag 5 D Sd Xeen $39 Conan S16 Mines of Titan Corporation S14 Pirales S19 Curse Azure Bonds $15 Pirates Gold $39 Cyber Empire $16 Planet's Edge S22 Cyber Space $39 Pool of Radiance $15 Dark Queen of Krynn $32 Pools of Darkness Dark Sun $47 Protostar $39 Drk Sun Grey Isle Ex Pk $34 Quest for Glory 3 $38 Darklands $39 Quest for Glory 4 $42 Darklands Mster Ed wbk $51 Realms of Arkania $35 Daughter of Serpents $19 Red Crystal $34 Death Knights of Krynn S21 Rome: Pathway Power $29 Circle Reader Service #46 Savage Empire S34 SpelJam:Pirate Rim Spc $16 Spellcraft:Aspects Valor $38 Star Saga 2 S28 Stonekeep $52 Stronghold $36 Summoning $38 Tales Magic: Prop Shad S16 The Genies Curse S45 Ultima 4 Quest of Avatar S35 Ultima 5 Warriors Dest $35 Ultima 5 Warnors Dest S38 Ultima 6 False Prophet S19 Ultima 7 Black Gate $48 Ultima 7 Forge of Virtue $18 Ultima 7.5 Part 2 Silv Sd S20 Ult 7.5 Serp Isle Spc Pk S18 Ultima 7.5 Serpent Isle 948 Ultima 8: Pagan S48 Ult 8: Pagan Spc Acc PKS17 Ultima 9: Ascension S52 Ult Uworld 2 Labyrinth S46 Ult Uwrld Stygian Abyss S19 Uncharted Waters S42 Unlimited Adventures $37 Veil of Darkness $37 Vengeance of Excalibur $16 Waxworks $29 Wizardry 5 ODCP $26 Wizard 6 Cosmic Forge $34 Wizardry 7 Crusaders $39 Aces Europe Miss 1 or 2527 Aces Over Europe $39 Aces Pacific Mission $19 Aces of the Deep $42 Aces of the Pacific $42 Air Warrior SVGA Armoured Fist Art of the Kill Assignment Miami $26 Attack Pack $42 B17 Flying Fort Classic S19 Car and Driver $26 Combat Classics 2 $29 Cyber Race $42 Delta V S48 Design Own Railroad $19 Elite 2 $38 Elite Plus S19 Eye of the Storm Fit Sim S29 F117A Stealth Fighter S42 F15 Strike Eagle 2 Scen S17 F15 Strke Egle 3 Ace PK S52 F15 Strike Eagle III S42 F19 Stealth Fighter S18 F 40 Pursuit Simulator $29 FA 18 Hornet $54 Falcon 3 Scent Fight Tgr$24 Falc 3 Scen3 FA 18 Horn$32 Falcon 3 Scen 2 MiG 29 $32 Falcon 3.0 $46 Falcon 4.0 $59 Fire & Forget 2 $30 Flat Top S48 Fit Defend F14 Tomcat $48 Flight Sim Toolkit S58 Flight of the Intruder S16 Fly the Grand Canyon $39 Grand Canyon Scenery $18 Grandest Fleet $36 Great Nav Bat Am in Atl $21 Grt Nav Bat Sp Ships Atl$19 Great Naval Batlles $44 Great Naval Battles 2 $39 CGW FEB 3 $9 IBM SIMULATIONS S29 $38 ATP 2.0 ATP Flight Simulator ATP Flight Sim 1.00 A.T.A.C A10 Avenger A320 Airbus AH-64 B Longbow AH-64 Helicopter $30 $46 $44 $54 $46 "


"Time IS NEW Boscos, SQILFE OFFICE MALZ Score: 2855 from lines of dialogue, as in Tenplacing the \"eye\" icon right on top of Max tacle, the player selects a type of will not work, while placing it above Max's speech act--question, exclamahead will. rion, non sequitur-or else None of the above interferes with gameplay chooses icons representing characto a serious extent, but it is needlessly annoySartres Angst Villa ters and events in the game. This ing. The new interface would need some ~ 3 Miles allows the game's writers to contweaking, therefore, before I could recomtinually surprise the player with mend it unreservedly. their context-sensitive witticisms, rather than displaying a list of gag Hare Of The Dog lines in a bland menu format. The Less easily tweakable is the game's storyline, technique adds spice already in the a rambling, picaresque mishmash centered floppy-disk version of the game; around the pursuit of an AWOL Sasquatch gobs of latent hostility and alienation in their when the inevitable CD-ROM who has vanished from a New England freak obnoxious running commentary on everyversion comes out, replacing printed text with show. Sam and Max, \"freelance police\" by thing they encounter. They are constantly speech, the degree to which the new system trade, are called upon to track down Bruno egging each other on, trying to top each other improves interactive conversations should be the Bigfoot and, while they are at it, Trixie in cleverness and sang-froid, and it tries one's even more apparent. the Giraffe-Necked Girl, who vanished on patience. Not that the obnoxious remarks Extensive use of spoken-word audio will the same day. They undertake this mission by aren't funny, if you go for that sort of thingalso help in a less obvious way. Some of the poking around the freak show's various tents they often made me laugh out loud, but dialogue text, which is color coded to indicate and trailers and (for no apparent reason) a enough is enough, and what is who is speaking, is hard to read against some chain of discount grub-huts funny for the duration of a tencalled \"Snuckey's.\" Their invespanel comic strip starts to grate afleert tigation leads them to a series of ter a few hours of gameplay. tourist traps around the country such as \"The World's Largest Play It Again, Sam ALIQUOR BABY NEEDS USED Ball of Twine\" (where they have The gameplay itself is solid. Luto chat up a psychic and steal a casArts has renovated its SCUMM mood ring) and «The World of game engine by removing the inFish\" (where they have to pilfer ventory and command icons from a pailful of fish and then disthe screen, allowing the whole guise themselves as a giant space to be occupied by graphics. trout). The result is that there is room for Along the way there are lots of the characters to be drawn large and weird characters to talk with in detail; this, plus the elimination (my favorite being the painfully of the \"interface frame\" surroundloquacious Doug the Mole ing the graphics, helps break down Man) and puzzles to solve. The the barrier berween the player and latter tend not to be very hard, the action. It's one more step, and not a backgrounds. Sam's brown text is especially cially particularly since the characters periodically barricularly since the characters periodically negligible one, toward allowing gamers to prone to illegibility, while Max's white letters give the player a nudge in the right direction. play a cartoon.\" can be eye-scaring if your monitor's bright(«I'm sure this is somehow useful,\" Sam says ness is turned a notch too high. Replacing text Players still select from the usual command at one point, pointing to a set of binoculars. with audio should eliminate the problem. icons (Walk, Talk, Use, Take, Look), which \"I think we're supposed to do something in Of course, different color schemes or some they cycle through by clicking the right there,\" says Max at another, as they exit the kind of letter shadowing could also have mouse button. Clicking on a cardboard box carnival's Tunnel of Love ride.) The hardest eliminated the problem, and the fact that they stowed in one corner of the screen calls up puzzles are the ones that require the player to weren't used suggests (mildly) inadequate one's inventory; any of the objects one has use Max as a tool, since it is not obvious just forethought on LucasArts' part. There are collected can then be picked up and used as other examples, too. Consider one what he is useful for. At various times, you command icons themselves. (It is worth menquirk of cycling through icons tioning that, once again, LucasArts has come rather than selecting them from a up with some of the cleverest and best-drawn menu: if one attempts to use an icons in the business. What these guys can object on someone or something conjure up in less than a half-inch of space is inappropriate, the computer incredible.) jumps the cycle back to the default Perhaps the most novel element of the \"walk\" icon, requiring the player to 9 gameplay is the way in which conversations click several times in order to bring are handled. When the player clicks the up the object again for another try. \"clacking teeth\" icon on a character, a row of Or consider the peculiarities of dialogue and subject icons appears across the icon placement: sometimes, if you bottom of the screen. Instead of choosing want to look at Max (for instance), IZH ZOMEO Page 88 Computer Gaming World "


"LANDS OF LORE OY CHOS CHIPS &BITS \"LANDS OF LORE The dark army encroaches. King Richard falls and Scotia beckons you... laughing. In her mad quest for power, Scotia has ravaged the King. dom. She seeks the throne yet it eludes her. She's getting desperate and mean, Can you stop her? Do you even dare to? CD$44 *PACIFIC STRIKE is a World War II flight simulation that allows you to change the course of the war in the Pacific Theater. Fly a wide variety of expertly modeled aircraft in all the major theatres, in cluding Pearl Harbor and Midway. Plan your own missions and earn promotions. Features VGA Graphics. $52 PO Box 234 Rochester VT 05767 Call 800-699-4263 Intl 802-767-3033 Fax 802-767-3382 'Source-10027 FRIGIN. RED CRYSTAL DUSK GODS MERHIN \"The Seven Secrets of Life\" TTELARS 183 \"RED CRYSTAL Seek out the 7 secrets of life. Can you forge through the evil that lurks in the depths of the eerie dun. geons, the ominous castle towers and the savage countryside? Play alone or modem it. Features over 50 levels, breathtaking graphics and an auto map. ping feature. $34 DUSK OF THE GODS' Become an Einherjor, one of Odin's champions, & travel throughout the lands of Norse Mythology. Battling hostile creatures will be one of many challenges you must face on your journey. Alter events so the gods may defeat the minions of Loke at the Battle of Ragnorak $16 \"MECHWARRIOR 2' Climb into one of 16 Battle Mechs and prepare to set your imagination on fire. You're strapped into a 100-ton machine that can annihilate a squadron of F-15s in a heartbeat. And you're about to battle your way across the planetary terrain. From ice to desert to urban land. $42 Apie 23 DEC. ene. -Q9Pinterstel IBM SIMULATIONS IBM SIMULATIONS IBM SIMULATIONS IBM SPORTS IBM SPORTS IBM STRATEGY $15 $39 $36 S19 Great Nav Bat Scen Bld $28 Gunship 2000 Scen Disk$24 Gunship 2000 VGA $37 Harrier Assault S32 Harrier Assault SVGA $48 ndy Car Racing $39 Jet Fighter 2.0 Jet Fighter 2.0 Mis Disk $19 lump Jet Jump Jet Aces Pack $50 Life and Death $19 Life and Death 2 $24 Lunar Command 1 Tank Platoon Classic $19 M4: Sherman Tank Sim $34 Mantis Exp Speech Pak $19 Mantis Exp Ftr VGA $28 Mantis Exp Ft VGA $34 Maximum Overkill $43 Max Overkill Mis Disk 1 $24 Max Overkill Mis Disk 2 $29 Mechwarrior 2 S42 Megafortress Miss Dsk 2526 MiG 29 $48 Microsoft Flight Sim 5.0 542 Microsft Fight Sim 5 SF $32 Microsft Fight Sim 5 DC $29 Microsoft Spce Sim 1.0 544 Mig 29 Fulcrum $32 New Facilities Locator S18 Pacific Strike $52 Pacific Strike Spch Pak $18 Power Boat Simulator $39 Power Politics WIN S 19 Privateer $47 Privateer Special Op $22 Privateer Speech Pack $17 Rally Rd Baron Mis Dsk Blder $18 Red Baron VGA $36 Red Storm Rising ODCPS18 Rd&Trk Grd Prix Unlim S34 Sailing Instrctr Pk VGA S239 S14 Sail Sm 3 Est or Wst Cst$32 Sailing Simulator 3 $42 Scenery Collect Set A S19 Scenery Collect Set B S34 Scen Col Califor Gr Brit S19 Scenery Enhance Ed $21 Scen: Hawaii or Tahiti $16 Sea Wolf $48 Seal Team $42 Secret Weap Luftwaffe $34 Sec Weap Exp 3 He 162 $21 Secret Weap Exp P38 $21 Shuttle $26 Silent Service 2 Speed Racer $34 Strike Commander $41 Strke Comnd Spec Op1 $20 Strike Comnd Spch Pk $16 Strom Troop $54 Stunt Island $37 Sub War 2025 $42 Syndicate Task Force Adm Pack $52 Team Yankee 2 $24 Test Drive 2 $30 Test Drive 2:Collection $19 Test Drve 2:Euro Chalnge $6 Test Drive 3 Test Drve 3: Passion $19 Test Drive 3:Road & Car $16 Thunderhawk $16 Tie Fighter $48 Tornado $48 Tracon WIN $28 Ultrabots Sanction Earth $39 Voice Command F117A $18 Voice Comnd F15SE3 $18 WC 2 Operation 1 WC 2 Operation 2 $22 WC2 Speech Mod $13 WC Secret Mission $20 WC Sec Mis 182 Bundle $20 WC Secret Mis 2 HD S20 Nascar Challenge $29 PGA Tour Golf $21 Pro Tennis Tour 2 $32 QuarterPole $30 Road to the Final Four $37 Summer Challenge $34 The Games Winter Chal $29 Tom Landry Football Dix $29 Tny LRussa Class Stad $15 Tny LRussa Bsb2 92 Tm$14 TLRssa Bsb2 Fnt Mng3 $14 Tny LRussa2 Bsbll Stad $18 Tny LRussa AL Stad S15 Tony LaRussa BB 1990 $15 Tony LaRussa BB 1991 $15 Tony LaRussa Baseball $19 Tony LaRussa Bsball 2 $36 Team Disk 1992 $16 Tony LRussa Fant Mngr $15 Tony LRussa NL Stads $15 TLRussa Tms 1901-68 $15 Unneces Roughness S34 W Gretsky Lgue Sim 2 $29 W Gretzky Hockey 3 S36 Weaver Baseball 2.0 S17 Weaver Commis Disk 2 S16 Wilson Pro Staff Golf S23 Wing Armada $54 Lance Haffner Baseball $36 Wing Commander $19 Lance Haffner Boxing $36 Wing Commander 2 $29 Lance Haffner Coll BBall $36 Wing Commander 3 $52 Lance Haffner Football $36 Wing Commander Acad S32 Lance Haffner Hockey S36 Wolfpack Links Courses:Firestone S17 World Circuit $35 Links Courses: Bay Hill $17 X-Wing $38 Links Courses:Pinehurst $17 X-Wing Mis Disk 1or 2 $18 Links Courses: Dorado $17 Yeager's Air Combat $21 Links Crses:Troon North $17 Links Pro 386 Golf $32 Links Pro: Mauna Kea S19 IBM SPORTS Links Pro: Pinehrst $19 Links Pro: Banff Spr $19 APBA Baseball S24 Links Pro: Belfry $19 APBA Bsbl Statmstr 2.0 S29 Links Pro: Innsbrook $19 APBA Bowling Links Pro: 6 Firestone $20 APBA Football $34 Links Pro: 7 Peb Bch $24  Hockey S32 ML 1950s World Series $17 APBA Micro Manager $32 ML 1960s World Series S17 ATP Tennis (Wrld Tour) S32 ML 1970s World Series S17 Action Sports Soccer S19 ML 1980s World Series S17 American Gladiators $21 ML Bsbl 4 Fantasy Mngr S25 Baseball for Windows $46 ML Bsbil 4 Gen Mngr $19 Dave Robinson NBA Act $44 ML Bsball All Teams ea $20 Front Page Football Pro $42 ML Football 2 $39 GREENS $34 ML Personal Pro Golf $28 Hardball 3 Collection $39 Madden Football 2 $17 Hardball 3 Players Disk $16 Michael Jordan Flgt Sim $21 Internal Sports Chall $21 ML 83-88 Bsbal Seas ea $17 Jack Nicklaus Crs1-5 ea $15 Microlgue 89 FB Seas $17 J Nicklaus Signature Ed S27 Microlgue Bsbll 4 US Tod $31 Joe Montana Football S31 Microlgue Bsbl 4 USTod $28 Joe Montana Football 2 $42 Microleague Basketball $28 LH Boxing Contenders S16 Microleague Football S20 LH Football Utilities S16 Microsoft Golf WIN $48 LH Pro BBall 91 Tm Dsk $16 Mike Ditka Pwr Ftball $34 LH Pro Bball Utilities $16 NFL Challenge $60 LH Pro Basketball $36 NFL Chal Premium Ed $59 LH Pro Bball 74-83 Tms $16 NFL Coaches Club $36 LH Pro Bball 8990 Tms $16 NFL Football $19 LH Pro Bball L Leaders $16 NFL Video Football $39 LH Pro Bball Utilities S16 NHL Hockey $44 Circle Reader Service #46 $36 Breach 2 $24 Breach 2 Scenario Disk $15 Breach 3 S36 Buzz Aldrin Race Space S38 Caesar $36 Campaign 2 $36 Capitalist Pig WIN $19 Carriers at War $24 Carriers at War 2 $39 Carriers War Const Kil $29 Castles $18 Castles 2 Chesmstr 4000 Trb WIN $36 Civilization $44 Civilization WIN $42 Clash of Steel $39 Cohort 2 $18 Command HQ Classic $18 Conquer for Windows $36 Conquered Kingdoms $36 Cong Kingdoms Scen 1 S24 Conquest of Japan $36 Crisis in the Kremlin $39 Dark Star S36 Detroit S36 Discovery Stp Columb $34 Dominion: 1 King's Life S41 Dominus Dune Dune 2 El Fish Empire Deluxe Empire DLX Scenario 1 $21 Empire Deluxe WIN $35 Railroad Tycoon 534 Fantasy Empires Fields of Glory Final Conflict Fort Apache Gemfire Genghis Khan 2 Genghis Khan ODCP Gettysburg $29 $29 $39 IBM STRATEGY $34 $34 $36 A Train $34 A Train Construction Set $23 A Train W Const Set S44 Air Force Commander $16 Airbucks 1.2 $24 Ambush at Sorinor S42 Arctic Baron $29 Armada S22 Armada 2525 $29 Ashes of Empire Battles of Destiny Big Business $29 8833 534 $36 $37 CGWEFRA "


"WEIRY CREEPY have to use him as an interrogator, a circuit breaker, and a knife; the best heuristic to keep in mind is, \"When all else fails, try using Max.\" Other sequences that some If you leus in weigest you an players may find difficult include antacids the two action sequences that must be completed successfully to finish the game, «Wak-A-Rat\" and \"Gator Golf.» The former lias Sam pounding rats with a hammer at the carnival; quick and accurate placement of the mouse is key to passing this hurdle. The latter has Sam whacking fish into a gator-infested swamp in order to build a bridge between the shore nothing is weak. None of them have anything to do with the game's story, however, and the island on which Max is imprisoned. and their presence (along with that of a bunch Dexterity is less crucial here, but it takes a of screen savers that kick in if you don't do while to figure out how to get the gators to anything for a few minutes) contribute to the move where you want them to. feeling that Sam & Max is more a computerSam & Max also contains a handful ofized busybox—not unlike the very road trip optional sub-games, including a version of \"activity books\" the designers satirize at every \"Battleship\" called \"Car Bomb,\" a coloring turn-than a unified, focused piece of fiction. book, a set of Sam and Max dress-up dolls, and a simple driving/jumping game called To The Max \"Highway Surfing.\" Ofthese, only the last (in which the player can get up to Level 7 or However gonzo Day of the Tentacle got, it thereabouts just by sitting back and doing was always grounded in a very clear and welldeveloped storyline and it made sure we cared about the characters and their plight. Samo Max is all over the map, literally; its main characters are basically jerks; and the quest they are on is of no significance even to them. So, although individual scenes in the game can be quite funny, the whole is rather less than the sum of its parts. Day of the Tentacle was that rarest of all creations, one in which everything came together perfectly. Sam & Max is fine, but lesser. It's like the difference between Raiders of the Lost Ark and Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doomor between the original Maniac Mansion and its lackluster follow-up, Zak McKracken and the Alien Mindbenders. Gamers ravenous for a LucasArts fix after finishing Tentacle finishing Tentacle will find that Sam & Max affords a couple of hours of somewhat similar amusement. Endlessly sarcastic New York intellectuals like my friends will find its tone wholly agreeable, but whether it plays in Peoria remains to be seen. Sam & Max marches to a different drummer. You'll have to decide if you can dance to its irregular beat. Cow NADIAN BECAUSE IT'S NOT JUST A GAME! A service organization developed to integrate technology and creativity to deliver a package of uncompromising high quality. DEPENDABLE, SEASONED PROFESSIONALS WITH THE FLEXIBILITY TO HANDLE ALL OF YOUR NEEDS. VERSATILITY IS OUR BUSINESS! AUDIO PRODUCTION? WE DELIVER EVERYTHING! RESULTS? WHAT DO YOU THINK? Certified developers for:  Composition, Arrangement, & Full Orchestration  Film Scoring . Sound Design  MIDI/SMPTE. Voice Over & ADR Service Media Vision CREATIVE We offer complete audio production for Film, Video, Multimedia.  Programming Writing. Game Design/Consulting Services also available. CREATIVE LAUS, INC. @Roland Extensive list of credits in the Multimedia and Film/Video Industries. For More Information Call (512) 834-8325 12330 Metric Blvd., Ste. 7202  Austin, TX 78758-2524 Circle Reader Service #96 Page 20 Computer Gaming World "


"CHIPS &BITS Pebble Beach \"PEBBLE BEACH GOLF LINKS' is the first in a series of LINKS CLASSIC EDITION courses made for the LINKS 386 PRO with VGA graphics Designers and programmers spent more than a year reproducing every nuance of Pebble Beach. Users will feel like they've actually played the course! S24 'THE PATRICIAN is a trading game based in Germany. Become a member of the social elite and begin to trade your way to the top. But, beware, the road to the top is bumpy Set against spectacular backdrops &covering 16 towns across medieval Europe, The Patrician is a compex & involved strategy game. $34 PO Box 234 Rochester VT 05767 Call 800-699-4263 Int'l 802-767-3033 Fax 802-767-3382 Source-10027 Championshin COURSE BCS ACCESS PRO LEAGUE D.R.A.G.O.N. FORCE NFL \"NFL PRO LEAGUE FOOTBALL' hits you like a 240 pound fullback with the goal line in sight. Coach your favorite team. Choose from 198 plays or create your own Features full detailed, color animation, NFL teams, players & stats, full rosters with substitutions, instant replay and true modem play. S39 'FLEET DEFENDER F14' Whether on routine Fleet detense duties, air to air combat engagements or special intercept missions. the F-14 Tomcat leads the field. Features state of the art 3D visuals. accurate flight modeling of all planes, authentic radar and weapons system, & campaigns. $48  DRAGON FORCE They're armed, dangerous and ready for action. They're the Drastic Response Assault Group Op erations Network Force an elite international strike force against terrorism. Lead your team of top secret trouble shooters on special operations to the hottest spots world wide. S12 2 RE Teams interstel IBM STRATEGY IBM STRATEGY IBM STRATEGY IBM TRADITIONAL IBM TRADITIONAL IBM WAR GAMES Take Break Crsswrd WINS24 Terminator Chess $34 Terminator 2 Chess WarsS37 Tesserae WIN S16 Timp Cst 2 Cas Rst Bay S16 Trump Castle 3 S34 Virtual Reality Studio 2 564 $36 IBM WAR GAMES $36 $26 3tysbrg: Intract Bat Sim $34 Global Domination S29 Goblins 2 Princes Buffn $24 Gold of the Americas S24 Grt Nav Battles Adm PakS48 HUMANS S24 Harpoon 2 S48 Harpoon 2 Battle Set 1 526 Heirs to the Throne S36 Humans: Insult to Injury S14 Kingdoms of France S34 Kingdoms of Germany $34 Koshan Conspiracy $32 Kye Deluxe WIN S33 L'Empereur S37 Laser Squad $16 Lemmings 2:The Tribes S35 Lemmings Datadisk S19 Lemmings ODCP Liberty or Death $37 Lost Admiral $19 Lost Admiral Enhanced $44 Lost Admiral Scen Disk S23 Lost Vikings S24 Maelstrom $38 Master of Orion $39 Mega Lo Mania $31 Merchant Colony $17 Napoleonics $34 New World Order $38 Vuclear War $19 Outpost $48 Overlord $21 Paladin 2 $34 Patrician $34 Perfect General S36 Perfect General 2 S44 Pertet Gen Scen 2 20th $23 Pert Gen Scen WW2 $21 Populous S17 Populous 2 $28 Populous Promise Lnds $14 Powermonger $34 Rags to Riches $36 Railroad Tycoon Classic $19 Railroad Tycoon 2 $40 Rampart $17 Reach for the Stars $24 Realms $16 Red Zone $32 Renegade Leg Intercep S21 Riders of Rohan S19 Robo Sport WIN S 34 Romance 3 Kingdoms $42 Romance 3 Kingdoms 2 $39 Romance 3 Kingdoms 3 $36 Rules of Engagement 2 $38 Second Conflict WIN $34 Seven Cities Gold 2 $36 Shadow President S39 ShadowGate WIN $32 Sid Meir's Civil War $58 Siege With Exp Disk $24 Sim Ant $32 Sim Ant Windows $34 Sim City Classic $27 SimCity Classic Win S29 Sim City 2000 $42 Simcity 2000 Windows $42 Simcty Graphic Set 10r2 $23 Simcity WIN $34 Simearth $34 Simearth WIN $29 Simfarm $41 Simhealth $29 Simlife $39 Simlife WIN $39 Smokin' Gun WIN S28 Space Hulk S36 Spaceward Ho! Spaceward Ho! WIN $36 Special Forces $39 Star Control $29 Str Cntl 2:Ur-Quan Mstrs $34 Star Legions $24 Strike Squad $41 Sub Version $36 Dr Thorp's Blackjack $32 Task Force 1942 $39 Gambit $36 Tegel's Mercenaries $18 Game-Maker Ver 2.0 $49 Tegel's Mercenaries 2 $44 Go Master Dix Ver 4015 $89 The Complete UMS $44 Go Mstr Dix 5 WIN 53 $79 Theatre of War $16 Go Master Jr Ver 4or 5 $19 Theatre of War Set 1 Go Mstr Jr Ver 5 WIN 53 $19 Traders $15 Go Master Tool Kit $39 Unnatural Selection $38 Go Mstr Tool Kit WIN 53 $79 Utopia $29 Go Master Ver 4 $34 Vikings Fields Conquest $19 Go Master Ver 4or5 WIN $39 Visions of Aftermath $16 Go Master Ver 5 $39 Walls of Rome $39 Grand Slam Bridge 2 $27 War in the Gulf $34 Grand Master Chess S19 Warlords 2 $42 GrndMaster Chess Dix $37 When Two Worlds War $42 Home Alone 2 $26 Worlds at War $19 Hong Kong Mah Jong Pro $32 Hoyle's Bk Gmes Class $29 Jeopardy 25th Aniv $15 Jeopardy Sports Edition $7 IBM TRADITIONAL Jeopardy. Super Talking $16 Joseki Genius $39 An Am Tail Coloring BK $19 King's Table $24 Animat Wrkshp $29 Laffer Utilities WIN $21 Bart Chess 4000 SVGA $36 Lucky's Casino Adv $39 Battle Chess EGAVGA S18 Monopoly Deluxe $29 Battle Chess WIN $18 Monopoly Deluxe WIN S29 Beat the House $29 Onigamo $39 Casino Game Pak WIN $32 Pinball Dreams Casino Mstr Gold WIN $43 Pool Shark $18 Checkmate S36 Positronic Bridge $30 Checkmate WIN S 36 Positron Brdge CompSE $60 ChessManiac 5 Bil & 1 $42 Price is Right $15 Chessmaster 2000 S27 Risk $19 Chessmaster 3000 $29 Russian Six Pack $39 Chessmaster 3000 WIN $35 Scrabble Deluxe $26 Classic 5 $32 Shanghaii 2 $29 Classic 5 WIN $30 Solitaire Royale $19 Clue Master Detective S16 Solitaire WIN $28 Cribbage Master $29 Solitaire's Journey WIN S38 Dealer's Choice $19 Solitaires Journey S34 Doodiemation Windows S19 Star Wars Chess $38 Dr Floyds Desktop Toys S14 Super Jeopardy $19 Circle Reader Service #46 Fleet Med $27 Gary Grigsby Pacif War $45 Gary Grigsby's War Rus $45 German Raider Atlantis 526 Gettysburg: Turning Point$36 Golan Front Grand Fleet $36 Grey Seas, Grey Skies $36 Halls of Montezuma S24 High Command S45 In Harms Way Kriegsmarine S36 Kursk Campaign $36 Long Lance $39 Main Battle Tank C Germ$36 Main Batt Tank MidEast $36 Main Battle Tank N Germ$36 Malta Storm $36 Man of War S36 Mare Nostrum S26 Marianas Turkey Shoot S14 Midway S26 Moscow Campaign Northern Fleet $36 Operation Overlord $36 Pac Storm Midway Cpgn $36 Pac Strm Solomn Camp $36 Panzer Battles $24 Patriot Patton Strikes Back $14 Prelude to Jutland $26 Red Sky Morning $36 Return to Falklands $28 Rising Sun S26 Rd Sumter to Appomatx S45 Rommel Bat For N AfricaS24 Rommel at El Alamein S36 Rommel at Gazala $36 Second Front $21 Squad Leader $48 Stalingrad Campaign $36 The Great War $39 Third Reich S34 $36 Across the Rhine $45 Action North Atlantic $26 Action off River Platte $26 Air Raid Pearl Harbour S22 Am Civil War 1.2 or 3 S24 Banzai S26 Battle Stations $22 Battle Tank Barbarossa $36 Battle Tank Kursk $39 Battle of Austerlitz Battle of Leyte Gulf $24 Battle of the Atlantic S36 Battles of Napoleon S24 Battleship Bismark $26 Blitzkrieg Ardennes Blood & Iron $48 Blue and the Grey $36 Borodino Napoleon Inv $29 Bravo Romeo Delta $29 Campaign Campaign Mission 1 $18 Carrier Strike Carrier Strike Exp Pak $19 Charge of Light Brigade $18 Decision at Gettysburg S18 Dreadnoughts Dreadnoughts Bismark S29 Dreadnoughts Deluxe S89 Dreadnoughts Ironclads $29 Drums of Glory $44 Fall Gelb Fifth Eskadra $36 $19 $23 $38 $36 CGW FEB 5 "


"REVIEW Mortar Combat! Battling With BRIX In MicroLeague's Latest by Allen L. Greenberg tii SEURS AN ONUNUN KAN AAN FLAVERI Stones ZZZ The secret to the success of the rubber highlighted using the space bar, at band and the paper clip in the office which point that brick may then be PLAYER 1 environments of the world is twofold: moved in whichever direction is they are simple, useful and cheap. And, peropen. Those familiar with the clashaps more importantly, they are cleverly dissic computer and arcade game guised toys for bored executives and Boulder Dash will probably feel at secretaries. This may be the best explanation home with the action here. for their ubiquiry in desks throughout the The game is divided into BRIX 1 world, especially those mahogany desks genand BRIX 2, which probably reerally lacking in papers to be clipped or ob flects its shareware origin. Both Ex3 jects to be rubber-banded. games contain seven levels, each of With the invention of the desktop dart which are divided into a variety of board, the executive fly-swatter and Tetris, sub-levels, difficulties, and subthe demand for office toys has been brought sub-levels so that the package boasts a total of gadgets appearing in some of the mazes. out into the open, and such toys need no 224 different challenges. Each puzzle is Automatic laser guns destroy everything in longer masquerade as marginally useful pieces tagged with its own secret code so that you their path and are set to fire every few seconds. of office equipment. Now, proudly and with can return to the puzzle in the future without You may destroy bricks by dropping them out false pretense, a pastime based on the playing through the carlier portion of the into an acid or water bath, although using the common household building brick becomes game. acid bath will cause the round to end. Transan object of recreation in BRIX, a new abAs long as they are adjacent to each other porters beam bricks from one portion of the stract strategy game from MicroLeague Inin either horizontally or vertically, any number maze to another. There are elevators that teractive. of matching bricks will cause an carry bricks up or down, as well as crumbling explosion. Several different brick bricks that turn to dust within several seconds patterns appear in each maze, and of supporting another brick. The most interthere is a varying number of bricks esting of these gadgets is an hourglass that causes the entire screen to do a vertical flip that bear the same pattern. An even ZZO number of matching bricks is usuevery few seconds. ZOZ ally easier to eliminate, since these BRIX includes a \"level solver\" which will, may be taken out in pairs. An odd mid-game, demonstrate the solution to a parnumber of matching bricks means ticular puzzle, provided you have earned that, at some point, the three bricks enough game points to pay for this service. must be brought together at the There is also a puzzle cditor that allows you same instant. to alter an existing puzzle or to wipe it out in IX XXXX The mazes can be quite complex favor of one of your own design. Each of BRIX'S two-dimensional screens and therefore require some careful BRIX is certainly an entertaining little exercontains a maze, the walls and borders of study. Unfortunately, careful study is a luxury cise, although its potential for desktop-based which may nor be altered during the game. you cannot afford due to a countdown timer addiction is not quite as high as its package The bricks in BRIX are inscribed with a varithat restricts each round to a small number of would lead you to believe. It may, however, ety of patterns and are scattered throughout fleeting minutes. An option to pause the prove more engaging, and certainly more each maze. The object is to manipulate the game is not available, and although cach challenging, than creating paper clip chains bricks so that two or more touch each other. round of the game may be reset and shooting rubber bands into coffee When they do, look out. Call it love, call it to the beginning as many as two BRIX mugs. hate—either way, the brief affair ends explotimes, this option does not reset sively. Each patterned brick must \"meer its the timer. Players who enjoy TITLE: BRIX march,\" so to speak, in order for the level to tackling these types of chal$34.95 SYSTEM: IBM be complete. lenges at a leisurely, crosswordREQUIREMENTS: 206 or better, VGA graphics, 1.5MB hard drive space: supports BRIX is played using only the keyboard, and puzzle manner may be unhappy Sound Blaster sound card neither the mouse nor the joystick are supwith this panicked pace. PROTECTION: None DEVELOPER: Epic MegaGames ported. A brick-shaped cursor is manipulated Making BRIX somewhat PUBLISHER: Microleague Software about the screen using the four directional more interesting than the averNewark, DE (800) 334-6572 keys. Once the cursor is on a brick, it may be age brain teaser are a variety of DON VANNNNNAN  CARE CGW PRICE: Page 92 Computer Gaming World "


"Senflict CHIPS &BITS The Galactic Conflict Continues 'SECOND CONFLICT is a game of interstellar strategy & conquest for windows. Control all aspects of the economy, military and civilian populalion. Allocate resources to produce battleships, stealth ships, transports and missiles. Features multiple human & computer players & a scenario editor. $34 ARCTIC BARON Your mission is vital: free the planet from perpetual winter and economic slavery. You command a giant steam powered train, but as your journey unfolds your need for fresh supplies be comes essential Featuring 3-D maps, exquisite graphics, excellent sound effects & music. $29 PO Box 234 Rochester VT 05767 Call 800-699-4263 Int'l 802-767-3033 Fax 802-767-3382 Source-10027 Aleut... File Vene Level T UN NATURAL Map Display Modify . corps Pavel N flases a Extras r IngLOR Dreadnoughts MORE Tourant EXCITING SEA BATTLES ever for trg UNNATURAL SELECTION' is a game that com. bines artificial life and animation to create simulation with plot & intrigue. You must selectively breed & mutate artificial creatures to outwit your mad scientist opponent. $38 6 FREE Issues of Strategy Plus' wl Unnatural Selection Purchase. \"DREADNOUGHTS models the looks and tactics of tighting fleets during the great age of the battleship Includes 7 scenarios such as: Falklands (1914). Jutland (1916) and Bank (1915). Features menu interface for entering com. mands, external 3D view & hidden movement. 1 or 2 players. $34 RED SES Onze DE 'THE COMPLETE UNIVERSAL MILITARY SIMULATOR' UMS, UMS II: Nations at War, the UMS II: Planet Edit American Civil War Scenarios, Desert Storm Scenarios, over 500 pages of dox all together in a 3 ring binder and slipcase. $44 IBM WAR GAMES IBM BUDGET IBM BUDGET IBM BUDGET AMIGA FREE GAME OFFER $9 $6 To The Rhine $36 V Vic: Gold, Juno, Sword$44 Victory at Sea $46 War in the Falklands $26 Warship Changed Histry $26 Waterloo $19 White Death $19 WW 2 Battles S Pacific $34 Vaxine S12 Video Poker Villa Crespo $9 Video Poker Win S12 Video Poker by Masque $9 Warlords Wheel of Fortune 2 $9 Wver Tm & Play Stats 89 $6 X-Men $9 Spend the specified amount on any in stock software and choose a free IBM game from the corresponding list below. Offer subject to change or cancellation without notice. Valid from Janist through Feb 28th or while supplies last. $29 IBM BUDGET $9 AMIGA SPEND $100 $7 Shanghai 2 Shark Attack Ult Golf $6 S Holmes Con Det 3 CD $19 S Holmes Con Detec CD$19 Sim Ant $19 Simcity Simcity Terrain Editor S9 Space Ace 2 MONO $19 Spirit Excalibur COLOR $14 Star Trek 25th Anniv $19 Starflight 1 $19 Super Tetris $19 Treasure Trap $9 Test Drive 2 $19 Test Drive 2:CA Chal $6 Test Drive 2:Muscle Cars $3 Test Drive 2:Supercars $6 UMS 2 $19 Vette Where Europe Carmen $19 Wordtris $19 Yeager's AFT $19 $9 S9 $9 $9 $19 S8 $12 Covert Action $12 Crime City $12 Crime Does Not Pay $12 Dark Hall Das Boot Submarine $12 Diplomacy $12 Dr Thorp's mini Blckjck $12 Dr Doom's Revenge $9 D Wng Jcks&Vid Pker 5 $12 Dragon Force $12 Dragon Lord Dragon Strike $12 Dragons of Flame $9 Electric Jigsaw $12 F15 Strike Eagle 1 Fighting for Rome $12 Free DC Games Master WIN $6 Gauntlet 2 Global Effect Gunship Harmony $5 Hearts $12 Hole in 1 Mini Golf Delux $12 Interact Adlt Sampler CD$12 Jack Nicklaus Clip Art $9 J Nicklaus SE Course 1 $9 Jeopardy 1 or 2 $9 Jeopardy Junior S9 John Elway Quarterback S6 Land Sea Air Trilogy S12 Leather Goddesses $12 Lexicross $12 Lightspeed $9 Lnks Crses:Barton Creek $9 MUDS $12 ML Baseball All Stars $12 Madden Football Marvel Trilogy $12 Matrix Cubed $12 Medieval Lords MegaFortress $12 Mega Traveller 2 $12 $12 Metal & Lace Upgrade S5 Micro legue bsbl Sea 13 $12 Millenium $6 Obliterator Oligopoly $9 On Target $12 Operation Comba! $12 Penthouse Jigsaw XXX $12 Pictionary $12 Pirates a must $6 Playmaker Football $12 Power Drome $9 Predator 2 $12 Punisher Puzzle Gallery 1 Puzzle Master $6 RR Tycoon W Strat Pls $12 Red Storm Rising Rings of Medusa $12 Ruckus Poker $12 Ruckus Roulette Savage Sentinel Worlds 1 $9 Seventh Fleet $3 Shadow Sorcerer $12 Siege $12 Snoopy's Fun Pack $12 Sony SRS7 Speakers $9 Sony SRS9 Speakers $14 Spot S9 Storm Across Europe S12 Strategic Forces $9 Street Ball $12 Taking of Beverly Hills $12 Team Yankee $12 Test Drive2: Supercars $12 Tie Break Tennis $9 Trmp Cst 2 Cas Rsrt Bay S6 Trmp Cst 2 DD1 Lts Sits $4 Trump Cst 2 DD2 Pker 2 $4 Turn-n-Burn $12 Typhoon of Steel $12 Under Fire $12 007 Jas Bond Stealth Aff$12 3D Pinball S12 3 in 1 Players's Pack $9 Action Stations Scen 1 $6 Acquire Airborne Ranger Airforce Com 2: WW2 $12 All Star Sports Pak $9 Allied Forces $12 Amazing Spiderman S12 Amrillo Slims 7 Crd Stud $12 Artura ... $12 Back to the Future 3 $12 Bbal Chall'87-90Tms ca $9 Backgamon by Geo WIN $9 Battle Command S12 Blackjack Blackjack WIN S12 Blue Max Aces Grt War $9 Captain Blood Cardinal of the Kremlin $9 Casino Craps $12 Casino Lite 7 Card Stud $12 Casino Lite TX Hold'em S12 Castles Nrthern Camp $7 Chess Net WIN $9 Chess X Colossus $9 Command HQ $9 Conflict $12 Conflict: Korea $12 Backgammon by George Blackjack Blackjack for Windows Chessnet Covert Action 3.5 Dragons of Flame 5.25 Dragon Force 5.25 Earth Rise 5.25 Free D.C.5.25 John Elway Quartrback 5.25 MacArthur's War 5.25 S.C. Out Trump Castle 2 5.25 Video Poker Windows Video Poker Video Poker By Masque JAGUAR American Civil War Vol 3 $24 Atomino Batt Chess Enhance CD $19 Black Crypt $26 Bridge 7 $19 Dark Queen of Krynn $6 Das Boot Submarine $9 Dick Tracy $10 Dreadnoughts Ironclads $12 Dragon's Lair 1 or 2 $19 Fast Break $3 Go Master Dix Ver 5 $49 Harpoon Battle Set 4 $19 Harpoon Scenario Editor S14 Heatwave Heaven & Earth $19 Jck Nicklaus Crse 1-5 ea S6 Leisure Suit Larry 1 S9 Lexicross S19 Mean 18 Golf $3 Menacer $3 Monopoly $14 Night Shift $6 Omar Shariff Bridge Dix $19 Out This World COLOR $19 Police Quest 1 $10 Reach for the Stars $19 Risk $14 Robo Sport $24 Secret Monkey Isle $19 ShadowGate S19 SPEND $200 Jaguar CD System $299 Jaguar Controller $24 Jaguar System S249 Alien Vs Predator S54 Baseball $54 Basketball $54 Battle Zone 2000 $54 Checkered Flag 2 $54 Club Drive $44 Crescent Galaxy $44 Evolution:Dino Dudes $44 Jaguar Form 1 Racing $54 Kasumi Ninja $54 NFL Football $54 Raiden $44 Tempest 2000 $44 Tiny Toon Adventures S44 $12 Acquire 3.5 Amazon 3.5 Breach 2 5.25 Lost Admiral Magic Candle 2 5.25 Megatraveler Zhodani 5.25 Mercenaries 5.25 Playmaker Football Rules of Engagement 5.25 Star Legions 5.25 Warlords 5.25 $12 CGW FEB 6 Circle Reader Service #46 "


"The Year The Stars Fell An Overview of 1993's Space War. Titles by Martin E. Cirulis Illustration by N. Taylor Blanchard "


"t could have something to do with the latest crop of TV science fiction, good and bad, or a reflection of the newest plague of brush-fire wars on our own little world; or maybe it's just that time of decade again. Whatever the cause, 1993 produced a hoard of software titles with science fictional elements, revolving around various aspects of tactical and strategic warfare in the depths of space and across the surface of alien worlds. CURHIDAS POES3EASED PRODUCURE133 TL Ship OTE SSSLA 2279 FCFORH ROTAR SHIPS Roun RELOC MENTAR Spaceward Hol Bonita In Milk Way In 2370 SINIUS SCOUT Summary of batile al Pool in 2170 32 La vie alul slit III You won the battle! found 13 OK Argus DEEAN Over the past year, I have had the occasionnization and exploitaARTIFACTS ally dubious pleasure of playing most of the tion of alien worlds was PAR, 65+ science fiction wargames to hit the shelves. the major facet of the The pack was large and competitive, includthree games that were ing the epic but light-hearted StarControl II closest to the traditional by Accolade; the much buzzed Master of model of SF wargames. Orion from MicroProse; the repetitive Star Spaceward HO! Master Legions and the Siamese twins of the software of Orion and VGA Planworld, Tegel's Mercenaries and Strike Squad, ets are all based on the all brought to you by the busy kids at Mindcraft; a fast-paced tribute to Frank leet map Races Planets Tech Next Turn Herbert's dream, Dune II from Virgin; the wacky Master of Orion: the Civ-ilized space game. cowboy frontier of Spaceward HO!markered by New nizing hotseat of most multi-player games World Computing; a game with its networking capability. With space for that just couldn't live up to 20 players, human and computerized, HO! its box-top brags, Maelstrom brought a cheer from most social gamers and by Merit Software; the gory drew in many non-wargamer types with the child of Games Workshops use of clever bells and whistles. boardgame, Space Hulk disMaster Of Orion came out in the second half tributed by Electronic Arts, of the year and turned out, by coincidence or the uninspired When Two design, to incorporate many of HO!'s userWorlds War and the comfriendly aspects into a more traditional, seriplex and innovative ship-toous clash of empire. The game involves 10 ship wargame, Rules of races with distinct trairs and advantages; any Engagement 2, both given Spaceward HO!: the wild, wild Western spiral arm of the galaxy. Space particular scenario involves five races ranlife by Impressions; and last explore/conquer/build fleets template which but far from least, a dedicated and evolving domly selected from the pool. Master of has been with us since the days of SSI's Impeshareware spaceploitation game, VGA Planets Orion has the kind of attention to detail that 3.0, distributed by its designer, Tim Wisserium Galactium on the old C-64 (nearly a keeps you coming back to try new strategies. man. As you can probably imagine, with a decade ago!). Still, this new crop of spaceploi. The only drawback was the fact that it was a field as extensive as this, there was very little tation titles has re-invented itself in a variety single player game; MOO could have made a time this year for me to play much of any of distinctive ways. V ways. brilliant multi-player platform. Instead it is other genre, never mind getting enough Spaceward HO! was the most notable beanother in a disturbing trend of non-social sleep. cause it presented the spaceploitation concept wargames from MicroProse. with a hybrid sci-fi/wild west theme and The most traditional spaceploitation game Spaceploitation HO! played the colonization of space for laughs. of the year, VGA Planets, still managed to Its simple economics and development were break new ground; it is a shareware game that With an attitude that would strike terror all controlled by convenient slider bars and, runs on a computer Bulletin Board System. and rage into any aboriginal heart, the colomost importantly, it did away with the agoUp to 11 players can carve up and exploit a Tech Spending Curele You seberdarones on should Tahvere US February 1994 Page 95 "


"QUADRO 500 world universe in the comfort of their world and its Military Industrial Complex Roll The Dice, Move Your Mice own homes, and when they have finished a while journeying to your foe's world and With the wargaming microscope turned to round of managing their worlds and fleets, paving it with lasers and bombs. Of course they simply order the software to pack the the enemy has the identical set of priorities, its highest power, we venture into the world turn into a convenient single file that can then and with the game running in real time, a of conflict where a player controls only a be uploaded to the BBS. The BBS host proprospective warlord has to think fast and react handful of dynamic units. In Tegel's Mercegram integrates the turns, resolves conflict, faster. W2WW incorporated a basic research naries, and its unofficial sequel, Strike Squad, and updates the galaxy. Diplomacy, treaties, and development system along the lines of f you are controlling small squads of troops by and Jihads abound in this game, which is very that found in HO! and gave you a multitude ordering each person individually. In Rules of similar in feel to a play-by-mail system but of options, but all this work on the designer's Engagement II, your job is to captain a single without the cost and wait. A new version, part was almost for naught; the simplification starship while giving orders to other ships in Planets 4.0, will support up to 20 races, a of mechanics demon struck again and renyour fleet. Real-time combat is a big part of workable AI, and offer even more refinedered most of the game's tactical options all three of these titles, and they trade heavily ments to the hosts, allowing them to fine tune moor. A weak Al opponent was also a fault, on the concept that you are a being with a mission. games to their own raste. VGA Planets can be but the modem capability helped get around found as shareware on an ever-growing list of this and make for an enjoyable two player Tegel's Mercenaries and Strike Squad from BBSs. game. Mindcraft are in the tradition of squad level Dune II was generally lauded as a great wargames that can be traced back to Avalon \"This World Must Be Mine!\" Hill's boardgame, Squad Leader. In these improvement over the first computer game games you are the commander of a group of This year also brought a narrowing of the version of this legendary SF series. Only a mercenaries who find themselves in the unSpace War focus down to battles over the token nod was given to the elegant and enviable position of trying to save the civilized surface of worlds. Star Legions. When two treacherous politics of Frank Herbert's imgalaxy while maintaining a healthy profit Worlds War and Dune Il all revolved around morral books, but Virgin still managed to & margin. Commanding these characters is a the trials and tribulations of invading capture the feel of fighting across this strange matter of guiding them around a and securing a single world. EconomMENTATIOPTIONS ics and politics were either sacrificed I Credits 14142171 skewed 3-D landscape while issuing very basic fire/grab/drop/move orders. or dealt with very superficially in or Harkonnen Quad. Characters not under your direct conder to concentrate on individual trol possess a rudimentary intelligence; structures and military units as the enough to shoot at any enemy in focus moved from strategic to tactical. DMG range, but not enough to come in out HITHEX It seems that reaction time was also of the laser rain on their own. Among considered important on this smaller FETREHTE other problems, the linear storyline of stage as all three of these titles were Tegel's Mercenaries reduced its replay based on a system of real-time convalue almost to nil. Strike Squad, while tinuous action instead of the more keeping an almost identical graphic relaxed and pensive turn-based simuand control engine, added permanent lations most wargamers are used to. locations that could be revisited and an StarLegions came out early this year Ultima-style \"go-there-talk-to-that\" and tried to present the gobbling of storyline. Unfortunately, the setting of worlds by a giant empire, not from the Dune II: Sand worms, spice, and many a gamer's vice. a broken leg did little to alleviate the Admiral's lofty perch, but from the and arid world. You must contend against patient's heart condition, and Mindup-close perspective of the General in charge craft seems to have declined to advertise the of securing a world once the flash and glory one, two or even three rival houses in a scefact that Strike Squad is Tegel's 1.5. space combat is over. SL examined many nario while trying to gather up enough preinteresting points of planetary invasion. Space Hulk is not a game about a big green cious Spice to support your war efforts. In addition, there are the awesome Sandworms Bombardments could cost you the destrucmuscleman in a spacesuit. It's actually the wandering the landscape, gobbling up assault tion of the very prize you sought, and you are first of what I am sure will be many computer conversions of the extensive and nihilistic always gambling glory against disgrace as you tanks like popcorn. To capture Dune, you WarHammer 40K series of games from Engtry to bid low on the ships and troops vou must battle over individual provinces, conland's Games Workshop. Distributed by will requisition from your Empire to get the quering one before being allowed to move on Electronic Arts, this software package is exjob done. Unfortunately, the game suffered to another, very much like Bullfrog's Powervere tremely faithful to its boardgame incarnation. from a high tedium factor. World after world monger from last year. The Al for the oppoSquads of Imperial Marines, a military offered fewer surprises and more sheer numnents' Houses is tenacious and tough most of branch that has evolved into a neo-religious bers Over-simplification of game mechanics the time. In the final analysis though, Dune order, must root out the dark and twisted that reduced your options and undermined is but a single world and, from a wargamer's enemies of humanity in the bowels of ancient the futuristic premise of the game did little to point of view, once you have captured her in dreadnoughts and the subterranean caverns help. the role of each different Noble House ofof shattered worlds. Game play is relatively Impressions narrowed the focus even fur fered to you, there is very little reason to go simple and easy to get the hang of. You face ther with When Two Worlds War, a head-toback. Modem support could have made a a hostile world through a first person pointhead conflict either against the Al or a human world of difference to the lifetime of this of-view similar to Wolfenstein 3-D, but lackvia modem. You have to protect your own game. ing the fluidity of motion found in that title. OVE Us SUANDO DI Page 96 Computer Gaming World "


"All Pros. No Cons. AL FOOTBALL LEAGUE wa 20 40 50 40 MAN MENU Care El de Puy Playol Coast Prandra Grill re to Do LAYERS 18 13 You're down by six and Junior Seau just PLAYERS sacked you again. Now it's 4th and 18 with only a minute to go. Should you go long to Sterling Sharpe, or dump it in the flat to Thurman Thomas? In Unnecessary Roughness,\" it's your call. But don't worry. You've got all the NFLPA i 1:1 7 Os et dicho pros you'd ever need to build your team. Like \"Neon\" Deion Sanders. John Taylor. Or Michael Irvin. And if they're not enough weapons for you, you'll also have a playbook that's thicker than a lineman's head. Unnecessary Roughness also features rotoscoped player graphics. Plus a rotating 3-D game orientation with infinite camera views SACOLASER that actually put you down on the field. Meanwhile, up in the booth Al Michaels handles the play-by-play, making this football game as real as you can get. Without getting hit, at least. Available for the yours, rush to your IBM PC and 100% compatibles. To score favorite retailer or AL MICHAELS call 1-800-245-7744. CALLS THE SHOTS the in UNNECESSARY Nation HR s e MAS ONLPA 1991 s egistered trademark of intestational Business i es of the respecto WIEL THE toe 1953 Recetat o n pers tr Dis Players in die de ce tyd by the Football and is off FEE GAMES WITH PERSONALIIL Circle Reader Service #133 "


"FIRST LAST 1 00:00 011 0 11 00:00 I DON'T WASTE YOUR SOUND CARD ON INFERIOR SPEAKERS. | 00:00 011 12TH 011 0000 I MSG KAV G MBUKI MATTRO TACFIR SHOA ACQUISITION 10 000 000 000 RAD: 2000 000 000 CHRONO 00:00:30 MELE FIRE TIME X 01 SET The Powered Partner 622 Powered Partners are the perfect complement to your multimedia computer system. They are the only speakers to be named a 1992 Windows Winner by Windows magazine. They were also nominated for a Readers' Choice award by Multimedia Magazine. But the best reason to use Powered Partners is the sound. Listen to the experts: \"They (Powered Partner 622) set the standard for all the other speakers\" (David Ranada-\"Windows\" recommended) and \"If you want the best, look no further... the (Powered Partner) 570s are the Rolls Royce of sound\" (Rich Heimlich). With such high praise, why buy anything else. there is a developing storyline CUMRCV DRPREP that evolves around you and deREPAIR CREW DISTRIEUTION.. mands your participation. If you VIDCOMM play the narrow military com5 mander and pay attention only TIME! FREE 001 TIME to battles while the universe goes by outside your viewport, you've Laine TIME  OFF T RAAL OFFE NAVMAP FULL SY5 sferi found a sure way to lose these AUTO EOR TUREN games. Unfortunately the gene MIN MAE FIRE splice brought with it the flaw of EEN -LL-LL -!-!-!the adventure game genre: the end of the story brings the end 22/10 MEL. MOLENDPER-1:00098 000 of gameplay, and the software TO VEC EIN B 1 600%NOR FOCUS graveyard gains another playedout hulk Rules Of Engagement 2: Underneath all those buttons is a great game. Maelstrom came on the scene carly in the year claiming to be The graphics are superb, and there is gore the final word in clash of empires simulations. aplenty as you progress from one scenario to At this point in the sales curve it seems Maelthe other in the service of your undying Emstrom was about as successful at fulfilling this peror. The only drawback is that squad memclaim as Idi Amin was at being President for bers not under your direct control have the Life. The general idea was good: you are a same life expectancy as those old Star Trek renegade military commander trying to keep guys in red shirts. your former empire from crushing the entire Rules of Engagement 2 seems proud to accivilized galaxy in its mailed fist. You control knowledge its sequeldom and is a great refinea fairly large network of ships, operatives, ment of its previous incarnation. As part of research teams and mines that support preOmnitrend's Interlocking Game System, RoE2 carious revolt. It's a great idea that falls short is meant to be linked to Breach 2 or, preferin the details. Unfortunately, the combat sysably, the upcoming Breach 3. With the games tem makes most of your neat research gadgets interlocked, the boarding of enemy ships and moot, and most of the plot devices stretch the installations is resolved at the squad level of credulity of the player much too far. Maelcontrol. RoE2 is actually more like a starship strom tours itself as having a high degree of simulator but without the arcade qualities replayability because the turning points of the marking other titles in this category. Here, plot occur different times in different games, your decisions are tactical in nature, and but no matter when you dip, it's still the same quick thinking combined with fluid tactics old dance. are far more important than lightning reSomewhere between the pretension of flexes. Personnel have their own personalities Maelstrom and the wackiness of Spaceward and motivations that affect how they respond HO! is Accolade's StarControl II. This game in combat, so you need to choose your ship is the fruit of a marriage between the action caprains wisely. Make no mistake; it uses a game StarControl and the very popular Starpolished ship-panel interface, but RoE2 is a Flight adventure game. As a sequel to the wars complex game-definitely the most complex fought in the original StarControl, SCII of the games covered here. It rewards every brings you the same bunch of friends and moment you put into it. There is even a enemies, but in much closer derail. Now you magnificent scenario builder that allows you can talk to them, reform alliances, and intimito construct entire campaigns based on the date old enemies. In fact, the first half of the success/failure branching paths that have game plays much like an interstellar \"Where been so successful in Origin's Wing Com are they now?\" episode. Combat is a series of mander series. single ship combats in high arcade style, each race having a special ship type with its own ADVENTURE Is My Middle Name! tactical profile. There is enough humor in the story to keep you from minding the thin parts With all these bombs going off across the of the plot, and the only drawback to the galaxy there were bound to be a few mutants wargame aspect is the fact the computer fights around, and sure enough, there were a couple too efficiently to make any ship but your of hybrids in the genre this year. StarControl human dreadnought worth using. As an adIland Maelstrom are both wargames at heart, venture game it must come to an end, but to but they are driven by adventure game plots. keep you from pulling SCII off your hard Yes, you must still collect material, make drive too soon, the designers have included a ships, and blow up other people's ships, but ship-to-ship melee sub-game that allows you Powered Partner 622 Features  Sophisticated 3-piece system with separate powered sub-woofer  Fully shielded, even the sub-woofer  Perfect for all computer and video applications  Electronic crossover and 3 power amplifiers For a dealer near you, call 1-800-969-AR4U. In Canada, call Precor at 1-800-268-1172. Superior Sound Simplified  1993 Acoustic Research, a division of IJI Circle Reader Service #34 Page 98 Computer Gaming World "


"Officially Licensed by T INDYCAR From the Creators of Indianapolis 500:The Simulation DENNZDU TER Eylerience Indy CarRacing! THIS BOSCH BOSCH BEPLAY . BIGHTFBONT COMPOUND PRESSURE CHANGE TIRE DONE SOFT 261PSI 10 Suan dalam 126 1928, 168.999.B The Official Game of IndyCar Racing The one and only PC simulation officially licensed by IndyCar. Now you can challenge the world's leading racers wheel to wheel. Plus, see the actual drivers, their teams and cars in lifelike detail. Complete Car Setup, Infinite Control You call the shots front and rear wing adjustments, brake bias, anti-roll, turbo boost, gearing, camber, stagger shocks, tire pressure and compound. Choose from 6 different engines and 5 different chassis for the ultimate race machine. Accurate Tracks Experience the Indy Car season as the real drivers do. Every turn, bank, straight and hill is painstakingly accurate. Race the short ovals, super speedways, road courses and city street circuits. This is the IndyCar simulation! Overall Game Play Feel the pressure. Make the same critical decisions the IndyCar teams make every race. Tune your car to the real track, qualify on the pole, develop your pit strategy, fine tune your race plans and more! INDYCAR Circle Reader Service #108 PAPYRUS PUBLISHING, INC. BAL Installment One of the Papyrus Racing Series! Indianopolis 500 : The Simulation toolrodemark of Electronic Art Inc Indianapolis 500 no registered trademark of the Indianapolis Motor Speedway IndyCar and heims logo are under exclusive licenta to Championchip Auto Roting Toom, Inc, Papyrus Roting Sorlesina U r odemark of Papyrus Publishing Inc. Papyrus Publishing "


"Saturn Titan Quis INSIPID ENERGY BIOLOGICAL  bat. to slug it out with any ship available in ronment with many choices that they the game, either against the computer or never utilize. The Al for W2WW was a friend. purported to be as strong as the one in Orbit: 9.52.04. Hass: 0,08 e. QQP's The Lost Admiral, and it very well MIMO: 3.2007 The Manhattan Project FOONS 8.40 C.S. may have been, but an Al that shines in no 178 uraying: 0.15 . If there was a trend in SF wargames Heather Class 3 019 15 days an enjoyable but relatively simple game Tectonite Class 2 TOR: this year it was that of scientific research. like Admiral is severely intellectuallychallenged in a game like W2WW where It should be easy to see how fascinating it is presented with a palette of sophistitechnology advancements are, and what FREE ORIES an involving dynamic they add to a comcated choices that it is simply not up to puter game. Let's face it, a large compomanipulating. This makes the game easy MINERAL nent of those 4:30 AM Civilization to beat and thus, pretty dull. On the other hand, an Al designed to take full games was waiting to see when the new EXIT MENU and wonderful invention would slide advantage of a game from the design out of the wise man's hut and finding stage up, as appears to be the case in Star Control 2: It's got graphics, it's got story, out how quickly you could put it to use who could ask for anything more? Master of Orion, is enjoyable to play in smiting your enemies. The lesson of again and again. The moral here is that tions are given to the player, which is usually a multitude of gadgets looks great in the this incredibly popular wargame has not been a good thing; but beware: nothing will bring manual, but the game's Al had better have the lost on the software community, and technoout the limitations of a wargame faster than subtleties to match them. logical research popped up all over the place tactical decisions that have no impact in comin 1993. The forms this research capability took For example, suppose I think the Zap\"Mr. Checkov, set plots were part of what defined this new crop of SF potron cannon looks really neat, so I invest ON Repetitive!\" wargames. For example, in HO! or W2WW, my empire's tremendous wealth in creating it While the worst of these games still held a research is a quick and dirty proposition: and re-arming my fleets. If I then find no few moments of enjoyment for me, the most few invest so much of your economy into re noticeable difference in combat from when common disappointment I had was discovercommon search, decide what ratio of that research my ships were armed with the old Goober ing how much SF wargaming has come to money is going into what discipline, get a new gun, I am going to realize that what should resemble bland SF television and movies. The technology level and a cooler looking ship premises and plots of some of these games are icon. Get one rech level behind the crowdextremely weak and would not be tolerated that's bad. Get two down, you better start for a moment in historical wargaming, but are shopping for mausoleum space. here acceptable because, «Hey, what do you In a more complex game like Master of want? It's all made up stuff anyway.\" UnforOrion, the arrival of new technologies took on tunately, in a big media world no one ever a more random aspect: after a certain amount learns from a mistake. Studios produce turof basic research on a topic you could make a keys like Last Action Hero, which die at the breakthrough next month or ten years from box office despite their desperate hype, and now. Also, instead of simply researching gein our little corner we have soulless drones neric levels of technology, you could choose like When 2 Worlds Waror the tritely plotted specific devices to research, from weapons to Maelstrom. When they do badly, it's because computers, and each one of these advance\"The SF wargame market is tiny and dying.\" ments had a name and unique effect in the Right. game. This is a quantum leap in realism, givSF wargames are in the same state that ing a person's virtual empire a sense of identity fantasy adventure and role-playing games that reflects his or her own personality; the were a few years ago: Fun, but mired in more attached a person becomes to something have been a tactical decision has been reduced derivative plots from books, TV and D&D. they feel they are creating, the more involved to irrelevant chrome and gradually lose inter\"Go out. kill something and get its stuff.\" they become in the simulation. est in the game. On the other hand if there is Spaceploitation is in the same hole now, but Maelstrom further refined this process by a difference, or better still, if I find out later hopefully, a few designers will start compliin that there are subrleries-i.c., though the allowing you to decide which characters to cating these tired plots with real world conhire and place in charge of what projects. Zappotron is far more effective in open space, cepts; i.e., people are generally afraid of Even games with no research model, like it fails to function at all in a Nebula where the players who rape and pillage as a hobby and VGAP or Dune II, still let you spend more old reliable Goober Gun did not only will will tend to hunt them down instead of giving money on facilities that would build you a I feel the grim satisfaction of having learned them the game winning doohickey. SF warbetter arsenal. I think it's safe to say that new something I didn't suspect, but the illusion games need a Lord British-type designer to technology modeling and SF wargames are that I am playing a dynamic, evolving simudrag them kicking and screaming out of the safely joined at the hip now, but there are still lation will be strengthened and I will be far galaxy of Space War pastiches and into the gerous complications, especially for de less likely to pull it off my hard drive in a week light of other more respected gaming forms. signers trying get a product out without payand tell my friends to avoid it. If I was invading Russia, I would be expected ing attention to detail. The more intricate The same general problem occurs with Als. to have to deal with partisans, and if I am your technology modeling gets, the more opWeak ones will appear far weaker in an enviraping an entire world I should have to dediNothing will bring out the limitations of a wargame faster than Tactical decisions that have no iMPACT in combat. Page 100 Computer Gaming World "


"PICK-UP THEI PHONE AND PICK TWO GAMES FREE! Dell Kings Ouest V AS GONE TOMORROW SLATERE CHARLIE *GO.CAMPING PREDWS 1-800-795-5979 PHARKAS Pharmacist Frontier SIERRA Choose Any Two Sierra MAC Games FREE When You Switch to Sprint!* directory assistance, customer service, even instant credit for wrong numbers. And we do it 24 hours a day! Sprint long-distance service just became more valuable up to $159.90** more! Now, when you switch your home long-distance service to Sprint, you can select any Sierra game, free! After enjoying six months of highquality long-distance, you may qualify for a second free Sierra game. *** Only Sprint can offer you a nationwide 100% digital, fiber optic network that provides the long-distance quality and reliability you need. Experience for yourself Sprint's \"fiber-optic\" clarity that makes both your long-distance calls and PC data transmissions crystal clear and virtually error free. Unsurpassed call and data clarity is just one of the many benefits you will enjoy as a Sprint customer. the most, including international calls-even if the called person is with a competitive long-distance carrier. The Most will also provide an automatic 20 percent discount off all calls to Sprint's millions of dial 1 customers, anytime and anywhere. When the person you talk to the most in a given month is a Sprint Customer, Sprint will combine both discounts for an effective overall savings of 36 percent on calls to that number.**** No Risk Guarantee Your satisfaction is guaranteed: we'll pick up the cost of switching your long, distance to Sprint, and will even pay to switch you back if you are not completely satisfied. (Some restrictions apply.), So why not sign up for Sprint and receive the clarity, savings and service you want while getting two Sierra games you enjoy? Sprint Save on Long Distance When You're away from home too! Sprint's FONCARDSM lets you continue to take advantage of long-distance calling and savings even when you're away from home. The FONCARD is free, with cards available for every member of your family. SIERRA The Most A Unique Calling Plan Sprint offers an unprecedented longdistance calling plan called The Most available now for all customers. The Most will save Sprint Customers 20 percent off already low rates on calls each month to whomever you talk to The Service You Deserve At Sprint, we make no compromises when it comes to dependable, personal service we do it all; operator services, Circle Reader Service #125 Offer valid only in the U.S. and for new Sprint customers. Not valid for FONCARD-only orders. One offer per household. Certain restrictions apply. Retail value of Sierra Games. To qualify for a second game, the customer must bill $20 per month in 3 of the first 6 months. THE MOST discounts apply to in-state/intraLATA calls only where authorized.. "


"IT'S ALL IN > Sources indicate that a rival syndicate has developed a dangerous new computer program, and our research boys want it. Your mission: @ build Company Agents using cybernetic implants and hi-tech weaponry. Utilizing action, strategy or a lethal mix of the @ TEAM SELECTION WECHASIAT two, you can infiltrate fifty remarkably de tailed futuristic cities, each 'alive' in real-time. @ To confiscate a copy of Syndicate, visit your local software retailer, or call toll free 8.00 245 4.5 25. Available for the IBM he PC and compatibles. Eliminate the Hooligans. Take control of the city. But expect maximum resistance "


"@ YOUR HEAD. @ DATADISK o Datadisk now available! Syndicate: American Revolt. New missions. New Weapons. New World Order. Features Network Play! AVAILABLE  DE  SYNDICATE Ita AMERICAN REVOLT ELECTRONIC ARTS CONS Circle Reader Service #59 "


"Game Attributes Summary Title # of Players Focus Scale Motivation Economic model Complexity Windows?2 o O O no O yes 3 Yes 3 no Star Control II Exploration, Warfare Single Ships Plot Driven Very without Simple sound Tegel's Mercs Mercenary Missions Squad Level Connected Very no Scenarios Simple Strike Squad 1-2 Mercenary Missions Squad Level Plot Driven Very Simple Master of Orion 1 Exploration, Exploitation Fleets Conquest Good yes Dune 11 World Domination Individual Vehicles Conquest Simple Spaceward HO! 1-20 Exploration, Exploitation Fleets Conquest Good Maelstrom Politics, Warfare Fleets Plot Driven Simple VGA Planets 3. 0 2-11 Exploration, Exploitation Fleets Conquest Good no Star Legions World Domination Divisional Conquest None yes Rules of Fleet Command Single Ships Connected None Engagement 2 Scenarios When 2 1-2 World Domination Individual Vehicles Conquest Simple no Worlds War Space Hulk 1 Extermination Squad Level Connected None 4 no Scenarios 1) Complexity is rated on a scale with 1 being comparable to Snakes 'n Ladders and 10 being a game with a game manual the size of a New York phone book. 2) This criterion is a very loose one and my.PIF file creation skills are nowhere near good enough to make these definitive or bug free statements. 3) Indicates designed Windows compatibility. O CAVO yes 3 The Cirulis Scorecard Title User Friendliness Replay Value A.I. Graphics Premise / Execution Overall B/A E/C Star Control 11 Tegel's / Strike Squad Master of Orion Dune 11 Spaceward HO! Maelstrom Star Legions Rules of Engagement 2 When 2 Worlds War Space Hulk mojo to de cocooo <e < 000 ooooooo BIA A/B A/A+ B+/D B/CAVA Coco B/C B B/A cate some resources to quelling the inevitable revolution. There were steps in some more interesting directions in 1993. In MOO, the Orion of the title is a lost world full of technologies but guarded by a dreadnought older than mankind. It's still conquest, but it's conquest that begins to have an interesting point to it. Further, in Tim Wisseman's VGA Planets, at least populations will grow angry and riot if you tax them too much or over-mine their world. right being to ask, but I can tell you what would be nice to see. It would be nice to see connectivity becoming a more important option. I think we can safely assume that at least that at least a couple of computer gamers have friends and more of these friends are getting network cards at home or work every year. A few more titles taking advantage of this hardware would be nice—space war has always been an ideal, multi-player arena. Finally, more interlocking games like Rules of Engagement/Breach would be appreciated, perhaps a planetary invasion game that links with a fleet battle system. As for what we are sure to see in the next year: there will be things like Breach 3 from Impressions, and two giant robot games, but it remains to be seen how much wargame there will be mixed in with the sheer arcade simulation of the cockpit. The grand strategy front seems quiet, and other than the 4.0 version of VGAP there is not much else in sight. I think MOO will safely reign supreme well into the new year. But even as I write, a new game from Merit Software has crossed my desk; It's called Command Adventures: Starship and it seems to have my name on it. So if you'll excuse me, I have many stars to cross and worlds to conquer before I sleep. CGW IN The year 2525... What will 1994 bring? I'm not really the Page 104 February 1994 "


"PACIFIC Bernacno THE MUSIOS BETHACING THE MISSIONS OF WORLD WAR FLYING ACES IS FASCINATING, BUT BEWRITING HISTORY IS HE ULTIMATE CHALLENGE. In Pacific Strike, you cruise into all major battles of the Pacific theatre Pearl Harbor, The Coral Sea, Midway, Guadalcanal, the Solomon Islands, the Marianas, Leyte Gulf, Iwo Jima and Okinawa. Now you can change the outcome of each battle and the entire war through your own successes and failures. Can you force an end to the war before the bomb is dropped on Hiroshima? Fly the Wildcat, Corsair, Hellcat, Devastator, Dauntless, Avenger and Helldiver, enjoying the astounding realism of their fully instrumented cockpits. You'll do more than practice! o Hone your skills as you face relentless enemy pilots in Zeros, Kates, Vals, Bakas, Betties and more so graphically detailed that you can even see enemy pilots and insignia. Prove those skills in a stunning variety of missions — grueling dogfights over the Pacific, dive-bombing runs against carriers and warships (including the Yamato! and challenging rocket attacks on pillboxes, airfields and other ground installations. PLC HHC ORIGIN We create worlds An Electronic Arts Company P.O. BOX 161750 AUSTIN, TX 78716 Copyright 1993, ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Pacific Strike is a trademark of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Origin and Wo create worlds are registered trademarks of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Electronic Arts is a registered trademark of Electronic Arts. Available at a software retailer near you or call 1-800-245-4525 for MC/Visa/Discover orders.  Actual screens may vary.  A Stand Alone Game Made in the USA Circle Reader Service #106 "


"AEGIS CD HAND OF FATE: KRYANDIA II COMPUTER Express Rejoin the adven turo in Kyrandia ll the long awaited second title in the Fables and Fiends series You are the THE LAND OF PAL offbeat, young mystic who must voyage to the center of the world to break the spell. Travel through swaps, farms, coastal towns and previously unchart ed lands of Kyrandia. Enables you and over 50 characters to change your mind, mood and mayhem based on preceding events. Hours of fun and awesome graphics, Features far-reaching lands infused with mysteries to decipher and puzzles to solve. Extensive sound effects and a musical score. PUBLISHER: Virgin Games Guardian of the Fleet naval simulation. Pushes you to the limit of toullime strategic and tacti col combat sumulation. Puts the latest in military technology and the ultimate high-tech worship at your fingertips. Features historically accurate battle scuences. Based on newly declassified military information and historical accounts of actual battles. Challenges you to use the arts of deception, intelligence and warfare in this high-tech, high-thrill military simulation. Since 1985 800-228-7449 TOLL FREE ORDER LINE PUBLISHER: Time Warner $54 $31 OMNI CD UPGRADE KIT AUDIO MAGICIAN PLUS 16 LAWNMOWER MAN CD STAR TREK: JUDGEMENT RITES FREE Multimedia Upgrade Kit includes Double OMNICD speed CD ROM drive, Aldus PhotoStyler SE, and QuickCD. Double-speed CD ROM drive is multi session photo CD compatible, fully MPC level 2 com pliant, CD ROM XA ready and features a 300KB/sec transfer rate, 350ms access time and a 64KB RAM buffer. For use in systems with or without sound cards. Motorized tray loading, doesn't require a caddy Supports all PCs and sound cards. Truly an impressive blend of 3D and blockbusting oction. There are 10 different vari eties of gameplay from puzzles through \"Cinema ic style platforms to fly through sce narios which are true to the feel and quality of the film Jobe, a simpleton who spends his hours cutting neighborhood lawns, is used as a guinea pig by Dr. Angelo, and attains super human powers with the help of a unique Virtual Reality system. Entered into a Virtual Reality world within the Earth's computer network, he seeks revenge against Dr. Angelo for the injus tice carried out against him. PUBUSHER: Sony Imagesoft IBM CD, MAC CD THE LAWNMONER MAN A 16 bit stereo sound card which is 100% Sound Blaster and Adlib compatible and feo tures a buildin joystick pott/MIDI interface. Includes a 20-voice FM music synthesizer Yamaha OPL3) Record, compress, store and play back sound, voice and music at 16 bits per sample Programmable sample rate from 4,000 44.000KHZ. FCM, ADCPM, ESPCM compression. Bundled software includes Audio Cipulibrary, Audio Reccer, Aidis Reinincler, Chimo, Stopwatch, Timer and Calculator PUBLISHER: Calypso The 5 year mission BIRTREK continues JUOSRENT RITES Encounter strange adversaries in situ ations that simply defy logic. True episodic format beams eight orig nal missions into your computer. As Captain Kirk, you and your entire crew. Spock, D McCoy. Uhura, Sulu, Chekov and Scott, bring the original unique TV series' humor on board. Digitized, original painted backgrounds and detailed computer rendered starships pull you into the missions. Original series sound effects and music take you back to the action PUBLISHER: Interplay PUBLISHER: Access $56 $66 $39 $33 172 155 200 JOYSTICKS/GAMECARDS Flight Stand... Flight Stick... Flight Stick Pro.. GForce Flight Yoke.......... GameCard Autoset ..... GomeCard Ill Automatic... GameCard III MCA Automatic .... Notebook Gameport.... Thrustmaster ACM Game Card...... Thrustmaster Driving Control... Thrustmaster Flight Control........... Thrustmaster Pro Flight...... Thrustmaster Rudder Pedals Thu Uta3let Weapn UPRO ..... Thunderstick.... Pro Audio Studio 16XL .......................337 Pro AudioSpectrum 16.. Reelmogic Multimedia Playback Sound Blaster 16 MCD. Sound Blaster 16 MCD ASP... Sound Blastor 16 SCSI-2 168 Sound Blaster 16 SCSI 2 ASP. SoundMan 16 SOUND CARDS CD-ROM TITLES Battle Chess MPC & DOS ....... Berlitz Japon Alive ........ Berlitz Think & Talk French Better Homes Healthy Cooking Bibles & Religion Blood Net Blue Force Budget Guide USA 1993 Campaign == CD-ROM TITLES 24 Capital ...60 104 29 FonCard Version il....... FanCard Version II IPS-360 GPS No Microsoft Bus Microsoft PS/ Practical PN Pro Movie Sony PIX Sportste Sportster 14 Star LS Star NX Star Sia VGA TV Elit AMERICA Ihne AMERICA Imune SPEAKERS 127 211 Request Your America Online Membership Kit (Includes 10 Hours Online) With Any Purchase CD ROM 20th Cent 7th Guest AD&D EYO ! AD&D: Dark AD30: Dung, Adventures... Adventures of Air Warrior Aladdin and His la Alone in the Dark. Animals MPC VERSION... Arthur's Teacher Trouble... B17 & Silent Service II Backroad Racer............... Battle Chess MPC & DOS 38RSS=893 FREE ACS300 Speaker Pait/Subwoofer....... 282 AR Partner 22 Speaker Sys. Gray AR Partner 42 Speaker Sys. CALL AR Partner 570 Speaker System....... AR Partner 622 Speaker System ...... Altec ACSI00 Speakers Altec ACS200 Speakers Koss HD-I Speakers.......... Koss HD 4 Speakers..... Koss HD 6 MPC Speakers..... Labtec CS-1000 Speakers............... Labtec CS-150 Speakers.... ........ Labtec CS 180 Shielded Speaker.... Labtec CS-550 Speakers Labtec CS-800 Speakers Labtec CS.900 Speakers. Labtec SS-100 Stereo Speakers... Labtec SS 700 Speakers..... DigitalEdge CD Mult, Kit.... Discovery Int. Dbl 16 bit Kit Fusion CD 16 Internal Fusion CD 16E External.... Fusion Double CD Internal Kit.... Memphis Multimedia Upgrade Kit.... 259 MultiSpin 3XE Ext 195ms....... 629 MultiSpin 3XI Int. 195ms ...... .......529 MultiSpin 3XP Portoblo 195ms..... OmniCD Upgrade Kit... PAS 16 Il Multimedia Kit........ Sony CDU-31A IL/L Mult, Kit... Sony CDU.7305 Ext. Mult, Kit Sound System W/Microphone 2.0.. Sound System w/Sound Card 2.0.......... 186 Texel DM3028 Int. 240ms Texel DM5028 Ext. 240ms......... 488 Texel Ext. Bare Drive.. ..... . Texel Ext. Business CD Kit................ Texel Ext Education CD Kit...... 733 Texel Ext. Home CD Kit. 672 Texel Ext w/PAS-16 & Cable........ Texel Int. Bare Drive ........... Texel Int. Business CD Kit.. Texel Int Education CD Kit......... 610 Texel Int. Home Bundle 573 Texel Int. Home CD Kit..... Texel Int. w/PAS-16 & Cable 573 European Racers F-15 Striko Eaglo III......... Family Doctor MPC WIN Fractal Ecstasy FreePhone Gabriel Knight.... Galoway II..... Global Explorer Goblins... Goblins 2 Great Naval Battles Pack Guinness Disk Records '93 Gunship 2000 w/Scenario.. HAM Radio..... . Hell Cab..... Hi-Tech Aircraft... INCA.. INCA 2.... Indiana Fale of Atlantis... Iron Helix.... Journeyman Project.... Just Grandma & Me.... Jutland Key Home Designer WIN King James Elect. Bible King's Quest VI... King's Quest VI Upgrade Labyrinth of Time Lands of lote........... . Laura Bow .. legend of Kryandia....... Leisure Suit Larry VI........ Lightning loom... Lord of the Rings Lost Treasures Infocom..... Lost in Time...... .... Lyric language French MPC Lyric language Spanish MPC.. MPC Music Mozart.. MPC Wizard Diagnostic...... MS Beethoven for WIN... Macmillan Kids Dictionary Mad Dog McCree... Mon Enough... Mantis Expertimental, Map Expert... Moria Early Years Collection.... Morio is Missing Deluxe Mayo Clinic Family Health Mega Race..... Microsoft Golf Windows MPC......... Might & Magic World of Xeen. Monopoly Deluxe... Multimedia Dinosaurs WIN.... Multimedia Mozott WIN... Multimedia Stravinsky WIN Musical Instruments National Lampoons Chess Naval Pack Newsweek Interactive Oceans Below Our Solar System... Oxford English Reference... Penthouse Interactive Photo CD Access DOS Photo CD Access WIN PhotoEdge Color WIN Pill Book.......... Police Quest IV.... 505 299 863 459 580 CD DRIVES & UPGRADE KITS HARDWARE FanCord Version II.... FanCard Version IM......... 29 IPS 360 GPS Navigation System........ Microsoft Bus Mouse 2.0.... .80 Microsoft PS/2 Serial Mouse 20 Practical PM14400FXMT EXT F/M..........227 Pro Movie Studio...... 319 Sony PIX 100 CD ROM XA Player 880 Sportster 14.4 EXT Fax/Modem.. Sportster 14.4 INT.Fox/Modem.. ..163 Star ISS loser Printer................ ...690 Star NX-1040 Rainbow 180CPS.... 161 Star Starjot SJ-48 Ink Jet... 275 270 54 366 463 769 Search for Cotus.. nic Arts Sampler venth Hour...... Encarta Encyclopedia '94.... Challenge CD Pack.. Chessmaster 3000 WIN..... Cinemanio Movie Guide '94...... Clipart Goliath ................. Colleo Break CD Collection... Company of Wholes w/Video Compleat Beatles Complete Bookshop ......... Complete House Compton's Encyclopedia Upg Conspiracy Cookbook Heaven..... Curse of Enchantia... Cybo Roce... D&D: Fantasy Empires. Daemonsgate Dark Seed Day of the Tentacle..... Deathstar Arcade Battles..... Dictionary of Living World Dinosour Adventure Dinosaurs Multimedia Ency. DirectPhone Dracula Unleashed Dragon's Lait Dune Eco Quest Search for Cetus..... Electronic Arts Sampler Eleventh Hour........ Encoito Encyclopedio '94. 371 684 CD-ROM TITLES CD-ROM ITLES 573 CD-ROM TITLES 20th Century Video Almanac .. .......112 7th Guest AD&D Eye Beholder Trilogy ..... AD&D. Dark Sun Shattered lands... AD&D Dungeon Hack Adventures. Adventures of Willy Beamish... Air Warrior Aladdin and His lamp... Alone in the Dark Animals MPC VERSION Arthur's Teacher Trouble. B17 & Silent Service II....... Backroad Racer 136 AudioMan Gravis UltraSaund.... Port Able Sound Plus Pro Audio 16 Basic Pro Audio Studio 16 ....... 135 212 "


"GIGA GAMES CD SOUND BLASTER 16 BASIC METAL & LACE INDY CAR RACING ound BLASTEN Thousands of the Finest shareware 23: MSDOS and MS Windows games on one CD ROM Features 280 clas Sic arcade games to the latest win dows simulations over 3,000 files in all Features an assortment of educatonal programs to target all ages: 135 programs for younger children, and 240 programs for older students Games include 130 card games, 135 adventure games and 160 utilities and cheat sheets for commercial ond shareware games. Also includes 130 Mah Jongg Tile sets, sports, triv o, word, war, and sports gomes, demos BBS doors and more! PUBLISHER: Walnut Creek The battle of the Robo Babes. Looking for a game to play? Something fun and exciting, yet sexier than munching dots or pudgy little pointers? look no further. The got geous Robo Babes cre expecting you You can find them on MeCHa Island soaking up the tropical sunshine. They'll give you a welcome you won't soon forget The Robo Babes even talk! Yeahl Hifi stereo cuts. Recommended for mature game players only Experience the INDYCAR thrill of racing against the world's bost drivers in the world's fastest race cors Gives you 800-horsepower IndyCor driving Detail even includes the paint schemes and PATRIS decals of actual IndyCors and the skid marks through the groove at every turn. Select wing angles, fire type and pressure, suspension stiffness, cember, gearing and much more. Adjust turbo boost, brake bics and roll bat settings from the cockpit. Custom-tune your origine in the dyno room PUBLISHER: Virgin Games Professional CD quality 16 bit storeo sound of a great value Ollers advanced audio technology to enhance business and recreational applications True 16 bit sloveo sound. 16 bit and 8 bit stereo sampling and playback from 42 441 LHE 20 voice, 4 operator FM music synthesizer CD ROM inte foce for Creative Labs CD ROM drives Includes a joystick port, Monologue for Windows Creative Wave Studio. Creative Soundo\"LE Creative Talking Scheduler and Creative Moses PUBLISHER: Creative Labs S PART #: 32529 $19 $ 130 PUBLISHER: Megatech PART #: 31594 $27 $37 BLOODNET UNDER A KILLING MOON CD NFL PRO LEAGUE FOOTBALL WARLORDS 11 FOOTBALL A Cyberpunk Gothic Peacets you into cyber BLOODNET space, a virtual reality world where conscious nos mots computer Two popular, dark adventure genres com bine to create an excit ing new role playing experience Transformed into a vampire, you must brave the streets of Manhattan 2094, where cyberpunks and urban mercenarios rule. Immerse into a global data network where a chatocter can download his consciousness to do battle with vampires androge gangers. Contains over 150 dig fized voices with 3-D rendered Hallucinographic an IBM CD version $44 Interactive movie goes lightyears beyond any other! Takes you to the streets of post World War III San Francisco, into a Virtual World full of people and places so richly detailed you'll feel like you're actually there. Hollywood slots add credibili ty and the necessary talent Create your own personalized Tex Murphy movie which can be replayed at any time. Rich original music, high quality digitized voices and sound effects make this Interactive Movie as exciting as it is visually stunning PUBLISHER: Access PRO LEAGILE Brace yourselt for impact Strategy, graphs ics and Pro League play so real, it's licensed by the NFL, the NFLPA and che sen by USA TODAY to simu late Super Bowl play Full field detailed color onimation with octual NFL logos, NFL players, teams, uniforms ond statistics Design plays from scratch, or choose from 198 cffensive and defensive play Conch your favorite team using the Pro Draft Pro Trader and Team Editor modules Full rosters with injuries and substitutions. True modem play with chat mode PUBLISHER: Micro Sports The sequel to the highly addictive, hugely successful award winning Warlords, Now you have more worlds to conquer. more mighty armies to make, and more enemies to van quish. New magi cal items and abili ties. Hites graphies and backed by a full sound trock Features include randam worlds for infinite playobility, mysterious hid. den mops, exciting and dangerous quests, and exotic army types. Contains 640x480 VGA grophics and sound boord support PUBLISHER: Microprose $40 $56 $34 PUBLISHER: SSG PART 2: 31521 $38 29889 164 CD-ROM TMES EXT. VOICE:508-443-6125 800-228-7449 328 FAX:508-443-5645 31 Union Ave., Sudbury, MA 01776 1 0 :00 -YR 16 C FAX:0011-508-443-5845 XI. CompuServe ID:70007, 15340 a tt LS, WHERE+62 82. XL. FREE UPS GROUND SHIPPING 10,000 IN STOCK ITEMS IBM PRODUCTIVITY CALL 28 32 293 ROMIX Comies Freex #1 ROMIX Comics Hardcase #1 ROMIX Comics Prime #1.. Rebel Assault Return of the Phantom. .. Return to Zork. SVGA Harrier... Sam & Max Hit the Road Scrabble Deluxe ........ Secret Weapons luftwalfo.. Secret of Monkey Island SeleciPhone Seven Days in August....... Shodow of the Comet SimAnt Enhanced SimCity Enhanced Sound Sensations...-. Space Quest IV Space Shuttle MPC Spoce Shuttle MPC Spellcasting Porty Pok Spitit of Excalibur ... Sporting News Pro Football Star Trek 25th Enhanced Street Atlas 20 USA WIN Strike Commonder/Tactical Technoluols... Tetris Gold Tony LaRussa Baseball II. Too Many Typofontsl.......... Total Distortion Typecase. U.S. Atlas 4.0.... UFO Close Guide WIN USA Today The 90's Vol.1 Ultimal VI... Ultime Underwuld I & Vocation Planner Gold Where in World Deluxe WinCD Professional 1.1.... Wines of the World Wing Il/Ultima UnderWld Wolf Pack..... World Atlas 4.0 World Circuit Grand Prix .98 576 CALL ABO Betty Crocker Cookbook WIN.............. CA Clipper Comp. Upgrade 5.2............ Calendar Creations Baseball Calendar Creations Dogs & Cats Calendar Creations Exotic Cars..... Calendar Creations Impressions Calendar Creations Nature Calendar Creations Oceans..... Coaster Screen Saver WIN Coin Keeper... Comic Keepet . Corel Draw 4.0 WIN......... DosqView 386 2.6........... Disney Collection Screen Saver ... DoodleMotion WIN......... ....... Deoft & Print... FoxPro 2.5 WIN..... ... 324 FoxPro Comp. Upgrade 2.5 WIN......... 188 FoxPro Ver Upgrade 2.5 WIN Holy Bible King Jamos Version....... Home Survival Toolkit.......... Key CAD Complete...... Lotus 123 Rol 4 Upg WIN 102 Lotus 123 Release 1 WIN 319 Lotus Improy 2.0 WIN MS DOS Upgrade 6.2. MSDOS Upgrade for Dummies 6.2 Morph WIN.. Norton Unilitios 7.0..... 119 Office Professional 4.0 Office Standard 4.0 . Olfice Standard Comp. Upg 4.0... 284 Office Standard Vers. 4.0. Paradox 4S WIN Photo CD Alaska... Photo CD Animals.......... Photo CD Auto Rocing Photo CD Butterflies Photo CD Fireworks Photo CD Japan Photo CD Porsche Racing Photo CD Sailboats.... Photo CD Underwater Photo CD WWII Aircraft Print Shop Deluxe Print Shop Deluxe WIN. Procomm Plus WIN Publisher 2.0 WIN... Q&A 40 WIN QEMM 386 7.01 Quattro Pro 5.0... Quattro Pro 5.0 WIN Rosemary West's House Fortune... Scenes Impressionists Collect... Scenes Outer Space Collection Scenes Sierra Club Collection... Shoebox Image Manager WIN Stamp Keeper Voice Assist WinFax Pro 3.0 WIN...... Windows 3.1 Windows NT 3.1 Windows NT Upgrade 3.1 Windows Upgrade 31 Word 6.0 WIN 313 Word Windows 60 Comp. Upg 122 Word Windows 6 Vers. Upg WordPerfect Vers Upg Windows WordPerfect Windows 6.0... 200 WordPerfect Windows 60 Comp BUNDLEMANA VALUES BM RECREATION 20 Wordperfect DOS 6.0... Wordperfect DOS 6.0 Comp. Upg Wordperfect DOS 60 Vers Ung... AD&D: Eye of Beholder Trilogy... Adventure Pack Air Combat Classics Berenstain Bears Fun lunchPak... Comanche & Mission Disk # Grea: Naval Battles Pack Hardball ll Diamond Collect........... Jet Pack Lucos Ants Classic Collection MechWarrior/BattleTech 1 & II... Micro Kitchen/Betty Bundle DOS Micro Kitchen/Betty Bundle WIN Perfect General Trilogy QEMM 386 Gume Pack 7,0..... Sierra Dynamics Bundle VGA Strike Commandet/Tactical WWII Pack. Wing Commander II w/Speech...... Wizardry Trilogy Baru Assets CD Penthouse Interactive CD Playboy Elect DateBook Strip Poker Pro # Data Disk Strip Poker Pro #2 Data Disk Strip Poker Pro 3 Data Disk Strip Poker Pro #4 Data Disk Strip Poker Pro #5 Data Disk Strip Poker Pro #6 Data Disk Strip Poker Profesional 34 Adven, of Willy Beomish. Adventure Pack ....... Air Combat Classics... Air Warrior SVGA Alone in the Dark Ancient Art of War in Skies Arborea 2.. . Archon Uitra... Arena... Art of the Kill...... Ashes of Empire B-17 Flying Fortress VGA Baseball Card Collector Windows Boho Chess 4000 Super VGA Battle Chess 4000 WIN Battle Chess WIN Battles of Destiny Beethoven Il... Betrayal at Kronder Blood Net Blue & the Gray Blue Force: The Next of kin Bram Stoker's Dracula Buzz Aldrin's Race into Space.. CD San Francisco Scenery CD Washington DC Scenery Caesar Caesars Palace WIN Campaign il Card Shop Plus... Carrior Strike Curriers at War ilCastle of Dr. Brain VGA Castles ll. Slege & Conquest Challenge of the 5 Realms... Chessmaster WIN Civilization Civilization HintBook... Civilization Moster Player Ed Civilization WIN Clash of Steel WWII 1939.45 Classic 5 WIN Coaster Cobra Mission...... Cognita WIN Cohort Comanche & Mission Disk #1 Comanche Mission Disk Comanche: Mission Disk ll... 63 IBM FINANCE/TAX SUUNNEAU388 Maneging Your Money 10 Quicken 3.0 WIN..... Quicken 7.0......... Quicken Deluxe CD WIN Taxcut Federal Final DOS 93 Taxcut Federal Final WIN '93 TurboTax Final 1040 DOS 93 TurboTax Final 1040 WIN '93 TurboTax Savings Guido DOS 93 TurboTax Savings Guide WIN TurboTax Tax Business DOS..... TurboTax Tux Planner DOS TurboTox Tax Planner WIN BM ADULT Access 1.1 WIN..... Access Comp Upgrade 11... Alter Dark. After Dark 2.0 WIN Auto Mop 30 AutoMap 3.0 WIN AutoMap Europe WIN . Auto Mop Sl Resorts WIN AutoMap Upgrade 3.0........ AutoMap Upgrade 3.0 WIN.... IBM PRODUCTIVITY BM RECREATION A 10 Tank Killer Ershanced 1.5 A320 Airbus: US Edition AD&D Dark Sun Hint Book... AD&D Dark Sun Shattered Lunds AD&D Dungeon Hack AD&D Eye of Boholder ADSD. Eye of Beholder Trilogy APBA Baseball for Windows Aces of Pacific 1946 WWII Miss.... Aces of the Deep Aces of the Pacitie VGA Aces over Europe... Acos over Europe Mission Aces over Europe: Mission #2 BM RECREATION 93 Circle Reader Service #51 "


"THRUSTMASTER WEAPONS MARK 11 GAME BLASTER COMPUTER Express User programma ble throttle and weapons functions. Compatible with Spin key board connectors Progrom your joy stick for any cur rent or future game. Your gom ing peripherals Joystick and WCS) will be instantly compati ble with current or future games. Features: LED lighting system indicates when certain func tions are activated, Screw down connector; Handle moves fore and oft for throttle control Sturdy sevenfoot cables, Allows joystick pro grammability through joystick interface Digital/Analog mode toggle switch: User pro grammable functions: One year warranty Converts the VGA output from your PC 10 a video signal so you can play all your favorite PC games on any TV set. Display on line services like Prodigy America Online, and CompuServe. Includes $150 worth of FREE games Prince of Persia Jetfighter Il, and Spectre Challengerl Supports 640x480 VGA resolution in 256 colors, outputs NTSC video in RCA composite and S-VHS Super video standards. Includes A/C Power Supply, o foot RCA coble, 6 foot SVHS cable and a VGA Y. cable Supports TV Auto Blanking, Toggling between VGA monitor and TV display PUBLISHER: ADS PART: 32333 Since 1985 800-228-7449EXT TOLL FREE ORDER LINE PUBLISHER: Thrustmaster PART #: 31258 $90 $99 UNNATURAL SELECTION PEBBLE BEACH GOLF COURSE MOTORMOUSE RED CORVETTE NHL HOCKEY '94 GUN BATHRM SILICNOT You ore a brilliant scientist, happily working to end world hunger by designing Theroids. Theroids are largo, docile animals with the potential to be a cheap, efficient food source. Then things start to go wrong, and one of your colleagues disappears with the genetic samples. Unstoppable mutant Theroids go on the rampage and the military is holding you responsible. A hightech, genetic battle-strategy game with incredible sound effects and speech. Features actual digitized film footage of real actors Ultimate, super beasts are yours for the making PUBLISHER: Maxis $27 FOR USE WITH LINKS, LINKS 386 bleue PRO, O MICROSOFT GOLF Located on the Monterey Peninsula in California. The A NONSAN only course of its COURSE stature open to public play. Along the LG shores of Carmel Bay, professional and recreational players alike have expero enced first hand the wonders of this seaside layout, rich with tradition and natural beauty Nine national championships have unfolded of Pebble Beach Super VGA version features real sound with all major sound boards Enjoy becoming a part of history! A serial mouse MOTOR MOUSE styled as an exact replica of a 1985 Chevrolet Corvette A sporty alterno tive to your dull grey mouse. A high quality three button mouse with buttons on the hood. Gives you the same quick access to on-screen functions. Simply plug it into your computer's serial port. Includes a special Windows driver that turns the cursor into an animated version of the car, including sound support to rev the \"engine\" and sound the horn. FOR IBM PC AND COMPATIBLES ONLY. Combines hot arcade action with in depth simulation and stats and a full season mode. NHL and NHLPA licenses ollow inclo sion of player names and faces as well as team names and logos includ ing the Stanley Cupl). Simulate the octual 1993 84 game NHL season. Compile team and player stats throughout the season. Ron Barr's digi fized voice sets up every game of the season. Digitized ink announcer voice reports goal summaries and penalties. Realistic organ music brings tink to life. Each rink features individual music, over 50 pieces in all. Supports Sound Blaster, Ad lib and Roland MT 32 sound PUBLISHER: Electronic Arts S40 PART #: 31741 DOS PUBLISHER: Access Software PART #: 32479 DOS $19 PUBLISHER: MotorMouse PART #132941 $35 Hond of Fate. Kyrandiu II....... BM RECREATION IBM RECREATION HardBall Ill Big League Parks...... HardBall lll Diamond Collect HardBall III Player Disk Horpoon II Heirs to the Throne... High Command Hoyles Book of Game 1 Classic.. Human's Like You've Never Seen.... Human's: Insult to Injury... INCA INCA 2 ICA Hint Book........... Machine IBM RECREATION Jump let.... . Kasparov's Gambit ......... Kid Pix... King's Quest V.VGA King's Quest VI... King's Quest VI Hint Book King's Ransom Kingdoms of Germany.... Kings Table Kronolog. Kye Deluxe Lands of lore ........ lands of Ic fint Book laura R VGA leath esses of Phobos n of Terror yrandio yrandi: IBM RECREATION 28 CALL Larry! ...19 Guit Lorry V. 8 2, THE SOFTWARE TOOLWORKS y VI Jack N . Jogged mings ' s Comanche: Maximum Overkill ..... Combat Classics II.... Command HQ Classic...... Command Starship Companions of Xonth. Conquered Kingdoms Conquered Kingdoms Scenario Crosswords Deluxe WIN... CyberRace. Cyber Space... D&D Fantasy Empires...... DED: Stronghold Daemonsgate...... Darklands Hint Book Darklands Day of the Tentacle Hint Boak Day of the Tentacle: Maniac II. Delto V... Detroit Doom Dragon Knight Ill... Dream Web Dune Dune II.... Dungeon Moster... Earth Invasion Arcade WIN Eco Quest It: Rainforest..... Eight Bull Deluxe......... El Fish Empire Deluxe... Empire Deluxe Scenario.......... Empire Deluxe Strategy Guide Empire Deluxe WIN Eternam. Evasive Action... ..... Even More Incredible Machines F 15 Strike Eagle ll Classic F-15 Strike Eagle Ill F. 19 Stealth Fighter Classic... F/A Hornet Noval Fighter Falcon 3.0....... Fokon: Mig 29/Deadly Adversary Falcon: Operation Fight Tiger Flash Back ........ Fler Defender Flight Light Flight Simlos Vegas Flight Sim: New York Scenery Flight Sim: Paris Scenery. Flight Sim. Son Francisco Flight Sim: Washington DC Flight Simulator 5.0........ Flight Simulator Toolkit... Forgotten Castle Four Play Freddy Phorkas... Freddy Pharkas Hint Rook Front Page Sports: Football Pro Frontier Elite il Gabriel Knight Gary Grigsby's War in Russia Gateway Geekwad Games of the Galaxy Global Dominations... Goblinins. Gobliiins Ill Goblins II The Prince Butfoon....... Grandest Fleet Grear Naval Bartles Pack Greul War... MIRACLE PIANO TEACHING SYSTEM (w/ 2 FREE SONG LIBRARY'S) $269.00 Jeopar Links: Innsbrook Course SVGA......... Links: Mauna Kea Course SVGA... Links: Pinehurst Country SVGA....... Lost Treasures of Infocom I........... Lost Treasures of Infocom Il....... Lost Vikings................. Lost in Time... lucas Acts Classic Collection ........ Lucky's Casino Adventure Lure of the Temptress............ Master of Orion MechWarrior ................... Merchant Prince Metol & loce Upgrade Disk NRIB Michael Jordan Flight Microleague Baseball/Football, Microsoft Arcade WIN................ Microsoft Space Simulator........ Might & Magic Clouds of Xeen Might & Magic DarkSide of Xeen... Mike Dika Football... Monopoly Deluxe More Incredible Machines More Vogos Games WIN Mortal Kombat NU APP NFL '94 WIN....... ... NFL Coaches Football... Nano Tank... Operation Combat 2... Outpost Pacific Strike Speech Disk.. Pacific War... Patriot Perfect General Great Barles Perfect General Trilogy... Perfect General Wwil Scenario... Pinball Dreams Pirates! Gold Police Quest ...... Police Quest IV Pool Shark Populous il.... Power Gemell Powermonger. Prince of Persia ll. Privateer Privateer Speech Pack Prophecy Quarter Pole Quest for Glory I... Quest for Glory ill.......... Quest for Glory IV ..... Quiz Shaw WIN.......... Rogs to Riches..... .. Railroad Tycoon Classic Railroad Tycoon Deluxe..... Railroad Tycoon Master Hint Rally: The Final Round Reach for the Skies... ....... Realms of Arkania... Realms of Arkania Hint Book Red Baron... Red Baron Mission Builder.... Red Crystal Red Storm Rising Classic Remind Me ........ . Return of the Phantom... Return to Zork....... SVGA Links: Inns SVGA... Links: Mouna R + SVGA Links. Pinehurst Count, GA........ Lost Treasures of Infocom I. Lost Treasures of Infocom Il........ Lost Vikings Lost in Time Lucas Arts Classic Collection Lucky's Casino Adventure.... Lure of the Temptress.... Master of Orion MechWarrior ...... Merchant Prince Metal & Lace Upgrade Disk NR18 Michael Jordan Flight..... Microleague Baseball/Football Microsoft Arcade WIN.......... Microsoft Space Simulator... Might & Magic Clouds of Xeen Might & Magic DarkSide of Xeon Mike Ditko Football.... Monopoly Deluxe More Incredible Machines More Vegos Games WIN. Lemmings Commings IBM RECREATION Joe Montana Jump Jet Kasparov's Kid Pox King's Quest V VGA King's Quest VI... King's Quest VI Hint Book King's Ransom..................... Kingdoms of Germany Kings Table Kronolog... Kye Deluxe Lands of lore ........ Lands of lore Hint Book............... INCA 2 INCA Hint Book Incredible Machine Incredible Toons... . Indiana Jones Fate of Atlantis Indy Car Racing Innocent Until Caught.......... Isle of the Dead... Jack Nicklaus Signature Golf Jack Nicklaus Signature Tour 1........ Jack Nicklaus Signature Tour 2 Jagged Alliance Jeopardy Deluxe WIN. leopardy with Alex ....... Jet Fighter Jet Pack Joe Montana Football...... IBM RECREATION IBM RECREATION IBM RECREATION Links: Banff Springs SVGA Links Belfrey Course SVGA.. Links: Firestone Course SVGA..... CALL "


"SIMCITY 2000 GABRIEL KNIGHT THE HUMANS UNNECESSARY ROUGHNESS CITY 2000 The ultimate City timulator. This morning, you approved a new solar power plant, designed an under ground transporto hon system, and jumped five paints in the polls. Then you raised taxes, read two local newspapers, builta 200, and pushed your education bill through the city council. It's time for lunchunless of course, there's a lite, tornado, earthquake or alien invasion. Scenario challenges include the 1991 Oakland fire, unemployment in Flint Michigan and more. Import saved cities from SimCity and SimCity Classic Gabriel Knight is the last in a long line of Shadow Hunters, those fated to fight the dark forces of the super naturel. Haunted by a centuries old curse, he's torment ed by terrifying nightmares. Now he must spend every woking moment scouting the side streets and back alleys of New Orleans for the key to his dark past. Features more conversation, more clues, more game options, and more dark secrets to discover, Includes a bound and illustrated graphic novel. IBM CD version $46. PUBLISHER: Sierra DOS/WIN You've never seen anything like them! Inside every Human is a small but usable brain Humans must learn to cooperate throughout all 160 levels by using and sharing tools that are discov ered along the way. Cooperation is the key in this world of dinosaurs and enemy tribes. It's a naive struggle against uxtinction, where you score points by finish ing levels with us many of your tribesman intact : HUMAN ly possible. Features eight Original soundtracks, colorful animations and throo levels of difficulty Suit up and go head to head against real NFIPA pros in a ferocious bottle of outro geous tockles, impossible one handed catches brutal head butts and flying helmets in a graphically intense PC football game, Design your own plays, tosters and logos. Take the field us TV sportscaster Al Michaels and call every exciting play Filled with intense graphics, real ishe animation and high-impact gameplay Impart and export teams from all 28 NFL cities Features 12 player competition, or 2 player cooperative game play Supports all major sound boards PUBLISHER: Accolade PUBLISHER: Maxis PART 1: 31457 DOS PART 1: 32616 MAC $39 $39 PUBLISHER: Gametek DOS, IBM CD $25 $34 KEYBOARD COMMANDER TEMPLATES EIGHT BALL DELUXE PINBALL LANWORDS FOR WINDOWS BEAT THE HOUSE High quality, full color keyboard over lays for flight Simula tors will turn any AT101 keyboard into a 3-D looking \"control panel'. Includes all key com mands in a logical layout, and legend boxes for cockpit do plays. Available for MS FS 5.0, FAL CON 3.0, VG 29 STRIKE COMMAN DER, ATP, X WING. COMANCHE, F-15 I. ACES OF PACIFIC JETFIGHTER, SECRET WEAPONS, B 17. GUNSHIP, ACES OVER EUROPE TORNA DO and morel Ask about Falcon 3.0's Keyboard & Utility bundles! Quantity Pricing 2 $21.50.3 $30.00, any 4 or more only $9.25 euch! Publisher: Keyboard Commander Corp. $13 Experience real pinball on your PC. Features a country and western pool table theme with great graphics, sound and realistic ball motion Three flippers control the action as players go for the 8-ball and then the Deluxe. Play along speech and background sounds encourage you to Quit talking and start chalking Features detailed 256 colors graphics and real time ani mation Includes alt, 3.way nudge, 3 flippers and multichannel digital sounds PUBLISHER: Broderbund DOS, MAC Fast paced, chal lenging. entertain ment value that's fun for all ages Seven word game variations, or cre ote your own ver sion. Change the look of your games with a choice of colorful ile patterns. Offer: 20 different computer opponents with increasingly sophisticated vocabulary and skill, ranging from beginner to expert levels, containing 160,000 words Online help. \"best plays, onagram finders, and word finders te also included. If you've got network support you can receive and send messages to your opponents via a chot windows screen PUBLISHER: Saber Software PART #: 32743 WIN Prepare yourself for a casino game ing experience! Includes the 160 page study Guide \"Beat the House Companion.\" Featuring slot machines, blackjack, roulette video poker and crops. Beginnots will learn the rules rituals and terms nology of carino play Seasoned gamblers are schooled in strategic counting techniques os well as profitable bening strategies. One to four people can play against each other, or computer players will fill the empty seats Anyone can be a High Roller when they know how to \"Beat The House!\" Publisher: Spirit of Discovery Part #30343 $29 $23 $27 18M RECREATION BM RECREATION Towot.. Ultima Underworld Ultima Underworld ll Hint Book. Ultima Underworld Il Labyrinth Ultima VII Part 2: Serpent Isle Ultima Vll Part 2: Silver Seed Ultima VR: Forgo Virtue Add On.... Ultimo VII: The Black Gote. Ultima Viu. Pogon... Ultrabas..... Unnatural Selection V for Victory Market Garden V for Victory Utah Beach V for Victory Velikiye Luki Vegas Games WIN... Veil of Darkness............... Victory Pak.. . Victory at Sea. Vikings: Fields of Conquest WW2 Batles of S. Pacific ....... WWII Pack.......... . Warriors of legend.... ...... Wheel of Fortune Deluxe WIN..... When Two Worlds War Wing Commander Academy.... Wing Commander ll w/Speech Wizardry Trilogy II....... ...... Crusader Dark Savant... World Circuit Grand Prix World War II: Bane S Pacific X Wing... X-Wing B.Wing Tour of Duty X-Wing: Imperial Pursuit Ysebius EXT, VOICE:508-443-6125 000-220/447 328 FAX:508.443-5645 31 Union Ave., Sudbury, MA 01776 B O D O* * FAX:0011-508-443-5645, X&CompuServeID:70007, 15340W D F  FREE UPS GROUND SHIPPING 10,000 IN STOCK ITEMS V for Victory Volikiye tuki.... Victory Pak Victory at Sog. Wheel of Fortune w/ Vanna White ... Rex Nebular Rex Nebular Clue Book Road & Track Grand Prix..... Road to the Final Four 2.... Romance Three Kingdoms til Rome: Pothway to Power Royal Flush........... Rules of Engagement il... SSN 21: Sea Wolf SVGA Harrier Sam & Max Hint Book.. Sam & Max Hit the Road.... Seo Welt............ Seal Team.... ... Secret of Monkey Island II... Seven Cities of Gold Comm Shadow Caster....... Shadow Coster Hint Book... Sid Meit's Trilogy Silent Service II Classic...... SimAnt WIN...... SimCity 2000... SimCity Classic SimCity Classic WIN... SimEarth WIN.... Simfaim........... Simlife WIN..... Smokin' Guns... Solitaire WIN Solitaire's Journey WIN Space Hulk. Space Quest IV Space Quest v Space Quest V Hint Book Spear of Destiny... Spear of Destiny Hint Book Spectre PC Spectre VR. Speed Racer Challenge Racer X.. Spellcasting Patty Pok SportsWorks........ Star Trek: 25th Anniv. Hint B Star Trek: 25th Anniversary Star Trek: The Next Generation.... Star Trek: Judgment Rites ...... Star Wars Choss.. Stonekoep... Street Fighter II Strike Commander Strike Commander Players Guide Strike Commander Speech Pock.. Strike Commander Tococal #1 Strike Squad.......... Subwar 2050... Summoning Syndicate... T2 The Arcade Game... Task Force 1942 Terminator 2029 Tossetoo WIN Test Drive II: The Passion Tetris Trio... The Games Winter Challenge Third Reich Tie Fighter Space Comba! Tony LoRussa Baseball il Tony Larussall: Al&NL Stadiums...... Tony LaRussa Il Fantasy Draft Tornado MACINTOSH TITLES Oceans Below CD Pathway into Darkness. Pax Imperia..... . Photo CD Access Print Shop Deluxe Print Shop Deluxe Business Print Shop Duluxo Comics. Print Shop Deluxe Sampler Quicken 40 Ready, Set Read Rex Nebular......... Royal Flush Sietra Award Winning Bundle... SimAnt SimCity Classic SimEarth.. ..... Similo... Spectre Sportster 14 4 EXT MAC&FAX Star Trek 25th Anniversary Stor Trek Screen Saver Stellar 7...... . Street Atlus USA CD.... Strip Poker inofessional Taxcut Federal Final '93 Thunderstick ADB... Tristan MACIC/MAC II V for Victory Ill. Mt. Garden H&NA SEGA SNES/3DO 4 Way Play Adapter SEGA..... Bubsy in Claw. SEGA Bubsy in Claws SNES Cool Spot SEGA Dungeon Master SNES Final Fight 2. SNES John Madden NFL 94 SEGA John Madden NFL '94 SNES Jungle Strike SEGA Jurassic Park SEGA Mad Dog McCree 3DO Megadrive Aduptor SEGA Mortal Combat SNES Mutant League Football SEGA NHL '94 SEGA NHL 94 SNES RoboCop vs Terminator... Shining Force SEGA Street Fighter I SEGA Street Fighter II SNES...... Super Off Road Bojo SNES WWF Royal Rumble SNES X Men SEGA 22 IBM RECREATION 44 STUL HSOLNDVW 7th Guest CD A Hard Days Night: Beatles CD American Civil War lll.... Battle of Britain 2. Best Books Botter Homes Health Cooking CD Bomber 2 Caesar ...... Coosars Palace Corriors At War Castlos il... Chuck Yeager Air Combat Civilization Cogito.. Dark Seod.... Disney Collection Screen Saver Dracula Unleashed CD....... Falcon MC..... Flight Simulator Freddy Pharkas Golf Companion... Hell Cab CD Indiana Jones Fate of Atlantis Iron Helix CD JourneyMan Project CD King's Quest VI... Legend of Kyrandio.... M Shormon Tank ...... Mac Attack... Mac Full O'Humans... Mario Toaches Typing Mario is Missing.... . Micro Kitchen Companion '94 Monopoly. Myst CD 800 228-7449. Orders Only, 508 443 6125 all other business Sales Dept Hours Monday Friday SAM till BPM, Saturday 9AM till 5PM All other Business Monday Friday9AM 5PM Most orders ship within 24 hours Temporary shortages are normally filled within 10 days Books, Momory chips, and some electronic components are not returnable. We ship only to verified billing addresses International orders welcome. Airborne Express Shipping charges 57 per order up 10 6 lbs. $1 perbatove 6 lbs. UPS Ground service charge $3 per order. Actual treight charges apply for computers, hard disks Bornoullis, tape back-ups. print ors, Multimedia kits, monitors, etc Alaska, Hawan, outside continental US. APO FPO call for information Prices subject to change without notice. Some product not avatable outs de the US Please call for more informa tion Not responsible for errors or omissions Mastercard, Visa, Discovet, prepad ordets purchase orders, wie transtor, cash, and cashiers chock accepted Personal and Company checks allow 14 days to clear. No Surcharge for credit card orders Your credit card is not charged until the merchand se is shipped We check for stolen credit cards All returns tar credt, repait or exchange must have a return autho rization number. Returned orders or ordered wrong items are subject to a 15% restocking tee Wo stop latest versions of software available. Over nine years of service. Thousands of satisfied cus tomors. Send your Fax today! All quotes answered immediately Product covered by manufacturer's warranty. Detective items replaced immediately. Educational government and corporato purchase arders welcome. All item numbers represent 3.5 floppy excent where noted The Dog 48 Circle Reader Service #51 "


"REVIEW Adventures in Cynicism A Review Of Merit Software's Command Adventures: Starship by Martin E. Cirulis THAIL BAWEAPONS TOUR PELOS I can appreciate irony of almost any kind, to the arcade action of Accolade's Star Control All action on the space and ground racrical but there are times when it gets a bit thick, II, and a ground combat/boarding party commaps proceeds in real-time. Starbases, planets even for me. As I was finishing my overbat system refined somewhat from Mindand derelict ships appear on this screen as well view of the year in science fiction wargaming, craft's Tegel's Mercenaries/Strike Squad. Your and may be boarded or landed on with pera new piece of genre software arrived, Commission is exactly that of another Mindcraft sonnel once your ship matches speed and mand Adventures: Starship (CAS) from Merit release, Star Legions, except that you are exbearing with the targer. Software. After pawing happily through the pected to conquer worlds not with fleets and contents of the bright shiny box I ended my troops, but with a handful of good ol' aliens Propaganda Alert article on the hopeful note that perhaps this with sidearms. Before you disembark, however, your tactinew game would avoid some of the pitfalls cal arca must be cleared of hostile that had plagued at least half of the previous OFWAGE ships. Note that, contrary to the year's crop, and start the new year well. As I manual's propaganda about the installed this new beastie (a bigun, weighing types of ships you will encounter in ar 25 megs of hard drive) I was even more and their likely behavior, all of pleased. Great sound and graphics washed them will attack you without parover me during the intro, and the manual, ley, no matter what your race or though sparse, promised a profusion of behavior is. If you cripple an alien equipment and options that reminded me of ship, it becomes a derelict; you may fine games like SunDog, Elite or Privateer. board it with personnel and use the Then, the chrome faded and game play ground combat system to kill the began. B TOASTERINE remaining crew and take the weapFRY LESTER 4491 ons they leave lying on the floor. Into the V.O.I.D. e 1400023 All ship scenes are featureless, a Contrary to first impressions, CAS only You travel across vast distances of space maze of fairly random hallways and rooms pays lip service to the four X's (Xplore, using a grand starmap, which is blank to about half the size of the planetary battle map. Xpand, Xploit, Xterminate). This game is begin with. As you travel from point to point in hyperspace, portions of the map are reOnce depopulared you receive a dollar-value really dedicated to the 4X's evil cousin, the vealed to uncover planets or starbases. Starreward for the enemy ship (from whom or VOID, Varying Only In Degree. VOID bases are all identical, and planets come in five what, I have no idea) and your prize disapgames are games that do not offer actual basic graphic types that pears. exploration and discovery or even new chalseems to have no effect on lenges; instead, they give you an initial battle gameplay other than varyCommand Adventures: Starship involving one or two enemy pieces. Now, this is a great learning scenario, but you begin to ing the obstructive terrain. TITLE: Command Adventures: Starship ger suspicious when the next battle has three When you are on top of PRICE: SYSTEM: of the same basic foe, and the next has four your map target you exit the REQUIREMENTS: 386SX or better, 2MB RAM and so on and so on. No surprises, no vari starmap and enter the Adlib (Gold), Sound Blaster (Pro), ation in play; you need only craft a strategy bridge of the ship. Here, you PAS-16, Roland MT-32 and for an ever growing number of identical enmust switch to the tactical Sound Canvas sound cards PROTECTION: Code look up on non-reproducable emy units. map that displays your ship paper DESIGNER: CAS boils down, with barely any heat at all, and allows you to maneuver Merit Software Dallas, TX to this premise: Capture all 50 worlds on the and fight in action-intesive (214) 385-2353 map. You have a space combat system similar battles as in Star Control II. $69.95 IBM 25MB hard drive space; supports Tom Lima PUBLISHER: Page 110 Computer Gaming World "


"Welcome to the cab ride from Hell. This cabby wants more than your money-he wants your soul! All he has to do is get you to the worst hellholes in history and see you try to survive. Sound fun? This is Hell Cab, an interactive epic adventure in the devil's time machine. Get ready to face ravenous dinosaurs, fight blood-thirsty gladiators and duck for cover in the WWI trenches of Verdun. To survive, you'll have to overcome countless dangers and resist the irresistible. Think you can beat the devil? Climb in! Dazzling animation, music and bone-rattling sound effects Multiple environments, complex strategies Reallife, first-prson interaction Visit your local gaming store or call 800-482-3766. ONE RIDE AND YOU KNOW WILLY EVERYONE WALKSINN Explore the Empire State Building in all its splen dor. It's virtually yours, courtesy of the devil's technology! Will your last stop be the devi's favorite sun spot... Hell itself? MEILCAB WARNING: TIME WARNER INTERACTIVE GROUP 220 Ve Avenue, Bank, CA 91506 (800) 482-3766 Circle Reader Service #1 RM108P1 "


"COST: 24532 HALL SHOPS slicker graphics in its consistencies» between the manual and the few details, it is exeactual game are amazing. For example, the cuted even more poorly manual refers to some danger involved in the in CAS. You can only hiring of crew members, hinting that there control one player at a were assassins about. Wrong! The crew you time using basic fire, hire don't even have names, never mind permove, and pickup comsonalities or divergent loyalties! There are also mands, and you can references to the four different kind of misleave an individual with sions you will find other ships performing, OUP CHEGO EHPP CARGO basic attack/defend ingiving you the idea that there is some kind of E. TOASTER AMMO: 71 structions when you coherent backdrop for this game. Wrong switch to another fig. again. There is no context for the action in LAZER XR AMMO: 50 ure, but when these this game, no beings to talk to, nothing to COST: 46443 units are under cominteract with. FUNDS E 632452) puter control, they are The box's picture of reality is even further You are given over 30 ship weapons to painfully stupid. They're fully capable of skewed. Careful consumers have learned to choose from, but don't expect a cornucopia shooting an ally standing in the way of an spot screen shots on a box that are probably of graphic affects and damage characteristics. enemy trooper and, in defense mode, will just animation sequences, not really a play All weapons, be they lasers, missiles, or mines, empty a clip at a wall while the enemy on the shot. However, on the CAS box, Merit has fire a little colored ball that travels across the other side also blazes away at the very same spliced control panels along the bottom of the screen and explodes where you had the cursor wall. animation screen shots to give the impression target placed when you pressed the mouse that you actually play against that kind of butron. There is no variation in speed, and A Universe of Illusion graphic splendor. While crowing about the the only difference is in the damage they Usually, the marketing of a piece of soft number of weapons you can use, the box fails cause; and you can only tell this is true beware is beyond the scope of a reviewer, but in to mention they can only be distinguished cause the enemy blows up with fewer hits. this case an exception Sadly, the thirty-odd exotic ground weapons has to be made. First, a OFFSET PODE work exactly the same generic way. couple of clarifications: When space is clear of enemy vessels, you Command Adventure: may shuttle your landing party to the surface Starship, regardless of of the neutral world and conquer it. There are the strong impression two objccrives: eliminate all enemy troops, given by the documenand use your engineers to build and activate tation and the box, is \"Isolation Grid Units\" in all four corners of not a role-playing game. the tactical map. If you satisfy both require. There are no characters, ments, an energy fence springs up, sealing you skills, or names inoff from the 99.98 percent of the planetary volved. Also, the only surface left unconquered, and the world is \"Adventure\" going on TWEAPONS IMBISHIELDSER declared yours. Once again, a monetary rehere is in the title. There LE. TOASTER 12 A FRY MASTER 49ward wings your way from the ether and you is no plot line to be fol2 D BVT4000731) can go on to another world or back to a lowed, no mystery to be starbase for repairs, ship upgrades and new uncovered—just simple, repetitious action from each other with a calculator. The term personnel. gaming. Vague allowances are made for these «strategic\" is bandied about to give you an As I said previously, personal combat is aspects, but they are nothing more than impression of a big space game, even though all your decisions are purely tactical. Perhaps camouflage for a bare-boned game. handled by an engine almost identical to the one used by Mindcraft in their Tegel's Now, it is true that sometimes a game's we can attribute these inconsistencies to boyMercs/Strike Squad scries. Except for slightly reach is beyond its grasp and falls short. These ish enthusiasm, perhaps to intentions less things happen, and a innocent, but either way I was left with a very SECURITY OFFICER MOVING disappointing game is sour taste in my mouth. just a fact of lifca Sadly enough, I haven't hit on half the Mmmmm. least the effort has been things badly done or omitted in this game made to make the game There were times when I was truly convince the best it could be. But that I had gotten hold of some half-finished here, I suspect, is a game pre-release version by accident, or that a at least six months short blood vessel had burst in my brain and I was on development time somehow missing the point. A long list of that has been hurriedly disgruntlements would be brutal and pointthrown into a glossy less. Let it stand at this: the graphics are great DE INVENTORY JE WEAPONS : MOVEN package to catch the LAZER and the sounds are stunning, but even the TOFSTER. TATTAGET FRY MAEL 162 DEFEND holiday buying frenzy. moderately experienced gamer will experiI PICKUP PISTOL VT4000 121 CFOPORT The number of \"inence disappointment on a galactic scale. Cow 1.., RIFLE Page 112 Computer Gaming World "


"Give Your Joystick a Thrill. in the early 21st century, staged fighting has become a lucrative profession for female hardbodies, with dozens of legal arenas in the city. But for the leanest, meanest warriors, the real money comes from the illegal bouts held outside the city. It's the hottest day of the summer and you're baking inside a dilapidated warehouse. You and your opponent — wear the latest in MECHA armor. The best fighting armor in the world. THE BATTLE OF THE ROBO BABES This won't be any picnic. With the intense heat and action, you'll both end up in less than full body dress. It's dream babes in heavy armor battling for prize money — action packed, arcade style fun for your PC. But be warned with its intense violence and voluptuous women, Metal & Lace: Battle Of The Robo Babes is for mature audiences only. And not for the faint hearted. Available now at your nearest dealer or call 1-800-258-MEGA. Or write Megatech P.O. Box 11333, Torrance, CA 90510. Visa, Mastercard, checks accepted. GLOGO en System requirements: 286-20 or faster machine (386 recommended) with 640K RAM, hard disk, joystick recommended. Operating Sys: MS DOS 3.3 or above, Windows 3.1. Graphics compatible with VGA. Sound support: Sound Blaster, Sound Blaster Pro, Thunder Board, Pro Audio Spectrum, Adlib Gold and Speed Moster. A CORRETH SHO T EROTIC NR-13 viele This game is not for the faint-hearted. Contains violence and some material inappropriate for minors. Fd a free demo call our 24hr. BBS at 310-539-7739. (8ND) NOT RECOMMENDED FOR PLAYERS UNDER 13. All companies and product names mentioned are trademarks or registered trademarks of the respective owners. MEGA TECH Circle Reader Service #88 "


"Letters from Paradise ESPANA floppy version of a game is released that a CD version of the same game MAY follow? David Bisman Bathurst, NSW, AUSTRALIA In the earliest days of CD games, the re-releases of floppy-disk games were primarily a laboratory for developing and refining the production skills and technological capacity for creating solid CD entertainment software. In order to lose the least amount of money on said experiments, it was necessary to have a game prove itself in the market first and try to market an enhanced version later. Now, the economics of scale are shifting. It is becoming more and more feasible The 5th Wave By Rich Tennant SC-WARE SOFTWARE Digital Deja Vu I live about 200 miles away from the nearest city with a population of more than 30,000 and CGW is basically my primary source of information on the gaming world. It is for this reason, and that of your close association with game developers, that I write to you. My question concerns games on CD. Like all addicted, sorry, dedicated gamers, you know that when a hot new game is released you can't wait to get stuck into it and with truly challenging games you play it to death, until there are no surprises left and all the puzzles have been solved. When this game is a success, the producers may then decide that with the right voices and possibly some better graphics, they could release the game on CD. Sounds great—NOT! How many people are going to turn around and pay an even higher price for the same game with the same objectives and puzzles? There is no anticipation (which is) a big part of CRPGs and adventure games. There is also no sense of accomplishment in solving any puzzles. One example which comes to mind is Indiana Jones and the Fate of Atlantis. My wife and I enjoyed the game immensely and would have snapped up the CD version in a minute, but having played the floppy disk version of the game, there is no point, even if the voices are great. From what I have read in your magazine, I can appreciate the financial constraints placed on some software companies which would restrict them from producing first-run games on CD as opposed to or as well as on floppies, given the relatively small number of CD-ROM owners, the extra expense and the fact that the game may be a rurkey on any format. But, is it at all possible for the software companies to announce at the time the ro cu temama \"'THE MANUFACTURERS OF A DATA ENCRYPTION PROGRAM THAT SCRAMBLES MESSAGES INTO A BRAINLESS MORASS OF INDECIPHERABLE CODE, HAS JUST FILED A 'LOOK AND FEEL COPYRIGHT SUIT AGAINST OUR GAME MANUAL DIVISION\" Page 114 Computer Gaming World "


"FREELANCE TNE  1993 by POLICE STEVE PURCELL         YOU KNOW.MAX, 66% OF ALL VIOLENT CRIMES ARE COMMITTED BY MONSTERS. I WOULONT HAVE BELIEVEO IT MYSELFIE HAON JUST MADFITUR WILL WHADDAYA KNOW THERESA FEROCIOUS MONSTER NOW THEN I SUPPOSE WERE BOUNOBY DESTINY TO DESTROY AS MANY MONSTERS AS POSSIBLEDOM NOW UNTIL THE END OF TIME OR UGIL WE FORSETTO HEAD IS BIOMTOTO ANG THERE'S SOME STUFF WELL THAT'S JUST FINE WE'RE DISMANILISHIM. AROUNDAMESSCIRU HERI MESASHRIFIED DWARE BRANDISHI HORTICHORA INSTALLATION APARATU A . OKAY L...QUESS ITS 16 START MURTINFOLKS. THAT SAM to have stand-alone CD titles because of the expansion of the installed base of CD-ROM drives. Hence, more and more titles are being released simultaneously (or near simultaneously) in floppy disk and CD formats. As the installed base of CD-equipped computers increases, we believe that CDs will become the dominant shipping medium of computer game software. In fact, we predict that this shift will have occurred by the Spring of 1995 and that it will require the same type of disk exchange then to get 3.5\" disk versions of games as it currently requires to get 5.25\" disk versions of games. In short, the answer to your question is that companies will not only announce their CD products at an earlier time, but CD products are beginning to take the point in their marketing plans. Within six months, it is likely that your question will become moot. Agent Orange I am writing to say that I am happy with the recent acquisition of CGW by Ziff-Davis. The additional pages of articles and advertisements are greatly appreciated (and your magazine is the only media outlet where I appreciate more advertisements). However, I have run into a problem with the magazine. While reading CGWand eating an orange, I noticed the print smearing. I cleaned my hands and ran a test on the ink. The print did not smear with dry skin or with water, but it came right off with juice from the orange. I am enclosing the page for your reference. Obviously, I will be avoiding citrus fruit while reading your fine magazine. Robert M. McLearen, Jr. Des Moines, IA Does this mean we should print a disclaimer? Maybe it could read, \"While CGW readers are advised not to eat citrus fruit while reading the magazine, we are not liable for cases of scurvy or insufficient vitamin protection against the common cold. Seriously, we pass along the word about citric acid and our ink in order for others a our ink in order for others to avoid both damage to the magazine and accidental ingestion. Hall Of Blame believe that your magazine, while certainly the finest in the industry, consistently makes one mistake. You admit too mange games into the CGW Hall of Fame. When I first began to read your magazine, there were very few games in the Hall of YOU REALIZE OF COURSE THAT WITH THE ET EA SEMI-FUNCTIONING A WHOLE HOST OF COMPLICATIONS FIRSTOF ALL THIRE SLOTS ANDY LOTS OF SCHOOL THENSSLECTIVE REGSTRATION CHRONIC UNCERTAINTY FLOW V ROG SCCL AND MAYRE AREWARDING JOR MOPANO UD CAUSTIC RAD OACTIVE A LIQUID SPILS TA CLOSELY FOLLOWED HY BAUL GIONS DOES THE MEAN ANYTHIND nally took cight years to get the first 12 or so and while most have sported VGA graphics in: and stereo sound, very few of them have been I believe that your magazine has become worthwhile to play, because they are so easy much too lenient in which games it admits to and not catered to anyone with real gaming the Hall of Fame. The Hall of Fame should experience. And Zork, perhaps the most inbe a great honor, and not made so casily fluential game ever was left off the list until available. It seems to me that most of the the Prodigy Infocomrades (Ed: led by Mr. games were inducted for either their popularMurray) got it on in the summer of 1992, iry or the fact that the members of the CGW because of a mistake. When you started the staff inducted them as their favorite games. I Hall of Fame, it wasn't rated high enough. do not understand this! Of the 31 games on I really believe that you need to rethink and the list, only three or four have made what I only three or four have made wharl reorganize the criteria and entry requirements reorganize the criteria ana entry requirem consider to be a worthwhile contribution to for the games in the Hall of Fame. It should the industry, with three to four others as be reserved for the most influential and impossible second choices. That's a total of sixportant games in the industry, and not just to-eight games. Where did the other 22 the ones that have been highly rated by the readers. Set an example for the rest of the games come from? industry and admit only the most worthy While I realize that the primary judge of a games. You used to do that and I hope you game being entered into the Hall of Fame is how popular the game is among CGW readMatthew Murray ers, that is not a fair criterion. Don't assume Bellingham, WA that just because a game is popular means it deserves to be in the Hall of Fame. Sure, The original CGW Hall of Fame was unKing's Quest V: Absence Makes The Heart Goweiled in CGW #45 (March 1989) Then Yonder' was a popular game, but I doubt veryter inductees were: Ultima III, Ultima IV, much that it had a positive impact on the Wizardry, The Bard's Tale, Chessmaster industry. I have only seen it have a negative 2000, Kampfgruppe, Mech Brigade, impact. Every game created after it has re M.U.L.E., and the original War in Russia. Of quired ridiculous hardware requirements, the original nine, only Mech Brigade seems a However, in the December 1993 issue, it was announced thar The Secret of Monkey Island was being added, for a total of 31 games. How could the number of games in the Hall of Fame have doubled in the three years since I had started reading the magazine, if it origiFebruary 1993 Page 115 "


"mpfgrupper its and may questionable choice, even in light of today's games. Mech Brigade was included because it fixed some design flaws in Kampfgruppe, a tactical game of WWII armored combat that still brings flutters to the hearts of dedicated warwamers, today. We felt that it would be inconsistant to induct Kampfgruppe into the Hall of Fame without inducting its successor and superior design. Unfortunately, Mech Brigade was never actually as popular as Kampfgruppe and it is the most difficult of the charter members to defend. At its inception, the criteria for inclusion in the Hall of Fame were: 1) quality of the game as perceived by the editorial staff; 2) quality of the game as demonstrated in reader ratings; and 3) contribution of the game to the computer gaming hobby as a whole and the genre to which the game wis specific. We still hold to those criteria. Indeed, the rotating descriptions of Hall of Fame members which we print in the magazine each month are intended to highlight those reasons which we believe meet requirements #1 and #3. We relaxed the criteria to induct Zork. Zork was never rated high enough to meet awalification #2. but there is no doubt that it was worthy of inclusion. As for the two specific games whose inclusion you considered unworthy, let me remind you that KQV was inducted because it represented: a) new technology in additions to the Hall of Fame per year. We using the scanning process to make backgrounds believe that is responsible growth. and animation look more fluid and realistic; b) the entire series as a whole (the most commerHeavy Duty Crimefighter cially successful adventure game series in hisI felt compelled to forward this letter in tory) and a watershed in the work of a response to a comment made by Johnny Wildesigner who defined the graphic adventure son in the December issue's editorial regardvenre (Roberta Williams has worked with coing the new \"record size\" of your magazine, authors and co-designers since that point.) from The following is an absolurely, positively, its inception. Further, The Secret of Monkey unquestionably truc story (well...just a few Island may well have been the apex of the minor liberties were taken). SCUMM system at LucasArts (nee' Lucasfilm) I was out buying some clothes one cold and Games. The system has evolved in some areas windy evening in late November at an area and devolved in others, BUT it is rare to find shopping mall. Following a couple of hours anyone who hasn't played and enjoyed Monkey of unbridled spending, I exited the estabIsland to the extent that they treat it as a lishment and began walking towards my car. reference point in the genre. It was at this time that a hoodlum came F inally, another reason for the proliferation of literally out of nowhere to grab the largest bag titles in the Hall of Fame is that the number of that I was carrying. He immediately proceeded to run off with his new prize, which genres represented have expanded. Simulation included a pair of pants, a shirt, some socks games, as represented in this issue, have adand, as fortune would have it, the latest copy vanced gigantic leaps past the technology that of CGW that I had happened to purchase at was in play when the charter members were my favorite bookstore on the way out of the inducted. Indeed, the number of titles available mal have increased. Remember, the number of athing to throw away my hard won currency in letes represented in their respective Hall of Fame these tough times. I gave chase. He bolted museums and the number of films listed in the across the parking lot and down an adjoining National Registry of Film increases with each streer. Though it was quite dark out and the calendar year. We have averaged less than five robber wore similarly dark clothing, I manTHE ULTIMATE Play-By-Mail Offer... ...JUST GOT BETTER! Another five major play-by-mail games have joined our unique offer: Cluster Lords (rules and 10 free turns in this deep space opera), Death and Sorrow (rules and 10 free turns in this introductory fast-moving wargame), Perseus Arm (the 170-page rulebook and 3 turns in a massive new space opera), St Valentine's Day Massacre (rules and five turns in PBM's most challenging crime game), World Conquest (rules and 4 turns in this clean strategic wargame). And now all subscriptions are processed by first class mail, ensuring you get the hottest news in the hobby. Play by mail is America's most exciting form of gaming, pitting you against crack players across the country and abroad. (Call (216) 673-2117 for news of the big national PBM convention.) Our offer gives you the chance to sample it and decide if it's for you. For those who haven't seen our guaranteed offer before, here it is: Take a $20 (4-issue) subscription to FLAGSHIP, the leading international play-by-mail magazine, and let our reviews, features and player comments help you pick the best of the latest games. We think you'll enjoy our frank, irreverent style. With your first issue we'll send you a $20 coupon for any of the above games and 19 others, with a description of each so you can decide which of these intriguing designs to try. The only condition: that you've not played with the chosen moderator before. But what if you don't like FLAGSHIP? What if you're not intrigued by the game you write for? Haven't you wasted $20? No! Write us within a month of getting your first FLAGSHIP to tell us you were disappointed, and we'll refund you the entire $20. (You can still use the coupon.) So: either you've enhanced your gaming with an exciting new dimension for $20. Or you've explored it and decided it's not for you at a cost of zero! Why not try it? Send $19.99 to FLAGSHIP, CGW offer, PO Box 454, Fair Lawn, NJ 07401-0454. [European readers: Send .99 to FLAGSHIP, CGW offer, PO Box 1733, Handsworth, Birmingham B20 2PP for the equivalent European offer!) Circle Reader Service #63 "


"\"Never before has there been a game so movie-like in its construction.\" — Computer Gaming World \"Graphics, music and sound effects are all.exceptionally strong.\" Questbusters TSUNAMI (pronounced soo-nah'-mee) n. A powerful vision RINGWORLO and a fresh approach to an almost forgotten Revenge of the P T art...the ancient art of storytelling. Look for these premium TSUNAMI titles: Based on the award wining book series by celebrated author RINGWORLO PROTOSTALE LEER EN NOVICE LEVEL FUNSTERSI Actual VGA screens THE INFODISK SAID YOU WERE TO DELIVER A WARNING MITT It never mentioned an insane Patriarch, Kzinti assassins, or the fact that the only hope for the future of the universe might be found on a world so immense it could hold a million earths. Ringworld holds the answers if only you can find it in time... Circle Reader Service #138 Experience Larry Niven's universe like never before! Available from your local dealer in 3.5\" disk or CD-ROM FORMAT. TM designates a trademark of Tsunami Media, Inc. Tsunami Media, Inc. 1993. All rights reserved. Tsunami Media, Inc. is an independent publisher, distributed exclusively by Accolade, Inc. "


"Holiday Carols for Computer Gamers We received a lot of interesting verses for our computer caroling competition. The two best were from Charlton Sun in Amherst, OH, and Bill DiMartino in Newbern, NC. We will be sending a one-year subscription to both Bill and Charlton. aged to maintain the pursuit beneath a trail of dim street lamps. The remembrance of years of high school track surely carried me relentlessly forward. After a few minutes of running, an unbelievable thing happened—the thief starred ro slow down! I couldn't believe it. I began to rapidly gain ground. By the time he'd reached Webster Square, some half mile away from the scene of the crime, the crook had slowed to a complete stop and ultimately collapsed in a heap on the sidewalk against a wrought iron railing. I came up beside him and, before I could say or do anything, the breathless burglar thrust the bag containing the stolen goods in my direction and, with face flushed and chest heaving, bellowed, \"Go ahead and take it back!\" Ar that precise moment, I realized that it wasn't the pants, shirt or socks—it was the near telephone book-like magnitude of CGW that had completely and utterly worn down this svelte and doubtless seasoned pilferer. The pages upon pages of advertisements, the Holiday Buyer's Guide, the truly incarcerating interview with Daryl Gates, the Kids & Computers section and the additional pages and pages of advertisements had all concerted and, indeed, conspired to weight down and ultimately defeat this mighty purloiner! Who would've imagined that such new-found bulk would have served so lofty a purpose? Well done, CGW! Well done! Jim Corbin Lowell, MA Not only do we need the screen rights to this story for a Made-For-CGW movie, but this may cause us to open up a new division to sell \"The Sub\" as an anti-theft device. LILTIMA HAILED AND A PENTILIM CHIP THAT DOESN'T (To be sung to the tune of \"Jingle Bells\") MELT DOWN David McGirth BRANDISHING MY BOW, Las Vegas, NV ON A HOT BRITANIAN DAY. O'ER THE LANDS WE KNOW, D&D GOING OUT TO SLAY, (WITH APOLOGIES TO CHAMPIONS OF OUR KING, ON A QUEST THAT NEVER CEASED. SSLAND TSR) MAKING PEACE BY VANQUISHING, (to the tune of \"Jingle Bells\") EVERY HORRID, EVIL BEAST. DASHING THROUGH MYTH DRANNOR, OH! WITH DARK SLIN IN A SACK, WISH I WAS AT HOME RIGHT NOW, ULTIMA! ULTIMA! PLAYING DLINGEON HACK. THAT'S MY FAVORITE GAME. DARK MOON AND HILLSFAR LINDERWORLD OR SERPENT ISLE, MAKE MY SPIRITS BRIGHT. I LIKE IT JUST THE SAME. WHAT FLIN IT IS TO SIT AND PLAY OH! D AND D TONIGHT! LILTIMA! ULTIMA! D & D! D & D! THAT'S MY FAVORITE GAME. I'LL PLAY IT ALL THE DAY! I THINK RICHARD GARRIOT AND I'LL CONTINUE INTO THE NIGHT, DESERVES ALL OF HIS FAME. THEN SAY: Charlton Sun D & D! DE D & D! D & D! Amberst, OH I'LL PLAY IT ALL THE DAY! OH, WHAT FUN IT IS TO SCREAM AND GOD REST YE SHOUT, MERRY AEROPLANES \"I WON THE GAME IN ONLY A DAY!\" (to the tune of \"God Rest Ye Merry, Gentlemen\") Ted Dawes DOES ANYBODY WANT TO BUY MY Melrose, MA COPY OF S.C.? WINTER UNDERGROUND I WISH I HADN'T GONE AND WASTED ALL OF MY MONEY! (to the tune of \"Winter Wonderland\") TO MAKE IT WORSE I ALSO BOUGHT GRUES ARE HOWLING, ARE YOUR THE SPEECH PACK, LISTENING? DISKS ALL THREE. THAT GOLD'S APPEALING, THAT IS OH WHY, DIDN'T WAIT FOR THE GLISTENING! REVIEW, WAIT FOR THE REVIEW! BUT CAN YOU FIGURE OUT THE ROOM OH WHY, DIDN'T I WAIT FOR THE THAT IS ROLIND REVIEW? WHILE WALKING IN THE WINTER Bill DiMartino LINDERGROLIND? Newburn, NC CLINKITY-CLANKITY GO THE FALLING ZORKMIDS THE 12 KS OF CHRISTMAS AS INTO A TROPHY CASE THEY GO. (to the tune of \"The Twelve Days of Christmas\") THEN IT'S BACK THROUGH THE TRAP DOOR FOR MORE TREASURE ON THE TWELFTH DAY OF CHRISTMAS, AS BACK INTO THE G.LI.E. WE GO. MY TRUE LOVE GAVE TO ME: CAN YOU GET, PAST THE BA-AT? TWELVE HARD DRIVES HLIMMING, ELEVEN NETWORKS LINKING, CAN YOU FIX THE FLOOD CONTROL \"TEN MONITORS GLEAMING, DAM? NINE MODEMS CALLING, OR CAN YOU FIGURE OUT THE ROOM EIGHT RA CACHING, THAT IS ROUND SEVEN FAN CARDS COOLING WHILE WALKING IN THE WINTER SIX SOLIND CARDS BLASTING, UNDERGROUND? FIVE MULTIMEDIA GAMES! Matthew Murray FOUR MEG OF RAM, Bellingham, WA THREE NEW MICE, TWO LOCAL BUS, Why is there no news of Sierra's first CDonly game, Phantasmagoria? What has happened to it? How come we never get a look ar this, presumably technological, breakthrough of a game? Raymond Port Santa Rosa, CA CGW has not published any material on this game because it is too early to even publish a \"Behind The Screens\" on the product. Roberta Williams is following a \"closed set\" philosophy on the product because they are trying a lot of new techniques in this huge game, and they don't want competitors technologically stealing a march on them by using such techniques in smaller projects. Hence, security is tighter than usual. We will cooperate with Sierra in publishing a \"Behind The Screens» as soon as it is practical from both their perspective and ours. CGW Page 118 Computer Gaming World "


"TSUNAMI (pronounced soo-nah'-mee) * BLUE n. A powerful vision and a fresh approach to an almost forgotten art...the ancient art of storytelling. Look for these premium TSUNAMI titles: RINGWORLD PROTOSTOR LE PETER CREATED BY. BEST SELLING :: GAME DESIGNER FUNSTERSI JIM WALLS Actual VGA screens Circle Reader Service #139 IT YOU'RE JAKE RYAN, rookie motorcycle officer. Ten years have passed since the unsolved murders of your parents, but a twisted trail of evidence still exists. While patrolling your beat, pieces from the past begin to link with the present. You're treading where you're not wanted and someone wants you to know it! BLUE FORCE... Realize your destiny. Available from your local dealer in 3.5\" disk or CD-ROM FORMAT. TM designates a trademark of Tsunami Media, Inc. OTsunami Media, Inc. 1993. All rights reserved. Tsunami Media, Inc. is an independent publisher, distributed exclusively by Accolade, Inc. "


"REVIEW Anime Mine MegaTech's Metal & Lace: The Battle of the Robo Babes by Charles Ardai KURUMYAM I. ELEVEREST DVE OVEDU . BV PER UBHVIDER  .  . AGUSTU VIEUVIC VID. GIVIE BIVVIE VIEW WIG NOVA COUPE               .   . Warning: The following review is a frank discusStrip Poker and endless rounds of Othello to and a handful of different background scenes sion of a game that features elements which may uncover an ankle here and an elbow there in against which to fight, but while this does be offensive to some readers. Hence, even the review may include references which could be Centerfold Squares, where it could take up to help keep the player interested, it only does offensive. Let the reader beware. a dozen games to get to the good stuff. (The so for an extra dozen fights or so. In the end It is easy to pick on a game like Metal year Squares came out, I learned to play it all cancels out since most players will spend Lace. Anything that willingly subtitles it. Othello really well-but, by God, I never the first dozen fights being bearen to a pulp self \"The Battle of the Robo Babes\" is want to play Othello again as long as I live.) while simply trying to learn the controls. asking to have fun poked at it. I assume the Metal & Lace suffers from the same flaws. The player starts with too little money to designers know that (although since English The full-screen Anime graphics of scantily buy the really good hardware and too little is obviously not their first language, we can't clad women are doled out as rewards for experience to use the hardware he does buy be sure), and I also assume they don't mind. beating the same women two times apiece in proficiently. By contrast, the robo-babes are If that's so, I say, «Bravo!\" It's nice, once in the combat sessions. There are seven different proficient from the start, in addition to which a while, to see a game that is what it is and 90-5 y they don't have to deal with a set makes no bones about it. Pac-Man was a DRAGIS EIVILE of inscrutable keyboard comgame about munching dots in a maze. LemAUVR, OVE R VIE mands. (Not to mention the paramings is a game about moving critters from lyzing fear that banging the EMITERETVE one end of the screen to the other. Metal en appropriate keys rapidly and freTWITTER GRAVIE ESKER   .  Lace is a game about beating people up and quently enough to vanquish a foe   . , , EVIZELE CUVIA GIVIE BUV seeing pretty, naked girls. That's all it is. If TLF EVA LIVRE BRUTALECET VN will shortly necessitate the purFEVEREUZBERG ER BIZI VE DIVEBUIE nobody wants what it has to offer, it won't ZDVIESI SALT DIVI GIVETUVI chase of a new keyboard.) First-orETUVI EUWE UITVIN X A UMIR EDVI DVERE sell. But since (to paraphrase H.L. Mencken) B E EVIMDI EVIDEOS SERVIVED der punches and kicks are easy REVIEVE EVIE VLEV no one has ever gonc broke overestimating ,   , .  BENICIPATETIT ISETE enough for the player to accomthe bloodlust or libido of the American pub, .   plish, but the more complex lic, if I were MegaTech I wouldn't worry. It moves, which are the only techwill sell. People may blush when they bring it niques that can win a fight, take a to the cash register, but that's never stopped women, each depicted in four graphics that great deal of practice to pull off. Playboy from selling a million copies of every degrade in order from L.L. Bean to Victoria's Wise players will go into two-player mode issue. Secret, to (if one installs the \"NR-18\" upand try all the moves out on a stationary No, the problem with Metal & Lace is not grade files) demurely topless, to \"Sure, my opponent; even so, the complex combinathat it's embarrassing or silly, or, for that panties are dangling, but are you ready for the tions of key-presses are likely to flee one's matter, excessively prurient. The problem ultimate challenge?\" That makes 56 bariles, mind in the heat of battle. with Metal & Lace is that the game, merely a plus the fights between rounds with the \"suThe game does have its share of secret tricks side-view human-punching-bag extravaganza per champions\" who have to be beaten three which once discovered male the same modeled after games like Street Fighter and times each-almost 70 fights in all, and that's much easier. Poke around on the barroom Mortal Kombat at its core, is not particularly assuming that the player wins every battle, screen to which one returns between fights screen to which one returns good. There is nothing wrong, in my opin which he won't. and you find that all the room's objects, when ion, with a little wholesome T&A, but the Anything a player has to do 100 times or clicked on, can disgorge valuable treasures as T&A is only a small (indeed, optional) part more had better be spectacular fun in order well as snide remarks. Click on the floor often of the game. Since the player spends more not to become boring quickly and then madtime clobbering the mech-suited babes than enough and it will let you have a suit of armor dening as time drags on. The combat in Metal it has been hiding: click on the Schwarzenegogling once he's beaten the pants off them, & Lace is, alas, a far Mega Tech ought to have put more effort into cry from spectacular Metal & Lace: The Battle of the Robo Babes making sure that their combat sequences fun. The designers compared favorably with those designed by try to spice things up TITLE: Metal & Lace: The Battle of the Robo Babes their competitors. PRICE: $49.95 by giving the player SYSTEM: IBM seven different types REQUIREMENTS: 386 or better, VGA graphics, 16MB hard Mano-a-Womano drive space; supports Adlib (Gold), PAS, of armor to choose Sound Blaster (Pro) T&A games have a history of misguidedly from, a half dozen PROTECTION: Code wheel DESIGNERS: Erwin Mab, Hideki Masuko. emphasizing the T&A factor over the game bits of machinery David S. Moskowitz, Kenny Wu PUBLISHER: MegaTech factor. Artworx, one of the earliest purveyors, (shields, boosters, Torrance, CA forced gamers to go through endless rounds neural amplifiers) to (310) 539-9177 of so-so poker to unwrap their opponents in upgrade the armor, OF THE RORO BABES Page 120 Computer Gaming World "


"\"I hope there will be a sequel...I will gladly buy it after this one!\" Computer Game Review ...the graphics in PROTOSTAR are incredible!\" . Computer Gaming World TSUNAMI (pronounced soo-nah'-mee) n. A powerful vision PROTOSTAR and a fresh approach WAR ON THE FRONTIER to an almost forgotten art...the ancient art of storytelling. Look for these premium TSUNAMI titles: RINGWORLO PROTOSTAR ADVANCED LEVEL WACK FUNSTERBI PLUE WALLS NELIETT LOCATION Actual VGA screens place to unwind. Circle Reader Service #140 MANKIND IS IRRESISTIBLE PREY... The Skeetch Empire has viewed Human prosperity as an invitation for conquest. Now they have sealed the borders of Human space. YOU are enlisted to serve as the PROTOSTAR Agent for an operation of grave importance. Your objective is to disrupt Sketch supply lines along the Galactic Frontier. You must assemble your team and win the support of the critical alien factions, Your War on the Frontier may prove that mankind is more predator than prey! Available from your local dealer in 3.5\" disk or CD-ROM FORMAT. TM designates a trademark of Tsunami Media, Inc. Tsunami Media, Inc. 1993. All rights reserved. Tsunami Media, Inc. is an independent publisher, distributed exclusively by Accolade, Inc. "


"GAMERS Can your Computer Handle the newest games? Let us help, We specialize in gamer's needs... IDE Hard Drives Seagate 130meg drive $210 Seagate 261meg drive $263 Samsung 252meg drive $238 Seagate 341meg drive $345 Western Digital 340meg $326 Mother Boards 486DX2/ 66 VLB 256k Cache $675 486DX/ 33 VLB 128k Cache $462 486/40 DLC $173 System RAM $43 Complete System 486DX/ 33 Vesa Local 128K Cache 255meg Hard drive, 1.2 & 1.44 floppy 1meg VLB Video, 4 meg Ram .28 SVGA Monitor, VLB Multi 1/0 Mini Tower Case 101 Keyboard, 3 button Mouse $1789 Large Inventory, Software and other Hardware Sound and Video, CD ROM Computer System Solutions 1-800-666-5590 *Prices Subject to change without Notice Circle Reader Service #52 DITHMO gerian bouncer a dozen times and he'll give images the game contains (half as many withyou some batteries. out the nudity upgrade) are prime examples Each source of goodies will also, occasionof the style. ally, dispense a malediction—an armor-damIn deliciously Japanese-flavored English, aging kidney punch, a pocket picked of the package promises \"flashy eyes, fine noses, $1000—but the clever player will use a simand spunky hair colors\" and there's no denyple scheme of saving the game immediatelying that's what it provides. The noses are fine. after receiving each blessing and restoring the the hair is spunky, there is a nice variety of the hair is spunky. game after each curse to eliminate all risk. By body types and voices, and there is even some carrying out this scheme for a few hours (since animation, though nothing to get too excited the barroom never runs out of treasures to abour (a finger moves, eyes blink, hot oil dispense), the player can rack up enough drips). Typical Japanese avoidance of all bucks to buy all the hardware he needs, including unlimited supplies of \"Al chips\" things pubic means that the artists carefully which, when called upon in battle, turn the selected poses which keep the babes, even at player's character over to computer control. their barest, a notch more modest than Sharon Stone. Though this feels like a bit of Al autopilot is, I found, the best way to play a cheat—like those old skin flicks where the the game—insofar as it can be called \"playing\" —since it gets one past all the interminanaked women were always carrying a purse, ble battles with minimal damage to one's or a plant, or something at crotch level keyboard or temper. However, playing the gamers so inclined will find sufficient fodder game in this fashion is utterly mechanical: for no end of licentious fantasy. one goes to the barroom; one clicks on everything, saving and restoring as necessary; one Hits & Misogyny buys up enough machinery to guarantee a win; and then one has the computer fight I regret that the game is also typically Japaitself. It's not the worst way I can think of to nese in some rather less charming ways: the spend some time, but when the minutes start backstory in the manual is bloodier and cruturning into hours and you've just heard the eler than anything an American publisher barroom ashtray say \"Oy!\" for the thousandth would release, for instance, and the game time, you start to feel that you are wasting often invokes uncomfortable stereotypes. your life. The final villain is a caricature Jewish AmeriAdd in combat graphics that are hardly can Princess named Rachel Saperstein («the better than Epyx's World Karate Championonly one in her Bar (sic) Mitzvah class that ship for the Commodore 64, sluggish keyhas not gone under the knife... Rachel loves to board response, and the endless, painful listen to Wagner\"). As a Jew, I find this mildly repetition of everything (for instance, there is offensive. If I were black, I might bridle at the no way to shut off the useless \"Mia the towel «Jamaal Wilkerson» character; if Scottish, at girl has a tip for you» feature that delays the the designers giving a Scors burr to the beginning of each fight), and you end up with drunken, burping beer barrel. a game that starts out weak and ends up up T There is also the more pervasive problem of unbearable. misogyny: the babes constantly taunt the What About the Babes? player, impugning his manhood, until he beats them soundly, kicks them out of the After all is said and done, Metal & Lace does fighting business, and makes them strip and have a saving grace. The odds are that more pose for his pleasure. (\"You can spank me,\" people will buy it for its sex than for its n for its one says, underwear around her knees.) violence, and it is here that the game performs Poorly adjusted adolescent males who play best. Though there are some slovenly mothis game will not exactly come away from the ments--one babe calls herself «Kathleen\" experience with a healthier attitude toward though the text on the screen identifies her as women. \"Cristina\"; another says, \"There's not a drop of silicon in these,\" referring to body parts Sensitivity, of course, is more than one that are sometimes augmented by silicone, should expect from a game called \"The Battle most players will be too pleased with the of the Robo Babes,\" so there may be no point quality of the art to care. in complaining; but good gameplay is not, Anyone now to Japanese Anime art will and there is equally little of that to be found. need to get used to the odd and somewhat The babes are hot-true enough but all in, disturbing combination of doe-eyed little girl if that's what you want, you'd be better off faces and sexy, adult bodies. Anime fans, buying a CD wrapped in plain brown paper. however, are in for a treat. The thirty-or-so CGW MIDNIGHT GAMES FINEST IN INTERACTIVE ENTERTAINMENT SINCE 1984 LEGENDS A RICHLY DETAILED AND REALISTIC COMPUTER MODERATED PLAY-BY-MAIL GAME SIMULATION COMBINING THE FINEST ELEMENTS OF FANTASY ROLE-PLAYING AND EMPIRE BUILDING! RULES BOOKS $15.00 CAMPAIGN MODULE $15.00 (INCLUDES SET-UP AND MAP) MIDNIGHT GAMES PO BOX 280 DEPT G MEDFORD OR 97501-0019 BBS# 503-857-8537 PHONE# 503-772-7872 FAX# 503-772-0636 COMPUSERVE# 71241,455 GIVE OUR MULTI-LINE BBS A CALL AND CHECK OUT THE LATEST IN WINDOWS AND OS/2 SHAREWARE, OR VISIT OUR GAMING SECTION Circle Reader Service #97 Page 122 Computer Gaming World "


"M P Lowest delivered prices with great customer service. DISCOVER Card MasterCard VISA 800-448-6658 * SHUPPUNGER ONLY PERO DISK-COUNT SOFTWARE COMPUTER MONTHLY 377 39 . 49 4599 29 47 39 26 75 39 336 39 47\" 1995 29 195 35% 399 43\" NO SURCHARGE SHIPPING IS ONLY $4.00 PER ORDER, NOT PER HOURS: M-F 9 AM-8 PM SAT 10 AM-3 PM EST ITEM PRODUCT INFO & OTHER BUSINESS: 908-396-8880 CHAOTICE HARDWARE INCLUDEDIII CD ROM Libry of Art:Renaisn 65 SOFTWARE Comanche 4205 Great Brilian 37 Lord of Rings 2 37 Pult Pult Fun Pack 26 Stronghold Loom 25° Aesops Fables 39 33 Mission Disk 19 A Train Lost File Sherlock 27\" Hawaii Quarter Pole 29% Studyware for ACT Lost Treasure 17 Instant Fact Loc. 19 Comic Bk Creator Lost Treas Infocom 42 Aircraft Encyclopda 45 Quest for Glory 1 Construction Set 22 22 GMAT,GRE,SAT 30 MacMillian Child Dict49 Across the Rhine 47* Companol xanth 35 Japan Scenery 19\" Lost Treasures 2 29% Amer Bus. Phnbk. 39 Quest for Glory 3 39 Studyware Biology. Manhole 49 29 New York Lost Tribe Amer Hert Pict Dict 75 Lost Tribe Computer Works 46% 25 Rags to Riches Aces Over Europe 44% 35\" Calc. Chem.,Econ... 1 Cohort 2 9 Paris Lunar Command 35% Aces of the Pacific 4295 Reach for Skies 19 Arthur Teacher Trbl 41 Maniac Mansion 39% Physics Statistic 25 Mantis Pilots Pwer Tools 24% 19% Lost Vikings Conquest of Japan 35% Autodesk Explorer 119 Reader Rabbit 35% Studyware LSAT Mission Disk Mario is Missing AD&D Collect 2 Contraption Zak 42° 25 17 Rescue Air 911 Maelstom Barney Bear Goes Reader Rabbit 2 . 35% Syndicate 37\" Mavis Beacon Crusader Drk Savnt399 San Fransisco AD&D Starter Kit 42 29% Magic Candle 3 37\" Ready for Letter 35% Take a break X-Word2 to School Mayo Clinic 49 Cuckoo Zoo AD&D Unlimited 31% 37 Scenery St A or B 37 Maniac Mansion 1135 Ready Set Read 29% Pinball into Space Pinball Mixed Up Moth Gs 37 Cyber Space 3495 Scenery Enhn Ed 25 Mantis 39 Adlbou&Junior #1 349 Reading Adv in Oz 36 Task Force 1942 374 Battlechess 34 Monarch Notes 35% Daemonsgate Speech Disk 17 Sound & Graphic 25 Air Bucks 3 Reading Comp 495 Beauty & Beast 32 Admiral Edit 49 Monkey Island 43% Darklands 376 19 Air Bus A320 Tahiti 459 Mario is Missing 35% Ready Set Read 29» 39 Beethoven Ninth Terminator 2029 59 MM Music: Mozart 33 Air Duel Darkseed Washington DC 29° Mario Teach Type 25 Realms of Arcadia 35\" Tesserae 1 Berlitz Think & Talk 7 MM Music: Vivaldi Darkside of Xeen 39% Air Warrior SVGA 35% West USA Scnry 39% Master of Orion 37% Red Baron 3 9 Trmntr 2 Cybrchess 35 French Our Solar System 29 Dark Sun AJ World Discvry 29, West Europe 19 Math Blaster Plus 29% Mission Disk 17 Tetris Classic Spanish 31 105 Pool Shark Daughter of Serpnt31 Mystery Freddy Pharkas 39% 29\" AlgeBlaster Plus Retum Of Phantm 33\" Bloodnet 30 4195 Time Riders Amer. 35 Per Prcision Map 8495 Deja Vu 1 & 2 375 Front Page Pro 459 Search of Spot 35\" Alone in The Dark 35% Rex Nebular Blue Force 37 Tony LaRussa Base.17 39% Protostar 3995 Design your Railrd. 35 Fun School:Fred Frog Alphabet Blocks 29 Math Blaster Wind 36 Ring World 34 Bookshelf Tony LaRussa il 37 129 Publish it! 69 Diet Pro DOS/Win 25/36 Math Rabbit 29 38% Amazon Sam Spy Teddy Br 17 Britanica Family Ch049 Reference Library 59 Robosports Wind 25 Expansion Disk 19\" 34% Dino Park 35% G-Force Mathology Amazon Trail Buzz Aldrin Race Rock & Bach Studo35\" Top Class Series ea 16 59 Return of Phantom 37 Dino Quest 31\" 37 Gateway 11 Mavis Beacon 29% Ambush Rodney Fun Screen31 Tornado Carmen World Dixe 65 45% Rotor/Airball/Time 25 Dinosaur Adventure 34 Gearworks 29% Ancient Art War Sky 35 Mega Lo Mania 29% Romero 29 Treasure Cove Cautious Condor 35 45 San Diego Zoo 49 Ancient Empires Discovering Amer 35% Geekwad Games 22.9 30 Mental Math Games 37 CD Game Pack Rule Engagment 239% Treasur Math Storm 35 55 Secret Weapons 59 39% Gobblins 1 or 2 Distant Sun 22 Michl Jordon Fight 37 Science Adventure 42 Treasure Mountain 35 C D Speedway Animal Adventure 47 57 Seventh Guest 59 Animation Studio 75 Dog Fight 37% Grand Slam Bridg II 32 Micro Cookbook 4. 31 Scooter Magic Cast/32 Treehouse Chess Maniac Sherlock Holmes 39 Dr Floyd Desktop 19% Great Naval Admrl 48% Microsoft Golf 39 Scable Delx 32 Arcade for Wind 29 Christmas Carol Tristan Pinball 33 Sherlock Holmes 2 42 Dr Jam Window 59% Super Ships 20% Armored Fist Midnight Rescue 35 Seal Team 37\" Turbo Science CIA World Fact Sherlock Holmes 3 49 Dr. Quandry 31 Great Works 30% Might & Magic 4 40 Ashes of Empire Sort Weapn Luftwf 29% Clipart Goliath Turtle Tools 30 Sleeping Beauty 37 Dragon Sphere 29\" Gunship 2000 Might & Magc 5 A.T.A.C. 39 Tour of Duty ea. Conan Cimerion 20 Ultima 7 36 Sound Works 35 Dragon Lair 3 39% 24 Scenario Disk Auto Insight Millies Math House 31 Seven Cities Gold 38 Creative Kids Forge of Virtue 36 Space Quest 4 37 Dreadnoughts 40% Hardball 3 35 Mind Castle 35% Shadow President 39\" Automap Silver Seed Curse of Enchantia25 Space Series.Apollo49 Automap Wind Dune 2 Dala Disk (ea.) 17\" 59 Mixed-Up Fairy Tal 30 Shadowcaster 47% Deathstar Arcade 30 Ultima 7 Part 2 Space Shultle 47% 29\" Dungeon Master 29% 34% Automap Europe Harrier Assault 74 Mixed-Up Mother Gs30 Shadowlands 29\" Dictionaries & Lang 30 Ultima Trilogy Spirit of Excalibur 37\" 37 3 9% Dynamix Bundle 42 Headline Harry 37 Money/Clocks Wrk 19 Sierra Action Five Autoworks 25 Ultima Trilogy 2 Dune 479% 45 Slellar 7 37 Health & Diet Pro B-17 Flying Fortress 19 26 Monkey Island 1/2 23 Education Master Sierra Award Winner47 Ultima Und 32 Strange Deadfellow 39 High Command 42% Monopoly Deluxe Bailey's Bookhouse29% Eco-Quest 1 or 2 294 34 Sierra Family Fun 32 Part 2 Electronic Cookbk 75 47* Star Trek Enhanced49 Bane Cosmic Forge 36 Eight Ball Delx 35% Hong Kong Mahjong32 More Vegas Game19 Sierra Starter Bndl 39\" Elect. Home Library 49 Street Atlas Ultrabots 99 El Fish . Batman Returns 39 35 Hoyle Bk Game 1/3 30 Mutanoid Challenge 31 Silent Service 2 19% Elcin Traveler Call 33 Uninvited Window 37% Talking Classic Tale75 Talking Classic Tale75 359 Humans Mystery at Museum 35% 25 Battlechess 4000 SVGA36 Empire Deluxe Sim Ant 34% Encarta Encyclpd 249 Unnecessry Rough35 Talkng Jungle Safari75 Battle of Destiny Inca 35% NFL Challenge 59 Sim Ant French 35 European Monarchs49 Time Table Science 59 U.S. Atlas DOS 3 1 Beat the House 29 NFL Coaches Club 33 Entrmt Pak Win (ea.)28 Incredible Machine 29 Sim City Classic F-15 25\" Utopia Ultimate Shareware 59 35 Betrayal of Krondor39% Eric the Unready Indiana Jones 4 37 Nigel's World 31 F-117A 25% V for Victory (ea) 42% U S Atlas 42 Betty Crocker Cook Call Eternam 35% Inspector Gadget 35\" No Greater Glory 20% Sim Earth 39% Vista Pro Family Doctor 39 US Atlas w/Automap49 Black Crypt 319 Eye of Beholder 20 Island of Dr. Brain 29% Omar Shariff Bridge 37 Sim Life Dos/Wind 39% Vocabulary Devl Fatty Bear 32 39 374 Bloodnet Eye Beholder 2 38 Jetfighter 2 Open Dialog 44% Sing a Long Wind 31 Font Master Wacky Funsters 199 39 US Presidents 49 35% Eye of Beholder 3 42 Adv Mission Disk 19 Operation Neptune 35 Blue & Gray Snap Dragon G Force 32 War in Gulf 19% USA Wars: Civil War 49 294 EZ Cosmos 42 John Madden 2 31% Orbits 2 | Blueforce 9% Snoopy Game Club 29 War in Russia Gateway II 35\" USA Wars:Korea 49 Ez Language Series 47° Johnny Quest 29\" Oregon Trail Delx 34% Body Illustrated Gettysburg:MM Hist43 USA Wars:Vietnam 49 Solitaire Window 29% Warrior of Legend 1995 Fr. Gri Sp.Jp, Rs 31% 38°5 Jump Jet Bodyworks Onnin Fy 42 Origin FX Solitaires Journey Gofer Winkles Ady 33 USA Wars: WWII 49 Bug Bunny WrkShp 31 35 Wayne Gretzky 3 35 F14 Fleet Delend 44% MPE Version 48% Out of This World 36 Space Ace 2:Bort 36 Waynes World 29\" Golden Immortal 28 Voyage Planet ea 69 Buzz Aldrin F 15 III 44 Kye Deluxe Outnumbered 30 Space Adventure 42 What's My Angle Great Cities Vol 1 49 30 Who Killd Sam Rup 25 Master Edition 49% kid Cad Pacific Wars Caesar Space Hulk Gunship 2000 When2Worlds War35 37% Willy Beamish 37 F117a Stealth 29 27% Kid Cuts Paladin 2 Car and Driver Space Quest 5 39 Guy Spy Where Crmn San Diego Win CD 32 Falcon 3.0 Carrier Strike 39 Kid Desk 25 Patriot 24% Spear of Destiny 39% America Past Humans 25% Wing Comm & Miss 45 34% Oper Fight Tiger 1995 25 PC Study Bible 42 Expansion Disk 19 Special Forces 29 Europe Inca 35% Wing Com/Ultima 6 45 Carriers at War 2 429 Mig 29 Data Disk 34 Kid Pix 35% Peppers Adventure 29% Spectre Inspector Ga. Aet 37° Wing Comm 2 Space 57 Family Tree Maker 42 319 Cash for Kids Kid Pix Companion 25 Perfect General 36 Spellbound Interactive Old Test 52 W Time 2/Ulti. Undrwld 57 Castle 2 Fantasy Empire 35 42% Kid Works 2 Pinball Dreams 29% Spellcasting 301 35 Interactive Storytime45 World Atlas 42 Castle of Dr. Brain Farm Creativity Kit 18 30 Kids Zoo Pirate's Gold Spell-it Plus Intro Games Fr/Sp 79 World War II Pak 37\" USA Deluxe 449 Kings Ransom Fatty Bear Birthday 31° Center Court Ten. 126 Playroom 2.0 SpellJammer 37% its a Wonderful Life 48 Adults Only Must be21 World Deluxe 44% Fields of Glory 33 45 Chalinge 5 Realm 33% King's Quest 6 39 Police Quest 3 Sports Adventure Jazz:Multimedia Hist69 Animation Fantasy 65 33 Wild Science Arcad35\" Flashback 32\" 34° Land Of Lore Champions Pool Shark 19% Star Control 2 35\" Ween:Prophecy Jets & Props 34\" 55 PC Pix Vol 1 or 2 65 Chemistry Works Flight Simul ATP 28% 38 Legacy Nones in Fast Lane 37 39 Prince of Persia 2 39% Star Trek 25th Aniv. 37 Wing Comandr2 47 Porkware Chessmster Flight Simulator 5 43% 29% Legacy Necromncr19 Print Shop Deluxe 45 Just Grandma & Me36 Star Trek AudioClip 34% Wing Com Acadm 31% Private Collection Air Tric Cntrlr 65 Children Writ & Publ 39 34% Legion's of Krella 37 Graphic Coll. (ea) 30 Next Generation 38% Jutland World Circuit 34% 44 Priv. Pictures 1 or 2 65 Arcty Scen Dsgn City Streets 59% 28 Lemmings Print Shop, New 35 Star Trek Screen Sav37 Kings Quest 5 MPE Edition 42 44% Seedy Vol 1-7 ea. 65 Lemmings 2 Aircraft Adv Factry 25 3595 Civilization Graphics (ea) Stickybr Math Tutor 30 World Tour Tennis32% King Quest 6 Up 26% Storm 1 or 2 65 #685 17 Civilization Deluxe 45 Lethal Wes Lethal Weapon 35% Print Shp Compion 31 Stickybr Pre-School 30 World War II Land Of Lore 35% 34* Visual Fantasy 65 Civilization Win # 701 Links 41% Privateer Languages of World99 Caddies 7.95éa. 3/$ 19 Clash of Steel Stickybr Read Tutor 30 X Wing Airport Facty Loc 17 Links 386 Pro 39 39 Prophecy Stickybr Spell Tutor 30 Mission Disk Learn to Speak Spn59 19 Coaster 35% California Course Disk ea 16 Protostar Storybook Weaver29 Leisure Suit Larry 42 Yobi Spelling Trick29% Cobra Missions East USA Scen 399 386 Courses ea 19 Pult Putt Parade 32 Strike Commander 45 Zodiac Signs 39% Sound Cards SB CDROM Intel 369 MIDI Software CD DRIVES Speech Disk Multimedia 17 Zoo Keeper SB Portblaster Joysticks 36 149 Strip Poker 3 32 Zug's Spelling Ady 22 All Stereo FIXK 9 Ballade Windows 79 Toshiba CH Flightstick 37 Aitech Data Disk (ea) 1476 SB Video Blaster 349 17 StereoFX CD Ady of Eco Island 22 Band in a Box 69 3041 Internal 489 CH Game Card 3 31 Audio Show 369 Covox Voice Bistr 640 SB Video Spigot 41995 Store: 1060 Randolph Ave. Rahway N.J. Cadenza 3041 External 594 125 CH Mach 3 28% Pro 256 280 Gravis Ultra Sound 129 SB Waveblaster 234\" Cakewalk 95 Texcel America CH Virtual Pilot 65 Pro Color Plus 529 CO-ROM Kit 299% Roland RAP-10 45995 Cakewalk Win SCC-1 GS 129% 375 3021 Internal 349 Eliminator Card 26 ProVGA TV TERMS AND CONDITIONS 459 Media Vision SC-7 139 Cakewalk Pro 3024 Dbl Spd 390 169 Audio Port Gravis Analog Pro 39 Pro PC/TV Plus 249 Master Card, Visa, American Express CDPC SC-55 959 Cakewalk Win Pro 240 3024 Business 679 Gravis Joystick 32 Pro VGA TV + 659 Discovox Accepted. No Surcharge on CDPCXL 1159 MA-12C ea 105 Encore 3024 Education 604 Gravis PC GamePad21 VideoSurge 659 Credit Cards. By mail: P.O. Box 3. Pro Audio 16 179 SPEAKERS Jammer Pro 125 3024 Home 569 Kidz Mouse 30% Video Surg SVHS 729 Carteret, N.J. 07008. All Sales Are Pro Audio Studio 224 CS-150 Shielded Laser Music Proces 79 28 3024 Multimeda 844 Kraft KC3 Joystick 28 Wave Watcher 419 Final. NO REFUNDS! Exchange on defective Pro 16 Multimedia CS-550 Shielded Master Tracks Pro 249 35 5024 Dbl Spd 495 Maxx Flight Yoke 69 merchandise with the same item only. No TVIGRX TV 269 Upgrade Kit 2 935 MCS Stereo w/3 band Equilizer 45 55 excoptions. All Products are now from 5024 Business 769 Maxx Pedal Pro Movie Audio 3399 Midiscan CS-1000 269\" 5024 Education 729 Skins & Pads 8 4\" Quickshot Game Cd14 manufacturer. All claims and guarantees Logitech Audioport 134 Midisoft Studio 159 5024 Multimed 969 Dust Covers Quickshot Warrior 18 15 Altec Lansing 200 219 are from the manufacturer. Call for Soundman 1320 current price and availability. GOVERMENT Music Bytes Vol 1 65 Grounded Wrist Strp 9 ACS 300 Modem & Fax 2 99 Suncom Command 1999 Sound Blaster AND SCHOOL. P.O.'S WELCOMED). Music Mentor For your 79 Keyboard Skins 15 Thrustmaster SB Midi Kit US Robotic Sportster MIDI Interface 59 protection, we will only ship to the Music Printer Plus 419 Snd Blast Pro MCA 259 Midiator 101 Senal 95 Sttic Pads 99% 2400 Int. FCS 69 address the credit card company has 011 Music Time 169 Sound Blaster Dolx 132 PC Midi Card Large-System FCS Pro 109 15 14.4 v.42bs162\" file, therefore shipping to Ak., Hi., 79 SB Pro 16 Piano Works9 9 1642 W/S/R Fax 29 Port SE Game Card 183 Wrist Pads PR., P.O. Boxes, 1499 APO/FPO extra. SB Pro16 ASP 209 Quick Score Deluxe99 Weapons 2 Stax (Dust Repellent)5 14.4 v.42bis Ext 1839 International orders call for shipping Songwright 5 89% SB Discovery 161 459 Hello Music 27796 Statx Complete Rudder Pedal 109 charges. N.J. Resident add 6% sales tax. w/ S/R Fax 2139 325 SB Edulanmn 16 549The Miracle Trax for Windows 60 UPROM Chip 29% Cleaning System 15 204 rostocking fee for all refused items. 43 US History USA Wars:Korea aro Blue & Gray S Adv 3995 30\" 29 35% 47 35 37\" 45 incang 35% 31 USA 35\" 33 34% 30% 29\" 22 47\" 25% 39 549 379 85 95 Circle Reader Service #55 "


"REVIEW JUST GOT LUCKY Gamblers May Hit The Jackpot In QQP's Lucky's Casino Adventure by Chris Lombardi OD 6. There are certain categories of comand less accessible games like Red Dog, Pai charm. There are seven tournaments availputer games that make a rush-hour Gow Poker, and Carribean Stud, in addition able, each a collection of games arranged in a elevator seem spacious by comto dining comfortably on the staples of the branching structure. In each game of the parision. Chess is the most notorious examgamblers diet: Blackjack, Craps, Roulette and tournament, the player is given a certain ple. You could build a court-yard monument Poker. (For a description of each game in number of hands, or dice rolls, or slot mato The Unknown Programmer with all of the Lucky's, see the sidebar, QQP's Book of chine pulls to rack up the bucks. When the chess game boxes created over the last ten Games.) turns are over, the player moves on to the next years. Gambling games, too, enjoy this overBefore placing their first bets, gamblers will node of the tourney and chooses the next populous distinction. You can almost bet on have to choose a persona to represent them in game to play. In the end, the player is given a dozen new gambling games being created Lucky's world. The stock in Lucky's stable of a score based upon the cash won or lost and every year. cartoonish faces includes a dozen or so char the average size of the bet. Each Tournament These categories spawn so many is designed to have its own flavor, from Short off-spring because they have the & Sweet to the Poker Player's Delight and the broadest possible appeal, and they Strategise's Holiday. These tourneys are a are relatively easy to produce. The ULT EEMALFUN FLAN great way for friends to compete, and offer a difficult part for publishers has challenge unavailable anywhere else. been boosting their games above the throng so that gamers take noIf It's Tuesday, It Must Be tice. The push in Chess has been Quantum City toward more multi-media eyeThe Three Week Vacation mode is the true candy, but with gambling it's not test of gambling skill and endurance. The so easy. You can only do so much player arrives at the Quantum City limits graphically with a deck of cards. with a wad of cash totaling 2500 bucks, a QQP's solution is too book of gambling coupons, and a nasty case add...brace yourselves...added play of the gambler's itch. The goal is to make it acters with a healthy variety of racial and value! It's a concept foreign to some marketfacial types. Mixed with the mostly middle through a three week gambling frenzy witheers, but one that is very familiar to the aged ladies and gents are a broad-lapeled and out going broke. gamers at QQP. Witness their card game -sideburned cat that pays homage to The Solitaire's Journey. Solitaire is another flooded QQP has done a great job in developing the King, and a couple of characters that are character of Quantum City. It is a city of 14 area of gaming, but QQP made their product dead-ringers for Jerry Garcia of The Grateful casinos (and one pawn shop), each with its a success (made it a Top 10 game for godDead. Once characters are assigned names own style. Each has a unique selection of sake!) by adding an incredible number of play and faces, the game will keep track of their games, betting limits, and prices for rooms options (100 different types of Solitaire!) and performance, rank them according to a rating and eats. They even attract different types of inventing clever ways to make the package add up to more than the sum of its individual system, and display the rankgamblers. As in reality, the Poker rooms of games. Lucky's Casino Adventure, QQP's new ings for multiple players. Lucky's Casino Adventure gambling game, finds them applying the Though it does support multisame technique. ple characters, the game can only be played by one player ar CASINO TITLE: Lucky's Casino Adventure PRICE: $64.95 Full House, Options High a time. SYSTEM: REQUIREMENTS: 386 or better, VESA compalIt's no empty marketing hyperbole to say Lucky's can be played three ible SVGA graphics card, that Lucky's Casino Adventure offers the larg. 5MB hard drive space, mouse different ways. While Single PROTECTION: None DESIGNERS: Game mode offers no surprises Destiny Software est selection of gambling games ever collected PUBLISHER: Quantum Quality Productions under one roof-18 games of chance, includ(pick any of the 18 games and Flemington, NI ing five styles of Poker. Gamblers can now have at it), Tournament mode (908) 788-2799 sample like hors d'oeuvres the less popular is a classic touch of QQP ADVENTURE IBM OOP Page 124 Computer Gaming World "


"The Labyrinth of Time Con c. d.) TERRUARY IANUARY DECEMBER The Labyrinth of Time. An epic fantasy of time travel and adventure, possible only on CD-ROM. The legendary King Minos has commissioned a labyrinth bridging time and space. You must overcome the power of Minos and destroy the Jabyrinth by manipulating the very fabric of history. But beware, the future may not unfold in quite the way you planned. ace. ROM bewar CONIC ARUBINTI NON * 1-900AUTY -1-900-288-HIND A. -4241. Available for PC CD. Coming soon for Macintosh CD. Macintosh is a registered trademark of Apple Computer. ELECTRONIC ARTS* 95 for the first minute. 75 for each additional minute. If under 18. get parents permission before calling. Requires a touch-tone telephone. Messages subject to change without notice, Circle Reader Service #60 "


"CAA MIKES PRIN LOAN \"you hoch it, we stock it discount rolex tenuine cubie Eirconia some clubs will have a preponderance of casual gamblers who play sloppy and unpredictable hands; others will draw old cimers who play very right, disciplined hands. In Lucky's you can tell the difference from one club to the next. In addition to money, a character's energy level is an important consideration while Vabile V cationing. An energy indicator bar will slowly tick down as the player whiles away the hours on me casino floor. The player can walk from casino co casino, using up energy and time, bur saving cash, or he can take a cab and spare the legs but spoil the wallet. Energy depletion can be slowed by eating regularly at nicer restaurants and sleeping at more expensive hoteis. A coupon book offers several hundred dollars in free stakes, and free steaks may come to the high-stakes gambler in the form of food \"comps» from generous pit bosses. In addition, silly random events will occur, temporarily closing a club and forcing the player to seek out other stomping grounds. Like the he «Bus Trips» in Solitaire's Journey, the Vacation mode adds a unique dimension to the staid conventions of computer card games. Sights & Sounds The world of Lucky's, as far as its graphics, sound, and interface go, is of an erratic consistency. The game requires a VESA compatible 522 OOEEOOR video card and makes good use of it in the beautiful digitized photos of the Vegas neon jungle that lie behind the main menus. In jolting contrast, the rest of the game is like a college kid on a Spring Break junker depicted in cartoonish simplicity, and in a than a wizened veteran of the felt. resolution reminiscent of the EGA graphics Aside from small problems with the look days. The interface, too, has its quirks. The and feel of the package, the only major probresolution of the mouse control is chunky, lem is the documentation. It's clear that it was giving the cursor a noticeable jerkiness. To its done in a rush. It fails to explain how to use credit, the game has keyboard equivalents for most of the commands, but not all. I found the Blackjack card counting feature and the myself using an uncomfortable combination vacation coupons, makes reference to tables that aren't there, and while it fails to discuss of both mouse and keyboard. even the slightest bit of gambling strategy (the Lucky's also plays a full hand of music and on-line docs give some), it insists on printing sound effects, though they didn't the rankings of poker hands six times do a whole lot for me. Aside from one mild rock tune, it plays a halfLet The Chips Fall dozen or so insipid melodies that Still, in spite of its lack of polish, Lucky's tend to bore into the brain and Casino Adventure is, without doubt, the best, lodge themselves there for the rest most complete gambling package available. of the day. The game also has a full While other programs will entice gamers with complement of spoken dialogue more eye candy, and others will offer the for the dealers and players. Most of serious student better instruction and play the voices are pleasant enough, but analysis tools, none can surpass Lucky's Casino the main male voice for the player's Adventure in its selection of games and its character, with his «Ah, man!\" and clever ways of uniting these games into comexclamations of joy, sounds more petitive tournaments and adventures. DESBL 1000 ATATTHYLLI LUCU TUJ 201 MTMGT-200 DATO a cada 20 -M7GTNT 200 ATATATL91990 TOO AT TATAY 100 WE GRAVE EUS 99 99B QQP's Book Of Games Baccarat: Baccarat is usually played at the lette, with a wheel marked with six different are here: Splits, Double-Downs, Insurance, finest casinos in special rooms where the numbers. Plunk your money down on a and the choice to play with 1, 2, 4 or 6 decks. players are waited upon by a retinue of tuxenumber, watch the animated wheel spin, The Help file contains a small chart of Doudoed attendants. The environs create an air and more often than not, watch your bling and Splitting strategies, which is nice, of elegance and exclusivity that allows the money go away. Probably included by QQP but a chart for basic Hit-Stand decisions mistresses of tycoons to lose their money in for the sake of completeness certainly not would have served the novice gambler berstyle, away from the unwashed masses. The as a selling point. rer. The game does have a card counting game itself isn't a very interesting one. The Bingo: That's the name-o of this game-o. feature that will track the number of Aces, feature that will track prayers and the dealer are dealt a hand of two Not exactly what you think of when you Face Cards, and Other cards that have been the hands are dealt, the players think gambling; nonetheless, Bingo has its played from the current deck, and will even chucse to ber on either their hand, the following, and those followers will find a give you a Hit-Stand Index. Sadly, the docudealers, or a tie. The hand that is nearest a nice simulation here. You can play one to six mentation both on-line and hard copytotal of 9, after a third card is dealt in certain cards with all of the Bingo game variations: doesn't explain how to use it. situations, wins. The odds and the level of Postage Stamp, Lerrer-T, -H, -U, -L-X, Caribbean Stud: This combination of skill involved are equivalent to choosing red Large and Small Picture Frame, and the Blackjack and Poker is coming into vogue at or black at the roulette table. granddaddy of them all—Blackout. The certain casinos. The player places an initial Big Six Wheel: Wheel of Fortune fans, chunky mouse interface really shows its bet and is dealt five cards which are treated and those who enjoy flushing money down weakness here, as you have to use precise as a poker hand. If the player chooses to play the loo, might get a thrill out of this. It's movements to mark your numbers. the hand, he must match the initial bet. If essenually a dumbed-down version of rouBlackjack: All of the standard conventions the dealer's hand is not an Ace-King high Page 126 Computer Gaming World "


"Arriving soon... Tower puts you in the controller's chair high atop the tower cab of a major airport to choreograph the movement of the incoming and outgoing air traffic. You control runway activity, ground crews and terminal traffic through a 360' scrollable out the window view with your keyboard or mouse. Local radar displays and easy access information displays give you crash reports, news stories and more. You can also link, via modem, with Microsoft's Flight Simulator and Mallard's Air Traffic Controller Character-style game play allows you to work your way up the corporate ladder' of each airport gaining perks, acquiring passwords to new levels and getting promoted accordingly. Points are scored depending on varying levels of traffic at different airports, types of pilots, time of day, weather conditions and the problems and emergencies that face the controller on the job every day. Tower cab simulator. m1 Photo-realistic graphics and features like a 360° scrollable view and easy access information displays put you right in the middle of all of the action. JE So if you think you're up to the challenge of directing traffic of a 'big league' international airport, get to your local software retailer for the arrival of Tower! From the publisher of today's hottest flight simulation enhancement products, Mallard Software. Who else? net. WS Am MALCE 1505 M-llard. See your software retailer or, for ordering information, call 1-800-WEB-FEET Maud  1993 Mallard Software, Inc.  1993 Aviation Simulations, Inc. Circle Reader Service #82 "


"hand or better, the dealer can't play, and the player is given even money on the initial bet. If the dealer can play, and the player's hand is a better poker hand than the dealer's, then the player is paid on a scale according to the value of his hand (3 of a Kind pays 3 to 1, Full House pays 7 to 1, up to a Royal Flush which pays 100 to 1). Casino: A trip to a gambling encyclopedia informed me that Casino was once a popular 2-4 player gambling game. It never made it into modern gambling institutions because it is a game of more skill than chance, and a good player can consistently win with or without Lady Luck on his arm. Explaining the rules of this unfamiliar game would take too long, so suffice it to say that it is a simple, moderately interesting game. With the low betting limits enforced by Lucky's, even the most skillful player won't earn much money playing it. Craps: In the real clubs, the Craps table is the most exciting place to be. While QQP's version doesn't capture that high energy, it does have all of the standard betting options and odds (there are no odds on craps). An animated hand shakes the dice and lets 'em roll. Keno: Keno is like a mini-state lottery held every 15 minutes, with similarly bleak odds and a terrible pay-off. Mark one to fifteen numbers on a card, and keep your eyes ur eves peeled on the board. While it might be fun to fill in a card while eating a buffet dinner in Vegas, I can't see anyone spending more than a few minutes with this game. Pai Gow Poker: The money tends to move slowly in this game due to frequent \"pushes.\" The player is dealt seven cards with which he must make two poker hands: a five card hand and a two card hand, with Card Draw, I've never seen a computer the only restriction being that the five-card player that has four spades showing try to hand must be higher than the two-card. If bluffa flush; if he bets the hand, you can be both of the player's hands beat the dealer's sure he's got the goods. The same seems to hand (according to standard poker convenhold true when the computer player is showtions), the player wins even money. If onlying four cards to a straight. one hand wins, the hand is a push. OtherRed Dog: Two cards are dealt in this wise, the player loses. simplistic game. The player can bet on Poker: Poker is the meat of any gambling whether or not the third card dealt will lie package, and the hardest to program corbetween the two previous cards. If the player rectly. QQP has done a fairly good job with bets and wins, he is paid-off according to an its five poker variants: straight Sevenand odds table. In the case that the first two cards Five-Card Stud, Jacks or Better and Lowball are of the same value and the third card Five-Card Draw, and Texas Hold'em. The matches them (3 of a Kind), then the player betting system struck me as being rigid at is paid 11 to 1 on his bet. first, since you can only ber a pre-set amount Roulette: The upscale gambler's game of each round, but the limitation serves to choice before such games as Baccarat came speed up the game. along. Place your bet and let the spinning Poker is, of course, the only game where wheel spin. you play against fellow gamblers, and not Slot Machines: The bandits of yore are the house, and it is very much a game of simulated here in all their glory. Lucky's psychology as much as luck. QQP has cap recreates cight different machines of three to tured something of this psychological aspeccfive reels and with 1 to 3 pay-off lines. Their in the computer players' individual personsilly themes are an appropriate parody of the alities. You'll find your basic types around real McCoy. There's Diablo Dollars, where this table: timorous gamblers who will only three 6's reap a nice reward, and Buggy play when they've got the nuts,\" \"chasers\" who will throw their money away running on. Some machines even claim to have a after an improbable hand, and testosteroneer an improbable hand, and testosteroneprogressive jackpot, but there's no way of fueled players who will try to scare people knowing how things are progreccina On the away with an carly raise, and who will conwhole, it seems that Lucky's machines are tinue to raise in a fit of machismo whe tinue to raise in a fit of machismo when much looser than most. challenged. And, as in real life, each of the Video Poker: A vile and addictive invencasinos in Vacation mode has its own chartion, the Video Poker machine has become acter. There are some tables that don't know the bread and butter for most modern casithe word \"check,\" while others play as tight nos. Lucky's has three varieties of machines: as a cocktail waitress's bodice. standard Jacks or Berrer, Deuces Wild, and The computer players play solid poker for Jokers Wild. All of the standard devices are the most part, though they are predictable supported, all with keyboard equivalents. in a few situations. For instance, in SevenCGW Arms 101 S122 The Gamers' Guide To Quantum City Quantum City is a big place with a lot to offer the simulated gambler. Here is a quick chart to help you find the gaming environment you're looking for, and at the right price. Casino Room Rate Meals Baccarat Big 6 Bingo Blackjack Caribbean Casino Craps Keno Pai Gow Poker Red Dog Roulette $175 $12/24/32 8-10pm $5-1000 $5-1000 $1-500 $20-40 $5-500 51-500 Bump's $14/22/32 $20-10K $1-500 $5-1000 S5-200 $1-500 Yes $5-200 S20-40 $5-500 $1-500 Coral Reef $24 $8/12/18 $1-100 $2-50 Yes $5-10 Destiny $68 $5/12/15 $10-5000 $1-500 $4-1000 $4-1000 $5-200 $15-30 Empress $73 $6/10/12 $10-5000 $4-500 $1-500 $10-20 $1-500 Flamingo $138 $5/9/13 $25-5000 $5-1000 $10-500 $25-50 $5-500 $5-1000 Hassle's $22 $8/12/118 $1-100 $2-50 $1-100 $5-10 $1-100 Jester's $82 S6/8/12 $10-5000 $1-500 $4-1000 $1-500 $5-200 $15-30 $5.500 $1-500 Cactus Klub $5/9/14 $1-100 $2-20 $1-100 $10-20 The King $78 $3/7/20 $10-5000 $1-500 $4-500 $1-500 Yes $5-200 $ 10-20 $5-500 $1-500 Nero's $154 $12/16/25 $20-10K $1-500 10-12pm $25-5000 $5-1000 Yes $10-500 $25-50 $5-500 $5-1000 The Pits S18 S3/9/11 12-2am $1-25 $1-25 Quantum $30 $5/10/15 $5-500 $1-100 4-6pm $2-200 $3.50 $1-100 $2-50 $10-20 $2-50 $ 1-100 The Ranch $42 $5/10/15 $5-500 $2-200 $1-100 $2-50 $ 10-20 $1-100 TI! 11.11 $38 IIIIII $1-100 Page 128 Computer Gaming World "


"FOR WINDOWS ! Limited-time offer $3995 Incredible Value! HIGH:SPEED 3D ARCADE ACTION FOR WINDOWS ! KARTUN || IIIB 23 THREE COMPLETE GAMES IN ON! :  INCREDIBLE PHOTOREALISTIC 3D GRAPHICS.  STEREO SOUND EFFECTS AND MIDI MUSIC (OVER 30 LEVELS OF PLAY AND 5 DEGREES OF DIFFICULTY INVASION MULTIMEDIA ARCADE FOR WINDOWS 3B1 PROBLEHENSIVE NOW AVAILABLE AT SOFTWARE RESELLERS THROUGHOUT AMERICA OR CALL 800-545-7677 or 310-793-0600 TO ORDER Circle Reader Service #31 "


"BEST OF THE Shaking Those Winter Blues REST Shareware Action To Combat The Season's Chill by Chuck Miller Vebruary is usually accompanied by the shamrocks, leprechauns, and bonus points at (either 3, 5 or 6), the table angle (the degree Winter doldrums, a time when most the end of its rainbow; «Excalibur,\" an Arthuof table slope) and whether sound effects and 1 people need a little pick-me-up to carry rian table based on the famous sword; and music are on or off. Shift keys activate the them through until Spring. While this is es\"Crash and Burn,\" shifting gears on a grand flippers, the space bar acts as plunger and pecially true in the more frigid climates, the prix playfield, pit stops and all. The second \"nudger\" (when a ball is in play), \"Z\" and \" cool temperatures and slower pace of the Pinball Pack contains «Magic,\" slight of hand nudge the table left and right respectively, \"P\" season seems to affect almost everyone—even pinball style in a 1950's magic shop; «Pinball pauses the game, and «M» and «S» toggle those in more temperate locales. Well, not to Jungle,\" a trip through the Amazon with music and sound. let Winter get the best of us, here are some Epic's Jill of the Jungle, \"Deep Sea,\" an underOverall, Epic Pinball comes with cnough shareware games guaranteed to shake the iciwater aquatic challenge with reefs, sink holes, bells and whistles to make play an enjoyable cles from your eyelids and get your reflexes and sunken ships; and \"Enigma,\" an empty proposition and an addictive pleasure. Ball out of hibernation. table where the action continually changes as action is realistic, and the options allow sufobjects materialize as you play. ficient configurability to tune play to your Due For A Good Paddling own liking. At a shareware registration fee of $29 per pack or $45 for all eight boards, Epic The first of two games examined this Pinball rings up a high score. Very few commonth is Epic Pinball from Epic Megamercial alternatives offer as much without Games, a compilation of eight different pincausing your waller to Tilt! Epic Pinball is ball machines available in two separate packs available from Epic MegaGames, 10406 Holof four tables each. Those familiar with Silbrook Drive, Potomac MD 20854, (800) verball from Micro League Interactive will 972-7434. On CompuServe just type GO know the quality to expect from Epic Pinball. EPIC. Programmed by the same team, this collection of pinball tables is even better than that offered in the previously released commercial Not Quite Spinal Extraction package. For those who would rather tilt their oppoSporting VGA graphics and support for nent than a pinball machine, Panda EnterSound Blaster, Sound Blaster Pro and Gravis tainment and Accend Inc. has a body basher Ultrasound sound boards, Epic Pinball reguaranteed to provide hours of bone crushquires a 386 or faster processor. Installation ing, spine jarring, visceral action-Sango is quick and casy; overall quality is very high. Fighter. Though the scenes have changed Graphics are attractively rendered and from that of city streets to the hills and valleys smoothly animated. Screen scrolling (each EBOG BOLA1 PLAYER 1 DRIZIA of ancient China, it is apparent that Sango table is approximately two screens high) is Fighter is a clone of the ever popular Street Save your quarters and warm your fingers smooth as glass. The only major failing 1 on the commercial-quality Epic Pinball Fighter. It makes no pretense at being anydetected concerned audio quality. When (two screens shown). thing else. In many ways, Sango Fighter does played with regular Sound Blaster emulation parallel its role model, but the change of local on a Sound Blaster 16, the digitized effects With registration, you receive printed to a China of the past somehow makes this and music sound a little muffled. Apart from documentation that includes a description of game more interesting, at least to this novice this shortcoming, I can find little else to fault game options, plus a complete explanation of street warrior. in the game's design or execution. each pinball table. Target values, awarded The story goes something like this.... The As mentioned, eight boards are available. points, skill shots, powerups, bonuses, timed frail and incompetent emperor of the Eastern \"Android\" offers fast action as you strive to events, ramps and jackpots are all clearly exHan Dynasty, Han-Ling, has left his country robor It's the only playable table plained. In addition, individual table menus in a state of disarray, managed by a group of provided in the shareware version of the provide on-line assistance in the form of a corrupt eunuchs. The result? Rebellion has game. The rest of the first Pinball Pack is brief synopsis of each table's rules. Additionspread throughout the country. After a great comprised of \"Pot of Gold,\" a machine of ally, you can select the number of balls to play period of unrest and fighting, Dong Zhuo GO PRODUC NEOUS DEDE332 Page 130 Computer Gaming World "


"AVY ON TARGET HOUSE AC-E OF THE COMPUTER GAMING COMP MPUTER VING WORLD GAM WOB CO  GARANTES MR Com PACIFIC LINKS 386 Under world TNDIANAJON 666 pat COMPUTER GAMING WORLD Uhinna JER VORLD COMPUTER GAMING WORLD | Pn Cute Ad citra Hot traBots' HOT FLASHES and the Biplay's Star Trek: h Anniversary Labyrinth O Worlds FATE OF ATLANTIS Press PA Juruter Frezar en Min Don't go unarmed to the software store. For more than 12 years, Computer Gaming World has provided game hunters with the best information in the field. CGW is the magazine for gamers who want more than quick overviews of the latest games. We're loaded with the most complete reviews, new strategies, and the best hints for the discerning hunter. Take aim now with Computer Gaming World and save almost $20 off the newsstand price. Only $28 per year (12 issues). MUNTII Lock and load with your Visa or MasterCard and call 1-800-827-4450 "


"rose to military power and usurped the throne. Though he was quickly defeated, the eunuchs, ten allied generals, continued to fight among themselves for power. Finally, after ten years of bitter struggle, Cao Cao eliminated his opponents and took control Now, many years later, Liu Bei, the legitimate heir to the throne, and his forces must regain power from Cao Cao. You are enlisted for this battle. Game play in Sango Fighter is very good, on par with the PC version of Street Fighter. While the shareware version offers two fight ing characters for trial purposes, the registered BRATISATIONS WIT H WATETELE  Games Too Expensive? Consider Pre-owned Software  Save big SSS over new  Original disks and manuals IBM AMIGA C64 Hard-to-find classics plus all the latest releases Call or write for free catalog (specify computer) Bare Bones Software 940 4th Ave #222 Huntington WV 25701 1-800-638-1123 Customer Service: 304-529-0461 BBS for complete list: 304-529-7050 Circle Reader Service #39 version includes 12 warriors, each with their own special attacks. Three modes of play are supported: Story, Battle and Two Player. In Story mode, the events of the conflict are told between fighting segments, weaving combat into the chronicle of territorial reclamation. You represent the five top generals in this scenario. Setop generals lecting Battle mode pits you as a single fighter throughour the con The Tingchun Mountain is a strategic flict as you face the opposition's 11 top generals. Finally, Two Player Sango Fighter weaves an illustrated storyline mode, lets you and a friend bash, between fighting segments. smash and slash it out against each other. $5 postage and handling, Sango Fighter is a All the traditional fighting moves are progood value, and comes recommended. To order your copy direct, contact: Accend Inc., vided from jumping to kicking, and punchPO Box 23958, Suite 289, Milwaukee WI ing to slamming. In addition, each fighter has 53223-0958, (414) 354-6038. his own special moves: Fatal Palm, Fling, Lethal Fist, Tornado, Whirling Sweep, and a Well, once again this concludes our look at slew of other physical and mental attacks. the best in shareware entertainment. Of late, Fighter control is provided through keyboard both the quality and quantity of shareware and joystick. Those wanting to use a joystick 1 games have been escalating at a rapid pace, should choose one of the gamepad variety roughly matching that of the commercial (flightsticks are out). Otherwise, the keymarketplace and making the job here all the board is preferred. more difficult due to space restraints. As such, only the highest quality titles have made it into this column. However, there are many more worthy games out there. So, be sure to check for additional titles from the companies represented here, and watch the bulletin boards for the latest releases. Games reviewed in this column are available through numerous distributors of shareware and public domain software, as well as on many national and private on-line services. If you do not have access Street Fighter-esque action is the core of game play to these services, you can usually in Sango Fighter. write or call the game developer for From a presentation viewpoint, Sango an evaluation copy. And rememFighter is a quality product. Graphics, VGA IGber, if you find a shareware program enjoyonly, are pleasing Animated combat actions able, please register it with the author. are smooth and reasonably lifelike in movement. Audio, if you have MIDI or Roland Send Us Your Best compatibility, is excellent, though AdLib, Sound Blaster and compatible cards are supIf you have authored a shareware or public ported. Music and sound effects (mostly domain game for MS-DOS compatible, grunts, groans, and the sound of body parts Macintosh or Amiga computers and would being mashed) are reproduced well. The like to have it considered for review in this overall quality of this release is equivalent to column, please send two complete copies on any commercial offering. 3.5\" disks with documentation and a cover letter to: Though I don't usually find myself drawn to this genre of action titles, I discovered Best of the Rest Sango Fighter to be an entertaining and addic Computer Gaming World tive game. Street Fighter fans are bound to 130 Chaparral Court, Suite 260 battle over it. At a registration fee of $30. plus Anaheim Hills, CA 92808. CGW DRACULA, In London $ PAR BASED ON BRAM STOKER'S ORIGINAL NOVEL For Windows. Excellent graphics, interface , sounds! Count Dracula is somewhere in London. Use your wits to track down the bloodthirsty vampire and put an end to his evil menace. Assume the role of Prof. Van Helsing, the renowned metaphysician or Mina Harker, the alluring| young schoolmistress. Learn the secrets of Renfield, the madman. Explore haunted mansions and much more. UNITER $29 cach. Mail check, cash or World Renowned money order to: Requires: SDJ Enterprises, Inc. Windows 3.1 1551 Fawn Valley Dr. VGA graphics St. Louis, MO 63131 386 25 Mhz or faster Supports Sound Blaster (314) 966-5602 (Evenings Only) Easy to Install Not available in stores. Satisfaction guaranteed or your money back Circle Reader Service #123 Page 132 Computer Gaming World "


"HOLY CHEAT THE WORLD'S FIRST GAME UTILITY AXIS THE GAMECHEATER You're not playing by their rules anymore... Baselling Axis the Gamecheater gives you a few new tricks in your favorite games special powers, enhanced weapons, and extra lives. So now you can get on with the adventure, past that nasty spiked pit, without burning your last life in a bad Super Dave imitation. Or you can loose your vengeance with that outlaw turbo laser cannon you've always wanted. With Axis the Gamecheater, you get the little boost you need to keep the game fun! Superpowers are yours on demand — with just the press of a key! Axis the Gamecheater provides custom cheats for dozens of the most popular games, on PCs or Macs, and we're adding new games all the time. Ask for it at your favorite software source! For more information, call 800-926-9677 PUBLISHING or 901-682-9676, Fax: 901-682-9691 Circle Reader Service #40 Copyright 1993, Baseline Publishing, Inc. All rights foreign and domestic reserved. Axis the Gamecheater and the Baseline logo are trademarks of Baseline Publishing, Inc. All other names are trademarks of their respective holders. I telp! I'm being held captive in the fine-print disclaimer! Baseline "


"U. Rit. TA Over There Attic ca bi se danas How To Make Dinosaurs And Jet Fighters In Three Easy Steps bu Robin Matthews AYN Hall. M. To Mere 32 This month is very much a best-of-Britand palaeontology brings dinosaurs to life. ish show, with a closer than normal The island of Isla Nublar, a tiny islet off the I look at two PC products from Ocean coast of Central America, is home to a cusSoftware destined to do pretty well. One istom-built dinosaur \"safari park,\" and you as their cracking flight sim T.F.X., the other is a world-renowned '-assaurus' expert have based on a best-selling book, that became a been invited to examine the cloned inhabivery, very big film, and has resulted in an even tants. bigger marketing opportunity! Thanks to the revival caused by young Spielberg, almost every conceivable dinosaur product has been fed into the insatiable mass-market appetite for our prehistoric friends. Ocean, a Manchester-based UK software house, launches another of their film tie-ins with the PC version of Jurassic Park, loosely based on the plot of the book. All too often, a successful film, TV or cartoon character has been an excuse to loosely associate a weak product that is sold purely on the basis of its marketable Jurassic Park \"label.» The history of such The dinosaurs are monitored and controlrelationships are often tenuous and mostly led by a huge super computer (probably a insulting. We are still waiting for a decent 486DX66 with local bus, VESA and Roland Disney tie-in, and games like Moonwalker, soundcard and a 5.25\" floppy disk drive) that Platoon and some of the James Bond games maintains discreet enclosures, paddocks and have been absolutely awful. Ocean has reall the island's security and feeding systems. leased its share of turkeys, Platoon in particuDennis Nedry, the park's computer guru, has lar, but seems nowadays to be a well-focused sabotaged the security systems. With the eleccompany, determined to establish a more trified fences down, hundreds of prehistoric quality-driven product range. predators, including Vicious Velociraptors Jurassic Park (JP) is probably the most ex(raptors), Dangerous Dilophosaurs (spitters) pensive license purchased by Ocean, and is and Terrifying T-Rex's are marauding combar-oriented adventure divided into two around and you are on the menu! differently presented environments. The baPart one of JP is an exterior shoot-em-up sic game plot follows Michael Crichton's with very high quality graphics and limited best-selling book, as a combination of cloning sound support. You start off in the Tyrannosaur paddock and nearby are the two grandchildren of the owner, John Hammond (played by Dickie Attenborough in the film, dahlings...). Combat is fast, furious and frequent. You must find the kids and then lead them to the visitors centre, negotiating a large game world in the process. The interface is smooth, with the only occasional difficulty being lining up exactly right to hit your opponent. Initial weapons include a re-chargeable 'phaser' which throws out bolts of electricity and a submachine gun. More ammo and first aid kits that restore health points are found in caches over the landscape, almost in Operation Wolf style. Picking things up is easy and inventory management is nice and basic. The graphic display is always busy, but not overly so, and the screen update and scrolling is smooth and quick. Having found the children and escaped successfully, JP then moves into its second reel, a completely different first-person perspective 3-D adventure where you come across the raptors and other dinosaurs literally face to face. Looking a bit like Bethesda's Terminator 3-D games, the second half is still combat-oriented but there are some straightforward object-manipulation puzzles. The graphics are very good and the speed of screen update and sound effects all contribute to a product that is atmospheric and full of pace. The objective here is to get to the generator and turn on the power. Once accomplished, the final chapter requires a trip through the caves, meeting up with the other survivors and escaping via helicopter. Page 134 Computer Gaming World "


"ARCTIC BARON The year is 2022 and global warming is threatening the very existence of mankind. Scientists put \"Operation Blind\" into effect to reverse the process, but something goes seriously wrong! The Earth is plunged into a nuclear winter and the sun becomes permanently eclipsed. ECT THE AGON YON IS TO BESTROY Centuries after the disaster, a new world order has been established and the Viking Union hold the power. They dominate the rail network and the only source of money coal and aren't going to easily give up their monopoly You command a gigantic steam powered train and use it to journey to towns to trade in supplies, slaves and mammoths. Your raw instincts will help you pull your survival plan together from the information you obtain along the way. Your mission is vital: free the planet from perpetual winter and economic slavery. You eccov 49.00 Sr.ATHRACI!! . 2018, praktij Your quest for the sun is one of danger and excitement... become the Arctic Baron... free your people! Available for IBM PC and Amiga ReadySoft Incorporated 30 Wertheim Court, Suite 2 Richmond Hill, Ontario, Canada L4B 1B9 Tel: (905) 731-4175 Fax: (905) 764-8867 Silmarils READYSOFT 1992 Silmarils All rights reserved. Distributed by ReadySolt Incorporated. Circle Reader Service #118 "


"PAPER MAVHEM \"The Informative PBM Magazine\" BORRA OS You take the role of a pilot for a United Nations air force acting as the world's police force. T.F.X. has five separate scenarios, the first set in Libya against a bonkers Arab general (almost history), the second in Yugoslavia during a civil war (could be the present), the third in Columbia versus a drug baron (next year?) and finally a real hypothetical in the south atlantic and the islands of South Georgia (very close to the bone, as the British Press has been reporting the possibility of a huge oil find there!). A full and detailed review of T.EX. is being prepared by fellow 'limey' and ace pilot Paul Rigby, but suffice it to say that just for a change T.F.X. might live up to the hype.... Do you know what PBM (Play-By-Mail) gaming is? If you don't, we can help you explore the world of PBM gaming. Paper Mayhem has been leading the way for over 10 years by informing people about PBM gaming. Articles, reviews, biographies and more fill each issue. Not to mention the ratings of PBM games and companies that our readers participate in. Paper Mayhem has been improving with the ever expanding hobby of PBM gaming since 1983. Each bimonthly issue brings you the latest on PBM news. So why delay and miss out on all the fun? Read Paper Mayhem and take advantage of PBM gaming. Send subscriptions to: PAPER MAYHEM Dept CG,1518 Adams St. Ottawa, IL 61350-4770 US Subscriptions: Single issue $5.00 1 year $24.00 2 year $42.00 FOREIGN SUBSCRIPTIONS: 1 year Canada $31.00: 1 year to Europe $51.00: 1 year to Australia $57.00. All Subscriptions to PAPER MAYHEM are to be paid in US funds and drawn from US banks. Foreign subscriptions are asked to use International Money Order in US funds. Jurassic Park Circle Reader Service #107 Statement of Ownership Management and Circulation DEFE Senn Tactical Fighter Experiment Overall, Ocean has done an excellent job with Jurassic Park. Even though the game only picks up on one or two aspects of the film (which didn't have the deepest plot in the world anyway), this is a respectable film tie-in. As it says on the packaging, are you ready to play in the park? Hardware-wise, JP requires an IBM-compatible system running an 80386 or 80486 processor. VGA graphics with at least 256k ram, 2 MB of system memory with at least 588k free and 800k EMS and 9Mb of hard disk space. Controls are joystick, mouse, keyboard or combinations thereof. While Soundblaster, AdLib and Roland ALTE sound cards are supported, JP's appetite was incompatible with Gravis Ultrasound. On a higher plane, Ocean's long awaited flight sim Tactical Fighter Experiment features three hi-tech aircraft. One is already a veteran of the Gulf War, the Lockheed F117A Stealth fighter and two are yer to enter active service, the Lockheed F-22 Superstar and the will-itfly, won't-it-fly European Fighter Aircraft, the EFA. Designed by Digital Image Design, T.EX. claims to combine the technical accuracy of Spectrum HoloByte's Falcon with some genuine arcade performance. Four basic flight models vary from the simple arcade model, through simple, realistic and finally the military simulator. The arcade model is forgiving and lets you hurtle across the skies ignoring most of the basic rules of advanced flight. The military simulator could be the most advanced flight model yet-it takes into account weather, remperature and weapon/wing distribution. This is the real purist's sim and involves so many calculations a second that a 486 is minimum spec. The other two flight models fall between the extremes and give a good learning curve. Title of Publication Computer Gaming World Publication No.: 672910 Date of Filing 11/16/93 Frequency Monthly No. Issues Published Annually Annual Subscription Price $28.00 Publication Mailing Address: 130 Chaparral Cl. #260 Anaheim Hills, CA 92808 Headquarters Mailing Address: One Park Ave New York, NY 10016 Publisher: Russell Sipe 130 Chaparral Cl.. 260 Anaheim Hills, CA 92808 Editor: Johnny Wilson (Same address as above) Managing Editor: Kon Brown (Same address as above) Owner: Zill Communications Company One Park Ave. New York, NY 10016 Bondholders, mortgages and other security holders owning or holding one percent or more of total amount of bonds, mortgages, or other secunies: None So life on the Ocean wave looks rosy at the moment. That's all for this month, next time Gremlin's Litil Divil and a look at what's happening this side of the pond. The above games and any of the other games mentioned in past \"Over There's can Strategic Plus Software, 28 D&E The Courtyard, High Street, Hampton Hill, Middlesex. TW12 1PD, Tel 01144819778088, Fax 01144819774822 or on Compuserve on 1000014,3466 Extent and Nature of Circ Copies Ea. Iss During Preceding 12 Mo's Total No. Copios: 117.075 Paid and/or requested Circ. 52,494 Mail Subscription: 18,735 Total Paid and/or Requested Circ. 71.229 Free Distribution by Mail. Carrier or other means: 1,829 Total Distribution: 73,058 Copies Not Distributed: 1,068 Return from News Agents: 42.949 Total: 117,075 Of Single Iss. Published Nearest Filing Date 122.600 54,753 20.641 75.394 Computer Adventure World has now moved (it took a reader from Canada to spot it—whoops and sorry!). Their correct address details are: Computer Adventure World, Bank Buildings, Charing Cross, Birkenhead England, L41 6EJ Tel: 01144516661132 1,583 76,977 826 44,797 122,600 Robin Matthews can be contacted on Compuserve on 76004,3456 and welcomes comments and requests (within reason!). CGW Page 136 Computer Gaming World "


"\"LET THERE BE PAX!\" Play PAX IMPERIA, the strategic, multi-player simulation of intergalactic empire building. DOS, Mac and network versions available. along with full color posters of this Great Moment From The Future. TEERD \"totally engaging throughout\" -Computer Gaming World \"a definite must for Mac gamers\" Dragon Magazine PAX \"strategically elegant\" Mac Home Journal IMPERIAL PAX IMPERIA.. lets you live like a King and play like an Emperor! Available now at your nearest dealer or call 800-769-2768. CompuServe, GO: GAMEPUBC Visa, Mastercard, check or money orders accepted. Changeling Changeling Software, Inc 596 Elm Street Windsor Locks, CT 06096 Imperial Stardate 2407... Melina Pariknova Lands The Fleet In The Vega System. Circle Reader Service #58 "


"REVIEW A Fate Worse Than Debt bol MUAS    Tilting With The Taxman In Psygnosis' Innocent Until Caught by Charles Ardai VANS Tf it is indeed truc that nothing in life is not a little of his backstory to Harry Harrifirst carrying out a minor act of pilfering for certain except death and taxes, then Innoson's famous \"Slippery Jim\" DiGriz. Jack T. the owner of a house of prostitution, then Lcent Until Caught, which puts the player Ladd-self-styled connoisseur, raconteur, undertaking several increasingly larcenous asin the position of having to evade both, is best and all around bad egg-will gladly heist any signments for a crime syndicate. Completing described as a fantasy game. Yet this is fantasy property he can get his hot little hands on, three of these assignments successfully gets of a uniquely adult sort. Combine a steady evading the corrupt and lazy cops of the 21st Jack off the backwater planet where he starts stream of sly sexual references, a casual atticentury through ingenuity, resourcefulness, out, but that's a far cry from solving his tude toward crime, scenes and suggestions of and (in a pinch) running really fast. problems. In all, he has to steal his way across graphic violence, and some small and grainy As the game starts, Jack comes up against two more planets and a spaceship before setbut nevertheless full-frontal, nudity, and tling matters to his satisfaction. \"uniquely adult fantasy\" emerges You put Jack through his paces with a as perhaps the only apt description point-and-click interface that is less convenfor this sometimes disappointing tional than it appears at first glance. All the but never dull import from the commonplaces of the genre are there the U.K. large graphic window in which the action Before the morally upright takes place, the menu of command icons among you run screaming from (Walk, Talk, Look At, Get, Use), the inventhe room, let me note that the ristory window crammed with sundry junkqué material is presented in the context of a science fiction plot and but there are also a number of features we with all the good, elbow-in-thedon't generally see. ribs humor of (and many tips of the Qo Some are minor but nice: the inventory hat to) classic science fiction comeESTATIS window is a free-form space in which objects dies such as Harry Harrison's the one nemesis he can neither out-talk nor can be manipulated, combined and overStainless Steel Rat and Douglas Adams' Hitchout-run: the Interstellar Revenue Decimation lapped, rather than a set of discrete compart biker's Guide to the Galaxy. Does this make it Service. It seems that our high-flying ments; all text appears in shaded speech more palatable? As a rule, yes. Bare breasts are (anti)hero has neglected to pay taxes on a bubbles, ensuring that legibility is never a bare breasts whatever the century, but at least lifetime of ill-gotten gains. The IRDS gives problem; the game allows up to 99 saved a fatal shot with a death ray spills less gore on him 28 days to come up with the cash. The games and automatically labels each with the the screen than the equivalent shot with a penalty for failure is what you percentage of the game that you have combullet would might call severe: torture, exeStill, you should know what you're getting cution, the sale of Jack's internal into. Though hardly «R-rated,\" Innocent Unorgans, and the seizure of all til Caught easily merits a PG-13. Anyone property owned by Jack's deTITLE: Innocent Until Caught $59.99 expecting it to be Space Quest VI is in for a scendants for the next 15 genSYSTEMS: Amiga, IBM (IBM reviewed) rude awakening. REQUIREMENTS: 386 or better, VGA graphics, erations. 18MB hard drive space: supports Ad Lib, Sound Blaster, Making matters worse, Jack and Roland sound cards Presumptions Of Innocence currently has no money to his PROTECTION: Documentation look up DESIGNERS: Divide By Zero Innocent casts your character as a small-time name and no way to earn any, PUBLISHER: Psygnosis Cambridge, MA adventurer with a big-time ego, an intergalacexcept by going back to his life (617) 497-7794 tic thief who owes most of his attitude and of crime. So, go back he does,  Innocent Until Caught PRICE: Page 138 Computer Gaming World "


"BLAST COMPUTER GAMES INTO ANOTHER DIMENSION FOR ONLY $169! *BRE GAME BLASTER BLASTS COMPUTER GAMES FROM PCS TO BIG-SCREEN TVs! Suggested Krwil vir MONOT TODOR DAMES DISSION KLASTEK GAME BLASTER turns your living room into a virtual reality SPECIAL OFFER! FREE GAMES-$150 valueINSIDE EVERY GAME BLASTER PACKAGE! gameroom by boosting your favorit These sensational computer games are FREE with every package! PC games from your VGA monitor Prince of Persia Jet Fighter II\" Spectre Challenger\" onto your big-screen TV. GAME BLASTER converts your PC's VGA output to a video signal and supports 640x480 VGA resolution. So take off today with GAME BLASTER —and blast your by Brderbund by Velocity by Velocity computer into the next dimension. Circle Reader Service #35 ADIS ADVANCED DIGITAL SYSTEMS 20204 State Rd. Cerritos, CA 90701 (310)865-1432 (310)809-6144 (Fax) (800)888-5244 Available from leading computer products suppliers, such as: Ballages Best Buy.CompUSA Comptability Computer City Computer Express Egghead Software Insight PC Zone . Tiger Software . USA Flex DEEP AI313 brand woud winnes av indeserks or registered traders of their reywin wine SPECT GRE BLASTER "


"ESITATIS black, only to return, bit by bir, fects would have been nice, as would voices when I brushed the cursor over it to go with the crackling reparree between Jack repeatedly. At another point, after and the various lowlifes he meets, but seven saving the game, I found myself floppy disks can only hold so much. (One of unable to change icons. At still anthe particularly impressive things they hold is other, I encountered a more tradian opening sequence so slick that it could be tional error message: \"ILL Error an outtake from Wing Commander.) 29/(Item)/Room 2.\" In fairness. The game's puzzles are a mixed bag: all are none of the bugs caused a total well conceived, but a few have the disadvansystem crash-I was always able to tage of not making a lot of sense. Why exactly DEOS OS fiddle around until the game came would a circuit board from a waiter droid, back on-line. However, there is no when combined with a boombox, create a reason I should have had to. remote control that would allow you to steer pleted. Other features are more substantiala different robot away from a ship? Why for instance, the lower left corner of the screen is devoted to an overhead map of your current would Jack be allowed to keep the fake subInnocence And Experience way token he makes after he has used it once? surroundings and, as a navigational convenI suppose it is a good sign that even with all Why would a pawnshop owner notice if Jack ience, you can click on exits on the map as the bugs, I never felt inclined to stop playing. takes a vase and walks out with it, but not well as those shown in the graphic window. Jack's story is interesting enough (the stage is notice if Jack takes the vase (still right under (Since many screens in the game scroll, one set by a startlingly well-written 27-page perhis nose), puts it in a bag, and then walks our? or more exits often get pushed off-screen. sonal history included with the game), the Being able to use the map for navigation saves puzzles clever enough, and most of the graphOther puzzles depend on your noticing oba lot of time.) ics and sound good enough to make up for Jects so minuscule a ticket stub poking out of a character's back pocket, a \"power point\" the undeniable shortcomings the game has in Also convenient is the distinction the game hidden in a junkyard, a pellet in an art galdraws between the \"Look Ar» icon, which other respects. lery-that they might produces a description when clicked on a easily escape the attenparticular item, and the \"Scan\" icon, which tion even of a player who you can sweep around the screen to search for uses the Scan function reitems you might otherwise have missed. Since ligiously. As a reviewer, 1 several of the key objects in the game are BE had the benefit of a roughly the size of a parentheses and a few are BADSIDE cheat-sheet provided by the size of a comma (this is one of the game's Psygnosis; without it, I main weaknesses, actually), the \"Scan\" funcam not sure I would have tion makes the difference between nervefound all the microscopic wracking gameplay and gameplay that gives objects you need to finish minimal cause for complaint. the game. Where the gameplay does fall down, in fact, Innocent Verdict it is rarely because of poor design and usually because of what appears to be poor coding. I Good designers take have played few final versions of games that STATISTI care of their players, have displayed more bugs per hour than InFor instance, though the package art and making sure that all puznocent Until Caught. Starting with an instalsome of the close-ups used during dialogue zles, however difficult to solve, are logical and lation procedure I had to run twice before it sequences are truly awful, most of the visuals that all events, however strange, are explica\"took\" and a sound card configuration proare great. This does not necessarily mean they ble—also that their game makes no unreasoncedure that is less than user friendly, Innocent are attractive: the look is generally quite able demands on the player in terms of broke down at least once every half dozen seedy. However, assuming that seedy is the eyesight, manual precision or the like. Innolook the artists were after, Innocent succeedscent Until Caught displays too little of that screens. marvelously at conveying a future caught sort of TLC. Like the world it depicts. InnoAt one point a quarter of the screen went somewhere between cyberpunk cent is a little more cold and unfriendly than and New York City circa 1994. I either am accustomed to or enjoy. The bars still have neon signs, but Still, it is rare that a game startles me in the the subways let out into a spaceway this one did, because of both the quality port-it is a tense and atmosof its writing and the unusual candor of some pheric near-future mix. of its grittier and raunchier sequences. (\"Hi,\" Punchy, peculiar music does its Jack says to a hooker. \"No,\" she replies, «but part in supporting this atmosI can be if you want.\") Unusual games earn phere. Synthesizer rags, lowpoints in my book, as do daring ones, and down blues, and spicy adventure Innocent is both. It's not for all tastes, heaven melodies play side by side with knows, but for those who like their advenouter-space themes that echo tures a little raw-in more senses than oneJohn Williams. More sound efInnocent Until Caught delivers. Cow SUSMAY ICES! Parent Page 140 Computer Gaming World "


"\"The Patrician S Since I saw you last, we hear rumours y beloved Patricim that you meet in darkened backrooms of alehouses freguented by pirates who sellarna, Nie Pagal Edict forbidding trade in armel e to cancel the wcding; ay father is so upset he threatens mest populinow mot of You won't loose just the dowry... The council will not support a man who breaks the laws of Boo, no matter how much ab you have givon the church and the poor. I am so vexed I must see you soon. With concern 2011 Hy precious M.Sc Arblay ? Weavy winds and pirate altacles hoop me fins longer than planned. Wear not about kuow many things about him he w Taller were left waaid... ayol The town Council shall last me from where 3 chall rise to Aldernion of the ship 3 vie whole Hanseatic league 16 tliis letter is a picture of as Successfully for Houth of politics and business! it court the days until our marriage, The From Tlovgorod bearing a stift of furs that you might wrap them on your slender,Smooth young body. With Passion Patrician 17th, Ernting 356 A.$con y alourd, Patrician laque, ing must have ante I write with urgency to hell you to certain which is africken with the we might not indle the heat nedy, your f you slap full of rices, intes Durelt tomt mayor, not you! of our passion and Jovance fac marriage plana. further bad new.. recently 1991rblay has begun business in the town and claims he will be advised to throw altuge feast for the With ove A. Scon The miserable cur! on your return you vould townsfolk ils Stockholm The Patrician is an epic saga of power and money set it medieval Europe. Trading and strategy are key to taking your riglitful place in the Hanseatic League the most powerfull group of highly organized traders who transformed international trading in the middle ages. In your pursuit to become a member of this social elite, you begin your climb to the top maneuvering your statis from humble merchant to elected Mayor and ultimately Alderman. But the road to the top won't come easily with bribery, blackmail, lavish feasts and financial \"donturions» becoming your fools. (1 Komuna As the Patrician (an ancient roman aristocrat) you'll travel the high seas visiting sixteen seaport tourus, each with different trading potential. Be careful though, your expedition will find you confronting pirates and using the primitive but devastating weapons of the time. Every decision you make has a bearing on what happens later, so you must be a skilled strategist in all aspects of your life including personal relationships. Complex, involving and addictive, you'll find The Patrician is in a leagne of its own! ASCON Available for IBM PC, Amiga & PC CD-ROM READYSOFT Record ReadySoft Incorporated 30 Wertheim Court.Suite 2 Richmond Rui Ontario, Canada L4B 189 Tel: (905) 731-4175 Fax: (905) 764-8867 1993 Ascon Ltd. Distributed by ReadySoft Incorporated Circle Reader Service #119 "


"FABLES & FIENDS. THE HAND OF FATE IS A TRADEMARK OF WESTWOCO STUDIOS, INC. 1993 WESTWOOD STUDIOS, INC. VIRGIN IS A REGISTERED TRADEMARK OF VIRGIN ENTERPRISES, LTD. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 1:35 17:11: : : : kiige LOGIC GOODBYE Kiss CONVENTIONAL "


"I Vow you see it. Now you don't. The land of Kyrandia is disappearing piece by piece and all the evidence points toward one perilous conclusion: a curse. Thus begins The Hand of Fate, second in the Fables  Fiends\" scries, where you are the offbeat, young mystic who must voyage to the center of the world to break the spell. Out of sync and out on foot, your aberrant journey reveals nothing is what it seems. Everything is what it isn't. And you can count your friends on one hand. Literally. Conspiring to push the twisted edge of cinemagraphic entertainment, Westwood Studios has designed more puzzles and gameplay in the first few chapters of The Hand of Fati than in all of The Legend of Kyrandin\" The most advanced graphics on the market are first pencil tested, then painted on-screen to surrealistic perfection. Breakthrough Trulight technology illuminares cach scene more cinemat. ically for a fuller, fourth dimensional picture. The new Shadow Sunlight State of Mind System, along with superior intuitive interfacing, enables you and over 50 characters to change your mind, mood and mayhem based on preceding events. \" Don't just play with your mind. Change the way your mind plays. Grasp The Hand of Fate and kiss conventional logic goodbye. THE HAND OF Fate Westwood TUDIO Varpe Circle Reader Service #143 "


"REVIEW ROLE-PLAYING REVERSAL Yserbius and Fates of Twinion Go From On-Line Games To Boxed Set by Bernie Yee Then Sierra On-line's subsidiary, Medieval Land, is not so much a sequel to and dollars by allowing you to become familDynamix, published what is perYserbius as a parallel game. There appears to iar with the environs, interface, and game haps the best fantasy role-playing be no plot relation between the two, except mechanics before your modem gets that game of the year in Betrayal at Krondor, it for the fact that both will suck up your on-line \"ATDT\" code and starts dialing your local seemed that the stalwart adventure gamers at dollars and time. As for the stand-alone verTIN access number. As if to reinforce this Sierra might be interested in testing the rolesions, that's a different story altogether. off-line «proving grounds\" marketing plan, playing waters. With the Quest for Glory The \"boxed set\" is a solo version of the Yserbius boxed sets come with 30 hours of free (QFG) series, Sierra was clearly no stranger to on-line success. While TIN'S Yserbius showed on-line time to TIN. That alone may make the conventions of the genre, but QFG has excellent on-line gameplay, with some puzYserbius stand-alone worth the price of adgrown to be less of a pure hybrid advenzles solvable only by group cooperation, the mission for gamers who want to venture boxed set is a hollow shell of its line. vibrant on-line self. Both Yserbius and Twinion are essentially the Guide to Dining Alone INVENTORY ITEMS same games with different dunYserbius and Twinion are examples of miniZE yeon layouts and different monmalistic game design. The perspective is a sters. Playing Yserbius without sters. Playing BER simple first serbis.. without simple, first person view that moves you fellow on-line gamers is like being through the dungeon in discrete 10'steps and CLOSE in an amusement park after hours, 90 degree turns: it's the same system first one in which the rides aren't all done in Wizardry I, brought into color by YOU encounter 1 Snake. i Battle Begins that fun to begin with. Bard's Tale, and institutionalized by Bustaquest attacks Snake causing 105 Yserbius is no technological Dungeonmaster and Eye of the Beholder. The You found 20 gold pieces and earned 10 achievement in game design. In graphics are nice, though not up to par of the experience points! GAME You seeScroll of the sun many ways, it is a throwback to the intricate walls found in Eye of the Beholder. Shadow of Yserbius original Bard's Tale game, with a Like Eye of the Beholder, you are limited to first-person view on your display exploring underground settings, but unlike ture/role-playing game than an adventure and character statistics taking up Eye, Yserbius has a very nice little auto-mapgame with role-playing elements. Sierra conyour VGA screen, which is understandable ping function that keeps tabs on where you've servatively opted to stick a toe in the pool since Joe Ybarra, a Bard's Tale implementor, been and where you should be going. Sound rather than jump in with their new role-playcontributed to the Yserbius design. Aside is adequate, and while there is a running ing releases, Shadow of Yserbius and the Fates from the VGA niceties and the point-and musical score, the repetition can become teof Twinion. If these names sound familiar to click interface, there really is dious. As in Ultima Underworld, you play a you, that's because they are, far and away, the nothing that truly distinShadow of Yserbius most popular gaming areas on The Imaginaguishes Yserbius from its 8-bit tion Network, formerly The Sierra Network, predecessor, other than the TITLE: Shadow of Yserbius which is now run by Sierra and AT&T. TIN gateway. Eilee SMW off PRICE: $59.95 SYSTEM: WSERBIUS The game engine for Yserbius originally apIBM The appealing part of YserREQUIREMENTS: 386-16MHz or better, VGA peared on TSN installation disks, and the graphics, mouse; supports Adlib, bius is that you can start dePAS, Roland and Sound Blaster game was written specifically for multiveloping your hero or sound cards; Yserbius-9MB HD space Twinion-4.5MB HD space player, on-line play. In a little role-reversal, heroine off-line, then take PROTECTION: None the TIN interface now comes with the standhim or her on-line where DESIGNER: Ybarra Productions The Nation's multiplayer PUBLISHER: Sierra On-line alone versions of Yserbius and Twinion. TwinYserbius really shines. This Coarsegold, CA (800) SIERRAT ion, a recently opened section in TIN's feature saves on-line time damage and killing 11 YOU WIN THE BATTLE! e lantan gucsu. Page 144 Computer Gaming World "


"THE FIRST SUPER-VGA FLIGHT SIMULATOR SUPER-VGA HARRIER ADVANTED Si m Series visual world, where objects are sharper, cleaner and can be seen for miles. Drom the flight fanatics at Domark comes the first-ever strategic flight simulator designed for full-screen SVGA graphics technology. This is not a typical flight sim. SUPER-VGA HARRIER blows the competition out of the sky with super-fast, silky-smooth screen update--at twice the resolution! Now you can experience a much larger \"Harrier receives extremely high marks for graphics which are the best I've ever seenBETTER THAN FALCON. The explosions and ground detail are really great.\" PC SOURCES MAGAZINE «After playing Harrier in SVGA, all other flight-sims look like they are being played through a telescope... Not so long ago, a few glimpses at multimillion dollar serious flight simulators produced memories of images not far from those present in Harrier; very simply, it's that good.\" -STRATEGY PLUS MAGAZINE SLEEVE DISTRIBUTED BY Screens shown: 640 x 480 256-color SVGA resolution. IBM PC/COMPATIBLES: Available October 1993 Spectrum HoloByte DMARK Visa/MC orders: call 24 hrs a day. 7 days a week: 1-800-695-GAME (orders only). Super-VGA Harrier 1993 Domark Group Ltd. Published by Domark Software Ltd. Programmed by Simis Ltd. Graphics by the Kremlin. Sound by Martin Walker. Produced by Jim Tripp. Falcon is a trademark of Spectrum HoloByte. 1-800-695-GAME 1900 S. Norfolk St. Suite, 202 San Mateo, CA 94403 415/513-8929 Circle Reader Service #227 "


"GALLERY IREPLACE DELETE Bustaquest the Lily Male El Level 12 Ranger Harriori PLAY HELP OUIT solo adventurer with no one lending a hand or a sword. In the TIN version of Yserbius and Twinion, the whole point is to join a party of adventurers to recreate the feeling of sitting around the dining room table with a group of friends, rolling dice and mapping your latest adventure in the pen-and-paper variety of role-playing games. Combat is also simple and straightforward, resembling the system used in Dungeonmaster or Eye of the Beholder. It lacks some of the tactical nuances in the SSI Gold Box series (including America On-Line's multiplayer Gold Box game, Neverwinter Nights), Darklands and Riftwar—which is a pity, considering that Yserbius is really a game of combat. You face off with one or more groups of f baddies (some of which can be out of sword range), and if your sword swipe is lethal enough, you can kill two, three or four monmon sters with one round of combat. Magic is not really an offensive factor in the beginning of ion hero will have hundreds, if not thousands of hit points, and he or she will be tossing around spells that not only reduce your opponents to cinders, but should be covered by the latest nuclear nonproliferation agreement. Much as the Bard's Tale series was reduced to megalomaniacal idiocy with characters and villains that resembled gods more than Merlin or Arthur, Yserbius will give you that feeling of gods among men, as your character stomps on enemies like you would crush an ant. ObviThis is the Yserbius Galleru. Use the left ond right arrows to select a character. Press Replace to create a chorocter of your own design, Delete to remove the current chorocter, Ploy to enter Yserbius, or ovit to return to the waiting Room. Shadow of Yserbius GO L2the Reservoir H | ELEFE Your health increases Du 125 You are healed! ETER These cursed walls keep sealing me in! Oh, I do wish there was a faster way through this maze of horrors and giants Fates of Twinion the game, though certain scrolls (like the Scroll of Protection) and potions (the Elixir of Healing) are necessary for surviving the tougher encounters. Luckily, you can also buy these items in the local store. The magic system is also familiar. Your character is allotted a certain amount of Mana, or spell points, which increases with experience to enable you to cast more spells with greater effectiveness. Offensive spells, such as lightning, and defensive spells like Energy Field, are matched with information spells that find secret doors, reveal set monster encounters (but not random ones), and more. Twinion starts the adventurer off with no spells, while Yserbius gives you a starter set of enchantments. In between casting spells and killing creatures, don't expect much conversation. There is no non-player character interaction in the boxed set of Yserbius. Nor is there any in the on-line version, but people are too busy talking with each other and having fun to notice. The NPC interaction is of the \"step on the conversation, and you can't fight the NPCs progression and development. and can't steal from them; for all intents and Despite these flaws, there is something to purposes, they don't exist. Although you run purposes, they into plenty of monsters (scaled back from the be said for Yserbius as a stand-alone game. It on-line version because there are no other is refreshingly simple to play-no complex adventurers to back you up), they don't count notes to keep, no changing conversation ac as NPC interaction. In fact, combranches, just go in, kick butt and take the bat becomes tedious after a while, treasure. With a few puzzles in the diet to give with set «monster squares» that reyou some fiber with your hack and slash meal, plenish bad guys over and over. you have a diverting and amusing FRPG to Since SSI's Gold Box games have occupy your time for a little while. Problem been retired to the great hard drive is, most FRPGers don't want to be amused in the sky, the stand-alone Yserbius they want to be thrown into a real world, with is sure to take its place as the big rare treasures, unspeakable horrors and, like hack and slash FRPG. Unless you any good book, a gripping storyline that are a pure combat fan, this is a doesn't let go. That's a good RPG-it should dubious distinction, at best. be like being there. If Sierra is going to do a Despite all the combat, there is fantasy role-playing game, they should do it COME no place to rest and restore hit with as much relish as a King's Quest advenpoints without exiting the dunture or the stunning new Gabriel Knight. geon, unless you find a magical There is no way that, in the age of Lands of fountain. Luckily, Mana and Heal Lore, Riftwar, and Ultima VIII: Pagan, you potions are often found as booty, and you will can take an FRPG like Yserbius seriously as a use them up quickly. And in a bit of idiosynstand-along game. As an introduction to crasy left over from on-line play, adventurers TIN, The Shadows of Yserbius and The Fates can leave the dungeon and head back to the of Twinion succeed nicely. No doubt that it \"inn\" while in the middle of exploring a level. will gently introduce many gamers to the joys There are two entrances into the dungeon, of multi-player gaming. But if you want to be the main entrance and the \"resume\" entrance. captivated and lose track of time while playThe \"resume\" entrance puts you back where ing a stand-alone game, pass by the Yserbius you left, and the main entrance puts you at and Twinion for greener pastures. There's a the beginning. But you can still go lot of them. CGW to the store, sell off items and buy more potions and scrolls, before \"resuming\" your last adventure. If you die, however, you get thrown back to the inn and you are forced to start your spelunking from the main entrance. There is no death in Yserbius, only inconvenience. Grog attacks Young Giant causing 53 Everlasting God Stompers Young Giant attacks Grog causing 37 Character development lacks the el Choose Your Action subtlety of other great FRPGs like Young Giant attacks Grog causing 32 U damage! Riftwar; Darklands or Ultima. Pretty soon, your Yserbiusor TwinFates of Twinion damage! Iidamage! Il damage! Page 146 Computer Gaming World "


"OTHER GAMES MAY TALK. THIS ONE HAS A VOICE. Star Trek: The Next Generation's PATRICK STEWART in LANDS OF LORE: The Throne of Chaos Fireball Mist or Doom W ith Patrick Stewart as the voice of King Richard, Lands of Lore has a royal advantage over other fantasy games: An actor of real authority in a role of authority, at the head of a huge cast of heroes and villains who speak, rant and roar their way through the most vocally interactive role-playing D adventure yet devised. (A mammoth 130 MB of digitized speech makes it possible.) The Dark Army is on the move, led by the shape. shifting sorceress Scotia—and each time you meet her she'll be more powerful and terrifying than the last. But your powers can grow, too. Experienced-based character development makes great warriors of those who take arms (in real-time combat) against a sea of indescribable monsters and makes mighty wizards of those who cast Larger Than-Life spells. 220 HARIA Explore ancient A NUNKER castles, living forests, hidden lairs, bustling towns, haunted caverns, through 30 enchanted NDS LORE levels made vividly real by more than 20 MB of compressed art and special effects. Westwood For the PC CD-ROM INSTRID EWIVELY BY Virgin LANDS OF LORE THE THRONE OF CHAOS a trademark of Westwood Studies Inc 1994 Westwood Studios Inc. All rights reserved Virgin Isarestered trademark of Virgin Enterprises Ltd Circle Reader Service #145 "


"REVIEW Saturday Morning Fever! Sid & Al's Incredible Toons Will Drive You Looney Tunes by Neil Harris ack in the early part of the century, surprised if the next propulsion system for parts in The Incredible Machine, we are now artist Rube Goldberg creared newsbattleships is just a wee bit more complex battleships is just a wee bit more comp working with Sid Mouse and AI E. Cat, paper cartoons diagramming than it might have been otherwise. two animated creatures who look like machines of fantastic complexity. His washed up rejects of a by-gone machines were typically «time-saving cartoon era, each having the devices\" that accomplished their goals stereotyped animosity for the through an outlandishly circuitous chain of other's species. In the puzzles, events. It might start with an anvil dropperhaps Al will have to catch Sid, ping on a seesaw which propelled a mouse or Sid will have to destroy Al. By through the air onto a platform with some placing the pieces together just so cheese which released a balloon which trigand pushing the \"on\" switch, a gered a switch...all ending in the compleseries of animated steps play out tion of a menial household task. Rube VAAAAART on the screen until the goal is Goldberg's machines became part of reached, in its action looking like American folklore, leading to one of the something Wile E. Coyote had stereotypes of the mad inventor-the father ordered from ACME, though in \"Honey, I Shrunk the Kids,\" for exam Sid & Al's Incredible Toons is the sequel hopefully performing more effectively. ple. to the Incredible Machine and boy what a So where Sid & Al's Incredible Toons In Dynamix' recent puzzle game, The sequel! I'll be up front and admit my bounds past the original game is in its charIncredible Machine, the goal was to create unabashed love for this game. It's exactly acter, or rather, its characters. Along with incredible machines in the Goldbergien what I wanted from a sequel to The the titular stars, Sid and Al, is a supporting vein and to solve mechanical puzzles. In the Incredible Machine. The puzzles are more cast of toons including Bik Dragon, Eunice puzzles, an item or group challenging, the animation and sound Elephant, and Hildegard Hen. Each charof items was missing from effects are hysterically funny, and there are acter has a set of actions him, her, or it will a machine, and it was the a host of small improvements. take under different circumstances. If Al player's rask to figure our sees a dead fish, he'll lurch his overfed self which item was missing A Game With Character over to it and scarf it down and spit out the from where. I showed this bones. Al will also eat bananas and bubble Like The Incredible Machine, Sid & Alis game to an engineer friend gum. If he sees Sid, he'll chase him. a series of puzzles that begins with a goal who immediately became Dropping things on Al's head get different and with some of the parts needed to comaddicted. He bought a reactions. Something heavy will make a plete the goal. The object is to choose from copy and showed it to all small flock of birds circle his head, tweeting the pieces available and produce the desired his friends, leading to a result. The difference is that the machine merrily. An egg will crack and he'll do a chain reaction that slow burn, frying the egg. The variety of \"parts\" are wonderfully drawn and brought productive work animated cartoon characters. to a halt at a major naval Whereas we were dealing with mostly Wil yard. I wouldn't be a bit inanimate and mundane machine Page 148 Computer Gaming World "


"reactions and animations is a real treat. I'm sure there are many animations still lurking in this game that I haven't seen yer because I haven't put together the right combination of circumstances so far. page Hotely 03 TOILET The supporting characters have a lot simpler reactions than Sid and Al. Bik Dragon spews fire when bumped, useful in lighting bomb fuses, heating teapots, or toasting one of the other characters. Eunice the Elephant vacuums up peanuts and anything else in the vicinity of her favorite snack, and she also tosses objects and, of course, runs away from Sid the Mouse in terror. Hildegard Hen lays an egg if she's bumped, and the egg drops down onto something or someone. Most of the reactions are logical and internally consistent within the game, and will be familiar to those of us reared on Saturday morning cartoon shows. There are a few that I have trouble with, mainly the fact that some characters and objects are arbitrarily immune to the effects of saving that for the next sequel. A nice touch gravity. I mean really, an elephant is is that Sid puts on a mining helmet before not affected by gravity but a mouse is going into the tunnel, and when he comes It's only a quibble really, because you get out the first thing used to the rules in a hurry. If you care to that becomes visible read the manual, it's all there, but most of is the beam of light us will learn more from trial and error. It's from the helmet. more fun that way. Nobody Said More Objects Than Carter This Would Has Liver Pills Be Easy One major improvement over While the previThe Incredible Machine is in the ous game was a chalvariety of the objects you have lenge, with a little available. I counted 66 different perseverance (and objects, nor counting the characmaybe a few friends ters already discussed. Some of kibitzing over a few them are only slight variations of shoulders) it could each other, like the five types of be solved completely. I find this game to be much tougher. It's divided into levels. The first is called Cake Walk, and it's very simple, designed to demonstrate the basics of the different parts and get you used to the game. The next section, called All Brawn, No Brains, are about at the level of the puzzles in the prior game, requiring a lot of trial and error along with a good dose of inspiration. inclines and six types of walls, which vary From then on, it's time to swear. The in appearance and in how slick they are third level is called Really, Really Hard, and when something is sliding along them. It's not named that way to make you feel Some items are unique. And some, like the goo lile the good. On the earlier levels I had the stamilectrie gears, pulleys, conveyor belts, rope, electric na to solve many puzzles in each sitting. gears, punieys, conveyor belts, rope, ecc switch and outlet, and teeter-totter are pretOn this level, it's all I can do to get through ty much identical to the parts available in one, after which it's time for a hot toddy The Incredible Machine. and a good night's rest. Some of the objects have interesting That's not all. There is an even tougher properties that can be adjusted. The level-Looney Bin!, Ratapult can be set to fire off one or multiwhich might just ple boulders. The timer can be set to go off send me there. After a immediately or to delay until a later time. while I get the feeling Generally you have to adjust these just right that this level was crein order to bring off the desired result. One ated just so Dynamix my favorite new obiects is the chou can sell hint books. Man Motor. If some food drops into his Ten of the puzzles in tray, the Chow-Man scarfs it up. his chest this level can't even uffs out, and he ioes along his treadmill be attempted until all Sid ought to consider getting this kind of 90 of the other puzexercise. zles in all the levels have been solved. At The tunnel is another handy item. It the end of all 100 comes in two identical parts, and a characDIY puzzles there is some ter going in one part will come out the kind of spectacular other before long. I keep expecting a show, or so the docutrain to come out of one of them. mentation says. I may Maybe I haven't hit a high enough never see it myself. level yet, or maybe the designers are * 29 les famosos February 1994 Pge 149 "


"Toon It Yourself Kit The designers would have been severely remiss if they didn't let players design their own puzzles using all these wonderful characters and gizmos. Of course they knew better. The Home Toons section gives you a blank slate and a full selection of all the pieces to play with. You can even save your puzzles to disk and trade them with your friends or, as the manual suggests, upload them to your favorite on-line service for the rest of us to try—especially those of us still stuck on the Looney Bin! level. The only shortcoming in the Home Toons section is that the game can't be programmed to understand when the puzzle has been completed successfully. That's a shame. Perhaps the designers can take this on as their own puzzle for the inevitable next generation game. game automatically saves your progress and Finally, a special mention should go to eliminates the strange set of codes that the folks who put together the manual, saved your score in the older game. A score Michael Waite and Richard Tunnell. The system with points based on speed of solvmanual is well organized, fun to read and, ing the puzzles was apparently judged with its cover parody of TV Guide and fresuperfluous-solving the puzzles is certainnetic layout, in the spirit of the game. ly reward enough for me. Kudos Deserved Jeff Tunnell and his co-designers, Chris re Cole and Brian Hahn, have pulled off a winner here. Sid & Al's Incredible Toons deserves a place on your computer and will certainly show up on best game of the year lists. It's challenging to solve, fun to play, and great to just watch the animations and 02 listen to the sounds. CGW ) Nom! eine The other improvement I'm very fond of is the screen dump feature. The game creates a disk file containing a screen dump when you hit the ALT-S key combination: a handy feature if you want to analyze a screen away from the computer. This would be very handy from inside a padded cell, although the psychiatrist might frown on it. On the other hand, solving the puzzle that sent me there might be therapeutic. WOD More Improvements I mentioned earlier that there are many small improvements to Sid Al's Incredible Toons compared to its predecessor. This SPECTRUM FASTEST ELECTRONICS CD DRIVE ON THE MARKET ESEBE SEBESEBES P.O. BOX 6295 SALINAS, CA 939 12-6295 1-800-983-4321 CALL US TODAY!! ask for catalog Sm Cay 2000 Star Controll Space Hulk SSN 21 Seawal The Great Wa 1914-1918   Uterra VII: Pagn VbrVctory Gold Juno Sword Victory a Sea War in Russia Warlord I When Two Worlds War Wing Commander Academy CO ROM DANES Creative Omni CD Sand Pasar Discover CD 16 Mullmeda 5479 Sand Blaster Edutainment CD 16 Muhamedia Kit 539 Texel CD ROM $439 WE SELL: IBM SEGA MAC SNES $59 CD-Ft 7h Guest ADSD Dark Sun $56 AD&D Dungeon Hack $40 AD&D Eye of the Beholder Td 856 ADSD Fantasy Empires $46 Be Face $42 Dracula Unleashed $51 Dune 545 Esche Unready Great Naval Bates Iron Holx Journeyman Propt Labyrint of Time Logind of Kyranda 548 Rebel Assault Roumbo Zork Sherlock Holmes, Cans la ll $39 Sherlock Holmes, Consulting Il $61 Srika Commander $59 Tony La Russa Baseball 11 $68 Ultima IV Una Underwat& II Wing Commander 2 Deluxe S40 Wirg Commander I Deluxe Wing Commander / Uma VI Wolpack $50 920 MAC/PC Alone in the Dark ed H Bloodhet Bue and the Gray Clash of Stod Comanche & Mission Disk #1 $62 Command Adventure: Sarship $43 D&D Stronghold 545 Dominion 545 Dunel Eye of the Beholder I II Eye of the Beach II Falcon 3.0 Forgoton Castle Front Page F.B.Pro Global Domination Harpoon II High Command nca 2 Isle of the Dead Kaspoarov's Gambit Master of Orion Polce Quest 4 Prince of Persia 2 Private Quello Glory 4 Reum b Zork Seal Team 7 Cities of Gold (commem ed.) Shadowcase SPECIAL BUNDLE $48 Chessmaster 3000 Loom Secret of Monkey Island Stellar 7 BAEEESEE8888888 869 $40 300 RCA stereo jacks Front headphone jack Personal head phone set 542 BM Fast 200ms access time 330 KB/sec transfer rate Multi-spin technology Photo CD capability MTBF 50,000 hr's Two CD-Roms ATARI JAGUAR WE SELL ALL COMPUTER & VIDEO ENTERTAINMENT PRODUCTS Two stereo speakers Double enclosure door ADSD. Dark Sin ADSD. Dungeon Hack $68 S46 LOS Automatic lens cleaner Plays audio CDs FECHA ALL SALES FINAL, NO REFUNDS PRICES SUBJECT TO CHANGE, CONTACT PUBLISHERS FOR DEFECTS 20% RESTOCKING FEE ON RETURNED & REFUSED ITEMS PAYMENT CHECKS (ORDERS SHIPPED WHEN CHECK CLEARS), MONEY ORDERS (TREATED AS CASH) CA residents add $7.25 sales tax SHIPPING: FREE SHIPPING WITH $100 PURCHASE, UNDER $100 ADD $5 PER ORDER, 2ND DAY AIR ADD $7 OTHER SHIPPING TERMS ARRANGED. COD ADD $5 Circle Reader Service #130 Computer Gaming World 1-800-777-3642 wunity Centre Circle Reader Service #117 Page 150 "


"IVE-VIDEO  HIT SONGS SOUND EFFECTS  AMAZING GRAPHICS CHALLENGING The Ultimate Interactive Video Dating Gamer Dream Girl Live...ON CD! Do you have what it takes to be with the most beautiful models around? Now you can find out thanks to the latest in computer technology! This advanced interactive multimedia game places you in the action DIT AND 16-BY with live-video, sound effects, amazing graphics and hit songs! You determine what happens next as your Dream Date asks you questions! The better your response the further you get! At last you have a chance to spend time with beautiful models and win their hearts! INCLUDED! DREAM GIRL, DREAM BOY ONE MISTAKE BEST OF LOVERS, BEST OF FRIENDS HOLDING ON ENDLESS NIGHTS THIEF OF HEARTS EXPERIENCE LIVE-VIDEO  HIT SONGS SOUND EFFECTS AMAZING GRAPHICS CHALLENGING & ENTERTAININ EXPERIENCE LAVE-VIDEO  HIT SONGS . SOUND EFFECTS AMAZING GRAPHICS CHALLENGING & ENTERTAINING HIT SONGS Windows Screens Saver Included! Protect your computer screen with Live Video Songs and Super Graphics! ($29.00 value) ONE OF THE FUNNIEST GAMES OF THE YEAR! Sold at better computer stores, everywhere! Or to order direct call: 1-800-465-CDCD Call (416)656-6406 for technical information or support. SONGS \"Microforum To receive a FREE catalogue of Microforum CD titles or for DEALER inquiries please call (416)656-6406 or fax us at (416)656-6368 Circle Reader Service #90 "


"REVIEW Palm Reading The Hand of Fate Hands On Experience With Westwood's Latest Adventure by Scorpia, Adventure Games Editor The Hand of Fate is the second in Westmost or all of her inventory. Thus, each new It was nice to see a female lead character for wood Studio's Fables & Fiends series, section provides everything necessary to solve a change. Too many adventures these days are 1 a sort-of sequel to Legend of Kyrandia. the puzzles in it, and there is no need to worry still male-oriented as far as the main character Sort-of, since the main character is Zanthia about having overlooked some crucial item is concerned. Featuring Zanthia in this one the alchemist, a supporting character in the back in the swamps, or anywhere else for that earns Westwood a point on my scorecard. first game, rather than Brandon. matter. There has been a definite improvement in The land of Kyrandia, as usual, is in puzzle construction over Kyrandia, trouble, but this time the trouble is where too many solutions depended more than a megalomaniac jester: solely on trial-and-error. You can, of slowly, piece by piece, Kyrandia is discourse, solve almost any puzzle in any appearing. If this goes on much adventure with that method, bur it is longer, there won't be any Kyrandia often time-consuming and tedious. left at all. Not a pleasant prospect to Most players prefer situations where contemplate. there is a logical connection between Naturally, all the mages and sages the item(s) and the solution, even if paw frantically through musty old volit takes them a while to figure out umes hoping to find a solution. Natuwhat it is. Nasty Weed rally, they don't find anything. The So it's good to see that many of the outlook is pretty grim until Marko (a B OPTIONS puzzles in Hand of Fate can be wannabe mage) shows up with his new thought out, if you take the time to assistant, a hand. The hand, through Graphically, and in terms of the interface, think about what needs to be done. diagrams, explains that they need an anchor the game is similar to lead of Kyaudia So Naturally, some answers are going to be a stone from the center of the world to keep Hand of Fate is visually pretty and the point little obscure, but games that are too ea Kyrandia together. Zanthia is unanimously in cvetem seu to use clicking on an usually aren't all that satisfying. chosen to go get it. Lucky Zanthia! item picks it up to become the cursor; the However, Westwood is still a little too fond The task would seem to be a simple one, item can then be placed in the inventory or of red herrings (misleading items), which can until Zanthia returns home to find all her clicked on something or someone else to be found all over the place. One or two are equipment smashed and supplies stolen. Ob\"use\" it. traditional in adventures, but Hand of Fate viously, someone doesn't want her fixing up Conversations are handled in a similar has more than its share of them. This can the problem, and now she has to get to the manner, but they are autobecome frustrating, with players wasting time center of the world the hard way. This is matic sequences. Clicking over things that really aren't where the game actually begins. The Hand of Fate on people usually starts Hand of Fate is a linear adventure, divided them TITLE: talking, with ZanThe Hand of Fate PRICE: $62.99 into sections, that begins with the swampthia making pre-deterSYSTEM: REQUIREMENTS: 386-20MHz or better, DOS 5.0 or lands around Zanthia's house. Each time a mined responses; there are higher, 2MB RAM (IMB XMS or section is completed, you move on to the next no choices to make as to EMS), VGN/MCGA graphics, 20MB hard drive space, 3.5\" HD floppy one, and there is no going back to a previous what she will say. Then THE LAND OF PATC area. Usually, this makes players nervous, as again, conversations are Roland MT-32/LAPC-1 and linear games often require that some obscure not a main item here alPROTECTION: item from the beginning be used at the end. though it is important to DESIGNERS: Westwood Studios PUBLISHER: Virgin Games Happily, this is not the case here. Every talk to everyone you meet (800)874-4607 time Zanthia moves on, she rends to lose at least once. IBM drive, Mouse: supports Adlib, Adlib Gold, Sound Blaster (SB Pro), General MIDI None Irvine, CA Page 152 Computer Gaming World "


"TORTURED SCREAMS EAR PIERCING SHRIEKS. ANGUISHED CRIES. NOISES FROM THE SOUND CARD YOU JUST BOUGHT? NO. FROM YOUR WALLET. Must a 16-bit state-of-the-art sound card cost an arm, a leg and several other appendages? Must you raid your children's college fund to get the CD-quality audio supplied by 32 Operator Wavetable Synthesis? Must you fork out a sum equal to the GNP of a small European nation for Sound Blaster compatibility and a MIDI interface? In a word, no. The new ARIA 16 offers all of this, plus easy installation and a Digital Signal Processor that allows you to upgrade to speech recognition, for the oddly level-headed price of $99. Or, for a bit more, there's the ARIA 16se, featuring a SCSI-2 interface, a mic/headset, and InterA play's Star Trek 25th Anniversary: 3 Episode Edition with ARIA speech recognition. To learn more, call us at 1-800-477-3473. And give your ears the sound they want. Without ticking off your wallet. AND TO Prometheus 1994 Prometheus Products Inc. All trademarks are property of their respective companies. & 1993 Paramount Pictures All Rights Reserved. STAR TREK is a Registered Trademark of Paramount Pictures, Prometheus Authorized User "


"       . Why does this always happen to me? GAMEPORT. Finally, a Joystick Connection for Your Notebook! Inside Zanthia's Laboratory TOT OPTIONS Transform your high-performance portable into a serious simulation machine with the Notebook Gameport. Connect an IBM-compatible joystick or yoke and rudder pedals. The Notebook Gameport\" not only maximizes the entertainment potential of your notebook computer, it's also the quickest, easiest joystick connection for your desktop! Ask your local retailer for the Notebook Gameport, or call Colorado Spectrum to place your order: important at all. Mustard Island is a case in point. You can easily spend hours trying to deal with the cannibals, when in fact the real puzzle is to avoid the island completely in the first place. There is also a certain amount of subtle misdirection that can lead you down the garden path if you aren't careful. For instance, throughout the game Zanthia concocts little potions to help in different situations. The trick is that she won't be making all the potions listed in her recipe book. So it's easy to get caught in a mindset that looks to magic instead of logic for a solution to a particular problem. The best way to approach Hand of Fate is to keep in mind that everything you need in a section of the game can be found in that section. If one or more ingredients for a potion can't be found, it's a good bet that magic isn't the answer to the puzzle you're trying to solve. Look for another way of doing it. FAHEPORT COLORADO SPECTRUNT 748 Wieders Way, 6-201, Fort Collins, CO 80535 International Telephone: (303)225-1087 (800) 238-5983 Hot Water placed. OPTIONS 9-Pin Connector to Computer's Serial Port Easily connects to all IBM compatible notebook and desktop computers Pass-through Serial Mouse Port Mouse remains fully operational while gameport is in use.    GAMEPORT Four-axis Gameport Supports joystick & rudder pedals simultaneously No calibration, jumpers or manual speed adjustments necessary One of the surprising things about Hand of Fate is that it's really a rather short adventure. There are only about seven sections to it, all of them fairly small. Some areas may be more difficult than others, but in general experienced gamers are likely to finish this one quickly. If the game has one really sore point, it's the ending. Having gone through the game using your head, you are suddenly thrust into what is a type of mini action sequence, which is done in real time. The only \"puzzle» here is figuring out which ways Zanthia should jump to avoid an unpleasant demise. The use of what is basically an arcade sequence is a jarring note, and really doesn't fit in with the rest of the game as a whole. A less active, and more puzzle-oriented, endgame would have been better. Overall, Hand of Fate is a humorous, moderate-level adventure game. Much of what was wrong with Legend of Kyrandia has been cleaned up, although Westwood's technique still needs a little more polish (and a few less red herrings). Anyone looking for a short-term adventure workout is likely to enjoy this one. CGW Circle Reader Service #47 Page 154 Computer Gaming World "


"\"THE GRANDEST FLEET\" IS COMING !! FROM Q.Q.P.INC \"OUR FINEST GAME YET\" Also Look Out For The Perfect General II And The Lost Admiral II (908) 788-2799 495 Hwy 202 Flemington, NJ 08822 Circle No. 114 on Reader Service Card "


"REVIEW Can Larry Keep It Up? Leisure Suit Larry Lands His Sixth Sexy Sequel Shape Up or Slip Out! Leisure Suit LaTTL 6 by Allen L. Greenberg s ludicrous as it may seem, there was eestly call \"the Land of the Lounge once a time when leisure suits were Lizards\" one's roots) the hero is not only regarded as fashionable, but once again alone and desperate for even quite attractive. Leisure Suit Larry, on female companionship. This time, the other hand, has never been considered however, Larry has stumbled onto either fashionable or attractive. In fact, this the palatial facilities of \"La Costa sex-conscious fictional character (along with Lotta\" health spa. In one of Sierra's YAE007 his creator, Al Lowe) may have even contribfamous mega-introductory seured to the justifiable death of leisure suit quences, we discover that Larry has popularity. Larry, whom one might describe won two weeks at the place as consolation while Shablee wishes only for a new dress, yer as a Saturday morning cartoon character let prize after appearing on a television dating hides a secret behind her romantic eyes. Filoose in a whorehouse, appears to have show. (First prize winners, according to one nally, Shamara keeps herself, as well as her Shape Up or Silp Oud staff member, need only remain for inner thoughts, hidden from the rest of the Leisure sui Larry 6 a single weekend.) From the mospa. ment he steps up to the reception As is usual with Larry, though he works window, Larry finds himself facing hard to meet the needs of women, he rarely some of the most beautiful women receives what he has earned, and moments of he could ever hope for. To bed even romantic climax quickly turn to painfully one of them, Larry would fulfill any comical punch-lines. It is easy to imagine quest or satisfy any need. In order to yourself sitting on a stool in Lefty's bar, lissucceed in LSLO, Larry finds himself tening to Al Lowe as he tells Larry's funny, striving to fulfill the requests of nine sad story, punctuated by frequent elbow-jabs different women, so that they, in to the rib cage. It is only through Larry's luck, TOOOO7 007 turn, might satisfy his. as well as your perseverance, that the hero will The alluring inmates at \"La Costa finally experience the night of his dreams. Lotta\" include a thunder-thighed There are additional game points to be learned all about life either in a schoolyard receptionist whose only hope is that carned, provided you are willing to endure Larry will manage to repair the facility's liposeveral of Larry's less glamorous bodily funcalcove, or by repeated viewings of teen horSuction apparatus-a machine that, when tions. mone movies. functional, appears capable of draining Lake To know Larry is to become familiar with In addition to Larry's prospective conMichigan. A sadistic exercise trainer named a wealth of sexual puns and double entendres \"Thunderbird\" tries to en quests, there are several innocent bystanders \"Thunderbird\" tries to entice the hero with with whom he will have to deal. One of the previously unworthy of human awareness. the joys of leather, chains and handcuffs. spa's employees carries a wrench, without To date, Larry has appeared in five advenRose, who specializes in tures, only four of which have been publishcolonic treatments, wants ed. (Al Lowe has casually stated that he has Leisure Suit Larry 6: only a small gift (certainly no intention of issuing Larry's fourth advenwithin Larry's capabilities). Shape Up Or Slip Out! ture, and we can only assume that it was just The Tilting Burgundy too vulgar for public viewing.) Leisure Suit might notice Larry if she TITLE: Leisure Suit Larry 6: Shape Up Or Slip Out! Larry 6: Shape Up Or Slip Out! (LSL) has could only set aside her gui CUERRA PRICE: $69.95 SYSTEM: IBM (DOS and Windows) now been released by Sierra, and it manages tar for a moment. Merrily REQUIREMENTS: DOS Version-286-16MHz or better, to live down to the same seamy moral standis in the mood for love only 10MB hard drive space, mouse. Windows Version-386SX or better, ards set by the previous four. when she is bungee jumpAdLib. General MIDI, PAS-16, Gone, for this outing, is Larry's formering, and Char claims to be Roland, Sound Blaster and partner Passionate Patti, with whom Larry in desperate need of batterPROTECTION: DESIGNER: ies for her \"friend.\" The Al Lowe was forced to share equal screen time in his STOG PUBLISHER: Sierra On-Line previous adventure. In what may be a \"backhard-bodied Cay would be I Coarsegold, CA nger Hunter (800) SIERRAT to-the-roots\" move for Larry, (if one can honwilling to double date, Computer Gaming World Page 156 2MB RAM, Windows 3.1; supports Ultrasound sound cards None "


"Psychotic Killers. Hand-To-Hand Combat. High Explosives. Acid Baths. 16 Then it Gets Bad. CRITICAL PATH Kat, chopper pilot-turned survivalist, has only one hope for escape from Generalissimo Minh's maximum security facility... You. Guide Kat along the Critical Path, through scene after scene of killers, mutants, traps and high-explosive surprises. It's a gritty, realistic cinematic experience! \"This isn't a game..they're going to KILL me!\" From your fully-equipped control center, you share Kat's view via a camera mounted on her headset. Action bursts forth on your screen with lifelike 3D motion video, explosive sound effects and music soundtrack! Warn Kat of fast-approaching dangers. But if you slip up... it's \"Game Over\"! Sign up for combat duty at a software dealer near you. MEDIA VISION WINDOWS CD-ROM Call 1-800-845-5870 for information on a dealer near you.  1993 Media Vision, Inc., 47300 Bayside Parkway, Fremont, CA 94538. Fax (510) 7709592, Media Vision, the Media Vision logo and Critical Path are trademarks of Meda Vision, Inc. Al other trademarks are those of their respective companies. All rights reserved. Circle Reader Service #150 "


"Shape Up or Slip Out! Leisure Suit Larry 6 which all is lost. The most unusual the graphic screen. This way, you can contram service ever devised becomes struct commands like \"take key,\" \"move the source of some important items door,\" or \"have intimate relations with Char\" and will require the hero to provide with a single mouse-click. some quick, on the spot distraction Once Larry has acquired an object, there is in order to obtain them. A \"secret no risk that it will be lost through incorrect agent\" security guard keeps a careful SULK usage. The spa provides its guests with certain eye on the spa, unless Larry can amenities, including towels, soap and provide him with an even greater marches, which may be replaced as needed; eyeful. Finally, a mercenary lifeLarry need only learn how to summon room guard must be made to look in anservice. A scrolling pictorial list of objects other direction at precisely the right BOXOSE 007 QOZ held in inventory is always displayed along moment. the bottom of the screen. Once selected, an Like Larry's earlier adventures, object may be examined, put to use or comLSLO is not particularly difficult, stuff into his multi-pocketed leisure suit, and bined with another of the objects in invenand experienced players might be disapnearly every item he discovers in the spa istory. pointed to find that they can complete it worth some points with the typical Sierra In the continuing effort to «idiot-proof within two or three evenings. Larry, whose scoring system, not to mention the women. games (which makes one wonder how Larry lust-crazed mind would probably not be able to focus on a more challenging adventure, The Clicker Picker-Upper has lasted so long), each action icon is now equipped with a \"hot spot,» which is, approshould have few problems uncovering most In addition to puzzles, which are appropripriately, a small red dot on some part of the of the items that are necessary to complete his ate for the beginning player, LSL6 also feaicon. The dot represents the active, or sensitasks. Certain key objects, however, are only tures an adventure gaming interface that is tive part of the icon and allows you to more to be acquired through trickery and theft. remarkably easy to use. Larry's actions are remarkably easy to use. Larry's actions are accurately place that icon on an object. This accurately place that icon Often, the game's sly, cynical narration will confined to six icons: walk, see, manipulate, is a valuable device for any graphic adventure, provide a nudge in the right direction. Mantake, speak and...zipper. The zipper is reand particularly appropriate for a game feaaging the large number of objects that Larry served for special occasions that occur far less turing Leisure Suit Larry—who is always eventually must carry around with him is not often than Larry would like. In general, the looking for the hot spot. Also, this will be a problem in LSL6. There seems to be no cursor becomes whichever icon has been sehelpful to those who will consume large limit to the number of objects he is able to lected, so that it may be placed somewhere on quantities of alcohol in an attempt to improve THE MOST COMPLETE ADVENTURE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM ON THE MARKET TODAY! INTRODUCING... THE TRIAD CAMPAIGN SYSTEM USES TEM USES Windows 3.1* FOR GAMEMASTERS SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS IBM/Comp with Windows 3.1* . Minimum 2 megs hard drive space 4 megs RAM RULES Designed to implement detailed campaign backgrounds and scenarios. Adaptable to multiple campaign backgrounds or worlds MAPS World size to tactical  Markers display key locations, characters and creatures  Sizeable' display windows. Zoom. Applicable sound, graphics and text with map markers SPELLCASTING Adjustable parameters to create different effects System calculates spell characteristics and appropriate level, area and range SYSTEM FEATURES Example adventure included Formula calculator Rules documented in context sensitive help files with cross-references  Encounter generator loads all data, no need to consult charts or books  Game clock and calendar. Player's Guide . Gamemaster's Guide COMBAT Damage calculated and subtracted from target. Combat results returned in text form suitable to read to your players Spell effects applied automatically to all creatures in effect area. Set character destinations and targets and let the system perform the movements and attacks CHARACTERS Character creation quick and easy or as detailed as desired Detailed skills, professions, stats and abilities ORDER NOW! Mail check or money Call or write for GAMEMASTER'S Clip Art and Sound Clips Disks order for $39.95. more information Available $12.00 ea; $10.00 with TCS order. Add $4.00 for shipping and handling (904) 494-3165 (Specify 8 Bit Mono or 8 Bit Stereo for Sound Clips) Nawu Triad Institute Additional Player's Guides dvailable, 3 for $10.00 PO, Box 11246 Pensacola, FL 32524-1246 Florida residents acul applicable sales tax Circle Reader Service #102 Page 158 \"Windows is a registered trademark of Microsoft Corp Computer Gaming World "


"MISSION The sexy role-playing adventure game You stumble back to your office after a long, hard day of detective work. You can't wait to get cozy with a bottle of whiskey, but your answering machine has an urgent message. \"This is a life and death emergency. Women are disappearing. Donna's missing. Please, come quickly.\" Donna's rescue is only the beginning of an adventure that indulges your wildest fantasies as it plunges you into fun and danger. While on screen you're dazzled by innovaWANTED: Private Investigator to Rescue Desperate Beauty. tive and original Japanese animation that's taking other countries by storm, and is now available in the U.S. \"Cobra Mission is unique.\" Computer Game Review \"...quite an original.\" Strategy Plus\" \"I have to admit I enjoyed it.\" \"Game Bytes\" Available now at your nearest dealer or call 1-800-258-MEGA. Or write: Megatech, P.O. Box 11333, Torrance, CA 90510 Visa, MasterCard, checks accepted. System requirements: 386 or faster machine with 640K RAM hard disk with min. 11 megabytes of available space required, mouse recommended. Graphics compatible with EGA, MCGA and VGA (VGA highly recommended). Sound support: Sound Blaster, Thunder Board, Pro Audio Spectrum and Adlib. Circle Reader Service #151 This game is not for the faint-hearted. Contains violence and some material inappropriate for minors. NOT RECOMMENDED FOR PLAYERS UNDER 18. None of the games developed by Megatech Software have been rated by the MPAA MEGA TECH "


"Leisure: Su Lart 6 the game's jokes, and will need as much a particularly modest or shy purchaser help as possible with their motor and can only hope that no one in line at the visual coordination. Gammie software store notices that LSLOs packLarry is able to move, without hinHow do you do, Sir. age promises a product which is \"longer I'm Gammie drance, from one portion of the screen to Boysulay, Head of and harder.\" This is clearly labeled as a Human Services another. He need no longer be brought to and Dustomer game not for minors. The program uses a complete halt due to some pixel-sized Relations here at La some mildly offensive language, alCosta Lotta. impediment. Further, there is no longer though it stops short of what is euphemany confusion as to which pathways on istically referred to by thousands of radio the screen lead to dead ends, as opposed stations across the United States as the to those which lead to other locations. \"s-word\" and the \"f-word.\" However, Larry may be made to travel to any door EXITO ETOTE 000 players with young children nearby or object simply by clicking on his objecshould also be aware that the program tive. will cause their computer to scream in Players will also appreciate the presence seductive detail, although some players might feminine ecstasy each time a point is of two game-saving aids. The first, when sewish for some revealing photographs rather scored. The program also includes several lected, reminds you to save after each major than drawings. The game's finale is, quite non-interactive sequences which, through game sequence. The second allows you to set naturally, a \"climactic\" sequence that inreferences to unconventional sex, may also be up a system that periodically reminds you to volves some very impressive video sequences considered offensive by some users. These save the game. may be \"fast-forwarded\" without loss of and makes the game well worth finishing. points or game-play. The sound effects and background music Pixelated Playmates The obvious conclusion regarding LSLO is are very enjoyable, with the possible excepthat it is a very clever game that will easily tion of Larry's flatulence. Music ranges from While many adventure games have atoffend the puritan-minded, just as it might Larry's familiar honky-tonk theme to the Botempted to use graphics that appear painted offend the experienced gamer looking for a lero-like music that accompanies the game's or even photographed, LSL is still very much serious puzzle challenge. For the novice who most romantic moments. Each room and its a cartoon. The pictures are still highly deenjoys a touch of risqué entertainment and occupants are colored by their own musical tailed, however, and Larry's hideous features good, off-colorjokes, LSLO is a very novel and have never been more obvious. His \"babes,\" theme. enjoyable source of Titillation and Amuseof course, have all been rendered in achingly As though it were some kinky sex product, ment. CGW SIDELINE SOFTWARE D Groepen ORDERS 1-800-888-9273 ONLY T YOUR PC IMPORT & CLOSEOUT CONNECTION NEW PC TITLES TYPE Alien Breed Arcade Battle Isle '93 War Simulation Body Blows Arcade Brutal Sports Football Arcade Simulation Daemonsgate Role Playing Game Elite 2 Space Strategy Fields of Glory SirategySimulation Fire and Ice Arcade Fury of the Furries Arcade Ishar 2 Role Playing Game Jurrassic Park Arcade Strategy Kristy's Fun House Arcade Ryder Cup Golf Sports Simulation Simon the Sorcerer Graphic Adventure Sub War 2050 (Microprose) Simulation T.F.X. Simulation T-2 The Coin-Op Arcade PC EUROMAGS Get the latest news on the best PC titles from Europe! These high gloss, full color magazines also feature demo-packed playable cover DISKS with each issue! PC Formal, PC Review, PC Zone, PC Player, PC Plus, PC Power, PC Action, or PC Games each only $10 SORBANDARD ZGODA S Global Conquest (Microposa) 21.95 GP Unlimited Road & Track 21.95 Greg Norman Golf 18.95 Harpoon 14.95 Heart of China 18.95 Hero Oues! 18.95 Hook 16.95 Il Came From the Desert 14.95 Jack Nicholas Greatest 18 16.95 Joe and Mac Caveman 18.95 King of Chicago 14.95 Legend of Kyrandu 21.95 Lemmings 2 28.95 Links 386 29.95 Lure of the Temptress 18.95 Mantis 24.95 Mavis Beacon Typing Tutor 18.95 Mega Lo Mania 21.95 Microprose Greens 26.95 Mike Dilka Football 18.95 Mig 29 Fulcrum 18.95 Nigel Mansell's Grand Prix 21.95 Obitus 18.95 Pacific Islands 21.95 Paperhoy 2 16.95 Pit Fighter 18.95 Populous & Promised Lands 24.95 Power Manger 21.95 Prince of Persu 16.95 Pushover 18.95 RBI Baseball 2 14.95 Rex Nebular 24.95 RoboCop 3 19.95 Rocket Ranger 16.95 Sargon 5 18.95 Shadowlands 18.95 Sim Anl 21.95 Sim City Terrain Editor 9.95 Sleepwalker 21.95 Sleeping Gods Lie 14.95 Spacewracin 16.95 Special Forces 24.95 Spell Casting 101 18.95 Spoils of War (RAW) 18.95 Storm Blasters 18.95 Strike Fleet 19.95 Super Off Road 16.95 Super Space Invaders 18.95 Super Tetris 19.95 Team Yankee 21.95 The Inmortal 19.95 The Lost Adhura 21.95 The Simpsons 16.95 T.V. Sports Baseball 21.95 T.V. Sports Boxing 21.95 TV Sports Football 14.95 Trump Casino 2 18.95 Uima 6 21.95 Velle 14.95 Witxworks 24.95 White Death (Raw) 18.95 Wichid 18.95 Wolfpack 18.95 W.W.F 2 24.95 Zool 21.95 THE ULTIMATE ROLE-PLAYING AID Introducing The Ultimate Character Editor. This exciting new product features full mouse and keyboard support, online context sensitive help and a complete windowing system (does not require MS Windows to run). This editor allows you to edit 30 of the games listed below (including Might and Magic 1-4Ultima 4-7, allSSI AD&D games, Bard's Tale 1-3, Wizardry 6-7 and more). The price for this editor is $59.95. So, for the price of 3 editors, you will be getting 30 editors. Upgrades will be available to handle new games as they are released for only $9.95 per game.  CHARACTER EDITORS $19.95 each Might and Magic (1,2,3, 4 or 5), Pool of Radiance, Hard Nova, Bard's Tale (1, 2 or 3). Wasteland Dragon Wars, Space Rogue, Wizardry (Edits 1-3). Wizardry 4 Wizardry 5, Bane of Cosmic Forge, Crusaders of the Dark Savant, Treasurers of the Savage Frontier, Sentinel Worlds I, Knights of Legend, Secret of the Silver Blades, Curse of the Azure Bonds, Champions of Krynn, Space 1889. Drakkhen, Keys to Maramon, MegaTraveller (1 or 2), Keef the Thief, Darklands, Escape from Hell, Ultima (3, 4, 5, 6, 7 or 7 pt. 2). Savage Empire, Dark Heart of Uukrul, Tunnels and Trolls, Lord of the Rings (1 or 2). Countdown to Doomsday, Eye of the Beholder (1, 2 or 3), Darklands, Death Knights of Krynn, Fountain of Dreams, Magic Candle (1) 2 or 3), Pools of Darkness, Ultima Underworld (1 or 2), Twilight 2000, Planets' Edge, Dark Queen of Krynn, Prophecy of the Shadow, Martian Dreams, Realms of Arkania.  HINT BOOKS $9.95 each except where noted Might and Magic 1. Knights of Legend, Curse of the Azure Bonds, Champions of Krynn, Legacy of Ancients, Dark Heart of Uukrul, Wizardry (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, Bane or Crusaders ($12.95)), Eye of the Beholder 2, Might and Magic 3 ($12.95). IBM listed. Apple and C64 versions also available. Please add $4.00 for shipping and handling VISA Open from 9 AM 9PM every day for your convenience. Playable con magazines Stitles from G S9 SHIPPING (UPS Ground) For up to 3 pieces, by payment: Mastercard & Visa $5.00 .C.O.D. (Cash Only) $10.00 Next day & second day air available! Call for prices on special shipping. Shipping times not guaranteed. Price & Availability subject to change! No refunds or exchanges. Defective products exchanged with same item, Products warrantied through Sideline. FAX ORDERS CALL (305) 491-6134 Need Into? Call (305) 491-9519 DEALER INQUIRIES INVITEDI 840 N.W. 57th Court, FL Lauderdale, FL 33309 DON'T MISS THESE DISCOUNT PC DEALS! 4-D Sports Boxing 18.95 Carriers at War 21.95 688 Attack Sun 18.95 Centurion Defender of Rome 18.95 A Train 26.95 Chuck Yarper's Adv. Cambal 21.95 Action Stations 18.95 Collossus Bridge 4 16.95 Ancient Art of War in Skies 24.95 Command HO 18.95 Alac (Microprose) 24.95 Creepers 18.95 B-17 Boniber Microprose) 24.95 Deluxe Strin Poker 2 18.95 Bard's Tale 3 18.95 El Fish 21.95 B4T2 21.95 F16 Falcon 14.95 Ballle Isle 18.95 Fire Team 2200 16.95 Battlechess 18.95 First Samurai 18.95 Bloodwych 14.95 Four Crystals of Trazar 21.95 Carner Command 14.95 Flight of the Intruder 18.95 SAWA wanocer GOSSELIN COMPUTER CONSULTANTS P.O. Box 1083  Brighton, MI 48116. (313) 229-2453 Circle Reader Service #124 Circle Reader Service #69 Computer Gaming World Page 160 "


"VKNG ) SOFTWARE, Inc. SAME vast IBM compone 640k, 13 H A GAMING AD&D AI Quadim AD&D Stronghold AD&D United Adven. Betrayal at Krondor Clouds of Xeen Companions of Xanth Darkside af Xeen Dark Sun Grey Isles Camp. Dungeon Hack Fantasy Empires Gryphon Mast Hvlar Hand of Fate, The Kings Quest 6 Kings Ransom Legacy Legends of Drakka Lost Vikings Magic Candle 3 Plrates Gold Quest for Glory 3 Realms of Arkanla Red Crystal Return to Zark Shadowcaster Simon the Sorcerer Ultima 7 Cyber Race Dominion Dune 2 Gateway 2:Homeworld Masters of Orion Mechwarrior 2 Out of This World Privateer Speech Pack Space Hulk Star Control 2 Star Trek:Next Gnrtion Strike Commander Speech Pack Tactical Disk Syndicate Terminator/Rampage Wing Commander 2 Wing Commdr Academy X-Wing Imperial Pursuit B-Wing Prew Ambush at Sorinor Archon Ultra Blue & the Gray Caesar Cohort 2 ESS Indy STM CITY 2000 IBM $45 For information and release dates 1(404) 840-7906 To place orders in U.S. and Canada 1 (800) 852-6187 Fax 1/404) 840-7925 2980 Lake Colony Drive, Suite 3, Norcross GA 30071 Please have credit card readyt Open Saturdays 10-5. TIL 800 PM EASTERN TIME! IBMMac High Command Hint Books Kings Ransom Dagger of Amon Ra Pacific War Labryinth of Time Deja Vu 182 Rod Sky at Moming Logend of Kyrandia Falcon MC Third Reich Civilization/Rome 640k 13 Mad Dog McCree Harpoon 2 V for Victory Series Myst Indy Jones/Fate Atlantis 37 Gold, Juno, Sword Clouds of Xeen Kings Quest 5 Victory Pack Kings Quest 6 Victory at Sea KOTIVE IT'S LICE Logitec Cyberman Leisure Suit Larry 6 WWII Battles of Pacific 37 HYGIE The most advanced way to Leisure Suit Larry 6 Lost Treasures Infocm Modern master 30 games Might & Magic ybermanis the revolu Might & Magic 4 Out of This World A-10 Warthog tionary input device for Panzer Battles Commnche:Max Ovrkll & htrng tates Pax Imperia Expansion Dsk. #1 43 Reach for the Stars Expansion Dsk #2 you face feedback that Red Baron Empire Deluxe BM Lets you feel the action Rommel North Africa Scenario Disk Secret of Mnkey Island 1:37 Empire Deluxe(WIN) Privater Jan Secret of Mnkey Island 237 F-14 Fleet Defender Darkside of Xeen Rebel Assault SIMCity 2000 F-15 III Darksun Sherlock Holmes Series F-15 II SIMFam Falcon 3.0 Consulting Del. #1 32 32 SIMLife Mig 29 Falcon 3,0 Consulting Det #2 32 32 Victory Pack Og Fighting Tiger Lands of Lore Consulting Det #3 47 47 V4 VctrylGold, Juno, Swr 39 Flight Sim 6.0 Lemmings Companion 17 Space Quest Might & Magic Off Guide 2 Victory at Sea Gunship 2000 Star Trek 25th Annivers 59 Campaign Disk #1 Might & Magic 3 or 4 13 ea Tony Larussa 2 Viking Ratings Harpoon 2 Privateer Underworld Wing Co 253 Mig 29 Protostar Realms of Arkania Ulltma Underworld 2 47 Red Sky at Moming Ultima 1-6 Bundle Hands of Fato Return to Zork Seal Team Ultima Underworld 182 53 Run 5 Magazines 1619 64 SCI-FI Sam and Max SIMEarth: Strategy Guide12 Sim City 2000 SIMLife: Strategy Guide 12  Mechamander Simon the Sorcerer Star Control 2 schools, hospitak univer Mercenaries2 Strike Commander Pax Imperia stys, sewer subways, Reach for the Stars Ultima: Official Book and complete water main Rules of Engagement 2 25 Ultima 7 system. Your oly Wews Spaceward HOI(WIN) Ultima 7 Part 2 rotatable and allows for Spaceward HOIDOS) Ultima 7/Underworld 1 16 zooming in or aut A Ultima Underworld 101 211ea Star Legions 2 IBM $42 Windows Shopper Gulda 30 Strike Squad MAJOR undrade When Two World's War 38 Wizardry 7 (Crusaders) 13 Wing Commander 2 Dlx 29 Hardware Iron Helix General Labryinth of Time Specials Lands of Lore Lost Vikings CH-Flightstick Pro Civilization Master of Orion Civilization Windows CH-Virtual Pilot Police Quest 4 Emplre Deluxe Gravis Eliminator Card B-17 Flying Fortress Pilot Control Stand Privateer Global Domination Soundblaster ASP 46 Command HQ Rebal Assault Incredible Machine 2 -Paladin 2 Soundblaster Pro Delx Sim City 2000 Lemmings 2 Silent Service 2 Thrust Master Series Warlords 2 Lost Admiral Enhanced Dec Flight Stick Spellammer Perfect General Enhanc Dec Keyboard Summoning Flight Stick Pro R.R. Tycoon Deluxe Overlays Game Card SIMCity 2000 Macintosh SIMEarth(Win/Dos/Mac) 42 Rudder Pedals SIMFarm Weapons Control Aces of the Pacific Weapons Control 2 95 SIMLife Mac B-17 Flying Fortress SIMLife (Windows) CDROM AD&D Unlimited Adven. 38 Commanche:Max Ovrkl 10 Socrates V 3.0 Chess Battlechess F-15 Strike Eagle 3 Unnatural Selection Caesar Falcon 3.0/3.01 IBMM Gamers at War Falcon Pro Sports Castles 2 Jan 7th Guest -Flight Simulator 5.0 AD&D Fantasy Empires 39 CHII War Vol 13 32 Ea. Privateer Aegis: Guardian Fleet Dec Cilization X-Wing APBA Basbal WIN Front Page Football Pro 48 Blade Hockey League S/m2 Bloodnet g Rates/Hours Andy Car Racing Commanche & Missns 47 Links 386 Pro Cyber Race UPS Rates: Cround: $5.00 3-day air:S6.00 Banff Springs Dark Sun Jan Day of the Tentacle 2 dayatr: 7.00 AK & HT:12.50 Belfry Innisbruck Discovers of the Deep 34 COD add: 5,00 Overseas:Call Mauna Kea Dracula Unleashed Pebble Beach Dune Pinehurst Dungeon Hack Mail Rates:AK & H): 6,00 Canada: 6.00 NFL Pro League Football38 Eye of Beholder Trilogy 49 Overseas: Call F-15 III NHL Hockey Stratomatic Baseball Great Naval Battles Tony Larussa Basball 2 37 Hellcab Prices subject to change, so call first! 92 Stats Disk Inca Hours:Mon-Fri 10am-8pm(EST) Iron Helix ALINL Stadlum's Fantasy Draft Journeyman Project Tam-5pm(Pacific) Wayne Gretzky 3 Kings Quest 6 38 Victory at Sea Designed by Jim Dunakan Victory at Sea will be the premiere grand strategy Pacific Theater came on the markete bo it's game depin and ease of play. Conquered Kingdoms Add on Disk #1 D&D Fantasy Empires Battles of Civil War Series Vol 1 Vol.2 Vol.3 Great War, The Heirs to the Throne Man of War Paladin 2 Pirates! Gold Rallroad Tycoon Deluxe 42 Seven Cities of Gold Siege:Walls of Rome Warlords 2 World War II Forge of Virtue Ultima 7 Part 2 Tho Silver Seed Ultima Underworld 2 Wizardry ? Crusader Present IBM 25 Alone in the Dark Amazon Blue Force:Next of Kin Champions Dagger of Amon Ra Day of the Tentacle Freddy Pharkas Gabriel Knight Labryinth of Time Manlat Mansion 2 Metal and Lace Retum of the Phantom Sam & Max Hit Road Speed Racer eeeeeeeee 67 Aces Over Europe Campaign Dsk #1 Feb Across the Rhine Battle of South Pacific Carriers at War Construction Kit Clash of Steel Great Naval BattAdmiral Bundle Grigsby's War in Russta 47 Bloodnet Command Starship EUROPE Aces Over Europe Over 20 metody modeled araat Fly for the Luftwafe RAF, ar IRAAF inntiralam par Thesapest and smoothest 3D graphics witha Gaurad shading in Lanewares Mode JBM $42 Circle Reader Service #144 "


"KIDS COMPUTERS Review Oceans Below an interactive educational program, it is similar to watching a documentary about scuba diving — with the added benefit of moving through the material at will. Alfred C. Giovetti My Paint Suspended weightless, floating between the bottom of the ocean and the door to the other world populated with air breathers, the diver observes, through the crystal clear liquid, the vast variety of multicolored marine creatures. While shadows of the surface waves pass across the reef landscape filled with many forms of multicolored life, the diver now belongs to the world of water. If your kids want to follow in the wake of Jacques Cousteau, Oceans Below will take them diving without the risk. Crayons have saved more than one Mom and Dad from the loony bin during foul weather. With My Paint, your children won't wait for stormy weather to break out the colors. They get the same chance to nurture their artistic talents, but their fingers will be on the mouse instead of on the crayons. MO17000099 Use the program to simulate a dive along Australia's Great Barrier Reef, or in Hawaii, the Red Sea, the South Pacific, the Sea of Cortez, the Galapagos, or 11 other dive sites. Kids and parents can learn about undersea plane wrecks in Truk Lagoon, shipwrecks, underwater animal and plant life. More than 68 sunken treasures hidden in the game help to reproduce the sensation of diving. This isn't a virtual reality program, where a simulated dive would take one through three-dimensional ocean settings. At each of the 17 dive sites, a description of the location, the diving conditions, the water conditions, and the most notable sea life can be obtained from the icons along the bottom of the screen. During the dive, the only option one has is to swim down to a digitized scene of the reef area containing the indigenous animal life. Clicking on the features shown in the picture will pop-up a full-motion video describing the fish, crustaceans, coral, and other interesting objects, accompanied by a short speech segment describing the item selected. For the best results, the computer's video card will have to support the VESA standard. Parents should check the manual that accompanies the computer at home to make sure this won't be a problem. Standard VGA boards without VESA drivers result in muddy displays. A double-spin CD-ROM drive would also help, but at the least the CDROM drive on the computer should have a speed of 150KB/second. Again, check the manual. Oceans Below simulates the diving experience, which is pretty unique among software programs. It can be quite informative and entertaining, but it is not able to give the feeling of weightlessness, excitement, and pressure that comes with a real diving experience. As DK's Oceans Below Price: $49.95 In Brief: An undersea nature showtype program that will take adults and children to 17 world-famous dive sites Requirements: IBM compatible 386SX/25 or better with 4MB RAM, hard disk with 5MB free space; SVGA display with VESA driver; mouse; CDROM drive; DOS 5.0 or higher; Windows 3.1 or higher, MS, MSCDEX Version 2.21 or higher. Audio Support: Sound Blaster compatible cards; MPC-compliant audio cards. Other Versions: DOS CD-ROM ($49.95); Macintosh CD-ROM ($49.95) My Paint Price: $49.95 In Brief: An electronic coloring book with sound and animated icons. Requirements: IBM PC or compatible with 512K RAM; EGA or VGA display: mouse; hard disk. Audio Support: Sound Blaster, Sound Blaster Pro, Ad Lib, Disney Sound Source, ProAudio Spectrum, Echo II. and Tandy. For ages: 2 to 12 Saddleback Graphics 12812 Garden Grove Blvd. Unit P Garden Grove, CA 92643 (714) 741-7093 Circle Inquiry #171 The Software Toolworks 60 Leveroni Court Novato, CA 94949 (415) 883-3000 Circle Inquiry #170 The program's animated paint palette springs to life, unlike the stagnant icons Page 162 Computer Gaming World "


"FutureVision Expanding Educational Frontiers Through Technology NOW APPEARING! We Future Vision in order to form a more perfect union with our corporate institutional, reseller and end-user customers do hereby dedicate ourselves to ensuring your right to: 1. Sassle-free service II. A dedicated educational software specialist III. Che largest selection of Mac. Windows. DOG and C9-ROM based education software IV. The best price. V. Complete satisfaction with your product and servier. VI. Receive your order when you crpect it. VII. Be free from auttomated telephone attendants YOUVE SEEN'EM IN COMPUTER SHOPPER... YOU'VE SEEN'EM IN PC SOURCES! HERE FOR AN EXTENDED ENGAGEMENT IN COMPUTER GAMING WORLD FutureVision STARRING THE EDUCATIONAL CURRICULUM CONSULTANTS WITH A CAST OF THOUSANDS OF BLOCKBUSTER SOFTWARE TITLES! ...... .........34.00 HAUKELOZ SIMULATORS Aces Over Europe .... ...41.50 ATAC.... ..33.50 B-17 Flying Fortress... . ..38.50 Car & Driver........... .....37.50 Commanche: Maxim. Overkill..43.50 F-15 Strike Eagle 3.. ...41.50 Iron Helix .............. ...49.00 Road & Track.............. .36.50 Strike Commander..... ..47.00 Syndicate ............ ....47.00 Tomado .49.00 Ultrabots ...37.00 X-Wing ...39.00 ADVENTURE AD&D Unlimited Adventure...34.00 Alone in the Dark.................35.50 Betrayal at Krondor................41.50 Cobra Mission ......................48.00 Dark Side of Xeen......... ..41.50 Darklands...... ........... -38.50 ....38.50 Day of the Tentacle .............34.50 Eric the Unready .................36.50 Eye of the Beholder III... ...41.50 Flashback.... ..32.50 Kings Quest VI. ...44.50 Lost Tribe..... .27.50 Pirates Gold ...41.50 Police Quest IV. ...45.50 Prince of Persia 2 ...44.50 Protostar........ ....41.50 Quest for Glory IV. ..38.50 Ringworld ..... ..35.50 Space Quest V...................38.50 Star Control 2...... -.34.50 Ultima Underworld I.. .....46.50 Ultima VII Part I or .............46.50 WAR GAMES A-Train .... ..33.50 Caesel .... ..35.50 Civilization MPE.......... .......47.00 Conquered Kingdoms.............36.00 Empire Deluxe .. 36.00 High Command .41.00 Populus ................... ..38.00 Powermonger.......... ..32.00 Railroad Tycoon Deluxe..........47.00 Rome........... ...31.00 Seven Cities of Gold II............36.00 Sim Life ...... .39.50 Star Trek 25th .....36.00 Stronghold... ........39.50 EDUCATION Alge-Blaster 3................31.00 Dinosaur Adventure ............31.00 Eagle Eye Mystery ............31.00 Fatty Bear's B-day Surprise ....31.00 Foreign Language .................CALL Kid Pix ........... ....35.00 Kid Works 2..... .............35.00 Metrognome Music..............31.00 Stickybear Preschool............31.00 Supersolvers Midnight Rescue 31.00 Talking Spell-it Plus..............31.00 Think Quick.... 31.00 Treehouse...... ....39.00 Writer Rabbit ......................31.00 .. HUM\" <!-0 2 < . CD-ROM Jutland .... ...52.00 King's Quest V................ ..49.00 Legend of Kyrandia.............49.00 Loom ................. Mantis Experimental Fighter....45.00 Mario is Missing ...............24.00 Mixed up Mother Goose........24.00 Monkey Island I.. ..... ...27.00 Peter and the Wolf ............22.00 Putt Putt Joins the Parade ......39.00 Right College.... .................27.00 Secret Weapons/Luftwaffe ....24.00 Seventh Guest...................55.00 Shakespear ........................... 16.00 Sherlock Holmes............. ..44.00 Space Adventure ....................29.00 Space Quest IV... ..........19.00 Stellar 7.... Ultima Bundle (1-6)........... ..59.00 Where in the World CSD........29.00 Willie Beamish.... .......27.00 Wing Commander & Ultima 6.21.00 *** ........ ......39.00 ....... ...20.00 SPORTS Frontpage Football........ Hardball 3........ .34.00 Links 386... ..36.00 Michael Jordon in Flight.........38.00 NFL Challenge. ..59.00 Tony La Rusa II... ..36.00 World Circuit... ...32.00 ARCADE Beat the House Gaming Tutor..32.00 Goblins II. ................. ..25.00 Hoyle's Classic..... .............31.00 Lemmings II...... ...............34.00 Take a Break Pinball ............30.00 Take a Break Pool.................30.00 CD-ROM Animals...... ....24.00 Arthur's Teacher Trouble.........36.00 Battle Chess.....................24.00 Buzz Aldrin's Race-Space .....58.00 Dinosaur Adventure...............29.00 Interactive Storytime ...........29.00 ... ................ wenge .............. ALL PRODUCTS SOLD CARRY MANUFACTURER'S FULL WARRANTIES AND DOCUMENTATION! ORDERING SHIPPING PAYMENT  Phone orders accepted M.F from 8.00am 5:00pm PST  Orders received before 2.00PM will be  No surcharge for Visa or MasterCard orders  Fax orders accepted 24 hours a day 7 days a week shipped same day for product in stock  C.O.D. orders welcome with a $5.00 charge  Ask for a catalog of our complete software selections  $5.00 shipping charge por order.  School government and corporate purchase orders accepted. CALL YOUR PERSONAL EDUCATIONAL CURRICULUM CONSULTANT FAX 1-800-995-4669 1.800.995.4661 INTERNATIONAL CUSTOMERS Voice-408.370.4650 Fax-408.370.9466 Many other titles available. . Prices subject to change without notice. FutureVision. 644 N Santa Cruz Ave Suite 12. Los Gatos CA 95030 Circle Reader Service #65 "


"I TION to put hand while a second click might produce palm. Because of its ability to be so tightly customized, this program would be especially suited to children with special reading needs, although any child aged seven on up will enjoy hearing these ghoulish tales. Scary Poems for Rotten Kids is just one of many excellent offerings in the publisher's Kids Can Read program series. Felicia Donovan and we pids Common S DKT KIDS COMPUTERS found in traditional paint programs. In My Paint, icons dance, flash, and move side to side. Kids will be held in rapt attention. Although children can create and color their own pictures, an assortment of 28 coloring book pictures, or templates, are also included. The idea here is for kids to master the advanced tools of the paint program. Each one of the coloring book pictures comes to life with its own sound effect, such as dinosaurs roaring, trains chug-chugging, and cats meowing As a bonus, the publisher bundles an additional Video Coloring Book Disk called Alphabet Fun with My Paint. It's the first in a planned series of five add-on disks that can be installed by way of a special Parent Menu. Each add-on disk brings more than 25 new drawings and sounds into the My Paint program. It's refreshing to see a software company back up such a quality effort by adding so much to the original product. Rain or shine, My Paint is sure to brighten up any child's day. — Jeff Kingston Mathology Scary Poems for Rotten Kids Price: $29.95 In Brief: An interactive CD-ROM storybook filled with hair-raising reading adventures. Requirements: IBM compatible with 2MB RAM; VGA display, hard disk; CDROM drive; DOS 5.0 or higher: Windows 3.1 or higher. Audio Support: Sound Blaster compatible For Ages: 7 and up Other Versions: Macintosh CD-ROM ($29.95) Discis Knowledge Research PO Box 66 Buffalo, NY 14223-0066 (800) 567-4321 Circle Inquiry #172 This bit of edutainment presents math concepts within the storybook world of Greek mythological figures. New games begin with an overview of ancient Greccia and its people's thirst for knowledge. Zeus asks the players' help in regaining lost skills with numbers. Players can save unfinished games and can bypass the legend. One or two can play. The game will keep track of each player's turn. Players can select warrier type and the degree of game difficulty. As a warrior, kids move around the screen by pressing various keys. Before solving number problems, players must find their way through the city. They can gain bonus points by being a skilled fighter. The warrior only fights those opposed to knowledge. Concerned parScary Poems For Rotten Kids TEN GERINEVATE Near lim 130g T CC 1900M NUMER 2 PEGILL There are 7 goldfish weighing 1 ounce (oz) each. Loter, 4 goldfish swam away. How much do the remaining goldfish weigh? CHINESE INNSLUEN: example, one child might click on a word and hear it pronounced first in Spanish, then in English. Another child might click on a word; hear the word pronounced, hear a definition of the word, and then hear the word pronounced again. Each word is highlighted as it is read by the narrator so users can follow along word for word. A unique Recall tool allows teachers or parents to print or display words that a child selected for extra help. These lists can then be used to develop future review or vocabulary lists. The poems, based on the original text by Sean O Huigin, range from the lighthearted «The Day the Mosquitoes Ate Angela Jane\" to the rappin' \"The Munchies,\" to the skin-crawling \"The Body.\" Each work is accompanied by unearthly sound effects and clear narration in character-appropriate voices. Lines like It slips beneath your doors at night... and sucks up everything in its sight (from \"The Body'), are sure to capture and hold the reader's attention. Each text is accompanied by original, interactive illustrations. Words pop up and are pronounced when clicked on and hidden sound effects are triggered by clicking on certain objects. Many of the illustrations are multi-layered -a first click on a hand will produce the word STURES You don't have to be rotten or a kid to enjoy this interactive CD-ROM storybook. Eerie sights and sounds abound on this program designed to enhance reading skills. Scary Poems for Rotten Kids opens with a screen that looks like a real book. In its simplest form, this electronic book can narrate any or all of its 13 poems. Even the youngest kids can sit back and enjoy the language, without having to read it a real plus when it comes to the art of poetry. But the publisher has adapted the program for the different skills and abilities of its users. With a click of the mouse button, the program can be configured to read each poem sentence by sentence, word by word, syllable by syllable, in English and/or Spanish, and with or without sound effects or narration. It will provide definitions and explanations for every word and phrase contained in the poems. Using the Bookmark option, parents or teachers can modify each of these settings to match each child's particular reading skills and/or deficiencies. For A Mathology Price: $59.95 In Brief: An arcade-action math adventure game set in Greek mythology Requirements: IBM compatible with 640K RAM; VGA display, hard disk with 4MB free space; DOS 3.3 or higher. Audio Support: Adlib and Sound Blaster compatible sound devices. For Ages: 8 and up Lawrence Productions 1800 South 35th St. Galesburg, MI 49053-9687 (616) 665-7075 Circle Inquiry #173 Page 164 Computer Gaming World "


"Purple Car Lands on Moon! For a Due to a freak accident at the Fireworks Factory, Putt-Putt is blasted to the moon. There he meets Rover, a lonely little lunar terrain vehicle left behind by the astronauts. Putt-Putt and Rover, must work together to rebuild a rocket, and accomplish a few good deeds for the Moon People before they meet the Man in the Moon and are homeward' bound. Putt-Putt Goes to the Moon teaches the benefits of coopération and the lasting value of friendship. BM-PC or Color Macintosh *Offer good while supplies last, FREE Demo Call (206) 485-1212 E GOES Ages 3-8 TALKS! Wow! You were here with the astronauts?!? O MONGOUS ROCKE icecreano HUMONGO Hello! I'm Governor Moonbeam. And you must be? Adven Lises BENTERIAN Want to buy our rocket? It's for sale. Only 10 glowing moon crystals. Circle Reader Service #147 "


"KIDS6 COMPUTERS ents should know that this is not a heavy battle action game. No guns and knives here the weapons of choice are rocks and spears. Kids gain rewards from skillfully moving about the screen, not by performing combat heroics. Kids first master addition and subtraction skills. Then they advance to multiplication and division skills through 24 levels of difficulty. The highest levels involve using decimals in all four of these math functions. Students progress from solving word problems that require only one computation to problems needing multiple steps. Some problems require that students separate key facts from extra information in the problem. For example, a question may state that a person drinks four ounces of milk, then go on to list other menu items. But the question to answer only concerns the amount of milk consumed. Defining useful information from unnecessary facts is key to building comprehensive math knowledge, and for shaping critical thinking skills. The game presents 240 separate math problems randomly. Each one is seen within its own picture. Players can opt to see up to six hits, depending on the question. The game includes a calculator and list of formulas. Although the reason for setting the game within the historical context of ancient Greece remains vague, Mathology provides basic instruction in math concepts and practice in computation. Jack M. Germain CAPE GIRL 92 Match and Sky Match; in which kids visual cue is given; kids must listen to fight through fish, space aliens or air hear the cue — a wonderful way to reinballoons to match a chosen letter, num force listening skills. Electronic bookber, color or shape before their air tanks marks can mark the concepts a child has run empty. Other learning concepts in already mastered and place them at the clude Big versus Little, Same versus next level each time they play the proDifferent, Order of the Alphabet, Num gram. Catch A Match offers lots of reber Sets or All Concepts. Each concept wards each time a child succeeds and is is pronounced as the cursor passes over varied enough to keep kids interested for it, so pre-readers can make their own a long time. choices. Parents can set which concepts Volume I's Coloring Box is a full-feawill appear for kids to choose from; so, tured paint program with freeform or if parents want to reinforce only letter pre-designed scenes that provide an unrecognition for example, they simply se structured environment in which chillect Letters no other game concepts dren can explore lines, colors, shapes will appear. and letters. Parents can set some of the mechanical options, such as mouse control, to make it easier for kids to use. This KAIRI AL CRECHELORLMNOPQRSTUVIEXYZ allows even very young children with undeveloped motor skills to play. The background scenes, objects, patterns and letters provide for a wealth of creativity which can easily be printed out to create BOY storybooks. Volume Two of Rusty and Rosy's PHERE Read With Me is equally rich. It also Rusty & Rosy, Read With Me contains two deceptively simple games: (Volumes 1 & 2) Treasure Hunt and The Word Traveler. Price: $49.95 for each volume Treasure Hunt is a matching game that In Brief: Excellent pre-reading programs that focus on letter and letter reinforces shapes, upper-and lower-case sound recognition. letters, simple words and rhymes. Other Requirements: IBM compatible with concepts include colors, word-to-pic4MB RAM; VGA display; hard disk: ture, letters-to-picture and signs. Signs DOS 3.1 or higher; Windows 3.1 or higher. is a wonderful introduction to real-life Audio Support: SoundBlaster, Dis signs like Stop and Handicapped. Kids ney Sound Source, Adlib, Covox can play Treasure Hunt alone, with a For Ages: 3 to 7 friend, or against the computer. Each item or object is clearly pronounced as it Waterford Institute is flipped. For very young players, cards 1590 East 9400 South can be placed face up. Kids earn treasSandy, UT 84093 800-767-9976 ures for every correctly matched pair, Circle Inquiry #174 and each set of matched cards reveals more and more of an interactive island Keeping the program open, however, scene with hot spots that trigger animakeeps the many learning opportunities tion and reveal the next set of cards. The this program provides available at all number of cards used in the game can be times. One of the nicest features of this set ahead of time by parents, adjusted by program is that it is self-adjusting in kids during the game, or be automatdifficulty levels according to the perically increased by the program every formance. For example, if a child begins three games. at Level Two and misses several Perhaps the most interesting and matches, the program will automatically unique game of all is The Word Travdrop to Level One. Once the child demeler, which allows children to explore words, letters and individual letter onstrates proficiency at that level, the sounds (phonemes). The use of phonics program returns to Level Two. This enis considered by many educators to be sures that kids truly understand each the second major step (after letter recogconcept before moving on to new matenition) in mastering reading. The Word rial. Traveler can be played in Easy, Medium Occasionally, an ear will be displayed or Hard mode. Using text-to-speech in the Item-to-be-Matched box, but notechnology, an animated robot proRusty and Rosy Read With Me Finally, here's a series of programs that address the many complicated processes involved in learning to read. Rusty and Rosy Read to Me (Volumes 1 and 2) have a wealth of sophisticated features enhanced by an excellent design that keeps the game concepts simple. Through it all it maintains a depth that's hard to find in early-reader programs. Kids start Rusty and Rosy Read With Me by selecting their names from a preassigned list created during installation. Parents use the installation process to configure the program to their child's skill level. Catch-A-Match, one of two deceptively simple activities in Volume 1, provides three scenes: Sea Match, Space Page 166 Computer Gaming World "


"asa ca Daaaa Eda Your child will flip over Reversi's multiple skill levels. Mix away! Dozens of pictures and thousands of colors await! 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Have any fours? Go Fish with Fatty Bear. Lines and Boxes. It's Fatty Bear's favorite game. Experience the ancient Chinese game of Tangrams. Ages 3-8 Includes Reversi, Tangrams, Go Fish, Lines and Boxes, and Fatty Bear's Paint Set.  Develops logic and strategy skills Enhances pattern recognition and spatial thinking abilities  Junior Adventure quality speech and animation  Four skill levels  Challenging enough for everyone, even grown-ups!  Only $29.95! To order, call 206-485-1212 Circle Reader Service #118 TALKS! ENTER "


"KIDSS COMPUTERS Thinkin' Things h N ree IN nounces any word the child makes, real or invented. Real words are encouraged through pictures and a pop-up Word Zapper that lets children know they've created a real word. (The program's 60,000-word dictionary ensures many bits and can be customized.) Kids get rewards for creating real words, which can then be sent into a child's personal dictionary to be recalled, reviewed or printed out. Each of these volumes comes with a companion videocassette that reinforces letter recognition, letter formation (Volume 1); and vocabulary and print concepts (Volume 2) through songs, animation and nursery rhymes. Another handy feature is the KidMode option, which prevents kids from leaving Read With Me to get to other programs. Onscreen help, sound effects, and instructional sound may be toggled on or off. Rusty and Rosy Read With Me should be on the shelf of every home learning center. Parents will find it extremely useful in helping to develop the basic concepts that create new readers. — Felicia Donovan The Great Computer Adventure Price: $39.95 In Brief: This adventure game introduces and explains the components that make up a computer. Requirements: IBM compatible with 640K RAM; VGA display: hard disk with 3MB free space; mouse. For Ages: 7 to 12 To help your child develop problem solving and analytical skills, Edmark brings another winner to the computer. Thinkin' Things joins Millie's Math House and Kid Desk as an excellent example of educational software. But this isn't dry stuff — there's plenty of room for youngsters to display their creative side. Children as young as four years old should be able to jump right into this program. The publisher has designed a difficulty scale, called a Grow Slide, into the program. Parents can easily change the settings to provide a challenge appropriate for their child's abilities. American Training International 12638 Beatrice St. Los Angeles, CA 90066 (800) 955-5284; (310) 823-1129 Circle Inquiry #175 ONUN The Great Computer Adventure Thinkin' Things Price: $59.95 In Brief: Six modules stimulate creativity and analytical skills. Requirements: IBM compatible with 640K RAM; VGA display hard disk, mouse. Audio Support: Sound Blaster and other sound devices. For Ages: 4 to 8 Other Versions: Macintosh ($59.95) tons to manipulate a high-tech gadget to obtain information about missing computer parts. A small video window, called the Volcano Meter, keeps players posted on the game's elapsed time. Information on sites visited, parts found, and parts taken display on screen when players press a Notes button. Only a limited amount of time is allowed to solve puzzles and retrieve parts. This makes the adventure more exciting. As challengers play, they learn interesting facts about eight computer components, including: disk drives, keyboard, memory, modem, monitor, mouse, printer, and processor. The program uses colorful animated graphics and entertaining games to motivate play. The program's sound effects, while amusing, are not supported by any audio cards — they sound out of date on the PC speaker. Challengers who beat the clock win the game and earn a place of honor in the program's hall of fame. The Great Computer Adventure is both entertaining and educational. However, some children will have only a limited interest in the program. Challengers who go on the treasure hunt a second time may encounter different clues, but occasionally they will discover identical game puzzles and clue locations. Nevertheless, for a first time player, this package does a wonderful job of teaching computer literacy in a JOD of teaching com very engaging way. Carol Holzberg, PhD Computer proficiency in many schools means knowing the parts of a computer and how they work. This computer adventure sends children on a treasure hunt in search of missing computer parts, helping them to learn about the different parts of the computer. Players must find all hidden components before time runs out. An encoded electronic map provides location clues. Kids travel from one site to another using the map as a guide. Each location contains an envelope. Once kids locate the envelope, they receive a clue in the form of a riddle or rhyme. If they unravel the identity of the computer part referenced in the clue, a door opens onto a puzzle. Contestants must solve the puzzle before they can take the uncovered part. Some puzzles involve memory skills. Others build vocabulary and reading skills. A few involve math. All exercises draw on critical thinking skills. The look of The Great Computer Adventure will be familiar to any kid or parent who has played the games in the Carmen Sandiego series. Kids use butEdmark P.O. Box 3218 Redmond, WA 98073-3218 (206) 556-8484 Circle Inquiry #176 Kids learn comparison and problemsolving skills in the Fripple Shop as they fill orders for delightfully wacky pets. Requests arrive by phone, fax, or in person. Fripple customers are very specific about what they want. The young Fripple merchant will need to evaluate his or her inventory with a careful eye. When a customer says she likes \"straight hair, big eyes, but no spots\" the child must pick the right Fripple from the shelf. A correct answer sends the Fripple bouncing happily out the door to its new owner. Should a child stumble, the proPage 168 Computer Gaming World "


"OC Help Kids Key Into Computers. The Computer Learning Foundation. We're here to help you. Kids are the key to America's future. And computers are the tools of their times. By the year 2010, virtually every job in America will require some use of technology. That means we must prepare all of our youth today to take on technology tomorrow. The Computer Learning Foundation is helping schools obtain more computers. Inour new Computer Learning Dollars program, schools can earn free computers, software and other technology products by saving Tetra Pak Tetra Brik aseptic symbols from fruit, juice, milk and other non-carbonated drink boxes and by saving receipts from North Carolina Office Depot stores. Computers benefit children today. Computers can enhance children's learning and unlock their creativity. They can help children be more productive and develop better communication skills. Computers make learning come alive and create learning experiences that weren't possible before. Plus, children love using computers, so children maintain a positive attitude toward learning. The Computer Learning Foundation is here to help parents and educators The Computer Learning Foundation is an international non-profit foundation taking the lead in computer literacy efforts. We are here to help parents and educators with the information and resources they need to help our children. We have involved millions in discovering the benefits of technology. Our lesson plan and resource guides help parents and educators use technology with children. Our Computer Learning Month each October is a focus for thousands of community and school programs. And we award thousands of dollars in technology products each year in our Computer Learning Month contests. Write to us today. We're here to help you. Help kids key into computers. You Won't Believe What You'll Achieve! For more information, write to: COUPOTER LEALILIGcmate Computer Learning Foundation P.O. Box 60007, Dept KC Palo Alto, CA 94306-0007 Available only in Massachusetts, New Jersey and North Carolina during the 1993-1994 school year. The Computer Learning Foundation is a non-profit educational foundation funded by corporations.Corporate Partners: Sega Youth Foundation Principal Sponsors: Tetra Pak Inc. Kids & Computers Teaching K-8 Office Depot, Inc. Microsoft Corporation Curriculum Product News T.H.E. Journal Media & Methods Corporate Associate: IBM/EduQuest MAC Home Journal Technology & Learning "


"KIDSS COMPUTERS is not up to photographic quality. The narration accompanying the pictures is interesting and well paced. The Mission Control door opens up explorations in various American space projects. Beginning with a Prologue, it moves through Mercury, Gemini, Apollo, Sky Lab, Apollo-Soyuz, Space Shuttle, and Space Station. Each project is further divided into missions, most of which include specific text entries, video clips and narrated slide shows, Kids can also get information about the goal of each mission and examine crew photos. gram provides gentle hints to help reach the goal. Two music-oriented modules stimulate pattern recognition, as well as visual and auditory discrimination skills. Kids will get a kick jamming along with a funky ape named Oranga Banga on drums, or tapping out melodies on a xylophone with a tuneful chicken named Toony Loon. Add to this a pair of visually stunning segments that let young artists create futuristic images on their own digital canvas. Kids can drag spheres or geometric shapes onto a workspace with a background design they have selected. They can even set the objects in motion, accompanied by the music of their choice. The effect is really quite impressive, especially to adults watching a preschooler create original designs within a short time. The only skill required for success is an ability to use a mouse, which most youngsters pick up readily. Parents will appreciate the clever devices Thinkin' Things' uses to stimulate their child's thinking. It's a well-designed and creative program that really enhances learning. And the kids? They'll be having too much fun learning to be thinking of such things. Dennis McCauley and its entertaining approach makes learning to type easier to take. Kid Keys offers three variations on the typing theme. All three have various options easily set through a picture menu bar across the top of the screen. The learning modules can be selected from the menu bar and by pressing a large symbol on the wall of Keystone's Playroom. Keystone is a friendly dragon who greets youngsters at the opening screen. With the Magic Keyboard, children become familiar with key and letter locations. Keys make sounds and music when pressed. Letter combinations make sounds when pressed, and a group of lively characters repeat the letters and the words they form. The second variation, Dragon Tunes, combines the teaching of finger position with music. Each letter plays a note to a familiar song. When the letter sequence is finished, the tune plays back. For advanced learning, children create their own songs in timed practice sessions. There are 26 tunes, one for each letter in the alphabet. Players select the song they want to use from the Dragon Songbook. Express Tours ILOR OBRALI 2:13 Americans in Space Price: $69.95 (Macintosh and Windows version ship in same package.) In Brief: Requirements: Macintosh with 3.5MB RAM: 256-color display: CD-ROM drive; System 6.05 or higher. IBM PC (386SX or better) with 2MB RAM; SVGA display: hard drive; CD-ROM drive; Windows 3.1 or higher. Audio Support: Sound Blaster compatible aaa Americans in Space Multicom Publishing 1100 Olive Way Suite 1250 Seattle, WA 98101 (206) 622-5530 Circle Inquiry #177 Boasting over 500 photographic images and an hour plus of video with narration, Americans in Space comprehensively traces the history of America's manned space flights. Kids who only know the space shuttle will marvel at how we came so far, so fast. At its beginning, the program presents what looks like the foyer of space center. To the left is an elevator marked Express Tours. Straight ahead is a door marked Mission Control, and to the right is the Exit. In the center of the room is a podium with a book on it labeled Pilot's Manual. The Express Tours icon opens up a narrated slide show. The topics covered are Race to the Moon, Turning Points, Disasters, Living in Space, and Cruising the Planets. The slide show can be run in a window or take advantage of the entire screen. (The show runs faster when displayed in a window.) The publisher made a good selection of pictures, although some of the detail and contrast Double clicking on the Pilots Manual opens the program's help feature. This feature helps parents and kids navigate smoothly through the program. Overall, this program is highly recommended for families interested in exploring America's role in the exploration of space, particularly manned space flight. Joel Schwartz, M.D. Kid Keys Price: $49.95 In Brief: Children build keyboarding and early reading skills. Requirements: IBM compatible with 640K RAM; VGA display: hard disk with 6MB free space; mouse; audio device; DOS 3.3 or higher. Audio Support: Sound Blaster compatible sound devices, Disney Sound Source: Covox Speech Thing: IBM PS1 Audio; others. For Ages: 4 to 8 Kid Keys Davidson & Associates P.O. Box 2961 Torrance. CA 90509 (800) 545-7677 Circle Inquiry #178 This musical typing tutor combines keyboarding and early reading skills with speech and song. It's an effective combination. The program has just enough animation to keep preschoolers and elementary school kids interested, Monster Rescue, the third game in the program, challenges players to use keyboarding skills to help the keyboard monsters get out of Keystone's castle. A Page 170 Computer Gaming World "


"LAUND AN HOWIE MANDEL Join your kids on an adventure they'll Cho never forget! HOWIE MANDEL 00 Howie MANDEL TUNAONDO Take them to Tuneland', a magical place of fun, music and laughter! Tuneland stars Howie Mandel as Lil' Howie, a loveable, animated playmate, in the first fully-animated interac\"The best product of its kind I've seen all year.\" tive cartoon. Join your child and Lil' Howie for hour after hour of Gina Smith playing, singing and learning that computers can be fun. Oh! By the way, Mom and Dad, Editor-in-Chief, when you play with Tuneland by yourself, Lil' Howie promises not to tell! Electronic Entertainment See your nearest software dealer today! Magazine PAYGROUND SERIES ws 7th LEVEL 7th Level, Inc., 5225 San Fernando Rond West, Los Angeles, CA 90039 01993 7th Level, Inc., Tuneland, Desktop Playground and 7th Level are trademarks of 7th Level, Inc. All rights reserved. . SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS: IBM: Tandy or compatible 386 25 MHz or better with a minimum of 4MB of RAM, SVGA display and CD-ROM drive with CD audio connector, MPC compatible sound card, MS-DOS 3.3 w/WindowsTM 3.1 or later. Optional: amplified speakers, headphones Circle Reader Service #32 "


"ROCK & BACH STUDIO KID KEYS COMPUTER Express Ages 7.14 Produce your own action-packed music video! Assemble a band from a large cast of outrogeous charac tors with their own individual music styles. Teach them your songs, or choose from a funky collection of programmed selections. Conduct, lead the am, or let them go wild on their own. You control the sound and light mixer. Put it all together and create videos for your friends to playl See how sound is related to music. Try out the instruments in a symphony Orchestra Travel through music history with Bach, Mozart and others Features SVGA graphics and digitized sound PUBLISHER: Binary Zoo Ages 48. A mogi cal typing program that builds skills for young children. A Kid Keys friendly drogon named Keystone guides children through three exco ing activities that familiarize them with basic key board functions Kids can explore the keyboard with unique and animated imagery in the Magic keyboard. As they type, different animations appear that reinforce letters and key positions. Once children are familiar with the keyboard, they can play Dragon Tunes and the Alphabet Song Gome, Features easy to read type, digi tized speech, music and sound effects PUBLISHER: Davidson Since 1985 800-228-7449 EXT TOLL FREE ORDER LINE $21 $28 BODYWORKS 3.0 STUDYWARE SATI THINKIN THINGS MATH ACE thor LARS SAT All new 1994 edi. tionl The human body is the ulti mate mochine Explore its sy tems, structures, and functions in fascinating detail An adventure in anatomy. Colorful comprehensive graphics guide you on a journey through the body. Advanced \"speech back\" sound lets you hear the correct pronunciation Detailed animation bring the intricate func tions of the body to life. Includes both DOS und Windows versions, Discover the miracle of the human machinel Prepare yourself for the new SATI in four simple steps Complies with the new SAT format and covers all the new question typos. Covers all the topics included on the SAT Contains thousands of questions, answers and on screen explana tions, four full tests; complete on screen glossary und dictionary, useful hints and test taking strategies, pull down munus, mouse compatibili ly. Exploins all correct and incorrect answers. Scores and analyzes Test Prep Guide practice exams as well as on screen Study Ware exams Review and prepare at your own pacel PUBLISHER: Cliffs Six thought provok ing activities build problem solving creativity, critical thinking and mem ory skills that will give your child a DWANGON solid foundation for a lifetime of Successful learning Varying levels of difficulty to ollow for different ages and abilities to learn and be challenged. Instruchons are spoken or graphical, so even pre-readers can build their thinking skills Gives kids the tools they need to think analytically, solve problems creatively, and have fun learning to learn Ages 8-14 Turns your kids on to math Includes cap tivating arcade style game, ossential skill building Exercises, and an intro duction to 70 major math con cepts. Features engaging graphics. MIDI music, and sound effects. Hundreds of real world challenges with Bat Bot, your animot ed math navigator. More than 3000 math problems with a visual math function genera tor. Also features Smart lob, on interactive math workshop PUBLISHER: Magie Quest DOS, MAC PUBLISHER: Software Marketing DOS/WIN S.38 $34 PUBLISHER: Edmark DOS, MAC $34 $28 MATH SCIENCE & HISTORY READING READING Body Illustrated. Computer Works Dandy Dinosaurs CD..... DinoPark Tycoon........... Discover Space EZ Cosmos 4.0................. Earth Treks ..... Eco Quest Search for Cetus CD Ecology Treks .... Jurassic Dinosaurs CD.... Jurassic Dinosaurs WIN. Kid's Zoo CD ........ Kid's Zoo DOS/WIN. Oceans Below CD Odell Down Under WIN....... Oregon Trail Deluxe............. Pepper's Adventures in Time...... Quarky & Quaysoo's Science.. Science Adventure 2.0 Space Adventure ...... . Space Adventure CD..... Space Adventure II CD .... ... Time Riders American History ..... Time Treks. Undersea Adventure WIN........... Webster's Dictionary WIN.......... Where in America's Past Carmen ..29 Where in Space Carmen Deluxe... 40 Where in Time is Carmen...........29 Where in World Deluxe CD..........54 Where in the USA Deluxe. Where in the USA is Carmen?.......29 Where in the World Deluxe ..........40 Where in the World is Carmen?...29 Wild Science Arcade w/T-SHIRT....22 Zookeeper...... Zugs Race Through Space.............23 Math Blaster WIN.......... Bailey's Book House Math Rabbit Enhanced ......... Beauty and the Beast CD Mathology BookMaster for Speed Reading ... Mega Math... Cinderella CD.... Mental Math Games 2.0 Dinosoft Phonics.. Millie's Math House Follow the Reader Operation Neptune... Heather Hits Homerun CD StickyBear Math Tutor... Jr High Grade Builder 3 Pack Superhe Midnight Rescue .. Just Grandma & Me CD....... ayranch CD....20 Request your Free T Ache CD 20 Shirt with purchase of BINARY ZOO Rock 'n Bach, Mystery  at the Museums, or Wild Science Arcade. Dr Letter Rusty & Rosy Volume 2 WIN .........29 Scary poems for Rotten Kids CD.....20 School House: 30 Programs..........18 Sleeping Beauty Storybook CD......25 Speed.. StickyBear Reading Tutor ....... StickyBear Reading Tutor Super Solvers:Ancient Empires Tale of Benjamin Bunny CD.... Tale of Peter Rabbit CD.... Talking Classic Tales CD. Talking Classic Tales CD. Talking Jungle Safari CD. Talking Phonics Plus Tell Tale Heart CD..... Thomas' Snowsuit CD Tortoise & The Hare CD Treasure Covo Ugly Duckling CD..... Zugs Dinosaur World.... WIN..... Bailey Teacher Trouble W Aladdin and His Lamp CD Amanda Stories CD. Arthur's Teacher Trouble Bailey's Book House... Beauty and the Beast BookMaster for Speed Cinderella CD...... Dinosoft Phonics... Follow the Reader 29 Heather Hits Home 20 Jr High Grade Bulder 3 Pack ...... .22 Just Grandma & Me CD.... Long Hard Day at the Ranch CD....20 Mind Castle Moving Gives A Stomach Ache CD20 Mud Pubble CD ................. Once Upon A Time II................. StickyBear Math Tutor............. Super Solvers:Midnight Rescue ..... Super Solvers:Out Numbered..... Treasure Math Storm! Treasure MathStorm! WIN... Treasure Mountain ..... What's My Angle...... 34 Recamy un k in Ready, Set, el A & Rosy Rosy WIN... y Poems fo-otten Kids CD.....20 Sch u se: 30 Programs ..........18 ne Jeauty Storybook CD..... Jeed.. StickyBear Reading Tutor ........ , StickyBear Reading Tutor ...... per Solvers:Ancient Empires.... Tale of Benjamin Bunny CD.......... Heather Hits Homerun CD..... Jr High Grade Builder 3 Pack...... Just Grandma & Me CD........... long Hard Day at the Ranch CD Mind Castle....... Moving Gives A Stomach Ache Mud Pubble CD. Once Upon A Time II. Paper Bag Princess CD Peter and the Wolf CD Reader Rabbit1 Enhanced Reader Rabbit II WIN. Reader Rabbit III . Reader Rabbit Ready for Letter... Reading Adventures in Oz ....... Reading and Me Talking............ Ready, Set, Read WIN... Rusty & Rosy Volume 1 WIN .........29 WS Aladdin Print Kit....... Animation Studio WIN Betty Crocker Boys & Girls.. Creation Stories CD... Creative Writer WIN. Fine Artist.. Kid Cuts............ Kid Doodle WIN... Kid Pictures ............. Kid Pix. Kid Rhymes Lenny's Music Toons CD Lenny's Music Toons WIN.... Logo Writer......... MetroGnomes' Music ....... Miracle Piano w/FREE Songs ......269 My Own Stories..... Peter Pan:Story Painting Adv. ........31 Print Shop Deluxe 1.2..... Print Shop Deluxe 1.2 WIN...........46 Print Shop Deluxe Comic WIN...... 24 Print Shop Deluxe Comics ....... Print Shop Deluxe Companion.......34 Print Shop Deluxe Companion WIN34 Print Shop Deluxe Sampler ......... Print Shop Deluxe Sampler WIN....26 Show & Tell for Kids... Sound Source...... Story Book Weaver Wild Learning Safari Alphabet Blocks WIN.... ..29 30 Ache CD20 HVH READING CREATIVITY 24 MATH Alge Bloster Plus Algebra ................. Algebra By Example.. Calculus WIN...... Chemistry Works DOS/WIN. Dinosoft Addition & Subtract Dinosoft Math Flashcards Dinosoft Multiply & Divide..... Early Math WIN.... .... Geometry Concepts.............. Kid Cad WIN..... Learn About Fractions Line & Shape Eater CD.... Math Blaster Spot/Kid Works II.....43 Aesop's Fables CD. Aladdin and His Lamp CD.... Amanda Stories CD... Arthur's Teacher Trouble CD......... Circle Reader Service #149 "


"BEGINNING READING BIG GREEN DISC ALGE BLASTER 3 MARIO'S TIME MACHINE READING The unique Dream Team talking char acters have emerged as an SOUVIS absolutely femark able teaching tool Using proven leam. ing methods, Yobi Bananas, lack Spooky and loid establish a one-on one relationship with your child while giving positive reinforce ment. Challenging puzzles and exciting story lines are skillfully blended with music, sound effects and articulata characters to create an extraordinary learning experience leads your child through the process of learning to read. An interactive doo umentary on the futute of our plan et. Informs you of the environmental issues threatening Our planet and what you can do to help solve them looks at problems including global warming, pollu tion, ozone deple tion, acid rain, and the potential solutions: recycling, alternative energy sources and conservation. After examining the facts, enter into an environmental debato. Fully narrat ed with stunning photography throughout Features specially filmed video sequences, in depth photo stores, and animated diagrams. Ages 12 to adult Newest version of HASITE the world's bes! Mel Erg gram Guides you through an entire year's algebra cur riculum, using an interactive tutorial opproach, Four unique activities with all new SVGA graphies, anima tions and sound will help you develop a better understanding of the algebraic process. Learn how to solve equations and translate word problems into algebraic expressions. Two challenging now grophic games will ensure that you become a graphing expert Covers all subject areas ond features on screen hints PUBLISHER: Davidson WIN Join the Mario MARIO'S Brothers on a wild ME MACHINE ride through time as they re live great moments in history in this new series Take o romp with the dinosaurs during the Jurassic period, stop off in ancient Egypt to meet Cleopatra, and arrive just in time to witness the first successful powered Flight of the 20th Century all in a day's work for the popular plumbers. See Mario visit the workshop of Thomas Edison rido along with Neil Armstrong and cheer for Babo Ruth, in addition to witnessing scores of other historic events, Entertaining and educa tional for the whole family PUBLISHER: Software Toolworks $28 PUBLISHER: Sierra $28 PUBLISHER: Sony Imagesoft   S $33 MAVIS BEACON TEACHES TYPING 3.0 SOFT KARAOKE EAGLE EYE MYSTERIES IN LONDON AMAZON TRAIL Learn to type with the world's best-sell ing program. Now it's better than ever! Provides all the fea tures of version 2 like personalized practice lessons and witty conversa tional oxplanations, New exciting fea tures include proc tice text from the New Grolier's Multimedia Encyclopedia and Newsweek Magazine, lesson tracking ability and amazing games that take a fresh approach to making learning even more fun. Features 256 color graphics and new MIDI music. Movis will have you typing like on expert in no time for users of all ages So much fun for ISOFT the holidays! Totally amazing! KARAOKE Turns your PC or MAC into a full fledged home Karaoke machine A breakthrough in entertainment Lyrics light up to the right beat directly on your monitor. Instantly access your own personal song bank. Countless hours of fun lot music lovers and professional musicians Tempo and Key are fully adjustable. Includes five logally licensed top Billboard hits and hun dreds of optional songs availablo. Guaranteed to run on Windows 3.1 with your sound board, REQUIRES A SOUND BOARD PUBLISHER: Tuno 1000 DOS, MAC Match wits with the world's smartest junior detectives! Jake and Jennifer Eogle run the hottest detective agency, and they are looking for 8-14 year oid volunteers to help them solve their lotest Series of cases Solve over 50 new progressive ly challenging cases. Use your deductive tec soning and reading comprehension skills. FREE poster size map of london included. Use the mop for cluse to solve the cases, Keeps chil deon enthralled while strengthening their deductive reasoning skills. MAC version: $35. Journey through time from the mouth of the Amazon to its lofty sources in the Andes high coun try Find the medi cinal plant that will save the ancient Incas from extine tion and deliver it to the Inca king Meer as many as 30 other historie explorers, naturalists, scien tists, and natives. Exercise problem solving and reading comprehension skills Develop navigational abilities Introduces ecosystems and provides insights into South American his tory from the time of the Spanish Conquistadors to present, PURUSHER: MECC DOS, MAC PUBLISHER: Software Toolworks S $26 PUBLISHER: Electronic Arts $30 $33 TreeHouse....... Word Munchers.................... 9NTBS Mario's Fun with letters......... Mickey's ABC's Enhanced...... Spell It Plus......... Super Solvers:Spellbound. Word Attack 3. Word Munchers........... Word Tales CD... Yobi's Spelling Tricks WIN TYPING Easy Working Typing WIN.. Mario Teaches Typing ......... Mavis Beacon Typing 3.0 Mavis Beacon Typing CD...... Typing Tutor V Plus... 800-228-7449 601 FAX:508-443-5645 EXT. VOICE:508-443-6126 31 Union Ave., Sudbury, MA 01776 B* **. 07-y-* * FAX:0011-508-443-5045 XIX. CompuServeID: 70007.15340WH & Blant TV  FREE UPS GROUND SHIPPING 10,000 IN STOCK ITEMS GEOGRAPHY Discovering America........... Expert Maps Lost Tribe My First World Atlas... Mystery at Museums w/T-SHIRT Nigel's World.... PC Globe Maps & Facts ..... PC Globo Maps & Facts CD... PC USA 3.0 World Atlas 4.0 WIN LANGUAGE Berlitz Think & Talk Italian CD.......99 Berlitz Think/Talk Spanish CD 9 9 Language Assistant:French 5.0.......56 language Assistant:French WIN 56 Language Assistant:German WIN. 56 Language Assistant:Italian 5.0.......55 Language Assistant:Spanish 5.0....56 Learn to Speak Spanish CD.......49 Vocabulearn French I...................34 Vocabulearn French I WIN...... Vocabulearn Italian ......... Vocabulearn Japanese I WIN.. Vocabulearn Spanish . . Vocabulearn Spanish I WIN 29 34 MACINTOSH TITLES MACINTOSH TITLES TEST PREPARATION ACT W/CHF Notes... Biology Studywarc... Calculus Studyware..... Chemistry Studyware...... GMAT w/Cliff Notes. GRE w/Cliff Notes LSAT w/Cliff Notes ... Physics Studyware... SAT NEW Personal Trainer WIN...34 Score RX for ACT at Home... Score RX for GRE at Home Score RX for LSAT at Home Score RX for SAT at Home.............61 ....... AJ World of Discovery...............29 Berenstain Bears Fun LunchPak......25 Berenstain Bears Junior Jigsaw....... 18 Berenstain Bears Learn At Home....25 Cuckoo Zoo ....... Fatty Bears B-Day Surprise CD.... Fatty Bears Birthday Surprise First Letters & Words...... First Shapes........ Fisher Price Classics Kid Pix Companion WIN Kid Pix WIN. KidDesk Mario Early Years Collection CD Mcgee Series Bundle Mickey's 123's Enhanced.. Mickey's ABC's Enhanced.... Mickey's Jigsaw Puzzles ..... Mixed Up Fairy Tales ............ Mixed Up Mother Goose CD.... Number Munchers..... Peanuts: Yearn to Learn WIN..... Playroom 2.0.......... Power Hits Kids... Putt Putt Goes to the Moon...... Putt-Putt Fun Pack....... Putt-Pult Joins the Parade.. Scooter's Magic Castle Slater & Charlie Go Camping .... Snoopy's Game Club... Stickbear Preschool CD.... Stickybear Preschool ............... EARLY LEARNING Algebra.. Oregon Trail Algebra Blaster Plus Phonics ......... Backyard Playroom 2.0 Calculus Studyware... Principles of Chemistry. Dinosaur Adventure.... Reader Rabbit Early Moth Reader Rabbit Ready for Lotter..... Kid's Studio Spell It Plus..... Kid's Typing StickyBear Reading Room E KidDesk Super Solvers:Out Numbered Mac Globe ..... Super Solvers:Spellbound...... Mac USA 2.0.. Treasure Math Storm!....... Mario Teaches Typing Tree House .... .... Math Blaster Plus.. USA GeoGraphy.. Math Flashcards Vocabulearn French I. Math Rabbit 2.0....... Vocabulearn Italian I.... Millie's Math House. Vocabulearn Spanish I ... Mind Castle Where in America's Past 22?..... Multiply & Divide Where in Time is Carmen?....... My First World Atlas Where in the World Deluxe.........46 My Own Stories Where in the World is Carmen22.29 Odell Down Under Zookeeper 800 228-7449 Orders Only 508 443 6125 all other business. Sales Dept. Hours Monday Friday BAM till BPM, Saturday 9AM SPM All other Business Monday Friday9AM till 5PM Most orders ship within 24 hours Temporary shortages are normally filled within 10 days. Books, Memory chips, and some electronic components are not returnable. We ship only to verified billing addresses. International orders welcome. Airborne Express Shipping charges 97 per order up to 6 lbs. $1 per lb. above 6 lbs. UPS Ground Service charge $3 per order. Actual freight charges apply for computers, hard disks. Bernoulli's, tape back.ups. print ors, Multimedia kits, monitors, etc. Alaska, Hawail, outside continental U.S., APO/FPO call for information Prices subject to change without notice. Some product not available outside the US Please call for more informa ton. Not responsible for errors or omissions. Mastercard, Visa, Discover, prepaid orders, purchase orders, wire transfer, cash, and cashiers check accepted. Personal and Company checks allow 14 days to clear. No surcharge for credit card orders. Your credit card is not changed until the merchandise is shipped We check for stolen credit cards. All returns tor credit, repair or exchange must have a return authonation number. Returned orders or ordered wrong items are subject to a 15% restocking tco We Mau ship Intest versions of software available. Over nine years of service. Thousands of satisfied cus tomers. Send your Fax today! All quotes answered immediately. Product covered by manufacturers warranty. Delective items replaced immediately. Educational, government, and corporate purchase orders welcomo. All item numbers represent 3.5\" floppy, except whore noted .....79 34 ..47 39 REFERENCE American Heritage Dictionary .......34 Americans in Space CD......... Animals San Diego Zoo CD.........56 Barron's Book Notes WIN. ....46 Body Works 3.0 Creep Crawlics CD..... 41 Cute 'n' Cuddlies....... 39 Dictionary of Living World CD.......93 Dinosaur Adventure CD......... Dinosaurs! MPC Encyclopedia CD .45 Greatest Book Collection CD.........31 MS Dinosours Multimedia CD........51 Orbits:Voyagc the Solar System 32 Addition & Subtraction ................16 43 VIST Circle Reader Service #149 "


"KIDS COMPUTERS ian Jackknife, the Barcelona Corkscrew, or the Stuttgart Screamer. Here they will go against five computer competitors in a five-lap race. set of hands with moving fingers shows which fingers to press as letters pop onto the screen. This game introduces the use of uppercase and lowercase letters. The program's print option activates when players reach various score ranges based on accurate typing. This feature prints thank you notes from the various friendly monsters with the player's name on it. That's a great incentive for young kids learning the essential keyboarding skills that will help them with their future computer instruction. Jack M. Germain forth, skip ahead or back, mark favorite passages, even make notes in the margin. However, the software offers tools a traditional book does not, allowing the reader to instantly find text, export passages, and jump to annotations on a whim. The book is simple for a child to navigate, the mouse isn't even necessary to turn the page. Adults will enjoy Alice for its extensive annotations, which give new insights to the book (the annotations make a book all by themselves). To keep it simple for the little ones, parents can switch off the annotations, the toolbar and other gimmickry. Throughout the book includes familiar drawings of Alice on her underground escapades. As a nice touch, a click of the mouse switches between normal text and large print. The Complete Annotated Alice is a joy to peruse, or read from cover to cover. Despite a few minor cosmetic problems, this program provides a rewarding experience for both young children and adults. Kevin Savetz The Complete Annotated Alice Lewis Carroll's classic children's books Alice's Adventures in Wonderland and Through the Looking Glass come alive in The Complete Annotated Alice, a multimedia CD-ROM from Voyager. This well-produced Hypercard stack contains the full text and pictures from both books. In addition, the program includes extensive annotations, comments, and analysis of the stories and, as a bonus for Carroll fans, \"The Wasp In a Wig,\" a lost chapter that didn't make it to print in either book. European Racer Price: $70 In Brief: A plastic car model and CDROM disk combination allows youngsters to build and drive an authentic European sports car. Requirements: IBM PC or compatible (386SX or better) with 4 MB RAM; hard disk with 13MB free space; Super VGA display: CD-ROM drive; mouse; DOS 5.0 or higher Audio Support: Sound Blaster compatible Revell-Monogram 8601 Waukegan Rd. Morton Grove, IL 60053 (708) 966-3500 Circle Inquiry #179 European Racer MAN Every kid wishes for the chance to jump behind the wheel of a Porsche 911 S, but most of them settle for building the model. Revell-Monogram turns model building into model driving. Young model makers receive a 1/24th scale model Porsche 911 Slant Nose and a CD-ROM disk in this program bundle. The software assists in the construction of the model with step-by-step instructions, and three-dimensional views over which kids have control. Video clips show model-making tips — how to glue, paint, and detail the model Porsche. A painting option lets modelers see how each car looks in different colors before painting. An on-line glossary of automotive terms enhances the program's educational aspects. The driving simulation begins on the showroom floor, where a female voice describes the model and its capabilities, From here, the game accelerates through the backroads of Europe. Young drivers must dodge obstacles, outrun the police, and sustain as little damage as possible (and finish with fuel in the tank). If successful, drivers will arrive at one of four tracks: the Zurich Switchback, the SicilRandom road and weather conditions means players must modify their cars before or during each race. Drivers may choose from a selection of five different wing spoilers, three tire options, and between an automatic or manual transmission. This sophisticated software product brings with it sophisticated hardware requirements. One major warning: The installation program modifies the system's CONFIG.SYS file without first saving the original file. The multimedia effects of interactive 3-D graphics, digitized sound effects, and video will have kids glued to the computer screen for hours. Model building has come to the MTV generation, — Jeff Kingston CGW The Complete Annotated Alice Price: $19.95 In Brief: A captivating, multimedia romp through the looking glass and beyond. Requirements: Macintosh LC or better with 2MB RAM; hard disk; System 6.0.7 or higher; Hypercard 2.1. The Voyager Company 578 Broadway, Suite 460 New York, NY 10027 (800) 446-2001: (212) 431-5199 Circle Inquiry #180 Using The Annotated Alice is very much like thumbing through a traditional book. Readers can page back and Page 174 Computer Gaming World "


"My son and I love this game!!! Great work!! Robert Strauss, Burbank Oxydo magnum! for PC, Mac, A500 A2000, ST, TT or Falcon Computers. Sequel of the award winning Oxyd, now at a store near you! Moc: 1MB RAM, color or monochrome! PC: 386 or above, 2.5MB RAM, EGA or VGA, Soundbla or Adl. optional. OI My daughter (11 years old) and I have become \"Oxyd\" addicts. We cannot wait to begin exploring the many other levels. Thanks for creating such an excellent prod uch. R. S., Germantown Tenjoy this game a great deal and so do my children and their friends. It is just what I have been looking for !! Jerome Wescott, Minneapolis My whole family enjoyed your game a great deal. Michael C. Moore, Columbia This is, without question, the most impressive game! have ever seen. I am amazed at the audio, visual and action. George L. Tanty, Arlington Heights Outstanding program!!!! John Bernauer, Los Gatos Wow! That's all I can say about Oxyd. What an incredible game! Hurry! I can't wait to play!! Oxyd has to be the most artistically superb piece of programming that I have seen. From my position of having completed about one third of the single-player levels, the landscapes have been continuously varied with a marvelous attention to graphic and audible detail that makes each new one a continuing delight. I especially appreciate how the marble interacts in seemingly realistic but different ways when rolling over or bouncing against different \"natural\" (or unnatural) substances like stone, wood, swamp, freefall etc. At this point, I'm already worrying that I'll run out of levels (assuming / keep solving the puzzles). Jeffrey R. Harrow Ord Credits: Best Brain Game Moc World Come Hall of Fame 1993 Game of the Year Computer & Podagogik 06/93 Score this game a solid 10 Cument Notes 06/93 \"A\" rating Wow! Exquisite. A must for your games library. AmigalWord 06/93 Game of the Month. MacWelt 02/93 Top of the Charts Brain Teaser Category PC Games Geonan edition This game is highly addictive. Stuart Ritchie, Canada One of the nicest games I have seen in a long time. Thanks for creating such a challenging piece of software. Steve Brannan, Canada Even our 3yr old enjoys the game. I'm completely hooked! Patricia B. Smith, NH 100 new landscapes. New objects and game elements to explore. The game is a blast! Excellent graphics, extremely well done. Interesting challenges in each landscape also. I look forward to the next 90 landscapes. David Mangini, CT I just had to write to tell you how much fun I've had playing Oxyd. The attention to detail the sounds, the textures of the surfaces really adds to the fun of the game. It invites the imagination for a ride. Thanks also for making all of the landscapes challenging but not impossible. At first Ithought that landscape 76 was unfairly difficult, but when I found the way through it, I really admired the ingenuity. Tom Phoenix, Portland Oxyd magnumnl is an entirely new and riveting challenge for Oxyd experts and beginners alike. TURPINHEITIT The game is really slick, well designed. Those first 10 levels alone were worth paying for! Call 617-497-1130 for the Oxyd magnum! retailer nearest you It is rare to find such a visually appealing, addictive and playable game. Kathryn Wilson, Australia One of the most elegant games I've played. Thanks a lot for a great game. Jeffrey Jondahl, San Diego Get a free appetizer for PC, Mac, Amiga or ST: Send S 4.00 for shipping & handling for 10 challenging landscapes of Oxyd to Dongleware, 35 Howard Street, Cambridge, MA 02139. Send S 4.00 for a 5 level teaser of Oxyd magnum! (PC or Mac only) I'm really impressed with your game, Oxyd. Congratulations on a unique and fun product, and best luck to you all. John M. Dodd, Thousand Oaks OK so we got hooked! Circle Reader Service #57 "


"CD-ROM REVIEW Beggar's Canyon, Anyone? LucasArts Rebel Alliance Wants You FIRE by Paul C. Schuytema on your blaster helmet and prick up your X-Wing down a river bed or weaving an \"calculate on the fly\" technology, and the your synapses to receive the all-enA-Wing through the stalactites of an ice cave limited movement is very acceptable for game compassing waves of the Force. add up to one of the most visually intense play purposes. It creates the effective illusion Once again, it's time to jump back in time, experiences you can imagine. of flight control. In other levels, such as the back to a galaxy far, far away to do battle In the cut scenes between chapters, the plot Imperial Walker shoot-outs, the flight path is against the evil Empire and their dreaded unfolds through a blending of video clips pre-recorded. In these levels you may maDeath Star. Lucas Arts has brough the strug. (taken from the first two Star Wars movies) nipulate the aiming reticule and achieve a gle of Star Wars to life in an arcade shooter and computer-generated animations. The very minor level of left-right/up-down varientitled Rebel Assault, a game that takes full video segments are full screen, although the ation, but you are constrained to the estabadvantage of a CD-ROM disc to cram into video quality has been compromised to allow lished flight path. its 15 chapters all the pomp and circumstance for the screen size, a decent frame rate, and a for the screen size, a decent frame rate, and a Although the game does not offer a diskwe've come to expect from the pulp science CD-quality soundtrack. based save-game feature, Rebel Assault will fiction saga. It is a fresh experience, provide a password to use when you return to a melding of arcade action and cinthe more advanced levels. The only problem ema that showcases the possibilities is that the passwords are granted only after the of a CD-ROM game. In some ways, completion of several levels of play, and not Rebel Assault is a breathtaking game, after each level. This can add up to frustration yet it comes up a few light sabers when you have to battle through three levels short in some key areas. The game is composed of a series just to get back to where you lost the game of 15 chapters, beginning with basic the last time. flight training, screaming down the The plot seems to fold certain elements of infamous Beggar's Canyon on TaThe Empire Strikes Back (such as the Imperial tooine (the subject of many of Luke raid on the snowbound Rebel base) into the plot Skywalker's boasts) and ending with DAMAGE PILOTS SCORE 109365 to destroy the Death Star. As an exercise in story the archetypal assault on the Death The action level in Rebel Assault is unrelenttelling, I can't help feeling slightly disappointed Star. The central character is nor Luke Skying. You must blast, swerve and aim conin the game, as it essentially replays several walker, but an amazing facsimile, a rebel stantly, testing the mettle of your trigger scenes from the movie, adding precious little rookie who must prove himself (or herself, finger and the endurance of your joystick fresh substance. The plot is flimsy enough in since the game can represent either gender) control skills. At times, it seems like luck (or that it requires a knowledge of the movies to through a hail of fire. perhaps the Force) is the only thing keeping make sense of it, and so it seems foolish to replay The chapters consist of \"mini games\" all you from tumbling into a ball of flames at the some of the scenes exactly (such as the briefing threaded together in a linear, cinematic plot. bottom of some godforsaken riverbed. \"Fast\" of the stolen Death Star plans). I wish that Lucas While the goal and presentation of each chapand \"frantic\" are keywords in Rebel Assault, Arts had taken a little mo Arts had taken a little more creative license with ter is varied, the basic skill-hand-eye coorand you should be prepared to lean on the fire the game and offered up a fresh plot thread to dination is all that's needed. Most chapters button constantly. make it a new cinematic experience, not just a are \"aim and shoor\" games, while a few others The graphics are an interesting point and shoot replay of the original movie. test your flight and maneuvering skills. It blend of traditional graphics and Rebel Assault should be noted that Rebel Assault is in no way video clips. Some levels, such as TITLE: Rebel Assault a flight simulator, or in any way remotely the ice cave shoot-out and the PRICE: $69.95 related to Lucas Arts' X-wing. asteroid field, feature video scenREBEL SYSTEM: ASSAULT REQUIREMENTS: 386-33MHz, 4MB RAM, VGA graphics, MPC Level 1 CD-ROM The two qualities that stand out in Rebel ery flying past, and you are aldrive supports Pro Audio Spectrum, Assault are the media experience (the video. lowed limited movement with Sound Blaster, and Ultrasound sound cards animations and sound) and the hyper-intense which to dodge and fly through PROTECTION: level of action. Make no mistake, the quality the obstacles. It is an interesting DESIGNER: Vince Lee LucasArts of the graphics and the cut scenes is the best way to present a game, since the San Rafael, CA (800) 782-7927 yer delivered in a PC action game. Screaming level of detail can far surpass any -TAR WARS IBM None PUBLISHER: Page 176 Computer Gaming World "


"IMAGINE A GAMING DEVICE SO INTUITIVE IT'S LIKE NOT HAVING ONE AT ALL. CYBERMAN THE MOST ADVANCED WAY TO MASTER 3-0 GAMES. Now moving in a game is as easy as thinking about it. Only CyberMan moves in three directions (x, y, and z), and three rotations (pitch, yaw, and roll), which com relate directly to your moves inside a 3-D game; your DI intuitive movements translate literally to the screen. LOGITEGH It's also the only controller with tactile feedback that The Senseware» Company makes you a physical part of the game. CyberMan is avail. able now at your local dealer, or call 1-800-732-2928 pandenieks belong to their registered oamers CYBERM RMA Circle Reader Service #81 "


"No     GAMEPORT. Finally, a Joystick Connection for Your Notebook! Beyond the plot, though, how does it play? In some areas, excellently and in others, very weakly. Certain chapters, such as one consisting of taking out Imperial recon droids in an ice cave, are wonderfully challenging, exciting and frustrating, while in another, shooting twolegged Imperial walkers by the dozen becomes a mindless exercise in rapid shooting. Taking out the Star Destroyer is a white knuckle experience at first, but after several runs, the patterns are easily anticipated, and you can talk or drink a pop while playing. Chasing TIE fighters through an asteroid field, however, is an exercise in shooting and flying mania that I thought I would never survive; the game made me calculate the trajectories of so many objects that I thought my brain would overheat. Transform your high-performance portable into a serious simulation machine with the Notebook Gameport. Connect an IBM-compatible joystick or yoke and rudder pedals. The Notebook Gameport not only maximizes the entertainment potential of your notebook computer, it's also the quickest, easiest joystick connection for your desktop! Ask your local retailer for the Notebook Gameport,\" or call Colorado Spectrum to place your order. CAHEPORTE COLORADO SPECTRUND 748 Whalers Way, E-201, Fort Collins, CO 80525 International Telephone: (303)225-1687 (800) 238-5983 9-Pin Connector to Computer's Serial Port Easily connects to all IBM compatible notebook and desktop computers. Pass-through Serial Mouse Port Mouse remains fully operational while gameport is in use. DAMAGE ] PILOTS SCORE 012025 In all, I would say that Rebel Assault is an odd mix of challenging and mindless levels, offering very little continuity in the difficulty scale. If I had one overarching bone to pick with the game, it would be the \"sameness\" of the levels. Each replay of any chapter offers the same fare, with TIE Fighters approaching in exactly the same patterns and Imperial Storm Troopers showing up in the same places. With the exception of a very few levels, where so much is going on that an entire pattern is hard to grasp (such as the asteroid field dogfight), a level is fairly easy to memorize, making the repeated-play challenge diminish logarithmically. In one level, where your alter-ego has to blast Imperial Storm Troopers in a series of ice-cave locales, the patterns were so easy to anticipate that I had figured it out on my first run through, and actually came out of the encounter undamaged. If one could record\" the joystick and trigger actions of a successful game, then that recording could win the game time after time. Rebel Assault is also peppered with more than a few bugs, the most irritating of which is the constantly decaying calibration of the joystick. It is not uncommon to have to recalibrate the joystick up to a dozen times during a single game. Also, some of the branching paths in the Beggar's Canyon and cave scenarios are implemented very poorly, with visual jerks, frozen screens, and movement to the left when you want to go right. One thing that Rebel Assault does do is to herald in a new era of CD-ROM games. The game is played entirely off the disk with no installation required, and except for beginning load time, it is fast, fluid and furious the entire way through. It is exciting to see the level of detail that can be achieved while still keeping the play speed at the manic levels. Rebel Assault is a gorgeous, fast-paced shooter that is a lot of fun to play. The problem is, the fun is too short lived, and the game certainly doesn't lure us back to play again and again. If you love the old arcade style of frantic aim and shoot games, then Rebel Assault will be an experience not to be missed. If you live to see the cutting edge of PC entertainment technology, then this CD-ROM is a must have. But if you want hours of in-depth play, then perhaps the Force should guide you elsewhere. CGW NOTEBOOK GAMEPORT Four-axis Gameport Supports joystick & rudder pedals simultaneously. No calibration, jumpers or manual speed adjustments necessary. Circle Reader Service #48 Page 178 Computer Gaming World "


"THIS IS YOUR BRAIN. THIS IS YOUR BRAIN NEUROJACKED INTO CYBERNET IN SPECTRE VR Lives: 3 Damage: C Ammo Score: SSD HEAPON Level: 33 Bonus:415 FH FULL MOTION VIDEO FROM CD-ROM: THINK OF IT AS AN INTERMEDIATE STEP BETWEEN CYBERSPACE AND LIFE AS YOU'VE KNOWN IT. SMART WALLS ARE COVERED WITH LIVE ACTION VIDEO. ACID POOLS WILL TRY TO TRAP YOU MAYBE YOUR SCATTER SHOTS CAN HELP UNTRAP YOU ANY QUESTIONS? GO AHEAD, LEKINTO A WADLE OTHER WORLD RATHATS F YOU THINK YOURE READY TO HANDLE NANOECOND PESURE FROM SMART-WEAPON ENEMIES THAT LEARN YOUR EVERY MOVE THEN STRIKE FROM ANY DIRECTION W ITHE CYBERWORLD HAS NEVER BEEN SO FRIGHTENINGLY REAL. BUT THERE'S HOPE AT LEAST YOU'LL HAVE AN ARSENAL THAT'S JUST AS SMART AND POWERFUL AS THAT OF YOUR OPPONENTS THE QUESTION CAN YOU NAVIGATE THE MATRIX AS QUICKLY AS YOUR BRAIN PROCESSES THE STIMULATION ON YOUR SCREEN: THE ANSWER FIND OUT AS YOU HOVER ABOVE THE CYBERARENA, OR SUBMERGE INTO NEGATIVE CYBERSPACE YOU CAN EVEN ALTER THE LANDSCAPE, YOUR OPPONENTS AND YOUR WEAPONS WITH VRCHITECT\" SO. ACK INTO SPECTRE VR WITH ONE PLAYER A NETWORK OF UP TO EIGHT. OR EVEN MODEM PLAY ON THE PC AND GET READY FOR A WHITE AVAILABLE FOR YOUR IBM PC MAC AND CD-ROM HOT ELECTRONIC ADRENALINE RUSH, BUT BE FOREWARNED: REALITY WILL NEVER BE OVITE THE SAME AGAIN. VELOCITY Circle Reader Service #142 Circle Reader Service #142 HEY, YOU WITH THE CPU: GET A CYBERLIFE. GET SPECTRE VR\". 2012 OCTOBERADA TO ORDER SEE YOUR LOCAL RETAILER, OR CALL 1-800-VLOCITY "


"REVIEW MONTESTE WITH A HYLLON-INIELEEN Dig Your Fangs Into The Dark Future of Bloodnet by Douglas Seacat Inn ark genres have become very popucreatures who are losing their connections to the role of Ransom Stark, a man who has been lar. We are experiencing another age life. victimized and must strike back at his perseof the Film Noir, where the shadows Cyberpunk is a much different genre. It is cutors. Like many residents of 2094 Manhatare more alluring than the light. In particular, a futuristic mythos of computers and technoltan, Ransom was first victimized by we have come to enjoy the concept of the ogy, where scientific progress has created Trans Tech, his former employer. This megacorporation controls cyberspace with an iron ogy provides an escape, not a solution, to natural experience. Reality has been sub hand, monopolizing the technology of the verted by computer information network. Trans Tech is notorinnnnnnnn nerworks which can link ous for abusing its workers. In BloodNet, the directly to the mind and \"Virtual Reality\" of Cyberspace is stressful on create imaginary worlds. the mind. Merging one's thoughts with the BOL Day 1 02:50 A There would seem to be computer is hardly a natural process and overlittle room in this hardexposure can cause severe mental unbalance. edged universe for mystiA disease known as Hopkins-Brie Syndrome cal creatures of the night. can end the career of the best cyber-jockey, Despite this, BloodNet since victims can no longer separate reality proves the two genres from fiction. Instead of treating such victims, complement each other. TransTech fires them, leaving them both unBoth rely on the darkness employed and mentally unstable. of a crowded city where This was the fate of Ransom Stark, before the population is inured to he was given a neural implant that helps violence and despair. In suppress his hallucinations. No longer workthe Cyberpunk world, the ing for Trans Tech, Ransom was forced to problems and where life is a struggle for surmega-corporations leech money and inforbecome a cyberspace pirate, illegally hacking vival in an overpopulated rar-warren. Two mation as greedily as any blood-sucker. Why into the system on a mercenary basis for the literary genres have taken these themes to shouldn't vampires adapt to the world of the highest bidder. Such a criminal profession has great popularity: Cyberpunk and the Modern future? The passing of time been taken up by increasing numbers of Gothic. BloodNet is the bold attempt by Mimeans nothing to such creathe underworld, all of whom need the croProse to combine these fictional environtures. Cyberspace becomes ments into a better, darker, more morbid simply another avenue of exTITLE: whole. Bloodnet ploitation, another means PRICE: $69.95 What does a vampire have to do with cyBLOODNET SYSTEM: IBM with which to quench their REQUIREMENTS: 386.16Mhz or better, 2MB RAM berspace? A difficult question. On one hand thirst for blood and power. VGA graphics, 9MB hard drive we have a dark metropolis dominated by space, mouse; supports Adlib, PAS, Roland, Sound Blaster (Pro) hidden supernatural forces, creatures who Sound Master and Wave Blaster Forcibly Inducted sound cards. have lived for centuries in secrecy, hunting PROTECTION: None DESIGNERS: John Antinori, Laura Kampo upon humans in the hours of darkness. The It is in this rich backPUBLISHER: MicroProse modern Gothic is designed to stress our own ground that BloodNet's story Hunt Valley, MD (410) 771-1151 humanity as we sympathize with undead takes place. The player takes Page 180 Computer Gaming World "


"DEAK PERFORMANCE INTRODUCING SPEED BUMPS LIKE YOU'VE NEVER SEEN. A CD-ROM game with some serious roadside attractions, answer bizarre highs and lows. questions and chat with the locals. Your challenge-drive like mad to But don't dilly-dally, reach the highest point in each of the get into high gear continental 48 United States! Whip out and hitch a ride the map, plan your strategy and try to to your local beat the world record! Blow past campy software dealer. MEDIA VISION Geo Circle Reader Service #85 Media Vision, Inc., 47300 Bayside Parkway. Fremont, CA 94538 (510) 770-8600 Fax: (510) 770-9592. Media Vision and the Media Vision logo are trademarks of Media Vision, Inc. Peak Performance is a trademark of Ken Bell Productions, 1993 Ken Dell Productions. All other trademarlos and registered trademarks are those of their respective owners. All rights reserved. "


"When Ranud kill thing expice. Ret information Trans Tech hoards within their network. Rage gangs have sprouted throughour Manhattan. These punks and former employees of TransTech wage a war of survival by any means possible. Such gangs have no solidarity, and are as likely to kill each other as hurt Trans Tech. There are worse dangers than the rage gangs, however: vampires have begun to plague the city. Ransom discovered this danger first-hand, when his payment for a job turned out to be the bite of a vampire. Ransom feels himself changing, becoming a monster thirsting for blood. Only his neural implant keeps Ransom from completing the transformation to an undead. Now partially human, he strives for a way to turn himself back to normal. Stalking Manhattan The player takes control of Ransom Stark, exploring the dark future of New York. To become human again, Stark needs much information, most of which must be gained from the myriad residents of the city. He has to get back in touch with old friends, make some new ones, always fearing discovery by Trans Tech or the vampires who turned him Along the way, he becomes embroiled in conflict with Trans Tech, which he discovers (unsurprisingly) has ties to the vampires. Despite the fact that the player is always Ransom Stark, it is possible to create a customized MLLLLLLLLS 11:55 version of the down-andout hacker. Through a series of questions (similar to the famous Ultima IV Combat process), each person can Quick develop their own unique Descriptive Bite \"Ransom Stark.» The list of skills and attributes is extensive and interesting, ranging from combat related skills to cyberskills and personality attributes. The game's interface is designed to make Stark's quest as easy as possible. The controls are relatively simple. The bulk of the game takes place in the \"real\" world of 2094 Manhattan. Movement around the city takes place on a nicely drawn overhead map, where arrows indicate possible locations of interest. Such travel is conveniently instantaneous, but adds time to the game clock, de pending upon the distance traveled. Ransom's hunger grows as the game continues, and can only be satisfied by drinking blood, usually killing a victim and lowering Ransom's humanity. When Ransom loses all his humanity, the game is lost. Such hunger cannot be ignored. When Ransom is too avoided. The vampires of Manhattan are a hungry, he will lose control and kill ransingularly vicious breed, and some rage gangs domly. Several creative alternatives to killing express their dissatisfaction best through viocan be found in the game (such as the use of lence. Reflecting the dangerous nature of blood-producing nanotechs) but none are both the Gothic and Cyberpunk genres, permanent, and Ransom's hunger always redeath is a distinct possibility whenever combat is entered. Each side is allowed to place characters on the board, and then melee ensues. If left to their own devices, the characters will fight the entire combat automatically, without any intervention by the player. Otherwise, a player can take a hands-on approach and arrempt to turn the tide of battle with specific commands. Characters can maneuver for better positioning, target differturns. The player must marshal his time, ent foes, use items, and switch weapons. developing a course of action and following llowing Th There are a few vampire specific options, like up clues. \"biting\" a foe, or \"exerting will» to confuse As the game progresses, new locations bethe enemy. In general, however, combat is a come available, giving the game a sense of simple affair. Furniture doesn't provide progress. However, in general, the game is cover, and moving about isn't generally helpquite non-linear. Stark begins the story with ful unless one happens to be using a melee a list of contacts and friends, but is free to weapon. The best strategy is often to scatter explore to his heart's content. The designers the characters evenly among the opponents, have done an excellent job of providing an make sure they have heavy firepower, then sit back until all foes drop. This quick approach lets one get back to the story as rapidly as possible. Naturally, no Cyberpunk game would be complete without cyberspace. Some of the puzzles in the game can't be solved until one finds a cyberspace port, decks in, and traverses this alternate computer realm. To a net-runner, no possession is more important than his computer deck. BloodNet allows one to upgrade the deck's hardware as the game progresses. Cloak chips can be found which reduce the chance of Trans Tech security noticing intrusion, memory can be upgraded, as can the \"Soul Box\" (an important deck cominteresting cast of characters whose dialogues ponent which ensures mental integrity in the not only help develop the atmosphere, but cyberspace realm). provide leads to continue the game. Some When transported to cyberspace, the player people won't cooperate until Stark has done begins on the General Planc. a digital highthem favors, while others are willing to help way between different computer realms. directly. The game begins as a solo quest, but Here one occasionally bumps into other up to five individuals can be added to the \"Data Angels\" (characters similarly decked group. Some people need to be hired to join, into the net), with whom one can talk. Othwhile others are willing to help Stark out of erwise, it is necessary to know an active adfriendship. One of the major decisions in the dress of a WELL, where all manner of game is deciding which characters to bring interesting programs and information can be discovered Conversation is the most important gamc As the game progresses, Stark gains inactivity, but occasionally combat cannot be creased access to locations in both the «real URTET TASTE  Day 1 00:45 WIMMINIUM alala DASARNAN Page 182 Computer Gaming World "


"NOW PLAYING AT A CD-ROM DRIVE NEAR YOU. ENTER QUANTUM GATE, THE FIRST VIRTUALCINEMA EXPERIENCE. How you interact makes the difference. full-length, cinematic adventure experience! How you between life and death! interact with real on-screen actors determines how The year is 2057. Earth will only support life for the story unfolds...all the clues you need await your another decade. You've enlisted to help conquer discovery. Six different action segments challenge you Tar-Palantire, possibly Earth's only salvation. Explore with new situations and constant a detail-filled virtual environment, navigating both danger. All presented interactive and arcade-style action scenarios that test in realistic video, with 16-bit your skill at space-age combat and role-playing. CD-quality sound. The High Adventure In VirtualCinema! challenge awaits at a VirtualCinema makes you the main character in this software dealer near you. MEDIA VISION Call 1-800-845-5870 for information or a dealer near you. Media Vision, Inc., 47300 Bayside Parkway, Fremont, CA 94538. Fax (510) 770-9592. Quantum Gate and VirtualCinema are trademarks of Hyperbole Studios. Media Vision and the Media Vision logo are trademarks of Media Vision, Inc.  1993 Hyperbole. All other trademarks are those of their respective owners. Circle Reader Service #86 "


"world\" and cyberspace, uncovering both grenades, and holographic technology. The ally a Data Angel will be found wandering the more characters to interact with and more gamer has the opportunity to cyber-up with general plane, but this is a relatively rare information about TransTech and the vam enhanced legs, hands, arms, and even eyes occurrence, making the net seem vast and pires of Manhattan. Similarly, the danger and ears. An interesting feature is the \"Jury empty. The excitement of updating one's increases as he becomes hunted by both facRig\" option which allows fabrication of items Soul Box was reduced when I noticed no tions. Stark has to walk a narrow path to or drugs from base components. All these negative side effect of staying for prolonged maintain his humanity while also using his features help imbue the dark atmosphere rime in Cyberspace, even with a simple Tin vampiric gifts to best advantage. with a decidedly science fiction edge. Soldier Soul Box. On the vampire side, huntUnlike some modern games that require ing is handled extremely loosely. To hunt, Pumped Full Of Vasopressin the cutting edge of hardware, BloodNet delivone can simply click a victim, who will imMicroProse is to be commended for showers decent graphics without the computing mediately disappear with the message \"Stark ing that a Gothic-Cyberpunk synthesis is posstrain. Animation is limited, and most of the has disposed of the body.\" This works no sible. Thematically, the game has a lot to graphics consist of still-shots of the backmatter how many other people might happen offer. The designers could have chosen to slap ground in a current location. These back to be watching. Further, despite the manual's down an easy action/adventure game drawing ground shots are well-rendered, adding to the assertion to the contrary, Stark's humanity on two popular genres. Instead, they does not lower for acts of violence, made the story the centerpiece, inonly killing victims for blood. cluding a huge amount of dialogue to Several aspects of the game are bring the plot to life. The conversatechnically sloppy. The largest extions are hard-edged and filled with ample of this is combat, which has enough futuristic lingo and jargon to few redeeming qualities. Combat march any literary effort. graphics are markedly inferior to As the game progresses, the parallels the rest of the game, and the entire between the two genres become incombar sequence is both confusing creasingly clear, building mood. and frustrating. Having most of the TransTech has developed the link becombat automated by the computer tween mind and computer so strongly is a good idea, but only if computer that they have begun to leech valuable supervision actually works. Someinformation from the minds of users, times characters will refuse to follow becoming a vampiric entity. Reversnew orders, sitting uselessly in the ing this paradigm, Ransom Stark's combat rather than doing what hunger for blood grows with ravendark mood of the game without becoming they've been told. ous intensity, checked only by a complex distracting. In Cyberspace, strange morphing Exacerbating the combat problem is one piece of technology, the neural implant data strucrures float about within the comparticular flaw in game design. There is an On the gaming side, the programmers have puter web. These efforts provide an excellent event in the game which causes a group of included several convenient options. Stark's backdrop for the story without demanding thugs, led by \"Buzz\" to attack the player neural implant allows him to remember all cutting-edge computing power. frequently in the subway. No matter how the conversations he's had throughout the many times Buzz and his men are killed, they game, which can be re-read as needed. While Access Denied will continue to attack at random intervals in taking some notes is advised, the player need never despair missing something important. In spite of praise-worthy efforts, BloodNet the game. Worse, the event which makes is flawed in several respects. Although based them attack is virtually unavoidable. SimiThe movement system is also convenient. upon a most interesting premise, the game as larly, certain characters can disappear permaUsing the map allows one to journey a whole left me vaguely dissatisfied. A major nently if they are \"dismissed\" from the party throughout the city without the redium of reason for this is the game's pacing. I greatly even if they are needed later. some CRPGs; travel between areas only takes prefer non-linear plots to restrictive ones, but up game-time, not real-time. Once in locasometimes BloodNet seems to bend too far tions, it is unnecessary to walk near to charthe other way. Leaving options open is great, ICEing The BloodNet acters to speak to them, another welcome but often the player seems to be left with no decision. Objects can also be picked up any sense of direction whatsoever. The protagoBloodNet has much to recommend it. As where on the screen, or dropped with equal nist becomes like a witless errand-boy, runyet, there are no other games which combine liberty. Further, when speaking with somening around for others with little appreciable these two game-worthy genres in this way. one who desires a particular item, it isn't reason. Perhaps Cyberpunk needs a little Gothic innecessary to dig through the inventory to find fusion to bolster its lagging popularity, and it since this is handled automatically. All these While there can be no doubt that the idea vampires are certainly a strong current fasciof a Cyber-Gothic is a good one, the game features help both to streamline game play fails to deliver on some of the features of these nation. The game is to be lauded for emphaand reduce CRPG Frustration Syndrome (a genres. The story, atmosphere, and themes sizing the story line, something many recent most persistent disease). are all solid, but the details are lacking. This games have forgotten, but the story is BloodNet delivers nicely on Cyberpunk is particularly true in cyberspace, which was couched in game elements that are less than technology. There is a wide and interesting a grear disappointment for me. In BloodNet, ideal. BloodNet can be compared to an uncut variety of gadgets and weaponry in the game, cyberspace takes on none of the depth of the gem; it is a dark and wonderful gem of an including nanotech weapons, circuitry frying «real world\" characters and places. Occasionidea, but a gem without polish. Cow Page 184 Computer Gaming World "


"Islslsls=1 LAM Strategy.graphics and Pro * * League play so real it's licensed * * by the NFL, the NFLPA, and * chosen by USA TODAY to simulate Super Bowl play. BRACE YOURSELF FOR IMPACT NFL Pro League Football hits you like a 240 12:34 3 4 OT SCORE TO O Z 0 DO 200 pound fullback with the goal line in his eyes. UZB DOW YDSTOSO 3 12 NFL Pro League Football has full field PR 0000010 detailed color animation with actual NFL logos, INILI Hoden Play CC But I won't been essin rin) NFL players, teams, uniforms and statistics. Design plays from scratch or choose from 198 offensive and defensive plays. Coach your favorite team using the Pro Draft, Pro Trader and Team Editor modules. Full rosters with injuries and substitutions. Instant replay. True modem play with chat mode. Stats Keeper and League Leaders modules, provide pages of the most complete statistical reports found in any computer game! So go ahead Brace Yourself for Impact with the best in the NFL. PRO LEAGUE NFL Pro League Football is a landmark product NEL FOOTBALL INFL for Micro Sports....the most powerful football simulation available today. 99 Mark Cohen The Sports Game Review Circle Reader Service #75 MICRO SPORTS 800-937-7737 Team Can't find NFL Pro League Football? Call directly to place your order or for the name of your nearest retailer. NFL Pro League Football is a registered trademark of Micro Sports, Inc. Micro Sports, Inc. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. "


"STRATEGY The Tale Of Mustafa One Character's Rise to Glory in SSI's Fantasy Empires by H.E. Dille Today, fellow warriors, we hear the tale of Mustafa, a young dwarven proud army of my homeland. I will round up groups of 100 strong noble who rescued his kingdom through diplomatic cunning and brilliant fighters and, when they are ready, I will send them off into one of the maneuvering on the field of battle. Pay attention, brave fighters, that nine provinces. Every third month, I will look for one among them when your call to battle comes, you shall be prepared. who can be a leader like ourselves. I will train this one personally. As each of the provinces of Ethengar Khanate are subdued back into In the summer of his thirty-fifth year, Mustafa the Noble received lawfulness, I will build new keeps for the collection of taxes and to some rather unexpected news. He and a small band of adventurmaintain order. I am confident that I can do all this without your aid. ers, some of whom he dared to call friends, were returning to Wair...before you protest, I did not mean that you were not needed Northern Rockhome when a messenger came stumbling up to the at all. Word has come to me about Eol, Magdel, Dauros and Nightparty, somewhat weather beaten from his travels. The messenger spawn, the other powers that had challenged my Uncle in the past. gasped and wheezed his way through the news, glancing over his Each are restless and seeking to expand their base of power. They are shoulder periodically, as though he could scarcely wait to get home. already fighting amongst themselves. If we are to have any hope of Mustafa learned of the passing of his Uncle, the Baron of Murkits, meeting this threar, we must be prepared. I charge each of you to a and the subsequent summoning of his presence by the Baron's quest: Search the lands for magical items that can aid our common advisors. goal. Return to me when each is found, and I will have units available The news was troublesome, and not simply because of the grief it for your command.\" conveyed. Mustafa felt unprepared for the responsibilities laid before Thus began the tale of the one who unified all Mystara under a him and shared his feelings with his friends. The land was facing single banner. Mustafa's plan to consolidate the Ethengar Khanate perilous times, and they were all too aware of the risks and opportuwas sound, and by the time he had done so, all but one of his friends nities conveyed in the inheritance. His duty seemed clear, however, had come and gone many times, building experience and gathering and he forced himself to cast his magical larder for the Imperial doubts aside. He was, nevertheVault. The missing friend, an less, quire relieved when his Elf of some stature, had perished friends offered to join him. inexplicably. Upon arrival in Murkits, MusMustafa mourned his loss, not tafa found that the situation was only from a personal standpoint, grave indeed. In the time since his but also because he had hoped Uncle's passing, much of the to use this hero to gather supBUILDING fief's wealth had been carted off HIZARD TOHER port in the Elven Kingdom of and the country of Ethengar COST Alfheim. The elves were powerKhanate divided into nine sepa10000 CP ful warriors, and the Leader who rate provinces. Further, the once developed their trust would proud castle of Murkits had been likely prevail in the coming conravaged, leaving only a keep, an flict. Mustafa coveted their armory and some rather insignifilands, but opted to expand into cant fortifications. There wasn't the Principalities of Glanuri and even a remnant of the Baron's the Broken Lands first. It was Guard or any other standing mirumored that powerful magic litia. All of these once loyal retainers had apparently pursued more users and clerics could be trained there and none of his current mercenary objectives in the absence of central leadership. The months provinces could support them. He had skirmished briefly with Eol in ahead would be long and arduous, but Mustafa knew what he must the mountainous region known as Rockhome, land of the dwarves, do. Gathering his party of adventurers, Mustafa laid out his plan. and had seen firsthand the power of magic on the battle field. \"Friends, my first task must be to train and re-organize the once Nightspawn, the foulest of all the opposing Lords, had established Page 186 Computer Gaming World "


"A long time ago ha galaxy far, far away.com good and evil clashed. Lab Phoebe THE SOFTWARE TOOLWORKS STAR WARS CHESS Now available in this galaxy for IBM PC and compatibles and MPC CD-ROM THE SOFTWARE TOOLWORKS STAR CHES ombine Star Wars characters with one of the oldest strategy games in the world and you get the Software Toolworks' Star Wars Chess I the most thrilling animated chess game in the galaxy! It's your turn to pit yourself against the dark side.. and may the Force be with you! Up to 72 animated 3-D capture sequences! It's like making your own Star Wars movie on a chessboard! Through dazzling animation, Leia, Luke, C-3PO, Darth Vader and other characters you love come to life in brilliant 3-D sequences. Up to 72 unique capture moves and authentic Star Wars music and sound effects make this a chess program like no other in the universe. Relive battles The Force is with you between the Rebel Alliance and the evil Empire through astounding original artwork and a powerful chess program THE SOFTWARE TOXOLWORKS For the store nearest you or to buy, call 1-800-234-3088 THE SOFTWARE TOOLWORKS STAR WARS CHESS Fame copyright 1993 LucasArts Entertainment Company. All Rights Reserved Used Under Authorization. STAR WARS is a registered trademark of Lucasfilm L.id Underlying computer cude 1993 The Software Toolworks Inc. All Rights Reserved. The Software Toolworks is a registered trademark of the Software Toolworks, Ine. IBM is a registered trademark of International Business Machines Cowa . Circle Reader Service #129 "


"AL-YALTH TE FICHYEK 250 R BALLISTAS 2 CATAPULTY U FIGHTER 50 E FIGHTER 50 EIGHT 18 EGONS: INCORE ! 17691 TROUP COST: SUSY RECOLS$ 853 RETJES BUHUDINGS ELF DARF CLERIC N. USER DROID TOTAL. Cowpol & TO months, rising from regulars to veterans in the process. In the wake of their wrach, keeps and armories were constructed in the mountains to begin training dwarven warriors. Any excess monies collected were invested in more cleric and wizard towers, scattering them among all the provinces that would support them to prevent mass destruction from any magical attack on one province. All was proceeding well until Mustafa's warriors attacked the Makkres Mountains, where Eol had built a huge castle to withstand the assault. Lacking catapults or battering rams to breach the heavy gates, over 200 battle hardened veterans were cut down in the fields surrounding the castle by barrages of javelin sized arrows fired from ballista on the battlements. A second period of consolidation was necessary. Mustafa felt that Eol had his back to the wall, but he needed to buy time to construct the siege engines necessary to reduce the fortress, Magdel and Dauros were as yet uncontacted, but one or both of them had surely come in contact with Eol. In the hopes of spurring their campaigns against Eol, Mustafa sent both leaders aid. If the plan succeeded, Eol would be caught between the narrowing jaws of a vise. While fortifying the castern and southern borders with a steady stream of fighters and dwarves, Mustafa had sufficient reserve force to renew the offensive in the west. The objective would be to drive through the Broken Lands and solidify control of Alfheim and the Republic of Darokin. The initial going was easier than expected, because Nightspawn had used the preceding period of peace to expand southward into the Five Shires and the Grand Duchy of Karameikos. He possessed a lot of warriors, but had foolishly garrisoned them in small groups throughout his lands, as opposed to concentrating force where necessary. As this campaign progressed, the forces of Dauros mounted a surprise amphibious invasion of Bor, and threatened Murkits with a large force. Fortunately, Mustafa had used magic sparingly up to that point, allowing the globe of power to glow a brighter red with each passing month. Death was cast on Dauros's legions, weakening them for the coming slaughter. Concurrently, a meteor storm was summoned to wreck havoc in the M summoned to wreck havoc in the Makkres Mountains. The catapults and ballista were ready, and Mustafa did not want to lose too many TILES SOD CP TUBM Oh a presence in the Broken Lands. For Mustafa's plan to work, he needed to appease Eol from attacking his eastern borders while he massed troops in the west. The rate of his expansion thusfar had precluded the construction of castles or siege engines, both of which would have cased his burden. He proposed a treaty for six months (turns), adding 2500 gold pieces for enticement, which Eol gleefully accepted. Mustafa massed three armies of 200 fighters in separate western provinces, each lead by one of his original party. Other Fighter leaders that had risen from the ranks were left with token forces on the eastern border to guard against treachery. To the south, Mustafa's underbelly was soft and weak. Fortunately, no sign of trouble had appeared in this area. The three armies swept quickly through Glantri, conquering three neutral provinces each month without encountering Nightspawn. The entire resources of the treasury were devoted to building keeps in the wake of their passage. By the end of the third month, the armies were depleted to a quarter of their original strength from nothing more than quelling the local populace. It was time to consolidate the new acquisitions. Two Armories were constructed behind the front lines to replenish the western armies. Other revenue was expended in the construction of a wizard tower in the principality of Boldavia. As plans were contemplared for the coming months, a dark specter arose over the province of Kiyats. In the guise of the Grim Reaper, the visage struck our coat of arms thrice, and 70 of Mustafa's stalwart defenders fell to the ground, dead. Eol was suspected of the deed, though none could prove it. Treachery was in the air. The prophecy was fulfilled shortly thereafter when Eol broke the treaty two months early, taking Kiyats without casualty and defeating the defenders of Bor with minor losses. To counter this offense, Mustafa hastily constructed two more armories in Murkits, which brought his total troop concentration in the home province to 240. These were split and sent to reclaim the contested provinces the next turn. Nightspawn would have to wait for now, and a treaty was struck with him immediately. With four armories fully employed, Murkits turned out a steady stream of 240 warriors a month. These forces continued the counteroffensive through Eol's scattered forces in Rockhome for the next six FICHTEN BATTERING RAM EALISM CATAPULT FICHTER Page 188 Computer Gaming World "


"IBM CD-ROM AMIGA-CD32 IBM OFTWARE XPRESS Save 20-50% On Software HOT! NEW RELEASES! FAST! HUNDREDS To Choose From! DISK CATALOG FREE! SHIPPING -*FREE! CD-ROM CD32 JOIN AND SAVER Strike Squad\" Street Fighter II Microsoft Flight Sim 5.0\" Detroit (Mindcraft) $34.95 300050 (Capcom) $24.95 300071 (Microsoft) $39.95 300097 (Impressions) $29.95 300105 Bloodstone\" Air Support Walker Flashback ** P.O. Box 324 Jefferson, WI 53549-0324 (Mindcraft) $21.95 300051 (Psygnosis) $24.95 300193 (Psygnosis) $21.95 300100 (SSD) $29. 95 3 00115 Lost Admiral\" Leander King's Quest VI ** SSN-21 Seawolf\" (QQP) $31.95 300055 (Psygnosis) $24.95 300194 (Sierra) $39.95 300102 (Elec Arts) 541.95 300155 Lands Of Lore\" Space Shuttle Master of Orion\" Animation Classics Pack Quarter Pole\" Eye Beholder III Drannor ** (Virgin) $29.95 300001 (Virgin) $24.95 300023 (MicroProse) $29.95 300057 (Readysoft) $39 95 300195 MicroLeague) S24.95 300119 (Sir Tech S41 95 300156 Ultima VIII: Pagan\" Lord Of The Rings\" Carriers At War II ** Pinehurst Links Course * Silverball ** BloodNet:Cyberpnk Gothic \" (Origin) $47 95 300159 Interplay) $26.95 300024 (SSG) $34.95 300058 (Access) $10.95 300090 (MicroLeague) $27.95 300120 (MicroProse) $34.95 300157 Rules Of Engagement II Lost Admiral Tom Landry Football Deluxe SimEarth Pirates Gold ** (Impressions) $37.95300002 (QQP) $31.95 300055 Dragon Knight III (Merit) $24. 95 3 00060 (Maxis) $24.95 3 00096 (MicroProse) $34.95 300121 (Megatech) $39.95 300156 When Two Worlds War 7 Cities Of Gold (Comm) ** Red Crystal: 7 Secrets Life ** Legacy: Realm of Terror\" Cohort 11 Amazon ** (impressions) $29.95 300003 (Elect Arts) $34.95 300056 (QQP) $29.95 3 00062 (MicroProse) $34.95 300118 Impressions) $15.95300122 (Access) $34.95 300160 Return Of The Phantom Aegis: Guardian of Fleet\" X-Wing ** Ultima VII: Serpent Isle \" Humans Insult To Injury ** 300061 (MicroProse) $31.95 300004 (Soft Sorcery) $44.95 Dracula \" (Lucas Arts) $34.95 300077 Ongin) $45.95 3 00133 (Gametek) $09.95 300136 (Psygnosis $32.95 300161 Betrayal At Klondor Strike Squad\" Imperial Pursuit USA East Scenery Air Combat Classics\" Civilization (Sierra) $34.95 300005 (Mindcraft) $34.95 300048 (Lucas Arts) $14.95 300078 (SubLogic) $34 95 300139 (Lucas Arts $39.95 300137 (MicroProse) $39.95 300162 Goblins II Stunt Island\" Seal Team Speed Racer\" Microleague Pro Pack\" Fleet Defender: The F-14\" (Sierra $19.95 3 00006 (Disney) $2995 3 00073 (Elec Arts) $34 95 300067 (Accolade) $19.95 300072 (Microleague) $26.95 300138 (MicroProse) $44.95 300164 Crusaders Of The Drk Savant Blue Force: Next Of Kin\" Mechwarrior 2: The Clans \" Hole-In-One Min Golf Dix!\" Flight Assignment: A.T.P\" NHL Hockey (Sir Tech) $34.95_ 300013 (Tsunami) $34.95 300032 (Activision) $37.95 300068 (DigiTek) $18 95 3 00075 (SubLogic S29.95 300140 (Elec Arts) $41.95 300166 Privateer ** Grandmaster Chess Dix Ed** NFL Coach Club Football\" B-Wing ** Pinball Dreams Lost In Time\" (Orgin) 545.95 3 00014 Capstone) $29.95 300026 (MicroProse) $34 95300069 (Lucas Arts) $14.95 300079 (21st Century) $24.95 300147 (Coktel) $34.95 300168 Day Of The Tentacle ** Eight-Ball Deluxe Spear Of Destiny\" Indiana Jones:Fate Of Atlant Pinball Fantasies Shadow Of Yserblus\" (Lucas Arts) $31.95 300015 (Amtex) $29.99 3 00027 (id Software) $34 95300063 (Lucas Arts) $31.95 300081 (21st Century) $2495 300148 (Sierra) $21.95 300169 Armour-Geddon Innisbrook Links Course ** Coaster ** Lucky's Casino Adventure * Clash Of Steel\" Unnecessary Roughness\" (Psygnosis) $2495 300016 (Access) $14.95 300028 (Disney) $24.95 3 00074 (QQP $35.95 3 00083 (SSD) $37.95 300116 Silver Seed ** (Accolade) $32.95 300165 Empire Deluxe Scenarios * World War II: South Pacific Challenge of Five Realms\" (Origin) $14.95 Belfry: Links Course More Incredible Machines\" 3 00017 New World) $14.95 300029 (QAP) $29.95 3 00082 (MicroPlay $34 95 300085 (Access) $14.95_ 300149 (Sierra) $26.95 3 00170 Metal & Lace: Robo Babes\" Blue And The Gray F-15 Strike Eagle III Band Of The Cosmic Forge Star Control II ** Forgot Castle:Awakening\" (Megatech) $26.95 300018 Impressions) $34.95 300030 (MicroProse) $39.95 300084 (Sir Tech) $29.95_ 300197 (Accolade) $29.95 300150 Twin Dolphin) $49.95 300172 Third Reich Wing Commander Acdy\" Great War 1914-1918 \" Heirs To The Throne\" Jonny Qust: Mayan Waris ** Inca \" (Avalon Hill) $20.95 300019 (Origin) $29.95 300031 (SSI) $37. 95 3 00088 (OOP) $3195 300086 (Hollyware) $24.95 300108 (Sierra) $34.95 300196 Warlords II ** Protostar: War On Frontier ** Bountiful Links Course\" Fantasy Empires Dungeon Hack\" Eric The Unready (SSG $34.95 300020 (Tsunami) $34 95 300033 (Access) $10.95 300089 (SSI) $34.95 300125 (SSI) $34.95 300110 (Accolade) $29 95 300174 Cobra Mission \" Dune Il SimFarm ** Desert Strike Brix. Ringworld (Megatech S41.95 300036 300008 (Virgin $29.95 (Maxis) $29 95 (Elec Arts) $29 95 _300054 300128 (Microleague) $19.95 300111 (Accolade) $32 95 Prince of Persia 2\" 300175 Links 386 Pro ** SimCity 2000\" Mario Is Missing\" Lost Vikings Wacky Funsters\" (Broderbund) $34 95300011 (Access) $34.95 300037 (Maxis) $36.95 300059 (Soft Toolwks) $29.95 300129 (Interplay) $24.95 300113 (Accolade) $16.95 300176 Mig-29: Deadly Adversary Humans SimAnt Strike Commander ** Elder Scrolls: The Arena\" Alone In The Dark ** (Spect Holo) $44.95 300034 (Gametek) $22.95 300038 (Maxis) $30.95 300190 (Origin $45.95 3 00130 (Bathezda) $39.95 300152 (Interplay) $29.95 300177 Comanche: Max Overkill \" Beat The House ** SimLife ** Frnt Pg Spts: Football Pro ** IndyCar Racing ** Battle Chess (Nova Logic) $39.95 300048 (Spirit Disc) $24.95 300039 (Maxis) $34.95 300141 (Dynamix) $41.95 300134 (Papyrus) $37.95 300153 Railroad Tycoon Dix\" (Interplay) $24.95 300178 Empire Deluxe ** El-Fish Syndicate Trump Castle Ill ** Chessmaster 3000 ** (MicroProse) $34.95 300042 (New World) $29.95 300040 (Maxis) $29.95 300142 (Elec Arts) $34.95 300135 (Capstone) $29.95 300154 (Soft Toolwks) $24.95 300182 Aces Over Europe\" Gateway II: Homeworld\" A-Train Dark Sun: Shatter Lands Global Domination ** DarkSeed (Sierra) $34.95 3 00021 (Legend) $31.95 300041 (Maxis) $34.95 300143 (SSD) $46.95 300087 (Impressions) $29.95 300103 (Merit) $34 95 V For Victory IV * 300185 Wayne's World\" SimCity Classic Space Hulk A-Train Const Set \" Dune (Elec Arts) $39.95 300022 (Capstone) 521.95 300043 (Maxis S24.95 300145 (Elec Arts) 534.95 (Maxis) $18.95 300144 (Virgin) $29.95 300186 Simon The Sorcerer .. Freddy Pharkas: Frontier ** Return To Zork\" Spaceward Ho!\" War In Russia\" Legend Of Kyrandia: Fables (Sierra) S34.95 300007 (Infocom) $26.95 300044 (Infocom) $34 95 300064 (New World) $29.95 300093 (SSI) $49.95 300171 Virgin) $29.95 300187 Lampoon's Chess Maniac\" Rags To Riches \" Star Trek: Judgment Rites \" Lemmings Stronghold \" Scrabble Deluxe Comp Ed (Spect Holo) $34.95__300009 (Interplay) $29.95 300045 (Interplay) $31.95 3 00065 Psygnosis) $24.95 300094 (SSI) $35.95 300173 (Virgin $19.95 300189 Creepers Earth Invasion Sam & Max Hit The Road Lemmings II: The Tribes Star Trek: 25th Anniversary Robo Sport (Psygnosis) $24.95 300010 (3D1 Prod) $20.95 300046 Michael Jordan In Flight \" (Lucas Arts) $31.95_ 300066 (Psygnosis) $29.95 300106 (Interplay) $32.95 300179 (Broderbund) $20.95 300191 Dominion\" Kings Ransom Wing Commander Deluxe Hired Guns Agony (Elec Arts) $39.95 300012 (Mindcraft) $39.95 300049 (Readysoft) $29.95 300070 (Origin) $45.95 300095 (Psygnosis) $31.95 300109 (Psygnosis) $24.95 300192 = Not Available For The IBM \" = Not Available For The Amiga SEE HOW EASY IT IS TO SAVE UP TO 50% ON YOUR SOFTWARE PURCHASES.  Just f in and mail the coupon in this ad (Select payment method) and we'l send you your introductory YESI Count MO INI Send me my INTRODUCTORY selection il srod below (which I am package along with a copy of your first disk catalog already receiving at up to 50% ofr) and I agree to purchase at least one mora  You agree to buy just ONE moro soloction from us in the next year (Pnced $19.95 or above) you may selection at your pull price within the next year. decide to discontinue receiving our catalog at any time thereafter. Our regular prices are normally at least 20% lower than the suggested retail price. (A shipping and handling charge will be added to all orders of $100 or less Selection Formation FREE shipping for orders over $100, oxcluding tax) Selection Number: Price: IBM AMIGA FREE Disk magazine onch month. Each magazine contains 250 items and can be saved to your hard drive Water Poe Jetectes de Pas M Are tar 15 Bus Gay to keep an archive of up to 4 months of items. This will give you up to 1.000 different items to choose from. Each item is described in detail and most items also have a picture description. If an item is not in your catalog and Please send Me Future Catalogs IBM itaar With ar Grat) AMIGA RUTH you are looking for a specific title you can request it in our REQUEST section of the catalog software program.. In The Following Format Waren 20 or Crepe YOU control what you want and what you don't want. Use our Easy-Order method of placing your order via 35 DIA . DISA your computer modem if you are paying with a credit card or COD. (The call is FREE) or use our convenient order card which will be included in each mailing Orders are usually shipped out within 1 week of your order Choch method of payment: U charge this purchase to my Credit Card . Our BONUS plan is designed to save you 20%-50% on many of your purchases through our company Onco you have fulfilled your agreement with us you will be entitled to take a selection at 20%-50% off our regular price Payment Is Enclosed 10 metrice VISA MASTERCARD PLUS $. Mping PUS TATT OPPIM with each selection you purchase at price. Depending on your purchasing habits, you can save 100's of dollars on your annual software purchases. C.0.0.Ad Selection Price PLUS 5495 sepping Acct. No. . You always have the option to purchase your software in any format that the selection is available in (CDPIVS $5.00 COD, Charpe P S Panfit appilule) ROM, CD32, 5%\" or 3X\" Floppy Disk). Our company supports IBM & AMIGA computer systems only. Use your Credit Card to place your order. (No Surcharge on Credit Cards) You may also Pre-Pay with a WI Residents Add 5.5% Tax wine is signiture personal check only by sending us your check with your order (Using our order cards) but please allow 14 days for the check to clear. We also accept C.O.D Orders CO.D. order must add $5.00 to their order total Name Send TO: GOVERMENT AND SCHOOL P.O's WELCOMED We will also have special interest issues full of educational and productivity software Address Apt. . If the Application is missing, write to Software Express, PO, Box 324. Jefferson, WI 53540-0324 Software Express City State ZipP.O. Box 324 NOTE Al Items In This Ad Are For 3.5\" Disks Only Once you join, you can select from any available formats Phone Number 1 Jefferson, WI 53549.0324 Shipping is FREE with an order over $100 -WE DO NOT SNIP TO P.O. BOXES Circle Reader Service #128 "


"of them in eliminating Eol, for nents, his forces were scattered all now he knew that Magdel was CHARACTER CREATION over the land. This made them easy crouched like a snake in Soddertargets, despite their experience. fjord and Ylaruam. Further, Mustafa had expended all With two-thirds of Mystara in of his accumulated Magical enhis grasp, Mustafa had sufficient ergy, and lost a good number of resources to build concentrations heros to dangerous quests and ill of armories in Alfheim, massing VEXORG fated attacks. Magdel capitalized deadly armies of Archers that LAWFU. on the weak borders and began an ES could swing to any front in a few across the board offensive, ignorSTIR 9 Der short months. Using a Rod of INT 10 CON ing all requests for a treaty. WIS True Sight brought back from one 6 CHA With each passing month, Musof the hero quests, Mustafa sought tafa's base of power shrank, while our the largest concentrations of Magdel's grew. The heroes that troops in the enemy lands. Wizard lead her forces were indeed powerand Cleric towers were targeted in ful, and Mustafa saw the need to the same manner. Tornados and Lightning Storms were wrested from personally coordinate attacks against them in each battle. In the end, the magical orbs and sent where they could do the most damage. he succeeded in turning back her offensive when she controlled fully Structures crumbled under the onslaught, and even elite troops were 40% of the land. Mustafa's Elves deserved the most credit for changdestroyed in the ensuing chaos. ing the tide of events, though the ability of his many clerics to turn Despite the aid that was given, Dauros did not prove much of a Magdel's undead legions could not be discounted. threat. His center of power was in the island Kingdom of Ostland. At the feast of celebration that marked the war's end, Mustafa and he had already been driven from the mainland by Magdel. Eol reflected on the lessons of his campaign. He vowed to never discount fell swiftly before the assembled sicge engines, though he did outlast the affects of magic. Also, to further his skill as a diplomat, using this Dauros. Nightspawn proved clusive, as he mounted a campaign of refined art of gentlemen to obtain his true objectives. Finally, he cat and mouse through the archipelago of island fortresses that ran learned not to underestimate the presence of heroes on the field, and along the southern expanse of Mystara. Magdel proved to be an to husband well the men under their command, as one elite unit is entirely different proposition. worth five of fresh recruits. These things he now knew well, and would By the time Mustafa had succeeded in eliminating the other opponot forget the next time the Empire is threatened. Cow COMPUTER SOFTWARE CLOSEOUTS >>>COMMERCIAL SOFTWARE FOR IBM AT BARGAIN PRICES<<< BASKETBALL IBM APPLE II. C-64 3 IN 1 FOOTBALL Unmatched statistical accuracy. Stats compiler. Full team and player statistical breakdown. You call the plays and timeouts. Compare scouting reports. Use the two-minute rule  766 total teams included, NFL, WFL, USFL, WLAF & College from 1925 to present. Trade, draft or input teams. Standings and League Leaders! BASKETBALL THE PRO GAME You're the coach and you choose line-ups, shot selection, style of play and much more. Stats compiler. Full team and individual player stats kept for up to an 82 game schedule. All players rated by actual statistics and tendencies  27 current teams and over 190 great teams from the past included. Standings and League Leaders! IBM STEALS, YOUR CHOICE $5 .. TGNS OF IBM HITS...$15 EACH CROSSHOW COURIR,TKO, YIOF HORUS, WORLD CLASS LEADERBOARD, ECHELON, GUNOAT ARCHIPELAGOS, ROCKET KOCKETS, GHOSTS * .GRAND PRIX CIRCUIT,HOVIRFORCE, TEST DRIVE2 GORLINS, PRESIDENT IS MISSING, SUPER HULY 2.. STRATEGIC CRAPS, STREET ROD, FREED.C. POWER HALL. GAMI: IMPOSSILE MISSION 2, CALIFORNIA HOI.ITICS, HILL STREET BLUES, BIG BUSINESS GAMIS, SUS 11A1111 1A (RACKIWN, WERLI). ARMADA 2523, DUSK OF THE GODS, MOONSHINE . GAMES, WINIER GAMES, MEATII SWORN, STREET. RACERS, KILLING CLOUD, MISSION IMPOSSIBLE FIGHTING MAN, TURNO (ITAMPIONS, OUTRUN.\" STEEDHALL 2. TEENAGE MUTANT NINJA TURTLES. SILI NI SERVICE SITIFIRE ACE, SHADOWGATE. VIDEO POKER FOR WINDOWS, CHESSNET FOR CONCENTRATION WELL TRIS STARQUAKE FACES WINDOWS. BLACKJACK FOR WINDOWS, REVELATION NIGNI TUNI1R, MINTY PYTHON, VIGAS CASINO, KNIGHTS OF THE SKY, FLAMES OF FREEDOM, SPECIAL HARRARIAN, SORT OF KINGS, MAGIC JOHNSON, FORCES, GREENS UPGRADE, LIGHTSPEED, COVERT SIA | VIAIR R11 It il || Gl, GAUXILIT1 . ACTION, F-15 STRIKE EAGLE 2, MEGATRAVELLER I. DAYS OF THUNDER, FOUR CRYSTALS OF TRAZERE $10 SPECIALS FOR IBM CASINO CHALLENGE, BAD BLOOD, PUNISHER KONTO ALONE, TEST DRIVE, DRAGON WAKS. MILLENIUM, TROIKA, TWILIGHT INI, CODINAME VEGAS VIDEO BOKER, RATING THE HOUSE ATI ICHMAN, THEXDER, FIRESTAWK, HOYLES BOOK OF 111. ACNIACX, C'RIBIACE STRATEGIC CRAPS GAMES 2. OIL'S WELL. MANHUNTER SAN FRANCISCO. CHIAMIONSHIP POKER RIVOLUTION 71. BAT. PALERROY 2. SARGON 4 HIDDEN AGENDA WARLORDS HUSIHUCK, JEOPARDY 2 ANNIVERSARY 1 MACARTHUR'S WAR, SECRET OF THE SILVER BLADES, WILL OF FORTUNI (KOL), MID WINTER DUCK ROGERS 2. MATRIX CUBED, DARK QUEEN OF DR IXXIM'S REVENGE, GUNSHIP, FALCON E XRYN KRYNN, CONFI.ICT KOREA, GATEWAY TO THE SAVAGE AMAZING SPIDERMAN COLONEL'S BEQUEST FRONTIER TREASURES OF THE SAVAGE FRONTIER. HOSTAG RESCUE MISSION, DIAVU 7, HARRIER I DEATH KNIGHTS OF KRYNN, SUPER SPACE INVADERS COMRAT SIMULATOR, CONQUEST OF CAMELOT, MEGAFORTRESS, AMARILLO SLIM'S REALIOKER. MANUNTER NEW YORK, ROTOX, ARKANOI 2. 12. VENGEANCE OF EXCALIBUR, COUNTDOWN TO POLICE QUEST?, 111 ROES OF THE LANCE DXOXOMSDAY. MACINETIC SCROLLS KOBLUE 7 SPIRITS OFRA STARCKXISE WARRIOR HOU S E . . . .. TRACXINS OF FLAMI, MEDIEVAL. 1.ORDS, HARINN SPECIAL $20 DEALS SCENARIO EDITOR, MOND'S FIGHT PALACE HARD'S TALE CONSTRUCTION SET KNOWLEDGE SIERRA SUPER SPECIAL ADVENTURE, SPELLCASTING 101, HYPERSPEED, LAND 20 tach or more 15 sach SEA. AIR TRILOGY, SILENT SERVICE 2. RED STORM O TROK CLERY , KININ QUINI I..., NIACHI RISING. ALLIED FORCES BUNDLE. F.1 STEALTH FIGHTER! QUISITI, RISTO 1111 DRACHIN 1 I ISTRI SUL IROLEAGUE HASEBALL., SAVAGE EMPIRE, REALMS LARIY I /ILIARI, TRYSIKKAMISI 1.OST ADMIRAL, FIUNT FOR RED OCTOBER HIT OUESTIO 11HHARI TIINA CRISIS IN THE KREMLIN, PROPHECY OF THE SHADOW PREMIUM $25 BLOWOUTS SHAIXOW SORCERER, V FOR VICTORY: D-DAY or 1-117A SIL ALTH HIGHER, GUNSHIP INI, MANTIS, RUSSIAN FRONT or MARKET GARDEN DARXLANIS, GREENS ULTIMA SAVAGE EMPIRE VISAMCORDERS CALL TOLL-FREE 1000's more Items for all different 1-800-676-66 16 computers... Apple, Atarl, Amiga, C64/128, Credit Card Orders Only 111 $25 minimum ) MAC, & lots more IBM/MS-DOS !! COMPSUIT TO ORDER: Send check or money order including shipping charges or ss for USA SX for Canada, Slo all others Califomians must include 725% sales tax To receive our P.O. BOX 5160 catalog with 1000's of closeouts for all computer types, send $2 in cash or U.S. SAN LUIS OBISPO postage stamps.. DO NOT CALL FOR A CATALOG!!! A catalog is free with any CA 93403 order from this add. To check for an item not listed here, call (805) 344-6616. ORDER TODAY! Mail check or money order for $39.95 each. You may call in and order with VISA or Master Card. Please add $3.00 for shipping and handling. For more information, call or write for a free brochure. 1-800-477-7032 LANGE HAFFNER GAMES P.O. BOX 100594  NASHVILLE, TN 37224 615/366-8088 Circle Reader Service #80 Circle Reader Service #49 Page 190 Computer Gaming World "


" Guess what's coming for dinner... OLAM DDOON NGEN DNGEL 'All hell just broke loose in the heavens. Your mission: kick some mean, green Alien bult! Overcome 18 labyrinth levels of the most ferocious creatures ever to terrorize the cosmos. Then set the Intex Space Station for self-destruct and face the biggest challenge of all: get out quick or die! Alien Breed is not for those who are afraid of the dark. 18 levels of Alien encounters and deadly missions Simultaneous 2 player option ASS Lulu utilitis  d-smooth screen scrolling, Powerful sound effects and digitized speech. MICROLEAGUE .. TEANDO Developed by Team 17 Ltd. Published by MICROLEAGUE interactive software U.O.P., 201 Bellevue Building, Newark, DE 19702 1-800-334-6572 Circle Reader Service #92 1-800-334-6572 Circle Reacler Service 492 interacche sofnan "


"COMPUTER WARGAMING WORLD \"I Came, 1 Played, I Conquered» Call Me A Dreamer (Just Don't Call Me Late For The Game) by Alan Emrich Art by Rodger MacGowan; Copyright 1994 RBM Graphics GORPUTER WARGAMING WORLD tice? In the meantime, we must consider the more immediate future of our hobby. First, the bad news. After finishing his work on CPU Bach, Sid Meier is finding it tough to get motivated to go back to his Civil War game. It has been sitting on his back burner for a while, so we're watching closely to see what toy Sid will pick up and start playing with next. Among the good news, there are several random dispatches. Another inter-network CHQ tournament has been launched. This one is featuring the new 2.x version of the game and involves several players from the CompuServe and Prodigy networks. Computer-enabled board wargamers will be pleased to hear that more boardgame titles are appearing for the Aide de Camp system all the time. The Gamers have released their Perryville, Barren Victory and Stalingrad Pocket for the ADC system, among others. Scott Hamilton, who is presently busy preparing his WWII East Front tactical armor game (Tigers on the Prowl), will be working on a major 2.0 revision for the popular Aide de Camo kit. In this issue.. Flight Commander Review A Paper Chase by Alan Emrich .... 194 The Data Highway as a Military Objective While at the Western Cable Show back in December, I attended a panel where the likes of Rupert Murdoch, Ted Turner, John Malone and Trip Hawkins discussed the future of 500-channel and interactive TV. The possibilities of the future were on the lips of every attendee at show. Wandering through the various booths, I noticed one for The History Channel, coming soon to a cable station near you. Since many of us see the world through simulated field glasses (i.c., \"wargamer's eyes\"), purring The History Channel together with the interactive television that is rapidly approaching would make any wargamer smile. When the networks finally achieve interactive history, we'll probably be fighting each other to be first in line and then we'll be fighting each other on-line, big time. Why end this daydream here? Imagine the Interactive History Channel of the future While scanning your listing of favorite programs, you notice that Wednesday night at 8:00 PM is The Age of Napoleon. The show's concept is that cach week, a group of veteran wargamers (and amateur historians) would get together to maneuver units and issue commands within the game's structure through their interactive TV system. Meanwhile, some entertaining commentator/historian (David Chandler:) follows the game, presents the history of the age (complete with anecdotes) and interviews some of the players. All the while, information is coming in on the forging and breaking of alliances, military maneuvers, battles being fought, etc. Professional actors in period costume could do cameos of prominent individuals from the era to help bring it all to life. Wow! Reality Check Sure, the ratings might not be that great, but with 500 channels, who is going to noInspecting the Walls of Rome by Emperor \"Hadrian\" E. Dille ... The Global Domination Review Gathers Chuck Moss...... 200 Aide de CGW? 206 Italian Commander: \"If you are a great general, come down and fight me.\" Marius: \"If you are a great general, come and make me fight you.\" It's no secret that we like wargaming strategy articles, but we also like tables, outlines, indexes and other \"game aids.\" Allow me to put before you, the talented grognards among our readers, an open solicitation for supplemental wargaming material that would be considered game aids. If you see the need for a popular computer wargame to have supplemental material, and you re up to the task of creating them, give me a call here at CGW and let's see if we can work an article our of it. You can reach me from 8 AM to 5 PM Pacific Time at (714) 283-3000 x25. Take this to your hearts, and give me your charts. If you're able, give us a table. You get the idea. If you re able, give From the bunker, Alan Emrich CGW Gaius Marius (c. 157BC 86BC), Adcock, The Roman Art of War Under the Republic, 1940 Page 192 Computer Gaming World "


"St-Ge 50 YEARS , Nantets G OF GLOBE GOTHICT Brampo cralds a new generation of War Simulations ampaignieriur a now ene ation of Warnula os with more depth the atore and time is real brought his knowledge to bear on computer gaming with an end result that tooks and feels more realistic than ever before. All aspects involved in the running of an army have been considered, so that now you can place yourself in comment on either side at any level in the chain of command. Over 1307 templates of the most significant enter the battlefield in one of the military forces from 56 different 152 types of military vehicles. nations of the last 50 years APOS and Mobile Artillery. have been included to gain an utilise weapons ranging from insight into real conflicts such as wire-guided missiles, rockets. Korea, Vietnam and Operation homing missiles, and machine Desert Storm guns supported by laser rangefinders to tracer The action takes the form of fast rangefinders, night vision, and 3D graphics if you choose to gun stabilizers HAdepth to Campaign II is Coved by the all new strategy. Xpem Military consultant, Wilf owen from recent conflicts has JONATHAN GRIFFITHS EID A Company, Platoon 2: Friendly M1 Abrams Half speed 2299 SAMPAIGN YEARS OF GLOBAL G Tomyo 3 = empire = 1-0-0-0-N C h iemged as he most r Aprovecha Who level da the closely resembling that of a real son action as mulhelicopters in ito-grouno SkairMi air atite neplou the anima an during fence battle veld ao on la proved sent ment aturing all the modern aport systems: gu deo missiles ciets, homing m silaset ngefinders, gun sabilizers and night sichts. Sukhumatu N asree-Shire Anun Mandau AVIODO D) 0066 0.0.2 a 0.0.0. tehran CAMPAIGN WAS BIG CAMPAION WAS GOOD CAMPAIGN II IS BIGGER, BETTER ANTIQUINE SAMLINY THE MILITARY SIMULATION OF ITS YEAR= IRAQ Empire Software. The Spires. 677 High Road, North Finchley, London N12 ODA. Telephone: 081-343 9143 Empire Software is a registered trademark of Entertainment International (UK) Ltd. G 1993 Empire Software Jonathan Griffiths Circle Reader Service 161 s TIWA RI "


"REVIEW Air-to-Air Combat For The Reflex Impaired Aixspeed A Review of Big Time Software's Flight Commander 1000 by Alan Emrich File Edit Display Next Pilot Radio Windows Options LAIRAV OS T EM | | D elieve it or not, there were \"flight sims\" as a boardgame, but with the computer keepSince the screen includes an overview map for long before there were computers to ing track of all the number crunching and \"telescrolling,\" several zoom levels to play on, fly them on. In the glory days of board \"boring parts» of air combat in the jet age. (I plus smooth scrolling buttons, managing wargaming (during the 1970s and early 80s), can almost hear the voice of Sid Meier saying, large air battles is about as easy as can be. cardboard counters representing individual \"Charles, just give 'em the really cool parts\" aircraft flew across gridded paper maps. Supbecause that's exactly what Flight Commander Praise The Lord porting each counter was a separate sheet of has.) And Pass The Ammunition paper used to simulate its cockpit control Before each mission, you must arm all of panel. Upon this cockpit sheet were more Flight School the airplanes on your side. The number of cardboard chits to designate speed, altitude, The well designed manual starts you off planes is up to you; Flight Commander probank, incline, weapons, performance ability, with a quick tutorial lesson, blowing up a few vides the freedom to vary force levels, and you damage, etc. Although we had to envision ground targets in a cakewalk mission. The can create large squadron level engagements much of what was going on with our mind's game includes many such single mission scewith the click of a mouse. Since Flight Comeye, we were flying dogfights with planes of narios. These cover the era from Korea to the mander covers the entire span of jet aircraft every era back in those days—and it was great! near future of jet combat. While there are history, the quality of heat and radar homing some historical encounters, most missiles, \"dumb\" and laser guided bombs and seem to be hypothetical engagesuch, all vary with the epoch played. Here, ments. you can decide if you want more radar or hear Tutorial number two is far more seeking missiles, bombs or extra fuel capacity, interesting. This takes you to the etc. whatever your plane can carry without other half of the game, commandexceeding its hard points and still maintain ing a squadron of planes through a flight weight. Honestly, I had more fun with campaign. Campaigns are conthe old \"clunkers\" from the Vietnam and necred missions fought over a seArab-Israeli wars of the 70s than with the rics of days, where one or two newer stuff. I learned a new respect for pilors missions per day might be conwho flew during my formative years with ducted. With about a dozen planes those old weapons. For other players, howand pilots, keeping pilots rested ever, it is easy enough to suit one's own tastes and damaged planes repaired adds from the wide selection of mission and armaNE a new dimension to Flight Comment options to choose from, although I ali mander. would urge players to try every era. Clearly, Charles Moylan cherished those Flight Commander is played days as well. He has created a one-man comon a square grid, with each Flight Commander puter game company, Big Time Software, square and each level of altitude Inc., and produced what is, essentially, a representing 1/3 of a mile. Each TITLE: Flight Commander computerized flight combat boardgame. game turn simulates 7.5 secPRICE: $69.95 SYSTEM: Macintosh Though an admitted computer joystick jock, onds of real time. Aircraft can REQUIREMENTS: Mac Plus or better, System6.0.5 or higher, Charles wanted to create a computer game in face in any of 8 directions (the Monochrome: 1MB RAM, which his tactical skills and knowledge of air square's four sides and corners) Color, System 6: 2MB RAM, Color, System 7: 3MB RAM combat techniques would determine the outand maneuvers are conducted PROTECTION: DESIGNER: Charles Moylan come of engagements, not his hand-eye coorin 45 degree increments. The PUBLISHER: Big Time Software, Inc. dination. Taking a page from those map will either be a pale blue Baltimore, MD 21212-6444 cumbersome paper wargames of yesteryear, and white for air-to-air duels or (410) 366-8984 he created Flight Commander to be as detailed brown for bombing missions, dhe Next Paul Eu Pula C-17 ERLBET COMMANDERE None P.O. Box 39444 Page 194 Computer Gaming World "


"Stop playing with yourself. Get 15 hours of gut-stomping fun for less than $20. No more figuring out in one day how to beat the puny A.I. of a computer game. Oh, no; I'm afraid you're up against something just a little more difficult this time: the nastiest, meanest, smartest, most cunning opponents in the game world-other humans. With a computer and modem, you can team with-or against-some of the best gamers in the Known World. Take your place as a European vassal lord in The .Hundred Years' WarTM and try your Machiavellian mettle in the epic battle for empire and prestige. Don the hauberk of a warrior and travel dangerous lands in the color graphics role-playing world of rakkarTM for the Island of Kesmai Play the latest version of the very first true multiHow to register for an NVN subscription: player game, MUD II: The Quest For To register on-line, set your comm software to 1200, 2400 or 9600 bps, N-8-1, and ImmortalityTM... or test your strategy full duplex. Dial 1-800-336-9092. When connected, enter CG94PL and press against dozens of other would-be <RETURN>. Then enter name, address and Visa, Discover Card. American Galactic Emperors in Galaxy II: Express,\" MasterCard number or EFT information. Your Starter Kit will be mailed right away. Expanding EmpiresTM For more information, call 1-800-336-909. So stop playing with yourself! Membership is just $8.95 a month and includes 4 hours of non-prime access in standard services. Or, for $19.95 a month you can have 15 hours of access in standard services during non-prime time. Thereafter, access rates are as low as $2.50 an hour after 6pm local time and all day weekends. Isn't that a small price to pay to get your butt waxed? NVN-Good stuff. Good price. Subscription fee is $8.95 per month, which includes 4 hours of non-prime time access in standard services. 9600 bps access available at no surcharge. Standard services are $2.50/hour during non-prime (6pm 7am weekdays, and all day weekends); and S7.50/hour during prime-time (7am 6pm, Monday Friday). Premium services carry additional charges. Unused portions of monthly hours provided by subscription may not be carried forward or transferred. Hourly rates and service content are subject to change without notice. NVN is a service mark of National Videotex Network, Corp. All others are for identification pumoses only and belong to their respective companies or organizations. Internet mail ASK ABOUT OUR OTHER INTERNET SERVICES NVN Circle Reader Service #101 "


"D W File Edit Display Nent Pilot Radio Windows Options ITH Djel FM ARR FEM 0 1 Mert Pot NA File Edit Display Next Pilot Radio Windows Options BAYITY ALLERIE minute or two, which kept things get better attack angles from this useful feedmoving quickly and maintained back, and learning the minimum and maximy interest level like boardgames mum ranges (in squares) for firing certain on this subject never could. radar homing missiles. Players will also get a feel when they're up against superior technol\"Bandits! Bandits!\" ogy. Sometimes ECM can protect a plane Flight Commander comes with a from everything but a cannon's gunsights. plethora of sound effects and many What I found so striking about Flight Comdigitized voices to liven up play, mander was how fast the game moved along. both at appropriate times and ranI finished most scenarios in about 15-20 mindomly. Each turn begins with an utes once I got the hang of the system (which audio cue of a jet passing overhead was pretty quick). Setting up another mission and the beeps, chatter and exploor campaign takes less than five minutes, so sions progress from there. The my verdict is that Flight Commander has got audio atmosphere is terrific, al«replay value\" written all over it for those who though it can be toggled off when can handle a strategy game on tactical jet you need to play in \"stealth mode.\" combat, rather than a real time sim. After individually plotting your aircraft's Flight Commander is not only a fine solitaire course, pressing the Next Turn button simulwargame (the Al is better than I am at its best taneously executes every plane's plotted malevels, but in modern aerial duels, that's not saying much, I'm afraid), but two human players can play on the LAS KOLL same machine with ease, quickly NEZ taking turns entering their moves and then watching together as they are resolved. There is no play-byemail or play-by-modem feature supported, but I have a feeling that these will come if the game catches on. on. Presently, Flight Commander is only available for the Macintosh, but I found out that Big Time Software is already investigating a Windows version of the game. Frankly, Flight Commander would neuvers. Cannon fire is automatically rebe a perfect Windows Wargame due to its solved whenever the opportunity presents irsolved whenever the opportunity presents irquick, simple and exciting play. It is easy to self during this execution phase. The firing of envision it as a \"10 minute break\" game. all other weapons actually occurs during planning phase. Bombs will score their hits (if DYOB (Design Your Own Battles) any) immediately when fired, as will missiles unless the advanced rule is switched on that The glory of Flight Commander would have moves missiles during the execution phase to be in its flexible design-your-own scenario concurrently with aircraft. This latter option features. From a simple display, you can select can create some real nail biting as missiles can create some real nail bicing as missile offensive and defensive combatants, the mismight take two or three turns to sion objective for the offensive player (bombclose with an enemy-two to three File Edit Olsploy Next Pilot Radio Windows Options turns that they can fire back! After a few mouse clicks, your aircraft are armed and the mission begins. If you are fortunate enough to have area radar (when using that advanced rule), you'll know where your enemy is on the map at all times (just like a boardgame). Players without EWACS or ground based radar to paint the sky must find their targets with either aircraft radar or get within eyeball distance (and with long range missiles, planes can be dead before they'll ever make visual contact). The enemy might begin in your sights or on your tail, but usually they are at some relative position inbetween. Planes paths are plotted individually by way of a simulated joystick to the left of the main playing area. By clicking on and repositioning this joystick, you alter the distance, altitude and direction of that plane's next move for the current game turn. Effects of acceleration and deceleration will not kick in until the following turn, however. Diving for the second consecutive turn allows the option of performing a Split-S maneuver, while climbing two turns in a row affords the opportunity to perform an Immelmann. Barrel Rolls and High-G mancuvers can also be plotted, although the latter has only a chance of success (based upon the airplane type and pilot skill). I found this interface to be so intuitive, quick and casy that my turns were plotted in only a OVDA LASON TORTA SA REZZA The NEW CAPE COD CONNECTION ELECTRONIC SHOPPING MALL 1.4 Phantom C . VEYE D IY Pro M47 Our BBS is back 24 HOUR Electronic On-Line Shopping is available. . Download our complete new & used Software, Tabletop & Sports Apparel Catalogs, updated daily with new products. OnLine Ordering 24 Hours . One of the largest used software listing available today. Have us sell your used software on consignment. Robert Berry, Proprietor 21 PLEASANT VIEW AVENUE FALMOUTH, MA 02540 BBS 508-548-2908. HELP 508-457-0738 24 HOUR FAX 508-457-4558 Chaffing At The Hit Defenses are handled by probability tables within the program. Certainly pilot skills, plane types, and technology levels are all factored into the equations. Missiles and cannons might miss for any of a number of reasons, and the player(s) are notified of the reasons why they missed when they do. I found myself quickly learning to EN PRE extent E Circle Reader Service #44 Page 196 Computer Gaming World "


"ZERO'S & ONE'S ASK FOR PRICE LIST AND TAKE A LOOK AT OUR SALE ITEM (800) 788-2193 Take Break:Pinball 29.95 Yobi Magic Spell Tricks 29.95 call HARDWARE CREATIVE LABS: CD 16 Kit (Business) 635.00 Discovry 8 CDRom Kit 399.00 Discovry 16 CDRom Kit 469.00 Edutnmnt 8 CDRom Kit 449.00 Edutnmnt 16 CDRom Kit 519.00 Snd Blaster 16 218.95 Snd Blaster Pro Dlx 119.95 Video Blaster 299.00 Video Spigot 399.00 MEDIA VISION: Fusion 16 CDRom Kit 499.95 PAS 16 Snd cd 165.95 Pro Aud Studio 16 189.00 Pro Audio Spectrum 16 MM Kit 899.00 TOSHIBA 3401 200ms Int w/Pas Cable 495.00 AI TECH: Pro PC/TV Plus 309.95 Wave Watcher-TV 419.00 Video Surge 615.95 OTHER SND, MM, & VIDEO: Computer Eyes RT 434.95 Gravis Ultra Sound 129.00 TelevEyes VGA-TV 199.00 WIN TV 399.95 SPORTS Car & Driver Front Page Sports Ftbl Jack Nicklaus Sig Golf Jordan in Flight Links 386 Pro NFL Pro Football 1992 NFL Video Pro Football Sports Adventure Tony LaRussa Bsbl II Trouble Shooting Golf Wayne Grtzky Hocky 3 Wilson Pro Golf World Circuit Grnd Prix World Tour Tennis 41.95 41.95 36.95 39.95 35.95 35.95 47.95 37.95 29.95 35.95 24.95 35.95 31.95 18.95 call STICKS & YOKES CH PRODUCTS: Auto III Game Card 27.00 Flight Stick 35.95 Mach 11 22.00 Mach Ill+ 27.00 Virtual Pilot Yoke 62.95 GRAVIS Analog Pro 37.95 Game Card Hi Speed 29.95 THRUSTMASTER: ACM HiSpd Game Card 26.95 Weapons Control Mark II 99.95 U-Prom for WCS Mark! 27.95 Flight Control 59.95 Flight Control Pro 99.95 Rudder Pedals 99.95 COLORADO SPECTRUM: Mouse Wheel call Sample Listing of Products B-17 Flying Fortress 41.95 Design Your Railroad 34.95 Veil of Darkness 35.95 Birds of Prey 31.95 Discovery Columbus 35.95 Wing Commander 18 47.95 Campaign 35.95 Dragon Lair III 35.95 Wizardary VII:Crsaders 41.95 Comanche:Maximm Ovrkl 43.95 Dune Il 35.95 X-Wing 41.95 Carrier Strike 41.95 El Fish 35.95 X-Wing Misson Dsk 19.95 Carriers at War 34.95 Eric The Unready 35.95 CD ROM Conquerd Kingdoms 35.95 Flashback 31.95 Conquest Japan 35.95 Freddy Pharkas 41.95 7th Guest 52.95 Empire Deluxe 35.95 Global Effect 19.95 Arthur's Teacher Trbls 41.95 F-15 Stirke Eagle III 43.95 Goblins 2 24.95 Chess Maniac-Natl Lampn 34.95 Falcon 3.0/Mig 29 call Heimdall 21.95 Clip Art Haven-jewel 16.95 Flight Sim 4.0 37.95 Home Alone 2 27.95 Composer's Qst MPC 54.95 Flight Sim Add-Ons call Humans 25.95 Compton Interact. Encyc. 249.95 Fit Sim Scen USA East 41.95 Inca 34.95 Curse of Enchantia 24.95 Flight Sim 5.0 call Indy Jones 4 35.95 Daggar of Amon Ra High Command 41.95 Kings Quest VI 44.95 Day of Tenacle 41.95 Jetfighter II bundle 44.95 Kyrandia (Legend) 34.95 Dinosauer Adventures 41.95 Jump Jet 41.95 Legacy Realm of Terror 36.95 Dune 56.95 Liberty or Death 35.95 Legends Valour 37.95 Eco-Quest 1 41.95 Lost Admiral 35.95 Leis. Suit Larry 5 Encarta MM Encycl. 269.95 Pacific War 47.95 Lemmings 2 35.95 F-15 Strike Eagle Ill 47.95 Patriot 43.95 Lost Treas Infocom 11 29.95 Fontmaster 2 Patton Strikes Back 14.95 Lost Treas. of Rain Forest 29.95 Games 1993-Jewel 21.95 Perfect General 35.95 Magic Candle III 37.95 Global Explrer-DeLorme 89.95 Rebel Assault tba Maniac Mansion 14.95 Indy Jones:Fate Atlantis 41.95 Secret Weapons Luftwife 29.95 Mantis 31.95 Inspector Gadget 35.95 Special Forces 29.95 Mario Is Missing! 34.95 Iron Helix Strike Commander 47.95 Mercenaries (Tegel's) 37.95 King's Quest VI 44.95 Task Force 1942 38.95 Might & Magic V 41.95 Jutland 52.95 Theater of War 19.95 Monkey Island 2 25.95 Just Grandma & Me 38.95 Tornado 44.95 Out of This World 36.95 Kodak Photo CD 29.95 V Victory 1, 2 or 3 ea 43.95 Paladin 11 35.95 Legend of Kyrandia 41.95 Pirates! Gold 41.95 Map Expert by Delorme 299.95 ENTERTAINMENT Police Quest 3 39.95 Mayo Clinic (jewel box) 29.95 A-Train Midi Music Shop-jewl box 22.95 Prophecy by Sierra 41.95 24.95 Populous 11 MS Cinemania MPC ADD:Unltd Adventure 37.95 54.95 34.95 Prince of Persia 11 Monarch Notes 41.95 Action 5-5 Sierra Gms 24.95 61.95 Quest for Glory III Old Testmanet Interact Adventre Starter-Sierra 41.95 49.95 19.95 Return of the Phanton PC Karoake Air Bucks 77.95 41.95 35.95 Ringworld Playing with Language 35.95 29.95 Alone in the Dark 35.95 Romance 3 Kingdoms Prophone 1993 Ed 39.95 129.95 38.95 Amazons Pub.Paradise-Clip Art Rome:Pathway to Pwr Arcade Hits 22.95 24.95 29.95 Putt Putt Fun Pack 26.95 Rules of Engagement II 41.95 Armourgeddon 39.95 Rodney's Fun Screen SciFi:5 Actvision Games 26.95 39.95 Ashes of Empire 34.95 41.95 Shadow President RoMaterial:Vis/Snd Effect 19.95 Back to Future 11 26.95 Shadowlands 29.95 Shareware Studio V.C 18.95 Bart Simpson-Wierdnes 29.95 Sherlock Holmes 3 Sherlock Hims:Lst Files 42.95 4 3.95 Batman Returns 41.95 Siege 22.95 Space Adventure 2.0 61.95 Betrayal at Krondor 39.95 Sim Ant Space Quest IV 41.95 35.95 Blue Force 39.95 Sim City Ultima Underworld 1&11 29.95 35.95 58.95 Caesar Sim Earth Who Killed Sam Rupert 42.95 Carmen SD-Space Dluxe 47.95 24.95 Sim Life Castles 11 Willy Beamish 41.95 41.95 35.95 Simpson's Arcade Wing Commander II Dix 52.95 Challenge of 5 Realms 29.95 39.95 Space Hulk WCmdr 1I/Olt Undrwrid Civilization:Master Playr 49.95 52.95 Space Quest V Classic Adventure-Lucas 35.95 41.95 World Fact Book '92 59.95 Conquered Kingdoms Spear of Dstiny Wlinstn 35.95 35.95 Creepers Star Control 11 29.95 35.95 WINDOWS Dagger Amon Ra Star Trek 25th Anniv. 41.95 35.95 Alphabet Blocks 29.95 Dark Half 34.95 Stunt Island 33.95 Audio: Star Trek V. 34.95 Dark Seed Syndicate 41.95 36.95 Conquered for Windows 44.95 Terminator 2029 Darklands 41.95 41.95 MS Goll 42.95 Ultima Underworld II Daughter of Serpents 32.95 47.95 Origin FX Screen Svr 24.95 Ultima VII Part 2 45.95 Day of Tenacle 34.95 Star Trek Screen Svr 44.95 Ultrabots 36.95 EDUCATIONAL ACT Studyware 29.95 Alge-Blaster 29.95 Amazon Trail 34.95 Auto Works 44.95 Calculus 24.95 Castle of Dr. Brain 29.95 Cuckoo Zoo 31.95 Dinosauer Adventure 32.95 Discover Space 37.95 Eagle Eye Mysteries 31.95 Inspector Gadget 34.95 Island Dr. Brain 29.95 Kid Cad 3-D 29.95 Lost Tribes (Soc. Stdy) 24.95 Mario Teacher Typing 24:95 Math Rabbit (New) 29.95 Mickey's ABC's Ench. 19.95 Millie's Math House 29.95 Operation Neptune 34.95 Oregon Trail Dix 35.95 Peter Pan Print Kit 31.95 Playroom ver 2.0 29.95 Putt-Putt Fun Pak 25.95 Ready for Letters 34.95 Rock & Bach 34.95 Scooters Magic Castie 31.95 Time Treks 29.95 Treasure Math Storm 34.95 What's My Angle-Geom 29.95 MODEMS Prices too Low to Print: Boca, Sportster, Supra, Zoltrix, Zoom and others 34.95 AND A WIDE RANGE OF OTHER PRODUCTS FROM A...TO Z...!  FLT SIM/WAR A Line in Sand 26.95 Aces over Europe 44.95 Air Warrior SVGA 35.95 Ambush at Sorinor 35.95 Armored Fist 42.95 ATAC 34.95 MANY SALE ITEMS IN OUR FULL PRICE LIST ALL IBM COMPATIBLE ZERO'S & ONE'S 3315 E RUSSELL RD, #H-177 LAS VEGAS, NV 89120 ORDER: 800-788-2193 FAX: 702-897-1571 TECH/INFO: 702-897-2797 INTL: 702-897-2797 Prices and availability subject to change. All sales final. We do not guarantee compatability. All software is factory fresh and unopened. We are not responsible for manufacturer's defects. Contact publisher regarding defects. Any return subject to 20% restocking fee. Shipping: 1st game $5; add'l games add $1 each inContinental US. 2nd Day Air $6 1st game, add'l games add $1 each in Continental US. COD add $5.00. All prices are US Dollars. WE ACCEPT M/C & VISA. Circle Reader Service #146 "


"File Edit Display Next Pilot Rodio Windows Options NEI CASE LG G FASHION INTeht TA.TUG Hornet EN DREVO BITE N add even more to Flight ComFlight Commander is for any Mac Plus or mander's replay value and drew me newer system (and, yes, it even plays all right PET back to the game again and again. in black & white). The manual is written in a friendly, informative manner that will What's Not To Like? quickly get you started and have you masterI found one minuscule bug in the ing all of the advanced oprions in no time. It game (my tutorial airplane had no even includes an extensive reference section. bombs, so I had to destroy the With customizable missions and woolly camground targets with missiles and paign games, this board-cum-computer warstrafe them). When I called Chargame gets a big thumb's up from this fly boy. les Moylan to report this, he said I have to admit, I really enjoyed having the that it would be fixed in a wink. time to think about my flight tactics, rather When queried what I didn't like than rely on my sorry old reflexes. Cow abour Flight Commander, I had to admit that I found it tedious to issue identical orders to ing any number of target types, including every plane in a groun that I ships, or going for air superiority), and the wanted to keep formation. Charles general weather conditions. Aircraft on each promised that I could have a patch NA side can be automatically or manually sethat afternoon with that feature in lecred, and these selections can be either if I wanted it, and that it would based on point values or simply numbers of ULSEL certainly be in the game's next reaircraft per side (and some very large furballs vision. Honestly, I got the feeling can be constructed!). It's a breeze to create, that he was doing this just because say, two groups of four strike aircraft, support I was a fellow wargamer who liked by a third group of three fighters and have his game, not because of any spethem encounter a dozen enemy bogies and a cial «reviewer's clout.\" This sort of target with SAM support. Even the process of dedication and attention to cusarming these aircraft can be handled by the tomers is the beauty of the onecomputer, if desired. These instant scenarios man game company. File Edit Display Next Pilot Radio Windows Options Al SHIFRS ES Y En Flane t el BECOME THE ULTIMATE GAMER Watch me come alive in your computer! Girlfriend Teri Shown Here TOON The World's First Artificially Intelligent Virtual Woman! From REM Software Order from your favorite dealer or send check or M.O. for $69.95 Plus $4 shipping Add $4 if C.O.D. Specify 3.5\" or 5.25\" disk Revolutionary new game for PC compatibles Artificial intelligence, Interactive Conversation  3000+ word vocabulary, synonmys, idioms She lives in your computer, and talks to you on the screen VGA video of a REAL woman no cartoons! Runs on any 286, 386, 486 (12MHz min.) Requires 640K RAM and 10Mb hard disk No nudity, possible mature situations Also available Girlfriend Lisa.M now only $59.95 \"If your dealer dosen carry Girlfriend, show them this ad and they can order it from us!\" With the Infinity Machine\", you can make virtually any game bow to your every whim! With our easy to use real-time editing technology, you can add lives, edit character specs, and change weapons & abilities all without ever leaving your game. With our Infinity Code system, you can generate your own codes for easier access to game features! And when you're in a tough situation, Infinity Machine's slow motion feature gets the action back under your control. MasterCard AldeaLabs 709 Lingco, Suite #106 Dept. #CGW Richardson, TX 75081 (214) 235-4999 FAX 235-4992 dastercard VISA VISA $34.95 u.s. TO ORDER, CALL 313-457-1161 Circle Reader Service #37 Circle Reader Service #122 Page 198 Computer Gaming World "


"Cao Cao Genghis Khan It took 1400 years, but we finally got them together! CLAN OF THE GRAY WOLF a big IN EEN icture this two of history's most ruthless and ambitious leaders in the same room Now, throw in the fact that both are looking towards world domination with massive armies following their every command. Sounds interesting, doesn't it. This winter, Koei's bringing Genghis Khan and Cao Cao together to a store near you, and it's going to be of The Three kingdoms exciting. After all, Genghis Khan is out to lead his DRAGON OF DESTINY. Mongol hordes victoriously across Asia and Europe in GENGIS KHAN II: CLAN OF THE GRAY WOLF and Cao Cao's devising new ways to reunite China after the collapse of the Second Han Dynasty in ROMANCE OF THE THREE SEAL AN ALLIANCE. PREPARE FOR DISEASE & DISASTER! KINGDOMS III: DRAGON OF DESTINY. The contest for world domination is about to begin. Are you ready? CONQUER THE WORLD! SEIZE THE BATILE ADVANTAGE. VGA color Mouse support Sound Blaster & AdLibTM sound support KOEI ALSO AVAILABLE FOR SNES & SEGA. KOEI Games are available for all systems in retail outlets nationwide! If you can't find the KOEI product you are looking for, call us at (415)348-0500 (9am to 5pm PST). PC KOEI Corporation, 1350 Bayshore Highway, Suite 540 Burlingame, CA 94010 Compatible Genghis Khan I and Romance of the Three Kingdoms Il are trademarks of KOEI Corporation Circle Reader Service #78 "


"REVIEW And The Walls Come Tumbling Down Mindcraft's Siege Engine Comes of Age in Walls of Rome by H.E. Dille \"The origin and rise of fortification is undoubtedly due to the degeneracy of mankind.\" J. Muller, Professor of Fortification Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, 1746 CHAIN MAIL WHICH The statement of our esteemed Prof. Muller doesn't speak well of the moral character of the folks at Mindcraft. Fortifications and more fortifications have been their business for over a year now, between their original Siege game, their Dogs of War extension, and now their latest siege game, Walls of Rome. If the Professor's suggestion is correct, it sure doesn't show in Mindcraft's product. The Siege series of games has done anything but degenerate. It has, in fact, improved quite a bit. Walls of Rome (WOR) pulls the Siege gaming engine out of the Dark Ages into more classical times, literally and figuratively. In the literal sense, this release has abandoned the Medieval fantasy setting of its predecessors in favor of the historical battles of antiquity. Figuratively speaking, WOR corrects many of the Al problems of prior releases, breaking breaking down the artificial wall that had inhibited player satisfaction up to this point. The computer opponent is much more aggressive, logical and methodical than before. The result is a well executed treatise on the sieges of the Romans, Celts, Carthaginians and Parthians, which introduces you to the soldiers of the time, but doesn't require you to feed them, house them, and give them time off for the Holidays. WORallows you to pursue a single battle in which you may take either side, or a campaign focusing on the expansion of one of the aforementioned empires. The campaigns are played out as a series of linked battles without strategic maneuver between each one. The remainder of the force is in reserve within there is a maximum number of 40 groups per the barracks. By clicking on the barracks, you side at any given time, regardless of the numcan see a display of the troops and equipment ber of troops in each group. available for deployment. Double clicking on To the right of the troop window is a similar a troop type will bring up a window providing display for equipment, which might include additional information about that unit, inladders, bridges, catapults, ballistae and cluding offensive and defensive strength, cluding offeneive and defensive strength Greek fire, among others. This equipment is weapon types and speed of movement. Mindavailable for immediate use, but if you wish craft has even done a little homework and of to supplement these figures for an extend dressed the troops in authentic period apbarrage or some other strategy, it is possible parel. to construct more equipment using the Engineer function. The enARMORED CELT WARRIOR gineering options are one of the THE CELTS INVENTED finer points of WOR and suppleWAS LATER ADOPTED BY THE ROMANS. ment the base combat model VSED BY HANNIBAL AS FRONT-LINE TROOPS nicely. HEAVY INFATTRY, Used To Couldn't Spell Engineer, Now I Are One Beyond knocking politely at the SAEED  SETAGSE front gate, placing ladders under crennels (the openings at the top of S HARE HATCE HELMET, SHIELD OK a wall) is the fastest way to get into a castle, but it is also very danger\"To deploy troops, click on the unit, then ous. Troops who carry the ladders are burclick on the up arrow at the top of the barclick on the narrow ar rhe ran of rhe bardened and very vulnerable to attack, although racks display. This will form a group. Addithe survivors of such a group can immediately tional clicks on the arrow will add to that group in accordance with the multiplier opscale the walls. With proper timing, defenders tion set on the left side of the display. The may pour Greek fire down on the ascending default setting is the Roman numeral ten (X), Man warriors and push the ladders back off the and it is adequate for most situations. The walls. Because of this, it is always best to have maximum size of any given group is 50 solO sol at least one archer group supporting the raisdiers, and they may be deing of the ladders via barrage and two large ploved in coniunction with Walls of Rome: an cquivalent amount of equipment; 50 Roman Siege Warfare in Classical Times slingers can carry 50 ladders to raise along the castle 5 TITLE: Walls of Rome: walls. Also, 50 archers can Siege Warfare in Classical Times PRICE: $59.95 carry 50 pots of Greek fire to SYSTEM: conduct a barrage of flaming REQUIREMENTS: 286-12MHz or better, VGA graphics, arrows. When Cavalry is Ali Atabek, Scott Baker, Paul Kellner, sent to the field, the maximum group size is reduced Torrance, CA to 25 because the horses (310) 320-5215 count into the total. Also, IBM PROTECTION: DESIGNERS: mouse Documentation look up PUBLISHER: James Thomas Mindcraft Man The Battlements! At the beginning of an engagement, the defensive side will have a limited number of troops already manning the walls of the castle. cat Page 200 Computer Gaming World "


"«THE PR HPS Simulations, the WARGAMER'S Computer Company, and designer Scott Hamiliui, bring you the ULTIMATE WWII tacticarimbat simulation. overing the ENTIRE Eastern Front from 1939-45, Tigers On The Prowl includes a detailed database of hundreds of fighting vehicles, weapons, and force structures for the Axis, Allied and Soviet forces. Likewise, combat is resolved by precise calculations of armor thickness and round penetration at the instant of impact. It also features morale, hidden movement, communications, airstrikes, night fighting, forest fires, and much more. Designed for all levels of wargamers, Tigers On The Prowl includes 5 scenarios, a VISA/MC: CALL flexible scenario builder, and three levels of complexity. Orders are given to platoons or sections, with a maximum of a supported com(408) 554-8381 bat brigade on each side. Can be played Dealer Inquiries solitaire against the computer, or by Welcome two players either face to face or by mail/e-mail. Tigers On The Prowl can use maps and symRequires VGA, bols created with Aide De 570KB free RAM Camp. Tigers On The and 2 MB hard disk SIMULATIONS Prowl is as real as space. Mouse optional. Art HPS Simulations you can get withFor IBM and compatibles. P.O. Box 3245 out being there. Santa Clara, CA 95055-3245 Copyright 1993 by Scott Hamilton/HPS Simulations. All rights reserved. IBM is a registered trademark of International Business Machines, Inc. "


"SEN POGO gions controlled, casualties for the day and the battle, and other reports of interest to the astute commander. For those who are willing to invest the time, Mindcraft has included a fully functional system editor with WOR. This feature allows you to edit existing battles or create entirely new ones of your own, which may be subsequently uploaded to the Mindcraft BBS for other WOR players to enjoy. Separate editor functions include map alteration and construction, troop composition and numbers, location of the battle, days allowed for the slege, event daylight allotted. Chinks In The Armor infantry groups behind the engineering unit TOPTIONS REPORTS  to flood the breach created. Casualties will be high in such an assault, but if properly executed, a «beachhead» can be established on one of the castle walls and supplemented with further troops as the attack continues. Another classic method of breaching the enemy defenses is through mining. Undermining the castle walls so that they collapse is much more time consuming than a ladder assault, but it is usually not as costly in terms of men and equipment. Tunnels appear as green squares on the terrain display and do of zoom available to view the clashing troops. not impede troop movement on the surface. At the widest view. the enrire field is depicred. Siege towers, when properly constructed and the user can control area functions like and placed against a castle wall, provide imastle wall provide imbombardment and troop movement. Zoombombardment and troon movement Zoom mediate access for large numbers of troops. ing in a level, the overview shows roughly a Although initially harder to erect than ladthird of the entire area, with each group now w ders, siege towers are preferable for their dudepicted as a mass of individual dots as oprability and the increased safety they afford posed to a block of color. Dots that turn dark assaulting troops. The construction of siege in a group are casualties, so this view is a good towers should be done far from the castle, out one to quickly monitor the progress of several of range of enemy archers, catapults and bal groups at once. Clicking the magnifying glass listae. Once completed, the tower is pushed a third time reveals individual soldiers in to the desired location, acting as a shield in combat, and only a portion of an entire group the process for the troops who are moving it. may be visible on the single screen. At this Other engineering functions inSFTTONS REPORTS COMMAND T E clude the laying of bridges and the construction of battering rams, MENGULO catapults, ballistae and ramparts Cli behind which \"artillery\" can hide while bombarding. If troops are encountering too much resistance while performing a given function, you may also have them drop their equipment and mount a defense or a hasty retreat. Other troops can later gather the equipment that has been dropped. level, arrows whiz back and forth, and the corpses of the fallen litter the landscape. This Taking Tactical Command level of magnification allows minute control of individual troop movements if desired. Once troops are deployed in the field, they Deployed groups may be relieved on station can be given orders to advance, occupy a by other units or released from their current given area, conduct a barrage of an area, targer activity. These units return to the barracks to a single group, conduct patrols in an area, recover from their fatigue and allow wounded even chase and fight a specific enemy unit. As soldiers to recuperate in the hospital. These you can see, this is a much more diverse soldiers become available for redeployment command structure than was present in prior after their wounds have healed (the Mindcraft titles. Further, when units are exact number of days varies). given movement orders-say, move from an attacking barracks to one of the critical loca Victory in WOR centers around tions within a castle—the AI recognizes the controlling strategically important closest access point to the interior (ladders, regions in each castle. These conditower or whatever), vectors the unit directly tions are also modified by the ratio to that point, and automatically plots the of attackers to defenders, so that zig-zag path necessary within the castle. This games that become un-winnable alleviates user frustration over trying to obdue to heavy casualties are not protain exact tactical point to point movement longed unduly. To monitor your and frees the mind for tactical thought. progress toward victory, the main On the field of battle, there are three levels menu bar contains reports on re65995 WOR's gaming engine, though vastly improved as noted, still requires some minor tweaking. Units on the move still tend to elongate into weak columns as opposed to retaining more classic fighting formations. Also, when defending, you must keep group size small to get cach deployed unit positioned correctly on the wall. As such, with the limitations imposed on the total number of groups, the defender will generally have fewer troops in the field than the attacker at any given time. Some players have also reported a bug that allows no more than 23 groups to be deployed at any given time. This anomaly only appears with certain hardware configurations, but Mindcraft is working on a patch if you are experiencing the problem. The patch can be obtained directly from Mindcraft or through the major networks. Despite these minor flaws, I could not help but be impressed with the amount of ir provement that has occurred. WOR is not only a solid extension of the original Siege engine, it offers loads of replay value as well. If you have yet to experience Mindcraft's Siege system, it may be time to go back in time and assault the Walls of Rome. CGW ATTACKER'S SOUTH BARRACKS 320 Imm Page 202 Computer Gaming World "


"GREAT NAVAL BATTLES\" VOL. II GUADALCANAL 1942-1943 IN SUPER This one will blow you away! VGA! Get ready for the second volume in SSI's hugely successful ADVANCED SIMULATOR SERIES! GREAT NAVAL BATTLES VOLUME II: GUADALCANAL sends you to the South Pacific for the monumental conflict that rocked these remote islands. Five tactical battles, three carrier battles, and one full campaign provide limitless hours of cutting-edge World War II naval combat simulation. All in crisply detailed Super-VGA! Build your forces from 100 ship types and 20 plane types as you engage enemy forces on land, at sea, and in the air. Sophisticated command and control features let the computer handle the details while you make the big decisions. Or, micro-manage every detail — right down to the targeting of individual guns! IBM 256-COLOR SVGA DISPLAYS GREAT NAVAL BATTLES VOL. II: GUADALCANAL THE PREMIUM NAVAL COMBAT SIMULATOR. IBM & COMPATIBLES Available on 3.5\" disks NA and K ORTOM CD-ROM. eos : To order. Visit your retailer or call: 1-800-245-4525 with VISA/MC ( US, and Canada only). oneel E G1993 Strategic Simulations, Inc. All rights reserved. Circle Reader Service #133 "


"MISSION Call 800.999.7995 FREE SHIPPING! ON ALL U.S. ORDERS OVER $50. VIA UPS GROUND WITH COUPON. FBC CD-ROM ADULT SAMPLER CD ROM Brix ...... Caesar .... ... E teel............. $14 WD METAL & LACE SUISSURSITY STONES SCISSORS N IBM DISK GAMES Forgotten Castle Awakening .50 Front Pg Sports Football Pro 47 By Megatech SIUNES UD ROM A .T.P.: Flight Commander .......37 Gabriel Knight....... .. ........43 In the 21st century, staged Aces of Pacific:WW2 1946.....22 Gary Grigsby's Pacific War ...47 by Pixis Interactive Aces of the Deep ........ fighting has become a lucrative ...43 Gary Grigsby's War in Russia 47 ... profession for female hardbodBeautiful women engage Aces of the Pacific ... ......47 Gateway 2.............. Aces Over Europe ................43 Geekwad Games of Galaxy......25 ies. But the real money comes you in an all or nothing. 15. AD&D Al Qadim Genie's Curse 45 Gizmos & Gadgets. head-to-head competition AD&D Dungeon Hack..............40 Global Domination............. from the illegal bouts held outside the city. It's dream babes of high stakes, the stakes are AD&D Fantasy Empire.............40 Goblins 3........... ... . in heavy armor battling for not for money but rather for Adventures of Willie Bemish 243 Grand Slam Bridge 2.. ......33 THE BATTLE OF THE ROBO BABES prize money. Action packed. PEXES articles of clothing. Your After Dark Screen Saver DOS.35 Great Naval Bat Admiral's Pk.54 arcade style fun for your PC. goal is to make your oppo. Air Dual Flight Simulator....42 Hardball 3 ... But be warned Metal and Lace nents bare all without hav. Air Warrior .............. .....37 Hardball 3 Stadium Disk .........19 ourself ing to expose yourself. Al is for mature audiences only. Airport & Facilities Directory 20 Hardball III Players Disk ........19 \" Scissors N Stones is the first interactive erotic game that features Anir Ambush at Sorinor ......... ....40 $34. R Rated Harpoon 2....................... Animation Studio Windows .....79 Harpoon 2 Battle#2 WESTPAC 30 full motion video merged with 3D generated animation that adds Archon Ultra .... $39. Mature .40 Harpoon 2 Scenario Editor.....30 an extra dimension of realism. never before available. Includes. Armored Fist....... .45 Head Coach Football Windows 27 Realistic 3D walk through sequences, Full person point-of-view, Ashes of Empire .37 Heirs to the Throne..............37 MAN ENOUGH CD Addicitve game-play, multiple opponents. $99. Axis The GameCheater.... 43 High Command ........ Baseball Windows Hong Kong Mahjong Pro.. by Accolade Beat the House ............... .32 Hoyle's Book of Games 3 .... Betrayal at Krondor .......... ...43 Incredible Toons............. If you want a shot at the the Blood Net. .43 IndyCar Racing ............. ultimate date, you'll have to Bloodstone ... ..30 Isle of the Dead. earn it. Jeri's the kind of Bodyworks 3.0..................43 Italy Scenery Disk woman every man dreams Bram Stoker's Dracula...........37 Jagged Alliance.... about but she demands CATALOGUE By New Machine ...24 Jeopardy Alex Windows..... more from a man than a This super hot CD Rom ..37 Jump Jet .................... Carrier Strike clever line. If you're going .43 Kasparov's Gambit................39 Sampler contains tasty tidbits Carriers at War .43 Kid Pix to date Jeri, you'll have to from the most popular adult Carriers at War 2... King's Quest 6 pass her test. She has five 998-9% CD Roms available. This Chess Maniac 5 PC .45 King's Ransom.......... girlfriends. You'll like all of new MAGSHINE includes clips from the follow. ChessMaster 4000 Windows...37 King's Table .......... them. The question is, will Civilization ........ ing: Night Watch, J. Stephen ........ ...47 Kronolog The Nazi Paradox ....43 they like you? Hicks picture disks, Seymore Butts, Dream Machine, Legends Civilization Windows. ...54 Krusty's Super Funhouse.....32 $50. Clash of Steel Night Trips, Secrets. Hidden Obsessions, Dirty Dancing ....43 Lands of Lore .....................37 Classic Funpack for Windows.20 Leasure Suit Larry ..........45 Future Sex Magazine Coaster ... .. 20 Legacy Realm of Terror .......43 Cobra Mission ....... .47 Legend Kyrandia 2 Hand Fate 40 Cohort II .22 Leisure Suit Larry 5 ........ A PBO LEAGUE Comanche Bundle.......... ....45 Links 386 Pro.......... by Baseline Software Comanche Mission Disk 1........28 Links Course Banff Springs ...22 Comanche Mission Disk 2 ........35 Links Course Pebble Beach ....29 Be Immortal in all of your Command Advent. Starship..43 Lost in Time by Micro Sports favorite computer games. AXIS Companions of Xanth ............37 Lucky's Casino......... The Gamecheater is the world's Play by yourself or with Conquer Windows........... ...43 Masters of Orion ....................45 friends and travel the road to first game utility that will allow Matinee Screen Saver ........... Conquered Kingdoms the Super Bowl. Season Conquered Kingdoms Data 1...27 Meadowlark Bridge Windows.59 you to cheat at your favorite ...33 Metal and Lace ....... Cuckoo Zoo ........ replays in less than 20 mingames. With AXIS, you can .....34 utes. Truc modem play with Daemonsgate ........ ...43 Metal and Lace Upgrade.........5 utes. Truc modem play with cyber Race. override predefined game func....34 Microsoft Arcade Windows.....34 tions with assignable hor keys. Chat mode. 5 years of teams Dark Sun Shattered Lands ....52 Microsoft Flight Sim. 5.0. 49 You can add timc, lives, money, in their official NFL home and away Jerseys. Create your own Delta V... ..43 MM 2 Day of Tentacle .............40 extra ammo or fuel, or whatever league or use preset leagues with NFL schedules from the last 30 Detroit. .37 MM4: Clouds of Xeen ...........43 THE Discovery:Steps of Columbus 37 MM4: Dark Side of Xeen ..........45 AMT r years. Choose 198 preset plays or design your own. Computer it takes for you to win. $43. Dominion.. determines playoff schedule using NFL tie-breaking procedures. ..40 More Incredible Machine....32 $37. Doom. .47 More Vegas Games Windows..22 Dragon Knight 3..... ......43 Mortal Kombat...... Dune 2: Building of a Dynasty 37 NanoTank Windows.. ..30 Dyno Quest......... ........27 New York Scenery Disk... Eagle Eye Mysteries.. ..NFL Coaches Club Football .....43 Eagle Eye Mysteries London...35 NHL Hockey '94.... ....... by Meadowlark Software By Pacific Data Earth Invasion Windows. ...27 Out of This World Eight Ball Deluxe.. ....32 Pacific Strike.. ... Great bidding and extensive help Volume #1 in the local girl Empire Deluxe ..................37 Pacific Strike Speech Pack.... available make Bridge for series. Shot in Hawaii. Over Empire Dlx. Scenario Builder 22 Paris Scenery Disk.... . Windows the ideal choice for any 1000 pictures of girls on Empire Deluxe Windows...... ....37 Perfect General .. Eric the Unready .................! bridge player seeking to bid and the beach, on the stage and ....37 Perfect General Bundle... Eternam.. .37 Peter Pan Story Painting ......35 play better. We have tested in the bedroom. Eye of Beholder 1,2,3 Bundle...52 Pinball Dreams. Meadowlark Bridge with the 128 $39. Eye of the Beholder 3 -37 Pirates Gold ............................43 hands in Ron Klinger's Guide to Falcon 3.0.... 50 Police Quest 4....... Better Bridge. Meadowlark Also available: Falcon 3.0 Mig 29. .37 Power Game Bundle 2....... Bridge reached the recommended contract on 104 of the hands. Falcon Fighting Tiger ....30 Powerboating Simulator III. Microbridge Companion reached 62 correctly bid hands, Grand Fatty Bear Birthday Surprise 35 Prince of Persia 2..... Slam Bridge II correctly bid 57. Can play over thirty conventions Exotic Girls $39. Fatty Bear's Fun Pack..........24 Privateer ............... with a detailed explanation of each convention. Many, many more Hawaii Girls $39. Flashback ..... ........... ...35 Privateer Mission Disk 1....... Tropical Girls features! Fleet Defender F-14 Tomcat...50 $39. Privateer Speech Pack..... Flight Light. ..... 22 Pro League Football.. Flight Sim Toolkit. .57 Putt Putt Goes to the Moon....35 AXIS GAMECHEATER NFL FOOTBALL PRO LEAGUE FOOTBALL 2 COASE 6.40 BRIDGE FOR WINDOWS LOCAL GIRLS C 423 Sisest $52. CALL US AND USE YOUR MC. VISA OR DISGOVER 800-999-7995 "


"CD ROM CENTRA .....54 EAU NESUAIP ... .62 .43 **.37 *.87 ..50 29 L 2 ........43 ...39 ..39 1.50 ...43 ....53 Caddle........ 888888888 37 .40 22 ....35 59 *4.44 ..48 ....39 35 *.43 ...39 .64 Putt Putt Joins the Parade....33 Putt Putt's Fun Pack ........ Quarterpole.............. Quest Glory 4 Shad Darkness 43 Ouest for Glory Ill ...... ...43 7th Guest Global Explorer ..... ..... Protostar War on Frontier ....43 US History ...... ... ....34 Southern Beauties Railroad Tycoon Classic ..........22 AD&D Dungeon Hack .... .........37 Gobllns 2 Putt Putt Goes to the Moon ....47 USA East West/ATP .. Storm 1, 2, 3 or 4...... Railroad Tycoon Deluxe ....... AD&D Fantasy Empires .........45 Goblins ...... .. Putt Putt Joins The Parade .39 USA Wars: Civil War .... ....39 Super Smutware ............. Real Weather Pilot.... Aegis Guardian of the Fleet .....53 Great Naval Battles ..........54 Putt Putt's Fun Pack ............39 Video Cube .......... ........ Swimware 1993............. Realms of Arkania .. . Alone In the Dark ..... .. Grollers Encyclopedia 6..... Rebel Assault ................ Virtual Reality Starter Kit 1 ....42 Tropical Girls ... Red Baron ....... .... Animals Gunship 2000 ........ Return of the Phantom ...... Where World Carmen Deluxe .39 Wild Women..... Red Crystal ............... Arthur's Teacher Trouble ........40 Hell Cab.. ................. Return to Zork ...... .... Wild Places .20 Women of Venus Return to Zork... .. Astrology Source.. .52 House of Games Rodney's Fun Screen Willie Beamish ............. Rules of Engagement 2. B17 & Silent Service Combo ...19 Inca ... Scl-Fi Fantasy Windowmaster-... .. ......32 ADULT INTERACTIVE CD'S Sailing Simulator III VGA .........49 Barney Bear Goes to Space ...29 Intro to Wordperfect 5.2. ..37 Secret of Monkey Island ....... Windows 1983 ........... .........84 Adult Movie Almanao ..........99 Sam & Max Hit The Road .........37 Baslos Electronlo Cookbook 39 Iron Hellx .......... Sharoware 1993 2. Wing Comm & Ultima 8 ...........30 Adventures Seymore Butts .69 San Francisco Scenery Disk...32 Bible Ubrary. Jets & Props ............ Shareware 1993 ... Wing Commander 2 Deluxe ...30 Cat and Mouse ............... Scenery Enhancement Editor 27 Blood Net ................... Just Grandma and Me...........37 Shareware Explorer............50 Wing Commander Deluxe .....30 Condo Cutles .............. Scenery Grand Canyon .........22 Blue Force .... ...... Jutland .................... Shareware Overload 3 Pack...29 Wolfpack ...... ......45 Digital Dancing Scenery Tokyo Japan..... Campalgn... ...40 KGB/CIA World Factbook ......40 Shareware Overload............19 World Circult Grand Prix ...45 Doors of Passion. Seal Team ............ King's Quest & Upgrade ..........27 Sharif on Bridge ................57 Dream Machine Shadowcaster ...................45 Chess Maniac King's Ransom ....... ... Sherlock Holmes Detective 2 32 ADULT CD ROM (21. TO ORDER) LA. Strippers ............. Sharif on Bridge ... ChessMaster 3000 Kings Quest 8 ............. Sherlock Holmes Detectivel .32 101 Sexual Postlons 1 OR 2 ......69 Night Watch...... Shuttle Space Flight Comanche Kings Quest V ..... Sherlock Holmes III ............49 Adult Palate Vol. 1 or Vol. 2......69 Paradise Club Siege Walls of Rome Conspiracy ...... .47 Labyrinth of Time.... .52 Shuttle Fight Simulator .......34 Adult Sampler ......................14 Scissors N Stones Silent Service 2 Classic .. Creepy Crawlles. Lawnmower Man .37 Sleeping Beauty American Girls ....................39 Silverball 34 Cute & Cuddlles Learn Fly Fishing .... Small Blue Planet Anlmation Fantasies 1 or 2......69 ADULT CD'S (MOVIES) Sim Ant. Cyber Race Ubrary Europ & American Art 57 Software Vault: Games Busty Babes 2 ................ After Dark Trilogy Sim Ant Windows Daemonsgate ...... Ubrary of the Future .. Colloction......... Creme De Le Creme ...............44 Betrayal............. Sim City 2000 ... Dark Sun Shattered Lands ....64 Loom ............. Software Vault: Gold .... Cyborgasm (Volce Only) ........29 Busting Out.... Sim City Classic DOS Dracula Unleashed ..... Lord of the Rings Software Windows Collection.34 Digital Dreams ..... Cafe Flesh ......... Sim City Windows ......... Dragon's Lair ..................40 40 Lost In Time ......... ...45 Space Quest 4...................28 Exotic Girls ............. College Girls ..... Sim Earth Windows Dune ................ .....59 Lost Treasures of Infocom 2 47 Space Quest 4.............43 Girls In Vivid 2..................... Debble Does Dallas Sim Farm.... Encyclopedia of Clip Art. 34 Lost Treasures of Infocom ..47 Sports Illustrated Almanac ...39 Girls of J. Stephen Hicks II ....29 Deep Throat Sim Life ... ............ Eric the Unready Mad Dog McCree. Star Trek 25th Anniversary ..60 Girls of Mardi Gras ...............44 Devil & Miss Jones Simon the Sorcerer...... ..34 European Racer's............... .47 Majestic Places .......... ....29 Star Trek Collectibles . ...47 Girls, Girls, Girls, Girls....44 Hidden Obsessions Slater & Charlie Go Camping .32 Eye of Beholder 1,2,3 Bundle ...54 Mammals National Geo......29 Star Wars Chess ......... Hawall Girls ..... ......39 Insatiable ........... Smokin' Gun Windows..... Eye of the Beholder 3 ... Mantis: Experimental ............47 Strike Commander ....... High Volume Nudes...... .....39 Legends of Porn II Solitaire's Journey .............7 F11/F15 Strike 2........ ..40 Mayo Clinic_ ........... Terrorist Group Profiles .......44 Hot Pix 2, 3 or 4 ... Moving Fantasles ... Space Quest 5...... ..... F15 Strike Eagle 3............... .59 Mayo Clinic Total Heart.....40 The Journeyman Project .......47 Island Girls 3 in 1 New Wave Hookers II Spectre VR.. Family Doctor Mitsuml Double Speed Drive 245 The Tortoise & The Hare ......40 Kama Sutra Night Trips ................... Speed Racer Challeng Racer X37 Fate of Atlantis .... Mixed up Mother Goose ........24 Tlo Fighter ........ King Dong..... Princess of Persia ...... Spoils of War 5.25 Fatty Bear's Birthday Surpr. .45 MM 2 Day of Tentacle ...........45 Timetable Sclence & Innov. ..39 Local Girls 2 ... Rimfire Pacific SSN-21 Seawolf.. 45 Fatty Bear's Fun Pack ... North American Indians ..........44 Tony LaRussa 2.... Local Girls ........... Secrets Star Reach ........ .. Fingers for Windows.... ......30 Oregon Trall.......... ...........40 Tornado ...... ... ....45 Men Who Love Women ...... Tract I Love You .... Star Trek Judgement Rights...37 Fractal Ecstacy ..................45 Our Solar System ...... .......22 Total Baseball '93 Ed.............49 Mystique of Orient Visual Fantasies Star Wars Chess.......... .45 Gabriel Knight ........................50 Phoenlx 3.0 .......... .. ..........15 U.S. Presidents ...... ......39 PC Pix Vol. 1, 2 or 3 ......69 Wicked ..... Stonekeep ... Geekwad Games of the Galaxy 25 PhoneDisc Residential USA ....50 Ultima Underw/Wing Comm 2 60 Smutware ................... Street Fighter II .............. Gifs Galore ........22 Private Eye Mysteries ........45 US Atlas & Automap.........57 So Much Stareware ...........69 Strike Command Mission 1....22 Strike Comm Speech Pack.....20 Strike Squad .... .. ....40 The Blue and The Gray ..........43 Ultima Underworld II ...... Strip Poker Professional.......35 The Elder Scrolls The Arena....43 Ultima VII Silver Seed... SOUNDCARDS Stronghold ....... .40 The Great War 1914-18.. ....47 Ultima VIII Pagan......... Super Tetris Windows, ..35 The Merchant Prince.. .......40 Ultima Vill Speech Pack.. .22 Ad Lib Gold 1000 SVGA Harrier ....52 Third Reich ....... ..... .........37 Undersea Adventure........ Digital Edge CD ROM Kit.......695 Call 201.676.7454 from your fax Syndicate ........ .37 Tom Landry Football Deluxe...32 Uninvited Windows.............. ...40 Discovery CD 16 bit Internal.595 machine. Receive information on Syndicate American Revolt....25 Tony Larussa Baseball 2 ...40 Unlimited Adventures ........ .37 Edutainment 16 Internal .......595 new releases, Adult CD rom, T2 Arcade Game....... ......32 Tornado ........ .52 Unnatural Selection..............35 Pro Audio Spectrum 16.........189 Take a Break Pinball Windows 32 Tower.......... .......43 USA East Scenery Disk ..........43 Sound Blaster 16.............138 specials, and more. Terminator 2029 .................43 U.S. Atlas for Windows .54 V Victory 4: Gold Juno Sword 43 Sound Blaster 16 ASP 24 HOURS A DAY 7 DAYS A WEEK Terminator 2029 Op Scour ....22 Ultima 7: Forge of Virtue .......22 Victory at Sea... ...45 Sound Blaster Deluxe............ Terminator Rampage..............43 Ultima 7: The Serpent Isle ......50 Victory Pak............ .....47 Sound Blaster Pro Deluxe.....122 Tetris Classic .........................32 Ultima Pt 1:Stygian Abyss .......25 Video Jam......... .35 Sound Blaster Pro MCA....... 258 Walker Sound Galaxy NX Pro 16........ Our New Mission Control Communique is here! Warlords 2 .............. Sound Machine Sound Kit... Warriors of Legend.. Soundman 16........... Order our color catalogue filled Washington Scenery. Ultrasound.. WC 2 & Speech Pak...... Voice Blaster.... with New items, WC 2 Special Ops 1&2, Wave Blaster ...... When Two Worlds War. ........ CD Rom, Adult CD ACCESSORIES Where in Space Carmen ........43 Simply send in coupon with your order! Where in the World Deluxe .....48 Winball Windows.................30 Art of the Kill.. Rom, Discount Offer expires 02/28/94 Wing Commander & Ultima 6.39 CD Rom Caddie. Wing Commander Academy ...35 Cyber Man...... Coupons, Complete Wing Commander Deluxe Ed..50 Gameblaster...... Wizardry Trilogy 2.............37 Koss HD/4 Speakers Listings and more! World Circuit Grand Prix ......37 Notebook Gameport. WW II Battles of South Pacific 37 Sound Blaster Speakers....22 FREE with your order, Methods of Payment X Wing MD 2 B Wing.... ..............22 Supra V32 Int. Fax Modem.....169 We accept Visa, MC, Discover Card & Money X-Wing otherwise send $2.00. X-Wing Mission Disk 1............22 orders. Personal checks allow 14 days to Mitsumi Double Speed CD clear. School, State & City purchase orders JOYSTICKS Rom Drive. High Performence (Outside of Pics accepted. Operation, 250 ms access time, US and Canada send powered tray loading, double ACM Game Card Shipping Analog Plus... shell-dust-sealed mechanism. UPS Ground ($5 minimum)/UPS Blue ($7 Flight Control Pro .............115 $5.00) minimum); APO & FPO ( $7 minimum); Flight Control System ..... On Sale! S235.00 Overseas minimum $30 shipping (please fax Flight Control Yoke orders) Send money orders or checks to: Flight Stick............... Flight Stick Pro..... MISSION CONTROL Formula T1. 551 Valley Road, Suite 211 G Force Yoke ......... Dept. CGW0294 Gameport III Automatic Mach I.............. Upper Montclair, NJ 07043 PC Command Control ...... PC Gamepad .. Overseas & Military Orders given special attention! Rudder Pedals. Bachelor Pad $16. Virtual Pilot ............. ..... Major League Baseball Weapons Controller Mark 2....99 Mouse Mat All 28 Teams $12 Circle Reader Service #100 Get the facts via FaxBack... ...219 ...99 129 FREE SHIPPING On All US Orders over $50 via UPS Ground 4 COMMUNIQUE Featureviews Lock made for 28 CONTROL  201-6771400EAY 201-677-9484 "


"REVIEW The Last Dictator 9.3 Grabbing The Global Reins In Global Domination by Chuck Moss HELLO TAK nderneath our civilized veneer, unFuhrer's puss, but political sensitivity, or just fantry and light armor to strike aircraft and derneath our day-to-day submissiveplain common sense, prevailed.) The personair mobile troops. There are six settings for ness to demands of family, job, and alities resemble characters in Sid Meier's Civiforces, and you can tweak your units around, country, we strategy gamers all possess a comlization: each favors his or her own strategy adding or subtracting as cash flow merits. mon drive: we want to rule the world. Fortuand trustworthiness level, but their graphic This \"unit mix» seems irrelevant from the nately for family, job, and country, we have depictions pale against those of Sid's Civ. strategic purview, but is actually vital to the lots of socially acceptable outlets for this lust The strategic game runs just fine, albeit tactical game. to conquest. slowly, on an old 286, but getting the most Movement logistics are handled very abThe most recent outlet for our will to power of the tactical game requires a 386. The stractly. You buy \"movement points\" and use is Global Domination from Impressions. Part \"learning curve\" of the game can hardly be the mouse to manipulate a little hand to pick of a full-court press of Impressions game recalled a curve at all: you boot it up, you make up your armies-shown as bullets of varying leases, Global Domination attempts to be some mistakes in the first game or two, and sizes-and place them somewhere else. If the you're ready to conquer the world. new territory is unoccupied, it changes to the zoz! The documentation is adequate, attacker's color. If defended, a conflict ensues and the game's icon-driven menus that can rage for months. Sca movement is are largely self-explanatory. The handled through fleet points and little manual has a little tutorial exercise ships that sail very slowly between continents. that explains everything you need There is no naval combat. to know. One non-Risk wrinkle is the addition of The interface is mouse-driven, covert operations. You can purchase intelliwith menu buttons selected by a gence points that enable you to spy on other pointing finger cursor. While the players, learn about force compositions, leadgraphics are sharp and clear, oneership qualities and offer alle ership qualities, and offer alliances and pacts. and longs for the ability to select some OEM. MOMENTS PLATER It also allows you to build \"special forces» that of the more common commands try to \"destabilize\" (i.e. drive mad) other leadtry to both a grand-strategic game a la Command via keyboard. Many operations must be done ers, buy loyalty, and incite territories to reHQ and a tactical game in the Dune II or repeatedly, and constant clicking of the same volt. Perfect General mode. The resulting game is buttons gets tiresome. at once both a failure and a surprising success. The global map is clear and sharp and very Revolution is an integral part of the game, as a territory in revolt changes color to a vivid Global Domination is actually a successor of colorful. Split up into territories with differpurple and cannot be invaded or traversed for sorts to an earlier Impressions conquest game ent \"cities\" or point levels for each province, an indeterminate—usually lengthy-period called The Final Conflict. The Final Conflict the world begins just like the old board game of time. Indeed, fomenting revolution is the arrempted to marry logistics, strategy, ecoRisk, with players holding a few regions best way to tie your enemy up in knots. The nomics, and the arcade-style action that amidst a lot of unclaimed space. Indeed, the revolution command is a little fist, and one of Euro-audiences seem to love. It flopped misstrategic game is very reminiscent of Risk, the game's most amusing features is sailing erably, myself being one of the perhaps five with players taking turns, spending income your fist above the world, capriciously dropyanks who actually bought and played it. on armies, attacking, garrisoning and defendping down to cause trouble. Like those two Global Domination has narrowed its scope ing. young reprobates on MTV would say: \"Heh, and concentrated on two areas: a simple straEach turn represents a month and is not hot heh-revolution is cool!\" tegic world conquest game and a detailed divided into phases. You can tactical simulation for the action-oriented perform any action in any order Global Domination conqueror. you choose. Typically, one goes TITLE: Global Domination The game allows five human or computer to the logistics screen, buys arSYSTEM: players to slug it out for world dominion. mies, places them, moves, atREQUIREMENTS: 286 or higher (386-16MHZ either on our world or a randomly generated tacks, and conducts covert recommended), VGA graphics, 8MB hard drive space, mouse: one. The computer players have personalities operations. Typical turns last supports Adlib (Gold), Aria, Roland, Sound Blaster sound chosen from a list of nine historical wor10 to 15 minutes. thies—from Queen Victoria and Abe Lincoln Purchasing armies is not a toA to Gengis Khan, Henry V, and a drooling DESIGNER: tally abstract exercise as in Risk. David Lester S PUBLISHER: Impressions Caveman for novices. (Bismarck stands in for Players assemble forces of difCambridge, MA 02142 (203) 676-9002 Adolf Hitler—the documentation shows Der ferent components—from inPRICE: $59.95 IBM Cards None The Heart PROTECTION: Impressions Page 206 Computer Gaming World "


"16 10 37 GPSERIC THE UNREADY ESCAPE FROM HELL ETERNAM EYE OF THE BEHOLDER EYE OF BEHOLDER 2 EYE OF BEHOLDER 3 EYE OF BEHOLDER 3-CD F-117A STEALTH FIGHTER F15 STRIKE EAGLE 2 FIS STRIKE EAGLE 3 F19 STEALTH FIGHTER FAI CON 3 SCEN FIGHTR FALCON 3.0 FALCON AT FANTASY EMPIRE FIGHTING FOR ROME FINAL CONFLICT FIRETEAM 2200 FLAMES OF FREEDOM FLASHBACK FLIGHT OF INTRUDER FLIGHT PLANNER FLIGHT SIM AIRCRAFT FLIGHT SIMULATOR 4.0 FLIGHT SIMULATOR 5.0 FLOOR 13 FOUNTAIN OF DREAMS FOUR CRYSTALS TRAZER FREDDY PHARKAS FRTA FREE DC FRONT PAGE FOOTBALL HOYLE'S BK GAMES VOL 3 HUMANS HUNT RED OCTOBER HYPERSPEED IMMORTAL INCA INCREDIBLE MACHINE VGA INDIANAPOUS 500 INOY JONES FATE ATLA INDY JONES: LAST CRUS ISHIDO ISLAND OF DR BRAIN VGA JCK NICKLAUS GATST 18 JACK NICKLAUS SE CRS JACK NICKLAUS SIGNATU JACK NICKLAUS UNL GOLF JAMES BOND STEALTH JET FIGHTER 2 MISSION JET FIGHTER 2.0 JOE MONTANA FOOTBALL JUMP JET JUST GRANDMA & ME-CD KEYS TO MARAMON 21 MERCHANT COLONY MICHAEL JORDAN FLT SIM MICKEY'S 123'S MICKEY'S ABC'S MICKEY'S JIGSAW PUZZLE MIDWINTER MIG 29 FULCRUM MIGHT & MAGIC 1 MIGHT & MAGIC 2 MIGHT & MAGIC 3 MIGHT & MAGIC 4 MIGHT & MAGIC 5 MIKE DITKA FOOTBALL MILLENIUM MINES OF TITAN MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE ML BASEBALL 4 USAT ML BASEBALL GM/OWNER ML BASEBALL MANAGERS ML FOOTBALL 2 ML FOOTBALL DELUXE MONKEY ISLAND 2 MONKEY ISLAND VGA MOONBASE MURDER NASCAR CHALLENGE NFL COACH'S CLUB NFL FOOTBALL NFL PRO LEAGUE FB '91 NFL PRO LEAGUE FB '92 NIGHTBREED non RIDERS OF ROHAN RISE OF DRAGON-VGA ROAD & TRACK GRAN PR ROAD TO FINAL FOUR ROBOSPORT WIN ROCKETEER ROMANCE 3 KINGDOMS ROMANCE 3 KINGDOMS 2 ROME: PATHWAY TO POW ROMMEL AT N. AFRICA RULES OF ENGAGEMENT RULES OF ENGAGMNT 2 S.C. OUT SAVAGE EMPIRE SCRABBLE SEA ROGUE SEAL TEAM SEARCH FOR THE KING SECOND FRONT SECRET OF SILVER BLADE SECRET WEAPONS LUFTW SENTINEL WORLDS SHADOW CASTER SHADOW OF YSEABIUS SHADOW PRESIDENT SHADOW SORCERER SHADOWGATE WIN SHADOWLANDS SHERLOCK HOLMES-CO SHUTTLE SIEGE NOS 11 KGB 19 25 KILLING CLOUD KING'S QUEST 4 EGA KING'S QUEST 5 VGA KING'S QUEST 6 VGA KNIGHTS OF THE SKY KOSHAN CONSPIRACY KRISTAL 16 NO GAMER'S GOLD WE PAY CASH FOR USED GAMES We want your current used games 1-800-377-8578 call for authorization before shipping or FAX list for current quotes to 605-334-8766 In Canada, call 605-339-2060 USED IBM GAMES COMPLETE & VIRUS FREE WITH THE ORIGINAL BOX. DOCUMENTATION AND DISKS 4D BOXING 689 ATTACK SUB 7TH GUEST-CD A-TRAIN A.T.A.C A 10 TANK KILLER 1.5 ABC BOXING ABC MONDAY NIGHT FB ACES OF THE PACIFIC ACTION SPORTS SOCCER ACTION STATIONS ADV OF WILLY BEAMISH AIR BUCKS AIR BUCKS VER 1.2 19 AIR FORCE COMMANDER ALL AMERICAN COLLG FB ALONE IN THE DARK ALTERED DESTINY AMAZON AMAUSH ANCIENT ART WAR-SEA ANCIENT ART WAR SKY APBA FOOTBALL ARE WE THERE YET? ARMADA 2525 ARMOUR ALLEY BAT. B17 FLYING FORTRESS BAD BLOOD BALANCE OF POWER 1990 BALANCE OF THE PLANE BARD'S TALE 1 BARD'S TALE 2 BARD'S TALE 3 BARD'S TALE CONST SET BATTLE CHESS BATTLE CHESS CD BATTLE ISLE BATTLES OF DESTINY BATTLETECH 1 BATTLETECH 2 BETRAYAL AT KRONDOR BIG BUSINESS BLITZKRIEG ARDENNES BLOODSTONE BLOODWYCH BLUE ANGELS BLUE FORCE NEXT OF KIN BO JACKSON BASEBALL BRAIN BLASTER BREACH 2 BREACH 2 SCEN DISK BUCK ROGERS 1 BUZZ ALDRIN RACE INT CAESAR CAESARS PALACE CAMPAIGN CAR DRIVER CARRIER COMMAND CARRIER STRIKE CARRIERS AT WAR CASTLE DR BRAIN VGA CASTLES CASTLES 2 CASTLES-NRTHRN CMPN CENTERION DFNDR ROME CHALLENGE OF 5 REALM CHAMBER SCI MUT PRST CHAMPIONS OF KRYNN CHESSMASTER 3000 WIN CIVILIZATION CLASH OF STEEL CLUE MASTER DETECTIV COASTER CODE NAME: ICEMAN COLONEL'S BEQUEST COMMAND HQ CONAN CONFLICT: KOREA CONFLICT: MIDDLE EAST CONQUERED KINGDOMS CONQUESTS OF JAPAN CONQUESTS OF LONGBO CONTINUIM CORPORATION COUNTDOWN COVERT ACTION CRACK DOWN CRIBBAGE GIN KING CRIME WAVE CRISIS IN THE KREMLIN CRUISE FOR A CORPSE CURSE OF AZURE BONDS CYBER EMPIRES CYBERGENIC RANGER DAGGER OF AMMON RA DARK CENTURY DARK QUEEN OF KRYNN DARK SUN DARKLANDS DARKLANDS MASTER ED DARKSEED DARKSPYHE DAVID WOLF: SECRET AG DAY OF THE VIPER DEJA VU 2 LOST IN LV DEATH KNIGHT OF KRYN DICK TRACY DON'T GO ALONE DOUBLE DRAGON 2 DRAGON FORCE DRAGON LORD DRAGON WARS DRAGONS OF FLAME ORAKKHEN DUNE DUNE 2 DUSK OF THE GODS EARTHRISE ELVIRA 1 ELVIRA 2 EPIC FUENOSanaan WE'RE BUYING! IBM & MAC GAMES Got Something To Sell? Follow these Easy Steps 1. Prepare a list of the games you are selling. Specify IBM or MAC. Coll, fax, or mail your list to GAMER'S GOLD. 2. GAMER'S GOLD will quote the current buying prices & issue an authorization number for your shipment. Gomes will not be accepled without an authorization no. Price quotes are good for 14 days. 3. Pack games in box. Write authorization no. clearly on outside of box. Mail to GAMER'S GOLD. 4. If you would like to use your money or credit to purchase games, include a wish list\" of litles you are interested in. 5. Your check will usually be mailed within 5.7 working days of receiving your games. Games will be checked for viruses & completeness. Games must be complete with all disks, printed materials, & in original box. Incomplete games will be returned at your expense. STREET FIGHTER 2 STREET ROD 2 STRIKE ACES STRIKE COMMANDER STRIKE COMMANDER SP STUNT DRIVER STUNT DRIVER STUNTS SUMMONING SUPER OFF ROAD SUPER TETRIS SWORD OF ARAGON SYNDICATE TANGLED TALES TANK TASK FORCE 1942 TEAM YANKEE TEENAGE MNT ARCADE TEENAGE MNT MANH MIS TEGEL'S MERCENARIES TERMINATOR TERMINATOR 2029 TEST DRIVE2 TEST DRIVE 3 TEST DRIVE 3:ROADSCAR THE PROPHECY THEATRE OF WAR THEIR FINEST HOUR THEXDER 1 THUNDER HAWK THUNDERSTRIKE TIME QUEST TIMES OF LORE TOM LANDRY FOOTBALL TONY LARUSSA BB TONY LARUSSAULT BB TOP GUN DANGER ZONE TORNADO TRACON TRACON 2 TREASURE TRAP TREASURES SAVAGE FR TRILOGY TRISTAN PINBALL TUNNELS & TROLLS TWILIGHT 2000 VGA TYPHOON OF STEEL ULTIMA 4 QUEST AVAT ULTIMA 5 WARRIORS DE ULTIMA 6 FALSE PROPH ULTIMA 7 BLACK GATE ULTIMA 7 FORGE OF VIRT ULTIMA 7.5 SERPENT ISLE ULTIMA 7.5 SILVER SE ULTIMA TRILOGY 1 ULTIMA TRILOGY 2 ULTIMA UNDERWORLD 1 ULTIMA UNDERWORLD 2 ULTRABOTS SANCTION E UMS 2 UNCHARTED WATERS UNDER FIRE UNLIMITED ADVENTURES UTOPIA V VICTORY: UTAH BEACH VEIL OF DARKNESS VENGEANCE OF EXCALIBR VIKING CHILD VISIONS OF AFTERMATH WACKY FUNSTERS WAR IN MIDDLE EARTH WAR IN THE FALKLANDS WAR IN THE GULF WARLORUS WARLORDS 2 WATERLOO WAXWORKS WC 2 SPEC OPERATION 1 WC 2 SPEC OPERATION 2 WC 2 SPEECH PACK WC SECRET MISSION 1 WC SECRET MISSION 2 WC/ULTIMA 6-CD WEAVER BASEBALL 2 WEAVER COMMISIONERS WEAVER MLBPA PLR ST WESTERN FRONT WHEN TWO WORLDS WR WHERE IN WORLD CSD WHERE IN WRLD CSO-CD WING COMMANDER 1 WING COMMANDER 2 WING COMM ACADEMY WIZARDY 4 WIZARDRY 5 WIZARDRY B-COSMIC FOR WIZARDRY 7-CRUSADERS WOLFENSTEIN 3D WOLFPACK WONDERLAND WORLD CIRCUIT WORLDS AT WAR X-WING X-WING B WING X-WING IMPERIAL PURS XIPHOS YEAGER'S AFT YEAGER'S AIR COMBAT CD-ROMGames WE SELL USED GAMES All games are tested & IBM disks virus checked games are in original box with original documentation Call for current title availib W WE ACCEPT VISA/MasterCard/Discover 2 GAMA Most items shipped same day. S5 UPS/S7 2nd Day Air GAMER'S GOLD 1008 W. 41st Street Sioux Falls South Dakota 57105 id Go 26 POON& BS ENCO N. FRONT PAGE FB PRO FULL METAL PLANET FUTURE WARS GARY GRIGSBY PACIFIC GATEWAY GATEWAY 2: HOMEWALD GATEWAY SAVAGE FRTR GENGHIS KHAN GHOSTS & GOBLINS GLOBAL CONQUEST GLOBAL EFFECT GOBLINS 2 VGA GOBLINS VGA GODFATHER GOLD OF AZTECS GOLD OF THE AMERICAS GRAIL QUEST GRANDSLAM BRIDGE GREAT NAVAL BATTLES GREAT NAVAL BATT-CD GREAT NB AMERICA ATL GREAT NB SUPER SHIPS GREENS G GRIGSBY'S PAC WAR GUNBOAT GUNSHIP GUNSHIP 2000 SCEN OSK GUNSHIP 2000 VGA HALLS OF MONTEZUMA HARD NOVA HARDBALL 3 HARDBALL 3 PLAYEASD HARDBALL 3 STADIUM D HAAPOON HARPOON DESIGNER SER HARPOON EDITOR HARRIER ASSAULT HEART OF CHINA VGA HEAVEN & EARTH HEAVY METAL HEROES OF THE 357TH HEROES OF THE LANCE HIGH COMMAND HILLSFAR HOOK HOVERFORCE HOYLE'S BK GAMES VOL 1 HOYLE'S BK GAMES VOL 2 L'EMPEREUR LAKERS VS CELTICS \"LAND,SEA AIR TRILOGY LANDS OF LORE LASER SQUAD LEATHER GODDESSES 2 LEGACY:REALM OF TERR LEGEND OF FAERGHAIL LEGEND OF KYRANDIA LEGENDS OF VALOR LEMMINGS LEMMINGS 2 LEXICROSS LHX ATTACK CHOPPER LIGHTSPEED LINE IN THE SAND LINKS 386 PRO LINKS GOLF LORD OF THE RINGS 2 LOST ADMIRAL ENHANCED LOST FILES SHERLOCK LOST IN LA LOST PATROL MADDEN FOOTBALL 1 MADDEN FOOTBALL 2 MAELSTROM MAGIC CANDLE 1 MAGIC CANDLE 2 MAGIC CANDLE 3 MAGIC JOHNSON MVP MANHOLE MANHUNTER SF MANTIS EXP FIGHTER-VGA MANTIS EXP SPEECH PA MARTIAN DREAMS MARTIAN MEMORANDUM MATRIX CUBED MAXIMUM OVERKILL MAXIMUM OVERKILL MISS MEAN STREETS MECHWARRIOR MEDIEVAL LORDS MEDIEVAL WARRIORS MEGAFORTRESS MEGAFORTRESS MISS DK MEGATRAVELLER 1 ZHOD MEGATRAVELLER 2 MEGATRAVELLER 3 G  NO GREATER GLORY NOVA O VGA OBITUS OIL'S WELL OPERATION COMBAT OUT OF THIS WORLD PALADIN 2 PAPERBOY 2 PATRIOT PERFECT GENERAL PGA TOUR GOLF TOURN PIRATES PLANET'S EDGE PLAYMAKER FOOTBALL POLICE QUEST 1 VGA POLICE QUEST 3 VGA POLICE QUEST 4 POOL OF RADIANCE POOLS OF DARKNESS POPULOUS POPULOUS 2 POWER HITS: MOVIES POWER HITS: SCI/FI POWER HITS: SPORTS POWERHITS: BATTLETEC POWERMONGER PRINCE OF PERSIA PRINCE OF PERSIA 2 PRIVATEER PRO LEAGUE BASEBALL PROPHECY 1 PROPHECY OF SHADOW PROTOSTAR PSYCHIC WAR QUEST FOR GLORY 1.EGA QUEST FOR GLORY 1-VGA QUEST FOR GLORY 2-EGA QUEST FOR GLORY3-VGA RAILROAD TYCOON RAILROAD TYCOON 2 RAMPART REALMS REALMS OF ARKANIA RED LIGHTNING RETURN OF PHANTOM RETURN TO ZORK REVOLUTION 76 REX NEBULAR COS GEN SIEGE EXP DOGS OF WAR SIERRA ADV BUNDLE SIERRA FAMILY FUN PK SILENT SERVICE 2 SILPHEED SIM CITY SIM CITY GRAPHICS SET 1 SIM CITY GRAPHICS SET 2 SIM CITY TERRAIN EDIT SIM ANT SIM EARTH SIM LIFE SIMPSONS ARCADE GAM SKATE OR DIE SOLITAIRE'S JOURNEY SORCERIAN SPACE 1889 SPACE ACE SPACE ACE 3 SPACE HULK SPACE QUEST 1 VGA SPACE QUEST 2 EGA SPACE QUEST 3 SPACE QUEST 4 VGA SPACE QUEST S-VGA SPACE QUEST BUNDLE SPACE ROGUE SPACEWARD HO! SPACEWHECKED SPEAR OF DESTINY SPECIAL FORCES SPECTRE SPEEDBALL 2 SPELLCASTING 101 SPELLCASTING 201 SPELLCASTING 301 SPELLCRAFT: ASPECT SPELLJAMMER:PIRATES SPIRIT OF EXCALIBUR STAR CONTROL STAR CONTROL 2 STAR FLEET 2 STAR LEGIONS STAR TREK 25TH ANNIV STARFLIGHT 1 STARFLIGHT 2 STELLAR 7 STORMOVIK 19 17 . CALL Y POP DO NO Prices & availability subject to change. Call Toll Free for current titles and those not listedwe've got lots more! All Used Games are complete & virus free with original box, documentation & disks. All sales are final-defective games replaced with same title. Free shipping (Regular Ground) in the continental USA on orders over $150. a an 8 26 Circle Reader Service #67 "


"BNN otta EenSLEN 11 ORES So...you buy armies, attack, try HISTORY SCREEN diate-level, conquer-the-world game that's to beat the other guys, and stir up surprisingly enjoyable and addictive. Imagine mischief at home. Is that all? Nor a jazzed-up Risk with computer players and by a long shot. Global Domination nasty revolution! Global Domination neatly has a detailed tactical game, called fills the niche between simple games like Risk \"satellite battles.» Briefly, those and more involved products like Command unirs you buy in the logistics screen H.Q. and Empire Deluxe. are placed on a detailed map of varying terrain, and you must dont lutts Wom While the game does come with a modem either attack or defend certain obfeature, attempts to tele-play foundered on jectives like headquarters, airfields slow conflict resolution, which may have and supply depots. been due to my buddy's slow machine. However, Global Domination makes a great soliYou have mouse-driven comprey moved. Also, it's very slow on low-end taire game. I lost much sleep and marital mand of your units, which can vary from one (286/386) machines. infantry soldier to flects of tanks, helicopters accord («I know its 1:30 but I'm besieging and jets. Command is much like Dune Il and In short, the tactical game, while visually New Jersey!\"). It's fast, fun, and sneaky. It is The Perfect General, with individual units segorgeous, is simply not up to current standnot too complicated, but neither is it overly lected and objectives chosen. The graphics ards. After a couple of tedious battles, I simple-minded. Replay value? All I can say is and sounds of this portion of the game are longed for the quick, easy, resolution of the that this article was delayed by frequent \"fact stunning. strategic game. The other bells and whischecks» that took up to four hours each! tles-conflict watching, physical maps-add However, the tactical game does not measSo give Global Domination an unexpected little to the game and remind one of Final ure up to the standard of the other games thumbs up. Its ambitious challenge to The Conflict's Euro-style chrome. So the muchmentioned. The command system is clunky, Perfect General falls flat, but what's left makes lacking the fluidity and case of the other ballyhooed tactical simulation is, in my opina perfect addition to the global conqueror's games' controls. The command options are ion, not quite enough. Maybe in arcade-mad hard drive. It's a pleasant and entertaining too few to efficiently handle large numbers of Europe, it would work, but the US market little game allowing you to match wits with Europe, it would work, but the US market little game allowing units. I spent too much time fighting the has segmented this type of game and dealt history's greatest warlords and sweep them interface and watching those beautiful iets with it in a far more detailed fashion. before you like digitized chaff. Now, if you'll and tanks go somewhere else than ordered, or So take away the tactical wargame and excuse me...I've got to drive Napoleon our miss the target by one «square\" because the what's left? A simple, workmanlike, intermeof Africa. CGW Precision analog joystick with an unsurpassed 5-year limited warranty Compatible with all flight simulation software, including Microsoft Flight Simulator 5.0. Announcing O.T.C. 1 Lightning fast trigger button Dual position thumb button Cursor centering adjustment Realistic throttle control When that enemy MIG is bearing down on you, HUNT and PECK are not the first two responses that come to mind. If you agree, consider the advanced Thunderstick with OTC-One Touch Command. Touch a button to look left. Release it and you're automatically looking forward into your heads-up display. A single touch could select a weapon, target, and fire all at once. Eight dualprogrammable buttons on the front panel let you replace multiple keystrokes with One Touch Commands. Comes with a selection of predefined command sets. A simple display lets you set up your own to suit your aircraft or mission parameters. For over 30 years, Kraft has delivered Speed, Power, and Control to earth-bound pilots. When it's time for reflex responsive flight, reach for the Thunderstick with One Touch Command. We wouldn't give you the power if we didn't think you could handle it. Convenient throttle defeat switch Kraft AR Kraft Systems, Inc. 450 W. California Ave. Vista, CA 92083 Tel: (619) 724-7146 Fax: (619) 941-1770 Circle Reader Sonic #79 "


"Brian Vodniks Stores NOW! Available in Kingdoms Bermany DF IM Brian Vodni The BEST Medieval Strategy Game Series made. Period. Features New Additions Kingdoms  1-6 Players, 196 Territories  Artificial intelligence (AI) that makes  7 Troop types and catapults extremely tough computer opponents at the  5 Difficulty levels with handicapping higher difficulty levels (even tough enough  Control of up to 20 armies and to beat the game designer, Brian Vodnik!) 5 flotillas per kingdom, 5 Castle types  QuickmoveTM and Double QuickmoveTM  Toggle each kingdom between human, which greatly speeds up the computer's turn computer, and off  Quick and easy food shortagel  Resource management of food, crop increase notification for faster turns Germany wood, stone, iron  Quick siege Beautifully HAND-DRAWN graphics  Dispatch/Gather troops to or from castle Available NOW! Huge 832 X 711 pixel map that you garrisons to adjacent territories actually play on!  Immediate/Delayed catapult construction  Simple point and click interface to an option intricate and detailed game  End of turn checking for movable armies gieldo of Congueat Actual IBM Screen Shots Brian Vodnik's Vikings DEXE CODEX REDUCED!! Call or send $4.00 for a 7-turn playable demo or download it FREE from our BBS @ (708) 545-1410 and get hooked! Save $20 off of the list price of $59.95 and get Kingdoms of Germany for only $39.95 + $3.50 S&H Reduced! Get Vikings for only $29.95 + $3.50 S&H. Registered users can upgrade to Vikings Enhanced for $10. Call for Details. Buy Vikings and Kingdoms of Germany for $64.95 + 3,50 S&H and get the VikingsTM Enhanced upgrade (a $10.00 value) FREE! Check, Money Order, and Visa/Mastercard accepted. Call Realism Entertainment for more details on all offers at (708) 595-7487. Besclism Tentertecinment VikingsTM is available for Amiga and IBM. Kindgoms of Germany available for IBM. Coming soon for Color Macintosh. Realism EntertainmentTM 6N522 Pine Street VISA Bensenville, IL 60106 Mastercard (708) 595-7487 VIKINGSTM, Fields of ConquestTM Kingdoms of Germany and TRUE 32-BITIM, are trademarks of Realism Entertainment The video game perfectionists ... details, details, details,  1993 Realism Entertainment All Rights Reserved Worldwide. Circle Reader Service #121 "


"Opponents Wanted Those wishing to place their own free ads need only send us a postcard (or use the Notes section of the RID card), letter, FAX (714-283-3444] or E-Mail (Prodigy (EXPT40B), CompuServe 176703,622), The Sierra Network at Box 1048, GEnic and America On-Line (CGWI). Generally, we run them only once, so send another cach time if you want to keep your name listed! The ads themselves should serve as reasonable examples as to how to write your own. However,  Include a brief description of the types of opponents and games you are interested in playing Games being played other than direct by modem can be listed (trading save game disks or even face-to-face).  At least one (possibly more) telephone number(s) must be included. Do not forget the area code and mention whether they are Home, Work or Modem numbers.  Include your city and state so that people who call you will both: a) have a clue as to what time zone you are in and b) recognize it when they sce it on their phone bill. The Networks The following are voice contact numbers for many of the various on-line network services that connect gamers. Call them for more information on these networks. America On-Line: (800) 827-6364 CompuServe Information Service: (800) 848-8990 Novalink (formally Digital Dreams) Network: (800) 274-2814 Genie: (800) 638-9636 The ImagiNation Network: (800) IMAGIN-1 Multi-Player Games Network: (800) GET-GAME National Videotex (NVtel): (800) 336-9096 Prodigy: (800) 822-6922 x556 USA Today Sports Network: (800) 826-9688 Bulletin Board Systems Wargamers unite! Looking for an opponent for War in Russia, Empire Deluxe, Falcon 3.0 or others? Look no more! Cybersystems BBS has an Opponents Wanted and Wargame discussion message bases, Sysop moderated wargames, tournaments and more. Large War in Russia tournament in progress. Play FT, swap saved games, play-by-modem. 24 hours a day, hassle free! Funning Sychronet, 3 Gigs, 3 Lines, 30 on-line games. Settings: 8-N-1, 2400/9600/38.4 (USR Duals). No fec. Call (908) 654-1290. The Dakota Central Telenet BBS in Carrington, ND (58421) is a BBS with many challenging on-line games and over 30,000 files available to download free of charge. On-linc games include the massive Land of Devastation post-nuclear war RPG with an available EGA graphic user interface, plus you can battle other traders and aliens in Trade Wars 2002 (tournaments start frequently). Explore with your character in the combat-happy RPG Wizard's Arena, and make big booms with others like Nuke War and Naval Battle. Trivia and card games are also on-line. Huge games file area. Free access, with a small fee for total access. 3 nodes; 300-14,400 Baud, 8-N-1. Call (701) 674-8115, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. The Informer BBS under SYSOP John Custer is running flight sim updates, Cracks, flight sim conferences. This is the home of SIMNET, the flight sim network of the 510 Tactical Fighter Wing (sponsors of SIM CON 93). We also have a direct link to Thrustmaster tech support and many pilots to answer your questions. (415) 468-6713, 6714 or 6715. Call Little Caesar's Nightclub at (416) 238-8238. All wargamers should check out message base #13 for discussions on computer wargaming. Find an opponent or leave a review. All computer platforms welcome. The Elfspire Tome is a Fantasy Role-Playing Game Master's resource bulletin board. We feature role-playing cchocs, on-line games, fantasy clip art and much more 1200-9600 Baud. (415) 595-2387. The Electronic Estates BBS in Oak Lawn, IL invites you to join their Tradewar 2002, Global Warand Chessgames. Many files available for download, Netmail, instant access and more. \"A world class, American BBS\" (pmc 11/93). Call (708) 424-6136. Will you hack and slash your way through a real-time, multi-user dungeon (MUD) or attempt to conquer an entire galaxy? It's your choice when you call The Batboard BBS in Columbia, MO. Enjoy the true AD&D action of Legends and the professional e-mail game VGA Planets (with an off-line VGA interface) or tackle over 30 other on-line challenges, including ANSI Pro Football, Chat Roulette, BandWarz, role-playing, strategy, trivia and casino games. Prizes awarded for highest monthly scores, with full access on your first call (and it's free)! Two CD-ROMs on-line, with the latest in quality on-line, with the latest in quality shareware games! FidoNet cchocs (including GAMING), multiline chat, the adult role-playing game Wild Side visit today for the best in multiline diversions! We're always open 24 hours at (314) 446-0475 with 14400 bps supported. The Delphic Oracle is an all-gaming BBS. Play RPGs (ADD, GURPS), play-bye-mail games (Diplomacy, ASL), Empires at War (a Napoleonic on-line game) and other games on-line. Find modem game players. Gamemasters and players wanted. Simi Valley, California (805) 582-9004 (2400 8-N-1] Free access. The Gaming Connection BBS in Everett, WA specializes in connecting modem-tomodem players. Give it a call at (206) 742-4044, twenty-four hours a day. Join a Gaming Ladder and make new friends to challenge. Empire Deluxe and Harpoon scenarios, plus access to everything (including over 5,000 files) available on your first call! The Ho-Down BBS wants you to \"test your metal\" in multi-player games of Spaceward, Ho! Are you tired of beating 19 smart computer players in a small galaxy Want a real challenge? Try competing against the most deadly, devious, dastardly, dangerous, diabolical, double-crossing dealers of death and destruction this side of Deneb. In other words, against players just like you! Call with modem ser at 8-N-1, up to 14400 bps, (206) 577-8868. The Imperium BBS is looking for modem gamers like you! Tournaments are run for Knights of the Sky, Command HQ, The Perfect General and Global Conquest (just to name a few!). We have on-line games, message base and 3 gigs of files, too. Call one of our three nodes in Middleton, NJ at cither: 1200/2400 (908) 706-0342: 9600 v.32 (908) 706-0305; HST Dual Standard 38.4 (908) 706-0321. The Mac Commonwealth BBS in metro New Orleans, LA is sponsored by the National Home & School Mac User Group, a nonprofit organization promoting leisure and learning on the Mac. Our multi-line system features over 1 gigabyte of downloadable files, with emphasis on games and educational material. On-line magazines, Usenet newsgroups, OneNet conferences and Internet e-mail. Support file sections for over 60 commercial games! First Class graphic user interface. All lines support 1200 v.32bis 14,400 access. For information on BBS and group activities, send inquiries to NHSMUG, P.O. Box 640641, Kenner, LA 70064. BBS line 1: (504) 837-7984. By Area Code Grognards, unite! Rather mature gamer (who confesses to remembering initial release of Avalon Hill's Gettysburg) is stranded in the wilderness of LaGrange Park, IL and wants to find other wargamers familiar with Aide de Camp. Hopefully, we can play some Flat Top-electronic, double-blind. Also looking for a good, long session of Grigshy's Pacific War to play by file transfer (I'm not only willing, but eager to be the next Nagumo). Byron Inglesh, CompuServe (73322,203]. Miami, FL player throws down his gauntlet to anyone who challenges him in a game of Bartlechess (cither disk or CD-ROM). If you have a network with Internet access, respond at CJHM22A@PRODIGY.COM or call Stephen Hertz at H-(305) 448-8425. Seeking local opponents for modem gaming, Will play The Perfect General, F-15 III and many others. Call me in Syracuse, NY at H-(315) 622-2204. Ask for Jerry any time between 8am and 10pm. Looking for a local opponent to meet for face-to-face game of Clash of Steel. Warlords Il or other board and computer wargames. I'm in Harford County, MD. Call Josh at H-(410) 939-1021. Opponents sought for Empire Deluxe, Conquered Kingdoms, The Perfect General and Global Conquest. Will also play other modem capable games (I have a PPI 14.4 modem). I can't afford long distance, but will consider PC Pursuit. Contact Gene Gooldy between 12pm and 10pm any day at H-(410) 923-6188 in Anne Arundel County, MD. Local modem opponent wanted for almost any flight sim or Robosport. Call Al (The Cheesy) at H-(415) 593-1989 in the San Francisco bay area. Wanted in the San Francisco area: Head-to-head Falcon 3.02.1/MiG 29 1.01 players. Will also play F-15 III/Tornado. I can play at speeds up to 14400 Baud and am a member of the 510 Tactical Fighter Wing. All challengers welcome. Call H-(415) 468-2021. Local (Contra Costa County, CA) modem opponents wanted for Falcon 3.01 (or allicd) and The Perfect General. Contact Joseph \"Joc Cruise\" in Concord, CA at H-(510) 827-0283 anytime. Beginners are more than welcome! I have lots of free time, so if you are interested in another game, or want to play face-to-face in any game of your choice, please call. Seeking local opponents for Command HQ, 688 Attack Sub, The Perfect General or any other game of your choice. Please, call David in the Vancouver/Lower Mainland area and let's do battle. Phone me at H-604) 264-7998. B rigadier General \"Shifty\" Pierre challenges you to battle in The Perfect General. The battle \"Stuck in the Middle Again,\" short game, partial sighting, random hit. It doesn't matter where you live, I have PC Pursuit and I'll phone you. Or, what about a war for control of the planet in Empire Deluxe? CGW Tournament rules, Wrap on. I live near Chicago. Voice: H-(708) 479-4344; BBS: (815) 886-0109. Local opponents sought for The Perfect General, Falcon 3.02 and other games in the NYC area. Contact Lorenzo \"Wren\" Lamberty at H-(718) 597-3588 anytime after 4pm. Seeking opponents for modem play in the Colorado Springs, CO area. I would love to play The Perfect General, Empire Deluxe, Modem Wars, Knights of the Skyor anything you've got a hankering to lose at (hehehe). Contact Steven Woodcock at either of the following: H-(719) 392-2975 or by email via the InterNet at: swoodcoc@oldcolo.com Local opponents wanted for Falcon, F-15 III or Tornado. Call Rod in Memphis, TN at H-(901) 527-8764 or W-(901) 525-2557. Opponents wanted in the Longview, TX area for Conquered Kingdoms by modem. I am also interested in any type of modem strategy game. Call Bill Anderson at H-(903) 663-2120. Looking for PBEM opponents for Second Front, Carrier Strike or just about any other wargame. Contact Ernest Calridge in the Toronto arca after 6pm at H-(905) 238-8238. Mediocre Empire Deluxe player sceks same for modem or e-mail contest. Ask for Johnny at H-(909) 676-7251, CGW Page 210 Computer Gaming World "


"ADVERTISERS' INDEX RS# RS# ADVERTISER PAGE 99 % % % % o à a % % % 108 109 113 115 116 114 17 118 119 120 121 122 123   o % % 48 3 3 3 53 190 5 80 81 84 124 83 6 6 125 ng O 126 6 127 e 6 6 ADVERTISER PAGE RS# 3DI Productions 12971 7th Level 171 147 Accolade 97 148 Accoustic Research 98 50 Advanced Digital Sys. 13972 Al Tech Internation 219 73 Aldealabs 198 74 Apogee Software 75 Bare Bones Software 132 76 Baseline Publishing 133 77 Bethesda Softworks 78 78 Bethesda Softworks 79 79 CH Products Cape Cod Connection 196 Chips & Bits Chips & Bits Chips & Bits 87 84 Chips & Bits 89 150 Chips & Bits 91 85 Chips & Bits 93 86 Colorado Spectrum 154 88 Colorado Spectrum 178 151 Compsult 190 89 Computer Express 109 90 Computer Express 172-173 91 Computer Sys. Solutions 122 92 Creative Labs, Inc. 71 93 Disk-Count Software 123 94 Domark 227 95 Dongleware Publishing 137 Dongleware Publishing 175 Electronic Arts 125 98 Electronic Arts 102-103 Entertainment Internat'l. 193 100 Falcon Northwest 7 101 Flagship Magazine 116 102 Formgen Future Vision GE Information System Gamer's Gold Genovation 51 106 Gosselin Comp. Consult 160 105 HPS Simulations 6 Papyrus Publishing Promethius QQP QQP QQP OOP Quality Computers Readysoft Readysoft Readysoft Realism REM Software SDJ Enterprises Sideline Software Sierra On-Line Sigma Designs Sir Tec Software Software Express Software Toolworks Spectrum Electronics Spectrum HoloByte Spectrum HoloByte Strategic Simulations Suncom Technology Thrustmaster Inc. Time Warner I. Group Tsunami Tsunami Tsunami Tsunami Twin Dolphin Games Velocity Development Viking Software Virgin Games Virgin Games Zero's and One's ADVERTISER PAGE High Tech Expressions 27 Humongous Adventure 165 Humongous Adventure 167 Imagination Network 17 Impressions 3 Impressions 5 Inner Circle Technology 65 Innerprise Software 185 Interplay 63 Keyboard Commander Koei 199 Kraft Systems Inc. 208 Lance Haffner Games Logitech 177 Mallard Maxis Software Maxis Software Mediavision 157 Mediavision 181 Mediavision 183 Mega Tech 113 Mega Tech Merit Software Microform Microform 213 MicroLeague 191 MicroLeague MicroProse Software MicroProse Software Midian Software 90 Midnight Games 122 Mindcraft 75 Mindcraft 77 Mission Control 204-205 National Videotext Nawu Triad Inc. 158 Nova Logic Nova Logic Ocean of America Ocean of America Origin Systems Origin Systems Paper Mayhem 129 130 132 187 150 30-31 44-45 50 ô à en 134 135 149 52 136 215 137 35 os 139 140 141 142 145 179 99 144 161 142-143 195 143 145 146 147 Choo SEO. 197 No Reader Service number. Please call advertiser for information. 2 February 1994 Page 211 "


"Taking A PEEK Look at hult to Look at Open Move Consume Pick Up Close Use Tall to Remove hear live A quick look at titles now appearing on a store shelf near you. M-30 Grenade Launcher, SKYNET reappears. It seems that prior to its destruction SKYNET sent a core dump of all its vital data back to 1984, housed in a specially modified T-800 Terminator. The result: SKYNET became fully functional much sooner than planned and used the knowledge of its future destruction in an alternate timeline to bring about the annihilation of mankind before the resistance could be formed. Fortunately, just enough resistance fighters survived the timeline shift to send a resistance commando into the past to defeat SKYNET. The player, of course, becomes said commando. With enhanced features over the previous Terminator release, Terminator Rampage offers a look similar to id Software's Doom, though the gameplay doesn't compare. Action, regardless of difficulty, is intense. The faint of heart need not apply. IBM ($69.95). Circle Reader Service #3. Simon the Sorcerer TELL -T TTHE JU_LE Oriental Rug Activision 11601 Wilshire Blvd. Los Angeles, CA 90025 (800) 477-3650 SIMON THE SORCERER: Begin with a spellbook and a large cauldron. Fill it with swamp water; mix in a dash of Altered Destiny and add a smidgen of Legend of Kyrandia. Then, blend in a large portion of The Secret of Monkey Island topped off with a just a hint of Waxworks and mix well. The result? Simon the Sorcerer, a wacky, tongue-in-cheek interactive fantasy with an attitude about an adolescent destined to save a magical dimension from the archetypal evil wizard. With humor closely resembling that of LucasArts' Monkey Island, this tale of a dimension-crossing boy and his dog features a rich world of tasty puzzles designed to test the wirs of the most astute adventurer while keeping the humor dial turned up to the max. IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #1. Creative Multimedia 514 NW 11th Ave., Suite 203 Portland, OR 97209 (503) 241-1530 Wacky Jacks TARGET ITD La THE MAGIC DEATH: Digital detectives in search of murders to solve may want to investigate this new offering from Creative Multimedia. Bearing strong resemblance to Viacom's Sherlock Holmes titles and built on the engine of CMC's earlier Who Killed Sam Rupert!, The Magic Death brings criminology into the 90s with more technology-based means of aiding the sleuth in determining the culprit(s) involved in a crime. Blood tests, fabric analysis, autopsies and the like are now at your disposal. Examine the crime scene, question the suspects, check your sources, review the evidence, verify alibis and hold your press conference. Watch your time, though; you only have six hours of game time in which to solve the case. IBM CD-ROM with Windows-ROM ($49.99). Circle Reader Service #4. The Terminator: Rampage CRIME SCENE Int er Apple Computer, Inc. 20525 Mariani Ave. Cupertino, CA 95014 (800) 708 STAR WACKY JACKS: Not quite live, from Cupertino, it's Don Pardo! Yes, the voice of Saturday Night Live provides the vocal counterpoint for this simple multimedia game show. Up to four players switch back and forth in the \"hot seat\" in front of the computer in order to play games similar to Concentration, Hangman, Tic-Tac-Toe, and scrambled pocket puzzles. All of the games draw from a large library of pictures from around the world and feature the vocal stylings of the golden-throated Pardo. Though the CD access time means occasional \"dead air,\" which would horrify the legendary TV announcer, Wacky Jacks'three difficulty levels make it easy for families to play the games together. Macintosh CD-ROM ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #2. The Magic Death Cyberdreams, Inc. 21243 Ventura Blvd., Suite 230 Woodland Hills, CA 91364 (818) 348-4560 CYBERRACE: Designed by the renowned futurist Syd Mead (Blade Runner, Tron, 2010, Star Trek: The Motion Picture), Cyber Race brings futuristic 3D combat and racing to the PC. A front runner in concept, Cyber Race also benefits from improvements in VOXEL graphics that allow Cyberdreams to render detailed landscapes at amazingly fast speeds. Though some role-playing elements fill the intermediary scenes between race segments, game play is primarily action intensive. Most playing time is spent in the CyberSled, jockeying for position and eliminating your opponents. Certainly, having the talents of Syd Mead in the development of the storyline is Bethesda Softworks PO Box 7877 Gaithersburg, MD 20898-7877 (301) 963-2002 CyberRace THE TERMINATOR: RAMPAGE: Just when you thought it was safe to hang up your Page 212 Computer Gaming World "


"THE ULTIMATE CD DISK FOR VIDEO GAMES SUPER HR     Games Incredible Graphics, Super Sound Effects & Fast Action ! These are only some of the features that you will find on this CD ! Each game has been carefully selected as one of the best in it's category. Have hours of fun with Super Arcade Games. Some of the games included are: GOTCHA, HELUS, KEN'S LABYRINTH, XERIX, LLAMATRON, MAJOR STRYKER, DEFENDER, MEGATRON, VGA LEAPER, GATEWORLD, PROTEC HEAVY WATER JOGGER, STELLAR DEFENSE FLUX STARFIRE JETPACK 3D CATABOMBS SEA QUEST SPECIAL OFFER $29.00 OVER 150 OF THE LATEST GAMES ! ALL UNDER AN EASY TO USE MENU SYSTEM MORUM Cicle Reader Service #91 SOLD AT BETTER COMPUTER STORES For support call 416 656 6406 ALL TO RECEIVE A FREE CATALOG OF ALL THE MICROFORUM TITLES To order direct call 1-800-465-CDCD "


"the strength behind Cyber Race, and the story itself may actually eclipse game play. Nonetheless, it appears that CyberRace will find a strong appeal among sci-fi fans and racing enthusiasts. IBM and IBM CD-ROM ($69.95). Circle Reader Service #5. tinues, Nemesis once again threatens life as we know it, resulting in your call back to action. Unfortunately, he has gained control of the Time Gates and must be stopped before he can unleash any more high-tech monsters from the distant future or decaying beasts from the ancient past. As it stands, this continuation of the Catacomb games looks and plays exactly like the former releases. Unfortunately, this means the graphics are still only 16-color EGA (though VGA and SVGA compatible). Playability is good, almost addictive, and offers bang for the buck in spite of its lackluster visuals. IBM ($14.95). Circle Reader Service #8 Morphman: The Challenge of the Queaxmar Experiments! Dynamic Dimensions Development, Inc. 512 Main St., Suite 1014 Ft. Worth, TX 76102 (817) 336-1105 MORPHMAN: THE CHALLENGE OF THE QUEAXMAR EXPERIMENTS!: Look! Up in the sky! It's a bird. It's a plane. Actually, it's both. It's Morphman! Combining 3D animations with Microsoft's Video for Windows, Morphman provides an interesting concept, but generally lacks more than minimal interaction. As superhero Morphman, you must rescue Professor Roberts from a group of evil military scientists who have kidnapped and imprisoned him in their fortress. Using your wits and molecular sampler, you must infiltrate and destroy the structure, freeing the professor in the process. Under normal use, your molecular sampler allows you to \"sample\" creatures you meet and alter your molecular structure to match them (like a fish, bat, etc.). Used in reverse, the sampler becomes a powerful energy weapon. Unfortunately, the interaction seems rather too limited for those attuned to more traditional quests. IBM CD-ROM with Windows ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #6. HEALTH WEAPON INVENTORY Lethal Tender Id Software, Inc. (800) 434-2637 DOOM: If Wolfenstein 3-D kept you happily awake each night, look forward to a delight of insomnia with Doom. Instead of nasty Nazis, this time you may gleefully blow away space aliens with a variety of weapons, including rocket launchers, mega-machine guns, and even space-age brass knuckles (with appropriate spikes, of course). The player is a space marine, rooting through the treacherous depths of our local space station for the \"Ultimate Evil,» which gives the usual levelto-level crash and bash some semblance of a plot. Game controls are similar to Wolf 3-D, but also include a strategic map of the space station levels for planning one's Rambo-like assaults. Be sure to have at least a 386SX, but for those wishing the full thrill of carnage, only a 486 will do. Since networking is supported, bring along a friend to share in the visceral delights. Doom is a stand-alone product, not requiring Wolf 3-D, and the first episode of Doom is shareware from Id Software. IBM (Registered version: $40). Circle Reader Service #9. Northern halls 812 DRVO Rene BE Viewing TE Terror of the Catacombs Classics Fun Pack Game Categories Help NoR BEAVER Sif AXNOURRIN UKRXWZMO UTEYOB OUR 3.AONE LIKIZOKNOT QUAQUAR US AZU ZBoas. KK RUKE ANOWS XZ E X LORILE EA AGUNY KJ AGUARST RURANT KRYFHORASCUBUK  KARLIARD NANMR no TOC EUP ITTER Froggman Software PO Box 144506 Miami, FL 33114-9776 (305) 567-1363 LETHAL TENDER: Remember when your mother told you not to pur money in your mouth because you didn't know where it had been? In Lethal Tender, Froggman's version of a Wolfenstein 3D game, Nick Hunter infiltrates a secret underground manufacturing plant where the criminal mastermind, Thorne Devereaux, is producing a high explosive called PAID (Particle Accelerated Incendiary Device). The plan is to impregnate coins with PAID; hence, creating millions of monerary time bombs jingling in peoples' pockets all across America. When the protective coating wears off-BOOM! Hunter's task, of course, is to foil Devereaux's plans by destroying his operation. Lethal Tender is not exactly in the same league with Wolfenstein 3D, but it is a good value for its low retail price. With ten action-filled levels to explore, Lethal Tender offers a full clip of excitement for the money. IBM ($14.95). Circle Reader Service #7. R RATIONE OSIRD TUPO FUNXVEBOLC PELICAN CVETERA 20 G ZH HUMMINGBIRD Classics Fun Pack for Windows Impressions Software, Inc. 222 Third Street, Suite 0234 Cambridge, MA 02142 (203) 676-9002 CLASSICS FUN PACK FOR WINDOWS: This collection of seven Windows games is definitely FUN! Classics Addiction Pack might have been a better title for the package. Included are Peg Jump, Code Breaker, Word Search, Puzzle Game, and three solitaire card games. Most need no introduction as they are self-explanatory. All, though, are just as brain teasing as the original table games on which they are based. Those who like a good game of solitaire will surely gravitate to Klondike, Lady Louise or Canfield. Logic lovers will be drawn to Peg Jump and Code Breaker. Gamers with a penchant for word puzzles will find Word Search worthwhile. Whether you have only 15 minutes or hours to play, this little collection of classics is worth the low admission price. IBM TERROR OF THE CATACOMBS: Following on their popular Catacomb adventures, Froggman has just shipped their newest title in the series. As the 3D adventure conDoom Page 214 Computer Gaming World "


"You can play war games or you can make history. Hannibal takes history out of the books and into your PC. Experience the life and times of one of history's most controversial heros. You are Hannibal. Think his thoughts, fight his battles, befriend his allies and negotiate his treaties. Do everything as he did, or dare to do more. Based upon the actual history of Roman and Carthagan campaigns. +700 towns, each a possible friend or foe. Go to market to equip your army with horses, ships, mercenaries and elephants. Keep tabs on the political situation: don't raise tax rates too high or you may suffer the consequences. Negotiate peace or seige and destroy to increase your finances. Includes historical survey of Hannibal and his times. S . Can you conquer the powerful Roman Empire? Suggested Retail Price: $19.95 Published by UPC Code: 037523-84113-1 Developed by Format. IBM/PC Compatible V.O.P., 201 Bellevue Building MICROLEAGUE System Requirements: 640K RAM, 286/16mhz or foster, hard drive, Newark, DE 19702 H IS DOS 3.3 or higher, VGA, supports SoundBlaster and SoundBlaster 1.800.334.65729 compatible, mouse recommended Circle Reader Service #93 "


"with Windows ($24.95). Circle Reader Service #10. 1996 LEI EFS ME weather conditions are also available. So, you can land at LAX in the middle of a snow storm if flying into L.A. isn't unreal enough for you. Weather reports can be grouped for providing comprehensive preflight briefings and can be printed out for inflight reference. You can also save interesting weather patterns in archive files for later use. In addition, random weather patterns can be generated with difficulty levels ranging from novice to impossible. All considered, Real Weather Pilot is a first-class rool for a coach fare. Flight Simulator 4 or 5 is required. IBM ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #13. DAV 1DAYS BASED AT ORLEANS STATUS GROUNO STILE WW2 AIR FORCE COMMANDER: At the bargain price, one can hardly expect Impressions' second title in their Air Force Commander series to be \"Their Finest Hour,\" but it is still worth considering. Focusing on the European theater of World War II, WW2 Air Force Commander is a real-time, strategic simulation of air combat that allows you to recreate the large-scale, airborne conflicts of the second world war, including the famous Battle of Britain. Included are 28 historic scenarios, a wide variety of WWII planes, and reasonable selection of geographical maps, all featured in 256-color VGA graphics in an casy-to-use point-and-click interface. AdLib music and Sound Blaster digitized sounds are supported. Owners of the original Air Force Commander who have eagerly anticipared an add-on \"mission disk\" can purchase WW2AFC directly for $9.95, plus $5 shipping and handling. IBM ($19.95). Circle Reader Service #11. WW2 Air Force Commander Take Put Look at Open Close Give Talk to elopers You close the envelope. Companions of Xanth FILES SITUT HAL LEATHEE PILOT CHALLENGE HELP Maris Multimedia London E1 8AX, England 011-44-071-488-1566 RED SHIFT: Although it is not a game, Red Shift is a powerful astronomy program that allows amateur astronomers to print visibility reports on deep sky objects to determine when and where such phenomena can be observed. One simply selects a location on the map and tells the program to calculate with regard to that location. Then, it's easy to find the Andromeda Galaxy, Horsehead Nebula and a host of comets. There are 250,000 stars and 40,000 deep sky objects catalogued in this program, and the algorithms were executed by scientists from Space Mission Control in Russia. Combined with this astronomy program is a multimedia library of both still pictures and about a half dozen film clips. Macintosh CD-ROM (69 British plus Value Added Tax). Circle Reader Service #14. Ruta AD AN AINOAT DIT MILITES ALFORT DELETE MILITID ATRIOT Win101 YURTACE OBSERURTIOM CO X1 URARE Los Angeles Xhine stal port in Select TFT Los Angeles Ch 2339562.51511 91182712.9657 53553 | in     SARCO BAR EXIT Real Weather Pilot Legend Entertainment Company PO Box 10810 Chantilly, VA 22021-0810 (800) 658-8891 COMPANIONS OF XANTH: Previewed in our July 1993 issue (CGW #108), this graphic adventure breaks some new ground for Legend Entertainment. It is their first release to use a parserless, icon-based interface (there is a parser, but it is nearly transparent to the user). Plus, it's a very funny game based on an interesting literary license. When Piers Anthony wrote  Spell for Chameleon, the first Xanth novel, he certainly couldn't have expected the number of forthcoming ritles it would generate. Even less would he have expected that the competition described in one of those Xanth novels would appear as a computer adventure game. Based on Anthony's novel Demons Don't Dream, Companions of Xanth offers traditional adventure game puzzles, though it also has some that cannot be solved without the help of the titular Companions. IBM ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #12. -RREO Red Shift Mallard Software, Inc. 3207 Justin Rd. Flower Mound, TX 75028 (214) 539-2575 REAL WEATHER PILOT: Storm clouds are looming on the horizon with the release of Mallard's Real Weather Pilot, which generates weather for Flight Simulator 4 or 5. Capable of dialing up the DUATS weather reporting system and downloading actual weather reports, Real Weather Pilot lets you experience the actual weather conditions between any two U.S. airports. Of course, simulated Masque Publishing, Inc. PO Box 5223 Englewood, CO 80155 (303) 290-9853 MULTIMEDIA KALEIDOSONICS: This interactive art toy combines 38 attractive photographs of natural wonders, from the desert to the mountains to outer space with a jazz/fusion soundtrack. Designer John Ratcliff (688 Attack Sub, Seawolf) uses a variety of special effects to play with the images, while floating 2-D and 3-D texture wrapped objects like liberated parade floats. Where this program differs from a screen saver is in its endlessly customizable options and relaxing New Age audio. Users may change-and save-2D and 3-D settings, object movement and rotation, mirroring, warping, background shatters, speed and brightness. Rob Wallace created the soothing 48 minute score for the program in a MIDI studio using his computer. If you want to up the technological ante on nature-scape videos such as those seen in The Nature Company, Kaleidosonics may be your cup of tea. IBM CD-ROM ($24.99). Circle Reader Service #15. Multimedia Kaleidosonics Page 216 Computer Gaming World "


"Ready Soft Incorporated & Epicenter Interactive Present TRAGONS LAIR LICET TE PO OD SO WHIF ac ceremy You're in for the adventure of your life... TREO Dragon's Lair is back and better than ever on CD-ROM! This full arcade version is packed with spectacular animation and digitized sound, bringing Dragon's Lair to life like never before!  SEGA Site You control the actions of Dirk the Daring, a valiant knight, on a quest to rescue the fair Princess from the clutches of an evil dragon. Fight your way through the castle of the dark wizard who has enchanted it with treacherous monsters and obstacles. RealMagie 3DO also available for IBM PC & Macintosh Lead on brave adventurer... your quest awaits! ReadySoft Incorporated 30 Wertheim Court, Suite 2 READYSOFT Richmond Hill, Ontario, Canada L4B 189 Tel: (905) 731-4175 Fax: (905) 764-8867 Circle Reader Service #120 Licensed by Sega Enterprises Lid. lor play on the Sega COM system. Sema and Sena CD are trademarks of Sena Enterprises TID. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 300. the 3D0 logos, and Interactive Multiplayer are trademarks of The 300 Company \"REELMAGIC\" is a trademark of Sigma Designs, Inc. \"Dragon's Lair\" is a registered trademark of Bluth Group, Ltd. 1993. Character Designs 1993 Don Bluth; 01993 all audio, visual and concept used under the exclusive license of Epicenter Interactive Inc. Programming 1993 ReadySoft Incorporated. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED "


"READY 10 BOTOL 09 EUR WE ALI SIBEL Media Vision Multimedia Publishing 47300 Bayside Parkway Fremont, CA 94538 (510) 770-8600 CRITICAL PATH: It's Cinemaware Meets Digitized Video when Media Vision, manufacturer of multimedia hardware (read: sound and video cards), enters the multimedia publishing fray with their first interactive actionadventure. In this new CD-ROM title combining motion picture, video game, and computer generated animation elements, Kat, a 24-year-old renegade chopper pilot, must be safely guided through a post-apocalyptic setting with your help. Pursued by mutant thugs and dogged at every turn by an insane dictator, Kat is forced to face one life threatening event after another in an effort to escape her captor's \"fortress.\" During the course of the game, you must anticipate the various threats to Kat's life and help her avoid danger by aiding her from a remote control station. Extensive use of video and sound effects makes the game intense and creates a fastpaced and captivating experience. However, expect a good deal of trial and error in the process of securing Kar's safety. IBM CDROM with Windows ($79.95). Circle Reader Service #16. print shop, and film clip vault. Not only does this product provide short, succinct QuickTime film clips from some classic science fiction films, but it also provides the text for more than 50 of Isaac Asimov's robot stories. Unfortunately, the robot assembly portion of the program isn't as sophisticated as one would hope. It is essentially Designasaurus for robots, with the user assembling paper doll robots that can be printed to hard copy or animated on screen. Though somewhat interesting, there isn't any real game to it. Also, the advertised screen savers require After Dark to function. Still, it is definitely the type of product that has something for every robot fiction fan. Macintosh CD-ROM ($79.95). Circle Reader Service #18. Critical Path Kronolog: The Nazi Paradox MIT AUTOTOO ASSIMOTO TODO KIOLI PUBLE 100 Merit Software 13707 Gamma Rd. Dallas, TX 75244 (800) 238-4277 KRONOLOG: THE NAZI PARADOX: In Kronolog's version of history, Germany won World War II through a German monopoly on the atomic bomb. The result of this revisionist past is a plausible furure of a world on the brink of ecological disaster. It is now 2020 and America is under the cultural and intellectual chokehold of the Nazi German Empire. To make matters worse, the Nazis have invented a workable time machine. Meanwhile, American society is involved in a surrogate war in the Far East and is on the edge of complete environmental devastation. Some Nazi collaborators and a secret underground movement soon raise the tensions to apocalyptic levels. You are, of course, thrown into this milieu, with your goal being to stop the environmental destruction and bring the Nazi government to its knees. This puzzlebased, icon-operated animated adventure features a more interesting premise than execution. IBM ($69.95). Circle Reader Service #17. NovaLogic 19510 Ventura Blvd. #200 Tarzana, CA 91356 (818) 774-0812 WOLFPACK CD: This is a reworking of the original Wolfpack released in 1989, packed onto a CD with a fabulous new introduction sequence and sound track. While not the definitive work on the subject, WolfPack CD is more like a \"Fun Pack\" for burgeoning submariners. Using a fairly easy point-andclick interface, players can jump from ship-toship on their side (commanding cither the submarines or convoys) as they close for a fateful engagement, leaving every unattended ship under the Al's guidance. Instead of running from room-to-room or ship-to-ship, as in some simulations, commands can be entered from a single control panel in this simulation. What makes WolfPack CD compelling is its intriguing soundtrack and mission construction set. New captains will also appreciate its short learning curve, which will have them at periscope depth before they can say \"Heil What's-His-Name.\" IBM CD-ROM ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #19. Isaac Asimov's The Ultimate Robot OSTAT Wolfpack CD-ROM QQP, Inc. 1046 River Avenue Flemington, NJ 08822 (908) 788-2799 HEIRS TO THE THRONE: A decisively German import (you can almost hear the accent when reading the roughly translated docs), this is one speedy strategy game! The king has died and you, as one of the land's Barons, must step in to fill the vacuum. Narurally, the other Barons are also vying for control of the kingdom, so the stage is set for a classic multi-player strategy game (for up to four players ar the same machine). With clean systems and an intuitive interface, the game offers a bunch of options and random maps that serve to give it depth and variety. Strategists will quickly find themselves mastering the interface to the point where they will be clicking off turns as fast as their wetware can N/A wa Na Da 30% Microsoft Corporation One Microsoft Way Redmond, WA 98052-6399 (206) 882-8080 ISAAC ASIMOV'S THE ULTIMATE ROBOT: One of the first releases in the new Microsoft Homeline is this combination photo gallery, short story library, robot paper doll 25% Baron ROVNI Fenrir Heirs to the Throne Page 218 Computer Gaming World "


"Do it on the big screen...with gamePlayerTV full-motion video/audio capture, compression, and professional audio/video output to TV and video. S o, dont settle for small-time pleasure when you can achieve the ultimate in game-playing excitement with gamePlayerTV. For more information on this and our other products, contact your local dealer or call us at 1-800-882-8184 or 1-510-226-8960, or fax 1-510-226-8996. Play PC games on TV! The new AlTech gamePlayerTV lets you do this. Instead of playing games on your PC monitor, you can maximize your game-playing excitement by playing them on a larger TV screen. Imagine sitting in front of your 20\" TV playing your favorite computer game and for the first time, seeing and hearing the power of 24-bit computer graphics. WOW! Sit down Sega; this is real power! GamePlayerTV is well-suited for game, business presentation, video recording, and all home and business audio applications. It includes high-quality digital audio record and playback capabilities for all your Windows Sound System, SoundBlaster and AdLib games and educational and business software. And, whether your TV accepts NTSC or PAL signals, game PlayerTV provides 24-bit, 16.7 million color resolution and S-Video output for enhanced TV viewing and video tape recording. An easy and user-friendly on-line TV adjustment screen puls all the controls for TV output right at your fingertips. The sound editing software included with game Player TV makes recording and playback of digital sound fun and exciting. AlTech's enhanced Windows-installed software makes the set up of gamePlayerTV easy and effortless. AlTech can assist with your other desktop video and multimedia needs too. We offer a complete line of fully compatible DTV and multimedia products, including integrated Wave WatcherTV audioSHOW AlTech International 47971 Fremont Blvd., Fremont, CA 94538 AlTech Audio/VideoBlender VideoSurge gamePlayerTV ProPC/TV Plus Vis i on f o M u 1 im e d i a AlTech International, 1993. Audio/VideoBlender, Video Blender, VideoSurge, Wave WatcherTV, audioSHOW. gamo Player TV and ProPC/TV Plus are trademarks of AlTech International Star XWING Wars is a product of Lucas Arts. All other trademarks are the property of their respective holders. Specifications are subject to change without notice. Circle Reader Service #36 "


"process. IBM ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #20. file. Too many strikes and the gamer is out. Enough fast pitches and the date may be on. There are some interactive video sequences such as a paintball game and parachute drop that add garnish to play. The spice of the game, however, is provided by the witry repartee replete with sexual innuendo and the boudoir pictures provided during encounters with each of the six lovelies. There is nothing X-rated about these film clips and slide shows, but those who think Victoria's Secret catalogs are too risqué will want to steer clear of this producr. IBM CD-ROM ($79.95). Circle Reader Service #23. Police Quest: Open Season SCRUB KAR268 SP Where there's BMCIALMEST Nearlo DASA Tento 5. ts Rindu NEM Take A Break! Crosswords, Volumes I & II Sierra On-Line, Inc. P.O. Box 485 Coarsegold, CA 93614 (800) 757-7707 POLICE QUEST: OPEN SEASON: This latest offering in the Police Quest series draws from the expertise of former L.A. Police Chief Daryl Gates. Beginning with a brutal murder of one of L.A.'s finest, you don the badge of a detective working on a bizarre murder case. Life as an L.A.P.D. homicide detective is no picnic: as if the bad guys weren't tough enough, you must also deal with the press, and must follow strict police procedures at all times. From the manual that reads like \"the book\" that officers must go by when enforcing the law, through mandatory weapon qualifications, to visiting actual police hang outs, Police Quest: Open Season evinces a remarkable degree of work-a-day police realism as a result of Gates' contributions. Set in a new, enhanced game engine with marvelous digitized backgrounds, this game may be more appealing than True Crime television. IBM and IBM CD-ROM ($69.95 and $79.95 respectively). Circle Reader Service #21. TAKE A BREAK! CROSSWORDS, VOLUMESI & II: Provided courtesy of Sierra and Dynamix, and designed for use in the Windows environment, this exercise in alphabetic aerobics offers over 750 puzzles broken down into several sizes and complexity levels. With an animated faery for a host, Take A Break! Crosswords animations and digitized voices make their contributions to what is, essentially, a digitized version of a crossword puzzle book (however, since these puzzles can be printed out, you can still solve them in the paper and pencil medium if you desire). The intuitive interface comes in particularly handy when playing against the clock for bonus points, and the inclusion of an auto-check feature and on-line hints will help serve the crossword-impaired among us. IBM with Windows ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #22. Twin Dolphin Games, Inc. 220 Twin Dolphin Dr., Suite B Redwood Shores, CA 94065 (415) 637-9300 NANOTANK: If Mr. Wizard couldn't help you understand electronics, Nanotank may offer some clues. In this bizarre Windows puzzle game, Nanotank allows you to control a microscopic probe as it traverses the treacherous innards of a computer system in search of an evil virus. The 100 puzzling levels are set up like circuit boards, with an entry point and an exit. Thc Nanotank must cross the board and reach the exit without losing contact with a powered \"trace.\" The pathway is littered with odd components—switches, diodes, capacitors, relays, optocouplers, teleportersthat must be manipulated or repaired with solder to make clear the pathway to victory. You don't need a degree in Electrical Engineering to play Nanotank, but that kind of problem-solving smarts would certainly help. IBM with Windows ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #24. 1 Wu're pretty m SIV. This may be a first-class parallin after all 2 HHO on I don't know to used for date al fl applicatie bolli modus wally lockey Let me take a lonk at that you go Man Enough eIME OG SCORE BREV Nanotank SMOKIN' GUNS: Ready! Aim! Click! Trigger-happy gamers now have six venues of rapid-fire carnage under Windows with Smokin' Guns. Scenarios include: Gangsterland, for shootin' it our against the mob; House on the Hill, for a Haunted House ecto-blaster of ghost-busting fun; County Fair, a more traditional shooting gallery with no return fire; Neptune Six, offering outer space alien popping; Silicon Gulch, a wild west six-gun slinger; and Terminal Flight, for Bruce Willis types. With mouse cursor as gunsight, your task is to dispense with the bad guys while avoiding blasting innocent bystanders. Though killing bad guys increases your score, hitting bystanders lowers it 1000 points each. Multiple rounds are provided in each scenario with each round offering increased difficulty. Survive long enough without your life meter running out and get your name on the sharpshooter list. With oodles of configuration options and great visual and audible enhancements, Smokin' Guns hits the bull's-eye. IBM with Windows ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #25. C6W UVERY STABLE SALOONES GOODS | Tsunami Media, Inc. PO Box 790 Coarsegold, CA 93614-9983 (800) 644-9283 MAN ENOUGH: In this dating simulation, the object is to win and not to \"score.\" The gamer as Mr. Right (or Mr. Wrong, as the case may be) has to interact with six beautiful and, more importantly, different women in order to be successful in his simulated social life. Interaction occurs mostly via menued conversation trees that are numerically weighted for each computer date's proBu Smokin' Guns Page 220 Computer Gaming World "


"* COMPUTER GAMING WORLD HALL OF FAME The games in Computer Gaming World's Hall of Fame have been highly rated by our readers over time. They have been rated for their impact on the computer gaming hobby during their peak period of influence and acceptance by our readership. Note that the dates listed for each game are the copyright dates and may precede the actual release dates. Specific formars listed are those which CGW has in its possession. Their Finest Hour LucasArts Entertainment Co., 1989 Amiga, Atari ST, IBM Lucasfilm, (now LucasArts) electrified the gaming world with Larry Holland's second action game combat flight simulator. The realistic bit-mapped graphics were a big hit with gamers who were tired of the polygon-filled look of other flight simulators, and the flight model was more realistic than that used in its predecessor (Bartlehawks 1942). In addition, gamers loved the ability to fly on both sides of the conflict and to take on the role of a crew member, as well as a pilot. The Bard's Tale (Electronic Arts, 1985) Many Formats Chessmaster (The Software Toolworks, 1986) Many Formats Civilization (MicroProse, Inc., 1991) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh Dungeon Master (FTL Software, 1987) Amiga, Atari ST, IBM Earl Weaver Baseball (Electronic Arts, 1986) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh Empire (Interstel, 1978) Amiga, Atari ST, C-64, IBM F-19 Stealth Fighter (MicroProse, Inc., 1988) IBM Gettysburg: The Turning Point (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1986) Amiga, Apple, C-64, IBM Gunship (MicroProse, Inc., 1989) Amiga, C-64. IBM Harpoon (Three-Sixty Pacific, 1989) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh Kampfgruppe (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1985) Many Formats King's Quest V (Sierra On-Line, Inc., 1990) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh M-1 Tank Platoon (MicroProse, Inc., 1989) Amiga, IBM Mech Brigade (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1985) Many Formats Might & Magic (New World Computing, 1986) Amiga, Apple, C-64, IBM, Macintosh M.U.L.E. (Electronic Arts, 1983) Atari 8-bit, C-64 Pirates (MicroProse, Inc., 1987) Many Formats Railroad Tycoon (MicroProse, Inc., 1990) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh Red Baron (Dynamix 1990) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh SimCity (Maxis, 1987) Many Formats Starflight (Electronic Arts, 1986) Amiga, C-64, IBM, Mac, Sega The Secret of Monkey Island (LucasArts Entertainment Company, 1990) Many Formats Their Finest Hour (LucasArts Entertainment Company, 1989) Amiga, Atari ST, IBM Ultima III (Origin Systems, Inc., 1983) Amiga, Apple, Atari ST, C-64. IBM Ultima IV (Origin Systems, Inc., 1985) Amiga, Apple, Atari ST, IBM Ultima VI (Origin Systems, Inc., 1990) C64, IBM War in Russia (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1984) Apple Wasteland (Interplay Productions, Inc., 1986) Apple, C-64, IBM Wing Commander (Origin Systems, Inc., 1991) Amiga, IBM, Sega Wizardry (Sir-Tech Software, 1981) Many Formats Zork (Infocom, 1981) Many Formats Ultima III Origin Systems, Inc., 1983 Amiga, Apple, Atari ST, C64, IBM Although Lord British often refers to the first three Ultimas as a trilogy (and they are marketed as such), Ultima III was really the first one to have a coherent plot beyond the typical dungeon romp. It set the tone for the future series and encouraged Lord British to try to accomplish more, in terms of role-playing, in the next trilogy of releases. Also, when the Ultima series was converted to the Nintendo platform, Ultima III was the game which became known as Ultima to hundreds of thousands of cartridge gamers. February 1994 Page 221 "


"Top Adventure Games Reader Poll #113 GAME Day of the Tentacle Monkey Island 2: Le Chuck's Indiana Jones: Fate of Atlantis Quest for Glory III Sherlock Holmes CD The Seventh Guest Star Control II Les Manly in: Lost in L.A. Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes King's Quest VI: Heir Today... COMPANY LucasArts LucasArts LucasArts Sierra Viacom Virgin Accolade Accolade Electronic Arts Sierra +100 SCORE 10.19 9.91 9.79 9.56 9.55 9.42 9.36 9.28 9.20 9.17 Top 100 Games COMPUTER GAMING WORLD The #1 Computer Gamo Magazine 10 @ @ @ OOO Type SP RP ST AD WG AC RP ST WG AD Score 10.41 10.29 10.20 10.19 10.16 10.00 9.98 Undetimaid Top Role Playing Games 9.97 -VM + GAME COMPANY SCORE Ultima Underworld Origin 10.29 Betrayal at Krondor Dynamix 9.98 Lands of Lore Virgin 9.65 Might & Magic: Darkside of Xeen New World Computing 9.46 Ultima Underworld II Origin 9.42 Might & Magic III New World Computing 9.41 Ultima Vil Origin 9.34 Eye of the Beholder II SSI 9.34 Might & Magic: Clouds of Xeen New World Computing 9.34 Wizardry VII: Crusaders of Savant Sir-Tech 9.10 *33*3*3*348348338438* ST AD SI WG SP WG SI RP 9.93 9.91 9.87 9.79 9.78 9.75 9.72 9.68 9.66 9.65 9.63 8 9 10 WG SI 9.59 9.59 Top Simulation Games 9.58 9.56 9.55 SCORE 9.78 9.66 AC WG AD,RP AD WG WG,ST AC SP Game Company 1 Links 386 Pro Access 2 Ultima Underworld Origin 23 Master of Orion MicroProse Q4 Day of the Tentacle LucasArts Warlords 11 SSG 6 Wing Commander II Origin 7 Betrayal at Krondor Dynamix 8 Solitaire's Journey QQP 9 V for Victory: Velikiye Luki Three-Sixty Pacific 10 Monkey Island 2: Le Chuck's Revenge LucasArts 11 Dune 11 Virgin 12 Indiana Jones: Fate of Atlantis LucasArts 13 X-Wing LucasArts 14 The Perfect General QQP 15 Front Page Sports Football Dynamix 16 Carriers at War Construction Kit SSG 17 World Circuit MicroProse 18 Lands of Lore Virgin 19 V for Victory: Utah Beach Three-Sixty Pacific 20 Falcon 3.0 Spectrum Holo Byte Wolfenstein 3-D Id Software 22 V For Victory: Market Garden Three-Sixty Pacific 23 Quest for Glory III Sierra 24 Sherlock Holmes CD Viacom V for Victory: Gold Juno Sword Three-Sixty Pacific 26 Conquered Kingdoms QQP Privateer Origin 28 Links Access 29 Might & Magic: Darkside of Xeen New World Computing 30 NHLPA Hockey Electronic Arts 31 Warlords SSG 32 Ultima Underworld II Origin The Seventh Guest Virgin 34 Might & Magic III New World Computing 35 War in Russia SSI 36 Comanche: Maximum Overkill NovaLogic 37 Aces of the Pacific Dynamix 38 Syndicate Electronic Arts Hardball III Accolade 40 Star Control II Accolade Pacific War SSI Might & Magic: Clouds of Xeen New World Computing Eye of the Beholder II SSI Ultima VII Origin 45 Chessmaster 3000 Software Toolworks 46 Les Manly in: Lost in L.A. Accolade 47 Jack Nicklaus Signature Golf Accolade 48 Lemmings Psygnosis 49 Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes Electronic Arts 50 Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe LucasArts 9.55 GAME COMPANY X-Wing LucasArts World Circuit MicroProse Falcon 3.0 Spectrum HaloByte Comanche: Maximum Overkill Novalogic Aces of the Pacific Dynamix Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe LucasArts Red Storm Rising MicroProse Stunt Island Disney Silent Service II MicroProse Gunship 2000 MicroProse DO00 SP 9.39 9.38 9.19 9.04 9.04 9.03 9.02 WG,ST 9.53 9.50 9.47 9.46 9.45 9.43 9.42 9.42 9.41 9.40 RP 10 AD RP WG SI 9.39 SI 9.38 Top Strategy Games 9.37 9.37 SCORE 10.20 9.97 9.87 GAME Master of Orion Solitaire's Journey Dune II Syndicate Chessmaster 3000 Hong Kong Mahjong Pro The Lost Admiral Mech Warrior The Incredible Machine The Island of Dr. Brain COMPANY MicroProse QQP Virgin Electronic Arts Software Toolworks Electronic Arts QQP Activision Dynamix Sierra ORIONI 9.37 STAC SP AD.AC WG RP RP RP ST AD 9.36 9.34 9.34 9.34 9.34 9.32 9.28 NO 7 8 9 10 9.32 9.13 9.05 8.94 8.92 8.91 SP 9.27 AC,ST AD 9.21 9.20 9.19 SI "


"WG WG Avolonds SSI SSI Sierra Spectrum HoloByte Electronic Arts Sierra SSI Sir-Tech Sierra COMPANY AD AC ST AD RP RP AD WG Top Wargames GAME 1 Warlords 11 V for Victory: Velikiye Luki 3 The Perfect General Carriers at War Construction Kit 5 V for Victory: Utah Beach V for Victory: Market Garden V for Victory: Gold Juno Sword Conquered Kingdoms 9 Warlords 10 War in Russia SSG SCORE 10.16 9.93 9.75 9.68 9.63 9.58 9.55 9.53 9.43 9.40 SSI Three-Sixty Pacific QQP SSG Three-Sixty Pacific Three-Sixty Pacific Three-Sixty Pacific QQP SSG SSI RP WG RP AD,RP ST SI AD comhshiba 4.18 9.17 9.17 9.14 9.13 9.11 9.10 9.10 9.09 9.09 9.08 9.07 9.05 9.05 9.05 9.04 9.04 9.04 9.04 9.03 9.02 9.02 9.01 9.00 9.00 8.98 8.98 8.97 8.96 8.96 8.95 8.94 8.92 AD SI Top Action Games AD,RP SI ovo AWNGAME Wing Commander II Wolfenstein 3-D Privateer Lemmings Tetris Classic Oh, No! More Lemmings Prince of Persia 2 Out of this World Flashback Lemmings 2: The Tribes COMPANY Origin Id Software Origin Psygnosis Spectrum HoloByte Psygnosis Broderbund Interplay SSI Psygnosis 51 Clash of Steel 52 Second Front King's Quest VI: Heir Today... 54 Tetris Classic 55 Hong Kong Mahjong Pro 56 The Castle of Dr. Brain 57 Eye of the Beholder Wizardry VII: Crusaders of Savant 59 The Dagger of Amon Ra Conflict: Korea 61 Ultima VII: Part Two Serpent Isle 62 Empire Deluxe 63 Bane of the Cosmic Forge Quest for Glory 1 (VGA) The Lost Admiral 66 Stunt Island Red Storm Rising Eric the Unready Conquests of the Longbow 70 Silent Service II 71 Quest for Glory 11 Gunship 2000 73 Police Quest 3 74 Ultima V Battles of Destiny 76 Space Quest IV Western Front 78 Carriers At War 79 The Adventures of Willy Beamish Freddy Pharkas Frontier Pharmacist 81 Alone in the Dark 82 Mech Warrior 83 The Incredible Machine F-117A Oh, No! More Lemmings 86 The Island of Dr. Brain 87 Rise of the Dragon Martian Memorandum 89 F-15 Strike Eagle III 90 Chuck Yeager's Air Combat 91 Indianapolis 500 Elvira MiG-29 94 Command HQ Spellcasting 301: Spring Break 96 Rex Nebular 97 Gateway to the Savage Frontier 98 Tony La Russa Baseball Il Populous 11 Hoyle Book of Games, Vol. 3 SCORE 10.00 9.59 9.50 9.21 9.14 8.92 8.60 8.57 8.38 8.33 AD RP WG,ST AD =52952882888   22 8 8 8 8  WG Origin New World Computing Sir-Tech Sierra QQP Disney MicroProse Legend Sierra MicroProse Sierra MicroProse Sierra Origin QQP Sierra SSI SSG Dynamix Sierra 1-Motion Activision Dynamix MicroProse Psygnosis Sierra Dynamix Access MicroProse Electronic Arts Electronic Arts Accolade Spectrum HoloByte MicroPlay Legend MicroProse SSI SSI Electronic Arts Sierra WG AD AD 9 10 AD ST.SI ST 8.92 8.92 AC,ST Top Sports Games 8.92 8.91 8.89 AD 8.89 8.88 8.87 8.83 COMPANY Access Dynamix Access Electronic Arts Accolade Accolade SSI Micro Sports Accolade Electronic Arts 92 OVOU AON GAME Links 386 Pro Front Page Sports Football Links NHLPA Hockey Hardball III Jack Nicklaus Signature Golf Tony La Russa Baseball II NFL Pro League Football The Games: Winter Challenge PGA Tour Golf SCORE 10.41 9.72 9.47 9.45 9.37 9.27 8.78 8.54 8.50 8.49 8.82 RP SI WG,ST AD AD RP SP 10 8.82 8.81 8.81 8.80 8.79 8.78 8.78 8.78 ST ST Poll is based on reader survey cards in each issue of CGW and published two issues subsequent. Data on more than 100 games is archived and top ten lists may contain games which scored below the Top 100 cutoff. Games on unnumbered lines have scores equal to the line above. = Top game of type. Magenta=New Game AD=Adventure, RP=Role Playing. SI=Simulation, ST-Strategy, WG=Wargame, AC=Action, SP-Sports The Computer Gaming World Poll A monthly survey of the readers of Computer Gaming World Magazine. "


"What You've Been Playing Lately PC Research Hits List Of Top-Selling Software October, 1993 PC Games (MS-DOS/Windows) Rank ci c ô tô S c  ca c Title and Source Microsoft Flight Simulator 5.0 (Microsoft Corporation) Privateer (Origin Systems, Inc.) AD&D Dark Sun (Strategic Simulations, Inc.) Return to Zork (Activision) Scenery Disk: San Francisco (Mallard Software, Inc.) Masters of Orion (MicroProse, Inc.) Microsoft Arcade (Microsoft Corporation) Street Fighter II (Hi Tech Expressions) X-Wing (LucasArts Entertainment)SimCity The Blue & The Gray (Impressions) Front Page Sports Football Pro (Sierra On-Line, Inc.) Rerurn to Zork CD-ROM (Activision) The 7th Guest (Virgin Interactive Entertainment) NHL Hockey (Electronic Arts) Chessmaster 4000 (The Software Toolworks) SimCity (Maxis Software) SEAL Team (Electronic Arts) Lands of Lore (Virgin Interactive Entertainment) Links 386 Pro (Access Software, Inc.) X-Wing: Imperial Pursuit (LucasArts Entertainment) Every month our mailbox bulges with hundreds of Reader Inpur Cards from our most loyal and outspoken readers. Over the years we've found these cards to be an invaluable source of feedback. Within 10 days of releasing our latest issue we can expect to see cards pouring in with suggestions, encouragements, tirades and many good laughs, in addition to the data for our Top 100 poll. Through your efforts, we know exactly where we stand with our readers (you don't mince words!), and we are treated to well-articulated opinions on anything and everything related to gaming. This column is a forum for these responses and for the results of our \"Playing Lately?\" query on the Reader Input Card. Thanks for taking the time to fill them out... keep 'em coming! Playing Lately? Results For CGW #113, November 1993 Master of Orion (MicroProse, Inc.) Front Page Sports Football Pro (Dynamix, Inc.) Warlords II (Strategic Studies Group) X-Wing (LucasArts Entertainment) Aces Over Europe (Dynamix, Inc.) Privareer (Origin Systems, Inc.) Betrayal at Krondor (Dynamix, Inc.) Lands of Lore (Westwood Studios) Empire Deluxe (New World Computing) Civilization (MicroProse, Inc.) ovan AWN15. 16. 17. 18. 20. Rank Amiga Games Title and Source Overlord (Virgin Interactive Entertainment 688 Attack Sub (Electronic Arts) Hoyle's Book of Games (Sierra On-Line, Inc.) Oh No! More Lemmings (Psygnosis) John Madden Football (Electronic Arts) Notable Quotables \"I think FPS: Football Pro is as close to a perfect game as has ever been made, computer or otherwise!\" S. Morze, Alhambra CA \"Mastering Orion has taken all my time. Orion has mastered me!\" Leominster, MA \"To those who make strategic military wargames, let us make new units! Kuan, New York City \"Grearzine in December-it's always fun. However, my mailing label is covering the second-best part of the young lady (an Amazon?). You didn't do that on purpose, did you?\" John Laton Rank Crim Macintosh Games Title and Source Chuck Yeager's Air Combat (Electronic Arts) SimCity (Maxis Software) Prince of Persia (Brderbund Software, Inc.) Star Trek: 25th Anniversary (Interplay Productions, Inc.) Microsoft Flight Simulator (Microsoft Corporation) \"I saw a picture of Johnny Wilson the other day and he looks just like the man who mugged me last Friday. Do you know if he was in Kansas City recently.\" tly Stephen L. Click, Kansas City, KS Rank \"I don't think Strike Commander gets the credit it deserves. Granted, it requires a fast machine to run on I had an older 386/33 and boy was it slow, totally unplayable. I recently purchased a REAL computer, DX2/66 VESA 16MB, etc., and I tell you, Strike is hands down the best sim on the market. It is unfortunate that more gamers don't own faster machines so that they could really enjoy flight simulation at its best.\" Randy Heiting, Ranama City, FL $-croNa CD-ROM Products Title and Source Return to Zork (Activision) The 7th Guest (Virgin Interactive Entertainment) King's Quest VI (Sierra On-Line, Inc.) ROMaterial (Moon Valley) MPC Wizard (Aris Entertainment) Dracula Unleashed (Viacom New Media) Mad Dog McCree (American Laser Games) Day of the Tentacle (LucasArts Entertainment) Just Grandma and Me (Brderbund Software, Inc.) Wing Commander Deluxe Edition (Origin Systems, Inc.) you?\" \"I know this might be too much to ask of you folks, but one issue of CGWa month simply isn't enough for me!!! Ever think about going weekly, since now you have the muscle of Ziff-Davis behind Byron Hamilton, Palm Springs, CA \"First there was Empire. Then there was Civilization. Now there is Orion.\" (mystery conqueror, address unknown) 10. This list is based on units sold by ten retail chains, representing over 1300 stores. For more information please contact PC Data at (703) 455-1025. Page 224 Computer Gaming World "


"atches The Patch File Vomputer game programs have grown so massive and the number of ** Rules of Engagement 2 V1.07 Update (Amiga): Update to the Amiga possible configurations has become so huge that incompatibilities version of Impression's game. 12/02/93 and glitches seem to be breeding at an exponential rate. Consumers Solitaire's Journey For Windows Patch: Corrects minor bugs in the and publishers are both frustrated at the need for adding patches into Windows version of SJ. 11/11/93 \"buggy\" programs, but they seem to be an interim solution that is going to Strike Commander/Tactical Operations 1 Fix: Converts old Strike be with the hobby for a while (presumably, until a standard platform conCommander save games to the Tactical Operations format. Only needed if figuration is agreed upon). So, until the golden age of standardized platyou wish to run Strike Commander saves create prior to Tactical forms and bug-free programs, Computer Gaming World will publish a reguOperations installation. 9/30/93 lar list of the latest updates of which we are aware. ** Tony LaRussa II Version 1.2 Update: . 11/5/93 These patches can usually be downloaded from most major networks (e.g., CompuServe or GEnie), but can also be obtained from individual Tornado 1.0 to 1.0c Upgrade: An update for the US version of the game. software publisher's own BBSs or direct from the publisher with proof of 10/29/93 purchase. We continue to urge publishers to keep us updated on the latest V For Victory 3.1 Upgrade (IBM): Upgrades Velikiye Luki and Market versions/patches to their games. Garden Versions 2.0 to Version 3.1. 8/19/93 (*** indicates new files) V For Victory Utah Beach 2.0 Data Upgrade (IBM): Upgrades Utah Blue And The Gray Update V1.01 Update: With this patch, poor quality Beach to Version 3.1 8/19/93 units will now rout at 15% rather than 10%, transporting troops will not V For Victory 3.11 Upgrade (Mac): Upgrades Velikiye Luki and Marker \"pop\" back into a train or ship, and the AI will now be tougher and quickGarden to Version 3.11. 8/19/93 cr in battle. 10/23/93 V For Victory Utah Beach 2.0 Data Upgrade (Mac): Upgrades Utah ** Clash of Steel V1.1 Update: Fixes a number of small bugs. 11/18/93 Beach to Version 3.11. 8/19/93 Darksun V1.1 Update: Fixes problems with Wave Blaster and Sound V For Victory: Gold Juno Sword Version 4.01 (Mac): Upgrades the Blaster + LAPCISCC1. Eliminates the crash that may occur after the final Macintosh version 4.0 to 4.01. 8/28/93 battle, and random crashes when changing regions. 10/26/93 War In Russia 1.1 Upgrade: Fixes three bugs and adds an enhancement. ** Empire Deluxe V3.11a Upgrade: Updates Version 3.11 to Version 10/04/93 3.11a. Corrects a number of minor bugs and extends the sound card supWarlords Version 1.1.5 Update (Macintosh): Updates any version of port, 12/02/93 Warlords Mac to V1.1.5. 10/09/93 Even More Incredible Machine Windows Patch: Corrects several prob Warlords II c1.02 to v1.02a Update: Fixes a bug with certain VGA cards lems including these specific errors: \"You cannot run more than one copy (Diamond) and updates a few sound drivers, including PAS 16. 10/26/93 of this program\" error message when in 256-color mode, and \"Run Time WW2: Battles of the South Pacific: Corrects a problem with the ranking Error: Stack Overflow\" error message when Windows MIDI Mapper is not system. 9/21/93 configured correctly. 10/19/93 ** Fantasy Empires V1.1 Update: Fixes the Multiplying Siege Engine The PRODIGY W Bug, the Disappearing Hero Bug, and eliminates most random crashes. 11/25/93 ** IndyCar Racing V1.02 Update: Fixes random crashes/hangs and low Computer Gaming World is Prodigy's on-line games expert. Look for us in their Game Center, a forum where users read articles posted onmemory problems. 11/25/93 line by CGW and exchange messages on the bulletin boards (we can ** Kasparov's Gambit Version 1.1: In addition to restoring the chess be reached there at EXPT40B). The Prodigy Game Poll is run by engine to the full strength of the original 32-bit Socrates II program, this Prodigy based on a list of games provided by CGW and is updated patch also improves driver setups, low-memory detection, time controls, weekly. Note that it is not a cumulative rating over time (like the ratings and much more. 12/3/93 CGW Top 100 Poll). Instead, the Prodigy Game Poll is a weekly Lands of Lore Version 1.11A Patch: Fixes a number of small bugs includ\"Snapshot\" of game popularity with gamers rating their favorires on a 1 10 scale. The highest total point earners make their Top 10. We ing the inability to retrieve Dawn's second key. 9/08/93 provide this data to our readers as another barometer of \"what's hot\" ** Leisure Suit Larry 6 Update: Fixes the \"Oops errors\" that occur while in computer gaming playing. Also contains the bonus sound effects for 8-bit sound cards. 11/24/93 Links 386 Complete V1.11 Update: Contains both the Link 386 Pro EXE version 1.11 and a collection of new VESA drivers for various video cards. TOP TEN RANKED GAMES 9/03/93 Heeh of December 3 to December 9. NFL Coaches Club Football Update: Corrects some rare problems, improves the AI, and adds some new features. 10/21/93 RANK SCORE TITLE RANK SCORE TITLE Omar Sharif on Bridge Upgrade (IBM/Windows): The latest version of 2503 Wolfenstein-30 6 1347 wing commander 2 Interplay's bridge game for Windows. 9/03/93 1897 X-Wing 7 1202 SimCity 2888 Railroad Tycoon Deluxe Version 2: Fixes a few problems and adds some 3 1751 Civilization 8 1288 Front Pg Football features. 11/23/93 4 1718 Kings Quest VI 9 1118 Falcon 3.8 Red Sky At Morning V1.33: The latest version SimCan's new wargame. 5 1373 Seventh Guest T81818 Links 386 Pro 9/18/93 BALANCE YOUR BUDGET OR ZIFFNET FOR PRODIGY HAS Return of the Phantom CD-ROM Speech Fix: Fixes digital speech repeat ZAP A MARTIAN QUER 3.000 SOFTWARE TITLES YOU CAN DOWNLOAD TO YOUR PC and echo due to an odd EMS configuration. 9/14/93 Look Rules of Engagement 2 V1.05 to 1.06 Update: Patch for those having Menu Jump Path A-Z Xref Copy Tools ? Exil CORE problems running the game with a Viper graphics cards. 10/09/93 GAMEPELE WN-: February 1994 Page 225 "


"The Rumor Bag In Search Of Nessie t was raining in Inverness. To those who are familiar with the area, such a stateI ment is tantamount to stating that Apple Il games are a rarity. Nonetheless, I was not about to let a Scottish squall spoil my great adventure. I stood on the deck of a tourist I stood on the deck of a tourist ship that was sending its exhaust smoke behind us in such a way as to emulate the famous fog on the moors. Still, I kept my eyes glued to the surface of the loch in hopes that the most famous resident of Inverness might welcome me to his or her world. The friendly native guide, her blonde hair darkening as it peeked out from under her tam and became soaked with the rain, kept delivering her spiel about the monster as though it were a warm spring day instead of a wet, rainy one. I might ha' believed the wee lass, but her dimple kept showing so I realized it was all a game to her. As she finished her tale, I told her there was another set of Celtic tales that was about to find its way to civilization. After all, Koei Corporation is hard at work on a title called Celtic Tales: Balor of the Evil Eye. It is expected to be the first in a series of fantasy/strategy games in the Koei tradition. She seemed genuinely intrigued by my rumor, but as the boat pulled up to a dock next to the ruins of Uruquhart Castle, she told us how the English had destroyed the castle in order to strengthen their rule of the highlands. I briefly pictured the destruction and wondered aloud if any computer games would ever be based on the Jacobite Rebellion. \"Not really,\" my guide surprised me by answering what I had intended as a purely rhetorical question, my friends and I at the wargaming club usually prefer games with nukes or Nazis.» She really surprised me by interesting method of plotting air attacks and even included an anti-aircraft calculation based on a 1/3 chance of hitting the aircraft if a machine gun is present within two hexes of the target. He thanked me, but proceeded to throw a brief scare into me. He reached down and pulled out his dirk. Fortunately, he handed the dirk to me with the bone handle blade first. I accepted the knife and noticed the word Adanac on the handle. When I asked him why the game company's name was on his dirk handle, he quickly explained, \"Laddie, in my wargame club we play Nukes, Nazis and Napoleonics. I just thought ye might be interested in the fact that Adanac is working on a new game called, The Road from by Sir Ian Bain Macintosh Marengo to Waterloo.\" I handed back his dirk and assured him I was interested. Then, as we trudged up the stating that they were testing a new game stone stairs to an upper story where we could from QQP. look out over the loch, I told him that the \"It's called The Pure Wargame Volume 1: winding stair wells reminded me of a new Death From Above,\" she said and the dimple puzzle game from QQP. Called Origamo, it was lost in her most thoughtful expression. is essentially Tetris meets anagrams. Artistically, the real-time shaped puzzle game fea\"li's sunnosed to have eight scenarios bur \"It's supposed to have eight scenarios, but we've tures oriental, pyramid, Native American, we've only played the Arnhem, Kanev, Maleme and Ste Mere-Eglise Carenran and Alice in Wonderland themes, among others. (6/5/44) scenarios. I guess it's obvious that it emphasizes paratroopers, but the bonny part I looked out over the loch and strained my is that you can have the troops drop into their eyes for even one view of the sea monster. The historical locales or face random drift. In fact, drizzle had moderated by this point and the the random weather option can make your sun had begun to shine. I kept finding that I plans gang agley faster than you can quote a was less and less interested in seeing Nessie Robbie Burns poem.\" By the time she exthan I was in viewing the bonny face of our plained about the way the score takes into tour guide. So, I kept turning my back to the account the objectives and area controlled, as loch as my eyes took in the lovely. After all, if well as the number of prisoners taken and I wanted to see a monster, all I had to do was casualties inflicted, we had reached the keep wait for The Evolver from Trimark. The of the old castle. Evolver can easily be described as «Terminator meets Child's Play,\" but the most interBy now, the rest of the tour was getting esting prospect for the film is that the game restless. They didn't like a fellow with a tartan and film are to be produced concurrently. So, bag on his head getting that much special filming for the game will be accomplished at attention from their tour guide. We were the same time as filming for the theatrical down in the dungeon and, as a bekilted Scotsrelease. I was just about to inform our lovely man came toward me with a menacing gleam docent that production was set to begin in in his eye, I felt like I was right in the middle mid-January of 1994 when a little girl of Capstone's new Corridor 7. a new game pointed to the loch behind me and covered using the Wolfenstein 3-D engine with fullher mouth to stifle a scream. screen graphics and diminished lighting, There was an audible intake of breath from \"The Scotsman didn't have real violence on the entire group as I turned around, only to his mind, though. He had simply heard me see the bubbles where some large creature had discussing QQP with our native guide and been scant moments before. Had I really wondered what was new about The Perfect missed seeing the legendary monster or, as so General II. I told him that the art was more many readers have written in to tell me, had detailed and that animated shells zip across I merely missed the mark? Ah, well, I could the map whenever the tanks or anti-tank always have purchased a picture of the monweapons fire. I also told him that the most ster from one of the local residents. You don't important difference was the addition of airsuppose the pixelation means anything, do craft. In fact, I told him that they had a really you? Cow Page 226 Computer Gaming World "


"FIRST-EVER COMPREHENSIVE FLIGHT MODELING SOFTWARE FLIGHT SIMULATOR TOOLKIT oproep buwan ADVANCED Sim-Scrics CREATE YOUR OWN PLANES OBJECTS & BATTLEFIELDS IN SUPER-VGA! Domark set the standard the first 3-D flight modeling with SUPER-VGA HARRIER, the software ever produced for your first-ever SVGA strategic flight PC, is Domark's second offer simulator. Now, we're pushing ing in its ADVANCED SIM-SERIES that standard to new heights! state-of-the-art flight simulaFLIGHT SIMULATOR TOOLKIT, tor product line. FST is revolutionary. It's powerful, sophisticated, and easy to use. Technophiles will appreciate the attention to detail-cockpits include modern instrumentation, such as OBI, DME, and Glidescope as well as the ability to build every detail of their sim world. In a hurry? Not interested in building every last plane, tree, truck, valley or skyscraper? No problem. Just check out the extensive library of clip-art imagery: aircraft, ground targets, landscapes and objects. You'll be streaking through the heavens in no time! FLIGHT SIMULATOR TOOLKIT. YOUR AIRCRAFT. YOUR LANDSCAPES. YOUR MISSIONS YOUR WORLD. PA ! DISTRIBUTED BY Visa/MC orders: Screens shown: IBM 256-color SVGA displays. IBM PC/COMPATIBLES: Available November 1993 Requires Windows 3.1 Flight Simulator Toolkit 1993 Domark Group Ltd. Published by Domark Software Ltd. Programmed by Simis Ltd. Graphics by the Kremlin DO MARK Spectrum HoloByte call 24 hrs a day, 1-800-695-GAME 7 days a week 1-800-695-GAME (orders only) 1900 S. Norfolk St., Suite, 202, San Mateo, CA 94403 415/513-8929 Circle Reader Service #152 "


") Ultima VII AVATAR YOU'RE NOT IN BRITANNIA ANYMORE! Foiled by your defense of Britannia, the evil Guardian transports you to a world already under his dominion. Now you must confront alien realms and powerful new enemies in a battle without allies. But wait! Perhaps more has changed than just the battlefield ... ? Incredibly smooth and lifelike animation 400 frames of art per character (1200 frames for the Avatar) and 10 times the art of any previous Ultima!  A new, more natural perspective.  Compatibility with EMS, XMS and all other common memory management systems. Twice as many frames per second, producing a richer, faster story in this luxuriously detailed world! VOLUNTARILY RATED MP-13 (For Mature Players) GRIGIN Actual screens may vary. VI    .    Look for the new Pagan Clue Book! An Electronic Arts Company P.O. BOX 161750 AUSTIN, TX Pagan and Avatar are trademarks of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Ultima. Origin, and We create worlds are registered trademarks of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Copyright 1993 ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Electronic Arts is a registered trademark of Electronic Arts. For IBM PC and 100% compatible systems. Available at a software retailer near you, or call 1-800-245-4525 for MC/Visa/Discover orders. Circle Reader Service #105 "

