r

Vol. 3 No. 6

December 1983

FEATURES
ROBOTWAR:

12

Third Annual Tournament

ULTIMA III

18
Scorpia

Review & Tips

OPERATION WHIRLWIND
Review

25
Mark Bausman

REACH FOR THE STARS

27
Ed Curtis

Review

LEGACY OF LLYLGAMYN
An Intro

28
Robert Reams

BROADSIDES
Review

NORTH ATLANTIC ' 86
Review & Strategies

30
David Long
34
Jay Selover

Departments
Inside the Industry
Taking a Peek
Letters
Dispatches
Scorpion's Tale
Name of the Game
Tele-Gaming
Atari Arena
The Commodore Key
Micro Reviews (Flying Tigers, Space Station Zulu, The Enchanter,
Fortress, Secret Agent)

Game Ratings
Reader Input Device

6
8
14
16
17
20
32
37
38
42
52
54

INSIDE THE INDUSTRY
by Dana Lombardy

Results of the Readers Survey from the July/August
1983 issue of CGW.
Percent
of
Question
Readers
1. I buy about the same number of computer
games each month-even games I haven't
actually seen or played.

7.2

2. I buy about the same number of computer 19.8
games each month, but I'm more selective
now and don't usually buy until I see a game.
3. I buy fewer computer games now, but I'll
17.9
still occasionally buy a game that I haven't
seen yet.
4. I buy fewer computer games now, and I'm 55.1
more selective about which ones I buy.
Those who checked numbers 3 or 4 above were then asked
to check one of the following.
5. I'm spending less money now each month 56.9
than in the past on software, but almost all of
it goes to new games.
6. I'm spending less money now each month
than in the past on software, but almost all of
it goes to non-game programs.

6.0

7. I'm spending less money now each month 37.1
than in the past on software, but this is equally
split between games and other software.
In analyzing these results, it's apparent that the reader
of CGW is more than just a casual computer user. In fact, a
good number can be considered "hardcore" computer
game hobbyists. Second, as a serious hobbyist, you spend
on the average more money in a year than other
computer-product purchasers (we're excluding business
purchases and considering only at-home computer
users).
These assumptions make the survey statistics even
more important than a general survey would reveal. You
the reader of CGW, are the "leading edge" of the home
computer revolution in this country. Your attitudes and
buying habits affect the industry far beyond your total
numbers.
For example, while the hardcore computer game hobbyist may only represent 10 to 15% of all home computer
users (I suspect it's even higher), you spend close to onethird of the dollars that go to computer games. In fact, for
dozens of small publishers, the purchases of computer

garners represent almost all the money they make when
they offer a new title.
We're not saying these things just to make you feel important. These are facts that market-wise software
publishers consider when they decide to release a new
game or expand their line.
And what are you telling the industry? Your answers to
our survey confirm trends reported by stores and
distributors over the past months: computer game sales
are still good, but overall game sales have slowed, and the
average customer is being more careful with his money.
73 percent of you are spending less on software now
that you have in the past. For whatever reasons-whether
it's too many titles to choose from, or too many bad
games- you're cutting back on the number of items you
buy and the amount you spend. And if you, the hardcore
hobbyist, is spending less on software, other computer
users are also probably adjusting their spending
downwards as well. The days when a publisher or store
could just stand back and watch sales grow automatically
are over. It's a very new and different market game from
this point on.
However, one bright spot is that computer games per se
haven't died. In fact, 94 percent of you are still buying a lot
of games. Although you may be spending less on games,
you're still maintaining your interest in them.
That's good news for publishers. It means that they and
the stores are going to have to offer you better service and
better games in order to keep their share of your gamebuying dollars.

In addition to games mentioned elsewhere in this
issue, the following products have been received by
CGW. Some of these products will receive more
detailed attention in future issues. Readers wishing
to review any of these games should contact CGW.
American Educational Computer
2450 Embarcadero Way
Palo Alto, CA 94303
READER COMPREHENSION SKILLS:
AEC has a 6 program series entitled
EASYREADER. RCS is the second of the
series. The other titles are Learn About
Sounds in Reading; Learn About Words in
Reading Parts 1 and 2; and Reading Comprehension Skills 1. The Easyreader series
of programs are packaged in sturdy attractive vinyl boxes. Lessons are individualized
to move learners along at their own pace.
Sound, color, graphics, and animation are
employed to keep students on-line and
learning. Special guidelines instruct tutors
how they can help by pronouncing words,
prompting, etc. Thus the program can be
used as a family activity. Apple II 48K Disk.
Ark Royal Games
P.O. Box 14806
Jacksonville, FL 32238
ACROSS THE RUBICON 16K and ATR
32K: Computer wargame based on the Battle of Huertgen Forest (just prior to Battle of
The Bulge). Player controls the American
forces in an attempt to capture pillboxes,
cities, and an airfield. Up to 42 units including infantry, light tanks, heavy tank, and
supply are controlled by the player. Support
comes from artillery, tac air, and intelligence
reports. The 32K version adds mortar units,
German artillery, counter-battery fire, unit
locator, group movement, strategic map, etc.
16K has four levels of play, 32K has game
save and five levels of play. 16K is cassette;
$19.95. 32K is disk or cassette; $24.95. Radio
Shack Color Computer.

BOMBER COMMAND: 16K Radio Shack
CoCo game of strategic air operations in
Europe, WWII. You the Allied air armada
on both a tactical and strategic map of
Europe. Points are gained by destroying
military and industry targets with bonuses
for Berlin, Munich, and other mission
targets. A squadron HQ display tracks losses
and totals. $19.95. Cassette.
MISSION: EMPIRE! A strategic space warfare game in 16K or 32K. Formerly
distributed by Strictly Color Software. CoCo,
$19.95. Cassette.
GALACTIC TAIPAN: A space economic
game in which futuristic merchants must
use 17th Century commerce tactics. 32K
cassette for the CoCo.
Avant-Garde Creations
P.O. Box 30160
Eugene, OR 97403
THE ELECTRONIC FLASH CARD: An
educational program for the Apple II which
makes use of flash card style drills. You input your own flash card problems (a FrenchEnglish quiz is included with the program).
The system supports most foreign accent
marks and characters. Questions can be
structured in any of 7 formats. A password
entry system prevents illegal access to your
quizzes. Looks to be a good learning tool.
Disk. $29.95.
Avalon Hill Game Co.
Microcomputer Games
4517 Harford Rd.
Baltimore, MD 21214
LEGIONNAIRE: Chris Crawford's popular
Atari wargame is now available for the Apple II. Legionnaire is a real-time game of
combat between the Roman Legions of
Julius Caesar (you) and the barbarian hordes

of Gaul. You can command up to 10 legions
against the Gauls who will always outnumber you 2-1. The Atari version rates 6.93
in RID, the Apple version should be just as
popular. Disk. $40.00.
Blue Chip Software
19818 Ventura Blvd. #240
Woodland Hills, CA 91364
TYCOON: The second in a series of
economic "games", TYCOON is a complex
yet very enjoyable simulation of the fast paced commodities market. During weekly
turns you are called upon to buy and sell options on commodities ranging from soybeans to Japanese Yen. Available for a wide
variety of machines, TYCOON is both a
valuable learning tool and a fascinating
game. $39 to $49 depending on the version.
Bram Inc.
18779 Kenlake Place
NE Seattle, WA 98155
ZOMBIES: Here is a nice looking fantasy
adventure game for the Atari. The 3-D oblique projection scrolling graphics are
outstanding. Your task is to retrieve seven
crowns which are hidden in seven dungeons
of Wistrik the Evil. In addition to the great
graphics ZOMBIES features on-line instructions, one-player and cooperative two-player
modes, two levels of difficulty, and high
score saved to disk. There are 74 different
dungeon screens. Review coming. $34.95.

Broderbund Software
17 Paul Dr.
San Rafael, CA 94903

THE ARCADE MACHINE: The popular
Apple arcade construction program is now
available for the Atari as well. See CGW 3.1
page 32 for a review of TAM. As Broderbund did with the Apple version, they are
sponsoring a contest for best design using
TAM. Details are in the back of the instruction book. Deadline for entries is June 30,
1984. $59.95.
SPARE CHANGE: The blurb on the box
says "Warning...get ready to laugh. There
are Zerks on the loose!" And laugh you will,
Broderbund again shows us delightful
animation. SC is an arcade game in which
you attempt to stop the Zerks (Ozzie and
Zeke by name) from pilfering tokens.
Although the game design itself is a bit
weak, the graphics and animation make SC
a nice showcase game. Apple (Atari and
C-64 should be out soon) $34.95.

CBS Software
Greenwich, CT 06836
MATCH-WITS: A nice looking "Concentration" style game in which you attempt to
match pairs of a rebus. Six pre-programmed
categories: words, sports, famous people,
multiplication, cities, and animals come
with the game. You must match two facts
about a thing. This makes MW educational.
You don't match symbols, you match facts.
The game includes a utility so that you can
construct your own games. Apple and
IBMpc, $29.95.
MURDER BY THE DOZEN: A logic and
deduction game playable by up to four people (either cooperatively or competitively).
Players work on any of the 12 cases, making use of the dossier, a map, and a clue
book. Apple, IBMpc, C-64. $34.95.
SUCCESS WITH MATH: A series of math
review programs which help students to
learn and practice math skills at their own
pace. The four programs are: ADDITION/
SUBTRACTION (grades 1-4); MULTIPLI-

CATION/DIVISION (grades 2-8); LINEAR
EQUATIONS (grades 7-11); and QUADRATIC EQUATIONS (grades 9-12). Each
program takes the student step-by-step
through arithmetic and algebra concepts
which are known stumbling blocks to young
readers. Programs are $24.95 (disk) or $19.95
(tape) each. Available for Apple, Atari, and
C-64.
Datamost
8943 Fullbright Ave.
Chatsworth, CA 91311-2750
ARGOS: Apple arcade game with three
phases. In phase one (pictured) you attempt
to thwart a space borne invasion. In the second phase you anti-jet guns as you defend
Los Angeles. It doesn't look like L.A.
(perhaps it's the lack of smog?). In the third
phase you control a tank on a city street as
you blast missiles, bombs, spaceships, and
parachutists. $34.95.
CONQUERING WORLDS: A strategy/arcade game for up to 4 players, in CW you
must take over the planets of star-systems (as
many as 32) by movement within the

systems and warp movement between them.
You begin with knowledge of only your
stellar system and its planets from which
you must discover the galactic direction of
other star systems and, if occupied, fight for
their control. Combat, normally done by arcade action, may be decided by the computer. And, to make things a bit more interesting, each turn has a time limit. Apple
II, $29.95.
ROUND ABOUT: An Apple arcade game in
which shapes zoom and zig zag around a
playing field as you shot them. $29.95.
THE BILESTOAD: Check this one out. A
very nice looking strategy/adventure game
in which you compete in a "malevolent sort
of amusement park". You control armored
knights as you make your way around a
variety of "islands", actually battlefields.
The overhead view displays an impressive
view of the contestants as they fight with
shield and axe. Beyond the outstanding
graphics, the game allows for a variety of
strategies. The rule book calls TB a "nonstructured" game. A variety of elements called "shyben" allow various modes of travel
around the battlefield. We like it. Apple II,
$39.95.
Electronic Arts
2755 Campus Dr.
San Mateo, CA 94403
MURDER ON THE ZINDERNEUF: A
detective game which is playable again and
again. The characters are the same, but the
motives, relationships, victims, and
murderers change. You can play the role of
any one of eight thinly disguised renowned

detectives (e.g. Inspector Klutzeau, Lieutenant Cincinnato, Achille Merlot, etc.). You
only have 12 hours to solve the crime. "To
accomplish your goal you can follow
(shadow) suspects, search rooms for clues,
and interrogate passengers in whatever style
you wish, from soft and seductive to hard
and mean." Atari and C-64. $40.00.
MUSIC CONSTRUCTION SET: Utilizing
increasingly popular icons, MCS allows you
to compose music on your Apple II. Sweet
Micro System's MOCKINGBOARD is highly
recommended. After seeing this program in
action musicians will be pricing Apples in
their local computer stores,

Flower Soft
564 Tara Ct.
Manteca, CA 95336
(209) 239-2116
BANNER-RAMA: A program that prints
banners for parties, bulletin boards, games,
etc. Two letter sizes and four formats give
you flexibility in designing your banner.
Easy to use and useful. Supports most
printers (default setting is for MX-80/100).
Apple II. $29.95.
H.A.L. Labs
4074 Midland Rd. Suite 23
Riverside, CA 92505
VINDICATOR: Apple arcade game which
employs a variety of enemies (some similar
to coin-op favorites) which attempt to
despoil the environment you are charged to
protect. $34.95.

Micromax Systems Inc.
6868 Nancy Ridge Dr.
San Diego, CA 92121
CUBIT: Nice looking arcade game that is
much like the coin-op game Q*BERT. Four
levels with each level having four rounds
make up the game as you go around jumping on cubes to change them to the correct
color. Apple II. No price listed.
MicroProse Software
1 Caribou Ct.,
Parkton, MD 21102
301-667-1151
FLOYD OF THE JUNGLE: Arcade game in
which 1 to 4 players (computer can control
up to three positions) race through the
jungle. Perils include lions, tigers, elephants,
and pygmies with poison darts. The emphasis is on the race. Could be a good party
game. Atari (48K disk or 32K tape) and C-64
(disk or tape). $29.95.
NATO COMMANDER: Scrolling, real-time
wargame that simulates a Soviet Bloc invasion of Europe. A one player game, NATOC requires you to assume command of the
NATO armies. Five scenarios and four skill
levels. Review coming. Early Atari versions
had the penchant of dropping the black color on the screen (especially annoying since
roads, towns, and West German units are
black in color). This problem has been
cleared up with version 2. If you have an early version of the game that exhibits this problem, MicroProse will replace your disk.
Contact them for details. Atari and C-64
(disk or cassette). $34.95.

Ibid Inc.
179 Allyn St. Suite 607
Hartford, CT 06103
THE ALPINE ENCOUNTER: TAE is the
first in a series of adventure games in which
players battle VODAC, an evil organization
bent on world conquest. Combining the full
parser type graphic adventure game with arcade sequences (snow skiing) you work your
way through 93 scenes and interact with 28
personalities. There are many possible paths
to the ultimate outcome. In October the company says that "48 conclusions have been
discovered. Many more are possible." Apple now, C-64, IBMpc, and Atari to follow.
$59.95.
Master Control Software Inc.
P.O. Box 26714
Salt Lake City
PHARAOH'S PYRAMID: A Q*Bert style
game with an attractive fiction. You start on
level one as a slave and work your way up,
using the gifts of Isis, fighting the plagues
of Moses, building a pyramid, and finally
becoming the Pharaoh of Egypt. Apple now,
C-64, Atari, and IBMpc coming.
Nexa Corp.
P.O. Box 26468
San Francisco, CA 94126-6488
CYBERNATION: A strategy/arcade war
game in which you must disengage
warheads in an enemy held base. Three
distinct mission levels. As with other Nexa
products, the perspective graphics are well
done. Apple. $40.00.

Origin Systems Inc.
P.O. Box 58009
Houston, TX 77258
CAVERNS OF CALLISTO: An arcade game
in which you enter an alien cavern (actually an abandoned mine) in search of purloined parts of your spacecraft. A variety of
items must be found in order to complete
your task. No mapping is necessary, as one
comes with the game. Apple II.
Reston Publishing Co.
11480 Sunset Hills Rd.
Reston, VA 22090
MOVIEMAKER: Here something new that
will appeal to many computer gamers. MM
allows the gamer to become a director! The
user devises the action, sets the scene,
creates the actors, and plays back the completed computer "movie". No programming
ability is needed as you create mini-movies
and cartoons. Atari (disk) , $60.00. Apple
disk and Atari cartridge expected out before
Christmas.
SPACE KNIGHTS: Another "different product from Reston is SK, a science fiction
novel plus disk with game programs based
on the novel. Atari. Book and disk. $24.95.
Sierra On-Line
Sierra On-Line Building
Coarsegold, CA 93614
B.C.'S QUEST FOR TIRES: An entertaining arcade game (especially if you like the
cartoon strip B.C.) in which you, as Thor,
must rescue the Cute Chick. Other charac-

ters involved in the game are Fat Broad,
Dooky Bird, turtles, and a dinosaur. Atari.
LEARNING WITH LEEPER: A series of 4
games for pre-schoolers: Dog Count, Balloon
Pop, Screen Painting, Leap Frog. Atari ROM
cartridge received.
OIL'S WELL: Arcade game in which pacman, uh, I mean, a drill bit gobbles oil pellets
while avoiding oozies and land mines.
Although it has some maze-chase elements,
it is essentially different in that you must lay
pipe, and remove pipe so as to get the most
oil without having your pipe destroyed by
the baddies. Atari.
Sirius Software
10364 Rockingham Dr.
Sacramento, CA 95827
CAPTURE THE FLAG: Remember
WAYOUT, Sirius' game with breathtaking
3-D graphics? Now they have taken Wayout
and made it more competitive. CTF is,
essentially Wayout for two people playing
competitively. One player attempts to capture the flag, while the other player seeks to
capture the other player. The computer can
play either position if you wish. Atari.
GRUDS IN SPACE: A graphic adventure
game set in space. Your objective is to
deliver a rare fuel to a stranded ship on
Pluto. This will involve teleporting to
various planets and solving various puzzles.
Apple, Atari.

Continued on p. 45

COMPUTER DIPLOMACY
Some of you have read about a game called
COMPUTER DIPLOMACY that has been expected from Avalon Hill Microcomputer Games
for some time now. The game has been delayed
due, as we are told, to the fact that AH is
negotiating the sale of the game to a larger
company.
Diplomacy°' is a board game for seven
players based on Europe just prior to WWI. It
is a game of negotiation, psychology, alliances,
and treachery. While thousands play the board
game around the world, there is a sizable
number who play the game by mail (PBM) using
a gamemaster to run the game. Whatever
becomes of CD, there is, and has been for almost
a year, an exciting computer related activity taking place in the Diplomacy hobby.
Russell Sipe, editor of Computer Gaming
World, has taken PBM Diplomacy into the computer age. Through the vehicle of THE ARMCHAIR DIPLOMAT, Sipe's online Diplomacy
newsletter, Diplomacy games are now being
played by ELECTRONIC mail (PBEM). Games
are being run on both Compuserve and The
Source.
If you have a Compuserve or Source account
and like to play Diplomacy (or want to learn)
contact Russell. On Compuserve he can be
reached by email or by message on GameSig
(72435,1434). On The Source he can be reached
by smail (TCL920).

THIRD ANNUAL CGW
ROBOTWAR TOURNAMENT
MUSE SOFTWARE and COMPUTER GAMING WORLD proudly announce the THIRD ANNUAL CGW ROBOTWAR
TOURNAMENT.
Looking for some better competition for your ROBOTWAR' robot? Here is the perfect place to try him (her?) out. Put
up your contender. Does he have what it takes to be a champion? You'll never know unless you "go for it!" ROBOTWAR
fans are invited to enter their best Robotwar design into our national competition. Can you beat the likes of NORDEN +
(winner of the first annual tourney) or DRAGON (winner of second tourney)? You will never know unless you try. And
look what you can win! The winner of the tournament will receive a trophy and a check for $100.00 from MUSE
SOFTWARE!
All entrants will receive a free Robotwar T-Shirt as well as a discount coupon towards the purchase of ROBOTWAR
DATA DISK #2 (containing all the entrants; available after the tournament).
Contest Rules
1. Send your Robotwar program (source and object code) on a diskette to: COMPUTER GAMING WORLD
ROBOTWAR TOURNEY
P.O. BOX 4566
ANAHEIM, CA 92803-4566
2. Include a brief description of your robot. What is it designed to do?
3. Only one submission per contestant.
4. Include your name, address and phone number with your submission. If you wish your diskette returned, also include
return postage.
5. CGW reserves the right to reproduce entries in disk form (with credits) in ROBOTWAR DATA DISK #2.
6. CGW reserves the right to publish the source code of the winning robot in the pages of the magazine. The winner
will be invited to write an article on his/her design.
7. Include T-Shirt size (S, M, L, XL).
8. Entries must be received by Jan. 31, 1984. Winner will be announced in the April 1984 issue of CGW. A round robin
style tournament will be used to determine the winner.

LETTERS
COMBAT LEADER
Dear Editor,
The computer in Combat Leader
(CL) is a tough opponent, but your
readers should be able to beat it with
a few simple tricks:
1) If your tanks can reach good concealed positions with clear ground in
front of them, they should stop and
wait for the enemy tanks. (The computer usually begins with several
feints by a few tanks or armored personnel carriers (APCs). Then the
computer makes the main advance
with its tanks.)
2) The tanks are the most valuable
units in this game. You should not
risk losing them in a blind advance
too far northward. Move your tanks
into a protected position in the
southern half of the map with clear
fields northward so that they can
hopefully bushwhack the enemy
tanks. Depressions give the best

cover. You will have to enter
repetitive orders to squeeze most of a
tank platoon into a single depression. A few trees in front of the
depression will provide additional
cover.
3) Keep all of your tank platoons
close together, about 100 yards apart.
This will help them to combine
firepower against any targets within
range.
4) APC's are too weak to trade punches with tanks. You should use your
APC's to drop infantry at concealed
positions, then retreat the APC's. If
spotted, you can use smoke 100 yards
out to conceal them.
5) Dismount your mortars in the rear
toward the middle. They should
shoot first at APC's and infantry,
then at tanks. If they can't see targets,
they should blindly lob shells at
suspected enemy positions, such as
reverse slopes of hills, possible
routes of advance, and enemy smoke
screens.
6) Antitank gun squads should dismount as far northward as possible,
and in the suspected path of the
enemy advance. Each should be concealed so that enemy armor will not
see it until after they get within the
killing range of its guns, which is less
than 200 yards. A good location
would be a depression in the middle
or south part of a large woods. The
squad's field of fire should cover the
expected approach route for the
enemy, and the unit should occassionally "look" in other directions. It
is very embarrassing to only look northward, and then be steamrollered
by enemy tanks approaching from
the south.
7) You should not risk placing rifle
and machine gun squads too far forward. Do not bunch these squads too
close together, or you risk losing all
your eggs in one basket. With good
fields of fire, they can serve as spotters for your mortars. You might try
to place one rifle squad in a depression on a hilltop to get maximum
visibility. The fields of fire of your
units should overlap so that the
enemy tanks cannot sneak behind
your positions without being
spotted.
8) In the objective scenario, you will
eventually have to seize the objec-

tive. But it is usually not safe to do
this until after you have destroyed
the enemy tanks. On a map with lots
of clear terrain, you can advance
more boldly than in hills or forests —
you might risk a tank dash northward to find and destroy the
enemy mortars.
9) Patrols are not a good idea,
because they frequently are killed
shortly after they find the enemy
tanks.
10) You should not give up your company command in order to control
individual units. Your "robot" subcommanders can probably handle
them more efficiently. Also, if you
give up the company command, the
computer may advance your other
troops to exposed positions.
The main objective in this game
should be to position your tanks to
fire from depressions against enemy
tanks in clear terrain. If you can
destroy his tanks, you should have no
problem hunting down his remaining APC's and infantry.
Good luck, and good bushwacking!
Floyd Mathews
Pasadena, CA
MORE C64 PROBLEMS
Dear Editor,
It was quite refreshing to read Jon
Freeman's column concerning the
true state of the Commodore C-64
personal computer, especially after
all the nonsense published about it.
As a professional programmer, I
bought the 64 because of my budget,
and because I wanted a machine to
do some off-hand programming on.
Unfortunately, I got the usual misinformation and got caught with a
less than desirable machine. Programming in assembly doesn't usually
phase me, but the operating system
(the KERNAL) for the C-64 is such a
mess, that it's just too much for me.
I hung on to the computer, however, because I hoped that there
would soon be available either
another language for the C-64, or an
extension of the BASIC to get easily
at the graphics and other features of
the machine. You see, I think the
C - 64 has what it takes internally, but
that the software wasn't sophisticated enough to take advantage of it.

But, alas, deep down I now know
that even if said programs were to
become available for the C-64, that
they will take away room from RAM,
and that they'll take their sweet time
in coming. As it is, various magazines have already published articles
about "Simon's BASIC" an extension
of the on-board C-64 BASIC that will
add 144 commands to the machine
at a cost of (surprise!) 8K being taken
away from the BASIC. But where is
the cartridge or disk? Nowhere that
I can see.
In short, I think that the (hopefully)
upcoming extended BASIC and other
software may save the C-64 (at least
until they change the drives, those
fools), but I doubt you'll see a lot
of software utilizing that extended
BASIC or any other language. So, Jon
has my promise to spread the word
that "the emperor has no clothes".
David Nakamoto
San Gabriel, CA
C64 DEFENDED
Dear Editor,
If you check your records, I think

you'll find that I'm one of your best
subscribers — with you since volume
2, number 1. In all that time I haven't
found it necessary to do anything but
sit back and enjoy the magazine.
Sure, I've submitted a few Reader
Input Devices, but I've never felt I
had to stand up and be heard before.
But this time I had to speak up. Tell
Jon Freeman to put his hatchet away
and take a fair look at the Commodore 64.
I was one of the first people in the
country to actually buy a Commodore 64, (July 1982). Two months
later I was probably the first person
in Phoenix to get the Vic-1541 disk
drive to use with it. I've had the
machine a long time — I know its
good and bad points.
Let me deal with Jon's objections
first, then I'll try to make a fairer
criticism of the machine.
In comparing the C-64 to other
computers like the Apple II, Atari, TI
99/4; byte for byte the C-64 gives you
more than any of them. Sure, with
the operating system unmodified,
you only get 39K of usable memory
in RAM. That's 1K more than the

Atari gives you, and BASIC is in the
machine so you don't have to lay out
another $50 for the BASIC cartridge.
Textural display on the C-64 may not
be the finest, but I've compared my
home color tv program for program
with Ataris, Apples, and TI's. Jumpman, Frogger, Monopoly, you name
it, looks as good on the C-64 as on
any of the others. RF interference
seems to vary a lot from machine to
machine — I've had almost none
with mine, and I haven't taken any
special precautions. Sure, the light
blue on dark blue at the beginning
when you turn the machine on is
hard to see. One key stroke, control
2, changes the cursor color to white,
and with that combination the definition is outstanding — very easy to
read, and easy on the eyes.
Out of the 16 colors, I'm not too
fond of the three shades of gray, but
the black and white are absolutely
necessary. Considering that most
games use four to six colors maximum, the 11 colors that are real
Continued on p. 50

DISPATCHES
Insights From the
Strategy Game
Design Front

Dan Bunten
of Ozark Softscape
Can you imagine an arcade game
without graphics or animation? How
would a "text version" of "Pac Man"
strike you? Such a game would never
have caught on!
All coin-operated arcade games use
an animated graphics display to convey information about the status of
the game to the player. As we
discussed last time, all such games
also use a joystick (or another similar
device) for player input. Conventional wisdom in the computer field
currently requires "a full-stroke
typewriter-style keyboard" with "an
80 character per line upper and
lower case text display" on all serious
home computers. This doesn't impress the arcade makers. They use
joysticks and graphics displays
because such devices are much more
"user friendly". Can you imagine all
the words needed to describe your
current position in the maze during
a "Pac-Man" game? "You are approaching an intersection. To your
left is a long hallway. To your
right . . ."
Cognitive scientists who study how
our brains function have obtained
some answers to why "a picture is
worth a thousand words". According
to them, different parts of the brain
are used to interpret text (symbolic
language) than the areas used to examine graphics (images). Text is
made up of symbols (characters)
which are translated into elements
(words) which are then combined to
create concepts and ideas. It isn't until our brains have done a lot of pro-

cessing that we are able to grasp the
essential thing being communicated.
Graphics, on the other hand, convey
their whole message at once, allowing the brain to then dissect the picture into elements and symbols as
needed. The power of graphic communication is well known and has
led to a great increase in the use of
charts and graphs in many fields. A
graph allows the viewer to "get an
overview" or "focus in on important
elements" or "look at things with a
different perspective".
Much of the data stored in your
brain is in a graphic form. For instance, remember the house where
you lived previous to the one you live
in now. How many windows did that
house have? Immediately your brain
recalls a moving "picture" of you
walking through that house and
counting windows. The information
is stored in a "visual" form that can
be analyzed for any number of things
such as: the number of closets, the
location of the refrigerator, and how
the rooms were connected. To retain
such data as discrete groups of "textlike" pieces would be very awkward.
I wouldn't contend that arcade game
designers analyzed all this before
they decided to use graphics instead
of text. They just knew what "felt
right" to the average game player.
Color graphics communicate more
easily and quickly than text, but
animation is what really made arcade
games popular! To a generation raised on a diet of Saturday morning cartoons, nothing could be more appropriate than animated characters
and objects. Even as far back as
"Space Invaders", it was obvious that
the cute, marching aliens were a big
part of its success. The "state of the
art" has advanced considerably since
then. Games such as "Q-Bert" and
"Popeye" are cartoons whose outcomes are controlled by the player.
Animation has other advantages.
Our brains are much better at
discovering things that move in relation to other things. We focus in on
patterns of motion quickly. We can
determine the trajectory and speed of
an object much faster than we can
describe it in words. Thus, a graphic
display is essentially "dead" until it
is animated (pun intended).
So, if strategy games are to achieve

the potential appeal I think they
could have, designers must follow
the example of the arcades. Use
animated color graphics. There are a
number of good examples on the
market of graphic strategy games. I
hope we have seen the last of the text
wargames. People like Chris Crawford and Roger Keating have made
the "separate boards and counters"
for computer games obsolete. We may
even see the end of "semi-animated"
battles if Combat Leader and Broadsides are any indication. The success
of various hi-res adventures indicate
the popular preference for pictures
(even if they are static). Better still,
games like Castle Wolfenstein and
Aztec show that players will not require as many complex options if you
give them an interesting character to
animate.
There are many good examples of
what can be done with graphics in
strategy games, but there are problems. Designing reasonably attractive visuals for all the options in your
game can be very difficult. A good
graphic strategy game needs the
quality of arcade animation but with
a great deal more options. Thus, the
designer may end up producing the
equivalent of three or four arcade
games in one strategy game. The performance required by animation
routines almost always requires that
you write in machine language. This
is a whole lot slower to write and debug than some of the "higher"
languages. Although a picture may
be worth a thousand words, it may
take over 4000 bytes to store it in the
computer. (No one knows how our
brains store pictures but I'm sure it
isn't in the sloppy form that we store
bit pattern drawings in a computer).
The final disadvantage to including
graphics in strategy games is that you
are putting yourself up against the
best that arcade designers can do.
Besides a simple mechanic for how
the joystick works, all that arcade
designers worry about is graphic
gimmicks. So they are good! But a
strategy game designer has to worry
about all the other elements that
make up a game. You have to be sure
that you keep track of all the pieces
that make up the players' score, that
Continued on p. 48

ZORK II
As told by Scorpia
Back for more, I see! Well, step
right in, plenty of room tonight;
everyone's out doing their holiday
shopping. Take a seat by the fire
while Fred pours out your usual, and
we'll get started on Zork II. Once
again, it's off to the Great Underground Empire! This time, however,
it won't be quite so easy. For one
thing, there's much more territory to
cover, and for another, there's the
Wizard of Frobozz.
This delightful (?) person will inevitably appear at the most inconvenient moment, and zap you with a
spell. These spells all begin with the
letter "F": Freeze, float, fall, fence,
fantasize, ferment, etc. Some, such as
float and fence, are merely annoyances, but others, such as fall, could
cause you to end up dead. Therefore,
it's best to save the game often, and
restore any time the Wizard appears
and hits you with a spell.
You start inside the barrow, with
your old friends, the Elvish sword
and the brass lantern. Picking those
up, you move on through the underground area until you come to the
Dark Tunnel, where the path forks.
One leads to a stream, the other to a
garden area with a Gazebo.

While investigating the Gazebo, you
may catch a glimpse of a Unicorn
with a ribbon and key around its
neck. Whatever you do, he will
always be out of reach, so you might
as well leave him alone. Later, someone will help you get the key from the
Unicorn. For now, just make sure
you take everything off the table,
because all those items will come in
handy in the future.
Now, you might as well make your
way through the Topiary and into the
Carousel Room. No one likes the
Carousel Room, and the reason is
obvious: no matter what direction
you try to move, you will usually end
up going in a different one. The room
spins around, you see. So, you may
want to go West and find you've gone
Southeast instead.
Of course, there's a way to turn it
off, but you'll have to get past the
Riddle Room and into the Circular
Room for that. The Riddle Room is
well-named; you will have to answer
a riddle to get the door open. Actually,
the answer isn't all that difficult;
think about being thirsty. And, as an
added bonus, the answer to the riddle
is also a clue to the Circular Room.
Because you'll have to do the right
thing in the Circular Room to get to
another set of rooms where you'll
find some yummy tea cakes, a robot,
and a red sphere, among other things.
Examine those cakes carefully, and be
sure to save the game before you do
any experimenting! Also, remember
to check out the pool in the Pool
Room. The flask is important, but not
in an obvious way . . . and make sure
you have the cakes with you.
The red sphere in the Dingy Closet
is very important. However, as you
might guess from the sign on the
wall, it's trapped. You will find the
robot helpful here. Keep in mind that,
just because you can't see him,
doesn't mean he isn't there . . . or that
he can't hear you. Don't forget to look
into the sphere!
Once you have everything you
need from this area, you can make
your way back to the Carousel Room,
which has become stationary. You
can now use this room as a central
point for your explorations, dropping
off items and treasures that you don't
need for the moment. In fact, you

should leave all your treasures here,
because you won't be needing them
until the end of the game.
Now there are several ways to go,
and for the most part, it doesn't
matter which way you take first, so
let's consider the Dreary Room. Peek
in through the window, and the
scene should look familiar. At least,
it will if you have looked into the red
sphere. Recall the scene from the
sphere carefully, and then think
about what you found back at the
Gazebo. That should give you some
ideas on how to open the door and
get the blue sphere.
In your travels (and pretty close to
the Dreary Room, too), you will come
across a dragon. He is your typical
fire-breathing dragon, so you want to
be careful here. On the other hand,
you don't want to be too careful,
because you have to get rid of this
scaly nuisance. You won't be able to
do it where you find him; the trick
is to get the dragon to follow you
somewhere. Think about the opposite
of fire, and you should be able to
figure out where to go.
With the dragon out of the way,
you can now investigate his lair.
However, don't spend too much time
on the trunk; the person in the room
is more important at the moment.
Keep her in view at all times, waiting
when necessary. She will assist you
in obtaining a small but important
item. And remember to go back and
check the dragon's trunk later on!
The bank is another interesting in
place, and has one of the two most
frustrating puzzles in the game.
There are two treasures available
here, a portrait in an office and some
money in the vault. You will soon
find that you can't leave the ordinary
way with the portrait, and that there
seems to be no way into the vault.
First, read the brochure on the
floor of the Safe Depository. That
should give you some idea of what's
going on here. Then devote your
attention to the curtain of blue light,
for therein lies the method for obtaining the two treasures. Direction is
very important here; keep in mind
which way you are going, and also
Continued on p. 47

ULTIMA III:
Review & Tips

Scorpia

Such is a typical episode from
Ultima III. Lord British has done a
superb job with this game, making it
unquestionably the best in the series
so far. The game has been streamlined AND expanded, graphics are
better than ever, the gratuitous violence of Ultima II has been done
away with, and, after having played
the game through to its conclusion,
I found no bugs in this version.

Ultima III
NAME:
Fantasy Adventure
TYPE:
Apple II/
SYSTEM:
FORMAT: Disk
#PLAYERS: 1
Lord British
AUTHOR:
$54.95
PRICE:
PUBLISHER: Origin Systems
Houston, TX

Warrior, thief, cleric, mage. Together, they are exploring a heavilywooded part of the continent of
Sosaria when suddenly . . . ORCS!
Quickly, the warrior unlimbers her
bow and sends an arrow flashing
through the air, while the thief slings
a rock, and the cleric, mace at the
ready, begins a cautious advance.
Then the mage casts the mighty

spell REPOND, and 6 Orcs die on the
spot. After that, the group makes
short work of the remaining Orcs,
and the thief turns his attention to the
treasure chest. His clever fingers
deftly avoid setting off the acid trap,
and the group is richer by 56 gold
pieces and a sword. Now, they will
continue on their way, searching for
the clues that will help them to defeat
the dreaded Exodus.

Those who are familiar with the
previous Ultimas will have noticed
that, unlike the earlier games, you
can have more than one character in
the game at the same time. In fact,
you can form a party of up to four
characters to bring into play, and they
can be of any valid character type.
Not only can you have a regular
group, you can have character classes
hitherto unavailable, including multiclassed characters, such as Druids,
who know both mage and cleric
spells, Paladins, warriors who can

cast cleric spells, Barbarians, who are
fighters that also have some thief
abilities, and Rangers, fighters who
can cast both mage and cleric spells.
However, there is a point beyond
which the multi-classed character
cannot advance, and only the "pure"
mage or cleric will ever be able to
cast the highest-level, and therefore
most potent, spells.
This brings us to the combat sequences, which have been completely
over-hauled, and make the game
much more exciting. First, when
combat begins, the scene changes to
a close-up of your group and the
monsters. Your party appears, all
characters individually, at the bottom
of the screen, and the monsters, also
individually, at the top. So, in this
example, we have the Fighter and
Thief in front, with the Cleric and
Mage behind them, and a group of
10 Ores at the top of the screen.
Perhaps fortunately, the good guys
always get to go first!
There will always be some distance
between the groups at the start, so it's
wise to have distance weapons like
bows and slings handy. You can aim

in only the four directions North,
South, East, and West, but the monsters can use the diagonals, which
can make them deadly close-up, or if
they happen to be dragons or other
fire-breathing creatures who can toss
fireballs at you from across the room.
On your turn, each member of the
party gets a chance to act individually. So, a character can advance,
retreat, cast a spell, attack, etc., on his
turn. And this is all done in real-time;
if you wait too long, the turn will pass
to the next party member, or to the
monsters. And the monsters will not
be standing still; on their turn, they
will advance towards the...and if you
happen to be up against spell-casting
types, they will throw spells at you.
There is no running away here; combat will continue until one side or the
other is wiped out. If the monsters
are destroyed, you usually get a
treasure chest to open, but not
always. For instance, fighting sea
monsters will never get you a chest
(makes sense: jellyfish don't usually
haul such things around with them!).
If one or more members happen to
die, they will not be automatically

restored. Instead, you must get them
resurrected. This can be done by a
high-level cleric of your own, or
you can buy a resurrection (if you
have the money!) at one of the healing shops.
One of the more interesting aspects
to combat is the fact that only the
character striking the death blow will
get experience for killing a monster.
This means that the members will
not all advance in level equally. Keep
that in mind, as it may have an effect
on your combat strategy.
Fighting in the dungeons is pretty
much the same as out in the open,
except that you don't know the monsters are there until they attack; there
is no forewarning this time around.
The only difference is that, while on
the surface you are likely to run into
any type of monster at any time, in
dungeons the nastier ones tend to be
found on the lowest levels only.
Speaking of dungeons, they're a lot
smaller now; they only go down eight
levels. They are smaller because, for
the first time, you REALLY have to
go into them, or you will not be able
Continued on p. 51

THE NAME OF
THE GAME

Jon Freeman
In my first column a few issues ago
I argued that plagiarism — loosely
defined as ripping off someone else's
ideas and passing them off as your
own — should be just as much of a
no-no in the field of computer games
as it is elsewhere in the Real World.
This time out I'd like to approach the
topic from a few other angles: identifying plagiarism and related ripoffs;
what protection copyright, trademark, and patent law does (and does
not) offer; and what we can do about
such matters.
A WORD OF WARNING: I am not
a lawyer. I am not offering "legal advice," and my opinions should not be
used as the basis for legal action. If
you have serious questions about
copyright law or your legal rights,
consult your attorney.
That said, let's acknowledge the
following: (a) You probably don't
have an attorney. (b) Thanks to more
firsthand experience and larger legal
bills than I like to think about, unless
you are a lawyer, I almost certainly
know more — probably a lot more —
about this than you do. (c) The
caveats in the previous paragraph go
double for those without my expertise. Hasty and ill-considered advice
to sue someone, for instance, could
result in substantial liability. Sticking
your foot in your mouth is always
embarrassing; being presented with
a bill for the meal might just ruin
your whole day.

THE SHORT ARM OF THE LAW
The brunt of my attack in my initial
column was directed at games that
were, in my opinion, obviously,

overtly, and in many cases explicitly
rip-offs — PAC-MAN clones, for instance. I could name a dozen without
taking a breath, but CGW wouldn't
print their names, and you know
them, anyway. They represent a clear
case of moral and creative bankruptcy. If they also constitute legal
plagiarism, as it appears, you might
wonder how they can get away with
it. So do I. There seem to be several
"answers"; none of them entirely
satisfactory. Some of these clones are
put out by companies that may be
viewed by the big boys as too small
to bother with. In many cases (e.g.,
K.C. MUNCHKIN), something is be-

are similar in construction or intent
but noticeably different. (Just think of
all those colas.)
Trademark law is a joke — and getting more so all the time. Recent
court cases have emphasized that a
trademark (e.g., Monopoly) must be
more connected to a company
(Parker Brothers) than to the product
it is identifying (the game of Monopoly). Thus, the more effective the
trademark, the less legal it is, and any
trademark worth keeping . . . you
can't keep.
Adding to this colossal stupidity is
the recent absurd habit of sticking
"TM" on everything that moves. A

ing done, but the legal maneuvers
take so long that everyone may have
forgotten about it before the verdict
is in.
Compounding the problem is an illogical attitude on the part of the
courts. Examining the mess that is
our current legal/political system
would require at least a long book;
let's note merely that the law looks
backwards, not forwards. It does not
apply general principles of justice to
new situations as they develop; instead, the focus of the system is on
closing the barn door after the horse
is gone. Thus, you would logically
conclude that if it is illegal to
plagiarize a person's book, play,
movie, song or board game, it would
also be illegal to plagiarize a person's
computer game. You would, but the
courts wouldn't be sure until an example of that particular kind of
plagiarism was brought to trial and
a new precedent was set — a process
that might take years.
(This nonsense is similarly responsible for the current confusion over
videotaping — an issue resolved
years ago in the exactly analogous
area of audio taping.)

little "TM" (or "tm") attached to a
name or title does not mean that the
name or title is, was, will be, or can
possibly be a trademark. All it means,
in theory, is that someone in the company connected to the product connected to the title (or, especially in
the most egregious cases, a lawyer
connected to the company . . . trying
to justify his fees) is trying to assert,
unilaterally, that the name/title is a
trademark. In practice, the people involved may suspect or believe the
name is not — and will not be — a
valid trademark, but they hope the
"tm" will discourage other people
from using it. One assumes this latest
strategy is the reason for attempting
to claim a trademark on words like
"Luke" and "hyperspace."
You cannot trademark a computer
game — only its title — and you can't
patent it, either. Simply put, you can
patent hardware but not software:
devices — things — but not text,
titles, or ideas. Generally, patents
touch the world of computer games
only indirectly, such as the attempt
by TI, in its relentless drive toward
seppuku, to use a patented chip to
keep other companies from writing
software to support TI's hardware.

"TM" MEANS TOTAL MESS
While plagiarism, as legally defined, is still illegal, a variety of
related practices, immoral or at least
impolite, are still legal. For instance,
were I to title a game Crunch, Shatter and Munch, you might view that
act as a deplorable rip-off. It would
not, however, be illegal. You can't
copyright titles, and trademark protection does not extend to names that

YOU CAN'T PATENT
"POUGHKEEPSIE"
While people often confuse the
elements of patent law with the protection afforded by copyright, they
are quite different. Suppose, for instance, that two people — one in
California and one in New York, say
— are, separately and independently,
busy inventing a widget: the same
Continued on p. 41

1

OPERATION
WHIRLWIND

Mark J. Bausman

which turned out to be a full size
multi-color map of the battle area. It
showed all of the terrain features including clear, woods, roads, buildings, streams, and the city; and along
the bottom was printed the unit symbols. I liked the game immediately
when I saw I had seven unit symbols
and the computer only had two. Lit-

Operation
Whirlwind
Battalion level
TYPE:
strategy
Atari 400/800/1200
SYSTEM:
48k
FORMAT: Disk
#PLAYERS: 1
AUTHOR: Roger Damon
PUBLISHER: Broderbund
San Rafael, CA
NAME:

It is just before dawn on a cold
morning in Northern France. The
naked light bulb hanging from the
ceiling of your command trailer casts
a harsh shadow over the tactical map
spread out before you. On the right
edge of the map, fifteen kilometers
from your present position, is the
small French town that is your objective. At this time of year the two
rivers you must cross will be swift
and deep, and aerial reconnaissance
has shown that all bridges over the
rivers have been blown up. Your
engineers will have their work cut
out for them as they must rebuild
those bridges or your heavy tanks
will probably never be able to get
across the rivers. Today, all elements
of your command will be needed; the
artillery to bombard from a distance;
the recon units to sweep ahead and
locate enemy positions; the light
tanks to soften up enemy resistance;
the heavy tanks to finish strong
points; the infantry to mop up and

perform close assault on enemy infantry; and your own Battalion HQ
to guide the whole affair. As the sun
appears over the horizon you can
hear the sounds of firing from both
north and south of your location.
Silently you hope that Battle Groups
North and South will be able to do
their jobs because you know that any
enemy not destroyed by them will fall
upon you and reinforce any resistance left in the city. If you have taken
the city you know those same troops
will fight to the end in order to retake
the town. Your operations officer
enters the trailer with news that all
vehicles and men are prepared for
jump off. The sun has fully risen and
it is time to plug your joystick into
port 1, hit the start key for a new
game, and choose your level of difficulty for another bout with the computer in Broderbund's new game —
OPERATION WHIRLWIND.
When I opened the box, the first
thing I saw was a folded up poster

tle did I know the actual balance of
power was stacked in the computer's
favor.
In the Command Phase, you may
scroll around the map and make your
plans for movement. You may also
order your units to dig in or become
combat ready. Digging in will prevent you from moving, but you will
still allow combat while giving depleted units the opportunity to build
strength. Units are combat ready by
default, unless they have been
ordered to dig in, in which case they
will stay dug in until you order them
to be combat ready. A nice feature
here is that dug in units will flash and
are therefore easily seen. When you
have finished looking at the map and
ordering your units to dig in or
become combat ready you will press
the start key and go into the MOVEMENT PHASE.
During movement phase you may
move any or all of your units which
are combat ready. To move a unit,
you simply use the joystick to move
the cursor over the unit you want to
move and press the fire button. You
will then see the unit's movement,
Continued on p. 48

REACH FOR
THE STARS
Ed Curtis

(starting with a small fleet and some
transports, rather than with an
already established colony); Variable
Production Costs (which allows you
to vary the costs of all factors within
pre-set parameters); and Variable
Victory Conditions (for those who
want to be peaceful colonizers or
"Space Huns"). By manipulating
these variables, it is possible to
customize RFTS into a vast array of
possible games, each with its own
distinctive flavor.

NAME:

REACH FOR THE
STARS
TYPE:
Strategy Space
Game
SYSTEM:
Apple II, C-64
FORMAT:
Diskette
PLAYERS:
1 to 4
AUTHOR:
Roger Keating &
Ian Trout
PRICE:
$60.00
PUBLISHER: Strategic Studies
Group
Sydney, Australia
Below you lies a scarred and
pockmarked planet awaiting your
decision to land an occupying force
or to blast off the last vestiges of
civilization from this once tranquil
land. As tempting as it is to end your
problems in this system with a single
order, you are, alas, a conqueror, not
a simple destroyer. The order goes
out and fifty transports land at
strategic points to control and pacify
the temporarily stunned natives.
The above is an example of just one
of the many situations which will
face you (hopefully as the player with
the decision to make) in the new
strategy space game—REACH FOR
THE STARS (RFTS). As the leader of
one of four races expanding into the
limited selection of 54 star systems,
it is your responsibility to plan your
races growth by balancing its economic, military, and research expenditures. Too much in the first, and
your colony may be destroyed or captured. Too much in either of the
others, and you might soon find your
race hopelessly out-produced by all
three of your competitors. With the

factors of every game different, there
is no "optimal" strategy. You must
remain flexible enough to respond to
new information as it is discovered.
THE GAME
RFTS is designed for four players,
up to three of which may be run by
the computer. It should be noted here
that the computer does a very creditable job, so much so that at its veteran
level (the most difficult of three
levels) it can prove to be a deadly
opponent.
After selecting the number of computer players, their levels of competence, and the names of the human
player(s), you are given the option of
setting the following nine variables:
Game Length (40, 80, or 150 turns);
Novas (the possibility of a star going
unstable and exploding); Natural
Disasters (minor but dangerous setbacks to your young colonies); Xenophobes (described later); Solar Debris
(dust motes which slow movement);
Randomized Star Map (a new computer generated star map, other than
the standard one shown on the included map); Task Force Set-up

As mentioned, the star map consists of 54 star systems of various
types, each of which has a set probability of having planets of a particular type (primary, secondary, tertiary, or hostile). These planets are,
in turn, rated for a number of factors,
including population, industrial
capacity, and planetary environment.
A primary planet, for example, might
have a population rating of 90, maximum industrial capacity of 50, and
a social environment of 75. This
would mean that the planet could
hold 90 factors of population before
revolt became a possibility, could
have up to 50 factors of industry built
on it, and starts with an Earth-like
planetary environment. (All factors
fall on a scale of 0-100, so that a
planetary environment of 75 is very
good.) Of the three factors, only
planetary environment is subject to
enhancement beyond its initially set
levels.
During the production phase, the
phasing player is moved to each
planet under his control and is given

Continued on p.

49

LEGACY OF LLYLGAMYN:
An Introduction to Wizardry's Third Scenario
by Robert Reams

NAME:
TYPE:

ous orb from thieves. The leaders of
Llylgamyn have appealed to the
descendants of the heroes of the
"Knight of Diamonds" and the "Proving Grounds of the Mad Overload"
to quest during this time of need.
The new adventurers will be
chosen from this years graduating
apprentices. Each apprentice, age 20,
will undergo the ancient Rite of
Passage. These new level one characters will be used for this adventure.

Legacy of
Llylgamyn
Fantasy and
Adventure
Apple II/IIe, III

SYSTEM:
FORMAT: Disk
AUTHOR: WARD, Andrew
Greenberg and
Robert Woodhead
$39.95
PRICE:
PUBLISHER: Sir-tech Software
Ogdensburg, NY
Five generations have passed in the
Kingdom of Llylgamyn since an intrepid band of adventurers regained
the ancient armor of the Knight of
Diamonds and the Staff of Gnilda.
Since that time, peace and prosperity
have prevailed. The tranquility of
their idyllic place, however, has been
broken by an angry mother nature —
there have been earthquakes, tidal
waves and other strange happenings.
But, the people of Llylgamyn have
tended to ignore these events. That
is, until the peaceful seas rose and
destroyed the colony of Arbithea and
an earthquake damaged the temple of
Gnilda. Panic was wide on the land

until wiser heads called for a new
generation of adventurers to seek the
cause of their troubles. This new
band of adventurers would accept a
quest to save Llylgamyn from peril.
There is only one relic which has
power to reveal the source of the
danger. A mystical Orb taken long
ago by the great dragon L'kbreth, one
of the five children of the World Serpent, and it is she who is dedicated
to the preservation of the balance of
the world. Legends passed down
thru time say that this dragon has
taken the Orb to her mountain lair.
There she has invoked the powers of
good and evil to protect this wonder-

Legacy of Llylgamyn (LOL) is not
a stand alone adventure in the Wizardry series. Characters transferred
from scenario one and two are required to enter into the Rite of
Passage. This scenario will not allow
questing on the Legacy of Llylgamyn
disk itself. A blank disk must be initialized and then, using the utilities,
a working scenario disk made. Again,
using the utilities, you must transfer
characters onto the new scenario
disk from the first two adventures.
(Note: It is important to remember to
write protect the original disk during
this process or the ancestor will be
lost during the Rite of Passage.)
Transfer sufficient characters to form
at least two parties. This is a very

challenging adventure and, unfortunately, there will be a loss among
the ranks of the heroes.
Boot up this new adventure and go
to the Training grounds. Using the
"R" option it will be possible to
create the characters which will be
used. During this ceremony, there is
only one point where a choice is
allowed. Regardless of the prior
alignment, each character being
created may declare a new alignment
within traditional limitations. A wise
move at this point will be to shift as
may as possible of the characters being created to neutral alignment.
Neither good nor evil characters
alone can prove worthy of receiving
that orb which is the goal of this
quest. To complete this adventure it
is necessary to have both good and
evil parties. Maximizing the number
of neutral characters in the parties
means a more rapid accumulation of
experience points for those able to
travel with both groups.
Initially, the most striking aspect of
this new adventure is again working
with a character with only 12 hit
points and no spells. This is a sobering experience for anyone who has
been used to characters of level 20
and above with all available spells. It
is necessary to remember to have an
encounter and escape to the castle's
Adventurer's Inn while you still can.
(Try and remember playing Wizardry
for the first time.) A good practice in
Legacy is to back up your characters
prior to entering the maze.
LOL was designed by the WARD
group (Wizardry Research and Development Group) Robert Del Favero Jr.,
Samuel Pottel and Joshua Mittleman.
They are in large part responsible for
the quality product which is this new
adventure. Andrew Greenberg and
Robert Woodhead collaborated with
this group to create the first of three
scenarios which will be in this series.
The thought and effort incorporated
in this game design make it an exceptional challenge to even the experienced gamer. Strategy and preplanning are required for success.
The authors have enhanced the
graphics display for presenting this
new adventure. The new system is
called "Window Wizardry". The hi-

res images, showing greater detail
and allowing better manipulation of
screen graphics, provides greater
control over the information available to the gamer. With this adventure, it is worth connecting a color
display to enjoy the presentation of
the new monster types as they appear.
The items available at Boltac's
Trading Post have changed. To properly equip your new parties you
either need to be familiar with medieval armaments or have a good dictionary. It will be wise to purchase
portion of Dios, and on levels above
one to purchase LATOMOFIS POTS
in quantity as they will be needed for
survival. A new command has been
added which makes shopping much
easier — the ability to pool gold,
which transfers all the gold in the
party to one person. Another useful
command which has been added
provides a list of the names of the
characters who are eligible to join a
party being assembled at Gigamesh's
Tavern.
This adventure abounds with puzzles, riddles and strange new monsters.
The mysterious island which you will
discover on level one will be out of
reach for quite a while, but when the
means to cross the water becomes
available, a very pleasant surprise will
be found there. The challenge of the
maze presented in Legacy of Llylgamyn will require careful mapping.
There are six levels to the maze, with
the levels above one containing hidden and apparently inaccessible
areas, with secret doors scattered
throughout most levels. There are
plenty of chutes and one death trap.
The death trap is a very nasty surprise inserted into the adventure for
no apparent reason. There is a riddle
which warns the adventurer not to
proceed any further, unfortunately
the nature of the trap is not apparent
until it is too late. A warning to the
adventurer reading this review, "a
riddle in three segments do not proceed", if you must, have a backup
because you are going to need it.
The quest takes place inside a
mountain. The adventure starts at the
lowest level and your parties must
find their way to L'Kbreth's lair near
the top of the mountain. With a

suitable offering, it is possible to get
the Orb of Earthin. The lowest level
is inhabited by a fierce band of
Garian Corsairs which you should
skirmish with long enough to collect
experience points worth at least two
or three levels before attempting the
next level of the mountain.
Level three will be the most difficult map to draw in any of the
Wizardry adventures. There is a trick
involved which, when understood, at
least makes the mapping task possible. Level three may yield the "key"
to a short cut which will save much
door kicking. If this "key" is not
found on level three, then try four.
On levels four and five will be found
objects which are vital to the successful conclusion of the quest.
A final word of caution. This
adventure contains more deadly
monsters than either of the other
scenarios. Earlier I recommended
that Dios portions be carried in the
earlier stages of bring characters up
in experience level. Above the first
level, the questing party will encounter monsters which will poison
members of the group — thus additional Latumofis Pots will be required. This adventure also contains
more monsters which are life
stealers. In an encounter, they will
take experience points and reduce
their opponent a level. Your only
sure protection is to back-up before
entering the maze.
Anyone who has played Wizardry
and was slightly disappointed by
Knight of Diamonds, should be very
pleased with the Legacy of Llylgamyn. In every way, it is a superior
product. By staring with new characters set at level one, the excitement
is back. The new windows are exciting, and even though they slow the
game some, the overall effect is well
worth the slower speed when one
considers color scenes and the improved information display which
may be toggled on and off as required.
The Legacy of Llylgamyn is an example of the maturing and improvement of an already excellent product.
This new adventure will challenge all
who accept this quest and will leave
you looking for the two sequels
which follow in its path.

BROADSIDES
Dave Long

NAME:
TYPE:

Broadsides
Tactical/Arcade
Wargame
SYSTEM
Apple II
FORMAT: Disk
#PLAYERS: 1 or 2
AUTHOR: Wayne Gavris
PRICE:
$39.95
PUBLISHER: Strategic
Simulations
Mountain View, CA

"Avast there, ye swabs!! Load with
chain shot now, me hearties, an' aim
fer 'is sails! We'll cripple 'is wings and
then dance a pretty ring around 'im..."
Unfortunately, while I was firing at
his sails, he was firing at my hull
with solid shot, and my sweet ship
went to a watery grave just as his
masts came crashing down. My
problem, as usual, was a poor eye for
distance, and the frustration of often
seeing my shots splash into the sea
while my ship shivered to the impact
of his Broadsides.

Thus ended one of my many encounters on the high seas in SSI's
new tactical simulation of ship-to-ship
battle in the Napoleonic era. Your options during combat are many, your
options in selecting and/or creating
ships even greater, and when you get
frustrated with tactical decisions (like
what type of shot to use or which
type of sails to hoist), you can opt for
the arcade version of the game and

just blast away incessantly without
bothering over details.

THE BATTLE ROYAL
During battle you give orders to
your crew of stalwarts by turning the
paddles to change the displayed command, and then pushing the paddle
button to select your order. Orders
can also be given using the keyboard
or the Sirius Joyport along with an
Atari joystick. The keyboard option
is a bit slower than the paddle option,
but since both sides play with the
same system, it doesn't really affect
the play of the game.
Your options during battle are as
follows: Turn to Port, Faster Speed,
Steady Speed, Slower Speed, Back
Sail, Battle Sail, Full Sail, Solid Shot,
Chain Shot, Grape Shot, Aim at Sails,
Aim at Hull, Fire xxxx Yards (low
range), Fire xxxx Yards (mid range),
Fire xxxx Yards (high range), and
Turn to Starboard.
After selection of your order, the

crew acknowledges your command
with a snappy "Aye, aye, sir", and
begins to implement your desires.
Naturally, since these are wooden
sailing ships and not formula racers,
a command to turn, or change speed
or sailing configuration takes time to
implement. The larger your ship
(under normal circumstances) the
slower she is to respond to the helm.
Should you happen to give the wrong
order, you may find yourself headed
for a disastrous loss, since your
crew must first respond to your incorrect order and then try to compensate for your ineptness. All this
costs time, and the enemy may well
be maneuvering to rake your bow
while you blunder about.
THE DISPLAYS
The combat display is superb. On
the left 3/5ths of the screen, you are
shown a seagull's eye view of the
engagement, depicting the two ships
in relation to one another. Below the
ships you are given a two line display

showing each side's current victory
points, wind speed and direction,
and the time of day. Each battle
begins at dawn (6:00 AM) and can
continue until sunset (6:00 PM),
though I've never seen an engagement last that long. Wind speed and
direction can change at any time, and
the wind can blow in the same 12
directions in which the ships can
move. As in real life, these lumbering behemoths of the sea move very
sluggishly on a tack, and not at all
directly into the wind, but they can
really kick up their heels with the
breeze at their backs.
'Tis one of the facts of the sea that
the wind can shift at crucial moments,
and ye'd best be alert, for foolhardy to be still givin' orders when
ye've not noticed the wind shift!
As the ships maneuver, and the
distance between them changes, the
scale of the gull's eye view changes,
going from 1200 yards across the
display to 600 or 2400 yards. Should
the distance become too great, (1500
to 2000 yards apart) the two ships
will disengage and then re-engage
one hour later in prime broadside
array. You can't run forever!
The right 2/5ths of the screen shows
details about the two ships. Combat
begins with a silhouette of the two
ships, and a display of your hull
points (when they fall to 0 you go to
meet Davy Jones in his locker!), your
crew strength (lose too many men
and you'll strike your colors), current
speed, maximum speed, current
order selection, and, last but not
least, the number and type of guns on
each side of your ship.
As you suffer and inflict damage,
the ship detail display reflects that
damage. You will see holes appear in
your hull, watch your crew strength
diminish, grimace as your sails are
shredded by the enemy, and even be
kept up to date on the guns you each
lose during action.
When you sink your opponent, or
vice versa (much more common in
the early games I played) you'll see
the ship sink slowly below the waves.
Many actions are decided not by
the exchange of broadsides, but rather
by cut and parry of your bonny crew
on the decks of the two ships. When
you close with your opponent, you

cast grapples to tie your ships
together, the screen changes from the
sailing display to the boarding
display and, or course, your command options change as well.
During the boarding engagement,
crew members are distinguished by
the direction they are facing, and you
command your men to attack or
retreat, fight very aggressively, very
defensively, or in balance. You also
command your snipers to fire at the
enemy on your deck, on their deck,
or at the enemy snipers. It's usually
wise to avoid firing at your own deck
unless things are looking pretty bad,
since you may very well miss and kill
your own men. "Friendly Fire" was
a threat 200 years ago too!
Intelligent use of the boarding
option can truly snatch victory from
the jaws of defeat. If your hull is looking more and more like a sieve, and
your sails appear more akin to
ribbons than sheets, yet your crew
remains strong, try to close with the
enemy. As you close, fire grapeshot
to decimate his crew, for a point
blank range you can't miss, and you
do double damage. One or two barrages of grape can severely deplete
their numbers and then you should
tie 'em up. More than once I've saved
the day with this tactic, though the
enemy will try to fight a defensive
boarding action and cast off the
cables which bind you together. If
this happens, the ships drift apart
and play reverts to the sailing screen.
Try to close again! Be persistent!
On the other hand, should positions be reversed, avoid a boarding
action like the plague! But, should it
appear imminent, blast 'em with
grape and then try to slash the cables.
Just remember, each man you see fall
means 10 crew casualties, and you
can't fight without a crew!
THE VARIABLES
Five original set ups are given on
the game disk, from easiest matchup
against the computer to hardest, with
two of these available slots on which
to save your own matchups. Using
the variables, however, you can recreate many of the greatest historical
battles, or make up your own.
You can change your ship's name,

her hull strength, crew strength,
number and type of guns carried,
speed, turning and reloading time,
fire and sniper effectiveness, and
boarding casualties inflicted. If you
get sick and tired of ending each
game with a swim in the drink, make
yourself a super ship and go at it
anew! The variables pages also allow
you to save your newly created
matchup under Player Option A or
B, to avoid having to re-invent the
wheel each time you play.

VICTORY CONDITIONS
Victory points are awarded for
destroying sails and masts, killing the
enemy crewmen, damaging his hull,
and for destroying enemy guns. The
victor also scores a bonus based upon
the elapsed time of the battle. Thus,
if you sink him quickly, you'll score
more points than if the battle drags
on til late afternoon.
HISTORICAL SHIPS
Statistics are given for 22 actual
ships of the era, perhaps the most
famous being John Paul Jones'
famous Bon Homme Richard vs. the
British Serapis. In addition, historical
data is presented for British, French,
American and Spanish ships of the
era, so you can discover for yourself
the whys and wherefores of the tactics of the day. The Spanish, for example, were much slower at turning
and reloading, while the Americans,
though not inflicting as great a
damage as some others, could maneuver and reload faster than most.
CONCLUSIONS
Broadsides is an excellent depiction of ship-to-ship combat in the
famous age of "Wooden Ships and
Iron Men." The graphics are very
pleasing, and the historical statistics
presented allow you to create a virtually unending array of different
battle situations. The arcade game
allows you to continue to fight battle
after battle with the same ship (so
long as you keep winning), while the
tactical game makes for a good tournament situation, say best three out
of five battles, or most victory points
scored during a specified number of
engagements.

TELE-GAMING

Patricia Fitzgibbons

'Tis the season of twinkling lights,
brightly colored packages, and holiday cheer; a time for family gatherings and the renewal of old friendships. But maybe you're feeling a
bit lonely, sitting in front of your
computer with only a machine as
your gaming partner. Perhaps you're
wishing you could join a group of
new friends and explore a dungeon
together, or you're imagining the fun
you could have as a valued member
of a starship crew in search of vast
and uncharted galaxies.
At some point, most of us tire of
solitary games and want to match
wits with real live human beings.
But can you, at home with your
computer, meet other gamers for a
friendly contest? You bet your sweet
modem you can!

In this issue and the next, I'll be
discussing interactive multi-player
("MP") games. The idea of MP
games is as ancient as gaming itself;
the reality of today's electronic MP
games requires a computer, a modem,
and a subscription to a telecommunications network. Because MP
games are difficult to design and
quite costly to produce, they are
relatively rare. The Source, for example, is working on the possibility of
MP games, but none are online at
this time. CompuServe, however, has
a number of MP games in place, and
more are planned.
The most popular MP game on
CompuServe is "MegaWars," and it
is played in real time by thousands
of garners every week. On a typical
evening, one hundred or more space
warriors roam the universe in teams
of up to ten players. New recruits can
join either the Colonists or the
Kryons, and teams are assembled
informally or by posting announcements on the electronic bulletin
board of the Multi-Player Special
Interest Group ("MPSIG"). As a
member of MPSIG, you can communicate with seasoned "MegaWarriors" (with names such as "Admiral
Danger," "Han Solo," and "THX
1138"), set up pre-game conferences
or scrimmages, challenge other teams
to a game, and trade strategy tips.
"MegaWars" is an institution on
CompuServe and has attracted a core
of dedicated players. Drop by MPSIG
one evening and see what the fuss is
all about!
Recently, CompuServe has introduced "MegaWars II," an MP space
wargame that features sound and
color graphics for users of CompuServe's VIDTEX terminal program.
Two four-man teams compete to capture planets and annihilate enemy
opposition. With the help of your
ship's phasers, shields, scanners,
and sub-space communications, you
and your teammates can spend many
exciting hours playing this fast-paced
game.
If you're more comfortable as a
free-lancer, you can bypass the team
system of "MegaWars" and try your
hand against up to nine individual
players in CompuServe's MP "Space

War" or "DecWars." Keyboard commands, such as "F" to fire missiles
and "M" to move your ship forward,
allow you to accomplish your seek
and destroy missions. Although similar to the mammoth "MegaWars,"
"DecWars" is easier to learn and
faster to play. You may wish to warm
up for the larger, more difficult game
by working up through the "DecWars" ranks first.
If an evening of "The Wars" has
left you keyed up, you might enjoy a
relaxing session in CompuServe's
Casino. At present, only MP Blackjack is online, but MP Poker should
be available soon. One thousand
wagering credits are yours when you
take your place at one of the fourman tables. You can gamble, deal, or
simply watch the fun, and by using
the "K" ("kibitz") command, you can
send messages at any time to other
players or members of the peanut
gallery. Even if you're unlucky and
must be ushered out of the Casino
(bankrupt!), you may obtain more
credits from the friendly cashier.
Maybe you would prefer to play
with several friends at home, all of
you sharing your one machine. If so,
you can still enjoy multi-player gaming. CompuServe also offers "Backgammon," "Concentration," "Football," "Scramble," and "Fantasy."
Each player can then take a turn, and
CompuServe's computers act as both
the playing field and scorekeeper.
In addition to the computer games
I've mentioned, CompuServe is host
to the Gaming Special Interest Group
("GameSIG"), whose membership includes almost five thousand garners.
GameSIG schedules online, real time,
fantasy role-playing games such as
"AD&D," "Traveller," and "Man,
Myth, and Magic," as well as ongoing
games of "Diplomacy," "Monopoly,"
and "Risk." Time and distance disappear when a group of "Dippy"
players from all over the country get
together with their GameMaster to
plot international intrigue.
Of course, almost any board game
can be played "live" in GameSIG.
Usually, a group of players schedules
a date and time for a game. The
players then keep track of their
Continued on p. 46

North Atlantic '86:

Review and Strategies
Jay Selover

NAME:
North Atlantic '86
TYPE:
Strategic Wargame
SYSTEM:
Apple II
FORMAT: Disk
#PLAYERS: 1 or 2
AUTHOR: Gary Grigsby
PRICE:
$59.95
PUBLISHER: Strategic
Simulations
Mountain View, CA

North Atlantic '86 (NA86) is the
third Gary Grigsby design to be
published by Strategic Simulations
Inc. It uses the same basic game
system as Guadalcanal Campaign
and Bomb Alley, but stretches it
right to the limits in portraying the
complexities of modern naval conflict. The game begins with a
hypothetical set-up well into a NATOSoviet war in 1986. The Soviets have
subdued West Germany and
Scandinavia, and have forced neutrality on
France. As the game starts on September 7, the Soviets are established
at their bases in Murmansk and Riga,
and at captured bases in Bergen
(Norway) and Hamburg (FRG). An
invasion of Great Britain is the
ultimate goal, but first the naval
lifeline to the United States must be
cut. Allied bases on the Faroe Islands
and on Iceland are the key. If these
can be captured, long-range Backfire
bombers will be able to devastate the
NATO supply lines and ultimately
starve out Great Britain.
There are several perspectives
from which to evaluate a wargame

on hypothetical future conflict. First,
is it an enjoyable game? (Yes.) Second, does it accurately portray current and future capabilities and propensities? (Yes.) And third, is it likely
to happen that way (would the game
be a good training aid for midshipmen at Annapolis)? (No, at least
I hope not.)
If you haven't seen a Gary Grigsby
design, the game uses half-day turns
(a daylight turn, then a night turn).
The player controls the naval and air
forces of his side (and also, abstractly,
the available amphibious and airborne infantry). In a turn, one first
creates new task forces and/or combines and divides those already in action, and then moves each one individually on the 40x40 low-res map.
Next comes assignment of the aircraft you want on combat air patrol
(CAP) over your bases and task
forces. Next, searches are conducted
to locate enemy task forces. Finally,
one assigns air strikes and missile attacks against spotted enemy task
forces and bases. The computer then
takes over and resolves all combat
(CAP and flak vs. airstrikes and

missiles, airstrikes vs. ships and
bases, surface combat by opposing
task forces, and any land combat between infantry forces). The computer
also handles reinforcements, a "repair and refit" pipeline for ships, and
the unloading of any troops and supplies which have been sealifted to
their destination. The system is not
a dazzling graphics display; its forte
is rather in managing large forces of
ships, airplanes, and infantry, and in
processing complex search and combat routines. Believe me, you don't
need graphics for excitement. When
you see the message, "SSN-116
FIRES TORPEDOES . . . TORPEDOES APPROACHING
CVN NIMITZ . . ." followed by a pause,
your pulse will quicken!
Something Old, Something New
If you're a veteran of Guadalcanal
or the Mediterranean, you might be
interested in the new staff in North
Atlantic '86. There are a few general
system refinements: more task forces
are now allowed (9 for the Soviets
and 11 for NATO), a new option off
the task force menu gives an update
on the status of all friendly bases, and
the pipeline display can now be set
to scan only a particular ship type
and/or a limited length into the
pipeline. Most of the additions actually pertain to modern combat. For
instance, air missions now take place
in night turns as well as daylight
turns. Also, one no longer needs to
assign combat aircraft to searching.
The computer maintains an inventory of utility aircraft (search planes,
early warning planes, and helicopContinued on p. 46

-

_

instance, make the beginning levels
of play easier on the home versions
since the game is no longer interested
in George Washington's face.

ATARI ARENA
Allen Doum

All of the reasons (discussed two
issues ago) for converting a game
from one computer to another also
apply to converting a game popular
in the arcades to home machines.
The fact that a game already has a
following makes a success more likely
than with an original game. But, if
the reasons for doing so are the same,
so are some of the disadvantages.
An arcade machine can be built
with all the custom hardware and
software that the game might require:
extra buttons, special graphics, and
now even laser discs. The home
machine, like any general purpose
device, is at a disadvantage.
There are two issues that have
nothing to do with that advantage.
The first is that a home game is
under different economic constraints
than an arcade game. This is largely
ignored in the demand for these
games, but some publishers, Atari for

The other issue is originality. This
is a two-edged blade. On one side are
the rights of creators of the original
game. They took the risks on a new
product or idea, and should profit
from any "spin-offs". But what about
the guy who doesn't own the
machine that the "authorized" version is released on. Are the owners
of Apples, for example, not supposed to play Star Raiders, or any game
similar to Star Raiders, just because
the only authorized edition is on the
Atari?
Whatever the legal answer to that
question is, it is obvious that many
software producers and purchasers
do not find games "derived" from
other games objectionable. (And arcade game manufacturers are not exempt from this either, of course).
When is a game a copy? Or a
variant? Is a sequel any more or less
a rip-off? How new does a new idea
have to be? There is no set answer to
these questions. Each gamer (and
game creator) has to set his/her own
definition. In the current situation,
each new game popular in the arcades starts a race to get a similar
game on the market for each of the
machines. And, because the
"authorized" edition has to try to live
up to the original, a "derived" game
may even be more fun to play. The
race is on.. .
. . . and it looks like ZAXXON. It
would be difficult to decide just how
original ZAXXON was in the first
place. The scenario is remarkably
similar to Scramble, right down to the
use of target fuel tanks to refuel the
players aircraft/spacecraft, and both
games giving the player control of
two dimensions of movement on a
constantly scrolling playfield. What
ZAXXON did of course, was to scroll
the playfield in a different direction
than either of the ones that the player
was controlling, giving a "three
dimensional" perspective to the
graphics. The two games below take
opposite approaches to the problem:
one maintains a similar scenario
while cutting back on the graphics

action; the other maintains the
graphics perspective while drastically changing the scenario.
Nightraiders from Datamost, keeps
the alternating "city" and "space"
screens. The players ship moves left
and right, but altitude is only indicated by how high "up" the screen
the players bullets go. The playfield
scrolling is vertical only, not
diagonal.
Blue Max (from Synapse) restores
the diagonal scrolling, but moves the
action to a somewhat fanciful version
of World War One. The player may
strafe or bomb a variety of ground
targets, while enemy aircraft may appear at any time, from in front or
behind the player. By hitting "priority" targets the player may advance to
the next of three levels. One major
difference here is that there are no
"lives" to lose in Blue Max. Each hit
damages the plane in one of four
ways, with a fifth hit ending the
game. Damage is repaired by landing
at a friendly airstrip. Any time the
plane crashes, no matter how well
the player has done, the game is over.
While many will say that this is more
realistic than "lives", the loss of the
game from one mistake can be quite
frustrating.
. . . and it looks like Q*BERT. In
truth, we seem to be knee-deep in
Q*BERT's these days, without even
counting the authorized cartridge
from Parker Brothers.
Juice (from Tronix) is not exactly
like Q*BERT, of course. The main
difference is the playfield; seen as a
foreshortened rectangle with many of
the squares missing. The player must
move over each of the squares the required number of times for each of
six levels of play, with three different
layouts in each level. There is a
bonus board at the end of each level.
Because of the rectangular shape,
joystick control is a little easier to
learn than with Q*BERT, but the
game is not substantially better or
worse than the original — just a little different.
. . . and it looks like Donkey Kong.
. . . and it looks like Dig Dug.
. . . and it looks like Frogger.
. . . and it (still) looks like PAC-MAN.
. . . and it looks like this trend will be
around for awhile.

computer. It gave the designers at
Commodore something to expand
on, something that with significant
newly designed chips came to be the
C64. The engineers for the most part
understood what they were doing.
However the people writing manuals
and programs did not understand
what powers the engineers had given
the new computer.

THE
COMMODORE
KEY

Commodore 64
Roy Wagner
This time I would like to talk about
understanding the Commodore 64
(C64) and how that relates to the
games we can expect to see. In the
last issue of CGW, Jon Freeman had
some pretty harsh statements to
make about the C64. Some of what
he said is valid, some
incosequtal,dmhowefintlack
of understanding. I do not blame Jon
for his lack of understanding as I do
not think Commodore fully understands the potential and capabilities
of the computer. The C64 is only an
infant (barely a year old) and consumers and programmers are only
beginning to see what it can do.
The C64 came from a long line of
very capable black and white computers. These computers lacked the
expressive powers of color and good
sound. The first entry into the world
of color and high resolution was the
VIC. This computer showed good
potential and is still a very successful

The operating system designers
took a very simple and smart approach. They took the existing small
8K ROM operating system and the
existing 8K ROM BASIC 2.0 (BASIC
4.0 would have required another
chip) and slightly modified them to
use the new 6510 chip (an expanded
6502). The C64 does have 64K of
RAM (user available memory) that
can contain anything. Typically 24K
is used for the operating system,
BASIC, character set, and
miscellaneous 4K. This leaves about 39K of
memory available for the novice
BASIC programmer. Game programmers who understand how to use the
64K of RAM are able to take advantage of much more than 39K of
memory. A programmer with great
understanding, could even replace
BASIC and the operating system
with versions that did only what they
needed to have done. These new versions would simply be loaded from
disk when the game was loaded.
The color display designers provided the Video Interface Chip (VIC,
no direct relation to the VIC computer). This chip extended the state
of the art to give the C64 extensive
capabilities. It gives us programmable character sets, single and
multi-color sprites, high resolution
and much more. Screen, color, and
character memory are all relocatable.
They gave us enough colors for all
practical programming and gave us
black, white and three shades of grey
so that displays not requiring color
(such as word processing) could be
distinctly provided. The greys also
work nicely for shadows. Sprites are
easily positioned using X-Y coordinates.
The sound designers looked at
several very expensive commercial
synthesizers and provided an extremely sophisticated Sound Inter-

face Device (SID) chip. It's capabilities
are difficult for the novice programmer to use. However, a great many
software packages are available both
in public domain and commercially
to make things easy. The SID chip actually has four voices; three output
and one input (not discussed in the
manual). This voice accepts microphone or recorded input (voice or
music) and can be processed by the
SID filters and output to the monitor
or external speaker(s) with the other
three voices. Another SID chip with
three voices can also be chained to
provide six voices and this can be
done many times to provide unbelievable sound. Understanding how to
use all this power is only beginning.
What does this mean to the computer gamer? It means most of us
have not yet seen the great games
that will be. Any game that is written
for Apple II and IIe can easily be converted to the C64 and be significantly
better if the programmer doing the
conversion "understands" the C64.
The capabilities of the Atari computers are very similar to those of the
C64, so those conversions will be as
good, if not better. Right now we are
seeing a lot of software released for
the Apple, then the C64. That is
because the Apple has been around
for a long time and their programmers fully understand the capabilities of the Apple. Soon you will be
seeing much more quality software
being released first for the C64 then
the others.
ACCESS SOFTWARE INC understands the C64. Their software games
have been first and only for the C64.
Their first release, NEUTRAL ZONE,
positions you in a space module at
the edge of the galaxy with the task
of protecting your home base from
alien attack vessels (several different
types). Your "gun turret" rotates 360
degrees for a full panorama (the view
is fantastic) as the screen scrolls left
or right. The three dimensional gun
fire and sound effects are excellent.
It gets lonely out there in space, but
if you don't defend your base it will
be destroyed. The game offers several
levels of play.
The newest game from ACCESS is
called BEACH-HEAD (BH). This

game shows how the company has
taken understanding and expanded
on it to do greater things. This game
requires you to accomplish several
tasks as commander of the sea and
land forces attacking a beach-head in
the Pacific (you can almost hear the
waves). You must destroy strafing
enemy aircraft with your porn-porn
guns, then shell enemy ships who are
also attacking you. You then land on
the beaches with your armored
vehicles to travel past many obstacles
and enemy fire to reach the enemy
bunker. Your fire power must be
quick and accurate here, because
when the enemy sets aim on you it
never misses. BH has excellent action graphics and tremendous sound
effects, with the top scores saved to
disk. Both games are more arcade
like than strategy/tactic and retail
for $34.95.
In the last issue, I commented
about good original software and
look alikes that are not worth buying.
Another prime example of this are
two game conversions that have just
been released for the C64. Bill Budge's
PINBALL CONSTRUCTION SET
(PCS), from Electronic Arts (reviewed
in CGW, MAY-JUNE 83) is outstanding (C64 conversion was done by
Olaf Lubeck). It includes 5 demo pinball games that play like the real
thing (except for letting me jostle the
machine when I had a ball stuck). It
even includes some extras that
neither the Apple or Atari version
have; multi-color mode for up to 255
color combinations and a format disk
option. The pinball games you construct can be given to friends who do
not yet own the construction set.
The other game, Broderbund's
DAVID'S MIDNIGHT MAGIC
(DMM) (reviewed in CGW, MARAPR 82) is ONE pinball game that
plays nicely, has good sound and
colors, and saves the top 10 scores to
disk, but it is only one game with
some slight control options. Both
games PCS and DMM are prices at
$39.95. With the PCS, you could construct your own DMM. Another
game from Broderbund, with tremendous possibilities (150 screens +
any you want to construct) is LODE
RUNNER. This game was the subject

of a feature article in the last issue
(OCT.) of CGW.
I would like to thank Bob Johnson
at D.E.S. for making the above games
available to me for this article.

Vic-20
Dr. Johnny L. Wilson
The Commodore Key to Strategy —
At last, Avalon Hill is translating
some of its original microcomputer
games for the Vic-20. NUKEWAR, a
player vs. computer war game, is one
of the first. The screen shows two 64
point grids, each representing a fictional country (though almost all my
friends seem to name them USA and
USSR on their first try). The game
begins in a random cold war year,
anytime after 1956. Each turns equals
one year. It CAN continue until the
1980's before the computer launches
a "hot" war at the player's nation.
Don't count on it, though. Every year
makes it more and more probable
that the computer will launch a
nuclear attack.
Each year (turn), the player may
either a) build two bases or b) build
one base and spy on the computer's
nation. The first choice has the advantage of building one's offensive
capability more swiftly, but has the
disadvantage of catching you flatfooted if the computer attacks that
year. The second choice builds offensive punch slowly, but has the advantage of giving the player a first strike
capability when the computer plans
to attack first. At the start of the
game, if it's before 1965, the player
can either build bomber or missile
bases. Bombers are more accurate offensively, but are much slower in
reaching their target and more easily
defended against. Defensively, it is
necessary to build several bomber
bases in order to have an adequate
air defense against the computer's
bombing raids. Missiles activate and
strike much faster. Starting in 1965,
the player may build "Polaris"-type
submarine bases. This enables the
player to develop a balanced defense
"triad." And, starting in 1970, the
player may build ABM bases.
When "hot" war is declared (either
by the player or computer) the game
switches to a "tactical" level. The

player must decide what bases to activate, what targets (on the basis of
previous intelligence) to choose and
whether to negotiate or not. There is
a chance that some bases will activate automatically, however.
Strategy Hints: 1) Since "hot" war
is not likely to start in the first 4-6
years of the game, build two bases
every year for those years. Then, spy
every year thereafter to insure a first
strike and a good awareness of potential targets. 2) Since the more bases
of a type that are available to you increase the likelihood of their automatically activating (and saving you
a game turn), build in a balanced
manner. 3) Don't negotiate unless
you have a clear-cut advantage. (16K
expander required).
Commodore Key to The Unknown
— Prickly-Pear Software markets
GANGBUSTERS, a multi-player
strategy game for the Vic-20 with 16K
expander. Two to six players attempt
to progress from PUNK, to HOOD,
to RUNNER, and eventually to SYNDICATE BOSS. Our games have
generally taken longer than the 1-2
hours suggested in documentation,
however, since we spend an excessive amount of time at the track.
One flaw in the program is that one
of the players invariably gets locked
out of the first game turn. It's aggravating, but not insurmountable.
Each player has the opportunity to
invest in unions, bootlegging, prostitution, bullet-proof limos or the bribery
of police at the start of each turn
(which equals one year). That is, you
may if you are not in prison. You
may also be offered a chance to fill
a "contract." Next, each player has
the opportunity to go to the track to
play the ponies (or meet some underworld touts and tipsters). After visiting the track, the player can try to
"pull" his record, pay back the
"juiceman" (loan shark), steal a limo,
of, if high enough in the mob, put out
a contract. Finally, you can adjust the
percentages you want to collect from
each of your rackets.
The program offers colorful bookkeeping and flawless tabulation. It
has very limited graphics, but is an
intriguing game with more than one
strategy which can win. 0

NAME OF THE GAME (Cont.)
widget — or, at least, similar widgets.
The New Yorker's been working on
the project for two years, the Californian for five. For dramatic effect,
let's suppose they finish on the same
day, but the New Yorker manages to
get in line at the Patent Office just
ahead of the Californian. What happens? The New Yorker gets the
patent; the Californian gets nothing.
Forget five years of work, an earlier
start, and the obvious fact that
neither was copying from the other;
for the next seventeen years (the term
of the patent), the Californian can't
do anything with the widget without
the New Yorker's permission. (If this
strikes you as just a tad unfair — as
stupid, in its own way, as the trademark provisions mentioned earlier —
you won't get any argument from
me.)
But wait. If they had been working
on games, not widgets, the results
would be entirely different. In that
case, it doesn't matter who got in line
first; for the rest of their lives (plus
50 years that probably won't matter
much to either one) both of them are
entitled to copyright protection for
their own efforts. Regardless of the
similarities in the two widget games,
unless it can be proved that one
designer actually copied the game
design from the other's game, neither
owes the other anything.
This brings us to another crucial
point of copyright law that almost no
one understands: you cannot —
repeat, cannot — copyright an idea.
(If you thought that was exactly what
does get copyrighted, you have lots
of company, but you're still wrong.)
You can only copyright the expression of an idea, not the idea itself —
the design of a game (as I use the
term) but not the concept.
What in the world does that
mean???

REAL MEN DON'T EAT GARLIC
Let's go back to our two widget inventors turned game designers and
suppose that the New Yorker, a fan
of Bela Lugosi, decides to do a board
game called Vampire Spy. Six months
later, the Californian releases Love at
First Byte, a computer game. The
New Yorker says, "It was my idea
first." The Californian says, "No, I

started working on a vampire game
five years ago." Both consult lawyers,
who tell them they can't copyright
the notion — the idea — of "a vampire game" — only a specific vampire
game: the expression of that idea. A
vampire game that used precisely the
plot and characters of Dracula would
be such an expression, but it would,
in fact, infringe upon the copyrights
already held by author and studio.
Still suspicious (or maybe just
greedy), our New Yorker protests,
"But Love at First Byte has wooden
stakes, garlic, coffins, and silver
bullets, just like my game!"
"So did our movie!" cries a studio
rep.
"So did my book!" wails the ghost
of Bram Stoker.
"And they weren't original with
him, either," grumbles someone.
In fact, due to "convergent
design," the "variables" in many
games — especially simulations —
aren't all that variable. If two independent people or companies do a
game on the Battle of Gettysburg, we
would not be surprised to discover
that the basic conflict, objectives, participants, and setting were similar; in
fact, we would be shocked if we
found Robert E. Lee commanding
the Union army.
Even in such cases, however, we
as critics, fans, and game players
want a moral resolution, even if a
legal one is hopeless. We want to be
able to decide whether and whom to
blame, and whom to praise. Did
Company B rip off Designer A or
not?

DID THE BUTLER DO IT?
Often the answer is easy: many
plagiarists don't bother dissembling
because they don't know — or don't
care — that there is anything objectionable about copying someone
else's work. Some cases, on the other
hand, are so murky that only the
possible plagiarist knows for sure.
The rest of the time we must satisfy
our own consciences with our own
best judgments.
This calls for careful, intelligent
analysis of whatever evidence is
available. For starters, do the companies or designers have a reputation
for imagination or imitation? Then

look at the games. In our vampire example, the similarities in the two
games (coffins, stakes, etc.) are expected; they go with the territory.
What is notable are the differences:
a love story (game) set in San Francisco and a spy story (game) set in an
imaginary Balkan country have less
in common than we would expect,
given a vampire hero in both. Having more or less the same "Order of
Battle" in both Gettysburg games
would be reasonable; having an entry in both Combat Results Tables
that read, "FLYING SAUCER
CRASHES; ALL DEFENDERS
KILLED," would be more than I
would ever believe of coincidence.
We do not, then, concentrate on the
logical, normal, and expected; we examine the peculiar and idiosyncratic.
Using a maze in a game is like using squares, hexes, or a track around
the edge of a board; evidence of
neither plagiarism nor novelty. It tells
us nothing about the designer's
creativity or integrity. On the other
hand, dot-eating is neither a natural
activity nor a traditional design element. Nor are power pills that turn
the hunted into a hunter. The combination of dot-eating, power pills, a
specific maze shape, and so forth
constitute a unique "expression of an
idea" subject to the protection of
copyright and our own moral
judgment.
There are legal safeguards against
rip-offs, but they are slow and inefficient at best. There are much more
effective and immediate methods
available, and "they is us." Two steps
are required: (1) Carefully distinguish
the flowers from the weeds; and (2)
act on that distinction. We can support originality and creativity in what
we write, say, and buy — or we can
allow the weeds to take root and take
over.
That's our garden out there. And
it's time we tended it.
Jon Freeman is Creative Director of
Free Fall Associates, a development
team whose newest games, ARCHON
and MURDER ON THE ZINDERNEUF, are available from Electronic
Arts. Other titles from Jon include
TEMPLE OF APSHAI and CRUSH,
CRUMBLE, CHOMP, and TAX
DODGE.

NAME:
Flying Tigers
Strategy
TYPE:
Apple II/ Plus
SYSTEM:
FORMAT: Disk
AUTHOR: David Wesely and
Stephen Goss
$29.95
PRICE:
PUBLISHER: Discovery Games
936 W. Highway 36
St. Paul, MN 55113
Ace attempted to bank left, while
firing at the tail of the 'Sally'. Static
erupted in his ear. Tex has been hit!
He fired at the Nip bomber and broke
off contact with a quick dive. The
`Nate' on his tail missed, as Ace
pushed forward on the throttle. The
static that was his lifeline to his buddies bit into his ear again, as Red announced, "Got one, Ace!"
It's December, 1941 and your
meagre squadron of P40C Tomahawks is outnumbered, as usual.
It seems like the "Nips" always have
the advantage in firepower, as indeed
they did in pre-World War II China
and they do in this bi-level game. Flying Tigers (FT) has a strategic level,
where you decide the best altitude,
approach, angle of attack, and target
for your formation to use in engaging the 8 fighters and 9 bombers of
the enemy force. FT also has a tactical level where you have a graphic
cockpit window view of the enemy.
In this phase, you may use either the
keyboard, joystick, or paddle to control the plane.
Using the strengths of your equipment as a guideline (as described in
the small white booklet of the
documentation) and the summary of

the Flying Tigers' actual historical
strategy (as described in the tan
booklet), it is actually possible to win
the game without resorting to the tactical level. It costs lots of wingmen,
though. As you win, you are able to
select better and more effective
planes your choices are: 1) P40C
Tomahawks, 2) P43A Lancers, 3) P66
Vanguards, 4) Mohawk IVs, 5) P400s
and 6) Hurricanes. Of course, each
plane has a different effect on your
potential enemy's planes. If you
would like to try this strategy, I found
that the Tomahawks and Lancers
should always try to attack from
above, since they cannot usually
outclimb the Japanese fighter escort.
Also, NEVER use a level approach
(command AL) to attack the Japanese
bombers when the fighter escort is at
a higher altitude. It's invariably "sitting duck" time, if you do.
Although the game may be won in
the strategic level, it was the promise
of the tactical level with its cockpit
view that attracted me to the game.
Here is where I have some misgivings about the game. Although the
documentation does say that the program will not allow you to dive or
climb too steeply, it seems to me that
you can barely climb at all. A friend
and I tried repeatedly, using both
joystick and keyboard controls, to
force the plane to climb consistently,
but continued to lose altitude. One
wonders if the program is not
weighted heavily against the kind of
maneuverability we armchair aces
fantasize about. In addition, it is exceedingly difficult to master this
phase of the game, because every
time the player is "shot down" in a
dogfight (that is, graphics mode),
he/she must reboot the entire program in order to play again. This is
a very awkward design feature and
it is to be hoped that it will be corrected in future editions.
One impressive feature of the
game, once one figures out which

booklet or card tells what, is the
documentation. The game designers
have packed a bonanza of
informat veslncour.Ama
white booklet describes the game
situation in its historical context and
gives a tour de force of both Allied
and Japanese aircraft used during the
conflict. This is supplemented by a
glossy poster with line drawings of
all of the aircraft described in the
booklet. There is a card with loading
instructions for the particular computer on one side and some very
good strategic hints on the other.
There is a booklet on the various controls (joystick, keyboard, or paddle)
with an appendix on Flying Tiger
tactics that is most useful. Last and
actually superseded by the program
menu itself is a command summary
booklet. My only criticism of the
documentation is that it would have
been more "user-friendly" if it were
in ONE booklet with either a Table
of Contents, Index or both.
Please note that there are some
possible difficulties in loading the
Apple II Plus. A friend had trouble
loading the program on his 48K
machine with integer firmware in
place, but didn't have trouble loading
it with a language card in place. Further, the documentation warns that
the program will not load if there is
a card slot #0. So, try removing those
two cards or following the instructions in the documentation for
replacing ROM chips and creating a
"monitor card," If you're very experienced with dealing with the
chips inside your computer.
In short, Flying Tigers is an interesting game that is not yet living
up to its potential. It has many good
features (the graphics mode, the bailout option, and the emphasis on each
plane's strengths and weaknesses).
The designers are to be commended
for their attempt to cause players to
think strategically BEFORE engaging
in tactical combat. They are also to

be congratulated for their attempt to
create the feel of actually flying a
plane and having the enemy in one's
sights. I just can't figure out whether
or not the game is a splendid failure
or flawed success.
The siren sounded on the air strip
once again, as Ace's squadron took
to the air to shoot down the `Sallys'
and a 'Nate' or two prior to their
attack on Kunming.
Dr. Johnny Wilson
NAME:
TYPE:
SYSTEM:

Space Station Zulu
Strategy
Atari 400/800/1200
Apple II/IIe
FORMAT:
Disk (48k)/
Cassette (32k)
#PLAYERS: One
AUTHOR:
Dennis Shields
PUBLISHER: Avalon Hill
Baltimore, Maryland
SPACE STATION ZULU (SSZ) is
a humorous strategy game of space
station defense. The Yargs are a
peace loving race who like to study
and investigate the galaxy they inhabit. After discovering the Xhapthon Star Drive, the Yargs became
very deeply involved in space exploration. They established a
number of outposts where their expeditions could resupply and relax
without always returning to planet
Yarg. Space Station Zulu is such an
outpost. It has a 43 member crew and
you are the Captain. The crew stand
three month tours, in between which
they are frozen in suspended animation. Shortly after an exploration
ship left the station "Intruder Alert"
sounded. Space Station Zulu's sanctity has been violated by unknown
life forms!
The computer reports these aliens
have three stages of growth: spore,
larva, and adult. The creatures are
scattered throughout the station and
their numbers are increasing rapidly. Their favorite dish is "Yarg"!
As Captain, your job is to rid the
station of all adult and larva alien life
forms. There are 21 rooms lettered A
through U; four docks numbered 1
through 4; and four passage tubes
numbered 5 through 8. Access between chambers is through hatches

represented as small niches in the
wall. Rooms S and T contain suspension freezers for the crew not currently on watch. Scattered
throughout the rooms are ten different types of weapons, ranging
from hammers to rifles.
You start the game with four
robots, 16 Yargs awake, and 32
frozen Yargs. You can place the
Yargs and robots in any rooms. Yargs
are peace-loving and not good at
fighting, so two or more Yargs should
be placed in a room. Robots are good
fighters and if all else fails can selfdestruct destroying everything in the
room. But, you only have a total of
four robots.
To unfreeze a Yarg in rooms S or T,
one awake Yarg must be there with
no alien spores, larva, or adults in the
room. Rooms S and T are critical
because you need to add crew to
combat the aliens. Until you use a
weapon you don't know whether it
will kill the alien, have no effect, or
worse — "make them grow"!
The best strategy is to use at least
four Yargs to confront an alien. Try
out as many weapons as you can to
learn which do the most damage and
use only those for the rest of the
game. If all else fails, send a robot into a room full of aliens and self
destruct. The game ends when all
Yargs are dead or all aliens have been
destroyed.
The graphics are simple, but close
ups of individual rooms are very well
detailed. Actions are portrayed with
text statements rather than graphic
displays. For example: "YOU KILLED HIM or MISSED"; "KILLED AN
ADULT — DAMAGE: — NEEDED
A — "; "WEAPON HAS NO EFFECT"; or "WEAPON MAKES
MONSTER GROW".
Despite this, the game is an excellent strategy situation. You won't
win the first time, but keep trying. If
you start to consistently win on the
first level, try the other variation of
"Hidden Monsters", or the "Difficult" or "Little Hope" levels.
Hosea Battles, Jr.

NAME:
Enchanter
TYPE:
Fantasy Adventure
SYSTEM:
Many
FORMAT: Disk
#PLAYERS: 1
AUTHOR: Mark Blank,
Paul Lebling
PRICE:
$39.95
PUBLISHER: Infocom
Cambridge, MA
You stand at a fork in the road,
holding nothing but your spell book.
Your mind is dazed from the immensity of recent events: from nowhere,
you, a lowly novice enchanter, were
summoned into the presence of the
august Circle of Enchanters, and
charged with an almost impossible
task: to enter the domain of the powerful warlock Krill, and destroy him. As
the dawn sun rises over the land, you
draw a deep breath, choose your path,
and trudge off along a dusty road.
Thus begins THE ENCHANTER,
the latest member of Infocom's stable
of winners. It has all the touches you
have come to expect (even demand!)
of them: the great command parser,
excellent text descriptions, intriguing
puzzles, and coherent story line, to
name a few. The one difference between this game and most of the
other Infocoms is that you know exactly what has to be done from the
very start. No guesswork about the
ultimate objective is necessary,
although that doesn't mean getting
there is easy!
In this game, the use of magic is allimportant. You start out with four
spells in your possession, and as you
progress, you will find scrolls with
other spells written on them (one per
scroll). Some of these spells you can
"write" into your spell book, thus
making them re-usable. However,
some are so powerful and complicated that you can't transfer them
into your book, and so they can be

used only once (the scroll vanishes
after use).
As you wander through this land
of enchantment, you will come
across various creatures, some
helpful, some not so helpful, and
some that are merely red herrings.
You will have to determine in which
category each of these beings are,
and act accordingly.
Also, your actions should be considered with great care: some situations have more than one solution,
and choosing the wrong one will put
the game hopelessly out of reach. It's
always best to save a game before experimenting, and this one is no
exception. All sorts of unpleasant
things (such as being rated a -10
"menace to society") can happen
when you start messing around with
magic.
Food and water are also important,
as well as sleeping: periodically
throughout the game, you will be
reminded of your body's physical

NAME:
Fortress
TYPE:
Abstract Strategy
SYSTEM:
Apple II/Atari
FORMAT: Disk
#PLAYERS: 1 or 2
AUTHOR: Jim Templemen/
Patty Denbrook
PRICE:
$34.95
PUBLISHER: Strategic
Simulations
Mountain View, CA
FORTRESS from Strategic Simulations, is one of those games that you
can learn to play in five minutes and
spend years learning to master. It
combines simplicity of rule with infinite strategy to provide a fastmoving, yet thought-provoking game.
The object is simple: control more
territory at the end of the game than
your opponent does. This is accomplished by placing fortresses on the
playing field. A fortress can control
up to five squares at one time: the

needs, and woe unto you if they
aren't satisfied! Finding a water
supply and something edible at the
beginning of the game is a must.
There are also some rather neat tieins with the Zork series. If you've
played ZORK III, you might recall
Scenic View 4, the sacrificial altar
and monstrous creatures. Well, you'll
learn a little more about them in this
game, maybe more than you'd like to!
You may also come across a vaguely
familiar person in one of the Mirror
Rooms.
THE ENCHANTER is a lot of fun
to play, especially with some of the
deft touches of humor here and there
throughout the game. In terms of difficulty, I would rate it as being harder
than Planetfall, but not as hard as
Suspended or the Zorks.
Bottom Line: Another typically excellent game from Infocom, and not
to be missed.
Scorpia

one on which it is established, and
the four squares adjacent to it in the
N,S,E,W positions (obviously, corner
fortresses will control less territory).
The action takes place on a 6 by 6
grid. You and your opponent alternate moves, placing new castles on
the board or fortifying existing ones.
Each existing castle can be fortified
twice, making for 3 levels of fortification in all. The stronger a castle is,
the more likely it is to control the surrounding territory.
If the squares surrounding a fortress are not under equal influence by
your opponent, your flag is planted
on them, to indicate control. When
an empty square is adjacent to the
castles of both players, it will be
given to the one with the stronger influence on the square. If the influence is of the same strength,
neither player can claim the square.
Castles can also attack and destroy
each other. Two castles immediately adjacent to each other are considered to be "in combat". If their
strengths are equal, they are simply
under attack. However, if one castle
has more power in terms of fortifications and the support of other nearby castles, then the enemy fortress

will be removed and the victorious
player's flag will be planted on that
square.
The standard game is 21 moves by
each player. However, there is an option to change the number of moves
to be anything from 1 to 54. This
change is temporary, and will revert
back to standard the next time you
boot the disk.
You can play the game with a
human opponent, or any one of six
computer opponents. Each of these
computer opponents has its own
strategy and method of playing the
game. Further, it is possible for these
computer players to learn from the
games, and therefore improve their
own play. This is accomplished by
writing the results to a separate save
disk. You can also record the history
of your play (most recent 30 tournaments) as well as that of the computer players. You can even create
and "train" your own computerized
opponents, and SSI is running a contest to determine the best computerized players.
The documentation that accompanies the game is a short, but welldone booklet that contains the basic
information, as well as some strategy
advice, and a brief "walk-through" to
familiarize you with the play.
FORTRESS comes on a dual disk:
one side contains the Apple version
and the other side has the Atari version. Both versions are identical, except that the Apple game has an
on/off option for the sound effects.
With either machine, you can use the
keyboard or the joystick to move
around the playing field.
Bottom Line: If you like strategy
games, this is one you'll want to
have!
Scorpia

PLEASE
TAKE TIME
TO FILL OUT
READER INPUT
DEVICE

Secret Agent
NAME:
Hi-res Adventure
TYPE:
Apple II/
SYSTEM:
Disk
FORMAT:
#PLAYERS: One
$32.95
PRICE:
PUBLISHER: Jor-And
Glendale, CA
Secret Agent grabbed my attention
as soon as I booted it up. Even though
there is no color the detailed hi-res
graphics and animation are welldone, interesting, and entertaining.
As is common to these types of
games, very little information is obtained from the written instructions.
You are able to use two word responses like "go door" or "unlock
door". You use single letters for
directional movement (i.e. N.S.E.W).
There is also a save game feature.
You carry a watch throughout the
game and you access it by command
to see how much time you have left.
As you probably realize the time left
becomes critical towards the end of
the game (I believe you use up six
minutes each time you give the computer a command). Time is lost in trying to solve the problems. My first
two attempts to finish the game resulted in time running out. To finally
finish the game I had to start over
from the beginning and pick all of the
best "paths" to get to the finish in the
allotted time.
The game is very playable. My previous encounters with games of this
type sometimes left me stuck in situations that to me had no logical answer in relationship to the game
scenario. The answers or actions required in Secret Agent, while hard,
are logical to the surroundings. As
always, use your common sense.
Oh, and by the way, good luck in
the maze!
James A McPherson

ON VACATION
Silicon Cerebrum, The Learning Game, and Chip & Ferb
are on vacation this issue.
They will all be back in the
February issue.

TAKING A PEEK (Cont.)
Software Entertainment Company
537 Willamette St.
Eugene, OR 97401
STELLAR 7: Best version of a 'Battlezone"
game we have seen for the Apple. You control the Raven, an anti-gra y tank as you fight
on a series of planets with differing enemy
units. Apple (C - 64 before Christmas). $34.95.
Strategic Simulations Inc.
883 Stierlin Rd. Bldg. A-200
Mountain View, CA 94043-1983
PROFESSIONAL TOUR GOLF: A golf
game which pits famous or not-so-famous
(you can key data in that will create a golfer
in your image) golfers on two different
courses. Included are Pebble Beach and a
course containing famous and difficult holes
from around the world, such as Augusta National, Merion, and Oakmont. Apple and
C - 64. $39.95.
QUEEN OF HEARTS: SSI's first arcade
game. They should stick with strategy
games. QOH is a video pinball game that
isn't as interesting or as smooth as other
popular pinball games such as PINBALL
CONSTRUCTION SET, DAVID'S MIDNIGHT MAGIC, or RASTER BLASTER.
Apple and Atari. $39.95.
Task Force Games
1110 N. Fillmore
Amarillo, TX 79107
SURVIVAL: A game for one to six players
in which players compete against the hostile
environment (rather than against one
another) in an attempt to travel 340

kilometers to safety. Four scenarios. Atari
cassette. Price not listed.
WAR OF THE WORLDS: Based on their
board game of the same name. The screen
shows a map of London at the turn of the
century. Each turn Martians land in their
Cylinders. Tripods emerge and ravage the
countryside. Your goal is to destroy the martians. Atari cassette. Price not listed.

Xerox Education Publications
245 Long Hill Rd.
Middletown, CT 06457
CHIVALRY: A combination
board/cmputegfhAl.Designdort
whole family, Chivalry features 20 different
games based on the days of chivalry
(jousting, tournaments, etc.). Disk,
gameboard, playing pieces, poster, rules.
$49.95.

STICKYBEAR BASKETBOUNCE: A multilevel computer game for the whole family,
with emphasis on the children. Players attempt to catch bouncing bricks, doughnuts
or stars before running out of baskets. Apple. $39.95.
STICKYBEAR OPPOSITES: A game that
teaches opposites (up/down, full/empty, in
front/behind, etc.) to 3 - 6 year olds. Apple.
$39.95.
STICKYBEAR SHAPES: Helps 3-6 year
olds learn to recognize shapes of common
objects. When the child make a correct
choice, the big, bright picture comes alive
with animation. Apple $39.95.

TELE-GAMING (Cont.)
moves by using their own boards (set
up next to their home computer).
Often, the regular game rules are
slightly modified in order to compensate for long-distance play. For
example, in online "Monopoly" each
player has a list of game cards. Using
the dice-rolling function available in
GameSIG's online conference area,
the players roll the dice, in turn, to
choose their next cards. Who owns
what and how much money has been
spent is noted by the referee.
Chess is yet another very popular
game played online in GameSIG.
"Chessnuts" have the choice of playing in real time in the conference
area, or posting their moves in
messages on the electronic bulletin
board. The players are very enthusiastic about this new type of chess
playing, and have even been competing in a GameSIG chess tournament, begun last May. If you'd like
a game of chess, it doesn't matter
where you live or what hours you
keep. You can simply issue a challenge via the bulletin board, and
quickly begin a game with an opponent who may be thousands of
miles away.
CompuServe is one telecommunications service that is committed to
presenting interactive multi-player
games for its subscribers. Rumor has
it that another, much expanded, version of "MegaWars" is in the works.
The new scenario will transform the
shoot-em-up aspects of the game into
complex space battles involving the
capture and development of planets.
Other projects, including an MP fantasy role-playing game, are on the
horizon. (To find out about subscribing to CompuServe, call (800) 8488199 or (614) 457-8650.)
Are multi-player games the wave of
the future? I think so. Consider the
two aspects of "telecommunications."
The "tele" part is innovative and
exciting, but the "communications"
part means human interaction, even
friendship. And that's a nice thought
for this holiday season.
Patricia Fitzgibbons (`Nightie'
—72145,)
is one of two sysops on
Compuserve's `GameSIG'. The other
is Scorpia.

NORTH ATLANTIC '86 (Cont.)
ters) at bases and on appropriate
ships, and executes searches automatically. After removing this major
operational decision from the player,
the designer has introduced a new
one — most planes which execute
strikes can be outfitted with bombs
or alternate armament (air-to-air
missiles for fighter bombers and air-to-surface missiles for bombers). One
can also execute bombing attacks as
either a base attack (destroying
enemy supply) or a ground support
attack (aiding the upcoming infantry
combat). Finally, strikes with
air-to-surface missiles can be given a
"stand-off" range. This allows the
strike force to launch the attack from
up to 300 km (3 squares) from the
enemy task force. The missiles then
penetrate to the task force alone.
CAP, flak, and electronic jamming
will attempt to thwart the attack, but
the bombers themselves will (hopefully) not come under fire.
Missiles, missiles, and more
missiles! Everyone has missiles in
this game. Surface ships have surface-to-air (SAM) missiles, antishipping missiles, and anti-submarine missiles. Aircraft have air-toair and air-to-surface missiles. Submarines have anti-shipping and antisubmarine missiles. Missiles have
ranges from 10 km for some air-to-air
missiles (these are just factored into
dogfight combat) up to 300 km for
some anti-shipping missiles. Surfaceto-surface gunnery combat is often
anti-climactic to missile attacks between task forces which are still one
square separated.
NA86 does provide a good evaluation of the capabilities of the combatants, and most contemporary
forces and weapons are included.
The NATO player has seven types of
planes. The three standard carrier
planes; the F-14 Tomcat (remember
the Libyan fighters over the Gulf of
Sidra?), the A-6 Corsair, and the A-7
Intruder are all there. You also get the
F-15 and F-16 fighters, the British Tornado fighter-bomber, and the AV-8B
Harrier jump-jet used by the British
Navy and the U.S. Marines. The
seventh NATO plane is the C-141

Starlifter; this cargo plane can play
a pivotal role by airlifting troops or
supplies to a threatened base, and
even by dropping paratroops on
enemy territory. The Soviets have a
similar inventory of six planes; a
fighter (MIG 23), a fighter-bomber
(SU 24), two bombers (TU 22M and
TU 16), a jump-jet on the aircraft carriers (YAK 36), and a cargo type (AN
12).

Differentiation in surface ships has
similar detail. Everything from
nuclear aircraft carriers to troop
transports are present (and are given
correct weapons systems). There are
eleven different types of NATO
transport ships and eight different
NATO destroyers. Differences between classes of destroyers may be
as small as the type of anti-submarine
missile carried, but the differentiation is still there. If you're interested
in what we've got in the modern
Navy (as well as our best guess on the
Soviets), this game has it all.
Playing The Game
This is not an easy game to master.
If you don't know the difference between an AMRAAM and a Flogger,
you'll learn alright; but you'll lose a
lot of ships and planes doing it. The
game provides two short scenarios
which will be invaluable training aids
before you tackle either of the campaign games (thank goodness for
"Save Game" options, the campaigns
are 122 and 252 turns long). In
solitaire play, the computer handles
the Soviets, and plays them very well
even though they have the burden of
the attack early in the game. To really
enjoy NA86, you need to do some
homework. Make up some tables of
unit types and capabilities; those provided on the player-aid card are
useful but fragmentary. Study them,
and then play a short scenario until
you're confident that you know the
capabilities of different units.
Playing the NATO forces in the
campaign game is a real test of your
mettle. The Soviets start with considerable superiority at sea and overwhelming air power. I don't care
Continued on p. 54

SCORPION'S TALE (Cont.)
the fact that walls may not always be
what they seem.
Sooner or later, you'll make your
way to the bottom of the volcano.
Here you will find a hot-air balloon.
Now, if you could just figure out
a way of blowing up the balloon,
you could probably go places. It's
not all that difficult; remember, hotair balloon.
Once aloft, just wait awhile, and
you'll come to a ledge. Look around
carefully before going anywhere, or
you may find the balloon going on its
way without you. The ledge has one
treasure, and the library another,
although the second one is not
immediately obvious.
Back in the balloon, wait some
more and you will eventually rise to
the Wide Ledge. Again, look around
before leaving the balloon. This time,
no treasure is immediately evident.
However, there might be something
in that box in the Dusty Room, if only
you could get it open. Examine the
box carefully, and you will notice a
brick-shaped hole in it.
It won't take you long to figure out
that this is where the brick from the
Marble Hall goes, but what to do after
that is another matter. You'll need
some string, that's certain. Just make
sure you don't blow yourself away!
Now, you're getting close to the
endgame, but you still have a few
things to do before that. One of them
is visiting the Oddly-Angled Room,
which is one of the most treacherous
and devious mazes ever devised.
You'll want to save the game before
going any further here; one misstep
and you could be hopelessly lost.
Move around until you find the
club, and make sure that you look at
the club, because it's a valuable clue to
the nature of the maze. Another clue
is the shape of the windows on the
floor. Taken all together, these clues
should help you discern the true
nature of the maze, and the writing
on the club should give you an idea
of what you have to do here. Be persistent; you may not do it exactly
right the first time, but that's why you
saved the game before you started.
Remember to hang on to the bat.
That about does it as far as prelim-

inaries go; you should be ready for the
endgame now. First, you have to get
past the lizard head in the Guarded
Room. This should be no problem, if
you did the right thing back in the
Pool Room. Go from the Guarded
Room directly to the Aquarium,
where you have to deal with the baby
sea serpent. It's a little bit tricky, but
some experimentation with the bat
should help you find the solution.
Now it's off to the Wizard's Workroom. There are three stands here,
each one a different color. Those
colors ought to remind you of something, at which point you should do
the obvious. This will cause a black
sphere to appear. Take that into the
Pentagram Room.
Properly used, the black sphere
will help you summon (in case you
hadn't guessed) a demon. Listen
carefully to what he has to say. When
you've satisfied his demands, you
can ask for anything you want. What
you want is something that will help
you to move the Menhir statue.
Meditate on that for awhile; only one
thing will work. Once you have it, go
to the Menhir Room and move the
statue. Get the item, then return to
the Oddly-Angled Room.
Go downstairs to the Cerberus
Room, where, naturally, Cerberus is
waiting. Fortunately, you should be
able to easily handle this monstrous
dog, thanks to the item from behind
the Menhir. Now go on into the
Crypt. This is the end of the game;
there is one thing you have to do
here, but I'll keep you in the dark as
to what that is. When you've done it,
you'll find yourself on the landing to
the Endless Stairs of Zork III.

While you ponder that, I'll see what
the regulars are having, now that the
stores have closed.
PLANETFALL: The key isn't that
hard to get; the solution is an attractive one. Been to the Tool Room yet?
ALI BABA: Go backwards from the
Succubus Room; you will get to the
Princess eventually. ULYSSES &
GOLDEN FLEECE: Only listening to
the Siren's Song will get you to the

fleece. Remember your mythology!
PRISONER II: A keyhole needs a
key. If you've been taking the easy
way out, this is the time to move
around instead. And now, I'll see you
next year (!), when the feature will be
Zork I. In the meantime, my very best
wishes to all of you for a joyous holiday and a Happy, healthy (and
adventure-filled) New Year!
Scorpia (74045,221) is one of the two
sysops on Compuserve's `GameSIG'.
The other is Patricia Fitzgibbons.
You can send you adventure game
questions to Scorpia via any of the
following modes: Compuserve (email
70001,1263); The Source (ST1030);
Pony Express; Scorpio, 1319 Second
Ave., Suite 540, NY, NY 10021.
ERRATA
Oops. Hope you are not still
trying to find the ladder on the
west wall in Zork III. In Scorpia's last column (CGW,
Oct. '83) she indicated on pg.
46, paragraph two, that you
need to move the ladder on
the west side to the hole. Actually the ladder is on the east
side. Scorpia caught the error
before production but her corrective missive was lost in
"editor-land." Sorry readers.
Sorry Scorpia.

DISPATCHES (Cont.)
none of their numeric values overflow, that they have sufficient options
to make for interesting play, that
your model (if it is a simulation) is
realistic! And then on top of all that,
you have to make the graphics as
good as arcade games because that's
the standard players will compare
you against. Hmm . . . maybe I
should write arcade games instead.
Dan Bunten is the author of COMPUTER QUARTERBACK, CARTELS
& CUTTHROATS, mid CYTRON
MASTERS all available from Strategic
Simulations. He is the lead designer
of the Ozark Softscape group that
wrote M.U.L.E. and SEVEN CITIES
OF GOLD; both of which are available
from Electronic Arts.
WHIRLWIND (Cont.)
firepower, and range displayed along
the bottom of the screen. In addition
to these factors, the unit also has activity points which are used up by
movement and combat. The activity
points are not shown, but if a unit is
nearing the end of its allocation then
the cursor will turn red. Movement
is much the same as in other games,
except no diagonal moves are allowed and you may move the same
unit as often as you want until all of
the activity points are expended. During the movement phase the computer does not just sit there waiting
for you to do your thing. It's forces
are lying hidden and just waiting for
you to come into range. When you do
they will become visible and probably open fire. When all movement
is complete then press the start key
again and you will move to the Combat Phase.
In the COMBAT PHASE, you
order your units to fire. To do this
you move the cursor over the firing
unit and press the fire button. You
then move the cursor to the target
and press the fire button again executing your fire order. The most
frustrating part of this game is killing the enemy. At the higher levels
they can be extremely tough and take
hit after hit without being destroyed.
Of course there are range and
line-of-sight restrictions and your unit
must have activity points left from
the movement phase. You should

have a good idea of what combat you
want to do before entering this phase
as all during the phase enemy long
range artillery will be falling. The
barrage ends when you are done
with combat and you press the start
key to move to the ASSAULT
ORDERS PHASE.
In this phase the infantry and engineers really shine. They may be
ordered to assault any enemy units
to which they are adjacent. In addition to assaults the engineers may,
daring this phase, be ordered to rebuild bridges which have been blown
up. If the bridges are not rebuilt, the
tanks will have a hard time crossing
the rivers and without them you can
forget about taking the town. Tanks
may also be ordered to assault, but
they will execute an overrun rather
than an assault. When all assault
orders have been given then press the
start key and, you guessed it, you
move into the ASSAULT PHASE.
In the assault phase all assault,
bridge building, and overrun orders
are executed. This phase differs from
the combat phase in that the combat
phase simulates combat from a distance while this phase is the close up,
bayonette to the body, combat.
Losses will be much heavier in this
phase. The assault phase is the last
phase you execute. After this the
computer will go through some actions including movement and firing
at your units. At this time the computer may also begin its withdrawal

or execute its counterattack. If it is
a counterattack, then new enemy
units will enter from the top and bottom of the screen, at which time you
should be prepared for some heavy
fighting.
At the end of each turn your victory condition will be displayed and
you are given the opportunity to save
the game. To win, you must have at
least one unit in the town and no
enemy units east of the final stream
or south of the forest above the town.
You must hold this position against
counterattack for two consecutive
turns. There are five levels of victory,
with the best possible being a breakthrough at level 3 with no strength
loss to your units.
Although not as complex as some
computer wargames, this game provides the elements of a good tactical
duel. You have various units with
each unit having different capabilities in movement, fire power and
range. You have terrain with its
various implications of defensive
bonus and movement hindrance.
You also have a very clear objective
and a certain time limit in which to
reach the objective. As in real situations, the enemy is hidden until exposed by movement or fire. The computer is a good commander and his
forces are very tough. It takes a lot
of work to beat the computer at the
higher levels, but with luck, perhaps
you will succeed and handle the
vicious machine. ❑

REACH/STARS (Cont.)
the opportunity to use that planet's
production and the available global
points (points unused by that players
planets last turn) to develop that colony. The colony's production is based upon the population (P), the current industrial capacity (IC) and its
current social level (SL) in the following manner:
Production = Px2 + (ICxSL)/16.
It may be used to build the industry
up to the systems maximum, build
space ships (explorers, transports,
and starships), to raise the social level
or the planetary environment, to
develop more advanced starship
designs, and to build planetary
defenses. There are, however, limitations upon how fast certain factors
(social level, planetary environment,
technology research, and planetary
defenses) may be increased which
are simulated by set maximums
which may be spent on these
categories per turn.
All of this production, though, carries a certain potential danger in
games with the full set of variables.
If the Nova option is used, then the
probability of a star going nova is increased by massive research and
development. While this is not mentioned in the rules, it soon becomes
apparent as key systems begin to go
unstable and must be evacuated. The
risks of rapid development must be
balanced against the immediate
threat should you fail to develop
while others do.
STRATEGIES AND TIPS
When dealing with computer opponents, it is important to remember
its priorities. Firstly, it hates humans!
It will attack a human player in
preference to another computer
player. Secondly, it hates a winner.
Being in first place puts a poster with
your face on the wall of every
planetary post office. Thirdly, it hates
other players with colonies in the
same star system in which it has colonies. And finally, but far from least
important, veteran level computer
players will NEVER forget a player
who has attacked one of its colonies!

You might as well prepare yourself
for a long and bloody war once you
have trod upon a vet' colony.
Another factor that is critical to
winning is to CONTROL YOUR
POPULATION! If left to grow, a
planet's population will soon reach
the point where it is growing faster
than you can ship them off-planet.
Once this point has been reached, it
is only a matter of time before the
population exceeds the system's
capacity by such numbers that it
revolts (write off one colony). Roger
Keating, one of the two responsible
for RFTS design and development,
recommends a population level in
the mid-twenties but, for added safety from attack and the extra population production, I favor a population
in the low thirties. This also makes
your colony less subject to the effects
of some random disasters. The key is,
though, to stop it at a level where it
is still manageable.
Speaking of excess population and
what one can do with it, it is important to know that early in the game,
when everyone is running around
with tech level one starships,
transports make very effective CSP
(Combat Space Patrol—their job being to intercept enemy craft entering
the system). They are so good, in fact,
that I often use them to stake out promising star systems which I am not
yet prepared to colonize.
To continue along this line of Tips,
feel free to put token forces on good
star systems early in the game. It will
not drive off a determined attempt,
but any non-explorer will destroy an
unarmed explorer when it tries to
search that system.
Conquered planets are also a pain.
From the point of view of the exowner, he must try to re-take the
planet as soon as possible if he is to
have any chance. The new owner, on
the other hand, is forced to hold the
system with as many ships as he has
available until he can land sufficient
transports to hold the planet. (Fifty
transports will make the planet all
but invulnerable). But, remember, do
not let the native population grow to
out number your "colonists" by over
two to one, or they could revolt
against you.

Finally, the Zenophobes! When
these malcontents stop in a star
system which has one of your colonies in it, it acts to isolate the colony from your available global supply points. More importantly, any
combat which takes place in a system
which contains a Zenophobe is much
bloodier. If, therefore, you notice that
one of your neighbors is being visited
by one of these randomly wandering
vagabonds, send a single ship over to
pay your respects and watch the
results.
RFTS is, after a little playing, a
very user friendly game. Its instructions are, for having been written in
a foreign language (Australian), quite
understandable. The only exception
to this rule is in the Save/Recover
part of the first edition's rules. It
states that you should press "C/R" to
recover a saved game. This is fine,
but unfortunately C/R, in Australian,
means Control "R"—not carriage
return. When this minor difficulty is
understood, RFTS becomes a game
nearly devoid of anything to complain about (other than the viciousness of the Veteran level computer
players). The only real point of
criticism which I have found with
this game concerns the natural
disasters. These are randomly visited
upon you during the turn resolution,
leaving you to discover them when
you find that your colony has lost all
of its industrial capacity. This would
not be so bothersome if there was
only a message of explanation accompanying these minor disasters.
When asked, Roger explained that
they could have been included, except for a lack of space. Hopefully
future versions for 64K machines will
include these.
CONCLUSION
In final analysis, RFTS offers
features to be found in no other space
game. Its great artificial intelligence
and careful design could only be expected after Roger Keating's many
successful designs for SSI (When
Super Powers Collide series) and Ian
Trout's long hours of work in
development. My only hope is that
RFTS is soon followed by more
games of the same quality. 0

LETTERS (Cont.)
colors are likely to handle all of your
color needs. As for Atari's eight
shades apiece — that's a bunch of
hooey. You never see more than eight
colors on screen at one time for Atari
(you can get that on the Commodore
and then some) and if you want different shades or tints, you get them
by simply adjusting the color knob on
your television set.
Atari's player-missiles and Commodore's sprites are the same things
— forms defined by a shape table in
memory. The C-64 sprite does not
take a lot of memory, and they can
be mapped in hi-res by the really
good programmers. It's a toss-up
there.
From the lack of time Jon spends
on the C-64 SID music chip, I suspect
he does not understand it. Atari has
a good music synthesizer, but Commodore has a better one. (I only wish
it weren't so clumsy to activate. Poking things into memory takes a lot of
time when you're programming.)

I've worked on every brand of
micro-computer there is, and haven't
found the perfect BASIC yet. Commodore's BASIC has some very good
things about it, and some not so good
things. The best thing about it is an
on-screen editor better than anything
else on the market. It is so good that
one almost doesn't need a word processor program in order to write with
it. Although integer variables are supported by the language, I almost
never bother with them. The floating
point variables are accurate enough.
Try squaring some numbers on the
Atari and taking their square roots
again. With the Commodore, the
square root of 4 is 2; with the Atari,
it is either 1.9999 or 2.0001. It always
bugged me when I owned the Atari
that I couldn't do simple arithmetic.
Commodore's BASIC has a few other
good features — it is relocatable and
redefinable. A couple of peeks and
pokes take the language out of ROM
and place it in RAM where you can
make it do anything you want, including all the tricks of Apple's
microsoft. You sure can't do that
with BASIC on a cartridge. Commodore supports n-dimensional arrays
. . . and for naming files on the disk,
it allows up to 16 characters, which
can be alphabetic, numeric, or even
punctuational. You get that kind of
power on the Apple, but not on the
Atari. The worst thing about Commodore BASIC is that variables are
limited to two characters.
I fail to understand why Freeman
has trouble understanding Commodore's documentation. I found it
numbingly simple. The Programmer's
Reference Manual (for $19.95) is
much more complete than the small
guide that comes with the computer.
How much does the Atari programmer's manual cost, and how complete
is it? How about the hundreds of
pages of Apple manuals? You can't
get them for a mere $20. In addition,
there are now at least half a dozen
books that explain how to use the 64
in infinite detail, ranging in price
from $6.95 to $19.95. Buying one or
two of them is not such a bad deal.
And, C-64 user groups are springing up like mushrooms after a rain.
Anyone who wants a little help can

join one without much difficulty.
People may have heard that Commodore disk drives are so bad that
they all had to be recalled. This isn't
true. One batch, released in August
of 83 were recalled. How many
thousands of cars has Ford recalled
with safety defects? The fact that
Commodore recalled the faulty
drives when they were discovered,
shows that the company cares about
its public. I used my disk drive for a
little over a year before needing even
routine maintenance — a record
none of my Atari using friends has
been able to match.
Sure, people buying the 64 are
novices. They're getting an awful
lot for their money, and if they make
any effort to learn about their
machine, the value increases. When
Apple first came out the people buying it were novices — the same for
Atari — the same for Radio Shack.
None of them offered a comparable
value for the money.
Does the C-64 have flaws? Yes, but
not the ones that Freeman cites.
Using poke commands as the basis
for all their graphic routines gets to
be a real hassle! Not having a break
key on the keyboard gets to be annoying. Some of the funny syntax of
Commodore BASIC will drive somebody who is fairly proficient in
Applesoft, Radio Shack, or Atari
BASIC nutso. And there is a real tendancy to get OUT OF MEMORY
errors when doing complex programming in BASIC.
On the other hand, the machine is
rapidly being improved, and is growing in capability at an incredible
speed. Already there are other languages available for it — how about
FORTH, PASCAL, PILOT, and CP/M!
I now have three of those and only
wish I had the time to learn how to
use them. The '83 releases have been
improved to eliminate sparkle, and
the keyboard has the finest feel this
side of an IBM Selectric that I have
ever seen on a home computer. Give
the machine a real chance, Jon — I
think you'll find that it is really the
best value on the market right now.
Ken St. Andre
Phoenix, AZ

ULTIMA III (Cont.)
to finish the game. However, don't
think that fewer levels mean easier
dungeons! There are plenty of tricks
and traps, as well as unfriendly
creatures roaming around, to keep
things interesting, not to mention
difficult.
Of course, you ,won't be going
down there empty-handed! Guild
shops, although difficult to find, sell
several useful tools, including keys,
torches, gems and powders. Gems
are magical items that show you a
map of your surroundings. On the
surface, they display the entire
world; in dungeons, they show the
entire level you're on. In either case,
the party location is shown by a
flashing dot. Naturally, you can only
use the gems once. Powders negate
time, freezing the actions of all
creatures outside the party. This
comes in handy when fighting a large
group of nasty monsters, or when
escaping from town guards after an
unsuccessful theft attempt. Powders
are, as you might expect, expensive,
and can only be used once. Be
warned, however: powders WILL
NOT work in Exodus' domain! Transacting is extremely important in this
game. There are people in every
town who have clues for you; some
you can get for free, others will cost
you money. Visiting the Oracle, if
you can find him, will be helpful in
your quest. So is having a drink or
three at the local pubs. Naturally, this
means you'll be doing a lot of
travelling around.
Transportation now comes in three
forms: feet, horses and ships. There
are only two places where you can
buy horses, so you'll probably be
walking most of the time when on
land. Ships are initially manned by
pirates; you will have to fight and
defeat the crew to get the boat for
yourself. However, sailing isn't quite
the simple matter it used to be.
Before, you could just go in any
direction you wanted, now you have
to keep an eye on the winds. You
must sail in accordance with the way
the wind blows, so if it's a North
wind, you can't go North, or South
if it's a South wind, etc. And, of

course, in calm winds, you can't
move at all.
Speaking of moving, one of the
more interesting features of the game
is its use of "line of sight" displays.
For example, if you are walking
around a building, you can't see
inside it, and if you stand at the
doorway and look in, you see only a
little bit of the interior. To view the
entire shop, you have to step inside
the door. And even then, you may
have to go as far as the center of the
room to see everything. The same is
true of the outdoors. When walking
through certain areas of particularly
dense trees, all you see is the little
patch of land immediately surrounding the party; everything else is in
darkness. And, of course, you can't
see behind the mountains.

Your travels will take you to strange
places, and you will find many
mysteries to solve along the way.
How does one get to Dawn, city
of myths and magic? Where is lost
Ambrosia? What secrets do the
shrines hold? Is there a way past the
silver snake, and, if so, what lies
beyond? How do the Moon Gates
work? And, perhaps most important,
who or what is Exodus? Quite some
intriguing questions to be answered!
To help you along, the game comes
with several useful items: a very
well-done cloth map of the continent
of Sosaria, two books of spells, one
for mages and one for clerics, a
handy quick reference card, and, of
course, the basic instruction manual,
which you should read before booting
the game.

As with previous Ultimas, you will
have to make a copy of the flip side
of the disk. Once made, you will play
from, and save to, the copy. All the
characters you create (up to 20) will
reside on that disk. Thus, any time
before you actually begin play, you
can disperse the current party and
form a new one.
Now that we've looked at some of
the good points, it's time to look at
some of the more annoying features
of this game. First, the beginning of
game is rather noisy, and the little
animated sequence, cute the first
time, becomes tedious by the tenth
time. There is no way around this;
you have to sit through it every time
you boot up the game. Second, while
you can examine your entire roster of
characters, you don't see any information beyond class, sex, race, character status (good, poisoned, dead,
ashes), and whether or not he/she is
in a party. So, you can't tell from the
roster which characters have what
equipment. You can only get the full
list using the "Z" status command
during play, and that only works for
members of the current party.
Sailing by the wind was a good
idea; unfortunately, it often becomes
frustrating, as the winds tend to
change quite rapidly. If the wind
shifts were fewer and slower, it
would make sailing more fun. As it
is, the winds change about every five
moves or so, causing frequent stops.
But the really disappointing thing,
at least for me, is the very ending of
the game itself. After all the fighting
you go through to get to him, the
actual dispatching of Exodus is
remarkably calm and quiet. This was
a very unexpected anti-climax; I had
really been expecting something a
little more spectacular.
Still, in spite of that, the game is excellent, and I am not in the least sorry
that I bought it. The improvements
over the previous Ultimas alone is
worth the price of admission, and the
game will certainly provide many
hours of enjoyment (and frustration!).
Bottom line: Definitely not one
to miss!
This review originally appeared in
the Gamesig Archives of Compuserve
and is reprinted here by permission.

R.I.D. was prepared with the help of SPEED STAT by SoftCorp International, Westerville, OH 800-543-1350

See page 54 for details on the Reader Input Device

There were 231 RIDs turned in by press time for this
issue. We plan in a near future issue to share some of
the game design ideas that we asked about in "Misc.
question A" in RID 10.
Newly rated games and updated game ratings are
listed with bold type in the table on page 52.

GAME RATING
The table on page 52 includes games evaluated by our
readers. For a game to be included in this listing it must
first have been offered for rating in our regular RID
rating system. Games offered for evaluation are those
covered in the magazine and/or those having a good
sales record during the time of evaluation. Once offered
for evaluation, the game must have been evaluated by
a sufficient number of readers to be included in the
results. Any game not evaluated by at least 10% of the
respondents was not included in the results.
Games were rated on a scale of 1 (terrible) to 9
(outstanding). Respondents were asked to consider such
things as PRESENTATION (graphics, sound, packaging, documentation); GAME DESIGN (design, playability, interesting?); LIFE (does the game wear well?)

RID -11 (Use card provided)
On this page a number of games and articles are listed
for evaluation. Please take time to evaluate these games
and articles. Use the guidelines above for game evaluation. Leave blank any game which you have not played
enough to have formed an opinion.
Please rate articles on the basis of the article itself,
not your opinion of the game being reviewed. Enter a
zero for any article that does not interest you.

NORTH ATLANTIC '86 (Cont.)

Final Thoughts

how good you are, they will capture

I find it interesting that NA86 is
completely non-nuclear. Whether
this hypothesis of restraint is overly
optimistic, I don't know. It does,
however, allow the game to develop
as an interesting strategy exercise. By
ignoring nuclear weapons, though,
Gary Grigsby sidesteps completely
the question of nuclear missile submarines. These sea-borne ICBM platforms are operated by both sides. In

the Faroes within the first three days.
The real test will come as the Soviets
next move on Iceland. If you can stop
them, you're doing very well. Even
if Iceland is lost, you cart still win the
game. As the U.S. Navy arrives on
the scene piecemeal and the superior
quality of the NATO aircraft eats
away the Soviet numerical advantage, the tide will slowly shift. The
real test is to show the will to keep
playing through the lean times. In the
first weeks, the Faroes will fall, Scapa
Flow (the British base in northern
Scotland) will be bombed unmercifully, NATO morale will begin to
drop, and naval losses will be high.
It's difficult as a new player to avoid
the conclusion that you're just incompetent as a commander, but stick
with it; it's not over until it's over!

the game, we don't have to worry
about them, they won't siphon off
any conventional naval forces to defend them. We also avoid the question of whether attacks on nuclear
missile submarines would prompt a
nuclear launch by either side.
NA86 is not a comprehensive game
of future combat (thank goodness!).
It is a challenging simulation of
theater combat in a more or less

plausible future. It definitely should
not be your first computer wargame.
But, it definitely should be one of
your computer wargames!
One final note. The original version of NA86 had a bug which was
corrected about July of 1983. The
problem was in the location of the
Faroes base. Though the map location was correct, the program treated
the base as if it were one square to
the east, on a "land" square which is
inaccessible to ships. Thus ships
could never dock at the Faroes base.
If you're not sure if your disk has the
bug and want to find out quickly,
launch an airstrike from Scapa Flow
at the Faroes. If the program returns
the range as "six", you're ok; a range
of "five" indicates the bug. SSI will
send you a good copy if you return
the problem disk to them with a note
of explanation.

