Features
16
A Stinging "B" Movie Satire, I Presume?
Amazon: Guardians of Eden Makes a Spearpoint of Humor
by "Jungle Ranger" Chris Lombardi

20
Dr. Zhivago's Card Clinic?
Interplay's Omar Sharif on Bridge Makes Johnny Run
by Johnny "No Trump" Wilson

22
A Look At the Back Nine
Russell Sipe Reports on Exciting Developments
in Computer's Golfing World

24
The Consumers Come Home to Roost, Part 11
The Continuing Story of Machines, Marketing and Mobs
At Chicago's Summer Consumer Electronics Show

38
Made in Japan, But Does A-Train Make The Grade?
Maxis Bytes the Bullet Train
And Stanley Trevena Takes a Ride Worth "Reading"

44
Indy Cuts The Gordian Nazi
And Figures Out the Fate of Atlantis in the Process
With Archeological Digs by Charles Ardai

4B
Stranded in the "L-Zone"
Tony Reveaux provides the signpost for multimedia ahead.

50
Achtung) Haiti
Castle Wolfenstein 3-D Raises the Stakes for Shareware
by Chris "Hair Trigger Lombardi

54
Like Sands Through The Hourglass
So Are the Dune(s) of Our Lives
Maxwell Eden Joins Virgin's Fremen?

68
Coffee, Tea or PC?
Good First impressions Made by Air Bucks
A "First Class" Section by Alan Emrich

70
Lokil Dusk of the Gods is an Odin, but a Good'n
Allen Greenberg Puts on His Viking Hat
And Finds the Thor Spots

74
Gaming Lite
A CGW Survey of Professionally Produced Budget Software

B6
George Orwell Would Be Proud
Johnny Wilson Looks for Utopia in Konami's Upcoming Release

BB
Measured on a Giger Counter
Cyberdreams Plants an Alien Darkseed
Bravely Adventured by Val Miller

92
Hang Up The "Beware of Guardian" Sign
Charles Ardai Passes Through The Black Gate of Ultima VII

110
Sneak Preview "High Command"
Colorado Computing Unveils its Operational Level Wargame
by Alan Emrich

112
Can Aces of the Pacific Beat Flight Sim Kings?
Dynamix Red Baron Turns Japanese and Goes Jungle
As Flow for Review by "Dauntless" Doug Fick

115
Evan Brooks Goes To War!
The Man Who Put The "Rear in Rear Admiral
Launches a Carrier Strike Campaign on the Japanese

120
More Conflicts from 551
Richard Savage is Up to the Challenge
in His Review of Conflict: Korea

124
Viva Le RAW!
Napoleon I Tries the Transition From Computer Gaming
to Miniatures
As Reconnoitered by "Cossack" Wyatt Lee

126
Normans? Is That You?
Vikings Becomes a Multi-Player Party of Saxon Violence
As Told From Hastings by Brian P. Doud

Departments

14
58
62
64
66
66
67
67
79
82
92
96
102
108
128

Taking a Peek
Rumors
From the Cockpit (instruments, Part II)
Over There (European Games Report)
The CGW Poll
PC Research Top Games
What Have You Been Playing Lately?
Hall of Fame
Advertiser index
Once Upon a Time (Computer Game History)
Letters (We Get Letters )
Kids & Computers ("Edutainment Software"
Scorpion's View (Dark queen of Krynn)
Scorpion's Tale (Gateway)
Computer Wargaming World's "Broadsides is Gripeshot"
Editorial (More Sensless Violence)

I

•

Taking A Peek
Accolade
San Jose, CA
ROAD & TRACK PRESENTS —
GRAND PRIX UNLIMITED: As previewed last issue on page 38, this Formula I racing simulation features
course design, the ability to customize
(i.e., "tweak") a race car and, of course,
some serious simulation driving. IBM
($59.95). Circle Reader Service #1.
Capstone
Miami, FL
AN AMERICAN TAIL: Don't let the
"kidware" look of the box fool you, this
is a real adventure game. Complete
with all the trappings of that genre,
Fievel sets out through both of his film
adventures (An American Tail and
Fievel Goes West). The digitized VGA
backgrounds make for a nice setting as
the characters interact through dialogue
sequences and the player selects an appropriate answer from a list of choices.
Naturally, items must be found and
logic puzzles solved, but these are
geared for ages approximately eight to
twelve. There are also games to be
played along the way, which must be
won in order to advance. Frankly, this
is the right game for kids to try after
they master Mixed Up Mother Goose
(assuming, of course, that one wants
them to grow up to be adventure
garners and have no one else ever get to
use the family computer again). IBM
($44.95). Circle Reader Service #2.
Domark
5300 Stevens Creek Blvd.
San Jose, CA 95129
PIT FIGHTER: "If I only had a quarter
for every quarter I ever spent playing
Pit Fighter." Every arcade enthusiast
who ever thought this and has an IBM
or Amiga at home can probably consider this home version of the popular
coin-swallower to be an investment
rather than an expenditure. Faithfully
recreating the latest coin-op version,
but without the graphic pizzazz of the
arcade version, Pit Fighter features one
and two-player modes. The three classic characters of Ty, Kato and Buzz are
ready for players to lead them to the
World Pitfighting Championship.
When playing this delicious coin-op
conversion, fortunately, no "quarter"
will be asked (after, of course, 160 are
given). IBM, Amiga ($39.95). Circle
Reader Service #3.
SUPER SPACE INVADERS: Like
Pac Man, Space Invaders became a
part of American culture in 1979.
Those little alien ships that shimmied
back and forth as they oozed down the
screen toward the player's "kill-o-zap"

gun. All the while, they were hurling
down their deadly "squiggles o' doom"
while the player hid underneath the
very bunkers at which the squiggles
were chipping away. Would the last
alien die before the player's gun? This
hot-rodded version is very '90s now,
with a nice enough graphic look and
sound support to mesmerize another
generation. Now, with new levels to
conquer, "hidden" levels to find and
some aliens who have learned some
new moves, it's time to spin that classic
Dr. Demento tune, Space Invaders.
("He's hooked, he's hooked, his brain
is cooked!"). IBM ($39.95). Circle
Reader Service #4.
Electronic Arts
San Mateo, CA
GLOBAL EFFECT: Since this is an
election year, hearing promises that
won't be kept shouldn't affect our
American readers. Still, this British
game might have been better had it
avoided both the politics of broken
promises and "political correctness."
An interesting blend of SimCity meets
wargaming (and a few other genres —
there is a ton of promise in this package), the player is in charge of an environmentally doomed planet facing an
ecological ice age. As urban sprawl
happens of its own accord, one must
keep up with the Jones family (and
everyone else), providing them with
the energy, fresh water and sewage
treatment they need to get a bad situation from getting worse. Suffering
from woefully understated documentation, a special dedication to the subject
is almost a prerequisite in order to enjoy the "learning experiences" in store
when playing this game. Amiga, IBM
($49.95). Circle Reader Service #5
HEROES OF THE 357TH: It's a tough
market out there for flight sims, and
Heroes of the 357th has everything it
takes to be largely ignored by the hard
core "joystick jocks" out there. Using a
Wing Commander style of mission
segues (including no player requirements to take off or land), plus briefings, promotions, etc.), players are
limited to flying P-51D Mustangs as
they go on a campaign tour of duty with
"The Yoxford Boys." While the flight
model in Chuck Yeager's Air Combat
was superior, Heroes still has value as
an introductory flight sim for those who
don't want to learn a keyboard full of
keystrokes to accompany their simple
joystick maneuvers. IBM ($49.95).
Circle Reader Service #6.
HONG KONG MAHJONG PRO:
Knowing a good thing when they see it,
the folks at EA read about the original

Taking A Peek
Hong Kong Mahjong right here in the
pages of CGW. Now, a handsome programming effort has gone into this
faithful recreation of the popular Chinese gambling game. Skillful play of
the beautifully rendered tiles is required to make the various runs and sets
required to play a chow, pong or kong.
Since Mahjong is a 4-player game, a
dozen digitized computer opponents
are included. Rich with graphic detail,
a tutorial is provided for those without
experience in Mahjong and very tough
opponents for those who think they
know their way around the wall. IBM
($49.95). Circle Reader Service #7.
RAMPART: Bolster the balustrades
and man the machicolations, 'cause in
this conversion of a coin-op hit, the
cannon balls come fast and furious. In
solo mode, the player defends his walls
from attack by sea; sinking enemy
ships and rebuilding his walls with
Tetris-like skills. In the two or three
player mode, the players turn the guns
upon each other, trying to knock down
walls faster than the opposition can
build them back up. This one requires
a sensitive mouse-hand and calm spatial-puzzle skills under pressure. If
lightning-paced arcade action makes
one looney and Tetris makes one batty,
then one had better set sails for another
shore. If, however, hot and fast multiplayer competition tickles one's turrets, one can break out the mead and
sweetbread and have a ball (or several)
with Rampart. IBM ($39.95). Circle
Reader Service #8.
Hi Tech Expressions
584 Broadway, New York, NY 10012
PETER PAN & ROBIN HOOD
FAIRY TALE FACTORY and LITTLE MERMAID & BEAUTY AND
THE BEAST FAIRY TALE FACTORY: These two products are two
sides of the same coin. Although they
have a pseudo-Disney print kit feel
about them, these are really cartoon
"frame" kits. Users select background
scenery, objects, characters and dialogue balloons and arrange them in
such a way as to create a "cell." The two
characters in each package (Peter Pan
& Robin Hood for "boys," Little Mermaid & Beauty and the Beast for "girls"
if color coding has anything to do with
marketing) can be mixed and matched
for kids to make some interesting original creations. Dialogue is typed in and
the art files are called in through very
DOS-like menus, placing these Fairy
Tale Factories beyond the youngest
user age group. Thank goodness this is
marketed toward kids, because a bunch
of adult magazine editors (who shall
remain nameless) can come up with

some balloon text that would make
their parents blush. [grin] IBM ($24.95
each). Circle Reader Service #9.
Legend Entertainment
Chantilly, VA
FREDERICK POHL'S GATEWAY:
Sporting the "Legend-airy" interface of
look of their Timequest and Spellcasting products, this time the supercharged text adventure engine with
graphics sports a 256-color VGA pallette and new screen formats with
which to have dialogue and operate the
high tech equipment of the world created in the popular Gateway science
fiction series. This latest offering from
the Legend team is their largest adventure to date (seven meg on the old hard
drive) and, despite the sound support
bug in the initial release, is causing
many lost hours of sleep among adventure gamers here at the office. Because
of the grandeur of this epic, an official
hint book is included in the package for
those suffering from the "Heechee Jeebies." IBM ($59.95). Circle Reader
Service #10.
Mallard Software
550 Edmonds #201
Lewisville, TX 75067
(214) 436-0044
FS PRO: For those who know where
they're going but don't have a flight for
getting there, this is the Microsoft
Flight Simulator companion product to
solve that problem. Calculating distance, headings, wind course corrections, weights and balances, and
managing fuel are only part of the many
features this package provides for
simulation airline pilots. Complete
with ground school module, flight logs
and airport databases, the on-screen
help will ease assimilation. Best of all,
the package is prepared to get you
through the roughest turbulence of all
by including a memory manager to get
the entire operation off the ground in
the first place. With products like this,
Mallard has earned their wings. Circle
Reader Service #11.
HAWAII SCENERY UPGRADE:
Climb in a Cessna and enjoy the scenery of this tropical travelogue. The big
island, Maui, Kahoolawe, Oahu, Kauai
and all the other islands are there for
your perusal along with two dozen airports for the island hoppers out there.
Islands extend out through the Leeward
Islands all the way to Midway. (Not
pictured). IBM. Circle Reader Service
#12.

Taking A Peek
MicroLeague Sports
2201 Drummond Plaza
Newark, DE 19711-5711
(302) 368-9990
MICROLEAGUE BASEBALL 4: And
Microleague Baseball begat Microleague 2, and... begat Microleague
Baseball 4, the latest generation of Microleague baseball games in their near10 year tradition. The grounds crew has
been busy on this managerial-level
simulation, resurfacing the field with
VGA graphics and adding animated,
digitized, old-time baseball clips that
run briefly at pivotal moments in the
action (the close play at first, the called
strike three, the catch at the wall). The
most interesting new feature is the result of a deal between MicroLeague
and USA Today, through which players can download daily statistics from
the USA Today Sports Center for use
with the fantasy league expansion program. IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader
Service #13. (Not Pictured)
Origin Systems

Austin, TX
WING COMMANDER II, SPECIAL
OPERATIONS II: Concluding the
middle part of the great Wing Commander trilogy, our intrepid hero,
"Blue Hair," is back to dealing mayhem
among the Kilrathi foes of Terra.
Twenty new missions weave through a
complex plot involving the new Morningstar prototype fighter (a squadron of
which is lead by none other than "Maniac" himself) and the traitor "Jazz"
Colson is back to cause more trouble as
he works for the secret society of the
Mandians. This expansion campaign
requires a copy of the original Wing
Commander II game to play (and a
certain tolerance for the new nuclear
weapons technology — oops! Are we
giving too much away?). IBM
($29.95). Circle Reader Service #13.
Psygnosis
Brookline, MA
AQUAVENTURA: Psygnosis. Need
more be said? State of the art Amiga
splash screens and 3-D graphics, a
post-apocalyptic fiction, and more bitblasting action than a joystick jock
could stand. In this inflection of the
Psygnosis theme, the player's spirit (in
the form of a space ship) moves over
the face of the deep (a water world
taken over by aliens) in 3-D action
resmbling BattleZone or SkyFox. In between battles, the player is treated to
those wire-frame, space/time wormhole piloting sequences that players
have been hating since Star Raiders.
Basically, beneath the Psygnosis sheen
lies aged mechanisms of arcade gam-

ing's past. Amiga ($49.99). Circle
Reader Service #15.
Sierra On-Line
Coarsegold, CA
THE DAGGER OF AMON RA: Interactive fiction's leading lady, Roberta
Williams, has cast her creation and the
genre's best actress, Laura Bow, in a
new tale of murder and intrigue, set in
a museum of natural history and Egyptology. Trapped within these dark halls
with a group of untrustworthy caricatures, our cub reporter must unearth the
mystery of Amon Ra before a killer (or
a curse?) puts her on Isis. Previewed in
issue #95. IBM ($69.95). Circle Reader
Service #16. (Not Pictured)
Spectrum HoloByte
Alameda, CA
TETRIS CLASSIC: It's nice to see that
this is more than just a mere repackaging of "the same old stuff." Spectrum
has added one "hol of a byte" into this
256-color VGA improvement on their
classic arcade addiction. Russian music
has been scored for sound cards, adding
to the Russian "fairy tale" motif of the
backgrounds. Many two-player options have been added and feature cooperative, competitive and
head-to-head modes (one new addition
even features dual pits). "Soft drops"
have been added to control the drop
speed of pieces, pit depths can be varied
and timer setting, in addition to all of
the other standard settings, will provide
even more variation for this great productivity killer. Now the only question
is, how to hide this game from the wife
and kids? IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader
Service #16.
SSI
San Mateo, CA.
PROPHECY OF THE SHADOW:
Tired of feeding, watering, and blowing the noses of a party of 8 adventurers? Weary of long (and useless)
character attribute lists that nm from
Bocci Skill to Resistance Against Ad
Campaigns? With this product, SSI
kicks off a new line of single-character
role-playing adventures that keeps the
mechanics to a minimum and the story
to the max, using a brand new engine
and a new look, complete with digitized
images of costumed human models as
NPCs. With one character to hassle
with and only three attributes to worry
about, this may provide a nice break for
the logisitics-weary veteran or the perfect introduction for the role-playing
initiate. IBM ($59.95). Circle Reader
Service #18.

Industry News
game with Acclaim's cartridge game
entitled Steel Empires), the game features robotic combat (with elements of
strategy and action) from an overhead
perspective and features adventure elements within a (promised) rich universe in which to hold the martial
events which form the core of the game.
GDW (Game Designers Workshop), the respected boardgame pub-

ans of the Advanced Dungeons &
role-playing system will
be interested in hearing that The Sierra Network plans to provide on-line
gaming as part of their future service.
John Comeau (Vegas Johnny's
Dealer's Choice) will be working on a
Roulette game for Villa Crespo's Coffee Break series. It will have a heavy
statistics database.

F

Dragons™

Apogee Software (masters of shareware) may be transferring their 3-D
technology from Wolfenstein 3-D to a
Car Wars/Roadwar/Deathtrack-style
game.

Dan Bunten is seriously considering
an updated MU.L.E.-style game.

Whether he does or not, it seems very
likely that Bunten's Ozark Softscape
will return to the Electronic Arts fold
in order to reach a new audience for
multi-player games on a new platform.
The Fat Man, George Alistair Sanger,
and Team Fat, George's team of counterpoint commandos, are currently
working on the musical scores for two
edutainment titles: Berenstain Bears,
Learn at Home from Compton's NewMedia and Mutanoid Word Challenge
from Legacy Software.
Strategic Simulations, Inc. plans to
release the U.S. version of Steel Empires. To be called Cyber Empires (to
ensure that gamers do not confuse this

lisher, is working with electronics
manufacturer JVC to coordinate development of cartridge and CD-ROM
games for the Dangerous Journeys
role-playing system. Dangerous Journeys is the latest Gary Gygax design.
Cyborg Games, the respected Playby-mail publisher, has announced that
it will close its doors by mid-July.
The Summoning is a new first-person
fantasy role-playing game to be released by Strategic Simulations, Inc.
Designed by Event Horizon Software
(DarkSpyre and Dusk of the Gods), the
CRPG is expected to emphasize skill
and character development more than
combat strategy.

Sneak Previews are not designed to
be reviews. They are feature articles
based on "Works in progress" that
CGW's editors have deemed worthy of
early coverage. These articles are not
intended to provide the final word on a
product, since we expect to publish
appropriate review coverage when the
game is completely finished.
he cliff-hanger — that early TV,
and even earlier film gimmick,
that kept the first generations of
vid-kids coming back to the tube at the
"same Bat-time, same Bat-channel" to
behold the horrible fate of their favorite
Hero. Would Flash Gordon and his
hopelessly damaged ship careen into

T

the heart of the sun?! Would Batman
and the Boy Wonder become pickled
pescados in the Penguin's pernicious
pickerel-packing appliance?! Of course
not, but, as per the schemes of a nefarious, Hollywood-employed psychologist, we would come back to the
matinee or the boob tube to witness Our
Hero's improbable, though certain, escape.
Access, and lead designer Chris
Jones, have adopted this device, and
many other relics of this "classic" Hollywood era, in adding to the growing
group of interactive fiction titles that
parody the work of this bygone age.
Amazons: Guardians of Eden (Amazon) imitates/parodies the popular
"jungle film" in which the intrepid

Amazonian adventurer would, without
fail: hire out a run-down cargo plane that
would run out of gas/be shot down/find
itself without a pilot; run across a rivulet
teaming with piranha; cross a treacherous,
dilapidated rope bridge; end up in a cannibal's pot or with a blowgun in his ear; and,
finally, meet an Aryan beauty in the heart
of the jungle. Amazon is structured like the
serials of old, such that each of these stereotypic events in the life of a jungle adventurer
is encapsulated in a "chapter" that seems
always to end on the crux of a dilemma.

Just as Amazon's story is a composite
of nearly every jungle adventure story
ever told, so its look and game play are
each respective composites of their
forebears. Nearly every scene in Amazon involves a skillful blend of several

Sneak Preview
media and media techniques: digitized
video, "painted" computer graphics, digitized photos of modeled artifacts and sets,
and animation. Under the direction of Doug
Vandegrift (an award winning story-boarder and animator of several Saturday-morn-

ple decisions in real-time. One is the classic
"pit of despair" scene where the player is
thrown into an arena to do battle with a
Titan of some sort for the entertainment of
cruel spectators. hi this case, the Titan is an
immense Amazonian bred ant, digitized
and animated from a model. The ant looks
wonderful -- as if it were pulled directly out
of an early Hercules film, giving the entire
sequences that campy feel of "B" adventure.

Pleasing Everyone

ing cartoon episodes), the Access art team
has created a solid, uniform look out of
these mixed media. Whereas many games
that mixed digitized images and painted
images in the past have had a jarring,
"chunky" look (including Access' very
early graphic adventures), Amazon finds the
integration techniques maturing — and the
graphics acquiring a more believable quality.
The game play, too, mixes gaming devices and perspectives in a way that will
certainly keep garners on their toes. For the
most part, the game is a typical graphic
adventure. The player must search each
graphic screen for the horde of artifacts with
which to fill his immense pockets, and employ them in extended strings of actions.
The puzzles tend to be on the more involved
side (to the delight of adventure gamers
who bemoan the trend toward easier puzzles in recent games) and some are fresh and
interesting. Many are time dependent, that
is, the player must figure out the correct
sequence of steps under pretty unforgiving
time constraints. In these sequences, one's
character will die many times (giving plenty
of opportunity for graphic death scenes,
each preluded by a flashing "Shock Warning!" in deference to a goofy technique of
early film), but each death will usually provide a hint on how to avoid the immolation/puncture wound/cranial trauma the
next time.
Amazon also has some interesting cooperative puzzles where the player can gender-swap between the main male character,
Jason, and his female side-kick, Maya. In
the graphic adventure sequences, each character sees things in his or her own particular
light, revealing information that the other
might not be privy too. In a more interesting
sequence, the player must alternate between
the two in order to master a spatial puzzle,
best described as a simplified Lemmings
level. It's a cute, spicy touch.
Amazon also sports a couple action sequences, where the player must make sim-

There has been concern within game design circles that in order to please hard-core
game players, designers are being pushed to
create increasingly more complicated
games, to the exclusion of casual garners
and new comers (and thus, according to a
few industry "chicken littles," cause the
stagnation and death of the entire industry).
Access has been concerned about this as
well and has struck a decent compromise in
Amazon. As mentioned, some of Amazon' s

puzzles are a bit involved which, though
refreshing to the advanced garners, might
be daunting to a new computer user and
gamer. But these casual garners and the
newbies need not fear that they will be stuck
on screen-one of their $50+ investment.
Amazon allows players to set the game difficulty level at the beginning of the game.
The difficulty setting does not alter the
game's puzzles in any way, but rather, determines the number of times the player can
access the tiered, on-line hints, which range
in their explicitness from the gentlest nudge
to a heave and a throw. A player can access
the hints as many times as he likes, no
matter what difficulty level he is playing,
but, if he peeks more than his difficulty
setting allows, he might not receive quite
the lipstick-smeared hero's ending he was
expecting.

Speak To Me!
As in many adventure games of its ilk, the
Amazon story development involves con-

versations with a variety of characters
found throughout the game. These characters manifest themselves as animated, digitized clips of actors, as in Access' earlier
Mean Streets and their most recent Martian
Memorandum. Fortunately, Access got actors and actresses from a local acting troop
to read most of the parts. It's been common
practice among many companies to grab

anyone around the office, family, friend to
read spoken parts in games — to wincing
effect. Here, most parts are read well, and,
even if some lines are over acted, they blend
into the campy feel of the whole.
But even the best acting can't bear up to
the repetition involved in an adventure
game's conversational tree. Designers have
yet to find a discourse system that eliminates redundant tracing of a conversational
path. While garners have gotten used to this
convention with mute games, the problem
becomes a "blaringly" apparent nuisance
when one must actually listen as conversational snatches are repeated three, four and
five times.
While Access has not eliminated the
"tree" convention, they have reached what
seems to be a decent solution to the redundant speech problem. A character in Amazon will only actually speak his or her first
and last (greeting and concluding) lines.
This gives the player the pleasure of hearing
the characters speak, but saves the device
from being over done. The introducing line
sets up the character's personality and allows the remaining text to be "heard" by the
player in that voice. If the player should
happen to come back to a character and
initiate a conversation again, there will
often be a different greeting and salutation,
even though the majority of the textual conversation is repeated.
From the gorgeous opening rain forest
pan reminiscent of the spectacular footage
in the recent film At Play in the Fields of
Our Lord, to the story's multitude of silly

references to the Baby Boomers' collective
TV conscious, from the visceral South
American rhythms of the Roland soundtrack (similar to those rediscovered by Paul
Simon in his Rhythm of the Saints album),
to the campy storyline of a "B" Romancing
the Stone, Amazon: Guardians of Eden is
as diverse and colorful as the region in
which it is set In it, we begin to see interactive movies mature and strike a satisfying
balance between cinematic moments and
interactivity.
Will Amazon: Guardians of Eden, avoid
the dreaded CGW cover curse and hit its
September release date, or will it be thrown
into the bug-filled pit of software delay?!
Stay tuned ...

Review

I Slammed The Sharif, But Did Not
Finesse His Devotees
Interplay's Omar Sharif On Bridge
by Johnny L. Wilson
ome of the "People who need people" are card players who are
looking for contract bridge partners. With Interplay's release of Omar
Sharif On Bridge, the male lead from
the films "Doctor Zhivago" and
"Funny Girl" (the musical being the
source for the hit song, "People ") has
managed to lend his name, voice and
expertise (as a syndicated columnist on
bridge) to a product that enables computer garners to find computerized
bridge partners and opponents at any
time of the day or night. In providing
these partners and
opponents, Omar
Sharif On Bridge
(Omar) features a
modicum of graphics, digitized voice
(for Sound Blaster
owners), print capability (for those
who want to study
hard-copy records
of their games) and
on-line
tutorial
based on Sharif s
advice with regard
to each trick.

S

Bridging
The Gap
Though
the
graphics in Omar
may not seem remarkable
to
gamers who are
used to the latest in SVGA games, it is
both esthetically and functionally superior to Electronic Arts' CGA offering,
Grand Slam Bridge (released in the
mid-'80s) and some very competitive
TITLE:
SYSTEM:
PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

Omar Sharif On Bridge
IBM
1-4
$59.95
Chris Emsen
Interplay Productions, Santa Ana, CA

all-text games created by Tom Throop
during the same period. The "cards " are
displayed in their proper colors and set
in the paradigmatic N,E,S,W configuration used in most bridge books and
newspaper columns. Hence, play is
easy to follow and flows like a real
game. In addition, the game uses a
graphic grid to assist players with the
bidding conventions. Reading from left
to right, players can immediately visualize the next appropriate bid by observing how many "lower " bids have
already been crossed out. Since bidding
is one of the toughest matters for beginners to learn, this is an extremely helpful feature.
By providing a sotto voce commentary during the game, Sharif's voice
adds a touch of class and sophistication
when the digitized speech option is
chosen. While the option adds to the
initial "wow" of the game, it does not
add significantly to the play value of
the game and is not anywhere near as
valuable to the gamer as the print option and on-line advice. The former lets
one compare custom games with the
games recorded in standard bridge literature (e.g Goren is Bridge Complete
or Grant and Rodwell's Bridge Maxims). The latter is particularly valuable
when one can type in bridge problems
from one's favorite newspaper columnist and compare Sharif's advice with
that in the newspaper.

A Trump Without A
Castle
The artificial opponents in Omar are
precise, playing in textbook fashion,
and rarely make mistakes. They can,
occasionally, be finessed, but not often.
A finesse is, for example, when South
leads a small card of one suit (e.g.
spades) even though West, one of the
opponents, may have the outstanding
high card in the suit (e.g. the ace) to the

Review
Dummy's penultimate high card (e.g.
the king). If West opts not to play the
ace, South finesses the trick by playing
the king as high card. If West does play
the ace, South plays another
spade and manages to promote the king to high card in
the suit for a later trick.
Promoting means to raise a
card (or cards) to the highest
position in a given suit. If the
player has all the face cards
in a given suit, he/she can
promote them by playing the
king and forcing his/her opponent to either play the ace
or lose the trick with the king
in it. Of course, once the king
and ace are gone, the queen
and jack become the highest
cards in the suit. Promotion
is relatively easy in Omar
because the artificial opponents tend to
play the high cards right down the line
rather than risking the loss of a trick
through a daring finesse.

Who's The Dummy?
In short, anyone can pick up Omar
Sharif On Bridge, whether they have

any bridge background or not, and learn
how to play a respectable game. I had
personally never played bridge before
picking up Omar and had always been

"42" (a game played with dominoes
where each end of the domino can be a
suit) and Rook (the Parker Brothers
card game with similar play mechanics) player, Omar even allows
one to let the Dummy (the
open hand, visible to all players, which is usually played
by the winning bidder) play so
that one does not have to
worry about making a mistake. With the on-screen hints
to let the player know what
he/she should play and the option to let the Dummy play,
even novice players should be
immune to fear.

Zhivago Knows
Bridge
somewhat overwhelmed by the contract bridge literature I had perused.
After playing Omar, the bidding made
sense (thanks largely to the provision
of the grid system) and I was able to
understand how to promote cards and
finesse tricks. For those who do not feel
comfortable with bridge as fast as this

Since discovering Omar
Sharif On Bridge, I have been
informed that there is a $300
program that is more complex and features a superior AI to that of Omar. For
most of us, however, Omar Sharif On
Bridge is so easy to get into, challenging to play and well-designed in terms
of interface that it is likely to become a
permanent resident on our hard disks.

A Round-Up of Events in the World of Computer Golf

The "Year of
Computer Golf"
What was once a sleepy (albeit steady)
category, computer golf has, in 1992, become one of the hottest tickets in town.
Several major releases or strategic alliances have occurred or are about to occur
in the field.
Speaking of hot tickets, two of the game
manufacturers had press events at the U.S.
Open at Pebble Beach in June (see the related stories).
Ranging from cartridge based product
releases through on-line golf tournaments,
a half dozen companies are making significant contributions in 1992 to what may become known as the computer golf hobby.
Like flight simulator fans, computer golf
fans are becoming a recognizable group of
garners. With the on-line golf communities on the Computer Sports Network and
Prodigy (see below), this group of garners
will become even more visible.
Actually, computer golfers are potentially a larger consumer group than computer garners in general. People who
would never consider themselves computer garners are buying and becoming
computer golf junkies. One group of fans
of Access Software's Links golf game are
actually touring the country playing the
real life courses they have played on
Links. The presence of on-line golf tourna-

ments is creating a telecommunity of computer golfers that will surely some day
spawn real life golf tournaments bringing
together golfers who have befriended one
another in on-line tournaments.
Computer golf instruction and teaching
is becoming a reality as well. Last year
Microleague Sports released Personal
Pro. This year MicroProse will attempt to
add an instructional element to their
Greens (see related story).

PRODIGY AND ACCOLADE TEAM UP
As previously reported in CGW, Prodigy has teamed up with Accolade Software (in association with Jack Nicklaus
Productions) to produce PRODIGY Tour
Golf. Using a special version of Jack

Nicklaus Golf & Course Design: Signature Edition, players can randomly join a
tour with 149 other Prodigy members or
they can reserve their own personalized
events with from four to 32 players.

Each month, Prodigy offers a different
tournament on a different course. After a
player goes on-line and signs up for a
tournament, Prodigy downloads the
course of the month along with a "round
ticket" that controls the weather and time
allowed to complete the round. Players
then disconnect from Prodigy and play
the round at their convenience. In between rounds, they can practice on the
same course.
Following each round the player
uploads his score card which is displayed
on the leader board. After several rounds
top scorers advance to the next round. A
Clubhouse bulletin board will allow players to post notes to one another, bragging
about their good shots, and explaining
away their bad ones. The PRODIGY Golf
Tour is a Custom Choice option on the
Prodigy Service. Members pay $7.95 for
each monthly tournament, in addition to
their regular monthly fees.

Microsoft & Access Team Up
In the May issue of CGW, we revealed
that Microsoft and Access Software were
teaming up to produce Microsoft Golf
(which is basically Links for Windows).
On June 23, Microsoft ended their official
"no comment" stance and announced that
Microsoft Golf was in the works (with a
projected 3rd quarter 1992 release date).
Microsoft and Access have taken the
highly successful Links: The Challenge of
Golf (which is a DOS application), and
combined it with the push-button Windows interface. On-line help, multiple
windowing configurations, the support of
256 colors, and the ability to quickly
switch out of a golf game to another application, makes Microsoft Golf more than
just an enhanced Links.

pecting the company to lose a week's
worth of productivity.
Microsoft Golf will retail for $64.95. Although the game will run on an 80286, an
80386 is recommended (as is a minimum
of 2 MB of RAM). In addition to the English edition, Microsoft will also release
German and French language editions.
The game will ship with the Torrey Pines
Course. Microsoft Golf is fully compatible with Access Software's Links Championship Course Disks.

The ability to play a hole, then minimize the game (i.e. send it to the background while working on other
applications) will make Microsoft Golf a
very popular office game. Perhaps too
popular. One Microsoft manager said that
when Microsoft Golf went to "company
wide beta-test" some managers were ex-

MicroProse and
Leadbetter Team Up
MicroProse used the incredible backdrop of the U.S. Open at Pebble Beach to
announce the signing of David Leadbetter
as the "teaching pro" incorporated in
their upcoming David Leadbetter 's
Greens.
Leadbetter is known as the pro who
teaches the pros. His techniques, outlined
in his best-selling book The Golf Swing,
and now available in Greens, have improved the play of such PGA pros as Tom
Watson, Curtis Strange, Nick Faldo and
Ian Baker-Finch. According to the MicroProse, "Leadbetter will accompany players on their rounds and provide invaluable
advice on club selection, stance, hand position, swing and shot making."
Greens is more or less the flight simulator of computer golf games. MicroProse

ME Software and Pebble Beach Team Up
T&E Software also staged a promotional event at the U.S. Open. To promote
their new Pebble Beach Golf Links for the
Super Nintendo, T&E Set up two tents
with playable copies of their new game
for the public. In addition Pebble Beach
course pro R.J. Harper took on touring
pro Scott Simpson in a charity match of
Pebble Beach Golf Links. Harper won the
contest and donated the $1000 first place
prize to the Monterey Junior Golf Association. Scott Simpson donated the $500
conciliation prize to his favorite charity:
The Search Ministries.

has taken the rapid screen refresh technology and camera tracking elements of their
flight simulators to make their golf game.
Whereas in other golf games you get a
static shot of the ball as it flies away from
you (or toward you in a reverse angle
view), in Greens you can select one of
seven camera views that dynamically
track and pan around your ball.
Using twelve screen refreshes per second your view follows the ball according
to the mode you are in (e.g. fixed pan,
fixed swing, track 'n pan, and four other
modes). While this technology means that
Greens cannot produce as much graphic
detail as other golf games, the dynamic
view along with the rolling 3-D landscape
gives garners interesting views and gaming experiences not possible in other computer golf games. Don't let the static
pictures (which cannot compete with the
static picture of a Links or Jack Nicklaus
screen) fool you. The unique experience
in Greens is seeing a shot in motion.
The Amiga version (which came out earlier this year) does not carry the David
Leadbetter connection, nor is it as graphically pleasing as the upcoming IBM version (due out in the fall).
Continued on pg. 105

Industry News

More News on Upcoming
Computer Games
Part II of the Summer Consumer Electronics Show
ast issue's report spent a considerable amount of space on the
"roar of the crowd" aspects of letting consumers attend the
Summer Consumer Electronics Show and then, delineated the
technological trends to be observed in the "smell of the greasepaint"
behind the screens of upcoming computer games. The report closed
with a summary of upcoming wargames. This issue, we will look at
what is happening in CD-ROM games, sports games, simulations,
adventure games, role-playing games and strategy games.

L

ROM Is Where The Heart Is (CD-ROM)
Naturally, when one thinks of CD-based entertainment, one thinks
of computerized film footage. So, the first companies one would
associate with CD-based entertainment would be those who are
related, through a corporate connection to the film studios. In this
sense, one would only be half correct. While, at least, two of those
software companies associated with film companies (LucasArts, a
corporate cousin of Lucasfilm, and Sony Imagesoft, a relative by
corporate marriage with Columbia Pictures) are serious about CDROM development, but neither have combined their CD game
projects with film project footage. LucasArts plans to release a
CD-based version of Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe before the end
of the year. It is, essentially, a deluxe version of the disk-based game
with all of the extra disks included on the CD. Other LucasArts
CD-ROM products include Loom and Secret of Monkey Island, both
of which feature enhanced art and digitized voice. Sony Imagesoft,
publishers of SewerShark (described in last issue's report) and an,
as yet un-named "Make Your Own Music Video" game, is publishing
games with digitized film footage, but not using feature film footage
from their corporate relative.
Sega's Batman Returns CD-ROM is not expected to use digitized
film footage, but will feature extra levels, animation using a new 3-D

and portions of the soundtrack from the movie. Other Sega CD titles
will include Joe Montana NFL Football (with a modicum of NFL
film footage), Night Trap (as described in last issue's CES report),
ICOM's Sherlock Holmes, Consulting Detective II, Origin's original Wing Commander, and a battery of Sierra/Dynamix hits: Adventures of Willy Beamish, King's Quest V and Stellar 7.
Garners who play Microcosm from Psygnosis may feel like they
are in the middle of the film, Fantastic Voyage, however. The game
uses a mixture of digitized film footage and 3-D rendered technology
to give garners the impression that they are actually travelling
through the human body. In a similar vein, garners who play Interplay's upcoming multimedia version of Sim City may well think they
are watching a local newscast (and the new version may have some
gaming twists, too).
ICOM plans to use techniques described as artwork cellularization
(capturing artwork into cell-like segments in order to create a higherquality look to the animation) and landscape blending (a technology
that blends animated cels with traditional graphic backgrounds in
order to create a more unified look to the digitized "cartoon") in
games over a wide variety of platforms. On the Turbo-Grafx-16,
ICOM will release Beyond Shadowgate (a sequel to their floppybased hit) and Shapeshifter (an action/strategy game using the cellularization process prolifically). Their SNES products will include
Road Runner's Death Valley Rally (a true interactive cartoon) and
Batman, Revenge of the Joker (an enhanced version of the SunSoft
8-bit game, based loosely on events in the first feature film). Most
interesting for computer owners will be ICOM's The PGA Tour, a
golf game for IBM and Macintosh that will pit computer golfers
against "impossible" holes, like the one atop Mt. Everest. The golf
game is expected to be a showcase for ICOM's 3-D rendering
technology.

Industry News

Many of the other CD-ROM titles have been previously announced, including: Virgin's The 7th Guest (described in last issue's
report), Paragon's Challenge of the 5 Realms and Mantis (both of
which use digitized speech and the latter of which uses 3-D rendering
techniques), Interplay's Out of this World, and Accolade's Jack
Nicklaus Ultimate Golf for CDTV. All of these titles are expected to
be enhanced and expanded versions of floppy-based titles.
Finally, Origin intends to release CD-ROM versions of Wing
Commander II, complete with voice module and both Special Operations Disks, and a Strike Commander Deluxe product.

The Pilgrim's Egress (Adventure Games)
Perhaps, the most interesting new twist on an adventure game
comes from Walt Disney Software's new Buena Vista label. Entitled Dog Eat Dog, this game of office politics may be considered
more of an interactive soap opera than a traditional adventure. In
addition to the off-beat subject matter, the game uses neural networking technology to handle the "rumor chain" in the office.
Another intriguing offering is Hired Guns from Psygnosis. Although it is more of an action/adventure game than traditional
puzzle-solving romp, garners should enjoy the four-player cooperative action aspect of the game. The game is expected to feature an
expanded palette of 4,096 colors on the Amiga. It will also be
available on the IBM, but without the phenomenal color support.
Space adventures are something of a trend in late 1992. MicroProse plans to release Rex Nebular (Sex Nebulous?), a graphic
adventure romp through a bizarre section of space that was originally
scripted by Steve Meretzky (Leather Goddesses of Phobos, Spellcasting 101). The game uses 3-D rotoscoped animation which flows
vividly across hand-painted backgrounds in this premiere release of
MicroProse's new graphic adventure engine. It is expected to have
three difficulty levels and use over 80 puzzles when garners follows
all the possible branches. Meanwhile, Sierra's Space Quest 5 pits
intergalactic hero/space janitor Roger Wilco against a cartoon-style
canvas of cosmic criminals. The animated artwork is so studio crisp
that sequences demonstrated at CES looked more like a cartoon than
a game. Also, Interplay hinted that they are expected to release future
products using their StarTrek graphic adventure engine from the
StarTrek: The 25th Anniversary Game.
Horror will also figure in adventure game releases during the rest
of 1992. Darkseed (reviewed in this issue) used digitized film in order
to get the animation correct for player movement, H. R. Giger's

horrific art (Alien) for inspiration and digitized voices for NPC
conversations. Meanwhile, IntraCorp plans to release Stephen
King's The Dark Half as an adventure under their Capstone label.
In the psychological adventure thriller, a writer gets in touch with his
"dark half," so the game's interface is depicted as a typewriter
keyboard. Sierra also plans to enter the horror market in early 1993
with their first CD-only product, Roberta Williams' Scary Tales.
Virgin, of course, has been showing its Gothic thriller on CD-ROM,
The 7th Guest. Further, Psygnosis is expected to announce a major
CD-ROM product in the near future that fits firmly in the horror
genre.
As always, licensed products play a hefty role in upcoming adventure games. An American Tail (see this issue's "Taking A Peek") uses
digitized backgrounds from the films and a no typing interface in
order to produce an adventure game overlay with family games
interlaced between puzzles (dot-to-dot, rebuses, etc.). The Capstone
label will also see an L.A. Law adventure with digitized photos of the
actual sets from the television series as backdrops and a dynamic
case file within the interface that functions as an auto notebook for
gamers weary of recording clues off-line. IntraCorp also promises
that their Home Alone 2: Lost in New York game will feature
significantly more puzzles than their earlier Home Alone game.
Konami purchased one of the more expensive licenses available
when they opted to publish Batman Returns. The action/adventure
game should not be confused with the videogames that carry the same
name. The computer version uses digitized shots of the movie's sets,
but has a plot that is not keyed to the film's plot. The interface concept
is for the player to function predominantly as director.
Electronic Arts opted not to go the licensing route in their first
graphic adventure on the IBM. The Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes
has the advantage of character familiarity without the downside of
high licensing expenditures. The game features an interface which
is very similar to the earlier SCUMM parser used by LucasArts (nee
Lucasfilm), auto-notetaking similar to that in The Magic Candle,
graphics similar to those in pre-parserless Sierra games and a score
which successfully imitates a classical style.
Meanwhile, Sierra does not have to go "out of house" in order to
find marketable universes. Sequels to both the King's Quest and
Quest for Glory series are in store for adventure garners later this
year. Both King's Quest VI and Quest for Glory III are using an
overflowing toolbox of graphic techniques to bring their popular
environs to life. Characters are filmed, photographed, digitized, ro-

Industry News
toscoped, hand-painted, animated according to film footage and
digitized from stop-action animation sequences.
Two political pot-boilers may fill out the
adventure game category. Definitely expected
before the end of the year is Virgin's budgetpriced Floor 13, an adventure/strategy game
which places gamers in charge of a secret
police force as they try to uncover and stymie
over 100 conspiracies and espionage plots.
The game promises to be full of dirty political
tricks galore. Also, there are rumors that Accolade will yet release its Conspiracy: The
DeadlockFiles, an adventure game which uses
graphics composed entirely of digitized photos as it unravels the poison within a government that threatens to destroy everyone.

Role Out The Marrow (RolePlaying Games)
Sequels, of course, have nearly always been
a major staple in the role-playing genre. This
year is no exception, as Origin's Ultima series
and New World's Might & Magic series try
to up the ante in terms of state-of-the-art roleplaying. Origin continues the study in evil
begun in Ultima VII with the continuation of
Ultima VII Part 2: The Serpent Isle and, as
noted last issue, New World is presenting two
interlocking games with a bonus endgame
(The Clouds of Xeen and The Dark Side of Xeen).
Paragon will continue publishing adaptations of GDW's "people
and paper" role-playing games with their post-holocaust Twilight
2100, a sequel to Twilight 2000, and their space opera game, Mega-

Traveller III. The latter will feature three different scenarios within
a random universe and will be expanded further by an add-on mission
disk in the future. Omnitrend will publish
Paladin II in conjunction with Impressions.
This is the sequel to Paladin, Omnitrend's
original fantasy role-playing strategy game
(Breach meets magic).
Strategic Simulations, Inc. plans to continue
their successful foray in the CRPG market with
both the Advanced Dungeons and Dragons series and some new entries into the fold. Instead
of the familiar gold box engine, the company is
introducing the world of Dark Sun. Dark Sun:
Shattered Lands emphasizes psionics, as well
as magic, and has the feel of a post-holocaust
world with a more intriguing and interesting
background. In this case, it seems that the sorcerers of the world have drained the natural
energy from much of the planet (and the living
creatures therein) and left it as a virtual wasteland. The story itself bears some resemblance to
Demetrius and the Gladiators meet Dune (now
there's an image!). At any rate, both the beautiful tiled graphics and the new twists in the story
line and skills bode well for this new CRPG
engine. In addition, the company is about to
unveil its first title in the Spelljammer series
(AD&D in space).
Gamers who are tired of worlds designed by
TSR may find sustenance in two other role-playing entries from SSI.
On the fantasy front, SSI is publishing The Summoning, a new
first-person CRPG from Event Horizon (DarkSpyre and Dusk of the
Gods) which is supposed to emphasize character building over

Industry News
combat skills. On the space opera front, SSI is publishing M (no
relation to the Fritz Lang film classic), a CRPG which bears closest
resemblance to the FASA universe which contains the Renegade Legion. Unlike SSI's licensed product from that universe (a tactical
space wargame), however, the approach in M
is closer to that of classic role-playing than to
its wargame cousin.
M is not the only CRPG which will involve
space adventure. Spectrum HoloByte and
Paramount Studios have announced that the
former has received the exclusive license to
produce StarTrek: The Next Generation games
for a wide variety of platforms: IBM, Macintosh, SNES, CD-I and the anticipated Nintendo
CD. Paramount is reported to have recently
approved the graphic look of the major characters (as pictured in this article) and Spectrum
HoloByte has engaged a published science-fiction article with several StarTrek novels under
his belt to script the CRPG. ST:TNG is not
expected to be released prior to the first quarter
of 1993.
As for horror, Accolade plans to publish
Wax Works, a European CRPG from those macabre people who brought us Elvira and Elvira
II (HorrorSoft). The interface looks almost
exactly like the one in the Elvira series, but the
hit points for each section of the body have
been removed in favor of the more traditional
sum total of hit points, used in most CRPGs.
For superheroes, Hero Software's long-anticipated Champions

continues to get closer to release, but has still not cleared its beta test.
Champions was described more fully in CGW #93.
On the traditional fantasy role-playing front,
GameTek plans to import Daemonsgate I -

Dorovan 's Key for MS-DOS and Amiga systems. Daemonsgate I is the first of a trilogy by
U.K.-based Imagitec and features the exploration of a mythical continent in order to stave off
a pending invasion by daemons. Virgin is
highly pleased with its first Westwood Associates (Circuit 's Edge, Eye of the Beholder) project in the Fables & Fiends series, The Legend
of Kyrandia. Expected to be a late summer
release, the game appears to be a "search for the
wicked wizard" game wrapped in the popular
point and click interface found in Westwood's
best work.
Finally, as told in our Winter Consumer Electronics Show report, ASCIIware is planning to
publish Spellcraft, a computer game design
most similar to the boardgame Wizard War
where players carefully craft spells from the
objects at their disposal in order to thwart the
designs of other wizards. Also previously announced was Dynamix' first CRPG, based on
the fictional universe of Raymond E. Feist. It
is to be called, "Betrayal at Krondor."

On A Wing For The Player
(Simulations)
Perennially one of the best-selling categories in computer games is
that of first-person, real-time simulations. Sequels, conversions and
expansions are expected to dominate the market. In terms of expan-

Industry News
sion products, combat flight simulation fans can expect to see a
Gunship 2000 mission disk from MicroProse, a scenario disk based
on Dale Brown's Sky Masters for Three-Sixty's MegaFortress, and
Operation: Fighting Tiger for Spectrum HoloByte's Falcon 3.0
(rumored to have been delayed until early 1993).
In terms of conversions, there are a wide variety of offerings in the
queue. MicroProse's updated Harrier: Jump Jet is a high-profile
state-of-the-art remake of Mindscape U.K's Amiga game of several
years ago. Building on the original research but framing an entirely
new game on the skeleton, Harrier promises to
be an intriguing addition to any aficionado's
software library. It also boasts a strong and
atypical musical score for a MicroProse product in order to get the adrenalin rushing.
Psygnosis is also boosting the performance
level in its conversion of their Armour-Geddon
action/simulation. The graphics in the new MSDOS and CD-ROM versions are significantly
better than their Amiga/Atari ST counterparts
and the addition of a serial connect
head-topinrfswelothpduc.
Electronic Arts has transformed its MSDOS helicopter simulation, LHX Attack Chopper, into a new Sega Genesis game, touting the
product as the first helicopter simulation on the
platform. Like the company's earlier F-22 Interceptor simulation on the Genesis, the product
is impressive on that machine. EA has not lost
sight of the MS-DOS-based flight sim market,
however, since it is transporting Birds of Prey
from the Amiga to the IBM platform.
In addition, both Electronic Arts and MicroProse have sequels, of sorts, to add to the combat flight simulation genre. EA has just released
Heroes of the 357th, described by many players
as an extension of the Yeager Air Combat system and MicroProse plans to unveil F-15 III
later in the year. If F-15 III lives up to its promise, it will challenge
the technological supremacy of Chris Roberts' Strike Commander,
as well as feature head-to-head modem play (possibly even between
F-15111 and Falcon 3.0).
In addition to F-15 MicroProse plans to expand the combat
flight genre's envelope with B-17, a World War II bomber simulation
from Andy Craven's Vektor Grafx (developers of Shuttle and newly
acquired by Mic roProse) where players can switch between the roles
of each crewman a la MegaFortress and Battle of Britain. Also, the
company is still planning to release their drug war game, ATAC. The
planes are expected to fly realistically, but the game will be enhanced
by a Wing Commander-style storyline and strategy track. CGW's
editors were also impressed with the graphic segues between black
and white photo-realistic backgrounds to color backgrounds a la The
Rocketeer.
As of the Summer CES, Dynamix had just released Aces of the
Pacific. The game features impressive graphics and a delightful
character shell for playing a campaign game, but needs some finetuning in the area of flight models and frame rate. At press time,
Dynamix had provided a patch for some of the problems and
expected to tweak the game further. Also at press time, Spectrum
HoloByte's Warthog A-10 simulation was tentatively scheduled for
end of the year release. Warthog is expected to integrate, by modem,
with Falcon 3.0.
Of course, aircraft are not the only combat vehicles that appeal to
simulation fans and they are not the only vehicles being simulated in
1992. 1992 may well be the year for tactical naval combat games,
whether in the wargames or simulation genre. MicroProse is nearing

completion on a World War II naval combat simulation covering the
Solomon Islands campaign and Strategic Simulations, Inc. is using
the developers of MicroProse's Silent Service II to create a WWII
naval combat simulation set in the North Atlantic. Task Force is, as
noted in last issue's report, expected to integrate with an aircraft
carrier simulation (tentatively called by its working title, Flat Top,
but no relation to the Battleline and later, Avalon Hill game) to be
released in 1993. It features a very effective use of U.S. Navy archival
photographs to set the stage for each scenario and its design team
boasts that the on-screen ships feature more
polygons per ship than any simulation out
there. Finally, the MicroProse game benefits
from consultation with World War II veteran,
A dmiral Marl-

The SSI simulation is the first in an anticipated Great Naval Battles series. Entitled
Great Naval Battles: North Atlantic 1939-43,
the game features impressive graphic depictions of WWII era ships from two basic angles
(viewing the action from the bridge as a captain
might or getting an aerial view of the entire
fleet from a commodore's or admiral's perspective) or alternatively, one can check out a
strategic map of the action as though one were
viewing the action from a situation room in the
admiralty.
Also, as noted in last issue's report, Novalogic (WolfPack) is still seeking a publishing agreement on its fictional robot combat
strategy game, Ultrabots, and post-holocaust
battlefield game, Battlefield 2000, but plans to
launch its helicopter simulation, Maximum
Overkill, during 1992. Written entirely in assembly language and featuring sprite animation at 320x 240 resolution, this awesome
simulation clips along at 20 frames per second.
Finally, as reported in the WCES report,
Electronic Arts is planning to release a licensed driving simulation.
Ned Lerner (Chuck Yeager's Advanced Flight Trainer) has turned
the company's Car and Driver license into a driving fantasy simulation. Using polygon-filled technology, ten different terrain types
and ten different exotic cars (ranging from a classic Shelby Cobra or
'57 Ferrari TestaRossa, through a modern Corvette ZR-1 and Lotus
Esprit Turbo, to a Mercedes C11 IMSA prototype), EA has essentially created a Test Drive "dream house" product.

For Every Action (Action Games)
Some products cross over the line between simulations and action
games. The Wing Commander series is one such product and its
emulators, whether they be within Origin's walls (in the form of the
upcoming Strike Commander or the projected Trade Commander)
or outside them in the case of Paragon's Mantis or LucasArt's
X-Wing Fighter. The latter is a Larry Holland project which will
feature 3-D graphics, a carefully designed flight model and campaign/story wrapped in the Star Wars universe. Players who want to
be Darth Vader are going to be disappointed, however. Pilots will
only be able to enlist in the Rebel Alliance and will choose between
flying A-wing, Y-wing and X-wing fighters. Naturally, players will
not be able to risk Luke's life within the game's structure. Instead,
they will get news reports about Luke's fantastic victories and, if the
player's character is successful, one can expect a climactic convergence in the story's denouement.
Another game which offers elements of a simulation, but has its
roots in the action genre is that of CyberRace from Cyberdreams.
This is a futuristic Mad Max meets Car Wars under the rubric of
DeathTrack game and will feature polygon-filled cars which are
armed and driven by dangerous (and angry) rivals.

INDUSTRY NEWS
Simulations are not the only cross-overs into the action game
genre, however. Ever since the days of Tetris and Pipe Dream, many
strategy games have had the real-time element with enough reflexes
required to get the adrenalin flowing. Spectrum HoloByte is continuing the tradition with Tetris Classic, a remake of the game with
the backdrop of a classic Russian fairy tale (Aleksandr Pushkin's
Ruslan and Ludmilla) draping the classic game. The game now
contains head-to-head play via modem and a dual-pit option on the
same monitor.
Psygnosis' Lemmings is another game that
has crossed over the boundary. Lemmings fans
will be looking forward for the conversion of
the classic to the Macintosh and the release of
Lemmings II in late 1992. The latter will feature several tribes of Lemmings with different
attributes (i.e. surfers, skiers, etc.). In the game
context, players will try to solve problems
involving all the tribes of Lemmings in order
to put find pieces of an amulet and put it
together. In addition to Lemmings II,
Psygnosis plans to unleash another game filled
with physical puzzles and action sequences for
the Amiga and IBM platforms. Tentatively
called the "Tomato" game, this program requires players to put together Rube Goldbergstyle inventions in order to solve puzzles and
save their tomato.
ASCIIware further confuses the delineation
between the action and strategy category with
its Spindizzy Worlds, a SNES incarnation of a
European action game where players try to
direct their spinning tops through a variety of
3-D scrolling worlds with a variety of landscapes, each with its physical obstacles. In a
similar fashion, GameTek's Humans features
a tribe of Stone Age humanoids who must learn
to work together in order to solve physical
logic puzzles. Humans will appear on the
SNES, Sega Genesis, MS-DOS and Amiga platforms during 1992.
GameTek's Gadget Twins is also supposed to emphasize logic
puzzles for players on both the Sega Genesis and MS-DOS platforms.

Further obscuring the line between action and strategy are EA's
PowerMonger (just available on the MS-DOS platform and soon to
be released for the Sega Genesis) and ASCIIware's Dominus. Both
allow the player to command armies over large areas of terrain and
both require the player to be able to think fast in real-time.
Electronic Arts' Rampart (for both MS-DOS and SNES) offers
something of the feel of both a strategy and action game. Players
decide where to place their cannons and the targets for their propaganda balloons. Then, they fight a battle based on their decisions.
After the battle, the players have to solve a Tetris-style shape puzzle
(in real-time) in order to rebuild their castles and continue.
Strategic Simulations, Inc. has even put together a multi-player
game that requires players to use military strategy to design their
cyborg armies and economic strategy to fund their military campaigns, but uses arcade-style combat to decide the tactical battles.
Entitled Cyber Empires, it is the U.S. version of Millenium' s Steel
Empires. The company hopes to position it against Accolade's "Star
Control II."

Add to these hybrid games the list of traditional action games and
it is possible to have quite a library of games. Virgin is not only
publishing the NES version of Broderbund's classic Prince of
Persia, but also unleashing a polygon-filled action game called
CyberCop for the Amiga, Atari ST and MS-DOS and a whole slew
of action-oriented sports games. ASCIIware is not only releasing

the games described earlier, but a pure action driving game on both
the SNES and Sega Genesis called Double Clutch. Interplay is not
only releasing its wide range of strategy games, but it is also releasing
two action games: Claymates (Alter Ego meets stop-action animation) and a classic platform game, Vikings, for the SNES. Finally,
Accolade is not only releasing their Star Control II hybrid game, but
they are also releasing Universal Soldiers, a traditional action game
based on the Carolco film, and WarpSpeed, a three-dimensional
space combat game which is supposed to be one of the first arcade
games to take advantage of the SNES' Mode 7
rotation and scaling capabilities.
Naturally, Psygnosis is not limiting itself to
physical logic games in real-time. The British
publisher plans to import Shadow of the Beast
III, the latest in the lines of action/adventure
classics, and a game with the working title,
Walker. The latter, developed by the same team
that produced Lemmings, places the player in
control of a robotic mechanoid that is trying to
stave off assaults of infantry, armored and air
force troops. The animation is remarkable.
Electronic Arts has a hefty interest in sports
games, as will be noted later, but also plans to
release pure action games as well. Desert
Strike, the action hit on the Sega Genesis, has
been converted to the SNES platform and the
company has a horizontal scrolling action/adventure called Search for Ultra Force on the
SNES that features some delightful animation
surprises in gestures, actions and reactions.
Other pure action titles from EA include: Young
Galahad and Twisted Flipper. Both are to be
released on the Sega Genesis with the former
being a typical action/adventure game and the
latter being a "heavy metal" style pinball game.
Finally, one of the hottest EA titles is potentially Lotus Turbo Challenge. It is a two-player,
split screen race across the United States. The
game promises to feature different "puzzles" for each of eight
dangerous environs across the continent from marshes to desert.

Sports
Of course, one can hardly speak of action without considering
sports. Electronic Arts has converted their professional basketball
game into two different Sega Genesis versions and a SNES game.
Bulls vs. Lakers, the updated NBA playoff game built off Lakers vs.
Celtics, will be available on both dedicated game machine platforms.
Team USA Basketball, on the Sega Genesis, features the finest
American professionals vs. the best of the rest of the world in a
roundball game with the same basic interface as the NBA games
which preceded it. In addition, EA has adapted NHL Hockey on the
Genesis so that it is now NHLPA Hockey and uses real player names
and statistics. The prolific videogame publisher has also transported
SSI's Tony La Russa's Ultimate Baseball to the Genesis in order to
compete head-to-head with Sega's own Sports Talk Baseball. Both
baseball games feature battery saves for season replays.
Virgin plans to release a wide spectrum of cartridge-based games
which will emphasize action and reflexes, as well. Muhammad Ali
Heavyweight Boxing (Sega Genesis) features action from a number
of angles, digitized sound and a tournament mode and World Trophy
Soccer (Sega Genesis) offers a tournament mode for up to eight
players. In addition, Virgin plans to unleash 16 on-screen hockey
teams in Super Slapshot (SNES), designed in conjunction with
Gordie Howe. Another SNES sports title is Super Slam Dunk where
the player controls one player on a five-person team.
On the personal computer side, there are not quite as many titles
announced for 1992. In addition to Road and Track Presents Grand

Industry News
Prix Unlimited (previewed in CGW #96, p. 38)
and Al Michaels Announces Hardball III (reviewed in CGW #97, p. 78), Accolade is releasing Summer Challenge. The game is a
multi-venued follow-up to their successful Winter Olympics-style tournament and features: pole
vaulting, high jumping, javelin hurling, hurdling
(400 Meter), cycling, kayaking, equestrian
events and archery. As in Winter Challenge, up
to ten players may compete in the tournament.
Psygnosis is also focusing on the Summer
Olympics with their Carl Lewis Olympic Challenge game. The game concentrates on track and
field events; uses a hefty amount of digitized film
footage and requires more team management
than reflexes in order to become successful.
Electronic Arts plans to update their classic football game and
present a John Madden Football '93 version of the game. Most
important in the new version is the addition of a "hurry-up" offense
and a split-screen play selection screen so that the defense can be
shifting players about and reacting to offensive formations as the
offense approaches the line of scrimmage.
Dynamix is also developing football game, but it will present
three-dimensional perspectives and on-field sequences such as haven't been seen, yet, on a computer screen. Finally, Konami's NFL
Video Master Football is a game that focuses more on strategy than
reflexes. Indeed, it is an armchair coach's dream game in that players
can coach any NFL team at any given point in a game on any
simulated Sunday. The game might more accurately be entitled NFL
Divinity.

Computer golf titles are also important to the sports category.

Gamers wishing to find out the latest on these
titles should read the "Golf News" article
(elsewhere in this issue).
Finally, Electronic Arts' as yet untitled
Michael Jordan in Flight product will feature
digitized, rotoscoped three-dimensional action of three-on-three or one-on-one contests.
Developed off actual video-taped footage of
Jordan himself, this product is potentially the
most realistic-looking sports game yet on the
personal computer. The game even allows
players to create their own "highlight" footage for viewing later a la Stunt Island's flight
footage.

Strategy
Many of the strategy games to be released in
1992 are enhanced versions of successful products from earlier years.
Electronic Arts celebrates the 500th Anniversary of Columbus'
landing with a new version of Seven Cities of Gold for both the
MS-DOS and Sega Genesis platforms. The new version is expected
to have an expanded world beyond the limitations of the first game.
New World Computing plans to capitalize on the success of Empire
by publishing a revised, enhanced and more challenging version,
tentatively called Empire Deluxe or Empire Gold. The same publisher is planning to transform the popular space conquest game played
on many AppleTalk networks, Spaceward Ho!, into an IBM game
that can be played via the network.
Another trend in strategy games for 1992 is an emphasis on
gambling games. Now, New World plans to release Vegas Games
for Windows and Konami plans to distribute the Spirit of Discovery
(Park Place) game, Beat the House. The latter allows players to test
strategies, as well as learn those of gambling expert Avery Cardoza.

INDUSTRY NEWS
By presenting tutorials for blackjack, craps,
roulette, slots and video poker, the MS-DOS
package takes aim at the Villa Crespo Software line which has become the standard in
gambling software. Meanwhile, Villa Crespo
has begun work on an enhanced version of
their budget-priced Casino Craps game and
started development on a premium roulette
simulation. Virgin, meanwhile, has not forgotten the 8-bit cartridge market and is releasing an NES version of their Caesar's Palace
gambling game for that machine.
Another style of strategy game that is becoming increasingly popular is the artificial
life genre. Maxis is preparing to publish SimLife, complete with more detailed biome development than was found in SimEarth and the chance to establish
a complete food chain for one's eco-system. Further, the game is
easier than SimEarth because, once the climate is set it is established
and does not change as per the GAIA model. SimLife is more
generous in terms of on-screen help than its predecessor was and
offers more interesting scenario possibilities than SimEarth did.
Walt Disney Software's Buena Vista label went another direction
with the development of artificial life on the computer. In this
strategy game, players try to create mutant armies that can defeat the
mutant armies of a mad scientist. To accomplish this, the player
selects a species with attributes similar to what he/she eventually
desires and breeds one of three virus types into the community. When
the mutants have the desired attributes, one can take them to war with
the opposing forces. Such a description only scratches the surface of
a game which is still largely clothed in secrecy.
Political simulations also seem to be making something of a
comeback in the strategic arena. Like the micro-management to be

found in Spectrum HoloByte's recently released Crisis in the Kremlin, Shadow President
from new player D.C. True (Dreams Come
True) is SimNation meets Global Crisis. The
database for the program is the CIA's World
Fact Book and players must use that information
balanced against the suggested actions of hi s/her
advisors in order to meet each global crisis. The
game appears to be a delicate blend of domestic
and international policy (which is, of course,
how it should be).
Konami has a strategy game for young children that could also be defined as edutainment.
Entitled Facts In Action and developed under
Park Place Productions' Spirit of Discovery
aegis, it is a multi-level Concentration-style
game that teaches children to associate inventors and inventions,
animals and characteristics, leaders and historical events, etc. The
company also developed a pure educational product, called The Body
Illustrated, that features a learning game and some beautiful graphics.
Previously announced strategy games include Interplay's Battle
Chess 4000, Buzz Aldrin's Race Into Space and Castles II; ThreeSixty's Theatre of War, Impressions' Air Bucks (see the preview in
this issue) and Spectrum HoloByte's as yet unnamed chess program.

And There's More
Finally, no matter how thorough we think we have been in describing the upcoming products and no matter how many pages we devote
to these two part reports on the Consumer Electronics Shows, we
always discover that there are additional worthy products on the way.
Nevertheless, that wraps our report on the spell of the technology,
the roar of the consumers for this year's Summer Consumer Electronics Show.

Short Term Dip Sends MicroProse Back to Square One
1991 was generally good for new issues and MicroProse (NASDAQ: MPRS) was no exception. The Initial
Public Offering was sold out at the high end of expectations and, until the last week of June, 1992, the stock
traded roughly sideways after increasing just about 50%
above its initial offering price. On June 29th, however,
the company saw the per share price drop beneath the
IPO price for the first time. One does not have to be a
technician to know what occurred on that day. The
company simultaneously announced that they would not
be shipping four highly expected (and, in some cases,
expensive) products prior to the end of the fiscal quarter
ending June 30th. The four products were: Darklands (a
state-of-the-art fantasy role-playing game), B-17 Flying
Fortress (a combat flight simulator), Mantis (an outer
space adventure) and David Leadbetter 's Greens (a golf
simulator with modem support). The latter was delayed
in order to launch the product, originally entitled Greens,
as a licensed product under the name of Leadbetter,
known as the "golf instructor to the pros." The former
three games could have been released, but would have
required updates in order to satisfy their customers.

Instead MicroProse opted to absorb the loss in the first
quarter of their fiscal year and believes that the addition
of the four products in the next quarter will more than
make up the difference. The revelation that MicroProse
could lose between $.16 and $.22 per share for the first
quarter sent the stock price plummeting. Young companies (in terms of having gone public) tend to make
analysts nervous when they do not have enough historical data with which to absorb earnings disappointments.
Therefore, such stocks tend to be fairly volatile around
earnings report time.
MicroProse has acquired British developer Vektor
Grafix since the disappointing announcement and expects, probably prior to press time, to announce the
acquisition of another company with which MicroProse
has had a longstanding relationship. With new acquisitions and a strong second quarter, MicroProse hopes to
recoup those gains and then some. As for now, the
earnings picture depends on the established products
pictured underneath the graph.

-

Review
Maxis Fills The Train Deficit With Japanese Imports

Leavin' On
That Noonday Train To Chiba
by Stanley Trevena
poor sister in the U.S. rail system) is a
vital part of their infrastructure. In Japan, the model offered enough reflection of their actual system to enable
A-Train III to tie with SimCity for the
Best Simulation of the Year Award
from Japan's Login magazine. A-Train
is the U.S. conversion of A-Train III.

Sight, Sound and Sense
TITLE:
A-Train
SYSTEM:
IBM AT, PS/2 S I00% Compatibles
PRICE:
$69.95
PROTECTION: None
DESIGNER:
Artdink
PUBLISHER:
Maxis, Orlinda, CA

t would be almost impossible to review this game without making
comparisons to the award winning
MicroProse game, Railroad Tycoon.
There are so few games dealing with
this subject matter, and Railroad Tycoon was such a hit, that all that follow
will be compared to this classic. Many
on-line discussions about A-Train were
started with messages like "How does
it compare to Railroad Tycoon? ", and
"Is it like SimCity? " To answer both
questions I would have to say that it is
neither. The game does have a rail managing component that plays a significant enough role in the game. It also has
a significant city development component. However, at the heart of this game
(notice the omission of the word "simulation") is a financial model that drives
the overall gameplay. All actions revolve around a central focus on profitability. This game stands on it's own
and is not a clone of either.
A-Train is the first Maxis game not
developed in-house. The first version
of A-Train was released in Japan in
April 1986. A-Train II was released in
Japan in July 1988 and was published
in the U.S. by Seika Corp. as Railroad
Empire. In December 1990, A-Train
III was released in Japan and has been
a consistent top-ten seller since. This is
not surprising when one considers that
almost everyone travels by rail in Japan
and even passenger transportation (a

I

The graphics are extremely clean,
whether they are viewed in hi-res VGA,
EGA or Hercules graphic modes. We
particularly liked the fading of day to
night and season to season as it is depicted in the VGA mode. From the
gamers perspective, it is fascinating to
float high above the city, watching the
countryside light up as night approaches. Unfortunately, gamers are
likely to be tired of the refrain I must
repeat with regard to sound support.
While most of the major sound boards
are supported, the sound effects themselves are very limited and players will,
as in too many games of late, want to
turn the background music off almost
immediately, just to save their sanity in
the long run.
The interface, that mystical landscape where the brain's wheel of progress meets the rail of the game's
parameters, is designed with logical efficiency. Since A-Train is heavily
menu-driven, a mouse is highly recommended, even though the game is playable from the keyboard. The menus are
all triggered from hot spots around the
frame of the view/edit window through
which the player can access such things
as the Satellite View, Bank, Stock Market, Growth Chart, Subsidiaries Information, Balance Sheet, Railroad
Operations, Subsidiaries, and Trains. A
Quick Menu option will replace the
Trains and Subsidiaries area with a
Sim City-like icon strip (my preferred
interface mode).

Robber Baron Agenda
In A-Train, often irreverently called a

cross between a model train set and a
Monopoly game, the player is provided

with six scenarios. Each scenario map
has at least one existing rail line that
connects to an outside town off the
map, providing passengers and materials for a fledgling town. Some scenario
maps are more developed than others
and provide the player with varying
degrees of challenge. The New Town
scenario offers , a basic game with nondescript geography; for instance, while
the Bay Area scenario allows gamers a
chance to develop industrial zones and
the lower part of the map. Gamers more
interested in creating fantasy empires
will opt for the Resort Development
challenge with its mountainous area
full of lakes and sociologically-minded
garners will choose the Multi-City
Connection with its group of pocket
residential areas waiting to be linked
and developed. Those looking for the
ultimate challenges will either choose
the Reconstruction scenario or Downtown Reorganization option, both presenting the gamer with significant
social/economic problems to be overcome.
To successfully develop a region, the
player will have to build a efficient rail
line to move passengers and materials
(little white boxes of abstracted building materials that may as well be called
"widgets") between population centers. The laying of track is fairly
straight forward. The manual gives
some tips on building a belt line and
stresses that this is the best type of line
for maximum development and profit.
Because of limitations in the rail model,
players will have to build some exotic
(and unrealistic) layouts to handle such
things as switching stations and
pseudo-signal towers. This is in sharp
contrast to the rich traffic handling features of RailRoad Tycoon. A player
cannot stop at a station traveling in one
direction and then, bypass that station
on the return trip without the use of

Review
twisted track layouts. Only basic levels
of scheduling and switching are available to the player. Storage areas must
be purchased and provided for trains
delivering and picking up building materials. The mechanism that drives this
function can be frustrating at times.
When a train stops it will pick up if it is
empty or drop if it is loaded.
The rail line provided at the beginning of the scenario will provide the
player with an initial supply of both
passengers and materials. The player
can supplement this supply by building
factories. The only limitation on materials built at a factory is that they must
be transported by the player before they
can be used. Local development by the
SimResidents can use the materials
within 10 blocks of the factory. Residential development is influenced indirectly by the player. Unlike SimCity,
the player does not stamp out residential zones with a cookie cutter. Residential development is a byproduct of the
players growing businesses. The process can be accelerated by the buying/clearing and selling of land in
growth areas. The entire map is divided
into blocks. Other types of player-developed properties include; Apartments, Lease Buildings, Commercial
Buildings, Hotels, Stadiums, Ski Resorts, Amusement Parks, Golf Courses,
Small Stations, and Big Stations. The
operations and profitability of these entities are always at issue and need constant attention.
Fortunately, advisors are available
for most of these establishments in order to prevent the player from making
major mistakes. If, for example, the
player wants to sell off a very successful apartment complex the apartment
manager will advise the player that they
are making a profit on that property.
The player need not listen to this advice
and can still sell the property.
Many players may be turned off by
the heavy financial spin of this game.
The player can dabble in stocks, buying
and selling 24 types of stocks complete
with price charts for the past 30 weeks.
Bank loans of 1, 2, and 3 year duration
are available at fluctuating interest
rates. All types of real estate can be
bought and sold. Financial operations
of the railroad have to be closely monitored to see if the expenses justify the
sales. All this attention to finances may
lessen some players "fun " and seem

abruptly. Check the Debt Total screen
under the Bank Menu and Report 1 for
Taxes Due often to assure proper reserve levels are available.
5.Shelter cash in real property at tax
time. Income tax is 50% while property
tax is 5%. It won't take the player long
to determine where the best place to
keep money is.
more like work. On the flip side, the
analytical gamer will have a numerical
feast.

Strategy Guide For The
New A-Train Executive
Getting started with A-Train can be
daunting. There are many rules that are
not, at first, apparent without a thorough reading of the manual. Here is a
list of some common mistakes made by
most new players when playing this
game, provided in an attempt to ease
the incline of the initial learning curve
and waylay potential disenchantment
with the program:
1.If track extends beyond a station
even one block it will appear as if the
trains are dropping and then picking up
the materials at the end of a line.
2.The passenger model revolves
around the worker schedule. Failure to
set one's schedules for 8:00 pickup in
residential areas and 18:00 for the return trip from work centers will send
passenger sales plummeting into the
red. Also, using anything but an AR III
for passengers and a GP 40 for freight
will net less than optimal income. Balance this against the purchase price.
3.Buying/clearing and selling too
much land in a new area under player
development will "steal " precious resources from the player and actually
prevent development. This open land
will draw small residential buildings
that require far less materials than the
commercial and industrial projects the
player wants to build. It can get real
frustrating watching the reserves creep
up to needed levels only to have a spurt
of residential buildings drain it away. If
too much cleared land exists, buy it up
and hold it until initial player development is complete.
4. The player must have enough cash
on hand to pay the bills. There is no
warning in this game when taxes or
bank loans come due. If the player is
short of cash the game will end

6.New players have a tendency to
locate their material storage areas right
next to a station. To maximize urban
sprawl, storage areas can be anywhere
within 8 blocks of the station. This also
dictates that stations be at least 15
blocks apart. Avoid making a round
trip from a station greater than 24hours, this will make scheduling much
more efficient.
7.Remove trains from service when
not needed. When areas are developed,
remove freight trains and convert to
passenger only lines. A train held in
reserve will not impact profits as much
as one being used inefficiently.
8.Above all else, GO SLOWLY. This
game can run up into the 100 year
range. You do not, and cannot, develop
a map in the first year. Doing too much
too soon will only lead to failure.

Steep Grade Ahead
I enjoy playing A-Train for the joy of
management rather than jumping
through the hoops necessary to meet
the victory conditions. Players who
manage to bankroll $50 million automatically "win." So what? I find that
the challenge of sculpting cities out of
the landscape, while trying to keep the
books balanced is the most satisfying
part of A-Train. Of course, having a
degree in Business and Computer Science may account for my bean counting, analytical dark side. Hopefully, the
tables printed along with this article
will serve as "penance" for such dastardly tastes (grin).
Of course, the primary question is,
"Will most players rate A-Train as
fun?" The answer is that many will not.
Like another Maxis product, SimEarth,
many players will be intimidated long
before they master this game. This is
unfortunate, as many people will miss
out on a fine program because of a
steeply graded learning curve.
The tables on page 42 will decrease
your learning curve for this program.

Review
A Train Charts

LucasArts' Indiana Jones and the Fate of Atlantis
by Charles Ardai

I

t must be difficult to come up with new

MacGuffins for Indiana Jones to track
down. ("MacGuffin " is what Alfred
Hitchcock called the item in a mystery or
adventure movie that all the characters are
trying to locate, retrieve, steal, kill for and
die to protect.) After an archaeologist has
found the Ark of the Covenant and the Holy
Grail, not to mention the sacred Sankara
stones of India, what's left? Tenure? Retirement? A lifetime of narrating PBS specials?

d the Fate
Indiana J
of Atlantis
SYSTEM:
IBM
PRICE:
$59.95
PROTECTION: Document Look-up
DESIGNER
Hal Harwood
PUBLISHER
Lucasfilm , San Rafael, CA

In Indiana Jones and the Fate of Atlantis
(Atlantis), scripter Hal Barwood comes up
with a considerably more satisfying answer:
Indy has to search for the fabled sunken
continent. He not only has to search for it,
but he has to find Atlantis, and quickly,
because his ruthless foes, the Nazis, are
trying to find it, too. Why? Because Atlantis
is the world's only source of "orichalcum,"
a powerful mineral which, in the hands of
the Third Reich, could create a near-invincible German army capable of achieving
Hitler's ultimate goal, world domination.
In other words, it is once again up to
Indiana Jones to find something no one has
been able to find for millennia; to fight off
hordes of evil-doers along the way; to use
his Yankee ingenuity to get himself out of
dozens of dead ends and deathtraps; and,
while he's at it, to save civilization as we
know it. This is no piddling, two-bit quest
to find a lost idol or a gold dagger; the quest
for Atlantis is a strong enough storyline to
hold its own next to any of the Indy films.
It has exactly the right combination of gravity, silliness, genuine scholarship and mystical mumbo jumbo to fit Indiana Jones like
a well-worn fedora. One can easily imagine
Atlantis being filmed and released as a
fourth Indiana Jones movie. (It was, in fact,
adapted and released as a comic book series
by Dark Horse comics.)
Atlantis is more fun than the Last Crusade
graphic adventure was, if only because
everything in that game was lifted from the
movie. Here, for the first time, gamers have
a chance to participate in a brand-new Indiana Jones story, discovering it along with
the characters. There is no way to predict
what sort of derring-do awaits around each
shadowy corner. As Indy says in Raiders of
the Lost Ark, "I don't know, I'm making it
up as I go. " This is what Indiana Jones, and
what adventure gaming, is all about: excitement and the genuine thrill of discovery.
Both come in large doses in Atlantis.

The Indy Pendant

Indy's quest begins when a German spy
steals a statue from him at gunpoint. To find
out more about the statue and the strange
pearl-like bead it contained, Indy hunts
down an old partner-in-crime, Sophia Hapgood. Once a respected archaeologist, Sophia has taken to calling herself a psychic
and giving lectures-cum-channeling sessions on the subject of Atlantis out of a
fleabag theater in New York City.
Once Indy has succeeded in getting into
the theater despite not having a ticket (improbably, when he flew out to New York he
neglected to bring so much as a nickel with
him), and in disrupting Madame Sophia's
Atlantean slide show, Indy gets to confront
Sophia backstage. After a bit of wellscripted banter (with which the game
abounds), Sophia shows him what orichalcum can do by inserting a bead of the stuff
into the mouth of an Atlantean pendant she
stole from a dig site in Iceland.
The bead goes in, the lights go off, sparks
fly, the computer screen shakes... sure
enough, this orichalcum is powerful magic.
Indy figures out at once what it takes the
game's Nazi scientists several additional
scenes to realize, that a tank, plane or bomb
powered by orichalcum would be many
times more powerful than ordinary ordnance. There is just one thing standing between the Nazis and the ultimate weapon:
the only place to get significant quantities
of orichalcum is Atlantis, and no one quite
knows where Atlantis is.
Clues to Atlantis' whereabouts are in the
hands of experts and crackpots scattered
around the globe, as are a handful of
orichalcum beads and other Atlantean relics
(such as Sophia's pendant). The Nazis want
to get their hands on all of the above: the
experts, the crackpots, the relics, the
beads... even Sophia, since she claims to be
in touch with the spirit of a dead Atlantean.
Needless to say, they would also like to get
their hands on Indy, since they have a couple of scores to settle with him.
The player's job is to ferry Indy around
the globe, from the jungles of South America to the frozen caves of Iceland, from the
sky above the desert of North Africa to the
deepest reaches of the Mediterranean Sea,
one step ahead of (and sometimes one step
behind) the Nazis. In each location, Indy
has to overcome one or more obstacles to
get information. In the Azores, for instance,
a dotty old professor will tell Indy where he
can find a lost dialogue by Plato (the real
source of the orichalcum legend) but only

if Indy will give him an Atlantean artifact.
Indy can get an artifact in Iceland, but not
until he has a spare orichalcum bead in order
to dislodge it from the ice in which it is
buried. Indy can get a bead from a temple
in Tikal, but not before he tells the temple's
guardian the name of Plato's lost dialogue.
However, he does not know the name of the
lost dialogue, so first he has to figure that
out ..
Interlocking puzzles of this sort are central to the structure of the game, and one
often has to shuttle back and forth from one
country to another before having everything one needs to solve a given puzzle.
This is rendered enjoyable by the fact that
travel is as simple as clicking on a means of
transportation and watching an arrow get
drawn on a map (as in the movies), as well
as by the fact that the settings are as lush and
exotic as anyone could want: a hot-air balloon over the Sahara, a posh hotel in Monte
Carlo, a colorful bazaar in Algiers, an alley
in New York, a labyrinth in
Crete and, ultimately, the mysterious heart of Atlantis.
The game captures the
globe-trotting quality of the
movies very well, showing
each location off to great advantage with striking background paintings and detailed
foreground animation. In Algiers, for example, a knife
thrower juggles his weapons
while his audience watches in
rapt admiration; in Monte
Carlo, a busy intersection is
perpetually criss-crossed by
pedestrians, any of whom Indy
can catch up to and talk with.
Many of the locations are several screens wide and feature
exceptionally smooth scrolling, and most also incorporate
the element of depth, with characters
shrinking appropriately as they recede into
the distance. Each scene also has its own
soundtrack, featuring samples of John Williams' various themes from the three films
and a good deal of original music written
for the game.
If the feel of the game is not perfectly
cinematic, it is because the graphics for the
various characters are still (literally) rough
around the edges and because an abundant
soundtrack does not quite make up for the
game's notable lack of sound effects. Spoken-word audio is also sorely missed; there
is a lot of dialogue in this game, and one
wishes after a few hours of reading speech
balloons that at least some of it had been
digitized. Nevertheless, Atlantis is a more
cinematic game than most and has a pace
and flavor appropriate to the movies that
inspired it.
Contributing to the pace is the by-now-familiar Lucasfilm point-and-click interface
(nine verbs, an inventory display, and a
large action window) which simplifies most
interactions to the point that they can be
accomplished with a minimum of effort.
The disadvantage of this interface is that it

occasionally leaves one wishing for verbs
one does not have available — I very much
wanted to "enter" the tent in Iceland — but
on the whole it is a good interface. It does
lead to a certain stylization of interaction,
Walker™" such as saying "Use tofu carton with Landwhen what one means is "Pour
the tofu on the floor in front of the upsidedown LandWalker™ to lubricate its path,"
but no parser is perfect. This one, at least,
permits low-frustration gameplay.

Indy Best Direction
Contributing to the flavor of the game, on
the other hand, is the balance of action,
ingenuity and wit it presents and the level
of each it demands of the player. What is
more unusual, the game as a whole has three
distinct plot "paths " from which a player
can choose after he has found Plato's lost
dialogue. Each plot direction (the three are
"Team, " "Wits" and "Fists ") features
scenes and puzzles that the other two do not,

Once Indy gets to Atlantis, things very
quickly proceed to the game's climax. Here,
there isn't much in the way of teamwork
since Sophia is fast becoming possessed by
the Atlantean spirit Nur-Ab-Sal, but there is
plenty of action and puzzle-solving. The
final scenes are exciting enough to serve as
a satisfying end to a very satisfying adventure.
Although the endgame is the same no
matter what, there are alternate solutions to
puzzles for especially dedicated players to
ferret out, and to encourage players to do
this, the game calculates both a "Current"
and a "Total" score based on how many
obstacles the player has overcome and how
he has overcome them. One can only get the
maximum number of Total I.Q. (Indy Quotient) points by finding all the various solutions to all the puzzles in all the paths of the
game. I doubt that many players will go to
this much trouble just to get a perfect score.
The point, however, is that the option is
there. Atlantis really gives garners
their money's worth, in terms of
quantity as well as quality.

Indy Long Run

making it possible to replay the game at
least twice without too much overlap. In the
Team and Wits paths, Indy gets to commandeer a Nazi submarine; only in the Fists
path, however, does Indy get to fight giant
Nazis hand-to-hand deep in the bowels of
the Cretan labyrinth. In the Team path, Indy
and Sophia have to work together to conduct a bogus seance; in the Wits path, the
same goal is accomplished with a rousing
car chase. Wits and Fists both offer a ride
on camelback across the Sahara; Team puts
Indy and Sophia in the hot air balloon.
Some puzzles are common to all three
paths, and the paths re-converge when Indy
reaches Atlantis, so it would not be accurate
to say that Atlantis contains three separate
games. However, Atlantis does contain a
whole lot more than one ordinary game, and
gives more than lip service to the goal of
interactivity. The designers have put an extraordinary amount of effort into creating a
game that tailors itself to the interests of a
particular player. A gamer who doesn't like
fist fights and action sequences can choose
a path that emphasises dialogue, and vice
versa. Never before has a game paid this
much attention to what the player wants.

Indiana Jones and the Fate of
Atlantis is the best Indiana Jones
game made so far and, since The
Last Crusade was quite good, this
means that Atlantis is better than
quite good. As graphic adventures
go, it is excellent; its shortcomings
are mostly shortcomings of the
genre. For instance, most of the
locations, picturesque as they are,
are comprised of only a few
screens each. The temple in Tikal
is all of one screen; Monte Carlo
in the Team path, all of two. What
is acceptable in a movie (letting a
single set stand in for all of a country) is less palatable in a game
whose apparent goal is to allow
players to interact with their environment.
Just as "stagy " is the designers' decision,
presumably in the interest of sparing the
player the annoyance of constant saving and
restoring, to let Indy have more than one
crack at solving most of the game's puzzles.
For instance, if one messes up the seance
sequence with gullible Alain Trottier in
Monte Carlo, one is able to lure Trottier
back to the table for an unlimited number of
re-tries. This is convenient, but it makes no
psychological sense — no one is that gullible. There has to be a better way, or at least
a less glaring way, to let the player avoid
excess disk-work.
These issues aside, Atlantis is an exuberant, funny, well-crafted and clever game
worthy of both the Indiana Jones name and
the Lucasfilm imprimatur. Fans of the
movies, as well as fans of games such as
Monkey Island and Heart of China, will
find plenty to enjoy. And who could dislike
a game that might, as a side effect, lead
young gamers to start reading Plato? No, for
that reason alone, Indiana Jones and the
Fate of Atlantis is Indy at his best.

Review

L-Zone Elevates Multimedia

Synergy's Game of Exploration Offers Bold
New Sights
by Tony Reveaux

TITLE:
SYSTEM:

L-Zone
Color Macintosh II or greater,
4 MB RAM, CD-ROM drive
PRICE:
T99
PROTECTION: None
DEVELOPER Synergy/lnfocity, Inc.
DESIGNER
Haruhiko Shono
PUBLISHER
Cameo Interactive, Ltd.; Tokyo
U.S. distribution by Invision
Interactive

L

-Zone is not so much a game as it is a fascinatingly

complex interactive exploration environment of poetic
technology. Those who liked Reactor's Spaceship
Warlock are likely to find L-Zone right smack in their time
zone — the far future. The player's character is brought down
into a hidden valley, right next to the deserted Dome City of
No Name. A sleek bullet train will, when one pulls the right
levers, whip the player down
into the labyrinthine depths of
the City. From there, players
are allowed to wander
through the different rooms
of strange and bewildering
machine systems, often feeling as though they may have
sneaked into an immense
combination of a planetary
monitoring station, biochemical manufactory and
nuclear power plant. The
good news is that nobody is
there to stop one from fooling
around!
These are weird-and-won-

drous yet sophisticatedly logical designs that were put there
to do a job — a big job. The object of the exploration is to
accomplish a lot of clicking around to see which of the
hundreds of buttons, levers, handles and screens are active.
When the player hits the jackpot on this multimedia "busy
box," magical things happen! Lights, gauges and video
screens activate, motors and pumps start, data storage devices
play, holograms of a skeleton and a brain appear, a view of
the City arises, urn-shaped canisters glow in colors and a
quirky robot is brought to life.
Be warned, however, L-Zone is not simply a software toy.
There are many places where players will have to use their
wits in order to advance
to the next step. Within one cloistered circular chamber, a
terrain mapping table displays satellite views of the planet.
One will need to go back to square one as it were, in order to
ever leave that chamber. At
another door, one may have
to find a "cutting" solution to
advance.
In an honorable nod to

Spaceship Warlock, an elevator wooshes player characters from one level to the
next, delivering one to a vestibule that hosts a control
console overlooking a conference area. In that area, a
robot whirrs on to halt at center stage. A ponderous view
screen swivels open to reveal
closeups of the nervous 'bot
under the crosshairs as the

player is offered a choice of three
wicked-looking assault weapons. A
wireframe model of the piece is rotated on the screen for convenient inspection, and then the real thing is
scissored out of an overhead pod. The
gun automatically zeros in on the target and beams, shoots or shells the
doomed droid dead center.
When the alarm sounds at the next
portal, the character will have to find
a rad solution before maneuvering
any further. 3D readouts show the
rad-levels and pinpoint one's position
in the tunnel system. When the final
chamber is reached, it might even be
helpful to review the operator's manual for Alien in order to ensure that
one can exit with a proper big bang.
Like Spaceship Warlock, L-Zone
was built on MacroMind Director. In
addition, it features 63 QuickTime
movies, seen as the landing sequence
and train tunnel travel, and a myriad
of viewscreen displays which are exquisite cameos of abstract animation.
Norikazu Miura's music and sound
effects enhance the unique atmosphere of L-Zone with subtle electronic rhythms that convey the secret
lives of machines. When L-Zone is
run on a Mac II system with 256 col-

ors, it will function well, but the dithered-down graphics will lack the richness of smoothly rendered, lustrous
surfaces and shadow detail that LZone displays in higher resolution environments. The image fills a 13"
screen, and with a larger area, such as
the new Mirror 16" Color Display, the
game's image will appear in the center. I have found the best way to enhance the big-screen playing
environment is to set the desktop pattern to black for a neutral surround.
Under System 7, it is possible to exit
L-Zone through the Application
Menu to work on other things and
then, return to the game in its holding
position. Once one quits, however, it
is sayonara — there is no way to save
and return to any position.
I have traveled through L-Zone
more than four times. Yet, with each
succeeding exploration, I discover
something that I had missed before; a
door or secret panel leading to yet
another room, or a view-screen that
had more visions to reveal or additional operational modes of a system
that I thought I had mastered. L-Zone
is the embodiment of technological
adventure in the future tense.

Review

Id software Puts New Perspective On A Classic
by Chris Lombardi
TITLE:
Castle Wolfenstein 3-D
SYSTEM:
IBM
PRICE:
$50 for 6 scenarios
PROTECTION: None
DESIGNER
Id Software
DISTRIBUTOR: Apogee , Garland, TX.

M

y first experience with a computer game was in 1983 with a
remarkable little program
called Castle Wolfenstein by Muse
Software. In Castle Wolfenstein, the
player controlled a little stick figure
representing an American GI trapped
deep within the prisons of a Nazi
stronghold. With only a gun and eight
bullets, the player had to creep from
room to room, quietly disposing of
guards and gathering more bullets,
bandages and The Secret War Plans
on his way to freedom. It was a great
game, requiring fast reflexes and
strategy, and what's more, it talked!
When the surprised Nazi guards
yelled out "Achtung! ", "Halt! ", and
"Schweinhund! ", it was the first time
I had heard a computer make more
than its obnoxious beep.
Now, Id Software has taken the basic
premise for Castle Wolfenstein and
given it, literally, a new perspective. No
longer can the player hover detachedly
(and safely!) over a little stick figure
while it struggles and dies within a
Nazi nightmare. Id has put the player
inside the head of Our Hero, now
named B.J. Blazkowicz, where s/he
will see first hand what it's like to
tip-toe cautiously past daydreaming
guards, to sprint frantically out of a
stream of lead, and to machine gun an
advancing SS Trooper in bloody detail. In Wolfenstein 3-D, the player is
"there" like no game I've ever played.

in an instant. The speed and fluidity of
movement truly draws the player in; so
much so that I found myself actually
craning my head back and forth as B.J.
scoped out a hallway, ducked my head
as B.J. sprinted for cover under fire and
leapt in my chair as B.J. spun around to
find himself face to face with an equally
surprised guard.
Though the graphic detail of the environment is sparse, it is gorgeous
nonetheless. The castle is decorated
beautifully with textured walls, and

Blood On The Saddle.
And On the
Reigns...And The
Horse...And...

loads of Nazi paraphernalia. Beautiful
murals and stained glass windows of
der Fuhrer, the German eagle, swastikas, are liberally hung about; chandeliers, columns, coats of armor and vases
decorate the officers' quarters; while

Let My People Scroll!
Much like Origin's Ultima Underworld, Wolfenstein 3-D is set in a
free-scrolling, texture mapped environment. Though less detailed than Underworld, the scrolling action is much
faster. Using the keyboard, mouse or
joystick the player can race through the
castle hallways at impressive speeds,
can glance side to side at nearly the
pace of one's head, and can spin around

until they catch sight of B.J., whereupon they give a startled expression
and a shout, and race toward B.J. with
pistols drawn. If B.J. should happen to
kill the guard with his animated knife,
pistol or machine gun that extends into
the screen like the swords and fists in
Ultima Underworld or Elvira, the
guard will give a scream ("Mien Lieben! " or just "Hiyeeee") and jerk back
spasmodically in a spray of blood. The
pneumatic pump of the machine gun,
communicated in both the sound and
the visual action, is frighteningly realistic.

blood stains, torture cages, prison cells
with the skeletal remains of POW's still
clutching the bars and other gruesome
sights attest to the brutality of the
Wehrmacht. The inhabitants of the castle, as well, are depicted in detail. The
guards goose-step along the hallways

As one can probably tell, Castle
Wolfenstein 3-D is extremely violent.
The first screen of the game, before
the title splash, is a pale blue mock-up
of the film industry's rating notice
with the rating PC-13, for Profound
Carnage — which may be putting it
lightly. When B.J. finishes his work
on a castle floor, there's a few dozen
bleeding corpses, dogs and men, piled
high in the hallways. Though I killed
hundreds of stick-figure guards in the
original Castle Wolfenstein and never
thought twice, the first-person perspective with the graphic detail and
digitized sound really brings the act of
killing home. A discussion of "implications " is best left to an editorial [EdSee this and the previous month's],
but I must warn those sensitive to
such things to steer clear of this one.
For those unfamiliar with the original game, the object of this scenario
is to work one's way through several
castle levels in order to face the Ultimate Bad Guy at the top level of the
castle. B.J. must scramble around, kill
guards and find goodies to keep himself supplied and fit. B.J. takes varying amounts of damage from enemy
fire — naturally, B.J. takes more damage the closer to the enemy he is. B.J.'s
physical state is communicated via a
percentage, from 0 (dead GI) to 100 (fit
as a fiddle), as well as through a mug

Review
shot at the bottom of the screen. Our
Hero is a square jawed American kid
(apparently raised on Wonder Bread
and lug nuts) whose eyes dart side to
side during the action. Besides grinning
evilly when he has found a new
weapon, his face changes to reflect his
health; the expression ranging from a
healthy, corn-fed gleam to a swollen,
post-bout Stallone impression.
B.J. improves his health by gobbling
up plates of sausage and kraut left lying
about the place, and keeps his guns
loaded with ammo clips stripped from
dead bodies and storage closets. In addition, there are bits of treasure,
hoarded artifacts and jewelry, that B.J.
can gather for extra points. Points become extra lives for B.J. at every
20,000 point milestone. The Nazis
don't leave everything out for wandering GI's to pilfer; most of the good stuff
is in secret rooms accessed by hidden
doors. While running around, ducking
machine gun fire, B.J. can strafe along
the walls hoping to find a secret panel.

The Sounds of Violence
While B.J. blasts his way to a Congressional Medal of Honor, there is always a sound track accompanying the
action. Most of the time it's the classic
hushed swing of spy-films, the rat-ta-

tat-tat of the trap set's top hat used for
the stereotypic "sneaking" scene, but
it's different for each castle floor.
Sometimes patriotic songs, Halls of
Montezuma or Anchors Aweigh, are
stylized into a melody. In one case,
there's a Morse Code message that bede-beeps along to the rhythm (which
someone on-line has actually decoded,
finding a rather interesting message).
Overall, the sound track is used to good
effect in building suspense and pulling
the player further into the experience.

There are six scenarios available for
Wolfenstein 3-D. The first is the standard "escape " scenario as in the original
game. The others like Operation: Eisenfause and, my favorite, Die Fuhrer
Die!, have different characters, scenery, music and story, though all end in
the assassination of some ultimate in-

carnation of evil. One special and important note here: the first scenario of
Wolfenstein 3-D is shareware, distributed by Apogee, a large distributor of
shareware games. For those unfamiliar
with shareware policy (as I was before
this article) it works like this: one is free
to get a copy of Wolfenstein 3-D (usually through a public bulletin board),
play it and decide if they like it. If one
wants to keep it, Apogee asks that they
register it — that is to say, pay for it.
Otherwise, one must erase it. The extra
scenarios for the game are not shareware and are only available through
Apogee. A complete six scenario package is available for 50 bucks.
Castle Wolfenstein 3-D is, with Ultima Underworld, the first game technologically capable of creating a
sufficient element of disbelief-suspension to emotionally immerse the player
in a threatening environment, even
when viewing it on a flat screen. I can't
remember a game making such effective use of perspective and sound and
thereby evoking such intense physiological responses from its players. I
recommend gamers take a look at this
one, if only for a cheap peek at part of
interactive entertainment's potential
for a sensory immersed virtual' future.

Computer Flight

From The Cockpit
Part Two: What

Are All Those Instruments?

by Timothy L. Trimble

P

art one of this feature (July 92,
CGW#96) covered the use of the
Artificial Horizon, Turn Coordinator, Slip Indicator, Airspeed Indicator, Directional Gyro, Altimeter and the
Rate of Climb Instrument. Although
this served as a good introduction to the
instrument panel and may be enough to
provide much enjoyment with Flight
Simulator, there are still many more
instruments that can be utilized. Most
of the those in Part One can be used for
VFR flight (Visual Flight Rules — flying via visual references) but would not
be sufficient for IFR flight (Instrument
Flight Rules — flying via instrument
references).
The next instrument we'll examine is
the Magnetic Compass. While everyone already knows what this instrument
does it is still good to mention that it is
not reliable for precise turns. After a
plane becomes level, after a turn, it will
take a few seconds for the compass to
straighten itself out. This is exactly
how it works in Flight Simulator.
One of the most important instru-

ments for IFR flight is the Omni-Bearing Indicator (OBI) with Glideslope
and the Nav 1 radio (just to the right of
the Altimeter on the standard instrument panel). Together these two instruments provide precise information
about the location of the aircraft in relation to transmitters on the ground.
The ground based transmitter is called
a VOR (Very high frequency Omnidirectional Range) which does an excellent job of transmitting a directional
signal along magnetic headings, also
called radials. The Nav 1 radio receives
this signal and tells the OBI which
magnetic radial the aircraft is sitting on
in relation to the VOR. This also requires that the pilot adjust the OBI degrees (two digits in the little window
inside the instrument) until the vertical
needle is centered and the From/To is
displaying "To." Once the needle is
centered then the degrees will show
where the aircraft is. For example, if the
aircraft is directly east of the VOR then
the OBI will show 90 degrees. Due
south would show 180 degrees. If
"From" is being displayed in the instrument then the degree reading would be

the opposite, such as 90 would be 270

and 00 would be 180. Remember, too,
that this is regardless of which way the
aircraft is facing. The effective range of
the VOR transmitter can be from 25 to
40 miles, depending on the altitude of
the aircraft.
The Glideslope of the OBI comes into
play when the aircraft is approaching
an airport for a landing. This is called
an ILS (Instrument Landing System)
approach. The vertical needle shows if
the aircraft is to the left or ri ght of the
approach path to the runway and the
horizontal needle shows if the aircraft
is too high or too low below the approach path. If the vertical needle is to
the right and the horizontal needle is
below the center of the instrument then
the aircraft is too far left and too high
above the proper approach path to the
runway. Adjustment of the degree indicator is not needed for an ILS approach.
This is where the Outer, Middle and
Inner Marker Lights are helpful as well.
These lights respond to transmitter beacons along the approach path to the
runway. The Outer Marker (OM) light
will light up and a beeper will go off

Computer Flight
when the aircraft passes over the beacon. This can be anywhere from four to
seven miles from the runway and designates the start of a final approach. The
Middle Marker (MM) signals the point
at which a missed approach (aborted
landing) is started and the Inner Marker
(IM) is usually placed at the threshold
of the runway.
The Distance Measuring Equipment
(DME - just below Time on the standard instrument panel) measures the distance (nautical miles) to the VOR that
is tuned on the Nav 1 radio. With Flight
Simulator the DME will also measure
the speed of the aircraft if it is flying
directly toward the VOR. With the
combination of the OBI, Na y 1, DME
and a good map, it is possible to determine the general position of the aircraft. However, for pinpointing the
exact location of the aircraft, the second
OBI and the Nav 2 radio can be used to
tune in a second VOR station. For example, with the use of a map and a
pencil, the pilot can draw a line from
the first VOR (on the map) along the
line of the OBI-indicated radial in degrees. The pilot then tunes the second

VOR via the second OBI, centers the
needle, and then draws a line from the
second VOR (on the map) to where it
meets the first line. The two lines intersect at the plane's current location. (It
may sound confusing but it is actually
quite easy.)
In Flight Simulator, the second OBI
can be switched over to become an
Automatic Direction Finder (ADF).
The ADF uses a circular dial similar to
the Directional Gyro and an arrow to
point to the exact direction from which
the transmitted signal is coming. The
Nav 2 radio is used for tuning the frequency of the ADF. Although Flight
Simulator uses ADF transmitters, real
aircraft can tune their ADF to AM radio
station antennae as well.
Although it is of little use in Flight
Simulator (so far), the Transponder
plays a very important role in pilot
communications. This instrument allows a ground-based radar controller to
assign a "tag" (number) to an aircraft,
allowing the radar system to track the
aircraft's progress. The Air Traffic
Controller (ATC) will tell the pilot to
"squawk ident " a four-digit code on the

Transponder, sending a signal to ATC,
and allowing the controller to assign
the signal to a "blip " on the radar
screen. Once this "blip" has been identified, the ATC will be able to track and
direct the aircraft, even amidst heavy
air traffic.
This discussion of the instruments in
Flight Simulator represents a fraction

of the material that is available for pilots and armchair pilots alike. Many
publications and materials that are prepared for use in the "real" world of
flying can be applied to the world of
Flight Simulator — with an incredible
amount of accuracy. So, perhaps, this
insight into instruments will encourage
gamers to attempt more than just a casual flight through the towers of the
World Trade Center or a carefree buzz
by the Golden Gate Bridge. Now, it's
time to see what can be accomplished
with the instruments.
Once again, this is Timothy Trimble,
"From the Cockpit" squawking an
ident of 1224 for an ILS approach to
SFO, saying so long till next time.

Foreign Correspondence

Over There
A Time to Fly
by Paul Rigby

arrier

is the latest flight simulation under development
by MicroProse UK. Martin Moth and Leo Fouhy, who
are working on Harrier, offered their thoughts on the
project. "We've had a lot of help from RAF Wittering
2330CU. We had the Station Commander say that 'if they're
going to do a flight sim they might as well do it properly',"
said Martin.
MicroProse is very proud of the new graphic engine they
have developed for Harrier. "It is a fractal based landscape, a
bit similar to Midwinter 2, but it will be gourad shaded so that
it will be very smooth," explained Martin. Gourad shading
actually takes the individual polygons and smooths them out.
In addition, the join cannot be seen, resulting in an, apparently,
seamless landscape. "You will fly down valleys rather than
over them," explained Martin. "Falcon 3's landscape started
it with its fractal landscape but it was only a tiny portion of
the whole game world. Beforehand [ie: before Falcon 3.0] you
only saw flat land with triangles and pyramids bolted on. We
have taken it further so that you can, literally, scan a map into
the computer and the computer will work out spot heights and
so on."

H

The missions will include the standard primary/secondary
target situation, where the player is told where to go, to shoot
up the target and return to base. However, there will also be a
full campaign system. Here one will be able to run a campaign
and take total control. This will involve flying out on reconnaissance missions returning and deciding to destroy specific

targets. The exciting aspect of supplies is that it is possible,
whilst blowing up installations, destroy a bridge, for example,
that just happens to be on the player's supply route. No
supplies would be received until after the bridge is repaired!
The basic fighting area is Hong Kong, fighting against the
Chinese, "Which is something, generally, that no one else has
done," said Leo. "You'll see all sorts of different weaponry
that may not have appeared before in games because the
Chinese have a lot of old stuff as well as the new. However,
we're making a few assumptions. For example, that they've
got hold of some good Russian equipment such as MiG29s.The sub-types simulated will include the AV8B/GR5 and
the GR7 night attack version.
Release is due sometime around Christmas on the IBM with
Amiga to follow in early '93.
An interesting release is due out from Impressions in September. Called Caesar, this game is all about construction,
ruling, defending and pacifying. The player stars as an ambitious Roman official bound to become the Emperor. In order
to rise through the ranks and become Emperor, players must
prove their worth. They will be judged by various criteria: how
peaceful things are, how well-off the citizens are, how cultured they are and how, if at all, the players have extended the
glory of the Roman Empire. When players have excelled at
these they will be promoted to a more prestigious place, where
the cycle is repeated, and so on.

Foreign Correspondence
Features include re-designing the city, building from scratch
(forums, temples, etc), constructing walls, roads and so on
outside the city. Combat is included. However, if players also
owns Cohort, they can boot that up and play the combat
sequences in full tactical splendor. Similar, in theory at least,
to the Interlocking Game System between Rules of Engagement and Breach.
Ragnarok was a time, described in Norse mythology, when
the gods assembled and took part in an apocalyptic battle
which sounded the end of the world and the beginning of a
new one. It is also the name of Imagitec Design's new strategy
game based upon the ancient game of King's Table, played
by the Norse peoples for many generations. The background
plot to the game sees Odin, in disguise, carry a King's Table
and a batch of special pieces that represent the figures that will
take part in the battle from place to place. Odin is fated to die,
but he is determined to cheat death. His solution relies on
finding the right strategy to defeat his future foes. How better
to test his strategies than by playing against that fickle and
unpredictable beast — man.

In the game the player takes the role of Odin and plays his
version of King's Table against various villagers (who have
their own personalities and style of play). The game itself is
a sort of chess, tactical-type game but played on a board 11 x 11
square with six different types of square. Once one villager is
defeated, Odin's sum of tactical knowledge increases enough
to move onto a tougher opponent. Apparently, the ultimate
opponent will be Loki himself — the toughest cookie in the
game. Once he has been defeated Odin will have found his
successful battle strategy. All of the well-known (and some
not so well-known) legendary characters will be included.
When two pieces meet the game will show an animation
vaguely reminiscent of Battle Chess. There will be major
differences, though. The animation will not slow the gameplay down, as it takes place in a secondary animation window
and, reportedly, the player will never become bored by this
sequence. Possibly because the animation will be varied. The
speed of the game is reportedly high as is the quality of the
AI. Release on the IBM and Amiga, probably on the Mirage
label, should be around a month away.
Anyone who would like to contact me, can do so on CompuServe (75300,1503) or by mail to 20 Malvern Road, Liverpool, England, L6 6BW [please include three 'international
reply coupons' for a reply].
Note: The above games, and any of the other games mentioned in "Over
There" in past issues, can be obtained from:
Computer Adventure World, 318 Kensington, Liverpool, England, L7 0EY.
Tel: 01144-51-263-6306
Premier Mail Order, Trybridge Ltd., 8 Buckwins sq., Burnt Mills,
Basildon, Essex, England, SS13 1BJ.
Tel: 01144-268-590-766 Fax: 01144-268-590-076
Software City, Unit 4, BDC, 21 Temple Street, Wolverhampton, WV2
4AN. Tel: 01144 902 25304. 24-hour credit card hotline: 01144 902 25304.

All of the above telephone numbers assume one can dial
direct. If anyone has any trouble contact the international
operator.

Bestseller List

Sneak Preview

Fasten YourSafetyBelts

The Captain has Turned On The

f one recalls the beginning of the
classic film Casablanca and the
segues in every Indiana Jones
movie, it is easy to envision a map upon
which lines are drawn from one point
to the next symbolizing the character's
travel routes. At the end of Casablanca,
of course, is the famous airport scene
with a DC-3 Dakota playing its part in
the lives of characters the world has
come to love. I mention this only because after spending some time with
Impressions' Air Bucks, I could hear
Humphrey Bogart's voice saying,
"Alan, this is the beginning of a beautiful friendship. " As La Marseilles
played in my head, that fateful airplane
took off.
Today Templehoff, Tomorrow
The World!
Many wags at the CGW office have
called Air Bucks "Railroad Tycoon
with wings " ("Runway Tycoon?").
Frankly, they are not far from the
truth. The preview copy we received promised and, more importantly, delivered a lot of game. Air
Bucks (or is it "Air Buck$?") is an
airline empire-building game that is
most easily compared to Sid
Meier's Railroad Tycoon. In both
games, players must build transportation routes between cities, generate income and triumph over three
competitors. The good news for
those who were frustrated with always playing against the computer
opponents in the latter is that Air
Bucks allows up to four human opponents to play (although it is pretty
awkward in its present implementation). In Air Bucks, as in Railroad

I

Tycoon, players start with little
more than money and a "world to
conquer" (er, develop). In these important regards. One can see the
flying locomotive at the end of
Back to the Future, Part III and
smile knowing that such is the stuff
games are made of.
Air Bucks puts the player in the role

of a transportation mogul in the post
World War II era. In a manner of
which even Howard Hughes would
be proud, players begin each game
with a single DC-3 (Dakota) and
landing rights in Florida. Armed
with $100,000, play takes wing as
new basing rights are secured,
planes are purchased and an economic empire is forged through the
perils of global politics and vicious,
cutthroat competition.
From Props to Jets to SSTs
While the DC-3 begins the game as
the queen of the skies, the DC-6
quickly becomes available, as do 40
years of other aircraft over the
course of the game. Like the Grasshopper to 4-2-0 Norris upgrade in
Railroad Tycoon, each new vehicle
is anxiously awaited in hopes of
providing better, faster and cheaper
service. The advent of jets and supersonic airplanes has a "revolutionary" effect on the marketplace
as well. Air Bucks is definitely a
game where it pays to keep an efficient fleet running and even older
airplanes will continue to see service for many years as they move
from "main" routes to secondary
"short hops."

As in RRT, the strategy of selecting
the right cities to service is crucial.
The economic model presented in
Air Bucks centers on cities which
are categorized by three sizes:
small, medium and large. Many
"small" locations, however, exist in
strategic locations such as Guam
and the Azores. These are useful for
providing "hops" for planes which
do not have long, transoceanic
ranges.
Each city will sell the landing rights
to its one and only local airport to
up to two players in the game, so it
is imperative that you do not get
"squeezed out" by the competition
from the larger ones. Even if this
should happen, there is still plenty
of good to be made on "short hops"
between smaller cities if you have a
monopoly there (and your prices
aren't so outrageous that people refuse to use your service — but you
sure can gouge them a bit). Fortunately, the world is not always a
predictable place.
Booms, Busts and The
Old Shell (Oil) Game
While the locations of cities never
change on the global map, their size
can be scrambled before play begins. This keeps the replay value
up, assisted by the many random
events that occur during play.
Newspapers will deliver historical
headlines that might effect business, but the most crucial variable
is the price of oil. The cost of fuel
is the cost of doing business to an
airline (well, that's an exaggera-

tion, but not by much). Profits are
tied (sometimes, as in real life, all
too closely) to the price of petroleum. Airlines must become very
competitive when fighting for
shrinking consumer dollars through

narrower profit margins. The competition is downright vicious; no,
it's beyond vicious. It made me stop
and think about what the suicide
rate must be for airline presidents.
Yikes!
Like RRT, Air Bucks is played in
real time with a "cash register"
ringing up the player's balance
moment-by-moment. It will go up
and down in the twinkling of an eye
as tickets are sold and overhead
costs are paid out with each "tick"
representing a day of real time. Finances work largely on a straight
cash flow basis, but loans can be
garnered and stock issued (however, players should only consider
these options in times of dire need).
By popular demand (Air Bucks has
already had a "European version"
released and received a good deal of
feedback from it, the changes for
which will be implemented in their
"U.S. version"), players will be allowed to buy and sell stock in their

competitor's business, just like in
Railroad Tycoon.
"Control freaks" (players who love
to manipulate the minutiae of
games, even if it is far below the
level of management which they
are simulating in the game) will
love Air Bucks. Planes can be individually custom fitted with tailored
seat and cargo designs. Thus, players can add or subtract First and
Coach Class seating or cargo space,
mixing and matching these three
elements at will (for a minor cost in
time and money, of course). Fares
are strictly player-defined and set
by each specific leg of an airline's
route (there can be up to eight stops
per route, so the fare rates can become quite detailed). Airplane
maintenance level and fleet "customer service " levels for passengers can also be adjusted to suit.

The Joyous Stress of Being an
Air Traffic Controller
As if managing your company's
purchases and policies were not
enough, planning your airline
routes, both in securing the choicest
basing rights and getting the right
planes to fly between cities at the
right fares, is the real core of Air
Bucks. Players will become deeply
immersed in the details. Knowing
when to add another plane to an
existing route, when to lower fares
(or try to get away with raising
them), determining the value of fast
non-stops over long distances versus slow, short hop routes and so
forth are all problems that must be
solved at the player's desk. The
planners and schedulers out there
are going to find themselves in an
avionic dreamscape while the "roll-

the-dice-and-move-your-mice"
style of gamer will be reaching for
the airsick bag, dizzy from the mental overload.

Not Just Solitaire, Either!
Air Buck$ must be played by four
players, but any or all may be computer or human players, giving the
game a multi-player flexibility that
Railroad Tycoon lacks. In the copy
examined, multiple human player
games were only possible at one
computer, but the publishers are
considering adding modem play for
the U.S. edition of the game. As an
enthusiastic multi-player modem
gamer, this is a move I greatly applaud. There is a nice feature which
allows the computer and human
players to take over for each other
at any point in the game, too. In this
way, you can tap into a competing
airline and sell off the basing rights
you need (heheheh) or turn your air
empire over to the computer to optimize for a few minutes. (Not that
I would ever do such a thing.)
Thanks to playing Air Bucks for this
preview, I've become deaf to the
siren call of a stack of other new,
waiting games (not to mention my
loved ones, the house and all of
those other things that promptly get
ignored when a game like Civilization, Railroad Tycoon or Air Buck$
enters one's life). It's just so hard to
hear the clamor of responsibilities
over the revving revelry of quad
airplane engines taking off to deliver happiness to far away cities.
Pass the honey-roasted peanuts,
please. I'm looking forward to a
long flight. (Oh, look! They're
showing Casablanca.)

Review

Interstel's Dusk of the Gods
by Allen L. Greenburg

TITLE:
Dusk of the Gods
SYSTEM:
IBM
PRICE:
$69.95
PROTECTION: Documentation Look-up
DEVELOPER: Event Horizon Software
PUBLISHER: Interstel, Webster, TX

Lost causes are not particularly
popular in today's uncertain times.
With the exception of some political
struggles, as well as many arcade
games imported from Europe, the idea
that certain battles are meant to be
fought passionately, yet without hope
of victory, is largely a concept of the
past. The classic "noble warrior " who
enjoyed the privilege of an unavoidable
and glorious death in combat was embraced by the Viking culture which
flourished one thousand years ago in
Europe and the North Atlantic. The mythology of these people is unique in that
it describes a race of gods who live with
the prescient knowledge of their own
death. Dusk of the Gods (Dusk), a role
playing game from Interstel, is based
on this mythology.
According to Norse legend the chief
god, Odin, ripped his own eye from its
socket in order to be granted the privilege of drinking from a well of knowledge and wisdom. Hence, he learned of
Ragnarok — the destruction of his race
following a war with the evil Loki and
his progeny. To prepare for this battle,
Odin instructed a group of warrior
women, the Valkyries, to gather newly
dead heroes from earth's battlefields
and carry them to Valhalla — Odin's
great hall in Asgard. There, the heroes
found new life along with non-stop partying and an all-you-can-feast menu.
This way, Odin hoped to assemble an
army with which he could defeat Loki

and thwart his inevitable fate. In Dusk,
the player takes on the role of one of
these fallen heroes and agrees to help
Odin by accomplishing certain tasks
which the chief god, largely for contractual reasons, is unable to complete
himself.
Dusk's graphic screen shows an
oblique view of the hero's surroundings and scrolls in all directions as the
character is moved along under the
guidance of the mouse, joystick or keyboard. Asgard is essentially a series of
partially interconnected rooms and
buildings, the contents of which become visible as the hero enters them.
Inside most of the rooms are non-playing characters (NPCs) with whom the
player can converse. Outside are meadows, forests and caves. In the open air
are other NPCs, both friendly and hostile, some of whom must be met in
combat. A character screen containing
the hero's inventory, armor and health
status ingeniously slides on and off the
main graphic screen as it is needed.
An amazing amount of research has
been invested in Dusk. For some reason, the game's designers seem to have
felt compelled to include nearly every
character and story from their studies in
the final product. In a manner which
recalls the boy-scout activities of King
Graham, from Sierra's King's Quest
series, the player will be deluged with
requests for help. Becoming a sort of
horn-helmeted social worker, the hero
will hear from deities, giants and humans — all with personal problems.
Players must learn about, and solve,
such little-known conflicts as the one
between the two divine factions, the
Aesir and the Vanir. More popular subjects include the famous literary team,
Beowulf and his dragon. There is also
the matter of recovering and repairing
the hammer belonging to Thor, god of
thunder. The resolution of each of these
problems contributes a measure of
strength and stability to Odin's army
against evil.
For each conversation, the player is
presented with several informationwindows, full of monologue from the

NPC. The hero may then further quiz
that character on certain key words and,
as has become almost an industry
standard in this genre. Some key words
remain a secret until they are identified
during a discussion with some other
NPC elsewhere in the game. In these
situations, players will frequently need
to jot down messages to themselves
such as "Remember to ask Hyrrokin
about Skidbladnir." Spelling counts.
Combat and magic are also involved
in the game. Naturally, each hero or
heroine has a rating in each of these two
areas. This is significant because combat is not merely an arcade exercise in
Dusk. Rather, the player simply clicks
on the appropriate weapon icon once
the on-screen hero is properly positioned for a fight. The effectiveness
with which that weapon is wielded, of
course, depends on the combat rating.
Magic, true to Norse legend, is based
on a series of runes, each of which is
associated with a different spell. Of
course, the effectiveness of casting said
spell is dependent on the character's
magical ability. Both runes and weap-

onry are scattered throughout the game
and the hero/heroine may gain additional powers by worshipping at a temple belonging to one of the chief gods.
These powers are temporary and the
player will often be forced to experiment with them in order to discover
their nature.
One of the most interesting aspects of
Dusk is its real-time character generator, although the player may elect to
use one of the pre-generated characters.
Since the Valkyries may not select a
live warrior for Valhalla, the player is

Review
given about a minute during which a
young hero must leave home, study,
worship whichever god he or she
pleases, fight wars, grow old and die.
This extremely compressed life span
determines which god will most favor
the character during his or her afterlife,
as well as the person's aptitude for
fighting and spellcasting. The hero may
die again while in Odin's service, but
only to come back to life in Valhalla
with all equipment intact.
The action takes place in several
realms. Asgard is quite bland — much
like an upper-class retirement community. Connecting it to Earth, otherwise
known as Midgard, is the famous rainbow bridge which is guarded by the
extremely sensitive Heimdal. Midgard
presents far greater dangers than Asgard and features the dangers to be
found in the darkened, underground
caverns and dungeons of any typical
CRPG.
The Norse legend not only predicts
the fall of the gods, but also indicates
that a new family of gods waits to take
their place. In Dusk, Ragnarok will occur in spite of all efforts to prevent it. If
the hero is successful, however, the evil
forces will lose much of their strength

and the original gods may yet survive.
One can only wonder what these beings
will do for entertainment once Ragnarok is behind them and all of their
problems are solved. Although Inter-

stel has found some rich material on
which to base a role-playing game,
most players will probably find Dusk to
be a very disappointing experience.
There is a monotonous uniformity in
the way each character and his or her
story are presented in the program. After interviewing even a small number of
NPCs, the information soon begins to
read as though it were coming from a
tiresome museum guidebook. The text
itself is written as though it were to be
delivered by elementary school children in a class play. Likewise, the

game's VGA graphics generally lack
imagination and barely manage to
storm new heights of adequacy.
A major problem with Dusk concerns
its instruction manual. Again, this book
appears to be the result of some impressive research efforts. However, its
many stories and pages serve the program's copy protection scheme far better than it does the player. Most of the
book contains definitions and background material which may or may not
be of interest. The instructions for actual game-play, however, are disorganized, confusing and in desperate need
of a competent proofreader.
The gods and heroes who populate
Norse mythology have generally been
depicted as beings who are passionate
in their various loves, conflicts and
deaths. Those art forms which have
most successfully drawn on this material— Richard Wagner's monumental
musical drama The Ring of the
Nibelung or Marvel Comics' successful reworking of the thunder god Thor
into a super-hero — have certainly not
ignored these aspects. Dusk's lack of
emotion, along with its uninspired
graphics, make it far less appropriate
for recreation than for education.

Review

Plays Great
Less Filling
hen Scorpia finishes a dungeon romp in the shadowy
caverns of her New York domicile, the high priestess
of adventure and role-playing games confesses to
playing one of the solitaire games in QQP's Solitaire's Journey (previewed in CGW #95, p. 100) in order to get in a quick
game and relax. M. Evan Brooks, one of the dominant figures
in CGW's flag-rank of military reviewers, uses the same tactic
with the same game to remove the battle fatigue after one of
his momentous campaign games. CGW's publisher opts for
Pipe Dream in the Microsoft Entertainment Pak for Windows
#2 whenever he needs a quick escape from the pressures of
mahogany row. CGW's editor is more apt to pick up his mouse
for a fast rubber of Omar Sharif on Bridge or a furtive foray
into Villa Crespo's budget-priced and smoke-free casino in
Casino Craps. Assistant editor and wargame guru Alan Emrich can't seem to get away from the big guns, so his favorite
"quick" game is Villa Crespo's On Target.
The truth is that even garners who would be expected to have
the most sophisticated tastes need light quick challenges that
can satisfy their desire for a challenge without satiating either
their schedules or their hard drives. What they need, to paraphrase the beer commercial, is something that plays great, but
is less filling with regard to time and disk space. This article
is designed to provide a quick overview of this style of game.

W

Gorillas on the Disk
With over one half million units sold the Microsoft Entertainment Packs (MEP) are the Gorillas of the Gaming Lite
Jungle. You know what we mean: where does a gorilla sit?
Wherever he wants to. If theories about large numbers of
pirated games are true, the question is: how many copies of
MEP are there? Who knows?
What we do know is that Microsoft's Entertainment Packs
are the leaders in the gaming lite category. The idea behind
the MEPs is to provide quick gaming experiences from within
the Windows environment for the traditional Microsoft customer. The marketing spiel on each box clearly signifies that
Microsoft thinks the target machine for MEPs is the office
computer. "No more boring coffee breaks." "You'll never get
out of the office." "Only a few minutes between meetings?
Get in a quick game of Kotski." Whether played at the office
or at home, MEPs provide relaxing short term diversions from
whatever it is that's stressing you out, be it boss, spouse or
gorilla.
The first two packs are built around an MEP version of a
successful DOS based game. MEP #1 features Tetris for
Windows. Tetris is an addictive game designed by Alexy

Pazhitnov and Vadim
Gerasimov of the USSR
Academy of Sciences
Computer Center in
Moscow. The DOS version in the U.S. was published by Spectrum
HoloByte. The flagship
game in MEP #2 is Pipe
Dream, the Windows
version of the popular
Lucasfilm action-strategy game. MEP #3 promotes Fuji Golf on the cover, but the real winner here is a
Windows version of the old computer game called Life. The
MEP version is called LifeGenesis and is made up of both the
mathematical cell-generation simulation (of the original Life
program) and a game based on that model.
In addition to Tetris, MEP #1 contains Taipei, Minesweeper,
TicTactics, two solitaire card games, Pegged and a series of
screen savers. Taipei is a solitaire version of mah jongg;
Minesweeper is an interesting mind puzzle game in which you
try to clear minefields. It is a game of logic with just enough
luck thrown in to make it either fun or maddening (depending
upon your psychological make-up).
TicTactics is a 3-D version of tic-tac-toe. Pegged, a computer version of the old wooden-block-and-golf-tee mind
game in which you try to jump "pegs" in such a way as to have
only one "peg" remaining at the end.
Beyond Pipe Dream, MEP #2 provides diversionary action

with JigSawed, Rodent's Revenge, Stones, RattlerRace, two
solitaire games and more screen savers. JigSawed is an interesting little program that takes a bitmap (you can provide your
own if you like) and scrambles it into a jigsaw that you put
back together on your screen.
As mentioned above MEP #3 contains LifeGenesis. This is
a new version of the old Life computer program created in
1970 by mathematician John Horton Conway. If you have
never experimented with Life (the program) then buy MEP #3
just to get it. The program is built upon three simple rules that
govern the birth, life and death of individual cells. Watching
the program execute these three rules can almost be a mystical
experience as you watch computer entities grow, shrink, mate
(create), attack (destroy), live and die (all in abstract but very
understandable forms). Beyond the program itself, LifeGenesis contains a game based on the three basic rules. You can
play against another human or the computer. LifeGenesis is

absolutely fascinating stuff and an important little piece of
computer software history.
Another interesting program is a Japanese creation, Fuji
Golf. Although light-years behind Microsoft Golf (Microsoft's new golf game based on Access' Links golf game),
Fuji Golf is an enjoyable little program that you can modify
for humorous effect. Fuji Golf contains separate text files that
contain the names of golfers and their handicaps. The game
comes with a sizable list of Japanese named golfers. Use your
word processor to change the names of the low handicap
golfers to those of your friends. Modify the names of the high
handicappers to those of your enemies. If you don't have any
enemies, change the high handicappers to the names of incumbent politicians. The program will randomly select computer
controlled golfers to play your round with you. Who knows,
you might get Dan Quayle with a 22 handicap!
There is also a text file used by the program to pull up
appropriate quotes for events in the game (such as "looks like
I hit the yakuza, Jim"). You can have all kinds of fun changing
the lines, and seeing the effects in the office during your
federally mandated 10 minute break every two hours.
Unlike Magilla Gorilla, when people see the Microsoft
Entertainment Packs in the store window, they'll "love 'em,
buy 'em, they're really ideal..." if what they are looking for is
"gaming lite"!
Epyx Proportions
While a little harder to find, perhaps, two entries from long
time publisher Epyx certainly fill the bill as "software lite."
Chip's Challenge is a set of addicting, puzzle solving levels

of play. Each puzzle is a Lemmings-like experience in logic
and a quick fix for testing the acceleration speed of one's
brain. Their Getaway package is a black & white foray into
software designed specifically to kill time on a laptop computer. The six games in Getaway include no documentation
(the installation instructions are printed on the disk's label)
and offer a slightly demented variety of old favorites. Twisted
Word Salad anagrams, a "reverse-Tetris" Cascade game and
a spatial-logic dilemma called Stuffin' the Briefcase were
some of the more interesting of the six games included in
Getaway. Others included Dominoes, a couple of solitaire
card game variations and a Totem Pole game that bears a
striking resemblance to Mastermind.
Sierra Plays it According to Hoyle
A trilogy of full-priced Sierra games offers a wide variety
of lite gaming. The Official Hoyle Book of Games series
features a sextet of family favorites in Volume One (including

Cribbage, Crazy 8s, Gin Rummy, Hearts, Klondike Solitaire
and Old Maid). Many of these will look very familiar, indeed,
to users of The Sierra Network, which is another excellent
source for "lite" gaming (and boasts a new $12.95 per month
flat fee structure). The second volume concentrates on 28
varieties of solitaire card games while the third volume offers
another half-dozen family favorites, this time including Backgammon, Pachisi, Yacht (which is a Yahtzee clone), Dominoes, Checkers (the animated frog pieces are very cute) and
Snakes & Ladders. This latter package offers VGA level
graphics and a stereo soundtrack (which the others lack), but
is priced fifteen dollars higher then the first two volumes at
$49.95.
Volumes One and Three each feature multi-player games
with a variety of characters from Sierra's many products to
play against. Yes, even Leisure Suit Larry is there to be
challenged. More conventional "human(ized?)" computer opponents can also be found aplenty and the simulated multiplayer environment comes off pretty well in these packages.
Sierra's foray into "budgetware" is their $9.95 (pre-printed
on the packaging as "marked down" from $14.95 — although
we know of no copies released at the higher price) Crazy
Nick's Software Picks series. Each features two or three games
of varying quality with VGA / EGA graphics and full sound
support. Again, coattailing onto their already commercially
successful family of Sierra characters, these thin sliced packages include Roger Wilco's Spaced Out Game Pack (with Ms.
Astro Chicken, Monolith Burger and Sand Skimmer), Parlor
Games With Laura Bow (where it's no mystery that this
package includes Dominoes and Yacht), Robin Hood's Games

of Skill & Chance (with Archery, Nine Men's Morris and
Sticks to make the Renaissance fair), King Graham's Board
Game Challenge (featuring Sierra's oft regurgitated Checkers
and Backgammon) and, finally, concludes with Leisure Suit
Larry's Casino (which is a dive featuring a Slot Machine,
Black Jack and "Poker"). Gambling aficionados may want to
stay clear of this latter product, for Leisure Suit Larry's
Casino is to gambling games what Larry himself is to a
desirable date for your 15-year old daughter (the Poker game,
by the way, is really Video Poker).
Realizing a good market when they see one, Sierra is not
quitting here, either. Produced by Dynamix but sold under the
Sierra label with be the first two of many projected Take a
Break series games. This full-priced ($49.95), fast-paced
"baby blockbusters" are both slated for release in August and
covering two of America's favorite pastimes which have not
been overexposed as computer games. The first is entitled
Take a Break Pinball and includes five different "machines,"
each based on different Sierra adventures and characters. This

is slated to be a full-scale graphic tour de force from Dynamix,
featuring animated backglasses, interactive animated surprises and a sophisticated soundtrack.
The second, Take a Break Crosswords, features over 350
different puzzles with clues provided at varying degrees of
difficulty. Mercifully, for the crossword "impared," a special
hint feature is included for those particularly thorny words
(such as "Indigenous people's ancient nickname for the Tigris
river").

The Food Groups of Gaming: Fats, Starches,
Greases, Sugars, Salts and Caffeine
Perhaps the tastiest treats for budgetware buyers comes from
renowned "house of gambling games," Villa Crespo Software. President Dan Sejzer is taking his company into drug
and department stores with an entire marketing plan built
around The Coffee Break Series of small (caffeine packed?)
computer game packages. Each game in the series comes in a
solid, cardboard box that is little bigger than the 5.25" floppy
disk it contains. They are packaged in bright, primary colors
with attractive gold lettering on the front and arranged on
point-of-purchase displays with a suggested retail price of
$12.95 each.
The first four games in this series are available now and
include slightly pared down versions of two of their larger
products. The games are Amarillo Slim's 7-Card Stud (which
still retains many of the player defined options from Dealer's
Choice) and Dr. Wong's Jacks+ Video Poker. A new product,
Casino Craps offers easy entry into the real gambling style of

the game, while an old shareware favorite, called On Target
in this incarnation, rounds out the first four releases. This latter
product features a classic artillery duel for one or two players,
each aiming their cannon at the right angle and applying the
right amount of firepower behind the shot in an effort to knock
out the other player's cannon. With a few new twists added,
it proves as fun and addicting as ever.
A preview copy of one of their next games is getting a lot
of replay from our assistant editor these days. Called Armada,
it is a souped up version of the classic game Battleship where
players must guess the location of the enemy's fleet before
their own fleet is sunk shot-by-shot. It was impressive to see
how "90s" a venerable old chestnut like Battleship could
become. Ten more games in the series are set for release by
Fall, including: Dr. Thorp's Mini-Blackjack, Combination
Lock (a TV style quiz show), Baseball Facts (tons o' trivia),
Ninja Rabbits (an action-arcade game similar to
(Tysouinr-gklNeBwpacht),v.soflienr

players), Wild
West Games (six rodeo games such as
Bronco Riding, Knife
Throwing and Trick
Shooting), 3-D Pinball, Space Vegetables
(harvesting the
Moon's crop to feed
the overpopulated
Earth), Rescue Squad
(an action-adventure
scroll-around-shooti
ng-everything-and-di
e-a-lot game) and Demon Blue (an actionarcade game in the
maze-runigostbh-reaugin).Aotherfvngamspledforth
series by year's end.
1-2

Staying Out of the Dud Bowl
One thing is certain, with so many six-packs, twelve-packs
and economy sized options for "gaming lite" in the marketplace, every gamer ought to be able to find his/her favorite
brew. There is a lite, but challenging game that should keep
every gamer from having to interact with the "Dud Bowl" of
comuter gaming disappointments.

Computer gaming in days gone by
en

years ago, Fall 1982, we were watching Poltergeist, Blade
Runner, and An Officer and A Gentleman on the big screen.
Jimmy Conners and Chris Evert Lloyd won the U.S. Open in
tennis, Ray Floyd won the PGA Championship, and the St. Louis
Cardinals beat the Milwaukee Brewers 4 games to 3.
Wizardry: Proving Grounds from Sir-Tech, Computer Baseball
from SSI, Olympic Decathlon
from Microsoft, Choplifter
from Broderbund, and Southern Command from SSI were
the top five rated games by
CGW readers.

T

In an editorial celebrating the
completion of one year of publishing CGW we observed that
the number of titles available in
Fall 1982 was much larger than
in Fall 1981. 1982 was a big
growth year for computer
games. We went on to say "this
does not mean, however, that
1983 will see the large increase
of software houses that characterized 1981-1982.
Given increased competition in the computer
gaming industry and
the state of the economy (we were coming
out of a recession), it is
increasingly more difficult to start a new software house" . As the
chart on this page
shows the number of
new computer entertainment software companies started in 1983 were indeed much lower than in 1982.
The Sept-Oct 1982 issue of CGW featured, among other articles,
reviews of Starblazer (Broderbund), Galactic Gladiators (SSI), and
The Road to
Gettysburg
(SSI). From an
historical perspective perhaps the most
interesting article was the designer's notes
to
Starship
Commander,
an Apple II
game from a
small company called Voyager Software. At the 1982 West Coast
Computer Faire, CGW found Voyager Software's booth tucked
away in a lightly trafficked area of the show. Someone told us to
check them out We were told they had really pushed the envelope
of Apple II graphics with their little known game. The designer of
the game and author of the CGW designer's notes article was a little
known "kid" of 19 years named Gilman Louie. Gilman went on to

be the President of Sphere Inc. (Spectrum Holobyte) and is best
known for the Falcon series of computer flight simulators.
In his article Gilman said "It took over six months to write Starship
Commander. It was written with an eye towards detail and believability. To accomplish this, the program was broken down into
several modules: each module being a program in itself. When
completed the Starship Commander program was over 120K long,
contained over forty major commands, hundreds of minor commands, and over thirty high resolution dynamic screens."
Five years ago, in the Aug-Sep 1987 issue of CGW, we reported
on the 1987 Summer
CES Show. We said
"from the very beginning of the show we
heard the key word
marketing over and
over again". As the
computer game industry matured it turned
increasingly to marketing techniques to gain
market share and increase profits. The result of this was fewer
titles in the years that followed,
but supported by larger marketing efforts and a shorter turn
around time for conversions.
By Fall 1987, most entertainment software companies had
adopted a three tiered pricing
scheme: a high end line($40
plus), a mid-range line ($2040), and a budget ware line (under $20).
While a number of companies boasted of their plans for
growth through marketing, and
delivered on those promises,
hindsight provides some interesting if not downright humorous quotes from that issue. Firebird
[the British software company] told us within the first two minutes
of our appointment that they were "here to win " in '87-'88. "We are
out to slay the giants" said Martin Davies. Davies is now with Origin
Systems. Michael Katz of Atari stated unequivocally that "the big
news for Atari this year is marketing ". And, finally, the new president
of Activision, Bruce Davis released a statement at the show which
read "our number one objective is to attain a consistent level of
profitability by building our existing strengths in the marketplace".
Some of the games reviewed in Fall 1987 (in the Aug/Sep and
October issues) were Phantasie III (SSI), PHM Pegasus (Electronic
Arts and Lucasfilm Games), B-24 (SSI, Russia: The Great War
(SSG), and sneak previews of Ultima V and Wizardry IV.
The top five rated games according to CGW readers (in the
Aug/Sep 1987 issue) were Gettysburg: The Turning Point (SSI),
Bard's Tale II (Electronic Arts, developed by Interplay), Gunship
(Microprose), Ultima IV (Origin Systems), and Kampfgruppe (SSI).

Contest Results
TOP

AD WINNERS
ANNOUNCED:

E

very January we hold the CGW TOP AD CON-

TEST. You, the readers, are asked to list what you
believe to be the best ads in the issue. We ask you
give us your first, second, and third choices for each of
two categories: full page ads, and partial page ads. The
reader that comes closest to picking the actual winners
will be given a check for $250 and a lifetime subscription
to CGW.
This year we have a repeat winner! Well, sort of.
Strategic Simulations is again the big winner in the full
page category with their Eye of the Beholder II "Bigger... Better...Meaner Than Ever" ad. Last year SSI's
Eye of the Beholder I ad won. Hmmmm. SSI followed
nearly the exact same formula in the two ads (this year's
ad had three screen shots while last year's had two).

Creative Software's Send For The Loremaster, a humorous half-pager in which a bounding knight gets his
bottom burned by a big bad black dragon. Second place

It's obvious that you like dark ominous ads, because
this years second place ad is Accolade's Elvira II: The
Earth Opened Up. The Elvira II ad has a look and feel
similar to the Beholder II ad: dark, evil creatures, three
screen shots (much smaller screens than in the Beholder
II ad).
Finishing third in the full page category is Lucasfilm's
Monkey Island 2: Nobody Laughs When This Pirate
Plays With Dolls ad. Here again is a skeletal image but
in a somewhat less ominous ad. Humorous quips wind
their way through the ad copy. For example: "We hired
256 out-of-work artists from Los Angeles and crammed
them six-deep in an office until they came up with

pictures we liked"; then, there is this: "We're not perfect.
But we think scanned art, scintillating soundtracks, rehashed jokes and a great story get us close -- and over
budget, too."
The big winner in the fractional page category was

in the fractionals went to Odyssey Software's "Tired of
Fake Looking Drawn Graphics?", a 1/3 page ad that
crammed four digitized screen shots in the narrow confines of the ad. Links: "So realistic you'll think you're
there" came in third with their regular half page fractional/spread. The Links ad, although finishing third, is
a very interesting layout showing not only the six championship course boxes and screen shots, but also an
attractive panorama of the 14th green at Firestone Country Club.
The CGW reader who came closest to picking the
winners was Robert Chong of Scarborough, Ontario,
Canada. Robert wins the cash, the life time subscription,
and never-ending fame. Congratulations, Robert, and
see you at next year's contest!

Fighter Fuel
I am greatly distressed at your recent review of the Fighter Duel flight
simulation. Not only is it a revolutionary breakthrough in frames per second
animation, regardless of enemy proximity, it is just as fast on a stock Amiga
1000 as it is on my Amiga 2000/40. I think by the examples given as your
reviewers' favorites, it is easy to see why it was not liked. Get someone who
has a flight sim from the nineties, or at least someone who enjoys sims to
review the software. Fighter Duel is, by far, the best flight simulation on the
Amiga in stand-alone and link mode and is the only one to consider for
head-to-head over a modem. The SKCCUG user group in Seattle, WA is taken
aback by the harsh treatment this sim has received and hopes that you will
find another reviewer to take a real look at this Amiga breakthrough. For
years, I have been screaming for sims that support modem and when one
comes along ... it stinks. What Jaeger Software has done is unbelievable,
and your readers should know that. I have talked to Matt Shaw on several
occasions and, honestly, bugged the hell out of him and will continue to do
so. Working for Hewlett-Packard, I know customer service and Jaeger does
it right.
This letter is testament of my devotion to this sim, there is no other piece
of software (I own thousands of dollars worth) that I would defend like this.
Please take my concerns, and the concerns of the Seattle SIG/SIM groups to
heart. Fighter Duel is simply the best there is ... please reflect that.
Ronald C. Lincicum
Seattle, WA
One thing readers and reviewers, respectively, have trouble understanding
is that a review is nothing more than an experienced observer's opinion,
reinforced by an editor's hand. The cliche which reads, "One man's meat is
another's poison," is not simply an editorial defense for an optimistic review
of a mediocre product or an excuse for a negative review of a worthy product.
It is an immutable fact of human nature. Our reviewers and even those of us
self-proclaimed dispensers of editorial omniscience cannot speak for everyone.
As you will note from the next few letters (some of close to fifty we have
received in opposition to the Fighter Duel review in CGW #96), Fighter Duel:
Corsair vs Zero has a serious community of adherents. As you will note in
our responses to these letters, we are not disputing the positives claimed by
FD's defenders, we simply want you to know that we were honest in our
misgivings and that Fighter Duel received objective editorial treatment,
regardless of our differences of opinion. Indeed, we are very impressed with
the high marks which Fighter Duel receives from Amiga owners who use it
to fight head-to-head over the modem. Mr. Lincicum objects that we selected
a reviewer who does not like flight simulations and who was unfamiliar with
the '90s era flight simulation. To this, we object that Leah is a flight
simulation aficionado. She and her husband both enjoy flight simulations.
She and her husband had reviewed Electronic Arts 'Birds of Prey and reader
response, as well as our own personal opinion, suggested that their portrayal
of that product was right on target. The editorial staff of CGW become aware
of Fighter Duel because of rave comments in on-line messages and it was
sent to the reviewer because we were certain she would enjoy it.
When we received the surprisingly negative review, I immediately queried
my staff as to which of them had flown the simulation. Two of the editors
testified that they had done so. They both protested that the simulation: was
hard to fly (a testament to its realistic flight model); had a very inefficient

interface (the two editors plus, later, myself, all had trouble managing the
throttle with the mouse while still accessing other controls via the mouse)
and had a mysterious lack of artificial opponents for a game which was
named for a dogfight between two famous planes.
Yours truly determined that everyone must have gone mad. Their observations seemed totally impossible to me because of the enthusiastic messages
I had seen before and necessitated my own personal hands-on experience
with the game. Like Mr. Lincicum, I was also impressed with the frame rate.
Unlike Mr. Lincicum, I did not see the fast animation as representative of
advanced technology as much as I saw it as a result of reduced detail in
graphics. Though we discovered that many flight simulation buffs are more
concerned about flight dynamics than pretty graphics, readers have verbally
raked us over the coals in the past for recommending games with limited
graphics. Then, I discovered that I must be related to LBJ's old nemesis who
could not walk and chew gum at the same time. I kept throttling down and
sending my plane in the drink whenever I wanted to access another control.
Finally, I personally circled the arch for over 20 minutes looking for a
Japanese fighter to engage with. Hours later, one of our staffers performed
the obvious maneuver and located the enemy fighter closer to sea level. We
had naively expected that a Japanese ace who was patrolling the area would
engage us within that time period.
Naturally, we will not attempt to argue with the groundswell of letters we
have received in support of Fighter Duel as a wonderful product. We simply
want readers to be aware of the fact that we published our negative review
out of honest experience with the game and no malice toward anyone.
I am writing today to express justifiable outrage from your review of
Fighter Duel by Leah Wesolowski. First of all, it is egregiously obvious that
Ms. Wesolowski knows absolutely nothing about flight aerodynamics. For
her to complain that she cannot "take-off' or keep from stalling should
immediately disqualify her from passing judgment on what many consider to
be the most accurate, mathematically correct, and just plain fun flight sim ever
to be published on a personal computer.
Your magazine has a wide and diverse readership. I frequently base my
purchasing decisions on what I read in the pages of your formally [Ed:
Apparently, Mr. Phillips means "formerly '7 respectable periodical. In this
case (and I wonder how many others now), you have published rubbish that
has tarnished forever your integrity in this business. I know that you cannot
control the ideas of your reviewers, but I strongly suggest that in the future
you get alternative opinions from others on your staff before you print such
unjust material.
Fighter Duel is a magnificent piece of programming produced by a small
company in Rockville, MD. Jaeger Software spend hundreds of hours
refining this product into what it is today. Moreover, they have listened to the
ideas and questions from hundreds of people in an effort to further refine an
already near perfect product. The release of the next version will incorporate
many of these suggestions and I am sure that it will make an impact that you
will remember.
Finally, Ms. Wesolowski's thoughtless remarks are damaging to small
young firms like Jaeger. I wonder if a "five minute " foray into such a
well-thought-out program is the norm for your reviewers. If that is the case,
then I will never read your magazine again. You and Ms. Wesolowski owe
an apology to Jaeger Software and a new review by a more astute and
thorough individual. Anyone with a modest interest in flight sims will find
this product (especially the head-to-head) simply awe inspiring.
C. Richard Phillips
Chantilly, VA
Frankly, even if one believes that we are totally wrong on this review, we
do not see how that challenges our overall respectability. We suppose that
persons who would subscribe to such an argument would have traded Ted
Williams after his first strike-out (Well, he gets a lot of hits and runs batted
in, but I don't see any excuse for that strike-out). We believe we cover games
very thoroughly and are convinced that the great majority of our reviews are
right on the money. We do not, however, expect everyone to agree with us
all the time. Perhaps, the most glaring problem with your analysis was your
misreading of the article with regard to the five minutes! The article states
that her longest time "in the air" was less than five minutes. That does not
count the lengthy reloads between an attempted take-off and the next one. It
does not count the times she actually made it to the arch, still without finding
an enemy. Indeed, astute and thorough readers will note that the harshest
language used in the article referred to the dogfight implied on the box, which
took our in-house staffers several hours to engage, and not to the
wGheiatd-rogEplny.Wefthdoznsmeag
latter.
I play the two-player mode against people very frequently. It is the most
exciting game I have ever played! The fact that the game still runs at 28 frames
per second, even over a 1200 baud connection is truly amazing.
Jeff Hanna
GEnie Subscriber
If the simulator was as bad as the article describes, why do I have $150.00
phone bills from duelling with people long distance? Why are there 40 people

spending at least this much if not more duelling in the Fighter Duel tournament?
Mark E. Smith
GEnie Subscriber
I have spent many hours with this flight simulator competing with others
in a national tournament. The beauty of this flight simulator is that it can be
played long distance.
Brad E. Howe
GEnie Subscriber
Fighter Duel is the best. Nothing compares to the realism, frame rate and
excitement. I have played Air Warrior on GEnie for over two years, spending
hundreds of dollars per month and it [Air Warrior] pales in comparison.
George Searing
GEnie Subscriber
We hope the discussion of alternate points of view will assist our renders
in making their own decisions with regard to Fighter Duel: Corsair vs. Zero.

Parallel Dimensions
Concerning M. Evan Brooks' article in the July '92 issue of CGW under
the Broadsides and Gripeshot column, the following should be pointed out:
although computer games do sometimes run in cyclical patterns with respect
to new releases, there is a very good reason for this, the marketing components
of software companies have seen a need to fill a void and sometimes, that
void is so obvious that three or four companies will market similar products
at the same time.
It is hard to understand why someone working for a magazine that is
dedicated to reviewing these releases and sorting out the good from the bad
would complain about that sort of thing. Mr. Brooks complained about there
being too many releases of one sort or another of games during certain time
periods, but he failed to mention or may not realize that each game, even when
it covers the same subject, has its own special place and no two games will
cover the same subject in the same manner.
I applaud the fact that game manufacturers are releasing similar products
at the same time. That is known as competition and makes life interesting.
It's nice to have many choices of similar games and it is good that CGW helps
me to choose the one that will suit my particular needs.
Bill Greco
Southampton, PA

Parallel development is a twentieth century manifestation of an economic
law espoused in the nineteenth century. Joseph A. Schumpeter suggested that
any innovation in a given industry will result in so many imitators that it
becomes increasingly difficult for any manufacturer to make a profit, including the innovator. In the modern world, information about technology is so
often shared and so readily accessible (Software people often use the phrase,
"It's an incestuous industry!') that it seems like the effects described in
Schumpeter's Law have been accelerated. In the software world, this is
inevitably true (if Software Magnates has a "no-typing" interface and
modem support, we'll have a "no-typing" interface and modem support). In
fact, the definition expands to include subject matter as well as technology.
If one publisher is successful with a multi-player space conquest game,
everyone tries to get a similar product out there, rallying around the
marketing incantation "Think of it as [the original game] done right!" or
the designer's slogan "We think we've out-[the original game]ed [the
original game]." The next thing one knows, nobody's multi-player space
conquest game is selling and the industry wisdom becomes "Nobody cares
about multi-player space conquest games. They're dead!"
At CGW, we certainly agree that there is nothing wrong with healthy
competition. Indeed there is nothing wrong with parallel development if all
products under development have their own distinctive features. We simply
agree with Evan Brooks that there are enough untapped and fertile fields
that the marketing channel does not have to be clogged with the four-hundred
and second remake of a Gettysburg game or the three-thousandth iteration
of a tank simulator. Where are the fighting sail simulations? Where are the
sophisticated diplomatic games? Where are the games that explore human
relationships in other ways than pure combat or sophomoric sexploitation?
Where are the economic games with human dimensions? While we agree that
competition is welcome, we still feel that the editorial's concern with oversaturation makes an important point.

Racial Spurs and Sexual Slurs
I recently purchased Wizardry VI: Bane of the Cosmic Forge, based on a

review in your publication. The Wizardry series of computer role-playing
games have always been my favourites, among the few so well-designed they
hold my interest long enough to complete the scenario. I eagerly awaited each
new release.
That is, until last week, when, in playing Bane of the Cosmic Forge, my
party entered the pyramid area and encountered the "monster" class called
"Amazulu Warriors." I was shocked and dismayed to find such blatantly racist
(and sexist) images in my favourite CRPG! With graphics circa 1950s
National Geographic, and a sound track out of an old Tarzan movie, these

images combine the most common and offensive stereotypes about Africans.
As well, my party had enough magical "firepower" at this point that the
ensuing "battle" evoked for me my father's World War II horror stories of
Ethiopian warriors with spears attempting to resist Italian tanks and bombers.
As I cannot, even (or especially) in a fantasy role-playing setting, reconcile
myself to killing half-naked Black women, I will not be able to finish the
scenario. Nor will I be able to purchase more Sir-Tech products, or recommend them to my clients, unless I am satisfied that their designers and
playtesters have had access to adequate anti-racist education, in order that
they understand why these images are so offensive. Sir-Tech is certainly not
the first to attempt to use a human ethnic group in a role-playing scenario and,
unless more of their customers speak up, it will not be the last.
For your demographics, I am an adult white woman, university degree,
income level $30,000+. I use my computer both at home and in business, as
I run a company that specializes in computer consulting, training and business
management for the arts and publishing industries.
Ruth Dworin
Toronto, Ontario CANADA
Would you have finished the scenario if you were killing half-naked
WHITE women? Interestingly enough, those "monsters" you encountered
were actually designed using Wizardry 's Valkyrie class (Germanic female
warriors) and Ranger class (not exactly lightweight characters). We suspect
that this might not have been as much of a problem if the program had stuck
to the classic Teutonic and Norse mythologies. Perhaps the real racial
problems in society are so pervasive that we have become oversensitive in
this regard. Scorpia tells us that the Amazulu Queen (besides having almost
100 hit points and an awesome weapon in her magical spear of death) and
the Amazulu Priestess (the girl in the mask, who had rather an awesome
potpourri of deadly spells at her disposal) were an extremely deadly duo. To
quote Scorpia on this issue, "I don't understand it. In fantasy as in real life,
bad guys come in all shapes, sexes and colors!" At CGW.

The Tail-End of Scor pion's View

Elaine, I want to assure both you and your former partner, Mike Nichols
Gust kidding, Elaine, don't throw that copy of Adler at me), that we are
working to solve our technical difficulties. I could give a long and involved
technical explanation for how Scorpia's article came to be apocopated, but
it would sound like I'm blaming someone else. Fortunately, I will have a
managing editor to blame from this issue forward. The missing paragraphs
of Scorpion's View read:
. method to use if you want to change the party order, as people are
displayed in the order they were asked to join.
Overall, Ultima VII is one of those games that give me very mixed feelings.
On the one hand, the graphics, sound, and realism of the world is excellent.
No other Ultima has made Britannia come alive as a real place the way this
one does. The story, although sometimes obscured by side plots, is engrossing. The new mouse interface (when combined with those hot keys) simplifies
much of the interaction in the game.
On the other hand, not enough thought went into some of the technical
design. The vanishing keys, poor combat AI, lack of solo mode, relative
worthlessness of many spells, and some other problems of lesser note, along
with the bugs and slow speed, detract greatly from the enjoyment of the game.
Getting through this Ultima will require a certain amount of patience and
forebearance.

Previw
Of Syphogrants and Tranibores, Scientists and Kings

A Sneak Preview of Konami's
by Johnny L. Wilson
Sneak Previews are not designed to be reviews. They are feature
articles based on "works in progress" that CGW's editors have
deemed worthy of early coverage. These articles are not intended to
provide the final word on a product, since we expect to publish
appropriate review coverage when the game is completely finished.
n Sir Thomas More's Utopia, the 16th century classic dealing
with political theory, a cardinal told of a mysterious island in the
shape of a full moon. It had one large harbor which was nearly
inaccessible except by the experienced mariners among the Utopians
themselves. It was, according to the churchman, a wonderful land
where everyone rotated between urban and rural residence and
between leadership (one syphogrant/magistrate per 30 households
and one tranibore/chief magistrate per ten syphogrants) and servanthood (menial labor whether in the city or country), being willing to
distribute necessities and luxuries equally among all the citizens. On
the island, there were 54 cities which were identical in layout, culture
and laws.
Konami's Utopia (designed by Europe's Gremlin Games) bears
no resemblance to the island (which had a name
that would mean, literally, "no place" in Greek)
in the classic 16th century work. The cities are
not the same, because players build the cities in
a manner resembling a cross between SimCity
and Moonbase. Further, the game's versions of
utopia look more like the terrain fragments in
Populous than they look like the new moon in
More's book. The terrain types for planetary
surfaces run from a red, sandy soil to a black
volcanic soil through grasslands and on to icy
glaciers and mountainous regions complete
with geysers. In a real sense, they represent "no
place," as well, because the terrain simply looks different and determines what one cannot build rather than really affecting play significantly.

I

Also, the citizens are not quite willing to experience full and equal
distribution as their passport to contentment, since players must
constantly monitor their quality of life in order to keep the population
content and crime at a low ebb. Finally, Konami's Utopia has no
treacherous channels to keep the enemies of its cities away. Rather,
the player must balance the search for a high quality of life with the
necessity of a strong military (both offensive and defensive) while
navigating about the map via a point and click interface that looks
amazing like the one in PowerMonger.
In short, Konami's Utopia is almost a Moonbase/PowerMonger
hybrid. The player takes on the role of Colony Leader in a project
with the goal of colonizing ten different worlds around a distant sun.
He/She purchases each building (whether industry, governmental
headquarters, warehouse or living quarters) individually (as opposed
to simply "zoning" a la SimCity) in much the same way players do
in Moonbase, but has to eventually neutralize (destroy is such an ugly
word) a hostile alien presence on each planet in order to win (much
as one must conquer or absorb hostile tribes in PowerMonger). So,
Utopia presents a juggling challenge where players must balance the
quality of life ala SimCity (albeit without the obstruction of dynamic
models like traffic congestion and population migration to get in the
way), make money through production and trade a la Moonbase, and
conquer the planet in real-time a la PowerMonger. Like SimCity,
Utopia is an open-ended game where there is no specific point at
which one has to stop playing, but unlike SimCity there is an enemy

which will keep coming at the player's colony until that alien is
defeated.

The Wage of Fabricius
From the time the player boots the game and enters the answer to
the copy protection quiz, it is obvious that this is not "your ancestor's
Utopia." The game plays a briskly upbeat version of Pachelbel's
Canon, a Baroque era tune that is usually supposed to relax the
hearer. Instead, the fast-paced digital version lets one know that a
challenge is on the way. The immediate goal, in all ten progressively
more difficult scenarios, is to raise the Quality of Life rating for the
colony above 80% and to keep it there long enough for the government of Earth to recognize the player's character with a medal. If the
player can raise the QOL to 90%, the Earth government will offer a
more prestigious medal.
If one allows, on the dark side of the planet as it were, the QOL to
deteriorate, Utopia allows crime to escalate. First, thieves start to
steal colony funds. Later, there are murders on
the streets. If the QOL doesn't begin to improve, the murders will be followed by organized terrorism. Finally, the Colony Leader who
still doesn't manage to get the QOL up is liable
to be assassinated a la Hidden Agenda
In many ways, the player's character may be
like the (3rd century B.C.) Roman general,
Gaius Luscinus Fabricius, who is mentioned in
More's Utopia. Fabricius was reputed to have
died penniless after he had said that he would
rather rule the rich than to be rich. In Konami's
Utopia, the player gets the privilege of ruling
a potentially rich space colony, but does not
amass any personal wealth (even simulated) in the process.
This does not mean, of course, that the player gets no satisfaction
out of the economic aspects of the game. Indeed, the player not only
gets to build profit-making industries such as locating ore deposits
and building mining facilities, but the player gets to determine the
number of skilled workers for each industry and when the price is
right to sell that ore to other planets. A dynamic commodities market
can be accessed at any time from the finance report screen, provided
the player has enough power to operate the "trading computer."
Another economic ball for the player to juggle is that of research
and development versus production. The player has to decide if it is
worth advancing thousands of monetary units (that could be immediately used for workshops to produce trade goods or to build
defensive weapons) on either civilian or military research. When one
builds an industry or weapon at the colony's existing technological
level, there is an immediate gain to be seen and utilized. With the
research grants, however, it is not immediately evident how long it
takes to recoup one's investment by moving up the technological
ladder.

The Wisdom of Crassus
The Roman Senator Crassus is quoted in More's Utopia as stating
that "No amount of money is enough for a king that has to keep an
army." This is the old "guns vs. butter" issue of macroeconomics and
it is vividly portrayed in the game system for Konami's Utopia. For
the colony to survive, the player will have to build a defense infrastructure that may not seem immediately cost effective. For example,
the colony is totally immobilized if the command center is taken out,

sneak Preview
so the player must build a duplicate command center fairly early as
a contingency. Again, building tanks can be expensive and require
the player to purchase weapons components on the open market
(think of it as subcontracting). This is a significant drag on one's
economy, but is a necessity for survival. Such "guns versus butter"
decisions are continuous realities within the game.
In speaking of the defense infrastructure, note that there are two
types of weapons within the game: stationary and mobile. The former
include laser turrets (always in auto-search and auto-fire modes,
clicking in 30 degree segments around a full circle) and missile
launchers. These are perimeter weapons and players will want to use
them to create a defensive ring around their cities.
The mobile weapons
include tanks and aircraft. These are handled in a way similar to
the combat in Populous. Instead of sending a leader unit or a
papal magnet, though,
the player posts a flag
to indicate the objective and sends his/her
tank units toward it.
They will attack any
hostile forces they encounter. These are the basic units and they are
enhanced whenever technological breakthroughs occur.

Three Old Men
The cardinal in Sir Thomas More's Utopia said that each of the 54
cities selected three wise and experienced men to meet in an annual
council. In Konami's Utopia, the player always has a council at
his/her disposal. This is both good and bad. It is good because it
represents an amount of information that can be rapidly assessed via
the function keys or by pointing and clicking on the advisors' icon.
From the psychiatrist one gains information on the colony's QOL
rating, while the colony administrator offers a quick comparison of
production versus usage. The head of research basically complains
about the amount of research grants and the civil engineer merely
reports on functional facilities within the colony. The financial
consultant offers a quick look at the bottom line and the supreme
commander reports on military readiness.
The bad news concerning the advisors in Utopia is that they, with
the exception of the head of research, do not really advise. They only
report. They do not recommend. Fortunately, Utopia has some
warning messages and alarm icons (similar to the on-screen hints in
SimCity), otherwise, new players could get lost.

Philosophy of a Civil Kind
As Sir Thomas More's philosophy was built upon the wisdom of
political philosophers who preceded him, so the design philosophy
of Konami's Utopia is built upon the successful designs of the past.
It has the look of Populous and PowerMonger with the creative joy
to be found in building cities as in SimCity and Moonbase. Utopia
offers more intensity than the latter two games because of the
ever-present threat from a computer enemy and more interest to the
strategy player because its simulated economy is handled with more
depth than the former two games.
Gamers who are more interested in game with a reality-based
model are likely to find the Utopia of the game to be as ephemeral
as the utopia described by the cardinal in More's classic work.
However, gamers who want a well-balanced challenge and do not
mind the abstractions in the world model are likely to discover that
the sum of Utopia's game design is greater than its parts. Whether
gamers will agree that a game so similar to so many other games is
an exciting game, or not, remains to be seen..

Review

Cyberdreams Gives Birth To Their First Graphic
Adventure
by Val Miller
TITLE:
Dark Seed
SYSTEM:
IBM
PRICE:
$69.95
PROTECTION: Key Disk
DESIGNERS: Mike
Cranford, Mike Dawson
PUBLISHER:
Cyberdreams, Woodland Hills, CA

ne would be hard pressed to find a figure who has
changed the face of gore and horror films more profoundly than artist and designer, H.R.Giger. I don't
think anyone who has seen the film Aliens will ever forget the

O

nightmarish spawn of Giger 's disturbed genius that ran amok
upon the S.S.Nostromo and then proceded to run amok within
the dreams of a movie-going generation.

There's another side to Giger that most have not seen,
which, though less demonic, is no less disturbing than those
belly-busting, acid-spitting aliens. The piece at center page
hints at what seems to be an obsession of his; the marriage of
angelic human beauty, of the female and the child, with the
warty, exoskeletal, techno-organic machine. I don't know
about other's reactions, but these images create within this
reviewer a push-pull of compulsion and revulsion, a guilty
pleasure that would have made Freud dizzy with delight.
Cyberdreams, a fledgling Los Angeles software group, has
taken these terrifying visions of Giger's bizarre fantasy life
and worked them into the art and storyline of their first
release, Dark Seed. Through both Giger's background art
and an effectively eerie soundtrack by Gregory Alper,
Cyberdreams has created the most integrated and
effective feel for a horror adventure yet.
The story is set in and around on older
home in Woodland Hills, recently purchase by Mike Dawson, a lawyer
turned writer seeking a refuge in
which to free a mind pregnant with .
artistic inspiration. Through
reoccurring nightmares and bizarre gifts sent from Beyond, Mike comes to
realize that, unless he
can devise a plan to the contrary, his mind will give
birth to more than just inspired
literature.
In poking around the house and
surrounding environs, Mike happens
upon a trial of messages left by the former
unfortunate owner of the house and comes
to find that the full length mirror in the living
room is no ordinary looking-glass, but rather, a
portal into a semi-parallel dimension. The world

through the looking-glass is a near twin of reality, dressed in
Giger's artwork and inhabited by an alien race practically
cut-and-pasted out of Alien. Like the aliens of film, the creatures of Dark Seed find humans to be a delightful place in
which to parasitically gestate. And guess who's going to be a
daddy?
The game makes effective use of standard cinematic techniques in dream sequences and cut scenes of disturbed visions
that foreshadow Mike's pending fate. In the first of such
bizarre moments, a gift is delivered to Mike's home by a
friendly UPS carrier. Inside the box is only a cute baby doll,
but while the eerie soundtrack whines a discordant version of
Rock'a'Bye Baby, the doll transmogrifies into a slimy Gigeresque alien creature. While not 'terrifying' or 'startling' (it'll
be a great day for interactive fiction when a scene can really
scare the bejesus out of a player), these scenes artfully meld
sound and Giger's art to create a powerfully eerie mood. Not
since Brian Moriarty's Loom have I been so impressed by the
artistic intercourse between sight and sound.
Cyberdreams created the dark side of Dark Seed by scanning pieces of Giger's art and rescaling, shaping and otherwise
tweaking the images to make the backgrounds and objects
necessary to roughly parallel those in the real world. They did
some excellent work here as most of the scenes look as if
they were created on a graphic workstation for a computer
- game and not composed piecemeal from another me
dium.
The player-cum-Mike Dawson explores both
dimensions of Dark Seed via a mousedriven interface, and watches the action
unfold via the familiar sidelong perspective. The interface is cursor-centered with the right mouse button
cycling through three cursor
modes: either "go", "touch"
or "look." When in "touch"
• mode, the cursor is an
open hand that points
when the cursor is
over a manipulable object.
Similarly, in "look " mode
the cursor remains a question
mark until it is placed over an
appropriate object, where it becomes an exclamation point. The
player's inventory neatly appears at
the top of the screen upon the cursor's
command. It's all very fluid and tidy,
though perhaps oversimplified, and it im-

Review
mediately becomes intuitive and forgotten — like all well-behaved interfaces should.
The on-screen character depicting
Mike Dawson appears to be a composite of digitized images of the actual Mike (the designer plays
himself) and looks quite realistic —
most of the time. Video footage was
used in creating small action sequences, like climbing stairs, prying
into things, pulling levers. Such animations come out smooth and lifelike, adding a nice touch to the finished product. Unfortunately, the
most prevalent action, walking
around the screen, is another matter,
full of jerks and starts, and looking as
if Mike were walking on a moving
sidewalk — a motion that would
more befit Mike Jackson than Mike
Dawson. In some instances, one can
direct Mike to touch an object right
next to him, whereupon he will spin
around, walk to other end of the room,
pirouette again, and walk back to his
original position. Though this is really a minor hitch, it makes it clear
that this is a brand new game engine
that still knocks and pings on occasion.

Beyond the remarkable visual aspects, Dark Seed is a very typical
graphic adventure, designed much
like the very early graphic adventures
— and makes some of the same mistakes. For one, the game is somewhat
"real time. " It is divided into days and
has a clock which is always running.
This is not bad in itself; after all, Sierra's Conquests of the Longbow did
quite well with its day-by-day structure. Unlike Longbow's, however,
Dark Seed's days are not
self-contaid.Thr clevntswhi
must take place at specific times and
specific places, and if the player
misses them, the game continues on.
Two days later, the player might figure out what s/he missed, and then
must restart the game all over again.
For example, the player must go to
town on the first day and make an
action that will trigger an event on the
second. Unfortunately, nowhere is
this trigger-event hinted at, nor is it an
obvious action. If a player misses it
(like this one he or she) may never
realize it and become hopelessly
stuck. This is the worst case, but there
are many others like it. The game
progresses in a tiresome "one step

Review
forward and two back" pattern, such that one is constantly
restarting the game and replaying sequences over and over.
Many of the puzzles are designed such that they can only be
deciphered after the fact. This sure gives the game some of
that ever elusive "replayability, " but certainly not the right
kind of replayability.
Another potentially frustrating design element; there are crucial objects
in the game that are placed such that
they blend nicely into Giger's intricate backgrounds. One is a tiny, perhaps four pixel, dot that one would
only discover by running ones little
cursor hand all over the screen. Another is a lever that opens a very important doorway in the game. There
was little effort spent in making this
a gamer-friendly experience. For instance, once the lever just mentioned
is found, the classically conditioned
adventure gamer's response is, of course, to pull it without
delay. BZZZZTTPP! Bye, bye. Dead. Restart. Apparently, the
aliens find it necessary to run several thousand volts through
their door handles. And what beats all is that, once through
that door opened by the lever, one finds another object that,
when one tries to touch it, is told "No, no. Don't touch that!
It has deadly amounts of electricity coursing through it! " I
almost yanked my mouse out with that one.
After the painstaking ordeal required to complete this game,
one would hope for a satisfying "cheese screen " (where the
player is rewarded for successfully running the maze). Unfor-

tunately, it won't be had. This is a complicated story; there's
a lot to resolve here; at least a little explanation due, but the
ending is abrupt and vague, concluding with Mike "only
beginning to understand " and the player completely in the
dark. It's either a weak attempt at artistic elusiveness or an
opening for a sequel, with either option a letdown.
Like my reactions to Giger's art, my
feelings about Dark Seed are a frustrated mix. While few interactive adventures have ever used art and sound
in communicating mood as powerfully as DarkSeed, the interactive elements are so poorly implemented that
they nearly destroy the effect. I want
to clutch this game to my breast and
fling it against the wall in the same
angst-filled motion.
Despite its failings, Dark Seed and
the Cyberdreams group hint at tremendous potential. They
have a staff heavy laden with computer entertainment experience, and, apparently, the financial backing to purchase some
great stories and art, like that of Syd Mead (design talent
behind Blade Runner, Alien, and the original Star Trek film,
among others) and Harlan Ellison (Hugo and Nebula award
winning author) for their next two releases. Before then, let's
hope they pickup some pointers from adventure gaming's past
and create interactive stories that are not only beautiful, but
fun to play.

Review

Seventh Time's The Charm
Origin's Ultima VII: The Black Gate
by Charles Ardai
Ultima 7: The Black Gate
TITLE:
SYSTEM
IBM, 386SX minimum
PRICE
$79.95
DESIGNER: Richard Garriot (and Alan Gardner
PUBLISHER: Origin Systems, Austin, TX

U

nlike thirteen, the number seven does not carry with it
any automatic negative connotation. Things good, bad,
and indifferent come in sevens: days of the week,
deadly sins, and dwarves, just to name a few. No one minds
being seventh at a dinner table and, should the seventh of a
month fall on a Friday, no one cancels his flight plans just to
be on the safe side.
Nevertheless, the seventh installment in Origin's classic
Ultima series seem s to have picked up a negative word-of-mouth
in some gaming circles for no reason other than that it's a
seventh installment. Many who were delighted when Ultima
VI was released cannot be bothered to boot up Ultima VII, as
though it goes without saying that the seventh of anything
can't possibly be any good. The market suddenly seems
saturated; weary gamers, sure that they have played enough
Ultima to last them a lifetime, eye the new Ultima with suspicion
that it is just More Of The Same. Several people whose opinion
1 otherwise respect warned me off the game, saying that, though
they hadn't played it themselves, they understood that it was
not worth playing.
Well, they understood wrong,
Ultima VII is not more of the same. It is daring and unusual,
has a sophisticated interface and story,
takes full advantage of both its own history
and the conventions of its genre, and manages to be at once grounded in tradition
and unpredictable.

True, there are elements of the familiar,
starting with the cheesy, rune-covered fabric map that comes packed in the game
box. Computer gaming needs another visit
to good old Britannia like the movies need
another visit from Freddy Kreuger, and
the map does nothing so much as remind
us of how often we have been here before. However, even in
this connection Ultima VII manages to inject new life into the
formula: the new game takes place two hundred years after
the previous one and, in the interim, Britannia's familiar
landscape has been altered in significant ways.

Ultimate Alteration
Like Stephen Donaldson's Thomas Covenant in the second

Covenant trilogy, the Avatar returns to a land changed for the
worse. It has been so long since the people of Britannia have
seen the Avatar that they have begun to question his existence.
Almost no one believes that he will return and, since people
need to put their faith in something, the vacuum created by the
Avatar's prolonged absence has allowed a cultish substitute
to rise to prominence.
The cult is called "The Fellowship " and, by the time the
game starts, there is a Fellowship branch in almost every town
on the map — even Buccaneer's Den, once a bastion of all
things illegal and immoral. In its dogmatic tenets (a nicely
creepy collection of which is included with the game, along
with the Fellowship's revisionist history of what happened in
the first six Ultimas), the Fellowship seems to support community, trust, decency, and other Good Things. If it discards
the Avatar's Eight Virtues, it only does so because they are
not relevant to the new age. Everything seems on the up and

... except that the Fellowship exercises a strange, coercive
hold over people's minds and seems to be involved in any
number of shady goings on, including the grisly murder that
the player comes upon as the game opens. Then, there is the
question of what those torture devices are doing locked away
in the tunnels behind Fellowship Hall in Buccaneer's Den; and
the question of why magic no longer functions the way it used
to; and, most of all, the fact that Lord British does not like the
Fellowship at all, which long-time players of the Ultima series
should know is not a good sign.
When it comes to suspense and a strong,
unified plot, Ultima VII delivers as none of
its predecessors did. The permeation of Britannia by the Fellowship sets the tone for
the game, which (aside from bits of humor
here and there) is more grim than one expects.
The threat is one a player can take seriously,
mostly because it is not just another
mega-vilntryokehwrld(tug
there is some of that at the end). The storytelling here is of a very high level, superb
because it develops real characters, real fear, and a real sense
of loss. Britannia is not the place it used to be. As in Infocom's
Spellbreaker, magic is collapsing; society is coming apart at
the seams; poverty and decay are rampant and, as a result,
demagoguery and humbuggery are ascendant. As the best
fantasy is, Ultima VII is an allegory for problems in the real
world.

None of this should give the impression that the game isn't
entertaining, arousing adventure full of dragons to slay, sleeping
beauties to awaken, and other noble quests to perform. However,
Ultima VII contains much more than just adventure. Scriptwriter
Raymond Benson and the other members of the writing team
have really outdone themselves. In terms of its plotting, Ultima
VII is head and shoulders above almost any of the other fantasy
games out there.

Ultimate Refit
Of course, there is more to a game than its story. There is,
in particular, its gameplay. Here, too, the designers have taken
some chances, not all of which pay off. On all but the fastest
machines, character movement is a little slow. There is also
an occasional problem with the three-quarter overhead perspective. As in Virgin's Conan the Cimmerian, which used a
similar perspective, characters get "stuck" against the edges
of buildings from time to time. On the whole, though, gameplay
is smooth and not distracting.
The movement toward a no-typing
interface is finally complete. In Ultima
VII the entire screen is given over to
the action window, over which smaller
windows are sometimes superimposed.
The best way to play the game is with
a mouse; the right button controls the
Avatar's feet (his movement) and the
left button the Avatar's hands (his interaction with objects). Clicking on the
Avatar himself or on members of his
party brings up inventory and status
displays and allows the player to alter
combat settings, spellbook selections,
and the like.
When the player encounters another character, dialogue or
combat ensues. Dialogue is a simple matter of selecting subjects
from a slightly difficult-to-read menu and reading the other
character's responses. This game handles itself well, with good
line readings, few long-winded orations, and a minimum of
irritating " thee" s and " thou" s.
Combat, like dialogue, is a simple matter. Clicking on an
enemy attacks that enemy. A variety of attack "modes " are
available, permitting the player to choose whether to attack
the nearest foe, the weakest foe, the strongest foe, a random
target, or whatever. (Defensive choices, including the option
of running away, are also available.) It is almost always
preferable for the player to handle combat manually, choosing
which enemy to fight in each round of combat, but it is good
that combat-inept (or -weary) players can turn on a sort of
autopilot and get help with the game's action sequences Ultima
VII is less combat-intensive than some of the other Ultimas
but there is still plenty of fighting —no one will walk through
this game without breaking a sweat. (The final confrontation,
in which the player finally catches up with the three villains
he has been chasing throughout the game, is particularly
harrowing.)
In order to solve all of the game's puzzles, the player has to

visit every town and most of the dungeons on the map. Along
the way there are the usual interlocking mini-puzzles to best
(along the lines of "Aye, lad, I will give you what you seek,
but first you must bring me the lost shoehorn of the gods").
Some of the puzzles are pointedly witless, but most are good
and some, excellent. If there is one thing I would change it is
the game 's insistence on the sort of geographi cal puzzle (teleport
from here to here to here, find the invisible walls, pull these
levers in this order) that belongs more in a Martin Gardner
magazine column than in a sophisticated, story-intensive piece
of interactive fiction. CRPG grognards, however, will love
bits such as the Teleporters of Despise and the Cube Puzzle
on Fellowship Isle.
Travel around the countryside is accomplished on foot, by
cart, and by boat. The landscapes are attractive (though not
gorgeous) and movement across them is initially delightful,
just to admire the scenery. After a while, many of the towns
staroemblnhr,witecangblhrs,
trainers, inns, and Fellowship Halls.
Nevertheless, each location has, at
least, one unusual feature, and the use
of a chase as the central plot element
gives the narrative a powerful engine
that prevents the player from staying
in one place for too long. The result
is that the game never becomes boring
or confusing. There are always leads
as to where to head next and the
distances involved are not so enormous as to turn a walk to the next
town into a multi-screen, do-nothing
trek.

Ultimate Ultima?
Gamers who stay away from Ultima VII because they think
they know what's in it will miss something wonderful. Origin
has produced an unusual game, with innovations of plot, tone,
and gameplay that, while not spectacular, are certainly worth
seeing. A good novel doesn't have to revolutionize the form;
it simply has to use the form well and tell a good, new story.
Ultima VII does this, and in many ways is like a really good
fantasy novel.
However, there is some truth to the argument that after seven
installments, the series is courting disaster. By now people
look at each new Ultima and, while daring it to succeed, expect
it to fail. According to the game's literature, Ultima VII is the
first installment in the "third trilogy. " If installments eight
and nine are as good as number seven is, there should be no
problem; the danger is that it will be increasingly difficult to
do something new each time.
After about fifteen cinematic outings, James Bond seems to
be taking a much needed rest; as much as we love the crew of
the Enterprise, Star Trek VI is probably a good point at which
to say goodbye; and after seven Ultimas, it might be time for
Lord British to turn his sights elsewhere, at least for a while.
For now, however, he has lived up to his reputation. Ultima
VII will be a hard act to follow.

OPINION

Scorpion's View
SSI's Dark Queen Of Krynn
as told by Scorpia

, to bring back a previous position.
er, saving and loading are now
very, fast. Remember the hundreds of

D

ark Queen Of Krynn (DQK for.

short) is the conclusion of the
Dragonlance trilogy from SSI. It
was designed to be a challenge, and, as
such, is meant for a high-level party and
experienced gold box players. Characters can and should be transferred from
Death Knights of Krynn, although they
can be created specifically for this
game. It is better to bring over a party
if you can, since this time (in contrast
to previous products) everyone will
keep their money and equipment, including such high-level weapons as the
footman's dragonlance, swords +4, and
so on. New characters will not, of
course, have such powerful items, but
their equipment will all be in the +2
range: +2 swords, bows, arrows, armor,
etc., along with bracers AC 4 for
mages, to start. As usual, you can't
choose the spells for new mages, but
they come with a reasonable selection,
including the important Delayed Blast
Fireball.
The game engine is typical gold box,
with two important changes. First,
DQK incorporates what has probably
been the single most-requested feature
in the gold box series: the ability to
restore a position from within the game
itself. Until now, restoring a game (especially after a disastrous encounter)
meant exiting to DOS and re-running it.
In DQK, you only need to encamp, and
menu choose the Load option from the camp

t files that cluttered up your disk
rive? Those are all gone, replaced by
only a few files per save position. This
streamlining has brought about the
swift disk access of the current game.
The other new feature is the "Inv"
command, available from the adventuring menu. This shows special items
being carried by the party. Gold box
veterans may recall, for instance, that
in Curse Of The Azure Bonds, the party
carried several objects that did not
show up in character inventories, but
were necessary for finishing the game.
With no way to check, it was difficult
to know whether or not you had everything you needed. The Inv command
does away with that uncertainty, and
you always know exactly what you
have. This is particularly important
since there are many special items to
pick up along the way.
Unfortunately, aside from these improvements in the game mechanics,
there is little to like about Dark Queen
of Krynn. Playability suffers from a
couple of insidious bugs, poor design,
and a great deal of gratuitous damage.
The first bug occurs in level advancement. Anyone who has played a gold
box game knows that the color of a
character's name changes when he or
she is ready to go up a level. A flaw in
the code, however, prevents the color
change from happening with multiclass characters. Experience keeps accumulating, but the character's name
remains the same color, even when he
has enough to be trained.

Worse, this bug strikes randomly. I
had three Fighter/Magic Users in the
group, and each one "stopped " at a
different level. It was extremely puzzling to see one red mage up at 15th,
while the second couldn't go beyond
13th, and the white mage was stuck at
14th level, when all of them had more
than was necessary to train up.
All you can do about this is keep track
of the experience yourself, and train
multi-class characters when they have
enough for a level advance. The tables
in the back of the manual show how
much is needed for each class to go up
a level, so the calculations are simple.
Of course, you shouldn't have to do
this, and how such a bug ever got past
the playtesters is a mystery, but you
don't really have much choice. This
affects only multi-class characters; my
single class Knight advanced properly
throughout the game.
The other bug occurs in the dungeons
of Hawkbluff, but not all the time, and
not for everyone. There is a particular
book you're supposed to find in a certain location after you have a confrontation with Trandamere.
Unfortunately, this book does not show
up for some people. The cause of this is
obscure, but SSI does have a fix for it.
If the book does not appear when it's
supposed to, the only thing you can do
is get in touch with SSI and ask them
for the patch.
In general terms, the objective of
DQK remains vague for quite some
time. Your team is sent from Palanthas
to find out what the forces of evil are up
to (aside from the usual no good). Before long, the party links up with Captain Daenor, who is on the trail of
Draconians that have demolished his

OPINION
town and kidnapped his sister. After a
series of nasty encounters with Draconians and friends in a maze of caverns, the party loses the trail in a storm
at sea. This inaugurates the underwater
adventure in the Sea Elf complex,
where evil Sahaugin and enraged sea
dragons are running rampant.
When everything has been set to
rights, the team is sent on to Taladas,
where the main action takes place,
about half of it on the mainland and the
other half in the two towers on the
Burning Sea. Up to this point, DQK
plays pretty much the same as any gold
box game. Once in Taladas, however,
matters take a definite turn for the
worse.
One thing you come up against very
often is the fraudulent choice. A number of situations arise where you are
supposedly given different courses of
action. No matter what you pick, the
result is always the same. For example,
in New Aurim you infiltrate the palace
in disguise. There you are given the
assignment of escorting new Draconian recruits to Hawkbluff.
This is a setup. Your team is hardly
on its way when they are attacked by
rebels, who start killing the recruits. It
doesn't matter what you do; run, attack,

or wait, the recruits all die. This, mind
you, occurring in front of a manned
guardpost, where no one comes to help
or gives an alarm.
There are many such instances, but
certainly the worst is the lighthouse at
Hizden. You must talk to the sage who
lives there. So, your party toils up
eleven flights, fighting past Gorgons,
Beholders, Spiders, Iron Golems and
other delightful critters, until they reach
a door. At the door, the usual three
choices of bashing it, picking the lock
or using a knock spell are presented.
None of that matters, since none of
those will open the door. The real way
to the sage is back down on level one,
where a teleporter is hidden behind an
illusionary wall that is not detected
when you have Search active. The only
way to find it is to walk into all the walls
until you hit the right one. You might
figure this out when you reach level ten
and find the dying Elf woman, who
mumbles some cryptic clues about a
"porch" (the porch being the small enclosed area that has the teleporter).
The unfortunate thing is that there are
a couple of places where your choice
does make some sort of difference, but
by that time you are likely to have
developed a mindset of "it doesn't mat-

ter." So you still have to approach each
situation as though the choices were
important, so you don't miss those rare
occasions when your actions do produce different results.
These situations are bad enough, and
the unusually high amount of damage
your party takes does not make things
any better. One of the nastiest encounters occurs in the Gnome Tower, where
you are looking for the missing Gnome
King.
After a single combat in one room,
you go through a door into the next one.
As you pass through the door, your
party is hit with spells, taking an average of about 30 points or so damage,
which cannot be avoided by any means.
Even characters inside a Globe of Invulnerability will be injured, so you
begin the fight in less than optimum
condition.
Since you're up against Enchanted
Draconians and a Dark Wizard, this is
a tough battle. It can be tougher if you
have bad luck. On one try (we had to go
through this one several times before
succeeding), the Dark Wizard went
first, and cast a Delayed Blast Fireball.
Between that fireball, and the door
damage, Gawain, my Rose Knight
(wearing a ring of fire resistance),

OPINION
dropped from his usual 138 hp's down
to 50, and combat has just begun.
When this combat ends (assuming
your party survives), there is a short
automatic interlude (with another set of
spurious choices), followed by your
team taking more unavoidable damage,
followed by a second fight (with more
of the same opponents), all with no
opportunity to save.
Aside from this, there are other occasions throughout the game where you
have two or more fights back-to-back
with no chance to save in between. If
you have Elves in the party who end up
dead, or if the whole party should die,
somewhere along the way, you can't do
much aside from restoring and trying
again (possibly many agains), until you
come out the victor.
Your task of surviving is not made
any easier by the inclusion of Enchanted Draconians to the roster of evil
critters. Anyone who played Champions of Krynn knows about Auraks, the
dragonmen that blow up when they die
for real. Now, there are Sivaks, Bozaks
and Kapaks who also explode when
they die.
Enchanted Sivaks go out like a meteor swarm, although the damage they
do (if your people are protected by
Globes and Fire Resistance) is fairly

minor. Enchanted Kapaks splatter into
acid puddles that go in several random
directions, and that damage, too, is not
especially potent.
Enchanted Auraks are similar to the
regular ones, except they do much more
injury when they explode: 16d8 is nothing to sneer at. Gawain got caught once,
for about 80 hps of damage. Fortunately, Auraks (of either kind) become
motionless before they blow up, so you
can simply move everyone away (far
away) to avoid severe pain.
The Enchanted Bozaks, however, are
something else. They blow up doing
magical damage, for which there is no
protection, over an area similar to that
of an Ice Storm. The average hit from a
dying Bozak is about 20 points, sometimes less. In addition, they have fire
shields up, so you don't want anyone
striking them with a hand weapon.
Any of these Draconians in a combat
is plenty; when there are several, or a
mixed bag of several, you can expect
that your party will be hurting when the
fighting ends. Having clerics with a raft
of healing spells is an absolute necessity in the game.
Money is another sore point in the
game. Your party is showered with
coins, gems and jewels, but there is
little to do with this wealth. Training is

free. Inns are free. Healing at temples
is free. Most items for sale are so mundane that they are not worth bothering
about and the few magical things you
can buy are easily affordable. There are
only two places in DQK where cash is
important, and even then, you don't
need all that much.
I went through the game twice. The
first time around was extraordinarily
difficult (on novice level, yet!) since I
didn't know until too late that the multiclass characters could be trained up.
The second run was, of course, not
quite so hard, since I knew what to
expect and the party was training properly as we went along. High level (20+)
mages do make a big difference, as
their spells not only generate more
damage, but seem to have a better
chance of getting past Draconian magic
resistance.
Overall, DQK is the nadir of the gold
box games. The excessiveness of combat surpasses even that found in Silver
Blades. Fake choices, pointless activities and useless treasure provide no enjoyment. What was meant to be a
challenge comes off as a frustrating
exercise in survival that only the most
devoted hack'n'slashers would want to
experience.

Scorpion's Tale

from Legend Entertainment
ack for more, I see. Well, Fred is
B
back, too, from the Annual Grues
Convention, so just sit down and
relax while he pours you a cold one.
You'll probably need it, before and after the little trek you're about to take
into the wild black yonder.
Gateway is the latest adventure game
from Legend Entertainment. You
may think it odd that I'd tell the "Tale"
on this one. After all, the game comes
with a free hintbook— and therein lies
the rub. It isn't so much a hintbook as
an answer book. Instead of providing
little nudges working up to the solution,
it gives you the answer right off. Handy
when you're really stuck, but many
people would rather have the nudge
than the solution ... so here's your
nudge (grin).
Before getting to the good stuff,
though, there are a couple of problems
you need to know about. At the armory,
save before going inside. Exit to DOS,
re-boot the game, start from the beginning, and then, load in your save at the
armory door. This will reset certain
pointers so you can use the button
(when you find it).
The other problem comes with exiting the ship while music is playing. On

Sigma Dayan 7,
the game locked
up when I stepped
out of the ship with
the music on. After rebooting and turning off the music before leaving the
ship, I had no further problems. As a
precaution, I made sure to turn off the
music on all subsequent landings on
any planet, and the game never crashed
again.
Gateway is a space station built by the
Heechee, a vanished race of aliens
popularized by science fiction genius
Frederick Pohl. No one knows what
they were up to, why they suddenly
disappeared or how a lot of their technology works. Yet, the Heechee left
behind a fleet of perfectly operational
starships that can go faster than light.
Too bad that Earth scientists haven't
been able to figure out where all the
course codes go.
That's where you come in. You,
lucky person, are a Gateway prospector. This means you get into a Heechee
ship, punch in an unintelligible bunch
of symbols and wait to see where you
end up. Just what you've always
wanted to do, right?
Anyhow, it's your first day on the

station, so you'll probably want to look
around a bit (the place isn't large; none
of the locations in the game are), but try
not to miss ship-handling class. You
don't get your blue badge unless you
attend, and no badge means no trips.
It isn't long before you find out that
there are two badges, blue and green.
The greenies are the elite prospectors,
who have a better chance at finding
something worthwhile on their jaunts
(although they still don't know where
they're going). Wouldn't you rather
have a green badge?
Talking to the right people, and
spending a little cash will help you
towards that goal ... but first, you have
to prove yourself. That means a trip or
two into the unknown. As a blue badge,
you get six course codes. Five of these
don't lead anywhere special (just out
and back), but one of them will strike
paydirt of sorts. Not much, but enough
for your purposes.
So, you land on this planet (remember
to check before every landing to see if
you need your spacesuit), and all you

Game Hints
have to do is get into the dome. Not
very hard, if you take time to explore
the area. Once you're inside, picking up
the artifact is simple, and before long,
you're on your way back to Gateway
and a green badge.
So far, so good. While you wait for
your green badge class, you probably
want to spend the time figuring out how
to snatch the tuning fork in the museum. Bet you already figured out you
need this for something or other. That
need doesn't really show up until well
along, but what the heck, a little thievery will help to pass the time.
Of course, you just can't walk in and
take it (unless you're looking for
trouble). First, you need a little trivial
exercise. Second, you have to pay close
attention to the other artifact, the one
that looks like a toaster oven (but isn't).
Now you put the first and second together, and you get ... well, you get
something helpful, let's put it that way.
You've probably also wandered into
the park (of sorts). Probably, you even
noticed that big lever. Naturally, you're
a nice person, but sometimes it pays to
be not so nice (about the only time in
the game, in fact). Hint: it isn't the tools
that you need.
It's likely you've also found your
way to the VR (Virtual Reality) lab.
Here you can do your good deed for the
day by entering the Beach simulation
and breaking it (you don't have to
bother with the Psych sim). This is easier than it looks, once you figure out
you need to be generous.
We don't want to overlook the armory. There's a nice little gun inside,
which you can't just walk off with (although you'd think that you would be
issued a weapon, considering the dangers of flying off into the great unknown). You have to sneak it out
another way. This is related to one of
the problems mentioned at the start of
the article, and there's no point to entering the armory until you have the
key.
Well, by this time you're ready for
green badge class. You get a little info,
but ship handling is just the same as
before. The big thing is that you get a
course code. Just one, but that's plenty,
and before you can say "whoosh,"
you're off to Aleph IV.
This place is not uninhabited. In fact,

it's inhabited by some primitive and
unfriendly aliens. As you might expect,
they have something you need, as a
little spying at the dome will reveal.
Now, all you have to do is obtain the
item. For this, you have to get into the
alien village (remember, no one can be
in two places at the same time), and you
need a little help from a "friend " . A
short wait, a small deposit, a quick getaway, and you've got the device. All
you have to do now is figure out the
keypad in the dome.
You can do it by trial and error, but
there's a better way. Those symbols all
look similar, don't they? Then again,
maybe not. Odd, when you come to
think about it (so do think about it).
You're not done yet. There's still the
Heechee artifact to grab. This puzzle is
a colorful one. Just think back to all
those boring basic art classes and primary colors. Don't get mixed up ... or
maybe you should.
Hey, you've been doing real well so
far. Let's hope you keep it up, 'cause
now the serious stuff begins. A mysterious meeting and a really frightening
revelation sends you off on a mission
of great importance. I'm not gonna tell
what this is all about; you just have to
play the game to find out. However, it's
enough for you to know now that there
are four planets to visit, and you have
to turn on a machine on each one.
That's simple. Getting to where you
can operate the things is another matter
entirely. These four planets are entirely
self-contained, and you can do them in
any order. If one stumps you, go somewhere else and come back later.
So, we'll look at Aurigae VI first. Not
much to see here, except the plate in the
ground and the window in the building.
Once you get the plate working, you
can visit another part of the planet.
Make sure you check out those murals.
Now, you need to return and pick up the
black pyramid. Then, it's back to to the
temple and through the mini-maze.
You can get through it by trial and
error (it's not hard at all), but there's an
easier way. My, how colorful those
rooms are. Looks like they have all the
colors of the rainbow, in fact (heh).
Next stop, Dorma V. This is a tricky
one, since the Heechee place is not
evident. What is evident, among other
things, is a man-beast, sort of like Big-

foot. Keep out of his way while you run
around and grab everything you can.
On this world, you have to sleep often,
and you experience some weird dreams
(with cryptic clues) while you're napping. Pay attention to them.
You must enter the crystal cave
(when Bigfoot isn't around) and use a
little force to get something. Once it's
pristine, you can deal with Bigfoot easily, which is good, because you need
him for something you can't do yourself. He's a lot stronger than you are,
especially when violent.
Before long, you're off to Kaduna HI,
certainly the nastiest of the quartet.
This is a jungle world, with lots of mean
veggies. Stay in one spot too long, and
tendrils come up out of the ground to
grab you. And those anemones aren't
nice, at all. Neither is the wildlife, what
with worms that chew on you, spiders
that attack you, and a snake that wants
you for dinner.
The spider is easily dealt with, provided you have a weapon. The worms
are a nuisance, but you can throw them
off yourself at any time, after which
they are promptly eaten by the flying
dinosaurs (yummy!). The snake, however, might give you some trouble,
since you won't be able to blast it. For
this critter, an alternate meal is the order of the day. Check out the landing
site and think about those spike balls.
Now, you only have to deal with the
pufferslug on the machine itself. This
thing ain't called "puffer" for nothing.
It blows up to enormous size when
annoyed. Just like a balloon. Hmmm...
just like a balloon ...
Okay, last stop, Nemira III. Here you
find the missing Rolf Becker. You can
bring him back with you to Gateway for
some extra points. That requires being
very nice during this outing. You can
also be very nasty, and still finish this
portion, so it's up to you how you want
to play it. Regardless, you have to talk
to Rolf about a number of things and do
some poking around, to obtain the information you need to solve all the
puzzles.
This is the hardest planet, because
you have to repair the machine before
you can use it. You need an actuator
cell. That you can get after a long and
tedious business with a bunch of tools
(save in case you make a mistake along

Game Hints
the way). You need a lens cap. Rolfie
boy has that, and will trade it for some
ore. Before you can get it, you have to
find his old mining site, which contains
a clue to where you can dig up a new
vein. You also need a lens. This is lying
around in a hard-to-reach place. Well,
it's hard to reach if you aren't Tarzan
(hehe).
Now, you just have to get the miniature dinosaur (Rolf's pet) out of the
way. No problem, if you know a little
something about the critter. The raft
trip is optional (one of the nice things
to do to get Rolf to return).
So, you're back on Gateway, but
you're not done yet. You have to find
the Heechee artifact on the station. This
is where that tuning fork comes in real
handy. So does what you learned from
the maintenance man.
One more trip is in order, but first you
have to pass the Deep Psych test. This
is a quickie (one puzzle). Just remember, ya can't kill, ya can't run and ya
can't hide.

Finally, you are off to the end game.
You'll figure out soon enough that this
is all VR and you have to "break" the
simulations. The first one is easy. Play
a few of the games and something
should occur to you in short order. I did
it with the Wheel of Fortune, myself.
Just place your bets (grin).
The second is meaner. This is Hell,
four rooms in a circular arrangement
and they have to be done in the right
order, namely the Demon Gauntlet, the
Empty Chamber, the Mirror Room, and
the Hydra Room. You get something in
each that will help with the next. Feel
free to fool around in all the rooms
before you get serious, since no matter
what happens, you can't die here (you
keep coming back to life). Besides, a
little messing around will provide some
clues on what needs to be done here and
there.
No, you're not exactly finished yet,
but almost. Hang in there! You have to
get into Deep Psych one more time and
now, the tech isn't around to give you
the password. Fortunately, he left the

manual behind. If you paid attention to
how he read the password from the
book, you should have no trouble at all
figuring out where to go so you can read
it, too.
WHEW! What a long, strange trip it's
been, but it's really over, at least for
now. And I see by the old invisible
clock it's that time again. Remember, if
you need help with an adventure game,
you can reach me in the following
ways:
On Delphi: Visit the GameSIG (under the Groups and Clubs menu).
On GEnie: Stop by the Games
RoundTable (type: Scorpia to reach the
Games RT).
By US Mail (enclose a self-addressed, stamped envelope if you live
in the United States): Scorpia, PO Box
338, Gracie Station, New York, NY
10028.
Until next time, happy adventuring!

f

II

3

-

by M Evan Brooks

Part 2 of A Discussion
Begun In CGW#96
omehow, in my previous article, editorial gremlins seemed to have consumed my final salvo. So we'll try
once more — did you ever wonder about
the hubris of companies that decide you are
simply too stupid to name your own directories? So, they make it easy — their games
are under their corporate logo, e.g. MicroProse, Dynamix. While it is commendable
to offer a default setting, I get upset over
those games that refuse to allow me the
latitude of renaming the destination drive or
the name of the directory itself.
But on to another subject. Just what exactly is a wargame? Does it prepare one for
war? Several years ago, a book was entitled
Military Justice Is to Justice as Military
Music Is to Music; if we substitute Wargames are to War as Military Music Is to
Music, we will probably be correct. John
Keegan noted that:
... the exact circumstances, let alone the
rhythms and dynamics of land battle, deft
easy reconstruction ... However precise
[one's] understanding ..., however detailed his knowledge ... , he will never quite
be able to place the people of the past in
time and place... Walking the ground itself
will not yield the answer, for, even if one
burdens oneself with a soldier's hamper,
everything else that worked to deaden or
hasten the soldier's step — fear, crowd
pressure, the obstacle of fallen bodies —
will lack from the simulation. Sight lines,
so immediate and easy to establish on a
peaceful visit, cannot be those of the day of
battle, when smoke clouds, formed bodies
of troops, even a neighbor's head and
shoulders, intervened to alter a participant 's view."

s

112

Review: Aces Of The Pacific
1 16

Replay: Carrier Strike

120
Review: Conflict Korea
124

Review: Napoleon
126

Review: Vikings

— The Price of Admiralty, pp. 10-11
Military cadets are encouraged to
particen"sfd;hyvitesofa
battle, each prepared with a participant's
memoirs, and tutor each other on what happened and why on that particular day of
history. The computer (and board) wargame, as we know it, is akin to a staff ride

— we possess "too much" knowledge when
we play. We "know" that something happened, and even the general order of battle
and certain aspects of key terrain. This
knowledge was not readily apparent to the
participants.
Dr. Peter Turcan, a British designer, has
attempted to make the wargame more realistic. His efforts (Borodino, Armada, and
Dreadnoughts from PSS and Waterloo from
SSI) offer the player only the perspective
available to the battlefield commander. His
designs are sui generis, and every serious
gamer should examine his system. However, even with such a limited perspective,
one still "knows" more than he should.
My personal knowledge of the Gulf War
was one of experience. Yet most Americans
in the comfort of their living rooms, knew
more about the war from CNN than I could
grasp from my limited vista. But what they
lack is the adrenaline rush, the sense of
urgency and the limited options that are
available. Winston Churchill once noted
that nothing in life is more exhilarating than
having someone shoot at you — and miss!
Similarly, a Navy admiral told his pilots on
the eve of Desert Storm that he wished he
could be out with them; Daniel Ellsberg
wrote that warfare can be an exhilarating
experience — as long as you don't get shot.
As a product of the anti-war 1960s, I considered such remarks to be hyperbole. But
there is a basic truth about the nature of war
— one that is missing in the nature of the
wargame.
Wargame designer Richard Berg questions the veracity of computer simulations.
Unlike the paper genre, one cannot verify
the verisimilitude of the underlying data
(unless one can get into source code analysis). But does the combat participant have a
quantifiable knowledge of his weapons systems and command structures?
Wargaming is a fascinating hobby — but
one that teaches mechanics and alternatives; not one that can accurately reconstruct the battlefield in a realistic fashion.

Sneak Preview

Reich 'N' Roll

A NEW WARGAME COMPANY ASSUMES
by Alan Emrich
TITLE:
High Command
SYSTEM:
IBM
PRICE:
$44.95
PROTECT: Document Look Up
DESIGNERS: Gregg Carter and Joey Nonnast
PUBLISHER: Colorado Computer Creations

t was Christmas, 1976. I was in my junior year of high school and had
been an avid wargamer for years. The game I had been longing for awaited
me under the tree. I'll never forget the joy of opening that gift — Avalon
Hill's Third Reich.
No previous game had done justice to strategic level combat during WWII on
the entire European theater. Strategic level combat, attrition, economics,
production and even faint traces of politics were found in that crude, first
edition release. It was simply the most exciting wargame of its day and its
popularity among wargamers, both for its subject matter and as a game, has
never waned to this very day. I reveled in every year and every revision of
what I knew was a great wargame that could always be made just a little bit
better with a little more tinkering. Today, sixteen years and four major
revisions later, now in the guise of Advanced Third Reich, Avalon Hill has
released a perfected version of the game that has played my heartstrings like
Yitzak Perlman plays the violin.

I

Who says you can never recapture your youth? This time it was not a
Christmas present, but one of many computer game demo disks, alpha and
beta product versions that crosses my desk. Filled with all of the promises of
every other "exciting new" product, I installed it with heaps of journalistic
skepticism. Then, to my astonishment, as I started "pushing the pieces around"
on that first, interactive demonstration copy of High Command, my youth
came rushing back to me.

The Big Band Era of Unit Types
It was 1976 all over again! Only this time, it was on my computer screen at
work. I didn't know whether to play quietly at my desk enjoying this "guilty
secret" or to shout it out and tell the world. By nature of writing this preview,
I have chosen to do the latter.
High Command covers the European Theater of Operations (ETO) during
WWII on a slightly smaller scale than Third Reich. Using monthly turns and

multiple air and naval phases with a land movement and combat phase
sandwiched in between, High Command also presents veteran wargamers
with a more detailed counter mix. Besides the standard land unit types,
mechanized infantry and marine units come into their own. Air units come in
three flavors (fighters, fighter-bombers and strategic bombers) while naval
units are broken down even further (submarines, merchant ships, transports,
destroyers, cruisers, battleships and aircraft carriers).
Units do not have set strength points, either. Instead, they can range in strength
from somewhere between .01 to 9.49 points per "counter" and can be
produced in fractional increments. All units can be split up and combined at
will during the pre-game turn organization phase. Thus, players have great
flexibility in adjusting their forces for deployment. Each unit is also rated for
its effectiveness as well as its strength. When either is gone, so is the unit.

Economies of Scale
But having units is only half the fun. Producing them is the other half! An
extremely rich economic system takes the player each month through a sea
of oil and a mountain of resource points. These are allocated to factories and
shipyards which can produce an amount of the desired item at a fixed cost
over a period of time. Resources must even hazard the perils of trans-oceanic
transportation, and the Germans can even attempt to run resources in from
their South American suppliers!.
The detailed economic system is almost a game unto itself, with players being
allowed to invest in their economy, research and development, as well as

forging the tools of war. Economics also produces the "coin" of diplomatic
exchange, used to win allies and influence minor countries. A complete "war
production module" has been integrated into High Command, turning players
into modern day Albert Speers as they try to skillfully manage a clean, detailed
subgame of resource allocation and management.

Flying and Floating
The air and naval systems involve selecting from a plethora of missions and
assigning specific forces to them, then plotting their destinations, hex-by-hex.
Both players plan in secrecy and then, an execution segment reveals where
any clashes of airforces or navies occurred. Combat is fought in "rounds,"
with either player being allowed to opt out after each. Losses are attritional
in nature, both to unit's strength and their effectiveness.

Land Warfare
Each land phase is divided into six pulses (and six is exactly how many
movement points armor and mechanized infantry units have, not by coincidence). Unit's moves are plotted individually, hex-by-hex and
pulse-by,otharcnefulyotadcrinesulta
particular times and places for maximum effectiveness. Where the big innovation introduced in Third Reich was a lack of "zones of control" for every
non-armored unit, High Command takes this one step further by stripping
away any deterring factors to enemy movement past friendly units or through
friendly territory.
Instead, players must either maintain solid "lines" (which is impractical) or
operate in "clumps" of corps (presumably formed into army groups). Since a
hex is controlled by merely passing through it (a la Second Front), with
nothing to restrict enemy troop movements, the lines become very fluid
indeed. However, the penalties for being "cut off"(out of supply) in the beta
test version previewed for this article were amazingly severe, which would
give any zealous, Patton-like attacker some pause before blithely marching
across the plains.
As with air and naval combat, land combat is fought in attritional rounds with
players receiving reports and being allowed to retreat after each round.
Interestingly, a player can "declare war" during any round of activity. The
violated neutral will not be able to start playing until the next phase. Thus, if
Germany declares war on Russia during the first air phase (and so get a free
round of ground strikes), the Russian army will be able to move in the next
(ground) phase. If Germany waits until the ground phase to cross the border,
the Russian army will be frozen in place but the Luftwaffe will not have
softened them up (or warned them) first. It's all up to the German player...
High Command has an excellent "strategic map" overview feature. It can be
quickly altered to show hex control, supplied areas, political leanings, specific
unit and resource locations, etc., etc. Unfortunately, hex control and supplied
areas can not be seen on the tactical map where players must make the crucial
decisions that are greatly effected by such matters.

The Experience of Variance
One thing that High Command has really got going for it is the wide number
of scenarios and variants for each one. There are four tutorial mini-games
(Poland, France '40, Invasion of Russia and D-Day), five full campaign

Sneak Preview

HIGH COMMAND
games (including a 72-turn epic). Oddly, the
game must end on the historical turn of May,
1945 and, apparently, not one turn before or after
that.
Before playing a game, many, many options are
presented, including selecting the computer to
player either, neither or both sides, adjusting
various AI levels and "die roll" modifiers, varying the belligerency of important neutrals, creating weather zones, worrying about overseas
merchant shipping routes, Japanese success in
the Pacific options and several others. A scenario
editor is also practically built which will allow
players to get into the games databases and
modify things further. All in all, there is plenty
there to keep things lively over many playings.
During play, those who do not wish to be bogged
down in the details of every phase can delegate
it out to the computer AI. This is purely voluntary, as the AI will not take over a single function
unless specifically requested by the player on a
phase-by-phase basis. Best of all, player's can go
in and modify the computer's orders at will. In
other words, the programming will satisfy both
the hands on "control freaks" as well as the time
commitment conscious "grey hairs" of our
hobby. Interestingly, I played a game where I
only ran the German economy and diplomacy
and was utterly fascinated. The computer AI
picked up on my production and diplomatic
"grand design" and started shifting its military
operation to be in synch with the forces and allies
available. Kudos to Colorado Computer Creations.
High Command is, however, very "processor

intensive." The computer does an awful lot of
thinking when it plays and players with 286
processors will have to show some patience. The
more options that are piled on (i.e., the more
complexity desired), the more the computer will
carefully think about. Be warned! On a 386/20,
the longest Allied phase (production) took almost five minutes. It is nowhere near as bad as
UMS II, but it is noticeable and needs to be
mentioned. Fortunately, there is plenty of documentation to read during the lulls.

Shades of First Edition Third

Reich
The graphic look threw me back into nostalgialand as well. Seeing the map and pieces, I longed
to break out my Atari 800XL from the garage
again. (Later, I found out that, four years ago
when they started this game project, it was originally for an Atari!). There is a clean, simple
beauty to the graphic look of the game which does
not detract in the least from play.
The rules describing the game system are, like
those in the first edition Third Reich (the board
game), full of loopholes large enough to drive a
Tiger tank through. To find out how the economic
system works, for example, will mean gleaning
information from at least three different locations
in the 200+ page manual (nicely bound like a

paperback book). The beta version examined
has air units destroying ground units wholesale from ground support missions and the
frequency of naval engagements led me to
believe that Lord Admiral Nelson did the
navy's Al programming. Several quirks in the
system can be grossly exploited by wily human players wishing to do so and, frankly, this
only added my feelings of deja vu.
The game's interface, in particular, is kludgy.
Players will have to make a lot of mouse clicks
to accomplish a turn — and I mean a lot! If I
could spell carpal tunnel syndrome, it would
be quite appropriate to mention it here [grin].
Without going into great detail, the ergonomics of the interface were poorly conceived,
giving players who are already doing plenty
of work in managing so many things, too
much extra to do. Some of the informational
boxes are not well organized and a lack of
"sliders" to make adjustments of points also
detracts a bit from the game.

Shared Enthusiasm
As with first edition Third Reich, though, I'm
going to stick with High Command. Like
Third Reich, High Command is brilliantly
designed but was stunted in playtesting and
development. I spoke with the designers, who
are a couple of wargaming physicists that
made this game in their extra time purely as a
labor of love. After speaking with Gregg Carter extensively by telephone to research this
article, it's clear that they're going to support
this game through many revisions and enhancements. The active solicitations I read
from Gregg on CompuServe for player input
on what to do in the 1.1 version is very reassuring to me. As I pointed out each oddity and
omission from High Command, he took notes
and thought about what it would take to implement the suggestion in the 1.1 version of
the game which will, apparently, be the "initial
feedback response fix" version.
High Command is being released before its
time, but not by much with the improvements
that will be quickly coming in version 1.1 and
the many enhancements (such as VGA graphics and modem/play by e-mail features) are
planned and partially completed. Unlike the
sixteen years I've waited and labored over
Advanced Third Reich (where, for my persistent efforts, I was listed among the design team
— so I know what I'm talking about), I believe that same degree of perfection will be
much sooner forthcoming from the dedicated
fathers of High Command. It's one of the
most exciting computer wargames I've ever
seen and is packed with many clever design
elements. All I can add to that is a sea of
flashbacks to my joyous (misspent?) youth as
a wargamer and say, "Yahoo! Here we go
again!"

TITLE:
Aces of the Pacific
SYSTEM:
IBM 386SX or better
PRICE:
$79.95
PROTECTION: None
DESIGNER
Damon Slye
PUBLISHER: Dynamix Eugene Oregon

Douglas Fick is not only a pilot of
combat aircraft, but he also teaches
other pilots how to fly today's modern
aircraft. His last review for CGW covered Falcon 3.0.

Though Dynamix' latest entry in
their Great War Planes series,
ces of the Pacific (Aces),

builds on the success of the award-winning Red Baron, the game's "fuselage"
has been penetrated by just enough
"bullet holes " to require some serious
maintenance. It is simultaneously awesome and disappointing. It is too good
for aficionados with fast machines to

pass up, but it
needs a tune-up in
order to be King
of the Slot. As reported in the
sneak preview
(CGW #92, pp.
86-87), Aces was
designed to advance the state of
the art in the combat flight simulation genre. Such a challenge is not an
easy task. This article is one pilot's
"after action report."

The View From
Angels 25
Aces of the Pacific models every
facet of fighter, light bomber and torpedo aircraft operations involved in the
Pacific theater during World War II.
Players take to the skies in any one of
twenty different fighters or seven different bomber aircraft. In addition different heavy bombers either can be
escorted or assailed by the player. The
game even includes a landing signal

officer (LSO) frantically waving paddles to keep the player in the groove
during carrier landings.
The gamer can choose any level of
involvement, from flying single missions (training or wartime) to a full
campaign that will see the player flying
from the opening shots at Pearl Harbor
until VJ day. More than any other
World War II flight simulation, Aces
emphasizes the importance of surface
attack missions. Players will have
enough bombs, rockets and torpedoes
to play through a variety of scenarios.
Lest one should think air-to-air combat
has been ignored, however, one should
know that players have the option of
dogfighting famous aces like Pappy
Boyington, David McCampbell and
Saburo Sakai. Additionally, players
will have to work out strategies to bring
down flying behemoths like the B-29
Superfortress without falling victim to
its formidable defensive armaments.
The campaign mode consists of a series of sub-campaigns, varying from
one to dozens of missions, that cover all
the major actions of the Pacific theatre.

Review
Each time one of the sub-campaigns is
completed, the player can choose
which campaign to fly next. The player
can also choose which squadron to
fight with. This gives the player a good
deal of flexibility with the different aircraft types as the war progresses.
In keeping with their tradition of providing quality documentation, Dynamix includes a well researched,
spiral bound manual that covers the
history of the war in the Pacific, gives
aircraft "bios " with color plates of each
machine in the game, and provides
complete discussion of flight dynamics
and game pla
A Positive Rate of
Climb
GRAPHICS — Building on their
work with Red Baron, Dynamix has
produced a program very pleasing to
the eye. Aircraft are more detailed,
both internally and externally, than
their grandfathers in Red Baron. One
can even see subtle light-sourcing
within the cockpit as one maneuvers.
Further, with the inclusion of ground
attack and anti-shipping missions,
Dynamix put a lot of effort into providing realistic targets. Hangars,
buildings, fuel tanks, anti-aircraft
gun sites and ships, ranging from corvettes to carriers, act as convenient
backstops for bullets, bombs, rockets
and torpedoes. When these targets are
destroyed, they really let go. Looking
down at the still smoking ruins of an
airfield that one's flight just worked
over provides a certain amount of job
satisfaction. Also, where Red Baron's
clouds were portrayed as large blocks
that were widely scattered over the
playing area, the weather model in Aces
has paid much more attention to "visible moisture." Hence, clouds vary
from small buildups that a good sneeze
would dissipate to solid layers, thousands of feet thick. Aces is definitely
graphically superior to Red Baron.
DEPTH OF GAME PLAY — Almost every type of mission that fighter
or light bomber/torpedo aircraft undertook during the war is recreated in Aces
of the Pacific. Dynamix went all out to
provide a complete simulation of all
aspects of air combat in the Pacific
theatre. During the course of their career, players will be tasked to both intercept and escort bombers, defend and
destroy shipping and ground installations, and generally scour the sky clear
of enemy aircraft.
The largest enemy formation size in
Red Baron was four aircraft. Aces has
upped the ante so that it is not uncommon to see a swarm of eight or more
adversary aircraft closing with one's

flight. Generally considered, Aces provides a lot of replay value and players
are not likely to find themselves bored.
AIRCRAFT — Some areas of aircraft modeling are excellent. Diving
performance and maximum speeds at
varying altitudes are very well done.
The ability of various aircraft to both
absorb and inflict differing amounts of
damage seems remarkably accurate.
Trying to score a kill against a P-47
Thunderbolt when one's aircraft has
only a pair of 12.7 MM guns can be a
time-consuming affair. Conversely,
watching a lightly armored Zero erupt
in flames after a short burst from a
heavily armed U.S. fighter shows

clearly just how frail many of the Japanese aircraft were.
Dynamix also took the time to accurately model ammunition consumption. Using the historical armament
load and rates of fire, they show how
ammunition-limited many WWII
fighter aircraft actually were. Players
will find themselves having to be conservative on their shots to avoid running out of bullets before running out
of targets.
MISSION RECORDER — Taking
advantage of all the graphic detail is
easy to do via the mission recorder. The
recorder writes every mission to tape
and allows players infinite flexibility in
viewing options. The player can watch
previously recorded battles from any
aircraft present, or move the camera to
any point desired. Want to watch that
torpedo strike home? No problem. Just
move the camera to the ship's waterline. This is a very powerful feature and
a lot of fun to play with.

Going Into A Stall
(Negative Thrusts)
SPEED — All the graphic detail has
a heavy cost associated with it. Playing
on a 386/33 Mhz system with more
than just a few aircraft slows play to
such an extent that the game loses much
of its enjoyment. Even on a 486/50 Mhz

system, the game bogs down when
multiple aircraft are over a ground target. Without a doubt, this might prove
to be a fatal blow to Dynamix' hopes
of continuing the Great War Planes series. A simulation that won't play
smoothly except on the very fastest
(and most expensive) computers may
not capture enough of the market to
make further ventures profitable.
Time will tell if Dynamix is willing
to tighten up the current game code to
increase speed. Another option may be
to allow players to downscale graphics
and find a balance that works for their
machines. The current graphic detail
adjustment scales just don't seem to
have much affect on game speed.
ADVERSARIES — The enemy artificial intelligence isn't nearly as aggressive as in Red Baron. In Baron,
some of the aces were very tough and
a fight against any more than two at
once was a challenge. In Aces, while
the adversaries are still dangerous, it's
much easier to defeat a large number
of them. It almost seems as if the
programmers were relying on the
sheer number of the enemy planes to
make up for a relatively weak Al. Red
Baron had such excellent play balance, one has to wonder what happened in the interim.
AIRCRAFT — Aircraft turning performance seems to have been limited to
the extremes; either the best or the
worst. Every aircraft stalls somewhere
between 60 and 80 miles per hour. This
is true whether the aircraft is straight
and level or pulling hard in a turn.
Climbing performance is also greatly
overestimated.
Comparing the performance of a P-51
in Aces to a P-51 in Chuck Yeager's Air
Combat reveals some remarkable differences. The Yeager P-51 takes four
minutes and fifteen seconds to reach
10,000 feet from a standing start, which
is very close to what several reference
sources list for the Mustang. In Aces,
the same P-51 makes the climb in one
minute and 51 seconds, a climb rate of
over 5,000 feet per minute, twice what
it should be. The Yeager P-51 stalls in
straight and level flight at 100 mph, and
140 mph when in a turn. The Aces'
Mustang stalls at 80 mph either way.
These may seem like insignificant
points, but they do affect game play. By
flattening out such differences between
aircraft, the player will notice that adversaries tend to perform the same way
no matter which aircraft is being flown.
An experienced player will have little
trouble flying a lumbering P-47 Thunderbolt in a dogfight against several

Review
agile Zeroes. Historically, the only way
to survive in such a fight would be to
use slashing hit and run tactics to take
advantage of the Thunderbolt's great
speed and deny the Zeroes a turning
fight they would surely win. Overall,
by levelling out turn performance, the
game heavily favors the larger, less agile but more heavily armed and armored U.S. fighters.
SOUND — Another aspect that has
deteriorated from Red Baron to Aces
is sound support. What was crisp and
sharp in Red Baron comes off as
muted and dull in Aces. Most likely,
this was done to account for the fact
that the player's pilot is now enclosed
in a cockpit, but it is noticeable nonetheless. Engine sounds are a nondescript hum and the pop of bullets
striking targets is the same snare
drum, whether the bullets are hitting
the player's aircraft or any other.
Gone, of course, is the sharp slap of
bullets shredding fabric and wood
(since, indeed, the fabric and wood are
gone, as well) that Red Baron employs
to inform players that they are on the
receiving end of a series of lead telegrams from the enemy. Still, it would
have been nice if Dynamix had provided players a bullet rending metal cue
to indicate when their own planes are
being needled with those unwelcome

fuselage tattoos courtesy of foreign
aces. For now, the player's first indication of danger may well be an engine
erupting in flames.
Further, when an aircraft enters a stall
in Aces, the only indication is a small
"stall light". When an actual aircraft
enters a stall, a very distinct rumble is

forward, and, in aircraft with bubble
canopies, the deep six (i.e. straight aft).
A huge blind area exists from 60 degrees above the aircraft's nose to just
above the aircraft's tail. This means
that for a good percentage of the time,
players will lose sight of the aircraft
they are maneuvering against. Shifting
to the very powerful external view
mode takes too much time and effort
in the middle of a heated dogfight. A
nice addition might have been a track
mode for the nearest threat, similar to
that in Falcon 3.0 and Chuck
Yeager's Air Combat. At the very
least, a high six view mode covering
some of the blind area would have
been handy.

Emergency Landing
(Conclusion)

both heard and felt as the airflow separates from the wings. The addition of
such a sound effect would have added
to the game's feel a great deal.
VIEW MODES — Carrying over a
weakness from Red Baron, Aces provides the player with very limited view
modes from within the cockpit. During
the heat of a dogfight, the only truly
usable views are straight ahead, high

Aces of the Pacific has terrific potential. A lot of time and effort has
gone into the program to give it great
depth and playability. The only major
flaw is speed of play, but it is a serious
one. As it currently stands, Aces of the
Pacific is 80% "battle-ready." Here's
hoping the next few revisions provide
that extra 20% to make the program
everything both Sierra/Dynamix and
the players wish it to be.

CARRIER
STRIKE

N

ormally, writing up a campaign

replay of a game like Gary Grigsby's Carrier Strike would seem
to be clearly within my purview, but I
was reluctant to undertake the assignment. Having recently switched motherboards, I found that the mouse
implementation would not function
properly on either Western Front or
Carrier Strike. (Note: discussions with
SSI reveal that in over 15,000 units
sold, my mouse problem is unique.)
However, I was sufficiently aggravated
that I wanted little to do with the simulation. Also, I found the graphics somewhat lackluster. Thus, I quickly
determined to duck the assignment.
However, I was interested in the subject matter, so I attempted to try the
product purely for my own interest —
and discovered that Carrier Strike is a
fascinating and enjoyable simulation.
Once I learned the play mechanics
(which are relatively simple), I found
the game to be a real player — one that
I could not put down. Much to my
family's chagrin, I spent ten hours of
Memorial Day running through a cam-

paign. The following day, I telephoned
Mr. Grigsby and personally apologized
for my earlier criticisms. This is the
history of that campaign.
The campaign scenario may be initiated in any of the major Pacific scenarios. I decided to begin with the earliest
scenario (Coral Sea) as the Americans
and proceed on through the war. This
replay will note the major strategies
and tactics employed, as well as certain
"player" hints developed through extensive play.

I. Coral Sea
It is May 7, 1942. My assignment is
to protect Port Moresby and cause as
much damage to the Japanese fleet as
possible. Depending on the luck of the
draw, enemy activity can be either
moderate, heavy or very heavy. Prior
experience told me that anything other
than moderate would be an American
Armageddon. Moderate enemy activity
is mandated for the American to have a
reasonable chance of setting the stage
for eventual victory.
Enemy activity is moderate. How-

ever, I luck out — while my fleet carriers could be as few as two, I in fact
receive four (Yorktown, Enterprise,
Lexington and Hornet). The Sons of
Nippon are in for a nasty surprise!
My task forces are deployed far to the
east of Port Moresby, and the prevailing wind direction will compel me to
sail east every time I launch. But for a
player seeking tactical surprise and a
covered withdrawal, this is adequate.
CAP (Combat Air Patrol) should be
aloft by first light (0600); in fact, since
there is no penalty for launching in
morning darkness, I recommend that
CAP always lift at 0400. It will not be
forgotten, and it leaves the carrier deck
space available for "more important"
missions like searches and strikes. CAP
is like money — you can't have too
much of it. Since strike missions usually seem to penetrate enemy defenses
anyway, I put two-thirds or more of my
fighters on CAP, and only have 6-10
fighters from each carrier accompanying my strikes.
By 0520, search missions should be
launched — without fail! While they

will have nothing to report before daylight, I want their eyes available inclose so that I do not receive an
unpleasant breakfast call. For historical
purists, the search mission "rays"
should be turned off; they reveal too
much information about possible enemy task forces.
At any rate, 7 May is a day of tension
but little result. No enemy task forces
are sighted, and as darkness falls, my
search and CAP assets are landed and
prepared for the following day. Hint: be
careful not to send out a search mission
late in the afternoon. They have a tendency to get lost and ditch once darkness arrives.
The following morning, I engage in
similar operations. After CAP and
search planes are launched, I prepare
the decks with priority to dive bombers
armed with 1,000 pound armor-piercing bombs. Torpedo-bombers are a
lesser priority as their accuracy renders
them virtually useless. Since immediate contact is made with hostile carriers
by 0700. Massive strikes are quickly
launched, and once the initial planes

return, organization falls into the chaos
of preparing the returned planes for a
second and third strike and sending
them out as quickly as possible.
Numerous hits are made on two separate Japanese task forces, while I receive little damage in return. Also, I
manage to force my surface task force
into the enemy carriers, and while they
cannot penetrate the carrier screen, I am
confident that their disruption can have
little positive impact on the enemy.
As darkness falls on the second day,
the Japanese withdraw, leaving me
with a decisive victory. Port Moresby
has been saved! Air casualties are as
follow:

The Japanese have lost the fleet carriers Akagi and Kaga, the light carrier
Shoho, two cruisers damaged and two
destroyers sunk. American losses place
the Lexington and Yorktown in dry
dock for a month, a cruiser is damaged
and a destroyer sunk. A lopsided victory, and one that I am confident will
lead to Japan's early demise.

II. Midway
June 20, 1942 and the Japanese are
throwing everything at Midway. In
fact, the Imperial effort will always be
very heavy, so be careful. Of course,
with my resounding success in the
Coral Sea, I am confident that little can
go wrong. However, I only receive
three carriers (Yorktown, Hornet and
Enterprise).

My starting position seems historical
— to the north of Midway Island. This
time, contact is made at first light, and
large multiple strikes criss-cross the
skies. My confidence turns to consternation when my search planes report
over seven Japanese carriers present (it
is not until much later that I realize
some of these sightings may have been
erroneous reports).
But once the strikes begin, they continue throughout the day. Again, I manage to sail my surface fleet into the
Japanese van, and again, they cause
little damage — but it seems so satisfying. The Enterprise is sunk, and the
Yorktown incurs 98% damage. It is sufficient for the higher brass to issue a
"General Withdrawal " order, and my
vessels retreat to the east.
My strikes had not gone without results, and I was confident that at least
two Japanese carriers had been destroyed. As night falls, both sides retire,
but not before my land-based aircraft at
Midway finishes off another enemy
carrier.
Air casualties are as follow:

Midway has been saved, but my victory is marginal, and I am growing concerned. Japanese carrier losses are very
heavy: Hiryu and Soryu sunk, Shokaku
in repairs for three months and Zuika
for two months, and the light carriers
Junyo and Zuiho sunk. On the other
hand, I have lost the Enterprise, and the
Yorktown has less offensive power and
seaworthiness than the Skipper's Minnow. My surface forces have also taken
a beating—three cruisers sunk and one
damaged, and two destroyers sunk and
one damaged.

Although I have been blooded, I feel
that the strategic situation is in my favor. Carrier battles generally go to the
one with the first strike placed on target, and I have been consistent. While
my planes' accuracy is less than satisfying, I cannot lose my sense of coming
victory.

III. Eastern Solomons
August 23, 1942, and I am on the
offensive. I have to get transports and
supplies to Henderson Field, and engage the enemy forces. Opposition is
expected to be moderate, while I have
four carriers.
Search planes reveal no enemy forces
nearby, and at noon, the enemy task
force is sighted — 500 miles to the
west. Obviously, battle will have to
await until the following morning. The
only combat to occur is land-based B17s hitting Rabaul while Japanese Bettys strike Henderson Field in return. In
a night action, the enemy task force
bombards Henderson Field.
Luckily, the wind has shifted to the
west, thereby allowing me to draw
closer and not have to lose time in air
launches. The following morning, I
know I am in harm's way, and resolve
to get off my strikes early. However,
my only enemy is a surface task force.
Since a strike will only circle over my
carriers for two turns before landing, I
decide to issue the order. Hit the enemy
task force; if the carriers are spotted in
the interim, I will divert the strike for
the more attractive carriers. Hint: diversion of strike missions is an effective
tool; if there are no enemy naval forces,
you can order a strike on an enemy
airfield. This gets the strike moving in
the right direction and can often catch
the enemy unaware.

Score
Victory Points Japanese American
Mission
163
0
Damage
1 „287
1,563

Victory is complete. The Japanese
carriers Shokaku and Zuikaku, previously damaged at Midway, have been
sunk as well as the light carrier Ryujo.
The battleship Kirishima is also sunk,
and the Hiei damaged for two months.
Finally, three cruisers, a light cruiser
and two destroyers were damaged and
an additional destroyer sunk — at the
cost of a month in dry dock for the
Saratoga and the Wasp, and some damage to a destroyer and an oiler (which
fell prey to a Japanese submarine).

IV. Santa Cruz
November 20, 1942, and my mission
appears similar to the last. Opposition
is again expected to be moderate, and I
have my four carriers back for another
run at the Japanese.
I cannot find the enemy, and have to
send out three separate search missions. Finally, I find the enemy task
forces in late afternoon, but there is
sufficient time for a massed air strike.
Unhappily, my tactic of using my surface task force to deplete the enemy
bears bitter fruit, as Japanese torpedoes
and gunfire devastate my warships. But
the point loss is not fatal, and my air
strikes try to complete the mission of
the surface warships.
Air casualties are as follow:

kota), two cruisers and a third damaged, two destroyers sunk and three
damaged. Again, a Japanese submarine
damaged an oiler. But it is apparent that
the Japanese have few aircraft left, and
I see little potential for disaster.

V. Marianas
It is May 17, 1944, and enemy opposition is expected to be moderate. I have
to engage the enemy fleet and get a task
force to Green Island. I have seven
carriers in two task forces: three fleet
carriers — Bunker Hill, Franklin and
Enterprise, and four light carriers
—Montery,CabLgl
and
Bataan. The light carriers carry only
fighters and torpedo bombers, but I am
confident that I far outnumber my enemy.
Actually, the battle is an anti-climax.
I am so far away that I cannot engage
with my carriers, while land-based aircraft continually strikes the Japanese
fleet all day. That night, the Japanese
withdraw, and the war is over.
Air casualties are as follow:

My casualties are nil, while the Japanese lose the fleet carrier Taiho and
light carrier Ryuho. In addition, two
Japanese light carriers are damaged
(Chitose and Chiyoda).

Conclusions

By 0940, the first strike had returned,
been rearmed and sent back into the
fray. By 1200, a third strike had been
sent to complete the destruction on the
surface fleet. It appeared that the third
strike caused the final out and retired
the side. As night fell, the Japanese
retreated once again.

All in all, it was a rather one-sided
affair, but such is to be expected in
carrier operations. Coming back from
an initial defeat can be rather difficult,
but luckily, I did not have to undertake
such an arduous task.

Air casualties are as follow:
The Japanese lost fleet carriers Soryu
and Hiyo. In surface warships, they lose
the battleship Kongo, a second battleship heavily damaged, four cruisers
damaged, a light cruiser damaged, four
destroyers damaged and three sunk,
My losses are a battleship (South Da-

The American radar advantage allowed me the luxury of having some
advance warning, but this has only
whetted my appetite to return to the
Coral Sea — but this time as the Japanese.

Review
Strategic Simulations, Inc,. s

Conflict: Korea

by Richard Savage

Title:
System

Conflict:Korea
IBM

$59.95
Price:
Copy Protect: Document Look-Up
Norm Kroger
Designer.
SSI, Sunnyvale, CA
Publisher:

On June 25, 1950, the North Korean People's Army stormed south,
intent on conquering South Korea and unifying the peninsula nation
under Communist rule. Liberally armed with Chinese and Soviet
weapons and tanks, the North Koreans routed the Republicf Korean
("ROK") troops wherever they met them. Shortly after the conflict
started, the United Nations passed a motion to aid the ROKs.
So, American troops and planes were quickly dispatched to help
heir hard-pressed ally. SSI's Conflict: Korea recreates this first year
of conflict, when the North Koreans were seemingly unstoppable and
the UN forces were forced into a small perimeter at Pusan. Then came
the inspired Inchon landings and the pushing back of the North
Koreans past the 38th parallel to their own capitol. Finally, the wild
card of the Chinese People's Liberation Army is introduced, starting
yet another rout to the south by the UN troops as they maneuvered
back past the 38th parallel. This is the setting for the latest, and best,
of SSI's computer wargames, based on the original Red Lightning
system.
As the UN player, one must stem the original onslaught of North
Korean troops, stopping them short of their goal of pushing all
friendly troops into the sea at Pusan. As the North Koreans, or NKPA,
One must overrun, infiltrate, and decimate the ROK and UN troops
that stand in the way before UN airpower and the increasing American Build-up make the task of total conquest impossible and hence,
one's supply lines interdicted and one's armies exhausted, one battle
short of victory.

Conflict: Mechanics
Conflict: Korea is a regimental, division level simulation with

turns representing about one week. The game is played on a superb
VGA map, depicting an area from Pusan in the South, all the way to
the Chinese border in the North. Each hex (with on-screen hexes
being optional) is approximately 15 kilometers across. This is a large
map, with much more space for maneuver than in previous games of
this design.
Airpower can be computer or human controlled, although I recommend that the players control it personally, as the computer seems to
favor air strikes over interdiction, even though the latter can prove
decisive in the long run. Airpower comes in the same style as the
previous games, air superiority, interdiction, and ground support,
with all squadrons rated for their effectiveness in each capacity.
Weather plays an important part in airpower's availability, but even
in bad weather, a portion of the airforces will still be effective. As
stated in the Designer's Notes, with weekly turns, some air strikes
were bound to succeed, even in the worst of weather. There is even
a weather forecast for the coming weeks, so the players can plan their
campaigns accordingly. Of course, meteorologists aren't called
"weather guessers" without a reason! The longer the forecast, the less
likely it is to be accurate. A nice touch.

To round out the capabilities,
there are amphibious capabilities for the UN, (1st Marine Division, anyone?) Railroad
movement is also possible, but
with the realistic caveat that if
one is using railroads to transport troops, less supplies will be
able to use these same trains.
Finally, the UN player has a one
shot paratroop drop available to him, useful for cutting off supply
and allowing some extra offensive force to be inserted when needed
in a hurry.

The 38th Parallel or Haven't I Seen
This Place Before?
In the historical scenario, it is a fine line to be trod between giving
up territory and saving the troops. If the Communist juggernaut is
allowed to roll south unchecked, even the Pusan perimeter won't
hold them from marching to the sea. Conversely, if too many troops,
mainly ROK regiments, are sacrificed in trying to slow down the
NKPA, there won't be enough of them left to mount a counteroffensive into North Korea to liberate the capitol of P'Yongyang. Thus,
the player is presented with a delicious paradox: If he uses only ROK
troops to liberate North Korea, the Chinese won't intervene, but if
one UN unit crosses the 38th Parallel, the Chinese will not be pleased
and soon Red Chinese units will spring up as if by magic, surrounding and attacking the "Imperialist Dogs" of the UN. This usually
results in an historical pell-mell race back to the 38th parallel, and a
defensive line around Seoul, and the rivers nearby.
Also included in the 1950's historical package are two scenarios.
"Operation Chromite" and "Cold Steel." "Operation Chromite" is the
September 1950 seaborne invasion of Inchon by the 1st Marine
Division, and the resulting breakout of the defending UN units in the
Pusan perimeter. As the UN player, capturing all of Korea is the
primary objective. As the North Korean, denying real estate to the
UN is the key to victory. "Cold Steel" is set in November, 1950, when
the UN forces were overrunning all of Korea. That is, they were
overrunning the entire country until a few hundred thousand Chinese
soldiers materialized out of thin air, and hurled the attackers back.
As the UN player, trying to hold on to as much territory as possible
is the only way to win the game. As the Communist side, one must
push the UN forces as far South as possible, preferably recapturing
Seoul.

Korea 1995 — The Hypothetical
Scenario
Conflict: Korea was expanded to include a "What if'?" scenario for
the near future which postulates an all out, desperate attack by the
North Koreans in order to unify the nation. The designer has hypothe-

Review
sized that United States forces were heavily committed in other areas,
to give the scenario some play balance. Given the awesome air power
that the ROK-US player still has, and the numerous divisions, rather
than brigades, of seasoned ROK troops, along with the U.S. 2nd
Infantry Division, I expected a mild diversion in contrast to the
lengthier, more exhausting 1950's version. My impressions were
soon shattered when divisions of ROK troops were annihilated by
the hordes of North Korean corps and reinforced divisions! Shades
of the "frozen Chosin." What was happening here?
It took a few playings before I was able to use all of my assets
properly, which put a screeching halt to the North Korean offensive.
This scenario, though only 16 turns long, offers a lot in terms of
playability. Watching the awesome effects of F-15 and F-16 jets,
along with B-52's and A-10's using their ground support capabilities, is great, but not the way to win the game.
Conflict: Korea is the third in
an evolving series of games
published by SSI and designed
by Norm Kroger. I'm glad to
say that each one has improved
a bit over the last. Conflict: Korea finally got rid of those grotesque, thick, hex grids, making
them an option. Further, the
VGA graphics simply make for
a much better map. In addition,
the documentation for Conflict:
Korea is superb. Conflict: Korea has an excellent order of
battle for each scenario, right
down to whether a unit is green,
seasoned, or veteran, and what
hex it starts in. Finally, and most
importantly, the AI in Conflict:
Korea is superb! No more "sui-

cide ttacks" by the computer (where it wipes itself out). Instead, any
time the computer comes up against a formidable stack of units under
the human player's command, it will try and maneuver around the
obstacle, while leaving units in front of the opponent, to pin him.
Using the "fog of war" option is a must for the true grognard. I
[Ed: a formidable veteran of wargaming in many forms], found
myself sorely tested, merely using the "challenging" category of AI.
To play against the "Hairy" or "Hideous" AI would be a truly
daunting prospect. I have really only touched on some of the excellent elements of this game. There are many details that add further
to one's enjoyment of the game. For example, having refugees
clogging roads and making movement harder is a significant touch.
Further, watching the freezing line slowly descend, as illustrated by
the frost symbol, when winter sets in adds to one's awareness of
weather-oriented problems. The ability of UN troops to "bug out,"
by giving them six more movement points, at the loss of most of
their heavy equipment, is delightful, as is the addition of mine
warfare for the harbors. Indeed, I
particularly liked having Communist guerillas units to deal with
and the player-defined capacity
to form divisions with regiments,
naming them oneself. There simply isn't enough space to adequately describe the pleasure this
simulation will give the true wargamer. I just hope that, unlike the
real Korean conflict, this game
doesn't become the "Forgotten
game." Conflict: Korea deserves
better fate than it has received so
far. Check it out.

TITLE:

Napoleon I:
The Campaigns 1805-1814
Atari ST & Amiga
SYSTEM:
k PLAYERS: 1-2
PRICE:
$49.95
DESIGNER
Frank Hunter
PUBLISHER: RAW Entertainment
3027 Marina Bay Drive Suite 110
League City, TX 77573

here are enough hardcore
Napoleonics aficionados among
our readership that one must be
precise about one's experience with
gaming systems which cover that "glorious" era if one desires to be taken
seriously. While I by no means consider myself a hardcore Napoleonics
buff, my daughter did once ask if I had
so many Napoleonic wargames because I was obsessed by the brilliant
French general. My boardgame experiences include: Avalon Hill's classic
Waterloo, War and Peace, Empires at
Arms and Battle for Italy (based on
their larger product, The Struggle of
Nations), as well as Keith Poulter's Napoleon & The Archduke Charles series
published in both the Wargamer and
Strategy and Tactics). Miniatures experiences include: the adjudication of a
Systems 7 miniatures campaign (across
the face of an old SPI Strategy I map),
multi-player battles with Grand Army
and Empire, and solitaire gaming with
Napoleon's Battles. Computer gaming
challenges include: Strategic Simulations, Inc.'s Napoleon's Campaigns:
1813 and 1815 (essentially, a board
game with the computer as referee),

T

Waterloo and Battles of Napoleon, as
well as Koei's L'Empereur. Nevertheless, Napoleon I: The Campaigns
1805-1814 is distinctly different than
all of them.
Napoleon I is a campaign game that
allows players to participate in the
sweeping geographical thrust of the
emperor's prolonged conflict with the
Allied Coalition. It is a game designed
to offer enough options to please every
gamer. Some of the design options are
effective. Some are not. It is a game
with design issues which are well-conceived, but oftimes, execution which is
ill-received. It is a game that can both
exhilarate and frustrate.

Who's In Charge?
At first glance, Napoleon I is extremely unsettling. One is immediately
tempted to bypass the documentation.
After all, who could take seriously a
manual that tells you how to load and
play Napoleon II in a game entitled
Napoleon 1? Nevertheless, players will
have to read that documentation to

make sense of the game, since the game
takes an unusual tack in its mechanics.
Once the game is loaded and the
player chooses the side to command
(Human as French, Human as Allies, or
Human vs. Human); whether to have
hidden movement or not; and whether
or not Archduke Charles is already in
the game and/or the British have increased their subsidy to the Allied
cause, the clock immediately begins to
run and units begin to move about the
map. Unless the player chooses to interrupt the game in order to give specific orders (via the Amiga's pull-down
menus), the forces keep moving until
contact is made.
Naturally, with hidden movement in
effect, one does not realize where enemy units are until they are sighted by
friendly units. In this sense, it is very
similar to SSI's Napoleon's Campaigns: 1813 and 1815 or Waterloo

except one does not have to wait for a
dispatch from the front in order to know
that the sighting has occurred. Also different from the SSI games is the fact
that Napoleon I does not give its commander an estimate of strength whenever one's forces encounter opposing
forces. The strength estimates are given
whenever one side or another decides
to engage in a tactical battle.
Since many grognards are "control
freaks" and like to determine every minor move on the part of their subordinate commanders, there will be many
gamers who do not like this semi-independent movement on behalf of their
forces. The design is more realistic,
however, from a command perspective.
The subordinate commanders act on
their own initiative until given a specific objective to take. In this regard,
Napoleon I is like a Strategic Studies
Group game without the turn-based order phase. One simply inputs orders
when they are necessary.

Engaging The Enemy
Whenever one engages the enemy,
the program shows its tremendous versatility. The battles can be resolved tactically on-screen, resolved instantly or
played out using miniatures
rules (and entering the results
upon rebooting the program).
The on-screen tactical battle
will be particularly disappointing to hardcore
Napoleonics aficionados. It
runs in real-time and each
command to a given unit must
be made through the pulldown menu system.
Also, those who are looking
for some graphic portrayal of
the battle will be disappointed
with the tactical presentation.
Though infantry units can
maneuver into a square, for instance, there is no graphic
representation of this onscreen. One receives a message that the
unit has done so, but there are not even
the formation changes which are
graphically presented in SSI's Battles
of Napoleon.
Further, even though the documentation states that morale is important (and
the results of tactical battles usually
confirm this declaration), grognards
tend to expect command control restrictions such as one has in the

boardgames, The Struggle of Nations
and Napoleon and the Archduke Charles or in miniatures rules such as Napoleon's Battles. The program may
enforce such restraints internally, but it
is not communicated in the battle display. Worse yet, the facing of units is
not important in the tactical battle resolution. One can have an enemy unit
completely surrounded and not receive
any extra advantage from enfilade fire,
etc.
Finally, as if that wasn't bad enough,
this reviewer experienced the most
frustrating bug ever in a computer wargame. During a tactical battle, Massena's troops totally eliminated one of
Hiller's infantry units. Yet, after the
unit was reduced to zero, it regained its
original strength rather than being
eliminated. The unit was surrounded by
enemy troops, so it should not have
been replaced by another unit. The
other unit shouldn't have been able to
get there.
However, the other two tactical options make Napoleon I worthwhile.
The quick resolution option is built on
Colonel Trevor Dupuy's QJMA model
in Numbers, Predictions and War. This

When one selects the "resolve with
miniatures" option, the program gives
the details on commanders, morale,
troop strengths, etc. Then, it immediately saves the game and allows the
player to switch off the computer.
Later, when one restarts the program,
it allows one to input the casualties by
positioning the mouse and clicking
once per 100 casualties (for both infantry and cavalry units) and once per gun
(for artillery). Unfortunately, this takes
longer than simply typing in the appropriate numbers and means that purists
have to make adjustments in their ratio
of men: figures (Napoleon's Battles has
a 120 men per figure ratio for infantry
and 80 men per figure for cavalry), but
it is workable and shouldn't bother
most players. Once the adjustments to
the data have been input, the program
retakes control until the next engagement or player interrupt.

What Napoleon I Is Not
Napoleon I is not a political and economic game for those who are looking
for a computer version of Empires At
Arms or even the style of Koei's L 'Empereur with more detailed tactical resolution. Further, Napoleon I is not a
game for "control freaks;"
too much of the game is
free-running for those who
want to micro-manage a vast
military campaign. It is not
a game for players who need
state-of-the-art graphics and
sound, either. The maps are
rather plain and functional
rather than the kind of eye
candy many gamers are
looking to find.

Crowning Napoleon I

form of tactical resolution allows one
to play out an entire campaign in one
evening's play. One certainly can't do
that with the boardgames War and
Peace or Empires At Arms.

The Best News
To me, the best news was the ability
to let Napoleon I handle the strategic
movement of a campaign until contact
was made, then resolve the tactical battle using Napoleon's Battles (my current favorite set of miniatures rules).

What Napoleon I: The
Campaigns 1805-1814 happens to be is a fast-playing,
versatile campaign game
that fills a void in the genre of computer
games based on the Napoleonic era. It
meets two important needs for me: that
of a large-scale campaign game that can
be played in a single night (somewhat
like the introductory level boardgame
Waterloo or the wooden block game
Napoleon) and that of a referee for a
miniatures campaign. Anyone looking
for a game to meet either of those
needs, would do well to examine Napoleon I.

Review

TITLE: Vikings: Fields of Conquest
SYSTEM: Amiga
PLAYERS: 1-6
PRICE: $59.95
PROTECTION: Document look-up
DESIGNER: Brian Vodnik
PUBLISHER: Realism Entertainment
Bensenville, IL

ikings! The very term conjures
mental ice sculptures of muscular Norsemen with horned
helms, sailing the oceans in dragonprowed ships as they sought villages to
pillage and kingdoms to conquer in the
names of a violent pantheon of warrior
gods. The mere sight of an army of
these fighters would have been enough
to send the groups of poorly armed
inhabitants of the invaded lands heading for the hills in abject terror. Vikings:
Fields of Conquest, Realism Entertainment's attempt to conquer the kingdom
of computer games, will not have
gamers heading for the hills, but such
are the images of conquest that the
game seeks to hew out of the raw material of its revisionist history (since the
Norse invaders never managed to colonize as much territory in actuality as is
possible in this game).
In Vikings: Fields of Conquest, the
player represents one of six kings, all

V

of whom share the same goal — to
gather the strength to crush the opposing kingdoms and be proclaimed King
of England. This is done by amassing
armies to scour the countryside and
absorb the territories that make up the
game's land mass, while either fending
off or actively attacking the opposing
armies (who are, naturally, attempting
to write our hero into the history books
prematurely). This scenario is similar
to that posed half a decade ago by Kellyn Beck in Cinemaware's Defender
of the Crown. Vikings, however, is a
much more complex and strategy-oriented game than its graphically stunning and action-oriented counterpart.
Setting up a scenario requires choosing a king, a difficulty level and a starting territory (which can also be
randomized). Setting the difficulty
level to Easy and randomizing one's
kingdom placement is a good way to
start the first game and get a feel for the
flow of play. When the rival kings are
stationed and the copy protection is
behind the human player(s) (matching
a territory shape on the screen with one
in the manual), the campaign begins.
As with other games of this type, the
main objective is conquest, so the
strength of one's armies is of utmost
importance. Strength in numbers is the
key. Therefore, men and women who
would be King are advised to buy, beg,
borrow or steal as many men as possible from the earliest phases of the game
forward. In addition, those who would
be King may use various activities,
such as mining for ore and establishing
agriculture to produce raw materials
which, in turn, may either be sold to
purchase more troops or used in the
construction of outposts or seaports.
All orders are easily issued through
command menus accessed via onscreen buttons.

The detailed landscape is composed
of forests, hills and mountains, laid out
roughly in the shape of the British Isles.
The home castle for each of the kingdoms is topped off by a flag of corresponding color, happily waving in the
breeze. The flotillas, outposts and armies have small graphic icons, but the
battles are all in just-the-facts-ma'am
bar-graph style. Except during the
opening screens, sound effects are limited to clicks for confirmation of
mouse-button presses.

Prelude to Ragnarok
At game's start, there are four established armies, with another that can be
created by the second turn, and a 20
army maximum over the course of the
game (funds allowing). Initially, one's
armies are, of necessity, small. So, they
must be beefed up considerably for any
chance of success. Gathering one's armies turns out to be the most challenging part of the game. Each territory has
some peasants who will put up a fight
to keep those nasty invaders out of their
village and even these ill-armed assortments of rabble can give a small army
a run for its plunder. To improve the
odds, one garners gold the old-fashioned way (from taxes) and uses said
bounty to purchase fighters of various
skill levels and catapults. Provided the
funds are available, unlimited numbers
of men and catapults can be obtained in
one's homeland. There is a limit, however, on the number of troops that can
be purchased from outlying territories.
One's success within the game, like
that of the Vikings themselves, often
depends on getting men across bodies
of water via flotillas. One can have as
many as five flotillas sailing, each with
an army and commanding baron. Maintaining an invading force can be an
enormous task, given that the armies
must be well-manned. It is best to con-

Review
quer coastal areas as quickly as possible, thereby allowing for the construction of a seaport and the creation of
flotillas.

Siege: Castles In Runes
Armed offensive reaches
its pinnacle when laying
siege to a castle. Here, it is
best to have 20 or so archers
and crossbowmen, as well
as, at least, two catapults.
The bowmen are necessary
to defend the catapults
against damage (which lowers their potential for breaching the walls). Attempting a
siege can reveal an opponent's weakness at home.
Enemy forces will often
amass virtually all their
strength for further conquest
and leave only a weak garrison in their home territory.
Those who would be king
should both leave a strong garrison in
their own castles and occasionally, test
the home garrisons of their rivals.
Should the latter prove too weak, the
castle's control reverts to the would-be

conquerors. Then, the victor can proceed with mop-up operations.
One major point of curiosity arises.
Whenever the human player (in a solitaire game) is defeated, one would as-

sume that said player would be given
the option to start over or quit. This
isn't the case. Instead, the human is
notified that he/she is out of the game
and the game continues with the computer armies fighting it out. While this

is a nice feature for those interested in
a game's outcome, the option to restart
is oddly absent. Fortunately for diehard players, the game does allow the
human player to take over one of the
computer player's positions. While
winning in this manner is
hardly the same, it does offer
a chance to salvage a disappointing play session.
As a multi-player game, Vikings: Fields of Conquest is a
welcome addition to the inventory of strategy games
where one player can input
moves at the computer while
his/her friends plot behind
said player's back. If it offered a modem-play option, it
would be near-perfect as a
multi-player game. Even as a
solitaire game, however, it offers strategic level action during a period covered by very
few computer games. Vikings: Fields
of Conquest is a challenging strategy
game, requiring careful planning and
resource management, ideal for those
who would be King.

Editorial

More Senseless Violence
by Johnny L. Wilson

tate of the Magazine: As regular readers of CGW may
have noticed, we've had more than our share of logistics
problems in the last few issues of the magazine. Normally, the summer issues are something of a respite for us.
The release of fewer game titles prompted a downward spiral
in pages that meant we could catch our breaths before the busy
fall season. The good news is that such a drop in pages did not
occur. Our readers will get considerably more pages of computer game coverage in 1992 than they did in 1991. The bad
news is that it pressed us beyond our limit.
The bad news is that we have made some silly mistakes. The
good news is that we have made staff changes to correct them.
We want to acknowledge three of these mistakes, in particular.
We regret the two and one half paragraphs truncated from
"Scorpion's View." The missing material is printed on the last
page of the "Letters from Paradise" column in this issue. We
are also embarassed over the omission of Robert Gardner Jr.'s
byline on the opening page of his second Lemmings strategy
article. Fortunately, the name did appear on the appropriate
table of contents page, but Robert needs all the credit we can
give him for this fine series of articles. Finally, we wish to
formally apologize to Charles Bernard, the illustrator who
graciously allowed us to reprint his science fiction cover from
a German publication as the illustration for the review of
GEnie's all-text space trading adventure, Federation II. We
really like Charles' work, believe it illustrated the article very
well and regret losing the appropriate credit at the last minute.
The credit should have read: "Illustration by Charles Bernard.
Used by permission."

S

State of the Industry: (Part II of "What is Senseless Violence?") As observed last issue, CGW has not joined the crowd
of politically correct baby boomers that feel like all expressions of violence are wrong and wants to ban everything that
even implies violence. We are not advocating that our readers
boycott war toys and the sales of toy guns (much less wargames, miniature armies, video games and computer games
— grin). We are simply looking at issues where the software
publishing and game design communities need to join with
the journalistic community and ask some hard questions about
what we do.
What have we done when we create a situation observed
recently by a CGW staffer? An arcade had a streetfighting
coin-op game where two people were playing side-by-side as
their on-screen personas duked it out on the display. One
on-screen character was knocked down and the person controlling the defeated character physically attacked the "victorious" player. Is this the sign of a good design because the
player got so "into" the arcade game that he completely lost
his disbelief and "became" his on-screen persona for a moment? Or, is this the sign of a bad design that underemphasized

ning, jumping, shooting, die-a-lot games might increase his
anti-social tendencies, so we monitored his NES use fairly
heavily and restricted that use completely whenever he "acted
out" (that's a traditional social worker's term for any improper
behavior from cursing out one's parents through causing
bodily harm). Strangely enough, we discovered that he "acted
out" less when he was actually playing video games than when
he did not have the video game influence. Let him play on his
Nintendo and he shot baddies on the screen. Take away his
NES and he beat up his siblings and the kids on the street.
So, far be it from me to argue against the cathartic benefit
of video game or computer game violence. Yet, even with the
immediate benefit of the catharsis, there must be a compensating concern. After one episode of "acting out," our foster
son was asked by his therapist how he thought his sister felt
when he hurt her. "She doesn't feel it," he said. Now, even
though this child had experienced plenty of emotional damage
before he ever encountered a video game, that's a terrifying
thought. How many in the computer game/ video game generation have shot, stabbed, bludgeoned, kicked, punched and
bashed so many pixelated opponents that they think, admittedly in a more insidious and subconscious way, that real
human beings do not feel it when they shoot, stab, slash,
bludgeon or kick real human beings?
When, as a pastor, I rode with policemen and offered in-car
counseling, I discovered an amazing fact. Emotionally, there
is no such thing as a "good" shooting. A "good" shooting is
an internal affairs department term that means the officer acted
properly according to regulations and in light of the situation.
Most officers had to deal with their feelings, even after a
"good" shooting. Sometimes, it took months for a given
officer to come to grips with what he/she had done. Now, if
there are mitigating emotional factors to even "good" shootings in real life, why don't our simulations touch on some of
the aftermath of the ubiquitous violence in these games?
This series of editorials ends a long way from proving a
point. It is basically an editor sharing from his heart after
talking with other editors. Yet, there is a call to action.
Designers and publishers, please do not design games where
violence triumphs independently of the consequences. Let's
be careful out there!

1

r

