June-July 1985

Vol. 5 No. 3

FEATURES
Sports Games Survey
28

Games Examined

The Battle of Chickamauga
Civil War Battle Game Reviewed

Imperium Galactum
A Review

Games You'll Never See
Humor

Crusade in Europe
Design Notes

Lucasfilm Enters Home Gaming
Ballblaser and Rescue on Fractalus

Playball i
Baseball Games for your Computer

16
Rick Teverbaugh
18
Mark Bailsman
19
Stewart MacKames
20
Chris Crawford
21
Edward Bever
22
Gregg Williams

24
Bill Oxner

DEPARTMENTS
Taking a Peek

10

Screen Photos & Brief Comments

Letters
Scorpion's Tale
Mindwheel

Silicon Cerebrum
Social Values

Atari Playfield
Where Have All the Games Gone?

Micro-Reviews

15
23
Scorpia
28
Bruce Webster
30
David Stone
33

Reforger'88
Two Basketball Gaines
Video Stock Market
Timeship
Zenji
Squire
Napoleon at Waterloo

Reader Input Device

46

Let us forward your request for further information you'd like to receive on any
number of products or services mentioned or advertised in this issue of Computer Gaming World.

1

Clearly print/type your name/company address on one of the attached
reply cards.

2

Circle the number(s) on that card
correspond to the number(s) you'll
find at the bottom of the ad(s)/articles(s)
about which you'd like to learn more.
(You'll also find these key numbers on
advertised products in this issue's Advertiser's Index.)
Stamp and mail the card. The
sooner it's sent, the quicker you'll
get the literature you're after.

3

1■111111111111■111111111■111

Why not take this opportunity to subscribe to Computer Gaming World? A
subscription card can be found facing
page 40.

Avalon Hill Game Co.
4517 Harford Rd.
Baltimore, MD 21214
301-254-5300
MAXWELL MANOR: Glurks, Sprigles
and Wigglers are the denizens of the
haunted house known as Maxwell
Manor. This is a fairly standard
adventure game with treasures,
weapons, rooms, creatures, etc. The
game permits many variations. Nine
skill levels. Atari. C-64.

Brainpower, Inc.
24009 Ventura Blvd
Calabasas, CA 91302
818-884-6911
THINK FAST: Is a tool to aid in the
analysis and development of memory
skills. It employs exercises designed to
strengthen
one's
memory
for
numeric/verbal
(left
brain)
and
abstract (right brain). Apple. Mac.
$39.95.
Circle Reader Service #11

Circle Reader Service #9

Avant-Garde Publishing
37B Commercial Blvd.
Novato, CA 94947
415-883-6306
DAVE WINFIELD'S BATTER UP:
Actually a package of three seperate
items. First is Dave Winfield's book,
Batter Up - The Act of Hitting. Next
is a software tutorial on hitting. The
third piece is Slugfest, a batting
challenge game. The book and tutorial
teach basic hitting techniques. The
arcade game portion you must hit a
variety of pitches by chosing whether
to swing high, medium, or low. This
product is much different than the
other eight computerized baseball
programs reviewed in this issue. Apple.
C-64. IBM-pc & Jr. $39.95
Circle Reader Service #10

Broderbund Software
17 Paul Drive
San Rafael, CA 94903
415-479-1170
WHERE IN THE WORLD IS
CARMEN SANDIEGO?: A mystery
game where players try to outwit a
gang of international thieves headed
by Carmen Sandiego. A combination
graphic adventure, trivia game,
mystery and arcade animation. One
novel twist is that a copy of the World
Almanac is included with the game as
a source for deciphering clues. $39.95.

takes you inside your computer for a
close-up look at its inner workings.
Your mission is guide a coded message
from the Keyboard Room to the RAM
and then to the Disk Drive Room.
The graphics are spectacular and with
the Mockingbird option you can even
have stereo music and speech. But,
watch out for Willy's archenemy, Hex
Luthor. Apple. $39.95.
Circle Reader Service #13

Electronic Arts
2755 Campus Drive
San Mateo, CA 94403
415-572-ARTS
MAIL ORDER MONSTERS: Excellent
graphics, a sense of humor, a challenge
to play. Be the first kid on your block
to build your own a flesh eating house
plant (the Carnifern). Choose from 12
different monster stocks, 20
enhancements, 15 weapons, 6 defenses,
etc. Test your creation against
supplied baddies or against other
owner's models. If you liked Crush,
Crumble & Chomp (a Jon Freeman
design) you will find this a worthy
descendant. C-64.
Circle #14

Circle Reader Service #12

Data Trek
621 Second Street
Encinitas, CA 92024
619-436-5055
WILLY BYTE IN THE DIGITAL
DIMENSION: A fast paced game that

RACING DESTRUCTION SET: A
split-screen, computer slot car racing
set for two players. Similar in nature
to the other "construction" sets by EA
(Pinball, Music and Adventure
Construction). In this one you pick
and customize your vehicle, build a

racetrack and then test it out on a
split-screen display. The graphics are
super and the special effects, such as
race tracks with Lunar gravity, are a
nice touch. If you liked Road Warrior
(the movie) you will also like the
option to have Destruction Derby type
races. C-64.
Circle #15
Epyx
1034 Kiel Ct,

G.I. JOE: This game features the AllAmerican hero fighting the evil
"Cobra" in twelve different battle
situations. There are several different
Joe's to choose from, each one suited
for a particular mission (jungle, desert,
etc). Sharp graphics and battle sounds
enhance play. Battles are arcade style.
Both Joe and Barbie will likely appeal
to the 6-10 year old group. One or two
players. Joystick controlled. C-64.

Sunnyvale, CA 94086

Circle Reader Service #16

408-745-0700

BARBIE: CGW reader surveys show
our average reader is a 32 year old
male. For our non-average reader,
Barbie is an arcade type game. Your
objectives are to dress Barbie for her
date with Ken (maybe HE reads
CGW), shop in different stores and/or
go to the hair salon. The player
chooses from over 1000 combinations
of outfits and hairstyles. The graphics
are excellent and the speech generator
is the best yet for the C-64. Order of
Appearance and Terrain Effect Charts
are optional. C-64.

Hot Line Software
1591 Calle le Cinco
La Jolla, CA 92037
619-454-6664

HOLMES: An adventure game that
takes place in London 1892. You are
Sherlock Holmes and must solve four
baffling cases. The richness of the text
is remarkable. It is also faithful to the
style of Conan Doyle. Movement is not
standard to most adventure games.
You are provided with a separate
booklet listing 900 specific locations in
London, such as Scotland Yard,

Victoria Station, Colt Fire Arms Co.,
etc. At each location you will find
information that may assist you in
solving the case. The information
generally comes in the form of
interviews with individuals at each
location. The game something of a
sophisticated version of Clue.
Circle Reader Service #17

Mentor Learning Systems
1825 De La Cruz Blvd
Santa Clara, CA 95050
800-554-1636

CONCEPTOR: Uses graphics to
engage players in a game of perception
and classification. Users are presented
with a series of graphics and a set of
rules that may apply to the graphics.
Players must match the graphics with
the corresponding rules. The game was
designed to be a learning tool for the
focus-recognition theory of education.
IBM PC, JR, Apple. $49.95.
Circle Reader Service #18

Continued on pg. 44

I want to know more about telegaming. Please
continue this column. By the way, can I contact
you on Compuserve?
Ichiron Mizukoshi
Tokyo, Japan

ED: We will continue to cover telegaming as
space permits. CGW can be contacted via
Compuserve account #76703,622.
Great displeasure is hereby registered over the
month slippage in delivery. We deserve more of an
explanation than an adjustment of the issue date.
Van Nuys, CA

ED: For a time we carried a single month on the
cover of our magazine even though it was a bimonthly. (CGJV 4.6 carried a Dec84 date even
though it was the current issue through the end of
January). At the request of some of our retailers we
have gone back to the older practice of putting both
months on the cover. CGW 5.1 was therefore the
-Feb-Mar issue (as printed in the Table of Contents
of that issue). Unfortunately the cover mistakenly
carried a January date. Dumb, but true.
Keep IBM - there is a large base of well-heeled
users who still don't know about games but are
learning.
Boston, MA

ED: CGW attempts to serve the needs of all our
readers, those well-heeled, round-heeled, faithhealed, etc. Articles are planned for earthsoled and
sandal shod readers.
Dear Editor,
More reviews. Taking a peek is good. Less
commentaries. Go monthly.
Las Vegas, NV

ED:
OK. Thank you. OK. Perhaps.
I finally subscribed to CGW. It seems as if that
is the only way to insure getting it. I especially
enjoy Scorpia. She's helped me thru some tough
spots.
Signe L. Saboe
Ardmor, PA

ED: Let this unsolicited reader response be a
lesson to all non-subscribers! Think of a sub as
insurance. Yes, Scorpia has helped us with tough
spots as well. Clorox bleach is also good on spots.
I love your magazine but I really wish you had
plans to put a special section for Apple products
like you have for the C64 and for Atari.
Cosmos Angelakis
Arlington, MA

ED: The largest percentage of our major
reviews cover products available for the Apple, thus
obviating the need for a separate column.

Question: Have you ever negatively reviewed a
game? Answer: No. You must be afraid to.
University of Georgia
Athens, GA

ED: No, we are not afraid to knock a bad game.
However, we ARE afraid to print negative letters to
the editor.
I enjoy CGW very much, but must complain
about the large number of spelling errors. When I
share my issues with friends, they too have noticed
the errors. Your reviews are interesting and well
written.
Daniel Antolec
Monona, WI

ED: CGW has revampeed its speeling chcker and
hird new proof-readerss. We antcpate no more
prblems int he futurre.
Thank God Silicon Cerebrum is back. Let's get
heuristic!
Andrew Tuline
Canada

ED: We've warned you heuretics about using our
pages to spread your religious propaganda. Watch
it!

Over the past year most of my favorite computer
mags have cutback or done away with Atari
articles. I'm grateful that CGW has not "sold-out"
to bigger software selling brand names. Thanks.
Andrew Nagata
Honolulu, HI

ED: CGW is currently accepting bids for our
new "sell-out" policy. We ain't cheap but we can be
had. Let's dig deep into those pockets folks.

Nix on the replays. Bad enough The General
and F & M carry them. Why do I want to read
about someone's bout with the computer?
Narcissistic space filler!
Bellevue, WA

ED: I guess this means you won't enjoy our next
issue, featuring our business manager's bout with the
flu.
We would like to give special thanks to some of
our foreign subscribers who took the extra effort
(and money) to make their RID votes count. Ichiron
Mizukoshi (Tokyo, Japan), M.T. Chauvin (La Ferte
sous Jouarre, France) and Ken Goldie (Glasgow,
Scotland).
CGW takes our readers' opinions very seriously,
despite the humor in the replies, and we encourage
you to write to the editor. Include your name and
address if you want to see your name preserved for
all eternity within these hallowed pages.

SPORTS GAMES
SURUEY

by Rick Teverbaugh

It has been said that people live out their fantasies in sports through their heroes. But computer
gaming could be altering that perspective just a bit.
Today, instead of merely wishing you could guide a
team or individual to the pinnacle of success, a
gamer can rise to those heights within the loose
confines of a computer game.
For 11 years, I have been a sports writer. For
all of those years I have played sports games. My
start was Cadaco's All-Star Baseball, with the
player discs and the spinners that hurt your fingers
after marathon sessions.
For the last five years I have played sports
games on computers, preferring to let the machine
handle the drudgery of chart-checking and dicerolling while I concentrate on the fun.
Now I'll try to combine my writing experience
any my gaming experience into a readable scouting
report on the sports simulations on the market currently. If you're ready for a leisurely trip down
the clipboard, let's get to it.[Ed. Note: Baseball
games are surveyed elsewhere in this issue and thus
are not covered in Rick's survey.]
FOOTBALL
Computer Quarterback; Strategic Simulations;
Apple, C-64. For the feel of football, at least on
the complex NFL level, this one sends everybody
else to the sandlots. Without any flashy graphics, it
still feels like football. There are many plays and
thousands of possible results. There is even an
option to create real teams.
On-Field Football; Gamestar; C-64. An ambitious arcade effort, but one that's not very easy to
control. When playing against the computer, be
prepared to take some lumps. You might even find
your finger giving out from the number of joystick
button depressions you must make to enter plays.
The game has nice graphics.

3-In-1 Football; Lance Haffner; Apple. For
college, NFL or USFL followers, there's no other
game so geared to recreating past seasons.
Offensive and defensive options are few and it will
take awhile to get used to the partial yardage figures. For an all text outing, the feel is still good.
Football Strategy; Avalon Hill; C-64, IBM,
Atari. This game is almost too simple to put in the
same category with the others. Every time the
same offense is put with the same defense, you get
the same result. Some things don't make sense.
Running a draw play against a blitz always produces negative yardage.
Tuesday Morning Quarterback; Epyx; Apple. If
you like your football with a sense of humor, this
is your ticket to the gridiron. But if having Terry
Bradshaw get hurt and having him replaced with
Darth Vader doesn't sit well, look elsewhere. The
game is well-thought out, but there is an uncomfortable feel about the arcade/strategy mix.
Touchdown Football; Imagic; IBM. For graphics
and realism, this is the top draft pick for arcade
games. Offense picks the formation, pass patterns
and line blocking. Defense picks only formation.
When viewed in color, teams resemble Dolphins and
Steelers.
BASKETBALL
One-On-One; Electronic Arts; Apple, C-64,
Atari. Nobody has been able to duplicate the fluid
motion of the sport with such flair and detail.
With a program this good and this authentic, it will
be a while before any challengers come around.
No basketball fan can live without this program.
College Basketball/Basketball-Pro Game; Lance
Haffner; Apple. Again an all-text statistical basketball simulation. Any cage fan with an imagination can easily get involved in the dream matchups
possible with the teams included in this package.
There are current teams and stars of the past
available.

BOXING
Title Bout; Avalon Hill; Apple, Atari. A really
decent board game that hasn't yet made a good
translation to the computer. The game is statistically accurate and varied, but the visuals are so
poor that they would be better left to the imagination. Also the in-ring comments by the fighters
during the bout are distracting.
Ringside Seat; Strategic Simulations; Apple, C64. Game has a nice feel for action in the ring, as
well as realism in the end results. More boxers
would have been nice, but there is the ability to
create your own. Option of selecting strategies at
the start of each round makes the bout a real
audience participation event.

Professional Tour Golf; Strategic Simulations;
Apple, C-64. As weird as it might seem, this
game's biggest attraction is being able to put yourself out on famous golf courses with the touring
pros. PTG has a real feel to it. You'll almost need
to put on your cleats to boot up. Only bogie this
program gets is its' green play.
Tournament Golf; Avalon Hill; Apple, C-64.
Arcade-type play on some real-life courses highlight this top flight production. In the more difficult mode, it will take awhile before you can consistently get off good shots with perfect arm and
wrist coordination. You might find a whole new
meaning to the word "choke."
KARATE

AUTO RACING
Racing Destruction Set; Electronic Arts; C-64.
Easily the most versatile sports program on the
market. The name of the game could give rise to a
suspicion about the seriousness of the racing aspect,
but it is unfounded. There is split-screen, headto-head racing with your choice of nine machines
over 50 tracks. There's also an editor for creating
your own tracks. And just for fun you can literally
blow your foe off the road.
Pitstop II; Epyx; C-64, Atari. The name tells
you all you need to know about the standout difference in this game. This race really will be won
or lost in the pits and on-track gambles really can
be fatal. Actual race action isn't quite as good as
other entries.
International Gran Prix; MUSE; Apple. A oneplayer battle against the clock on a variety of challenging courses under variable conditions.
Perspective is from the car's windshield, but there
are no picturesque graphics to liven the drive.
Pole Position; Datasoft; C-64. For wheel-towheel, nerve-wracking action, it's still hard to beat
this classic. Crashing doesn't end the game, but it
sure does slow you down. Sometimes simply qualifying for the race is challenge enough and the start
of the race from back on the grid is a sight to
behold.
Rally Speedway; Commodore; C-64. This effort
reminds me a little of the Intellivision racing cartridge. The graphics are quite a bit better and
control of the car is improved. There is an editor
included to create your own track and the crash
sequences are too funny to describe.
GOLF
Championship Golf; Hayden; Apple. Seeing the
flight of the ball from both a side view and an
overhead perspective is the only unique feature
about this otherwise weak entry. Aiming each
stroke and selecting the strength of the shot is
imprecise at best.
Hi-Res Computer Golf 2; Avant-Garde; Apple.
First computer golf game on the market to really
challenge the gamer and still feel like golf. This
second version includes the ability to play more
course modules and to set the auto-swing mode for
a less frustrating, perfect-swing-every-time effort
that still won't make the game too easy.

Karateka; Broderbund; Apple, C-64. This
karate simulation is loosely tied to an adventure
theme, but the real joy of the game is in the combat. Key to survival is recognizing the different
strengths and weaknesses of the various opponents.
Black Belt; Earthware Services; Apple, C-64.
Truly the most involved arcade-style martial arts
program. Your character will progress through the
ranks and learn more skills as he goes. Graphics
are a bit better in the C-64 version, but either will
make you bow in homage after each outing.
Competition Karate; Motivated Software; Apple,
C-64. Not only my personal favorite in this genre,
but also near the top of the list of all sports games.

Continued on pg. 40

The Battle of
Chickamauga

by Mark Bausman

to the Los Angeles Rams and the Battle of
Chickamauga proved to be the last serious offensive
by any Southern Army.
DESCRIPTION

NAME:
TYPE:
SYSTEM:
AUTHOR:
PRICE:
PUBLISHER:

The Battle of Chickamauga
Wargame
Atari 48K
Worlds to Conquer, Inc.
$35.00
Game Designer's Workshop
Bloomington, IL

HISTORICAL
In September of 1863, the Confederacy was
facing third and long, with five minutes on the
game clock and down by ten points. Lee had been
defeated at Gettysburg, Vicksburg had fallen, and
Rosecrans' Union Army of the Cumberland had
kicked Bragg's Rebel Army of the Tennessee out of
the important Southern rail junction at
Chattanooga. The fans weren't leaving yet, but
some good news was in order.
Braxton Bragg was tired of being outflanked by
his enemy and disobeyed by his subordinates. In
the last few days he had received reinforcements
from Johnson in Mississippi and Longstreet in
Virginia and now his army was nearly equal in size
to Rosecrans. After huddling with his Generals he
decided to call a trick play and, on September 19,
1863, he turned the Army of the Tennessee and
met the Army of the Cumberland twelve miles
south of Chattanooga at Chickamauga Creek. By
the evening of September 20 the Northern Army
had been defeated and was on its way back to
Chattanooga. Bragg's wide receiver, General
Longstreet, had caught a deflected pass near the
goal line. Unfortunately, the South came away with
only three points as Bragg did not press his advantage and Rosecrans stayed in Chattanooga. The
Union brought in a new quarterback and issued
fresh Gator Aide to all their troops. It would now
take more than trick plays to save the Army of the
Tennessee from destruction. Bragg was later traded

Game Designers Workshop, a well known board
game company with 10 years of experience, has
teamed with a programming group called "Worlds to
Conquer" in order to allow us to call the plays in an
historical recreation of the Battle of Chickamauga
(BOC). The game comes with a single disk, a hex
grid map of the Chickamauga Valley, rules book,
command reference sheet, quick start instructions,
and a 12 page Historical Reference manual. You
may opt for a one or two player game and can be
either the North or the South. In addition to being
able to save a game at any point, you may save an
individual move or load a saved move from disk.
This, I believe, is the first practical play-by-mail
set-up and the instructions give complete details on
how a play-by-mail game should be run.
Additional game control options include the computer intelligence level, and allowing or not allowing morale, fatigue, and communications to affect
movement and combat. The forces are depicted at
the Brigade level with a Corps, Division, or Brigade
designation and a rating for number of men,
cannon, and casualties. All game commands may be
input by using the joystick or keyboard.
MECHANICS
BOC is played in 13 turns which span September
19-20, 1863. Each turn is divided into an Orders
Phase and a Resolution Phase. During the Orders
phase, each unit will have 120 minutes to move and
attack. How long it takes to cross a terrain square is
determined by the terrain type, unit type, unit
mode, and possibly fatigue, morale, or communications if you have those game options turned on.
Combat is governed by the same factors and you
may chose to fire at near units, or use your artillery on units further away, or close to melee attack
to force an enemy out of a hex. Orders may be
canceled or reviewed and a single command allows
you to find all units which do not have orders. You
may use any one of three strategic screens to get an
overview of troop dispositions and then switch to
Continued on pg. 40

the defensive ratings of a destroyer. Don't give up,
though, as all of the bugs have been corrected in
the version currently available and SSI will replace
your Version 1.1, should you have one, with a copy
who's lack of flaws will leave you with no excuse
for your crushing defeat.

Name:
Type:
System:
Price:
Author:
Publisher:

Imperium Galactum
Strategic
Apple, Atari, C-64
$39.95
Paul Murray
Strategic Simulations
Mountain View, CA

The days of Empire are not gone forever.
Thanks to Paul Murray and the staff at SSI, you are
given the opportunity to spread the peace and security of your benevolent dictatorship to the entire
star cluster with their game; Imperium Galactum
(IG). In this four player game (three of which may
be run by the computer), you must strive against
your human and computer opponents to develop the
greatest base of population in the cluster. To
accomplish this task, the entire resources of your
planet are at your disposal. Further, you may add
to this amount by negotiating trade agreements with
independent worlds and through development of
any colonies which you may establish. As the only
victory condition is population, you have the option
of concentrating on building your population, or to
choose the "easier" path of eliminating your opponent's populations. In either case, the road will not
be an easy one. The outcome will depend upon
your diplomatic as well as your tactical skills.
The game itself contains some very interesting
features. These include such things as an built-in
method of diplomacy which allows alliances and, of
course, back-stabbing; a large selection of predesigned ships, all of which serve valuable functions; the ability to custom design ships of your
own; and impressive book-keeping system which
maintains records of the damage and efficiency for
every ship; commerce raiders and their defensive
counterparts; and a host of other features.
Before going any further, however, it must be
pointed out that the other features, in the case of
Version 1.1, include some rather impressive bugs
which could make play rather difficult. First, the
most immediate problem is that the system can lock
up when the problem is run with certain pieces of
hardware such as eighty column cards. The next
most obvious bug is that this version constantly
indicates that you need no traders, all the while
destroying your economy for your foolish belief in
its little fib. And, while these and other lesser
problems could be lived with when known, the
owners of the Apple Version 1.1 can look forward
to their dreadnought size ships dying like WW1
British battle cruisers, as the program gives them

When asked, IG's designer, Paul Murray, confessed that of the game's many features, he most
enjoyed the ability of two weaker players to join
forces against a stronger one, and the timing
required to judge just when to stab your ally in the
back. He also stated that he thought that the independent worlds (an option) added an interesting
feature which enhanced the flavor of the game.
Another factor which he felt important was the
levels of difficulty for solitaire play. Each level
increased is significantly more difficult than the
last, until you get to Level 1, where the computer
players are actually programmed to be human
haters. Considering some of the diplomatic opportunities for viciousness and the programmed animosity of the computer players, it is obvious that
Paul didn't have a friendly little space game in
mind when he designed IG.
STRATEGY
It is important to spend the first few turns exploring the cluster. With the information gained at
this time you can find independent worlds with
which to negotiate trade agreements and potential
sites for future colonies. And, concerning colonies,
it is recommended by higher powers (Paul again)
that colonialization not be taken up seriously until
you reach technology level four, at which point you
may begin to improve a planet's environment. It is
also important to remember that all classes of ships
are important. While the larger ships are important
for their fire power, the smaller escort vessels
remain critical to screen your capital ships from
attack by other suicide intent small and medium
sized vessels. For the novice, it is strongly
recommended that the first few games be solitaire
until the games many features are sufficiently
understood. Learning to manipulate the rather
involved economics and keeping your economy
sound can at first be a bit difficult. And, doing it
while three other people are trying to rush you
through your turn can soon lead to a feeling of
helplessness. Due, however, to the enjoyable features of the multi-player interaction, it is without
question recommended once players have gained the
needed command of the game system. IG is a challenging multi-player game of space conquest. Its
many well considered features and its variable game
length (it has no set length, but may be ended on
any turn by the player's decision) save it form the
fault of many games by giving it a rich supply of
options and no end-game, every man for himself
situations. The rather simplistic victory conditions
(population only counting) at least allows opponents
to keep track of one's relative position by probing
enemy (and allied) planets. As a final assessment, it
must be concluded that Imperium Galactum is a
game which due to randomization factors, optional
alternate cluster make-ups, a long list of features,
challenging levels of solitaire play, and machiavellian multiplayer dynamics, will continue to be
enjoyed for a very long time.

GAMES YOU'LL NEVER SEE
by Chris Crawford

Ed. Note: We are pleased to announce that Chris
Crawford will be joining CGW as a regular
contributor. As the designer of the highly acclaimed
Eastern Front (and others) and as a prolific
writer/speaker in the computer entertainment field,
we knew that Chris was a talented fellow. But it
was not until Chris submitted the following article
that we discovered that he is also deeply disturbed.
Welcome to the staff, Chris!
From where do game design ideas come? How
do designers get their ideas? There is no simple
answer to these questions, for they dig close to the
very heart of an intensively creative process, and
creativity as a human activity remains resistant to
analysis. Because of its emphasis on fun, skill in
game creation is frequently associated with a sense
of humor. Sometimes this sense of humor manifests
itself in game designs whose market value is, shall
we say, limited. Yet, these designs reveal a side of
the game design process that few outsiders see.
With this in mind, I would like to present a few of
my own outrageous designs; designs which were
never produced.
My first such design dates from 1975, before the
advent of home computer games. This game was a
board wargame, and was inspired by the fad for
games of ever larger scale. The game was titled
"Bore in the East", in mock homage to the great SPI
blockbuster, War in the East. The map showed
Germany and Russia, with two gigantic hexes
overlaying them. Two gigantic cardboard cutouts
represented the two opposing armies, German and
Russian. The combat results table insured that the
game would last exactly one turn, with the
Germans losing five times out of six.
If the player flipped over the two counters and
the combat results table, he obtained a new game,
titled "Blasto-Cremo: the Ultimate Man-to-Man
Game". Each counter showed a stick figure holding
the lanyard on a gigantic cannon. When placed on
the map, the two cannons faced each other. Players
were given only one possible option: to fire their
cannon. Combat was executed simultaneously, and
the combat results table admitted but a single
possible outcome: the death of the target.
It took several years for me to gather up the
courage to make a second attempt at humor. By this

time I was with Atari, writing programs. A fellow
programmer by the name of Tod Frye suggested an
interesting idea for a game, which I developed and
implemented. The basis of the design was the then
current fascination with the so-called "first-person"
games. These are games in which the player see on
the screen the same scene that he would see with
his own eyes if he was on the scene of the game.
Most games are "third person"--you see the game
situation from the vantage point of an observer at
some distance from the action. You see yourself as
an impersonal square, dot, or blob. For example,
Star Raiders is a first person game, while Pac-Man
is a third person game.
Tod's suggestion was that the first person
concept be applied in an entirely new way: to a
firing squad game. I liked the idea so much that I
went home and threw it together over the weekend.
The game starts with a little stick-figure man on
the screen. Four little stick-figure men come
marching across the screen, stick-figure rifles on
their shoulders. All the while the player can hear
their little feet marching. The first little man
squeaks a command; the men halt. A second squeak
prompts them to turn to face the player. A third
squeak, and they aim their rifles out the screen. A
fourth squeak, and the player hears a loud
explosion, the screen flashes bright white, and a
fraction of a second later, turns black. The game is
over. I called it "First Person Firing Squad".
A few months later I designed a programmed
yet another laugh-packed game, generally known as
the Funny DOS. This game masqueraded as a
perfectly normal Disk Operating System, except
that its performance was... nonstandard.
For example, the Atari DOS includes a menu
item called RUN CARTRIDGE. This command
normally transfers control from the DOS to
whatever ROM cartridge is in place. In my DOS,
however, the command was more direct, more
immediately recognizable. Upon entering the RUN
CARTRIDGE command, the player saw the word
CARTRIDGE appear on the bottom left of the
screen with two tiny legs protruding from
underneath. The tiny legs worked frantically,
generating a sound halfway between "pitty-pat" and
"clop-clop", and the word CARTRIDGE galloped
across the screen.

Continued on pg. 38

offensive toward Arnhem, the Battle of the Bulge,
and the campaign as a whole from June until the
end of October. Each scenario includes variants
that cover different lengths of time, and thus take
different amounts of time to play, or alternative
deployments, so that the player can explore various
historical "what-if's" like Rommel's strategy of
coastal defense or Manteuffel's alternative to the
attack through out the Ardennes. In all, the game
contains fourteen separate variants, each an independently playable game in itself.
The game system uses "accelerated real-time"
mechanics, which means that time in the game
flows continuously rather than as a series of static
turns and phases. Units are moving and attacking
all the time. You can issue and change orders
whenever you want. All this activity can seem
confusing at first, but playtesters with widely different amounts of experience picked the game up
quickly. While it takes a long time to master the
subtleties of the system, it does not take long to
learn enough to take command.
Since he finished NC, Sid has put much effort
into making the system easy to play. Orders can be
issued using either the keyboard or the joystick.
Each unit in both armies has an independent intelligence, so that it can be ordered to a distant destination and will deploy to the proper formation,
seek the best route, and can even be allowed to
pick the most attractive location for defense or target for attack. A strategic map provides an
overview in the scenarios that scroll across more
than one screen.
THE COMPUTER OPPONENT

Crusade in Europe (CIE) is the first of the
COMMAND SERIES simulations (based on an
"accelerated real-time" game system) by Sid Meier
of MicroProse Software. Sid is best known for his
flight simulations Hellcat Ace, Spitfire Ace, and F15 Strike Eagle, and has already created one "realtime" wargame, Nato Commander (NC). Since NC
was released, he has refined and expanded the
system, and over the past seven months, I have
been doing the research, design, and documentation
for CIE.
OVERVIEW
CIE simulates the campaign in Northwestern
Europe from D-Day to the Battle of the Bulge.
The five scenarios cover the fighting in Normandy,
the pursuit to the German frontier, the airborne

While in NC, the computer can only play the
Russians, in the Command Series system, the computer can play either side, both and even switch
sides in the middle of a game. The computer plays
a credible game, particularly on the defensive,
without any hidden advantages. However, the
player can deliberately adjust play balance to make
it easier for a beginner or harder for a veteran.
In addition to this enhanced solitaire play, now
two people can play against each other. Because of
the "accelerated real-time" mechanics, the experience is quite different from face to face combat
across a board. Other new features include a
choice between full and limited intelligence and a
flashback mode that enables you to review the previous fifteen days of play.
RESEARCH
Sid created the Command Series system, while I
conducted the research, designed the scenarios, and
wrote most of the documentation for CIE itself. In
the research and design, my goal was to make the
simulation as accurate as possible, making each scenario challenging and enjoyable as a game in its
own right.
The Command Series uses actual numbers of

Continued on pg. 38

the one without it, thus allowing the player without
the ball to get between his opponent and the goal.
The craft with the ball automatically turns to face
its goal, and any craft that doesn't have the ball
rotates to face it. Also, your craft recoils hundreds
of yards when it "shoots" the ball.

Lucasfilm Enters Home Gaming
by Gregg Williams

Game design isn't as simple as it used to be-now that we've had enough shoot-em-ups for the
sheer variety to pall, we're in search of something
else: depth. Although depth is most often associated
with detailed (sometimes tedious) simulations, it is
possible to get such depth in an arcade game.
Ballblazer and Rescue on Fractalus (both from
Lucasfilm Games) are sterling examples of games
with depth. The Lucasfilm people took great pains
in crafting worlds as complete as any of the Star
Wars films, and it shows--I found more craftsmanship, more fantasy-making in the instruction
books to these games than I find in most games
themselves. Although I feel these games are weaker
in certain design elements than I would have liked,
I still find that the quality of the experience compensates for the deficiencies.
"Three minutes, two players, one victor!" That
slogan sums up Ballblazer, which squeezes more out
of the Atari 400/800 than any game I've ever seen.
This two-player game (which includes 9 computer
opponents as well) splits the screen horizontally to
give two perspective views of a long, rectangular
field cut into 15-foot checkerboard squares. Each
player rides a hovercraft that speeds across the
playfield with uncanny realism to play a capturethe-ball-and-shoot-it-through-the-goalpost game
that resembles soccer in the same way that
Defender resembles a pinball game. If spectacular
graphics weren't enough, Ballblazer adds sound
effects and a wonderful nonstop jazzy tune that
further enhance the game.
The manual, which explains that Ballblazer is
the most prestigious inter-species competitive game
in the galaxy, shows blueprints of the hovercraft
and includes a sportcaster's interview with a retired
Masterblazer. Read the manual carefully for important facts and strategy tips.
The game contains many nice touches that turn
out to be important to a winning strategy. For example, the goalposts move closer to each other after
each goal, thus making the next goal harder to
score. The (hover)craft with the ball is slower than

Though playing against a human opponent is
nice, I found that I consistently won or lost to the
same person--the game's self-handicapping features
aren't enough. However, you can always find just
the right computer opponent from the nine provided and improve your game that way.
If Ballblazer is quick and intense, Rescue on
Fractalus is almost restful. Along with another of
my favorites, Activision's Past finder, Rescue is a
good example of a new genre I've labelled the
"campaign game"--a simulation reminiscent of a
military campaign, where a game usually takes
anywhere from 15 minutes to several hours to play,
but the average player accumulates the skill needed
for a long game fairly easily.
Rescue has the same kind of depth (in both the
manual and game) as Ballblazer. In this fantasy
role, you are piloting a Valkyrie fighter plane as it
rescues downed pilots and destroys alien gun
emplacements and saucers on a mountainous planet.
That's it--not much to the plot, and about the only
strategy is in deciding how to land safely and pick
up the pilots.
Actually, Rescue is weaker on strategy than
Ballblazer, but it too is "rescued" by the details that
heighten the fantasy. For example, when you land
near a pilot, you can often see him running toward
your ship. He knocks on the side of the ship to be
let in, and if you don't do so immediately, the
knocks get slower as the pilot succumbs to the
corrosive atmosphere. The aliens can also make a
surprise appearance (in levels 10 and higher) guaranteed to make you jump out of your seat.
Rescue needs a "save game" feature--if you play
carefully, you can survive for hours (I've done so
for almost two hours). Also, there are too many
levels--17; fortunately you can start at any level
and skip up to three levels at a time. Fly below
level 4 a few times, then go directly to level 10.
When you get good, skip to level 16--Fractalus has
a nine-minute day that forces you to fly by instrument in complete darkness; this (apart from the
alien surprise) is the most interesting part of the
game.
Overall, both games are slightly weak in the
finer points of game design, but most players will
be satisfied. More importantly, the games set a new
standard of depth for arcade-style games that will
raise our future expectations--game manufacturers,
take note.

Gregg Williams is a senior editor at BYTE and
responsible for the 10-part "Atari Tutorial" which
BYTE published.
Ed. Note: Early copies of Ballbazer and Rescue
do not run on the Indus disk drive. We understand
that the problem has been corrected and
incompatible copies can be returned to EPYX for
exchange.
Ballblazer and Rescue on Fractalus are distributed by
Epyx Inc., 1043 Kiel Court, Sunnyvale, CA 94089

Don't be in too much of a rush to leave
here; this mind has many important items
and clues to be discovered. In fact, with
careful attention to detail and making the
right moves, you should be able to pick up
just about all the words to the Fear
Sonnet, which you'll need to enter the
Poet's mind. Remember that Bobby was a
musician as well as a singer. And it helps
to examine everything you find or come
across (not to mention, taking everything
that isn't nailed down!).

MINDWHEEL

As told by Scorpia

WARNING! Scorpion's Tale contains
hints on solving computer adventure
games. If you do not want help, do not
read on.

Back for more, eh? I see you managed
to get out of your tight squeeze from being
a Suspect. Good for you! Fred is pouring
out a little something, which you're
probably going to need very shortly. If you
thought becoming other people in
Hitchhikers was troublesome, wait till you
find yourself floating through the bizarre
minds of four different people in
Synapse/Broderbund's new game,
Mindwheel!
This is a tricky one. You not only have
to figure out the usual types of puzzles
found in adventure games, but answer
riddles and complete poems as well.
Talking to the various people you meet in
the game is crucial to solving it; it is wise
to make notes of what you hear along the
way. Clues and answers can also be found
in the book that comes with the game.
Also, expect A LOT of disk access in
this one; you may well want to use the
pause feature while reading the
descriptions of the events around you.
Remember that time is passing in the
game while you're just sitting there
thinking. Because not everyone is a
baseball fan, and the name of the player is
critical to completing the game, I am
giving the name in simple substitution
code at the end of the column for those
who really need it.
With that said, here you are in the
mind of deceased rock star Bobby Clemon.
There's a lot happening, what with the
fanatical crowd moaning and chanting in
front of you, thugs chasing your
bodyguard around the stage, and one of
the singers wanting to drag you off to the
back.

However, you can't do everything here
in one visit, not with that maniacal crowd
around you. So, when you've done
everything here you think possible for the
moment, you might want to take a quick
trip backstage, just to see what's past the
door. Maybe even make a quick trip up
the staircase. The woman in the cage at
the top has an important clue for you,
although you have to answer a riddle to
free her first. Your harmonica may be
helpful here.
Still, this may not be the best time to
go further. Besides, you have some
unfinished business back in Bobby's mind
with the thug. It shouldn't be too difficult
to find him. Obnoxious person, isn't he?
Also very persistent. Guess the only way
to get rid of him is to fight it out with
him. Just don't trust him too far!
When you've taken care of the thug
(at least, I hope you did!), you'll find
yourself on the fringes of the Poet's mind.
There is a cute little toad here, who just
might be useful. There is also an extremely
nasty devil by the name of Spaw, who will
not allow you into the Poet's mind until
you've completed the Fear Sonnet (this is
the same as the one in the book).
Of course, by now, you have most of
the words, right? Still, you might just
want to have a little chat with the toad
before you get on with the Sonnet.
Afterwards, you should have no problem
getting into the Love Room. Hmmmm,
pretty odd Love Room! Perhaps you
should talk to the waiter (and be very
careful that you don't walk west, unless
you enjoy being someone's snack).
So, here you are with a rather strangelooking lady (note: when talking to her,
make sure you address her as "Lady"; if
you say "Woman", the program will
become confused). And yes, before you can
get anything from her, you have to
complete another poem, this time the Love
Sonnet. Fortunately, there are only two
words needed for this.
Did you look carefully at the book
Spaw gave you as you entered the room? If
not, you should. And it should remind you
of something. If it doesn't, better look
through the book that comes with the
game. The answers to the Love Sonnet are
right there.
Once you've finished the Sonnet, and
gotten something very important (this is
all you need to do in the Poet's mind), you
might want to return to Bobby's mind to
take care of some unfinished business. The
crowd is gone now, and the stage deserted,
so you can walk down the ramp in safety.
The exit sign to the east seems interesting;
wonder what you might find beyond the
door?
Well, a small courtyard inhabited by
bums may not have been what you
expected, but they are here for a reason.
By all means, talk to the one bum who is

up and around. And don't forget to
examine everything in the place.
With that done, it's time to visit the
Generalissomo's mind. You'll find the
woman back in the cage, but the same
answer to the riddle will free her again.
Now, you can go beyond the cage, and into
G's mind itself. The first thing you see is a
soldier, petrified from the waist down.
Talk to him a few times; he has some
important instructions for you.
Now you have to get through the door.
If you read it, you'll find that it's another
poem to complete, but only one word,
fortunately, is needed here. The answer, as
a matter of fact, is infinitely easy. And you
should have gotten it back when you
where in Bobby's mind. Once you speak it,
the door will open, and you can go out
into the freezing cold.
Since you can't get up the stairs unless
you free the soldier, you might as well do
what he asked, even if that makes you a
little nervous. Don't worry, though, things
will turn out all right in the end. When
you have the required items, you should
look at them carefully before going to the
fountain.
Also, from time to time you will be
pestered by a couple of bizarre children.
Right now is not the time to "play" with
them. You'll get a chance to do that a
little later. Freeing the soldier is more
important at the moment.
When you've accomplished that, and
gone upstairs, you'll see, among other
things, a floating island. That is the mind
of Eva Fein. You can't reach it right now,
but you'll get there eventually. In the
meantime, don't overlook anything that
might be lying around here (and read the
description carefully, or you might miss
something).
Now you can go back and "play" with
the animal-headed children. Of course, the
fact that you end up imprisoned behind
barbed wire with the winged people may
not exactly thrill you. However, there is a
way out of here. Talk to the bearded man
about that.
Ummmm....looks like the lizard captain
isn't too happy about your freeing the
winged folks. Better get out of there fast,
and the only way to go is up. Just don't
panic (where have I heard that before?),
make sure you don't leave anything behind
when you go flying off.
And here you are at last, just outside
Eva's mind. This is important: you should
save the game here, because once you go
beyond the door, you WILL NOT be able
to save the game! So, if you do something
irrevocable on the other side, you can
restore back to this spot.
Examine the door carefully, since two
things are needed to open it. Once you
pass through, you will be in a garden.
Read the rules of the game carefully. You
might also want to use the map in the
book to chart your moves from this point
on. The ladder in the shed may or may not
be helpful, depending on which way you go
(I recommend Northeast, but you can take
any of the three doors).
As you may have guessed, this is going
to be a sort of bizarre game of chess. Some
of the characters you've already
encountered will be popping up again as

Continued on pg. 43

PLAY BfkLL!

by Bill Oxner
A hot dog. A beer. A lazy summer afternoon.
These simple images can only bring to mind one
thing - BASEBALL! Seemingly timeless, unchanging and pastoral; baseball is, according to some
anthropologists, one of the strongest elements in the
social fabric of American society.
The rest of the world may be going to hell in a
handbasket but the bases are still 90 feet apart. It's
still "three strikes you're out". My grandfather
booed the umpire and cheered a home run in 1900.
My father questioned a manager's decision to pinch
hit in 1930. I thrilled to Duke Snider blasting one
out in 1960. My son is only five but he knows to
stand and sing for the 7th inning stretch in 1985.
Baseball is a unique thread that binds us as a people and a society. My grandfather wouldn't understand 10% of what he would read in today's paper
and would be dazed by the technological marvels
around us. But take him to the ballpark and we
could share a wonderful afternoon discussing baseball strategy.
I hope the foregoing prose will convey a sense
of my lifelong love affair with the magic game of
baseball. Attendance figures show that I am far
from alone in my passion. It is for these reasons
that I am so pleased with the veritable explosion of
computerized baseball games within the past several
months. I can't always get to the park and winters
do seem long, but I can now sit down in front of
the monitor and replay the '84 World Series. A bad
day on the freeway coming home? Shut the door,
boot the disk and cheer for Don Drysdale to get a
third strike past Willie Mays. Nirvana!
The following material will survey eight current
programs. Space limitations will only allow an indepth look at four of the programs. These four are
"major" programs that are widely distributed and
represent significant design features. This is not
to disparage any of the other programs and I hope
the comparison chart will permit readers to make
informed decisions regarding ALL of the games.
COMPUTER BASEBALL
Strategic Simulations. 883 Stierlin Rd., Mtn.View CA
94043. Apple, Atari, C-64, IBM Circle #24 on Reader Card

Computer Baseball (CB) is the Pete Rose of the
group. Released in 1981 it is "ancient" in relation to
most computer games. But don't let the age fool
you, it is still an All-Star program. It is a tribute to
the designer's skills that the game remains one of
the best on the market.
CB is easy to "get into". The documentation is
clear and informative. You have the option of
human vs human, human vs computer or computer

vs computer. The last option is especially nice if
you want to see how your favorite team will fare
against the league but you don't have the time to
actually play every game yourself. Results of the
game are ready for the screen or printer.
One of MY prime requirements for an excellent
baseball program is the ability to update and compile stats. I enjoy playing a game and enjoy studying the cumulative stats. I do NOT enjoy compiling
stats by hand. CB gets good marks in this category.
It will update cumulative stats after each game and
has a very clear format for printing stats. The negative is that it does not currently allow a manager
to sort league leaders by category (HR, RBI, etc).
Not critical but it would be a nice feature and may
be available in future versions. [Ed. Note: We run a

computerized baseball league in the offices of CGW
and are currently playtesting Computer Baseball
Version 2.0 which will contain individual and league
leader stat compilation. Designer Charlie Merrow
hopes to have the new version available early this
summer.]
The sense of "reality" in the play of the game is
a subjective matter but CB does a fairly good job
in this category also. The limitation comes in the
area of graphics. CB graphics are adequate but not
great. CB begins by asking the game option (human
vs human, etc). You are then led through menus
that permit selection of teams and lineups. Graphics
include the pitch to the batter and the flight of the
batted ball. Fielders throw to the proper base.
Runners do not "run" the bases but their running
ratings appear at the base they occupy. Text is
minimal but descriptive. "Strike out". "Shallow fly
to left". "Ground ball to short".
One of the strengths of CB is the range of
defensive options open to a manager. The infield
can be All In, Guard Lines, Double Play, In at the
Corners or Normal. The outfield can be Shallow or
Normal. Baserunners can be held Tight, Loose or

Normal. The offensive manager also has a fairly
wide of options for batters and runners.
CB does a good job in the area of compiling
stats and allowing owners to create their own teams.
If you have the available stats you can create any
team or league you wish, from your son's Little
League squad to the 1985 All-Star game. However,
to trade players or draft players (from existing
teams) you must re-enter the stats for each player.
It is not possible to simply tell the program to trade
Dave Parker to Boston.
A nice touch for any sports game is the option
to have the computer play the role of opposing
manager. CB fills this requirement but it must be
pointed out that "Casey" is not exactly the Earl
Weaver of managers. The game program and player
stats simply take up too much of the available
48/64K to permit really extensive artificial
intelligence.
To give readers some idea of the popularity of
computerized baseball games it was reported to
CGW that Computer Baseball is approaching 30,000
copies sold. The bulk of these sales has come in the
last year or so. Together with the introduction of
several other new major products it is clear that
consumers are enthusiastic about computers and
baseball.
MICRO LEAGUE BASEBALL
Micro League Sports Assn. 28 E. Cleveland Ave., Newark DE
19711 (800)PLAYBAL. Apple, Atari, C-64 Circle #25 on Card

MLB breaks from the pack when the game
begins. The graphics can only be described as fantastic. The flight of the ball is three-dimensional
and is accompanied by text. Runners do "run" the
bases. When a runner slides into second on a steal
attempt there is a small cloud of dust near the bag.
When a manager visits the mound you actually see
him come out the dugout. He is joined on the
mound by the other infielders as they talk with the
pitcher. After an out (with the bases empty) the
infielders fire the ball "around the horn". A baseball
game, even a stat-based game, should be fun and
MLB can honestly be described as a truly fun game
to watch and play.
Although the graphics are good, it should not be
forgotten that MLB is a stat-driven game. Our experience with the game is limited but the stat reproduction does seem to be good. Rickey
Henderson will be excellent at stealing bases, Dave
Kingman is a turtle. Dwight Gooden will rack up
the K's.
Depending on your needs there are limitations
with MLB. There is no inning by inning linescore,
simply a summary of runs, hits and errors. No individual stats are kept by the program. If you wish
to maintain individual stats it will have to be done
by hand. However, Micro League indicates that a
stat-compiler is under development.
Consumer support by Micro League appears to
be excellent. There is an 800 phone number (800PLAY-BAL) for orders and questions. One very
nice touch that we would like to see all manufacturers emulate is a database of users. MLB publishes a newsletter which will keep owners up to
date on new items and will help them to find opponents in their locality. Computer leagues provide
great enjoyment and the newsletter will facilitate
the formation of a league.
PRO MANAGER
The Avalon Hill Game Co. 4517 Harford Rd., Baltimore MD
21214. IBM Circle #26 on Reader Card

In baseball terms Micro League Baseball (MLB)
is the hot new rookie on the squad. It has the endorsement of the Major League Players Association
and you may have seen Sparky Anderson doing
advertising spots for it on television. One of the
members of Micro League's board of directors is
Ruly Carpenter, former owner of the Philadelphia
Phillies. It is clear that despite its young age MLB
has deep baseball roots.
MLB has a very good menu procedure to get
you into a game quickly. Your options are basically
the same as the other games in that you choose
teams, lineups, and starting pitchers. The standard
game includes a selection of great teams of the past
but specific season stat disks are available from the
manufacturer. With the optional General Manager's
Disk you can trade or draft players.

Pro Manager (PM) could be described as the
DBaseIII of computer baseball games. If you don't
use it as a baseball program you can still use it as a
database manager. While the actual "play" of the
game is not as graphically exciting as the other
programs surveyed, it is unchallenged when it
comes to stat handling ability.

PM comes with the 1984 Major League teams
plus a selection of great teams of the past. The
computer can manage one team but not both.
Automatic (pre-selected) lineups are available for
each team, thus making it easy to set up and play a
game. The on-screen information, during play, is
very good in the area of player stats. The graphics
are minimal, consisting basically of the outline of a
diamond with the batter and baserunner names appearing at the appropriate bases. The flight of the
ball is not shown and the descriptive text is brief.
"Lineout to left". "Hard single". As with the other
games, the computer manager does not constitute a
credible opponent.
It is after the last out is made that PM really
starts to shine. It comes with the American,
National and Old-Timers leagues and you can
create your own Open League with drafted players
from the other leagues or player stats you have
entered. PM will maintain league standings. It will
update and compile cumulative stats for each team
and player. It will sort and print league leaders in
each of the batting and pitching categories. PM is
simply unsurpassed in the area of maintaining
player stats.

APBA MAJOR LEAGUE PLAYERS BASEBALL
Random House Electronic Publ., 201 E. 50th St., New York
NY 10022 IBM Circle #27 on Reader Card

CAPBA comes with the 1984 teams (676 players). You can draft these players onto as many as
100 artificial teams, broken into as many leagues
and divisions as you wish. Each stock team comes
with a pre-selected standard lineup. You can save
up to five specific lineups for each stock or created
team. This makes the pre-game procedure go very
quickly as you can instantly load your left-hand or
right-hand hitting lineup at the touch of a key.
Graphics are minimal. You are shown the
names of defensive players in their respective positions and their defensive abilities. The same goes
for batters and runners. Two very nice features are
the constantly updated stats for the pitcher and the
game stats for each batter as he comes to the plate.
Although the graphics are sparse, the designer made
a wise decision to utilize the player's imagination to
create excitement. Text descriptions of each play
are fabulous. Each play gets about five lines of
scrolled text. "It's a long drive to the gap". "Looks
like trouble". "Jackson races to his right". "He
dives for the ball". Pause... "He makes the catch!".
Despite the number of such descriptions needed for
each game it is possible to play an entire game
without a phrase being repeated.
The after-game boxscore is tremendous. It
contains the standard stats plus such items as put
outs and assists by each player, injuries, ejections,
balks, etc.
Unfortunately, nothing in life is perfect. The
price ($89.95), in relation to similar games, is not
cheap. The game does not currently compile
cumulative stats. This feature is under development but not yet available. The game is not setup
to have the computer act as manager. Given the
serious weaknesses of ALL the computer managers
of the other games I don't consider this a critical
factor. The designer indicated that he would only
add the option when he was convinced it would be
a sophisticated decision maker. Again, this is
under development. Finally, because of the wealth
of text that describes each play, the game accesses
the disk on every play (as does Pro Manager by the
way). This means a lot of disk use (and wear) over
the course of a season.
CAPBA is a thinking person's game. It requires
many more decisions than any other game surveyed.

This entry is the Dale Berra of computer games.
The son, Computer APBA (CAPBA) is young to the
game but his father has a long and continuing
place in baseball. The APBA Game Company
began producing a table-top baseball game in 1951
and is still going strong. Many knowledgeable
baseball fans consider it the premier stat board
game in existence. CAPBA (that is to say, Major
League Players Baseball) is a totally faithful reproduction of the APBA Master Game, an advanced
baseball stat game. For those familiar with the
Master Game it has every feature plus one new
item, pitcher fatigue. If any bias is evident in this
review (although I hope not) it must be pointed out
that the reviewer has enjoyed playing APBA for 25
years.

Managers must decide whether to try for an extra
base, make a throw to home or throw to a base to
prevent the following runner's advancement. The
depth of player ratings makes for more complex
decisions. CAPBA utilizes all of the available official stats plus items not found in any of the other
games. Catchers are rated for their throwing arms
as well as overall defensive ability. The same for
outfielders and infielders. Pitchers are rated for
their move to first (affects stolen base success).
Pitchers are rated for their frequency of hit batsmen, balks and wild pitches. Batters are individually rated for their ability to hit left or right
handed pitchers. Runners are rated for steal success AND overall speed (two really different qualities). I could go on but I think you get the picture.
Official stats are the foundation for a good stat
game but subjective ratings are also very important.
These can only be found (in such detail) in
CAPBA.

STATISTICAL ACCURACY
Readers will note that I have only rated the
various games' statistical accuracy (in the chart) in
very general terms. To honestly review this category would require playing several hundred games
with each program. Time constraints make this an
impossibility. I have given the best idea I can,
based on play of the games, talks with designers
and analysis of the stats going into each game. I
feel quite confident of my rating for CAPBA but
the other ratings must be considered preliminary
judgements.

who is concerned with stat accuracy but more interested with a "fun" and easy game to play. Stat
Solo is for the player who will be primarily playing
alone. Stats accuracy is very important. Stat
League is for players who wish to start leagues.
Record keeping is of primary importance here.
The games are listed in a very general order of
reviewer preference. Computer Baseball Fever.
Catch it!
Arcade Style:
Beer & Pretzels:
Stat Solitaire:

WHICH GAME IS BEST?
Stat League:

It depends. Do you truly care for absolute statistical accuracy or do you prefer the excitement of
super graphics? Do you want the computer to
maintain cumulative stats or do you mind keeping
them by hand (or not at all)? Which computer do
you own? These variables make it impossible to
rate one game as best. However, I can give general
guidelines based on four categories of games.
Arcade style is non-stat based but has great graphics. Beer and pretzels is a category for the player

Micro League, Star League,
World's Greatest
Micro League, Computer BB
CAPBA, Computer BB,
Pro Manager
CAPBA, Computer BB,
Pro Manager, Monday Morn

Monday Morning Manager. TK Computer Products, PO Box 9617
Downers Grove, IL 60515. Atari. Circle #28
World's Greatest Baseball Game. Epyx, Sunnyvale CA. C-64.
Circle #29 on Reader Card
Baseball's Best. Windcrest Software, PO Box 423
Waynesboro, PA 17268. Atari. Circle #30 on Reader Card
Star League Baseball. Gamestar, 1302 State St. Santa
Barbara CA 93101. Apple, Atari, C-64. Circle #31

THE SILICON
CEREBRUM
Social Values

by Bruce Webster
I recently read an unpublished article on
computer games by Redmond Simonsen. For those
of you who don't know him, Redmond was one of
the "biggies" at Simulations Publications, Inc. (SPI),
a now-defunct firm that brought out over 300
military and adventure (board) games and which
for several years was the dominant influence in the
wargame industry. In fact, a number of the
computer wargames that have hit the shelves are
simply unacknowledged (and unauthorized)
computer implementations of "paper" wargames put
out by SPI. But that's another story....
Anyway, the article by Simonsen, which
critiqued the computer game market and made
suggestions as to what a computer game should (and
shouldn't) include, was very interesting and
insightful. In the article he said that a major flaw
of most computer games was that they did not have
enough social interaction. When you play a board
game with another human, you have a whole set of
social and emotional influences that add a lot of
flavor to the entire situation. When you play a
game against a computer, you are playing again
"the cold dead hand of an algorithm" (to use
Redmond's words), and you know it. The computer
doesn't learn, it doesn't adjust, it doesn't gasp or
gloat, it doesn't even spill Pepsi on the map when
it's losing. As a result, we soon "figure out" the
computer, and tedium sets in until we stop playing.
Or, worse yet, we start devising ways to cheat,
even though (as Redmond points out), we would
never think of cheating while playing a board game
against other people (at least, most of us wouldn't).
Finally, we get bored, and we go on to another
game, or we stop playing computer games
altogether (I play very few, since most can't hold
my interest for any length of time.)
One of the main functions of artificial
intelligence (AI) in computer games is to add that
social element, that feeling that someone (or
something) is staring back at you from the other
side of the screen. Since this column covers AI,
let's look at how we can inject some "life" into our
games.

In role-playing games, one approach is to
attempt to model personalities, so that people (or
beings) that you encounter not only act in
particular ways, but they also change their behavior
to respond to yours. For example, we (Wayne
Holder and I) did this on a very simple level in
SunDog. In SunDog, it's possible to annoy
bartenders and store clerks by wasting their time,
constantly changing your mind, etc. The more
annoyed they get, the more abusive their language
becomes, until they finally tell you to get lost, then
walk away from you. You can, however, restore
yourself into their good graces by buying items
from them. It's a small touch, though one many
players enjoyed--until they figured out just what
was happening and soon became used to it.
My plans for SunDog II were much more
ambitious. (I say "were", since I am no longer with
FTL Games, and they own all rights to SunDog). I
wanted to develop a more complex emotional model
for non-player characters (NPC), one that would
allow for a variety of reactions. More importantly
is that each character would have his/her/its own
emotional makeup--discernible differences in
personality and temperament. One bartender might
cheerfully accept any hassle or insult, while another
might as soon kill you as look at you. The model
was never worked out in detail, but I thought I'd
share what I did develop. Also, in all fairness, I
must point out that a few of these concepts were
inspired by an unpublished role-playing game that
Howard Thompson (founder of both The Space
Garner and Metagaming, and pretty much the
originator of "microgames" in the wargaming field)
was developing a few years ago.
Each NPC has several personality attributes
(patience, bravery, honesty, romance) that are
modelled on a 0-to-100 basis, just like the
"physical" attributes (intelligence, dexterity,
strength, charisma, luck). Someone with all
attributes at level 100 would be a saint; someone
with all 0's would be quite unpleasant. Most of us
(and most NPC's) fall somewhere in-between.
Each of the personality attributes (PA)
corresponds to an "option pair":
Attribute

Option

Pair

patience
bravery
honesty
romance
generosity

get angry
run away
lie
be mercenary
be greedy

cooperate
risk danger
tell the truth
be chivalrous
be generous

These option pairs represent choices that an NPC
may be called upon to make during the course of a
game. For example, the NPC may get involved in
an argument. His patience level will help determine
if he tries to argue or to calm things down.
Likewise, once a fight starts, his bravery and/or
romance levels may determine whether he stays to
fight or makes himself scarce.
The attributes themselves can be used in a
number of ways. The simplest is to use them as
probabilities. In a given situation, you might simply
generate ("roll") a random number from 1 to 100
and use that to make your choice. If the "roll" is
less than or equal to the attribute, then the NPC
makes the "positive" choice; otherwise, he makes
the "negative" choice. For example, for a "cooperate
or argue" decision, and given that the patience PA
is 60, a roll of 60 or less means that the NPC will

cooperate, while a roll of 61 or more means that he
will argue.
An alternate simple method is to assign a cutoff
level (or levels) for a given situation and simply
compare the attribute(s). This level represents the
amount of patience, bravery, or whatever needed to
make a given choice. In a combat situation, you
might set the level at 30 plus 10 point for each
opponent. A fight against 3 opponents would then
require a bravery level of 60 or more to avoid
running away (or surrendering).
A more complex method could combine
modifiers and probabilities. You might add, say, 10
to the "roll" for each opponent. If an NPC is
deciding whether to fight three opponents, and he
has a bravery level of 70, then he will only stay
and fight if he rolls a 40 or less, since a roll of 41
would be adjusted to 71 (40 + 3x10 for each
opponent).
Still more complexity comes when you consider
that multiple attributes might come into play. For
example, if the NPC is fighting to gain possession
of something quite valuable, then a low generosity
level (high greed) might induce him to stay even if
he's not very brave. If instead he's fighting to help
a friend or save a damsel in distress, then a high
romance level could be significant. Conflicting
attributes could make it really tough to guess which
way an NPC would go in a given situation.
Now we can start making things really tricky.
A confrontation usually doesn't immediately turn
into a free-for-all or a great new friendship.
Events have to work up to one situation or another.
So for each attribute, let's give the NPC a "mood

track". For bravery, the mood track might look like
this:
I

I

I

I

I

run away apologize stand firm confront risk danger

The NPC might start at "stand firm" and then
make a bravery check (with all the modifications,
combinations, and so on). If he passes by some
amount--say by more than 10 points--then he
would move over to "confront". If he fails by the
same amount, he would move down to "apologize".
However, if his roll is within 10 points of his
actual bravery value, then he continues to "stand
firm". For example, if his bravery attribute is 60,
then here are the effects of the check roll (after all
modifications):
Roll (with mods)

New State on Bravery Track

< 50

apologize
stand firm
confront

50 to 70
> 70

We assumed a margin of 10 points on either side
in this case. The margin itself could be an attribute
of the NPC, representing how "volatile" he is. A
low margin would represent someone who changes
moods rapidly--quick to take offense, quick to
forgive. Someone with a high margin would be slow
to shift moods, but having shifted, would be slow
to return to normal.
Ah, but what is normal? The "normal" state
might be the point on the mood track that roughly
corresponds to the attribute level. Someone with a
very low bravery level might start at "run away"

Continued on pg. 39

Atari
Playfield
WHERE HAVE ALL THE GAMES GONE?

David Stone
The question of the day is "Are software companies going to continue developing games for the
new Atari computers." Watching new games for the
Atari dribble in to the local retail stores, I am
beginning to know what it's like to come in fourth
place in a three-man race. I guess what really
hurts is that one of the machines, the IBM-PC,
doesn't even purport to be a game machine. Yet
there have been so many of them sold that a sizable
PC game market is opening up, drawing talent
away from more game-oriented computers like the
Atari and C-64.

The battle is not lost however. Atari Corp. is
still in the "orders phase". Many developers are
waiting for the dust from the Winter Consumer
Electronics Show to settle and for Atari's
"movement phase" to begin before committing
scarce company resources to a vigorous game development assault. Of course, if the forces of General
Trameil (Atari's president) collapse, the game is
over.
Clearly, the arcade game boom and "any 14 year
old kid can program a hit game" days of the early
'80's are over. Certain standards have been set and
are now demanded in games. There are fewer
games, but they are of an overall higher quality
than the games that were flooding the market a few
years back. Just compare the Game Ratings in the
back of your CGW -- not only have many of the
names changed, the quality has also.
One thing about excellence -- it makes it tough
for the mediocre to compete. What appears to be
left are the serious gainers (like you) and relatively
fewer serious game companies. On the other end of
the spectrum, there are now the Madison Avenuetypes who think that to be mass-marketable, a
game must be merchandised with the name of a
personality on the box.
COMBO PAKS
Meanwhile, have you noticed that some software
developers are now packaging C-64 and Atari
games versions in the same box? This cuts down on
their costs since about half the price you pay for a
game goes to distribution costs. With such big
savings you wonder why more companies don't do

"combo-packaging". Two big reasons. One, it's
darn difficult to finish two versions of a game at
the same time so they can be packaged and shipped
together. And two, assuming one genius didn't
create both versions, it's even harder to determine
how to split the royalties between the C-64 programmer and the Atari programmer. What combopackaging means to us Atari game players is that
we have to remember to shop the C-64 section of
the software stores to find all the Atari software
releases.
One company that is moving full steam ahead in
the Atari game market, and using "combo-packaging" is Datasoft -- the folks who brought you
Canyon Climber, Pooyan, Zaxxon, and The Sands
of Egypt. Datasoft has three games of interest due
for release in mid to late summer: Alternate
Reality, Zorro, and Goonies. Plus, for the arcade
addicts they're working on home computer versions
of Pole Position II and Elevator Action.
From all descriptions Alternate Reality is more
sophisticated than Datasoft's earlier joystickoriented fare. The Atari version of this game is
finished but they are waiting until the C-64 version
is done so they can be sold in a "Combo-pak".
Zorro is a multi-screen challenge with some
"problem-solving". Goonies will be tied-in with
Steven Spielberg's next block buster of the same
name. WHO YA' GONNA' CALL?
Let's hope that Goonies (the game) is as at least
as innovative as Ghostbusters by David Crane
(Activision) -- but easier to win. The Atari
version of Ghostbusters offers some unique game
challenges and, despite its fast production time,
Crane and Glyn Anderson (who adapted the game
for the Atari) developed a entertaining arcade-type
game.
MORE ON THE ST'S
So, how long will it be before we see

Ghostbusters, Goonies, or any other game for that
matter, on the ST's (Atari's new line of large
memory thirty-two bit machines)?The answer is
that no one knows. Jack Trameil, president of
Atari and former head of Commodore, may be
working with new machines, but he is apparently
playing the same old game. Namely, announce a
delivery date, then let it slip in the hope that consumers will put off their purchase of a competitor's
machine.
In the meanwhile, Atari Corp is selling ST
development systems to software developers (at
prices well-above those that Atari announced consumers will be paying when the systems are finally
released). These machines offer a whole new world
of programming challenges. I recently saw a 520
demonstrated, and I am firmly convinced that it
will take at least a year after the first "production
model" rolls off the line (this summer?) before
game designers and programmers develop a full
library of programming utilities to take real advantage of the GEM graphics system resident in the
new computers. When they do, get ready for easy
to play games that offer plenty of pop-on windows
and impressive color graphics. Imagine the design
features of the first game on the market that says
on the box "512K REQUIRED"!

REFORGER'88
Name:
Type:
System:
#Players:
Author:
Price:
Publisher:

Reforger '88
Wargame
Apple, Atari
1-2
Gary Grigsby
$59.95
Strategic Simulations
Mountain View, CA

REFORGER '88 reflects the same kind
of careful research and exciting game
theory which the hobby has come to
expect from Gary Grigsby after games like
Guadalcanal Campaign, Carrier Force,
Objective Kursk, and War In Russia. In
this simulation, a hypothetical invasion of
the Fulda Gap by Warsaw Pact forces
with the main objective of securing RheinMain Air Force Base near Frankfurt, U. S.
and West German forces must fight a
holding action against the Soviet and East
German aggressors in order for the superior replacement capability of the NATO
forces to take its toll upon the communists. The game can be described as grand
tactical warfare in that the player is concerned with unit to unit battle where terrain and target selection is vital to success,
but where the player must also be concerned with over-all supply appropriations, air superiority and/or target definition, and air reconnaissance usually reserved to strategic decision makers. The
game thus boasts a fine mix of two levels
of decision making where many games opt
for either a strategic or tactical level. In
the solitaire mode, the player is limited to
playing the NATO forces. Of course, this
must of necessity limit its appeal to the
aggressive player who wants to play a
computer opponent. In the two player
version, the game plays smoothly and is
friendly enough to allow an exciting game
to be played in one afternoon.
Grigsby wastes little programming
time on superfluous "whistles and bells"
like title pages and unnecessary graphics.
Instead, he offers helpful functions like
"auto-move depot." This function enables
the supply depots to reach the front lines
very rapidly, limiting the necessity of the
player trying to figure out the best route
to the front. Once the depot has stopped
near the front lines, the player can maneuver it to supply the units he most needs to
supply. The presentation of the game
could have been improved, however, if the
coated maps would have been printed with
map coordinates. Play could have been
speeded up considerably with that minor
addition.

As in most of Grigsby's land operations games, supply is a very important
factor. Unsupplied units find themselves
not only practically defenseless, but unable
to move, as well. It isn't pleasant to be a
sitting duck when five or more Warsaw
Pact units surround you. The successful
player will read the rules on supply carefully and apply significant effort to come
within the required two hexes in order to
supply all of his units.
The second most important factor in
winning the game is the Air Mission
Allocation Phase. The most important
mission is "air superiority." It doesn't
matter how many combat points the
player can place on a "ground attack," he
will lose an inappropriate amount of planes
if the enemy's "air superiority" is significantly greater than his own. I have found
that the NATO player is wise to use all of
his F-15s and F-16 Falcons, as well as
most of the Tornadoes, on "air superiority"
missions, so that the Phantoms, F-111s,
A-10s, PAH-ls and AH-64s will have a
reasonable chance of survival. This suggested allocation has the advantage of
using each of the planes according to their
strongest combat point values (except for
the Tornadoes which have a better ground
attack rating, but are desperately needed
to counterbalance the Warsaw Pact "air
superiority" because their 9 CP is third
highest in "air superiority" missions.
Then, just when a player thinks he has
the mechanics of the game in hand, he
must learn to be alert to two very important Warsaw Pact advantages, paratroopers and chemical warfare. For the
best strategic use of paratroopers, see
CGW 5.2's Strategically Speaking. In
chemical warfare, the Warsaw Pact needs
to have strategic objectives in mind, since
the doubling of the effectiveness of
airstrikes and bombardments is halved
when used against a combat group which
has previously experienced a chemical
attack. It is foolish, then, to use chemical
warfare so early in the game that its
strategic value and demoralizing effect
isn't available when NATO's defensive
forces dig in.
One last brief hint is in order. Unlike
some games (and of course, real battles)
where the same piece of land, hill or city
block is taken and retaken numerous
times, the defensive goal of NATO means
that once the Warsaw Pact forces enter a
city hex the NATO forces can never retake
it. Therefore, it is vital that the NATO
player meet the enemy before the city hex
attacks. In this way, the NATO player
may retreat into the city if he is defeated
and take full advantage of the city's
defensive terrain effects.
REFORGER '88 is an excellent game
using a free-flowing and user-friendly
system which is satisfying to play from the
initial boot to the last turn of battle. It is
the product of an incredible amount of
research and even a perusal of the list of
weapon systems makes some Pentagon
budget considerations seem clearer. The
game is destined for a great deal of playing
time and a long shelf life.
Jasper Sylvester

TWO BASKETBALL GAMES
Names:

Final Four College
Basketball
Basketball:
The Pro Game
Type:
Sports Simulations
System:
Apple
Author:
Lance Haffner
Publisher: Lance Haffner Games
P.O. Box 100594
Nashville, TN
37210

With the tremendous number of computer games hitting the market each year,
it is indeed rare to be able to point to a
release and say "one of a kind". But that's
exactly what Final Four College
Basketball and Basketball: The Pro Game
are. Both come from Lance Haffner games
and both are currently available only for
the Apple. Plans are currently being laid
for conversions to the Commodore 64 and
the IBM PC.
There are three requirements to enjoy
these two basketball simulations. First,
you must have an imagination. These
games are all text so it is imperative that
you be able to feel the excitement, hear
the squeak of the sneakers and visualize
the stuffs and the blocks in order to get a
real flavor of the sports from these games.
Second, you must be historically oriented
to the sport. The idea of seeing teams
from the past battle it out with each other
or with teams from the present has to get
the blood pumping. Finally, you need to
know the sport.
The college basketball game was the
greatest undertaking, as there are 230
teams included in the game. Over 160 are
from last season and the others are great
teams from seasons past. What makes that
such a big job is that there is no one reference work that gives all of the statistics
necessary. Putting together those teams
involved many phone calls and letters to
universities around the country.
That painstaking work makes it possible to put say last year's NCAA champions, the Georgetown Hoyas, up against the
unbeaten 1976 champion Indiana Hoosiers.
When I played that matchup, Indiana
opened an eight-point halftime lead and
held the Hoyas even in the second half for
a 76-68 win. Scott May had 24 points and
13 rebounds to lead the Hoosiers. Patrick
Ewing had 16 points and eight caroms for
the Hoyas.
In the college game, the player picks
his starting lineup and the other player (or
the computer) selects his. Each then picks
the type of defense (tight man-to-man,
sagging zone, trapping zone, match-up

zone or loose man-to-man) and whether
his team will press after each basket. On
offense, the choices are normal, safe or aggressive. There are even provisions down
the stretch for intentional fouls.
Each team is given time outs. Then,
and during dead ball situations, substitutions can be made and any of the offensive
or defensive selections can be changed. As
the game goes on, players will tire at a
rate based upon a player's real playing
time. If a tired player isn't removed, he
will become exhausted and his performance will become even poorer. As a
player waits on the bench, he will eventually become rested.
The pro game is very similar. There
are 81 teams included, going back to 1955.
The man-to-man defensive choices are;
regular, sagging, trapping, tight and loose
(zone is not available). There is also a 24second clock in the pro game, as opposed
to the college version's optional 45-second
clock. A three-point shot is also available
in the pro game.
While testing the game, the most
interesting pro matchup came when the
Wilt Chamberlain-led 1972 Lakers tested
the Kareen Abdul-Jabbar-led 1980
Lakers. The '72 version won the fourth
quarter 30-16 on its way to a 127-103
victory. The key was a whopping 64-36
rebound advantage. Chamberlain had 13
rebounds and 21 points. Gail Goodrich
had 28 points. Jabbar had 22 points but
only eight boards, but Magic Johnson had
12 points and a like number of rebounds.
The statistics printed out at game's
end are excellent. For colleges, field goals
made and attempted, free throws made
and attempted, rebounds, points and fouls
are recorded. For the pro game assists and
blocks are tallied also.
There are some problems with the
game. First, the keyboard is the only
input device. Which means both players
need to huddle around the keyboard or
one needs to be designated as the keyboard controller. Also, the computer as a
coach sometimes leaves a little to be
desired. Sometimes, for example, he will
wait to long to take out a tired player,
leaving him out of the game too long.
On the plus side there is a utility to
help you create your own college and pro
teams if you have the necessary statistics.
Overall, it is a well thought-out pair of
games that certainly fills a void in the
computer gaming world.
Rick Teverbaugh

VIDEO STOCK MARKET
NAME:
Video Stock Market
TYPE:
Strategy
Apple II Family
SYSTEM:
# PLAYERS: 1-4
AUTHOR:
Greg Berckes
PUBLISHER: Computer Adversary
Publishing
225 Ridge Court
Marion, Iowa 52302

The screen looks like the electronic
ticker tape above a trading floor of a
regional stock market and the "real time"
nature of the dynamic market environment
effectively simulates a reality missing from
many investment strategy games. The
game also offers an advantage over several
investment strategy games in that several
players may compete in the same market
environment. Those who want a "beer and
pretzels" type of investment game will be
pleased with the fast-moving and "tonguein-cheek" VIDEO STOCK MARKET
(VSM). However, it doesn't really allow
for investment simulations which reflect
actual investment conditions or for use of
a consistent strategy. In the first place,
NONE of the securities offered have a
reasonably good long-term outlook. For
example, GLASS doesn't offer much hope,
since stained-glass windows for churches is
a shrinking market. This investment is,
indeed, as the documentation notes, "...a
shattering experience." Further, who
would want to invest in a company like
FIFTH, a distillery whose executives
would like to "...drink up all the profits."
All the companies have something of
major significance wrong with them.
Perhaps, the intent of the game is for the
investor/player to examine their real-life
prospecti more carefully prior to investing.
Secondly, the lack of information and
news (other than the negative corporate
synopses provided in the short documentation) would preclude any sound investment decisions. All decisions in VSM must
be made upon market performance in a

given game and that can change far more
rapidly than in the "real" stock market.
VSM does have its interesting facets,
however. Even in the solitaire game, the
player must attempt to defeat 4 basic approaches. The first approach is that of
purchasing stock at the beginning of the
game and holding it until the end.
Timothy, another computer player, will
sell all his stock each day in order to purchase the stock which closed lowest on the
day before. Gregory, another computer
player, only buys and sells at the beginning of the week on the basis of the stock
which performed best in the previous
week. Helena, the most conservative computer opponent, simply invests her money
in a local bank and counting her interest.
The object of the game is to make the
most money in a period of 12 weeks. It's a
quick (averages 1 and 1/2 hr.) and easy
game, useful as a light and friendly
evening among other "beer and pretzel"
games.
Jasper Sylvester

BERSERKER RAIDS
Berserker Raids
Strategy/Wargame
Apple II/Atari
IBM-PC/C-64
FORMAT:
Disk
#PLAYERS:
1 or 2
AUTHORS:
Lloyd Johnson
Fred Saberhagen
$34.95
PRICE:
PUBLISHER: Berserker Works Ltd.
P.O. Box 14268
Albuquerque, NM
87191
NAME:
TYPE:
SYSTEM:

Johann Karlsen entered the bridge of
Nogara's flagship, NIRVANA. "We can't
defeat them. We need another year, at
least, to have a functional squadron. We
must retreat."
"Do you think that lifeless killing
machine is just going to allow us to
retreat? Hit them with what we've got.
It'll have to be enough!" The first lesson
one learns in Berserker Raids is that the
documentation can be deceiving. Page 8
clearly states, "Although the berserker
enters the game in year 4030 in this Trial
Game, you will probably have an additional 20 to 40 years before the berserker
discovers your planet." However, in more
than one playing of the game the berserker
arrived at Esteel (The home planet in
Saberhagen's stories, not specified in the
game) in 4030, the earliest possible arrival.
Needless to say, the conservative strategy
outlined in the documentation isn't sufficient when this occurs. In most
cases,however, one would do well to follow
the documentation carefully if one intends
to do well in playing the game.

Berserker Raids is based on the short
stories by Fred Saberhagen in the '60s
about automated killing machines who
functioned as mammoth space fortresses
with psychopathic programming. The
game itself plays similarly to Avalon Hill's
Andromeda Conquest or SSI's Imperium
Galactum in that much of the game
consists in allocating resources toward
conquering, controlling, and/or defending
a galaxy which is displayed on the screen
as a grid map. Like the games of this
genre, graphics are limited to a graphics
page title sequence and the rest of the
game is primarily a text/grid strategy
game. Like the games mentioned above,
Berserker Raids plays primarily as a
strategic level game in which resource allocations and ship design play a major part
in whether he/she will defeat the
berserker. The tactical battle depends on
some ability with naval tactics, in general,
but there are very few tactical options
open to the squadron commander or planetary defender if the strategic portion of
the game isn't played flawlessly. One
should not get the idea, however, that
Berserker Raids is a clone of those games.
Instead, BR offers 10 different scenarios,
each with a different strategic problem to
solve.
Trial Game is a typical space empire
game,except that the artificial intelligence
does attack the player's forces (which does
not occur in most space empire games). In
Talevian Outpost, the next step up from
the Trial Game, the human player is faced
with a logistics problem. He/she must
defend a planet with an out-of-date fleet
by refurbishing the fleet, even though most
of his/her fighting resources are more than
10 light years away. Asoka Pass is a scenario where the human player must expend his/her ingenuity in attempting to
consolidate the forces of five allied worlds
at the strongest base for defense and shipbuilding before the berserkers attack. The
name of the scenario seems ironic because
the human player must watch the
berserker conquer planet after planet
before the climactic battle takes place on
the chosen world. In Saberhagen's story,
Stone Place, the commander in chief of the
human forces is heavily criticized for letting the planet ATSOG be conquered,
while waiting for the bataille d' resistance
to take place. My personal favorite is the
scenario entitled, The Royalty Returns. In
this scenario, each of the human players
wants to hold the galactic throne, but the
problem is that they both need each
other's fleets intact to survive the
berserker menace. The human players
must balance the threat and the throne on
a precarious scale of strategy in order to
win.
Berserker Raids is a satisfying game on
several different levels. The solitaire version is challenging, but the addition of
another human player adds a dimension of
intrigue, negotiation, and strategy that
makes it even better. I have seen few
game systems that played equally well in
both modes and I really appreciate that.
BR is an excellent buy because it encompasses so many different types of space
games in one. The documentation is exceedingly userfriendly, as it contains stepby-step procedures, strategies, statistics,
maps and hints. It also includes the equations and probabilities upon which the

system is based on. It would be nice if
more games followed this procedure.
Berserker Works Ltd. doesn't plan to
stop at this system, however. The sequel
game to BR is Wings Out Of Shadow,
which uses a game map, as well as
adventure and arcade format in order to
simulate exploration of the Taynarus
Nebula and a possible boarding party of
berserker robots attacking your flagship,
Judith. It looks as though the publisher
plans to develop a whole line of games
which can effectively simulate all the
strategic, tactical and individual heroics in
the Berserker series. I wouldn't hesitate to
recommend Berserker Raids to any
Saberhagen or space conquest fan.
Jasper Sylvester

TIMESHIP
NAME:
TYPE:
SYSTEM:
FORMAT:
#PLAYERS:
AUTHORS:
PRICE:
PUBLISHER:

Timeship
Role-Playing Adventure
Apple II
Disk
1-4
Jamie Su
Herbie Brennan
$44.95
Five Star Software
P. 0. Box 631
Elk Grove Village, IL
60007

Judith Kane knelt on the dais and
carefully read the plaque mounted below
the coffin. "Murder Most Fowl!" the inscription read. "Hmm!" thought Kane
with her best Sam Spade cynicism showing
through, "looks like I'll be able to pin this
one on Howard the Duck." She left the
dais and braved the mist which surrounded it, while Bertram Trenchcoat, an
amazingly inept android assistant, followed. Suddenly, (most violence takes
place suddenly in a 20th Century mystery), a band of mist dwellers attack.
Judith fired her trusty Smith & Wesson,
only to discover that she had missed the
short, squat mist dweller who was closing
on her. "Drat," she cursed in a 1940's euphemism, "Sam Spade wouldn't have
missed!" The mist dweller attacked and
slashed her knee. "Wasn't it supposed to
be a blackjack to the back of the head?"
She fired again and watched the attacking
mist dweller fall to the orange colored dust
in agonizing death, then wheeled to face
the next attacker.
TIMESHIP (TS) isn't just another adventure game. It's a role-playing system.
In TS, the player(s) are allowed to travel
the time stream through an ancient
knowledge of mind power and universal
energy. The documentation for the system
is excellent in establishing the parameters
for the game milieu. The conception of the
timestream is interesting, being dissimilar

to such systems as portrayed by Poul
Anderson (ANNALS OF THE TIME
PATROL), Gordon Eklunds (SERVING
IN TIME), Clifford Simak
(MASTODONIA), or Robert Silverberg
(UP THE LINE). It looks like it will be a
wide open game system, as a result.
Unlike many systems which are restricted
to a certain time frame, the task and/or
adventure modules which are to be published at a later date will be free to explore
any historical or ahistorical era.
The documentation aids the first time
player in setting up the system by guiding
the novice through the process of creating
a data and player disk. The player disk
will be able to hold character files for up
to 10 players. After creating the data and
player disks, the program prepares the
player for play and allows the character
generation process (Time Traveller's Guild
Registration) to begin. Like many roleplaying systems, TS begins by quantifying
attributes. Unlike some RPG systems, the
quantities by which the basic attributes
are described are player determined (not
randomly assigned). These attributes are:
Strength, Charisma, Dexterity, Endurance,
and Intelligence. The experienced RPG
player will be familiar with their functions
within the system. All five attributes
begin with a value of 50 (below average)
and the player has 60 points to spend in
creating the character (60 pts. is average,
70 pts. = above average, 90 pts. = exceptional quality and 99 pts. is the maximum
allowed). Next, the player gets to modify
his combat skills. Each weapon skill
(knife, sword (lt.-hvy.), bow, spear, mace,
battle axe, revolver, sub-machine gun,

laser pistol etc.) has a Weapons To Hit
Number (WTHN) which reflects the character's proficiency with that weapon
(within 19 different categories). Each
WTHN begins at 60 and, since the lower
the WTHN the more likely a character is
to hit, the player is given 60 points to
subtract from the 19 WTHN categories.
That concludes the character generation
(or Guild Registration) process.
Next, in the tradition of most roleplaying systems, the player has the
responsibility of equipping his character.
Of course, it makes a difference where one
is going in time as to what he/she will
need on the adventure. In MURDER AT
THE END OF TIME, the introductory
module which is packaged with the basic
system, the player is warned that
weaponry is probably limited to 20th
century standard detective issue. The
player is also warned in the module fact
sheet that many objects which were
brought into the Timestream will be lost
or will decrease in effectiveness. These
factors and the opportunity to choose
one's own equipment enhance the interest
in this game.

occasions where it might be advantageous
to do something destructive in order to
escape or investigate, but the program will
simply not let one do so. The spelling
errors are also distracting. It is highly unlikely that the deceased was killed with a
wooden "steak," unless it was stage prop
food with a very sharp edge. Further, one
is given the impression I noted at the
beginning of this review that the phrase,
"Murder Most Fowl," is an important clue.
Watch the spelling errors and avoid frustration.
I am impressed with TS as a potentially interesting game system, but was
disappointed with the way the introductory module failed to make use of the
strengths of the system. One can only
hope that the future task (where the character must perform one action, i.e. assassination, rescue, etc.) and adventure (where
the character is allowed to explore a time
milieu in order to solve a given problem)
modules will use more of the built-in features of the system. If the future modules
will exploit those strengths, Five Star will
give Infocom some terrific competition.
Jasper Sylvester
Circle Reader Service #40

Alas, the introductory module is not
nearly as well executed as the game system. The game system requires consideration of one's "Charisma" value, but
interaction with NPC's and suspects is
exceedingly limited. For example, at one
point the character meets a nymph in the
woods. In attempting to initiate any form
of dialogue and/or interrogation with her,
the character is put off with the statement
that she isn't to talk to strangers. At
another point, when the character tries to
interrogate the "butler" of the deceased, he
is told that Igorr can't hear. Further, one
would think that after all the time spent
on creating a combat ready character that
one would be able to initiate combat. This
is not always true. If one attempts to
attack Igorr, the player is told that Igorr
isn't affected by the character's attack on
his knee. I find it difficult to believe that
a revolver bullet is going to be ignored as a
pathetic attack, even if it is directed at the
victim's knee. Why create an elaborate
and well-thought out combat system in
order to use it against mist dwellers and
not against obstacles to one's investigation.
Even the module has some nice features, however. I particularly enjoyed
seeing what the program does when an
obscenity is typed in. The program says ,
"Say you're sorry, you silly fool." It will
not accept any further input from the keyboard until the word, "sorry," is entered. I
also found the graphics in the module and
the fast-scrolling text pages for the basic
system to be esthetically pleasing.
However, the module contains too many
dead ends, some which act like a deus ex
machina. For example, knowing that to
press a certain button causes the character
to fall through an iris opening and into the
cargo hold of an alien vessel, Judith Kane
tied a rope to a stationary object and
pushed the button. When Judith couldn't
find an exit from the cargo hold, she
started to climb out on the rope, only to
have an unseen mist dweller pull the rope
up and out of her reach, moments before
she grasped it. Further, there are many

ZENJI
Name:
Type:
System:
Publisher:

Zenji
Abstract
C-64
Activision
Mountain View,CA

Many people play video games in
search of the "flow" experience--that
near-mystical experience where you forget
yourself, where you and the game become
one and your flawless performance seems
to come from somewhere deep inside you.
Some find it in Defender, others in
Centipede or Pac-Man. How wonderful it
was to find it in an elegant, beautifully
crafted game named Zenji.
Zenji is a delight to both the senses
and the mind. Its object is simple
enough--to connect a grid of T, I and Lshaped pieces to a central section by
rotating so as to create pathways. Pieces
connected to a central "source" turn green;
along the path available to it; when you
get to the center of a piece, you can rotate
it by holding down the joystick button
and moving the joystick right or left (I
tested the Atari 400/800 version). You
start with five "faces" and "lose face"
(groan!) when the timer at the bottom of
the screen goes to zero or when you are
touched by the Spirits of Illusion
(wandering adversaries that appear at
higher levels) or the Flames of Desire they
sometimes shoot at you. And while a
delicate, oriental tune enhances game play,

an urgent, concentration-breaking dit-dit
sound appears at higher levels. You score
points for touching vanishing bonus pieces
and for connecting all pieces to the source
in the lease amount of time.
Though the game seems leisurely, it is
not. It is a puzzle with a time limit. The
puzzle itself is exquisite because any move
(rotating a piece) changes pieces across the
width of the board. With ten seconds on
the clock and one piece unconnected, you
may suddenly realize that several key
pieces must be reoriented to provide a different set of paths that reconnect all the
pieces--and when your hands make that
connection on the last second while your
brain stares dully in indecision, you know
you've accomplished something.
As with most videogames, you must
play several rounds of Zenji before you
stop feeling intimidated by it.
Fortunately, the first two levels are 3-by4; the later levels get larger (up to 7-by-6)
and faster. Your first scores will be 2,000
to 4,000 but you will soon progress to
game scores of 7,000 to 10,000. My highest score so far is around 16,000, and a
friend has (sigh) doubled that.
This game is not for everyone. It left
about half the people unimpressed, but
delighted and overwhelmed the rest.
Unfortunately, there is no "pause" key for
the game. For a slow learner like me, I
wanted time to pause between levels (well,
to study the board, actually) but I suspect
the game was done this way to prevent insight into the design of successive levels.
Also, on the Atari version, you cannot
start the next game by hitting the fire
button. You must reach over to the computer and hit the start button.
Finally, I have two strategy hints to
maximize your score, go for the vanishing
bonus pieces as quickly as you can without
risking losing a life--you will never get
high scores by completing levels alone.
Second, one way to survive the dangerous
"illusion" adversaries on the higher levels
is to quickly isolate at least one of them in
an unconnected corner of the board. Done
correctly, you can interconnect most of the
board, then, by turning a key piece, connect the remaining portion and thus end
the level before the adversary can touch
you.

If you like geometric puzzles and
games like Othello, you should like Zenji.
It is a potential classic and gives exceptional value for the money.
Gregg Williams

Name of the Game, Dispatches, Come Cast a Spell,
Learning Game, Commodore
Key, and Strategically
Speaking are all on vacation
this issue. They will return.

SQUIRE
NAME:
TYPE
SYSTEM:
FORMAT:
# PLAYERS:
AUTHOR:
PRICE:
PUBLISHER:

Squire
Strategy
Many
Diskette
1
Jim Zuber
Varies with system
Blue Chip Software
Woodland Hills, CA

"I'm tired of playing this game. It
doesn't have anything to do with reality!"
If you've ever felt that way about financial
strategy games, you've never played any of
Blue Chip Software's simulations. Each
new program reflects more and more
sophisticated investment mechanisms.
SQUIRE is another step up from
MILLIONAIRE (reviewed in CGW 3.2)
and its fascinating cousins, TYCOON and
BARON (reviewed in CGW 4.3).
However, where MILLIONAIRE only
allowed investments in the stock market,
TYCOON only allowed investments in
commodities, and BARON only allowed
investments in real estate, SQUIRE recognizes that the astute investor uses more
than one medium of financial manipulation
and needs a balance of investments to be
successful. Therefore, SQUIRE uses a
combination of the three former games and
then some. In addition to common stocks,
commodities, and real estate, the investor
is now allowed to invest in bonds, collectibles, money market accounts, IRA's,
oil and gas exploration, and cattle feeding.
The latter three items are extremely
significant from a tax shelter perspective
and one of the important features of
SQUIRE is the necessity of being sensitive
to tax liability and how to reduce it.
Further, SQUIRE has a "reality mode"
option which allows "player-investors to
input their actual investments, income
needs, and interim goals in order to test
their financial planning against several of
SQUIRE's market environments. Once
again, Blue Chip has given us a tutorial, as
well as a game.
Friends of the other Blue Chip family
simulations will be comfortable with the
format of SQUIRE. It features the same
basic sequence of general graph (of the
economy), Financial News summary, price
change summary, historical graphs, and
command mode. It has added a retirement
status bar graph to aid the player's evaluation of his/her investment strategy's
performance. There is also an improvement in the game mechanics. It appears
that the Financial News, while still important, is not as easily interpreted or functional as in MILLIONAIRE or TYCOON.
This was the only flaw in TYCOON, since
an astute player could tell exactly what
was going to happen from the concentrated bits and pieces of the news. Instead
of giving the player more "red herrings" to

choose from (as is most often the case in
the real financial press), Zuber has chosen
to give the player less overt indicators.
This adds rather than subtracts from the
realism.
Those who enjoy playing BARON and
are amused by the unexpected events,
which make one both chuckle and groan at
the same time, will be pleased to note that
they are also in SQUIRE. After all, one
can't foresee every emergency in planning
for one's financial future, can one? The
strategies which may be found useful in
the other simulations (like "dollar cost
averaging" in CGW 3.2 and the fundamentalist approach in CGW 4.3) are
workable in SQUIRE, but one must also
keep a wary eye on the tax liability. It is
possible to make sound investments in
SQUIRE and still lose money, due to the
tax burden (sounds a little like real life,
doesn't it?). One should be particularly
aware of the tax advantages of cattle
feeding and oil and gas exploration before
playing the game (See pages 54-57 of the
documentation). The tax information
alone is eye-opening enough to make
playing the simulation worthwhile.
SQUIRE is an excellent simulation
within a series of excellent simulations. As
a game, it is slower moving than TYCOON
and MILLIONAIRE, but faster paced than
BARON. It still suffers from the solitaire
nature of the game, but is (like its progenitors) as much a learning experience as a
game. Those who have enjoyed the other
titles in this series will enjoy SQUIRE.
Johnny Wilson

Allied forces in red and French forces in
blue and I took the role of Napoleon
against a computer controlled Wellington.
In the upper right corner was a game clock
which showed 11:15 A M. At my disposal
were 70,000 French troops including
Infantry, Cavalry, and Artillery. The
computer had about 6,000 fewer soldiers
but its forces were entrenched along a
ridge line centered at the town of La Haye
Sainte, where 350 of the Kings German
troops were strongly dug in. Napoleon's
plan had called for heavy bombardment of
the British center , then cavalry charges to
expose the enemy positions, and finally a
direct attack by the Imperial Guard. I
decided to try the same plan. After
pressing the space bar to start the game
clock, I used my joystick to position the
cursor over the forward gun battery and
ordered it to open fire on La Haye Sainte.
Using the same procedure, I began to
order my corps to their necessary positions
for an attack against the town and the
supporting units around it. As the
minutes ticked off the game clock, my
artillery opened fire and the corps began
to move. There was no movement of any
kind from Wellington's positions. When I
felt that everyone was in place, I ordered
the first attack on La Haye Sainte. I
watched in amazement as 4,100 troops
failed to close with 350 King's Germans
and then began an uncontrolled retreat,
their only objective being someplace away
from the enemy. The rest of the afternoon
went much the same way. Eventually, a
charge by the Imperial Cavalry broke the

Continued on pg. 45

NAPOLEON AT WATERLOO
NAME:
TYPE:
SYSTEM:
#PLAYERS:
PRICE:
AUTHOR:
PUBLISHER:

Napoleon at Waterloo
Wargame
Atari (32K)
One
$34.95
Steve Krentek
Krentek Software
Kansas City, KS

The endless rain poured down as
Napoleon paced nervously in front of his
command tent. Before him lay the 64,000
well entrenched men of Wellington's Allied
Army. On his right, and still several hours
away, the leading elements of the Prussian
Army continued their advance. Napoleon
knew that if he did not attack soon the
Prussian and Allied forces would be able to
join and the grand dreams for France
would all be smashed. Slowly the sky
began to clear and at 11:30AM, five and a
half hours after he had planned, Napoleon
began the attack that opened the Battle of
Waterloo.
After loading Napoleon at Waterloo,
(NAW) my Atari screen displayed the

GAMES/NEVER SEE (cont.)
Another command, the LOAD FILE command,
captured the true essence of excellent user friendly
software design. The command is supposed to load
a file designated by the user. In my DOS, however,
the player/victim who is unfortunate enough to
enter a LOAD FILE command is first asked to
name the file to be loaded. So far everything is
normal. Upon providing this information, however,
the player is then asked, "ARE YOU SURE?
(Y/N)". This is somewhat abnormal for a command
of this type, but most people have seen it before,
so the player/victim types "Y" and continues. The
program then asks, "THE ENTIRE FILE? (Y/N)".
This is definitely nonstandard. But the
player/victim is a patient person; he mumbles
something to himself and presses "Y". He is of
course asked, "ARE YOU SURE? (Y/N)". If he has
the patience to type "Y", he is at last rewarded with
the question, "WHAT FILE WAS THAT AGAIN?".
My creative urge was not to be stifled by the
fainthearted protestations of those less enlightened
than I. When the hit movie "E.T." was released, I
along with millions of others dabbed away my tears
when little E.T. died and cheered when he
recovered. And as I left the theater, warm of heart
and wet of eye, I knew that I had to design a great
game around this noble tale. After weeks of
creative agony, I had my design.
The game starts with a simple landscape and a
blue sky. In the remote distance, a tiny brown dot
is moving toward the viewer. As it approaches, it
grows larger until the player can recognize it--why,
it's little E.T.! He is speaking to the player! "Home!"
he says longingly, "E.T. phone home!" As he nears
the player, he stretches his little arms out in
supplication. Just then the player hits the trigger
button on his joystick. Two powerful turbolaser
bolts from the bottom of the screen converge on
E.T., blasting him into little bits that float
downward.
At this point, the player hears a cry from the
side of the screen. "E.T.! What has happened to
you, E.T.?" A little boy emerges from the side of
the screen and runs toward the center. It's little
Elliot! As he reaches the center of the screen, the
player again hits the trigger, reuniting Elliot with
E.T. The player is awarded points for picking off
Elliot's baseball cap as it floats down.
When my E.T. game failed to win the critical
acclaim it so richly deserved, I turned my attention
to another game. This game, called "AIRSPACE
DEFENDER", is best described through the
advertising blurb I prepared:
"This is THE action-packed game of
aerial combat! It puts YOU in the
cockpit of a high-performance SU- 15
fighter, locked in a duel to the death
with a deadly unarmed Boeing 747
loaded with hundreds of ferocious
passengers!"
My agent assures me that he can sell millions in
a certain foreign country...

CRUSADE/EUROPE (cont.)
men and tanks as the basis for a unit's strength,
and modifies that raw value by its training and
combat experience. Both the computer's actions as
commander and each individual unit's performance
are affected by the quality of the army's leadership,
so I had to study the abilities of each of the commanders and rate his inclination to attack or
defend, his orientation towards combat versus territorial objectives, and his ability to attack, defend,
and maneuver. All the usual features of wargames
-- terrain maps, orders of battle, initial deployments, and orders of appearance -- required
detailed research, and special events and anomalous
situations, like airdrops and the invention of Rhino
tanks, required special rules. The Rhino tanks, for
example, were tanks with steel prongs welded to
the front that could plow through the Norman
hedgerows. To reflect their effect, the value of
hedgerows as defensive terrain decreases in late
July, when they appeared in large numbers.
A second type of research focused on the
broader outlines of the campaign. To me, the most
important thing in designing the simulation was not
to stuff in a mass of detail for its own sake, but to
recreate the operational situations that confronted
the historical commanders. I wanted each variant
of each scenario, even those involving "what if" situations, to play within historically justifiable
parameters, and thereby convey an understanding
of the opportunities and constraints the actual participants faced, or would have faced. To do so, I
had to get a feel for the pace of events and an
understanding of their causes. For instance, in the
first versions of the Normandy scenario the Allies
were generally able to break out by early July,
almost a month earlier than they did in reality. It
took much playtesting and repeated modifications
to recreate the conditions that underlay the historical pattern of events. Every game does not play
just like history, of course, but the player does face
the same sorts of decisions as the historical commanders.
A game should be fun as well as informative, so
I devoted considerable effort in development to
adjusting the victory conditions to create tense and
balanced situations. I also created scenarios with
widely varying lengths, so that players can learn the
system with short scenarios that have relatively few
units, entertain themselves for an hour or three at a
time with the intermediate scenarios, and extend
their play over days or weeks with the twelve-plus
hour campaign scenario.
The manual is long, but most of its information
is not necessary in order to play and enjoy the
game. The rules are divided into a short section
("How to Play") and a longer section ("How to Play
Well"), and much of the documentation is historical
commentary, a bibliography, and information about
the scenarios. A laminated center insert with a
color map and a few simple tables is included for
quick reference.
Creating Crusade in Europe was an exciting and
satisfying process for both Sid and me. I hope that
wargamers will feel the same about playing it.

SILICON (cont.)
and would seldom get a chance to work all the way
up to "risk danger". Likewise, someone with high
bravery would by default "risk danger" and would
have to miss a lot of rolls to sink down to "run
away".
Another possible effect of the PA level would
be to influence the margin. For example, if the
NPC has a low bravery level and has moved up the
mood track to "confront", then the "left margin"
could shrink and the "right margin" could grow.
This would decrease the likelihood of him
continuing to move up and increase the chance of
him moving back down to his normal state. Other
such adjustments could be made to suit your own
models.
INTERACTING WITH YOU
So far, everything we've talked about has dealt
with the NPC reacting to events in the game. One
of our goals, though, was to add a social element to
the game by having the NPC interact with you.
What are some of the ways in which this could
happen?
Well, the first level is by creating the events to
which the NPC reacts. If you're heavily armed and
have a couple of friends with you, and the NPC
has a low bravery level, then he might decide to
run away. On the other hand, if you're by yourself
and he has friends, then he might decide to attack-and you might consider running away.
A more personal (and subtle) way is through
some sort of conversation. In SunDog, we set up
what we called "push-button dialogue", where you
had a set of responses for each given situation. For
example, when you are confronted by robbers, you
can agree to give them your money, or you can
refuse. If you refuse, you then have the option of
explaining why by (1) claiming you have no cash,
(2) threatening them, (3) fast talking your way out.
A similar, but more complex method could be
used. Your options would be the same as the
options on the mood tracks. You might select the
bravery track, then offer "apologize" as your action.
You might, in fact, pick options from several
tracks. The NPC would then adjust all his mood
tracks as a result of your action(s), and the current
situation would be re-evaluated.
Likewise, you might put forth ideas or
arguments that appeal to the NPC's attributes. If
he's greedy, offer him money; if he's chivalrous,
tell him that someone needs to be helped. Those
offers, tested against the NPC's attributes, would
determine just what his actions will be.
I've really only given the barest essentials on
adding personality to your game. It's up to you to
make it all work for your particular game. I'd like
to end with an excerpt from a film we all know;
think about how this conversation might have been
modelled by a system like the one we've gone over:
L: "We've got to help her."
H: "No, look, don't get any funny ideas. The
old man wants us to wait right here... I'm not
going anywhere..."
L: "But they're going to kill her!"
H: "Better her than me. . ."

L: "She's rich."
H: "Rich?"
L: "Yes. Rich, powerful! Listen, if you were to
rescue her, the reward would be..."
H: "What?"
L: "Well, more wealth than you can imagine."
H: "I don't know. I can imagine quite a bit."
L: "You'll get it!"
H: "I'd better!"
L: "You will. . ."
H: "All right, kid. But you'd better be right
about this!"
[Excerpt from The Art
Ballantine Books, 1979.]

of Star Wars,

pp. 84-85,

As an exercise, you might assign PA levels for
both the characters above, set up the mood tracks,
and try to imagine just what kinds of rolls and tests
lead both characters into rushing into a detention
cell to rescue a captured princess.
I hope that you've enjoyed this excursion into
social behavior in games. More importantly, I hope
that you've come away with some good ideas as to
how to implement these ideas in your own games.
Maybe your design will be the one to turn the "cold
dead hand of an algorithm" into a human face
staring from the other side of the screen.
When Bruce Webster is not busy writing Silicon
Cerebrum he is an editor with Byte Magazine and
designs computer games such as his popular
Sundog.

CHICKAMAUGA (cont.)

SPORTS (cont.)

the tactical screen for individual Brigade movement. The tactical screen also shows the current hex
number the cursor is in, the total casualties, and the
current score. The score starts at two thousand,
with anything above that being a Confederate victory and below that being a Union victory. Points
are accumulated by killing the enemy or controlling
specially marked victory hexes. When all orders are
finished, the computer will switch to the "Both
Sides" strategic screen and show you the movement
and combat as it occurs. You may review the resolution as many times as you want. If you have set
the visibility option "On" then only those Brigades
which the enemy can see will appear on the resolution, otherwise, all units will be seen. There are
two night turns which represent six hours each. At
night you may build fortifications or receive
enhanced benefit from resting. After 13 turns the
game ends and the final score is shown.

Characters are given a name and then a random set
of characteristics. To improve they must gain experience on the mat and workout in the dojo.
Personalized instructors and strategic combat
sequences are just a few of the program's many
highlights.

STRATEGY
The Player's manual contains some very good
hints on strategy and tactics. The South must devise
an overall attack strategy while the North may
simply form a defensive line and then react to
Southern thrusts. This means the computer plays
the North very well but seems to lack the killer
instinct when it is the South. Since I'm a blood and
guts kind of General, I prefer to take the South and
use a strategy which calls for moving directly West
and cutting off the main Northern force from the
reinforcements arriving on the South edge of the
map during the first four turns. My objectives for
the first day are two fold;, first, to control the area
around Viniard's Field, and second, to have some
fresh reserves to throw into the battle during the
night turns allowing my exhausted Brigades some
rest. On the second day I renew the attack with the
objective of breaking up the Northern Brigades and
defeating them in detail. This strategy relies heavily
on being able to surround enemy Brigades without
getting surrounded myself. It's amazing how few
casualties I receive and how many I may inflict
when attacking a surrounded opponent. Surrounding
is almost a pre-requisite when attacking Union
forces stacked with Mounted Infantry. MI's are
armed with the Sharps 7 shot carbines and are quite
capable of stacking up many grey uniformed
bodies. Although this strategy does not take me
very far North, it does rack up an impressive body
count which translates to a high Southern score.
SUMMARY
To me, any computer wargame is composed of
two parts. The first part is the physical implementation of the game design and the second part is
how well the design models the battle. Very few
games can do both well. BOC is one that can. A lot
of effort has gone into making this game playable,
including the interchangeable use of joystick or
keyboard, and the optional use of fatigue, morale,
visibility, and communications, making the game
enjoyable by novice and expert alike. The turn
resolution is very quick but still gives a nice "feel"
for what happened. Overall, I feel that GDW has a
good first entry to the world of computer gaming.
Circle Reader Service #46

OLYMPICS
Microsoft Decathlon; Microsoft; Apple. Despite
the age of this program, it still has to rank in the
top 10 of all sports games for its creativity and
competitive fire. Almost every event requires the
mastering of a different hand-eye coordination.
However, I sometimes worry about my keyboard
holding up during the sprints.
Summer Games; Epyx; Apple, C-64. An absolutely beautiful program graphically, with a nice
competitive feel to it. You can pick the country
your athlete will represent and then go into action.
The skeet shooting is a bit of a downer, but the
diving sequence alone is worth the price of the
program. A second set of events is coming out and
I hope it can be run in sequence with the original.
TENNIS
On-Court Tennis; Gamestar; C-64. Tennis has
been much maligned in video games since the first
pong game. This outing is so unlike anything on
the market that it sparkles in its solitude. The
computer takes care of the positioning of the player
and all you need to do is pick the shot. That
makes OCT a real strategy test with arcade overtones. There are different player characteristics
from which to choose.
Tournament Tennis; Imagic; C-64. Position of
the player controls what type of shot is attempted
this time around. The position of the ball in relation to the racket controls the direction of the shot.
There are several skill levels and the ball boy racing out to get errant shots is a nice feature. Now
if I could only get the same service for my real
games.
HOCKEY
Slap Shot; Artworx; C-64. Nobody has yet
made a statistical game on the sport, but this arcade
version does capture the chilling excitement of the
sport. Its one flaw is that there is no computer
opponent. Otherwise, the graphics are clean and
fluid, a must for any attempt to recreate this fastmoving action.
RUNNING
Lead Pack Marathon; Lead Pack Software;
Apple. A marathon running game sounds like a
colossal bore. But this program isn't bad at all. It's
easy to play. All that's needed is to pick a runner,
set your target time for the first mile and off you
go. The graphics are colorful, if not terribly informative. The program keeps track of your stamina.
Play against computer-controlled runners or a
whole pack of human foes.

SCORPIA

(cont.)

you make your way across the board. If
you capture them, they will have to give
you clues. If they capture you, you will
have to answer a question or give them
something to get back some items they
take from you. Since you've gotten this
far, you should have no problems in this
area.
However, there are a few traps along
the way, and it could take more than one
try to get through all the way to the
portal leading to the Cave Master. Just
map carefully and keep at it, restoring
when necessary to save time. I'll tell you a
little secret: no matter which of the three
doors you start from, you'll eventually end
up in the same place, the pasture.
Now, the pasture is one of the tricky
parts. I suggest that you don't rush into
doing anything right away. In fact, hang
out for awhile, and let yourself get
captured. The answer to the question in
this case is absurdly easy, and you'll get
something important back.
You may have noticed that there is no
apparent exit from the pasture. However,
everything you need to get out is right
there. This includes the items in the
saddlebag. And the loquacious toad should
have given you a pretty broad hint on
what needs to be done. As before, don't
leave anything lying around.
When you get out of the pasture, you
will arrive at just about the last obstacle,
the trench of zombies. Very unpleasant
creatures. The solution to this is also
unpleasant; the toad will explain it to you.
Beyond the trench lies the hatch to the
room that contains the portal to the Cave

Master. Talk to the Red King; you have
one more riddle (or is it a poem?) to
complete. The answer to this one can also
be found in the book that came with the
game. You should examine the portal
carefully; you'll see attached to it the disc
that has been so important in the game.
However, you can't just take it; you have
to speak the name of the player (Number
14) to obtain it. Once you have the disc,
you can proceed beyond the portal, where,
at long last, you will get the Wheel of
Wisdom, the object of your quest! Just
make sure you do what the Cave Master
tells you, and quickly, too!
Whew! Looks like you saved the world,
after all! All this running around inside
other people's minds can really be
confusing, so before I forget, here is the
player's name: BDG CJYBZN.
If you have an adventure game
question (or two), you can reach me in the
following ways:
On the Source: SMAIL to ST1030.
On CompuServe: GO GAM-310.
By US Mail (remember to enclose a
self-addressed, stamped envelope if you
live in the United States):
Scorpia
P.O. Box 338
Gracie Station
New York, NY 10028
And that just about wraps up this
issue's Tale; see you next time, and Happy
Adventuring!

Penguin Software
830 4th Avenue
PO Box 311
Geneva, IL 60134
312-232-1984
SWORD OF KADASH: A fantasy
action adventure with real-time
animation. This is a role-playing game
with a mission to retrieve the
enchanted Sword of Kadash. 200 rooms
and passages to explore, different
difficulty levels to choose from. The
player increases in strength with each
successful encounter. Apple. C-64.
$ 34.95.
Circle Reader Service #48
Sierra On-Line
Sierra On-Line Bldg.
Coarsegold, CA 93614
209-683-6858
KING'S QUEST II - ROMANCING
THE THRONE: The second in a line of
animated adventure games by Sierra.
The series centers on the life of Sir
Graham and his treks across the
Kingdom of Daventry. The interactive

story is presented in full color,
animated, three-dimensional graphics
and scored with multipart music and
sound effects. King's Quest attempts
to merge the best aspects of text
adventures with the graphics of arcade
games. The animated graphics are
quite simply the best we have ever
seen on a home computer. IBM PC
and JR.
Circle Reader Service #49
Strategic Simulations Inc
883 Stierlin Road, Bldg A-200
Mountain View, CA 94043
800-227-1617
OPERATION MARKET GARDEN:
Yet another fine Gary Grigsby design.
Similar play mechanics to War in
Russia and Breakthrough Ardennes.
Very realistic action as the British
armored 30th Corps desperately
attempts to reach the beleaguered
Airborne units holding the way open
to the Rhine. Supply lines are critical
and engineers are essential to the
progress of the 30th. The historical

aspects are faithfully reproduced.
Apple. Atari. C-64.

MicroProse Software
120 Lakefront Drive
Hunt Valley, MD 21030
301-667-1151
KENNEDY APPROACH: This game is
one of the first simulations to include a
realistic speech generator. The Air
Traffic Controller hears his
instructions and the pilot's response as
radio messages are exchanged between
ground control and jet planes
(including the Concorde) and private
planes. A player begins as a trainee
ATC at one of five real-life airports.
Play is real-time. Variables include
bad weather, mountains, aircraft
distance separation, restricted zones
and fuel. Not as detailed as Flight
Simulator but still a very good
simulation of a demanding job. Atari,
C-64.

NAPOLEON (cont.)
defenders at La Haye Sainte, but by then
the Prussians had begun to arrive and it
was much to late to salvage the situation.
The actual game had taken a little over an
hour to play.
NAW is a real-time game played
without benefit of phases, turns, or
expenditure of operation points. You
simply use the joystick to position the
cursor over the unit you wish to move,
press the fire button and move the cursor
to where you would like the unit to be.
Releasing the fire button records the move
order and slowly the unit moves. Infantry
requires 8 minutes to cross an open area,
15 minutes to move through woods, and 11
minutes to move through a farm or village.
Light Cavalry, Heavy Cavalry, and
Artillery are measured the same way with
more or less time required to cross a given
area. You may give as few or as many
orders as you wish and, as time passes,
they will be carried out. Since only one
unit at a time may occupy any given
space, if you order a unit to pass through
another unit, the unit will stop and
attempt to move around the blocking unit.
If you move an infantry unit so that it
stops adjacent to an enemy unit then
musket combat will result. Musket fire will
continue (it takes about a minute to
reload) until one of the units either
retreats or is ordered to close for hand-tohand combat. You may examine the units
as the battle occurs and watch the
progress by counting the reduction in
numbers of soldiers. As the battle
continues, one unit or the other may
become disorganized and eventually
routed. A disorganized unit loses half its
combat value while a routed unit will not
fight at all and simply seeks the quickest
exit from the battle area. The program
considers a number of factors when
determining combat losses, including
allowing stationary units to fire first, the
number and type of troops, and the morale
of the combat troops involved. Corps with
poor morale are close to becoming disorganized and will not have much fight in
them. Movement and combat continues
until the game clock reads 9:00PM. You
may then press the "Option" button to get
a score. The score is based on the number
of casualties. A score of 100,000 is a
French victory. The best I have yet to see
is 78,000.
The mechanics are easy to master and
the game responds quickly to the joystick.
Each of the French corps have the names
of their commanders and I often find
myself trying to re-play historical
situations. The computer opponent simulates Wellington's strategy in that it will
fall back when attacked, except in the
center, and will almost never attack you.
The British left will collapse toward the
center while the right seems to fall back.
This means you can separate the right
flank. The playing area is small and the
game somewhat short, but we are talking
about recreating the Battle of Waterloo
not Napoleon's campaigns. The game has
no difficulty options and you must play
Napoleon against a computer controlled
Wellington.
This game has a lot going for it.
Mark Bausman

There were 387 RIDs turned in by
press time for this issue.
All games in this issue's RID rating are
newly rated. The breakdown by machine
was: Apple--45%; Atari--41%; C-64-18%; IBM--8%; Other--3%. Note that
total percentage is over 100% since many
respondents had more than one type of
computer.
The Game Ratings below list games
rated by our readers. for a game to be included in this listing it must first have
been offered for rating in our regular
R.I.D. rating system. Games offered for
evaluation are those covered in the magazine, those having a good sales record
during the time of evaluation, or those
which were previously rated and we think
need updating. Once offered for evaluation, the game must have been evaluated
by a sufficient number of readers to be included in the results. Any game not evaluated by at least 10% of the respondents
was not included in the results.
Games were rated on a scale of 1
(terrible) to 9 (outstanding). Respondents
were asked to consider such things as
PRESENTATION (graphics, sound, packaging, documentation); GAME DESIGN
(design, playability, interesting?); LIFE
(does the game wear well?)

RID #20 (use card at page 40)
On this page a number of games are
listed for evaluation. Use the guidelines
above for game evaluation (i.e.
PRESENTATION, DESIGN, LIFE). for
each game you rate place a 1 through 9

next to the appropriate number. Leave
blank any game which you have not
played enough to have formed an opinion.

I

