April 1989

Number 58

Features
Desert Rats
The Game, Not The T.V. Show / M. Evan Brooks

Jetfighter
Velocity's Simulation, Not The Plane / Daniel Hockman

Activision's "F-14 Tomcat"
The Plane, Not The Animal / Brad Bombardiere

Annals of Rome

7
7
12
12
16
16
22

"Wayne Gretzky Hockey," Eh!

38

The Game, Not The Player / Johnny L. Wilson

Gold Rush

59

Sierra Explores The Mother Lode / Michael Chaut

Scavenger Hunt Results

61

Scavenger, Not Scavanger

PSS' Epochal Epic, Not The Encyclical / M. Evan Brooks 22

Scorpion's Mail

24

Hints on "Manhunter," "Ultima V," and VII More / Scorpia 24

Techno-Cop
U.S. Gold's Disk, Not The Detective / David M. Wilson

The Magic Candle
Mindcraft's Program, Not The Paraffin / Scorpia

Computer Cavalcade of Sports
CGW's Second Annual Sports Survey / Wyatt Lee

Mindscape's "Captain Blood"
Science Fiction, Not Swashbuckling / Kevin C. Rohrer

27
27
28
28
32
32
35
35

Departments
Letters
Taking a Peek
Rumor Bag
Inside the Industry
Conversions Received
Back Issues
Reader Input Device
CGW Hall of Fame
Game Ratings

4
8
10
14
41
57
63
63
64

Letters

For publishers, it's also very costly to
produce and market games. When
development, marketing, advertising and
production are included, it costs
anywhere between $250,000 and
$500,000 to introduce a new product.
After retailers and distributors take their
share of the purchase price, the publisher
receives in the range of $12 to $20 per
copy sold to cover its cost and profits. In
addition, publishers must support their
products with new updates and offer
telephone and network support for users.

Low Shelf "ST"eem
When the Atari ST first came out, many
of us thought that the Atari would become the best-selling personal computer.
Just as the Commodore C64 when it first
came out, the Atari ST represented state
of the art technology at a cost that
everybody could afford. Programmers
naturally gravitated towards the ST because of its low cost and high performance. But the Atari ST has suffered
from both a lack of software and poor
market positioning. Its fate has been
much the same as that of the Atari
400/800 (which was light-years ahead of
the C64 in many ways): a great machine
with little or no support. Those who
bought Atari STs were quickly forced to
band together through networks and
user groups.
Talking to Atari users, we learned many
wanted to see our best-selling air combat
simulator, Falcon, converted to the Atari
ST. They also wanted us to take full advantage of the machine's capability,
rather than doing just a simple conversion from the Macintosh or IBM in the
way that many other titles have been converted.
Many of our competitors warned us that
releasing an ST product would be a
money loser. We were told that within
weeks the product would be up on the
bulletin boards and sales would fall to
zero. We chose to disregard these comments and felt that a majority of Atari ST
users really wanted new products and
that the piracy problem only existed with
a small handful of users. Many of us did
not even want to put copy protection on
the product because we feel that copy
protection is inconvenient and a
nuisance for the honest user. Copy
protection is also expensive, adding
about $0.50 per copy to our cost of
production.
However, within thirty days of releasing

Falcon ST, pirates had put the product
up on the bulletin boards—complete with
diagrams for the code wheel protection,
keyboard layout, and mission maps of
the product.

***The real cost of such software
piracy is not the lost $49.95 sale, but
rather the lost industry support for
Atari ST.***
Whether the machine format is an IBM,
Amiga, C64, Apple II or Macintosh, piracy
will always exist. A good software company accepts this fact and hopes that
there are enough users out there who do
not pirate to cover the cost of developing
and publishing a product and allow for a
reasonable profit.
Many ST owners argue that the ST has
no more pirates than IBM or Mac. Many
of us at Spectrum Holobyte believe this
to be true. The problem is that the number of installed STs is considerably
smaller than that of the IBM or Macintosh, thus increasing the impact of piracy
on sales. In addition, ST pirates seem better organized and piracy seems more accepted (or, should I say, tolerated) by ST
users.
The cost of developing a product is
quite high, especially on a complex
machine like the ST. Falcon ST was converted and enhanced by a third party
developer. A third party developer lives by
the royalties for each copy sold. Rowan
Software, the company that converted
Falcon, spent over $40,000 and 24 manmonths on the Atari ST version.
The Amiga version has already doubled
the sales volume of the ST, even though
Amiga Falcon has been on the market
for only 6 weeks while Falcon ST has
been released for 9 weeks. When the
Macintosh and IBM versions were
released, they sold four times the volume
of product over the same period of time.
Based on the current sales trend, the ST
developer will be lucky to break even. A
good-selling Amiga or Macintosh product
will sell 20,000-40,000 copies in its first
year. An IBM title will sell 40,000-100,000
copies, yet a top ST product would be
lucky to sell more than 15,000. It will be
very difficult to convince this development company to do another ST conversion when it could make triple the dollars
programming an Amiga, IBM, or Macintosh product.

There is no clear-cut solution to the
problem of piracy. All we can ask is that if
you like a program, buy it. Think of it as
an investment. The more invested, the
more and better titles you'll see for the
ST. Help us send a message to the rest
of the industry that there really is an ST
market willing to buy good software.
Spectrum Holobyte will continue to
monitor the ST market and keep a close
eye on what happens with Falcon ST. It's
a shame that a few users can hurt a
market as badly as the ST pirates and
deprive thousands of good ST users of
the product support that other machines
receive.
Gilman G. Louie
CEO/Chairman
Sphere, Inc. (Spectrum Holobyte)

Ed: We are regularly asked why the industry does not support the Atari ST to
the degree it supports other machines.
We appreciate this software executive
telling it like it is. This is certainly the
clearest exposition of the problem we
have seen to date.

Cherishable Donation
I'm donating a set of CGW to the local
public library, so maybe that'll help
spread the word about your fine
magazine. Although the constraints of
deadlines sometimes prevent you from always having a complete list of formats,
your reviews are excellent and have
steered me to numerous purchases, purchases I have thoroughly enjoyed. Your
coverage of various trade shows always
seems to include information that I
haven't found in other sources. Maybe
nothing big, but usually something about
a product in development that piques my
interest. It's nice stuff. Keep it up.
Gordon W. Meyer
Ames, IA

Ed.: Thanks, Gordon. We hope your
library's patrons get as much value out
of the CGWs as you have. Now, if only
this would start a philanthropic trend
among our readers . . . a CGW on every
shelf, not a bad idea.

Taking A Peek

Abracadata
P.O. Box 2440
Eugene, OR 97402
DESIGN YOUR OWN TRAIN:
MACINOOGA CHOO-CHOO:
Frustrated by the lack of space in your
domicile to build your dream model railroad? Well, Design Your Own Train may
not give you the satisfaction that comes
from recreating your favorite railroad
town in miniature or airbrushing grime
on your favorite GP-40 diesel locomotive, but you CAN get the satisfaction of
designing your own complex layouts. In
the Mac version (known as Maclnooga
Choo-Choo) track pieces can be layered
to create double track, switches, crossovers, etc. Beyond the basic scenery
available in the program, you can import
your own creations from MacPaint. MacInooga sells for $49.95 (will not run on
Mac II).
Less visually interesting is the Apple II
version (Maclnooga trains look like
trains while Apple II trains are represented by a string of small squares on
the track). However layouts can be at
least as complex, if not more so.
A third product, Run Your Own Train
(Apple II 64K, $34.95) allows you to get

inside the cab of your own train and
highball down the line. Use layouts
designed with DYOT or create layouts
within the RYOT program. Circle Reader
Service #1.

Capcom USA, Inc.
1283-C Mountain View/
Alviso Rd.
Sunnyvale, CA 94089
BIONIC COMMANDO: This action
game, part of Capcom's "Challenge
Series," features a hero with a bionic
arm that extends and contracts a la
"Doc Octopus" of Spiderman infamy.
The graphics are relatively primitive for
the "Ramboesque" genre and the
screens do not scroll; they are more like
pages with a hesitation between them
for a page turn. The documentation
does not even tell you how to use your
bionic arm (just push up on the joystick,
while pressing the left button on your

joystick's base). One or two players with
joystick required. IBM (pictured)
($34.95), C-64 ($29.95) and Amiga
($39.95). Circle Reader Service #3.
STREET FIGHTER: Beautiful
graphics are the highlight of this "Challenge Series" action game. One or two
players challenge Martial Arts fighters
from around the world to become
"Master of All." Special moves like the
"Fireball", "Helicopter Kick", and "UpperCut" are part of the player's repertoire in
this joystick driven game. IBM (pictured)
($34.95) and C-64 ($29.95). Circle
Reader Service #4.

Capstone
14160 S.W. 139th Court
Miami, Florida 33186
TRUMP CASTLE: The player can
choose from six different gambling
(Continued on page 52)

Review

INTRODUCTION
Desert Rats is a British import, which covers the North
African Campaign of World War II in extensive detail. With an
original copyright date of 1985, it is apparent that Desert
Rats is not state-of-the-art, and many of its game mechanics
bear a distinct resemblance/debt to both Eastern Front
(Chris Crawford) and Knights of the Desert (SSI). Despite
these drawbacks, the simulation is the most comprehensive
simulation of the African Campaign released for the computer.

DESERT
RATS
by M. Evan Brooks

DOCUMENTATION
The documentation is average. The game mechanics are
sufficiently explained and both tactical hints and historical
background are supplied. Yet, there are some omissions: the
documentation offers six scenarios, but the program offers
eight (Operation Compass, commencing on 9 Dec 40 and
Beda Fromm, commencing on 24 Jan 41 are the two additional scenarios). In addition, although victory conditions are
noted, the distinction between tactical and operational/strategic victory is lacking.
Logistic rules are well-defined. "Amateurs think tactics;
professionals think logistics." Perhaps the two campaigns
most deserving of a detailed treatment of logistics are the
Pacific Campaign and the African Campaign of World War II.
Therefore, the player will find himself paying particular attention to the supply rules in order to effect optimal utilization
of his forces.
There is no order of battle. With a campaign scenario lasting 624 turns, an order of battle would appear to be a necessity. Its absence coupled with unannounced withdrawals compels a conservative mode of play. This may well yield a semihistorical command mode, but this reviewer would have appreciated some additional details.

GAME PLAY
The map and character set are reminiscent of Eastern
Front; commands for each individual unit are input by keyboard. The most noticeable aspect of command input is that
the commander does not have the choice of when and
where to give commands. Like some early SSI land simulations (cf. Operation Market-Garden and Breakthrough in the
Ardennes), the program offers a fixed unit order for commands. Depending on the tactical situation, this can confuse
the player by breaking up a coordinated attack into a series
of isolated tactical actions.
Unit stacking is allowed, with up to a division and two
brigades allowed in the same square. This permits detailed
concentration in order to force a breakthrough (Schwerpunkt), but the difficulty of remembering where the stacks
have been made and the clumsy rigid battle order system
makes such concentrations of limited use, somewhat reminiscent of SSI's Knights of the Desert.
Various commands may be given: (M)ove, (A)ssault, (H)old,
(T)ravel, (P)ort transfer, (F)ortify, (D)ivide and (R)eport. These
are virtually self-explanatory, but the user should remember
to utilize the (R)eport option without fail. This gives information regarding strength, moves available, supply status,
morale, attack modifier, efficiency and fortification status.
Careful and frequent attention must be paid to supply
status. This is a critical lesson to be learned from the Desert
Campaign. An ineffective unit in supply can often defeat a
stronger unit that lacks supply capability. Numerous types of
units are available: medium/light/infantry tanks, reconnais-

sance units, motorized/foot infantry, support groups (infantry/artillery teams), artillery, anti-tank and headquarters.
Combat is between adjacent units, but since units move
simultaneously, a
well-planned assault based on a
non-mobile target may fail. As
the documentation suggests,
careful attacks
along axes of advance with
definite objectives
are the key to
success. Shortterm tactical objectives may
prove to be illusory accomplishments.
If a unit is
rendered combat
ineffective, its
icon will be
replaced by a disrupted icon.
Such units
should be
relieved as quickly as possible; their continued
use in the battle area should
only be made as a matter of
desperation and not routine.

CONCLUSIONS

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
VERSION
REVIEWED:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

Desert Rats
IBM
IBM
1-2
$39.95
R.T. Smith
Cases Computer Simulations, Inc.
(Scorpion)
19 Harbor Drive
Lake Hopatcong, NJ 07849

Desert Rats offers a
plethora of scenarios. It is the
only simulation currently available which covers the Desert
Campaign on a daily basis; this 624-turn extravaganza
should only be attempted by the true grognard. Yet for all its
comprehensiveness, there is nothing truly "innovative" about
Desert Rats. Its interface is clumsy, its play somewhat
tedious, and overall, the simulation does nothing to really intrigue the user.
Perhaps, it may be best summed up by game designer Ed
Bever's analogy about campaign scenarios and dancing
bears: "It's not that they don't dance superbly, it's that they
dance at all!". For the more casual gamer, this game offers
little. For the gamer intrigued by Rommel and Montgomery
(wait a minute, was anyone ever intrigued by Montgomery?),
Desert Rats offers the most detailed treatment available.

Industry News

I

n Washington D. C., everybody has a
secret they think is a matter of national security. For example, the other day
I was riding the Metro Rail from National
Airport to Downtown. When we reached
the Pentagon station, two officers,
adorned in their dress blues, stepped into
the crowded car and grabbed hold of a
handrail.

One asked the other if those Dynamix
guys had interviewed any A-10
drivers? At first, I thought they
were talking about my old
friends at General Dynamics.
Then, he said something about
A-10 having a more visceral feel
than some of the more detailed
combat flight simulators. When
he said the designers were living
up to the "close to the ground
view" they had made famous
when developing Skyfox for EA,
I realized he was talking about
Mediagenic's newest "Affiliated
Publisher."

in Los Angeles. He says it's a
one-to-three player game of the European
theater of World War II with area movement (77 countries and 224 areas) in the
Colonial Conquest style. It will emphasize
resource management more than the earlier game, however.
My taxi took me past more zone boundaries than actually exist in D. C. to get
to my hotel. His driving did remind me of

The
Rumor
Bag

I asked the officers if they were
aware of Compuserve's plan to
have Steve Estvanik, designer of
Avalon Hill Microcomputer Games'
The Civil War, create an on-line version
of Sniper!, the old SPI boardgame. I
received a hostile stare in reply as though
I had just leaked a government secret.
When they got off the train, I asked a
"three-piece suit" sitting across the aisle
what I had done wrong. He said they
probably thought I was either inebriated
or a spy.
When the "suit" pulled a copy of Pravda
out of his leather attache case and began
to read, I decided it was a good thing I
hadn't told the military men that ThreeSixty was delaying the release of Harpoon even further. It seems the company
scrapped major portions of code and
started the project all over with Digital
Illusions as the developer. That means it
will be August of 1989 before the
product is out, but it should have much
better graphics and the ability to play
either side of the battle (previously, one
could only play the NATO side).
As I looked at the headline in Pravda, I
thought it said something about
Microprose's tank game having a working title which translates as M-1 Tank
Platoon. That couldn't be, though, since
no one outside Microprose knows that
the new product will feature realistic
platoon tactics rather than the
tank-to-tank scenarios in the simulations released
to date.
The "suit" followed me from the train to
the taxi queue and offered me a nip from
his flask. Then, he told me that SSI will
unveil Storm Across Europe for the C64/128 at the Origins game convention

by The Honorable
John Spire
two soon to be announced projects.
Three-Sixty is very
close to unveiling
their product based
on the "International Race of Champions." With all the delays on Harpoon,
however, they are being cautious about
even announcing this one. The sequences I've seen emphasize the "feel" of the
terrain in addition to speed and performance. Also, don't be surprised if a more
established company announces an Indianapolis-style racing game using
polygon rendering during their Summer
C.E.S. demonstrations.
After checking into my suite, I met my
inside source at that famous French restaurant down the street from the White
House. During our martinis, she referenced the exotic appetizers available by
facetiously suggesting the non-existent
"Panda Burgers." We settled for alligator
strips and she admitted that she probably
should have said "Clathran Burgers" because she'd heard that the new
Masterplay adventure was entitled, Star
Saga 2: The Clathran Menace. She
reminded me that this is a continuation
of the story, not a pure sequel. The story
line for all three games was established
before they even started programming
Star Saga: One: Beyond The Boundary.
In the latest game, the characters are
older and the Nine Worlds are forming a
Space Navy. The characters are supposed to leave Outpost on a reconnaissance mission, but early events might disrupt their expectations. There are many
more sub-plots in the second game, the
economic realities will suffer supply con-

straints, and combat will offer more tactical options.
The waiter served us a very disappointing salad containing the most wilted endive in the universe. Such an observation
led me to suggest that Universe III,
Omnitrend's third release in their space
trilogy, should be ready by June. The
surprise news was that Breach II should
be ready by early summer, as well. It
seems the designers were influenced by the criticism in CGW
#53 (p. 8) which questioned the
combat system used by both
Breach and Paladin. So, they have
changed the algorithms, added suppression fire, developed diagonal
movement and fire, provided a
visual line of sight (as in the Ultima
series), and utilized path tracing
(players can see a line which indicates the path they have moved
on). It should have more of a lean
toward realism than its predecessors.
The flambe' caused us both to
think of dragons toasting a
medieval village. In fact, it
reminded my contact about
Interplay's Dragon Wars, a roleplaying game for the 128K Apple
and IBM. She told me that the screens
would use larger animation than current
CRPGs and assured me that the animation itself was more sophisticated than
the currently popular "two-stage animation." She indicated that the company
had licensed the Champions combat system from the popular pen and paper
RPG. Over a marvelous bottle of Pinot
Noir, she said the game will feature an
emphasis on character motivation.
During dessert, a Scandinavian beauty,
who looked remarkably like my former
girlfriend, knocked my small notebook off
the table. She bent over to pick it up and
pulled a fast one on the old rumor
monger. She pretended that she had
managed to run her nylon and, as I followed her hint to examine her shapely
thigh, she glanced quickly through the
notebook. Now, she's liable to scoop me
by printing a story about ICOM's next
Macadventure (set in 19th Century
Europe), Dynamix's Agent adventure
(Fall, 1989 on IBM/Amiga) which is slated
to feature five different types of "spy"
simulations, and Interplay's time travel
game being developed by the design
team that worked on Wasteland.
My dinner companion seemed alarmed
and asked how I missed seeing her ploy.
I smiled as I held up the Scandinavian
notebook, deftly lifted from her purse
while she'd committed my notes to
memory. On Capitol Hill, we're disciplined
enough to appreciate beauty and tend to
the job at the same time.

Review

J

etfighter: The Adventure (JF) is outstanding! What Bob
Dinnerman and Moses Ma have done with the IBM
EGA version of their modern air combat simulator (F14, F-16, F/A-18) must be seen to be appreciated. Velocity's
press kit hype refers more than once to the "blazing graphics
speed" of JF. They claim that their graphic display "outperforms the competition by up to 300%" when you consider
the speed of graphics refresh in connection with the level of
scene complexity and the amount of screen area updated. I
have no idea what a 300% improvement would actually look
like, but I can say that JF has the smoothest, fastest, most
pleasing graphics I have yet seen on a flight simulator, and
that includes Dinnerman/Ma's F/A-18 Interceptor which they

However . . .
The Envelope Has Rough Edges
The earliest version of JF (1.0) had some programming
problems. For example, typing in the name of your character
would hang the program if the name contained the letter X
or Z. But, by far, the worst problem with 1.0 was the fact
that the program would crash when the game began the
zoom-in to your aircraft following the tactical orders screen.
This problem can be avoided by hitting the minus key
during zoom-in. We are told that version 1.0 is no longer on
the shelves and owners of 1.0 can return their disks for a
free upgrade
to version
1.01.

THE NEED
F OR SPEED

Version
1.01, the current version
at the time of
this writing
(early March),
by Daniel Hockman
has both
eliminated
these
TITLE:
Jetfighter: The Adventure
problems and
SYSTEM:
IBM,Tandy,compatibles
added some
EGA required, VGA compatible
in versions 1.00 & 1.01
new features
CGA compatibility added in version 1.1
such
as an
PRICE:
$49.95
ILS (InstruDESIGNERS:
Bob Dinnerman
Moses Ma
ment LandPUBLISHER:
Velocity
ing System)
DISTRIBUTOR: Broderbund Software
and INS (Inertial Navigaprogrammed on the
tion System). The ILS assists you in following proper glide
Amiga! It is hard to
slope for a safe landing. The INS directs you toward your desbelieve but these two
tination (i.e. home base or ground target). These additions
talented designers have,
make landings easier. Or, in the case of carrier landings, the
in terms of animated
ILS changes landing difficulty from "extremely difficult" to
graphics, made the IBM
merely "difficult".
perform like an Amiga!
When I run JF on my Proteus 286GTX I have problems
with missions that require you to shoot down cruise or Exocet missiles. About half the time these missiles will jump to
Expanding
speeds of 1100-1300 knots, making them impossible to
the Envelope
engage. According to Velocity I am the only person that has
reported this problem. Maybe my computer has it in for me?
Although we are told
By the time you read this, Velocity will be distributing verthat JF has completely
sion 1.1 of JF which has additional improvements. Among
new code, gamers will
these will be sound drivers (Tandy for sure, Ad-Lib possibly).
certainly recognize it as
Owners of 1.01 can upgrade to 1.1 for a small charge.
an IBM incarnation of the F/A-18 Interceptor product that
Dinnerman and Ma produced under the Electronic Arts
Although Velocity is proud of their documentation, which is
label. For our comments on F/A-]8 Interceptor see CGW
certainly different (the major portion of the manual is done
#50 pages 14-15. However, JF has gone beyond the earlier
as a script portraying the training of "Top Gun" fighter jocks),
product.
I find it more difficult to follow than other manuals. However
the NOTES.BAT file on the A disk is very helpful.
JF has 32 missions in addition to the training missions. It
Then there is the question of CGA, EGA, VGA. Although
will take you some time to get through them all. Missions
the flag on the package indicates that the program will run
range from the innocuous "visual ID" assignment to bombon CGA, that is not true for versions 1.0 and 1.01. These vering missions that pit you against numerous ace level pilots,
sions require EGA. Version 1.1 will support CGW, however.
accurate SAMS, and flak.
The background fiction (a 1993 economic crisis in the third
world precipitates conflict between the U.S. and Latin
American countries) is entertaining and provides a
more-or-less believable backdrop to the various missions.
The external views of your aircraft are outstanding. You can
pan left/right and/or up/down all around your aircraft to get
any perspective you want. Fascinating!

Product Acquisition
Although this first offering from Velocity shows a few rough
edges, it is a very, very good product. The blazing fast state
of the art animation is unsurpassed. Should your Defense
Department approve the acquisition of this weapon system?
Affirmative!

Industry News

Inside the Industry
News, Notes and Quotes From the
Computer Entertainment Industry
Dynamix
Joins Roster
of Mediagenic
Affiliates
CGW has discovered that
Dynamix formalized an "Affiliated Publisher" agreement
with Mediagenic on
February 14, 1989. The
Oregon based software firm
developed Skyfox, Arcticfox,
and the recently released
Project Firestart for
Electronic Arts, as well as
Pete Rose Pennant Fever
and Suzuki RM250
Motocross for Gamestar
and F-14 Tomcat for Activision. Dynamix president, Jeff Tunnell, indicated
that this was an extremely
significant move for the company which they had been
anticipating for several years.
According to Tunnell, the
firm has expanded swiftly
and plans to complete
several development projects
for Activision in addition to
releasing its own titles later
in the year. He stated that
the first two products to be
released under the new
Dynamix label would
probably be a flight
simulator tentatively called A10 and an action adventure
with the working title Agent.
Dynamix follows a trend
among successful
developers to move into
publishing endeavors. Interplay Productions announced an "Affiliated Publisher" agreement with
Mediagenic in early 1988

and Lucasfilm Games,
originally a major developer
with a high degree of name
recognition which created
products for several publishers, now publishes under its
own label distributed, in
turn, by Mediagenic. Bruce
Davis, CEO of Mediagenic,
commented on the larger
company's philosophy concerning developers evolving
into publishers. "I take it as a
good sign that developers
want to grow and work with
us. There are some
developers who have done a
good job over the years and
want to take a crack at
publishing. By supporting
them, we support the industry as a whole. A young
industry like ours needs experimentation. If we had a
lock on creativity and all the
prophecies necessary for success, we wouldn't need
entrepreneurs [like Interplay, Lucasfilm, and
Dynamix]. We're humble
enough to grow with the industry."
Davis observed that some
independent companies occasionally surface within the
industry, make a number of
mistakes, and eventually,
fail. He noted that this does
not help those that fail or
the industry's own reputation. The philosophy at
Mediagenic is to help those
developers with a proven
track record to establish a
solid base as a publisher and
avoid typical mistakes. "Our
experience can help them,"
the executive promised.

Mindscape Inks
Licensing Pact
with Mirrorsoft
Mirrorsoft, the British
software publisher who
developed Harrier Combat
Simulator (originally entitled
High Roller), has signed an

agreement giving
Mindscape the right to
publish several titles from
their Image Works line in
the United States and
Canada. The first product
slated for release under the
new agreement is Speedball, an arena sports game
similar to the competition in
the film Rollerball. At press
time, Mindscape expected
the product to be on store
shelves concurrent with this
issue.
According to Roger Buoy,
president and CEO of
Mindscape, "These games
are exactly what the
American consumer is looking for and we're excited to
be bringing them to the U.S.
market." The strategy for
marketing these games in
North America will build on
the action trend in the entertainment software industry

and emphasize graphics,
digitized sound, and fast play
mechanics.

Lucasfilm
Receives
Jean Renoir
Humanitarian
Award
On March 13, 1989,
Lucasfilm Ltd. became the
second organization in history to be honored with the
Jean Renoir Humanitarian
Award. The Los Angeles
Film Teachers Association
presents the award annually,
usually honoring individual
film directors such as
Frank Capra, King
Vidor, and Richard Attenborough. Prior to
the Lucasfilm selection, only the National
Film Board of Canada
had received the award
as an organization.
The award honors, " . .
. not only film excellence, but the expression of life-affirming
values which has always been the highest
contribution of the motion picture arts," according to LAFTA
President, Alice La Deane.
CGW's editorial staff
attended the awards banquet to see the Lucasfilm
Games division honored for
its work in developing multimedia teaching tools in collaboration with Apple Computer, the National
Audubon Society, and the
Smithsonian Institute. In
addition, note was made of
the company's contributions
to entertainment software.

Game Hints

A

ttention: all
fantasy Jet
Jockeys. Here
is the opportunity
you never had.
Activision's F-14
Tomcat gives you a
shot at being one of
America's most elite
fighter pilots. From
flight school to becoming "Top Gun,"
you control your
destiny. So, here are
some tips to help
steer your career in
the right direction.

"Tomcat" On
The Prowl
A Briefing for
Activision's "F-14 Tomcat"

Miramar,
Miramar,
Off The Wall
Your training
begins at basic
flight school. You fly
a T-2 Buckeye
through a series of
flight maneuvers.
Do not, by any
means, underestimate these lessons. If you do not
make the upper
15% of your class,
you will never get a
chance to thrill to
an F-14's afterburners. If you fail,
you may end up as
a traffic reporter in a
helicopter, or worse,
a professional
wrestler.
In order to succeed, each aerial
maneuver must be
flown with precision and speed. Correct
execution will result with you flying directly behind the instructor's aircraft, tight
and close. Know exactly what the
maneuver is and how it is accomplished
so that it can become almost a reflex.

Note that you will be given the opportunity to use the auto landing key
throughout your training. If you use it,
though, you will be dubbed a "wing
weenie" this will hurt your reputation. Instead, try to land using air speeds between 150 to 250 knots. After touch
down, you will immediately be asked if
you want to go up again. Remember,
every flight counts. It is not the best or
the last score you achieve that matters, it
is an accumulation of all your flights.
This basic fighter training gives you the
tools to fly your craft. Learn, live, and

by Brad Bombardiere

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

F-14 Tomcat
C-64/128
$39.95
Dynamix
Activision
Menlo Park, CA

love these maneuvers. Some day, they
will save your keester.
Advanced fighter combat school is the
next step. Your instructors neither ask,
nor do they give, any quarter. They are
merciless, much like the enemy. Your
first opponent will be Capt. Vice. If you
defeat him, you will earn the nickname
"Annihilator" or "Mustang." If you lose,
you'll be called "Pooch," or even worse
"Smurf' (I hate Smurfs). After the fight,
you will earn your golden wings and a
name that will stick for the rest of your
career.

Making Your Bones
After you earn your wings, your next opponent is Captain Bones. Win two out of
three dogfights with him and you will be
assigned to the Nimitz. There are a few

moves that will allow
you to beat
"Bones." On the
opening screen,
move your tail fast!
The fight is on and
if you wait to read
the on-screen
description, it will be
too late. Instead, go
to the afterburners
and use an Immelmann (or a Split S)
to change directions. Next, do a
high speed break
(banking on edge).
This should break
his "lock" on you.
Then, lull him behind you. When
your radar warning
sounds, pull back
hard and do an Immelmann. Slow
your air speed to
prevent blacking
out. Now that you
are nose to nose
and above him, lock
on and fire. If, after
you fire, your own
radar warning
device goes off, attempt more evasive
actions. This
strategy, when executed correctly, almost always works.
You may even win
three out of three
against him, furthering your career as a
deadly pilot.

Assuming you are
assigned to the carrier Nimitz, you will
serve under Admiral Hawk's command.
Performing well for him will bring praise
and kudos. Failure will cause you to discover that you left a piece of your butt in
the pilots' debriefing room. Your primary
job on this tour of duty is to guard the
Nimitz. Involving yourself with an enemy,
while another squadron flies in and attacks the Nimitz, will cost lives as well as
your reputation. A word to the wise
should be sufficient.
Two types of missions are regularly assigned in this section of the game: Fire
At Will ( who is this "Will" guy, anyway?);
and Do Not Fire. Fire At Will is the
easiest of the two. You have a plan set
up and you execute it. The second, Do
Not Fire (until fired upon) is a little more
complicated. There are two ways to hand(Continued on page 41)

r

Review

War, but only hard experience will yield a proper comprehension of the steps in order to minimize the danger to the Empire (cf. "Beware The Ides of March" below).
As provinces are conquered by Rome, they eventually become "Romanized" and yield additional reinforcements
(depending on the area, such reinforcements may consist of
legions, auxiliaries [native troops], limitanei [defensive forces
only] or none of the above). Table I of the documentation explains the recruitment and revenue potentials of the various
provinces.

Datasoft Markets An
"Ambitious" Game

E

M. Evan Brooks

ven before 1831, when Edgar Allan Poe compared his
idyllic "Helen" to " . . . the grandeur that was Rome,"
that era of empire and opulence had fascinated
western civilization for centuries. Annals of Rome allows one
to command the
Roman Republic/Empire and attempt to
recreate the Pax
Romana lasting for a
millennium. Can you
defeat the barbaric
tribes and maintain
the civilizing influence
of Rome, or will your
leadership result in an
acceleration of the
Dark Ages?

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
VERSIONS
REVIEWED:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
PUBLISHER:

Annals of Rome
Amiga, Atari ST,
C-64/128, IBM
C-64/128 and IBM
1
C-64/128, $24.95
Others, $34.95
PSS
c/o Datasoft
Chatsworth, CA

Annals of Rome is a
strategic simulation
with numerous innovative game
mechanics to yield a
fascinating portrait of
the course of empire.
Play mechanics are
easy to learn and Annals of Rome can easily become an addictive experience. The
documentation is adequate and explains
the ramifications of
the simulation.

A Lean and
Hungry Look
(Introduction)

Using the leadership provided by the
Roman Senate, the player must allocate the best leaders to the legions and conquer the provinces. While the mechanics of this are easily understood, as
leaders age and grow more ambitious, there is an omnipresent danger of a military leader wishing to assume the
Purple Mantle. The resulting Civil War can be a bloodbath,
with the careful troop dispositions of the player rendered
asunder and the borders left undefended against the barbarian levies. The documentation does describe the Civil

Crossing The Rubicon
(Game Mechanics)
Annals of Rome utilizes an area movement system. The
graphics are composed of a map of Europe/Asia divided into
areas (provinces), plus the data required to rule both wisely
and continuously. Such graphics are adequate, but not overly awe-inspiring.
In addition, during the Personnel Assignment Phase (when
one assigns his commanders to the various Roman armies),
a columnar table displays both provinces and leaders. On
the IBM-version, the charts are plain, but easy to use. On
the C-64 version, however, the lack of an 80-column display
makes use of the assignment table difficult to read and utilize. Perhaps a page-flipping mechanism would have made
the C-64 version more facile.
One of the most innovative aspects of Annals of Rome is
the length of a turn -- it varies from 1-25 years. Depending
on the action (e.g. threat of civil war, invasion from abroad,
etc.), the length of the turn is randomized, and the player
has little choice. Generally, one hopes for long turns; these
allow maximum recruitment from the provinces and a peaceful Romanizing influence on provinces held by the armies of
Rome. Short turns are generally omens of massive invasions
or civil war.
Beginning in 273 BC as the Roman Republic, the player
must expand. The documentation offers a somewhat ahistorical "quick fix"; a quick raid to Sicily followed by an assault on
Africa may grab the entire Carthaginian treasury for Rome.
Since provinces move "randomly," though, one must hope
for the luck of the draw. Be sure to send at least 35 legions
on this foray and, hopefully, move them out before Carthage
can react (at least, reassign the leader to a more secure
area), because when Carthage does react, all the troops
present in Africa will die. They will have served their purpose,
however, because the looting of the Carthaginian treasury
will have given Rome sufficient funds to finance the next 500
years of expansion. If the player is very lucky, the Carthaginians will have looted the Egyptian treasury, thereby allowing Rome a two-for-one looting opportunity.
While each game begins in 273 BC, the initial setup differs.
If Rome does not begin with at least 60 legions, the player
would be best served to reboot and start over. No matter
what, leave enough legions in Rome to deter the detested
Macedonians. Alexander the Great's relatives are a
dangerous enemy and usually attempt a rapid invasion of
the Italian peninsula. The Gauls, to the north, are a
numerous host, but not as formidable a military machine as
Rome. However, delay overexpansion until the treasury
shows a healthy balance.

Beware The Ides of March
(Notes on Strategy)
Economic Aspects: Although one can adjust the tax structure from 1.0 to 2.0, this is an option best avoided. The Carthaginian treasury provides sufficient funds for Rome's use,
and any tax rate higher than 1.0 leads to inflation and unrest. The only valid use for a high tax rate is to foment a Civil
War and, generally, the military leaders are sufficiently ambitious that the tax increase is, oxymoronic as it sounds, a
mere surplus. The game is often delayed while the various
computations are made. This is most noticeable on the C64. The IBM's faster processor somewhat alleviates this problem.
Civil War: This can be a very confusing aspect of the
simulation. As the Republic expands, its leaders grow ambitious ("yon Cassius has a lean and hungry look"). Time
and the rise of dictators eventually leads to the formation of
an Empire and the Republic is gone forever; but the Empire
does not forestall Civil War. Any leader assigned troops in a
province is a candidate for rebellion; bribing the troops may
deter a revolt, but this is self-defeating in the long run. Any
Civil War involves a reduction in Rome's fighting strength.
Therefore, this reviewer's recommendation is to allow the
revolts to succeed. Try to move friendly legions out of the
way of the invading legions; the rebels will gain all troops in
a province without a leader as soon as they enter such
province. Thus, one can refuse to assign leaders to the outlying provinces. This will eliminate the chance of the legions
"crossing the Rubicon," but it will also prevent the expansion
of Rome. Another approach is to simply move one's loyal
legions through the back door. If the rebels are coming
through the Alps, move to Greece or Sicily and allow the
rebels to "succeed." Often, one can use this trick to actually
better his legion deployment (only legions are affected by
revolt; auxiliaries and Iimitanei stay in place).
SPQR: By allowing the rebels to succeed, one watches as
one government succeeds another. Popularity is fleeting,
and it is rare to see a peaceful succession to the Purple
Mantle. This causes one to wonder who or what he is trying
to be—the answer is SPQR (Senatus Populusque Romae),
"The Senate and People of Rome." Leaders come and go,
but the concept of Rome is eternal. The player must recognize this and use it to maximum advantage.
Victory Conditions: Victory points are based on control of
various regions. Nevertheless, allowing Rome to be sacked is
a disaster resulting in a 5,000 point loss. Similarly, each new
dictator/emperor by means of Civil War yields a 25 point
loss, but such a loss must be measured against the possible
reduction of Rome's strength in a hard-fought Civil War. This
reviewer feels it better to lose a few points up front and maintain the legions of Rome as strongly as possible.
Unfortunately, there is no victory in this game. Its most significant defect is that it literally can go on forever. This
reviewer has played through the year AD 2030 (with Rome
reduced to the Italian peninsula arrayed against a world of
Turks, Arabs and Lombards). Historically, Rome fell in AD
476, but the Eastern Empire continued until the sack of Constantinople in AD 1453. The game allows the transfer of the
capital to an alternate site, but this reviewer felt such a transfer was an admission of defeat. Careful play can often allow
Rome to survive into the 17th Century AD, although the
peak of the Roman Empire is generally achieved between
AD 100-700.
Judicious expansion is the key to maximizing victory points.
Do not seize Germania or Dacia without going for the whole

map (worth an additional 1000 points). Seizure of these
provinces will result in several hundred thousand angry Germans and Dacians sweeping down on the Empire. Be
prepared and give them an invasion route. Remember, if you
retake their homeland, they will detour from their advance
on Rome in order to secure their homelands. In later years,
the Arabs and Turks become virtually invincible.
Saving the Game: Any save destroys the prior save. This is
unsatisfactory, since
often one wishes to
see the results from
several offshoots.

Lend Me
Your Ears
(Conclusions)
Annals of Rome is a
fascinating simulation.
Initial appearances
may not be overly impressive, but added
playing time yields sufficient reward. The most disappointing
aspect of the simulation is that it appears unfinished. Additional game development using different scenarios (startpoints), defined victory conditions, and a better save
mechanism would have yielded a much more polished effort.
Still, with all its defects, Annals of Rome is a pleasant
surprise.

Game Hints

King's Quest IV
Lots of trouble here with getting safely
out of the ogre's hut. I wish I had some
special method to tell you about that, but
it seems to be a random thing and all
you can do is keep trying (frustrating as
that may be) until you get out. I have
heard that those with the faster PC's
don't have as much trouble as others, so
it may be related to clock timing in some
way. In any case, don't give up hope,
you'll do it eventually. On another matter,
your shovel can be used only five times.
Make sure you're digging in the right
places. Once the shovel breaks, you
won't find another one, so read before
you dig.

Wasteland

Every other issue, Scorpia leaves the
common room at that famous tavern of
the mind, "Scorpion's Tale," and
answers the mail delivered to the back
room.
Warning: There are specific hints
about popular adventure games located in this vicinity.
It's time once again to look into the old
mailbag sitting here in the back room of
the Tale. "Old" is certainly the word for it;
mail service, sorry to say, continues to be
erratic, not to mention slow. So, my
apologies for late responses; there isn't
anything I can really do about it (except
complain, alas). I'd also like to remind
folks that I only answer specific questions
on games; I don't provide hint sheets or
maps. Now, let's see what we have in the
bag today.

People have been asking about the
password to enter Savage Village. I never
found it myself and took the direct way of
getting in, namely blowing up the wall
with explosives. A great time-saver, although you can't do this everywhere. The
door of the club in Needles, for instance,
is quite secure, and you do need a
password to get in, although I didn't find
anything of interest when I had managed
that. For those of you being washed
away in the sewers, there is an easier way
to get across. You can use a rope, if you
stand in the right spot. Just keep trying
at different locations along the river of
sewage and it will work sooner or later.

Leisure Suit Larry II
The KGB agents on the beach and at
the airport have been giving some folks a
lot of trouble. The main difficulty with the
spies on the sand seems to be having a
"full" bikini top. This problem is easily
solved by using something from the
guest room in the jungle. In order to
keep things clean, I won't say more on
that subject. For the KGBishna at the airport, you need an item from the jungle (I
can hear groans from people who have
already been through it more times than
they'd like to count). While you can't
direct Larry's movements as he wanders
around the jungle, you can still give
other commands (if you're quick
enough). Look carefully at the screen,
and you should see what you need.

Manhunter
A fair number of letters have come in
about this game; it seems to be catching
on. Aside from complaints about punks
in alleyways, a major problem appears to
be finding the fourth module. This can't
be done until you've worked out "the"
name and entered it into MAD. That will
lead you to the computer, which is more
than just a pretty face (grin).

Ultima IV
I've heard from people who have found
Blissful, and followed her advice, but the
expected results didn't happen. No one I
know of has ever gotten any information
after doing the specified meditations. The
best thing is to forget about Blissful and
(Continued on page 51)

Review

T

here hasn't been this much creep bashing since the

last "Dirty Harry" movie. In fact, Techno Cop seems like
a cross between Dirty Harry, Mad Max and the Terminator. It is a crash, trash, bash, and bag 'em kind of game
set in the future. The player "becomes" a member of the
technocop division of the police force and is "issued" the
latest crime-busting equipment, including: an .88 magnum
pistol (Harry Callahan, eat your heart out!), a wrist radar to locate criminals (a la Dick Tracy), and a V-MAX twin turbo "Interceptor" (Knight Rider in the 21st Century?)

Chase Scene
Game play begins in the V-MAX patrol car. Players must
rush to scenes of various crimes before the thugs can escape. Just in case there happens to be a traffic jam, one can
always use the handy roof-mounted machine gun to remove
the potential obstructions. Players shouldn't feel guilty about
blasting other cars or ramming them, because the manual is
straightforward in instructing players to keep in mind that
"everyone else on the road is your enemy." In actuality, the
game could have been more interesting if there had been a
few "innocent" cars to avoid or this obligatory "chase" segment had been shorter.
Until the player successfully completes a few assignments,
the car's only weapon is a machine gun. Fortunately, it will
not be long before the competent player is awarded a promotion and vehicle upgrade: a turbo-charger for additional
speed; hydraulic wheel rams to bash enemies off the road; a
rocket-firing cannon to blast away armored enemies; and
nuclear bombs (absolutely guaranteed to clear the road, not
to mention one's sinuses). Unfortunately, use of nuclear
bombs causes the screen to flash such that drivers often
lose control of their own vehicle. The manual does not explain how technocops manage to survive their close
proximity to nuclear blasts, but, of course, it is only a game.
On the upper levels of the game, a punk will climb out of a
truck and attempt to leap onto the roof of the V-MAX.
Players have several options in dealing with the problem:
ram into the rear of the truck and watch the punk fall off;
destroy the truck with machine gun fire and literally blow the
vehicle away before he can make his leap; or if he does
reach the patrol vehicle, dislodge him with a little erratic driving. One cannot shoot them off like the cover art seems to
suggest.

The Scene of the Crime
Once the player arrives at the scene of a crime, he is assigned a villain to capture and given instructions concerning
whether the crook is wanted dead or alive. He follows the
radar to the thug's location. The radar clearly shows the location of the crook, but not the obstacles which must be overcome in order to get to him. For example, it may show that
the criminal is on a lower level of a building than the technocop, but it does not show elevators, ladders, or ropes.
This is, by far, the most clever and challenging portion of the
game because the most direct route is almost never the correct route.
Further, technocops have to be careful where they walk.
Huge gaping holes in floors can drop them to lower levels
and end their life if the drop is more than one floor. Also,
gigantic attack rats will attack the player's cop. While it is possible to jump on these rats and crush them, jumping over
them can sometimes be more expedient. Players must also
watch out for lethal booby traps.

Slay Ride To
Justice
"Techno Cop" from U. S. Gold
by David M. Wilson

The thugs are armed
with knives, martial arts
weaponry, and crow bars,
while players are armed
with guns and nets. It is
usually best to save the
nets for when a Head
Thug must be captured
alive. There are innocent
bystanders in this segment
of the game, however, so
it is unwise to shoot or
capture everyone. In fact,
harming an innocent bystander penalizes the
player by 5,000 points.
This is a welcome feature.
Players are on a limited
time schedule at each
given crime site. If they fail
to locate and capture the
assigned thug during the
allotted time, they receive
orders to return to their
vehicle for further patrol.
Techno Cop contains
eleven progressively more difficult levels and, despite occasional boredom in the driving segment, the game is extremely absorbing. It lasts
longer than the typical arcade game and features an
easy-to-use save routine with
no disk swap required.

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:

VERSION
REVIEWED:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNE RS:
PUBLISHER:

Techno Cop
Amiga, Apple II,
Atari ST, C-64/128, and
IBM
C-64/128
1
$49.95 (Amiga, Atari ST)
$39.95 (Apple II, C-64/128, IBM)
U.S. Cold
Epyx
Redwood City, CA

The game offers some emotional release for those who feel
little confidence in the current justice system. With no Miranda warnings, no police
shooting review boards,
and no lenient judges or
parole boards, Techno
Cop puts the player into
the role of judge, jury, and
executioner. Thankfully,
due process keeps these
scenarios firmly
entrenched in make
believe. In the fictional setting, however, the
gratuitous violence of
Techno Cop blows away most of the competition.

Review

D

eep

Statistically Speaking

in Hidden Vale rises the fortress of Barbezza.
Within, tended by four and forty guardians, the Magic
Candle stands tall and burns brightly. No ordinary
taper, this candle, but a magical construct whose flame imprisons the mighty demon Dreax, embodiment of evil.
Trapped during a battle long ago, he yearns for freedom and
revenge, but the power of the guardians has kept him ever
within the flame. Until one day, when the guardians
mysteriously vanish, and the candle begins to melt. If the
flame goes out, Dreax will be freed, and his vengeance will
not be pretty .. .
The Magic Candle is a CRPG in the Ultima style: there is

Speaking of stats, there are quite a few. Aside from the
usual strength, dexterity, charisma, and agility, there are skill
levels for hunting, learning, magic (applies only to spellcasters), and weapons , as well as measurements of speed,
stamina and energy (a measure of fatigue). These stats
replace the more familiar "experience point levels," which are
not present in the game. Instead, the goal is to increase, by
training and other means, the characters' various skills and
attributes from their starting levels to their maximums as the
game progresses. The maximum (or best) any character can
be is determined
by his race
(human, dwarf,
elf, halfling) and
profession
(wizard, ranger,
mercenary,
tailor, etc).

Keeper of
the Flame
Scorpia Waxes Eloquently
About "The Magic Candle"
by Scorpia

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
VERSION
REVIEWED:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:

The Magic Candle
Apple II, IBM
(C-64/128 coming soon)
Apple II
1
Apple, IBM ($49.95)
64/128($39.5) -

DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

C

Ali N. Atabek
Mindcraft
234T 205th St. Ste. 102
9051

much more to do here than simply hacking monsters. In
your quest to restore the candle before it can melt and free
the evil Dreax, you will travel the length and breadth of the
land; converse with many people; and perform an elaborate
magical ritual. There is more than enough here to keep you
occupied for quite some time to come.
It begins in the castle of King Rebnard, where "Lukas" is
chosen as the hero to lead a band of adventurers to glory.
Lukas is a stock character. Like the rest of your party, he
comes with a set of predetermined statistics.
After the interview with Rebnard (an automatic sequence),
Lukas goes to the Knight's Room to select his companions.
Up to five can be chosen and you can return to the castle at
any time to drop someone off and replace him with another
character. There is also a second castle, at the other end of
the continent, where additional volunteers can be added to
the party. Members can be dropped off in either castle and
will stay there, waiting patiently for their turn to come again.
Looking over the roster in King Rebnard's castle reveals
some surprises. For example, listed among the warriors and
mages are such professions as tailor and gemcutter. Not exactly what one expects in a game of this type, but these
people not only have their strengths, but they are not as
poor at combat as you might think. It's a good idea to look
over the stats of every volunteer before making a final determination of the party's composition.

Charisma is
particularly important because
many people will
not talk to you
unless your
charisma (or, at
least, that of the
party's
spokesperson) is
high enough. If
your charisma
isn't sufficient,
you will be told
how much it has
to be before the
person will part
with information
(or even give
Torance,CA
you the time of
day).
The learning skill determines both how much you can
learn in a training session and how quickly wizards can
memorize spells. The higher the learning skill, the more a
character gets out of training. It is usually better to put off
training until the characters have had some increase in this
skill.
Hunting skill has two uses. First, it provides food for the
party should it be low on food and far from a town. Second,
it enables you to detect ambushes in dungeons. The higher
the hunting skill, the better the chance the monsters will be
noted before they attack. This is often a life-saver in the nastier dungeons (fortunately, there are no ambushes outdoors).
Energy is used to determine how tired a character is.
Everyone has a maximum energy of 99 which declines as
the party adventures. When it goes down to zero, the character is exhausted and unable to move. Energy can be restored by resting (in camp or a guest house) or by eating an
energy-restoring mushroom. Since everyone has the same
energy, it is not a factor in choosing party members.
Once the initial group has been selected, you return to Rebnard, who provides everyone with a going-away gift of 500
coins apiece (in the game, money is always referred to as
"coins") and wishes you all good luck. This is a good time to
take it slow and talk to as many people in the castle as you
can before heading out to Port Avur the nearest town You

won't get information from everyone at this time (some you'll
have to interview later when one of the characters has the
necessary charisma), but you'll still find out a lot of interesting things before you leave.
As you probably guessed, the roads are not entirely safe
these days. The evil minions of Dreax have invaded all the
lands of Deruvia and seem to be everywhere. On the other
hand, The Magic Candle has something I've been waiting
for, for a long time: the monster that's dead, stays dead.
Monster generation is handled more intelligently in this
game than any other I've played. Most CRPG's have the endless wave. You rampage through the dungeon (or
countryside) for fifty battles, and then have to rampage back
another fifty. New monsters seem to sprout up almost from
the corpses of the dead ones.
In this game, each country has a fixed number of patrols
and guardposts. When you've wiped them all out, they're
gone. Reinforcements only come into the land every three
months. The game begins in May, so, if you were to clean
out all of Pheron (the starting country) in that month, the
area would be clear of nasties until September rolls around.
Even better, dungeons stay cleared permanently. No replacements go to them at all. Thus, if you get partially
through a dungeon, you can back out, re-supply, and return
without having to kill the same monsters all over again just
to get back where you were before. There are no wandering
monsters, simply "set" encountersCombat is a fairly simple procedure, although sometimes
the strategy may become a little complex, depending on
what you're up against- Except in the case of ambush, the
party always gets a chance to set up: draw weapons, recall
spells, move around to a better position. Once that's
finished, fighting actually begins and, fortunately for you,
your characters get to go firstThis is good, because the monsters tend to act intelligent
ly. The cannon fodder like orcs are typically in front, while
the magic-using brains are in the rear (just the way you set
up your own group, in fact). The monsters also recognize
magic when they see it, and will try to home in on the
spellcasters in your party.
Actions are typically casting spells, moving towards (or
away) from an opponent, and striking blows. Dodging is art
automatic function and does not have to be specified.
Even wizards are not excluded here. They are perfectly
capable of wielding weapons as strength allows, and they
also have some fighting skill, although it will never equal that
of the true warrior. In a pinch, your spell-casters can wade
into battle and swing away with the best of them. Just as
nice, they can wear any armor at all, including plate mail.
This is a refreshing change from the usual "cheap baggy
robes" of most CRPGs.
Another important activity (both inside and outside of combat) is the eating of magical plants and mushrooms. These
herbs have many beneficial effects, including restoration of
energy, protection from physical attacks, extra movement,
temporary strength, and guaranteed placement of one's next
blow.
It is important to become familiar with these and others, as
without them you will have a hard (if not impossible) time
finishing the game- Weapons and armor are limited to those
noted on the back of the manual. There are no +30 swords
here. The herbs and mushrooms are, so to speak, replacements for these things. Proper use of the magical plants is

crucial to success, so experiment with them early and keep a
good supply on hand whenever possible.
Magic is pretty straightforward- Elves, rangers, and wizards
are all capable of learning spells, although wizards will
naturally be best in this department. Each wizard comes with
a book of spells that he can memorize (up to 99 of a spell
and apparently, no limit to the number of different spells that
can be in the character's mind at any one time).
Spell books can also be purchased (when you find out
where) and given to members of the party. It is also possible
for spell-casters to "trade" the books among themselves, so
that several can
study from the
same one at different times. Each
book (there are
four) has different
spells for different
purposes. Some
can be used any
time; others are
restricted to either
combat or noncombat use. They
are all described in
the manual, so
keep it handy when you're using magicSpells require energy to cast. If a mage is too low on energy, he can't cast a spell; at least, not the one he currently
has ready. It is possible to change the ready spell or eat a sermin mushroom (restores energy) on that character's turn, although he may not have the chance to cast that round.
Dungeons tend to be typical. The number of levels per
dungeon varies from a single level up to eight; most dungeons are about 4-5 levels deep. There is no auto-mapping
feature, but there is a way to get a map of the level you're
on, and copy it to paper. The layouts are simple and it
doesn't take very long.
In general, you can expect that behind every door lurks a
party of monsters, waiting to pound you into mush. If you're
not feeling in the mood for combat (or you're in no shape
for it), avoid going into rooms until you feel up to it.
Ambushes, however, are another matter. If you walk into
one, you're stuck with having to fight it out (or trying to escape, which is not recommended in this instance). With complete surprise, the monsters get a free round to act, while
the party members stand around and play target (they can
still dodge, however). After that, fighting returns to its normal
mode.
A good hunting skill, though, can reduce the chances of
walking blindly into possible disaster. You won't be able to
avoid fighting (the monsters are practically breathing down
your neck), but you won't be surprised and you'll have the
chance to prepare somewhat for the combat.
Treasure in the game is a little on the Spartan side. Monty
Haul doesn't live here, anymore- Bodies of monsters will
have some coins on them (the only treasure they ever carry).
Chests in dungeons generally contain gems of different
types to sell in town, or a supply of a particular magic herbOnce in awhile, they hold other items, but only one type of
object will ever be found in a chest (and they never have
weapons or armor). Chests can also be trapped to poison or
infect the unlucky person who opens it. It's a wise party that
goes into a dungeon with a good supply of healing herbs for
these unpleasant circumstances.

Split Personality
An interesting feature is the ability to split the party up into
independent sub-groups of one or more. This can be done
almost anywhere: in towns, dungeons, the outdoors. It will,
in fact, be necessary at one point in the game to have three
groups in three different places at once. The display keeps
track of who is in which party, so you always know where
someone is and
switching between parties is
done with a
couple of simple
commands. So,
for instance, you
could have someone training at
the archery
school while
everyone else is
wandering
around town. Or
you could put
several party members to work earning money while others
bed down for the night in the local guesthouse.
Earning money is the main reason for the gemcutters,
tailors, carpenters and metalsmiths in the game. There is
usually work for one or more of these professions in each
town, and it's an easy, no-risk way of raising cash while other
party members go about other business.
Towns are different in layout, but similar in content, each
having a tavern, guest house (inn), and shops for weapons,
armor, food, and general supplies. Some also have ships
that can be hired to transport the party to various locations.
Of course, there are always people to talk to. It is a good
idea to speak to everyone you see. They don't move, but
they all have time schedules as to when they are "there," so
it may be tough locate a specific person. It's all very well to
know that Foozle the Wizard is out around 2:00 A.M., but
you don't know where he will show up, so you have to keep
moving around until you spot him. It can be a bit much at
times, since every town has its own collection of night owls.
Besides towns, there are also villages. These are strictly
residential (except for the armorer in Kharin, there are no
shops). In order to talk to people here, you need to know
who you want first. You can't just walk in anywhere. You
must knock on the door and ask for someone by name. If
that person doesn't live there, you'll have to try another
house in the village or a different name at that door. There
are a few inhabitants to be found lounging around the village, and as with the towns, some of them are nightowls
who only show up after dark. Fortunately, villages are
smaller, so people are usually easier to spot in them.
Travel is on foot, by teleport spell (pops you around the
countryside, although its range is rather limited), via ship, or
through special teleportals, which you must locate and learn
how to use in order to travel great distances instantaneously
(or get into places otherwise unreachable).
Walking along the roads is a good way to meet interesting
people. Not everyone out there is a monster. You'll come
across merchants, dwarves, wizards, knights, monks, halflings, hermits, elves, and others as you make your way
across the world. All of them have something to say (or sell).
They aren't there just as scenery. However, you'll need a pretty decent charisma score to talk to a lot of them.

When you've been through all ten dungeons, learned everything you can, and obtained all the items and chants you
need, it's time for the endgame, which is unique in my experience.
On the last page of the manual is the "Zirvanad". It contains a complete description of what needs to be done to restore the candle. This is what everything has been leading
up to: the performance of a complex magical ritual by
several members of the party. No game has ever had such
an elaborate, non-automatic ending. There is something
very satisfying about a finale that does not require an anticlimactic battle or passive reading of text on the screen.
Of course, there is a bit more after that, with a banquet in
Rebnard's castle for the victorious heroes, (a brief, automatic
sequence where, instead of being showered with treasures
and goodies, the King thanks you very much, says your
names will live in history forever, and mentions that there is
more evil brewing to the east (hint, hint, nudge nudge).
Naturally, that will have to wait for the sequel (grin).

Stinging Observations
Overall, Magic Candle is a very good game. Combat tends
to be on the slow side, even with special mushrooms to increase actions during a turn. Also, there are too many narrow passages in dungeons, where splitting the party to get
everyone through is necessary and this is exasperating at
times.
An easier way of finding people like Foozle would be welcome. Shops in towns could use a sign or icon so you know
what a place is without having to go inside and find out (Actually, this is planned for the sequel, but it isn't available in
this game).
The ability to restore a game while in play would also be
nice. As it is, if you want to go back to a previous position
(or if "Lukas" dies and isn't resurrected), it is necessary to reboot the game. You can, though, save at almost any point
in the game, including towns, dungeons and the outdoors.
Bottom line: Definitely recommended; a well-balanced
CRPG with several good and original features.

Magic Candle Tips
Warning: This section of the
review contains specific hints.
This is an extensive game and good note-taking is essential. Greet everyone you meet and write down their names so
you will know if you've talked to them before. Always ask for
rumors as well as advice. A lot of the rumors are true.
Because there is so much to learn and do and a great deal
of travelling besides, I recommend starting with the "Easy"
version, which allows 1000 days before the candle goes out.
The medium and hard versions allow 800 and 600 days
respectively. The difference in time is the only thing that distinguishes one level of difficulty from another.
Money is the major limiting factor in the game. For some
time you will never have as much as you want, so plan on
making money early on to help you along. Take the two
(Continued on page 42)

Survey

Computer
Cavalcade
of Sports

Electronic Arts' new EWB. The major differences between this version and that
reviewed in CGW #36 include a more
polished statistical and physical model (earlier
criticisms of the running game, fielding, and
fielding "errors" have been taken into account), improved computer opponent ("Earl"
handles pinch hitters, pinch runners, and
relief pitchers more cogently), revised "official
scorer" (no more "cheap" doubles on a throw
to home), and an on-screen view which offers
a larger pitcher/batter perspective to facilitate
action in the "Arcade" and "Play and Manage"
modes. (IBM, $39.95)
Sporting News Baseball: This action/strategy game from Epyx offers a statistical base coupled with joystick-driven action.
Managers select teams and establish lineups
using the joystick and scrolling through
rosters. Then, they must bat, throw, and catch
for each player on their team by utilizing the
joystick. The position of the joystick determines the location of the batter's swing, the
status of the base runners, type of pitch,
fielders' throws, and position of the active
fielder when the ball comes to him. Using the
keyboard, players can reposition players,
pinch hit, make substitutions, and call time
out. Each team, whether an actual major
league team's roster is used or the player
creates a new one, begins with actual major
league statistics. During play, however, these
statistics are modified up or down by the
manager's arcade ability. This is exciting to action fans, but may be a problem with major
league statistical buffs. (Apple II, C-64/128,
IBM, $39.95)

Basketball

—A

Computer Sports Survey
by Wyatt Lee

"You'll look sharp and
you'll feel sharp, too!. . ."
The reference to Gillette's classic television
program may be a little dated, but there has
been a literal cavalcade of computer sports
games that have been released since CGW's
last sports survey (CGW #46). Some have already been reviewed, others are nearing
release. This survey is designed to "touch
base" with those products which have not had
significant coverage in CGW prior to this issue.

Baseball
Earl Weaver Baseball 1.5: At press time,
CGW had just received an early look at

Basketball Challenge: Those who have
played NFL Challenge, the fine football
strategy game from XOR, will be delighted to
know that this product is just as excellent.
The program has strategic depth and statistical detail- The model being simulated is collegiate basketball and uses authentic statistics, even if the teams are semi-disguised by
fictitious names. It will not take the CGW
reader long to figure out that the Lexington
Bobcats are the University of Kentucky, the
Durham Devils are actually Duke University,
and Ann Arbor Wolves are the University of
Michigan. The animation in the program is
limited to arabic numerals which "cavort"
around the court to represent each player on
the team. The movement, patterns, and plays
are represented realistically, however.
The player becomes the coach of one of the
top college teams in the nation. He chooses
the lineup, offensive set (low post, high post,
double low post, weak side forward offset,
double stack alignment, or wheel set), offensive tempo, defense (man-to-man, three different zone defenses, full court pressure, or attempt steal/foul defense), and defensive

tempo. When the team is on offense, the
clock is stopped, or there is a dead ball, a particular play can be called or a particular player
designated to take a shot. In addition to the
basic defensive options, the game allows the
coach to set individual matchups to exploit
size or speed. There is even a key for each
team's coach to "yell" at various players to call
shots or plays during the action. Of course,
no sports strategy game is complete without
handling statistics. Basketball Challenge gives
individual statistics for both teams, as well as
a shot chart to display both successful and unsuccessful shots for both teams. Although the
documentation does not mention it, the statistics screens (including the shot chart) may be
printed using the "Print Screen" function from
the IBM keyboard. For strategy players, this is
an exceptional product, but a technical foul
must be called due to the lack of a statistics
compiler for those intending to use it for
league play. (IBM and Mac, $39.95)
Fast Break: Steve Cartwright's basketball
game emphasizes action in the Accolade
tradition. It is a three-on-three basketball
game between two human players or against
the computer. The player takes on the role of
player/coach because he controls one active
basketball player on the court and coaches
two computer controlled teammates. It is
primarily a reflex-oriented game (using either
the keyboard or a joystick for input), but does
offer opportunities for some strategic
decisions as well. The player/coach selects a
lineup from the ten fictitious basketball
players listed and can utilize a playbook containing fifteen offensive plays. Fourteen of
these are pre-designed and the last can be
designed by the player/coach. Prior to each
game, the player/coach determines which four
plays from the playbook will be used in the
current game. In addition, the player/coach
selects a defensive play from five pre-set defensive options (fast break set-up, tight man-toman, loose man-to-man, trap, and double
team). In spite of the strategy, though, the
avid "joystick jockey" will like this game far better than the basketball fans who would rather
coach than play. (C-64/128, $29.95, IBM,
$39.95)
Pure Stat College Basketball: Players
familiar with Software Simulations' Pure
Stat Baseball and Avalon Hill Microcomputer Games' NBA (by the same designers)
should recognize the menu driven interface
utilized in this strategy game. In fact, the
game is so much like NBA that it allows college players to continue playing with five fouls
and foul out with six fouls (just like the pros).
In addition, the statistics compiler should only
be utilized for up to three games in a row, just
like NBA. If players try to save more than
three games in succession, strange anomalies
may occur. Those who liked the previous offerings will more than likely want to purchase
this game.
For those unfamiliar with the "Pure Stat" approach, each game comes complete with

statistical data for great teams of the past.
The game can be played computer versus
computer, solitaire, or against a human opponent. After deciding on the starting lineup,
play proceeds with the expected jump ball.
Depending on the outcome of the tip, the
player will be confronted with a menu of offensive or defensive choices. On offense, he
must choose the point guard and whether the
guard will pass or shoot the ball. When shooting, this leads to a sub-menu which allows the
guard to shoot from the outside, drive and
shoot, or go for a three point shot. Another
sub-menu allows the player to determine
whether to guard against the fast break,
rebound aggressively, take the ball back outside, or immediately shoot the ball again. On
defense, the player selects from a menu of
basic defensive formations and a sub-menu
which allows one to guard against either the
outside or inside shot, go for a steal, double
team a particular player and/or play for a fast
break (multiple choices are available). After all
the choices have been input, the game offers
a graphic representation of the resulting play.
Unfortunately, the game doesn't always
reflect the data input- The passes which are ordered are not always executed. Further, on
several occasions a team scored a basket and
the defensive set was called. Then, the program showed that team, which was supposed
to be on the defensive, shooting and missing
a basket in order to set up a fast break for the
other team. One might also ask why shooting
a three point shot increases the frequency of
steals or why teams do not "crash the boards"
most of the time when they are ordered to
rebound aggressively. (Software Simulations,
959 Main St., Stratford, CT 06497, Apple II, C64/128, IBM, $39.95)

Boxing
T.K.O.: Accolade has always placed a
premium on visual effects and visceral impact.
This boxing game offers a fresh visual perspective (face-to-face with the opponent) and an
impressive artistic quality far beyond the cartoon approach of the company's earlier Fight
Night product (players actually see damage
taking place on the boxers' faces). This game
has much of the appeal of the coin-op
arcade's Punch-Out, but with more strategy
and a capacity for two player games. By utilizing the upper half of the screen as one
boxer's viewpoint and the lower half as the
other boxer's viewpoint, both players are
presented with a first person perspectivePlayers really see the punches coming at
them and it is thrilling to land a solid punch
on one's opponent. The game also uses a
side window for damage indicators for each
boxer and an overhead perspective of the ring
to show position in the ring.
Strategy begins with the scouting report
(Continued on page 44)

Review

Y

ou are an expert programmer, known to the world
only as Captain Blood. It was your goal to create the
ultimate, computer science fiction adventure. Working
alone, you programmed for months to create Hydra, a
galaxy of 32,768 planets, and the 14 intelligent races that
went with the game. Each race had their own language, social systems, and personality. To enable them to communicate with each other, you created UPCOM (the Universal
Protocol of Communication). To facilitate transit between
planets, you made hyperspace travel a reality. Finally, it
was finished. The last thing you remembered, before losing
consciousness, was entering the "RUM' command.
When you woke-up wondering what had happened, you
found yourself inside the game! Somehow, your physical
being had been translated into Hydra. Even worse, your
genetic structure had been mutated into someone who was
part-human and part-machine. Five identical clones were
also created. These clones are now hidden throughout the
galaxy. You have 2 1/2 hours of real time to find each clone
and disintegrate it, thereby replenishing your body fluids
before you degenerate completely into a machine.
This is the premise behind Mindscape's new graphic adventure game, Captain Blood (CB). The player, as Captain Blood,
has approximately 2 1/2 hours to find each of the clones
(called Duplicates). He must transport them up to his
spaceship and destroy them in a disintegration chamber called
the Fridgitorium in order to renew his body fluids. When all
five have been destroyed, the captain will be whole again.
Once this is accomplished, the fair maiden Torka must be
found and Hydra exited.

Instrument Checklist
The copy-protected game disk is accompanied by a 25 page
rulebook, which describes: the premise behind the game,
operation of the spaceship and its scouts, and communication
with each of the fourteen alien races. Display screenshots are
included, and all instrument functions are fully described.
Icons used in the UPCOM are pictured and information on
each race is also included. In short, it is a very good idea to
study all the documentation thoroughly.
CB was originally developed in France and, as it begins loading, an excellent musical score written by French songwriter
Jean-Michel Jarre is heard. Then, since the game takes place
from a first person perspective, the adventure opens in Capt.
Blood's spaceship's control room and the player sees what
Capt. Blood would see. The screen portrays all the controls
and information needed to play the game: X-Y map coordinates indicating the ship's position; a clock ticking away the
seconds, minutes, and hours before the good captain
degenerate into a machine; a viewscreen depicting space as it
would appear outside the ship; and a control panel representing nine buttons and several more gadgets, all of which
can be accessed by the mouse. Upon clicking a button, the
Amiga's speech synthesizer tells what function is being performed.

Finding a Needle in a Haystack
To find and destroy each of the Duplicates, the player must
land on inhabited planets and talk with its residents. The trick
is to find an inhabited planet, then obtain good information.
Random movement from planet to planet is not a formula for
success. The game always begins with the player orbiting an
inhabited planet. Getting to the next inhabited planet is the
player's problem. Considering the number of worlds available,
one must be both a good interviewer and notetaker.
To move from planet to planet, push the Hyperspace button
and hold onto your acceleration couch! The growing whine of

by Kevin C. Rohrer
your engines is heard and the planets begin rushing past, to
be replaced by the colorful kaleidoscopic effect of Hyperspace
Travel. Once out of Hyperspace, the stars reappear and the
ship slows to a stop, the nearest planet then coming into view
as orbit around it is automatically attained.

Threading
the Needle
Capt. Blood's
spaceship is too
large to land on a
planet. Instead,
planetary exploration
is accomplished by
sending an OORXX,
a highly specialized
living creature
designed for surface
exploration. Clicking
on the OORXX Landing Activator drops
one from the ship
into the planet's atmosphere. The
mouse is used to
maneuver it up a
jagged canyon to its
ultimate landing site
at the canyon's end.
It is here that an
alien will be found if
the planet is inhabited. Canyon
Captain Blood
TITLE:
walls are steep, high, and twist in
SYSTEM:
Amiga, C-64, IBM, ST
and out, so care must be taken to
VERSION
REVIEWED:
Amiga
not hit a wall. The OORXX is susPRICE:
$49.95
ceptible to damage; six crashes into
DESIGNERS:
Phillippe Ulrich
Didier Bouchon
canyon walls will destroy it. On
PUBLISHER:
Mindscape, Inc.
some planets, the inhabitants are
Northbrook, IL
rather unfriendly and will fire
homing missiles at the OORXX.
Naturally, failing to dodge these missiles will also cause its
destruction.

A Stitch in Time
Upon landing, the wireframe landscape fills in with fractal
graphics and, if an alien is present, he or she will appear on
the ship's display. The lower half of the control panel changes
to that of the UPCOM control panel and an amusing looking
pair of lips will be positioned directly below the viewscreen.
The lips move, of course, whenever the alien has something
to say. Clicking on the lips causes the UPCOM symbols that
are being spoken to appear on the viewscreen along with the
English translation of the alien's message- Players are required
to scroll through the available icons and, when a needed icon
is found, click on it to load the icon into a Response Area located to the right of the lips. When finished constructing a sentence, the player simply clicks on the lips and the sentence is

sent. This may sound rather involved, but it is actually quite
easy.
Aliens give both information and disinformation. It is up to
the player to determine fact from fiction. Obviously, what one
says to the alien has
a great deal to do
with what he will say
in return. Some
aliens talk gibberish
or intentionally lie,
others evade questions by responding
with another question, and a few tell
the truth. One will
also need to return
to planets previously
visited to question
aliens again. Fortunately, the OORXX that is sent to each planet's surface stays
there and may be reactivated through one of the control
panel buttons, saving valuable time.
In some cases, it is necessary to perform some action in
order to get information from aliens. On some occasions, one
may have to actually destroy another planet. This is where the
Planet Destruct Activator comes in. When this button is
pushed, the planet displayed on the viewscreen lights up
dramatically and, accompanied by the appropriate sound effects, is destroyed, leaving only empty space.
Once one of the Duplicates is found, it must be coaxed into

being transported up to the ship and into its Fridgitorium,
where it will be disintegrated, thus renewing the captain's body
fluids for another 2 1/2 hours.

The Finished Product
On the Amiga, all sounds are digitized and in stereo- The
graphics are impressive and very detailed, with none of the
jerky movement sometimes visible in less powerful computers.
The predominant game colors are cool shades of blue and
purple on a space-black background, all giving an unnatural
and unearthly effect to the game. The captain's arm is also
blue, skeletal, and metallic looking as if it, and he, are no
longer human. This surreal color scheme enhances CB by adding an additional air of the bizarre.
CB's strengths are an unusual concept (surviving five 2 1/2
hour time limits by locating an equal number of individuals
scattered throughout a large galaxy), equally unusual execution (the UPCOM language needed to talk to different alien
races), delightfully surreal graphics, and the pleasant variety of
sound. There is enough arcade action thrown in (landing the
OORXX on planets) to break up any monotony that may be incurred while moving between planets and conversing with the
aliens.
Finding aliens to talk to isn't easy, and getting good information out of them is downright difficult. Therefore, finding the
Duplicates and Torka is not an easy task- Thus, CB is not for
the beginning adventure gamer, but will be supremely satisfying to those that can overcome the game's obstacles. Those
garners looking for a difficult adventure, who enjoy unusual
graphics, like science fiction games, and enjoy arcade sequences will find tremendous play value in Captain Blood.

Review
by Johnny L. Wilson
"Gretzky from the top of the slot, moues behind the net, looks
for Robitaille, fakes a pass to the point, he tries a wrap-around,
he shoots . . . he S-C-O-R-E-S!" (the crowd goes crazy!) "Wayne
Gretzky, a power play goal at 19:45 of the third period . . . and
the Kings lead 6-5."
The unmistakable rising decibel level of a hockey announcer
broadcasting a goal is about the only missing bit of hockey color
in Wayne Gretzky Hockey. The rest of it is there, though, including the sounds of bodies hitting the boards, sirens sounding after
goals, and the roar of the crowd. Team colors can be changed to

The Great One
Digitized
Bethesda Softworks'
"Wayne Gretzky Hockey"

reflect the dominant color on each team's
TITLE:
SYSTEM:
uniforms, the "ice" is actually scuffed up during
# PLAYERS:
play, and the Zamboni really refurbishes the skatPRICE:
ing surface between periods (if the player wishes to
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:
wait for it). Players usually see about two-thirds of
the rink from a viewpoint directly overhead. This
angle offers a wonderful perspective from which to
observe plays unfolding and take note of offensive/defensive positions. It also has the most incredible "Instant
Replay" feature where players control how much of a play to
show, the speed to show it, and whether to stop/start action
"frame-by-frame" as though observing game films. From the
opening sequence portraying Wayne Gretzky, nattily attired in
white and black jersey, firing the puck directly at the monitor
screen (simulating the disintegration of the screen itself), to the
digitized final buzzer, this is a stimulating game.

Hat Trick
Actually, Wayne Gretzky Hockey is composed of three distinctive, yet similar, games: "Control Player," "Play and Coach," and
"Coach Only." The "Control Player" mode, the game offers
enough fast-moving action for any arcade fan. The ability to play
at either normal or slow speed and handicap one's opponent so
that his players function at high school, college, or junior levels
(as opposed to professional level) means that even those with
relatively poor reflexes can become competitive in this game.
However, for anyone who appreciates professional hockey,

Wayne Gretzky Hockey offers much more. The artificial intelligence of the non-controlled players produces extremely realistic
styles of play. Players are rated from 0-9 in eleven categories: aggression, power, injury (avoidance), skating, puck control, shooting, quickness, fatigue, (tendency to be charged with a) penalty,
passing, and checking. So, the "meat-eaters" will rack up penalty
minutes just like real hockey. Also, players with great skating and
puck control will be able to clear the defensive zone and bring
the puck across the blue line better than those known for their
checking and fighting ability. Since the gamer can control any
player on his team by simply placing the cursor over the onscreen
player and
clicking, it
is possible
to play
every position (except
goalie) and
every style.
In addition,
the game
is physics
based, so
the onscreen
players
move realistically according to
momentum; the
puck
caroms
authentically, and the
time-scale
is believable-

The active player
is controlled using either a joystick or a mouse.
Wayne Gretzky Hockey
Amiga
The joystick control is typical, but the mouse con1.2
trol is an extremely interesting interface. Gamers
$49.95
Bethesda Softworks
utilizing the mouse place the cursor in the direcBethesda Softworks
tion they wish the active player to skate, pass, or
P.O. Box 7877
shoot. If the cursor is a long way away, the onGaithersburg, MD 20898
screen figure skates rapidly toward it. If the cursor
is only slightly ahead of the figure, he skates
more slowly. This allows the player to carefully define the area
which the animated figure is to patrol and to be more precise in
directing their passes. This reviewer found it simpler to shoot accurately for a specific corner of the net with the mouse.

Behind The Bench
For those who do not like joystick or mouse-driven action as
part of their sports simulations, there is a "Coach Only" mode
where garners make the same kinds of decisions which confront
NHL coaches. Prior to the game, one selects the eighteen different lines to be utilized in various situations: three five-on-five
lines, three four-on-four lines, three five-on-four "power play"
lines, three five-on-three "power play" lines, three four-on-five
"penalty killing" lines, and three three-on-five "penalty killing"
lines. Players are not permitted to mix-up the lines in the course
of the game.
In addition, one must make two types of important coaching
decisions during the course of the game. First, one can call a par(Continued on page 49)

(Continued from page 18

F-14
Tomcat
le it. The first is to keep your "set up to
fire" distance constant and keep asking
for permission to fire until you get it (or
until the bogeys leave). Personally, I
prefer the direct approach where you
taunt the enemy into an attack. Fly right
through their squadron until you provoke
a fire fight. The only problem in doing
this is that you never know quite when
they'll fire. So, when they do fire, you will
be kept quite busy evading missiles
through the first portion of the dogfight.
If you survive long enough, though,
they'll be the ones on the run. Remember, a stalemate is a loser. Destroy your
enemy and he'll be sent to Allah, while
you'll be sent to Hawaii.
After completing your mission, do your
best to land and this will boost your
reputation. If you land in spite of flight
damage, you'll earn the respect of Admiral Hawk. Of course, ejecting from the
plane is sometimes the only solution, but
it will mean answering to the review
board. Ejecting from a perfectly good
working Tomcat will destroy your reputation and, maybe, your career. Waiting too
long to eject may result in injuries too
severe to allow you to return as a pilot,
ending your career. Should your reputation continue to improve, Admiral Hawk
will start to depend on you more and
more. Of course, this will also mean that
the difficulty of your missions will increase.
If you manage to survive through age
28 with an 85% rating or better, you will
be sent to Top Gun School. Your fellow
students/opponents are extremely good
and success will require you to be better.
Use the Immelmann. The other students
initially have a problem defending against
it. If you use it too often, though, you'll
find it becoming increasingly ineffective
against your opponents. They are, after
all, the best in the world. Should you
manage to win all your dog fights and
land successfully, you will be awarded the
Top Gun trophy.
Once you reach 36 years of age, you
are allowed to retire. Pilots who manage
this seemingly impossible task find a
variety of careers worthy of their reputations. Remember, this isn't just a game,
it's a way of life.
CGW

Conversions
Received
For the Amiga
Alien Syndrome (Mindscape)
Balance of Power: 1990 (Mindscape)
Dungeon Master (FTL)
Fire-Brigade (Panther)
Galactic Conqueror (Titus)
Platoon (Data East)
Space Harrier (Mindscape)
Time Bandit (Microdeal)
Zany Golf (Electronic Arts)

For the Apple IIGS
Balance of Power: 1990 (Mindscape)
Dungeon Master (FTL)
Where in the World is Carmen San
Diego (Broderbund)

For the Apple II+
Dinosaurs Are Forever (Polarware)

For the Atari ST
ALCON (Taito)
Zany Golf (Electronic Arts)

For the C-64
Dinosaurs Are Forever (Polarware)
720 Degrees (Mindscape)
Uninvited (Mindscape)

For the IBM
Balance of Power: 1990 (Mindscape)
Dinosaurs Are Forever (Polarware)
Halls of Montezuma (SSG)
Strike Fleet (Electronic Arts)
TKO (Accolade)
Wasteland (Electronic Arts)

For the Mac
Crazy Cars (Titus)
4th & Inches (Accolade)
Pirates (Microprose)
Warlock (Three-Sixty)

(Continued from page 30)

The Magic Candle
wizards and as many people as possible who have moneymaking professions. Put all of them, except Min (who has
the best charisma), to work when you reach Port Avur. Drop
off the mages at a guest house and have them learn spells
while whoever is left goes around town talking to people.
Later, when you're ready to do some serious exploring, you
can return to the castle and replace the carpenters, etc. with
fighting men.
When outfitting your team, chain mail is a good choice and
will be sufficient for awhile. Unless you plan to have your
mages fighting, you don't need armor or weapons for them;
just see to it that they have a supply of Nift on hand. Later,
when you head into the tough dungeons, you may want to
get the wizards some good armor.
Food should not be too much of a problem. It is relatively
inexpensive and one ration is good for one day. Buy some
extra for everyone, then just check on it once in awhile.
Have your best hunter hunt in the outdoors whenever possible to increase the skill and cut down on the chances of
dungeon ambushes. Forego training party members until
you have gotten their learning skills up. Work with the
mages first. When you find out where you can get "learning

training," go there with as much money as you can and get
that skill increased as much as possible.
The same is true for charisma. There is only one place to
get it increased and it is not cheap. Choose one person to
be the party "spokesman" and get that character's charisma
up as high as you can. It isn't important to raise everyone's.
Once you're ready to start poking around in dungeons,
make sure each character has protections up. This includes
using Nift (which protects against physical blows) and shields
(magical spells to protect against magical attacks). Check on
these after combat and restore them as needed.
At the start, work on accumulating sermin for energy and
drelin for faster travel in the outdoors. Everyone should have
a good supply of these. Start buying Nift and Gonshi (the
speed-em-up mushroom) when you're headed for a dungeon.
Charisma only has an effect on prices when you're dealing
with the general store merchant. Food, armor, weapons, and
a night's stay at the inn all have fixed prices which are not affected by charisma. Have your most charismatic character do
all the buying at the general store. In other shops, each person can do their own purchasing.
Dwarves roam the countryside with gems for sale. Buy
them (especially diamonds) whenever you can; the jewels
can typically be sold in town for about twice what you paid
(especially in Port Avur) and offer a good way of increasing
the money supply.
Be careful you don't get ahead of yourself too early in the
game. If you find that you're taking a beating from the
monsters or that every combat is won by the skin of your
teeth, you shouldn't be around that area yet. Backtrack a bit
and wait until your team has gotten a little stronger. Or, if
you feel you simply must snoop around in the outdoors,
have a good number of teleport spells memorized so you
can move around quickly to avoid fighting.
When you get to the later dungeons, take your time and
figure out your best strategy for each combat. Different
monster combinations may require different methods to
defeat. Nothing happens until you "Begin," so you have as
long as you need to make battle plans.
Until you have several people to ask for, it's best not to go
to any villages. You won't accomplish much. Remember that
the further away from Pheron you are, the higher your charisma needs to be. So you also want a pretty decent charisma
score, as well as names of residents.
Be careful in the towns of Sumruna, Delkona, and Knessos. These towns also contain strongholds of the enemy and
you may walk into one without realizing it until too late
(there are no "Here be Monsters" signs hanging over the
door). You can make the townspeople happy (and pick up
some interesting information) by cleaning them out, although it is not necessary to completing the game.
Finally, do be patient. There is much to learn in this game.
You discover something new in each town you visit. Attempting to whip through it won't help at all, and may well put
you in an impossible position (this is not a hack-and-slash
story, after all). Finding everyone you need to talk to in a
town may be trying at times, but is well worth the effort. If
talking to people is getting you down, take a jaunt in the
countryside, bop a few monsters, and come back again
later. There's always something to do here, so take it slow
and you'll enjoy the game that much more.
Copyright 1989 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

Computer Cavalcade of Sports
(Continued from page 33)

Computer
Cavalcade
of Sports

which is displayed on-screen prior to each
bout. The opponent's style and characteristics
are displayed on one half of the screen and
player's can access "sliders," those ubiquitous
sliding scales, to prepare their boxers for the
upcoming bout. Deciding on the right stance,
power hand, type of punch (head or body),
strength, and weakness may make the difference between victory or defeat. Once the
round begins, players must use the position
of the joystick to indicate which of nine different target locations and five different guard
positions they will use. Guard positions are important for more than defense, however, since
they also determine what kind of punch the
boxer will throw. Jabs are thrown from the
upper guard positions, for example, but uppercuts must be thrown from the lower guard
positions. In addition to these tactical considerations, players should try to maneuver
their opponents up against the ropes to enhance the effectiveness of their punches.
In fact, the only potential disappointment in
the product is the fact that players can only
fight fictitious boxers. The game would be absolutely incredible if one could battle "Ali," "Liston," "Marciano," "Louis," and company. The
game should appeal to fans of the coin-op
Punch-Out and pure boxing strategy games
like SSI's out-of-print Ringside Seat alike.
(IBM, $39.95 and C-64/128, $29.95).

Fishing
Reel Fishin': Interstel delights in producing
games with a different slant. Upon one's first
observation, bass fishing does not seem to be
particularly fertile ground for a computer
game, yet Roger Damon has used his skills as
an experienced strategy game designer to create an intriguing format of economic management, fishing strategy, and mouse-driven ac-

tion. When players manage to be successful
in all three areas, they can participate in the
stiff competition of tournament fishing.
Evaluating the weather, selecting a lake and
fishing spot, utilizing the right bait, casting,
setting the hook, playing the fish, and determining the optimal time to enter tournaments
are the important ingredients of this game.
Tutorial elements exist for the novice fisherman, as well. The graphics do not push the
envelope on the Atari ST and are rather
utilitarian in spots, but they have some very
nice touches (particularly when the fish is
reeled in and the representations of the
various lures in the tackle shop). This program takes longer to play than Rich Tauber's
Bass Champ, discussed later, and that indicates the essential choice between the two
programs. Bass Champ opted for a faster
pace as opposed to some aspects of realism.
Reel Fishin' offers a slower pace with more
user control when one is out on the lake.
(Amiga, Atari ST, $44.95)
Rich Tauber's Bass Champ: Even if you are
not a fisherman, this is an addictive program.
Famous bass fishing champion Rich Tauber
provides a very accessible tutorial and players
compete in a tournament against computer
fishermen. Although the graphics are simple
and far below the craftsmanship of those in
Reel Fishin', the utilitarian graphics do have
some nice touches. We were pleased with the
contribution the sonar graph makes to game
play. Strategists will find that paying close attention to the topographical map of fictional
"Lake Stikapig" combined with judicious use
of the sonar will help them locate the fish.
Then, accessing Rich to find out the best bait
and optimal retrieve to use should put the
player on the right track (but not always!). The
screen offers cute little comments when the
fish are not biting and a simple action sequence using the arrow keys when you get a
bite. Unlike Reel Fishin', however, players do
not have the feel that they are really controlling the cast and retrieve. The action portion
of Bass Champ does not occur until the bass
strikes and the hook is set. The game does
keep track of the player's accomplishments,
total winnings, and accumulated sponsors.
(Shadowfax Systems, 2005 W. Culver Ave.
Suite 19, Orange, CA 92668, IBM, $40.00)

Football
John Elway's Quarterback: Readers who
have played Quarterback in the coin-op arcades will instantly recognize the personal
computer version of the game. It is a direct
translation. Players select from nine offensive
plays (functionally twenty plays if one reverses
direction on the nine and considers punts or
field goals, as well) and six defensive formations (plus special teams to return punts or
block field goals). On offense, the player takes
on the role of the quarterback. On running
plays, the quarterback runs the ball and on

passing plays, the player acts as quarterback
until the receiver catches the ball (becoming
the active player). On defense, the player acts
as the middle linebacker (unless a pass is intercepted or kick is received, then the ball carrier becomes the active player). To keep matters simple, there are only nine players represented on each team. The documentation is
solid and helpful, but John Elway's Quarterback is the kind of game almost anyone can
sit down and play in order to receive loads of
action with little expended effort. (Melbourne
House, 711 W. 17th St. Unit G9, Costa Mesa,
CA, C-64/128 and IBM with 5 and 1/4",
$29.95, IBM with 3 and 1/2", $34.99)
John Madden Football: Electronic Arts
products are constructed around a clear ideal.
They are expected to be simple, hot, and
deep. John Madden Football, originally
released for the 64K Apple II series is just
such a product. It is simple enough in the
"Quick Game" mode to offer a balanced action/strategy game, but it is deep enough in
the "Standard Game" to allow players to edit
teams, design plays, use rosters from actual
NFL teams (only available on separate data
disks) which rate professional football players
in more categories than any other game to
date, utilize plays from Madden's old Oakland
Raider playbook, and exploit one-to-one
player match-ups. The "Chalkboard" (Play
Editor) provides an extremely elegant method
of designing new plays or modifying old ones.
The ability to assign blocks, pass patterns,
men in motion, and rushing routes is tremendous. The "Chalkboard" even allows players to
walk through a play and decide if it really
works. Finally, the game is hot because even
those who feel uncomfortable with joystickdriven games can compete with those who
are excellent arcade players. This is because
the computer players are coordinated enough
to often "make up" for the "player coach."
Statistics-oriented players will love the ratings
system and attention to detail (although some
will fault the model because the passing game
is potentially too effective); action-oriented
players will find an intriguing combination of
action mixed with strategy, and Apple II
owners will be amazed at what their machines
can still do. (Apple II, $49.95)

Golf
California Pro Golf: Mastertronic just
released a golf program with two different
courses and a similar interface to earlier golf
games (World Class Leader Board or Mean
18). The interesting variable in this interface is
the ability to address the ball high or low
(using the up or down arrows on IBM) or
deliberately play a slice or hook in addressing
the ball (using left and right arrows on IBM or
a swinging arrow on the C-64/128). The
product certainly offers exceptional quality for
the price. (C-64/128, $9.99, IBM, $14.95)
Jack Nicklaus' Greatest 18 Holes of Major

Championship Golf: Readers who are familiar
with Accolade's best-selling Mean 18 will be
familiar with the basic interface of this licensed
product from the same publisher. The basic
differences between the two products revolve
around better graphics and more realistic putting in the Jack Nicklaus endorsed product.
The "Golden Bear" himself selected the most
challenging holes to be included, designed
the two additional courses which are simulated, and provides on-screen commentary related to playing each hole. Also, the scorecard
feature will keep track of either stroke or
"skins game" play in this latest game. (IBM,
Apple IIGS, Amiga, $49.95, C-64/128, $29.95)

Hockey
Power Play Hockey: Electronic Arts' actionoriented USA vs. USSR hockey game uses
relatively fluid animation with full size caricatures of the players. The game allows one or
two players to play one-on-one (for that
refreshing "breakaway" feeling) or a more traditional five-on-five approach (the computer
controls both goalies in either configuration).
The game simulates realistic rules (but don't
expect the referee to call 'em close), utilizes
simple strategy, and emphasizes arcade action
at three different difficulty levels. The moves
look right and the sound is outstanding (it's
not the Chicago Stadium Wurlitzer, though),
but there is no statistics base to work from
and the game is often tongue in cheek from
the documentation straight through to the
soundtrack. (C-64/128, $24.95)
Wayne Gretzky Hockey: See the feature
review of Wayne Gretzky Hockey elsewhere
in this issue.

Olympic Games
Downhill Challenge: The French company
Microids designed this game which Broderbund has published in the U.S. The animation and sound are extremely representative
of the subject matter, but the color palette on
the IBM is disappointing because it is
restricted to CGA pink and blue. The scrolling
is remarkably fast. The terrain scrolls by in
such a way that it really gives the feeling that
one is travelling over uneven terrain and working to get an edge for making those sharp
turns between gates. Up to six players can
compete in slalom, giant slalom, downhill,
and ski jumping. Each competition, except for
ski jumping, offers three difficulty levels in
terms of runs and they all use a first person
perspective from right behind the skier so that
the player must react from the same visual
perspective as the skier. This is the most extremely satisfying ski simulation yet, except for
one major drawback. It is nearly impossible to
play on a 286 or 386 processor. There is a

"fix" for this problem, however. The Broderbund technical support BBS [(415) 4923526) from 5:00 P.M. to 8:00 A.M. Pacific)
has a very small memory resident program
called, "Whoa!" which can be downloaded and
allows players to slow down or speed up their
processors for game purposes. (IBM, $29.95),
ST ($34.95)
The Games: Summer Edition: There is
something for every action-oriented player in
Epyx's tribute to the Summer Olympics of
1988. There are sequences which are joystick
busters (particularly velodrome cycling, hurdling, pole vaulting, and hammer throw), but
there are also some sequences which require
considerable thought along with the player's
coordination (diving, rings, and uneven parallel bars). Of all the events, archery, hurdles,
and the hammer throw are the most
straightforward. With the other events, players
will immediately understand why this is such a
detailed player manual. It actually takes a flow
chart to describe the possible ring and uneven parallel bar sequences, not to mention
the more than two pages of possible dives for
that competition. The manual also offers
specific hints for better performances in each
event and historical summaries of past Olympic competitions. All of the events offer sufficient challenge for the player to keep improving. In addition to the competitions themselves, players will enjoy the care taken to model
the human body in the animation, the attention to camera angles in presenting the
panorama of the games (and Opening
Ceremonies), and the extremely effective fractal graphics utilized to show rapid motion and
sweeping scenery. (Apple, IBM, $49.95, C64/128, $39.95)
The Games: Winter Edition: Epyx presents
unique perspectives in this product. Using a
television camera perspective rather than the
standard first person perspective of other action games, the competitions challenge the
player's reflexes with a variety of rhythm, reaction, and retention checks. Rhythm is important in terms of speed skating and crosscountry where players must coordinate the
joystick movement with leg movement, as well
as the slalom event where the trick is coordinating left and right movement through the
gates. Reaction is important in ski jumping
where one must press the button at just the
right time for "take-offs" and "landings;"
downhill skiing where one must schuss
through the gates; and luge where one is required to steer sharply through the turns.
Retention is important in luge because
players who take the time to memorize the
various track configurations will have a
definite advantage in anticipating turns. It is
also helpful to memorize one's figure skating
routine in order to coordinate moves and
music more effectively. The Games: Winter
Edition offers extremely attractive graphics,
animation, and visual perspective coupled
with distinctive approaches to action-oriented
subject matter. Those who enjoy quick

moving games with multiple players competing will certainly like this one. (Amiga, Apple
II, IBM, Mac, $49.95, C-64/128, $39.95)
Winter Challenge: This budget-priced game
from Mindscape's "Thunder Mountain"
division provides action garners with five
winter events. The animation and graphics
are somewhat cruder than the artwork in The
Games: Winter Edition and the arcade sequences which are similar (Ski Jumping and
Slalom) are usually more forgiving in Winter
Challenge. When players participate in ski
jumping, downhill skiing, and bobsledding,
the on-screen view utilizes the typical first person perspective except in the ski jump where
one must balance his character once he is in
the air by means of a side view. The slalom
event utilizes an oblique overhead side-view
similar to that event in The Games. Downhill
skiing is distinctive because it uses logs
stretched sideways along the course rather
than the familiar "gates" of standard competition. The biathlon event in Winter Challenge
is similar to cross-country skiing in the game
discussed earlier. It does not have the realistic
touches of The Games, however. For example, one must use the fire button to edge
up hills in the Epyx game, but one's character glides easily uphill when competing in the
"Thunder Mountain" game. Also, the latter
game reuses scenery screens over and over in
the same order. Nevertheless, the target sequences in the biathlon (using an over the
character's shoulder viewpoint) are simple, effective, and fun. (Atari ST, C-64/128, $9.95)

Racing
Auto Racing
Test Drive II: The Duel: The graphics are better and offer more variety than those in the
original Test Drive. Players can actually drive
off the cliffs or onto the desert (and face the
consequences). There are two supplementary
disks that also add to enjoyment of the new
product, a "Super Cars" disk of five different
vehicles (Lotus Turbo Esprit, Ferrari Testarossa, Porsche 911 RUF, Lamborghini Countach,
and Corvette Zr-1) to add to the Ferrari F-40
and Porsche 959 on the master disk and the
"California Challenge" scenery disk which allows players to race down the California
coastline. Another nice feature is the ability to
race against a computer opponent as opposed to the game's predecessor which only
provided for racing against the clock. Those
who liked the original product will be very impressed with this release, but those who never
liked the joystick/keyboard steering system of
the original will want to steer clear of this
game. Like Test Drive and Grand Prix Circuit,
controlling acceleration, shifting gears, and
steering the car by means of the same device
is extremely difficult and frustrating.
(Continued on page 55)

(Continued from page 38)

Wayne Gretzky
Hockey
titular play for a particular situation.
There are five plays which the would-be
coach can order from the keyboard: forwards spread across the attacking zone,
left wing and center crossing over, right
wing and center crossing over, forwards
flooding the left side of the zone, and forwards flooding the right side of the zone.
Second, one can change lines to keep
fresh players on the ice. The energy
rating for the active line is displayed at
the bottom of the screen. This number is
continually declining as the active line expends energy. Failing to keep "fresh"
players on the ice causes the on-screen
players become sluggish and play poorly.
Another choice occurs on relatively rare
occasions: late in the game when one's
team is behind by only one goal or when
a delayed penalty has been called against
the opposing team (since play will be
stopped automatically when the opponents touch the puck, hence they cannot score). The option of pulling the
goalie is available to coaches who are
either aggressive or desperate. This is accomplished with a simple keystroke and
enables the coach to send an extra attacker onto the ice to replace the goalie.
It may not sound like the "Coach Only"
mode leaves very much for the player to
do in the course of a game, but it is absorbing nonetheless. It is a lot like actually watching a hockey game from atop a
professional arena, but it is even better
because of the ability to coach one's
favorite players.

Power Play
In spite of all the play value the previously discussed modes have to offer,
the most awesome way to play this game
is in the "Play and Coach" mode. In this
mode, one gets the satisfaction of
making the same coaching decisions as
in "Coach Only," but gets to participate
as an active player on the ice. It is satisfying to select a line with Phil Esposito
centering it, but it is absolutely thrilling to
stake out the low slot (directly in front of
the net), demand a pass, and "one-time"
it (shoot off the pass) past the opposing
goalie as though one were Esposito himself.

Penalty Box
The referee in Wayne Gretzky Hockey
is simulated very effectively. In fact, the
referee calls a close enough game that
players can really feel exultant when they
"get by with one."

Beyond the overhead viewpoint, there is
also some extremely nice animation in
the game. The referee makes his calls
using authentic hand signals. Delayed
penalties are shown by an upraised hand
at the bottom of the rink and the actual
calls are depicted on a special animated
scoreboard placed center screen whenever there is a penalty. Whenever a goal
is scored, there is an animated "reward"
sequence depicted on the scoreboard
(sometimes, complete with fireworks). On
one megabyte systems, there are supposed to be fight sequences on the
scoreboard. They look nice on the demo
disk, but no fights occurred on our
Amiga 1000 with MicroBotics expansion card.
The only drawback in addition to the
missing fight sequences relates to the
team data. The game comes with the alltime great Boston Bruins and Montreal

Canadiens teams. Unfortunately, the
statistics for Wayne Gretzky do not even
appear in the game unless one buys the
NHL team data disks. As of press time,
these disks were not finished. This means
that players will have to laboriously enter
statistics and rate their players themselves. It would have been nice if some
rosters of modern teams had been
released simultaneously with the game in
order to provide some guidance in
developing the ratings.

Press Box
The final evaluation of the product
must be an unhesitating recommendation to anyone who enjoys hockey. Those
who are looking for a pure action game
and do not really care about strategy may
opt for a more traditional arcade game,
but this reviewer thinks Wayne Gretzky
Hockey scores a hat trick in all three
modes.

(Continued from page 24)

Scorpion's
Mail
her instructions, as they don't seem to lead anywhere.

Ultima V
The coordinates given by the Demon for the Shard of Hatred
are not correct. If you go to that location in the underworld, you
won't find anything there. What you should do is go down
Covetous to the underworld, walk south to the mountains, and
then head off westward. That will put you on the right track as a
start. Use gems often to see what's around you. Readers have
also been asking about Smith the talking horse. No, he doesn't
have anything important to tell you, although it's important to
know where he is.

Bard's Tale II
Some people are having a hard time finding the fifth word of
the ten on level four of Dargoth's Tower. It's in a small room in
the dark area where the stairs up are located. It's not easy to find,
because of the spinners, but if you persevere, you'll come across
it.

Bard's Tale HI
Folks poking around in Tenebrosia seem to be having trouble
finding a Shadow Door to go with the Shadow Lock. The door is
around, just not immediately evident. See what you can do about
getting into the forest; just keep an eye out for Smokey the Bear
(hehe). For those messing around in Malefia, make sure you
bring all your special goodies with you, as you'll be needing them.

Future Magic
The battlestation is, not surprisingly, confusing and frustrating a
number of people. The first level has three different "room" configurations which are repeated throughout the level. This can give
a feeling of walking around in circles, even though you aren't
(level three is the same way). Each level is nine "rooms" wide by
eight "rooms" high. Using graph paper and the long-range scanner (for coordinates) you can map the place eventually, although
patience is needed (for those without patience, I can provide the
routes to take, but do try it on your own first).
That's about it for this trip to the backroom. Remember if you
need help with an adventure game, you can reach me in the following ways:
On Delphi, visit the GameSIG (under the Groups and Clubs
menu). On GEnie, stop by the Games RoundTable (type Scorpia
to reach the Games RT). On The Source, send SMail to ST1030.
By US Mail (enclose a self-addressed, stamped envelope with
your questions if you live in the United States): Scorpia, PO Box
338, Gracie Station, New York, NY 10028.
Until next time, happy adventuring!

Taking A Peek
(Continued from page 6)

games in this colorful, casino gambling
simulator. Blackjack, Roulette, Craps,
Keno, Video Poker and nine different
slot machines all follow the rules and
regulations of the New Jersey Casino
Control Commission. Now you can lose
your money without leaving the comfort
of your home. Mouse or keyboard controls operate the betting and dice rolling.
IBM (pictured) and C-64 ($34.95), ST
($39.95). Circle Reader Service #5.

Data East
470 Needles Drive,
San Jose, CA 95112
GUERRILLA WAR: The coin-op hit
comes to the computer with good looking graphics and color. One or two
players attempt to overthrow the government with a variety of weaponry that includes bazookas, flamethrowers and
grenades (your standard Central
American arsenal). Jungles, tanks, and
air strikes (along with five levels of difficulty) provide lots of challenge. IBM
(pictured), and ST ($39.95), Amiga
($44.95) and C-64 ($29.95). Circle
Reader Service #6.

Datasoft
19808 Nordhoff Place
Chatsworth, CA 91311
LANCELOT: Three mini-games combine to let the player relive Malory's "Le
Mort D'Arthur." in this text adventure.
"Camelot" recreates Lancelot's rise to
fame, "Logris" fills out the roster of the
Knights at the Round Table, and "The
Quest for the Holy Grail" completes the
trilogy. Beautiful graphic windows give
this game a lot of flavor. IBM (pictured)
and Mac ($39.95), C-64 ($29.95). Circle
Reader Service #7.
TIME AND MAGIK: A trilogy of time
travel, graphic text adventures that includes: "Lords of Time"-a scavenger
hunt through time; "Red Moon"-a search
for the Magik Red Moon Crystal that pits
the player against the sinister Timelords;
and "The Price of Magik"-a showdown
with the Mad Guardian of the Crystal.
The graphic screens are really stunning!
Amiga (pictured) Mac and ST ($39.95),
C-64 ($29.95). Circle Reader Service #8.

the strength and direction of the shot.
The game is easy to play, with colorful
graphics and sound. Amiga (pictured)
($39.95), C-64 and ST ($29.95). Circle
Reader Service #9.

Game Tek
150 S. Pine Island Rd.
Plantation, Florida 33324

DigiTek
104 W. Seneca, Suite 4
Tampa, Florida 33612

DOUBLE DARE: Outrageous physical
stunts combine with brainstumping
questions as the Nickleodeon/MTV teen
game comes to the computer. Get shot
out of a cannon into a plate of spaghetti, or dare your opponent in this updated
version of Jan Murray's "Treasure Hunt."
IBM (pictured) Apple and C-64 ($14.95).
Circle Reader Service #10.

HOLE-IN-ONE MINIATURE GOLF:
Up to four can compete over a variety of
classic and fantasy layouts in this 72
hole golf game. The mouse determines

HOLLYWOOD SQUARES: One or
two players compete for cash and a car
in the computer version of the long running TV hit. The player must figure out

if the celebrity square they've chosen in
this "Tic Tac Toe" game has given the
correct answer or is bluffing. The celebs
even have the one-liners that have made
this game so popular on TV. The only
problem is you can't drive away the car.
IBM (pictured) Apple and C-64 ($14.95).
Circle Reader Service #11.

Konami
815 Mittel Drive
Wood Dale, IL 60191
CONTRA: The popular Nintendo
cartridge game comes to the home computer in this one or two player "shoot
'em up." Players run, jump, and shoot
their way past hordes of alien defenders,
while trying to blast their way into the
alien's lair. Machine guns, lasers, force
fields, spread guns - they're all here. The
playing hints include: "Shoot everything
in sight." Need we say more? IBM (pic-

of combat in this action game. The
players have separate screens one
above the other, and must work
together if they are to get to the evil
central computer creating the infestation
threatening to overrun the planet Icarus.
Both tactics and strategy are required to
complete this one. Typical Psygnosis
graphics and sound. Amiga (pictured).
Circle Reader Service #15.

CCS:
Scorpion
19 Harbor Drive
Lake Hopatcong, NJ 07849
ANCIENT BATTLES: One or two
players compete in this ancient warfare
game and construction kit. The game
has hidden movement, computer control of subordinate generals, auto-deploy
of forces, five scenarios (Hydaspes,
Cynocephalae, Zama, Pharsalus and
Chalons) and a construction kit to
design your own battle. This is a good
looking game on a neglected historical
period. IBM ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #16.

Actual Screenshots:
Scorpion
19 Harbor Drive
Lake Hopatcong, NJ 07849

tured) and Amiga ($39.95). Circle
Reader Service #12.
JACKAL: The player is a member of
the Green Beret's Jeep Squad in this
POW rescue mission. One or two
players operate an all terrain, four-wheel
drive, super-mobile attack jeep, armed
with machine guns, missiles and hand
grenades. (We could use one of those
on the Southern California freeways!)
Smooth forward scrolling and top down
graphics make this easy to play. IBM
($39.95). Circle Reader Service #13.

Melbourne House
711 West 17th St., Unit G9
Costa Mesa, CA 92627
WAR IN MIDDLE EARTH: Tolkien's
epic trilogy finally makes it to the computer in this fantasy role-playing/graphic
animation adventure/war game. The
player controls Frodo, Gandalf, King

Aaragorn and the good generals, and
must see that the One Ring is tossed
into the fires of Mt. Doom. Strategic
maps show the movement of large forces, while individual screens cover the
encounters that Frodo and the other
ring bearers have with the forces of
good and evil. Frodo must mobilize the
forces of good, encounter and screen
Sauron's evil minions, and get to Mt.
Doom before Sauron finds the One
Ring. This is a very detailed game with
many layers of strategy. Amiga (pictured), IBM, IIGS and ST ($49.99). Circle
Reader Service # 14.

Psygnosis Ltd.
First Floor,
Port of Liverpool Bldng.
Liverpool L3 1BY, U.K.
CAPTAIN FIZZ MEETS THE
BLASTER-IRONS: Two players are
necessary to get through the 22 levels

PURPLE HEART: Another 1 or 2
player commando game that includes
the usual weapons. In addition, though,
you also get Helicopters, Bombers,
Snow Mobiles (!), Motor Bikes and
Nuclear Subs. Captured weapons help
increase firepower and six different
landscapes provide the variety. C-64
($29.95). Circle Reader Service #17.

Strategic Simulations, Inc.
1046 N. Rengstorff Ave.
Mountain View, CA 94043
FIRST OVER GERMANY: Flying a
World War II, B-17 is the order of the
day in this one player game of air combat. The player starts as a 2nd Lt. pilot
and selects a crew, practices take-off
and landing, bombing and gunnery, and
formation flying. After the training phase
he must then fly a 25 mission tour of
duty over Germany. The screens include
strategic flying and tactical combat. C64 ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #18.

(Continued from page 46)

Computer
Cavalcade
of Sports

Drive II: The Duel as well as Accolade's
earlier high performance racing games.
(Amiga, IBM, $44.95, C-64/128, $29.95,
Scenery and Data Disks $19.95 and
$14.95)

Motocross Racing
Suzuki's RM250 Motocross: Gamestar
is known for its action-oriented sports
games and Dynamix is known for high
quality graphics. Both reputations come
together in this racing game which requires fast reactions, thoughtful set-up
(adjusting the bike for the race), and intuitive strategy for efficiently handling the
curves and jumps on each of ten different tracks. CGW's pre-release version
of the game offered impressive scrolling,
both in terms of frame rate and the intended perception of bouncing over
bumpy terrain and flying through the air.
(IBM, $39.95)

Fortunately, the simpler levels of the
game provide an auto-shift mode which
makes it easier, but the same lament
regarding steering is applicable to Test

Soccer
International Soccer: This British import

offers crude, blocky graphics and extreme
ly basic play value. It is very similar to
Atari 2600 games where the play is
straightforward, but limited to a very few
moves. At the lower difficulty levels, one
doesn't even have to pass to one's teammates in order to run up one-sided
scores against the computer opponent.
At least, the presentation of the trophy
has a cute graphic sequence. (CRL, c/o
Scorpion, 19 Harbor Dr., Lake Hopatcong, NJ 07849, C-64/128, $29.95)
MISL Soccer: Ed Ringler designs sports
games which not only emphasize action,
but also present the player with an awareness of strategy and teamwork. Like
Mindscape's Superstar Ice Hockey and
Superstar Soccer before it, MISL Soccer
(Major Indoor Soccer League) demands
that the player pay attention to the
team's fatigue levels and power ratings in
order to substitute effectively. Also like its
predecessors, the game allows the player
to be a general manager and coach by
making trades and taking a team
through training camp. In addition, the
game allows a player to participate in a
league against computer opponents (not
against human players, though). The

game utilizes teams modeled and named
after MISL teams and plays according to
authentic indoor soccer league rules.
(Amiga, Apple II, $39.95, C-64/128,
$34.95)

Tennis
Serve and Volley: This Accolade action
game has a distinctive emphasis on
strategy. Players utilize court maps to
determine position and aim from a
strategic perspective. From the tactical
perspective, one uses performance bars
(similar to those used in Mean 18's interface) to choose between flat, slice, or
topspin serves. In the same way, players
choose to use volley, lob, forehand or
backhand shots on the returns. The
game is sophisticated enough to allow for
fatigue and court types (clay for a longer
bounce, grass for a slower bounce, and
hard surface for the fastest and highest
bounce), as well as keep track of player
statistics through a single-elimination
tournament. With three different difficulty

levels, court backgrounds, and court surfaces, players shouldn't get tired of this
keyboard-driven tennis game for one or
two players. (Apple IIGS, IBM, $39.95)

Wrestling
Take Down: Gamestar's wrestling
game for one or two players is, of course,
a "take off' on the national "put on."
Take Down has some of the fun of
professional tag team wrestling without
too much "show biz" hype. The wrestlers
all have their special costumes, "stage
names," and distinctive moves, but unlike
those events which are regularly
televised, there is more action inside the
ring than outside. Each wrestler comes
with four pre-programmed moves (accessible at the cardinal points of the joystick
with the button depressed) and all
wrestlers have the ability to tag their
partner, throw a punch, climb the ropes
and dive on their opponent, and bounce
off the ropes for a flying body tackle, go
for a pin, or throw their opponent off

prior to a pin. Joystick operation is less
confusing than Mindscape's Bop'n
Wrestle where the same joystick positions
represent different moves depending on
the wrestler's position or Data East's
Tag Team Wrestling where there are
eight different joystick positions to
memorize, so it offers less joystick busting and more fluid action. Those players
who want more moves will opt for the earlier games, but those who want a relatively simple and satisfying game may want
to consider Take Down for their wrestling
game. (C-64/128, $29.95)

From The Pressbox
The current proliferation of sportsoriented titles practically guarantees that
sports fans can find the type of game
they are looking for in each sport.
Whether one is seeking to improve one's
reflexes or synapses, there is certainly a
game available to offer a satisfying challenge.

Back Issues

Review

T

hey suffered from scurvy, fever, rusty salt pork,

and seasickness to travel by sea or alkali dust,
mud bogs, Indian encounters, and cholera to
travel overland. They migrated toward camps with
names like Jackass Hill, Delirium Tremens, and Gomorrah. They gambled with profligate abandon, drank in
bacchanalian excess, and celebrated all the erotic
pleasures their gold dust could buy. Gold Rush,
Sierra's latest animated adventure game, celebrates
those wild and reckless days of the California Gold Rush.
In this case, the player "becomes" Jerrod Wilson, a
young gentleman and typical East Coast "city slicker,"
preparing to seek his fortune in the California gold
country. In the opening sequence of Gold Rush, the
four-way split screen gives the player some advanced information of the story that is to unfold. Also, the action
in this sequence reminded this reviewer of the coming
attractions for an old movie serial.
The journey begins with Jerrod standing in Brooklyn
Heights, New York in the year 1848. It quickly becomes
apparent that Jerrod's goal is to find passage to California, discover gold and become wealthy beyond his
dreams. There also is the matter of Jerrod's long lost
brother. (Maybe the two are somehow connected?)
After walking around the park, the player should try to
find Jerrod's home. Give the house the once-over and
"take" things that you may find. (The game comes with
an introductory walk-thru to help the player get started.)
After Jerrod has gone through the house he should immediately head toward town (go west, young Jerrod).
Early on, players will realize that a time factor is built
into the game. The current time elapsed can be discovered by pressing the "F6" key. Don't take too long
because finding passage west becomes much more expensive once the Gold Rush is announced. It may take
the player 2 or 3 repetitions of the sequences to get all
the desired tasks completed prior to leaving on his journey. Therefore, make sure that the save game feature is
used after each new clue is discovered.
Before leaving for California the player will have to
decide which route Jerrod will take. Will it be the Overland Trek, the Cape Horn Trek, or the Panama Trek. If
the player chooses the Panama Trek the total points
available for the game will change from 250 to 255.
This is because in History, the Panama Trek was the
most expensive route, and in some respects the most
perilous. The player will also have to accomplish many
tasks including: getting Jerrod's mail, selling his house,
and buying certain items that will help along the journey
depending on which route the player has chosen.
In order to win the game, players will experience what
it was like to "See the Elephant" (to experience the excitement and the lure of California Gold). One will also
learn of the ordeals that a traveler in the 1800's would
have come across. One will be taught the lessons of correct choice in animals for your team or what time of
year is best to make a journey of this nature. If, by
chance, the wrong choice is made, Jerrod will pay dearly, with his life! As with the real forty-niners, the West
will be very relentless.
Players will learn about bridling horses, poisonous
plants, eating the correct foods and branding horses.
When in doubt about specifics, it is helpful to refer to
California Gold, the 88-page mini-history book included
with the game.
The MacNeil brothers have really pushed the Sierra

"Californy"
or Bust
Sierra Revisits The "Gold Rush
by Michael Chaut

development tools to the limit in this product. The more
than 160 different scenes built into the game make this
game as large an undertaking as Kings Quest IV. It
should also be noted that Gold Rush is linear in nature,
but prospective adventurers should not be
misled into thinking
of this game as onedimensional. The
designers have given
us many riddles and
pitfalls to keep us
busy along the way.
As the game progresses, the puzzles get
progressively more difficult. This reviewer
recommends playing
through all three
scenarios. They each
have their own flavor
and perspective.
In terms of game
play, the use of abbreviations for the
most commonly used
terms (i.e. I = look, g
= get, t = talk) and
of the "F3" key (in the
MS-Dos version) to
"retype" or "echo" a
command helps to speed up play.
TITLE:
SYSTEM:

It should be mentioned that this game
comes without traditional copy protection, but it does ask the player a ques# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
tion concerning the era from the miniDESIGNER:
history book before game play can
PUBLISHER:
begin. The game comes standard with
five 5 and 1/4 inch disks, two 3 and 1/2
inch disks, a "Gold Rush Regions" map,
the mini-history, an MS-Dos Reference Card, and a
game play book (with walk-thru).
It is a difficult task to classify Gold Rush. Due to the
program's historical accuracy (The designers put over
250 man hours of research into this product, as well as
verifying its preciseness with an expert on the historical
era.), it is tempting to call it a "historical simulation."
However, it also hails with the best of Sierra's adventure games in terms of game play and graphics. Much

Cold Rush
IBM
(Soon:Amiga, Apple IIgs,
Apple Ile/c, Atari ST, and
Macintosh
1
$39.95
Ken & Doug MacNeil
Sierra
Coarsegold, CA

more than a history lesson, Gold Rush is stimulating, enriching and entertaining, a welcome addition to the
Sierra library.
Warning:
This
section
of the
review
contains
specific
hints.
Players
should research the
proper equipment, food,
and animals
to use by
means of
the mini-history. California Gold provides significant information for
all three routes to the west.
Further, the player should save the game regularly as
Jerrod progresses on his journey. One never knows
when a pitfall is just beyond the horizon. Since the
game conveniently provides the player with the ability to
save twelve different game positions within a directory,
this gives the player an easy method to backtrack.
It is important to have visited the town cemetery, taken

a family photo, and found the gold coin before leaving
Brooklyn. One cannot successfully reach the game's ultimate goal without performing these tasks. Be certain
to visit the blacksmith at Sutter's Fort, he has an important message. It will also be necessary to pan or dig for
gold so that Jerrod may purchase the necessary items
to find his final destination. There are up to fifty places
that will provide gold and points (1 point each) to the
player throughout the land surrounding Sutter's Fort.
Perseverance is necessary to find the right spots. While
one can win the game with only four "gold strikes", this
will not allow the player to earn the highest possible
score. When the player ultimately finds the Gold Mine,
there are eight visible and twelve hidden clusters of gold
to be unearthed. Again, these are not needed to win the
game, however not finding them will take its toll on
one's final score. For the hidden gold, use the pick on
the gray shaded areas of the mine walls.
Players should look for visible and invisible clues. If an
object cannot be identified, check it out. In order to win
this game with all possible points Players will have to
really persist.

Contest Results

Top Ad Scavenger
Hunt Contest Results
We had an impressive 175 entries to
the TOP AD Scavenger Hunt from the
January issue (CGW #55 pg. 13). Even
more impressive is the fact that the
majority of them got all the answers right!
Wow! You guys (and gals) are good!
By far the most interesting answers
came on question #20. We asked "The
common name of a person appears backwards in an ad. What name and what
ad?" Our faces are red on this one. At the
time the question was written, we mistakenly thought Sir-Tech was running an
ad which included the line "Trebor Sux".
Trebor, of course, is Robert backwards.
Since the ad didn't run, the question became void. However, most of you were
resourceful and found other examples of
backward names (some stretched a bit):
Ted, Bob, Pam, Gord, Meg, Sal, Ciryl. Although hardly a common name for a per-

son we thought those of you that noticed
Marlboro backwards in the Accolade ad
were particularly clever.
A couple of you noticed that the name
of the contest was misspelled
(Scavanger). Very observant.
Some of you also noticed that we didn't
list a prize for this contest. Surprised? We
certainly were when our copies came
back from the printer! At first we said
"Hey, they're having fun, they don't need
no stinking prizes." But we changed our
minds. So David Daniel of Redlands
California, your name has been drawn
from among the entries as our
Scavenger Hunt winner. You get a three
year subscription to CGW.
Next month we will announce the winners of the TOP AD awards for best ads
in the January issue as well as the reader
who came closest to picking the correct

order of finish. We will have an unusual
contest next issue as well. Thanks for
playing!
The Answers to the Scavenger Hunt
Quiz: 1/ Epyx-29 2/Interplay-22; 3/Infocom-34; 4/Cyborg-50; 5/Sir-Tech-58;
6/Cinemaware-27; 7/Interstel-65; 8/Taito10; 9/Lucasfilm-5; 10/Omnitrend-46;
11/Spinnaker-45; 12/June 1950-April
1951; 13/Simcoarum-60; 14/Star Empire67; 15/Zak McKraken-7; 16/Jeep-30;
17/Romance of the Three Kingdoms-43;
18/AH64A Apache in the Microprose Ad55; 19/Jetfighter-35; 20/See above;
21/Typhoon of Steel-17; 22/Tracon-61;
23/Aircraft or jet-52; 24/Redline-18;
25/Blackbeard-8; 26/Cassandra-73;
27/Malifon-68; 28/Stoneseeker-21.

Hall of Fame / R.I.D.

Be it known to all gentle persons that the above named games have been well
spoken of by our readers over a goodly period of time. Therefore they have been
enshrined in the CGW Hall of Fame as
games of renown and worthy of play by all

Game Ratings Chart

The wait is over! The new, improved CGW Reader Input Device is "online! Beginning with
CGW #54 (December 1988) we have asked you, our readers, to use our new rating system to
rate 168 current games. With the new R.I.D. letter grade system you are able to be more
precise in your ratings- We converted your letter grades to a 12 point numeric scale. Games
rated A+ received 12 points, Games rated A received 11 points, etc. The individual scores
were added and averaged- The results are expressed numerically and have the same familiar
feel of our old 9 point system.
We have also changed our categories. Whereas in the old R.I.D. system we only had three
categories: strategy, adventure, and action (and two of those categories were combined on the
game ratings page); we now have six categories all displayed in the same chart. You can quickly find the top rated games in your favorite category simply by running your finger down the
"Category column.
Some games belong to more than one category.

The Categories
Strategy (ST): Games that emphasize strategic planning and problem solving.
Simulation (SI): Games based on first person perspectives of real world environments.
Adventure (AD): Games that allow you to take your alter ego through a storyline or series of
events.
Role-Playing Adventures (RP): Adventure games that are based on character development
(usually involving attributes)
Wargames (WG): Simulations of historical or futuristic warfare from a command perspective.
Action/Arcade (AC): Computer games that emphasize hand-eye-coordination and reflexes.
Note: Next month we will be retiring a number of games to the CGW Hall of Fame. Don't
miss it!

r,

