Taking a Peek

Accolade
San Jose, CA
THE GAMES: WINTER CHALLENGE: This
product demands "peak" performance from
up to ten competitors in eight different pulsepounding winter sports simulations. Included
are downhill, cross country and giant slalom
skiing, the ski jump, bobsleds, luge and more.
A combination of VGA bit-mapping and polygon-filled graphics combine with full sound support and instant replay feature to create a
"winter wonderland" for sports enthusiasts.
IBM ($54.95). Circle Reader Service #1.
Disney Software
Burbank, CA
DICK TRACY: THE CRIME-SOLVING ADVENTURE: A tour de force for Disney's Sound
Source, Dick Tracy is full of digitized sounds,
voices and music that add a cinematic touch
to a game with comic book transition scenes
and arcade actions sequences. There's plenty
of problem solving, too, as criminals must be
interrogated, clues found and wiretaps placed.
Will Tracy be able to clean up the city? Get a
clue and find out... IBM ($39.95 or $59.95 in a

combo pack with the Sound Source). Circle
Reader Service #2.
HARE-RAISING HAVOC: Roger Rabbit has
his own personal gauntlet to run in this interactive cartoon. Using some very bizarre logic (?)
puzzles, Roger must figure out how to rescue
Baby Herman before Mother comes back and
sends Roger back to the science lab. Full of
pratfalls, electrocutions, and other forms of cartoon violence, Hare-Raising Havoc gets plenty of laughs. IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #3.
Dynamix
Eugene, OR
THE ADVENTURES OF WILLY BEAMISH:
As previewed in CGW #86, cartoon hero Willy
Beamish, the irrepressible pre-teen and
modern suburban survivalist, takes players

through an animated adventure that is a cross
somewhere between The Wonder Years and
The Simpsons. A wild adventure game that's
full of youthful mischief and grand adventure.
IBM ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #4.
Flight Deck Software
Williamsburg, VA
(804) 229-1757
THE INSTRUMENT FLIGHT TRAINER
(PROFESSIONAL 5.0): This is not a flight
simulator, per se, but is an instrument trainer.
This is not a game, although it is fascinating
in its true-to-life "feel" for real life instrument
flying. The program doesn't emphasize the
"outside view" and the user interface relies on
both keyboard and joystick input. Basically,
what Microsoft Flight Simulator is to civilian
flight, this product is to civilian instrument

Taking a Peek

flight, using scaled, detailed graphics. IBM
(professionally priced at $499.95). Circle
Reader Service #5.
Bullseye Software
Incline Valley, NV
SPLAT'ERS: The highly popular outdoor
"Paint Wars" game comes to the personal
computer in this arcade strategy game. Armed
with a "semi-automatic" air-powered paint pistol, the object is to capture flags from the
maze of rooms while avoiding the polygonfilled opponents and helping teammates. MAC
($69.95). Circle Reader Service #6.
Hi Tech
New York, NY
SESAME STREET: ABC's AND 123's: These
two black and white Macintosh games are relatively mediocre edutainment programs. What
gives this package value is the fact that two
programs are included in the box and that
one's kids might be more inclined to learn
from them through the licensing of the
Sesame Street characters. Letter Go Round
has Big Bird practicing letter recognition, spelling and word formation, while Astro Grover
(pictured) has children counting, adding and
subtracting. MAC ($39.95). Circle Reader Service /17.
FormGen
Toronto, Canada
COMMANDER KEEN: ALIENS ATE MY
BABY SITTER!: Young genius Billy Blaze is in
a world of hurt. Nasty aliens from the planet
Fribbulus Xax have stolen his baby sitter and
his parents are going to be home soon. This is
a job for Commander Keen, with all the jumping, dodging, climbing, shooting and other arcade actions one can imagine. There is even a
Pong "game within the game" to play as the
"player" passes the time during long space
voyages. IBM ($49.95). Circle Service #8.
ADVENTURES OF BEETLEJUICE:
SKELETONS IN THE CLOSET: This surreal
shoot-'em-up is geared for younger players
who might benefit from a slower paced game.
Beetlejuice must zap skeletons in an attempt
to rescue the fair (?) maiden Lydia. Still, he
can't stand around to line up the perfect shot,
since a "Jaws"-like monster emerges from the
floor at random and its favorite drink is Beetlejuice. IBM ($24.97). Circle Reader Service #9.
DAFFY DUCK, P.I.: THE CASE OF THE
MISSING LETTERS: The familiar Warner
Brothers cartoon characters are attempting to
stop daring, undaunted Daffy Duck from collecting the missing letters. These "missing letters," of course, complete the partially assembled words located around the game
board which, when completed, allow Daffy to
press ahead onto the next level. Judicious use
of bananas can keep the blocking characters
at bay long enough to made a "b" line for the
next letter. IBM ($24.97). Circle Reader Service #10.
THE FLINTSTONES: DINO: LOST IN
BEDROCK: Long before there was "Bonk,"
there was Fred Flintstone! This arcade/video
game for IBM-oriented youngsters puts Fred
on the trail of his missing pet, Dino, through
tar pits, swamps and the ever popular rock
quarry. Definitely for the younger crowd (preschool to preteen), things move at a slightly
slower pace with fewer "monsters" than most
Nintendo games. IBM ($24.97). Circle Reader
Service 11 11.
GREMLINS 2: THE NEW BATCH: Trapped in
a high rise building of 46 floors, each overrun

with cute little brown gremlins who, left to
their own devices will become the "green
meanies" of cinema fame. Armed with only a
flashlight and incendiary camera flash, the
player must walk around the floor/mazes searching for the batteries and flash bulbs to keep
his weapons at full charge. This one should
keep arcade gamers amused past midnight.
IBM ($24.97). Circle Reader Service #12.
THE JETSONS: BY GEORGE, IN TROUBLE
AGAIN: It's a sad day at Spacely's Space
Sprockets. Automation aggravation is running
rampant and tools, cogs and gears go on a
rampage. George Jetson must jump and crawl
past every obstacle in order not only to save
his job, but his whole company. Fortunately,
Rosie the robot has a control rod which will
slow down the mutant mechanisms. IBM
($24.97). Circle Reader Service #13.

SESAME STREET: LEARNING CLASSICS:
This "bundle o' bits" includes seven "classic"
Sesame Street learning programs in one box.
It is easy to tell they are "classics" by their
"classic" CGA level graphics. Still, Ernie's
Magic Shapes and Big Bird's Special
Delivery will have enough recognition for the
less critical young Cookie Monsters of the
household. Letter-Go-Round is pictured, but
all the games feature the basics of number, letter, color and shape recognition. IBM
($24.97). Circle Reader Service #14.
SESAME STREET: FIRST WRITER PRINT
KIT: Three programs in one, the
Letter-Go-Round (pictured under Sesame Street: Learning Classics where it is also included),
Sesame Street First Writer and the Sesame
Street Print Kit give kids a real beginning
level, "hands on" experience into word process-

Taking a Peek

ing and printing. IBM ($24.97). Circle Reader
Service #15.
TOM & JERRY: YANKEE DOODLE'S CATASTROPHE: This animated cartoon arcade
game allows the player to take the role of
Jerry in this action/arcade romp through a
household full of cartoon mayhem. Antagonist
Tom is after our hero, and the two characters
can fence, throw eggs and dynamite at each
other at will. IBM ($24.97). Circle Reader Service #16.
Better Games
P.O. Box 7644
Chicago, IL 60680
(312) 588-0795
STELLAR AGENT: While most people
thought that the "text only" adventure game
died with the brouhaha at Infocom, Robert A.
Kraus has attempted to recapture the glory
days of old. Using a menu-driven interface in
lieu of an actual parser, Stellar Agent puts
the player square in a science-fiction spy adventure that is both enjoyable to read and
play. IBM ($35.00). Circle Reader Service #17.
Koei Corporation
Burlingame, CA
ROMANCE OF THE THREE KINGDOMS II:
Romance of the Three Kingdoms is back
with AdLib compatible sound support, a classier looking rules manual and an additional
scenario. Historical and "fiction" options are
also available for each scenario. IBM ($69.95).
Circle Reader Service #18.
Konami
Buffalo Grove, IL
BACK TO THE FUTURE: PART III: With the
object to rescue Clara Clayton and stop
Buford "Mad Dog" Tannen, the player must
maneuver through classic arcade sequences
in order to get the girl. As Marty McFly and
Doc, the West becomes wild again with 3-D
scrolling action, as well as shoot-outs and a
pie tin toss! AMIGA ($39.95). Circle Reader
Service #19.
KILLING CLOUD: The San Francisco Police
Department of 2097 is very different from 100
years ago. Through the toxic smog, the evil
gang of Black Angels knows that the only
good cop is a dead cop. Your mission: to fly a
hovercraft and (literally) net the bad guys.
Armed with machine guns and cannons,
players fly through this simulation/adventure
game not only to catch the bad guys, but also
to get the bottom of the toxic "Killing Cloud"
that threatens the city. Amiga ($49.95). Circle
Reader Service #20.
J.R.R. TOLKIEN'S RIDERS OF ROHAN:
Things do not look good for the Riders of
Rohan. With Saruman flipped out in Isengard
and the evil forces of Sauron stirring to the
east, what's a king to do? This game puts the
player under the crown of Rohan's King
Theoden who must wage war with Isengard. A
strategy game in "real time" (akin to Command HQ in that regard), this fantasy epic
has been a long time coming and offers a
plethora of features for Tolkien fans and
strategists alike. Troops must be maneuvered
strategically and tactically in battle (a la
Sword of Aragon) in order to secure the day
for the forces of goodness. IBM ($49.95).
Circle Reader Service #21.
Maxis
Orinda, CA
SIM ANT: This time the "bugs" in your computer are meant to be there. With this
electronic version of an Ant Farm gone wild,

the player takes on role of "entodeus" (literally, "insect god") in the tradition of the hit
"sim" toys, SimCity and SimEarth. Not only
will players acquire a default knowledge of the
workings of ants, but a competitive game element as been added to this sim entry, pitting
the red ants against the black ants for back
yard supremacy. MAC ($59.95). Circle Reader
Service #22.
Microdraft
Taylor, PA
ROTOR: Another in the genre of "fly by and
die, guy" games, Rotor puts the player in command of a cannon-packed, small flying saucer.
The object is to shoot "containers" and, more
often than not, rescue their contents. Naturally, harrying bad guys are there to shoot back,
as the player tries to pick up items which in-

crease fuel, speed, armor, etc. lake aim and
shoot, but remember: there are no brakes on
this contraption! Amiga ($39.95). Circle
Reader Service #23.
Microleague Sports
Newark. DE
MICROLEAGUE FOOTBALL: THE
COACHES CHALLENGE, DELUXE EDITION:
Another contender for the "comprehensive
football" championship, this one uses real
NFL teams in a statistics based contest for
gridiron supremacy. Using a point-and-click interface over clear menus, players get both a
cute animation and a play-by-play text message to reflect the results of their coaching
decisions. The game comes complete with the
capacity to create teams, leagues and replay

Taking a Peek

entire seasons. IBM ($69.95). Circle Reader
Service #24.
MicroMagic
175 5th Avenue #2625
New York, NY 10010
(212) 969-0220
MICRO MAGIC: MAGIC TRICKS YOU CAN
PERFORM ON YOUR MICRO COMPUTER:
And now for something completely different:
Magic tricks on your PC. This package is
neither game nor toy, but a program (with
several accessories such five decks of cards,
tokens, boards, etc.) which conjures electronic
prestidigitation. Having one's computer predict
the future, read minds or employ x-ray vision
is a bit unusual (to say the least), but with a little human assistance, the "magic" is truly
there. IBM ($53.00 — Introductory price).
Circle Reader Service #25.
Nemesis
Honolulu, HI
GO MASTER: Expanding on the features of
Go Junior (see below), Go Master is undoubtedly one of the best teaching and playing
programs on this game. Designed exclusively
for a Microsoft Windows environment, this version expands on the concept of groups, as
well as their offense and defense. It even allows editing the board, replay and modem support. IBM ($69.00). Circle Reader Service #26.
GO JUNIOR: Designed as a teacher to Go
novices, this package offers three different
board sizes, including an 9x9 board size to get
beginners into the game quickly and easily.
With the analysis feature selected, players will
see the concepts of influence, liberties and the
scoring mechanisms explained in actual use.
This game will get players Go-ing. MAC
($35.00). Circle Reader Service #27.
DELUXE TOOLKIT — INCLUDES: JOSEKI
GENIUS, TACTICAL WIZARD, & SCRIBBLER:
How serious can one get about the game of
Go? Owners of this package will find out.
Featuring important lessons on corner openings, a tactical "life and death" analyzer plus
the "Nemesis Scribbler" (a game recording
and annotation system), this tool kit is a stand
alone product which can be linked with Go
Master for the ultimate Go experience. For the
true devotee. IBM/MS WINDOWS 3.0
($139.00). Circle Reader Service #28.
Rainbow Arts c/o Softgold
Kaarst, GERMANY
LOGICAL: The clock is constantly ticking in
this Tris like puzzle game. In Logical, one
must place the falling balls, which come in
four different colors, into a four-hole rotating
receptacle. The object is to get four of one
color in each hole, so that it will be closed off.
Once all four holes are closed, the player advances to the next of the 100 levels. Of
course, tricky elements like color changers,
one-way arrows, traffic lights and teleporters
(at the higher levels) won't make the player's
simple task simple for long... Logical contains
rules in four European languages (one of
which is, fortunately, English). Amiga
($39.95). Circle Reader Service #29.
Strategic Simulations, Inc.
Sunnyvale, CA
TONY LARUSSA'S ULTIMATE BASEBALL:
A.L. STADIUMS DISK: This supplemental disk
requires ownership of Tony LaRussa's Ultimate Baseball to use and adds all 14
American League stadiums to the game. IBM
($19.95). Circle Reader Service #30.
TONY LARUSSA'S ULTIMATE BASEBALL

N.L. STADIUMS DISK: This supplemental disk
requires ownership of Tony LaRussa's Ultimate Baseball to use and adds all 12 National League stadiums to the game. IBM
($19.95). Circle Reader Service #31.
TONY LARUSSA'S ULTIMATE BASEBALL:
GREAT TEAMS 1901-'68 DISK: Expands the
team roster by 26 teams (12 National League
and 14 American League). IBM ($19.95).
Circle Reader Service #32.
SHADOW SORCERER: An arcade game
based on the world of DragonLance, the fearsome foursome progress their way through an
isometric perspective world (with a sort of
Powermonger look to it) full of VGA graphics
and AdLib/Roland/Tandy sound support. The
four characters are controlled simultaneously,
which can get quite interesting during the real
time combat. Fortunately, the game is entirely
point-and-click icon- and menu-driven, with
storyline supplements written as "Journal
Entries" in well-presented documentation.
Circle Reader Service 1/33
U.S. Gold
San Jose, CA
MURDER!: Agatha Christie (or, for that matter, Sir Arthur Conan Doyle) might enjoy a
good cerebral challenge like the mysteries to
be unravelled in Murder! Similar to
Accolade's Killed Until Dead, this strategy
game selects from a data base of around
three million cases as the player searches the
house, interrogates suspects and picks up

clues. Only two hours are available to solve
each case. Interestingly, the documentation includes some descriptions of some of the most
bizarre and highly publicized murder cases of
the past 100 years (morbidly fascinating reading). IBM ($44.95). Circle Reader Service #34.
Virgin Games
Irvine, CA
CONAN THE CIMMERIAN: Using a system
which combines elements of action and roleplaying games, this "saga as game" retraces
the early years of Conan's adult life. In search
of vengeance for the destruction of his village,
Conan must explore 200+ locations in
Hyborea in order to learn the sorceries which
will help him fulfill his quest. IBM ($49.99).
Circle Reader Service #35.
Winware
Dallas, TX
(214) 458-0540
DELUXE SOLITAIRE (FOR WINDOWS):
Forty solitaire card games (few look familiar,
but all look challenging), beautifully rendered
for a Microsoft Windows environment make
this an enjoyable PC diversion. Games include:
Railroad, Chessboard, Scorpion, Spiderette
and many others. With on-line instructions and
user-adjusted graphic designs, players can
while away many hours playing these solitaire
card games. IBM ($30.00). Circle Reader Service #36.

Announcing...

Computer Gaming World's

T

his is Rhonda Buryit reporting from

New Hollywood. Silicon City is all
abuzz about this year's CGW Top
Ad Awards. Tonight the computer entertainment industry gathers at the CGW
Crystal Ball Room to find out who will be
the winners in the Fourth Annual CGW
Top Ad Awards.
Last year's big winner, Strategic
Simulations, won top prize for their "Eye
of the Beholder" Ad (//78, pg. 8; 1179, pg.
74; #86, pg. 42) which featured a, shall
we say, less than romantic heart-throb
leading man. In the award winning ad,
horror movie kingpin Freddie Undead
makes a rude entrance into your living
room. Fans loved it. While this reporter
wouldn't be caught dead in the same
room with Freddie, she does know what
the public likes.
As is done each year, the readers of
Computer Gaming World, this reporter's
favorite computer game magazine, serve
as the jury to pick those ads that stand
out as superior examples of the art of
computer game marketing. Truly, these

are the People's Awards! And, ladies and
gentlemen, keep in mind that the reader
who comes closest to picking the six winners will receive $250 cash, a lifetime subscription to Computer Gaming World,
and instant fame! If Larry Fortensky can
become an instant celebrity as Mr.
Elizabeth Taylor, you too can soar to the
heights of computer game society. Send
in your votes today!

The Rules
1. Use the Ballot Section of this
month's Reader Input Device card located opposite page 16, or a facsimile
thereof, to cast your votes.
2. In the "Full Page and Spreads"
category, vote for three different full-page
and/or two-page spread ads.
3. A two-page spread ad would be an
ad that appears on adjoining and facing
left- and right-hand pages and is one continuous advertisement. A two-page
spread ad counts as a single ad for
voting purposes.

4. Select a first place, a second place,
and a third place ad.
5. In the "Fractional Page" category,
vote for three different ads. These are
ads which are less than a full page in size.
6. On the ballot, list the company
names and page numbers of the ads you
are voting for. For example: to place a
first place vote for Acme Company's onehalf page ad on page 345, write "Acme
pg. 345" on the line for first place in the
fractional ad column.
7. The criteria for evaluation are
very simple: consider the graphics,
copy, and overall impact of the ad.
8. The votes will be weighted, added
and then averaged.
9. The reader that comes closest to
picking the final correct order of winners
will win $250.00 cash and a lifetime subscription to Computer Gaming World.
10. Entries must be postmarked by
February 1, 1992. No purchase is necessary. Winners will be notified by mail.

Industry News

N

o matter which Hard Rock Cafe a

person visits, there is always this
feeling that one has entered a
limbo where the ghosts of rock's past coexist with the intense sounds of its
present. The one in Chicago was no different. As I walked past the ubiquitous
teen-aged sirens like those that surround
the portal to every Hard Rock Cafe, the
front doors opened and a "wall of sound"
that would have made Phil Spector proud
surged outward to greet me. I couldn't
help but think about Phoenix
Technologies' new license for the Disney Sound Source. The deal lets the
publisher of the famous Phoenix BIOS
provide sound support through over 250
different clone makers. Phoenix will provide schematics for clone makers to
build their own sound chips, or can build
chips to specification or package the existing add-on with clone computers.
Stepping inside the restaurant, I immediately began to scan the crowd for my
source. I quickly spotted the green-eyed
vixen [Ed: We accept no responsibility
for the Rumor Bag Guy's incorrigible
sexism.] as she stood next to the oldfashioned gasoline pumps in the lobby.
The clear bulbs at the top of each
gasoline pump had been adorned by the
addition of lava lamps, so I greeted her
with a witty, urbane comment about dueling nostalgia. She politely chuckled and
suggested that "Dueling Nostalgia" might
be a good title for Three-Sixty's upcoming WWII version of Harpoon. Since the
working title for the James F. Dunnigan
design is Victory At Sea, I told her she
would have to find another product to
label with the nostalgia title.
As the Hard Rock's hostess led us to
our table, we passed a considerable
amount of rock memorabilia. We barely
noticed a "Temptations" poster, some

guitars from "Judas Priest," and a gold
record from "Van Halen." I suggested
that about the only item missing was a
gold disk from one of the Fat Man's computer game soundtracks. She smiled
knowingly and told me that George
Sanger (a.k.a. The Fat Man) was working
on a soundtrack for a hush-hush project
from Virgin Games. It is supposed to be
a puzzle-based CD-ROM game that will
be 100% rendered in SVGA mode. Its
working title is Guest and it is expected
to be a full 400 MB game. "They're
hoping it will be the next generation in
computer games."
The reference to the next generation
stirred a different image in my mind and
I couldn't wait to share with her about
Spectrum HoloByte's Star Trek: The
Next Generation license. The company
has the rights to publish games based on
the popular television series for use on
personal computers, dedicated game
machines and CD-based formats.
She laughed and said that Gilman
Louie had travelled full circle. I knew that
she was remembering the Spectrum
HoloByte CEO's early Starship Commander on the Apple II. She went on,
however, to talk about how game design
in general seemed to flow in cycles. "For
example," she noted, "RAW
Entertainment's tentatively entitled Con
quistador is supposed to have elements
of Empire, Pirates and Seven Cities of
Gold all rolled into one Amiga, Atari ST,
C-64 and IBM game."
Maybe it was the fact that one of
Madonna's gold records was hanging on
the wall beside her or maybe it was the
proximity of such a virile journalist at the
same table [Ed: We also accept no
responsibility for the Rumor Bag Guy's
delusions.], but this normally sophisticated and intelligent professional woman
suddenly spoke simultaneously with the
unhindered enthusiasm of a teeny-bopper

and the sensuous passion of a femme fatale, "Ooh, who is that?!" As soon as I
realized that she was not referring to the
visage under my bag, I glanced beyond
our table and saw the exotic good looks
of a man who resembled a familiar film
star.
"I don't know who it is," I answered,
with obvious disappointment in my voice
that I couldn't maintain her interest even
for the duration of a meal. "It looks sort
of like Omar Sharif, doesn't it?"
"Ooh," she responded with that
libidinous exuberance that seemed so
misdirected when it wasn't aimed at
yours truly [Ed: See, there is a poetic
justice in these stories.] "I hear that Interplay has agreed to publish a bridge
game with Omar Sharif. Do you think I
could meet him?" She punctuated her
question by running her fingers lightly up
my arm and touching my neck below the
edges of my bag....
Maybe it was the proximity of George
Michael's sweatshirt or the presence of
such a vibrant, vivacious woman at the
same table, but I kissed her hand
through the recycled paper bag I wear
over my head and slyly said afterward,
"Well, there goes my chance to be appointed to the Supreme Court."
"Supreme Court?" she chided, "Why, if
all your sources got together, you
couldn't be appointed to a jury!" She suddenly became serious. "By the way," she
continued, "You know that computer
game your magazine reviewed last issue,
Objection!?" I nodded. "It's been accredited for nine full continuing legal
education credits by the State of California."
Why should I care? I had just been
psychologically stripped down to my
legal briefs. [Ed: Fortunately, the Rumor
Bag Guy manages to get the stories
before he humiliates himself.]

Review

Spanish Knights
Virgin's Vengeance of Excalibur

TITLE:
SYSTEM:

Vengeance of Excalibur
Amiga, IBM, Atari ST,
and Macintosh
PRICE:
$49.99
PROTECTION: None
Robert Clardy, John
DESIGNERS:
Coonley and Alan Clark
PUBLISHER:
Virgin Games
Irvine, CA

by Stefan Petrucha

any have tackled the tales of Arthur and his knights, with
varying degrees of success. Rather than tread such wellworn ground, Virgin Games took a unique tack with
Spirit of Excalibur by setting it in the period following Arthur's
death, during the reign of his little-known heir, Constantine. Now,
the saga continues.

M

ings. After reading a somber description of the "Roles of Faith
and Nobility" in the rules, this reviewer was surprised to find his
Faithful, noble knights merrily slaughtering innocent dwarves in
order to obtain their treasure. Lancelot also had no qualms about
rifling dead bodies to search for extra gold. One might presume
his affair with Guinevere loosened his integrity.

Though he took great pains to prove himself in Spirit, Vengeance leaves the new king out of the running. In fact, the opening
sequence places Constantine in a magical stupor, while the Arthurian relics (Excalibur among them) are whisked off into the
night by a Demon Lord. The wicked, though perhaps capricious, deed sends the noble roundtablers scurrying across
Europe to locate the treasures. The player, after selecting four
worthy knights (some of whom may be chosen from Spirit)
shortly docks in Iberia (the Spanish Peninsula for post-industrial types) where, amidst warring armies, agitated Moors
and masochistic monks, the desperate search begins.

Like the game, the manual has a nice historical feel, but lacks
certain details. The background info is nice, but more on the individual knights, the relics and the mythos, would have been ap-

It is not an open-ended search, however. Vengeance, like its
predecessor, is structured as a series of "episodes," each of
which must be completed in order. As a result, there aren't a
lot of surprises. One has only to read the TV Guide-style
episode summaries in the rule book to know where the story
is headed.
The advantages to such a system are more subtle. In a standard open-ended setup, plot progression is tied to geography
(i.e., one must complete Castle A to get Key B to open Castle
B, etc.). Episodes bear a closer resemblance to story chapters.
They also permit the entire game world to change from
episode to episode. Hence, different "chapters" can have different subplots, characters, and, potentially, stronger plot
progressions.
Sadly, on this level, Vengeance does not compare well with
its predecessor. In Spirit, Constantine's efforts to prove himself in the shadow of Arthur had a dramatic "oomph" and the
episodes involved a refreshing variety of mini-plots that gave
the game something of the feel of the original Grail stories.
Here, however, the episodes aren't very interesting at all and
the overall plot is a "Foozle hunt" for the stolen relics, leaving
the story, in many ways, in the shadow of the shadow of Arthur.
There is also a rather ambiguous morality to the proceed

Review

preciated. In addition, while some players may enjoy discovering
what spells do, this reviewer prefers having basic playing info
"spelled" out.
The game engine in Vengeance is identical to Spirit's. Play is
controlled through a set of on-screen icons. This interface is so
extremely well-designed that the highest compliment it can be
given is that it doesn't get in the way of game play at all.
As for the graphics — in EGA, they look, well... red. In VGA
they look red, too, but it is a prettier red and there are a lot
more shades of it. The EGA text boxes have an ornate typeface
that is difficult to read until one gets used to it. The soundtrack,
on the other hand, is a pure delight. Many of the themes work
well with desperate key clicking and this reviewer often found
himself pressing the joystick button right in tune.
Action takes place on three levels: the map, for moving from
town to town; the scene, where individual encounters take place
and army combat, for the obvious.
At the scene level, knights appear on the left side of a local
background. Occasionally, one knight will get crowded half off
the left border, creating an amusing "cropped" family portrait
feel. There's an appropriately "flat" look to these graphics, giving
them a subtle resemblance to the tapestries and woodcuts of the
period. NPCs, friend or foe, appear screen right. If friend, the
NPC will repeat his little animation sequence while talking in text
boxes. This reviewer was particularly amused by several monks
who periodically beat themselves in the face with wooden boards.
If

a foe, the figures automatically meet center screen for

un

avoidable individual combat. Though the manual claims there is
some strategy involved, this reviewer could not find it. The player
can control the lead knight's sword strokes (two types of attack,
swipe and jab), but a rapid, random succession of button presses
seemed the most effective. Although various commands can be
issued to different characters, including the use of spells and objects, combat was often over before any such commands could
be issued. (Game hint: Brandeleis, while he has a lot of cash, is
a lousy fighter with a low sense of self-preservation. Keep him in
the back.)
The scene level also provides an occasional "maze" to wander
through, represented by a series of backgrounds with varying
exits and entrances.
The map level, as one might guess, provides a map of the immediate area. It is here, in this elegant overview, that Vengeance
achieves its greatest success. While the player moves about, all
across Iberia, armies and NPCs also move about, independently
warring, conquering and killing. This is a world constantly in motion, a situation continually degenerating. The player's attempts
to avoid stronger forces, reach certain locations before certain
NPCs do, and complete specific tasks in time, provides a sense
of immediate, impending doom which, alone, makes the game
worth playing. The ease of failure in such instances requires
saving early and saving often.
When armies collide, an army combat screen is provided. The
player has a few options for his forces, but superior forces beat
inferior forces, often with or without player participation. Vengeance, it seems, only creates the illusion of combat strategy.
There is, however, strategy on other levels. As in life, it's crucial
who one picks to be his friends (or in this case, who one pays to
be his mercenaries).
In the end, the final battle is disappointing. Once the appropriate objects have been obtained, the main villain goes down
like a house of cards, while the closing sequence is an uneventful series of text screens and still pictures that rattle off how nice
it is to save the world.
So, it is a mixed bag, but even where it fails, Vengeance of Excalibur does so in intriguing ways. If you are looking for some
tense real-time running about, with a potentially interesting
gaming structure, give Vengeance of Excalibur a shot. If plot,
character development or combat strategy are your pleasure, a
heartier mead might be provided elsewhere.

Industry News

(After all, when VR is really working, one
exits feeling disoriented and unsteady.)

Notes on the 2nd Annual Virtual Reality
Conference and Exhibition, San
Francisco, Sep. 23-25.
by Tony Reveaux
irtual Reality: Does this buzzword
stand for "Vapid Ruminations" or
"Very Rad?" Totally immersive, realtime interactive 3-D environments
designed for control by a single user are
the shape of the ultimate gaming world.
So far, VR games have been mostly in
the form of prototypes. A measure of
how far VR has come in one year can be
seen in the activities at the Virtual Reality
Conference. Last year, it was mostly
speculative talk. This time, the action
was in interface design, entertainment
and marketing. With advances in processing power, compression and control, the
technology is catching up to the visions.

V

One of the most active, and better
financed, directions in VR development is
theme park installations. LBE in theme
parks will, at least initially, be passive VR.
As in existing installations, viewers will
join others in a multiple-seating module
that will be the focus of the VR experience. Douglas Trumbull's Berkshire
Motion Pictures produced "Back to the
Future: The Ride" which has opened at
the new Universal Theme Park in Orlando, Florida. It uses the Omnimax technology with a fisheye lens, a 180-degree
wraparound screen and kinetic effects.
Jordan Weisman of Virtual World
Entertainments (Chicago, Illinois)

While the few desktop products exhibited at the conference were still in the
rudimentary stages or, like SimGraphics' VR Workbench and the
VREAM Virtual Reality Development
System, are designed as developer tools,
there is enough activity in VR to offer at
least two off-the-shelf control devices.
SimGraphics' Flying Mouse and Logitech's 2D/6D Mouse let one control not
only the axes of 2D space, but also yaw,
pitch and roll in the simulated 3-D
spaces of VR-land.
Mr. Film (Venice, California) has used
SimGraphics' VR Workbench and other
development tools to produce what they
call Performance Cartoons. Silver Suzy,
for example, is a full-body, detailrendered, real-time VR figure that one
can see without goggles or glasses. One
player controls the chromium-skinned
Suzy on her surfboard with her graceful
movements, and the other player determines the point of view of the VR
"camera eye."

Several important conclusions can be
drawn from the series of conferences and
panel discussions: The computer gamer
will be the first to drive VR; we'll probably
be introduced to VR in theme parks and
it will be the Japanese consumers who
will enjoy it in the home before we do.
Dr. Diana Gagnon of Interactive Associates (New York, New York) looks to
computer/video game players as the first
to actively embrace VR opportunities:
"They are very sophisticated, and will be
the first users of VR home entertainment
products." Both she and Steve Glenn of
SimGraphics Engineering (Pasadena,
California) agree that before VR enters
the home, garners will first encounter VR
via Location-Based Entertainment (LBE)
experiences located in public places.

Since the conference, however, Spectrum HoloByte announced a new venture called Cyberstudio to produce virtual-reality software for LBE. Using the
Virtuality entertainment system manufactured by W Industries in the U.K.,
new products will be distributed in the
U.S. by Horizon Entertainment, the arcade arm of Edison Brothers Stores,
Inc.

showed tapes of their successful "BattleTech" entertainment center. Like the
flight simulator — the ancestor of VR —
each player climbs into an individual
module, or simulator cab. While not fullimmersion VR with goggles and helmets,
the player can see the futuristic battlefield simulations on a monitor screen.
According to Weisman, "BattleTech"
centers will be opening up in many other
cities in a franchise arrangement.
The feeling during the September conference was that arcades, the most obvious beachhead for serious, full-immersion VR games, was not expected to be
in the cards for U.S. coin-op vendors.
After looking at the prospects, the arcade
companies have passed on VR because
viewing helmets would harbor head lice,
anything hanging off the module-like helmets or control gloves would be ripped
off and an attendant would be needed to
fit a player in and get him or her out.

Now in its prototype stage, Suzy is seen
on a screen via a 7-watt high-definition
laser projector now going into production, and will be targeted to a professional and industrial market for presentations. "We are dedicated to eventually
bringing a version of it to the home,"
said Mr. Film's Chris Walker. "It is so brilliant, and the colors are more saturated
than you get even in film. Its throw
length is limited only by the amount of
power pumping the laser."
They have developed other characters,
such as HeMan, that may interact with
players in combat games some day.
"The Eyephone and other wearable interfaces are not where the future will be.
They are fun to play around with, but not
something every home user would be
comfortable with. With a screen display
system like Silver Suzy, it is more immediate and 'natural.—
In Japan, VR games are under development for arcades, computer games and
hand-held games. Why the Japanese interest in VR? First, because Japanese
consumers are fascinated with gadgets.
Second, because the average Japanese
household has extremely limited space

Industry News

and home VR devices would enable the
visually-oriented Japanese consumers to
experience the seemingly limitless
spaces of VR's 3-D universes. Third,
Japanese households have more than
twice the penetration of game machines
than do U.S. households. So, Japanese
manufacturers are more willing to incur
market risk than their gaijin counterparts.
Naturally, there is, therefore, a lot of research being directed into VR by
Japanese corporations. Matsushita,
which already operates a VR showroom
for their kitchen manufacturing unit, is
developing a VR theater in conjunction
with MCA/Universal Studio Tours, and
has licensed technology to LucasArts,
Ltd. Also, Sony is starting a SonyLand,
a spin-off from its Columbia Pictures
properties, and seventy other companies
are members of an industrial group that
is studying VR.
In Japan, the government broadcasting
station has formed a company called
Media International Corp. (MICO), a
consortium of 47 companies in various
fields that is doing work with Palo Alto,
California-based Telepresence Research, and is representing them to
Japanese companies. Telepresence spe-

pletely outdated in a year if it was fun to
play around with in the meantime. So, because of Japan's consumer focus, there
is a great deal of trial and error. Using
the consumer marketplace to test ideas
is extremely viable in their society, while
such a strategy might well be disastrous
in the U.S. Ultimately, if a hit product becomes evident, it is picked up by
Japanese low-cost producers and then
floods the international market. Typically,
electronic products introduced in Japan
take a year to hit the U.S.

cializes in VR environments and remote
presence technologies and applications.
Finally, Fujitsu's game machine, the FM
Towns, is being developed to take advantage of its 386-based processor
power for VR applications in home entertainment.
Generally speaking, the U.S. is industrially oriented and Japan is consumeroriented. U.S. consumers tend to wait
until standards are in place before adopting a product. Japan is tolerant of multiple standards. Gadget-crazy consumers
don't care if a $700 device becomes com-

How serious are the Japanese in
marketing VR? NTT, the Japanese
equivalent to AT&T, has The Kenwood
Group, a video production house in San
Francisco, completing a 20-minute
promotional for a VR home entertainment service that they foresee selling
over their phone lines in the near future.
"The Touchdown" features an American
and a Japanese who strap on CyberCleats to play in a virtual football field
and play a 'through-the-air' guitar with a
band in front of a virtual audience. CGW
Tony Reveaux is a San Franciscobased consultant who serves as the
editor of Computer Publicity News and
as contributing editor for Artweek.

Review

ny

fan of professional boxing can easily get the
picture. The tuxedo-clad announcer strides to the
center of the ring and grasps the microphone that
drops in from over his head like a deus ex machina
ready to rescue the hero in a Greek comedy. His enunciation, tinged with the Bronx overtones forever associated with the sport, describes the combatants for all
of the assembled fans: "In the blue corner, the number
16 contender, weighing in at 219 pounds... a record of
20-0 with 18 KOs from Exeter... The Wol! In the red
corner, the number 14 contender, weighing in at 201
pounds and also undefeated... from San Mateo...
Ugotabe Kidding!"

A

The fighters shuffle together and test each other's
strengths and weaknesses, dancing the modern
equivalent of the warrior's pre-combat ritual. Astute observers gain some prescient sense of what is to occur
and the announcer prepares to describe the second
round.
"A bad first round for The Wol as his inexperience at
this level shows. Kidding is advancing confidently
across the ring and fires a quick combination. The Wol
still looks groggy from that first round. Somewhat
foolishly, The Wol is continuing forward, maintaining a
strong body attack with occasional hooks to the head.
A huge right hand from Kidding has Wol in trouble by
the ropes, he's down... 1... 2... 3... 4... 5... 6... 7... 8... 9...
10, Knockout! The fine unbeaten streak of the Wol has
come to an end at 1:35 of the second round."
The fiction used to introduce this review actually occurred
on the reviewer's computer as he suffered his first defeat in
Electronic Arts' 4D Boxing. This reviewer's initial reactions were rather negative, but the game itself proved to
have even more heart than his fighter.
Such a positive perspective certainly
could not have been predicted from looking at the box cover or getting one's
first taste of those strange-looking
polygon-filled boxers. After five games,
however, one becomes perfectly at ease
with the graphics. What causes the
change? There are two basic factors:
familiarity and accuracy. During the action, the punches flow so smoothly and land so correctly that
one can readily understand why the polygon choice was made.
Once one sees the advantage in terms of the accuracy of physical modeling that is possible through the polygon technology,
one overlooks the surrealistic nature of the boxers themselves.

Electronic Arts' 4D Boxing
by Wallace Poulter

TITLE:
4D Boxing
SYSTEMS:
IBM
#PLAYERS:
1-2
PRICE:
$49.95
PROTECTION: Document Look-Up
DEVELOPERS:
Distinctive Software
PUBLISHER:
Electronic Arts
San Mateo, CA

In the Gym (Preparation for Play)
The best way to get into 4D Boxing is to create one's own
boxer. The program provides the gamer with the opportunity to
choose the boxer's weight, height, hair color, jersey and shorts
color, skin pigment and facial "shape." Then, one can use the
"facilities" of the gym to increase one or more of the boxer's
skills: speed, power and stamina. In the early going, most
players will find that power and stamina are much more important than speed. Stamina, the ability to take punishment and
trade inside punches, is vitally important for a beginning fighter.
Then, once the gamer has developed some familiarity with the
game, it will become possible to develop a "stick and move"
fighter such as the great Pernell Whitaker. One will have to
master the basic interface, however, before moving to this style.

Review

It takes considerable practice to be able to score sufficient points
to win with a "stick and move" approach.

The Main Event (Game Play)

mix it up with both head and body combinations. Mike Tyson
was particularly effective in his early career by doubling up a
right hand to the body and then to the head. It is very nice to see
that work in the 4D Boxing program.

The fighter starts off as the number 51 ranked fighter and
moves (one hopes) up the rankings by beating a fighter of a
higher ranking. This seems quite a quaint concept, causing one
to wonder why the major boxing organizations do not simply
take a page out of 4D Boxing's book! (grin!)

Indeed, the more one plays this game, the more one sees that
for all its "game" trimmings, this is, in fact, a very accurate
boxing simulation.

I he top 50 fighters are a punster's delight. Lance Boil, Sadie
Mazo-Chisholm and others add a silly side to this product, but
one should not make the mistake of thinking that this is a silly
product. Players will need a lot of skill and, ultimately, an understanding of the strategies of boxing in order to be successful.
This is not a Low Blow-type of game.

This is an option which this writer used very infrequently. The
program provides nine different camera angles from which to
view the fight. This can be an effective learning tool. It is particularly useful for replaying a round of action and picking up
tips and pointers.

Trainer Talk (Strategy)
As one's boxer climbs the rankings, it is profitable to look for
the fighter with the lowest stamina rating. Naturally, these are the
easiest to knock out.
Never forget that the body is an easier target than the head and
that boxers can still score effectively while in close. Indeed,
though this reviewer is not entirely certain, but it seemed that a
counter punch thrown correctly scored more effectively than a
regular punch.
Combinations are important. The jab is only an effective
weapon if it is used with a second or third punch. Remember to

Television Coverage (Camera Angles)

Another one of the nice touches that this product delivers is the
ability to see the fight, while one is fighting, from any of these
camera angles and through either fighter's eyes. As the manual
notes, "This is a good way to look at your opponent close up....
You can really tell when he's about to go down. It's also a rather
interesting view if you get knocked down." They are not kidding
— there is a very weird sensation when one's boxer drops to the
canvas.

Press Coverage (Newspaper Headlines)
After the decision of the fight is announced, the last couple of
seconds of the fight are displayed against a newspaper format
background with suitable headline ("TKO Stuns Crowd").
Whoever thought of this delightful piece of
chrome is a "genius." Although it is just a
five-second piece, it adds a considerable
amount to the atmosphere of the game.

Counter Punches (Critical
Remarks)
At the risk of being called a purist, the
reviewer must question the idea of a fight
scheduled for eleven rounds. One usually
has fights set at ten rounds, twelve rounds
(the current championship distance) or even
fifteen rounds (the traditional championship
distance), but not eleven rounds.
The manual also says, "All amateur and
professional boxing matches use 3-minute
rounds." While this may be true in the United
States, it is not necessarily true in other
countries (most notably in the United
Kingdom).

The Decision of the Judges
Many serious boxing aficionados may well
be put off by the "unrealistic" graphics.
Those who get past that reaction and experience the smooth, realistic motion, however, will find an enjoyable product that will
entice them to return on a regular basis. 4D
Boxing is an excellent and thoroughly enjoyable game with an effective representation of
boxing skills. 4D Boxing scores a real TKO —
Technological Knock Out — and should be a
welcome and often-played addition to any
sports game library.

Review

X
nd Round One
begins.... Black
Adder comes out
confidently and meets
Bruiser Bilotta at ring center. Adder fires a crisp left
jab which scores. Adder
fires another jab, and a
third, all scoring effectively. Bilotta ducks inside a
Wallace Poulter
fourth jab only to be met
by a straight right. Sensing that Adder is alABC's Wide World of Sports Boxing
TITLE:
ready on his game, Bruiser fires his own jab,
SYSTEM:
IBM
but Adder comes downstairs with a punishPROTECTION: Document Look-up
PRICE:
$49.95
ing right cross to the body. Bilotta winces
DESIGNERS:
Michael Knauer, Jerry Albright and
from the blow and Adder has found the weakJohn Cutter
ness he was looking for. Blow after blow
PUBLISHER:
Data East
rains into the mid-section of Bilotta and
San lose, CA
down he goes. The referee counts to five and
Bruiser rises defiantly, but it seems only a
matter of time. Again, Adder starts off with shots to the head and
then pulverizes the body, looking for weakness. Down goes Bilotta a second time. There's the five count, but again he rises. This
time, however, there is no escape. Black Adder rushes in, eschewing defense, as he looks to finish off his man. Punch after punch,
pounding with the incessant meter of Bilotta's own pulse, comes
in. Adder meticulously searches for the finishing blow. Finally, a
solid right cross does the trick and Bilotta goes down for the
final time. Adder wins on a TKO due to the three-knockdown rule.

Heavyweight Contender

Data East's ABC's Wide World of Sports Boxing
by

Feel-Out Round (Introductory Matters)
ABC's Wide World of Sports Boxing is a hybrid action/strategy/
role-playing game that allows players to create a customized boxer
from scratch and direct his entire boxing career — both in and out of
the ring. Not only does the game rely on performance in the ring,
but upon money and personnel management. ABC's Wide World of
Sports Boxing offers a unique perspective in taking the boxer from
the "Who is Joe Balogna?" stage through the "Who can beat Joe
Balogna?" stage.
During the boxing action itself, the fighters are viewed from a sideon perspective. Ring movement is simulated by a dynamic background and it is easy, for example, for fighters to find themselves on
the ropes. So, even though a full view of the ring is not available, the
tactics which make use of the full ring are accessible. The selection
of punches is limited to a modest assortment: jab, cross, hook and
uppercut. As for the on-screen figures, note that both of the fighters,
as well as the referee, are modelled off the same actor. Various hair,
and skin tone styles have been rendered onto this digitized base.
This game might well be entitled "Cutter's Revenge!" A couple of
years ago, the present writer spoke to John Cutter at Cinemaware
concerning their TV Sports: Football product. While John may not
remember the call, it appears that this reviewer may have made a
tactical error in describing the original version of TV Sports: Football
as "easy." During the interview, upcoming plans for TV Sports
Boxing were discussed. The latter, alas, never appeared, but ABC's
Wide World of Sports Boxing is a soulmate to that design, and it is
intriguing to see the number of Cinemaware alumni (like Cutter and
Jerry Albright) who were involved with the design. Maybe John did
remember that "ancient" conversation since, under no circumstances, could this game be called "easy."

Caught on the Ropes
In fact, it is flat-out challenging. The joystick controls do not feel intuitive and it takes five or six games to master an accurate jab.
Hence, setting up styles and combinations that work will take a number of fights to perfect. Nevertheless, the wait is worth it and the
game functions become instinctive.
More important is the way boxing as a whole is portrayed in the
game. In the '50s, boxing was a major sport, with the world champions known to most sports fans. Today, boxing receives coverage
somewhat behind midget lawn bowling and full-contact croquet. The
multiple sanctioning bodies and expanding divisions have a lot to do
with that but, more important may be the overall sleaze factor associated with the movers and shakers of the sport. Individuals such

Review

as convicted felon Don King control the major fighters and the outside actions of Tyson and others have left a bad taste in the mouths
of many.
ABC's Wide World of Sports Boxing embraces this sleaze. The
fight managers are characters like Don McQueen, "Very flamboyant
and powerful. He is untrustworthy and will do anything for a buck,"
and Fifi Lamore, who refers to her fighter as a "big stud." On a personal level, this critic finds that these characters detract from the
overall product. However, they do not detract from the game play.

Middle Rounds: Picking Up the Pace
The game offers enough options when creating a fighter that it is
possible to create widely different fighters in skill and style. Each
fighter has a base of points allocated for such attributes as Power,
Defense, Stamina, Cuts, Chin, etc. Experimenting with these settings
shows one of the strengths of the product. Every type of fighter from
a stick and move dancer to the slowest slugger can be created.
One note of strategy — for all their differences, Muhammad Ali and
Mike Tyson have/had one thing in common: incredible hand speed.
Unless one is a superb counter-puncher, the setting up of an accurate jab is vital to the success of any fighter. Hand Speed and
Reach are important.

Counterpunches Score
There are a number of small problems in the program. For example, during a fight, a fighter will be cut on the right side of the
face. Nevertheless, when the decision is announced, the cuts are likely to be shown on the left. Further, a fighter can receive a rank of
65,526, obviously somewhat lower than one would expect even the
amalgam of fast proliferating sanctioning bodies today could
manage to create. Of course, with the confusion in boxing today,
that might entitle the fighter to a title shot!

Piling Up the Points
Practice, practice, practice. It is the only way to get any experience.
Use the exhibition option to learn the ropes. Use the jab to set up
combinations. Learn how to exploit a weakness and, most importantly, learn defense. It is impossible to load up on every attribute and
the computer-controlled player will search (but not cheat) for the
weakness.

Going for the Knockout
The "Wide World of Boxing" magazine (documentation) provides a
number of features including rankings, schedule, results and classifieds. These are, of course, provided to give the career option more
definition and substance. In this they succeed. Fighters move up and
down the rankings constantly. Smart players will keep notes of how
to beat a fighter, such as the body attack against Bruiser Bilotta, so
that as one's opponents move up in the rankings, it will occasionally
be possible to fight a rematch to improve one's own position.

A Strong Final Round
Data East must feel somewhat like Carl Lewis at the World Track
and Field Championships in Tokyo. Lewis broke the world record in
the long jump, but still finished a very close second. If this product
had been released a week earlier it would have been the champion
boxing game on the market with no close contenders. Now, one
would be remiss in ignoring the fact that the boxer's movements are
inferior to the action in 4D Boxing (reviewed elsewhere in this issue),
but the career options and resulting emotional involvement in the
boxers created for ABC's Wide World of Sports Boxing make the
latter somewhat superior. Regardless, boxing aficionados may spend
as much time arguing about which computer game is best as they
do about who will win the next heavyweight championship.

t

Sneak Preview

A Sneak Look At Lucasfilm's The Secret
by Johnny

assimilated on the three different islands
Threepwood will explore during the game.

G

amers who believe that pirates are

glamorous figures who cut a bold
swath through history and experience plenty of thrills and romance
will be as disappointed with The Secret
of Monkey Island II: LeChuck's
Revenge (M12) as they were with The
Secret of Monkey Island. This reviewer
has played M12 and it is no "Captain
Blood" (the movie, not the science-fiction
game).
On the other hand, those of us who
reveled in the funny, rollicking, politically
correct and sometimes, self-deprecating
satire of The Secret of Monkey Island
are going to positively adore M12. Those
of us who relished the musical score of
the original, are going to positively savor
the new reggae soundtrack of M12.
The insult humor that seemed so
apropos to the first encounters of
Guybrush Threepwood and seemed so
glaringly absent in the denouement of
the story on "Monkey Island" itself, is
back three-fold. Not only is insult humor
still the vital ingredient for effective
swordsmanship, but there are three different "insult sets" to be encountered and

Makin' Whoopee

que geography which is accessed via the
"sky-cam" view used in the original
Secret of Monkey Island.

Talk about not living happily ever
after... Guybrush has not only lost the
love of his life (Governor Marley), but
has also outlived his fifteen minutes of
fame. He tries to tell folks what a brave,
courageous ghost killer he was, but
everyone yawns and tries to interrupt
him (and shut him up) whenever he
does. Fortunately, he has a plan. Before
one can get too serious, however, the
game gently pokes fun at itself. The narration informs the player that Guybrush
has switched to a more dramatic posture. Then, he tells his companions that
he is after the treasure of "Big Whoop."
Unfortunately, the next plot development
discovered by the player is that the
treasure is not only on another island
than Scabb Island (where he currently
resides), but that a penultimate bad guy
(PBG?) named Largo forbids anyone
from sailing away from the island.

By the time Guybrush travels to even a
few locations on the island, from the
Swamp Rot Inn to the International
House of Voodoo, garners will appreciate
the new scanned graphics techniques
(see CGW //87, p. 32) and the way they
add marvelous texture and depth to the
backgrounds. It also will not take long for
even the casual player to discover that
the latest adventure features a host of improvements. The new scaling capability
works along with rotoscoped animation
to make character movement seem
more life-like. Add larger characters onscreen and vertical scrolling to this
capability and one gets some very
cinematic viewpoints. For example,
Guybrush has to dive off Captain Kate's
tugboat in order to recover an artifact.
The vertical scrolling allows Guybrush to
sink...er...dive through about six or seven
screens of ever-deepening fathoms of
ocean. It is a very effective scene.

The basic thrust of the game is getting
to the treasure of "Big Whoop." To do
so, Guybrush has to assemble four
pieces of a map and this, in turn, requires peregrinations to three different islands. Each island, of course, has its uni-

Naturally, the addition of light sourcing
(so that torches, lanterns, campfires etc.
flicker and cast realistic shadows)
enables the interior scenes and nocturnal
exterior scenes to project the right ambience. Another improvement in the se-

Sneak Preview

of Monkey Island II: LeChuck's Revenge
L. Wilson

quel is the addition of an icon-based inventory to allow simplified handling of
items, tools and artifacts. Ron Gilbert,
original designer of the SCUMM system
(Script Creation Utility for Maniac Mansion) that drives the Lucasfilm graphic
adventure interface, and the programming team that keeps the system improving (Aric Wilmunder, Brad Taylor and
Vince Lee) have provided a much more
stimulating and smoothly functioning environment for gamers to explore than
those of its predecessors.

Familiar Faces and Phrases
Fans of the original game will be happy
to know that some of their favorite characters from the earlier game are back in
the latest adventure: the men of low
moral fiber are to be found on Scabb Island (their circus debut did not go so
well); the Voodoo Lady has her business
on the first island (Voodoo? Who do?);
Stan (who has opened a new and completely different, previously owned business) and, of course, former Governor
Marley is to be found in a mansion on
Booty Island (adding to the non-romantic
aspects of the game, Guybrush will have
to grovel, grovel, grovel in order to get
something very important from his "Ex").
Also, the in-jokes on Lucas Arts and

the employees at Lucasfilm are still
present. When one enters the costume
shop on Booty Island, for instance, one
not only finds the costumes for "Sam
and Max," but can get a commercial for
the rare Steve Purcell comic book, as
well. The islands in the game are still
"trademarked" in a spoof of Lucas Arts
early tendency to trademark even such
familiar historical figures as "Nazis" in
"Raiders of the Lost Ark" and artifacts
such as "Ark of the Covenant." There is
also a nifty chuckle when former Governor Marley's guard scares Guybrush
when dressed in a LeChuck costume.
The dialogue choices are just as
hilarious as they were in the earlier game
and it seems like more conversations are
available. Conversations such as the one
with the men of low moral fiber even
offer running gags ("But what does this
have to do with performance?") and
Guybrush keeps finding out that no one
believes that he killed LeChuck.
Another feature of the original game
that is still present is the genre spoof.
When Guybrush takes a shovel to the
graveyard, for example, the program
drops immediately into a self-running skit
where the weather changes and lightning
begins to flash. This is also one of the
times when Gilbert has elected to use the

"cut scenes" that make the pacing in the
sequel even more entertaining.
Of course, The Secret of Monkey Island II: LeChuck's Revenge offers some
of the "cute" puzzles which are typical to
the genre. Some of the puzzle solutions
are kind of grotesque, however. For instance, Guybrush tries new uses for a coffin and sees if they will float; discovers
that alligators (?) are man's best friend;
develops a rat-infested recipe for vichyssoise and, appropriately enough for a
graphic adventure based on the SCUMM
system and using a piece of code known
as "sputum," wins a "spit decision" on
one of the islands. Indeed, there are
numerous bilious jokes about spit in the
game.

Phatt in the Booty
The real treasure in The Secret of
Monkey Island II: LeChuck's Revenge
is not to be found on Scabb, Phatt or
Booty Island. It is to be found in beautifully "painted" backgrounds, charming
animated characters, witty dialogue and
a continuously evolving interface that
gets more transparent with every new
release. When Gilbert and company
design a humorous and challenging adventure game, they mean more than
"monkey" business.

Review

Martian Memorandum

A

s I stumbled

by Michael Chaut

toward the
window,
trying to regain
my bearings in the
Rembrandtesque
shadows of my office, I realized that
I must have slept
the entire day
away in my office
chair. Almost getting iced will take
its toll on a person
and last night was
nearly the end of
the line for yours
truly.

The view from
my window didn't help, either. The
San Francisco skyline was
emblazoned with a psychedelic red
that seemed like a Haight-Ashbury
leftover — not the normal washed,
ruddy hue but a thick malicious deep
red, almost the color of blood. Maybe
I'm just being superstitious, but who
knows... maybe it's a foreshadowing
of what's about to come?

TITLE:
SYSTEM:

Martian Memorandum
IBM (VGA, MCGA, 640K
and Hard Disk Required)
PRICE:
$59.95
PROTECTION: None
DESIGNERS:
Brent Erickson
and Chris Jones
Access
Software
PUBLISHER:
Salt Lake City, UT

If You're Goin' from San Francisco
Martian Memorandum, Access Software's latest release, takes
the player from San Francisco (in the year 2039) to the farthest
reaches of humanity's expansion, Mars. As private investigator Tex
Murphy (who originally appeared in the 1989 release Mean Streets),
the player must question suspect after suspect and witness after witness in order to unravel the web of intrigue, deception and murder
which the designers have crafted. Murphy will have to deal with a
"booby-trapped" safe, thwart a man-eating snake and conquer quicksand pits.
Over the course of his investigation, it should become obvious to
Tex that he will not only have to rescue the kidnapped daughter of
his client (Alexander Marshall, the President of Terraform Corp.), but
he will also have to recover an ancient Martian artifact that is somehow linked to the missing girl.

Adventure Noir
As one begins Martian Memorandum, the player will find his or
her character in a dingy, 1940s-style office complete with venetian
blinds and an overhead fan. Even though the game takes place in
the year 2039, the mood, characterizations and ambience (as
created by the original music score) are set in the typical style of the
classic '40s-era Hollywood detective movie.
Martian Memorandum is a fairly straightforward adventure game.
It has a beginning, middle and an end, as well as various ways to arrive at each juncture. The plot holds together and the story even has
a message. One can tell that the designers spent a lot of time
developing the storyline before any programming actually took place.
Unlike other games in the adventure genre, the player does not
have to be a "nursery rhyme maven" to complete this game. In fact,
the game comes complete with an on-line context-sensitive help system. The company claims that there should be no need for a hint
book or any desperate phone calls to tech support. To obtain a hint,
the player simply selects the HELP icon from the command bar and

then clicks on the object that he or she needs help with. Players will
note that hints are given at different levels from vague to specific.
The first hint is general, subsequent hints are more detailed. If a
player wants more information, he or she re-selects the object.
Access continues to make innovations, the most notable of which
(in this outing) is Brent Erickson's technique of retrieving mass
amounts of compressed data rapidly. He actually has developed a
technique of storing more than 24 megs of data in a 7.2-meg space
while producing restorations of saved games and screen changes
(complete with digitized sounds and graphics) instantly. The game allows the player to visit at least 50 locations and interact with more
than a dozen non-player characters. Actors were cast, videotaped,
audio-taped and digitized to create all the characters. The sets and
artwork are phenomenal. It is obvious that many man-hours went
into the design of this product.

The Plot Beckons
Warning: This portion of the article contains specific hints on
game play. Readers who prefer to solve puzzles on their own should
avoid this section.
The command bar across the bottom of the screen allows the
player to initiate ten different actions by using mouse clicks or function keys. As the game begins, all objects found in the office should
be inspected (using the LOOK command). The player might even
want to try to use the comlink (found in the chair). It will soon become apparent that Tex should visit his new client, Alexander Marshall. During that visit, the circumstances surrounding the case will
be laid out; the player's character will be given a list of suspects to investigate and the adventure will begin.
Players should be certain to move Tex to the far left and right of
each screen. This is required, since several screens scroll right or left
and failing to do so will keep the player from seeing the entire playing field and hence, severely limiting the player's ability to complete
the game.
Film for the camera may be obtained from Jocques Sparrow, the
photographer. (Note: When looking through the camera, one can

Review

find references to various Alfred Hitchcock films: North By
Northwest, Rear Window and Psycho.)

Players should make sure that they give the rose from the gift shop
to Rhonda Foxworth some time during the date at the restaurant.
(She will be much nicer after dinner is finished.)
The dagger found at the murder scene should be given to Mac Malden. (This will be needed to lead Tex to the murderer).
After Mr. Alexander's body is found, Tex should go back to his office and search his safe. (What he finds will be very important.)
When in the jungle, the game should be saved often, as the
hazards are very deadly. Specifically, the quicksand sequence is very
unforgiving. One should make sure that he or she is on a stone
before stepping.
Players should make sure that they complete all the puzzles on
Earth before traveling to Mars. The addresses for many of the Martian characters will be found on Earth. Players should think carefully
about all the items they acquire and look for references to additional
locations they may need to search.
The invisible beams in Dick Castro's safe are not impossible to get
through, but infrared glasses can be obtained from Bradley Ericson
that will make the task much easier.
The key to the game is to get a suspect or witness to answer your
questions honestly, truthfully and completely. This is accomplished
by either talking with them in a manner that befits the situation,
giving them something that they want or passing along something
that they perceive as having value. It is also advisable to return and
speak to the characters more than once. As Tex attains certain items
and clues, the answers which may be given by the NPCs will often
change. This reviewer found it helpful to set up an information sheet
with characters' names, what they do, who they are, what object they
give, what leads they provide and what information they divulge.

This tool will help the player to follow a logical course throughout the
game. Another sound piece of advice is to take notice of the expressions that witnesses and suspects give as they are questioned. These
expressions provide clues as to a character's veracity.

Closing the Case
The on-line help system was really appreciated. Not having to purchase a hint book or frantically call tech support (at the player's expense) to finish the game is a welcome marvel. Perhaps the onscreen hints could be rated (i.e. first level, second level and third
level), thus more clearly providing the player with an option of how
far to pursue the hint.
The game allows the player to select sound and music devices
separately. Using the Roland MT-32 for music and RealSound for the
speech/sound effects was found to be the most consistent. Overall, it
provided a spectacular outcome. Unfortunately, this combination did
produce, on occasion, music that was so loud and overpowering that
the speech/RealSound was indecipherable. When using the AdLib as
the speech/sound device, this reviewer found unreliable results.
Some characters sounded spectacular, while others were muffled and
barely audible.
The yellow background text, used from time to time to establish
the storyline, was very difficult to read. The player is encouraged,
however, to read the text throughout the game, as the humor will provide many a chuckle. [Note: Access is encouraged to hire a
proofreader for reasons that will become increasingly obvious to the
players as they move through the game.]
Martian Memorandum produces hours of enjoyment, provides a
tremendous challenge and even offers an important message:
"Revere life, protect the living things and recycle." The game offers
quite a different perspective on Mars than the red planet depicted in
the fiction of Edgar Rice Burroughs or Ray Bradbury, but it is definitely a planet worth visiting.

Review

ne hears, if one keeps one's ear to
the ground in the proper places,
that Might and Magic III: Isles of
Terra is already a big hit, especially among
college-age garners. There is nothing
surprising about this. Might and Magic III
represents a visible leap forward, especially
relative to the first two Might and Magic installments, in CRPG design. It is a
get-together-and-play kind of game, with plenty
to reward both the person sitting at the controls and the people watching over his
shoulder.

O

Show Biz Magic
The interface is a joy, consisting of a 3-D
"display" window in which all the action unfolds in real time; a row of face icons, one
for each of the up to eight characters in
one's party, that allows quick access to the
party's skills, possessions, and information;
a point-and-click action menu that changes
into a combat menu when danger
threatens and clever graphic signals scattered around the screen to serve a variety
of functions. (For instance, there's a gremlin crouched in one corner of the display
window who waves his arm when a secret
passage is near.) Combat and movement
are quick and the controls are responsive,
which in this case makes the difference between a game that would be good but
frustrating and one that is actually fun to play.
The game's graphics are as invigorating as Technicolor must
have been when it first hit the scene, taking full advantage of a
256-color palette. Even if the soundtrack is generic, instantly forgettable fantasy tripe, the sound effects (which include a good
helping of speech) make up for it. To top it off, there are the
game's bells and whistles, which are of an order to elicit the latter — whistles — from surprised and delighted players. For example, the game begins with a full-screen image of arch-villain
Sheltem describing in digitized spoken-word audio the menaces
which the player is about to face. Also, at the other end of the
game, when a player's last character dies, a pair of giant dragon
jaws clamp shut over the screen before the final fade to black.
For obvious reasons, therefore, this is a game best played in the
company of friends — assuming that one's friends appreciate a
fine piece of computer game workmanship.
Might and Magic III is a top-of-the-line system showpiece, marrying the aesthetic sophistication of some recent "interactive
movies" to the down-and-dirty campaigning of a hardcore CRPG.
There is something to please almost every stripe of gamer.

Might Be Trouble
Unfortunately, Might and Magic III is also a remarkable exercise in water-treading which does not advance the genre one
inch in terms of plot, event or ontology. Here we are again, one
realizes, a band of hardy adventurers — elves, gnomes, dwarves,
clerics, paladins, sorcerers — tramping about the wilderness and
facing off against assorted orcs, rats, bugs, and other stock
uglies.
Here we are, once more mapping a corner of Middle Earth, or a
reasonable facsimile thereof, in pursuit of yet another necroman-

TITLE:

Might and Magic III:
Isles of Terra
SYSTEMS:
IBM
PROTECTION: Document Look-Up
PRICE:
$59.95
DESIGNER:
Jon Van Caneghem
PUBLISHER:
New World Computing
Van Nuys, CA

tic ne'er-do-well with a faux-mythic name and a bad disposition.
Here we are again — will we never be somewhere else?
It is here that the question of ontology — of what things exist in
a given universe — comes up. The ontology of MM3, the contents of its universe, includes nothing we haven't seen far too
often before. How many games before this one have populated
their landscapes with warlike half-orcs, magical elves (who are
also, of course, excellent archers), and skulking, lock-picking
thieves (here called robbers); with hit points, armor class, and
alignment; and with locations bearing such names as "Serpent
Wood," "Buzzard Bluff," and "Castle Greywind"?
MM3 even comes with a Silmarillion-esque backstory (which
doubles as a fairly inoffensive anti-piracy device) describing the
epic history of a War Among the Cods (here rendered exceptionally banal by the use of the four elements — Water, Fire, Air,
Earth — as the Gods) and the subsequent intercession of some
tritely benevolent meta-Gods with names like "Esoterica" and
"Cosmonium."
On the other hand, there is a market for this stuff. David Eddings rewrites the same high-fantasy novel over and over again
and never fails to hit the bestseller lists with it; Piers Anthony,
whose work I generally admire, is in the double digits with his
series of Xanth novels despite the fact that he ran out of new
ideas around number six; and the folks who churn out those
game-based novels for TSR Books are laughing all the way to
the bank. Why should things be different with computer games?
MM3 is a good game — no, an excellent game — for the
people at these extremes. CRPG junkies who can never get their
fill of computer D&D, and for whom familiarity is not a turn-off
but a selling point, will adore MM3. People who have never
played a game like this before, but who are even slightly interested, could hardly do better than starting with this one. The only

Review

by Charles Ardai

still island-hopping out there somewhere; rediscover the legendary
origins and secrets of Terra along
with him; and destroy Sheltem
once and for all, or at least until

MM4.
Starting from the small (but representative) town of Fountain
Head, the player's party has to go
out into the wilderness, search
swamp and mountain, town and
country, and slaughter, slaughter,
slaughter the armies of the night.
Along the way, spellcasters will
learn new spells, fighters will pick
up new weapons, and everyone
will get richer and more experienced. This growth occurs
through a series of mini-quests
that are mostly handed to the
player by NPCs. ("I need help
doing thus-and-so," says a
shadowy figure. "Will you help? Y
or N?")
Each town contains locations
where characters can be healed,
fed, replaced, armed, trained,
shod, or killed. Experienced
gamers will need no time at all to
get used to this gallery of old
haunts. Each town is built on
more or less the same plan, if not the same physical layout, with
little more to show players than described above. NPCs offer
hints and rumors as well as the usual services, but then again,
hints and rumors are one of the usual services in games like this.
people who will groan at another helping of old chestnuts, no
matter how attractive the serving platter, are players somewhere
in the middle: ones who have played enough run-of-the-mill
CRPGs to want something different.
Fairness dictates that I admit that I fall in the third category.
The really remarkable thing, however, is that its gameplay is so
entertaining that, for a while at least, I didn't even notice.

A Tale of Magic
For the record, a capsule version of the story might go something like this: In days of yore, when the warring Gods/Elements
joined forces to destroy all the world's mortals (who might otherwise have become powerful enough to threaten them), five Forces of the universe took pity and stepped in, giving unto the mortals the variety of powers and skills that would, over generations,
develop into character classes. The mortals survived; and when
the combat ended, the Forces took the battleground of the Gods
and crumbled it into the sea, the result being the thirteen magical
Isles of Terra.
Jump to the present: master wizard Corak has gone, alone, on
a journey around the Isles to recover the fragments of this primal
legend and to throw some kinks into Sheltem's latest scheme,
the details of which he cannot fathom, though he knows it has
something to do with playing Alignments off one another. All
looks bleak until upon the scene appears our merry band of six —
pre-rolled or custom-created — adventurers. There are three
major tasks at hand for our heroes: track down Corak, who is

Puzzles turn up, after a fashion, most having to do with unearthing something hidden or getting from one place to another. None
are especially difficult. Most of the fun in the game comes from
ordinary encounters, especially combat, since a lot of energy has
been spent on making the graphics and animation interesting.
Some weapons and spell effects appear in the display window,
even those that do not produce splotches of blood to indicate a
successful hit. The faces of the player's character icons change
expressions in response to various attacks and get replaced with
a tombstone graphic once they have shuffled off this mortal coil.
All monsters are well-drawn and at least minimally animated,
with unique sound effects for added spice.
The support screens — inventory, status, spellbook — are the
most attractive and best organized this reviewer has seen in
ages. Access to them is well thought out, since the player can
shift from one character to another within any sub-screen. This
makes it a breeze to equip the party and exchange supplies
among party members.
The game is long enough to fill hours and hours of an
adventurer's time and offers varied enough background graphics
to keep the eye from glazing over. Whether the imagination is
kept similarly active is another matter. For a fantasy game,
MM3's story is sadly mundane. So, the gamer who wants to be
surprised by discovery, conversation and story is likely to be disappointed in MM3, while the gamer who simply wants to play
may be ecstatic with the game. Might and Magic III: Isles of
Terra is a stunning new implementation of venerable concepts
that should please the majority of its intended audience.

Game Hints

Scorpia's Underground
Guide to Might & Magic III
T

he 'Isles of Terra" comprise a large
area and contain more than a few
areas where garners may go awry.
So, CGW's prolific adventure/role-playing expert has provided some guidelines for
troubled adventurers.

First Reports (Problems with
the Initial Version)
Note: Garners who purchase the original version of the game may encounter a few problems that others will not. None of them will
keep players from being able to finish the
game and all of them have been fixed in the
current version of the game. Just in case our
readers do not want to go through the trouble
of getting a new version of the game, here are
some quick fixes.
The Greek Brothers: The program does not
recognize it when you have talked to Brother
Delta in Wildabar. Ergo, when you try talking
to Zeta in the Arachnoid Cavern, he will not
tell you the number you need, which is 99. It's
still a good idea to follow the Brothers through
to Wildabar, however, as you pick up several
Quatloo coins useful elsewhere in the game.
The Dark Knight Keep: The inscription on
Ivory Billow is wrong. The correct instructions
are: "Count the secret number with Fire Hood
and Desert Breeze. Deduct Frost Wing, Forest
Green and Phantom Sorrow. Multiply by Shadow Grave." This will give you the right number
to open the way to the two power orbs.
Arachnoid Cavern: Similarly, Lord Luck's instruction is wrong. The correct one is "Multiply
by 2" (not 52!).
Is There a Lock-Up-Smith in the Dungeon?:
There are at least four ways to crash or lock
up the game. One is trying for a 77th win in
the arena. For whatever reason, the program
can't handle a 77th attempt and will die, dumping you to DOS. In the outdoors, avoid the
spot F2, X4 Y2. Stepping into this square will
cause the game to freeze and you'll have to
reboot. Be careful when moving sideways
(using CTRL-LEFT ARROW or CTRL-RIGHT
ARROW) in castles. Moving in that fashion
onto the exit square and answering "no" to
the "do you want to leave" question will cause
the game to lock up. Finally, if you have your
spellcaster(s) set to cast spells during autocombat, and if the ready spell happens to be a
non-combat spell (such as Light, Wizard Eye,
etc), and you use the auto-combat feature, the
game will lock up when you try to change that
during combat. Keep your spellcasters set to
fight or block, or else do the first round
manually and change the spell at that time.
Vanishing Items: Be careful about handing
off excess equipment to a character who
remains at the inn. I created Klodd to hold
some stuff and free up inventory space in my
regular party. We gave him about nine or ten
items, including several keys and a couple of
evil artifacts. Imagine my surprise (and horror)
when we came back later and he had nothing
in his inventory at all! Arrgh! To safely hand
off items, take the "item holder" into your

party and leave the inn. Give him/her the excess objects, save the game, re-enter the inn
and drop the character from the party.

It Won't Work: While most miscellaneous
items (cameos, medals, brooches, scarabs,
etc.) provide bonuses to armor class, some
don't. This is particularly the case with items
made of obsidian. I came across several that
did nothing for armor class, even though identification at the smithy said they were +20 AC.
Always try on such items and check AC
before and after to be certain you're obtaining
a benefit from them. If there is no change,
dump or sell the item.

Party Down
The pre-generated party that you start with
good enough to take through the entire game,
although I recommend dropping the Robber in
favor of a Ninja, who can fight better. However, if you want more spellcasters in the
party, consider having a Paladin or two, an Archer, and/or a Ranger. Clerics, like Druids, are
not especially good at combat. On my second
pass through the game, I dropped the Cleric
in favor of a second Paladin, the Barbarian for
an Archer and the Knight for a Ranger. This
combination worked very well.

Spell Bound
All characters that can cast spells should
join the guilds, but not be in a big hurry to purchase all of the spells available. A number of
spells can be found in the outdoors, and in
some dungeons (most notably, Temple of
Moo, Cathedral of Carnage and Magic
Cavern). Buy a few spells, then go looking for
the freebies.
The best places for goodies are the mountains in Troll Valley, the island of the gargoyles and the swamp island. Since beginning
characters probably aren't up to taking on the
monsters in these areas, you need to be careful when you go looking for neat stuff.
Stick to the mountains at first. Get the
Wizard Eye spell (terrific spell, by the way!).
This will show you the immediate area, and
keep you from stepping out of the mountains.
As long as you stick to the mountains, you
are safe, no matter how surrounded you may
appear to be. (This does not apply to some
areas on the swamp island, where you can
run into gargoyles and trolls in the mountains.)
Most of the items you find are randomly
determined when you come across the chest
or alcove or hole where they're tucked away.
(Only spells are the same each time.) So,
while the spot they're on will always have
something, what's there is not necessarily the
same.

Treasure Hunting
One thing you can do is save the game
before investigating these treasure troves.
Then, if you don't like what you got (or most
of it isn't useful), restore and try again. This applies to chests in dungeons as well, except
those that hold special items, such as spells,

hologram cards, artifacts and Pearls of
Youth and Beauty. These chests will always have the same items in them. Also,
chests that hold only money (or gems, or
gems/money) will have the same amounts.

You also need to be wary of traps. Digging up anything on the Forsaken Sands
will cause a Vulture Roc to appear (one
nasty critter that is tough to hit, tough to
kill and easily capable of trashing an entire party in a very short time). There is
also a minotaur that shows up when you investigate the goodies buried at F2, XII Y2 and it
has 1000 HP, an AC of 90 and a special instant-death attack. He is, by the way, typical of
all minotaurs. Figure to yourself that if you
can't dispose of him without a lot of trouble,
you're not ready yet for the final dungeon (the
Maze From Hell).
Digging on Dragontooth Island will always
set off traps that do a fair amount of damage.
Make sure everyone in the party is in good
health before messing around in the snow.
While you can reach many places through
the use of the teleport spell or the teleporters
in the towns, some can only be gotten to by
walking on water. This can be accomplished
by casting a "Walk on Water" spell, using an
item with the Walk on Water spell or wading
into the shallows around an island and casting
Etherealize.

Once you have reached one of these less accessible places, consider setting Lloyd's
Beacon on the spot if you plan on returning in
the near future. You can set as many different
beacons as you have characters with the spell.
This ability also comes in handy when you
want to pump up your characters before
taking on a mean dungeon. Visit the dungeon
location and set the beacon. Go to the statues,
wells or fountains (whichever is most convenient at the time), get your stats boosted,
then use the beacon to return right to the dungeon entrance. Since the boost will last only
until the next dawn (usually), the best time to
use this technique is early in the morning.
With regard to other items, it is wise to have
items identified at a smithy from the beginning
in order to find out their basic properties. After
awhile, you will notice certain patterns emerging which should help you decide what to
keep. Special materials (gold, silver, ebony,
etc.) always add to the protective or combative value of an item in the same fashion. For
example, gold always gives +4 to hit, and +8
to damage on any weapon, and +6 to any
armor type. Platinum always gives +6 to hit
and +10 to damage on any weapon, and +8 to
any armor type.
Special-purpose items operate in the same
fashion. So, anything with "Leprechaun" in the
title adds +30 to luck when equipped, and anything with "Freezing" in the title gives +15
Cold Resistance. The trade-off is that such
items do not give any extra protection in
armor class or any extra to-hit or damage
abilities to weapons. So, Freezing Plate Armor
gives +15 Cold Resistance, but only the
regular +10 Armor Class protection. A
Leprechaun broadsword provides +30 luck,
but no to-hit or damage bonuses on the
weapon itself. The one exception is when the
weapon or armor itself is made of special
material (e.g. Platinum Cryo Gauntlets give
+25 Cold Resistance and provide +8 AC like
any other platinum armor).
What makes things slightly easier is the
ability to wear multiple rings and pins

Game Hints

(brooches, scarabs, cameos, medals, etc). You
can wear up to four different types of pins, for
instance. So, it's usually better to get your
elemental protections and boosts from such
items, while going for the high protective
values in armor, capes, gauntlets, etc.

Outdoor Survival
There are two types of dungeons: those you
can walk into and those that require a key for
entry. Typically, the keys for the locked places
will be found in one of the open dungeons.
The Cyclops cave, for example, has the keys
for both the Halls of Insanity (in Evil Eye
Forest) and The Dark Knight Keep (red shield
on the front).
When you don't have the right key, the
game tells you this, and gives you a hint by
displaying the word "key" in the same color as
the one you need. This is true for all locked
dungeons, except the Maze From Hell (in the
southern part of Swamp Island); you need the
gold key to get in, but the word "key" is displayed in black, not gold.
In the locked dungeons, be prepared for opposites. Cleaning out the front part is often not
too hard; but the "rear," where the big-time
monsters lurk, can be extremely difficult. For
instance, the Mad Dwarves in Dark Knight
Keep are fairly easy to kill, but the Jousters
are another matter entirely.

Visiting the Great Houses
The castles are important mainly for the experience you receive for handing over orbs
and artifacts, but also for picking up some
goodies, gems and cash by raiding the chests.
Stealing from the chests does not appear to
have any effect on alignment for anyone in
the party, so go ahead and do some looting.
You will, of course, have to fight through the
castle guards when you open the chests, but
they should not be too tough.
The chests near the thrones are special, requiring a countersign before you even have
the opportunity to pick the locks. Each
countersign is different, and can be found by
going through the dungeons under the castles.
Note that using the countersign just gives you
a chance to open the chest; the alarms always go off when you give the countersign
(except in Dragontooth, where the alarm goes
off after you pick the lock, or try to). When
you open these chests, you are attacked by
special guards, who are tougher in some ways
than the regular castle guards, so be prepared.
Be sure to clean out all the castles before
handing over the vital eleventh orb (you can
give orbs to all the kings for experience, but
only one can get all eleven). Whichever king
receives the last orb — good, neutral or evil —
will immediately trash the castles of the other
two kings.
All castles have statues or fountains you
must visit for the clues to the special words
that permit dungeon access. None of these
dungeons are places for low-level parties, so
don't worry too much about picking up the
clues and solving the riddles at the start.

See the Pyramids of Power
The Pyramids can be entered once you have
the Gold Pyramid Card from Mount Keystone.
A Might of 50 or better is required to break
the glass and obtain the card. This will get you
into any of the five structures.
One thing to be extremely careful about in
any pyramid is what crystals you touch. Some

of these will age your party in ways that the
Fountain of Youth can't undo. Also, in some
unknown fashion, one time more than 30
years passed in the game, aging my team
from 22 to 59. This wasn't mere aging; the actual date in the game was 37 years after we
had entered the pyramid.
So, save before you go into one, and check
the ages of your party, as well as the date,
before you save the game anytime thereafter.
Generally, you can figure that if you touch
something and nothing appears to happen,
something actually has happened, and it isn't
good. The crystals that give answers, and the
altars that boost stats, are always safe. Anything else is likely to be bad news.
The pyramid on the Isle of Fire leads to the
end game. You must have the Blue Security
Card to pass through the final door. This is obtained by giving the eleventh power orb to the
king of your choice.

Staying Alive
Most of the time, it's best to kill something
before it gets close enough to beat on the
party. Equip everybody who can use one with
a bow. You can start shooting as soon as a
critter is in view, however far away it may actually be. Use the keyboard for this; by hitting
the S key quickly, you can get off two volleys
per round instead of one. This doesn't work
with clicking on the bow icon, so be sure to
use the keyboard.
However, there are a number of monsters
out there who have distance weapons of their
own: orcs and goblins, for example. Being lowlevel critters, they are usually not great shots,
so it's safe to trade arrows with them. Evil
rangers and archers, however, tend to have
better accuracy. Get immediately into melee
range, instead of shooting it out with them, by
using either the Jump or Teleport spells. If
your speed is greater than theirs, you will be
able to jump/'port right in front of them and
get your blows/spells in first. This is also a
handy way of dealing with spellcasting
monsters (such as wizards and witches), and
those like dragons, who have a breath weapon.
Still, there are exceptionally nasty critters
that you will have a hard time with, even after
you've been to magic wells or fountains and
had your stats pumped up. Even with 60th
level characters and very high stats (thanks to
the Dragontooth statues), it was virtually impossible for my team to take on the Dragon
King or the minotaurs in the Maze From Hell.
What you need in these circumstances is the
Heroism spell. This is one of the most important ones in the game. How it actually works
is a mystery, but it will allow you (especially
when cast by a high-level Paladin or Cleric) to
fight otherwise impossible monsters.

Terminators are virtually impossible to kill
with weapons. They are susceptible to spells,
though, so use such spells as Implosion, Mass
Distortion, Cold Ray, Incinerate, etc. when you
come across them, and try to finish them off
fast, as they can eradicate a character. Varying the spells you use is better than casting
the same ones multiple times.
Protection From Elements is the third important spell. At higher levels, it is much better
than the resistance you get from the statue in
Blistering Heights. For instance, with a Protection From Fire (as cast by a Paladin) active,
we walked all over the Isle of Fire without
being singed. This included absolute protection from fire breathers such as Fire Lizards
and Fire Stalkers. It also works well for walking through the fire spots in Castle Greywind.
At the time we did this, the protection value
was 83 (if you check the day/time icon, you
will see your active spells and how much
protection they are giving you). Protection
From Cold will similarly protect you from the
breath weapons of the green dragons, except
from the Dragon King, who uses some kind of
energy breath, from which there is no real
protection.
For getting past those nasty pendulums in
front of doors, or choppers set up in inconvenient places, or for getting through doors
you can't open or break down, the Etherealize
spell is what you need. Even when Teleport
won't work, Etherealize will, and it takes you
right past traps and doors with no damage at
all. Very handy, especially in the Whiteshield
dungeon, where all the doors have pendulums
in front and Teleport always fails (on the way
out, conserve spell points by unlocking/breaking the door from inside and then Jump past
the pendulum).
Finally, remember that most spells will wear
off at dawn, regardless of when they were
cast. Putting up a Power Shield or Heroism
spell at 4:00 in the morning is a waste of
points, as dawn comes at 5:00 AM. Keep an
eye on the time, and time your spells to get
the most out of them, sleeping if necessary.

Terra, Terra, Terra
If you pay all the heads in the swamps (except Betrayer!) the money they ask, you can
drop a coin in the Well of Remembrance on
Forsaken Sands and be rewarded with a random selection of Neat Items. You may want to
save the game before dropping the coin, just
in case the selection doesn't please you (heh).
Once you do this, the well disappears and
does not come back. Even paying Betrayer to
make the other statues forget you won't make
the well re-appear. Once is all you have, so
make the best of it.

Don't rely on the spells from temples after
you've made the necessary donations. It is far
better to use your own Heroism on your characters. Do this before going into any tough battle, such as with minotaurs or dragons.

Each shell given to the nymph Athea will provide you with 250K experience and 250K
gold. Males in the party always go bonkers
after a visit to Athea, so it will be necessary to
take them to a temple afterwards. There is
one exception to this, but I'll let you figure out
what it is (heh).

Another important spell is Power Shield. At
high levels, this will protect absolutely from
Mystic Clouds, liches and the gaze of the
Medusae that lurk in the Maze From Hell. It
will also protect the party from electrical and
energy fields in the pyramids and other
places; you can walk right through them
without ill effect. Ditto for the weapons wielded
by Iron Wizards and Ed-409s. However, it does
not do too great a job against the Terminators
in the final pyramid.

You can obtain gold, items or stat boosts by
sitting in one of the thrones in Castle Blackwind or Castle Greywind on the right days.
You only have the chance to sit on one throne
(per castle), and only one character can do
this. Save before trying the thrones, and then
decide which one you like best. The day for
each castle can be obtained by answering the
riddles from the graves on Gargoyle Island.

Sneak Preview

No More "Spam in a Can"
Interplay's Buzz Aldrin's Race into Space

n CGW's August editorial (#85), computer game designers were challenged
to develop a new toolkit in order to
meet the design challenges for multimedia games. Apparently, Interplay
decided to take up the challenge in Buzz
Aldrin's Race into Space (Buzz). To be
published as both a disk-based and
CD-ROM-based product, the game is likely to
set a standard for multimedia entertainment products.

sion kit for Jet Propulsion Laboratory
missions may be developed if the initial
program is commercially successful.

I

I he game allows the player to be in
charge of the space program for either
the U.S. or the U.S.S.R., while the computer handles the rival space program.
There is also expected to be a modem
play option available in which one player
can direct the U.S. program while the
other manages the Soviet program, but
as it stands, the basic game can be
either a solitaire experience (player versus computer) or a two-player face-toface game (taking turns at the same
monitor).

The reasons Buzz may set a standard
are relatively straightforward. First, the
game play itself is based on a well-tested
design: Lift-Off, a boardgame from Task
Force Games which has been popular
for years and which has enabled the
design team to play-balance the game
before ever entering a line of code.
Second, the subject matter (the race to
the moon) allows the design team to use
existing film footage of historical events
to dramatize the events. The film footage
to be used will not only include the historical results of space missions and high-altitude testing, but will also provide a base
of images to be modified in order to
present ahistorical results on-screen.
Such use should provide a definite sense
of "making history."
Third, designer Fritz Bronner has professional experience as both an actor and
director. Hence, part of the design
philosophy is built around his sense of a
cinematic approach combined with a
sense of the interactive nature of a
game. Whether the player is involved in
the research and development stage or
one of 58 different types of space missions, the game's goal is to present the
events of the space race in such a way
that history appears to be occurring
before one's very eyes. Add to this the interesting touches of customization, such
as the option of having one's own
digitized photo pictured on the screen
during some of the manned missions,

and something of the "show biz" chrome
which the product is expected to have
should be clear.
Fourth, Buzz Aldrin's provision of expert consultation from the astronaut's
perspective will guarantee that astronaut
involvement in the game will not mean a
"Spam in a can" approach. The roster of
astronauts available to the player will contain different personalities with different
skill emphases. So, a major portion of
the decision-making process for each mission will be the right crew assignments
for optimal performance.

To the Moon, Alice
Buzz Aldrin's Race into Space
recreates that exciting era of space exploration from 1957 to 1977. In the diskbased version, the game will allow
players to advance up to the Saturn 1B
rocket. The CD-ROM version will allow
the player to progress up to the Saturn 5
rocket. Neither version will allow players
to build a shuttle program, but an expan-

The basic objective of the game is, of
course, to reach the moon first. This is because a significant amount of political
prestige points accrue to the successful
space exploration team. The key to the
game may be found in prestige points
that are not only used to score the
player's progress in the game, but also
to be bartered as international political
currency. The propaganda value of successful missions was exceptional in real
life and it is reflected in the game, as
well. The space race was considered to
be a life-or-death issue by the two superpowers, and the scoring system of the
game mirrors this aspect of history.
According to the design team, there are
fifteen different approaches to take in attempting to be the first nation to reach
the moon. Although initially the historical
track may seem to be the most effective
approach, it is by no means the certain
key to victory. This is because the game
features enough random events modified
by factors such as astronaut skills and
the amount of research and testing prior
to each mission that there is a one in
10^84 chance of having the same game.

Have Rocket, Will Travel
The initial phase of the game is

Sneak Preview

oriented toward choices with regard to
rocket research and development. This research continues throughout the game,
but new development programs can be
added as one progresses in the game.
Upon nearing the capability for orbital
missions, for example, one will need to
place considerable emphasis upon research and development for the capsule
itself. The more complex the mission becomes, the more research and development decisions the player will have to
make.
The product is expected to include 58
different types of missions. Players will
not be required to undertake every mission type in every game, however. The
missions will be selected on the basis of
the overall track selected and the prestige points to be gained from each successful operation. What is not included in
the initial 58 missions, but may be included in the final design, is a "rescue
mission" which would be triggered by
another mission going awry. Whatever
the final mission selection is determined
to be, each successful manned mission
or unmanned probe will provide the
player with more detail and available in-

which, in turn, is likely to provide impetus to take more chances (i.e. speed
up the planned schedule) or to become
more cautious (i.e. enhance the survivability of one's astronauts/cosmonauts). The computer opponent will
have to go through the same decision
process as the human player, so the concept of a space race is continually emphasized during game play.

Opening the Toolkit

formation on which to base his/her next
mission (obviously increasing the chance
of success in subsequent missions).
Once the player reaches the manned
mission stage, it is not simply necessary
to declare the object of the mission, but
one must assign the crew on the basis of
desired skills. Astronaut skills will include
such abilities as: command pilot, LEM
pilot, docking/navigation skill, endurance
and EVA expertise.
As play progresses, the player will get
intelligence on the rival space program

Buzz Aldrin's Race into Space may be
first of many products which can be built
off existing film footage. One can easily
imagine a game of presidential politics
where the player, as candidate/campaign
manager, edits actual commercials to
reflect a message/theme/posture and the
demographic data within the game adjust
accordingly. One could even do Oliver
Stone one better by developing an adventure/strategy game around the John F.
Kennedy assassination. One player might
be trying to stop the assassination while
the other might be trying to perpetrate it.
Regardless of future directions, the publication of this product foreshadows a new
genre of multimedia games.

Opinion

Warning: Silicon Surgery
Can Make Your Characters
Plastic

I

by Loyd Case, Jr.

magine, if you will, that you're approached by a seedy-looking fellow
in a soiled trenchcoat emerging
from a dark alley.
"Psst — hey, buddy! Yeah, you. Don't
give me that innocent 'who, me?' look."
"The dark circles around your eyes
are giving you away, buddy," the man
continues. "You've been losing sleep
trying to finish Wing Commander Secret
Missions 2, haven't you? Well, l've got
the answer for you, on this floppy
disk. How would you like a Rapier
with 255 shields, 255 armor and six
neutron cannons? Don't answer yet, because you can also reduce those pesky
Kilrathi cruisers to 1 armor and shield
each. Interested?"
After your rebuke and explanation,
the man continues....
"Oh, so it's not Wing Commander?
You're trying to get through the campaign game of Their Finest Hour. No
problem. Here's another floppy, just for
you. Those wingmen of yours are real
idiots, aren't they? If only they could
get more experience... but, darn it,
they just keep getting killed off, don't
they?. Ahh, but this disk, my friend, is
your salvation. It's got 'BOBED.' You
can create instant aces with high
scores to fly on your side. They're still
not very good, but at least they can
keep those pesky enemy lighters off
your six for a while...."

If a Tree Falls in the
Forest...
Of course, there really aren't people in
seedy coats selling programs on the
street to help people "improve" their
game, but these "modification" programs
actually exist. The two examples in the
above little parable, for instance, are
genuine. This commentator knows, for
he has used them. WCVIEW allows a
player to edit the ships in Wing Commander, making them as strong or as
weak as desired. BOBED allows for the
creation of pilots with huge amounts of
experience for the game Their Finest
Hour.
But is it really cheating? To be more
precise, is it really cheating in a moral
sense?
Most people play computer games, at
least in part, to escape reality. Furthermore, these same computer gamers
probably wish to avoid making these
same very pesky moral decisions. It
must be acknowledged, however, that
most games have built-in assumptions
about what's right and what's wrong
anyway, so the question of "cheats" in
computer gaming is not presented to
muddy up the waters with debate, but to
acknowledge a situation and discuss its
implications for the computer gaming
hobby.
To begin with, hint books have been
available for a long time in order to help
adventure gamers solve a given game's
more difficult puzzles. Hint books started
as little flyers handed out at computer
shows or messages available on
electronic bulletin boards. Later, some

enterprising souls made money by compiling books of hints on multiple games.
Soon the game manufacturers themselves got into the act, selling hint books, or
supplying hints via a 900 area code
telephone number which dings the phone
bill every time they're called.
Some adventure games have very difficult puzzles, indeed, often created by
the warped minds of genius program
designers. Thus, using a hint book has
become like having a crossword puzzle
dictionary to help with solving the New
York Times crossword puzzle. There is
no loss of honor in using a crossword
puzzle dictionary or a computer game
hint book (unless one is really a purist).
So, maybe using program modification
"hacks" like WCVIEW and BOBED is not
really cheating.

The End of Civilization (As
We Know It)
Hint books were not the end of the line,
however. Soon, erstwhile entrepreneurs
and game enthusiast "hackers" were
developing little programs that would
allow people to doctor role-playing adventure games. If one keeps getting killed
on the ninth level, well, give the hero or
heroine the patented Rod of Scorpion
Sting or the devastating Blade de
Cuisinart, boost the character's constitution to the max and increase his/her hit
points from 45 to 150. There, that should
do it....
BOBED and WCVIEW are simply publicdomain descendants of those original
game editors such as Wizard's
Workbench for the Wizardry game system. However, it doesn't even stop there.

Opinion

Lately, Galoob Toys has successfully
won their fight to market an accessory
for Nintendo called the Game Genie.
Surprise, surprise... it allows players to
edit their Nintendo games, so they can
get higher and higher scores.

Catharsis. There's something strangely
cathartic about jacking up one's fighter
in Wing Commander, creating very
weak opponents and blasting away
through the most linear, eighteen-mission
path without a scratch. On the other
hand, it gets boring in a hurry, too.

Why Cheat?
Having talked to a number of gamers,
there seem to be only a few factors
which drive people to use these
programs:
Frustration. After a party has been
killed 86 times trying to get past the
Temple of the Lost Cause, a player will
do almost anything to get past the
game's bottleneck. Many players will
only "edit" their characters to get past
these unusually difficult roadblocks which
they perceive as placed in their way by
(presumably demented) game designers.
Time. In the game Their Finest Hour,
for example, it takes many, many hours
of play to develop a set of good pilots,
necessary for success in the game. This
is true even if the player has gotten very
proficient at the game through hours and
hours of play.

But Is It Really Cheating?
Still, the question remains: is using
these "hack" programs really cheating?
The answer is a definite "maybe."
That sounds wishy-washy, but it really
isn't. Sometimes a player almost has to
cheat because of poor game design. Perhaps not in the overall game, but in one
area where the designer may have unintentionally made it overly difficult or a
bug might have slipped in which unexpectedly stops the whole show. An analogy
can be drawn to clue books: if all one did
was read all the clues and rip through
the game in two hours, this commentator
believes that player would feel oddly
cheated.
That's what it finally comes down to:
cheating in a computer game is really

cheating one's self. Using a hint to get
past a section of a game which countless
hours have been spent on is probably
okay. Most people use hint books (and
these other accessory programs) in just
that way — as enhancements to the entertainment experience. People play games
for entertainment, perhaps for a little
education — not to be endlessly
frustrated.
In the end, individual gamers will have
to strike a balance between the time
spent with their entertainments and the
other aspects of their lives. Used properly, these kinds of programs and game
aids do serve to enhance the overall
gaming experience. The rub is, where is
the line drawn? Is a nine-year-old, given
Game Genie as a birthday present, really
cognizant of the decisions and tradeoffs
discussed here? This commentator
doubts it.
So the next time a gamer stumbles
across a program like WCVIEW, here's
hoping he/she thinks about it before
using it. Otherwise, a player is likely to
be cheating himself (and that player will
feel cheated... trust me).

Computer Flight

From the Cockpit
Situational Awareness While Flying
by Timothy Trimble

dicating for keeping the aircraft in a
proper attitude (its position in the air)

"Humm. The ground looks level but the
turn and bank instrument says that I'm
in a turn. Must be a problem with the instrument." No doubt this has been the
thinking of many a pilot just before colliding with the ground. Just as art imitates
life, many armchair pilots find themselves in the same type of situation, only
with a little more difficulty since the simulated pilot is not affected by the physical
forces and stresses that are exerted upon
a real pilot. In both cases, however, it is
important to have a good grasp of situational awareness.
Total awareness of all the elements of
one's situation at any point in time is the
crux of situational awareness. As it relates to flying, this means knowing where
one is headed, what position the aircraft
is in, where the ground is, what the position of the ground is, where the obstacles
are and very importantly, where is the
enemy and what is the enemy doing?
So, how does this relate to an armchair
pilot? Well, in almost every flight/combat
simulation product on the market today,
the armchair pilot will be able to accomplish his or her goals with more enjoyment and satisfaction if one is "situationally aware." This requires keeping a
mental fix on the situation that the plane
is in at all times. Fortunately, with the
help of some key steps, this is not as
hard as it sounds.
• What do the instruments say?
As in the example stated above, the
armchair pilot may have to choose
whether to trust what can be seen out
the window or what the instruments say.
The rule is: Believe the instruments!
Regardless of what the view out the window is, rely on what the turn and bank instrument or the artificial horizon are in-

• What is the current ground separation?
Again, this is one of the primary causes
of armchair pilots creating a crater in the
ground. By forgetting to keep an eye on
the altimeter while chasing a MiG, one
can quickly discover the unpleasant
"reality" that there was not quite enough
altitude for that inside loop maneuver.
• Where are the obstacles?
As the simulations become more realistic, there are more things to run into.
Mountains, buildings and other obstacles
have to be kept track of. In Flight
Simulator 4 from Microsoft, it is quite
possible to fly right into a high-rise antenna structure while looking out the other
side of the aircraft at the beautiful Golden
Gate Bridge. Even though it is important
to rely on the instruments for the situation of the aircraft, it is still important to
do a regular scan out the windows for
any obstacles.
• Where are the other (especially
enemy) aircraft?
This question does require a little more
mental effort for proper situational awareness. Products like Spectrum HoloByte's Falcon include cockpit instrumentation that displays the position of enemy
aircraft in relation to the player's aircraft.
Naturally, this helps in maintaining awareness. However, Red Baron, from
Dynamix, requires one to scan outside
of the cockpit in order to see where the
enemy aircraft are. Even in the high-tech
combat simulators this is still very important to do. Remember the scenes in the
movie Top Gun in which "Goose" kept
turning around in the cockpit to get a
good look at the enemy? This was to
answer several key questions:
Was the enemy climbing or diving?
What direction was the enemy going?
Was the enemy banked for a turn and if
so, in which direction?

Being able to visually answer these
three questions can help the armchair
pilot make a quick decision as to how to
out-maneuver the enemy. This is also
very applicable to space flight combat
products such as Origin's Wing Commander and Wing Commander II.
• What is the environment?
The environment is the virtual world in
which the armchair pilot is flying. It is not
the entire flying environment provided by
the product but is, rather, the environment that can be affected by the
armchair pilot within a certain unit of
time. For instance, in Flight Simulator 4
this could be: Where will the plane be in
ten minutes or what will be the plane's
relationship to the runway after dropping
another thousand feet? For products
such as Falcon, this would require more
precise evaluations, such as: Can the
plane be turned to face the enemy by the
time the enemy comes out of the S-turn?
To answer these type of questions the
armchair pilot (just like real pilots) has to
have a knack for thinking in three dimensions (3-D) and requires the capacity for
a full mental picture of the aircraft, the
enemy, the ground, obstacles and how
they all relate to each other.
In summary, here are the basic points
to evaluate for situational awareness:
1. Rely on the instruments for a proper attitude;
2. Keep an eye on the altitude;
3. Scan for obstacles;
4. Scan and keep a mental picture of
where the other aircraft are; and
5. Think in 3-D!
In the life of a real pilot, having situational awareness helps to promote a
longer life. For us armchair pilots, it
promotes more enjoyment and a chance
to "wax the tail" of the enemy a little
more often.
Until the next flight plan gets cleared,
this is Timothy Trimble, "From the Cockpit."

Game Hints

Scorpion's Tale
Scorpia Goes Back To School In

W

Spellcasting 201:
The Sorcerer's Appliance

ow, it's Christmas time already!
This year sure ran by fast, didn't
it? Fred's been waiting since last
holiday to get his shrunken head garland
up; it's his favorite decoration. Just don't
look at it too closely (grin). Speaking of
holidays, this is the time of year that
most schools close for a week or so, letting the students out for home visits. And
speaking of students...
He's baaa-aack! That's right, friends,
your favorite nerd-o wannabe sorcerer,
Ernie Eaglebeak, is here again! Okay, so
maybe he isn't quite your favorite, but
here he is, and you're just gonna have to
live with it.
Last time, Ernie was a lowly frosh. This
time, he's a lowly sophomore, having
somehow managed to survive long
enough to make it to the second year of
college. And having managed to survive
(and even be something of a momentary
hero), he's been pledged to that fine old
Sorcerer U. fraternity, Hu Delta Phart.
Can things be looking up for our boy at
last? Not hardly. Chris Cowpatty,
Pledgemaster for HDP, hates Ernie's guts
with a passion that makes a sun's interior seem like the Arctic wastes. Right
there, you know Ernie's gonna have
some problems.
The scene opens on Sunday evening,
with Ernie in the middle of one of those
fun simulations: The Sorcerer's Apprentice. He doesn't really have to get
through it, by the way; none of the sims
add anything to the point score. But, as
a matter of pride (and for looking good
to the profs), he might want to try his
hand at filling the tub and producing a
stiff drink for the master sorcerer. All it
takes is a little spellcasting and a little
slicing at the right moments.

Now, it's time for bigger and better
things — like meeting with Professor Tickingclock, the new head of the university.
All he wants is for Ernie to discover the
secrets of the "Sorcerer's Appliance," sitting behind locked doors in the basement
of Ivorytower. Tickingclock sure has a lot
of faith in Ernie...but then again, Tickingclock is just this side of senility anyway.
So, all Ernie has to do is survive hell...
err, pledge week, learn all about the Appliance and attend a few classes in between (and believe me, Ernie'd better go
to those classes). This time around, they
aren't just for fun. Important information
is learned in them (most of them, anyway), so he can't afford to miss one. Besides, the truancy nymphs will get on his
case if he doesn't (heh).
Monday dawns bright and early, with
Ernie and other pledges dragged into the
basement of HDP. This happens every
morning and this is where Ernie (and the
others) finds out what silly thing has to
be done that day.
Monday's task is simple: just climb up
and stick a mustache on the statue of
Meltingwolf. Easy, right? Well, it would
be, except that loveable old Chris oiled
the statue last night. Kinda hard to climb,
in that condition. There's probably a spell
around somewhere that could help with
this, if only Ernie could get his hot little
hands on it. Might be a good idea to
check out the old Appliance. In fact, it's
a good idea to check out the Appliance
regularly. It's very important with regard
to getting through the game. Also, each
pledge task successfully completed gives
Ernie another of the special attachments
for the Appliance (as mentioned by Tickingclock during that initial conversation),
which he'll need for the next day.

So, about 9:00 PM, Ernie and the
pledges (sounds like a pre-Beatles-era
dance band, almost) are rounded up and
taken down to the HDP basement. This
time it's to see if the tasks have actually
been accomplished or not. Naturally,
Chris is less than thrilled to hear that
Ernie got the mustache on the statue.
This only drives him to come up with
something nastier for the next day.
Nastier, in this case, means stealing the
mascot of HDP's rival frat, Tappa Kegga
Bru. The TKB mascot happens to be an
elevephant. Looks just like an elephant,
only eleven times bigger and much
meaner in disposition. Babar (the
elevephant) is also being guarded by
Lyle Onesaltyteardrop, as a precaution
against pledge week shenanigans.
Hint: there is no way Ernie is gonna
get Babar out the front door of TKB.
Don't even consider it. Then, there's the
matter of Babar's pleasant outlook,
which alone is enough to reduce Ernie to
strawberry jam. And, of course, there's
Lyle, who for all his sulks is keeping a
sharp eye out for people like Ernie.
Actually, most of this isn't too bad. If
Ernie attended class and took good
notes (this is a function of the game; you
can "read notes" anytime to refresh
Ernie's failing memory), it ought to be obvious how to get past Lyle and sweeten
Babar's temper.
Hey, that reminds me: has Ernie tried
the Veal Surprise casserole from the
cafeteria yet? No? Well, I can't blame
him for the hesitancy, but sometimes, unpleasant actions are necessary to get on
with life and pledge week. Also remember that any time Ernie sees a spellbox,
he should open it, no matter what people
might think of him.

Game Hints

So, Ernie (guided by your blinding intellect) manages to pull off another pledge
stunt, raising Cowpatty's blood pressure
to dangerous levels. Determined to make
Ernie fail, he comes up with another
tough assignment: make all the TKB frat
brothers jump fully dressed into the pool
during their sacred champagne toast on
Wednesday night.
Wednesday brings some surprises of its
own: during the night, poor old Prof. Tickingclock kicked the bucket. Tough luck
on the old boy, but good luck for Ernie:
all classes are cancelled for the rest of
the week. (Hey, I bet you were worried
about that, weren't you?) Now Ernie has
plenty of time to get things done.
So what about that pool party? Well,
first Ernie has to get in. No sweat there;
it's the same technique he used on Lyle.
Then it's just a matter of waiting for the
toast (once inside, Ernie is safe from
being bothered) and doing his stuff.
What? Can't hear ya, speak louder,
there's too much music in the background. And speak faster, too. Oh, you
want to know "what stuff" Ernie has to
do? Shucks, I just told you that.

By now Chris is ready to explode, and
comes up with the most difficult task yet:
spiking the punch at nearby Barmaid U's
homecoming party (yeah, Ernie gets to
go off campus!). This would be easy, except for the trigger-happy guards that BU
always hires to make sure the punch
stays non-alcoholic.
For this one, Ernie's gonna need a
friend; he can't do it alone. So, once
Ernie gets his friend (and gets his friend
clothed!), it's off to Barmaid U. A quick
look around tells Ernie that an invitation
is necessary to attend the reunion.
Wonder where he can get one?
While he ponders that, he might want
to visit the ladies' shower on the second
floor. Pretty steamy, huh? (grin) A little
too steamy — seems the shower doesn't
work right. What a shame. Too bad there
isn't a plumber in the house.
Anyway, the rest of this little escapade
ought to be pretty obvious, and before
long Ernie will be back at Sorcerer U to
bask in the glow of Chris Cowpatty's incandescent visage. Enjoy the moment,
Ernie, the tough one is coming up.

Friday's little job involves another offcampus jaunt, this time to nearby Balmoral City. All Ernie has to do is (ahem)
moon the queen at her afternoon parade
(I just report the facts...blame Meretzky
for this stuff!).
First, Ernie has to get off campus, and
this time, Cowpatty doesn't provide a
pass. As long as Ernie isn't feeling like
himself, that should be no problem. Now
he needs a ticket to get into the royal
grounds to see the parade. (They don't
hand these things out to just anyone,
y'know.)
Maybe his old friend Lola Tigerbelly can
help, but she doesn't appear to be terribly thrilled to see Ernie again. Say, did
Ernie ever do the Enchanted Forest sim?
Huh? Huh? I sure hope so, 'cause it has
a big clue for this part of the game.
So now Ernie has a ticket and a muddy
coin. Into the palace grounds he goes,
and hangs out until Queen Libido (yeah,
that's her name) passes by and...umm,
the guards didn't appreciate seeing a
place where the sun don't shine (and I
don't mean the brain).

Game Hints

In no time at all, Ernie's in a cell and
the royal carpenters are working doublequick to erect a gallows. This does not
look good for our hero. He should at
least clean up before his final appearance. Oh ick, the water in the sink is
cold, and the hot water isn't working.
Gee, nothing goes right for Ernie, does it?
Then again....with maybe a little
thought (but think fast, time is short!),
and a little hands-on experience, and a
certain spell, Ernie can get himself taken
to far more pleasant quarters and a far
more pleasant situation. (Just remember
to grab the wand first, Ernie!)
Now it's all done — Ernie has the last attachment for the Appliance, and he's
completed all the pledge assignments.
What could be left to do? Why, the end
game of course.
Be prepared: the minute Ernie puts the
wand on the Appliance and opens it, he'll
be captured (so to speak) by Chris Cowpatty and a Certain Person (whose name
I won't reveal, but whose identity will not
surprise anyone who has played this far).
The Certain Person, in the usual

vainglorious spiel all villains feel compelled to make at these moments,
reveals all. (No, he doesn't take his
clothes off; he reveals his dastardly
schemes!) Then the CP and Cowpatty
leave, with Ernie locked in the room.

imagination; you should have enough
clues by now to figure it all out.

A silly mistake on the bad guys' part,
of course. Ernie can get out any time he
wants to. The question is, where does he
want to go, and what's he supposed to
do when he gets there?

work....)

Well, did Ernie notice what it said on
the Appliance when he attached the
wand? "Necromancy." We all know that
has something to do with (ominous
organ music) the dead! Bet that gives
Ernie some ideas, and probably bizarre
ones at that.
Bizarre, however, isn't the word for what
has to be done. Timing is critical here;
Ernie needs enough moves to get where
he's going, and the only way to do that
is to, well, let's say, bowel over the campus, in a manner of speaking.
What comes after that is hard to
describe without giving too much away.
Maybe it's best to just leave this to your

So Ernie makes it into HDP, and will
probably survive his sophomore year as
well. That means only two more years to
go. (Unless he decides to do graduate
Whew! All this mucking about (hehe)
sure made the hours go fast. I see by the
old invisible clock on the wall, it's that
time again. Remember if you need help
with an adventure game, you can reach
me in the following ways:
On Delphi: visit the GameSIG (under
the Groups and Clubs menu).
On GEnie: Stop by the Games RoundTable (type: Scorpia to reach the Games
RT).
By U.S. Mail (enclose a self-addressed,
stamped envelope if you live in the
United States): Scorpia, P.O. Box 338,
Gracie Station, New York, NY 10028.
Until next time, happy adventuring!
Copyright 1991 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

Technical Notes

ctober 8th, 1991 marked a significant event in personal computing history. The Multimedia PC
(MPC) launch was the most impressive
product launch this writer has ever seen;
even the surroundings were impressive. It
was held in the largest natural history
museum in the world, the American
Museum of Natural History in New York
City. Shown among multi-million dollar
displays of precious gems was the future
of personal computing.
Keynote addresses started off the afternoon. James Burke, the renowned
science historian, PBS writer and host
(remember his Connections series?),
kicked off the event with his prediction
that the information age
being created by the easy
access to information will
send shock waves
throughout civilization. Information that is easy to
process, view and manipulate will allow people to
learn at their own pace.
Data will be assimilated in
the way that is easiest for
the computer user to
process. Threads will be in
the data that will enable
users to make new connections at their own pace and
to direct these new connections toward their personal
interests. Burke related this
predicted shock wave to
the Renaissance. The shock
wave that was created
during that period changed
virtually all institutions.
Education and politics were
never the same. According
to Burke, we are at a
similar threshold.

Following the speeches, attendees were
able to see product demos on working
MPC hardware. According to the Multimedia Marketing Council, 60 MPC
products are either ready to ship or will
be shipped before the end of 1991. No
other computing platform has been
launched with such a broad base of support from software vendors.
The new products are divided into three
categories: working, learning and playing. Perhaps most impressive were the
wide assortment of development tools
available to ordinary computer users.
They will be able to create software that
can include full-fidelity audio, 256-color
graphics and animated or digitized

MPC are: a 286 processor, 2MB of RAM,
a 40MB hard drive, VGA graphics, an
MPC audio card (2-channel digitized 16bit audio recording and playback, and
synthesizer support), a CD-ROM drive
that must meet minimum speed requirements and, finally, Microsoft Windows
with Multimedia extensions. At least
three manufacturers are presently selling
an upgrade kit that includes an MPC
sound board, CD ROM and Windows
with the Multimedia extensions. Of
course, most hardware manufacturers
will not be supporting a 286 processorbased version of the MPC, as they
believe that any MPC machine should
have, at least, a 386SX. Some hardware
companies will produce 286based MPC machines, however.

The Circuit Writer

Bill Gates (in a recent
USA Today article, Bill was
reputed to be the second
wealthiest American), Chairman of
Microsoft, spoke about the power of the
MPC platform. To demonstrate how easy
it is to harness this power, Mr. Gates assigned a group within Microsoft the duty
of creating an interactive tour of the
Museum where the launch meeting was
held. In a dazzling display of sound,
graphics, full-motion video and interactivity, the task was accomplished. The
"tour" was truly impressive, especially
since the "tour program" was created
without programming in the traditional
sense — all that was used was a "tool
kit." Now, without having to program,
average users will be able to create stunning applications on an MPC.

What about this MPC?
By Steve Witzel

"flicks." The best part is that they can do
all this without learning BASIC, C or PASCAL!

Who Is Behind This?
The Multimedia Marketing Council is
a non-profit subsidiary of the Software
Publishers Association. The council is
comprised mostly of hardware manufacturers and has two main functions: to administer the MPC trademark and to
promote the MPC concept to the public.
Most major hardware manufacturers are
producing a Multimedia PC or making an
upgrade kit so anyone will be able to
turn his or her current machine into an
MPC. The minimum requirements for an

What is extremely impressive is that it does not matter
which hardware manufacturer
provides the basic machine. If
it says MPC, it is compatible
with any MPC software. The
Multimedia Windows extensions add several important
features to windows. The first,
of course, is the capacity for
sound that has been so
elusive for PC users. Further,
Windows has a reputation
for having slow graphics updates, but the multimedia extensions provide new and
faster graphics drivers. Also,
the MPC specifications standardize full-motion video
playback. Software manufacturers are able to license the
MPC trademark for their compatible product.

So, when one purchases or
upgrades to an MPC computer, there should be no further worries about whether
the software will run on the
machine or not. Software with the MPC
trademark will run on any MPC machine.
Gone are the worries of sound board support, memory requirements, graphics
standards, etc. If it says, "MPC," it will
work. It's about time!
After reading all of this, discerning
readers will note that an MPC is just a
standard PC with sound and CD ROM.
This is certainly correct. An MPC is just
an incremental step in hardware. However, the interesting aspect is that the
software is revolutionary. By having
standards and a tremendous storage
capability (over 600MB on a disk), the
end results are amazing.

_

Bestseller List

Industry News

Intertainment to Byte
Perspectives From Intertainment '91

T

his year's conference on the future of

ing the masses which was championed by
Trip Hawkins, but it was also concerned
with using existing technologies in order to
transform television from a passive to a
more active medium. British television
producer Tim Child (Broadsword
Television) demonstrated the in-studio approach to interactive television; Larry
Taynor (Interactive Network TV) spoke
of home audience involvement and Yves
Plouffe (TVI) shared about Quebec's experiences with a 125,000-viewer branching
TV system.

interactive entertainment was significantly different from last year's conference. Last year, the bulk of the conference focused on machines and possibilities that would be here RSN (Real
Soon Now). Much of the conversation
seemed to be comprised of promises that
the attendees had heard all too often for
five or six years. This year, the conference
focused on both available technology and
the technology on the horizon.
Last year, CDTV and CD-I were promises.
This year, they are on sale. Last year,
videogames primarily meant 8-bit entertainment. This year, it's a 16-bit world. Last
year, virtual reality was too expensive for
entertainment applications. This year,
amusement park and home entertainment
applications are closer to reality. Last year,
interactive television meant very limited interaction via special cable connections that
took on-line polls or allowed viewers to participate in on-line guessing games. This
year, interactive television may be the future of personal computing.

The Collision of Film and
Silicon
Trip Hawkins, President and CEO of
SMSG, Inc. (San Mateo Software Group)
and Chairman of Electronic Arts, turned
most interactive metaphors upside-down
with his keynote address. Hawkins began
with his vision of a "universal box" which
would be present in every home. Now, the
box would be a computer, a game
machine, a telecommunications interface, a
photographic/video workstation and a
cable receiver. In fact, the latter is a key element because it means that when the cable
companies go to fiber-optic cables and
televisions can provide 1,000 channels
rather than the current 60 available on
most coaxial cables, people are going to
need something more than a remote control in order to access those channels. Indeed, they are going to need a computer
that helps them find the entertainment they
are looking for. So, if they are already
going to need a computer to get the benefit
of cable, why not put a CD-ROM in the box
and allow a gamer to play an interactive
movie right there on the television screen?
Why not allow a viewer to edit his/her
home movies on that same screen and
save the results to disk? What if it could be
a two-way system where one could answer
the doorbell via a camera/cable hook-up?
Naturally, there is a long way to go in
reaching this vision of a universal box. For
one thing, Hawkins noted that the average
consumer is not going to be satisfied with
images, film and animation that is less than

broadcast television quality. Currently, he
states that the equivalent of broadcast
television (30 frames per second) is the handling of about six million pixels per second.
When this is compared to the one million
pixels per second of the average 16-bit
machine, the result is a standard that is not
going to be accepted by the masses. In
fact, Hawkins suggested that he had yet to
see a television/film production person who
was satisfied with the MPEG standard of
digitized graphics and sound (and MPEG is
a stricter standard than JPEG). So, part of
the dream is for higher-quality standards.
In talking about this vision of a "universal
box," Hawkins noted that cable companies
do not have enough money to be able to
front the expense on their own. They are
not going to be able to allow consumers to
purchase the machines by just adding an
additional $5.00 per month onto their bills.
The machines are going to have to be available as a separate purchase that will have a
separate appeal to the consumer. The executive does not believe that consumers
will pay $1,000 or so for a machine that offers interactive entertainment — "...something they really don't understand right
now...." Instead, he posits a price point of
around $500 for a machine that can play
audio CDs, get 1,000 channels of television
efficiently, play digitized films and allow
viewers to participate in interactive experiences. Calling this the "Trojan horse" approach to reaching the mass market, Hawkins went on to describe technological,
legal and financial problems which will have
to be overcome in order to exploit this
potential new market.

Television That Responds
Not only was the conference concerned
about the "Trojan horse" approach to reach-

Broadsword Television's initial hit was a
television series called "Knightmare." In
"Knightmare," real children played a fantasy role-playing game of interaction and
problem-solving in the studio as their fellow
team members interacted with live actors
and computer-generated graphics
(projected via blue screen techniques)
onstage. "Knightmare" was followed by a
science-fiction role-playing experience
where the in-studio contestants (i.e. team
members) were dressed in space suits and
travelled through a three-dimensional environment as they guided their "robot"
through an alien space ship (an artificial environment completely generated in real-time
3-D graphics by a processor powered by an
Amiga 68030 chip).
The company's latest experiment is
"Cyberzone," a virtual reality environment
where contestants travel through a 3-D city
and zap obstacles. Although film footage of
this show did not look impressive, a new
edition of the game is currently under
development and should provide more
realistic texture overlays for the 3-D shapes,
adding to the "suspended disbelief" of contestants and home viewers.
Of course, in-studio interaction does not
really advance interactivity much more than
the average game show. So, Larry Taynor
began his presentation with a parable.
"What if," he asked, "one could get the
home audience involved in game shows?"
He stated that, in 1948, twenty of the top
twenty-five network shows (radio network,
of course) were interactive game shows.
Literally dozens of radio programs called
homes and let home players win prizes.
Now, with a $300 controller (featuring a full
keyboard) and a $15-per-month subscription fee, cable customers in Sacramento,
CA can compete with the in-studio contestants. Unfortunately, California contests do
not allow chance, consideration or reward,
so viewers do not really compete for prizes.
They can compete for "score," however, by
typing the first two letters of the correct
answer prior to the on-screen contestants.
In Canada, the designers of interactive
television programs have designed a spe-

Industry News

cial version of Jeopardy! in
which the in-home viewer is a
fourth contestant. Studio contestants are not allowed to
answer immediately and the inhome player uses the controller to select answers from an
on-screen menu of multiple
choice answers. The player's
score is tabulated by gaining
or losing the amount of money
chosen by the studio contestants and play balance comes
from the fact that the in-home
player gets to compete on
every question against all
three studio contestants.
TVI, the Canadian distributor,
is also experimenting with interactive drama. Although it is
not set up in such a way that
the viewer can change the ending, there is a "game," albeit
a guessing game, involved in watching
these episodes. The producers select about
20 different interactions during the course
of an episode. These interactions represent
plot progressions. The viewer presses the
button each time he/she believes a plot
progression has occurred and, at the end of
the episode, receives one point for each correct selection.
All of the above types of programming
seem to offer extremely limited interaction
compared with what computer games have
offered previously, but alert
readers/developers/producers should carefully observe what is being experimented
with in the field of interactive television in
order to be able to exploit that "universal
box" if it should ever actually be available.

Is It Live or Is It Virtual?
Interestingly enough, Steve Glenn of SimGraphics (one of the leaders in LBE
development of virtual reality entertainments — see the related article on page 24)
began his presentation with an illustration
drawn from the field of interactive
television. Glenn stated that "Consumers
want some measure of control over entertainment..." and went on to describe how
Home Video Jukebox was earning $100
million per year with a simple system in
which a viewer calls and requests a video.
Even though there is approximately a twohour delay before the viewer sees that
video, subscribers seem willing to pay for
the privilege.
Glenn believes that offering more control
to viewers will provide more satisfaction
and, hence, more profitable opportunities in
the future. He sees products advancing
from the level of passive ride attractions
(like the "Back to the Future" ride at Universal Studios in Florida) through interactive
coin-op arcade products and moving forward through networked arcade products
(like "BattleTech" centers or Spectrum
HoloByte's upcoming mall-based flight
simulators) and upward through specialized
networked products.
He also visualizes a market for VR produc-

demographics are very close
to those of CGW readers. 92%
of BTC users are male, more
than 45% are college graduates
and more than 40% earn more
than $30,000 per year (5% are
in the $60,000 plus range).
Naturally, this would suggest
that designers/producers of VRbased entertainment need to
pay attention to the types of
computer games which are already successful among this
target group.

Will There Be Interactive Studios?

tion in which virtual reality companies
would digitize the equivalent of a massive
backlot, providing thousands of digitized
sets for live performers to use as 3-D backdrops (citing future "Toto" performances).
He also perceived an era in which corporations and product lines would use animated
mascots rather than the costumed humans
of today's era. Further, he observed that
their company would eventually be able to
place actors in a body suit and record the
LEM movements. Such digitized "tapes"
would enable designers/producers to become more efficient choreographers and,
eventually, to develop a "digital backlot" of
animated characters which could be used
for several products.
Of course, the uses of LBE virtual reality
and production-oriented virtual reality has a
place in the future of computer entertainment, but most CGW readers want to know
when VR will reach the home. The big news
is that Texas Instruments is currently
developing what they call the "next generation" home entertainment center. Their goal
is to develop a home VR system that would
provide HDTV-quality resolution and a 110degree viewing angle. Indeed, CGW readers
with long memories will recall that Chris
Gentile (often credited as the developer of
the PowerGlove for Mattel) spoke in
general terms (at last year's conference) of
consulting on a total virtual reality system
for home garners (see CGW #78, p. 36). At
that time, the TVR was expected to be
tested in late 1992 and launched in 1993.
The TI product would seem to fit that
timeline, although some of the technical
specifications have changed (some improved, some less demanding).
Finally, Jordan Weisman of FASA and
Virtual World Entertainments talked
about total immersion into alternate worlds
that do not include head's-up displays.
Weisman's theory is that a convincing virtual environment can be created without
the traditional accoutrements of total immersion (helmet, goggles, gloves, pointers,
etc.). Interestingly enough, Weisman
presented a Michigan State University study
of BattleTech Center users and the

Since the keynote address
dealt with the relationship between the old Hollywood and
the new, it seemed only appropriate that one of the final
sessions would deal with the
idea of the interactive studio. Although
there was much excitement among many
of the participants about a partnership between the traditional entertainment industries and the interactive entertainment industries, Columbia Pictures Television executive Steve Mendelssohn provided a
much-needed reality check. He stated that
the studios in Hollywood are taking a goslow approach to multimedia and underscored the fact that studios tend to be followers rather than leaders. He observed
that even his own company had not synergized with its parent (Sony) in the way
many people had believed would occur. Further, he talked about "residual" issues that
would have to be resolved when the Writers
Guild, Directors Guild, SAG and AFTRA
began to observe passive media (film,
television, recorded work) being transformed into active media.
Then, he suggested that there was room
for cross-pollination between passive media
and interactive media in the present environment. He believes that the writing pool is
the natural place for synergy to start.
Writers are always looking for a new form
to write in and new frontiers to address. He
did not seem to be aware of the fact that
mainstream writers and composers were already filling the talent pools of entertainment software companies (particularly at
Sierra/Dynamix where the trend has been
visible for years).
Although other speakers on the same
panel laid some ground rules for participating in a synergistic partnership between passive and interactive media, Mendelssohn's
remarks provided a caveat for the entertainment software industry. That is, until some
legal considerations have been ironed out,
it is still cheaper to produce new material
for interactive properties than to license
linear properties for further development. It
falls to the creative iconoclasts (the independents rather than the media giants) who
seem to surface in the revolutions that take
place in any industry (particularly the creative industries) to carve out the new frontiers of Intertainment.

Review

Kindred Arrests
by J. D. Lambright
TITLE:
Police Quest 3
SYSTEM:
IBM
PROTECTION: Document Look Up
PRICE:
$59.95
DESIGNER:
Jim Walls
PUBLISHER:
Sierra
Coarsegold,

O

ne of the great strengths of the original Police Quest was
that the encounters were "fictionalized" versions of actual
arrests and situations, either experienced by designer Jim
Walls himself (a retired law enforcement officer) or one of his colleagues, that required correct police procedures to resolve.
Police Quest 3: The Kindred (PQ3) continues the tradition of excellence. In spite of the controversial "parser-less" interface
(which some veteran adventure garners believe has a tendency
to make the games less complex), the latest installment in the
career of Detective Sonny Bonds still requires authentic police
procedures to solve the case. [Ed: In fact, the police procedural
aspects of the series have been so well-received by actual law
enforcement agencies and personnel that Jim Walls' development company, Jim Walls Games, is working on a professional computerized training program using Sierra's toolkit.]
The puzzles in PQ3 are tougher than those in earlier Police
Quest adventures. Be careful in making decisions early on as
they significantly affect results further on in the game. Also, unlike some of the other games with the parserless interface, such
as Leisure Suit Larry 5, Sonny Bonds can die.
Of course, puzzles are not the only features to be enhanced in
PQ3. The graphic artists used rotoscoping (drawing over filmed
footage of live actors) to improve both the animated movements
of the characters and to provide a more cinematic perspective to
screen layouts and blocking (character movement on-screen).
Sometimes, the scenes are so real that reaching out and touching the monitor would almost cause one to expect to see blood
on one's hands (and PQ3 does have blood!).
The musical soundtrack, composed for maximum adrenalin effect by Jan Hammer of Miami Vice fame, effectively uses most
of the available sound cards in presenting an audio cue as to the
importance of certain scenes, as well as enlivening transition
times. Beyond the music, the sound effects do a good job of
emulating everything from typewriter clacking to the banshee
screams of screeching tires.

Roll Call
Warning: Portions of the next few sections of this article
offer specific hints for completing the game. Readers who
do not desire hints should skip to the section entitled
"Debriefing."
In PQ3, the player takes on the role of a modern detective. To
succeed, one will practically have to be a master of deductive
reasoning, an artist (using the game's computer-assisted composite photo technique), a social worker and a computer
specialist. Following the manual's "First Day Briefing (WalkThru)" will get rookies (first-time PQ officers) off to a fast start.

The game begins like any police officer's day, with a briefing.
As usual, parts of the briefing are thinly disguised versions of the
real thing. This is immediately followed by a one-on-one conference with a fellow officer to determine strategy. Then, it is
time to equip oneself for the investigation by heading to the locker room and adding useful articles to Sonny's inventory. Players
better make sure that Sonny ends up in the "Men's Locker
Room" or they are liable to meet an unhappy "fellow" officer that
resembles a female version of Mike Tyson.

Driving Sonny Crazy
Driving a police cruiser to Aspen Falls is next on Sonny's agenda. Navigation is accomplished via the map of Lytton provided
in the manual. Driving the car demonstrates some of the versatility of the new Sierra adventure game toolkit. The player
places the cursor in front of the squad car and presses the left

Review

mouse button to increase speed and the right one for braking.
The car can be turned by placing the cursor at the intersection
(and in the direction) in which the turn is to be made. Since
these controls are considerably different than those to which
players are accustomed, it make take a while before they are
mastered. In fact, one is very likely to spin out quite a few times
when turning corners too fast. If players are alert for the signs
which indicate upcoming intersections or are paying attention to
the built-in "locater beacon," they should get this part of the
game mastered fairly quickly.
Note that Aspen Falls does not have a turnout. So, one has to
stop the car, turn off the ignition and exit the vehicle at the appropriate location. There, one must talk to the bystanders, take
notes and proceed according to police procedures. For those not
properly prepared, a watery grave awaits. Sometimes the best
thing to do is "to do unto others as they do unto you." Remember, a suspect should always be handcuffed and searched before
anything else is done. In addition, one must always follow procedures when booking a suspect, since mistakes cost lives.

Homicide
At this point in the game, Walls opts to deviate from realistic
police procedures. Normally, when a member of an officer's immediate family is a victim of a crime,
said officer is not allowed to work on the
case. The chance of the officer's emotions causing him/her to make a serious
mistake is too great. In this case, Marie
(Sonny's wife) has been attacked and
stabbed. Of course, Sonny's involvement
in the case is simply a page out of the
average detective movie where the hero
violates a direct order just to "make
sure" the crime is solved. In the game,
for example, Sonny knows that the scene
of the crime will have been carefully
scrutinized by the experts, but there is a
tremendous temptation just to make
sure. One must be certain to use
evidence gathering techniques properly
and to take down important information.
Also, just as one would expect in a mystery screenplay, it sometimes takes a good night's sleep in order for the subconscious to
sort matters out.
One thing is certain. Walls does an excellent job of keeping the
player motivated in PQ3. Sonny will definitely want to visit Marie
and the sight of his helpless wife is enough to bring tears to the
hardened crime fighter's eyes. As if Marie's situation were not
bad enough, the hospital environment is tremendously depressing. Maybe the player could find something to brighten things
up? It might even help bring her out of the coma. After all, that
happens in other scripts. After that, well, maybe work will help to
pass the time.
So, the plot evolves. Sonny is transferred to Homicide and he
gets a new partner. One must get back to proper procedure to
advance further, though. Studying cases of similar homicides in
order to look for a "pattern," interrogating a witness and creating
a composite photo should be helpful. Unfortunately, there is
something about Sonny's new partner that just seems "funny."
Maybe watching her might not be such a bad idea. In fact, there
is something "key" about watching her.
In fact, after a routine court appearance, Sonny may get his
chance to "key" in on his partner. Almost immediately, the two

detectives get a radio call indicating that a murder has been committed in an alley near 300 Rose. Examining the body (a real
"nail biting" task) should give the detective some idea of the "pattern." This should be followed by a trip to return evidence to the
crime lab.
Sonny will eventually get enough evidence to end up at a local
pool hall. Once there, it certainly would not be a bad idea to
place a tracker on that vehicle Sonny has been trying to locate.
Then, one can enter the pool hall and, essentially, flush the
suspect out.

It's a Dirty Job
After all the excitement, Sonny might notice that someone has
"taken a powder" (not in the usual sense). It might not be a bad
idea to search that person's desk. The locker combination looks
helpful. After that, Sonny might need to get the janitor away
from the door. Well, what are janitors for? After obtaining his services, it is no problem to exit and enter "forbidden territory" long
enough to examine the contents of the locker. Remember, an officer had better inform his/her captain about such things.
After visiting both the coroner and Marie, the plot quickens with
a radio call from dispatch. Sonny will need to proceed to the appropriate address. He should not, however, enter the dwelling
until after the fire marshall says it is all
clear. Then, he should take careful note
of the contents of the dwelling, particularly the photographs. The altar room may
offer very fertile ground for gathering additional evidence.
Eventually, this will lead the detective to
visit the army recruiter at the mall and
read the file on the suspect. This, in turn,
will necessitate a visit with the criminal
psychologist back at the station and onward, to the endgame.

Book 'Em Dan-o!
If the investigation is proceeding well,
Sonny should be able to knock on the
door of the crack house and attempt to speak to its occupants.
As usual, the straight-ahead approach does not get him very far,
so he has to appear before a judge and obtain a search warrant.
If successful, he should be able to use the warrant to make a
search and garner enough evidence. He should return to the station and book the evidence. Then, after returning to the courthouse and appearing before the judge, once again, one can finally make the bust. Alert players will remember, however, the immortal words of Yogi Berra ("It ain't over till it's over!") and
make sure that the real brains behind the operation is brought to
justice, even if it is cinematic justice!

Debriefing
Police Quest 3: The Kindred is the best of the series to date.
The parserless interface enhances playability so much that even
those who did not care for earlier Sierra releases may want to
try the new generation. PQ3 offers more replayability than one
would suspect, because every time one tries to do something differently, something new will pop up that the player did not see
during the first experience.
Whether one is looking for a good "cops 'n' robbers" story, a
police procedural mystery or a challenging adventure game,
Police Quest 3: The Kindred fits the description.

Industry News

News for Computer Gamers from Comdex

A

lthough pen-based computers

seemed to be the star attractions
at this year's fall Comdex in Las
Vegas, certain general trends continued
to be much in evidence. To be specific,
the miniaturization of the laptop into
notebooks and palmtops, as well as the
emergence of multimedia platforms,
seemed to be gaining momentum.

The Search for the Gamer's
Notebook
Naturally, a notebook computer with
even gray-scaled VGA resolution would
be a boon for the business and professional traveller who carries a computer
with him/her and may want to play a
computer game on a plane or in a hotel
room. In general, the screen refresh rates
(for LCD screens) have not been efficient
enough to play games that require a fast
frame rate and tend to leave residual
"smudges" on the screen whenever objects move across the "monitor" or the
cursor moves over the playing area.
In playing Tetris, for instance, one
might have a trail flowing behind a block
that is more than two times the length of
the block itself. In a graphic adventure,
one might inadvertently add new lines to
the on-screen images by simply moving
the cursor. Of course, many of the early
laptops did not even offer a full 640 x
480 display screen.
One of the notebooks shown at Comdex that looked like it might offer an
answer for garners on the go was the
Avi ANB-386SX-20 notebook. Weighing
in at seven pounds and featuring a builtin VGA port (to hook up to an external
VGA monitor), the notebook offers: a
640 x 480 VGA (with 64 gray levels), two
RS-232 serial ports, built-in DC converter,
an FDD port (for external disk drive) and
DR DOS.

board compatible with the Yamaha gold
standard.
At a suggested retail price of $3,599
(and estimated street price of $2,489),
the ANB-386SX-20 is the first laptop that
will undergo future testing for a CGW
Lab report (where several different types
of "state-of-the-art" games will be tested
in both LCD and CRT modes, as well as
AC- and DC-powered). Technical representatives at the company say that there
is minimal blur when running Flight
Simulator 4 in LCD mode and that
Tetris leaves a trail equal to approximately "one-quarter" of one of the blocks
before the screen refreshes. Naturally,
the machine functions like any other
386SX computer when connected to a
standard VGA monitor. CGW will comment on other "gameable" notebook
computers as more information becomes
available.

Moving Toward Multimedia
All of the sound card manufacturers
which contributed to the earlier "sound
revolution" on PC compatibles are getting into multimedia. As noted in CGW
#88 (p. 14), the new AdLib Gold Card
(pictured) will not only use the new
Yamaha stereo chip that is almost
synonymous with multimedia sound, but
will feature three daughterboards that will
fit onto the Gold Card itself to provide additional features. One add-on serves as a
SCSI port (to add a CD-ROM drive);
another allows the user to create a "Surroundsound" mode and the other turns
the Gold Card into an answering
machine.
Other manufacturers are preparing multimedia upgrades, as well. Creative
Labs's Sound Blaster Pro provides 8-bit
stereo and has a built-in CD-ROM drive interface, joystick/MIDI port and MIDI timestamp. Covox also previewed a new

Perhaps, the most exciting news from
Covox was that they have developed a
software program called Overlord that
enables the Covox line of boards to emulate any of the current boards. (One
must have MIDI capability in order to
emulate the Roland.) Readers who have
had compatibility problems between the
Sound Master ll and the drivers which
support Sound Blaster and AdLib are
urged to download Overlord free from
the Covox bulletin board: (503) 3424135.

On "Making" Multimedia
One of the most impressive presentations at the show was an authoring station for multimedia, although the
hardware is developed for professional
developers as opposed to being available
to the general public or amateur
developer ($19,700). What is exceptionally impressive about this system is that it
allows a software developer to capture
video (from laser disc, broadcast or
tape), encode the images and audio (approximately 16K per second) and play
the footage back (as called for in a new
application) at thirty frames per second
with 800-line (NTSC) resolution.
The authoring station allows its users to
capture, edit frame by frame and then,
create what the company calls Soft Video
(playback data) in either the JPEG or
MPEG standard. The company also uses
the ISO 9660 standard used by the MPC,
IBM, Apple, Sun and NeXT machines.
Claiming the fastest CD-ROM data-read
time in existence for full-motion video,
the TMM authoring station demonstrates
that the technology for true multimedia
products is just around the corner. Frank-

Industry News

ly, CGWs editor was skeptical until they
allowed him to give the director's "cut
and print" order and then watch the
machine encode the data and play back
from the computer itself. It was an amazing demonstration with tremendous potential.

a new CD-ROM version of Sherlock Holmes: Consulting Detective that ran considerably smoother than the NEC TurboGrafx 16 version; Broderbund mesmerized parents of small children with
their first "Living Book," Just Grandma
and Me (a multi-lingual animated story
which children can "explore" via the
mouse or simply enjoy as the computer
reads the story aloud to them) and Inter
play showcased the sound capabilities of
Battlechess CD-ROM.

Is There Really a Multimedia Market?
"Multimedia" is, essentially, the use of
passive media in the form of digitized images and sound (in the present sense,
usually requiring optical storage and enhanced audio-visual capacity) in an interactive software program. It is an extremely popular "buzzword" in computing
circles because of its tremendous consumer potential (see the reports on the
MPC launch and Intertainment '91 in this
issue). The Interface Group, sponsors
of Comdex, presented a "white paper" at
the show, which estimated that educational materials (including both audio-visual
products and computer software)
amounted to approximately $700 million
per year and
professional/business-oriented audio-visual materials amount to
approximately $2 billion per year. The

Prognosis for Progress?

positively amazing estimate, however,
was that the consumer market for interactive computer-based multimedia could
easily amount to $42.5 billion in revenue
per year.
In terms of multimedia entertainment at
Comdex, Sierra was displaying CD-ROM
versions of King's Quest V and Jones in
the Fast Lane, as well as their Mixed-Up
Mother Goose multimedia title. Access
demonstrated the multimedia allure of
their Links for Windows; ICOM unveiled

If the exhibitions at this Fall's Comdex
were any indication, multimedia should
begin to be a significant minority portion
of the entertainment software market by
the end of 1992 and, possibly, hold a
slight majority of the market in 1993.
Now that the technological issues seem
to be coming together with some nearterm solutions, the challenge is to capture the imagination of consumers with
challenging game designs and fascinating products. There are still plenty of
questions about the future of interactive
entertainment, but there seem to be a
semblance of answers, as well.

Review

TITLE:
NFL Pro League Football
SYSTEM:
IBM
# OF PLAYERS: 1-2 (or more with league play)
PRICE:
$79.95
PROTECTION: None
DESIGNER:
David Holt
PUBLISHER:
Micro Sports Inc.
Football
Hixson, TN

N

for the Pros
Micro Sports' NFL Pro League Football

FL Pro League Foot-

by Win Rogers

ball is not an arcade
game that gives the
feeling of unleashing a long
pass or slogging it out on the
defensive line. It does not
blow players away with glitzy
graphics or sound. It is, however, unmatched as a thinking fan's football simulation.
It is football handled like a
game of chess with live
pieces. It offers an intelligent
choice of playing modes and
an incredible depth of statistical detail. This is not a game for
novices, but for serious fans who know their football and want a
game that takes full advantage of that knowledge. Further, it is welldesigned as a platform for computerized league play.
The "new 1991 version" now in the stores, the subject of the current review, is an upgrade of a game available previously. Owners of
the earlier version can upgrade at a reduced price. Gamers will want
to know what is in the box, since it carries a much higher price tag
than the competition. The game comes with a glossy player's
manual, two glossy player reference cards and 3.5" and 5.25" disks
containing compressed files that are expanded during installation. It
requires a hard disk, EGA or VGA graphics and 640K of RAM.
However, it is the wealth of real player statistics that has driven up
the cost, since the developer paid licensing costs to the NFL and to
the Players' Association. The game comes with five years (1986-90)
of NFL rosters for all the pro teams, an amazing 140 rosters in all.
Additional player disks covering earlier decades are said to be available. The game allows head-to-head play over modem and downloading of current team statistics from the USA Today Sports Center
(not tested by this reviewer). It does not support joystick or mouse.
The documentation, especially the reference cards, which describe
available offensive and defensive plays, is clear and helpful, but assumes a solid understanding of football strategy. There is a great
choice of offensive and defensive plays and strategies. The game
also contains the most excellent printing and record-keeping utilities
yet seen in a computerized football simulation.
The opening menu gives the choice of two playing modes and
various statistical utilities. Players can choose to play NFL Head-Up
Football or NFL Pro League Football. It is also possible to access
the General Manager, League Leaders and Stats Keeper modules
from this menu.

Going Head to Head
NFL Head-Up Football is a one play at a time game simulation.
When plays are being run, there is a full-screen shot of the play as if
from a low-flying blimp hovering directly above the quarterback's
head. The animation is rather rudimentary, and the sense of action is
limited by the fact that the ball is always snapped from the same
spot on the screen, so that the hash marks, not the players, move between plays. When the ball is not in play, the screen charts the position of the ball on the field, gives a text summary of the most recent
play and shows a shot of the referee who may be signalling a call.
The play-by-play summary can be routed to a printer for a full record
of the game.
Several choices can be made before the game begins. Two players
can take opposing sides, or one player can take on the computer.
The month, the weather, the speed of the simulation and other variables can be adjusted. The simulation knows which teams play their
games in domed stadiums out of the weather. Players enter a twodigit code to select a play from a vast choice of offensive and defensive plays shown on sturdy laminated sheets.
The large choice of plays is intimidating at first, but the codes are

logically designed and can be studied and mastered through repetition. After the game, the outcome and statistics can be added to the
accumulated records of either or both teams through the Stats
Keeper utility. There is no reward for eye-hand coordination and no
reason to feel pressured by even a tense last-minute goal-line stand.
The clock always stops long enough for one to input his/her twodigit code and there is no penalty for delay of game. By the way,
despite the range of other choices, there is no way to control who is
on the field through substitutions. Neither can one trade players between two teams or make other roster changes without a supplementary disk. Injuries do not play a part in this simulation.

Let the Season Begin
While the head-to-head mode of the game is enjoyable, the other
mode of play available in the game, the actual NFL Pro League Football, may be more interesting to statistics players, as well as being
better conceived and considerably more innovative in terms of game
design. The designers have captured the essence of football strategy
for a speedy game replay that does not require players to choose
each play.
The key feature is the "Game Plan," a one-page summary of the
overall strategy for a player to select, bearing in mind the player's

Review

and the opponents' team's strengths and weaknesses. There is a
chance to choose the percentage of time to pass under various
down-and-yardage situations, the percentage of times to blitz, play
receivers loose or tight, and so on. There is even the chance to program in half-time corrections, changes in the plan that will be implemented if the team is ahead or behind by more than a specified number of points.
The Game Plan screen is intimidating at first glance, and fortunately the computer generates a proposed Game Plan for any set of opponents to help the novice, who would not really have the knowledge
to plan a skillful outing against Joe Montana and his friends. As well
as filing the Game Plan, one also has most of the same choices as in
head-to-head play. However, on the reviewer's copy it was not possible to set weather conditions manually as promised in the manual.
After the Game Plans have been filed, the simulation takes only a
couple of minutes or less to play itself out (depending on the
computer's processing speed). The graphics, again, are unexciting.
One can watch a sideline view of the ball sliding back and forth
across the yard lines as drives churn on or sputter out, or look down
on x's and o's scurrying around following their patterns. The same
text summary of each play is available as in the other mode. It goes
by too fast to read, but can be printed out for later study.
To test the realism of the statistical model, the default Game Plans
were used to play out a full conference schedule. It took only a
couple of evenings to replay the 1990 NFC conference schedule.
NFL Pro League Football passed with flying colors. The strength of
the simulation showed up not so much in the standings as in the
league leader lists, where many of the right names appeared, and
even if they did not, the totals of the league leaders were in line with
the real-world results.
In the replay, the divisional champs were Philadelphia (14-2),
Chicago (9-7), and San Francisco (13-3) — two out of three correct.
As in the real world, Montana and Simms were among the
conference's leading passers; Byner, Anderson, Sanders and Smith
the leading rushers and Rison, Sharpe, Rice and Ellard the leading
receivers. Chicago and Philadelphia were the leading rushing teams
in the simulation and also in the real world. Other results did not
mimic reality so closely but were still impressive.

Behind the Scenes
The Game Plan feature makes NFL Pro League Football a useful
foundation for a fantasy league, since managers can mail, phone in
or fax their Game Plans to the site where the games are being
played. A full league of 28 teams can be accommodated in this way.
The stats can be saved and studied after each game.
The statistical depth of the simulation is most impressive. A combination of raw statistics and quality ratings is stored for individuals
and teams. There are good printing capabilities for statistics, standings, all-time records and league leaders at any point in the replay of
a season. To replay a season, one must set up a league (which can
be an exact copy of a recent NFL year or contain a mixture of teams
from different years).
Some of the menus are not user-friendly, and maneuvering through
the utilities to get the information one wants can be heavy going.
One first has to learn the difference between "Options" and "Preferences" (and between "Preferences 1" and "Preferences 2"). The socalled "Auto Update" feature takes too many confusing key-strokes
to be called "Auto." One has to learn that the correct menu choice
for updating the stats, oddly, is "Don't Print." Sometimes one thinks
one is exiting to the main menu but is taken out of the program altogether. Also, setting up a league can be tricky. Though the game
gives no clue, one has to learn to enter "90" for the year, not
"1990." Though the screen said that the Escape key would cancel
an incorrect selection of teams, it did not do so on the reviewer's
copy and the process had to be repeated from the start.
Despite some weaknesses in the interface and uninspiring graphics,
the robust statistical foundation of NFL Pro League Football makes
this an impressive product. The Game Plan feature makes it into a
learning tool with considerable depth. One can get an advanced
education in football strategy by replaying a particular matchup
several times with different strategic choices on the Game Plan. It will
keep flawless records for a fantasy league. Those who live and die
by statistics in a football simulation could not ask for more.

Foreign Correspondence

relief areas has compounded the programming challenge for the design team.

Over There
Kicking Up a Storm
by Paul Rigby

igital Integration has stepped
upon that ol' gulf War bandwagon with a new flight simulation
called Tornado. The opposition? The
Iraqis, of course. A number of mission
types and configurations will be available
plus a campaign that will include the option of interacting with the ground forces
and the use of deception as a tactic both
on the ground and in the air.

D

According to Digital Integration's
Dave Marshall, the new project will feature, "...real airfield layouts: multi-runway,
multi-taxiway and perimeter tracks.... All
of the buildings, structures and so on are
all from diagrams, plans and photographs. There are several hangars, hardened aircraft shelters, all from RAF
plans." Allegedly, the game will allow
computer pilots to fly down valleys,
cruise above rivers, follow railways, parallel highways and so on. The game is
even supposed to feature multi-line railways running through stations, with
sidings, etc.
Marshall states that the simulation will
still run at close to 20 frames a second,
even on a 386 with full detail selected.
This is particularly significant when simulating an aircraft such as the Tornado.
The main reason for concern is because
the screen will be full of speed-sapping
polygons as the aircraft hugs the terrain
during flight. The high percentage of high

Even the missions designed for Tornado will endeavor to imitate reality
more effectively. The design twist in mission development is the requirement for
the computer pilot to use co-ordinated attacks (from different directions onto the
same target) and rely on dissimilar mission flights using specialized aircraft to accomplish specialized jobs on one's behalf. Tornado will be released late next
year on all formats.
MiG-29M Super Fulcrum is the sequel
to another Domark (distributed in the
United States by Accolade) flight simulation, Mig-29 Fulcrum, created by the exBritish Aerospace team — Simis. The
aim of the game is to progress from the
player's solitary airfield, on the western
side of the map, and hit all manner of
enemy installations on the enemy's eastern area to, finally, take the enemy HQ.
The play is dynamic, so the enemy will always be on the move, advancing and
repairing battle damage. Therefore, hit a
bridge and expect it to be out of action
for a relatively short time until the enemy
can initiate and complete needed repairs.
The player can approach the task of
taking the rebel HQ in a number of different ways. One can break enemy supply lines, clear the air bases, hit the
strategic installations and then go for the
HQ. Other plans of action may be just as
effective, however. The player receives a
choice of two flight models: the advanced flight model (present on PC only)
and a standard flight model present on
all other platforms. The latter is, it appears, the same model as used in the
original product. Out now on all formats.
Another Simis product that is still
under development is Harrier, a V/STOL
simulation in which the player competes
in two different roles. According to
Simis' Jonathan Newth, players take on
the task of "campaign manager," arming
the plane and commanding it, as well as
up to twelve other aircraft and attendant
ships, as to "...what headings to fly/sail
on and what targets to take out." In addition to carrying out their respective orders concerning primary and secondary
targets, the computer intelligence has
enough "sense" so that the assigned
aircraft will not blindly hit the deceased
target (the ex-target, the target which is
no more, gone to join the heavenly choir
— to paraphrase a Python) but will,
rather, revert to the secondary target.
One starts out with a limited and welldefined set of resources. So, the longer

Foreign Correspondence

one plays, the more likely one's resources are to run down. Of course, there is
a limited amount of re-supply occurring
in the background, as well, but attrition
of supplies is a significant motivation in
expanding one's influence.
The commander's major task is to
remove the targets/insurgents on the islands. How this is accomplished, though,
is open. One decides upon what missions to fly and what targets to take out.
To assist in planning, players will get information via simulated satellite photos.
Reflecting reality, the photos will not offer
100% reliable information, owing to the
vagaries of interpreting such photos.
The second major role for the player is,
of course, flying the plane itself.
Maneuvers, such as VIFFing (dramatically braking in mid-air by reversing the
thrust nozzles), will be obtainable in Harrier. Other basics like 'ski-jump' take-offs
on the carriers have also been integrated.
In addition, the actual undercarriage has
been simulated. So, the aircraft can roll
off the end of the aircraft carrier and tip
off the edge rather than just rolling off in
a flat horizontal plane. This feature will ex-

tend to the terrain. Being a Harrier, it can
land [almost] anywhere.
Two versions of the game will appear.
One will be for fast PCs — very fast 286s
or 386 machines and above. The other
will be for slower 286s, Amigas and STs.
The differences? Slower machines will be
able to do and display less — although
precise details are lacking at the moment. Also, the terrain will be 3D on fast
PCs but flat 2D on slow PCs. Release will
be via Domark but no release dates
have yet been finalized.
U.S. Gold is distributing a new product
in the UK by Delphine, publisher of Future Wars (Interplay distributes Delphine products in the U.S.). Known as
Another World, the company must have
had the co-designer of Future Wars on
an adrenaline drip while he worked on
this product. He has honed his new adventure system to a point whereby this
first by-product can be poised for release.
Utilizing a 3D system with many
cinematic techniques such as pan, zoom,
close-up and so on, Another World follows the exploits of a nuclear scientist
who, as the victim of an experiment

'gone wrong,' finds himself in an alien
world. Escaping from the planet is the
task in hand and puzzle-solving combined with fast reflexes is the primary
method of achieving this situation.
Release is destined for all formats by the
year's end.
Note: The above games, and any of the
other games mentioned in "Over There"
in past issues, can be obtained from:
Computer Adventure World, 318 Kensington, Liverpool, England, L7 OEY.
Telephone: 01144-51-263-6306
Miles Better Software, 219/221 Cannock Road, Chadsmoor, Cannock, Staffordshire, England, WS1 1 2DD.
Telephone: 01 144-543-466-577/8/80;
Fax: 01144-543-466-579
Premier Mail Order, Trybridge Ltd., 8
Buckwins sq., Burnt mills, Basildon,
Essex, England, SS13 1BJ.
Telephone: 01144-268-590-766;
Fax: 01144-268-590-076
All of the above telephone numbers assume customers can dial direct. Those
having trouble should contact the international operator.

Survey

not visible, in EWBB 1.5). All games also
include the capabilities of generating or
storing lineups that include platooning
considerations and of accumulating statistics from simulated games and showing
league leaders.

I

n CGW #89, Win Rogers' article on

Earl Weaver Baseball 2.0 referred to
the following chart. We apologize
tor not providing the chart with the ar
ticle.
This chart provides a comparison of
five different computer baseball games.
All five games have: EGA, keyboard and
joystick support; no mouse support.
They have the capacity for 25-man

rosters of actual major league players
(no active players) with real statistics and
ratings. (TLUB must have 10 pitchers, 15
non-pitchers.) All five games can store
fielding records for players at two different positions. All games also contain
separate data disks for additional teams.
Default lefty/righty breakdowns are
added if they are not actually provided
on the data disks (these are present, but

Finally, all of the games described feature at least three play modes: play and
manage, manage only or computer
manage modes for either team. In addition, different skill levels are available in
play and manage mode. The latest
games feature superfast mode(s) for
quick replay and accurate simulation of
actual parks with grass/turf, indoor/outdoor, wind, and fence distance and
height factors (although they are present
but not visible in TLUB).

1991 Game of the Year
Awards
Overall Game of the Year

Wing Commander
Action Game of the Year

links
Adventure Game of the Year

King's Quest V
Role-Playing Game of the Year

Elvira
Simulation Game of the Year

Red Baron
Strategy Game of the Year

Powermonger
Wargames of the Year

Command HQ
Warlords
Special Artistic Achievement Award

Rise of the Dragon

Review

Review

Explored by Huemac the Rune Mage (aka Ken St. Andre)

ragon's Gate is the newest online
interactive role-playing game available on the GEnie network.
Garners who like medieval fantasy (in a
world liberally filled with nonhuman characters) will positively love the Dragon's
Gate experience.

D

It's something like falling down Alice's
rabbit hole. At the bottom, one finds
oneself in a strange office facing Max the
Magic Dragon. This is the beginning of a
"new life" for the player, a life in which
one's old body, identity and gender are
swept away and the gamer is reborn as
one of the twenty different major intelligent races that inhabit the land. One
can be fully human, as this writer chose
to be, or totally inhuman: a Dragon or an
Arachnian (giant spider), Elf (three different varieties), Dwarf, Goblin, Ogre or
Muatana-Al (a kind of vampire that feeds
on life-force instead of blood); Fighter,
Holy Order, Bard, Thief, Barbarian,
Forester or Rune Mage — all express
one's alter ego through choice of race
and occupation. Each being is defined
through six major numerical attributes
and five minor attributes. These attributes are randomly determined within
certain ranges appropriate to the type of
creature chosen. In addition, there are
dozens of skills to be learned and practiced (including all combat and magic
skills), as well as several foreign languages to master — thus assuring
players of the fun of watching their characters grow and improve as long as they
continue to play.
Like any good fantasy world, Dragon's
Gate is full of places to explore,
monsters to slay, quests to complete and
treasure to amass. Furthermore, the
world is dynamic, and new realms of adventure can be brought on-line as the
need for them arises. It is pretty much a

hack-and-slash environment for new
players. Virtually every NPC in the game
who isn't a shopkeeper or a priest will
turn out to be hostile, which means that
every time the player stops moving
his/her character, something or someone will attack. However, there are
friends to be found! Those friends are the
other players who happen to be adventuring in Dragon's Gate. Although players
may attack each other if they wish to, it
makes far more sense to team up
against the dangers of the Dragon's Gate
world. The very real social interaction
among the players is the chief attraction
of this game — that and the unparalleled
opportunity for extensive role-playing.
There were only three drawbacks to
Dragon's Gate that this reviewer experienced. The big one is that, like all online experiences that use a national
database, it will cost money, in this case
$6.00 per hour. That seems like a very
reasonable price for being transported
into a world of alien wonder and adventure. The second disadvantage concerns
the game manual, which must be
downloaded and printed out by the
gamer. While quite extensive, it neglects
to explain some very important parts of
survival in the world of Dragon's Gate —

such things as how to fight or cast magic
so that it will actually accomplish something are often explained by other
players rather than by manual text. While
this lack of basic information does lend
to the feeling of exploring an alien
society, it also costs time and money in
getting familiar with the basics. Lastly,
Dragon's Gate is a text-only game. The
feeling one gets through play is like
being in an old-style text-only computer
adventure game. There is something to
be said for such games. The imaginative
pictures conjured into the gamer's mind
as play progresses should be much more
satisfying than some low-res graphics sup
plied by a front-end program. However,
for those who don't actively use their imaginations, the graphic front end
provided for something like Neverwinter
Nights might be more satisfying. At least
the graphics make it easier to visualize
where one is and what is going on.
Dragon's Gate is a production of Adventures Unlimited Software, Inc. and
is available for $6.00 per hour between
the hours of 6 p.m. and 6 a.m. on
GEnie, page 915. The original concept
can be attributed to Mark Jacobs; design
and programming by Darrin Hyrup and
Mark Jacobs; scenarios by Mark Jacobs
and Dave Dickinson.
There is much to tell about the world of
Dragon's Gate that this adventurer
hasn't even hinted at, but time and space
are short.
Right now, Rime has disappeared
and these weary bones must go in
quest of him. Should the gentle reader
happen to meet one Huemac the Rune
Mage when adventuring in the world
of Dragon's Gate, such a gentleperson
is urged to proffer a "Hail and Wellmet!" We might well hoist flagons and
slay monsters together!

Sneak Preview

S

neak Previews are not designed to be
reviews. They are feature articles based
on "works in progress" which CGW's
editors have deemed worthy of early
coverage. These articles are not intended to
provide the "final word" on a product, since
we expect to publish appropriate review
coverage when the game is completely
finished. Sneak Previews are designed to inform our readers about upcoming
games and generate excitement about
the "state of the art" of computer game
design in general.

CARRIERS
A Massive Second
by Alan

"Look, up in the sky. It's a bird! It's a
plane! No, it's... a bunch of planes! Man
the guns! This is not a drill! Air Raid!"
Welcome back to Strategic Studies
Group's game of carrier operations in the
Pacific during World War II. That multiple
award-winning (now classic) wargame of
1984, Carriers at War is making a
"splashy" comeback on the IBM. For all
those people who have kept their Apple
Ils and C-64s around just to play this
game (and there are many of them), it will
soon be time to upgrade.

VGA on the Menu

100
Sneak Preview: Carriers at War

102
Replay: Conflict: Middle East

106
Sneak Preview: Patton Strikes
Back

112
Review: No Greater Glory

113
Game Aids: No Greater Glory

118
Strategy: The Lost Admiral

122
Review: Megafortress

126
Strategy: Megafortress

The first impression made by the new
Carriers at War is an improved graphic
look analogous to the way the Lexington
must have appeared at its christening.
While almost any graphic look would
have been an improvement over 1984's
standard, the Roger Keating/lan Trout
team at SSG in Australia has gone all out
to present top-of-the-line wargame
graphics. This might be difficult for experienced CAW players to imagine, since
the game strictly uses a menu-driven interface, but the truth is that each map has
been artistically rendered and the menus
given a Windows-like look and feel.
Above all that, each ship and airplane
which appears in the game has been
presented as a beautiful graphic
("painted," not digitized), complete with
statistics and a mini-history. Some gamers
may not care for the overly squat nature of
some of the plane diagrams, but they are pretty, nonetheless. Best of all, as ships suffer
damage in battle, these large silhouettes
graphically depict the destruction. It is now an
emotional experience to be able to actually
see one's navy burning away.
Although the beta version previewed for this
article did not include all the graphics, those
that were present created a plethora of "oohs"
and "aahs" around the office. Issuing orders,
watching battles and inspecting damage have
all been transformed into a visual experience
in the new edition of CAW. In fact, this game
has become one of the easiest "learn by watching" wargames this writer has ever seen. By
merely sitting next to someone playing CAW,
one can quickly pick up which menu does
what by observing the use of all of the icon
and text "push" buttons displayed on the
screen.

What's New in Armament?
The handling of ships and planes has also
been enhanced in the new Carriers at War.
For instance, ships now have both permanent
damage and "fire" damage (which can be
repaired, but can also spread). Graphic representations of both types of damage appear
when a ship is inspected and it is an impres-

sive spectacle to see a carrier with huge holes,
boiling fires and massive plumes of smoke
emerging from it.
Planes, too, are now tracked individually and
in greater detail. Since the program can handle over 2,000 individual airplanes, with each
one monitored separately (now a player will
know if they are inward- or outward-bound on
a search mission, shadowing a contact, lost
on takeoff, destroyed by flak, etc.), the information available concerning one's air assets is
tremendous. Even the strike waves are now
graphically represented.

Bombs Away!
The main air-sea battle routine has, like
everything else in the new CAW, been graphically enhanced. Furthermore, the designers
have not missed an opportunity to enhance
their already excellent simulation of air-naval
combat. Now, players will see a display to the
right of the screen which shows each phase of
the battle, complete with fighters and bombers
breaking off into groups of one to five planes.
Fighters will engage in air-to-air battles (with
very specific results reported), while bombers
will begin their attack runs.
Naturally, bombers will suffer at the hands of
enemy fighters and flak to varying degrees

Sneak Preview

AT WAR
Strike from SSG
Emrich

destroyers and light cruisers can deploy either
in front of or behind the battle line. Formations can be ordered to open or close range
and players can direct the fire for individual
weapons during each of the five-minute combat rounds. For a game aspect which rarely occurs, surface battles are quite a spectacle and
it looks like a lot of new programming and
design work went into them.

Remember the Al
Even back in 1984, Carriers at War was acclaimed not only for its comprehensive treatment of the subject, but also for its welldesigned artificial intelligence (Al). Again,
more tinkering has been done and improvements have been made, but most of the new
Al elements are merely fine-tuning. Basically,
the computer must make the same decisions,
based on the same level of misinformation
about actual enemy locations and damage, as
human players have to make. A routine has
been built into the program which examines
all the computer's sighting reports, judges
them and then, assigns any missions deemed
appropriate to investigate them further. If further investigations can produce enough proof
to warrant a strike mission, off it goes, for better or worse.
This means that an error factor is built into
the game and the computer can make mistakes just as deadly (or fortuitous) as a
human player can. Like a human opponent,
therefore, CAW's Al presents an opponent
who is thoughtful, yet is just as prone to the
fortunes of war when making command
decisions.

Missing from Action
One feature hailed in most SSG games is
their "design your own" features. These
"scenario editor" programs allowed players to
get into the game and create their own maps,
units and values. So it was with the original
Carriers at War, but not so in the new, 1991
version. Thus, players who have designed
their own scenarios, with stacks of information
at the ready, will have to wait a while before
"diving" into Carriers at War.

Future Promises

(being either destroyed, damaged or
"harassed" into making attack runs with greatly reduced accuracy). Even though there was
no actual animation depicted on-screen in the
pre-release version, watching the combat
results read across the screen was still exciting
enough to cause several shouts of gaming joy
and anguish to exude from this writer and all
the observers assembled about his monitor. Of
course, those who want to play a truly historical game can turn off the battle display and
wait to read the (often deliberately) inaccurate
reports which simulate the fog of war that
their historical counterparts had to deal with.
Even the surface battles have been enhanced. Now, a graphic battleboard is displayed in order to assist players in actually
maneuvering ships into one of those rare surface battles. Each side has three rows or
"lines" displayed. The central row is the 'Battle Line," where one's battleships and cruisers
are deployed. Carriers, tankers and transports
are placed "behind" the battle line, away from
the enemy, while screening vessels like

What You Don't See Can
Still Hurt You
Of course, carrier warfare still remains very
much a game of "hide and seek." Finding
one's adversary, and then getting reports
which are even remotely accurate, will always
be an admiral's problem. While this was already the shining star of the 1984 Carriers at
War, it has been enhanced in the IBM version.
The search routines now automatically determine the correct number of planes to cover
the player's selected search patterns, launches
and retrieves said planes and then tags sighting reports by their age. The error factor of
these reports is also built into the game, so it
is up to the player to decide how much
validity to lend to each sighting report. One
thing this writer did not like in the preview
copy was how sightings were marked on the
map. A blue "X" was "impressed" into the
map and was very hard to read. It is hoped
that the color will change to something a bit
more legible in the production version.

All is not lost, however, for CAW scenario
designers. A scenario editor is promised as a
separate product. SSG has opted to make the
editor a separate product for three reasons:
the additional time it will take to produce it;
the additional cost it would add to the game;
and the increased intensity involved in
scenario design for the new version of CAW.
This latter point is particularly important, since
each ship requires multiple animated explosions to be pictured for each plane and
ship type whenever said ship/plane takes
damage. Many users will simply not want to expend all that effort. Further, the size of the
documentation and disk space involved are
also likely to be huge, even without the design
kit features. No "paint" program will be included, either. Instead, the scenario editor will
accept any standard .LBM graphics file from
Deluxe Paint, put it into a special template
and then compress it.
Another feature which was promised is
sound support. While not included to any degree in the beta version previewed, assurances
that it will, indeed, be there must be heeded.
So far, the remake of Carriers at War bears
all the markings of a quality product. As for a
product release projection... well, SSG has met
with pretty clear sailing on this project as of
press time. If it continues, this game should
pull into port during the first quarter of 1992.
On the day this ship comes in, this writer, for
one, is going to take a long liberty and play
many, many hours of Carriers at War.

Replay

T

he

following is a replay of the 1973
scenario of Conflict: Middle East (published by Strategic Simulations
Inc.). The article focuses on the first eight
turns (four days) of the game's historical
scenario, including the initial Arab assaults
and the subsequent Israeli counterattack
along the Golan Heights.
Holiday tranquility reigned in Israel on the
afternoon of Oct. 6, 1973. It was Yom Kippur,
the Jewish Day of Atonement. But the peace
suddenly was shattered by the roar of
thousands of guns and hundreds of jets streaking toward Israel. Along the Suez Canal and
the Golan Heights, massive Arab armies thrust
across the Israeli border. The Arab strategy
was simple. They would grab a large chunk of
Israeli territory and then force the Israelis to
wear themselves out in counterattacks against
the weaker, but more numerous, Arab forces.
The Israelis intended to use their central position to concentrate their gradually mobilizing
forces against Syria and then Egypt.

The Onslaught — Oct. 6 A.M.
and P.M.
The Arab offensive began with heavy air attacks on Israeli troops and artillery units to
open up the ground campaign. [Ed: Players
who do not attempt to grab air superiority
will get the job done on the ground — for a

while — but not attaining air superiority is a
risky proposition for the Arabs, should a
protracted war ensue./ Arab warplanes inflicted some damage, but lost nearly 100
aircraft to Israeli fighters during this first day
of the campaign. The Israelis committed some
of their aircraft to attacking surface-to-air missile sites, but reserved the majority for close
air support for the coming ground battle.
On the ground, superior command and control enables the Israelis to move after Arab
moves were completed, but prior to combat.
Also, Israeli units have flexibility in being able
to reassign and form ad hoc units from troop
detachments. For example, a detachment of
the 7th Armored Brigade, the only strong Israeli unit on the Golan, reinforced the crucial
observation point of Mount Hermon. The
armor helped repulse an assault on the mountain by Syrian paratroopers and a Moroccan infantry brigade. Yet, other Syrian attacks on the
undermanned Golan fortifications succeeded
in capturing several fortified hexes.
In the south, an interesting Israeli stratagem
was to withdraw garrisons along the Suez
canal before the Arab blows landed. An Israeli
armored counterattack along the northern
area of the canal ejected an Egyptian commando brigade which had crossed the Suez. A
southern counterattack was launched, but less
successfully, as it was smothered by Egyptian
artillery and anti-tank weapons. An Egyptian

airborne brigade, helicoptered into a blocking
position in the Sinai mountain passes, was
completely wiped out by Israeli armor.
Several newly mobilized Israeli brigades were
consolidated into larger formations. [Ed: This
to provide local "hammer blow" counterattacks with which to blunt the Arab spearheads.] Just as in real life, poor 1973-era
avionics grounded the Arab air forces during
the night. While this same darkness handicapped the Israeli Air Force as well, its fleet of
versatile F-4 Phantoms flew some grueling
night missions which blasted Syrian armor.
Despite the increase of fatigue due to night
combat, the Syrians mopped up most of the
remaining Israeli strongpoints on the Golan,
but an assault along the southern Golan
heights failed after an Israeli parachute brigade
was helicoptered into the hex.
During the night, Egyptian commandos unsuccessfully assaulted the remaining Israeli
forts along the northern and southern ends of
the canal. Egyptian infantry, however, were
able to cross three more bridges and link
these bridgeheads along the eastern bank of
the Suez. Not an auspicious start for the
Arabs, but the situation was far from hopeless.

Mop-up — Oct. 7
The morning began with heavy IAF (Israeli
Air Force) strikes on Syrian units. Though far

Replay

smaller, superior Israeli effectiveness enabled
the Israeli Air Force to gain air superiority at
small cost. The IAF concentrated on Syrian
armor and SAM sites which, in turn, took their
toll on the vulnerable A-4 Skyhawks. In the
dawn light, Syrian tankers on the Golan
Heights gazed down on the Israeli settlements
in the clear terrain below. Their observation
was enhanced by the occupation of Mount Hermon, which the Israelis had abandoned because of confused orders. (The Israelis accidentally moved the garrison out and could not
retract the move — an important limitation in
the game's mechanics.) Israeli reserves
smashed another Syrian assault along the
southern Golan, while Israel continued retreating from the Suez canal, screening the Egyptian infantry and armor which were streaming
across it.
Again the ubiquitous Phantoms were the
only aircraft seen in the night skies. Concerned that some of their assault brigades had
taken 50 percent losses, the Syrians halted
their offensive and waited for the Israelis to dig
them out. The weak Israeli units in the Sinai
continued withdrawing, pursued by hordes of
Egyptian troops. Meanwhile, all Israeli reinforcements poured into the Golan and were consolidated, along with the remnants of
destroyed Israeli formations there.

Pause — Oct. 8
The day began with sporadic Arab air attacks on the Golan. Israeli Phantoms attacked
SAM sites, while the vulnerable Skyhawks
pounded Syrian ground targets. Limited recon-

naissance capabilities made the rear areas of
both sides largely invisible. However, the Israelis did bomb seemingly empty Golan hexes
in hopes of finding Syrian artillery and
managed to achieve some success along the
constricted Golan. A ground pause ensued
along the Israeli-Syrian border, while the Egyptians continued to ooze forward beyond the
range of their protective SAM umbrella along
the canal.

Counterattack — Oct. 9
The morning passed quietly except for the
customary air activity. That night, however,
the Israeli counteroffensive began with a massive attack by four heavily reinforced brigades
poised along the southern Golan. Syrian artillery and anti-tank weapons caused some losses, especially among the antiquated M-3
halftracks, but the defenders were being
destroyed or dislodged handily. Though
bolstered by the arrival of an Iraqi armored
division, the Arab weaknesses were becoming
painfully clear to the Syrians. The Arab units,
usually about 80 percent weaker than their Israeli counterparts, could not consolidate. The
attritional nature of combat resulted in hordes
of depleted Arab units, who could only stack
two per hex, a key design element in the
game simulating differences in doctrine. This
left the Arabs vulnerable to being systematical
ly destroyed. The massive Syrian artillery only
managed to inflict moderate damage and was
itself being attrited by Israeli counterbattery
fire and IAF air strikes.
Despite their success, the Israelis had still suf-

fered some losses during their Golan counteroffensive. Most of the Israeli reinforcements had
been mobilized and neither side could expect
more than scanty arms shipments from the superpowers. Intending to preserve their powerful but fragile spearheads, the Israelis rejected
a 1967-style blitzkrieg in favor of systematically clearing the Golan. An interesting plan, if
the Egyptians didn't press too far....

Payback — Oct. 10 to Oct. 17
The Israelis advanced further into Syria and
ground up most of the remainder of the
Syrian army. The Israelis chose to bottle up
the surviving Syrians around Damascus and,
by Oct. 14, had begun transferring artillery to
the now long-neglected Sinai front. The Israeli
successes precluded Jordanian intervention except for the introduction of a handful of
warplanes. Also on Oct. 14, the Israelis began
punching through the Egyptians on the northern Sinai road, supported by devastating IAF
air strikes. By Oct. 17, the Israelis were within
20 kilometers of the canal, facing only a
depleted Egyptian army. The Arabs finally
agreed to a cease-fire, and UN-sponsored disengagement talks began. The cost had been
horrific. The Arabs had lost 60 percent of their
tanks, 80 percent of their artillery, 30 percent
of their aircraft and 90 percent of their SAMs.
The Israelis had also lost 60 percent of their
tanks, 75 percent of their artillery and half
their warplanes. It had been a dearl y bought
victory.

Review

by Alan Emrich

Patton Strikes Back
TIRE:
IBM, Macintosh
SYSTEM:
REVIEWED ON: IBM
PRICE:
$59.95
PROTECTION: Document Look-Up
Chris Crawford
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:
Broderbund
San Rafael, CA

"Listen my children
And you shall hear
Of the midnight ride
Of a Panzergrenadier."

n Patton Strikes Back, prolific designer Chris Crawford (who
has solid wargame credits dating back to the days of
mainframes) presents history as it was meant to be: entertaining. While we can easily imagine Laugh-In's German soldier Arte
Johnson describing this game as "veeeeeery interesting," we
know that there is no reason for the prime-time personality to
finish that famous punchline. It is not stupid (to finish the line for
our younger readers). On the contrary, Patton Strikes Back is a
strategy game that is not only full of sound and fury, but actually
signifies something important.

I

Perhaps, it is best expressed by noting that it is not often this
reviewer's six-year old son actually enjoys watching daddy play
those boring old wargames on the computer. Now, he's giving
valid tactical advice to daddy! Truly, Patton Strikes Back's
design team have hit the mark with one little wargaming recruit
(now nicknamed "Junior General James" thanks to playing this
game).

Everything Old Is New Again
The "Battle of the Bulge" was the German offensive through Belgium in December of 1944. The tired American army was dispersed and resting in the snow when the Germans unleashed a
massive surprise assault, using many of their elite divisions. As
the Germans poured through the breach in the Allied lines on
their race to the Meuse river, a counterattack was organized. Brilliant execution of command and control by General George S.
Patton, Jr. brought relief to the besieged American 101st Airborne division, who had been trapped for days at the crucial road
junction of Bastogne. The rest, as players will find out, is history.
Patton Strikes Back (originally, and perhaps more accurately,
entitled Patton Kicks Butt!) is a brigade- and division-level wargame of the Battle of the Bulge. For solitaire play only as either

side, the game is played in real time (which can be altered from
arcade-fast to strategy slow and is "paused" every time a unit is
selected and pondered over). Alternately, a player may just elect
to observe a battle fought by the computer as both sides. Jaded
wargamers who have been playing paper wargames for years,
however, have seen scores of "Bulge" games come and go. So
what makes Patton Strikes Back something new?

Patton on the Glitz
Patton Strikes Back offers players an attractive map of the Ardennes forest (which is remarkably uncluttered, considering the
nature of the terrain there). Players can envision the "square"
grid upon which the pieces maneuver (except, perhaps, along
certain twists in the roads). Units move and attack only in the
four main compass directions, never diagonally. To simplify matters of maneuver for new wargamers, the military units are not
presented in the standard wargame symbology (rectangular
boxes with crosses, ovals and dots in them, as seen in the Computer Wargaming World Table of Contents). Instead, each unit
is shown as one of four symbols:
For defense, there is a large, placid-looking dot with a single
parenthesis along one side facing a given compass point, indicating the direction the defending unit is "facing" (i.e., best prepared
to defend).
For attack, there is a thick, stocky arrow. Slow to move, it
points in the direction of the attack's thrust.
For maneuvering, there is a a thin, elegant double arrow. Fast
and sleek, it also points in the direction the unit is maneuvering
toward.
For routed units, an "X" symbol appears to indicated their shattered status. Without any facing, these units move automatically
to the player's rear areas and are highly vulnerable if attacked.

The combination of these unit icons in play and the single "gestalt intake" map (which need never be "zoomed" to pick up
game details, as so many other wargames require) creates a

Review

play environment that is simplicity itself. An important principle of war is
simplicity, and Patton Strikes Back
has kept it simple.

When You're Odd, the
Odds Are With You
Granted, each unit, when selected,
presents such mundane wargaming information on the screen as the unit's
strength, fatigue and supply status,
but for the beginner who'll just enjoy
"pushing the pieces around," the accountancy of wargaming can wait a
while. Combat really does take all
these matters into account, however,
and those who would like to actually win this game (particularly
at the higher of the five difficulty levels) will have to learn how to
evaluate those numbers. Pull down menus or hot keys can be
selected in order to visualize each unit's "zones of control," supply status, supply lines and order status. All of these elements
function in such a clear, simple and logical way that it seems unnecessary to comment further.
As units "bump" into each other, the arrows on-screen animate
a bit to show the clash of units. Immediately afterward, a report
of the battle will pop up, with a comment like "Von
Schmendrick's elite 10th Panzer unit has crushed the green
troops of Smith's 61st Infantry regiment." Following that, units
might have their orders rescinded or changed by the computer,
pending the battle results. The worst fate of all, of course, is
seeing one's units "x"ed into a shattered state, where only time
and rest might afford their recovery.
Finally, for the new players especially, there is a selection on
the menu called "Tactical Advice." When selected, the German
player will see Chris Crawford, in uniform and bearing a delicious
attitude of German aristocratic arrogance, as he offers sound advice such as "pull these troops out" or "seize that bridge." An
equally humorous, cigar-chomping, coffee-drinking American lout
of a General will offer similar advice for Allied players. The tactical advice is very sound and repeated requests for advice do not
give duplicate answers.

You Are There
Every wargame tries to capture some type of "you are there"
experience, such as the plain-speaking, yet detailed, battle
reports mentioned above. To help the player achieve true
"suspended disbelief" and truly feel in command of this wargame, one need only listen. Listening, in fact, is what has drawn
a crowd around the old family computer while playing Patton
Strikes Back. The audio portion of the game has a perfect
soundtrack of bullets flying, bombs dropping, tanks squeaking
along, the thunder of marching infantry, the bugle call of
"reveille" to begin each game day and so much more. It is the
equivalent of a Hollywood soundtrack for a good war film. Everything about the sound and opening music to the game has been
designed to hit players emotionally enough to communicate the
feel of war.

Newsreels
Adding to the "you are there" element are little "mini-movies"
which occur during play. As units engage in battle or conquer
key objectives, not only do the sounds of battle and maneuver
fill the air, but "newsreel" footage of the event also plays for a

few delightful seconds on one's
monitor. Like the combat unit icons,
they add a friendliness and familiarity
to the game that embraces the wargaming novice in a manner not seen
by this reviewer in his 20 years as a
wargamer. Seeing these little "reward"
movies on a computer screen makes
Patton Strikes Back actually compelling to play.

Just Add History
So far, real wargamers ("grognards") are probably peering down
their noses as they read this review. A
game so full of "fluff," no matter how
well done, cannot be for the hard-core
historical simulation enthusiast. Wrong!
As certain moments pass during the course of play, the "instant
history lesson" pops up with a dreamlike musical fanfare. The
whole screen is filled with a history lesson which is actually applicable to one's experiences on the gaming battlefield. After reading the specific historical anecdote, the player can hit the "Tell
me more" button and get a second page from a more general,
military strategy perspective. Well-written by the historiphiles who
created this game, this Three Penny Opera approach (feeding
the players an enjoyable gaming experience before "preaching"
the history to them) is brilliant. Admittedly, not everyone will
want to get into the historical aspects of the game, but like the
sound and mini-movies, this instant history lessons can be toggled off. (Additionally, the lessons can be called up at will from a
pull-down menu.)

Hickory Dickory Docs
About the only place where this reviewer minded that the game
"went a bit off the paper" was, ironically, on paper. The documentation is certainly concise and accurate. No, that wasn't the problem. The classroom, conversational style of the rules was a tad
distracting. Passages like "Don't get surrounded, and if a big
mean Panzer division approaches, turn tail and run" and
"'Squares?' you say. 'What squares?' Oops — I forgot to mention
the map is divided into invisible squares, just like a chessboard"
are certainly personable, but not everyone will be comfortable
with such casual banter in a game's documentation.

The Fortunes of War(gaming)
This reviewer must certainly tip his hat to Patton Strikes Back.
Broderbund took a courageous publishing risk on this introductory war/strategy game, no doubt because Chris Crawford
believed so in the idea and sold them on it. Wargame sales will
pale next to their Carmen Sandiego and Print Shop titles, but
any good game, done right, will be a hit, even if only in a niche
market.
The design team had a definitive idea in mind for what it would
take to create exactly the type of game they wanted: easy
enough for beginners, fast enough to keep the excitement level
high and rich enough in historical detail to actually teach some
enjoyable lessons. For every design goal, they clearly hit a bull's
eye. When a professional critic like this reviewer can't find some
chink in a game's armor, the design and development work
must have been thoroughly executed. Now, it's all up to the consumers, voting with their wallets, to determine if Patton Strikes
Back sells as well as it was made.

Review

order of identity ranking —
an error that will needlessly irritate both generals
and geographical areas of
the nation.
The historical background provided in the
manual is excellent. Comprised of a reprint from
Strategy & Tactics and a
separate article from designer Ed Bever, it succinctly
explains the problems
facing each side in the Civil War and
No Greater Glory
TITLE:
how they attempted to resolve such
SYSTEM:
IBM
issues. An excellent historical bibliogPROTECTION: Document Look-Up
PRICE:
$59.95
raphy is included as well as a copy
DESIGNER:
Dr. Ed Bever
of Stephen Crane's Red Badge of
PUBLISHER:
Strategic Simulations, Inc.
Courage. This reviewer must admit
Sunnyvale, CA
that he has not read the book since
high school, and even then, most unwillingly. However, it is probably the best novel ever written about an
individual soldier in war, and should be required re-reading for
anyone with an interest in conflict simulations. Think of it as
Keegan's Face of Battle in a fictional mode.

Strategic Simulations, Inc.'s No Greater Glory
by M. Evan Brooks

Maps to Victory (Graphics and Sound)
The graphics are adequate. National and regional maps are recognizable, although this reviewer found the lettering on such maps to
be hard on the eyes. (Please note that the spelling of "Pittsburg" is
not an error; it reflects a nineteenth-century variant.) One can adjust
to the legibility level, however. What is more difficult to grow accustomed to is the switching from national to regional maps. Since one
must assign certain generals to the larger armies (top five for Union;
top three for Confederate), it would be nice to have a single screen
showing the size of one's armies. Instead, one must continuously
switch from national to regional maps and back again. In order to alleviate the problem, this reviewer recommends maintaining a written
list of the larger formations and their locations. While such information can be derived from the program, it is not readily available.
Railroad movement (a critical element of the game) is across territories. The rail markers bisect such territories and do not go from
point to point. This has been done to clean up the map and not
show a redundant clutter. In examining the map, however, one must
study it carefully. This reviewer could not understand how
McClellan's famous "jaunt down the James" (the invasion of Richmond from the east in 1862) could occur. Dr. Bever explained that
the "Northern Virginia" area extends south as far as the James and,
hence, McClellan's historical flanking maneuver has been simplified
to an attack from Northern Virginia to Richmond.
f the Battle of Water loo was won on the playing fields of Eton, as
Wellington alleged, what can one say about the American Civil
War, in which the leaders of both armies were trained in the same
institutions? Was the ACW won in the factories of the North or nearly lost in the legislative chambers of Capitol Hill? The answers to
such questions can be explored in Strategic Simulations, Inc.'s
No Greater Glory (hereinafter referred to as NGG). An obvious descendant of designer Ed Bever's Revolution '76 (Britannica
Software), NGG allows the player, as leader of either the North or
South, to simulate the American Civil War on a strategic level. It also
allows players to discover political and economic parameters, as well
as control more military facets than was possible in Revolution '76.

I

Dispatches from the Commander (Documentation)
The documentation is complete, although one must read it carefully. NGG can be played with a cursory glance at the rules, although
to play well, one must read thoroughly and carefully consider what
has been said. For example, when assigning commanders to the
field armies, they should be assigned in order of prestige. While the
documentation clearly states this, it is all too easy to assign them in

One must understand that the areas, named after cities, do not
reflect the cities themselves, but also encompass the surrounding
area. Thus, an area like "Philadelphia" is more accurately "Eastern
Pennsylvania." In fact, the designer considered the more general
label, but concluded that individual city names offered a better flavor
of the Civil War.
Since sound is limited to the internal speaker and does not add anything to the aural experience of the game, this reviewer recommends
that players immediately switch to the menu and turn off the sound
just as soon as the game loads. Otherwise, one will be compelled to
listen to at least four renditions of "Dixie" as the Southern States
secede from the Union. More importantly, turning off the music allows combat to be resolved much faster.

Flanking Maneuvers (Game Mechanics)
NGG is mouse-driven and provides a multitude of menus to be accessed during the game-turn. This reflects the fact that each year is
divided into three periods (i.e. game turns) and one must make a
multitude of decisions during each period/turn: civil affairs (decide
(Continued on page 115)

Game Aid

"No Greater" Advice
Strategic and Tactical Advice on SSI's No Greater Glory
by Tom E. Hughes, Jr.

p

layers of SSI's new strategic level
American Civil War game No Greater
Glory have a tremendous challenge in
trying to balance the political, economic and
military elements of the game. This article
should help players learn how the computer
opponent thinks and enable the "human" presidents to be able to campaign on a level battlefield.

When a player selects a difficulty level, only
two areas are actually affected: battles and
diplomacy. The rest, as they say, is history
(historical?).

ridge, Mason and Hunter as part of the eight
total assignments (including foreign ambassadors). For the Union player, one should use
Blair and Johnson (Border State moderates)
to balance out Wells and Adams (New
England radicals). To better visualize the potential balance or imbalance created by one's
selection of a potential cabinet officer's geography, abilities, loyalty and political affiliation,
see the "Political Appointees" table accompanying this article. Keep in mind that a
cabinet must be balanced at the end of the
both the Cabinet Phase (the first five appointments) and the Diplomacy Phase (the last
three appointments).

Playing Politics

Keeping up with the Ratings

To balance the Confederate Cabinet, a
player must, of necessity, use Bell, Breckin-

When troops of differing morale and experience levels combine, the new ratings of

Handicapping the War

the combined force can be determined by consulting the "Experience/Morale Combination"
tables. Basically, the values are averaged
together. On an IBM computer, however, fractions are never retained in these "integer
divides." This means that lower numbers from
"averaging" will prevail. Consequently, when
even one unit of a lower value is added to a
force, the cumulative value will drop by, at
least, one point.
For example, a force of 50,000 men with an
experience of "7" and a morale of "7" is combined with a force of 2,000 men with an experience of "0" and a morale of "6." The resultant force will be 52,000 men with an experience of "6" and a morale of "6."
Therefore, to keep a high valued force's
values as high as possible, even when they
must be combined with lower valued forces, it
is wise to combine all of the lower value reinforcements first into a single group, before joining them with the higher valued force. In this
way, the higher valued force will only experience the "truncation" on one occasion,
rather than several times.
For those interested in knowing exactly how
many units can or must be combined to minimize value lowering and maximize value raising, the two Experience/Morale Combination
Tables will give the formulae.

Judging Character
When playing a scenario using random
leader ratings, the computer receives some
added advantages. First of all, the computer
player is not restricted by prestige levels when
playing with random leader ratings (the

Game Aid

the modifier if that side is the Tactical Attacker or Defender (this is determined by the computer based on who controls the area being
contested, the size of the opposing armies and
the initiative of the opposing leaders — unless
one is defending the capitol building, in which
case that player is always the Tactical
Defender).

human player is still hamstrung by dealing
with leader's prestige, however). The other
computer advantage is that it knows "who's
who" on its own side, and always picks its
best leaders without the need for the trial and
error human players will require to make that
same determination.
During the Cabinet Phase, it should be
known that loyalty primarily effects a congressional petition being passed by that cabinet
member. Otherwise, leader loyalty is not particularly important.

Economics 101
During the Finance Phase, the "Inflation
Index" is calculated along fairly simple lines.
The Inflation Index equals the gross spending
of that side over the course of the entire game
to date, divided by the total income received
during the entire game to date. This gives the
actual Inflation Index. The detrimental effects
of inflation are actually only equal to the
square root of the Inflation Index, so don't
panic as it starts to move up.

They Eat Horses, Don't They?
When there aren't enough supplies in an
area to feed all of the troops there, bad things
are sure to happen. Generally, unsupplied
troops can locally requisition supplies (i.e.,
"live off the land") in an amount equal to
2,000 troops per unused factory in that area
(for a fee, of course). Any more unsupplied
troops beyond this amount causes destruction
of the factories in that area at the rate of one
factory per 10,000 troops still unsupplied. However, it is not as dark as that may sound. Over
time, up to half of the factories destroyed in
an area will come back on line.

Sound the Charge!
Trying to get a leader to move his troops
into battle can be a real challenge. Here is
how they stomach marching into battle:
A leader will march into battle if the leader's
initiative rating plus a random number between zero and seven is greater than or equal
to ten minus the army's experience level. For
an army with an experience level of "3" commanded by a leader with an initiative rating of
"4," that force will have slightly better than a
50% chance of marching into battle (it all
depends on the random number).

Terrible Swift Swords
When troops clash in battle, use the Combat
Formula Chart to understand the results.
"Number of Troops" is equal to the number
of troops, plus the number of riverines, plus
the number of coastal fortifications (they all
"weigh" equally in the battle equation).
"Modifiers" equals Troop Experience, plus
Morale, plus General's Ability, plus the Combat Mode adopted during the battle, plus a random number between "0-3."
"Combat Mode," for this formula, equals the
Combat Mode plus "4," plus or minus two
times the handicap level (which ranges from "2" to "+2" depending on the play balance level
selected at the beginning of the game), plus

After comparing each side's "Combat
Power," the computer determines the winner
and applies the casualties. There are many
casualty modifiers to keep in mind. For instance, the South, generally, will have greater
casualties than the North. The attacker's
casualties will usually be greater than the
defender's. Additionally, losses for defeated
force are generally greater than those for the
victorious side and a higher initiative value for
a given general will also translate into higher
casualties for both sides (the "Grant" factor).
Naturally, the more aggressive the orders (conquest as opposed to raid, for instance), the
higher the casualties which can be expected.
A higher morale rating will also translate into
higher casualties, while a higher experience factor will translate into lower casualties for the
veteran troops. Finally, as time goes on and
the troops are presumed to get better trained,
casualties also become higher.
By the way, leader ratings are not necessarily the same as they appear in the documentation. "Don't believe everything you read," suggests Ed Bever. Player's preconceived ideas
(particularly from reading the rules) should be
kept subject to modification by actual playing
experiences.

European Arm Twisting
Players should put the better of their ambassadors in England, rather than France. France
tends to follow England's lead. In order to succeed in getting these European powers to do
what one wants, bear in mind that the success
formula is a relationship between means and
goals versus a player's military outlook. The
computer checks what a player already has
compared to what that player is asking for, in
terms of European involvement. The level of
change requested, the player's relative slave
policies and the means used to obtain the
goal create the result. As a rule of thumb, the
Europeans want freed slaves and only gradual
changes in their status. Strong players can get
away with threatening the European powers,
while weaker players should stick to bribing
and enticing them.

Review

option would have required extensive
programming, given the number of playerinput decisions. Nevertheless, the ability to
observe how the computer reacts as either
side can give the player a realistic concept
of appropriate strategies.

(Continued from page 112)
the political attitudes toward regions), capital relocation, slavery policy, cabinet (and
diplomatic) appointments, financial
priorities and troop mobilization, as well as
determining strategic and campaign movement for the troops so activated.
The menus are easily understandable and
the game flows in a logical manner. Virtually every action mandates a player
response, and often, one might wish for a faster-playing simulation.
However, designer Ed Bever has explained that he intentionally
wanted such "stops" in order to allow the gamer to carefully peruse
what is happening and not miss a report due to an outside disturbance (e.g. telephone, doorbell, etc.). This aspect of design
philosophy is an individual preference and gamers will understand its
ramifications as they play.
Four save positions are allowed. These are simply noted as "Save
1" through "Save 4." One must remember what game was saved
where. This reviewer would have preferred to be able to name and
delete his own save positions, thereby naming them for easy reference (e.g. "C62M" — Confederate, Mid-1862). However, this would
have required additional programming routines and the omission is
not critical, especially given that Revolution '76 only allowed a
single save position.

To War (Game Play)
Game play is the most important criterion for a successful simulation. How well does NGG play? The game does simulate the
problems which historically faced each side. The Confederates must
deter the Union early or the situation will rapidly deteriorate. The
Union must survive with as little damage as possible in order to deter
foreign intervention and gear up for a juggernaut invasion of the
South. Accurately mirroring the reality, the North can make a number of errors and still win, while the South must be virtually perfect.
In addition, elections can make or break the player. The North must
show some success by the Presidential elections of 1864 to survive.
Poor Kentucky: Kentucky will usually be neutral. With its
neutrality recognized by both sides, it has a tendency to secede by
mid-1862. However, Kentucky's neutrality is rarely observed by either
side. When playing the Confederacy, the seizure of Paducah will offer
a knife thrust at the throat of the Union Midwest. Thus, the computer
Union rarely waits for this to occur and will invade on the second
game turn. If the Paducah invasion is successful, it will be followed
up by a seizure of Louisville, thereby bringing Kentucky back into
the Union by force of arms. Similarly, the computer South will often
invade Paducah simply for its territorial advantages. Thus, one
should not be too respectful of territorial integrity.
Washington, DC: If the Union loses its capital, foreign recognition
of the Confederacy is a certainty. At all costs, the Union must retain
Washington, D.C. This may well cause a delay in offensive planning,
but it is well worth it. As the Union, the player will discover that a
computer Confederate force can seize the capital when attacking at
almost 1-2 odds. It is vital to insure the safety of the capital before
embarking on military adventures.
Does the Computer Cheat? This reviewer is still unsure as to the
"integrity" of the artificial intelligence. While playing the Confederates, he noted successful Union naval invasions of Pensacola
and Jacksonville; while playing the Union, the same invasions would
often fail because the computer Confederate would reinforce the city
that had been chosen as an invasion site.

Sadly, the game does not offer a computer-versus-computer
matchup as a learning tool. Dr. Bever told this reviewer that such an

Al Moves: No matter which side one
selects, the artificial intelligence can be
used to assist in movement of troops and
supplies during the strategic phase. This
reviewer recommends against allowing the
computer to move supplies and troops; it is
too easy for it to position troops in an unacceptable location. Just remember to move
supplies by river whenever possible.
The Generals: Maintain a paper listing of
commander locations as well as force sizes.
Only experience will show one how much initiative a general has
(especially when using the "random" option) and it is frustrating to
lose both prestige and backing simply because one inadvertently assigned a general to the wrong command. It is essential to remember
that the generals are listed in a numerical order, which has nothing
to do with their prestige. Make sure that you issue orders by prestige
and not identity.
Naval Forces: The Union should build at least twenty to thirty
naval transports early in the War. This will allow an opportunity for invasion of Southern port cities and force the computer Confederate to
maintain a garrison or mobile reaction force in the rear. A bolder
Rebel may consider ignoring these "pinpricks" and allowing the garrisons and sympathizers to (hopefully) take care of them.
Garrisons: The Confederacy will find Grafton and Charleston, West
Virginia difficult to retain. On the other hand, their loss is not crucial.
The Union, however, must retain its rear. Moving all forces to the
front is a critical error in that anti-war forces can often spring up and
become a thorn. If New York is unoccupied, for example, draft riots
can actually allow New York to become a Confederate bastion. While
it is unrealistic to see a Confederate general leading the rebellious forces in the North, it does reflect the Copperhead mentality so often
present. As long as a minimum garrison is present, this potential will
be obviated.
Economics and Foreign Recognition: Generally, the Confederacy will achieve covert aid from foreign sources. However, it
should not be overbearing — enticements will suffice. Recognition will
only come with major successes — seizure of Washington will usually
generate foreign recognition. The Confederacy will find that deficit
financing is a way of life. While such financing will damage the extent of one's victory, it is important to remember that a debt-ridden
victory is better than subjugation.
Paths of Retreat: Remember to assure a retreat route. If assaulting Washington from Northern Virginia, the Confederate will often
find that his rear has been cut. If Northern Virginia is seized by the
Union, the largest Confederate field army will promptly lay down its
arms since it has no friendly adjacent territory. Often, one must seize
the opportunity; just be aware that opportunities can flow in two
directions.

Road to Appomattox (Conclusions)
No Greater Glory does reflect the major parameters facing each
side in the Civil War. However, one must remember that the military
is only a single facet and that the political decision-making can often
have a larger impact. Akin to Revolution '76, No Greater Glory
may have attempted too much in too small a game engine.

The Confederacy must move quickly and successfully, while the
Union must mobilize its economy and population in order to assure
success. Overall, NGG is a challenging simulation, but one that will
require much effort by the gamer in order to achieve victory by
either side. This reviewer still finds the game to be a significant challenge.

Strategy

Lost in Love

Dave Arneson's Tactics For The Lost Admiral

I

n its first ratings period, The Lost Admiral
jumped into the top twenty of The CGW Poll.
There is tremendous excitement about this
game and this reviewer has not been able to quit
playing the game, even after the review was
done. So, here (to borrow a cliche from a rather
conservative radio personality) is the rest of the
story.

the east or south. Destroy one of the enemy forces while holding back the other with a screen of
PT boats and subs. By the time one enemy fleet
is finished, there will still be time to turn and
destroy the other. Watch Akron and New Haven.
The enemy will usually try and sneak in along the
northern edge.
With one's major fleet off Pueblo (the 200-point
shipyard port), this area becomes fairly safe from
enemy infiltrators. Send a pair of destroyers down
the middle passage to harass the enemy and
wipe out his rear area ports, like Los Angeles and
Oxford, and attack his 200-point port of Tampa,
located in the SE corner. There will be ATs on ap
proach to this port, but press on. Wiping out the
enemy reinforcements will protect one's own
gains and keep the foe from re-opening ports that
have already been cleared.

Be Prepared
The first fateful decision a player must make is
in the composition of the starting fleet. This
author has tried extremes like solid U-Boat fleets
and Dreadnought armadas. While the subs did
better than the big ships, neither proved really
successful. Instead, a fleet needs balance. Even
then, one must think through every move and
have the right ships to support the player's plans.

Crossing the "1"
Attempting to concentrate superior forces at
decisive places and times makes the opening
move and set up very important. Failure to do so
will result in a meat grinder of an attrition duel
that the computer Al is better suited for than
most human players are.
This author prefers the "all the eggs in one basket" approach. Even this approach, however, will
require more than a little planning. One cannot
start a huge fleet at the end of a long channel
since it takes forever to egress.
Make sure that a 200-point building port can be
secured (emphasis on secure). The next consideration is having access to as many cities as
possible when placing initial fleets. It seems tempting to start in the middle of everything, but this
can be deceptive. Having too many cities close
by means that the nasty old enemy will probably
be close by, as well. This situation will hamper
proper deployment of the fleet. Fortunately, this
only happens during the "random map" games.

Jutland fiber Midway
One strategy is, naturally, to wear the enemy
down and win a battle of attrition. This is fine,
provided one has the sea room in which to
maneuver. With only two ships per space, the sea
fills up very quickly. The majority of the Al levels
play pretty aggressively. However, don't count on
the computer making Banzai attacks all the time.
As a tactical play hint, when a ship is hit and
the little flashes and explosions linger a bit, this
means that one or more enemy carriers are lurking about. The longer the explosions the more carriers there are.
Defending rear area ports is tough. Destroyers
generally seem to work out the best as garrisons. For base ports, park a battleship or
cruiser there with a destroyer and a submarine
and/or PT boat. Optionally, these forces can
operate near the port, but some of them need to
be anchored there at all times. Lose those builds
and the attrition will quickly wear down one's
hopes.

Man the Pumps!
To repair or not to repair, that is the question.
Weeeelll... it depends on where your repair base
is in relation to where the fighting is (i.e., is the
base close enough?), how much time is left
(there is no point fixing a vessel only to see it
end the game sitting at anchor), and what the

enemy has out there. A ship that is sunk is lost
forever and, in a campaign, that loss will affect
the size of the Flagships in the next phase. Ships
are hard enough to replace, so try to conserve
them. The Al does not, apparently, go in for
repairing ships much and will usually fight on
until sunk. If there is a friendly base close by,
repair your ship by all means.

Flagships
In campaign situations, a number of single
scenarios are strung together. Players will gain
more points toward promotion in a campaign but
the promotions will not come until the sequence
has been completed. The big difference in campaign games is the presence of Flagships. These
little gems are carriers with a difference. They
are slightly larger (although still likely to be sunk
if attacked too often) but they each will have a
special ability. These range from being able to
repair other vessels while at sea to "seeing" five
squares away rather than the usual two. In all,
there are five special kinds of carrier/flagships.
In a campaign game, the surviving Flagships
will gain more hit points for the next scenario
based on how many enemy ships sank in the last
one. This means that Flagships will have hit
points in the 30s (3 times the hit points a battleship has, for instance) which allows them to go
in "on their own." This is a big change from the
regular carriers that must be protected from almost everything. Needless to say, this also makes
flagships a prime target for attracting the
enemy's attacks (no wonder they call them
"bomb magnets"). Flagships add a new element
for tactics and strategy, further enriching this already enjoyable strategy game.

Strategy Tips
The reader is advised to take all this with a
grain of saltwater, but here are a few tips by
scenario.
Map #1 Scenarios: The enemy rarely uses the
western passage. Place a few fast ships here and
make an end run into his rear areas of Salt Lake
and Los Angeles, etc. The bad part is that this
maneuver takes a long time. PT boats are best to
cover the distance efficiently, but send at least
two.

Capture or occupy Pueblo and build a shore
gun there. This is a good central location from
which to oppose the enemy, who will come from

You will find that the computer player always
has more ATs waiting to re-establish control of
his ports. Be ready to either anchor a destroyer in
each port captured or run back again to clean it
out. ATs are bad news for PT boats and are best
left to be dealt with by subs and destroyers.
Map #2 Scenarios: Generally, one should concentrate in the north and plan a major sweep:
first towards Seattle and then, south towards
Dover. A major light force of subs, destroyers and
PT boats should head west to capture the enemy
200-point city of Springfield and knock out Fluke
and Dublin, the other two major ports. Should
this "fast force" encounter heavy enemy vessels,
it is an opportunity to redeploy the central fleet
off Boston in order to deal with them.

One will probably lose the two southern ports of
Texas and Jersey. Fast ATs can take Duke and
Hat while placing a sub (or destroyer) along with
a cruiser (or battleship) in these two ports. In that
way, the enemy cannot take them right away and
get the points. The trouble with deploying a
major fleet in the south is that the player's 200point shipyard port, Liverpool, is in the north and
one simply cannot afford to lose it. In all situations, protecting one's own 200-point shipyard
port and denying the enemy his is a major objective.
The First Convoy Scenario: One will have
plenty of time to get places. Park a cruiser, or
even a carrier, with the convoy and just plod
along. Meanwhile, one's beleaguered main fleet
must find and destroy the enemy. Although there
are a lot of "points" travelling with the convoy, it
is still the capture of ports which will determine
the winner. Therefore, the player must do four
things at the same time: protect the convoy;
protect his own ports; capture other ports and
destroy the enemy fleet.

Concentrate on harassing the enemy ports to
deny him points while seeking out his fleet. The
convoy is tough so it can be saved if the enemy
finds it with several ships. Trying to do all four
things runs the risk of losing all four . Remember
that those points are awarded for ports each and
every turn that they are controlled. Thus, in a
12 turn game, a 500-point port will gain someone
6,000 victory points! Double that if it is an enemy
starting port. If one can't get the points for a port,
make sure to deny them to the enemy by sinking
his transports and attack transports. (Players will
quickly notice that they never seem to have
enough of these lowly vessels).

■

I
2

2
2
4

e

a

Review

Teaching the "Old
Dog" New Tricks
Three-Sixty's Megafortress
by Stanley Travena

HILL
Megafortress
SYSTEM:
IBM (VGA and 10 Mhz req.(
PROTECTION: Document Look-Up
$49.5
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
Rick Banks and Paul Butler
PUBLISHER:
Three-Sixty Pacific
Campbell, CA

he

B-52 was built in the early 1950s, primarily for engaging in nuclear warfare with the Soviet Union.
Later, it was modified for conventional bombing
operations. Forty years after its inception, the B-52 is still
playing a role on the modern battlefield. Recently, the
venerable plane made a major contribution in the Persian
Gulf during Desert Storm: It helped to shape the battlefield
in preparation for the ground battle. The plane was effective, both tactically and psychologically. During the war, a
CNN correspondent interviewed a captured Iraqi general
who said he couldn't walk to the latrine without wondering
if a B-52 would bomb him. This reviewer was recently at
an airshow at Love Field in Dallas, Texas and watched a B52H do a low level fly-by. The plane is ominous.

T

Megafortress is the brainchild of Dale Brown and came
to life in his novel The Flight of the Old Dog. Unlike the B52s in the Persian Gulf, which primarily performed carpet
bombing missions with "dumb bombs," the Megafortress is
equipped with all the latest in high-tech weaponry, stealth
technology and electronic warfare. Dale Brown trained for
eight years aboard a B-52. He worked closely with ThreeSixty to bring his plane to life in this new computer simulation (see the Sneak Preview in CGW #81), and the final
product reflects the work that went into the project.
Frankly, this reviewer approached Megafortress with a
considerable amount of skepticism. After all, Three-Sixty
is not at the top of any flight simulation fan's list after their
Blue Max product, nor have they had many hits outside of
Harpoon (the only current entry by Three-Sixty in the
CGW Poll's Top 100 list). Then, upon reading the manual
and discovering that the game offers no support for a joystick, the enthusiasm level dropped even lower. Yet, what
this reviewer had failed to anticipate was the way
Megafortress could sneak up and fully capture for a
player the experience of flying a B-52 in much the same
way the B-52 itself takes targets on the battlefield.

It Takes Teamwork (Game Play)
Megafortress is presented to the player as a multi-posi
tion bomber simulation with activities to be mastered at
Pilot, Copilot, Navigator, Electronic Warfare Officer and
Weapons stations. The heart of the game lies in the
manipulation of the dizzying array of controls (accessed
via either hotkeys or a mouse) needed to keep this bird
flying, accomplishing the stated goals of a mission and
staying alive.
The aircraft model was developed from actual unclassified B-52H manuals. The would-be pilot is confronted with
a learning curve slightly steeper than the run-of-the-mill
flight simulation. For obvious reasons, the flight controls
had to be simplified for sake of gameplay. After all, few
would find it entertaining to fly an actual 100% simulation
of a B-52. Pre-flight and in-flight checklists are available
both on-line from the Copilot Electro-optical Viewing System (EVS) and in the manual. Also, pre-flight review of the
flight plan, weapons loadout, possible targets and fuel requirements make getting off the ground a little slower than
most fighter simulations.

Review

Mission Improbable
There are three areas of combat in
Megafortress: Red Flag (Nevada Desert),
the Persian Gulf and the Flight of the
Old Dog mission. The Red Flag missions
are designed as a training ground for the
new pilot. Sixteen progressively more
complex missions expose the new flyer
to possible combat situations. Gamers
are advised to spend much time refining
skills in practice flights at Red Flag. Key
skills that need to be perfected are:
avoidance, stealth, damage control,
weapons control and, most importantly,
navigation. The navigation officer can
make or break a mission.
Once the pilot has gained confidence at Red Flag, the game
provides fourteen missions straight off the front page from the
Persian Gulf theater. Then, for the ultimate in challenge, The
Flight of the Old Dog mission will take the player from the
Nevada Desert's "Dreamland" compound (the USAF's top-secret
test facility near Nellis Air Force Base) to the Kamchatka peninsula in the eastern Soviet Union. Very little information is given
to the player beyond occasional communications from the mission commander, General Elliot, and intermixed storyboard
screens. The missions are full of the familiar waypoints of other
games in this genre. However, in this simulation the player has
full control and can relocate waypoints, alter altitudes at
waypoints and even add temporary waypoints while in-flight. As
an example of the simplicity of design, setting a temporary
waypoint while the autopilot in engaged requires only a few
clicks of the mouse. The player goes to the navigator's station;
switches the large EVS monitor to RADAR mode (a high-resolution image of the landscape ahead of the plane); points to the
desired location for the temporary waypoint on the image; clicks
and drags the indicator to the appropriate altitude and releases
the mouse button. The display reflects the change with a vertical
indicator marking the new waypoint and the plane adjusts course
to reflect the change. The predefined course is resumed after arrival at the temporary waypoint.

Weapons Briefing
The object of Megafortress is not to aggressively engage every
target on the way to the objective. The key is to avoid confrontation at all costs, deliver one's payload and get home. However,
this will sometimes include the removal of troublesome AAA
sites, SAM sites and search radar installations. Several radarhoming weapons fill the need nicely. The AGM-84E is the
weapons officer's best friend. It is the Air Force equivalent of the
Navy's Harpoon missile. Most prefer a fire-and-turn strategy when
using this weapon, resuming course only after the contact leaves
the radar display. Fortunately, taking out key installations can
make the trip home a much safer journey.
Targets of opportunity can also be eliminated at the pilot's discretion. Some missions will have up to fourteen targets, so preflight planning and thoughtful weapons selection will add to success. Staying low and slow is important to maintaining a low
radar profile. If the pilot maintains an altitude of less than 300'
and keeps the throttle around 65-75%, search radars will only
search and not track the plane.
New pilots will make many mistakes. Leaving the external
lights on, going into and staying in active radar mode, leaving
the gear down and having it torn off, forgetting to turn the bat-

teries off after starting the plane, etc. Fortunately, after a few times through, these
"little things" that can ruin one's day will
go away and flight procedures will become automatic.
Perhaps the biggest mistake new pilots
make is to engage the enemy head-on.
Avoidance is the best strategy — the appropriate time to take action is when the
B-52 becomes an item of interest. Always
engage a plane while it is on the ground
or in the air in front of the plane. As in
all flight simulations, one must avoid allowing the plane to get on one's six at all
costs. While attacking a plane, he should
be lined up on the scope so that it is possible to go active with the radar and, when he is within fifteen
miles or so, launch two AIM-120C AMRAAM missiles. If the
enemy survives, it is good to fire off some air mines and make
sure that the Rear-Looking Infrared system is on. This will control
the AUTO CHAFF and AUTO FLARE systems if they are active.
The Electronic Warfare Station should only be used as a last
line of defense. Use of the jamming systems only broadcasts the
plane's location and invites more enemy response to the B-52's
presence. So, unless the player is particularly looking forward to
taking on MiGs head-to-head in an oversized, slow plane, it is
good to avoid jamming.
To complete bombing runs, the player will have to plan his or
her approach to an Initial Point (IP). Targets are generally near
waypoints, but the flight plan rarely lines up the plane for an effective bombing run. Select an IP that is about 30 miles from the
target and has an unobstructed flight path to the target. Make
sure that the radar range is set to 10 miles and that there are no
mountain ranges within 10 miles after the target. The TAC can
manage variable terrain but slow speeds and steep inclines can
cause the computer to force a stall and a gear-up landing into
the side of a mountain. The player will want to disengage the
autopilot or use temporary waypoints for an approach. The
arrow keys will allow minor adjustments to the flight path from
the Offensive Weapons station. Proficient use of the camera
mode and attack radar systems will make these bombing runs
go smoothly.

Sounds of Silence
This reviewer noticed one irritating aspect to the program.
When using a sound board, the engine noise sometimes cuts out
and goes silent, while leaving all other sounds active. Fortunately, by pressing the engine sound key ("0") twice, the player will
be able to restore the sound or, if desired, press the sound key
once to turn it off permanently.

Final Evaluation
Three-Sixty plans to release additional mission disks for
Megafortress. With such a solid gameplay system, these should
add even more to the overall value of the game. The interface is
well-conceived, the graphics are well-executed and the sound
board support adds a fascinating auditory dimension to the warning signals. There is enough here to keep any gadget freak
happy for a long time to come. If a player is looking for a game
with more emphasis on strategy and less seat-of-the-pants dogfighting, Megafortress will fill the bill. Although skeptical at first,
this reviewer believes that Megafortress might just be one of the
sleeper hits of '91.

Strategy

D

rawn from the pages of Dale
Brown's novel of the same name,
the "Flight of the Old Dog" mission combines both the elements of an
adventure game and a simulation. To
retain the challenge of the mission, there
are a few differences between the experiences of the crew in the novel and
the crew directed by the player. This article is designed to help garners reach
and destroy the laser in Kavaznya.

Weapons Loadout
The "Old Dog" mission table describes
the targets and their respective coordinates as they have been preprogrammed into the navigation computer prior to the mission. Also shown is
an appropriate weapon for taking out the
target.

Modification of this standard loadout is
desirable. Since the AGM-142A Have
Nap has a pre-determined location on
the wing pylons and the player will want
to have more than one on each pylon, it
will be necessary to start by removing all
of the AIM-120 AMRAAM missiles. Then,
one can load up the AGM-142As and
finish up with the AMRAAMs.

Great Escape — The Dreamland Scramble
Since the mission begins with a MiG-29
harassing the good guys, all can easily
be lost if a player takes too much time
flipping switches and performing the
standard checklist. Instead, while the engine is revving at 15%, the player should

extend flaps; toggle the Taxi/Land switch
to "Land;" flip the Autopilot switch to
"On" and turn the TAC "On." Then, one
should immediately switch to the Nav station, select Waypoint Edit, and place
"Waypoint 1" on the extreme left edge of
the map — due west. When the player
returns to the pilot's seat, the hangar
doors should be fully opened.
Remove the wheel brake and throttle
up to 100% at this point. This should get
the plane blasting down the runway and
clear of the hangar. The player should immediately man the OW station and allow
the TAC and Autopilot (which is now set
up to steer the aircraft due west) to take
care of the rest. From that position, one
should quickly switch to attack radar and
designate the MiG (red blip) as the target. Then, turn on the camera and lock
on the MiG for the
satisfaction of watching the bogey explode. That MiG
driver may be intimidating to ground
targets, but once in
the air, he's a wimp.
The player need
only select an AIM120C AMRAAM
from one of the
pylons and let fly.
That MiG pilot will
be looking for
reverse PDQ when
he sees the business end of that AMRAAM en route for
his bird.
The player should

now go back and "clean up" (raise the
landing gear and flaps).
Success in this phase of the "Old Dog"
mission is based on how fast the player
can get into the air and deal with the
MiG. No further action is necessary for
this leg. Eventually, an interlude screen
will appear informing the player that he
must get past the controller at Seattle.

The Seattle Dodge
Now, the Megafortress should be at altitude over the Pacific and ready to slip
past Seattle Control. Again, timing is crucial. The player should squawk whatever
code Seattle wishes, and then, switch off
all active radar (attack mode) and toggle
off all the lights and the transponder. If
one immediately pushes the nose over
into a 60-degree dive until the plane
reaches angels 10 (10,000 feet), it
should be easy to pull out of the dive
after passing Seattle's control area. While
diving, it is important to keep an eye on
the artificial horizon/pitch instrument and
begin decreasing the minimum altitude in
order to be able to switch on the TAC.
Since it takes a few seconds to bring the
nose down 60 degrees, a fast player may
be able to switch to Nav mode and edit
Waypoint 1 to due west of his position.
Note that it will take full power to pull
out of the dive when the plane has a full
load of ordnance and fuel. If the player
does not dive steeply enough, Seattle will
come on with a wisecrack and scramble
interceptors to end the mission. If the
dive is handled correctly, the player
should be able to match altitude with
dive angle — for example, 35 degrees of
dive for 3500 feet of altitude. If done
properly, this will insure pulling out of the
dive at precisely the altitude one has set
for TAC (108 feet). One should come out
of this screaming dive at just over 150
feet and, of course, disappear from the
Seattle radar screen. General Elliott will
advise the player to have his navigator
set a waypoint for due west (if one hasn't
accomplished this during the dive). This
is where the player must exercise caution. The Megafortress must do a 180-degree turn after that dive. If one is flying
at 108 feet, a sharp bank may lose
enough altitude to cause the player to
have to end his mission. Also, one must
try not to overcorrect or else the plane is
apt to reappear on the Seattle controller's scope and, again, end the mission.

Strategy

To Refuel or Not to Refuel
By now, the player should notice that
all this action (not to mention the flight
from Nevada) has taken its toll on the
fuel stores of the mighty EB-52. As in the
book, there will be a tanker for the player
to refuel from. Climb to angels 10 to
facilitate finding the KC-135 tanker.

MiGs, SAM sites, and rough terrain to
overcome) or, after the first attempt at
taking out the laser base, he may wish to
try the following as an alternate to the
"stock" mission.
To do this, edit the first waypoint as an
IP (initial point) on a run that travels right

On the Road to Kamchatka

between two SAM sites (touching the
perimeters of the range for both sites)
and on toward the laser base. The player
should fly "in the weeds," hitting the IP at
108 feet (using the TAC) and throttling
back to 65 percent to conserve fuel. The
player will be painted by both SAM sites
and the laser base will eventually "lock
on" to the Megafortress. This is the
primary threat. Failing to deal with it will
require rebooting the game in short
order. The laser base radar is difficult to
jam, though a HARM (High-speed AntiRadiation Missile) will take out the laser
radar. Once this initial threat is dealt
with, the player will be able to get in and
blast the airbase, along with nearby targets of opportunity. The rest of the SAM
sites may be taken out, but it is
preferable to continue jamming these
and save his ordnance for the airbase.

Once en route to the target area, the
player can fly the waypoints as
programmed (This can be quite challenging, as there are more than enough

In order to accomplish this, the player
should edit Waypoint 1 to the coordinates of X +169, Y +116. Waypoint 2
should be edited to the location of

When the tanker appears, the player
should click on the "C" button on the
refueling panel. The player will then
"authenticate" by painting the tanker
with the targeting (attack) radar with an
AIM-120 AMRAAM selected and a heavy
finger resting on the launch button. Then,
after the player re-selects the "C" key
once again, the KC-135 crew will suddenly be most eager for the player to have
his pilot bring the EB-52 over for a drink.
The active radar can then be switched off
by going back to either "Scan" or
"Camera" mode. Once the bomber performs the rendezvous with the tanker, it
is time to move on to the real meat of
the mission.

waypoint 4 (X +130, Y +168), and
Waypoints 3 and 4 should be superimposed upon Waypoint 5 (X +221, Y
+254) so that the player will still have a
waypoint for the Anadyr airbase in order
to land, refuel, and end the mission as a
brigadier general.

What Do I Do When I'm
Finished?
Megafortress Mission Disk
to Be Released
Similar to a Harpoon Battleset, the
Megafortress Mission disk will have two
new theaters: Lybia and Iran. The
premise is that a more extremist government in Iran has overthrown the current
one and is, in turn, providing arms to
Lybia. The Megafortress will fly covertly
out of Kuwait and Malta against targets
in Lybia and Iran which are fortified with
more sophisticated Gadfly and Gremlin
SAM sites. New targets will include ships
and mountain-based AAA sites. There
will also be new weapons including the
Penguin missile and the GBU-95 — an
FAE (fuel/air explosive). The product is
expected to ship in early December 1991
with a suggested retail price of $34.95.

Editorial

Hits and Myths

T

he State of the Magazine: The

early 20th century Swiss architect
turned playwright, Max Frisch, is
reputed to have said, "Technology is the
knack of so arranging the world that we
do not experience it." At Computer
Gaming World, we believe that computer games put the experience into technology so that players can learn the lessons which life inevitably teaches without
the risk that is associated with real
human experiences. As a result, our
coverage tends to focus on the impact
of a computer game upon the player(s)
as opposed to providing ritualistic citations of technological specifications. To
borrow a metaphor from another genre,
we believe that the play is more important than the stage design.
To be sure, some stage designs detract
from the performance of even classic
theater productions. In such cases, a
critic (be that critic a reviewer or simply
a viewer) has the responsibility to note
such an inadequacy. Other stage designs
actually enhance the audience's suspension of disbelief. In such a case, the critic
(whether formal or informal) has the
responsibility of commenting on such excellence. By and large, however, the hard
work of the stage designer is assimilated
into the overall enjoyment of the performance of the play itself.
That is the way it should be with computer games. Even a publication like
CGW, which tries to ask difficult questions of the games from many different
perspectives, would soon become as
boring to read as a pre-flight checklist if
we required reviewers to recite technical
specifications or make comments on
technical competence of every game,
even when the overall effect of the
graphics, sound, soundtrack and
documentation was simply that of blending competently into the overall experience. Our goal is to comment upon
those aspects of a game which particularly enhance or devalue the game ex-

perience, not to trudge dutifully through
a review formula.
We do not think that the page count of
the documentation tells the reader anything about the game's potential experience. Simply talking about the technical level of the graphics may not communicate whether the artistic style is appropriate to the game or merely distracting chrome. Indeed, we have had
software publishers complain that we did
not talk about their "state-of-the-art"
graphics when we thought that the animation itself looked like a throwback to 8-bit
personal computers and their limited
graphic sets.
State of the Industry: There has been
plenty of debate over the last few years
over whether computer games are approaching an art form. Since even the
genre's most stalwart defenders are backing off from the position that computer
games are an art form (a premature
retreat in this editor's opinion), let us continue the discussion by suggesting that
computer games represent another
form, myth.
One reason why CGWs editor has always affirmed computer games as an art
form is that, in their best representations,
they offer the same socially acculturating
and psychologically therapeutic experiences as good art. In the editor's perspective, art should challenge the observer to
consider the cultural and historical
perspective of the artist and to rethink
reality using the new viewpoint provided
by the artist.
Myth accomplishes both acculturating
and therapy, as well. Indeed,
psychologist Rollo May's latest book
(The Cry for Myth) describes myth as
having both a regressive and a progressive function. The regressive function, according to May, "...brings into awareness
the repressed, unconscious, archaic
urges, longings dreads, and other
psychic content." The progressive func-

tion "...reveals new goals, new ethical insights and possibilities."
It seems that computer games meet
some of the same criteria. When people
note the number of computer games
which involve evil, monsters, murder and
war, they are usually indicating that there
is something wrong with the genre. However, it is often by solving a puzzle or
resolving a dilemma; encountering a different perspective or unraveling the
designer's allegory and deploying one's
forces or retreating from the battlefield
that the player comes up with new ideas
and possibilities. Again, much of the subject matter covered in computer gaming
seems to deal with the darker side of
human existence. Yet, it is through the
vicarious experience of "overcoming"
such darkness that the gamer can create
his/her own new light.
It is to be hoped that opening a
dialogue in which the computer game is
discussed as "myth" will be a positive
step in focusing discussion on why computer games are important to society
and individuals. It could be yet another
way of allowing the design community,
the critical community and the "gaming
world" to consider anew the implications
of a game's subject matter and the handling thereof.
This month, CGW has the privilege of inducting a game into the Hall of Fame
which uses its technology in a very
humanizing/acculturating fashion. ThreeSixty's Harpoon not only successfully
uses its technology to bring ease of use
to a modern wargame, but it uses the
game's command perspective to bring
home the lessons of war. The continuing
release of battlesets to support the game
and offer new scenarios means not only
further enjoyment, but also a chance to
reflect on a changing world situation and
the implications for potential future conflict. Our congratulations to the "myth"
makers who transform the realities of
war into a learning experience, Larry
Bond and the gang at Three-Sixty.

