October 1984

Vol. 4 No. 5
Features
FLOPPY IMMORTALITY
Staying Alive in Wizardry

GAMESIG ADVENTURE GAME CONFERENCES
Lord British, Michael Berlyn, Scott Adams

COSMIC BALANCE CONTEST

9
Steve Estvanik
14
Scorpia
18

Participate in Our Ship Design Contest

CGW BASEBALL LEAGUE

18

A Computer Baseball League

THE COMPUTER AS OPPONENT
The Current State of Game AI

SUNDOG
A Review

THE CGW COMPUTER GAME CONFERENCE

22
Charlie Merrow
26
Ken Ryall
30

Top Names in the Hobby Give Insights

ROAD TO MOSCOW
A Review

STRATEGY GAME TIPS

33
Bill Wise
36

A New Column

Departments
INSIDE THE INDUSTRY
Reader Survey Results

TAKING A PEEK

6
Dana Lombardy
10

Screen Photos & Brief Comments

SCORPION'S TALE
Deadline

DISPATCHES
Seven Cities of Gold Designer Notes

TELE-GAMING
Diplomacy and Electronic Mail

ATARI PLAYFIELD
Games with "Nonsense" Themes

THE LEARNING GAME
Review of RAILS WEST

COMMODORE KEY
War Games

MICRO-REVIEW

13
Scorpia
20
Dan Bunten
23
Patricia Fitzgibbons
24
David Stone
28
Bob Proctor
35
Roy Wagner
38

(Seastalker, Lordling of Yore)

READER INPUT DEVICE

45

You Rate the Games

GAME RATINGS
Over 80 Games Rated

46

INSIDE THE INDUSTRY

Computer hardware/software store
Computer software store
Hobby or game store
Other type of store

by Dana Lombardy

Here are the results of the survey in the June 1984 issue of CGW (4.3) that asked
the readers where they buy their computer games, and how many games (on
average) they buy each month.
The first part of the survey asked what were the readers' favorite types of computer games. We categorized computer games into five types for the purposes
of the survey: adventure (role-playing); wargame, arcade, abstract; and sports and
other strategy.

PART I

18%
26%
5%
4%

The dominance of mail order houses as the preferred method of buying computer games was somewhat surprising. However, the fact that the second most
favored place to buy games from is a software-only store is not that surprising.

PART IV

The readers were asked to check the one type of computer game that is their
favorite (they play the most often):
41%
A. Adventure
45%
B. Wargame
4%
C. Arcade
D. Abstract
2%
E. Sports/Other
8%
It is not surprising that the majority of readers of CGW play mostly computer
wargames and computer adventure games. But it is surprising to see how low
the percentages are for the other categories, especially arcade-style games.

The readers then put down the number of computer games they buy every month
(average):

PART II

The last question asked how many computer games the readers copy from someone else's disk or tape.
This could have been worded slightly better since we were trying to find out how
prevalent "pirating" of computer games is.
The results do not give a true "average". In fact, the vast majority of readers
do not copy games from friend's disks or tapes. The results show the following:

The readers were then asked to check each of the following places from which
they regularly bought computer games (at least once a month). The total for all
six is greater than 100% because a reader could check more than one category.
Direct from software publisher
14%
Mail order house
55%
Computer hardware/software store
39%
Computer software store
40%
Hobby or game store
16%
Other type of store
14%
Buying from a mail order house, which usually offers computer games at a discount, is the method used by most of the readers to obtain their computer games.
Not surprisingly, the second most used method of purchasing computer games
is from either a computer hardware/software store or a computer software store.

PART III
The readers were then asked to check the one place where they buy their computer games most often:
3%
Direct from publisher
44%
Mail order house

1.94

Interestingly, this coincides closely with a similar question on an earlier survey
which asked how much the readers spent each month on computer games. The
answer was $54.00. If we figure the average game costs $30.00, the amount spent
to buy those 1.94 games comes to $58.20.

PART V

No games copied (zero)
1 to 6 games copied
7 to 15 games copied

70%
25%

16 to 150 games copies

2%

3%

Whatever copying or "pirating" is being done, only a very small number of the
readers of CGW do it—but some of them are engaged in a full-scale effort! Occasionally copying a friend's game is one thing. Making copies of dozens and even
hundreds of games is quite another. We would be interested in hearing from some
of the readers who make so many copies of computer games to find out why they
do it. Do they believe it's OK to do it when it costs the software publishers and
stores so much in lost sales? You may reply anonymously.
Next issue we'll have a summary of the results from all the surveys conducted
in CGW. This will give us an interesting profile on the readers of CGW: what computer games they play, and where we may be going as a hobby.

FLOPPY IMMORTALITY:
Staying Alive in Wizardry
by Steve Estvanik
Your party falls to the ground in their makeshift camp.
Uther has just used his last level 6 MAKANITO spell to
destroy the remnants of the force that attacked. Mukdar
and Yngvi, each level 10 fighters, still wince in pain from
the blows of the spells they absorbed. And Dantas, ever
the noble priest, has not enough power left to heal
everyone. The elevator that leads up from the 9th level is
still a journey away, so the party leaves camp. The battles
have been fierce, but several of the warriors have earned
enough experience to rise a level. Uther in particular
relishes the extra power he'll receive when he rises to the
11th level. Lost in their fatigue, the party fails to see the
small group of nightstalkers and ogres behind the next
door. Unable to respond, the weakened fighters die under
the ogre's blasts. Dantas is caught by a nightstalker and
drained a level. The rest of the party barely survives to run
in fear to a quiet corner. Only Uther, the bishop Elias and
the thief Ulrik manage to survive intact. Together, they
drag the bedazed Dantas with them. Uther casts a
DUMAPIC spell to find their new position and soon they
arrive at the elevator. Shortly thereafter the party emerges
from the caverns and heads for the Adventurer's Inn, to
rest and to heal. Then, it's back to Gilgamesh's Tavern to
mourn their lost comrades.
Not a particularly deadly round of play, but if you haven't
got days to spend playing Wizardry and building a stable
of 10th level fighters and mages, then every loss hurts. You
can recover some of these casualties in the Temple of Cant,
but that's not without its problems either. The spells might
go awry and turn your character to ash. The cost might
bankrupt you. More importantly, the strain on the characters will tell as they age faster than they should. It's a
young person's sport, this dungeon delving. So, what's to
do? One company sells a program that lets you tinker with
your character's files and give them powers and abilities
they haven't earned. The approach I've taken, while not
the purest, at least preserves the spirit of the quest. Using

this method, you will still face setbacks, but they will be
of the one step forward, one step back variety. No longer
will you have to watch an 11th level character die because
of one small miscalculation or greedy move. The hints to
this method are in the rule book. It takes only a little work
and disk switching to come up with the proper methods.
(In a way, it's only fitting that the disk backup utilities provide a way to speed your progress in this game. Used in
their normal fashion, they are one of the few pieces of poor
programming design exhibited in this well crafted game.
Why didn't the designers do that little bit of extra work
needed to take advantage of computers blessed with two
disk drives. The utilities now use far too many disk swaps
and excessive returns to the same procedure.)
The method I've developed for keeping characters
requires four disks: the system master (M), the scenario disk
you normally use (S), the backup disk you normally make
(B1), and a second backup disk (B2). The first backup B1
is made by invoking the utilities and copying S to B1(R).
This then lets you bring back your characters if the entire
party gets wiped out. It can't be used, however, if you only
want to recover one or two characters. So, we need a second
type of backup disk. Start this backup by creating a new
scenario disk, choosing M from the utilities menu. Then,
choose B from the utilities menu and fill the new disk (B2)
from the backup disk B1. (This is the other direction of
backups available from the same Backup Characters
command.)
We now have the disks we need. Use the S disk as you
normally would. When an adventure is complete, you now
have an extra backup to do. First, perform the normal
Continued on page 40

Activision
THE ACTIVISION DECATHLON:
Compete in the ten events of the
decathlon. Similar in appearance to
SUMMER GAMES by Epyx and containing the same events as OLYMPIC
DECATHLON by Microsoft. However
all events are controlled via rapid movement of the joystick. The other games require a wider range of keyboard skills to
play. C-64.

Avalon Hill Game Company
4517 Harford Rd.
Baltimore, MD 21214
COMPUTER DIPLOMACY: The computerized version of the popular board
game (see Tele-Gaming in this issue). The
game can serve as gamemaster for a
group of seven or can play any of the
positions in the game. You don't negotiate
with a computer player, it just makes
tactical moves for itself. The moves
and results can be printed out. The
graphics are very nicely done. If you are a
Diplomacy player with an IBM, you won't
want to miss this one. IBM (256K). $50.00.
DREADNOUGHTS: WWII naval warfare in the North Atlantic. More detailed
than AH's South Atlantic game, Under
Southern Skies. DN contains the Bismarck scenario (the strategic map looks

very similar to the map in their board
game BISMARCK) as well as a battle
program that allows you to set up
encounters between any of 44 different
ships. Documentation includes overview of the final days of the Bismarck
and a nice listing of the ships used in the
game. Apple II. $30.00.
GULF STRIKE: Computer version of
the board game by Victory Game Company. Based on fictional war between
U.S. and U.S.S.R. in the Persian Gulf
area. Combined land, sea, and air. Clearly on of AHs best computer wargames
to-date. Atari. $30.00.
QUEST OF THE SPACE BEAGLE: The
sequel to Jupiter Mission 1999. Three different tasks await you. In the first mission you fight a detailed arcade space
battle. In the second mission you must
escape from an underground Labyrinth,
and in the final third of the game you
must pilot the Space Beagle back to
earth. Realistic star maps must be used
to figure your way back. Two disks for
the Atari. $35.00.
Broderbund Software
17 Paul Drive
San Rafael, CA 94903
CHAMPIONSHIP LODE RUNNER: 50
new diabolical levels for the best arcade
game ever. If you are one of those people who are "down" on arcade-style

games, you will want to make an exception for this game and the original Lode
Runner as well. Highly recommended,
but be ready to do some heavy thinking.
Apple, Atari, C-64.

CAC Software
Box 16090
Arlington, VA 22215
BLACK STALLION WESTERN
ADVENTURE: Hi-res adventure set in
1887. You are a scout attempting to reach
the safety of a nearby fort. A black
stallion plays a pivotal role. The same
actions don't always produce the same
results.

Commodore Computers
West Chester, PA
KICKMAN: C-64 version of the Bally/
Midway arcade game.

SATAN'S HOLLOW: C-64 version of
the Bally/Midway arcade game.

Datamost
20660 Nordhoff St.
Chatsworth, CA
MR. ROBOT: Apple version of the
original Atari program. Play any of the
22 screens or design your own. Donkey
Kong style game. $34.95.
Daystar Learning Corp.
525 University Ave.,
Palo Alto, CA 94301
FACTACTICS TRIVIA GAME: Trivia
game for one or two (or teams).
Categories are TV, Sports, Movies, Rock
& Roll, Music Potpourri, Americana.
Two thousand questions. Expansion
games are planned. Apple, Atari, C-64,
IBM. $ 29.95.
Electronic Arts
2755 Campus Dr.
San Mateo, CA 94403
ARCHON II(ADEPT): While more
detailed than the original Archon,
gamers will recognize Adept as an
expansion of that game system. More
playing pieces and magic. The four

elements provide the playing fields.
Atari, C-64. $40.00.
REALM OF IMPOSSIBILITY: A
"deluxe edition" of the last year's
ZOMBIES game published by Bram Inc.
Has a two player cooperative mode.
Atari. $40.00.
SKYFOX: You won't believe the
graphics! As good as anything on the
Atari or C-64. The game uses advanced
techniques to bring arcade quality
graphics, geometrical precision, and lifelike combat flying adventures to the
Apple II family of computers. You get a
cockpit-window perspective that is
reminds you of Flight Simulator II, but
the graphics surpass FSII by a long shot.
While an arcade game, strategy comes
into play on higher levels of difficulty.
$40.00.
Isoft
Box 10762
Stanford, CA
EL-IXIR: When we first saw El-ixer we
thought "oh, a Go variant on computer,

that's nice." But we were not overly
thrilled. Now that we have played the
game, we say it's great! Imagine Go with
random elements. If you understand Go
you will understand El-ixir, but what
makes El-ixir so different, and a game
that could only be done on a computer,
is that the computer only gives you a certain selection of squares on which to play
your "stone" each turn. After selecting
one of the positions randomly offered
you by the computer, the computer give
you the opportunity to select one of the
four cardinal directions. It then will
deposit a row of 1 to 4 stones in that
direction. This interesting "twist" to a
classic game make El-ixir a tense and exciting match of wits. Apple and IBM.
$29.95.
Prentice Hall
Englewood Cliffs, NJ
BRAIN TICKLERS: A combination
book-disk which presents a collection of
puzzles and pastimes for the computer.
It is designed for anyone who is interested in problem solving or math
puzzles. Apple II. $39.95.

ScreenPlay
500 Eastowne Office Park #212
Chapel Hill, NC 27514
THE INSTITUTE: A Freudian adventure. You must escape a mysterious institute. You are not mad, but they don't
know that. The game is a series of
dreams. Apple, Atari, C-64.

Simulations Canada
P.O. Box 452
Bridgewater, Nova Scotia
SIEG IN AFRIKA: The War in North
Africa 1940-1943. You play the role of the
Commander of the North African
theatre. Players deal with strategic goals,
operational planning, supply maintenance, assignment of air and sea power,
and operational level orders to land
units. Apple II and C-64. $59.95.

Softie Inc.
San Francisco, CA
800-345-SOFT
THE NEW YORK TIMES COMPUTER
CROSSWORD PUZZLES: Thirty
puzzles for Apple II, III, and IBMpc.
COMPUTER CROSSWORDS: Thirty
puzzles created by Dell.

Sir-tech Software
6 Main St.
Ogdensburg, NY 13669
STAR MAZE: On of the best arcade
games around is now available on the
C-64 and Atari. You maneuver a
spaceship through a series of sixteen
complex mazes to recover "power
jewels". CGW sponsored a Star Maze
contest back in 1982. Although we are
not officially sponsoring a contest this
time around, C-64 and Atari owners are
welcome to "play" the contest
themselves. The contest was "to be the
first to submit a drawing of the sixteenth
level." It is not at all easy to get there.
Good luck.

Superware
2028 Kingshouse Rd.
Silver Spring, MD
AROUND THE WORLD: An adventure
quest in which you assume the role of
one of a variety of characters. Your task
is to travel around the world in the
shortest possible time. The "world" consists of 41 "boundless, scrolling, interconnected regions of the earth starting
in London and ending in North America.
Atari. $29.95

Well, there you are at the Robner front
door. What to do? Probably what most
people do when they're at someone's door.
After all, you won't get very far with the
investigation if you don't get into the house!
The grounds of the estate are also important,
but we'll come back to those later. Right
now, it's time for some indoor snooping.
You'll have to map out the house, of
course, but you'll find it's not all that large
a place. However, you should pay careful
attention to the room descriptions (if you
have a printer, you might want to print them
off the first time you go through the rooms),
particularly in the library, where the crime
was committed.

DEADLINE

As told by Scorpia

Ah, October! A good month; after all, if
October is here, can November be far
behind? Of course, here at the Tale, it's
always November (I arranged for that personally). Anyway, the rush is over, and Fred
is back from the Grues Convention. I see
he's pouring out your favorite beverage, so
settle in by the fire, and we'll talk about
Deadline.
So, you've had enough of fanciful adventures in underground caves and strange
alien spaceships, and now you want to "get
back to reality" with a nice, quiet, murder
mystery. Heh! Being a detective isn't as easy
as it seems in the books; after all, YOU are
the one who has to do all the work!
There are a few things to remember as you
go along playing Sherlock Holmes. Time is
important. Events will occur in certain
places at certain times, whether or not you
happen to be around. If you come late, you
may very well miss something important.
On the other hand, there are also some very
neat red herrings in the game that can lead
you to false conclusions, so be alert!
Another thing to keep in mind is that you
can't get a conviction unless you have some
solid evidence. No matter how sure you may
be of the guilty party, without evidence you
won't be able to prove your suspicions in
court. So, don't arrest anyone until you
know you have enough to put 'em away for
a long time.
Finally, the game can be frustrating in
some ways, as you have to spend more time
talking to people than in any other Infocom.
And when and where you do so can be
extremely important. Saying the right thing
in the right place at the right time to the right
person is not always easy! It will take some
trial and error on your part to figure out
when and how to ask questions, but in the
end, the effort will pay off. Talk to people
whenever you see them, it's good practice.
So, with all this in mind, let's go catch a
killer.

Speaking of the library, you'll find it has
a few interesting items in it. The blank pad
and the calendar are especially noteworthy,
but there are other things to look at as well.
Go over the whole room thoroughly. And
don't overlook the balcony outside; careful
examination there might give you a few
ideas!
Having finished with the library, you need
to go poking about in everyone's rooms.
Don't be shy; open doors and examine
everything you possibly can. There is
evidence to be found, if you know what
you're looking for (you might want to
re-read some of the material that came with
the game). While you're doing this, a few
things will happen. Somewhere, a phone
will ring. You might want to listen in on
the conversation. You also might want to
intercept the mail that will arrive a little later
on. And even the newspaper shouldn't be
overlooked; never know what ideas you
might get!
Now might be a good time to snoop
around the grounds. There's a shed that certainly ought to be looked into, and you never
know who you might meet while you're
wandering around the estate. In fact, it's a
smart move to talk to anyone you see; you
could dig up some very important information (provided, that is, you know what to do
with it!).
However, don't spend too much time in
the great outdoors; you want to be back in
the living room for the reading of the will.
Everyone will be gathered for this occasion,
and you have the opportunity now to pull
some fun stuff, although courtesy demands
you wait until after the will has been read.
Ok, once the will has been read and the
dust has settled, it's time to get the show on
the road. A little exhibition of some items
from the library ought to produce some
interesting results. Someone seems to be a
bit nervous, eh? Well, don't let that person
out of your sight!
Then again, there may be more here than
meets the eye! I wouldn't be surprised if the
person you're watching is up to something!
Now, how can we find out what that might
be? Hmmmm, well, as long as you're in
plain sight, probably nothing will happen.
Ah, but if you could hide somewhere....
Let's see, what would be a good place?

You need a spot where you can watch from,
without, of course, being seen. At the same
time, you don't want to be too far away from
the action, either. Now, you think about it,
and the right place ought to come to mind
after awhile.
Ok, now you're settled in, so be patient.
Remember, suspicious actions alone are not
enough! Let a little time go by, to be sure you
don't miss anything (timing is so important
here). Proper action will be rewarded with
some very interesting (not to say incriminating!) material.
Look it over carefully. The case seems to
get getting clearer, doesn't it? Now that you
have a better idea of the situation, you might
want to mosey on back to the living room.
Somewhere along the way, you should be
getting a lab report that will really heat
things up (what's that? What lab report? My
my, didn't you get your hands dirty before?
Better read this again from the beginning,
cause you missed something!).
Now, you are approaching the climax of
the investigation. I'll bet your new findings
are really going to come as a surprise to
some people! So, don't be selfish, share the
wealth. Got some interesting reactions, eh?
You should have by now almost all the
evidence you need, as well as a pretty good
idea of how the murder was committed and
who was involved. But, there is still a little
more to be done yet; you need just a tad
more proof to close the case. So, it might be
wise to slip out of the room and see what
happens.
This is the critical point of the game. How
you handle the events that follow will determine how successful you are in solving the
case. A partial success is possible, but
having the whole thing neatly wrapped up
is better, and you really don't want a second
murder, right?
Thus you must be careful now. Keep an
eye on your main suspect, and overlook
nothing. You'll have to move around a little,
but even if you lose sight of the suspect, you
should have an idea of that person's destination. Be patient, but don't wait too long
to make your arrest. Once everything is in
place, make your move.
Whew! The mystery is solved at last.
Agatha Christie was never like this! Looks
like "getting back to reality" isn't all it's
cracked up to be! Maybe a little trip into the
realms of fantasy again is what's needed.
Where to? Ah, I think I'll leave that as a surprise for next time. Until then, happy
adventuring!
Remember that if you need specific help
with an adventure game, you can reach me
in any of the following ways:
On CompuServe: GO GAM-310
On the Source: SMAIL to ST1030
By mail: Send a self-addressed, stamped
envelope, along with your questions to:
Scorpia
P.O. Box 338
Gracie Station
NY NY 10028
Copyright 1984 by Scorpia.

The GameSIG
Adventure Game
Conferences
by Scorpia
As you sit in front of your trusty computer, trudging through twisty little
passages all alike, or fighting it out with a
band of Orcs, have you ever thought "Gee,
I wish I could talk to the person who wrote
this game"? Getting in touch with most software authors could be thought of as an
adventure in itself. You could pick up the
phone, but it's likely you wouldn't get
through to the person you want. A letter
might be better, but game designers usually
have little time to answer fan mail. Yet, for
some game players, talking to the people
who write games is almost as easy as activating a modem.
CompuServe's Games Special Interest
Group (GameSIG) is the place where, among
other activities, adventure players from all
across the country get together to swap
hints, find out the latest information on new
games, and just chat about their favorite
adventures. It's also the place where
members have an opportunity that comes
only rarely to most game players: the chance
to talk to some of the biggest game designers
in the business.

LORD BRITISH
The evening of June 14th, 1984, there was
an air of excited anticipation on the SIG.
That night, the guest speaker was Lord
British, author the marvelous "Ultima"
series. As you might suspect, the conference
area was jammed with eager people, hoping
for the chance to talk to him. They were not
disappointed.
In the beginning, Lord British had the
floor to himself. To a hushed audience, he
gave some details about his current project,
Ultima IV. This one, he said, was going to
be bigger than any Ultima before it. Most
likely, it would cover at least both sides of
two diskettes, and would be far more complex than any game he had ever written.
Graphics would be greatly improved, and
the animation far superior to that of Ultima
III. The maps would have much more detail
in them, and monsters in combat would be
able to move individually now, where before
they all moved in synch with each other.
But this Ultima would not be one of mere

hack and slash; the very concept of the game
had changed. In previous Ultimas, there had
been an evil character to defeat. Now,
however, the goal would be different: personal development of the player-character.
To quote Lord British: "The object will be
to develop one of your characters into an
Avatar. This will take your players on a
journey of eight parts, where each part is
as complicated as any previous Ultima".
Wow! Eight games in one!
Having dropped this little bombshell,
Lord British went on to tell how transacting
with people and merchants in towns would
be much improved. Where before, most of
the "stock characters" said little beyond a
mere grunt, now they could carry on a full,
if brief, conversation. And it was here that
Lord British dropped his second bombshell.
There would be a lot of towns, and each
of them would need a lot of these "nonplayer characters". It would be a great help,
said Lord British, if the SIG members could
give him a hand with this chore. To that end,
he had written up a little sheet (with instructions) for everyone to fill out and send to
him. By completing this sheet, a person
would actually create a "non-player
character" for Ultima IV! Naturally, this
was a sensation! How often does one get to
take part in the creation of a major computer
game? While the members buzzed over this
little item, Lord British took a break (his
fingers were starting to come loose), and a
list of questioners was made (it was a looong
list!).
Throughout the rest of the evening, Lord
British fielded quite a few queries from inquisitive members. Most of the questions,
as you might expect, were about Ultima IV.
The SIG members were hungry for details,
and they wanted to know it all!
Lord B., however, kept a few things up his
sleeve. "I had best not tell directly of the
plot", he remarked, "for fear of telling too
much!". He also mentioned that parts of the
game changed day by day as he worked on
it. New ideas, new wrinkles, all sorts of neat
stuff occurred to him as he worked Ultima
IV. So, even if he told them anything now,
it might not be that way by the time the game
was finished.
Still, there were things he could talk about.
Ultima IV would be available by Christmas,
for a variety of machines. The Apple version would come first, to be soon followed
by Atari, C-64, IBM and MacIntosh. Music
lovers would be in for a treat: many new
musical scores were being planned for the
game, and a new synthesizer had been purchased to create the background music.
Not all questions were about Ultima IV,
of course. For example, one member
wanted to know if Ultima (any Ultima)
would ever have transferable characters, as
Wizardry did. It's hard to "say good-bye"
to characters developed over the course of
the game; players tend to become rather
fond of them.
While such transfers are not in the
foreseeable future, there is still hope: "When
I have perfected a role-playing system, and

use the computer fully, only then will I
branch out and make scenarios", replied
Lord British.
The questions continued far into the
night. Finally, as the clock approached one
A.M., the conference was regretfully
brought to a close. There were still so many
things to say, questions yet to be asked, but
it was time for Lord British to leave.
However, he promised to return for another
conference late in the fall, when the
workload on Ultima IV eased a bit.

MICHAEL BERLYN

The conference with Lord British was a
rousing success. And there was more to
come! One month later, on July 18th,
GameSIG members had the opportunity to
meet one of Infocom's top game designers,
Michael Berlyn, author of Suspended and
Infidel.
Once again, the conference area was
packed. All across the country, people were
glued to their terminals as Mike nonchalantly took the floor and began describing
how games were written at Infocom.
"We start with an idea", said Mike. "Lacking that, we go to Zayres, K-MART or
Macy's to shop for one....". With an idea
in mind, the background of the game is then
worked out. Once that's been done, the
details of the game are filled in.
As an example, Mike cited Zork I. "The
whole thing started with the white house.
There was no kitchen table, no bag smelling
of hot peppers, and DEFINITELY no garlic!
Those things were added after the environment. Once the environment was written,
and some objects added, the game was well
on its way".
Nor are all games written from beginning
to end; sometimes, an adventure starts at the
finish: "When I started to write Infidel,
there was no tent. As a matter of fact, I
started writing the thing at the ending. Yes,
I started writing at the last set of rooms".
From there Mike went on to tell of some
amusing things that can happen when
writing games under Infocom's sophisticated development language. He related an
incident from Starcross: "Give something
the wrong characteristics, like Dave Lebling did in Starcross, and you get a situation
like this: Next time you play, go into the lab
and type BEAM, OUT. Well, because Dave
had given the beam the quality of being a
person, it could be talked to and directed!"
Mistakes of this nature, said Mike, tend
to be made when you're working with about
a megabyte of code. In spite of intensive
debugging, some oddities do slip through.
Infocom knows about many of them, but
there are still a few zany things that can happen in these games. "Just try anything that
comes into your head.... anything that
sounds ridiculous. It may work!".
Regardless of these little slips, the
development language (called ZIL for Zork

Implementation Language", is remarkably
smart, and takes a great deal of the programming load off the shoulders of the game
writers. "The language doesn't make you do
tiring programming tasks like declaring
variables, it does that for you. It's also fairly
intelligent about the background universe.
For example, when I wrote Infidel, I didn't
have to 'program' what it meant to look
around a room. The game system
automatically knew what 'look' meant, and
how to do it. It also knew that if there was
no light there, that you couldn't see. It really impressed me when I first started working with it".
After explaining some more about the
rigorous testing procedures used on
Infocom games (and they go through A LOT of
testing!), there was a short break- Mike's
fingers were getting sore (a hazard of online
Conferences)- and the list of questioners was
made.
One of the first things everyone wanted
to know was: What's corning next? Mike
was prepared for this one, and mentioned
two games that should be coming out during the fall: Cutthroats, a murder mystery,
and Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy, an
adventure based on the book of the same
name. A sequel to Sorcerer (title currently
undecided) would be corning out eventually.
Other games were also in the works, but
Mike politely declined to give details on
them, except to say of one: "The only thing
we know for sure is that it is breaking every
rule ever written about adventuring".
Mike went on to remark that all of Infocorn's games are designed and written
strictly by in-house people; no outside submissions of any kind are accepted from
anyone (much to the disappointment of a
few budding programmers present). It does
simplify things for Infocom, since all their
writers/designers are salaried; there is no
provision for royalties in any form.
In answer to another question, Mike said
that he is essentially a self-taught programmer; he took a course in BASIC while in college, and learned the rest on his own. After
getting caught up in programming, he wrote
a game (Oo-Topos), and started a software
company of his own. He and his partners
in the venture did not quite see eye-to-eye,
and so Mike left to join Infocom. When
asked if there would ever be graphics in an
Infocom game, Mike was quite adamant
that there would never be any in an Infocom
adventure game. However, he did leave
open the possibility that someday, Infocom
might do something with graphics, other
than adventure games.
Finally, after many more questions, the
conference came to an end in the early morning hours. As before, no one really wanted
it to stop, but everyone was (a little) satisfied
to know that another conference would be
held later in the year.
So, Lord British in June, Michael Berlyn
in July. Could there, perhaps, be something
coming in August? The answer to that was
a resounding "Yes!", when the series of

special summer conferences closed out on
August 22nd with none other than Scott
Adams, of Adventure International (yes
Virginia, there really IS a Scott Adams!).

SCOTT ADAMS

Another crowd was waiting to hear the
man who got micro adventure gaming
started. "I'm credited", Scott told them,
"with writing the first microcomputer
adventure. This is true. Also, my company,
Adventure International, is now the oldest
software house I know of that has continually published to the retail market".
Scott then talked about his latest venture,
the Questprobe series. "Last year, AI and
Marvel Comics signed a 10-year license. We
will be publishing adventure games built
around all of Marvel's characters, including
Spiderman, Hulk, Fantastic Four, etc". He
went on to say that the first six have been
partially sub-licensed to Commodore for
distribution, and the first title in the series,
"Hulk", should be out some time in
September, with Spiderman to follow in
November.
All the games in this line will have fullscreen graphics. And, starting with the second Questprobe, they will have something
else: a full-sentence parser, which he called
SAGAPLUS. While Scott said that his parser
Continued on page 39

1

COSMIC BALANCE SHIT
DESIGN CONTEST

Computer Gaming World announces
it's SECOND ANNUAL COSMIC
BALANCE SHIP DESIGN CONTEST.
Design an unbeatable ship using
Strategic Simulation's Cosmic Balance
and win a trophy. Entries must be
postmarked by Dec. 7, 1984; in accord
with the following tournament rules:
1. One entry per person. CGW
reserves the right to publish all entries
in the magazine and/or in disk form.
Your entry disk should be labeled with
your name, address, telephone number,
the machine on which it runs, the tech
level of your entry, and the name of each
ship in your entry. The same information should appear on the disk jacket.
Include return postage if you want
your disk back.
2. A panel of three or more judges
will play each entry. Each judge will
use a ship or ships consistent with the

tournament guidelines. Your entry will
be played by the computer at level two
in solitaire play.
3. Each entry must be worth no more
than 250 victory points. Each game will
be played on Scenario Five: Dogfight.
There can be no more than four ships
per entry. Each ship must have a range
of one, and no ship can have a maximum speed greater than 32. No dreadnought can have more than 12 drives.
4. Each entry will play against each
judge once. The difference between the
entry's and the judge's victory points
will be recorded at the end of the game.
Each entry's score differentials against
all judges will be averaged. The entry
with the highest average score differential will be declared the winner of the
tournament.
After ten turns, if any entry warps
out or retreats to a range of more than
100 from the judge's ships, and if the

judge's ships do not pursue, then the
entry will not receive full credit for any
victory points recorded unless the entry suffered at least 25% damage. If the
entry suffered less than 25% damage
it will receive half credit for any victory points recorded. If the entry suffered zero damage then it will receive
zero credit for any victory points
recorded. The purpose of this rule is
to discourage ship designs which immediately retreat from the judge's ship
or ships, because each game with such
a design might last too long or might
end in a stalemate if the judge decides
not to pursue.
6. Send entries to COMPUTER
GAMING WORLD, P.O. Box 4566,
Anaheim, CA 92803-4566. Mark your
package "CGW SHIP DESIGN
CONTEST".
7. Winner will be announced in the
February 1985 issue.

It's a sad day in the offices of COMPUTER
GAMING WORLD, the mighty
SIPEOPATHS (pronounced
Sigh-Poeats)vcmpildhebtron
COMPUTER GAMING WORLD
BASEBALL LEAGUE and did not even
make it to the American League playoffs!
While compiling an overall record of 35-25,
the Sipeopaths, owned and managed by
CGW editor Russell Sipe, ended up a game
out of first at the end of the first half of the
season, and tied for first in the second half
only to lose a one game playoff. Team
Owner Sipe is now banking all his hopes on
his team in the CGWBL National League,
the Tehachapi Steamers.
Every thursday night this past baseball
season was CGWBL night as six
owner/managers piloted their teams in a 60
game season. The games were played using
SSI's Computer Baseball (CB). The
American League Division was make up of

teams that were created via a pre-season
draft conducted last April. The players of
the AL East and the two local teams (Angels
and Dodgers) were eligible in the draft.
The National League Division teams were
assembled via a Hi-Lo combination where
the best team in the NL by W/L percentage
was paired with the worst team in the NL;
the second best with the second worst, etc.
Each team owner selected one of the six
resulting combinations. From the 50 man
rosters created by the pairings, the owners
traded players for a set period of time. Finally rosters were cut down to 25 players and
the resulting teams became the six NL
teams. While the AL was a face-to-face
league, the NL was played with Computer
Casey coaching both sides.
The designer of CB, Charlie Merrow, and
the translator of the C-64 version of the
game, Roy Wagner, followed the league
closely and are making changes to future
editions of the game based on the stats the
league compiled and the observations of the
league owners. Sometime before the beginning of next baseball season SSI plans to
release a new improved CB that not only
will be more accurate, but will also include
such features as the ability to print out team
and individual leaders in a variety of batting and pitching categories; the ability to
set up a series of games to be played by the
computer; and the ability to change players
in the season statistical summaries

(something not possible with the current
utility Season Stat Complier available on
the Team Data Disk).
However, the most significant changes
will be in the quality of coaching by Computer Casey. The overwhelming consensus
is that Casey is a poor coach. When asked
about this problem, Charlie agreed saying
that in the original version of CB (i.e. the one

on the market now) there was precious little programming space left for programming the artificial intelligence of Casey. The
new version uses a number of machine
language routines that frees up programming space which will now go to developing
a better AI for Casey. One feature we suggest, and hope to see, is the ability to give
Casey general coaching instructions before
the game begins. For example you can tell

Casey to use the Hit & Run a lot, use it
moderately, or sparingly. In like manner
other coaching strategies can be designated.
The value of this, for those that prefer running games with Casey coaching is that
Casey can be adjusted to the style of play
most suited for a particular team. For example a power hitting team can be instructed
to use the running game sparingly so that
the "big hitters" get those extra full swings.
CGWBL is not the only CB league around.
There are several, but perhaps none is more
ambitious than that run by Mike White of
Wilmington Delaware. Mike already has
over 20 owners lined up for next season. In
Mike's league players can pick any team of
the past, although most of the teams selected
are from the 70's and 80's. If you are interested in Mike's league contact him at
3634 Silverside Rd. Wilmington, DE 19810.
Provided we get a "souped-up" Computer
Casey in the new version of CB, we are considering the possibility of running a Casey
Coached Hi-Lo League through CGW. After
team selection and a period of trading,
teams would be finalized. Games would be
run at CGW with weekly reports. Owners
would set lineups, pitching rotations, and
Play style (assuming the new CB allows it).
There would be a league fee in the $75 to
$100 range. Trophies to the winners. If this
is of interest to you, please drop us a line.
The number of responses will, in part, help
determine whether or not we run the league.

DISPATCHES
Insights From the
Strategy Game
Design Front

SEVEN CITIES OF GOLD
DESIGNER'S NOTES

Dan Bunten
of Ozark Softscape

It's great to be appreciated by the
people you respect. I have always felt
that the readers of Computer Gaming
World were especially attuned to
quality in their games selection. Well,
last issue you gave me and the rest of
Ozark Softscape a real thrill by voting
our games "M.U.L.E." and "Seven
Cities of Gold" numbers one and two
in the Reader Input Device (RID). The
approval of our efforts by the best
gamers in the field means more to us
than any number of rave reviews or
awards given by magazine editors.
Thanks. (Now, if only we could get to
the top of the "best seller lists" as
well!)

In the June '84 issue of CGW was a
review of Seven Cities that described
the play of the game very well.
However, that article succeeded in
prompting a number of "why did
you .... t" questions that I thought I
would answer in this column. In some
ways the design of Seven Cities was
more straight-forward than any game
we have done recently. Not since
"Cartels & Cutthroats" did we have a
game idea that required research
before we started working the game's
play experience. In fact, Seven Cities
generally followed the stages I
described in my Real World Gaming
column (CGW July '82 through March
'83 2.4 to 3.4) the process of simulation game design in great detail.
Rather than simply duplicate the approach covered in those issues, I
would like to describe Seven Cities in
terms of the development of the main
ideas instead of the design phases.
To begin the preparation for Seven
Cities by brother Bill and I read
almost a dozen books and researched
many more. Besides the chronicles of
the New World explorers, we investigated many diverse fields that
made up the background for the conquistadors. Information about such
things as ship design, navigation,
native American cultures and even
geology was collected to "fill out" our
picture of the Age of Exploration. For
us this part of game design is the most
fun. Bill and I are both avid readers
and love learning new things.
Research, therefore, is just a great excuse for spending weeks at a time
reading interesting stuff. (I know most
people wouldn't think reading history
was a lot of fun but our mom toilet
trained us early!)
The most striking aspect of the New
World the explorers found was its
size. An area many times the size of
Europe was suddenly available for exploitation. Over 16 million square
miles of land was sparsely settled by
primitive natives. Our design had to
first address the aspect of scale. We
wanted to represent the New World
with sufficient detail to give players a
sense of awe at its enormity. In addition the terrain varied widely. We
wanted to offer plains, mountains,

forests, swamps, rivers, lakes and a
variety of ocean depths. We also
thought it would be great to have
special features like lush prairies,
dark jungles, grand canyons, towering redwoods, and "lost cities". We
determined that six different levels of
native cultures were also needed
(from small tribes of poor
hunter/gathers to the cities of the
Incas.)
Thus, once we decided to represent
the area of the New World in a fair
amount of detail, we knew we had
found the crucial design constraints:
1)store enough data to represent the
world, 2)get the data back as needed
without disrupting the flow of the
game. We had to discover how to
compress the data to fit on the
smallest disk (Atari with 90K) and
how to read the data without irritating
pauses for loading. Through a combination of techniques we were able
to store 102,400 map points with 25
types of terrain at each point. To allow
continuous play while merging new
map data from the disk, we modified
the disk handlers on the Atari and
C-64 to do simultaneous processing.
(The Apple was fast enough not to
need this feature). Thus, our first decision painted us into a corner. Our only way out was to use technologies we
didn't have until we were forced to invent them. (I have talked to a number
of other game designers and this is a
common method for pushing the state
of the art). You decide you are going
to do something special then figure
out how!)
To give a sense of what the explorers faced when they headed west
into the unknown, we wanted to
create worlds that had never been
seen before. Jim Rushing wrote a random world generator that created
continental masses that varied from
island chains to large double continents with a connecting isthmus.
The generator created mountains,
river valleys and other terrain features
according to geologic rules and then
populated the land using a cultural
dissemination model. Thus, with our
"World Maker" you can't recognize
major land features and head straight
for the Aztecs in Mexico or the Incas

in Peru. You have to search for the
high cultures of the New World! In addition we made it possible that the Incas could be as advanced as the
Japanese of that same era. If the land
masses of the New World could be different than was historically the case,
so could the technology level of its inhabitants. So, not only do you not
know where the high civilizations are
but you don't even know who they
are!
The specification of the world was
our first design decision but equally
important was the element of native
interaction. Historically, in their encounters with natives, the Spanish
would use numerous tricks to amaze
and intimidate the "savages". If food
and gold was not provided willingly,
the conquistadors would usually
resort to violence. The combination of
armor, steel weapons, horses, cannons and intricate tactics were
enough to demoralize native
defenders armed with wood and
stone. Cortez with a couple of hundred men was able to run armies of
several thousand from the battlefield.
The conquest of both the Aztecs and
the Incas was preceded by kidnapping the king and later killing him.
But all encounters with the natives
weren't violent. Occasionally, missionaries accompanying the expedition would convince the conquistador
to use more humane methods. Gold
was not nearly as valuable to native
Americans as steel knives, woven
cloth and even trinkets in some cases.
Trading was always a possibility and
with fair treatment the natives would
often "convert" to Christianity and
European ways. However, even the
best intentions were often useless in
the face of the language barrier. Many
encounters between natives and
Spaniards became violent because of
miscues. Beyond language difficulties
there were also cultural and moral differences. When Montezuma proudly
showed Cortez the altars used in
human sacrifice, Cortez was unable to
contain his revulsion. On the other
hand the natives (who bathed frequently) could not stand the smell of
the Europeans.
We searched for a reasonably simple game mechanic that would provide

at least the major historical options
listed above. We stumbled on to it
after seeing an arcade game a friend
was working on. To simulate "body
language" we used the pace of movement. The three paces used when
moving on the map would relate to
postures when dealing with natives.
"Cautious" would mean peaceful,
"moderate" would imply a neutral
stance and "reckless" would be overtly hostile. We decided to use a single
conquistador character to represent
the whole expedition with up to nine
natives moving around him. Any time
the conquistador is standing still the
player can call for his options by
pressing the joystick button. In this
way we could provide the choices we
wanted to have, namely: "offer a gift",
"amaze the natives" and ask to
"trade". Each of these options would
have different effects depending on
the posture (pace) chosen, the location
in the village and the type of natives
you are confronting. For instance,
"amaze the natives" will pacify a
hostile tribe if you are not threatening
them with your sword; but if you are,
then mass destruction will result.
Combinations of actions are also
significant. If you approach the
village chief peacefully and "amaze
the natives" followed by "offer a gift"
several times, the chief will be very
grateful. In general we felt that the arcade aspect of the native interactions
was the perfect way to add excitement
to the game while still providing the
variety of options and the subtlety we
wanted.
The next point of the design dealt
with providing enough commodities
to give reasonable approximations of
the "trade-offs" involved in forming
and maintaining expeditions. At the
same time, however, we wanted to
keep the game very simple and
playable. We settled on men, food,
trade goods, gold and ships as the only "things" the player needed to worry
with. Nonetheless, attempting to keep
track of these five items provided
enough pressure on the player. You
can get a taste of the fear the explorers
felt as their food was exhausted and
the expedition died off. Or you can experience the frustration of returning
from a profitable land excursion to

find that your ships have fled because
you were gone too long and didn't
leave any men and food aboard.
The final design step was to turn
Alan Watson, our artist/programmer,
loose to come up with all the beautiful
graphics he could squeeze into a nearly full program. His European landscape and the "postage stamp" pictures on the transfer menus were true
masterpieces considering what
memory he had to work with.
Again let me say thanks to those of
you who have bought Seven Cities
and promoted it so well. We are currently designing our next product and
hope it will be as well received. Please
contact me through CGW or Electronic Arts if you have any comments
about game design or this column. I
can always use more help!
Dan Bunten is the author of COMPUTER QUARTERBACK, CARTELS
& CUTTHROATS, and CYTRON
MASTERS all available from Strategic
Simulations. He is the lead designer of
the Ozark Softscape group that wrote
M.U.L.E. and SEVEN CITIES OF
GOLD both available from Electronic
Arts.

Unpredictability

The Computer
As Opponent
by Charlie Merrow

No one wants to play against an opponent who makes the
same plays in the same situation every time. So random
number generators are used to make computer opponents
less predictable. But purely random plays are not appropriate to most situations, so various weighting schemes
are often employed to make certain "better" decisions are
more likely than others. Most recent war games are good
at making unpredictable plays when it is to their advantage
to do so. Some of the earlier games, however, had such fundamental flaws as failing to randomize the starting value
for the random number generator. One otherwise good
game which suffers from a limited unpredictability problem is Avalon Hill's MIDWAY CAMPAIGN (the northernmost group of Japanese ships are ALWAYS the
carriers!).

Adjustable Skill Levels
Ed.—Charlie's COMPUTER BASEBALL (see elsewhere in
this issue) and FIGHTER COMMAND from SSI are two
favorites around the offices of CGW. We are pleased to share
with you some of his insights on the computer as player.
When you are looking around for a gaming opponent and
there is nobody around, your friendly computer is ready,
willing, and increasingly more able to take you on. Computers as opponents in strategy games have made great
strides in the past several years. How good are they today?
Well, let's take a look at what constitutes a good computer
gaming opponent, and in so doing, see just how far up the
evolutionary ladder silicon mentality has come.

Competence
The ability to play a reasonable, competent game is paramount for any solitaire opponent. What you really want is
a style of play which makes you forget you're playing a
computer. You would like to feel that you can "outsmart"
this mindless robot, but not too easily!
Computers play most strategy games with a pretty fair
tactical ability but only a marginal strategic competence.
Chess programs can find "pretty" two-to-three move mates
or middle game combinations, but can't seem to decide
whether they should be conducting a strategic attack on a
backward pawn or defending against an opponent's queenside onslaught. In games like Gomoku or Reversi (Othello),
where tactics dominate, computers have become almost
unbeatable components.
Computers as wargame opponents usually can get just
the right forces on just the right hexes for each individual
battle, but have a hard time choosing which battles to fight.
Hardly any programs look at what their opponent has done
the past few moves to try and anticipate what he might do
on his next move — something human players do almost
subconsciously. Most programs play much better defensively than they do offensively, since more decision-making
and initiative-taking normally are required on offense. Two
games which do a fairly good job of both making strategic
decisions and playing offense are FIGHTER COMMAND
and GEOPOLITIQUE 1990 by Strategic Simulations Inc.
(SSI).

No one wants to be crushed and demoralized by a computer opponent while first learning a game. Neither do you
want a pushover for an opponent once you have gotten to
be good. Thus, variable skill levels for solitaire opponents
are almost a necessity for games of any significant degree
of complexity.
Most recent computer wargames have several solitaire
skill levels to choose from in the start-up menu. If no selectable skill levels are available, then a fairly simple way to
provide variable skill levels in some games is to give the
computer more or better players. Handicapping is another
method which may work in some games, such as Go or
Chess.

Honesty
It's important that the methods used to obtain increased skill by the computer are reasonable and fair. There are
few things more frustrating than a dishonest computer!
Some of the more common above board techniques
employed to improve skill levels are: use of more options
in making moves, consideration of more factors in
decision-making, and more accurate intelligence (military
variety) for the computer relative to the human player. All
of these methods, along with better (more experienced)
units, were used in varying the solitaire levels in Fighter
Command.

Ability to Learn or Adapt
The one area where there is tremendous room for improvement in computer game-playing ability is in the ability to learn a game by playing it, or to adapt to the opponent's style of play. Artificial intelligence is a field which
is making great strides toward the creation of computer
programs which have these characteristics. But, the
memory and processing speed requirements are generally quite large for games of any real complexity, thus making them unsuitable for most microcomputer wargames.
One recent exception to this rule is the board game FORTRESS from SSI. This game, which bears a similarity to Go
and Reversi, also shares their characteristics of being very
simple in concept but very difficult to master. However, the
computer can learn the game by playing against you or
Continued on page 40

players' moves, Russ also hosts online conferences on CompuServe with nationallyknown Dippy figures. Doug lives in Menlo
Park, California, and is a hydrologist for an
engineering consulting firm. His computer
is the Osborne. Here are some excerpts from
the interview:
CGW: How long have you been involved
in the Diplomacy hobby?
Russell Sipe (RS): I bought my first
Diplomacy game in 1977, read the rules, got
some friends together, and I have been
involved ever since. I played FTF until 1981
when I began to GM some local
play-bhonegms.TItardhePBEM
games in February, 1983.

TELE-GAMING
DIPLOMACY
AND
ELECTRONIC MAIL
Patricia Fitzgibbons

As many of you know, Diplomacy is a
board game published by Avalon Hill Game
Company. In "Dippy" games, seven players
plot, scheme, and compete against each
other for control of pre-World War I Europe.
Plans are made, alliances and deals are
negotiated, and orders are submitted to a
"GameMaster" (GM) who adjudicates
moves. If this sounds straight-forward and
simple, any Dippy fan will swiftly assure
you that it is not.
Diplomacy is a game of wits and witticisms. In THE PLAYBOY WINNER'S
GUIDE TO BOARD GAMES, Jon Freeman
elaborates: "It is definitely a gamer's game.
The aficionado finds in its freedom of
action, lack of luck, and multiplicity of
minds working at cross-purposes the
ultimate challenge."
Although most Dippy games are played
face-to-face (FTF), and many others by surface mail (PBM) or telephone (PBP),
Diplomacy has now taken hold online.
Subscribers to telecommunications services
such as CompuServe, The Source, and
GameMaster have been participating in a
number of play-by- electronic-mail (PBEM)
games. Several bulletin board systems also
offer PBEM to their callers (see the list of
telephone and modem numbers at the end
of this column).
To discover the history and modus
operandi of this exciting new form of
Diplomacy, I recently interviewed two
online pioneers: Russell Sipe and Doug
Beyerlein. Russ lives in Anaheim, California, and is the editor and publisher of CGW.
Using his Apple computer and a Diplomacy
adjudication program to adjudicate his

Doug Beyerlein (DB): I first discovered
Diplomacy in a wargaming face-to-face
gathering on 11 November 1965, and between 1965 and 1970 I played over 100 FTF
games. I have been playing Diplomacy by
mail since 1966.
CGW: What made you decide to develop
online Diplomacy?
RS: That's a good question. I guess I just
saw that electronic mail was ideally suited
as a vehicle to play Diplomacy, so I just
posted some messages and finally got
enough players together to start my first
game.
DB: Russell Sipe. It is all his fault.

people. So I have not gone out of my way
to develop PBEM there, although I certainly
am not opposed to those games.
CGW: Do you now prefer PBEM to FTF?
RS: Well, that is sort of like saying do I
prefer blue over red. I like both. Each offers
something the other doesn't. Each has
value. Some will choose one or the other.
In addition to publishing THE ARMCHAIR
DIPLOMAT (TAD), an online magazine for
PBEM Dippy, I also am the tournament
director for several Diplomacy tournaments
held in Southern California each year (FTF,
of course).
DB: When I have the time I enjoy FTF
most. The key, though, regardless of the
medium is getting seven top players
together. That is the type of Diplomacy
game I enjoy most.
CGW: How many PBEM games have you
run so far?
RS: We have just started our 8th game on
CompuServe; we have had two on The
Source. So TAD has, or is, covering 10
games. I was/am GM in 7 of those games.
DB: I am currently GM'ing two games on
CompuServe with 13 active players. I also
run a postal newsletter (' zine) titled
EFGIART and I GM two games there.
CGW: Are we talking about 7 players for
each of the 10 online games?
RS: Yes, 7 players per game, and since it
is common over the course of time for one
or more players to withdraw from a game,
the replacement players that are brought in
bring the average number of people who
participate in each game up to 9 or 10.
CGW: Where do your players live?

CGW: Which services have you used to
run games?
RS: I began on The Source then expanded
to CompuServe. CompuServe turned out to
be a much better system for what I was doing, therefore I began to put more emphasis
there. We have a Dippy PBEM base on CompuServe's GameSIG, so GameSIG became
the national rallying point of PBEM
Diplomacy.
DB: Russ recommended CompuServe as
the best online service, so that's where I
started.
CGW: Have you tried playing Dippy via
any BBSs?
RS: No, I have not, although I have heard
about them. There is a natural fear I have
about the BBS games, and that is that they
tend to be regional and this is one of the
things that could make the games irregular
according to the Diplomacy game rating

DB: Everywhere. The players in the
CompuServe games are scattered throughout the U.S. The players in EFGIART
include one in West Germany and another
in Japan. Diplomacy is a world-wide hobby.
CGW: Have you had a problem with
"disappearances" in PBEM?
RS: It has occurred, but I would not call
it a nagging problem. Actually, our players
tend to be more dependable than PBM
players. A PBM Dippy game will last 2-4
years (that's a long time to maintain interest
in a single game). PBEM games, since they
are done by electronic mail, can be played
with much shorter deadlines between
moves. The average PBEM game lasts 6-9
months.
CGW: Have you experienced any "nagging problems" in PBEM? RS: Not in playing the game. The nagging problem from the
very first has been that some reactionaries
Continued on page 39

called Zerks have escaped from their
machine. They run around the premises of
the Spare Change Arcade swiping tokens
out of token machines and popping them
into their piggy bank so they can retire. As
the arcade owner you want to keep the Zerks
in your arcade.
To do that, you fill up a bin with at least
10 tokens before the Zerks get five tokens
in their piggy bank. This gains you entry to
a Zerk Show. Entering the Zerk show
empties the Zerk's piggy bank, plus it puts
you closer to collecting money bags. This
and other actions earn you points. The
average, over-active imagination of a game
designer probably would have stopped here
and said that the object of the game is to
collect money bags and score high points.
SCA designers went a step further.

Atari
Playfield

David Stone

When the complete history of the arcadetype home computer game is written, the
record will undoubtedly show that as game
designers ran out of new animated
characters to "move and shoot" or to "chase
and be chased", they turned to nonsense —
games with silly themes and whimsical
characters achieving absurd objectives.
Spare Change Arcade, Gumball, and Drol
by Broderbund Software, and Quest for
Tires by Sierra On-Line are not necessarily
the craziest of the crop, but are good
representatives of NONSENSE games.

Spare Change

The high-quality of nonsense in Spare
Change Arcade (SCA) is evident from the
scenario: two animated arcade characters

After collecting ten money bags, you are
rewarded with a unique Zerk cartoon. A
Zerk cartoon is a five to ten second animated
Chaplinesque sight gag starring the Zerks
and the arcade owner. For example, in the
cartoon "The Kick Back" a Zerk steals a
token from a bin and is chased across the
screen only to be blocked by the owner with
folded arms. The Zerk pauses then turns
and drop kicks the token back into the bin.
Then, it's back to the arcade.
You continue to collect different cartoons
with names like "The Squabble", "The
Assist", and "The Collision". Eventually,
you are allowed to select the cartoon of your
choice from your collection. So, the object
of SCA is not just to score high but to collect Zerk Cartoons. High scores are saved
to disk, but not how many cartoons you collected or to what level you made it.
Now, does Spare Change sound nonsensical? Well, it is. But it is also a lot of fun
to play.
As zany as the premise of SCA is, the
feature that makes it read high on the funmeter is the Zerks. They have personalities.
The Zerks furiously jump up and down
when you snatch a token from them. When
you drop a token in the juke box music plays
and the Zerks stop their token-stealing
antics, run down to the juke box and dance!
(This gives you a few moments to work on
filling your bin.) Inserting tokens in the pay
phone or popcorn machine (at higher levels)
has a similar effect on the Zerks. I nominate
Zerks for an Oscar for "Best Performance
by Animated Characters in an Arcade-Style
Home Computer Game".
An additional feature that recommends
SCA is that you can go to a special screen
and custom tailor seven different features
to determine how tough a game the Zerks
play.
In sum, SCA is an exceptionally good
game because it has increasing levels of difficulty, strategy is required to outwit the
Zerks, and you are given rewards (the cartoons) for mastering each level.

Gumball

Gumball is an amusing variation on the
"pie assembly line gone mad" theme. You
start in the Gumball Factory as a lowly
worker. Your job: sort gumballs according
to color by opening and closing production
line gates and move colored gumball bins
left and right to catch the gumballs as they
come off the line. Then, empty the bins in
the shipping area to get credit. Meet your
quota before the end of the work day and
you advance to the next level — where the
day is just as long but the quota twice as
high!
After the play screen boots you are
immediately struck by the amount of color
and movement on the screen. Like a Rube
Goldberg contraption, the conveyor belts
rumble along, wheels turn, sparks fly, and
the eight o'clock whistle signals the start of
another's day work. Your bins slowly roll
into view beneath the production line. First
one gumball enters the works. You begin
pressing the joystick button — opening and
closing the routing gates. One press reverses
all gate positions, opening and closing tracts
for the gumballs to follow. Suddenly,
another gumball enters, then another, then
another. Things get frantic fast!
If you catch a gumball in the wrong colored bin, Mr. Nitpicker marches onto the
screen, shakes his fists furiously, then
stamps over to the bin and empties it. All
the gumballs you have collected in that bin
come tumbling out. As if that wasn't bad
enough, the clock relentlessly continues its
count down to quitting time. You may find
yourself shouting at Nitpicker, "Hurry
uuuup!!" so you can get back to work and
meet your quota.
Like Spare Change Arcade, Gumball has
several simultaneous objectives: get promoted, get a high score, and advance to the
next level. Points are earned by maneuvers
such as correctly sorting gumballs, completing levels, and (at higher levels) diffusing bombs. After successfully meeting your
quota, you are rewarded by seeing your
character (who is unseen during the action
of the game) leave the factory and walk
to his home. The fun here is that the home
gets bigger each time — reflecting your
affluence.
Despite your promotion to supervisor,
foreman, and so on, after each level, you
keep the same ol' job: sorting gumballs. At
each new level the configuration of the pro-

duction line remains the same, but the
number of bins you have to fill increases.
Plus, their maneuvering characteristics
change. At some levels the bins on the far
right cannot be moved under certain drop
chutes to catch the gumballs.
After level four, the gumball factory goes
from the silly to the absurd. It seems that
some crazy dental assistants have packed
some gumballs with TNT. When these
jewels enter the line you must shut down
production and disarm them. Frankly, just
getting to this level is so tough that you may
never have to worry about the big bang.
Gumball is fun for many of the same
reasons as Spare Change Arcade: it has
levels of increasing difficulty, it rewards you
for mastering each level, and it requires
some amount of strategy as well as timing
to open and close the gates to fill the bins
and meet your quota.

Quest for Tires

Earlier this year, Sierra On-Line released
Quest for Tires (QFT) based on the
characters from the popular comic strip
"B.C.". In this animated version you guide
a Neanderthal unicyclist across prehistoric
hills and valleys past various terrain
obstacles to save "Cute Chick".
As the screen scrolls automatically right
to left, you move your joystick up to jump
the unicycle over holes, rocks and rolling
stones. And, you move it down to avoid
things like low hanging branches.
Of course, the whole notion of a caveman
cruising across the countryside on a stone
unicycle is nonsense. But like so many other
nonsensical games, QFT is fun to play.
One of the game's "nonsense" highlights
is the encounter at turtle pond. On one side
of the pond is "Fat Chick" wielding a club,
ready to clobber you. You must wait for her
to raise her club and for all four of the turtles
to surface simultaneously in order to skip
safely across the pond. Another "nonsense"
highlight is when you catch on to the ankles
of a bird in order to be carried across a
deadly pit.
The setting for all this nonsense is well
animated. Clouds, distant mountains, and
foreground each move by at a different rate.
Also well-animated is the unicycle crash:
the wheel breaks loose, crushes the rider,
then bounces off screen.
One slightly annoying feature of the game
is that after a crash, the next turn starts
without the player signaling that he is ready.

Several times I crashed simply because I did
not realize until too late that my turn had
begun and my unicycle was off and rolling
again. Finally, QFT requires far more timing than strategy and, rather than levels of
play, it offers new obstacles to overcome on
the way to the rescue. Still, it is fun to play.

Drol

Drol is a good nominee for the "Best
Animated Arcade-type Game in the
Whimsical Category." The game is made up
of four, very long platforms (like a cutaway
view of a four-story building) that smoothly
scroll horizontally left or right for several
screen lengths.
In Drol you control a space-suited
character who looks a lot like R2D2. He is
equipped with rollers on his feet and a
rocket back-pack that allows him to hoover
a few feet above the ground. He rolls and
flys about, feet hanging down, and rotates
(not just flips) left or right.
Your objective is to get past a series of
crazy characters to rescue a little girl and
her pet lizard, a propeller-beanied little boy
and his pet alligator (equipped with a rocket
backpack), and their mom. After saving all
three the action stops and you are treated
to a remarkably well-animated scene of the
girl, the boy, and mom re-uniting.
Thwarting your rescue efforts is the
craziest cast of characters you are likely to
encounter in a home computer game:
bouncing scorpions and snakes, hopping
fatso's, twirling knives, honking vacuum
cleaners, a witch doctor, man-eating plants,
flying turkeys, and more! In addition to
the cartoon treat for saving the family, you
get points for blasting members of this
menagerie.
Drol was originally written for the Apple,
so it doesn't take full advantage of the Atari's
color capabilities. However, the high quality
of the animation, the cleverness of the
animated foes, and the nonsense of the
theme, all make Drol well-worth the money.

Conclusion
Arcade games with nonsense themes and
silly characters will subside and die off just
as surely as have the ones that required you
to "move and shoot" or to "chase and be
chased". However, just as surely as there
will always be a market for classic Walt
Disney animation, there will also always be
a market for well done nonsense arcadetype games.

SUNDOG: A Review
by Ken RyaII

BASIC INFORMATION
Name:
Type:
System:
Price:
Author:
Publisher:

Sundog
Space Adventure
Apple II
$40.00
Bruce Webster
FTL Games
San Diego, CA

The plot behind this science fiction
adventure is fairly simple. You are
given a star freighter, the Sundog,
and sent on a scavenger hunt across
space; rounding up supplies and settlers for a new colony. This, however,
is really just a good excuse to use a
remarkable and innovative game system to wander through an amazing
collection of 12 star systems, 18
planets, and over 50 different cities.
In fact, playing Sundog is so enjoyable, that is it easy to forget about the
mission. The game's most outstanding feature is a system of icons,
menus, and windows similar to those
on a Macintosh. These "Zoom

Action Graphics" let you worry
about playing the game instead of
typing in commands. Sundog is
played entirely with a joystick, simply by pointing to items in windows
that pop up during play.
Whenever your character reaches
a significant location, a window
appears with a detailed depiction of
that area. It might be the ship's
storage locker, the interior of a
building, or the scene of an encounter on the street outside. You
can then select options from a menu
or manipulate icons shown in the
window. The options might involve
piloting the ship, talking to people in
bars, or making a withdrawal from

a bank. The icons represent everything from food to spare parts for the
ship.
This system lets you do many
detailed and varied things while
avoiding confusion and inconsistency. With it, you can pilot the Sundog to other star systems, explore
cities, drive across continents, and
make deals on trade goods; all without touching the keyboard.
Trading is your main means of support. Just operating the Sundog is
expensive, and as the colony doesn't
reward you for bringing them supplies, you will have to make money
on the side. Goods bought in one
system can often be sold in another
for enormous profit; the trick is
knowing what is a good deal and
where things are in demand. Some
deals are fairly obvious. Taking furs
to the planet Snowball is usually a
sure thing, but markets fluctuate and
have to be learned through experience. There is no "blue book" value
for Class C Droids. Learning the
trading business involves a lot of
traveling around to different
markets, pricing goods and checking
availability.
Along the way, pirates often attack
and try to force you to give up your
cargo. You can then switch on the
Sundog's tactical display and, if
everything is working, control the
ship's lasers, guns, shields and radio.
Ship-to-ship combat is in 3-D, and
basically involves changing the Sundog's heading until the pirate is first
on the view screen, then lined up in
a set of crosshairs. There are some
nice visual aids to help with this, and
a display showing the amount of
damage the pirate has taken.
The Sundog also has a defensive
shield system that offers some protection from attacks. Shields are
reduced and occasionally knocked
down by enemy fire, but gradually
regain strength between hits. The
problem with both the offensive and
defensive systems on the Sundog is
that they guzzle fuel at an alarming
rate. If you raise the shields and
charge up the guns you could blast
pirates all day. You can't, however,
because your tanks will soon be dry
and a ship with no fuel can neither
move, fire, or defend itself. Keep

moving. It is better to land slightly
damaged at a planet than to end up
stranded in space. A distress signal
will sometimes bring additional fuel
from the nearest planet, but it will
usually arrive too late.
If you wish to avoid combat
altogether, you can jettison your
cargo to the pirates or simply not
carry any at all. This is safe, but not
very productive. However you
decide to handle them, pirates are an
enormous nuisance. The profits from
a successful trading run can vanish
after you repair damage from pirate
attacks. As you move around the Sundog, windows will pop up representing storage rooms and repair
bays. Each of the ship's major
systems has a repair bay, with icons
representing various parts. Entering
a repair bay is much like popping the
hood on your car. Each part is in a
specific place and will only work in
that place. Missing or damaged parts
will usually not cripple a system but
will reduce its efficiency and increase
its fuel consumption. Like most
things in the game, repairing the ship
is colorful, detailed and absorbing.
Each of the ship's systems require
specific parts, which must be found,
purchased, then hauled back to the
Sundog to be installed in the damaged
system's repair bay. It pays to keep
the Sundog "in tune" by keeping the
bays full of the right parts. Some parts
can be swapped from one bay to
another, allowing an industrious
player to cannibalize some systems
in order to get others working. One
part, a shunt, is inexpensive and can
be fitted in most part's positions. It
won't work as efficiently as the
original, but can be used as a sort of
"band-aid" until an actual replacement can be found.
All the parts, however, are not
available on every planet, so it's a
good idea to carry around spares in
the ship's locker. Then you can rummage around for a spare part to stick
in the engines after an attack leaves
you stranded in deep space. On some
planets you can find special parts
that will enhance one of the Sundog's
systems. These are quite handy, but
usually expensive and easily
damaged.

Ship's parts are not the only details
you have to attend to during a game.
After generating a character you
have to keep him fed, healthy, and
rested. The hints in the rulebook
could have come from a mother,
"Remember to rest, get plenty of
food, and take care of your health if
you get hurt." You can have up to
eight games in progress on the Sundog disk and any game can be saved
at intervals in case of disaster.
While all the exploring, fighting
and profiteering is fun, the object of
the game is to bring home a shopping
list of supplies to the new colony.
This proceeds through nine phases,
each of which has a list of required
items. These include the future inhabitants; cryogenically frozen, and
scattered around the planets in
warehouses.
This aspect of Sundog is unusual
and enjoyable. Instead of destroying
something, killing someone, or
smashing an evil empire, you construct a new colony. After all the
shooting is over, and all your money
is counted, you still have to bring
home the goods. You are working for
someone else, not to fatten a purse or
point total.
While playing, you start to feel as
if you are actually interacting with a
real environment, not wandering
over a plywood and paper movie set.
Most activities have some resemblance to a real experience. The
banks operate like automatic teller
machines, the bartenders get angry
if you waste their time, and beggars

call you names if you don't give them
anything. And, in order to buy rare
or unusual items you will want to
meet with a stranger, perhaps in a
secluded booth in a bar, to discuss
terms. Even getting robbed is very
convincing. Sometimes out on the
street you will suddenly be surrounded by thugs who want all your
money. You can either hand it over
or try to fight. In the latter case running is usually more effective than
trying to out-shoot six thugs. Better
yet; lower the stakes and don't carry
much cash.
In most adventure games, it is easy
to find the limitations imposed by the
scenario. In Sundog, it is easy to
imagine doing anything at any time.
Although all your immediate options
are clearly laid out, this does not
mean that strategies are at all obvious. Broader options, those beyond
your immediate surroundings, are
discovered only through careful
thought and experience. The game is
simply so huge in scope that
strategies are naturally varied and
complex.
While the plot is enjoyable, the real
star is the game system. This game
sets a new standard for sophistication, complexity, and ease of play. It
is for anyone who would like to exercise their skills as a starship pilot,
interstellar trader, or warp engine
mechanic instead of testing their
typing skill or reaction time. Sundog
is everything a great game should be;
it is immersed in detail, its strategies
are complex, and playing it is simple.

11011 PROCTOR

!MILS WEST

the
learning
game

There are a number of strategy games on the market
which simulate business or economic competition. Here
is a new one from SSI that is different. All of the others I've
seen, whether stock market, real estate or venture capital
games, are modern. The lessons they teach can be applied
to today's world. Many, in fact, are used in classes on
business.
RAILS WEST is a fascinating simulation of the
economic conditions of 100 years ago and belongs more
in a class on American History than on business. The
railroads were the very first large American corporations
and the conditions which allowed their formation were

unique. Never again will the U.S. Government give
tremendous amounts of public land as an incentive to
private enterprise. Nor would today's venture capitalist
feel comfortable loaning a fortune to build a railroad.
Today, the vast network of steel rails that made possible the growth of our country seems to have served its purpose. The last 40 years have seen abandonment, merger,
and consolidation. RAILS WEST is set in the period 1870
to 1900, thirty years that saw the construction of almost
every major line west of the Mississippi.
Victory Conditions
It was the Age of the Moguls. Some were Empire
Builders and some were Robber Barons. The former were
in love with Railroads and Progress, the latter in love with
money. The game allows you to be either. There can be as
many as three winners: the player with the best transcontinental railway, the player with the largest personal fortune, and an overall winner which is a combination of the
two. Usually, the overall winner will also be one of the other
two but it is possible for a player who finishes second in
both categories to take top prize.
This double victory condition creates much of the tension in the game. You represent your own interests but you
also control one or more railroads. It is easy to milk the RR
coffers to add to your personal wealth and it is likewise easy
to impoverish yourself to build up the RR. You can sell
stocks and bonds to the public to raise money, but only by
giving up some portion of your control over the line and
leaving yourself more vulnerable to other players. It is
tricky to find the right balance that will maximize the worth
of both at the end of the game.
Obviously, it makes a difference whether the end of the
game is 10 years away or 30 years away. You can start
either in the year 1870 or in 1890. The game suggests that
you stop in 1900, but you can really stop whenever you
want. If the players know exactly when the game will end,
it causes an unrealistic halt in all building near the end of
the game. A popular variation here is to agree to stop the
game at some point between 1902 and 1912 based on the
roll of two dice. After each yearly turn, the game ends if the
total on the dice is less than or equal to the last two digits
of the year.
The Routes
All play takes place on a map of the U.S. extending from
the Mississippi River to the Pacific Coast. All of the routes
on which a railroad can be built are fixed and some have
already been built. The rest have been surveyed and the
Government will charter them to any player willing to promise to build a railroad; first come, first served. Of course,
you have to fulfill that promise within a specified period
of time or lose the charter.
In 1870, very few of the possible routes have been built.
Most of those that have are around Chicago, except for the
first transcontinental line of the Union Pacific and Central
Pacific, which was completed in 1869. Under these conditions, the game seems to focus on building large, healthy
RR's. The winner will be the player who can finance the
expensive building process at the lowest cost. This means
borrowing at favorable interest rates and managing cash

flow through the various depressions and booms.
If the game starts in 1890, almost all of the lines have been
built and the character of the game is different. Now the
action centers around buying and selling stocks and
bonds—fighting for control of the best RR's, looking to pick
up bankrupt RR'S at bargain prices, and raising dividend
rates to transfer some of the RR profits back to your personal account.
The Play
There can be as many as eight players in RAILS WEST.
Of these eight as many as four can be controlled by the computer. There are also four levels of difficulty which are well
implemented, with level four being a challenge for beginners but not for experienced players. To start, you indicate
the number of players, select a start date and whether you
want a historical setup or a random one.
The players take turns performing operations. At the
earliest level, all human players take their turn before any
computer-controlled player. At the two hardest levels, it's
just the reverse. At level three, there is no discrimination
between human and computer.
The amount a player can accomplish in one turn (year)
is limited by Action Points, of which you get five to eleven
per turn. The Operations menu lists nine activities which
use up one point each time they are selected. These
include—as you might expect—buying and selling stocks
and bonds, and applying for and repaying loans. You can
also start a new railroad corporation, make an attempt to
control an existing one in which you own stock, or "switch
hats" to perform some action on behalf of a RR which you
control. There are also three choices on the menu which
do not use action points—these allow you to review current
information on prices, routes and railroads.
When you act on behalf of a railroad, you do many of the
same actions. These also use up your action points;
especially merging with another line, which takes three.
Many times you can favorably affect the price of a stock or
bond by selling them in several small quantities instead of
one big one. This approach also uses up action points
rapidly. Starting a new RR normally takes 3 or 4 action
points too. Not only must you start the company, but you
should charter a line, acquire some capital, and begin
building.

Conclusions
RAILS WEST is an excellent game but it is not for
everybody. It can be exciting, but only if the players understand the complex financial situation. You need to develop
a sense of timing to know when to convert debt from loans
to bonds, or when to raise dividend rates.
It is difficult to recover from early mistakes. Thus it will
take several games before you feel competitive with the
easiest computer opponents and games are not short. It will
take 20 to 30 minutes per turn at first, which means even
the shortest five year scenario will run two to three hours.
Much of your time will be spent pouring over a bewildering amount of data. I strongly recommend that you print
everything on the printer (all reports can be directed to
printer or screen) to make this easier.
There is an interesting side issue here. As computer
simulation games become more realistic (complex), there
is more need for the same kind of tools that we use to
analyze the situations which are being simulated. I was
very tempted to use VisiCalc or Lotus 1-2-3 to figure out
what was going on in RAILS WEST. Which game will be
the first to include a planning aid, or at least the ability to
progams? load data into one of the popular electronic spreadsheet
RAILS WEST has the high-quality components one expects from SSI. It is lots of fun when all of the players are
humans, even if they're inexperienced. It would make an
excellent classroom exercise in the hands of a competent
teacher.

and sold a couple hundred thousand copies
because everyone got to fly the corporate
plane. So, if someone came out with a corporate wargame.... (laughter drowned out
his discussion which mentioned something
about Ford Motor Co. attacking GMC.)
Anyone that could crack the IBM market
will walk away with a nice plum. But to do
it you almost have to redefine what you
mean by gaming.

The CGW Computer Game Conference
At the recent ORIGINS 84 (National gaming convention) Computer Gaming World
sponsored a conference on computer
games. Our Dispatches columnist, Dan
Bunten, chaired the conference. The "star
studded" panel included: Dan Bunten, Softscape (7 Cities, M.U.L.E., et.al); Mike
Cullum, Avalon Hill Microcomputer
Games Product Director; Sid Meier,
Microprose (Nato Commander Hellcat Ace,
et.al); Chris Crawford, Freelance Programmer working on Macintosh software just
now (Eastern Front, Legionnaire, Excalibur, et.al); Roe Adams, Former editor
at Softalk and holder of numerous adventure game "first-to-solve" titles; Robert
Woodhead, Sir-Tech (Wizardry, et.al); and
Lord British/Richard Garriott, Origin
Systems (Ultima Series).

QUESTION: What computers are you
targeting for? How do you rank the priority
of computers that you are developing
games for?
CULLUM: The feedback we are getting
from our dealers and customers has caused
us to put a priority on the Commodore. Then
Apple and Atari. Avalon Hill tends to be
conservative so we are taking a
wait-ndsecorthMains.
MEIER: The Commodore is the computer of

choice right now. Apple has been picking
up somewhat, and Atari has been so-so
recently. CRAWFORD: Macintosh is
number one because it is the most powerful machine out there. And it will have a decent enough marketplace. The Commodore
is number two for the short term. For the
long term Commodore is a big question
mark. Number three is Apple II. After that
it all sort of dissolves into a pile of IBMs and
Ataris.
BUNTEN: I don't think any of us are
answering this question on the basis of what
are our "druthers" (with the possible exception of Chris). We are answering according
to what makes good business sense. If you
are going to stay in this industry you have
to respond to the market. Very few people
feel strongly about the Commodore being
a big plus (Ed.— as a programming
machine? .... ) except for the fact that it sold
well and therefore there is a very good
market for C-64 games. So we write first for
Commodore, second for Atari, then Apple
and Macintosh come later.
ADAMS: I still think Apple is going to do
very well; especially now that they have
released the IIc. People are really into small
machines and the IIc is small, and has
powerful gaming features. The real kicker
in this whole discussion is the IBM. The
IBM market is so vast out there. The trouble is that you cannot sell anything for the
IBM if call it a "game", it's got to be called
a "simulation". Flight Simulator came out

WOODHEAD: I don't write games to make
money (Ed.: much laughter from the
audience as well as the rest of the panel). I
write games because I want to write them.
If they make money that's fine. In fact, that's
great!.... My major development effort right
now is on the Macintosh. It's a nifty
machine with a lot of power. You can do so
much with it.
GARRIOTT: I must agree with Robert on
both my motives for writing games and also
the long term effects of the Macintosh. The
Mac is so much more powerful than any of
the other machines currently available. If
it doesn't do well, something will have really
gone wrong. However, for the current situation, I disagree with everyone else's strategy
for the Commodore. If you start writing on
the C-64 or the Atari with their fancy
graphics, features which the Apple does not
have, the translation up to the Apple is far
more difficult, perhaps even impossible. All
of our authors are writing on the the Apple.
The translation to the Atari is very easy, as
long as we are working in machine language.
The conversion from the Atari to the C-64
is even easier (after some graphics changes).
It works well and everyone is happy.
BUNTEN: But IS everyone happy? You
Atari and Commodore people in the
audience, are you happy with the Apple
rewrites?
AUDIENCE: No!
GARRIOTT: The only problem with that is
that if the game is written on the C-64 or
Atari with sprites, the Apple version will
never get done. From a publisher's point of
view that's not money wise. Publishers have
to be sure that whatever game they do can
reasonably be translated to other computers
without having to do a total rewrite of the
game.

QUESTION: Where do the panelists think
computer strategy games are going in the
future?
CULLUM: More graphics, more memory.
I would love to see a half-megabyte game,
I think it would be fantastic. As for Avalon
Hill, we will continue to make more
historical simulations ("wargames" is a
term that is acceptable to this audience, but
for many it isn't, so we call our games,
"historical simulations"). The marketplace
will continue to demand more graphics or
arcade style action. If you've got a flight
simulator or a Battle of Britain game, the
players are going to want to "go up there
and shoot it out".
MEIER: I think there is a lot of room for

improvement in the current generation of
strategy games. Basically, I believe we are
at the first level of what can be achieved.
One area that I think will see a lot of work
in the days ahead is the quality of the computer opponent. Another area that we have
not touched on is the interactive game via
modem and/or network. Strategy games
have a lot of potential in this area.
CRAWFORD: The major problem facing the
design community right now is the unnecessary polarization between the visceral
and the and the cerebral; between the fast
paced shoot-'em-up game and the strategy
game. Everyone is trying to define games
in terms of a scale between these two
"extremes". The solution which is coming
slowly, is another dimension to gaming,
namely the interpersonal element. I do not
mean interpersonal in the sense of playing
with another person, but rather the social
element inside the game. Games right now
concentrate on "things". My slogan is
"People, not Things!" Ultimately, most of
us do not really care about "things". The
most important "things" in life are our relationships with other people. Our games
should reflect this. If you imagine a novel
or a movie with no people in it then will see
why I think games are so sterile right now.
We need to put characters, REAL
characters, not just something with a certain number of hit points associated with it.
ADAMS: One of the reasons so many hard
core D&D players don't like computer
adventure and role-playing games is that
they are so conventional. There is no real
Dungeon Master in the game; no feeling of
human unpredictability. I think Infocom is
striving to solve this problem, but they have
a long way to go. The next generation of
computer adventure games will need to put
a feeling of spontaneity into the game.
WOODHEAD: I see two major developments occurring over the next few years. On
the hardware end: someone is going to start
delivering software on digital audio disks.
The three hardware limitations in computer
game design are the speed of the computer,
the amount of RAM, and the amount of disk
space you have available. The disk space can
be a major limitation, especially when you
are trying to model something well. On the
software end: with improved hardware we
will begin to see games based on "expert
systems". An expert system is a complex
computer program that a very large
database that allows it to make judgements.
These expert systems are already in use in
many areas of business and science.
If your database is large enough, an expert
system should be able to realistically mimic
roles of human beings in adventure games.
You could have Inspector Clouseau wandering through a game, controlled by a very
defective expert system. Or you could have
a Sherlock Holmes wandering through an
adventure, appearing, disappearing, asking
questions, etc. Look for these kinds of games
in about three years.
GARRIOTT: The current trend is for better

graphics and animation as well as deeper
plots (in adventure games). Ultima IV,
which I am currently working on, has completely animated graphics, a full six-voice
synthesizer, and an improved "discussion
algorithm" which makes interaction more
realistic. Graphics, sound and depth is
where we all have to focus currently.
BUNTEN: Most of the panelists fall into the
adventure/role-playing camp or the
wargame/strategy game camp. My recent
efforts don't really fall into either. M.U.L.E.
is more of a family game. It feels more like
Monopoly than anything one would include
in the strategy or adventure game category.
While the market for wargames and
adventure games is large, there is an enormous market for people who don't have
computers yet, who don't care about board
games at all, who have never played
anything heavier than Trivial Pursuit.
Games, to them, are already too intimidating. Games have got to become friendly,
simple, easy and yet, deep! A good game
makes it trivial for these people to figure out
what they THINK they want to do, but the
difficulty must be in figuring what they really NEED to do to solve the puzzle.
If we can get people to sit down at a game
and through their own intuition, figure out
how things are and what things will occur,
THEN we can make the next break into
what games really can be.

QUESTION: What are each of you working on now?
WOODHEAD: Macintosh Wizardry, plus
we may have a TRS-80 version coming out.
We have two Apple Wizardry scenarios in
the works. One is a sequel to Legacy of
Llylgamyn (as yet unnamed). The other one
is The Return of Werdna, and Roe Adams
is doing the design.
CRAWFORD: I'm working on a game for
the Macintosh entitled ARMS RACE based
on the philosophy that "H-bombs don't kill
people, Geopolitics kills people."
MEIER: We are continuing to write games
for the wargame market on the C-64, Atari
and Apple.
CULLUM: We are going to be doing a lot
of conversions of our classic boards games
to the computer. We are converting some
of the Victory Game Co. board games. We
are also working on Status Pro Football.
BUNTEN: Softscape is working on the
Apple version of Seven Cities of Gold. The
IBM version is going to be out in the fall.
The Macintosh version will be out before
Christmas.

Next year ORIGINS will be in Baltimore.
Look for more information in a future
issue.

Game Playing Aids from Computer Gaming World

COSMIC BALANCE SHIPYARD DISK
Contains over 20 ships that competed in the CGW COSMIC BALANCE SHIP
DESIGN CONTEST. Included are Avenger, the tournament winner; Blaze,
Mongoose, and MKVP6, the judge's ships. These ships are ideal for the gamer
who cannot find enough competition or wants to study the ship designs of
other garners around the country. SSI's The Cosmic Balance is required to use
the shipyard disk.
PLEASE SPECIFY APPLE, ATARI OR C-64 VERSION WHEN ORDERING. $15.00.

ROBOTWAR TOURNAMENT DISKS
Diskette #1 contains the source code for the twelve entrants in CGW's Second Annual Robotwar Tournament. Diskette #2 contains the seventeen entrants in the Third Annual Robotwar Tournament. Muse Software's ROBOTWAR' required to use these diskettes. Please specify which diskette when
ordering. $15.00 each or $25.00 for both.

ROAD TO MOSCOW:
A Review
by Bill Wise

Name:
Type:
System:
Format:
#Players:
Author:
Price:
Publisher:

Road to Moscow
Wargame
C-64
Disk
1
Philip Gardocki
Bob Best
$30.00
Ba'rac Limited
PO Box 37206
Shreveport, LA
71133-7206

ROAD TO MOSCOW (RTM) is a new strategic level
game covering the Russian Front during World War II.
While not as comprehensive as SSI's WAR IN RUSSIA,
this game is quite good on it's own. All of the main features
of the campaign have been nicely incorporated into a very
playable game. The German armored spearheads will
spring forth from their starting positions and race towards
Moscow, Leningrad, and the Ukraine. But Soviet
resistance, supply problems, and the weather, will all
combine to wear out your forces and bring you to a halt
just as winter sets in.
The rules for RTM are short, clearly written, and include historical notes about the campaign. The one year
scenarios take two to four hours to finish, and the campaign game takes ten to twelve hours. The game is solitaire
only, with the computer directing Soviet operations.
The map is a 40x24 representation of European Russia
and adjacent areas, all on one screen. This allows a complete view of the entire map without scrolling. The map
is rotated 90 degrees with North being on the left of the
screen, rather than at the top. Units can be either standard
military symbols or icons shaped as tanks, infantry, or
cavalry. Each turn represents two weeks of time, and the
units represent corps for the Axis and armies for the Russians. Terrain includes clear, forest, swamp, river, mountain, city, ocean and lakes and the map is divided into
squares rather than hexes.
The scenarios cover the entire campaign as well as four
shorter one year scenarios for 1941-44. Games in progress
can be saved to the program disk, but you can only have

one saved game on the disk at a time. There are ten levels
of difficulty to keep the game challenging. Victory conditions revolve around control of key cities, with different
cities listed for each scenario. Ed. Note: Early copies of the
game had a problem with the SAVE GAME feature.
However, Ba'rac tells us that the problem has been solved.
The 1944 scenario is probably the most difficult. In it,
you must try to survive an incredibly powerful Soviet
assault that will tax your defensive skills to the limit. The
forces that you command will literally evaporate in the
face of this attack unless you can come up with a good
defensive plan.

Movement and combat are handled smoothly. Orders
are given for each unit with either the joystick or the
keyboard. You can examine each unit's status, current
orders, and level of fortification. As orders are given, units
change color from black to grey, allowing you to easily see
which units still need orders.
Units can entrench and fortify themselves. If left undisturbed for one turn, they entrench, adding 50 to their
defending strength. After a second idle turn, they are
doubled against attacks.
After all orders are given, movement and combat occur.
Units trying to enter enemy occupied squares initiate
combat. As combat causes units to fall below half strength,
they change color. Axis units go from black to blue, and
Soviet units go from red to orange. This technique is very
helpful in keeping track of events all across the map
without having to examine each unit after a combat phase.
Starting in 1943, the Soviets receive artillery units as
reinforcements. These units can fire one barrage of five
times their normal strength, even when not adjacent to
German units. When this is followed by a full scale attack,
you will usually end up with a hole in your line. Artillery
units disband after one barrage, and are then rebuilt as
reinforcements. Only two Soviet artillery units can be in
play at once, but two is more than enough. The Germans
do not have artillery units.
The changing of the seasons brings mud and then snow
to the game. When the mud arrives the ground changes

from light grey to yellow. Movement slows to a crawl, and
supply is more difficult for German units. The mud season
is followed by snow, shown as a bright white background.
Movement and supply are somewhat easier, while
swamps and rivers freeze. During 1941 and 1942, Axis
units cannot entrench or fortify during bad weather, so
if you want to survive the winter, stop your advance in
mid to late September and let your units entrench. If you
don't do this, be warned that the Russian winter attacks
will tear you up rather badly.
My major complaint with this game is that the map does
not cover enough ground. In playing the 1942 scenario,
you will not be able to duplicate the historical events
because the Germans advanced beyond the southern edge
of the Road to Moscow game map by more than one hundred miles. A game about a particular battle should at least
have all of the battlefield on the map. To me, this is an annoying flaw in an otherwise outstanding game. This problem, however, doesn't affect any of the other one year
scenarios.
One of the most interesting aspects of the game is the importance of maintaining reserves. The timely rotation of
depleted units out of the front line is critical. You CANNOT afford to have any units destroyed. As units lose
strength, they must be replaced by fresh units. Try to keep
at least some reserves behind each sector of your front.
Your line will always be under Soviet attack at one or more
points. Often the German units facing these assaults will
be severely weakened. If they are not replaced by fresh
units, they will often be destroyed. This is where the ability of adjacent friendly units to trade places is important.
Order the weak unit to move back, and the fresh unit that
you cleverly placed behind it to move forward. They will
exchange positions, and the Soviet unit that was itself being worn down by it's constant attacks will often become
exhausted, or even destroy itself in attacking this new German unit.
My overall evaluation of the game was quite favorable.
Even with my complaint about the map, I enjoyed the
game. The ten levels of difficulty allowed me to keep the
game challenging as my skills improved. The combination
of ease of play, interesting scenarios, an excellent game
system, and numerous strategic options will keep me playing RTM for a long time to come.

THE
COMMODORE
KEY
WARGAMES

Roy Wagner
The reader survey results published in the
previous issue of CGW revealed that wargames are our readers' favorite type of computer game. Seventy-three percent of the
readers played a wargame at least five times
a month and forty-eight percent considered
it their favorite type of game. In response
to that strong interest, this month's column
will discuss some of the various kinds of
wargames available for the Commodore 64.
I enjoy the thought process that goes into
playing a wargame as much as I dislike the
concepts carried through in actual warfare.
I only wish any wars which needed to be,
could be "fought with honor" using computers with a respectable acceptance of the
results, rather than the physical injury and
loss of human lives. There are many things
we will do when playing a wargame that
hopefully we would not do so readily in actual warfare, such as sacrificing a game
piece (representing human lives) to gain a
strategic advantage. But enough of idealism,
off to war we go.
Arcade games, for the most part, are wargames. Whether it is man-to-man fighting
with Pac Man or defending against assaulting waves of invaders from space. Those
types of games that are more reflex than
realism we will pass by for others to review.
However, there are arcade-like games that
are worthy of mention.
Choplifter and Fort Apocalypse have some
redeeming features of realism rather than
pure shoot-to-kill and score for the dead or
destroyed. Their object is to save lives. The
enemy is there to prevent you but points are
given most for life rather than death. Blue
Max (WW I) and Zaxxon (WW ?) simulate
bombing/straffing runs against enemy
targets. With these, destruction ranks high
as your object. The graphics in all are very
well handled.
Beach-Head (from Access) consists of

several arcade like scenarios that are piggybacked one upon the other. You are required
to defend against an enemy aerial and sea
assault, traverse a mined and torpedo boat
patrolled bay, land your tanks and maneuver them across a beach protected by
numerous obstacles, and finally destroy the
huge enemy fortress by accurately firing ten
shots. This game is still arcadish, but the
situations are nicely handled.
The last game of this type, also the newest
and best in it's overall presentation, is Raid
on Bungling Bay from Broderbund. Your
perspective if the action is an aerial view
of several islands (map and area radar provided). You, as the pilot of a helicopter, start
from an aircraft carrier which provides you
with repairs and bombs. You have, though,
unlimited gun fire. The object is to seek out
and destroy enemy factories and prevent the
construction of an enemy battleship that is
being built as you play. Once complete, the
battleship will seek out your ship and end
your game. To help accomplish your goal,
you must also eliminate enemy radar, defensive artillery, patrol and supply ships, and
assault jets. The action is fast and real time.
The aerial graphics are sensational and
scroll extremely fast.
The next category of wargames are more
like board games, yet with rules and
methods of play that are simple enough for
someone never before exposed to a board
or miniatures wargaming. In other words,
they are more user friendly than most of the
board game type wargames.
My favorite computer wargame in this
category is Combat Leader from SSI. It has
simplified your role to issuing commands
while the computer executes the moves and
displays the action. You command your
troops as either squad, platoon, or company
commander. You enter very simple commands (single letter) and point out areas of
action. The action takes place in real time,
with your troops moving while you issue
orders. I only wish the graphic representations were larger (each man is a single pixel). This game has unlimited options of play
with all types of terrain and tanks/troop carriers available. I hope to see more games like
this, such as Sea and Air Combat.
The game of Fighter Command, which I
am converting to the Commodore 64, is
similar to this concept. The player acts as
operations commander. The graphics are
minimal, being large overview maps of
England, and action commands are issued
as needed based on up to the minute reports.
The war activity takes place automatically
based on enemy strategy and your orders.
One day to thirty-four day scenarios are
available.
A wargame that is more role playing is Fifty Mission Crush from SSI, wherein you
pilot a WW II B-17 bomber and attempt to
complete 50 successful bombing missions
over France and Germany. You control your
gunners and decide upon the bomb/fuel
ratio carried on a raid in this historically
accurate game.

After games that take care of the moves
based on your commands, come games that
are basically computerized board games.
War games have existed as board games
nearly as long as warfare itself. After all,
Othello, Chess and Go are ancient wargames, now also available as computer
games.
A greatly simplified, yet very well done
board-like wargame is Operation Whirlwind
from Broderbund. This game introduces the
classic features of board wargames. There
are levels of difficulty with game turns in
phases (command, movement, combat,
assault order, and assault). Symbolic (icon)
pieces/units have movement, firepower,
range, and strength values that vary for each
type of unit (recon, infantry, engineer, light
& heavy tank, and artillery). You cursor to
each unit you wish to perform an action and
instruct it individually. Enemy movement
and action occurs automatically after you
finish each phase. The game has a very well
written manual and is an easy introduction
to this type of game to anyone. The game
is well done graphically using a scrolling
map. The map is the same for all levels of
play.
After this comes the pure board-like
wargames. The rules and graphic presentation of these are very similar to the board
games. Many show the conventional hex
mapping technique. Most of these games
are better than the board games, as solitaire
play is handled by the computer and the difficult aspects of the board games are now
handled by the computer. No pieces to lose
or move wrong, no tedious die rolls to
resolve situations, no tables to frequently
consult, no rules to forget or interpret
wrong; the only difficulty with these games
can be understanding the instructions. They
are not easy to play without knowing how.
A buyer/player of these games must pay
close attention to how the game is categorized —Introductory/Beginner, Intermediate, or Advanced/Expert. Nearly all these
games offer one and two player options, and
the computer will often play either side. The
one player (solitaire) play is only as good as
the computer player's algorithms (programming that handles the computers actions).
SSI and Avalon Hill are the leading producers of games of this type. Some of the
titles available for the Commodore 64 from
SSI are Tigers in the Snow(Battle of the
Bulge), Knights of the Desert (North African
Campaign), Battle for Normandy, Germany
1985, RDF 1985 (Saudi Arabia), and Baltic
1985. The latter three are games of fictional
warfare with Russia based on the modern
weaponry Avalon Hill has available Midway
Campaign, Panzer-Jagd (Russian Front
1943), and TAC (Tactical Arm or
Command)
That is the end of our battle plan for this
issue. Next time I will discuss the second most
popular type of game, the adventure/roleplaying games. I also will offer some suggestions on how to best spend your holiday
money before the new year comes.

STRATEGY GAME TIPS
Welcome to our newest column: Strategy
Game Tips. SGT will print strategy tips from
you, our readers. The column will be limited
to printing tips and strategies on strategy
computer games. This includes wargames,
sports games, economic and other "real
life" simulations and games in the classic
style (such as Pensate or Fortress).
DISCLAIMER: The tips printed in SGT
are those of the authors. We try to avoid
printing tips that don't work, but we cannot playtest all, or even most, of them. So,
let the player beware.
Tips can be mailed to Strategy Game
Tips, c/o Computer Gaming World, P.O.
Box 4566, Anaheim, CA 92803-4566. Try to
keep tips under 250 words if possible.
Payments for tips and strategies used in
CGW will be two issues of CGW. Please
specify if you are already a subscriber when
sending your tips.

WAR IN RUSSIA
When playing the Barbarossa
Scenario in WIR there are several
costly mistakes to avoid. First, pick
one main target to try for and send
most of your armor there. Attacking
both Leningrad and Moscow is
almost certain to lose you both. Don't
attack just for the sake of attacking, its
a sure way to leave yourself weak for
the winter. Move as fast as you can
until Smolensk falls.... don't let them
entrench. Don't attack with highly
fatigued units. Keep your airforces
moving forward, only using them in
groups of 100 + Air Points and against
tough hexes. Concentrate your armor
into only one or two attacks. Finally,
don't attack a fortified city unless its
isolated from supplies and heavily
bombed first.
Paul Murray, SSI
For the German player in War In
Russia, where he builds rail hexes has
a great impact upon his chances of
winning the game. In the NORTH
you should build a line through the
following hexes: 2,17; 3,17; 4,17; 5,16;
6,17; and 7,17. This brings you to
Smolensk. From there you can build
to Leningrad, Rzhev, or Bryansk
(depending upon your goals in the
north).
In the SOUTH build out of Lvov as
follows: beginning on turn 3: 4,25;
5,24; 6,24 and 7,23. This will bring
you to Kiev. From there you can build
northeast towards Kursk, or southeast
towards Dneprop'vsk. If a Deep South
strategy is to be used, consider this
route: on turn one build at 6,27. Then

follow with a northeastern advance
thus: 7,26; 8,26; 9,25 and 10,25.
Joel Billings, SSI
GEOPOLITIQUE 1990
Early in the game, use your Political
Action Points (PAP's) defensively.
Use them in areas in which you have
or want to obtain agreements. Garrison areas where you have military
agreements as soon as possible, thus
freeing up the PAP's previously committed to defend these areas. Also, if
at all possible, have a friendly country next to each garrisoned area, so
that in the event of a coup, your forces
will have somewhere to retreat, instead of being eliminated.
Commit all industrial capacity
points to raw materials production
except for the minimum industrial
points needed for military maintenance and mobilization. This will
result in a high growth rate, provided that you secure economic
agreements with other countries.
Go for Japan, the UK, and Western
Europe as your first priorities in any
scenario, either to defend or in which
to obtain agreements. Place readied
military units adjacent to countries
with which you plan to negotiate.
This will help greatly in influencing
the negotiations.
Once you have built up your
economy and garrisoned key countries, launch a diplomatic offensive
using as many PAP's as you can build
each turn. Interfere with obvious
Soviet diplomatic targets, and go after
any non-garrisoned areas in which
the Soviets have agreements. This
strategy has several drawbacks, but it
can produce solid victories if you do
not totally neglect military preparations.
Larry Farmer, Doraville, GA
EASTERN FRONT—BLITZKRIEG
To some, Chris Crawford's
EASTERN FRONT is an impossible
struggle against overwhelming odds.
To others, the challenge lies not in
winning, but rather whether or not
ALL Russian units can be eliminated
before time runs out.
Anyone who has played the game
realizes that forcing Russians to
retreat accomplishes nothing. Units
must be surrounded and destroyed,
but don't be timid! The Germans don't
have time to punch holes in the line
and pick off Russian units one at a
time. Drive those Panzer groups as
deep into Russian territory as feasible,

then wheel them back and attack
bypassed units from behind as well as
from the front with trailing infantry
groups. Don't worry about getting cut
off, as the Russian units are weak initially and, if you entrench, your
Panzer units should be able to hold on
until the infantry groups can force the
Russians to retreat into them.
One of the largest "bag" of Russian
units the Germans can capture early
in the war is the group of armies
around the Minsk area. Try this: Contrary to the historical campaign, pull
your Panzer groups out of the front
line and drive them south of the Pripet
marshes, then east to surround and
take Kiev (drop one or two groups due
south to surround the weak Russian
forces in the southern sector.) Then
wheel north and come up behind the
Russian units at Minsk and attack
from the east while also attacking
from the west with your infantry
groups. This can net you up to ten army groups and should get you off on
the right foot.
Richard Thuriot, Racine WI
CARRIER FORCE—MIDWAY
Gary Grigsby's CARRIER
FORCE.MIDWAY scenario can be a
difficult and frustrating battle for the
US forces. But by taking a desperate
risk, an overwhelming victory can be
achieved.
Using random setup, the location of
the Japanese troop transports is still
known. Disregard the strategy notes
in the rulebook, (and, here's the risk)
ignore the threat of the enemy carriers
and launch everything at the
transports. If your luck holds, the
Japanese carriers will be out of range,
and will not normally move towards
Midway until nightfall. This should
leave you unmolested to pound the
transports for the entire first day.
Also, create and detach a cruiser TF
to move among the transports for surface combat.
At nightfall, move to two or three
hexes SW of Midway. Launch all aircraft to rendezvous at Midway at
dawn (this is where all the Japanese
TFs can be expected to be). Then, as
soon as the sun rises....
The Japanese forces should then
retire to the NE where the US carriers
should now be in position to pick off
stragglers on their way past.
Of course, the risk is considerable.
If the Japanese carriers are NOT out
of range ...... or IF they are too far

away to reach Midway by dawn of the
second day....
The US cannot trade punches with
the superior Japanese forces. This
strategy can deal the US an embarrassing loss. But, on more than one
occasion, this strategy has scored
over 11000 points, while sinking more
than 50 Japanese ships, including
ALL their carriers.
Ed. Note: While this strategy may
well work, we would like to point out
that the risk involved would be considered prohibitive historically. Those
few American carriers were considered
all that stood between the IJN and the
Hawaiian islands and ultimately the
West Coast. If this strategy had been
used and the US had been clobbered,
the defeat would not have been "
embarrassing", it would have been Fatal.
BUT, Carrier Force is only a game,
s o ....

Richard Thuriot, Racine, WI

OPERATION WHIRLWIND
Those familiar with Broderbund's
OPERATION WHIRLWIND are all
too familiar with the frustration of
having strong advancing forces interminably delayed by only one or two
enemy units. This strategy should
help.
Do not advance units along both
roads. As the northern and southern
roads separate the two groups too far
apart to provide mutual fire support,
all a two-proned advance accomplishes is to divide forces and cut
firepower by half.
Wheel the northern forces down the
initial north-south road to join the
southern forces as soon as possible
(their route along this road should be
unhindered by enemy fire). Then,
with the enjoined forces, obstacles
along the southern road should be
more easily eliminated with concentrated firepower.
This opening strategy does not
change the available options and tactics once the town is reached. A
defensive line still must be established, while additional forces still must
penetrate and secure the town itself.
But, this strategy should allow a few
more turns to prepare the defenses
and take the town before the inevitable counterattacks.
Richard Thuriot, Racine, WI
KNIGHTS OF THE DESERT
The first turn of Knights is very important. To conserve fuel and operation points, attack the 2nd British armored division with all available units
at intensity four with three air power
points. Attack the depot beneath it
with the Ariete division at intensity
four. Move up the coast with six units
next to Bengazi and attack it with the
21st Panzer at intensity four. Attack

the depot further up the road in the
same manner with two mechanized
regiments at intensity four. Take your
army and march on Tobruk. Surround it with Italians, using the armored units to by-pass it and attack
Bordia. The turn should end with
Tobruk surrounded and Bordia
captured.
Chuck Kroegel, SSI
PARIS IN DANGER
The strategy chosen in any
wargame should always be dictated
by the victory conditions. Obvious as
this sounds, it is often easy to be so
involved with the nuances of play as
to forget the goal. This is particularly
true in "Paris" because of the very
fine tactical level of play available.
Unfortunately the victory conditions
are such that the Allied player would
do well to play the entire game
without ever having to fight a pitched battle.
The Allied player will score one
point for each town captured and thirty points for Paris — a possible total
of 91 points. The French receive one
point for each 750 Allied casualties.
If each Frenchman were to take one
Allied soldier with him, the elimination of the entire French army would
provide some 153 victory points!
Given these conditions, it becomes
obvious that the Allies should avoid
combat while the French should fight
at any odds. The winner is the first
player to score 60 points or with the
highest count at the end of 25 turns.
Tactical Observations: Finesse in
the use of cavalry and reserves is the
key in Napoleonic battles. The enemy
line should be engaged and worn
down, his reserve largely committed,
before seeking a decision by the
charge of your massed cavalry.
Charge to soon, and defensive fire will
devastate your units. When on the
defensive, hold your reserve cavalry
well too the rear and use it to smash
any breakthrough by flank attacks.
Timing is all important. The tactical
game revolves around questions of
when to charge, what formations to
assume, and where and when to commit the reserve.
Fred Jacobs, Petaluma, CA
OBJECTIVE: KURSK
The German problem in SSI's "Objective Kursk" is advancing to the
north edge of the map to capture Prokharovka, Oboyan, and Kursk. To
provide flank protection and still have
enough strength for the drive north
the utmost economy of force should
be practiced. The German must also
take care to maintain his supply route
south through Belgorod. This operation is carried out in two phases: the

initial penetration and destruction of
the Russian front line, followed by the
exploitation to the north.
The assault should be carried out
north of Belgorod along the main road
to Oboyan with the rivers and gullies
on the flanks used to protect the line
of advance. The initial break-in and
resulting dogfight will probably consume the bulk of the time available
leaving only two or three days for the
advance north. The first base ends
with most of the panzers in the
Oboyan/Prokhorovka area.
Phase two should encounter little
resistance except for any garrisons in
the target cities. If the German has not
taken heavy losses, some of his force
can be used in a drive toward
Korocha. The primary goal, however,
is Kursk and at least three or four
strong panzer divisions will be needed north of Oboyan. The remaining
units will be used to fight off Russian
attacks seeking to cut the German line
of supply.
Tactical Observations: There is little point in leaving the infantry divisions in the area northwest of the
river. They should be moved east for
use as flank protection in the drive
north. When setting up defense lines,
take advantage of gullies. Units attacking out of them are halved while
units attacking into them are doubled. This should enable you to set up
"killing grounds" to deal with advancing soviet units. Since disruption
results are cumulative, it is often advantageous to use a "one two" punch
to eliminate a strongpoint. Hit it on the
first segment with assault attacks
followed by a mobile attack and exploitation on segments two through
four. Because supply is very important, see that all road-minefields are
cleared as you advance. At times it
may be necessary to detach engineers
for this job. Take full advantage of
your artillery. Infantry in static mode
should bang away with their field
howitzers at anything in range. The
German does not have time to play it
safe. He must penetrate the Russian
line the very first turn to isolate and
surround as many units as possible.
Remember that you can retreat
through your own units in assault or
static mode so long as stacking is not
violated. Use bombers to disrupt and
immobilize enemy units in your rear
supply areas so that they can be mopped up by mobile forces.
Fred Jacobs, Petaluma, CA

Well, that wraps up the first installment of SGT. Oh, by the way, if you
have any good ideas for a title for this
column, drop us a line.

SEASTALKER

There you are, cozy and safe in your
research laboratory, hunched over your
workbench, studying the diagram of your
futuristic submarine, the "Scimitar." Suddenly, the videophone alarm begins to blast,
but you're so engrossed in your work that
you don't look up until your friend Tip Randall rushes to your side yelling, "Patti, snap
out of it!" You pick up the microphone and
speak with Zoe Bly, Commander of the
undersea Aquadome. The information she
relates is bad: An enormous sea monster is
battering the Aquadome, and you're the only person who can help. Your quiet studies
are at an end, and your adventure begins.
SEASTALKER, Infocom's newest "interactive fiction," is not for experienced
adventurers. Indeed, the game is labelled by
Infocom as a "Junior-Level" adventure.
Garners who have come to know and love
ZORK, DEADLINE, or STARCROSS will be
disappointed with SEASTALKER. A good
player will be able to solve the game within
a couple of hours, and that's not a whole lot
of fun for the price. However, youngsters
and beginners may enjoy SEASTALKER,
and its "tutorial" aspects make it a perfect
introduction to text-only games.
As always with Infocom games, the program diskette is accompanied by several
superbly written and illustrated documents.
The "Scimitar Logbook" contains detailed
diagrams of the submarine, the laboratory,
the aquadome, and a variety of submariner
gear. A nautical chart of Frobton Bay, as
well as nine "Infocards" with hidden clues
and descriptions of people and equipment,
are included in the game package. The
novice adventurer will want to frequently
refer to these materials, but an experienced player can make the game more difficult
by ignoring these documents. You could try
running through the game without reading
the hint booklets, then refer to them later
to see what you might have missed.
Even if you refuse to peek at the "Infocards," you will still encounter a lot of
unavoidable "hand holding" in this game.
Your buddy Tip Randall has a marked

tendency to offer advice, especially in tight
spots. For example, when the videophone
malfunctions, Tip suggests that you check
out the problem by using the Computestor.
Later, when you finally encounter the sea
monster (the "Snark"), Tip grabs the throttle and halts your sub saying, "This isn't
mutiny, Patti! I just figured we should stop
now." Other characters in the game also
volunteer timely information, and the program occasionally refers you to the Infocards: "If you want a clue, find Infocard
–4 in your SEASTALKER package. Read
hidden clue –1 and put 'electrolyte relay' in
the blank space." The Infocard decoder consists of a piece of red plastic that allows you
to decipher the printed clues on each card.
Perhaps you're wondering why Tip addresses me by name. Well, in this "interactive fiction," you really are the main
character. After booting the game diskette,
you're immediately asked to enter your first
and last names, and the story is thereafter
entitled "SEASTALKER: Your Name and
the Ultramarine Bioceptor." In replaying
the game for this review, I had a few
chuckles by changing my name to "Peaches
LaRue" ("Peaches, snap out of it!").
Depending on which brand of computer
you use and whether you have a printer, you
may use the "script" command to
simultaneously print out a transcript of the
game. A transcript of the story is an added
bonus, particularly for beginners who want
to check and correct their mistakes.
The SEASTALKER plot is quite simple:
The undersea Aquadome, staffed by Commander Bly and a crew of five technicians,
is being attacked by an enormous mutant
creature. Treachery is suspected, and you,
along with your pal Tip, have precious little time to find the traitor(s) and incapacitate
the Snark. The Aquadome staff is a gossipy
bunch; they seem to enjoy discussing one
other, sometimes in great detail. By following certain individuals and questioning
them, you can quickly discover who's telling the truth and who's not. The only difficult segments in the game involve underwater travel and combat. It's easy to smash
into a submerged, obstacle or to fumble your
moves when you're chasing that tentacled
sea monster.
As usual with Infocom games, humor
takes the edge off of your failures: "Uh oh!
Its rocket weapon is swinging slowly in your
direction! As you and Tip eye each other
despairingly, one thing's for sure: THE
ADVENTURE'S OVER!" Infocom's
famous parser accepts and understands
over 800 words, but if you enter a really
strange command, you might receive these
types of responses: "What a fruitcake!" or

"I assume you mean turn on the reactor."
To save moves, you can enter numerous
commands on one line. For instance, the
following command string works just fine:
Close reactor then turn on engine then open
throttle then open gate.
There are a few little inconsistencies or
glitches in the program. For example, you
aren't allowed to turn off the microphone
and drop it without saying "Goodbye" first.
You can hand the mike to Tip and then walk
away, but the program subtracts 3 points
from your score if you don't say goodbye
and then solve an additional problem. When
you visit the aquadome's storage room,
you're told that there are several supply
shelves with mechanical, electrical, and
chemical supplies. But when you ask to examine the mechanical (or other) supply
shelves, you're told that "You can't see any
mechanical supply shelf here!" Searching,
even searching very carefully, reveals
nothing. Although several important items
are indeed in the storage room, other
characters have to tell you about these items
before you can pick them up. It's also odd
that your sidekick asks you questions
(leading questions, naturally) regarding certain issues which were raised — in your and
his presence — by a crew member. These
conversations were obviously placed in the
program to help you along, but they aren't
"realistic."
SEASTALKER, written by Infocom's Jim
Lawrence and Stu Galley, is a fine game for
new players, especially young kids, who
may need extra help. Puzzle-loving adults
and experienced adventurers should stick
with Infocom's more complicated games.
Patricia

Fitzgibbons

Name:
Type:
System:
#Players:

Lordlings of Yore
Fantasy Adventure
Apple II
1-4

Author:

Jon F. Baxley
Trey C. Johnson
Softlore Corp.
San Antonio, TX

Publisher:

Lordlings of Yore (LOY) is a game of
strategy, tactics, and diplomacy set in the
era of knights and chivalry. You and your
opponents begin the game with an equal
number of troops and wealth, but with a different geographic situation in your respective shire (you can also impose handicaps
on game players if desired). Your objective
is to eliminate the opposing Lordings and
Continued on page 42

ADVENTURE CONFERENCE (cont.)

TELE-GAMING (cont.)

would not be as detailed as that of Infocom,
most players probably wouldn't notice. He
gave an example: "You can do something
like the following: Pickup all the gems then
climb the walls and go east and look in the
crib and get it".
This announcement was met with murmurs of approval, and Scott mentioned he
was thinking of re-releasing his first 13
adventures with the new interpreter. When
he asked the audience if they thought this
was a good idea, they responded with a
unanimous "Yes!!".
During the question-and-answer session
that followed, Scott revealed that he plans
to bring out his first 14 adventures for the
IBM, with both full graphics and the new
SAGAPLUS parser (this in addition to the
Questprobe series, which is also scheduled
for the Apple and Atari).

in the PBM Dippy hobby feel that the PBEM
games should not be included in the
database of PBM Diplomacy game statistics.
Fortunately, we have major hobby figures
supporting us, but, like those that opposed
them newfangled steam engines, there are
always detractors.

Also on the list of soon-to-come titles is
"Buckaroo Banzai", an adventure based on
the movie of the same name. This will have
graphics, but Scott didn't say if it would also
have the new parser.
One member noted that, after Adventure
–12 (Golden Voyage), Scott had not written
a new game for a long time. He asked if
Scott would be writing any new ones, and
received this reply: "It was a very busy time
running and managing Adventure International! We grew from a $0 per year company
to multi-million dollar per year company in
only a couple of years. But now I'm back to
my love Adventure writing once again!".
One interesting fact that came out during
the conference is that Scott doesn't play
other adventure games. When someone
asked him to comment on Infocom and
other games, Scott remarked "The only
Infocom I played was original Zork on a
mainframe. I loved it! I've not played
anyone else's adventures since, as I don't
want to be unduly influenced by someone
else's games".
Scott also pointed out a distinction
between his numbered adventures and
those in the "Other Venture" series.
Numbers are reserved for the games written
by Scott himself; unnumbered games are
written by other authors, many of them
freelance. As a matter of fact, AI has on file
over 80 software authors from around the
world who do work for them.
More questions. There are always more
questions, but never enough time to answer
them all. Despite the pleas of the audience,
the hour was late and the conference came
to an end. And, like the other guests, Scott
promised to return for another conference
in the future.
So, the GameSIG members were happy.
They'd had the chance to talk with some of
the people who had provided them with
many hours of enjoyment (and frustration!),
and they could look forward to more in the
future. In one way, going to the SIG is
adventure of it's own: you never know who
you might meet!

DB: Actually, except for some early
misunderstandings by a few PBM'ers, the
postal hobby has been very open to PBEM.
It is just a matter of educating them to the
facts about PBEM. Russell has done a good
job of that.
CGW: Have you been able to attract good
players to PBEM?
RS: Oh yes, I am quite pleased by that. We
have attracted several present and past
Dippy 'zine publishers to our games. We
currently have four publishers in our games
(besides myself). We have Doug, who has
been voted the Best GM in Dippy by the
PBM hobby. We have the active support of
the editor of the official magazine of the
PBM hobby, Rod Walker of DIPLOMACY
WORLD. But in addition to all this talent,
we also attract a good number of novices
who are learning the game quickly and playing very well. It is the best of both worlds:
novices and veterans in the trenches
together.
DB: Yes, I have been surprised by the
number of really good players online.
CGW: What do you see developing for
PBEM in the future?
RS: Nothing startling, just continued
growth. Barring unforeseen problems, I
expect that a year from now we will see
12-15 games ongoing through CIS and The
Source. Electronic mail provides an excellent opportunity for the "serious" gamer to

find like-minded people who want to exercise their minds and develop friendships.
Diplomacy just happens to be one of those
games that is an excellent vehicle to bring
these kind of gamers together, and PBEM
pulls in players from all over the country.
DB: I see continued growth and the start
of two to three more games on CompuServe
this year, once everyone has returned from
playing in the summer sun. Russ has some
additional plans for special online events in
the Fall. I see the need to keep in touch with
the postal hobby and to draw on their
resources and experiences so that we don't
repeat the same mistakes that periodically
plague the postal hobby. I am convinced that
PBEM is the media of the future for
Diplomacy. That is going to make the online
services exciting places to be for a
Diplomacy player.

LIST OF ONLINE DIPLOMACY
VENUES
Telephone Numbers:
CompuServe — (800) 848-8990 or (614)
457-8650
The Source — (800) 336-3366 or (703)
734-7500
Delphi — (800) 544-4005 or (617)
491-3393
GameMaster — (312) 328-9009
Modem Numbers:
Wordworks BBS — (919) 723-5275
Crystal Castle BBS — (313) 856-3804
Charlotte Apple Computer Club BBS —
(704) 527-6999
Feel free to contact me for additional
information about tele-gaming. Write to me
on CompuServe at 76703,657 or via U.S.
Mail to:
Patricia Fitzgibbons
195 Claremont Avenue –115
Long Beach, CA 90803
Copyright 1984, Patricia Fitzgibbons.

Articles We Will Never Print in CGW
"Interfacing The Original PCjr Keyboard
To Your IBM pc"
"A Harddisk Shopper's Guide For The
Timex Sinclair User"
"The TI-99A Success Story"
"A Cray Emulator For Your C-64"

FLOPPY IMMORTALITY (cont.)

COMPUTER AS OPPONENT (cont.)

backup of S to Bi. Then immediately choose backup again
and backup B2 FROM B1. Besides giving an extra measure
of safety, this extra backup provides the link we need to
resurrect characters without risk, money or aging. Let's
look at some examples....
The first one is the adventure which finishes like the one
described at the beginning of this article. You've taken a
group through an adventure, made some significant gains,
but lost a character or two. We now have a method to
insure that at worst you'll have characters from the last
backup. Never again will you need to bring in novice
characters unless you want to do so. Go to the Training
Grounds and call up each of the dead characters and delete
them. Then leave the game and call up the Utilities Menu.
Choose the transfer option to move copies of the dead
players from disk B2 to disk S. We then have a mixed set
of characters — the survivors of the adventure retain their
newly won experience and level changes. The fatalities are
restored to their status at the start of the adventure.
Cautious players can proceed to make backups of this new
party in the usual way. Copy S to B1 and then B2 FROM B1.
It sometimes happens that a character you wish to
transfer has some items which are now allowed. (Examples
include the rod of flame and the blue ribbon). To recover
these characters takes an extra few steps. Start the game
and use B2 as your scenario disk. Go to Gilgamesh's and
Add these characters. Then examine each one and Drop
the items that can't be transferred. (No system is flawless!)
Then go to the Utilities Menu and transfer these characters.
A more involved process is necessary for an adventure
in which all but one or two characters have been killed.
Here we want to save the survivors first. The quickest
method is to go to the utilities menu, choose the Change
Name option and insert B2 which contains the old version
of the survivor. Change the name of the survivor to
something like JUNK1(R). Then use the Transfer Option to
move the survivor from his1/2her spot on disk S to temporary
residence on disk B2. Now, we don't care about the data
on disk S, so use backup to restore S FROM B1, the normal
backup procedure. Use change name again, this time on
disk S, to modify the name of the survivor. Finally, use
transfer to bring the most recent version of the survivor
back to S from B2. (Again, cautious players will make a
backup of this new version, for should that survivor be lost
in the next round, you won't have a copy. This is the major
difference between Backup and Transfer in the utilities
menu: backup does nothing to the backup disk while
transfer deletes characters from the backup scenario).
When next you play, you can use the Training Grounds
to delete the renamed characters. This is why I suggest
using names like JUNK1 for the changed names — you'll
have little trouble figuring out who to delete.
These are just two examples of how this backup system
can save you hours of play. Try it, and you'll have more
hours for deeper dungeon exploring, rather than continually sending novice explorers against Murphy's ghost in
order to build up experience. And, perhaps there are ways
of using this method on subsequent scenarios.

other previously trained computer opponents. After a few
dozen games, the computer stops making most dumb
mistakes, and after a few hundred games, it can become a
formidable opponent. Different computer opponents can
be trained to have different playing styles, such as the
offense-minded Genghis Khan or the defense-minded Lord
Maginot included on the game disk.
Adapting to the opponent's playing style also is a feature
of the solitaire program in Dan Bunten's COMPUTER
QUARTERBACK by SSI. The technique used is basically
to observe tendencies in play selections in certain situations, much as coaches do in scouting their team's next
opponents.
Other Solitaire Features
One of the best personalities in a solitaire opponent is Monty of Ritam's MONTY PLAYS MONOPOLY and MONTY
PLAYS SCRABBLE. He also has a top skill level in Scrabble which is a challenge for just about anyone.
The ability to play both sides in a game is a useful feature,
as is the ability to have the computer take over command
of some of your own subordinate units. The SSI game
COMBAT LEADER was a pioneer in the ability for players
to take over almost any level of command, in addition to
playing the enemy. If you want to command a tank or rifle
platoon, and let the computer handle the rest of the company, you are free to do so. Only, don't be surprised if the
computer sends around vehicles and orders your men to
climb aboard just when you least expect it!
The Future
The ability of computers as gaming opponents is definitely on a steep upward trend at the moment. This is due to
a combination of better programming, more attention to
this aspect of the game, increased use of assembly
language, and increased memory availability. A good
barometer of the rate of progress is in microcomputer
chess, where it has been true for some time now that the
best programs of a year earlier are easy victims for the latest
efforts. The three Hayden programs Sargon I, II and III are
good examples of this rapid improvement.
In wargaming, more attention is being given to improving the computer's ability as a solitaire opponent in most
of the newer games. Some games, such as the Atari version
of Eastern Front 1941, are coming out with new versions
which have improvements in the solitaire part of the program. A key element to improving solitaire performance
is giving more attention to this area in the initial game
design. Many designers leave the solitaire portion of the
program to do last, figuring that they will pick up better
ideas on how to have the computer play the game after they
have played it against a human a few times themselves.
Then, in the time crunch of getting the program completed,
there is often insufficient time to really work on improving the computer's playing ability. But, if solitaire play is
given the proper amount of attention in the overall game
design, there is no reason why your home computer can't
be both an entertaining and a formidable opponent in your
favorite wargame of the future.

LORDLINGS (cont.)
ultimately become the Lord of the Realm.
You control your shire, in a manner similar
to that of a feudal lord, with taxation from
the peasants in the area being your primary
means of support. Your army represents
your main element of control in the game.
LOY is played on a grid map 14x14. The
grid is divided into four shires of 7x7. At the
beginning of the game you can request
changes in the computer generated setup
(i.e. more trees and/or mountains). The computer then generates the grid (thus each
game is different). Each shire is represented
in hi-res graphics that resemble a
chessboard, but the screen only represents
one shire at a time. There will be one castle
per shire where the Lord and Necromancer
reside at the start. As your men begin to
travel in the other shires, you will catch
glimpses of the other shires, but you will only be shown parts that would be visible to
your troops at ground level. You will also
not see enemy troops or their movement
unless it is within sight of your own troops.
Movements of troops are also affected by
the terrain.
You begin the game with 5000 peasants
in your home shire. Every peasant you control contributes one gold piece to your
treasury every turn. Control of these
peasants in your home shire is considered
automatic unless there are enemy units in
the same square.

Each turn is divided into 6 phases. They
are:
1)Necromancer—Here you are allowed to
cast spells. For example, you can create fog,
a storm, or a dragon. Or you can cast a variety of combat or transportation spells.
2)Treasury—During this phase you spend
your money. Besides buying spells, you can
hire knights and men-at-arms to increase the
size of your armies. You can also give money
back to the peasants to avoid discontent and
uprising. This is not mandatory, but your
shire esteem is computed each turn by your
donations. A very negative number (little or
no donations) can have a detrimental effect.
3)Deployment—When you first buy
troops, they are garrisoned in the castle.
This phase allows you to setup your armies,
give them number designations, and start
them on their way.
4)Movement—Units, other than those
deployed this turn, are now moved.
5)Combat—Any battles caused by your
movements are determined at this time. You
will observe each battle as it is fought.
6)Options—If you wish you can send a
secret message to one of your opponents in
order to form an alliance against another opponent or to try to buy him off.
You can also have a map of the shire
printed, yes that's right, printed along with
a roster of your armies. This is a big plus,
and something that more games should
consider.
Computer controlled shires tend to gang
up on human controlled shires.

The initial forays into your shire are
typically small armies that are either
scouting or trying to control peasants. You
first should sent out armies of 50 men-atarms each to guard your borders and attack
during these first encounters. While this is
going on, build up a large army and send
this through your lines into one of the other
shires. As you conquer new territory, leave
behind one unit armies to control the
peasants ad increase your taxation money.
Use the money to build up your supply of
knights and transport them by spell to your
large unit situated next to the enemies castle. With this much support you should be
able to conquer the shire.
While LOY has used a fresh approach to
this type of game, I was frustrated by the
long wait while the computer players did
their moving. The game would be more enjoyable if a way around this could be found.
The graphic presentation of the game is
excellent and overall I found the game enjoyable. There are enough alternatives and
actions in this game to continue to make it
interesting to play over and over again.

There were 358 RIDs turned in by press
time for this issue.
Newly rated games and updated game
ratings are listed with bold type in the table
on page 46. The breakdown by machine
was: Atari — 44%; Apple — 40%; C-64 —
15%.
GAME RATINGS
The table on page 46 includes games
evaluated by our readers. For a game to be
included in this listing it must first have
been offered for rating in our regular RID
rating system. Games offered for evaluation
are those covered in the magazine and/or
those having a good sales record during the
time of evaluation. Once offered for evaluation, the game must have been evaluated by
a sufficient number of readers to be included in the results. Any game not evaluated
by at least 10% of the respondents was not
included in the results.
Games were rated on a scale of 1 (terrible) to 9 (outstanding). Respondents were
asked to consider such things as PRESENTATION (graphics, sound, packaging,
documentation); GAME DESIGN (design,
playability, interesting?); LIFE (does the
game wear well?)
Several people have asked about games
that are offered for ratings more than once
over the course of several issues. We usually re-rate the top ten each time (and
sometimes other games as well). Please rate
the game each time we ask (not just the first
time you notice it in the R.I.D.).
RID #16 (Use card provided)
On this page a number of games and articles are listed for evaluation. Please take
time to evaluate these games and articles.
Use the guidelines above for game evaluation. Leave blank any game which you have
not played enough to have formed an
opinion.
Please rate articles on the basis of the article itself, not your opinion of the game being reviewed. Enter a zero for any article
that does not interest you.
PLEASE MAIL RID #16 CARD
BEFORE NOVEMBER 15, 1984.

R.I.D. was prepared with the help of SPEED STAT by SoftCorp International, Westerville, OH 800-543-1350

See page 45 for details on the Reader Input Device

