August 1989

Number 62

Features
Special Report: More Games From C.E.S

4

Paragon's "Dr. Doom's Revenge"

11

A Cap, Doc, and Spidey Simulator / David M. Wilson

Infocom's "Shogun"

12
14

35

Sierra's "Space Quest III"

36

Mindscape's "Hostage: Rescue Mission"

38

France's S.W.A.T. Team Simulator / Robert W. Struble

16

A "Cosmic Deity" Simulator From Britain / Biff Kritzen

Britannica's "Archipelagos"

Scorpion's Mail

A Space Janitor Simulator / Chris Lombardi

CGW's Test Lab Lists Tandy 16 Color Games

Electronic Arts' "Populous"

32

Hints on "Manhunter", "Ultima V" and more / Scorpia

A "Richard Chamberlain" Simulator / Dave Arneson

Color Me, Tandy!

Sneak Preview: "Dragon Wars"
Interplay's New "Fire - Breathing" Simulator

CGW Revisits the Summer Consumer Electronics Show

Why Is "Harpoon" So Late?

42

An "Apology" Simulator

19

A Puzzling Challenge From Britain / Wyatt Lee

Sierra's "Silpheed"

22

Departments

Japan's Samurai Space Pilot Simulator / Sheila A. Carter

What Warped and "Tangled Tales" We Weave 26
Origin's "Twist" Simulator / Scorpia

Simulations Canada's "Northern Fleet"
A "Cold Water" Simulator / M. Evan Brooks

29

Taking a Peek
Conversions Received
Game Ratings
CGW Hall of Fame
Reader Input Device

6
7
24
25
48

Summer C.E.S. (continued)

s we stood in the
Orange County
Airport's baggage
claim area awaiting our
baggage from the Consumer Electronics Show,
we forced our minds to
stay active by reflecting
on the products we had
seen. Boxes of show displays and media kits
from other computeroriented companies in
Orange County drifted
by on the conveyor belt
as we remembered to .. .

More Games from
the Consumer
Electronics Show

"Praise the Lord
and Pass the
Ammunition"
Although the pure wargame seems to be a
fading genre, Strategic
Simulations, Inc. was
preparing to release Red Lightning (on
IBM and Atari ST), an approach to World
War III in the European Theatre, and
Storm Across Europe (C-64), a strategic
level game using area movement in
World War II Europe (by the author of
Colonial Conquest, Dan Cermak). In addition, CGW was informed that Gary
Grigsby is at work on two long-term
projects, a World War III game which will
allow enthusiasts to play with the mix of
detail they desire, and War in Russia II,
an updated and enhanced version of the
Hall of Fame member.
SSI is not content to simply produce
historical wargames, however. David
Landrey, co-designer of the ACW series
and Battles of Napoleon, is working on a
pure wargame to be set in the Dragonlance world. In addition, the company is
close to releasing Sword of Aragon, a
fantasy wargame with a role-playing flavor
which seeks to unify fantasy, economic,
and military elements into one game.
Avalon Hill Microcomputer Games
had some surprises up their sleeves.
Their Atari ST programmers have been
keeping their compilers hot on World
War II Wipeout!, based on Victory
Games' Ambush! (the boardgame hit),
and the parent company's Third Reich,
the strategic level campaign game for the
European Theatre during World War II.
We were impressed by the game's appearance and are looking forward to getting hands-on experience with the game.
Military simulations from a first-person
viewpoint continue to be developed, however. Spectrum Holobyte's Tank will feature authentically modeled polygon-filled
terrain (courtesy of DARPA's database) in
order to represent three different types of
terrain: Ft. Knox (for training), the Middle
East, and Western Europe. The game

can be played in a simple arcade mode
or used as a command perspective on
the platoon level. The controls look like
authentic M1A1 controls, but the designers have had to add a few extra icons to
indicate terrain elevation and other matters you would know intuitively in a real
tank. Fog of war is extremely relevant at
the highest difficulty level, but is no problem at the lower levels. For those who
are not arcade oriented, the game does
not have to be played first-person real
time. Instead, one can give orders and sit
back and watch the conflict. This game
will also be part of the "Electronic Battlefield" series of networkable games to
come from Spectrum Holobyte.
Regular CGW readers are already somewhat aware of Microprose's M-1 Tank
Platoon. In this game, players command
one unit each of Abrams and Bradley
AFVs. In addition, there are three different types of artillery support available
and an A-10 which can be called in for
air support. The action in this game is intense. Military doctrine has been applied
more correctly than with any tank simulation to date. The tanks are polygon-filled
forms, as is the terrain, so the screens
scroll quickly and everything is fastmoving. There are lots of details in this
product that you have to see to believe.
Broderbund's Wolf Pack is not only
the company's first full VGA game, supporting the entire 256 color palette on
the IBM, but it allows players to set the
year of the war (affecting equipment) and
design scenarios. They are attempting to
develop a two-player possibility where
one player (Allies) commands surface
units and the other (Axis) commands the
submarines.
Accolade's Eye of the Storm was
developed by the team that designed
Thud Ridge for Three-Sixty. This UH-1

Huey game will use threedimensional filled polygons to
depict twelve different missions. It is a mission-based
game with a limited tour of
duty. Dynamix's A-10
Thunderbolt II: Tank Killer
will use VGA graphics with a
faster frame rate than the
EGA mode. In accordance
with the Dynamix
philosophy, the flight model
is very easy, but the game allows scenario building to
allow the player to establish
his own goals and plenty of
special effects to simulate
nap of the earth flying and
more.

Koei is continuing to work
on Bandit Kings of Ancient
China, based on the book
(Men of the Marshes) which
inspired Mao Tse-Tung to
develop his guerrilla tactics.
"The Victors"
Sports games will still be hot in the latter portion of 1989. Electronic Arts will
release an NBA-licensed, five on five, action game entitled Lakers vs. Celtics
(IBM); Melbourne House will follow the
success of John Elway's Quarterback
with Oral Hershiser's Strike Zone, Shark
Attack: Greg Norman's Ultimate Golf,
and Rick Davis's World Trophy Soccer;
Data East introduced their new MVP
Sports line with ABC Monday Night Football (a game in the style of
Cinemaware's 7V Sports Football); Accolade has provided for a team editor,
seven different ballparks, better animation, and league play in Hardball II. They
will also be releasing a game on international grand prix motorcycle racing, The
Cycles, and an off-shore power boat
racing game, Heat Wave. Meanwhile,
Epyx is hard at work on California
Games II.
One of the most challenging sports
games to be released this year will be
Broderbund's Playmaker Football
(Macintosh). This football game gives the
player the perspective of general
manager and coach in building up realistic teams and playbooks. Then, it uses a
sophisticated artificial intelligence to run
one or both teams. It is extremely
amenable to league play.

We're Back!
Now that Summer C.E.S. is over, it is
great to be back and have a chance to
watch these programs with so much
potential come rolling in. Right now,
everyone is excited. We'll tell you later
how well they actually play.

Taking A Peek

A.E.C., Inc.
7506 Broadway Ext.,
Suite 505
Oklahoma City, OK 73116
RETURN OF THE DINOSAURS: A
dinosaur has slipped through a crack in
time and is hiding somewhere in the
player's hometown. He must find out
what type of dinosaur it is and return it
to its proper era via the Time
Transporter. Sounds simple, right? This
adventure game is really a fascinating
tutorial that teaches database management to the whole family. The game features four levels of difficulty, and requires players to earn and manage
money and food, work within time constraints, learn to manipulate a database,
and explore the town and rural environment. This dino design is definitely different. IBM (pictured) and Apple IIC/E &
GS ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #1.

Bullseye Software
P.O. Box 7900
Incline Village, NV 89450
FERRARI GRAND PRIX: Macintosh
owners get the green flag with this Formula One racing simulation. Before
taking the wheel, drivers can choose
and handicap their competition, set their

Ferrari's gear ratios, set pit stop ratios,
and create their own courses and background scenery. Steering with the
mouse can be a bit tricky, but all in all,
an interesting treatment of a racing
simulation. Mac ($59.95). Circle Reader
Service #2.

Cinemaware
4165 Thousand Oaks Blvd.
Westlake Village, CA 91362
DARK SIDE: It's time again to save
the world from imminent destruction in
the latest release from Cinemaware's
"Spotlight" line of software. The player
must explore a hi-tech, futuristic military
base and shut down the Zephyr One, an
alien doomsday device set on final
countdown. Players must explore the different sectors of the base and destroy
enemy energy collectors, while refueling
and recharging their own lasers and

shields. The smooth scrolling graphics
and odd colors schemes impart an eerie
feel. Amiga (pictured), ST, & IBM
($39.95), C-64 ($29.95). Circle Reader
Service #3.
DEATH BRINGER: To free the land
of Mezron from the tyranny of the
Deathbringer, the player must travel the
land in search of five gems that, used
together, can bring down the evil wizard.
Similar in look and play to "Dungeon
Master", this role-playing adventure
takes you from dungeons to forests,
towers and temples. A point and click interface makes it easy and fast to get
around and communicate with the
many inhabitants you meet (not all of
them want your blood!), and the beautiful graphics and sound effects make this
game a very impressive looking entry
into the genre. Amiga (pictured) & ST
($39.95). Circle Reader Service #4.

($39.95) Amiga & ST ($29.95). Circle
Reader Service #8.
STARGOOSE: We are constantly
being amazed at the quality of the action games that are being turned out on
home computers and this game is no exception! One look at the outstanding,
scrolling graphics on this European arcade hit and you'll see what we mean.
The player must speed over a smoothly
scrolling 3-D relief landscape and steal
six crystals from eight different cities to
win the game, all the while avoiding the
usual assortment of machine gun nests,
laser pill boxes, rocket launchers and attack vehicles. By entering underground
tunnels, the player can refuel and
recharge his missiles and shields. The
tunnel sequences change the perspective to a more traditional 3-D scroll.
You'll be taking a familiar trip with this
product, but it never looked better! IBM
($39.95). Circle Reader Service #9.

Titus Software
20432 Corisco Street
Chatsworth, CA 91311
MLSA
2201 Drummond Plaza
Newark, Delaware 19711
MICROLEAGUE BASEBALL II: This
stat-based product can be the cure for
those with that armchair managing itch.
Players manage one of 32 famous
teams or create their own for league
play. With the general manager disk,
players can draft and trade players as
well as bring up budding youngsters
from the farm. A complete set of
managerial functions let you run the
show, and a stat disk compiles box
scores and accumulates league stats.
Everything a fanatic needs is here, except perhaps a drug testing and
managerial wagering option! IBM
($49.95). Circle Reader Service # 5.

Medalist International
180 Lakefront Drive
Hunt Valley, Maryland
21030
DESTROYER ESCORT: Players take
command of a WWII class destroyer in
this action/simulation game which looks
a lot like Epyx's Destroyer. Commanders escort six different convoys
through hostile waters, thwarting air attacks with anti-aircraft guns, sinking
enemy vessels with torpedoes and mortar, and avoiding sub attacks with depth
charge drops. The ability to vary difficulty
levels keeps the missions challenging. C64 ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #6.

TITAN: Just when you thought the

Psygnosis
c/o Computer Software Service
2150 Executive Drive
Addison, IL 60101
BLOOD MONEY: Gone are the days
when heroes battled evil aliens for the
sake of honor, valor, and humanity.
These days, they do it for a buck. In this
tough joystick-buster, prospective space
yuppies blast their way through hosts of
strange creatures while beefing up their
bankroll. The cash can by used to purchase ship equipment or that condo
unit on the Andromedian coast. Players
choose from four different planets, each
increasing in profit potential and difficulty. Amiga ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #7.

Spinnaker Software
One Kendall Square
Cambridge, MA 02139
QUADRALIEN: Alien nasties have invaded Powerstation ASTRA, contaminating it with radiation and destroying the
nuclear reactor's cooling system. Players
direct six special droids on their mission
to mop up the nuclear waste and
destroy the responsible aliens before the
reactor makes Chernobyl look like a
camp fire. Nice VGA graphics on the
IBM and a challenging strategic element
make this a player. IBM (pictured),

Breakout arcade system was dead and
gone, this product provides another
variation on the paddle n' brick idea.
Players slap a "power sphere" around a
3-D arena, attempting to disintegrate
bricks while avoiding death squares.
Eighty levels of fast scrolling graphics
provide the block breaking challenge.
IBM (pictured), Amiga & ST ($44.95), C64 ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #10.

Conversions Received
Airball (Microdeal) IBM
Baal (Psygnosis) C-64
Decisive Battles of ACW (SSG) IBM
Demon Stalkers (EA) IBM
Designasaurus (Britannica) Amiga
Dinosaurs Are Forever
(Polarware) Amiga
Fast Break (Accolade) Amiga
4th & Inches Construction Disk
(Accolade) Mac
Grand Prix Circuit (Accolade) Amiga
Gunship (Microprose) Amiga
Hole-In-One Miniature Golf
(Digitek) IBM
Jack Nicklaus Golf (Accolade) Amiga
John Elway's QB
(Melbourne House) Apple IIGS
John Madden Football (EA) Apple
Legacy of the Ancients (EA) IBM
The Magic Candle (Mindcraft) C-64
Ocean Ranger (Activision) IBM
Speedball (Spotlight) Amiga
Total Eclipse (Spotlight) Amiga
World Class Leader Board
(Access) IBM, Amiga

Review

C

aptain America
and Spiderman
both love New
York. Dr. Doom,
monarch of Latveria,
mad scientist and allaround bad guy wants to
turn New York into
Nuked York and he's got
a stolen nuclear missile
with which to accomplish
the task. Cap and Spidey
sneak into Doom's
fortress. Captain America
searches for Dr. Doom
while our friendly neighborhood Spiderman sets
out to stop the launch of
the missile. The
countdown has already
begun.
Doom has assembled an
awesome group of super
bad guys to defeat our
heroes. Cap and Spidey
will face some of the most
despicable characters ever
to grace the pages of a
comic book or the screen
of a monitor. These
dudes are bad!
Paragon bills Dr. Doom's Revenge as an interactive comic
book. If comics are perceived as primarily being visual, this is
definitely the case. The art work is definitely the strong point in
this product. The EGA graphics are high quality and just as colorful as the comic books themselves.
There are two types of screens in the game, comic panels and
action screens. The comic panels use great artwork to introduce
the action sequences and tie each sequence into the storyline.
Comic screens also serve as the place where players save or restore games. The action sequences also have excellent artwork.
Higher speed machines will see a bit more background animation, but not enough to really enhance the game to any great extent.

Comic Belief (The Good and Bad)
Unfortunately, a game needs more than great graphics to be exciting. The stunning visual qualities are greatly overshadowed by
the limitations of this action arcade game. The game runs slowly
and the controls seem extremely unresponsive.
The game is a step in the right direction for comicdom, because the characters don't just look like the famous heroes, as
they did in Data East's Batman and First Star's Superman,
they have the opportunity to perform like our heroes. Captain
America actually fights like the comic book hero. He performs exaggerated mid-air somersaults, acrobatics, flips, etc. and throws
his mighty shield. Spiderman is a true wall-crawler. He clings to
ceilings and walls and also does crazy acrobatics. The only difference between the comic and computer incarnations of these
heroes is that Spiderman's webs behave like clubs instead of
webs. This means Spidey can't catch thieves "just like flies" (as
the old T.V. cartoon theme used to say). Super villains like the
Hobgoblin, Oddball, the Hulk, Boomerang, Electro, Batroc, and
the Grey Gargoyle as well as Dr. Doom himself cavort about the
monitor in the appropriate style.
However, a glaring weakness is that players have few, if any,

DON'T

MESS
AROUND
WITH
"DOOM"!
by David M. Wilson

Dr. Doom's Revenge
IBM
Amiga, Atari ST and C-64 planned
REVIEWED:
IBM
PRICE:
$44.95
Mark E. Seremet
DESIGNER:
Paragon Software
PUBLISHER:
DISTRIBUTOR: Medalist International
Hunt Valley, MD.

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:

choices to make throughout
the game. The program has
predetermined the rooms that
Spidey and Cap will enter, as
well as the villains they will
face. If you find it somewhat
odd that Cap will battle Dr.
Doom (traditionally the Fantastic Four's arch nemesis) then
you'll be puzzled that Cap will
also battle Rhino and Electro
(traditionally Spiderman's
foes). Players have nothing to
decide except when to jump,
hit , dodge, avoid, throw, etc.
The game is similar to games
like Renegade or Bad Dudes
in that game play simply consists of one fight after
another. That is all there is to
it. Further, if Spiderman or
Captain America should happen to lose a battle individually, the game is over. There is
no chance for the other to
complete their mission.

The greatest disappointment
is the disk access time between screens. As important
as the comic panels are, they
slow the game down considerably. Perhaps an option could've been added to allow the player
to skip the comic screen. The disk access from boot to restored
game (all the way to the action sequence) takes approximately
three and one half minutes (on an 8088 with CGA graphics about three minutes and 50 seconds on a 286 with EGA
graphics). The program runs so slowly that players have the opportunity to read almost the complete comic book that comes
with the game while they wait for a chance to play. If this were
true only of rebooting the program, the game might prove more
exciting, but every screen loads sluggishly.
The Key disk copy protection scheme adds to the aggravation
of trying to get back to a saved game. Restoring from within the
game will only restore players at partial strength. Often, to defeat
a foe, players will need to be at full strength. Backing out of the
game completely and restoring the last saved position returns
players at full strength. To get back into the game, players are
asked questions about their system, level of play and then two
trivia questions from the biography section of the players manual.
Then, the insertion of a key disk is required in order to play on
the copied disks. This game would drive the owner of a single
floppy drive insane. Inserting the Key disk after having to answer
questions which could only be found in the game manual seems
overly cautious.
When players encounter a foe they simply cannot defeat on the
upper levels, it is possible to exit the game, return on the beginner level, beat the unbeatable foe (right the unrightable wrong,
reach the unreachable star, etc.), save, and finally, restore the
game at the hero or superhero level.

My Kingdom For A Plot
Dr. Doom's Revenge moves one step forward, two steps back
for comic-based action games. Most fans would like a little more
mystery and a little more ability to affect the plot. Comic fans are
thinking people. Stan Lee has consistently bragged that Marvel
Comics were the first comics to use college-level vocabulary.
Computer game producers will soon recognize that garners want
a little more than just action.

Review

Is It "Shogun"?
Nope! It's close, but no cigar! I've read the novel,
waded through the mini-series, and even read the biography of Will Adams, the "real" pilot that Clavell based
his novel on. In fact, reading the novel will certainly provide the player with some valuable tips on what he/she
should do. The game, however, differs considerably
from the novel.

by Dave Arneson
Dave Arneson is the co-designer of Dungeons &
Dragons" and founder of Adventure Games, a board
game company. He is currently involved in an RPG
campaign based on 16th Century Japan.

It Was a Dark and
Stormy Night . . .
A great storm batters
your ship. After months at
sea and a heroic crossing
of two oceans, it looks
like everything will soon
be ending.
As Infocom's Shogun
opens, you find your
player character standing
at the ship's wheel in the
midst of the storm. Talk
about starting right in the
middle of things!

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:

REVIEWED:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

Shogun
Apple IIGS, IBM,
Amiga, Atari ST, C-64-128
Macintosh
Macintosh
$59.95
Dave Lebling
Infocom
Menlo Park, CA

In Shogun, the player
adopts the persona of the
English Sea Pilot, John
Blackthorne. The game
begins on board the
Dutch Privateer, Erasmus,
during the most intense
portion of the aforementioned storm.
On board with you is a deathly ill Captain, half-dead mate, and an almost totally debilitated crew.

Dave collaborated directly with James
Clavell, author of the novel, in designing the game. It should come as no
surprise, therefore, to realize that Shogun requires the
player to act and think like Blackthorne would have.

Puzzle solving is non-existent. In the first sequence,
the player is presented with a situation that a real ship's
captain would have to solve. This is good! The bad part
is that you have almost no idea what to do! This is not
good. Here, success is determined by how well you, as
Blackthorne, thinks and acts, as compared to Clavell's
novel.
Therefore, the first job is to get your ship safely into a
small harbor. The ship may still be "wrecked," but you
do not necessarily die! Once ashore, the intrepid Englishmen must make his way in a mysterious, war-torn land
towards his goal.

Literary license aside, however, there is another question which should be asked. Is Shogun, the game, true
to 16th Century Medieval Japan? Ah, well, "would-be
Anjin-Sans" (Honorable Needle Watchers), it does not
taste like Sushi to my humble palate.
Perhaps, an altogether more relevant question would
be, "Is Shogun, the game, exciting?" Well, yes and no!
Hark, Hatamoto! Is that a waffling noise I hear? There
are some exciting situations, but rather than the stimulation of thinking one's way through to a logical solution,
one is continually forced to play ..

Guess The Parser!
Failure to make the proper decision (note the singular!) means that death follows soon after. A wrong
guess? DEATH! Deviate from the path? DEATH! Take
too long to come up with the right verb? Death!
Ah, Anjin-San, you may have noticed a subtle pattern
emerging. Ah! You are wise in the ways of "The one
true way" type of game. Thankfully, there are .. .

Hints!
When is a hint not a hint? When it doesn't help! One
hint, two hints, four hints, six hints! If you haven't gotten
it by the end of the list, the last hint should tell you exactly what to do. If you can't figure it out by then, you
can't figure it out!
To me, a hint is supposed to be a little shove in the
right direction. Additional hints for a situation should
add to your knowledge. In Zork Zero, the hints built on
each other to the point of telling you exactly what to do.
Well, at least most of the time. This brought about a
low frustration level because players could get quickly
back into the game. In Shogun, there were way too
many occasions when the last hint was no clearer than
the first one was. This brought about a very high frustration level.

Artistic Backdrop
The graphics in Shogun are quite intricate, stunning,
and beautiful. The pictures are used as borders around
the text, providing a very nice touch, and as part of the
story line itself. Some pictures show the rewards
received for successfully handling situations.
Well, the pictures are certainly nice to look at and they
do show what is happening, but they also carry almost
no intrinsic information about what is happening. They
are simply there to break up the text. They simply provide a backdrop and enhancement to the information
conveyed in the text.
Now, if the designer really wants to make optimal use
of these illustrations, they need to convey some additional information beyond what is covered in the text. They

should, in a phrase, provide clues and hints! In Shogun,
unfortunately, they simply provide a nice atmosphere.

Honorable Mentions
Fortunately, there are some very nice facets about

Shogun. First, there is a lot to the game. Players will not
win the game without putting in several weeks of game
play. There are plenty of items to locate, but the good
news is that you do not have to find every item in order
to win.
Second, it is easy to save the game as you go. It is
also, of course, a very good idea to do so. The nice fact
about Shogun is that the game is presented like "Chapters" in a book. Therefore, there are enough logical stopping points that players will rarely need to stop "in the
middle of things." There is also no problem about putting the game on your hard disk for easy saves and access.

Wisdom for Anjin-San (General Hints)
Once you get the drift of which verbs the parser is looking for, write them down. It will save trying to recall
them and similar situations will tend to use the same
command sequence throughout the game.
Once you have figured out a "Chapter" (situation), it is
time to save (immediately). This will save considerable
grief.
When a situation is described, pay close attention to it.
Those seemingly meaningless details are important. For
example (specific information follows), as the game
opens, you are HUNGRY and NEED rest. So, you better
get something to eat and manage to get some rest. Of
course, there is also a raging storm about. Therefore,
the ship's crew will have to man their stations before
you go below. If no one is running the boat while you
go below to snooze, the next sound you hear could be
waves beating against the rocks ... ROCKS!! Not so obvious is getting something to eat. It is also not obvious
that you cannot come back at a later time to eat the
apple. The same is true of getting sleep and saving the
pilot's log.
Now, I have no trouble with a mistake in the middle of
a storm resulting in a rapid demise. It is, after all, a
crisis situation. However, my character is supposed to
be an experienced pilot on a ship that he actually
knows. Why don't I know anything, then? Not to mention the possibility of collapsing from lack of food and
sleep, why don't I know how close my character is to
"the edge?"
This lack of knowledge is invariably fatal. It also means
doing the same scene several times before solving it correctly. Further repetition is often required in order for
players to acquire all the items in a scene which can
score points.

Which Way to the Emperor?
Making your own inquiries is difficult, time consuming,
and, many times, profitless. Assuming that everyone
who plays the game has read the book seems a bit
much to ask. Of course, having seen the mini-series
helps, but reading the book is one's best bet with
regard to finding a great deal of information. Players
should keep a copy handy, along with a paper and
pencil.

Frankly, Shogun loses a lot of excitement from the
book. There is no wandering off the beaten path to explore the land. Shogun is very linear. There is only "one
true way" to success. Ah, yes!
Once you succeed as AnjinSan, you can go
back and get all
those points you
missed the first
time. In the end,
however, your
path is still the
same. Your major
choices are unchanged.
As text games
go, however,
Shogun is only
mildly interesting. Nevertheless, messing around in 16th
Century Japan should be "more than interesting!" This
game could have been exceptional. Instead, it is merely
ordinary. Fans of text games will probably like Shogun
simply for the fact that it is a far different setting from
the run of the mill fantasy or detective genre they are
used to seeing.
For those readers who are still unsure about the entire
genre of text games, pass on Shogun. In this reviewer's
opinion, Zork Zero offers a much more satisfying experience.

CGW Test Lab

The Owner's Guide
to Tandy 16 Color
Several owners of the IBM Compatible Tandy computers have
expressed concern that, based on the packaging stickers, it was
difficult to determine what games support Tandy 16 color
graphics and which do not. Hence, Tandy Corporation loaned
the CGW Test Lab a Tandy 1000 in order to determine which
games do support Tandy 16 color graphics and which do not.
The following chart shows those IBM games which support
Tandy 16 color (whether or not it is specified on the package) or
not. Note: Those games listed as "Yes" on this chart display in
16 colors. Some games marked "No" simply display in four colors
on all machines, but can still be played on the Tandy. The chart
is based upon early game sequences and may not reflect
the performance throughout the entire game.
Title

Publisher

3D Game Maker
Ancient Battles
Annals of Rome
Aussie Joker Poker
Balance of Power 1990
Barbarian
The Bard's Tale II
Battlechess
Bionic Commando
Candy Land
Chessmaster 2100
Chutes and Ladders
Club Backgammon
Contra
Cosmos
Cyber Cop
Demon's Winter
Double Dare
Fast Break
Firezone
First Over Germany
Guardians of Infinity
Guerilla War
Halls of Montezuma
Heavy Metal

Scorpion
Scorpion
PSS/Datasoft
Aussie Joker Software
Mindscape
Melbourne House
Electronic Arts
Interplay
Capcom
Game Tek
Software Toolworks
Game Tek
California Dreams
Konami
Ishi Press
PSI
SSI
Game Tek
Accolade
PSS/Datasoft
SSI
Paragon
Data East
SSG
Access

Supports
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
Yes

Heroes of the Lance
Hidden Agenda
High Seas
Hollywood Squares
The Honeymooners
Indiana Jones and the
Temple of Doom
Jackal
Jigsaw
Kings of the Beach
Life & Death
The Magic Candle
Magic Johnson's
Basketball
Mini-Putt
Modem Wars
Out Run
Phantasm
Platoon
Pole Position II
Presumed Guilty
Rack'em
Red Storm Rising
Road Runner
Scavengers of the
Mutant World
Serve & Volley
Sky Shark
Slots and Cards
Sorceror Lord
Space School Simulator
Speedball
Star Wars
Steel Thunder
Street Fighter
Street Fighting Man
Thunderchopper
TKO
Total Eclipse
The Train
Turbo Champion
Cinder Fire
Vulcan
Wasteland
Zany Golf
Zoom

SSI
Springboard
Garde'
Game Tek
First Row

No
No
No
No
No

Mindscape
Konami
Britannica
Electronic Arts
Software Toolworks
Mindcraft

Yes
No
No
No
No
No

Melbourne House
Accolade
Electronic Arts
Mindscape
Scorpion
Data East
Mindscape
Cosmi
Accolade
Microprose
Mindscape

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes

Review
t was becoming increasingI
hard to
hear above the din
resounding off the
walls of the meeting hall. In front of the
people, high on a platform overlooking
the vast throng, stood a towering figure of a man. Speaking from a pulpit
thrust out from the stage, his face
twisted with emotion, the speaker
was whipping the crowd into a
frenzy of emotion.
Appealing to their senses of right and wrong, good
and bad, morality and
immorality, he skillfully arid
artfully pleaded his case.
"Death and destruction to the
evil infidels from the far
side of the world! May fire
and brimstone descend
on them to cleanse and
cauterize their soil! I shall
use the POWER to rend
their land with
earthquakes! I shall use
the POWER to twist and
fold their earth and villages with volcanos! I
shall use the POWER to
wash their tainted ground
with floods! I shall use
the POWER to turn their
fields and villages into
putrid, rotting swamps! I
shall use the POWER to
visit them with a plague
of ruthless, merciless
knights! And finally I shall
use the POWER to unleash the Armageddon of the Ages upon
them and their children, so that for all
time the history books will render glowing accounts of our land, our people,
our leader, and our POWER!"
The mass surged forward towards the
leader in his pulpit. Swaying in a hypnotic state they moved as one large
amoeba, one mind, one purpose, to
meld with their leader; follow him
across the seas; and give him strength,
the strength to call forth the POWER.
But as they began to move towards
the exits of the hall, they paused at the
sound of the distant rumbling that was
becoming louder by the second. And as
the walls of the parthenon began to
shake and disintegrate down upon
them, the leader came to the shattering
realization that heathens also had the
POWER ... and the time of the
earthquakes was now upon them all.
Populous is a British designed game
that casts the player in the role of a
leader, frankly God, or a god, or a deity
(EA prefers the latter term). As a god, you
manipulate nature and your people, (the
chosen ones), to subdue those that are
not your people (the rest of the world).
The object, as in all apocalyptic struggles, is complete victory for the chosen
ones. Sounds grim doesn't it? Yet the
game was designed on a set of Lego"

he is preparing to
do the same to
you! The game is a
race to develop as
fast as possible.
The computer's Al is very sophisticated
and learns your tactics, so time is of the
essence.
The basic function of the game is leveling land for your people to live on.
Mountains and hills must be flattened
out and gullies and oceans must be
filled in so your people can settle. The land is made of com-

And On The Eighth Day...
by Biff Kritzen

TITLE:
DESIGNERS:
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
PUBLISHER:

Populous
Peter Molyneux & Glenn Copes
Amiga
$49.95
Electronic Arts
San Mateo, CA

bricks in a couple of evenings and as
heavy-handed as the premise sounds, it
really is a rather light-hearted game.
As leader, the player must direct his
people on a campaign of conquest that
employs a variety of man-made and
natural disasters to subjugate the enemy.
Manna (in this case, closer to the
Polynesian "mana", i.e. supernatural
power, than the Hebrew's bread in the
wilderness, "manna") is the coin of the
realm in this game and it comes from the
size of your population. Provide your
people with flat lands to settle and they
will begin to be "fruitful and multiply". As
the size of their cultivatable fields increase, so will the size and sophistication
of their dwellings. Hilly areas with lots of
rocks will give you huts and hoes. Large
flat plains will give you castles and
swords. The more people, the more
manna. The more manna, the more disasters you can inflict upon the enemy.
These are simple economics that let you
concentrate on the method of destruction you will unleash on the unsuspecting foe. Well, not totally unsuspecting, as

puter Lego-like blocks, each
block providing a flat surface
to build on. The more contiguous flat blocks you
have, the larger and more
sophisticated the dwelling
the inhabitants can build,
with a castle being the pinnacle. Manna is produced
by the people in their
homes (kind of like little
elves sitting home and
spinning gold) and the
more you have the more
things you can effect. It
costs manna to do everything, so economy of action is important. It costs
manna to raise or lower
land, so it's not good to
go about flattening the
countryside haphazardly, although the temptation to
make over the world completely is a little hard to
resist!
As your manna level increases you get access to increasingly
more powerful and deadly natural disasters that you can inflict on the infidel.
Earthquakes rock the countryside and
cause land to crumble into the sea,
taking homes and people with it. The
land can be rebuilt, but it takes time and
manna. Swamps are deadlier yet, and volcanos can really give an opponent
headaches. Rampaging knights are death
and destruction machines that overrun all
in their path, cutting a swath through the
enemy lands and leaving behind burned
out shells of buildings. They must be
razed before the land can be built on
again. Floods wipe out any land that is
one or two blocks above sea level, so this
is a good way to make your hillside villages oceanfront resorts. And finally there
is Armageddon itself, a force that when
unleashed draws all to that final battleground, where all men fight as one,
and only one survives. Great stuff, huh?
The game integrates all of the above
marvelously well and the player can easily
concentrate on the destruction at hand.
The game screen has a strategic map
showing the whole world ("in your
hands") that is always on screen, a tactical map that shows any area you want to
see and work on, a sliding manna scale
that shows how much power you have
and what is available in the way of

destruction, and a point and click menu.
It's elegantly simple in design and layout,
and orders can be given and carried out
instantaneously. The graphics are somewhat whimsical and very eye-catching,
and the colors are simply stunning.
There are four types of worlds to fight
over, each one with its own gorgeous
color palette: the lush, almost tropical
grassworlds, with cool, refreshing greens
and cobalt oceans; the sunny yellow, parched desert worlds; the frosty cold, blue
and white ice worlds; and the ashen gray
and red, rock and lava worlds. This is a
beautiful game to watch, and visually rich
to play.
You can choose between "Conquest" (a
set of 500 worlds to fight over), or "Custom games. In "Conquest" the computer
sets the options and you must fight your
way to the end, world by world. Five
hundred worlds isn't as daunting as it
would initially seem because, based on
how well you do in each world, you may
be skipped ahead several worlds as you
call up the next game. I played around
forty games in the Conquest series and
was actually fighting at level 137. So you
needn't spend the rest of your gaming
life to finish the set. (But you may want

to anyway.) Simply put, this game is as
addictive as any that you'll ever play!
Hours really fly by as you fight your way
from one landscape to the next.
If 500 worlds seems like too much to
conquer, you can play the "Custom"
game that lets you determine what disasters you or the computer can use in
the game and what type of land you'll
fight over. The computer can randomly
generate thousands of different configurations so this is not a game that you'll
ever find repetitive.
Populous is a solitaire game but there is
an option to play via modem. The computer opponent is excellent so whether
you play solo or "face-to-face", by using
the options to handicap the game, you'll
be more than evenly matched.
A sample game might go something
like this. Initially you want to clear land
for your starting people to build on.
Don't do too much. You don't have a lot
of manna to burn, and you want your
people to spread out over a good sized
area, which they will do more quickly if
the cultivated area is smaller. Once they
spread out, you can further smooth out
the hills and let their settlements build up
quickly. Keep an eye on the enemy and

Environmental Impact Report
Landscape Details
The grass level is the easiest to play on, people can walk long distances
to settle on new land, unlike the desert and ice where they walk a small
distance and die.
The highest weapon factors are:
1. Grass landscape
sword
2. Rock landscape
sword
3. Ice landscape
none
4. Desert landscape
ball and chain
On the ice landscape, the castle produces the same amount of manna
as a tent, so don't waste space with a castle.

Building Tips
Except on ice worlds, start out by building a castle (the best manna
producer). Once finished, build down. This is done by reducing the level
of a piece of land adjacent to the castle. This will turn the castle into a
smaller building and produce a "walker" quicker, who will then settle a
new piece of land. This technique is called "Sproging". Be sure to replace
the land you dropped, so your castle will reappear.
When building flat land from sea level, build up twice on the same spot
and then flatten down once. This will save you extra builds and manna.
It's also a good idea early on to keep an eye on the enemy leader. If he
gets to big, drown or quake him.

Acts of Nature
A particularly nasty move is to volcano the enemy's plains. This forces
him to flatten out the area, (using time and manna). If you have the
power, volcano him twice in the same spot. This turns his land into Tibet,

when you get enough power, quake their
castles. As you become stronger, swamp
'em. Send your leader and his people out
towards the enemy lands to build settlements and fight anyone they come
across. If you have enough manna, volcano them. Better yet, volcano them
twice in the same area and create a huge
stumbling block to their development.
When you've settled a big enough area
and they're busy trying to repair the
quake, swamp and volcano damage,
build up your leader and create a knight
or two to go on a rampage. By then, if
you're a good builder (and destroyer) you
should have a larger population. Then
decide whether you want to crush the
baddies with knights, or "armageddon".
Armageddon will garner you more points
if you use it, but you don't get to watch
your knights slash and burn their way
through the enemy.
The game may sound vicious and
bloody, but it really isn't. The graphics
and animation are done in such a whimsical manner that playing Populous is
more like watching a Saturday morning
cartoon, than sitting through "Platoon".
This is a great game that you'll find yourself playing it over and over again.

and he might as well forget about the area completely. If you get "voiced",
just quake your own area and get rid of the rocks. Flatten it out and go
on from there.
Earthquakes are a real pain, not bad enough to kill you, just good for
keeping you busy rebuilding. Keep doing it to him where he has a castle
grouping.
Floods turn the game around completely. If you're going to flood the
enemy, be sure you have villages and people on high ground or you'll lose
them along with the enemy. This is the "redefine the coastline" option.
Your desert land in Las Vegas will turn into prime seaside resort property!
If you get flooded, build land quickly and you can still save some of your
people from drowning.
Swamps are extremely deadly, especially if your leader is the one being
swamped. Swamps can only be dropped on flat land, so keep that in
mind.
Knights are the most effective killing machines in the game. If you're
trying to swamp one, you must get them right underfoot or they'll detour
around them. Before creating a knight, try and get your leader's population and weapons factor at a maximum. This will give you a strong,
longer lasting hunter-killer. Knights close together in the same area will
join together.
A good way to take over enemy settlements is to place you papal magnet in the center of the opponent's building. Your leader will then move to
it and take over the building if he's strong enough. This also works to
build up your leader's weapon factor. Put the magnet in a castle and he'll
move to it and pick up the more advanced weapons.
The main tip given by Peter Molyneux, the game designer, was: The
Louisiana Strategy - If it moves swamp it, if it doesn't move swamp it
anyway!

Sneak Preview

hat is reality? When
since the land bridge necesdo thoughts actualsary to connect the stones
ize into material
with the obelisk cannot pass
reality? Does what I think
over water, sand, or conreally cause something to
taminated terrain.
actually be? What does
Thus far, the game sounds
philosophy have to do with
fairly simple. Nevertheless,
an action-strategy game? In
there are several factors
Britannica Software's Arwhich are not immediately
chipelagos, the first release
obvious, even in the early
in the company's new "Fanscenarios.
fare" line, the science fiction
Nightmare
by Wyatt Lee
(or maybe Psy-ence Fiction)
on PC Street
behind the game is founded
TITLE:
Archipelagos
The first factor is time. The
on a literalization of quesSYSTEM:
Amiga, Atari ST, IBM
hostile environment is conREVIEWED:
Amiga
tions like these.
PRICE:
$39.95
stantly working against the
It seems that the Ancients
DESIGNERS:
Logotron
player. The arboreal trees
PUBLISHER:
Britannica Software
imagined lush oases of
are constantly moving and
San Francisco, CA
plush tropical paradises.
the blood of the Ancients inThese were "Dreamlands",
cessantly spreads its
retreats for the mind which
poison. Even though the
evolved into a material
only artificial time conreality (more precisely,
straint placed on the
9,999 different material
player is the 90 seconds
realities). In fact, they beafter the last stone is
came so real that alien
destroyed, one is forced to
visitors conquered these
keep on the move berealities.
cause the blood can
The alien visitors staked
spread faster than the
claim on every archipelagos
player can build. The only
by placing networks of
way to stop the incessant
obelisks (sort of a cross beflow of putrefaction is to use the assigned key to check the map.
tween the monolith in 2001: A Space Odyssey and the
This pauses the program and gives the player a chance to catch a
Washington Monument) and stones (looking like a minibreath.
Stonehenge) in order to establish their control over the DreamThe second factor involves the Necromancers. By devouring the
lands and enable them to destroy the human tenants. Using the
grassy terrain and turning the squares nearby the target into
stone network as their base of power, arboreal trees continually insand, they can quickly undo one's strategy in creating the land
fect the landscape with the blood from those "Ancient" tenants;
bridge. By devouring the square immediately adjacent to the
ghosts of the twisted and mutilated Ancients devour the land in
player's cursor, they can actually cause the player's persona to
the Dreamlands; Eggs of Blood hatch during ominous
sink into the quicksand and die.
thunderstorms and can either contaminate or disintegrate the soil
Third, the Eggs of Blood cause the entire pace of the game to
on a given archipelagos; and the Lost Souls of the Ancients
increase. Fourth, the Lost Souls guarantee that there is no safe
wander the Dreamlands like whirlwinds of destruction. The early
place to stand still and pluck energy from the plants that spring
scenarios only have arboreal trees as obstacles. The other
up on the countryside. Rather, one must constantly be on the
obstacles/opponents are added to the scenarios after the player
move.
reaches a certain level of proficiency.
Strategies within the game must be dynamic and flexible. In
some scenarios, it is best to find every stone and the obelisk prior
"Mr. Sandman, Bring Me A Dream"
to doing anything. Then, one simply memorizes the positions,
In Archipelagos, the player hovers mentally (some might call it
connects stones to obelisk, destroys all and rescues the given aran astral projection) over the landscape of a given archipelago. Alchipelago from alien domination. At other times, the blood is
most every archipelago is randomly determined. However, every
spreading so fast, that one can almost never disinfect enough
fifth archipelago is bit-mapped so that it bears a distinct shape
contaminated terrain to connect the stone network and destroy
(i.e. Britain, Europe, the Logotron Turtle). It is the player's job to
them. Sometimes, players will need to harvest as much energy as
connect the entire network of stones and obelisk with an unpossible before even trying to connect the network. At other
obstructed and uncontaminated land bridge. When, or if, such a
times, one will have to build up strength as needed in order to
bridge is built, first the stones and later, the obelisk can be
connect each stone a step at a time.
destroyed by simply clicking on the mouse button (This repre-

W

Islands in the Stream
of Consciousness
"Archipelagos" Opens
with a "Fanfare"

sents the process of draining energy from the stones). Once all
the stones have been destroyed, the player has 90 seconds of real
time to travel back to the obelisk and destroy it. If he/she is successful, the result is written to disk and the player can advance to
the next archipelago (or exit the program until the next play session). If he/she doesn't reach the obelisk in time, it is fatal.
With the energy derived from destroying the stones (as well as
picking up some energy from uncontaminated plants which crop
up from time to time), the player can fly around remolding the archipelagos or undoing some of the damage done by the alien adversaries. By pointing to a given point and pressing the assigned
key, the player can transform water into sand, sand into grassy terrain, and polluted terrain into safe terrain. This will be necessary,

Daydream Believer (Conclusion)

The graphic presentation, from the rise and fall of the arboral
trees to the unveiling of the Eggs of Blood, is extremely phallic.
The colors are vibrant (at times, almost violent). Graphically, this
game is stunning, perhaps even shocking. The documentation is
sparse, but adequate (even though written in British). The game
concept is innovative and the play becomes increasingly engrossing. If one is looking for a game that offers a challenging conundrum set against a surrealistic premise, Archipelagos is precisely
the game. If one is looking for an offbeat product to offer relatively brief, but intense, play sessions, Archipelagos fills that order, as
well. In short, Archipelagos is a distinctive product that well deserves to be imported.

Review

O

nce, there was an age of glorious colonization and the
encouraging birth of the Milky Way Union. Now, the
Union faces a terrifying foe. Enemy, thy name is
Xacalite. Xacalite is the villainous leader of a group of extremists. His fleet is
enormous, and with
the capture of
GLOIRE, a powerfully built battleship of
recent construction,
he is almost invincible. Now, armed
with the latest in
weaponry, he and
his merry band of interplanetary terrorists, have decided
to overthrow Union
defenses, and take
over the reins of
power.

When an area is successfully completed, it is possible to land
on a tender to lick your wounds, select new armament, and
repair damaged parts. Every time 50,000 points are acquired, an
extra weapon is added to the Silpheed's arsenal.

SPACE
PILOT

In Silpheed,
Sierra's newest action-packed arcade
game, the Milky Way
Union's Silpheed
prototype (Super Air
Fighter SA-08) is at
your disposal. You
alone have been
selected to attack
GLOIRE, and defeat
the ruthless Xacalite.

Sights and
Sounds of Total
War (Atmosphere)
The musical compositions are original, and made this reviewer
somewhat reminiscent of the music found in new age martial arts
films. Why not? With the expertise of Bob Siebenberg of Supertramp, the accompanying score is better than the music one
usually hears on arcade machines. This is because the music follows the mood and even the intensity of the moment. However,
the enjoyment of these musical themes is only as good as your
sound equipment. Unfortunately, even with the aid of the Roland
MT-32 Sound Module, for example, the digitized quote from
Shakespeare (Julius Caesar, Ill, i) spoken by the talking face at
the beginning of the game is completely unintelligible (fortunately, you can read it in the opening credits).
The graphics are refreshingly clear, sharp and colorful. However, the background scenes change very little from area to area.
They are not detailed enough to be considered outstandingly different from each other. Each area of the game almost looks the
same.
There are 20 levels to this game, not counting the Final Battle
In order to win the game, players must destroy the gigantic battleship GLOIRE and defeat Xacalite. To accomplish this, one
must struggle to steer the Silpheed to the final battle stage. The
action is extremely intense, and the brief respite between level
changes is a welcomed relief. A huge talking head starts the
game, then it's time to get ready for great arcade action.
There are at least 15 different types of enemies. Each enemy
has different characteristics and utilizes different flight patterns.
Players should try to become familiar with them. There are
guided missiles, super performance air fighters and Kamikaze
style attackers that refuse to be denied or avoided.

Sierra's "Silpheed"
by Sheila A. Carter

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:

REVIEWED:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

SILPHEED
IBM, Apple IIGS,
Macintosh, Atari ST,
and Amiga
IBM
$34.95
S. Uesaka
and H. Godai
Sierra
Coarsegold, CA

It is also a good
idea to shoot Golans
and intercept them.
They have very helpful items inside of
them. But, beware,
Golans and asteroids
look very much alike
and making contact
with asteroids can
hurt. If a pilot loses
his/her shields and
suffers too much
damage, it will cause
the Silpheed to explode and automatically conclude the
game.
Sierra On-Line
and Game Arts of
Japan have, once
again, collaborated
to produce another
arcade delight.

Stayin' Alive
(WARNING: This
section contains
specific hints)

Acquire as many weapons as possible. Speed and Full Power
are probably the most valuable in the earlier levels. The V-Beam
is helpful in level 3. Also, since Level 20 is extremely difficult, this
reviewer found it most helpful to use the LASER CANNON and
the AUTOMATIC AIMING weapons.
You may also find it expedient to keep a record of the best
types of weapons used in the different levels. Regardless of the dif
ferent types of weapons selected per level, the Dogfighter never
seems to have enough of the right kinds of fire power for certain
types of enemies. For example, in level 20 it would be a great
asset, in this reviewer's opinion, if the player were given the opportunity to select at least 2 weapons per left and right sides of
the ship instead of one. If you select the Laser Cannon and Automatic Aiming weapons for level 20, one side of your ship is extremely vulnerable to flying debris and missile blasts. However, it
is possible to win with the selections offered; if the Super Dogfighter is doggedly determined.
Be sure to destroy all Golans and take all items.
In level 2, nuke the Robayon. This will earn you 50,000 points
and add another potential weapon to acquire at the next tender.
Note: Robayons have identical flight patterns and are very difficult to destroy. Be persistent.

Pilot Program (Conclusion)
Silpheed is exhilarating, nerve racking on the screen excitement. So, if you want to fly through the universe blasting evil in
all directions, save the minions from the terrible tyranny of the
ruthless Xacalite, and bring peace to the mighty Milkyway Union,
SAMURAI
then slip into the cockpit of the Silpheed destroyer and go for it!

CGW's Top 100 Games

The Categories
Strategy (ST): Games that
emphasize strategic planning
and problem solving.
Simulation (SI): Games based
on first person perspectives of
real world environments.
Adventure (AD): Games that
allow you to take your alter
ego through a storyline or
series of events.
Role-Playing Adventures
(RP): Adventure games that
are based on character
development (usually
involving attributes).
Wargames (WG):
Simulations of historical or
futuristic warfare from a
command perspective.
Action/Arcade (AC):
Computer games that
emphasize hand-eye
coordination and reflexes.

Game Ratings Chart

Hall of Fame
The Games In
CGW's Hall
Of Fame Have
Been Highly
Rated By Our
Readers Over
Time. They
Are Worthy Of
Play By All.

Review

S

ubtitled "The Misadventures of a Wizard's Apprentice," Tangled
Tales is the story of how a
young spell-caster attempts to
make up for previous errors. A
booklet enclosed with the
game explains how your character, mostly through sheer ineptitude and fuzzy thinking, so
by Scorpia
angers Eldritch the master
wizard that he wipes your
spellbook clean of all its contents.
Right there, you can tell it's
not going to be a good day.
Fortunately, Eldritch is kind at
heart and gives you the
chance to repair some of the
damage. This leads into the
TITLE:
Tangled Tales
first of three connected advenSYSTEMS:
Apple II, C-64
tures, through which you will
PRICE:
$29.95
DESIGNER: Gary Smith & Alex Nghiem
prove yourself worthy of being
PUBLISHER: Origin
a mage.
Londonderry, NH
The game actually begins
with the creation of your character. You choose name and sex, then move down to the four attributes of strength, intelligence, speed, and charisma. Each
comes with a starting value (given as a word instead of a number) that is the bare minimum for a moderately decent character.
In order to raise one attribute, you must lower another. For instance, you could lower your charisma from Tactful to Offensive.
This, in turn, would let you raise speed from Brisk to Energetic.
This is the only chance you have to fiddle with the attributes.
Once play starts, permanent increases come only after successfully completing an assignment and only one attribute (of your
choice) can be increased.
In the first adventure, it will probably be a long time before you
come across an offensive spell. Thus, you will usually be fighting
with a hand weapon. So, strength is very important because the
sooner you kill the monsters, the better off you are. In addition,
the greater your strength, the more punishment you can absorb
before dying.
The best attribute to lower in order to increase strength is charisma. This does have the drawback of making everything you need
to buy more expensive (by about 20 gold pieces), but the tradeoff is definitely worth the price increase. Later on, after you have
acquired more spells, intelligence becomes more important, but
this you can have raised by Eldritch when you finish a task.

Game Play
Once your character is complete, play begins. You start in your
room, where Jacob, the butler, summons you to Eldritch's
presence. With some trepidation, you tip-toe in, and find that
Eldritch has a little mission for you: replacing the vial of rare admantite dust that you wasted in your last escapade.
This is not as easy as it sounds. The dust is available in only
one place, the lair of an evil archmage called Xavier. You can't
just go waltzing in and pick it up by yourself. You won't even be
able to get in on your own. This task, like the ones that await
you later, will require the help of various companions and hirelings.
A few spells would come in handy, too, and these you must find
as you explore in and around the town. All the dungeons are
dark places (of course), so a light spell is your first priority. Fortunately, it isn't difficult to come across and you should have it
before you leave Eldritch's tower.
One thing you'll notice rather quickly is that the valley of Fairhaven is a small place. The outdoors is not at all extensive, and
mapping is not needed. This is also true of the dungeons, which
tend to be relatively straightforward, with an occasional secret
door here and there.

What you will also discover
before long is that you'll have
to do a lot of running around
back and forth between
various locations. Make no
mistake about it, this is not
your standard hack'n'slash
epic. It is more like trying to
solve the puzzles in a standard
adventure game, with a lot of
monsters thrown in your way
to make your life difficult. Just
imagine doing Zork I (although the puzzles here are
generally much easier) with unpleasant critters wandering all
over the place. You'll get the
idea.
Combat has only one purpose: it provides the money
you need to purchase items,
hire people to be in your
party, and get them healed up
when needed. You get neither
experience nor goodies for
defeating monsters. Therefore,
once you have enough cash to buy what you need, it's best to
avoid fighting whenever possible.
You might think that having a big party would be helpful, but
that's not the case. The more people running around with you,
the more monsters you face in any combat. This can get to be
nasty, as the opposition tends to gang up on one or two characters, often leading to an early demise.
Death, on the other hand, is not such a terrible thing. If you die
or your entire party goes under, Eldritch whips you back to the
tower and has you resurrected. Everything remains intact. However, if you should survive but one or more party members die(s),
you might have a problem.
In this case, you must go to a priest to get the dead resurrected. This is costly (as it is to get anyone unpoisoned or unparalyzed). If you don't have enough money, you need to pick up
some cash as fast as you can. Chance, the supposed patron of
Adventurers, will appear to you the next time you sleep. She will
tell you that until your comrades have been healed, you will be a
shadow of your former self. To put it bluntly, only half of your
spell points are regenerated when you sleep if you do not keep
your friends in good health.
Speaking of health, you can heal up and restore spell points
merely by sleeping. You can do this practically anywhere, although some places are safer than others. Bedding down in a
dungeon is always risky, but there are times when it has to be
done. Be certain to stand a watch on such occasions.
A major part of the game (in all three scenarios) is deciding who
to have in your party when. Sometimes, you need a character
with you before another one will join or need a specific NPC to
help you get past a particular obstacle. Not all of them will stay
with you, either. A few, having served their purpose, will vanish
from sight forever. Others, usually those you pay to join, can be
found again, and for another payment will go with you. Of
course, there are some, like Alvin, you couldn't get rid of (if you
wanted to) because they are bound by loyalty or duty rather than
cash.

Scenario Notes
In Fairhaven, you shouldn't have too much trouble completing
your task, once you get the hang of things. The puzzles are fairly
easy (rather obvious, in fact) and this section of the game seems
designed more as a learning experience than anything else.
Remember the lessons, as matters become a more complex in
the future. Note that Xavier is unbeatable, but your job isn't to kill
him anyway.
Once you've returned with the admantite dust, Eldritch gives

you your attribute increase and dispatches you to Violet Valley
(via teleporter) to end a mysterious drought. Of all the scenarios,
this is the most involved, and potentially the most frustrating.
So many things depend on having done something else first
that you can easily find yourself at a standstill at many different
points. Then, you have to stop whatever you're doing, backtrack
a bit, and try to figure out what you're missing.
For example, you will need the help of
three different NPC's in the party to get the
magic carpet away from the Imp. To
achieve your objective at the end of the
scenario, you need the assistance of three
other NPC's. It isn't a matter of having
people to fight monsters. Rather, each of
these characters has specific actions to perform at certain locations.
So, you must be careful about who you
have in the group at any time, especially as
several characters are important in more
than one situation. Inevitably, this leads to
much running around as you try to determine who can do what,
where. Once you have found the Recall spell, it becomes a little
easier. In general, if you come to an obstacle you just can't get
past, it's pretty certain you are lacking either the right party member or the right item.
For your final assignment, the little teleportals that link all the
valleys are weakening. You must go to Springdale Valley, find the
spell that will regenerate their powers and cast it on the three
teleportals.
This scenario will give you some pause for thought, as there
seems, at first, little to work with. Where before NPC's were all
over the place, now you find (at the start) only one. Before you

go running off to explore dark caves, it's best to buy everything
you can (except the Christmas Cookie), so you will have fewer
problems later. Also, keep an eye out for rabbit traps (Hint: there
are three of them).
Since NPC's are fewer here (four in all, three of whom will be
with you for most of this section), which ones to have in the party
is not a problem. In fact, most of this last
scenario is not difficult, once you have the
three you need. Make sure you talk to each
NPC after they have joined you.
The only real difficulty you may encounter
is dealing with the Devourer (shades of Alternate Reality!). He is absolutely unbeatable in combat and you cannot run
once you start fighting him. NPC's won't
help in this circumstance; this is something
you have to do on your own. Examine your
list of spells carefully for one that can be of
use here.
Once you have strengthened all three portals, you can return to Eldritch for your
final reward. This will end the game (an automatic sequence). So,
if you feel the urge to beat on hapless monsters now that you
know every spell there is to know, do it before talking to Eldritch.

Tattle Tales (Conclusions)
Overall, the game plays very smoothly, using an improved interface of the type found in Times of Lore. You can either point to
an icon or use a single keystroke to perform any action.
Graphics, while not exceptional, are pretty, with minor animations in the close-ups. When moving around, the view in the
main window is always overhead with an appropriate still picture
(Continued on page 46)

Review

We congratulate the author of this article, M. Evan Brooks,
who has just graduated from the United States Naval War
College in Newport, RI.
Northern Fleet is a simulation of modern naval operations in
the North Atlantic. Relying deeply on the American "Maritime
Strategy" (as enunciated in US Naval Institute Proceedings,
January 1986), the product enables one to play either the
American or Soviet naval forces in the region between the
GIUK (Greenland-Iceland-United Kingdom) Gap and the
Arctic Ocean.

Background on the "Maritime Strategy"
The "Maritime Strategy" relies on an early American offensive posture ". . . early forward deployment of sea-based
air power is essential to support our allies . . . If war
comes, the Navy will seize the initiative as far forward as
possible ... [and] fight our way toward Soviet home
waters." ("The Maritime Strategy", US Naval Institute
Proceedings, January 1986). The "Maritime Strategy" has
been severely criticized as a headlong rush to " . . . lob
bombs into the men's room of the Kremlin." In fact, many
officers feel that this pressing forward offensively could
make the U.S. even more vulnerable in the defensive
center.
In all fairness, however, one should note that the
"Maritime Strategy" does not depend on any particular
timetable. The offensive posture is dependent on strategic
realities. Therefore, it may not be as unrealistic as it seems.
Yet, most naval officers openly criticize the drive to the
Soviet home bases and support instead the establishment
of a cordon sanitaire near the GIUK Gap until NATO has
been reinforced and the Soviet naval forces have taken
some damage.

will yield a working knowledge of the levels of success. However, Mr. Nichols was kind enough to add some comments con
cerning victory conditions:
(1) Norway will fall if the Soviet land forces are allowed 20
turns of combat; since the war typically begins on game turn
five and lasts c. 35 turns, NATO must delay the Soviets for a
minimum of ten turns.

Testing the
Maritime Strategy
SimCan's
"Northern
Fleet"
by M. Evan Brooks

Northern Fleet
1-2
IBM, Apple II,
Commodore 64, ST, Mac
REVIEWED ON: IBM
PRICE:
$60.00
PUBLISHER:
Simulations Canada
Bridgewater, Nova Scotia

TITLE:
# PLAYERS:
SYSTEM:

What is the optimum strategy? In Northern Fleet, you must
decide. Your decision determines the fate of the northern allies.

(2) A single strike from a CVBG (carrier battle group) can
impose a five turn delay in Soviet ground combat operations

Utilitarian Presentation

There are no graphics in Northern Fleet. Game play is accomplished via keyboard input (giving instructions to one's
task forces and submarines) and plotting locations (known for
friendly forces, tentative for opposing forces) on a plasticized
map. Red and black grease pencils have been supplied for
such purpose, but do not use these instruments. The pencils
leave a permanent mark on the plasticized map which cannot
be readily removed. Instead, use a water-based writing tool,
which can be fully erased.

The documentation is "best described as utilitarian." The rule
booklet is short, 7 1/2 pages. However, it is sufficient to completely explain the game mechanics. The ramifications of these
mechanics are left to the player to discover on his own. While
this reviewer was familiar with the various ship types (e.g. Slava,
Sovremennyy, Udaloy, Kara), it is doubtful that the "average
user" is enrolled in the Naval War College or has a readily
available knowledge base that can explain the optimal uses
and characteristics of the various vessels.
This is too bad, because SimCan's Northern Fleet is a valid
and interesting education for anyone interested in modern
naval plans and operations. Prior releases (Seventh Fleet, Fifth
Eskadra, and Grey Seas/Grey Skies are even listed in the US
Naval Institute's bibliography to the Maritime Strategy). In fact,
any gamer interested in modern naval operations should
seriously consider the inclusion of a SimCan product in their
gaming library.
Each vessel bears a specific name (e.g. Dallas is a Los-Angeles class submarine), and noted by its class (e.g. L.Angl.-2).
Yet, at certain times, the name is used, while at other times,
the program only uses the class number. Unless one clearly
marks the identification number with the class, exact identification may become illusory -- a minor irritant. The Apple version
relies on class numbers only (due to memory limitations), thereby achieving at least internal consistency.
While victory conditions are explained briefly, only experience

While the lack of any graphics may well prove a negative to
many gamers, its omission is not missed. Northern Fleet is a
thinking man's game. Optimal fleet use and strike tactics are
the key to successnot flashy graphics and explosions.

Decision Implementation
Game play involves determining the placement of friendly forces, and mission assignment. Intelligence sources may give additional details involving approximate enemy locations, and
combat is resolved by the computer. The mechanics are
straight-forward; successful employment is a different matter.
Every turn, one selects the level of warfare, ranging from
Rising Tensions through Conventional War and Tactical
Nuclear to Operational Nuclear. Nuclear warfare at sea is something that the U.S. Navy studies, at a distance! Since a single
burst can destroy a carrier, it is apparent that it can drastically
change the strategic complexion. Nuclear war at sea favors the
Soviets, but once operational nuclear warfare begins, there is a
random chance of global nuclear war with everyone losing.

Escalating levels of warfare does cost victory points, so one
must weigh a decision to escalate carefully.
While the carriers are the "big ticket" items (100 points), it
should be noted that UNREP (underway replenishment ships)
are worth 25 points (as opposed to a destroyer or frigate worth
only 5-10 points). These ships are essential to successful carrier operations. Without them, a CVBG can only operate for
four days without returning to base for armaments and fuel.
The simulation emphasizes these ships by point value and also,
by allowing carriers to replenish their Harpoon anti-ship missiles if an UNREP is present. Since the United States Navy only
possesses around eight AOR UNREP ships capable of maintaining station with a CVBG at high speed, their importance should
not be underestimated.
Minefields are employed for both sides, although the Soviet
ones are twice as effective. This is due to their larger inventory
(the Soviets currently possess circa 400,000 mines) and their
emphasis on mine operations. U.S. Naval doctrine considers
mine warfare, but since "you can't pin a D[istinguished]
S[ervice] [Cross] on a mine" (as Jim Dunnigan once noted),
mine warriors receive short shrift.
The Soviets may initiate a SPETsNAZ attack once in the
game. Targets include OTH radar (over-the-horizon) in Britain,
the SOSUS facility (sonar receiving station) in Iceland, or airbases. Since these are noted in priority order and since there is
a 50-50 chance of success, the Soviet player may as well go
after the most valuable target.
Submarine employment must be carefully considered, as well.
Generally, the Soviets do not emphasize anti-SLOC (interdict-

ing the sea lines of communications), but a NATO player must
watch for a shift in Soviet usage. Similarly, the U.S. player
should attempt to destroy the submarines, particularly the
SSBN (ballistic nuclear missile submarines) in the bastions. Is
such a mission an escalation of the level of warfare? This issue
is still debated in naval war college, technical journals and symposiums. The simulation does not consider this to be an escalation. Therefore, seek out and destroy the SSBNs!
The Soviet computer is difficult to defeat. The U.S. computer
opponent is much easier, possibly reflecting tactical reality.
Interestingly, the American computer opponent is most
sophisticated on the Apple II version (as the last released
version, additional "smarts" were added).
Overall, the Soviet mission is straight-forwarddefeat Norway
and maximize U.S. losses through judicious use of land-based
naval aviation with a sprinkling of surface combat.
American play is more involved. The following tactics are
recommended:

The Missile Trap: An optimal tactic in Northern Fleet is to
maximize attrition of Soviet naval land-based aircraft at minimal
cost by utilization of the "missile trap". Designer Bill Nichols advocates a deception operation, wherein a small escort task
force is dispatched into the Norwegian Sea -- but still within
F-14 CAP coverage. If the Soviets mistake this for a carrier task
force, they will attack it in force. While the deception force will
most likely be destroyed, a substantial number of Soviet Backfires and Badgers will also be lost. Also, surviving Soviet bombers will need an additional 24-48 hours of refit before they are
ready to relaunch.
This tactic has been used before, e.g. the deployment of picket destroyers off Okinawa during World War II to intercept the
kamikazes. However, the range of the AS-4 (Backfire) and AS-5
and -6 (Badger) is sufficient that the aircraft could engage the
task force outside of US engagement range, thereby creating a
disaster more reminiscent of the Prince of Wales and the
Repulse wherein capital ships were destroyed because they
could not be supported by air assets.
Tactically, this may be sound, but strategically and politically,
it may well prove unacceptable to both policymakers and the
public. Placing a substantial portion of fleet assets "in harm's
way" with a "Bomb Me" sign is not a way to endear oneself.
Current Naval officers scoff at this concept. Could it in fact be
used? Hopefully, we will never have the need to know!

Carrier Sprint: After use of the "Missile Trap", the "Carrier
Sprint" may well prove the key to victory. Mass the carriers and
high speed escorts within range of land-based air assets, sortie
north at high speed, launch a strike, and return to safety. A few
such strikes can fatally delay the Soviet Northern Offensive and
assure a NATO victory.

CONCLUSIONS
In Northern Fleet, much of what is happening is hidden behind the immutable source code of the computer. Nevertheless, it is a clear success as it presents the "appearance" of historical accuracy. Whether or not such a portrayal is indeed accurate will, hopefully, never be revealed. But overall, the SimCan series of naval simulations are definitely worthwhile. They
present a proper "fog of war" gestalt and plunge the player
deep into the role of a strategic planner.
This reviewer's main regrets are that Northern Fleet's limited
press run engenders a high purchase price and that its
"utilitarianism" will not appeal to the larger gaming public. It is
the latter's loss.

Sneak Preview

"Dragon Wars"
olokai's nose
began to sting
as though
being assailed by one
of those foul and
noxious mixtures that
Halifax loved to concoct. The gag reflex
began to come into
play and it was all
Molokai and his companions could do to
hold back from filling
the street with their
vomit. The ancient inscription read
"Morgue" and that
was exactly what the
stone building was
being used for. It was
jammed to the brim
with the gray, decaying corpses of those
who had escaped
from this prison the
hard way. Graffiti
etched beside the ancient word voiced its
own hostile sentiment, "The way out,
chumps!"

M

animated windows are
larger than those in
The Bard's Tale series
and Wasteland. There
are more animated
graphics (ca. 70) and
they are more sophisticated than the simplistic animation we are
used to seeing in this
genre. Also, unlike
some games, not all
guards look the same.
Weapons change and
sometimes, body position. Third, even
though every view is
three-dimensional, the
automapping feature
offers a different
perspective and it is
the best automapping
we've seen yet, since
it accurately reflects
terrain, as well as the
basic path the party
has taken. Fourth, the
combat messages
flash one event at a
time on a window underneath the animation, rather than clearing the animated window and scrolling
across the screen as in Wasteland. The
bad guys are always on the screen while
combat continues.

Interplay's New Role-Playing Game

Molokai started to
turn and leave, but
the Wizard Halifax raised his hand and
stayed the party's exit. His long, bony
finger pointed to undernourished work
gangs who slowly carried the hideous
corpses from the building and stacked
them into piles of rotting flesh. The party
waited. Each adventurer wondered what
the wizard expected to see as his pale
gray eyes observed the scene. After a
while, some of the slaves placed several
corpses into a canvas sack, sewed the
sack shut, and hurled the entire bundle
over the wall. The wizard smiled.
Whatever happened, Molokai was certain he wouldn't like it.
Escape from the prison compound
known as Purgatory is the first order of
business in Dragon Wars, the new fantasy role-playing adventure from Inter-

play. For those who think the fiction
which began this sneak preview gives
away too much about the Count of
Monte Cristo-style escape, rest assured
that there are, at least, two other ways to
escape from Purgatory. In common with
other Interplay products, whether
developed for other publishers or published themselves, there are multiple solutions for most puzzles.
The Look
There is something of the familiar in the
game screens of Dragon Wars, but there
is also plenty that is different. First of all,
the graphics on the Apple Ile are double
hi-res and the detailing is so good that
some of us have thought they were
Apple IIGS graphics. Second, the

The Feel
The texture of the game is very different. Although the game does make extensive use of well-written off-line paragraphs, a la Wasteland, both character
creation and combat is considerably different. What the designers have done is
utilize mechanics similar to Champions
for combat and character generation.
This means that one doesn't "roll-up"
characters, rather, one spends points.
Each character begins with ten points
each for his initial attributes in: Strength,
Dexterity, Intelligence, Spirit, and Health.

Then, he/she has 50 points to spend on
increasing those attributes, purchasing
skills, or becoming adept at magic.

Those who use, or even trifle with, magic
have been put to death or sent into exile.
In order to protect themselves, several
city-states have threatened to unleash
their dragons. The player's task is to discover the motivation behind Drake's
prohibition of magic and find a way to
stop King Drake before the unimaginable
powers of destruction are unleashed.

Also, one doesn't learn a massive
spellbook in order to be a wizard, one
selects from four different types of magic
High, Low, Sun, and Druid. Indeed, the
spells must be learned by finding scrolls
with the spell inscribed upon them. Further, in order to cast certain spells, the
player must decide how many points of
power to put into each spell. Therefore,
the game includes much more resource
management than most fantasy games.
It also means that even the lowest spell
never becomes obsolete. The stronger
the magician gets, the mightier the spell
has the potential of being.
As far as combat is concerned, there is
a new philosophy. Characters have Stun,
Health, and Spell points. If one's Stun
points are completely depleted, he/she is
unconscious. If one's Health points are
completely depleted, one is dead. In
Dragon Wars, "Dead" means "Dead".
There is no resurrection spell to simply
bring the character back to life.
Another different philosophy in Dragon
Wars has to do with the "Monty Haul"
syndrome. In some games, it seems like
even the lowliest monsters have some
kind of treasure. The designers of the
game have deliberately removed the "Kill
MonsterGet Gold" approach. As Brian
Fargo notes, "I've always wondered how
a pack of rats carried three sets of plate
mail, anyway." There is treasure in the
game, but it is not randomly placed.

The Story
The story takes place in the watery
world known, appropriately enough, as
Oceana. Oceana is 85% water. Each land
mass is an island. The nicest island is
that "El Dorado" of the world, Dilmun.
The worst island is the prison colony on
Purgatory where the game begins. The
designers have successfully created an environment that feels like a "real" world. If
one wants to get from one island to

The Verdict

another, swimming, sailing, or taking a
bridge is essential. We didn't find any
quick teleport squares or listing of
teleport spells in our look at the game.
The premise of the story sounds something like a fable on nuclear deterrence.
It appears that each island is dominated
by an autonomous city-state. Though
warfare between the rival city-states has
been relatively steady, it has been a conventional war. No side has yet been willing to utilize the ultimate weapontheir
dragons. Each city keeps a dragon captive within its walls. Should it ever look
like the city would fall to another citystate, the dragon would be let loose. Although this would undoubtedly lead to
mutually assured destruction, those in
power believe that possession of the captive dragons is an effective deterrent to
conquest.
Now, King Drake of Phoebus is
threatening the delicate balance of
power. His overt goal is the unification of
Oceana under his supreme rule. In order
to accomplish his purpose, he has arbitrarily declared magic to be illegal.

It is extremely difficult to say how good
a game will be or how well it will play
before seeing a finished product in front
of one's eyes. However, Dragon Wars
looks like it has most of the features that
made Wasteland and The Bard's Tale
series so successful, plus plenty of features which pen and paper garners have
always taken for granted and many of us
have wondered why they weren't present
in computer role-playing games. It seems
almost certain that Dragon Wars will set
a new standard for CRPGs.

Game Hints

S

o, it's August again, and Fred is
off to the Dark Room of Colossal
Cave for the annual Grues Convention. Last year they got up a petition to
ban daylight savings time, but that didn't
work out too well. I hear that this time,
they're going to try and convince the Surgeon General that streetlights are hazardous to health (theirs). Somehow, I have
the feeling this won't do any better.
Anyway, it's almost time to look in the
old mail sack. First, though, please
remember that when you write to me for
help with a game, you really need to be
specific about your problem. Before I can
point you in the right direction, I have to
have enough information so I know what
to tell you. Most people do this, but sometimes a letter arrives that says something
like "Well, I have 8 of 10 treasures in
Game X, where are the others?". Not
knowing what 8 those are makes it impossible for me to help.
Ok, let's see what's in the bag this time.
King's Quest N: Some folks have
been spending a lot of time swimming in
the ocean looking for the whale and not
finding it (they have, however, found the
shark without any trouble at all!). That's
because they haven't paid their courtesy
visit to Lolotte. Until you do that, the
whale won't appear. So, drop in (heh) on
the old bag . . . err, dear and that will
take care of the problem.
Leisure Larry II: A number of people
are experiencing frustrations at the last
part of the game on top of the volcano.
Having been there myself, I know how
you feel. The difficulty in this case is the
parser, which, being what it is, (not terrific) can't understand what you want to
do, even though you're doing the right
thing. I have heard (although not tried it
myself) that if you use the full name of
the object you're trying to stuff in, that
will work. If that doesn't work, try stuffing
that item, and another, together at the
same time. A little bizarre, but it should
get the job done.

Scorpion's Mail
Ultima V: Several have asked about
the mysterious sandalwood box. They
can't get it open and this worries them.
Well, luckily for you, you needn't worry
about it. All that's necessary is to make
sure you have it with you when you go to
rescue Lord British. He'll take care of the
rest. If you haven't found the box yet
(tch!), you may want to take up the study
of music; it can do more than soothe the
savage breast. For those having
problems with finding the Shard of Cowardice in the Underworld, bring lots of
gems with you (LOTS of em). Look
around with them carefully, and you may
see something (no, not the shard). Now,
think of a way to get there (climbing
won't do it). Keep it up until you get to
where the shard is. A long trip, even if
you do get there in the wink of an eye
(grin).
Ultima HI: An oldie, but not forgotten
(I'll bet the recently-released Trilogy has
something to do with that). It seems that
there are a few people out there who are
having a hard time finding the four cards.
Well, you'll just have to make a trip
beyond the whirlpool, and remember to
search everywhere. Once you know
where to look, you should find all four of
them pretty quickly. And remember that
they have to be used in the right order . .
. or the consequences will be rather unpleasant.
Wizardry V: Speaking of cards, some
folks are missing the last of four (does
this sound familiar? Deja vu?) needed on
the seventh level to pass the Lords. Well,
I'll tell ya a secret: you have to use the
first three, and when you've done that,
you'll get the fourth one. But again
(more deja vu?), you have to do this in
the right order (and of course do the
right things inside) before you obtain the
card. And naturally you'll want to make
sure you have all four staffs before you
go messing about in the Maelstrom
(don't leave home without 'em!).
Might & Magic II: As I mentioned in
my article awhile back (March '89), it is
not necessary to go into the dungeons
under the castles to complete the game.
(Continued on page 47)

Review

software and movie industry's 'Summer of the Sequel' is
pon us. These last few months we've seen more 'Part
upon
Twos' than you could shake a Roman numeral at. However, amidst this sea of [twice told tales?] there's one that the masses have been crying for. You know, the one starring that svelte
man of action and adventure, that handsome herald of heroism,
that man above all
manly men. No, not
Indy! Cpt. Kirk?! Get
real! I'm talking about
Roger Wilco, adventurer/janitor extraordinaire.

u

Yes, Roger's back in
part three of Sierra's
lampooning space adventure series, Space
Quest III (SQ III). In
the previous games,
Roger has been up
against a tough lot. In
the original Space
Quest, he single-handedly foiled the Sariens'
plans of universal conquest. In the sequel,
heckdVoaul's
sleazy insurance salesman scheme. But this
time, our hero will
meet his toughest challenge. He's dealing
with the slimiest swarm
of software stealing
scuzzballs this side of
Nimbus III, the
notorious Pirates of
Pestulon. The "Two
Guys from
Andromeda" have
vanished and rumor
has it that this pack of
plagiarizing punks is
behind it. SQ III sends
our beloved Roger on
a galaxy-wide hunt for
the missing software
celebrities.
Those familiar with
Sierra adventures will
be familiar with the game play. Players use a combination of text
commands and/or joystick to maneuver Roger around a 3-D
world where he manipulates items and solves puzzles, while avoiding the many gruesome (and often hilarious) ways of biting the
silicon dust. Those who have followed the series, can expect a
storyline laden with the same colorful sarcasm that marked the
previous games. Those who haven't need not worry as SQIII can
be played by those without previous SQ experience, but they may
miss a humorous allusion or two.
The game makes marked improvement over it's predecessors in
most aspects, particularly in esthetics. The EGA graphics on the
IBM are some of the best from Sierra to date. Further, the
cinema-like title sequence is outstanding, similar to the movie
emulating efforts of the folks at Cinemaware. The main graphics
images are crisp and colorful, though I was most impressed by
the finer graphic detail utilized in some of the cinematic sequences: shadows fall on Roger whenever lighting is obstructed,
perspective changes as he walks into the horizon, and facial ex-

pressions reveal horror as you clumsily lead him to another untimely death. Roger is more animated than in his previous incarnations, the animated sequences reflecting the designers' close
attention to detail.
While the graphics are well done, the presentation wouldn't be
half as impressive without the sound. Those fortunate enough to
have a Roland MT-32
sound board or
equivalent will be
treated to one of the
best performances
their sound module
has given yet. Bob
Siebenberg, formerly
with the rock group Supertramp, has put
together a 30 minute
score that captures the
silly, tongue-in-cheek
attitude of the game
and will simply blow
your ThermoWeave
skivvies off. This sound
track and the equally
stunning sound effects
combine to create one
of the best sound efforts we've heard since
the Midi track done by
Origin for Ultima V.

hates
of
Pestulon

by Chris Lombardi

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

Space Quest III
IBM
$59.95
Mark Crowe & Scott Murphy
Sierra
Coarsegold, Ca.

On the unofficial
CGW Adventure Difficulty Index, SQIII
rates in the easy to
moderate range. While
a few of the puzzles require a little thought
and experimentation,
there's nothing that
will stump the average
adventurer for long.
Most of the puzzles are
fair, and there are no
objects hidden in
strange and unlikely
places.

The number of game
screens is relatively
small, as well as the
number of objects
players juggle at one time, so it is often not difficult to discern
which object is appropriate for a certain puzzle.
As in all Sierra adventures, the game playing strategy involves
extensive use of the 'Look' command. Fortunately, most of the
problems that arise from the graphic nature of Sierra's games,
i.e. being unable to identify an object from it's graphic image and
also unable to get a text description of it, have been reduced to a
minimum.
Liberal use of the 'Save' command is recommended, as the
wrong path almost always leads to a graphically gruesome death
In fact, half the fun is finding all the twisted ways Roger can kick
the mop bucket!
Those who played the original Space Quest know the frustration of playing an adventure with an inadequate parser. Fortunately, improvements made over the last two games have
brought the parser up to an acceptable level. While still not the

best in the industry, the game understands a reasonable number
of synonyms for important verbs and objects. In fact, although
most sentences beyond Verb' "Object" complexity are out, the
parser rarely bogs down game play.
Action sequences have always been and continue to be,
Sierra's favorite way of adding variety to their adventurers. Unfortunately these hand-eye coordination test have not always
been done well, and they've
been justly criticized as cruel and
unnecessary punishment. SQ
does have three action sequences, but it's evident that the
designers have made a conscious effort to improve the
quality of the sequences and integrate them more smoothly
into the adventure. One of the
action sequence takes the form
of a coin-op machine Roger encounters along the way. It's the
most difficult action sequence
and takes a while to get the
hang of. Those less dexterous
with the joystick can forego the
sequence if desired, as the clue
provided upon mastery is not absolutely necessary to complete the game, though don't overlook
the game completely.
The most interesting hand-eye puzzle is actually the climax of
the storyline in which Roger battles 'the bad guy' using a battletech type cyber-warrior. This is by far the best action puzzle I've
seen in an adventure. It's fun, it fits nicely into the story, and victory requires a definite strategy rather than just nimble keystrokes. Though adventure game 'purists' may still object to
these test of physical rather than mental abilities, those who enjoy
variety will appreciate the designers' effort to create action sequences that are enjoyable and complement the game.
My only problem with SQIII is the game length. It seems most
of the design effort went into effects rather than story development, creating a game that feels a bit rushed. While I didn't keep
accurate time records, the game time for this adventure seemed
about half that of the others. Thus, when the final credits rolled, I
still wanted more.
All told, SQ III is a very nice blend of game and glitter. The combination of graphic effects, animation, action sequences, and
biting wit leave no room for a dull moment. The game moves
very quickly and, as a whole, SQ III is a wonderful product and a
great time. Sierra fans won't want to miss it.

The Journal of Roger Wilco
The following is an excerpt from a data disk found on a
deserted parking lot in Coarsegold, CA. It appears to contain GAME HINTS which may be of interest to our readers.
"Ahem...Testing one...two. Wilco Log Star Date...uh, ah well it
seems my digital watch has stopped. Pity. At any rate, it
seems my escape pod has been captured by a hostile alien
force, drat it all! There goes my vacation leave on Hair Island."
"Using my keen eye for detail, I've located a hold containing a
decent looking ship. The ship is missing some vitals but I've
managed to round up the replacements. I found a motivator
amongst the junk but I'll need a hand (even a claw would do)
to lift it. I've also found a power supply, though the ship-board
rodents didn't appreciate my intrusion. Insert tab A in slot B
and this bird will be flying in no time."
"After escaping the alien vessel (what a blast!) I made a stop

on the planet of Phleebut, and eventually found the planets only
known settlement and tourist trap. The proprietor seemed a nice
chap though he did have quite a gift of loquaciousness. I sold
him that stupid stone I've been lugging around. His initial interest in the rock was high, so / got a decent price. Didn't leave
with all my buckazoids though, as I was talked into buying
some of the tourist trash. Well,
I guess it's not all that bad. The
undies fit quite nicely and the
Orat is kinda' cute. Upon leaving the joint I ran into someone
I'd rather not meet again,
though I don't think I need
worry. In the end, the musclebound monster was nothing but
a metallic morsel for one of the
indigenous creatures that hangs
around these parts."
"Ah, Monolith, over a billion
gastricly disturbed. After inhaling my favorite Monolith meal
(I've been ordering the thing
since I was knee high to a
slime beast), I discovered the
latest coin-op from Scumsoft.
Pumped half my buckazoids
into the thing, though I finally figured out the secret. Once you
get the chicken directly over the trampoline/landing pad, you let
the bird free fall and then give one flap up just after the halfway
point of the decent. The single flap will set the bird down for a
picture perfect landing (baacock!). More importantly I discovered a secret distress signal from the Two Guys. It's off to
Ortega to once again save the day."
"Leaping lava lizards! The travel brochure wasn't kidding
when it warned to dress light. If it wasn't for my Thermo Weave
(the super-stretch waist-band snaps back wash after wash!) I'd
be one crisp custodian. Now to find the source of the defense
beam."
"It was only a matter of time before I got past the Scumsoft
geologists. After that, it was just a small hike to the beam generator. Frankly, Roger Wilco is typically a calm and collected
guy, but I was quite shaken up after I blew that beam. If it
hadn't been for my stint on the intergalactic track and field
team ( ok, ok so I only laundered jock straps!), I'd be the latest
addition to the Ortegan geography ."
"Managed to infiltrate Scumsoft's Pestulon base undetected,
thanks to my gift from Arnoid, R.I.P. Even managed to change
into something more comfortable. Using this cover, I could
probably find the items needed to breach that security door."
"Ah the Two Guys! Once again I save the . . . . huh? Never
mind. I thought I'd emptied my last wastebasket when I entered
the battle droid arena. But, in the end, my experience was too
much for the pimple faced punk. All seasoned battle droids warriors know that if you anticipate the opponent's moves, punching at the same time as he does, you'll land the blow. Also, if
you can get the opponent on his heels and you're aggressive,
you can land several blows before he can recover his balance. If
you get your opponent against the wall you'll limit his range of
movements making for an easier target."
"After wasting the kid, it was a textbook escape. Raise a
shield, lower a shield, blast a pirate into the afterworld. What
could be easier? The difficult part was facing rejection by Sierra
president Ken Williams. Oh well . . . unrewarded and unemployed I once again fly off into the sunset. Time for that trip
to Hair Island."

Review

ou hang precariously
from the Embassy's escarpment, seconds
away from the encounter you
and your squad hoped you
would never see. The lives of
innocent victims depend on
the cool nerves and finely
honed team skills of your
men. Your marksmen have already been placed to cover
the Embassy's exits. Nobody
Ls getting out but can you
get in? A hasty rappel from a
building is dangerous
enough without the added
element of gunfire. You wait
on the signal to move in with
gut wrenching anticipation . .

The mixture of different
viewscreens and "camera
angles" offers an interesting
"You are there" perspective
that has rarely been captured
in a computer game.
Hostage: Rescue Mission
also features supporting characters with minds of their
own. For example, if a
marksman is left on the
street for too long without orders, he will seek cover on
his own.
The attractively presented
documentation contains an irritating error of omission. It
fails to inform IBM users that
they can press F9 to be
delivered from the overly
numbing theme music. Perhaps it's a terrorist mind control technique. Otherwise the
exciting realism and realistic
graphics present an interesting variation on the recently
popular police theme.
For those less than successful missions there is a
replay feature allowing the
replay of all or part of the mission without rebooting.
Most of this games annoyances are relatively minor
and easily ignored in light of
it's playability. Between stages the screen blanks with only the
power light to comfort you. The musical accompaniment can be
overcome. The terrible joystick/keyboard response can prove to
be detrimental to the game play and incidentally to your life.
Response is sporadic at best, a single keystroke or joystick movement may take four or five tries. This can be vitally important
when you've just crashed through the third floor window into a
room full of surprised terrorists. This is an annoying, sometimes
"fatal", problem.

"CODE BLUE,
CODE BLUE,
ALL UNITS...
by Robert W. Struble

Embassy of Blood
(The Setting)
Hostage: Rescue Mission offers tomorrow's headlines
today in a realistic combination of arcade and strategy.
TITLE:
Hostage Rescue Mission
The game simulates the
SYSTEMS:
Amiga, ST,
demanding realities of a
C-64/128, and IBM
deteriorating hostage situaREVIEWED:
IBM
PRICE:
$39.99
tion in it's final hour. NegotiaDESIGNERS:
Infogrames
tions have failed and you
PUBLISHER:
Mindscape Inc.
must lead a team of trained
Northbrook, IL
professionals into an imposing three story building filled
with fanatical terrorists and terrified hostages. Violence is now the
final option and a lightning fast surgical strike is the only way to
save lives before the fatal deadline.
Your team is composed of two three man teams. You must
guide your marksmen to covered positions around the building
where they can operate as counter-snipers. Be prepared to dive
for cover, perform combat rolls and low crawl along the dark
streets to evade the terrorist's spotlights and withering fire. Once
in place it's time for the Direct Intervention Team to airland onto
the Embassy roof. From there they will be able to rappel down
into the lower floors under cover of your marksmen.
It's inside the Embassy itself that the nerve wracking pace
rushes into it's explosive final minutes. Crashing through windows, team members must search out the occupants, differentiate friend from foe and move the hostages to a position of
safety while dealing with the heavily armed opposition. Your
weapons stitch ragged holes across the paneled walls. The fanatical terrorist band will use innocent hostages or even their own
members as living shields while firing at you with deadly accuracy.
The rooms, filled with bookcases, sofas and desks, soon become
littered with the bodies of the fallen.
Once the shooting stops and the survivors are rushed to safety
you must then brave an even more dangerous foe, the Media.
Your teams performance is evaluated the same as in life by the
front page. A successful mission can mean glowing praise and
possible promotion. The loss of team members, expiration of
deadlines, or death of a hostage will result in scathing condemnation in the morning press.

Promotional Considerations (The System)
There are three difficulty levels and five missions from which to
choose to chose. The more difficult the mission, the less time
you have to clear the Embassy. The higher levels provide you
with progressively less battlefield intelligence and fiercer opponents. The higher difficulty levels can only be reached by a
secret access code gained upon successful completion of the previous level.

Special Tactical Training (Warning: Hints Follow)
A combination use of keyboard and stick will yield optimal
results. Use the keyboard until you have gained entry through a
window then switch to joystick while clearing the building.
To avoid having to try the impossible feat of picking off a gunman behind a hostage, try running into them and immediately
leaving the room. The hostage will follow you to safety and allow
you to deal with the terrorist man-to-man.
Occasionally a foe will try to escape rather than engage your
man. Remember that the time spent chasing him about the
room could be better spent collecting hostages or in the hallways
where traffic tends to be heavier and lines of sight are clearer.
Finally, if there happens to be both time and team members to
spare you may be able to utilize the stairs shooting gallery. This
can occur when a team member is left on a cleared upper floor
as a decoy. Terrorists will detect his presence and attempt to
reach him by charging up the stairs. This tactic both isolates the
opposition and significantly increases the chance of their elimination.

Disposition (Recommendation)
With its multiple levels of difficulty and tactical demands, this is
a game not to be easily beaten and put on a shelf. If the joystick/keyboard response problem did not exist, Hostage: Rescue
Mission would be an unquestionable value. Even with the problem, it is an exciting and worthwhile experience.

Industry News

Why Is "Harpoon" So Late?
By Gordon Walton of Digital Illusions
n fact, why are so many entertainment
programs late? Are the programmers
incredibly dumb, the publishers crazy
and/or tellers of little 'white' lies? I will try
to cover both the specifics for the Harpoon program and the general reasons
within our industry that programs are late.

I

The Industry Problem
The first reason programs in general
are late is due to the incurable optimism
that affects almost all programmers.
Programmers consistently underestimate
the time it will take to do any programming task. Unfortunately, to be a
programmer requires an optimistic attitude, as doing a bug-free program is almost impossible, yet all programmers
believe that they can do this. Worse yet,
game programs have to be even more
bug-free than business programs due to
the fact that the programs have a limited
life and are not normally updated.
If a program is breaking any new technological ground, the risk factors in
scheduling go up by a factor of 10! A
clone or evolutionary product is much
less risky to schedule and sell (Hence,

one reason so many products are merely
a variation on some well known theme).
Next, entertainment publishers sometimes believe their programmers when
they give schedules. Possibly, they may
not fully understand the design and/or
technical risks. Last, they may believe
that by adding infinite resources to a late
project, they can bring it in "Real Soon
Now".

The Harpoon Problems
Many of you may believe that converting a board game to the computer
should be simple. If you just want a representation of the board game on the computer, this might be true. If you want a
product that takes true advantage of the
computer's power and interactivity, has a
reasonably intelligent computer opponent, extends the game such that you
can do larger scenarios than are normally
played using the paper rules, and finally
takes a turn-oriented game and makes it
a real-time simulation, it is going to take
some serious development time. Harpoon is interesting in that it is both an
operational and tactical game, allowing
the user to not only control groups of

ships and aircraft, but also have control
over the individual weapons on some of
these units. Harpoon's hybrid constitution adds considerable complexity to the
implementation of the final computer
product.
Harpoon experienced all of the previously mentioned industry problems associated with producing a product. The
original team truly believed that they
could do the program under the original
schedule. The design and technical
problems associated with a program of
this magnitude were underestimated. The
management of Three-Sixty had confidence in the original team, and did not,
therefore, challenge the process and
missed milestones satisfactorily. All of
these conspired to cause the original slippage. In a heroic attempt to get the
product out as soon as possible, ThreeSixty more than doubled the resources allocated to the original Harpoon development team. After months of slippage,
shipping became the goal, but this did
not address many of the underlying issues that were the true cause of the inaccurate time estimates.
After Digital Illusions was retained in
mid-February of 1989 to manage and
produce the product, we invested almost
four man months to do design review, additional design and make a detailed
specification for the entire Harpoon
product. This process has allowed us to
identify the problem areas, get a
reasonably accurate estimate of the time
and resources required to finish the
product, and hopefully produce a better
product.
You will see the IBM PC compatible version of Harpoon on the shelves before
Christmas. It will be a breakthrough
product in that it will allow you to control
multiple groups of ships/subs/aircraft in
the first "BattleSet", the "GIUK" (the
Greenland-Iceland-United Kingdom Gap)
which contains twelve scenarios ranging
from simple encounters to full scale battle setups. Three-Sixty will be producing
additional "BattleSets" for Harpoon, containing 12-16 scenarios, which will extend
the product for those who want even
more depth and challenge. The "Staff Assistant" feature will help the player learn
the art of modern naval warfare during
play, and can serve as a coach for a
novice player who might normally avoid a
product of this complexity. I believe that
the final product will be worth the very
long wait.
Three-Sixty can be reached at (408)
879-9144 weekdays, during West Coast
business hours. Please feel free to call to
get the most current information on the
shipping schedule. We currently estimate that formal beta testing will start
in summer 1989 and that the program
will ship in mid-September. But remember that all developers are optimists, and
Three-Sixty has committed to not shipping it until it is right!

Tangled Tales

(Continued from page 27)

on the left. In dungeons, the still is replaced with a 3-d view of
your current location.
The various NPC's you meet run the gamut from fairly normal
to pretty zany. The best ones are found later in the game, especially in the third scenario; those at the beginning seem a little
bland, for the most part.
On the whole, Tangled Tales is an uneven game. As mentioned
earlier, it appears to be an attempt to integrate adventure game
elements with role-playing elements, and this attempt is not entirely successful. Incessant combat is not a feature here and that
is good. However, there is enough of it that it can become an ir-

ritating obstacle, at least until you
obtain the Monster Detection
spell, which allows you to avoid
any fighting that is not pre-set in
the game.
Solving many of the puzzles is
more a matter of having the right
people in the party than anything
else, which reduces the main character to spectator at many critical
points in the game. A little less
reliance on all these NPC's would
have been better.
A major sore point is the fact
that you can't make backup
copies to play from. The game
comes on two double-sided disks.
So, given the considerable
amount of disk access during
play, the three adventure sides,
at least, ought to have been
copyable.
On the other hand, it is refreshing to have a game that is not
dependent on how many monsters you wipe out, how high you
can boost a character's level, or how much treasure you can get
your hot little hands on. Even better, none of the scenarios feature that tired old "kill the evil whatever" theme. Having NPC's
that are really important for more than just combat purposes is
another plus (although perhaps sometimes too important as
noted above).
Bottom line: Tangled Tales has both strong and weak points,
but in the final analysis, it is definitely worth a look by those of us
who are tired of monster-mashing and treasure grabbing.
Copyright 1989 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

(Continued from page 35)

Scorpion's Mail
No important information is down there, nor any critical items.
There are a few things you can get past those "No Elves/Dwarves/Paladins/Whatever" signs, but the effort required in shuffling
the party members around isn't worth the reward. You can do it if
you like, of course. Just remember it's a side trip and not the
main event (however, do not neglect the dungeons elsewhere, as
those are important). It is also possible to finish the game without
deciphering all the cryptic messages you come across during
your explorations. So, if you don't find all the messages (or the interleave codes), don't worry about it.
Manhunter: A number of people have been having a hard time
finding the Statue of Liberty. Now, living in New York as I do, this
was no problem for me at all (smirk). Of course, not everyone
has this advantage (poor souls), so it's understandable that some
people are experiencing difficulties. I'll bet you've all been going
for the big island with the star on it. Hehehe. That's not it. Look
elsewhere (and there aren't too many places to try).
Well, that's about it for this mail call. Remember if you need
help with an adventure game, you can reach me in the following
ways:
On Delphi: Visit the GameSIG (under the Groups and Clubs
menu). On GEnie: Stop by the Games RoundTable (type: Scorpia to reach the Games RT). By US Mail (enclose a self-addressed, stamped envelope if you live in the United States: Scorpia, PO Box 338, Gracie Station, New York, NY 10028).
Copyright 1989 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

Reader Input Device

