"Amazon. Castles 2 Strategy. Waxworks $3.95 $4.95 Canadian COMPUTER GAMING WORLD Rated Number 103 February 1993 00 Games The Premier Computer Game Magazine Dynamix and Raymond E. Feist Present Betrayal At Krondor Special TechnoWizardry Section 02 ono Also in this issue: Rex Nebular Sneak Preview: Caesar Conquered Kingdoms Strategy Sneak Preview: Alone in the Dark 2907412158 "


"LSnear of Destiny Colfenstein 3D Graphic Adventure DATA _LILILL PER Ariel FLOOR 8 SCORE LIVES 4400 3 3 HEALTH AH40 36% 23 FLOOR 5 SCORE LIVES 2900 3 HEALTH AMMO 17% 83 FLOOR 9 SCORE LIVES 2800 3 HEALTH ANIRO 9 80% 93 Vihmual Reality Spear of Destiny brings virtual reality to the PC, hurling you into an intense battle between good and evil in which only you can save the world! A breathtaking musical soundtrack sets the mood, while amazing first person\" visual perspective and spectacular digital stereo sound effects give an experience like no other game you've ever played! Pleases! #spectacular VGA virtual reality system breathtaking musical soundtrack for Adlib, Sound Blaster digitized stereo sound effects for Sound Blaster, Sound Source Lover 20 complete floors to cover 4 levels of play difficulty A special extra challenges for advanced game players * saves multiple games in process What dhe Reviewers Sayt the player is there' like no game I've ever played...\" the sound and the visual action, is frighteningly realistic...\" I can't remember a game making such effective use of perspective and sound and thereby evoking such intense physiological responses from its players.\" Game by id Software. Published by FormGen Corporation, Box 279, North Andover, MA, USA, 01845-0279 (800)263-2390 (416)857-4141 Fax: (416)857-4531 Circle Reader Service #63 "


"A Fantasy Role-Playing Simulation by D.W. Bradley Wizardryt:  CRUSADERS of the DARK SAVANT PARUM VARIVA 1919 Re DIANO MILIKO TRARIO ELDER 692 NILS Welcome to the sequel to Bane of the Cosmic Forge and the only game that could possibly follow its lead. It's everything Bane was...and more. 256 Colors Outdoor Campaigns. Full Musical Score & Sound Effects  Auto Mapping True Point & Click Mouse Interface. Unprecedented depth of story SIR-TECH Ogdensburg Business Center, Suite 2E Ogdensburg, New York 13669 To order or for a dealer nearest you call 1-800-447-1230 Circle Reader Service #105 "


"FEATURES: COMPUTER GAMING WORLD Three in 3-D for FRP, Please Johnny Wilson Takes a Stab at Dynamix' Betrayal at Krondor Special Techno-Wizardry Section 5. FracTools' Fairy Tales Creating Computer Objets d'Art 8 A Return to Zork? Yes! A CGW \"Behind the Screens\" Look at Activision's Movie-like Production 8 Dueling Centurions at the BattleTech Center Paul C. Schuytema Straps in to Discuss the Philosophy Behind the Design 8 Sneaking to Preview Alone in the Dark Chris Lombardi Discovers some Early Horrors in This Upcoming l-motion's Release 8 Syndicate in a Dark Future A Premature Look at Bullfrog's Upcoming Techno-Trip 8 Betrayal at Krondor pg. 8 Hearing it All at Comdex CGW Tunes Into Software Industry Rumblings 3 Turning a Big Screen TV into a VGA Monitor It's possible with a New Piece of Hardware and Some Important Advice from Chuck Miller 8 Investigating EA's Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes Super Sleuth Charles Ardai Clues Readers Concerning Electronic Arts' First Graphic Adventure 8 Taking a Dip into Accolade's Waxworks Chuck Miller Is Dripping with Observations on the Horrorsoft Game Alone in the Dark pg. 30 8 An Object Lesson in Golf Course Design The Final Chapter in Mark Willett's Guide to Jack Nicklaus Signature Golf 8 A Full House of Video Poker Games The Hottest Game in the Casinos Finds a Payoff in PCs by Michael \"Pit Boss\" Lasky 8 D arson 30 Dick dir Einventory Sour Dau OVC zoren USE JENSEE Calko LClose GIVESCU Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes pg. 42 Getting \"Bent\" on Adventure Games With MicroProse's Rex Nebular and The Cosmic Gender Bender by Jeff James 8 No \"if\"s, Cans or 'Bots A Riotous Replay of Maxis' Robosport Where Martin Cirulis Takes Deadly Aim Exposing the KGB Robin Mathews Uncovers Virgin's Latest Undercover Game 90 Ultima's Next Incremental Advance Origin's Forge of Virtue Might be Ultima 7a by Avatar 1st Class, C. J. Suddarth LIVERZEN L EXML Amazon pg. 102 "


"TM THEY'RE BACK!!! with new skills, for a new world... ZSKACSIS * SAVE THE TRIBES & WIN TI 12 BRAND NEW TRIBES OF LEMMINGS, EACH WITH THEIR OWN SKILLS SKIERS, SURFERS, BONGO PLAYERS. SNAKE-CHARMERS & MORE * PUZZLING PROBLEMS WITH HILARIOUS ANIMATION production designed by * SAVE THE TRIBES & WIN THE TALISMAN * 8-WAY SCROLLING * ENHANCED SOUND SUPPORT WITH DIGITISED LEMMING VOICES RIVETING GAME PLAY IN THE LEMMINGS TRADITION DNAA DESIGN Psygnosis 29 Saint Mary's Court Brookline, MA 02146 Tel: ( 617) 731-3553 Fax: (617) 731-8379 Circle Reader Service #93 "


"93 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD MicroLeague Baseball 4 Slides In A Review of the Field of Screens by Joe \"Shortstop\" Sherfy 102 Up The River Without A Tattle With Famous Game Explorer Allen Greenberg Accessing the Amazon 106 Bringing Shadowlands Into the Light Multi-Tasking (Multi-Questing?) Enters Domark's CRPG as Illuminated by Robin Matthews 114 The Campaign Companion for Castles II Important Tips and Strategies from the Castles Il Design & Programming Team 124 Conquered Kingdoms Revisited Alan Emrich Updates his Sneak Preview and Offers Some Rules Clarifications and Winning Play Techniques 128 Fighting Them On the Beaches (of France) A Guide for Better Play in V for Victory: Utah Beach by James \"Longest Day\" Lowerre 140 For Impressions' Caesar, A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to SimCity by Alan \"Caesar's Salad Days Are Just Ahead\" Emrich damage detail forces Pondo ma small Publisher Russell Sipe Editor Johnny Wilson On-Line Editor Alan Emrich Managing Editor Ken Brown Assistant Editor Chris Lombardi Art Director Susan Zurawik Graphic Artist Jack Rodrigues Marketing Manager Diane Miller M.I.S. Manager Gene Allen Assistant M.I.S. Manager Mike Weksler Editorial Assistant Caitlin Ackelson Ad Manager Jim Messing Subscriptions Kathy Garcia Contributing Editor (Adventure Games) Scorpia Contributing Editor (Wargames) Evan Brooks Ad Director Jay Eisenberg Computer Gaming World (ISSN 0744-6667) is published monthly by Golden Empire Publications, Inc. 130 Chaparral Cl. Suite 260. Anaheim Hills, CA 92808. Second-class Postage paid at Erlanger, KY 41011 and additional mailing offices. Permit #672-910. Contents are copyrighted by Golden Empire Publications. 1993. Postmaster: Send address changes to Computer Gaming World, P.O. Box 601. Mt. Morris. IL 61054-8052 The subscription rate for twelve issues (one year) is $28,00. Canadian and foreign surface subscriptions add $11.00. Foreign air subscriptions are $78.00 per year. All payments must be in U.S. dollars, made by check drawn upon a U.S. bank, Visa, MasterCard, or money order. Psalms 9:1-2 CompuServe( 76703.622) America On-Line: CGW Prodigy: EXPT40B Genie: CGW Subscription Dept. (800) 827-4450 Telephone: (714) 283-3000 Fax: (714) 283-3444 Foreign Subscribers: (815) 734-1113 For advertising information only, call: JE Publishers' Representative Company 3415 S. Sepulveda Blvd., Suite 520 Los Angeles, CA 90034 (310) 572-7272 For newsstand circulation, call: Kemco Publishers Services (603) 924-0224 Horadi Vu wolmar SSL 1: Vin up to 1 notches. O AZAS. T udte single og long sama game length start cities Hapa Habota start game Conquered Kingdoms pg. 124 58 62 74 Departments: Best of the Rest (Shareware) 110 Computer Wargaming Character Editors World Editorial Scorpia's View: Crusaders 126 Opponents Wanted of the Dark Savant 136 From the Cockpit Rumor Bag (Gregarious Yanquis) (Multi-Player Red Baron) Over There: European 146 Taking a Peek Software Report 154 Letters from Paradise Scorpion's Mail (Game Hints) 157 CGW Hall of Fame CGW Stock Watch: Broderbund 158 CGW Poll: Top 100 Games Company Profile: Impressions 160 What's Hot! Ad Index 161 Prodigy Poll & Updates Industry News: 162 Editorial Marketing (SEGA VS. Accolade) As Editorial 78 80 84 89 96 "


"GO AHEAD. INDULGE YOURSELF. THE ULTIMATE DRIVING GAME CARA DRIVER Test Drive Ten of the Best de les fulles de la Rinale MLE 400 Line Hi-res 256 Color VGA Graphics 2 Player head-to-head play via modem or network ELECTRONIC ARTS Now's your chance to test drive ten of the world's sleekest, fastest exoticars on ten of America's most breathtaking highways and race courses. You choose: will it be the Porsche 959. Ferrari F40, Corvette ZRI, Lotus Esprit Turbo, Eagle Talon, Toyota MR2, 1957 Ferrari Testarossa, Mercedes CII prototype racer, Shelby Cobra, or Lamborghini Countach? You can't even afford the insurance on some of these cars. We're offering you the keys and unlimited mileage. To order: Visit your local retailer or call 1(800)) 245-4525 anytime. Car and Driver is available for IBM and compatibles for $59.95. IBM screen. IBM is a registered trademark of International Business Machines Corp. By Lerner Research. Car and Driver is a rogistered trademark of Hachette Magazines Inc., used under license by Electronic Arts. The trademark of the respective prices are the products or their respective compradle owners, all of which have no affiliation with Electronic Arts This product is mist endurselor sored by any of the respective automobile manufacturers Circle Reader Service #57 "


"TIME TAKE PROD NO. SCENE DATE DIRECTOR PRODUCED BY Magician: Designer A Sneak Preview of Dynamix' Betrayal at Krondor by Johnny L. Wilson kemian Empire of Kesh or the Tsuranuanni Empire of Kelewan) and the mysteries of antiquity (the Valheru and the devastation of the Chaos Wars). All add to the \"gameability\"quotient of the universe. Cookie Tn Raymond E. Feist's multi-volume \"Riftwar Saga,\" two worlds are joined Lby a magical corridor: Kelewan, the alien world of the warlike Tsurani, and Midkemia, the world of the protagonists -a Middle Earth-like land of elves, dwarves and dragons. In creating Betrayal at Krondor, the new CRPG from Dynamix, a corridor exists between three worlds: the world of people-and-paper role-playing where the Friday night gaming group of Feist and his friends created the land of Midkemia, the literary saga of Midkemia's history in the Riftwar novels and, returning almost full circle, the world of computer role-playing where Design Team Leader John Cutter magically transforms the Midkemian mythos into a threedimensional environment. Midkemia is an ideal gaming environment. The world is large and peopled with fantasy races. Though most of the feudal lords pay homage to a central king, the government is practically balkanized enough to be subject to civil war breaking out at any given time. This makes for plenty of intrigue within the ranks of the protagonists' own kingdom. Then, there is the threat from without (whether the Midings. The gamer will simply use the directional arrows and compass at the bottom of the screen and move the party of characters along a step at a time. Then, once the party is in the center of a road, the gamer can toggle an \"auto-road\" feature and place the cursor over a directional arrow. By holding down the mouse button, the party will simply blitz down the road, affording a movement bonus for being on the road that is visually communicated to the gamer rather than numerically presented. Indeed, if one so desires, it is possible to zoom high above the party in an overhead map view and zip down the road so fast that one has a sense of flying (and that is appropriate because any further releases in the series may well have the option of allowing the gamer's character(s) to fly). As players encounter on-screen enemies, they occasionally hide behind terrain features such as trees and come out to ambush the party or they scale larger as they come closer and smaller as they flee. When players encounter on-screen objects, they scale as the party closes or broadens range on them. One need only click the right mouse button to determine Strengthen As Betrayal at Krondor reaches the computer screen, Midkemia has become so much a three-dimensional environment that gamers will sometimes wonder if they are playing a flight simulator rather than a CRPG. Indeed, one CGW staffer stated that he felt like he was about to take off as he moved quickly down the on-screen road between first-person perspectives of mountains and trees, seashores and buildPage 8 Computer Gaming World "


"what an object is and the left mouse button (once the party is close enough) to examine the object. We also liked the shading and brightening that constantly indicated the cycling of day and night. It Is Riftwar! (Combat) Combat is handled very elegantly in Betrayal at Krondor. The gamer's party of characters and any bad guys or monsters appear in the 3-D image area at the top of the screen. Then, in a phased movement where the sequence is governed by the character's Speed rating, characters move and/or swing/spellcast in descending order. For tactical movement, the gamer moves the cursor until a green rectangle appears on the 3-Space ground where the character should finish his/her move. If the character is in range to attack, a yellow rectangle will appear around the feet of the enemy as the gamer moves the cursor toward the enemy. If the character can cast magic at the enemy, a blue rectangle will appear around the feet of the enemy. suden the cursor over one of the arcane symbols and the name of the spell will appear, along with the range of damage said spell could cause and the potential cost in energy (Health points) should the character cast it. With some spells, many of the small dots on the outside of the spell circle will be highlighted. In such a case, the information on damage and energy (Health) cost is dynamic and changes as the gamer moves the cursor along the outside of the spell circle. This is because the different dots on the outside of the circle represent the amount of Health which the spellcaster is willing to put into casting the spell. Once the spell is selected and the amount of energy to be placed into casting it is determined, the view returns to the combat screen. Then, the gamer need merely ascertain that the blue rectangle is placed around the enemy's feet and click the mouse button. The visual effects are often very striking with enemy's turned into stone and shattering into dust or burned to a crisp and frittering into ash. Naturally, as characters advance, there are more and more geometrical diagrams to be discovered and, hence, more spells to be cast. In a real sense, the magic system for the computer game seems very much in tune with the spirit of the magic system at which Feist hinted in the books, but did not detail. The magic system will not satisfy gamers who wish to gather spell components or mix potions, but it should satisfy those who have read the Riftwar series of novels. Much of the Dynamix visualization of Midkemia is stunning, but Cutter's team has established a solid corridor between the technological interpretation of the world and the literary interpretation of the world via a lavish use of text. The entire game is structured according to chapters in a book, a book which would feature events taking place between A Darkness at Sethanon and Prince of the Blood. As the player solves each portion of the game successfully, another chapter is introduced. The pages of text are presented in a beautiful, illustrated manuscript format and are occasionally enhanced by images of the characters and animated sequences (with the limited movement of some early Japanimation). It is very obvious to even the most casual fan that the writers must have studied Feist very thoroughly or collaborated effectively with him. The tone of the text is just right. And Light Shelf Lie Spell type Mantial cost. 1-20 Damage flone If the gamer wishes to strike, he/she need only make a mouse-click while the yellow or blue rectangle is in place. Damage, if any, is immediately assessed and the turn progresses to the next fastest character or enemy. Combat continues until one side is destroyed or successfully retreats (the combat Al is smart enough to retreat, often!). Note: After combat, it is wise to select the campfire icon and \"Camp Until Healed.\" Characters can restore up to 80% of their strength in this way, even without benefit of healing spells. NW El Krondor Pasa (Conclusion) Well Met! (NPC Interaction) When the player's party encounters a non-player character who is not bent on immediately attacking the party, there is a digitized on-screen photograph of the character displayed on the screen. Much of the conversation is handled via the text pages indicated above, but the program also parses the subject matter of the NPC's conversation into clues for the player. Thus, when the NPC is finished with his/her canned speech, a screen appears with a set of on-screen buttons. Many or, conceivably, all of these buttons will list potential new topics for the NPC to discuss. All the gamer needs to do is point and click on one of these active topic buttons and the NPC goes on with the conversation. At the end of this new information, there may even be more topic buttons available. In this way, the player can extend or suspend the party's conversations with NPCs by either selecting new topics or not. Magician: Gamer (Spellcasting) Feist does not elaborate very much on the magical system used in either Kelewan or Midkemia. So, Cutter's team was forced to fill out the references. In the first book of the series (either Magician in hardbound or Magician: Apprentice in softcover), Kulgan speaks of Pug understanding the logical structures of magic. Later, in softcover's Magician: Master, Pug is informed by his alien mentor that Midkemian practitioners only understand part of the structure of their magic. Once a gamer clicks on the amulet icon, a spellcasting menu appears. The spellcasting menu consists of several spell circles containing geometrical forms with arcane symbols in each area of the diagram. Assuming that the character can cast a certain spell, the gamer need only move Betrayal at Krondor bridges the gulf between three fantasy environments. Some literary purists will insist that it is not possible to transform a novelist's fictional universe into an interactive environment. Some gamers will dislike the digitized images that look almost like paper dolls against the 3-Space world. Yet, we believe that many gamers will believe that it does so successfully due to the excellent implementation of its technology and the obvious collaboration with the novelist who spawned Midkemia. Cow February 1993 Page 9 "


"POPULOLKS STRIALS OF THE OLYMPIAN GODS PRODUCTIONS LTD ELECTRONIC ARTS "


"BACK WITH AVENGEAN<<I A MUST-HAVE EXPERIENCE. IF YOU'RE ALREADY A POPULOUS FAN, YOU'RE IN FOR A TREAT. IF YOU'RE A NEWCOMER, YOU'RE IN FOR AN ADDICTING, ENTERTAINING GAMING PHENOMENON. COMPUTER GAME REVIEW THIS TIME, ANCIENT GREECE IS THE BATTLEFIELD, AND NOW YOU'RE LOCKED IN CATACLYSMIC COMBAT WITH THE TITANIC FORCES OF THE OLYMPIN PANTHEON. AT STAKES THE WORLD-WINNER TAKES ALL! COMMAND 35 NEW POWERS: RAZF CIVILIZATIONS WITH CATASTROPHIC QUAKES; SET THE OCEANS TO A BOIL; RIP THE WITH LIGHTNING, NURL DOWNPOURS OF FIRE, PLUX TO THE DEPTHS OF POSEIDON'S LAIR: WIELONG ONT VULCANOES: SPIN-OFF TITANIC WHIRLPS) LOW HAPES VESSELS; UNLEASH AST DEADLY TORNADOES TO RAVAGE THE LAKE ONCOCT A SERIES OF DIABOLICAL PLAGUES TO PARALYZE THE POPULA AND YOU'RE WUST GETTING WARMED UP. CRUSH THE MOST POWERFUL THE GREEK GODS AND CLAIM YOUR RIGHTFUL SEAT ATOP MN OLYMPUS! UUD TORCH YOUR OPPONENT'S LANDS WITH A CATACLYSMIC FIRE STORM WHILE YOU RIP THROUGH THEIR CITIES WITH A MIGHTY TORNADO! CREATE A THRIVING EMPIREBUILD WALLS, ROADS OR PLANT TREES TO INCREASE YOUR POPULARITY AND POWER! YOUR ULTIMATE FATE RESTS IN THE HANDS OF ZEUS. SuccESS ON THE BATTLEFIELD MAY EARN YOU A SEAT NEXT TO HIM ON MT. OLYMPUS. POPULOUS IT IS AVAILABLE FOR THE IBM AND COMPATIBLES FOR $59.95. TO ORDER: VISIT YOUR LOCAL RETAILER OR CALLE 1(800) 245-4525 ANYTIME. POPULOUS IS A TRADEMARK OF ELECTRONIC ARTS. IBM SCREEN SHOTS. Circle Reader Service #58 "


"Once you've defeated alien armies, solved murders, and overcome curses, real life seems like child's play. The Lost TREASURES TAFASTRES II of Infocom BURIME CERET Fortune in Interactive Myelery. Fantasy and Seiener Fiction Adventure! Danger. Deceit. Triumphs. Tragedies. And always, the unexpected. The Lost Treasures of Infocom I & II may be just games. But then, so is life. Which is why you'll find these two incredible collections indispensible in your quest for individual fulfillment. Self realization. And, most importantly, engrossing entertainment. For those imbued with imagination, a sense of adventure and mountains of determination, The Lost Treasures of Infocom 1 & II are a paradise of pleasure. Herein are contained many of the finest interactive entertainment programs ever written. Twenty classics in Lost Treasures I alone. Including five Zork fantasies. Mysteries like Deadline and Witness. Science fiction favorites like The Ilitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy and Starcross. Eleven more in Lost Treasures II with the likes of Plundered Hearts, Border Zone, Trinity and Sherlock Holmes. Ask your software retailer for The Lost Treasures of Infocom. That way the next time life seems a little too real, you'll have some really exciting adventures just waiting INFOCOM. Available for MS-DOS, MS-DOS CD-ROM, Macintosh, and Macintosh CD-ROM. Visit your local retailer or call 1-800-477-3650 or 310-207-4500 to order. Circle Reader Service #125 "


"SPECIAL TECHNO WIZARDRY SECTION USELESTE omputers supply more than artificial opponents and playing environments for games and simulations. Computers also provide tools for: personal creativity and entertainment; the blending of media; group interaction; altered perspectives; new environments; faster processing of game/graphics data; and larger images. In this special section:  Paula Giese unveils new ways to play with data and images on our computers, creating conceptual breakthroughs as we «play\" with our world;  CGW Editor Johnny L. Wilson visits Activision's sound stage to observe the blending of live actors and computerized backgrounds for Return to Zork;  Paul C. Schuytema unveils the heart and soul of the techno-wizardry underlying VWE's BattleTech Centers; Chris Lombardi checks out the angles and technology to be found in l-motion's Alone in the Dark Lovecraftian polygon-filled graphic adventure;  CGW looks at the Al and 3-D rendering to be found in Bullfrog's upcoming strategy/adventure set in a dark future;  CGW's editorial staff considers the gaming potential of technologies demonstrated at Fall Comdex; RESES and 5 Chuck Miller shows us how to get a large VGA image without HDTV. "


"POWER TO THE IMAGINATION Bourbaki's FracTools by Paula Giese TITLE: Frac Tools SYSTEM: IBM PRICE: $35.00 PROTECTION: None DESIGNERS: Hugh Myers (Tools: Zoom); DISTRIBUTORS: Bourbaki (Boise, ID: Media Magic (Nicosia, CA) COMPANION PROGRAMS: FracTunes, FracZooms Paula Giese is president of Compulex Services, a computer consulting firm that works with lawyers and construction companies. She is a former Professor of Humanities at the University of Minnesota, where she was Editor-in-Chief and writer for the Minnesota Math and Science Teaching Project which developed a hands-on curriculum for grades K through 6 and a teacher education program. ette settings which prevent selected colors from moving and changing, so images can be meaningfully color-animated (just the eyes move, to show life, say), rather than \"all colors flow\" which is ideal for most kaleidoscope abstractions. To illustrate, the three \"frog planet\" images are part of a one-slide animation in which a complex sky-fractal goes from a few scatI ractals have generated great scientific excitement in the past R decade. They are images from a revolution in human thought, showing aspects of reality (with applications ranging from neurology to stock market cycles) only discoverable by using computer graphics. Many shareware programs exist which enable one to generate them. FracTools is the centerpiece of a family of slick, professional softwares for those who want to play with (rather than research) the fantastic shapes. With the tools available in this program, one can flow colors through them. merge them with other images, and easily make slide shows that combine fractal and painted or scanned PCX images. Its easy-to-use graphically-based menu-driven system, support for Super VGA and comprehensive manual make it the best current low-cost fractal software choice for those whose recreational preference is artistic or creative. Pretty Shapes and Colors FracTools generates Mandelbrot and Julia fractals from zooms on the images that come with the program. Images are generated in the proprietary format that allows innumerable interactive changes from Color and Effects menu choices. FracTools Musicians also saves any image in the industrystandard paint-raster PCX format. It from can load any PCX (not just a fractal) for color changes and pseudo-animation. FracTools supports control palcompatible Page 14 Computer Gaming World "


"o n making such slide-shows, because Bourbaki did not see the possibilities of this (I invented it); they thought of FracTools as a kaleidoscope. It is much more. Effects Menu F/X Simple slide-shows selecting effects and different palettes to flow or strobe colors, and lining up image files-can be menu-generated from FracTools. An easy scripting language makes more complex shows possible. There are no fade transition effects, such tered \"stars\" through a wildly colorful rotating nova, while the colors and lighting of the 256-color foreground scene PaintBrushcollaged over it change appropriately. \"Musicians from Hell\" uses the same technique to animate a 16-color standard VGA image. The background and most of the musicians' bodies are set to not \"strobe\" or color-change. The musicians' cheeks, lips, fingers, and eyes appear to move as they play, while the fractal representing their weird music revolves. \"Musicians\" is music-driven by another Bourbaki program, FracTunes, which can use AdLib, Soundblaster, or Roland songfiles, or can display animated images driven by live play on Roland-MPU-compatible MIDI instruments. A user-scripted series of images responds with colors in rhythmic motion to pitch, tone, volume and velocity. FracTunes is a light-and-color instrument that you can jam with visually as well as musically, creating computer-assisted multimedia karaoke. After playing with fractal images for a while, users can save any version they like as PCX files, which can be reloaded for color palette flows and rotations, or merged with other images using any paint program. Spectacular fractals can form backgrounds, or parts of them can be made into cutouts which can be clipped to painted or scanned images. Fractals make excellent components of images intended to convey a fantastic, futuristic, or spiritual feeling. \"Annie's Dream\" (page 16) collages the sleeping girl onto a butterfly-shaped Newtonian fractal from one of the ready-made sets Bourbaki sells. Newtonians are among the other kinds of fractals that a sister program, FracZoom, generates. When coloranimated, the bands of color flow outward along the wings, so the giant dream butterfly appears to be alive. Clear, Professional Menuing \"AsEasy as (fingerpainting) only neater...\" (page 16) shows FracTools' well-designed drop-down menus at work making a palette for animation of a Newtonian fractal. In 16or 256-color modes, the image's palette can be clicked to select from among millions of colors by moving the sliding bars. (Here they're shown set to vary Hue, Tint, Brightness. A mouse-click changes the method to Red-Green-Blue variation.) The cross-hair cursor will click-select a screen-pixel for color editing by jumping to the palette, so that all instances of that pixel's color can be changed. In 256-color modes (VGA only), the palette is bigger. Cursor jump-selecting and spectral palette-pans are essential aids to editing that even the \"magic-wand\" selections of expensive professional raster-edit programs cannot do. The \"random\" (generate a new palette) and \"copy\" (ranges of colors from one place to another) operations are useful for creating and trying many combinations quickly. All palettes can be saved as re-usable .PAL files. Any images can be gray-scales automatically or converted to \"line art\" for B&W printing, using palettes that come with FracTools. The major omission in FracTools is that it does not support any printer drivers. To print spectacular images, they must be loaded into a program that handles PCX file formats. FracTools doesn't do real file management just gets and saves the several file types it uses but its graphical file access capabilities are well-designed (superior to those of Windows), intuitive for users who wander multiple drives with many subdirectories. The manual needs layout glitz and it isn't always clear how to use the complete information it crowds in. There should be more examples. Yet, the manual does clearly state a major truth about FracTools: the way to learn to use it in 3 words is \"play, play, play.\" The changes that can be run on abstract fractal images are mesmerizing. After doing that a while, one may wish to get into color-animating non-abstract images where the methods are the same (but the effects controls are limited to picking the moving and fixed colors, flow control and speed settings). The manual has no information February 1993 Page 15 "


"13THERN FID HIHLER.PC as pro presentation programs offer, but the pseudo-animations of controlled color changes are more fun. PCX files can be assembled from many other programs (including screen-grabbers), so there are story-telling possibilities, including occasional text screens. For fractal files, there are many more effects than the controllable color flows. From the effects menu, changing the number of iterations (under which the fractal was originally generated) changes its appearance dramatically. Other effects include Stained Glass (dark outlines around each colored area) and the Dust (which reduces a fractal to lacy whorls of multicolor sparkles). The Kaleidoscope effect divides a fractal into four mirrored images, joining them seamlessly. FracTools' ASCII text \"show scripts\" can automate the best of one's graphic experiments. Unfortunately, although scripts can loop, pan and mimic some expensive presentation-package transitions, lack of an «IF» in this language and of \"STOP, GO BACK. CONTINUE, GOTO\" commands means only self-running, non-interactive, shows can be created. Bourbaki wasn't thinking of such shows; they were thinking of fractal kaleidoscopes. Fortunately, shows can be o Effects Culoru slidou given to friends who don't have the program or uploaded to BBSs without piracy, because there is a very basic giveaway showdriver. Fascination with fractals' beauty and endless the intricacy may inspire one to learn more about TITIPIT them, mathematically and scientifically. The manual begins this with EZ as.. a short, plain-language simplification of what ...only neaterl Mandelbrot-type fractals are, and a suggested reading list. Bourbaki's FracZooms can assist further. It generates some types (Newtonians, differential equations, Pickover Biomorphs) that the main program cannot, as well as providing a utility for batch-generation of sets of fractals unattended, which is handy if you have complex ones to regenerate at time-consuming higher resolutions. When FracZooms runs on a subdirectory of fractal files, it generates an ASCII file of records containing analytic information, parameters, values or variables, etc., which can be imported to a spreadsheet or database to systematically compare sets of fractal images and study their properties. The whole Bourbaki \"frac family» is highly recommended, as is the only retail source for it: Media Magic (800/882-8284), a catalog dealer for many fascinating books and softwares on the integrative theme of \"art, mathematics, science and computers.\" Make Paletto H Load Palotto P Save Palotto Default Palotto Black & White Palette Sat Gray Scale 011 Kidshows, Digital Photoshows, Grabbed-Screen Shows FracTools is a simple, inexpensive show creator that even young kids can use. With grade-schoolers from local school computer clubs, I've collaborated on several shows that have been hits with other kids and parents. Four-year-old Lisa's picture of me (scanned from her drawing, paint-colored by her older cousins) is all too recognizable. I've duplicated it to show one color-change plus comments from young art critics. Youngsters can create palettes for fire flickering across buildings, flow colors to make a sunrise, flash lightening on a stormy ocean. It isn't necessary to write scripts to get many of these effects, but kids may be motivated to learn how. FracTools' menu methods provide immediate yet vividly satisfying results children can realistically achieve. This often leads to experiments with the scripting language. FracTools has no leht real competition. Those 10.00 with artistic or creative leanings will be inspired You gots BV and delighted by Frac2 BLACK Tools, FracTunes, and Eyes! other Fracs. These tools put what may GREY Hair! be the greatest discovery of our age, Benoit Mandelbrot's visual-mathematical Turned YELLOW work that harnesses the infinite in never-ending exfoThis is liating networks at the Changed YOU by service of the power of the her Lisa W. (Age 4 1/2] imagination. Now that's SHIRTI techno-wizardry. CGW Page 16 Computer Gaming World "


"\"The best simulator I've ever seen! Rick Zalud, Computer Game Review TEND TO \"Makes the term virtual redundant!\" Dave Moskowitz, Video Games and Computer Entertainment REALITY! BEYOND THE EDGE DE THE ENVELOPE \"Sets a totally new standard for helicopter simulations!\" Amie Katz, Electronic Games \"Redefines the state-of-the-art in computer simulation graphics!\" Computer Gaming World COM A IC from NovalogicTM, the creators of WOLFPACKIM COMANCHE MINIMUM OVERKILLT IS the promise of aulation action come true! You come the ultimate in 21st Century Attack Helicopters-the Boeing Sikorsky RAH-66 Comanche, not just over, but in and around ultra-realistic 3-D terrain. Can it be true? Absolutely! Thanks to Novalogic's radical new simulation environment VOXEL SPACETM which produces graphics 500 times more detailed than any of those tired old polygon graphic games. You'll dive from mountain peaks, dart through winding canyons, and roar through pulse-pounding combat in stunning cloud-filled skies. So get ready for awesome graphics, pre , all sweat-dripping, teath-clenching. white-knuckle excitement unlike ng u've ever experienced  personal computer. Tear out to your nearest software dealer and tear into a new reality! CREATED BY: Smoothtas, vichest terrain wraphics ever seen in a real-time simulator First simulator with real-time controls of RAH-66 Comanche Unsurpassed speed and maneuverability Real-time fly-bys through actual terrain data One-minute learning curve Superb musical score and sound ONE ACTUAL SCREENSHOTS LER CGT223 FLARE PLARE 10 FLAME 20 For the IBM.PC 308 SX or greater V80 32 hit mode game wiha megabytes of linear addrussed powall Wolfpack. Comanche, Maximum Overkill VOXEZ SPACE Novalogic, and tho Novalogic logo are trademarks of Novalogic, Inc. 79510 Vitwa Blvd. Sto. 202. Tarzana, CA 91356 1992 by Novalogic, We All Rights Reserved Circle Reader Service #89 "


"More About Fractals... Forgotten Monsters, Ferocious Mathematicians \"A reason for relying increasingly on computer) graphics was that something strange and totally unexpected began to happen with consistency. Our graphics did more than inform. They made people dream. Colleagues flocked to tell us that we had made them see their own work in a different light, and had helped them by unveiling previously unnoticed analogies. For the first time, they felt that what they saw directly affected what they did next. All problems are not resolved, but many problems are deeply changed.\"— Benoit Mandelbrot Millennia from now, the creation/discovery of fractals will rank with the invention of writing and numbers in the history of human thought. In a century, IBM may be remembered only as the vast, bumbling computer bureaucracy which sheltered Mandelbrot and provided him tools to develop this revolution. This hasn't come easily. Mandelbrot is a maverick outsider, but his genius is such that the math Establishment has fought, rather than ignored, him. Recognition of the importance of his work has come more through the sciences and the arts. Moved by the irony of its name conjoined with fractals. Mandelbrot contacted Bourbaki-the-software-company. \"What made me laugh,\" he wrote Bourbaki, \"is the juxtaposition of the two words that play central and opposite roles in my life, fractal and Bourbaki... As to Bourbaki, it was the name of a strange cult which reigned in Paris for decades, and which I resisted and fought with a satisfying degree of ultimate success.\" In the early years, Mandelbrot (who is French by birth) published his mathematical researches mainly in Comptes Rendus, a French academic journal. He was fiercely opposed by \"the Bourbaki Group,\" which began in the 1920s as a handful of French mathematicians who wanted to return true rigor to mathematics, infested with sloppy thinking in their view. They adopted a pseudonym for their aggressive publications, Nicholas Bourbaki, after an obscure statue in a park where they first met. Lurking behind this name, Bourbaki, the anonymous mathematicians fired off a still continuing barrage of textbooks and articles which ripped into the iterative methods and what they termed the pathological monsters of Cantor, Peano, and their intellectual descendants-including Mandelbrot and his followers. No longer young idealists on a quest for purity, they are now antique bastions of rigor mortis whose views dominate American math textbooks and academic teaching. Mandelbrot's work is anathema to them, a revival of ancient \"monsters and pathologies such mathematicians threw in the dungeon, forever, they hoped. It is war. No lasers or swords. Instead, the combatants are savants, the liberated monsters beautiful, the spell-casting formulae arcane, potions only helpful after-hours, and final point scoring is for future generations. So, Mandelbrot naturally wanted to know if Bourbaki's FracTools were some covert ploy by Bourbaki-the-ferociousmath-purists emanating from the unlikely locale of Boise, Idaho, where Bourbaki-the-software-company (who probably didn't understand the history of their name) has been producing the fine DOS shell IDIR (\"Wonder\") for more than a decade. Or, as Mandelbrot tactfully put it, \"The reason I write is to ask whether the juxtaposition of these two terms (fractal and Bourbaki) was accidental or deliberate.' He was pleased to learn from Bourbaki-the-software-compa ny that FracTools was not some mathematicians' war-move; it is Fler for actually an homage to his work. This work has entered our culture in a unique way, not by pop simplifications (the way relativity theory did after The Bomb). but via widespread hands-on play with the methods and concepts. This came about by historical accident: at just the right time, cheap, powerful computers were available to the young in spirit, to future scientists not yet part of The Establishment, and to those who like intricate mental activity, especially using their own hands and eyes, even if no one pays them for it. Fractals became both a source for dreams of new sciences and an intensely involving recreation for fairly large numbers of people. The intensity of recreational involvement seems to arise from an intuitive perception that \"fractal thinking\" supplies something vital that is missing from the Western rational tradition, something which isn't supplied by airhead neo-mystic babble. Historically, defensive rationalists have maintained that the sleep of reason breeds nightmares\" of death, destruction, war, evil. But there are other dreams. Perhaps it is those dreams that fractal thinking taps, aided by computer power, and may yet awaken to life for everyone. \"All problems are not resolved, but ...' Illustration: Replicated within the periodicity bulbs of a Mandelbrot fractal generated by FracTools, Benoit Mandelbrot smiles. Behind him is a logarithmic ratios formula for determining fractal dimensions. Lower left, the \"dueling fractal» is positioned as on the 1985 Scientific American cover that brought fractals to 50,000 hobbyists' attention. Juray Page 18 Computer Gaming World "


"TIME TAKE PROD NO SCENE DATE DIRECTOR PRODUCED BY ON LOCATION IN THE GREAT UNDERGROUND EMPIRE On The Set of Return to Zork EEEEE LEE TEZE CESESEEN by Johnny L. Wilson SEM KEELES in quite a while. LGOP's interface could be described as \"clunky,\" at best. Return's interface may be revolutionary. It is certainly an interface that I would have said could not be done. LGOP's art had an unfinished, almost crude, look. Return's art is being integrated The technician calmly says, \"Speed.\" The director, Peter Sprague, calls for «Action!» and Robyn Lively, the youthful red-haired actress dressed as a fairy, pushes an invisible object off of her. The set is relatively bare, except for assorted lights, microphone booms and a large blue screen behind the actress. Yet, the monitor shows Robyn in the midst of a lush, green forest. Such is the magic of computer graphics and such was the setting when CGW invaded the sound stage of Activision's upcoming Return to Zork (Return). The concepts behind the project had sounded interesting, but we arrived at the set with a ton of skepticism (largely due to our feelings about Leather Goddesses of Phobos II) and left with an equivalent amount of expectation. The design team really seems to have learned from the mistakes and built on the strengths of the first attempt to create a full-scale graphic adventure from a classic Infocom title. First of all, LGOP II used amateur voice talents. Return uses professional actors and actresses, as well as an experienced screenwriter on-set to clean up and refine dialogue on the fly. Second, LGOP II was designed to be easy and accessible to entry-level players. Return has the most intricate puzzle structure we've seen aa son February 1993 Page 19 "


"game's fairy, Robyn Lively, fans of \"The Wonder Years\" should enjoy the troll, Jason Hervey (Wayne); and filmgoers who remember the remake of«Flash Gordon\" should be familiar with the blind bowman, Sam Jones. One of the actresses, Lori Lively, serves as a spirit in the woods and will be morphed into a tree. As an additional creative touch, Lori sings her part. Tougher yet, she had to sing her part a capella on the set and the accompaniment will be scored under her part at a later time. Fortunately, the project's voice coach, Teri Mason, has perfect pitch and was able to cue Lori and assist her in staying in the same key throughout each song segment. with the live actors from the very beginning. In short, Return has the potential of being ... well, ... a real Infocom game. Cast Party The cast is very interesting. We observed Ernest Lively, perhaps best known for his television role as Cooter on \"The Dukes of Hazard\" and his recent appearance in the action film «Passenger 57,\" playing the part of a one-armed adventurer. Between scenes, we asked him about the main difference between film and television acting and his first experience of appearing in a computer game. \"The biggest difference is that there's no one to act off of,\" he stated and went on to explain that, since most of his lines were directed at the player of the game, there was no acting synergy between his character and the one (the player's) he was speaking Chuckles como Exit, Stage Right The blue screen in the background of the sound stage was used as part of a chromakey technique. Film studios often use the blue screen in connection with invisibility and special effects. Much like the weatherman on a local television newscast where the map is processed in the backgrounds are computerized and processed into the shots during the filming. According to art director Joe Asperin, use of the chromakey method serves to assist the six computer artists on the project when they have to match cameras and light between the live video and the 3-D rendered backgrounds. Without filming in chromakey, the artists have to match shadows and light sourcing between actors and backgrounds after the fact and it is much tougher to make the scenes look natural. The objects in the backgrounds were modeled in a 3-D program called Infini-D and the design team plans to do a CD-ROM version where players will be able to walk into locations much like in Virgin's The 7th Guest (but, because of Volk's compression routine, requiring only one compact disc). Further, even the backgrounds are composed such that very few of the shots are \"square on.\" Instead, the artists strove to create new and interesting angles. to. Although this is often the case when close-ups are being filmed for a series or film, most of his scenes in the game are strictly solo performances. Further, the actors often had to film six or seven different responses for each potential action by the player. It is tough to get into an acting rhythm under such circumstances. He did like the fact that the Media Design West and Activision production crews kept the filming on schedule and didn't have to stop for half a day because the director didn't like the light.\" All of the actors and actresses had to participate in one ritual unique to the requirements of a computer game. In order to use William Volk's technology, which synchronizes phonemes and facial movement, each performer was required to say a standard line in three emotional states. So, at some time during each performer's tenure in front of the camera, a casual observer would observe him or her shouting, \"Mad dogs howling at the wind, so let's eat!\" The line doesn't make much sense semantically, but it does phonetically, as the line contains all of the phonetic units of which English words are made. Technicians will be able to use the facial movements from the line to create lip-synced dialogue. Those who used to watch \"Twin Peaks» should recognize the KEEP OUT Page 20 Computer Gaming World "


"That the team has been successful is clear from the fact that Michelle Em, the screenwriter (Jazz Heart, written for Robert Redford's Sundance Productions) who rewrote the original dialogue, complimented the artists' approach. That is significant because Michelle is an Art Center College of Design graduate and worked for Robert Abel's special effects group. Indeed, several of her storyboards were used in the spectacular \"other-worldly\" sections of the original StarTrek: The Movie. So, she knows storyboards and she was impressed. (She is also an experienced Infocom gamer, dating back to the original Zork, so she knows games, too.) is all technological fanfare and no story. Designer Doug Barnett (who wrote Cinemaware's Lords of the Rising Sun) scripted the original plot, wrote the original dialogue and developed the puzzle structure. Doug had always been an admirer of the Infocom classics and was thrilled to have the chance to create this return to the Great Underground Empire. Once the game was cast, Michelle Em entered the picture and began rewriting the dialogue to fit the characterizations she was seeing emerge from the cast. Michelle really loves working in the game genre. So much so that she often plays Infocom adventures before she writes, because they help her start visualizing scenes as a \"warm-up\" to writing her own material. Asked about the toughest challenge in switching from screenwriting to writing games, Em suggested that it is tough trying to write funny dialogue from 24 different character perspectives. Asked what was most satisfying about making the switch, she said: \"When I see a movie, I get impatient. They're so ossified. There i s such a formula. Games are like the beginning of the movie business. People are having so much fun that you don't mind working long hours.\" She went on to explain that she enjoyed the possibility of breaking the mold in the game business. Closing Credits Two consummate professionals serve to put the entire production together. Executive Producer David Mangone of Media Design West assembled a film crew which included the Emmy-winning (for ABC 20/20 segments) team of Glenn and Karen Winter and \"King of the Teleprompters\" Larry Klasen (Larry has worked with everyone from President Reagan to actors in dog food commercials). Activision Producer Eddie Dombrower (designer of Earl Weaver Baseball) brought in long-time acting buddy Peter Sprague to direct the actors, and artist Joe Asperin to coordinate the look of the production. Both producers were extremely impressed with the other's professionalism and, in observing them, it was difficult to realize that they had never worked with each other prior to the shoot. In summary, Activision seems to be making all the right moves as they attempt to bring gamers back to the G.U.E. for a Return to Zork. After observing the set, we can't wait until the premiere. CGW 0 1 0 A Maze Of Twisty Icons, None Looking Alike Perhaps, the most phenomenal improvement we observed in Return to Zork is the ambitious new interface. Based on studies conducted at M.I.T., the interface should always be where the user is looking. In Return's case, the twobutton interface consists of the mouse plus a pop-up diamond configuration with up to eight iconbased options. Now, the diamond pops up wherever the cursor is located. Presumably, that is where the gamer is going to be looking. The mouse button on the right brings up the player's inventory and the left button conjures the diamond with the options. Although this editor would have said it couldn't be done, we believe the icon-based interface solves some of the communication problems encountered with other non-text parsers. There is an icon for photographing the creatures, objects and characters encountered, as well as an icon for recording the dialogues in certain encounters and taking notes on clues uncovered. From the data saved via these icons, the gamer can show the pictures\" and \"notes to the NPCs encountered or play the recordings\" for them in order to gain other clues. In essence, the game has not lost the text capacity of the classic Infocom stories, it is simply that one uses images and captured sound bytes to prompt the on-screen characters into telling more and more of the story. Further, the interface allows players to assume one of three body language poses: bored, interested or threatening, when they interrogate an on-screen character/creature. This allows a richness that has been absent heretofore in non-text graphic adventures. Tell Me A Story No one should get the impression, however, that Return to Zork February 1993 Page 21 "


"LONGHORN Become the World's Greatest Conqueror! Uti TATTOTETTA 015552331 HILLER PEETEG 2. -OOP. urn O y Prodhi Plunge into a medieval world to conquer Cascatia, an untamed land of conquest & glory. Invade castles, fly over mountains, and use the forest to your advantage as you battle across the Cascatian Realm, to become the reigning king. Just about the best strategy and tactics game you will ever play. NINE BEAUTIFUL SCENARIOS. A RANDOM MAP GENERATOR. UTILIZE BASIC HUMAN UNITS, THE FANTASY UNITS OR BOTH.  21 LEVELS OF PLAY (STRONG AI). MODEM PLAY. COMPLETE GAME SCORING HISTORY. RICH IN STRATEGY AND TACTICS. SEVERAL FULL CAMPAIGN CONQUESTS. The \"Conquered Kingdoms\" computer game is IBM PC and soon to be Amiga compatible. It can be obtained through your favorite retailer or ordered direct by calling: 1-908-788-2799  Q.Q.P. All rights reserved. IBM is a trademark of International Business Machines. Amiga is a trademark of Commordore. "


"BATTLES SOE DCENY ( TTTT oop Several dudes holistic gaming Conquer the world in \"Battles of Destiny.\" Seek out and destroy up to three opponents in this state of the art global conquest simulation. It's simple to play, but only a true master will reign in «Battles of Destiny.\"  Challenging Artifical Intelligence (9 levels of difficulty) Air, ground and naval combat 22 different units to construct Modem play Over 20 beautiful worlds to conquer Complete player history  Dynamic scoring system Campaign play The \"Battles of Destiny\" computer game is IBM PC. It can be obtained through your favorite retailer or ordered direct by calling: 1-908-788-2799  1992 Q.Q.P. All rights reserved. IBM is a trademark of International Business Machines. Circle Reader Service #94 "


"«No Guts, No Galaxy!» The Design of Virtual World Entertainments' Battletech Center by Paul C. Schuytema by Paul C. Schuytema The 31st century is a dangerous place, especially for a MechWarrior. But ask anyone who's risked their neck for their House's honor and they'll tell you that nothing can compare to the thrill, Sliding into the Mark VII cockpit, wrapping their hands around the targeting stick and transmission slider, pumping their feet on the cool steel pedals and scanning the controls, the MechWarrior becomes a part of something else. Being the eyes and brain of a sixty-ton, thirty-meter Battlemech is no picnic. They must turn a machine of endo-steel and actuators into an athlete, sprinting it across the dusty surface of a mining planet, closing in for the kill and triggering an Alpha strike, all before the thin crescent moon descends over the distant hills. No, nothing can compare. In Virtual World Entertainment's Battletech Center (located at Chicago's North Pier), the experience is far more than just a game, it's a virtual tour de force Anyone who has played Activision's MechWarrior knows the setting: far future battlefields where the standard technology of war is an army of huge, anthropomorphic robots controlled by elite Mech Warriors. At the Battletech Center, they've created the experience of actually piloting one of these dreadnoughts, from training to the mission briefing to the battle. The player slides into a custom-built virtual cockpit with over 100 working controls and instruments to do battle in real time against real opponents. The experience plays havoc with one's adrenal systems. A large speaker mounted behind the cockpit chair rumbles and shakes one's bones. Twin screens sur rounded by lights and toggles fill and illuminate the dark, womb-like cockpit. The BattleTech experience goes a step farther than the \"traditional\" headgear-based virtual reality systems by creating not a virtual reality, but a virtual experience. When one is sitting in that dark cockpit, waiting e elevator to deliver the mech to the surface, it is possible to almost believe that one has been transported to the 31st century. Nothing in that cockpit betrays the experience and, in the heat of battle, as one's eyes shift from instrument to instrument, processing information, and every limb actively controls the movement and performance of the 'mech, one's awareness is certainly transported to the year 3052. The game centers around combat between these Battlemechs, from simple scenarios of \"shoot everything in sight\" for the novices, to urban team warfare and twilight battles where the arcing missiles cast eerie glows across the purple horizon. A battle typically involves up to eight players and the Battletech Center has encouraged the development of organized teams to compete in \"league\" matches several nights a week. The entire experience lasts approximately one half-hour, with a little over ten minutes devoted to pure cockpit warfare. A player has the option of choosing and configuring one of four 'mechs. During a sortie's briefing, touch-sensitive graphical databases are available to view the design and armament of friendly and opposition 'mechs. After the sortie is fought, the players gather in the debriefing zone to review their performance and discuss tactics. The Battletech Center is a marvel of computer game design in which everything has been created to support the experience: custom-made computer hardware, cutting-edge computer programming, costumed attendants, and futuristic architecture. The idea for the Battletech Center germinated back in 1979. Jordan Weisman and L. Ross Babcock III were two friends who wanted to create the ultimate interactive entertainment experience. Based loosely on the bridge of the first Alien movie, their original idea was to pit teams of individuals working on the bridge of a spaceship against other individuals. They attempted to secure funding, but because they were a recent college graduate and a college dropout, the funding just wasn't available and their forward-thinking idea of what computers could do was just \"out there\". The idea was put on hold. In the mid-1980's, Weisman and Jordan were attending an industry model show and saw some models that caught their attention. They were figures based on several Japanese animation series featuring robot warriors. These robots were fanciful, semi-sentient creatures empowered with near-mythical abilities. In the cartoons such as Gundam and Robotech, they battled, along with the help of wide-eyed teenagers, to save the world. Weisman was captivated by the models, and they were being dumped at huge discounts. The two bought a ton of the models, and contacted the Japanese companies about liPage 24 Computer Gaming World "


"begin work on their entertainment center. When they first met with programmers to initiate the planning of the first center, they still were not sure what it would be based upon. After talking with the programmers about the feasibility of the project, the Battle Tech universe seemed a perfect environment for their interactive entertainment center. During these early stages of planning, FASA licensed its Battletech game concepts to software houses, who created such games as The Crescent Hawk's Revenge and MechWarrior. The multiplayer Mechwarrior which is playing now on GEnie received much more active input from censes to use the anthropomorphic images. They began to think about these robotic \"creatures\" and their imagination kicked in. They worked on creating a fictional world which was more Western in influence, based on the history of the Roman successor states and the hordes of raiding Mongols. Weisman was very interested in history and he believed that a few people, brainstorming, could think of a fairly plausible fictional history, but if you used actual history as a template, you then had the actions of millions of individuals to draw upon. They also wanted to demythologize the robots, making them purely machines (albeit very advanced machines) more akin to tanks than superheros. They imagined what would be necessary to keep these machines of war running, from pilots to repair technicians. Weisman and Babcock wanted to make the world a declining culture (it's just more interesting, says Weisman), where the technology of the past was superior to the current technology. They created a scavenger society, where an armed forces recruitment slogan could have been: \"Join the army and drive the 'mech your father drove.\" In 1985, they created FASA corporation (which stands for \"Fredonian Aeronautics and Space Administration» after the fictional country from the Marx Brothers' movie, Duck Soup) and began publishing the BattleTech boardgame (now in its third edition). They thought it would only take a few years to build the capital for their interactive entertainment center, but it turned out to take a lot more time and money than expected ($3.5 million to open the first center). The boardgame has become immensely popular, spawning an entire series of supplements, technical documentation, and even a popular series of science fiction novels. The game is basically a tactical science fiction wargame in which them players control regiments of BattleMechs in a wide array of scenarios. The gameuniverse is set in the far future, in a region of space called the Inner Sphere, governed by rival and feuding, feudal houses (a derivation of the Roman successor states). In the evolving history of the game universe, the Inner Sphere has recently been in vaded by clans (the historical Mongols) who control new technology Battlemechs called OmniMechs ('mechs which are modular and easily reconfigured). This invasion occurs in the game year 3052, the \"current\" year of the Battletech Center. It was in 1987 when Weisman and Babcock finally generated enough capital to entertainment they offer, but he wanted to make that type of cooperative play available to more people across a wider spectrum. Role-players (pencil and paper) must create the world in their imaginations and are much more willing to suspend disbelief just by talking about it. To make the appeal larger, however, Weisman saw the need to make the experience as real as possible, encompassing every aspect of the Center. With this in mind, they envis ioned a multi-faceted experience, dividing the Center up into several major \"experience\" areas: observation platform, briefing, ready area, cockpit and mission review. Weisman and Babcock considered making the experience «traditional» virtual reality, with the helmets for stereo vision, etc., but they felt that the technology was still in its infancy. In the head-mounted systems, the graphic resolution is low, the lag-time and frame rate for the moving image is choppy and disorientating, and there is the obvious encumbrance of the helmet. Weisman feels that a cockpit-based system is the best current technology for suspension of disbelief. They wanted to create an experience that went beyond the arcade, and was aimed at an older, more sophisticated audience (18-35). Weisman points out that when coin-op games came into existence, they were indeed played by adults, but since most arcade games are based almost entirely on hand-eye coordination and the learning is by rote, ten to twelveRE OVARGA The Ready Area of the Chicago BattleTech Center FASA. The current president of FASA, Sam Lewis, worked closely to design a vast role-playing world and database that fit into the BattleTech universe. Eventually, they hope to use this growing database to link all of the Battletech Centers together, enabling the victories in one Center to effect on the political and historical history of the entire «Inner Sphere.\" Conceptual Reality It was in 1990 when the newly formed company, Virtual World Entertainments, opened the first Battletech Center in Chicago. Weisman remembers being there on that first day, seeing his dream becoming a reality. «It was wonderful,» he said, \"but when I came back the next day, I could see all of the things we did wrong, all of the things that needed improvement.» So, as soon as the Center had begun, it was already involved in the dynamic process of re-creation, which has recently culminated in a completely reworked program and cockpit system called the Mark VII. A In designing the center, Jordan Weisman wanted to create a \"live-action role-playing environment for cooperative storytelling.\" He has always been interested in role-playing games and the imaginative Launch Bay 7 year olds are better than adults. And who, as an adult, will stick with something that a kid is better at? That, coupled with the arcades' move to the malls, excluded an older, more sophisticated audience. In the Battle Tech Center's game, success is not based on hand-eye coordination alone. Actually, other things such as resource management, strategy, tactics and communication are much more essential February 1993 Page 25 "


"logistics (this is a business, remember) of moving people through the experience and setting up the time duration for each segment. When it came time to actually begin work on the game design, Corson first looked at the BattleTech boardgame. The detail and the background come from the original rules, as well as the designs for the robots and the weapons systems. Corson points out that the boardgame was designed for play with dice on a hex board and certain aspects of it had to be modified in order to move the experience into realtime, mostly through trial and error to arrive at the right type of controls. The programming for the game was written in C on Macintosh Quadra 700's and, when the game is up and running, a Quadra which is configured before each session by an operator, sets up the variables for the encounter. Each cockpit houses its own computer, sporting two CPU's, a graphics controller and a secon--N75) to success. Adults are better at and more interested in games of this nature. Also, players are grouped by experience level, so a new player will never be laser fodder for the wily BattleTech-mogul (though it is a good and humbling experience to play against an expert at least once in your apprenticeship. I played against one of the Center's staffers and was smoked time and time again. However, seeing his robot sprint past me, then swivel back, firing while running beyond my range, only made me hungrier for improvement). Nuts and Bolts The cockpit itself is a marvel, boasting over 100 buttons and switches which all work and all contribute to the experience. Weisman points out that this is a simulator, not an arcade game. The cockpit is designed with user-configuration in mind. Any game can be played at any level, selected by the user while in the cockpit. The player can steer and aim with the joystick or elect to steer with the foot pedals. There are also options for weapon configuration, torso rotation, targeting, scanners, transmission and reactor heat. As Jordan says: \"Everybody should be able to drive a Lambourghini, but the person who has more exBo perience will be better at it. So anyone might drive it with an automatic, while an enthusiast will shift with a manual.\" There is no HUD in the simulator, as is utilized in so many computer simulations. Weisman wanted to take advantage of the full cockpit, keeping the player's eyes moving, checking the status of varying systems. Enabling the player to scan the cockpit, eyes always moving, says Weisman, makes the adrenaline pump a lot faster. Greg Corson is the lead programmer at Virtual World Entertainments. While the first version of the game, which was recently phased out, was contracted out to a programming house, all of the latest programming is done in-house. VWE employs three programmers, two hardware engineers and one \"very prolific\" computer artist. Corson explains that the process of making the game begins with a pencil and a pad of paper, sketching the various aspects of the system. It is important to remember that the BattleTech experience is multifaceted, with different areas of experience, and each area (ready area, debriefing, cockpit) designed with the others in mind. Once the basic \"look\" of the experience has been sketched out, they focused on the IDI geting of missiles, logistical information and radar. He's Got The Look! The staff artist at Virtual World Entertainments, David McCoy, entered the world of computer gaming from broadcast animation. McCoy thought he knew nearly everything he needed to know about computer graphics when he joined the Battletech team, but he quickly learned that things are perceived much differently in \"the heat of battle.\" No longer is detail the most central issue. How things «feel» is much more important. McCoy said that during the development of the BattleTech Center's graphics, he had to constantly wrestle with the battle of \"How nice does it look?\" vs. \"How fast does it render?\" McCoy also quickly adopted a game designer's philosophy: if someone is moving around in their 'mech, just looking at objects, then they (the game team) haven't done their job very well. As McCoy says: \"you can look at things all you want in reality.\" What they are creating is an active, vibrant world where there is very little time for browsing. During the design process, the first step was to get the program to work smoothly. In the first play-test, the robots skated rigidly around the world, with no fluid movement. Once the dynamics of the games were solid, then came the animation. McCoy first starts by rendering the 'mech in a 3-D CAD program, utilizing the Battletech boardgame's visual information. He makes the 'mech as detailed and complicated as possible, ready for the \"glory shot» of graphic design prowess. He then strips it down, creating six or seven levels of simplified shapes which are drawn at farther and farther distances. The goal, he says, is to optimize the computer horsepower. The system has plenty of memory, he says, but rendering the movement of complex shapes slows the processor down. After the 'mech is designed, the parts are then stripped apart and entered into the animation program where they are reassembled into the joints and vertices of a dynamic Battlemech. Using a computer program to create a \"virtual claymation studio,\" McCoy is able to move the virtual 'mech in real-time with a custom-made controller box. By working its joints through various movements, he creates \"key frames\" which the computer fills in View from inside the cockpit dary computer controlling all of the cockpit instruments. All told, each cockpit contains roughly 12 MB of RAM. At the beginning of each day, the program for the game is downloaded into each cockpit, and when the game is running, each computer controls the events in its own portion of a vast world-database. Corson says the most amazing thing, from a technical point of view, is that the whole thing actually works together. The Center has sixteen cockpits, each with at least two CPUs, as well as a central computer and other secondary computers all linked together, all controlling such things as graphics, light-rendering, arcs and tarPage 26 Computer Gaming World "


"ROME WASNT BUILT IN A DAY How long will it take you... "


"with the proper smooth motion. McCoy points out that each 'mech has several different gaits animated in, and when the speed of the robot reaches a certain point, the computer changes the animation from a walk to a run. Corson says that when they were working on animating the 'mechs, a wrong line of code could throw the animation off, making the robot move in some kind of \"insane breakdance\". with the torso spinning around the waist, the arms coming off and reattaching, etc. Unlike broadcast animation, says McCoy, where a single frame might take hours and hours of rendering, he can create animations in real-time, seeing the results immediately. The process is much more flexible, allowing for trial-and-error attempts to make the movements as realistic as possible. The player's cockpit generates the information for his or her own mech, saying, in essence, \"here's the position I'm in, here are my vertices,\" and that information is picked up by the other cockpits where the mech is displayed, lumbering, walking or sprinting When the whole system works together, it is a gaming experience like no other, and fortunately, they have spent a good deal of time working on the mission debriefing Currently, there is only one Center in the United States, in Chicago (there are also Centers in Tokyo and Yokohama), but Virtual World Entertainments has just announced plans to open up six more Centers across the U.S., as well as to expand the game even further. From the results that they have achieved so far and what they have learned about large-scale interactive game design, the future seems wide open. Weisman sees this form of entertainment as an evolutionary step forward, beyond the banalities of \"sit and watch» television. Weisman is a visionary, optimistic that this form of entertainment will grow to the verisimilitude of movies and plays, and as he says: \"the whole staff here tends to think years ahead of the technology, so we'll have plenty to do -for quite a while. Virtual World Entertainments, Inc. 1100 W. Cermak, Suite B404 Chicago, IL 60608 (312) 243-6515 Battletech Center North Pier 435 E. Illinois St., #334 Chicago, IL 60611 (312) 836-5977 BattleMechs in action area of the center, where you can watch a replay of your entire battle from a bird'seve view. while another monitor displays each 'mech, the damage it has taken, etc. It's amazing how easily perfect strangers u can come together when discussing their battle, pointing to the screen and nodding when a particular tactic seems to work especially well. Weisman and Babcock envisioned a social gaming atmosphere, and they have certainly delivered. After debriefing, each player receives a printed mission report, which gives a play-by-play account of the mission's highlights as well as scores for the individual players. CGW Get It A CAMER THE INDEPENDENT MAGAZINE OF ADVENTURE GAMING The best information and insight on everything in adventure gaming, including: RPGS Computer Games Board Games Miniatures PBMs War & Strategic Games Game Fiction Industry News Convention Coverage Commentary ...and just an eensy-teensy bit of Controversy IN THE CURRENT ISSUE: THE (Almost) Au Review Issue SOCIAL BOARDGAMES  The Honor ROLL  READER SURVEY AND MORE! Get it now! Ask your retailer! The Gamer offers you a bi-monthly blast of reviews, news, and opinion about all aspects of gaming the only independent source for gamers that you'll find. Don't miss a single issue! Pick up the latest issue at your local game or comics shop...and if they don't have it, ask for it! Page 28 Computer Gaming World "


"CONSTRUCT & DEFEND CITIES TO ADVANCE THE ROMAN EMPIRE BU CULULLAH N ARU 1111111 A sgovernor of a province of the Roman Empire you must TWEET A build cities for the good of your people. Fortify your cities with walls & towers but should your defences fail, you must command legions to crush the hostile barbarian tribes! Success will lead to promotion -and ultimately, the very best may rise to become... Caesar! Battles may also be fought out in detailed animated combat using a much enhanced version of Impressions' Cohort (Cohort II will be I COE UFTL1780 available separately). P. GE DEEB Grow your city with ampitheatres, forums, Keep out hostile tribes with cross-country temples, aquaducts, roads, baths & workshops walls to match The Great Wall of China and much, much more! Impressions Committed to Excellence in Strategy Entertainment Impressions Software, Inc. 7 Melrose Drive, Farmington, CT 06032 Circle Reader Service #68 "


"» THE SHAPE OF THINGS TO COME Polygon Technology in l.Motion's Horror Adventure, Alone in the Dark by Chris Lombardi rt struck me as odd, pulling into the driveway of Interplay Productions in Irvine, CA, that the two most interesting horror adventure games of '93 were being produced just a block away from each other. Looking down the winding road of a planned commercial zone in one of the most notorious planned communities in Southern California (a scary thought in itself), I could see the distinctive red and white of the sign that marked the home of Virgin Games, where I knew that frantic programmers were working feverishly to finish their long-awaited and much hyped, 7th Guest While the Virgin team worked to stuff their technological behemoth onto two CD-ROM discs, I visited Interplay to discuss the beta version of a horror game that had materialized on my desk earlier that week. This game, entitled Alone in the Dark (Alone) and designed by the French developers Infogrammes and I Motion (a new publishing partnership with Interplay), comes nowhere near the visual and technological splendor of the Virgin production, but it does use an old technology in a new way to produce a fresh and engaging 3-D adventure gaming environment. And, while we've yet to see much game-play behind the 3-D visual fireworks of 7th Guest, the 3-D technology used in Alone both creates a convincing 3-D work with visual flair and lends itself to complex and rewarding play. And it won't require a CD-ROM in order to enjoy it. The \"old\" technology used in Alone is our dear friend, the polygon. The player assumes the role of a character whose image is composed of simple geometric shapes. As one will notice from the screenshots showing close-up images of the character, the result is rather rough-resembling the creation of a child and her set of wooden blocks. My immediate reaction to this rough hewn image was a disinterested shrug. Then, I started moving this blockhead around the 3-D environment. After watching the character stroll casually about the room, pushing objects around, and bending over to examine and pick-up 3-D objects, I was beginning to understand what the designers were attempting to accomplish. Then, after my first deadly encounter with a bizarre reptilian duck, wherein my character punched and kicked, with great fluidity and a life-like agility, at the bill of this creature of Lovecraftian inspiration (and died as a result), my cold disposition began to thaw, and I restarted the game intrigued. Alone in the Dark is set in the classic adventure game locale the haunted house. Since the very beginning, game designers have loved this setting for its discrete room structure and its limitless potential as a breeding ground for spooks, ghoulies, secret compartments and passages. Alone uses these conceptual design tools to good effect, creating a world where one is constantly looking over one's shoulder and searching every shadowed nook for the mechanism that reveals the secret study. Enhancing the effect of these haunted 3-D environs is the extensive use of camera angles\" to continually change the player's perspective. As one's character moves about a room, one's perspective will change many times; from a straight-away side-on pan, to an overhead \"closet-set\" shot, to an \"inferior-view\" from floor level, to many other perspectives in the visual grammar of cinema. While many rooms have only two such camera views, some have up to nine! When teamed with some nice sound effects (floors creaking with every step, eerie howlings, fiendish laughs, and growls from monsters), these changing perspectives have the effect of pulling the viewer into the environment in a similar manner as the effect achieved by Ultima Underworld and Wolfenstein 3-D, and, of course, film. Gamers should be warned, however, that the unique cinematic angles sometimes get too clever. Swift changes in the viewpoint can occasionally be disastrous when the player's character is in combat mode. At the very least, these shifts can be disorienting. Yet, given the option of not having the amazing variety of angles and never having a disorienting moment in combat or having the variety and occasionally being discomfited, most gamers would opt for the latter. Page 30 Computer Gaming World "


"SALES OMNI TREND FTWARE P.O. BOX 733  WEST SIMSBURY, CT O8092 PRESENTE Impressions Circle Reader Service #169 "


"Techno imzaedam ogy, I think the designers have really accomplished something in this game-something that will cause other established adventure game producers to lift their heads out of their 2-D box blinders and consider another gaming dimension. I look at the rough poly-images in Alone and am reminded of the state of tank and flight simulators using the same technology a few years ago. If the use of polys in adventure games progresses the way polygon rendered sims have, adventure gamers can look forward to some exciting 3-D game environments in the near future. For now, one need not bemoan the fact that one hasn't the cash for the CD-ROM upgrade necessary to play an exciting horror game with neat technology. They need only play Alone in the Dark, which I've come to call, «7th Guest for the rest of us.\" Cow With the hackneyed haunted mansion setting, comes the hackneved storyline. The player can choose to play one of two characters: the bespectacled Victorian sleuth, Detective Carnby, or the young Victorian heiress, Miss Emily Hartwood. Both enter the haunted abode of the deceased Jeremy Hartwood to investigate his \"suicide.\" Of course, the player comes to realize that the Hartwood's death was not a suicide at all, but just might be the result of his naughty delvings into the occult. Apparently his clumsy gropings for occult power had opened up a satanic portal, turning his lovely manor into a spiritual bus station at the junction of our reality and of unseen evil. As hinted at earlier, the story and setting owe much to the work of H.P. Lovecraft. While Alone does not acknowledge this debt, the Rumor Bag Guy has informed me that 1.Motion's/Interplay's next two releases using this game system will bear Lovecraft's name, as they have acquired the official Call of Cthulhu license. Unusual for an adventure in these \"point and click» times, Alone does not have a mouse interface. Players control the motions of their polygon characters and access their inventories with the keypad. As players scroll through the individual items, a 3-D spinning image of the artifact appears in a window, each item with a few action options associated with it. In the version I played, the keypad controls worked well in controlling the characters motions (the game often requires fine movements which make mouse control inappropriate), though it was rather clumsy when it came to accessing the inventory. Fortunately, I was playing the European version which has just been released overseas. Interplay will be refining the game before releasing it in the U.S. (target date: February), fixing a few glitches and tweaking the interface. These tweaks include adding \"hot keys\" for common character actions and adding additional functions to the inventory system, and thereby eliminating the sources of my frustration. While on the subLoada Saved Game ject of game mechanics, I must mention a small, 1st Save Donight though all too 2nd Save Tonight slick, feature of Alone's save game In the Closef system. When the Dead Dinner Party save game feature Art Gallery is selected, a speA Questionable Save cial screen appears where six save game names are listed, along with a small \"screen capture\" of the point at which the game was saved. This is a great help for adventurers like myself who can get so involved that they don't have the presence of mind to write clear and understandable descriptions of the save state. In Alone, when I come back to the game on a subsequent night, I no longer have to scratch my head over filenames like \"SNUFFED THE GHOULIE\" or \"GOT THE THINGY». I simply look at the save game screens to know exactly where the game state was saved to disk. Nice touch! Despite the rough edges (literally) of Alone's polygon technolSOFTWARE CLOSEOUTS IBM AMIGA, APPLE, COMMODORE 64/128, ATARI ST, MAC & MORE IBM ARCADE GAMES: IBM SPORTS SIMULATIONS: SUPER BUNDLE FOR C-64/128 Arkanoid II $14.50 T.V. Sports Football $14.50 10 GAMES FOR $14.50 Bubble Bobble $14.50TV. Sports Basketball $14.50 Includes: Demolition Mission, Operation Woll $14.50 Super Sunday $ 9.50 Oix Army Moves, Bad Street Brawler. $14.50 NBA Basketball $ 9.50 Rambo III $14.50 Blades of Steel $16.50 Tar Pan, Fist. Tai Ceti. Mutants Renegade $14.50 Double Dribble $16.50 Cyrus Chess. Doc the Destroyer. Sky Shark $14.50 Monday Night Football $29.50 & Uridium Less than $1.50 each! Harmony $16.50 John Elways Football Cycles $16.50 Sharkey's 3D Pool $19.50 SUPER BUNDLE FOR AMIGA Pick 'n Pile $16 50Pro Tennis Tour 1 $16.50 10 GAMES FOR $14.50 The Ball Game $ 5,00 Microleague Football $14.50 Vampire Empire, Sky Blaster, Triple X Savage $14.50 Microleague Baseball $14.50 Cybergenic Ranger $14.50 Tennis Cup $16.50 Crystal Hammer, Final Mission, Little Final Orbit $14.50 Grave Yardage $14.50 Urdu. ESTO Games. Por Dragon, Eskimo Games, Powersty, Spin Batman Caped Crusader $14.50 Subuteo Table Soccer $ 9.50 World & Clever and Smart Treasure Trap $16.50 Downhill Challenge Skiing $14.50 IBM STRATEGY GAMES Superbike Challenge $14.50 BM ADVENTURE GAMES: Waterloo $19.50 Championship Football $1450 Buck Rocers 1 $19.50 First Over Germany $19.50 Championship Baseball $14.50 leroes of Lance $19 Sons of Liberty $19.50 Championship Golf $14.50 Dragons of Flame Red Lightning $19.50 Pro-Beach Volleyball $16.50 puestron !! Under Fire $12 50 Superstar Indoor Sports $ 950 War of the Lance Gulf Strike $14.50 Superstar Hockey Roadwar Europa $16.50 IBM FLIGHT SIMULATORS: Phantasie III Mid-Winter $19.50 F-15 Strike Eagle Firezone $14.50 Solo Flight S.D.I. $14.50 Gunship Berlin 1948 $16.50 Tomahawk Fireteam 2200 $16.50 Super Huey II S950 Defender of the Crown Dambusters $ 9.50 Star Glider II Navcom 6 $ 9,50 Xiphos $14.50 Leather Godesses of Photos $14.50 Das Boot U-Boat Simulator $19.50 Carrier Command $14.50 Mines of Tan $ 14.50 Sands of Fire $16.50 Sky Chase $14.50 IBM CD-ROM SOFTWARE IBM. TRADITIONAL GAMES: David Wolf Secret Agent $14.50 Barney Bear goes to School $19.50 Amarillo Slim's Real Poker $14.50 Blue Angels $14.50 CO Grab Bag $ 1500 Friday Night Poker $14.50 Rocket Ranger $14.50 CD Game Collection $39.00 Blackjack Academy $ 9.50 Air Strike U.S.A. $14.50 Chessmaster 3000 $4400 Jigsaw $16.50 Blue Max $19.50 CD-ROM Collection WCIA $2900 BattleChess !! $19.50 IBM EDUCATIONAL PROGRAMS: Golden Immortal $39.00 Super Password $ 9.50 President Elect $ 9.50 Great Cites of the World $49.00 WILD & COOL GAMES: World Geography $ 950 Hound of the Baskerviles 549.00 Continuum $16.50 U.S. Geography $ 950 ones in the Fast Lane $3900 Drakkhen $19.50 Barney Bear goes to School $14.50 King's Quest 5 $ 29.00 3DGamemaker $ 500 Discover Numbers $ 49.00 Weird Dreams $14.50 Discover Alphaber $ 500 Maed up Mother Goose $39.00 Sex Olympics $16.50 Discover Math $ 5.00 poena Shareware 20 $24001 Sex Vixens from Space $14.50 Grade A Math 1-2-3 $16.50 Secret of Monkey Island $49.00 Holmes Consulting Detective $4900 1000's more items for all So Much Sharwate $3900 VISA/MC ORDERS CALL TOLL-FREE different computers... Apple, Lima 16 Bunde $ 49.00 1800 676 6616 $ 39.00 Atarl, Amiga, C64/128, MAC, VGA Spectrum Wing Commander Bundle $49.00 Credit Card Orders Only!!!! ($25 minimum) lots more IDM MS-DOS 11 Wing Commande Uitma 6 Bunde $49.00 COMPSULT A D SI T TO ORDER: Send check or money order including shipping charges of S5 for U.S.A., $8 for Canada, $16 all others. Californians must include 7.25% sales tax P.O. BOX 5160 To receive our complete catalog of over 2,000 items for all computer types, send SAN LUIS OBISPO S2 in cash or stamps to the above address. The catalog is FREE with any order. CA 93403 To check for an item notlisted here,call (805) 544-6616. $ 9.50 listar $16.50 Time & Mage $16.50 BAT $16.50 Star Saga $14.50 Dragonlord $14.50 Pirates! $ 1650 $ 5.00 LOOM Circle Reader Service #51 Page 32 Computer Gaming World "


"BHOH Watch with pride as your warriors move into intricate formations (HIGH RESOLUTION mode IBM PC only). Circles Attack City UCI VINO The game is full of sumptuous graphics. Your Chance to get your own back! Conquest of Japan gives you five cities, each with money to hire armies it is up to you to buy the right soldiers, and direct your armies to conquer Honshu, Japan's main island! In a truly epic production, you are both the general,planning campaigns, and the army commander, directing troops within each battle. All battles are played out in real time, with your soldiers moving into formation in fantastic, colourful animation! You can become as involved as you like-from watching progress, to instructing individual men if you wish to! You can even choose to play each battle in Hi Res (386/25 machines or better reccommended) or faster Low Res. FEATURES: Miniature-style war simulation Cities located differently each game Choice of authentic troop formations Simple to play Your chance to conquer Japan!! OF JAPAN fi ** IMPRESSIONS SOFTWARE INC. 7 MELROSE DRIVE FARMINGTON CONNECTICUT 06032. Circle Reader Service #70 "


"5 Brain Runner Brain Runner A Sneak Preview of Electronic Arts and Bullfrog's Syndicate able to manipulate his/her on-screen agents. Syndicate features many of the conventions associated with the genre. There is a standard Brobdingnagian corporation, MegaCorp. Further, one's agents can be fitted with \"mindcaps,\" brain enhance ment modules that connected directly into the user's neural system, similar to what William Gibson called Micro-Softs, George Alec Effinger called \"daddies\" (to go with \"moddies\") and Rudy Rucker called Wetware. Also, the game is being designed to feature network play (sort of a cyburb of its own) for up to eight people. Players will direct their agents (each with computer AI based on three major attributes: Perception, Intelligence and Aggression) to interact with other agents by adjusting their Al. LMTG 0004000 0000500 00002 16 MODIFY HERITA 003000 DA idley Scott would be proud. The 3-D rendered urban landscape of Bullfrog's upcoming Syndicate (working title) features the film noir look of Fritz Lang's Metropolis-with an overdose of perpetual acid rain and ominous shadows. It is Blade Runner Meets Neuromancer, an occidental version of Effinger's Budayeen or a dark shadow city from a Lewis Shiner novella. Syndicate uses hot new technology to venture into the universe of cyberpunk. Though novelist Norman Spinrad (Little Heroes) offered last rites for the genre, by questioning its existence as a genre, in a 1989 essay in Isaac Asimov's Science Fiction magazine (March, 1989), the dark future venue with its prodigious interlocking corporations, massive data processing networks, freebooting hackers and brain/personality enhancement modules seems to be gaining in popularity with gamers. R. Talsorian's Cyberpunk, Steve Jackson Games' G.U.R.P.S. Cyberpunk, FASA's Shadowrun (with its blend of magic and cyberpunk) and GDW's Dark Conspiracy (blending horror, magic, sci-fi and a touch of cyberpunk) are all successful role-playing games and Hacker, a card game about breaking into computer networks from Steve Jackson Games, has done very well (and may even be licensed as a computer game). Further, though neither Interplay's Neuromancer nor Infocom's Circuit's Edge were as successful as hoped, their commercial performance proved there was some market for cyberpunk computer games. As in Bullfrog's most successful games, Populous and Powermonger, the game world will continue to update in a simulated real-time mode, and the gamer will react by making real-time decisions via a point and click interface. The agents are roughly equivalent to the military leaders of Powermonger and the designers promise that the AI routines for the citizens of the cities are even more detailed than those in that game of world conquest. (Apparently, not everyone realized that every onscreen character in Powermonger had a name, occupation and home town.) As the screenshots on this page should communicate, Electronic Arts and Bullfrog have created a stunning visual presentation. What remains to be seen is whether gamers are ready, not only for real-time strategy/role-playing in a modern world, but for cyberpunk strategy and role-playing in a very dark future. We suspect they are. Cow The goal is to make the Al agents within the game so real, using Eliza-esque algorithms, that players on a network won't know when they are encountering humancontrolled agents or Al-controlled agents. Such a design objective is somewhat cyberpunk in and of itself. Finally, Bullfrog intends to create 60 incredibly detailed urban cities in which the player will be Page 34 Computer Gaming World "


"Themew face of horror lunge into a chilling maze of terror where vampires, werewolves and zombies prowl the dead of night. Confront Kairn, whose lethal powers flow from the blood of his murdered family. Will you emerge as the final victor? Or become his final victim? Your fate will be sealed within the Veil of Darkness. Unravel terrifying riddles. Fulfill bone-chilling quests. Clash in a deadly face-off with the vampire Kairn. Live the horror with heart-stopping graphics and animation, stunning cinematic sequences, haunting music, and blood-curdling sound effects. Fight for your life in one of three combat levels. Use the right weapon to destroy each ghoul, werewolf, and zombie. Or die. Meet a host of spectral characters whose dark secrets reveal more of the mystery. Sink deep into this gothic nightmare with stateof-the-art game play. Immerse yourself with the easy-to-use Real Time Visual point-and-click interface, Record every step you take with line-of-sight auto-mapping and print-out feature. For more information, call SSI at 408/737-6800. SRL Vejl of Darkness. IBM 256-color VGA Area  Strategic Simulations, Inc. All rights reserved. "


"COMDEX Pentium Futures and Computer Game Survival Crime Scene 6:00 Tall Comdex is certainly held in the right town. Las Vegas is synonymous with gambling and that is probably the right symbolism for the current state of the entertainment software industry. It seems that the software industry is always waiting to rake in the big chips on the next shooter, but the odds are never what one thought they were going to be. At this year's Comdex, CGW hoped to discover information about Intel's 586 chip and, if possible, more about «Smart T.V.\" platforms like Sega's CD-ROM drive and 3DO's upcoming machine. Unfortunately, the hard data was meagre or non-existent on both. As always, however, the computing industry's major exposition was thought-provoking. Chip Shots Intel's new chip will not be called the 586. Instead, the company used a major portion of their exhibit to introduce the Pentium M. The chip manufacturer used prototypes from Compaq, Dell, IBM, NCR and NEC to demonstrate real-time 3-D animation and full-motion video at four times the image area of the maximum image able to be handled by a 486. Since Comdex is predominantly a business/productivity-oriented showcase, the demonstrations featured CAD applications and a 3-D architectural program that let one zip through a fully-rendered house at, figuratively speaking, lightspeed. Since the demonstrations were not \"hands on,\" we cannot be sure how fast the processor would handle an Ultima Underworld, Betrayal at Krondor or F-15 Strike Eagle III, but we feel confident that the 100 MIPS (million instructions per second) will provide the five times the integer performance and ten times the floating point performance that Intel promises. Such speed virtually guarantees more authentic vehicle simulation performance and more effective use of the 3-D rendering technology which is becoming so popular in state-of-the-art games. Tube Stake As for 3DO, we attended a panel on \"Smart TV: Mass Market Computing» in which Robert Faber, Vice-President of Marketing for the new technology comCMC's WHO KILLED SAM RUPERT? pany spoke (along with Bernie Mitchell, National Marketing Manager of Philips Consumer Electronics (CD-I), Doug Glen, Director of Marketing for Sega's Multimedia Products, and Howard Elias, Vice-President of Tandy Corporation) Whereas the other three panelists had definite products to talk about, Faber outlined a philosophical prospectus for a Smart TV technology. Faber indicated that repackaging technologies (i.e. hiding the computer) is not adequate for a new platform to find acceptance. He insisted that there must be a breakthrough that sets a stake far enough out in the future for consumers to want to be part of the picture. He also hinted at a need for a marketing support plan to assure availability of the new technology and a long-range plan to lower the cost (although he ominously observed, \"Few technologies that are really worthwhile start out inexpensive.\"). Faber was unable to comment on the specifics of the 3DO machine, but industry wags are now questioning 3DO's commitment to the principles originally espoused by Trip Hawkins when he began preaching the virtues of the \"black box» some years ago (i.e. connectivity, cable network affiliation and mass market pricing). There were some hints, however, that 3DO would be releasing some specifics at their presentation on the opening day of the Winter Consumer Electronics Show in January of 1993. With regard to products already on the market, however, Bernie Mitchell impressed the audience with his portable CD-I (with its six-inch color screen) and his assurance that the platform is not only compatible with audio CD formats, CDROM, CD-ROM-XA and Kodak's PhotoCD, but would also be compatible with a CD-R (CD-Recordable) technology currently under development. Howard Elias presented a video tape touting the virtues of Tandy's VIS (Video Information System). Again, the system consists of a box that connects to one's television screen and \"hides the computer. The VIS is, essentially, a 286-based CD-ROM machine sans keyboard. Doug Glen demonstrated the NightTrap video game, which uses actual video footage, on the Sega CD platform. He observed that the launch shipment of CDs sold out and pointed out that, as a $299 add-on, the Sega CD is the only multimedia platform with mass market pricing. Glen's vision of the future for entertainment systems includes: 1) movies on dem and; 2) games on demand; 3) interactive movie games, and 4) video faxing of business, educational and shopping information. Though the current Sega Genesis configuration does not feature connectivity (with the original Tele-Genesis long since dead), Glen recognized that connect ivity is becoming more important in the marketplace and will continue to grow in importance. With regard to connectivity, neither Glen nor Faber were able to confirm their respective plans for the future, but Elias observed that the VIS had provision for modem output, due to their anticipated usage with home shopping options, and Mitchell announced that Philips is currently involved in a joint venture with GTE (General Telephone and Electronics) to provide a fiber-optic connection to the CD-I some time in the future. Sound Investment Multimedia was still a major topic of discussion at Comdex and, as a result, sound card manufacturers had a significant presence. AdLib has returned and will be marketing the AdLib Gold sound card, a move that will be supported by game manufacturers like Westwood Associates (Legend of Kyrandia, Dune II) and ICOM Simulations (Sherlock Holmes: Consulting Detective). Creative Page 36 Computer Gaming World "


"A Technological Breakthrough In 3-D Action Fantasy! Legends THE SMOOTHEST 3-D SCROLLING GRAPHICS EVER! Ultima Underworld,\" move over! Legends of Valour sets a new standard with the smoothest, most life-like screen scrolling in fantasy adventures. The fast, seamless first-person view never jerks or slows down even when you're turning. And unlike the competition, our 256-color VGA texture and detail is retained even when you move close to an object. with hundreds of characters and monsters, each with a unique personality. One-touch iconbased combat sequences are fast and furious. Encounters change depending on day or night conditions. And Automapping tracks every step you take. A LEGENDARY STORY. Choose from an array of professions by joining any of nine guilds. Embark on over 45 exciting quests with multiple endings. Restore a king to power, slay an evil demon and become the stuff of which legends are written! LEGENDS OF VALOUR. 3-D fantasy adventuring never looked better! For play on IBM and Amiga. Cluebook available. SEEING IS BELIEVING! Check out our demo at your nearest software store! SEL TWO VIRTUAL WORLDS! Explore two huge worlds: 28 miles of overworld town and an underground series of dungeons and labyrinths. Never before has any world been so massive or fully developed. The dynamic, evolving music score further heightens the realism. SPEL SIMPLE INTERFACE, SMOOTH MOVES. Use the streamlined point-and-click interface to easily interact 021 oppe 1992 899 IBM 256-color VGA VITOS WAT WE Experience the hottest, smoothest 3-D scrolling graphics ever in an underworld, or any world! TO ORDER BY VISA/MC: call 1-800-245-4525 (in USA & Canada). ULTIMA and UNDERWORLD are trademarks of Richard Garriott and ORIGIN Systems, Inc, respectively, LEGENDS OF VALOUR is a trademark of Strategic Simulations, Inc. 1992 Strategic Simulations, Inc. All rights reserved. Circle Reader Service #140 "


"Labs, Inc. had major booth space in two of the exhibition venues in order to demonstrate the possibilities for Sound Blaster Pro applications (though judging from their exhibits, computer games will not play a large part in their 1993 strategy). Further, the Pro Audio Spectrum was wellsupported by exhibitions from Origin Systems (Ultima VII, Wing Commander) and MicroProse (Mantis, F-15 Strike Eagle III). In support of sound cards, QSound was also getting significant attention with their demonstration booth where attendees could experience \"surround-sound\" without expensive, additional hardware. QSound has software-driven algorithms which enhance the capacity of one's existing system, assuming correct speaker placement. The newsiest sound presentation was at the Roland booth, however. Roland presented two new sound systems for use with multimedia. The SC-7 Sound Module provides both MIDI and DSP capability (with 128 digital samples of instrument sounds) for IBM and Macintosh users at a suggested retail price of under $400. The module comes complete with all the cables needed to connect directly to the serial port. At the top end, Roland introduced The Audio ProducerM (TAP-10) sound card, a 16-bit stereo system complete with their MPU-401 sequencing software (an amazing set of tools), A/D/A converter, MIDI interface and a capability of performing 2-track monaural sampling resolution at 44.1/22.05/11.025 kHz. Both cards are compatible with existing games and feature maximum flexibility for composition and sound sampling. Give Me A Home Where the CD-ROMs ROM One general disappointment over the last few years has been the dearth of interesting entertainment software on the CDROM platforms. In general, the products have been shovelware, text-intensive or only slight enhancements of previous products. It was encouraging to note a few exceptions at this year's Comdex. Naturally, one was the long-awaited The 7th Guest from Virgin (as well as promised CD versions of their Conan and Dune titles). Virgin has taken the premium route in product development. Another approach was presented by Creative Multimedia Corporation (CMC). CMC is publishing low-cost, but high value, CD-products in many areas (education and reference, as well as entertainment). Their $39.99 mystery game for the Macintosh, Who Killed Sam Rupert? features Quick-Time style film clips when suspects are interrogated and for a variety of investigative activities. For traditional gamers, the product probably has too many free-running segments, but it offers plenty for entry-level gamers. Further, their first product in The Taran Trilogy, Beyond the Wall of Stars ($49.95) has enough decision points to keep matters interesting and presents lots of text with enough animation to encourage further reading/exploration. Checking The Map In short, there are plenty of new developments in the offing that can affect computer gamers. Unfortunately, there is no clear direction as to where technology is taking the computer gaming hobby. This era of expected consolidation and confluence has become just as fragmented as the last era of diverse formats and non-standa rdization. CGW 20 ARE YOU TIRED OF PLAYING AGAINST YOUR COMPUTER? Broaden your horizons, challenge your mind and interact with other players across the nation. Star Quest is a computer moderated play-by-mail game, allowing you to compete with up to 100 other players. Imagine...an area of 1,000,000 cubic lightyears around our own Sun consisting of 800 stars and close to 10,000 planets, moons, and other objects. Players become explorers, diplomats, merchants, warlords and emperors competing for victory points in five different areas. Game turns are run every three weeks and cost from $4.00 to $12.00 depending on the number of orders. Our \"Game Startup\" package includes rules, map and first five turns for only $18.00. Rules are only $3.00. For more information on this game or to receive information on other games offered contact: DELTAX GAMING Musterbar  548 Great Hill Drive  Ballwin, Missouri 63021 VISA Circle Reader Service # 55 Page 38 Computer Gaming World "


"Flight From The Ground Up Warrior alony Enter a time when pilots really flew planes...airspeed was manageable, controls were simple, nothing was computerized. Dogfight success was determined by toughness and talent, not technology. Air Warrior\" lets you experience the thrill of air combat in 11 of the most feared warplanes of the WWII and Korean eras: Mustang P-51, Bf-109, Zero, P-38, Corsair, Spitfire, A-26 Invader, FW-190, MiG-15, Ki-84, F-86. This is the training school for on-line air combat duty against GEnie\" Air Warrior veterans. The theatre of operations could have over 50 planes airborne at any time; not a welcome mat for a novice pilot. Air Warrior is the first and only Super VGA (640 x 480 x 256 color) flight sim. Take to the skies in 3 modes: Beginner, Intermediate or Expert. Film your toughest missions and re-fly them differently to sharpen flight skills. Test yourself against a buddy in modem-to-modem airspace. But, log as many practice hours as you can; it's a wild blue yonder on-line. For further info on GEnio Air Warrior call 1-800-638-9636. Available on MS-DOS, November 1992 Don't let him back on top it'sa veteran move. Sight and squeeze to keep a Zero from zeroing in on you. KONAMKYMAI 900 Bring up the radar screen to ID the position of friend, foe, and landing fields, in a 900 sq. mile air theatre. 1000 KONAMI KESMAI Bogey #2, 11:00!! Chase him, but savo enough fuel to escape from behind enemy lines. A PUBLISHING PARTNERSHIP Corporation Air Warrior Isaregistered trodemark of Kesmal Corporoton, c) 1992 ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. Konami Cregistered trodemark of Konomi Co., Ltd. 1992 Konami. All rights reserved. Konami Game Hint & Tip Lina: 1(900)896-HINT (4486).Calls are 5.70 per minute. Touch lone phone required. Minors alust 75 Hreportal permission before coming Circle Reader Service "


"RE Gaming on the one eyed Monster Altech's ProPC/TV and Propo/TV Plus ---VGA to NTSC Converters by Chuck Miller quite an attractive option. However, if a great deal of \"rearranging' is in order each time one wants to increase the visual size of his game world, this option becomes less appealing. Arlech ometimes I tire of playing the latest, greatest adventure on a teeny tiny 14\" screen. A 17\" or 20\" Super VGA monitor would be much more appropriate for the task. Unfortunately, my aspirations of playing computer games on a large screen far surpass my budget for doing the same. Large-screen monitors, ranging in price from $900 to $2400, are simply out of my price range. Do You See What I See? Now, for a substantial amount less, the gamer can connect his or her computer to a large screen television and bring computer gaming to new visual heights (and widths). Aitech International has just released two encoder boxes which allow the liser to connect a computer with VGA card to any video device, including TVs, VCRS and video projection systems. NTSC, SVHS and PAL are all supported by these handy converters designed for multimedia applications, including games. ProPCTV Plus Making a Resolution The primary difference between these two models is in ease of use and supported resolutions. The ProPC/TV Plus allows one to use both a VGA monitor and television simultaneously. while the ProPC/TV only supports one output device. Both units provide NTSC, PAL and S-VHS output, a power supply and all necessary cables (the latter are, however, a little on the short side). The second major difference involves the level of VGA support provided. Though the ProPC/TV can handle VGA up to 640 x 480, it only supports 16 colors in that mode. The ProPC/TV Plus supports VGA and SVGA, with up to 16 million colors in 640 x 480 resolution. How Refreshing! While both encoders performed well, the ProPC/TV Plus is a superior product which is easier to use than its lesser brother. I did, though, experience one somewhat noticeable problem during testing — a light band scrolling from bottom to top across the TV screen. According to Aitech's technical support representative, this is caused by differing refresh rates between television (60Hz) and VGA (which can be either 59, 60 or 72 Hz). Solving this problem requires changing the dip switches on the VGA card to match its video refresh rate to that of the TV. I elected not to fiddle with my VGA card settings. Size Makes a Difference In the end, the buyer must justify an expense. While these devices will enable one to connect a PC to a large screen TV, adding another $100 will allow the purchase of a high quality 16\" VGA monitor like the NEC MultiSync 4D. Yet there is, for example, quite a difference in size between a 16\" and 27\" screen (I used a Sony 27\" Trinitron color television for my tests). The other major consideration is logistics. If computer and television share the same room or can be brought together easily, playing on a large screen can be M M AlTech ProPC/TV Getting the Picture If I had to make a choice, I would opt for the ProPC/TV Plus over the ProPC/TV due to its slightly better image quality, the extended resolutions available and the ability to view both a VGA monitor and television screen simultaneously (it makes running the required TSR software much easier and eliminates the cable swapping required by the less expensive unit). Honestly, though, if it is a chore to bring the computer and television together for use, I would pass on the encoders and go for the 16\" NEC MultiSync 4D monitor. Though the picture is not nearly as large, the image is much sharper and there are no relocation hassles. However, if I had a second PC that I could keep near the television, or better yet a laptop that I could easily connect, I would definitely think long and hard about picking up the Aitech converter. Either way, large screen gaming does make a difference. It heightens the experience, making the game world seem all the more real. Too bad the checkbook looks so anemic! For more information on these products, contact Aitech at Aitech International, 830 Hillview Court, Suite 145, Milpitas, CA 95035 or call (408) 946-3291. CGW Crossed Signals So what are they? The ProPC/TV and ProPC/TV Plus are external devices that convert VGA text and graphics output into an NTSC, PAL or S-VHS signal. Small enough to fit in a pocket or purse, these devices allow the gamer to get the \"big picture\" at more affordable costs. Remember, though, affordable varies from person to person. The base version, ProPC/TV, retails for $299 with the more capable ProPC/TV Plus at $499. Page 40 Computer Gaming World "


"| | ADDI CRCCG HAT'S THE PENGUIN UP TO: rigid winter winds swept over an already chilled Gotham City. Random street crimes were running at an all-time high, despite the holidays. Down below, in the city's frozen sewers, Oswald Cobblepot, known as The Penguin, planned more mayhem and schemed the takeover of the frightened metropolis. Gotham City is in trouble. A desperate call to Batman goes up. Partner with Batman to salvage Gotham City from The Penguin's cold-hearted plot. Guide him in swift, life-like moves from dark alleys to rooftops in vivid scenes straight from the hit movie, Batman Returns Control his combat style, and help conduct relentless interrogations of The Penguin's gang. Use the Batcave computer to input clues, analyze evidence, and review enemy bios. You're in charge of weapons and utilities, too. Save Gotham City... and put The Penguin on ice. HELL CC AT THE BANK AT HIDNIGHT. RETURN KONAMI Spirit a brzaci. Toxaced BATMAN and all related elements are the property of DC Comics Inc.  ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. Konami\" is a registered trademark of Konami Co., Ltd. 1992 Konami. Spirit of Discovery is a trademark of Park Place Productions.  1992 Park Place Productions All rights reserved. Konami Game Hint & Tip Line: 1 (900) 896-HINT (4486). Calls are $.70 per minute. Touch tone phone required. Minors must have parental permission before caning. KONAMI:Spirit A PUBLISHING PARTNERSHIP oll DiscoVERY *Circle Reader Service #76 "


"The Game's Afoot, One More Time Electronic Arts' The Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes by Charles Ardai TITLE: The Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes SYSTEM: IBM PRICE: $59.95 PROTECTION: None DESIGNERS: Mythos Software PUBLISHER: Electronic Arts San Mateo, CA SRL If there is any character who has appeared in more computer games than Nintendo's plump little goldmine, Mario, it has to be Sherlock Holmes. There have been almost a dozen Holmesinspired games over the years, one of the best being Sherlock Holmes, Consulting Detective, which is currently available in two different CD-Rom editions from ICOM. Other valiant attempts have included Imagic's Sherlock Holmes In Another Bow, in which Holmes took a sea voyage with Gertrude Stein, Picasso, Thomas Edison, and Houdini, among others; and Infocom's deadly serious Sherlock: Riddle of the Crown Jewels. The difference between Holmes and Mario games, however, is that new Mario games are always coming out because the old ones sold like gangbusters, while new Sherlock Holmes games come out in spite of the fact that their predecessors sold like space heaters in the Sahara. It is noteworthy that, until ICOM, no company had ever released more than one Sherlock Holmes game, while all the Mario games come from the same source. It is also worth noting that the Holmes curse is not limited to games: the last few Holmes movies, such as \"Without A Clue\" and \"Young Sherlock Holmes\" were not exactly box office blockbusters. So, why are new adventures of the Great Detective still hitting store shelves (not to mention movie screens)? Further, what is one to make of the newest of them all, Electronic Arts' Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes and its Gardner-esque title (\"The Case of The Serrated Scalpel\") that sounds more like a Perry Mason novel than Holmes mystery? Let's examine these questions one at a time. There's No Police Like Holmes The paradox of Sherlock Holmes can be stated so: while not that many people actually like the original Sherlock Holmes stories, everyone seems to think that everyone else adores them. Like Tarzan and Hawkeye, Holmes is a literary icon, universally known and much beloved as a character in the abstract — not, however, as part of any single work. Finding someone who has actually read and enjoyed the writing of Edgar Rice Burroughs, James Fennimore Cooper or Arthur Conan Doyle requires the patience of Diogenes. Most people know the characters from television and the movies, at best; at worst, from reviews of television shows and movies they never bothered to see. So, why do new Holmes adaptations surface with such regularity? Because the character is already famous and the material is in the public domain (thereby mitigating the requisite licensing fees associated with famous characters of more recent vintage. Batman or Indiana Jones, for instance). Another answer is that Sherlock Holmes is seen as bridging the gap between entertainment and literature. Game companies presumably hope to cash in on the recognition factor and have some of the character's ponderous respectability rub off on their product. They also figure that they Page 42 Computer Gaming World "


"you have nothing propongono na wana wangapi wamamahalan AL SUITE. War Room SPORTS MS SMASH BIL DO Lates A football fan's fantasy. NFL Video Pro is your ticket to the 50-yard line of 14 pro contests each week. The FIRST to capture pro football's fury at knee-level, using actual, fully-digitized B&W NFL video footage. Stalk the sidelines this season, barking out commands from a playbook of 150 offensive, defensive and special situation moves. Coach one key game or go where you're needed; lead all 28 NFL teams, if you're up to it. Digitized announcers and crowds react to your coaching decisions on every play. Take the winners to the post-season. Good luck...it's a long off-season for the losers. Team Team names and logos are the registered trademarks of The NFL and of teams depicted. Ron Ross/NFL Photos, David Boss/NFL Photos, Al Messerschmidt/NFL Photos, VideoProand Spirit of Discovery are trademarks of Park Place Productions. Konami is a registered trademark of Konami Co., Ltd.  1992 Konami.  Park Place Productions. All rights reserved. Konami Game Hint & Tip Line: 1 (900) 896-HINT (4486). Calls are $.70 per minute. Touch tone phone required. Minors must have parental permission before calling. A PUBLISHING PARTNERSHIP Circle Reader, Service #77 KONAMI : Spirit DisCOVERY bila "


"Talk can't go wrong basing their games on a body of work that has The story, so often the last and least of the elements put into a endured for almost a century. game, is surprisingly exciting and well-constructed. Jack the RipUnfortunately for them, they are wrong. There are only so many per has struck again — or so it seems. Some lurking devil has copies of a game that one can slaughtered a young actress sell to the members of the on her way out of the theater Baker Street Irregulars (the where she performs nightly, world's largest and bestripping off two articles of known Sherlock Holmes fan jewelry and spilling her enclub), and a vogue for Victoritrails on the cobblestones beana has never really caught on fore stealing away into the among the rest of the gameLondon fog. Sherlock Holbuying population. The result mes agrees to come when he is that while Holmes games is called in by a desperate have been good, bad, and indifInspector Lestrade, though ferent, their success has been he cautions Lestrade that seuniformly mediocre. rial killers are somewhat out Will someone, some day, do of his purview; after all, moa Sherlock Holmes game Dr. Watson tiveless or random crimes are right? Probably, though I'm 1000K 1111ck r nnent013 impervious to deductive reaJournal not holding my breath. Has soning. (Holmes, of course, Tove Oren Electronic Arts done it in Files Use never had the opportunity to \"The Case of the Serrated Scalread The Silence of the Close Give Set 2 pel\"? Scads of good press to Lambs.) the contrary, I'm afraid not. Close, but no pipe. As soon as Holmes starts investigating, odd facets of the crime \"Scalpel\" tells an unusually good story and it is filled to the brim catch his attention. What, for instance, is that strange white powder with audio-visual niceties, but it has one crucial shortcoming: it is at the edges of the fatal wound? If the killer is the Ripper, why has he wandered so far afield from his customary Whitechapel stalking not a game. It has the appearance of a game, but in reality it is just a series of animated vignettes, strung together in linear sequence, grounds? Why is a love letter to the victim written in a woman's hand? What is the meaning of the curious hair-oil stain above the with the player asked to do little other than prod the whole affair into motion every few seconds. It is no more a piece of interactive door? fiction than a flipbook is an interactive movie. Holmes spies these clues and more like them; Watson, never more than two steps behind, jots them down in his Journal, to A Ripping Yarn which the player has access throughout the game. (The journal is a point-by-point record of everything the player does, written in To start with the good points, though, the game is gorgeous, convincing pseudo-Doyle prose.) Holmes and Watson also share clever and surprising. It sets just the right tone with a virtuoso conversation, which is sometimes mere banter but which often opening sequence in which we see the initial crime committed provides useful information. For instance, Watson, being a doctor, against a stunning backdrop of busy, rainy, gaslit streets and is able to tell Holmes that it is unheard of for a scalpel to have a shadowy back alleys. Details are not neglected, down to the serrated edge, as the murder flickering candlelight in the windows of street-front flats. weapon apparently did. Indeed, there is such an abunIn addition to Watson, a dance of exquisitely animated number of familiar figures detail — a stray cat knocks do their best to help the inover a bottle which smashes vestigation, including Wigon the ground, the concealed gins, the head of the street killer smokes a cigarette — urchin pack from which the that the game possesses an real-life Baker Street Irreguunprecedented richness of lars draw their name; Mycroft Holmes, Sherlock's texture. older and smarter brother It loses some of the magic, who offers tips; Mrs. Hudhowever, when it cuts to lessson, Holmes' indefatigable than-exquisite close-ups exeA fashionable couple landlady; and the wretched cuted in a rather clumsy TLOOK AP1CK W airbrush style. Throughout Inventor Lestrade, who hates to ask Journal for Holmes's help but who the game, the large tableaux annove Oren) USE files knows he needs it. Many are more impressive than the Talk Close twe Set me new faces populate the game close-up portraits of the varias well. ous characters. (Holmes, inappropriately, is drawn as a young, handsome chap with a resem The world of 19th Century England is brought to life through blance to Nelson Eddy.) Still, even in close-up, the graphics are attire, dialect, and props, all carefully selected. Holmes' room at striking. 221B Baker Street is filled with details lifted straight from the The score, by Ron Hubbard, provides a throbbing, ominous stories, showing that the authors have done their homework well. undertone in this first scene. Elsewhere, it is a masterpiece of I noticed no anachronisms (though I hadn't realized that Victorian variety and discretion, offering a unique leitmotif to introduce each police drew chalk outlines around corpses, just as we do today) location in the game and then, fading out after a few minutes, to and I am pleased to report that nothing that the characters say or give the player quiet in which to think. do is out of character. Such Holmes aficionados as there are among the computer gaming public will love the game's atmosphere and ni Page 44 Computer Gaming World "


"HardBall III takes a full cut at major league realism. A power line-up that includes printable stats, standings and box scores; the ability to import data from HardBall II\" Earl Weaver // \"and Tony LaRussa\", plus a Team & Player Editor that allows you to alter everything from team logos to a player's ability AUKSESSA Petron Sad A HardBall lll zooms in on the bang bang plays. Five camera angles cover the entire ballpark. Watch instant replays and save the best for your own personal Highlight Reel. LET 'EM PLAY BASEBALL. WE PLAY HARDBALL. HardBall III leads off with digitized players and 256 color VGA graphics. Nobody beats this double play combo. Visuals as eye opening as a line drive up the middle. Animation as smooth as a Gold Glove shortstop. From fresh mowed grass to ivy covered walls, details that capture The Show. PRESENTING THE ALL-NEW HARDBALL IM 345 HardBall III plays textbook \"team effort\" defense. The strongest fundamentals in the game. Outfielders back up one another and infielders act as cut-off men, coming out to take the throw. HardBall III tests each hitter's power with eight real ballparks. Famous fields from both major leagues. Your catcher may have just enough pop to put it out of Chicago's \"friendly confines, but can he go deep in Toronto? Leugue Play Oakland July '92 AI MICHAELS ANNOHNOES OTD Hard Balen tas @a are Fea 100 Near Menta TE A HardBall Ill thrusts you into the heat of a pennant race. It's a 162 game, major league season-complete with road trips and an all-star game. Compile good numbers along the way and maybe you'll make the roster. The only computer game with Hall of Fame credentials. You don't outsell every baseball title in history by standing pat in the off-season. New HardBall Ill redefines computer baseball once more with real play-by-play announcing; unprecedented graphics, A HardBall lll has the realism and playability: plus more of the authentic baseball best play-by-play man in the business Network nuances that serious fans want in a simulation. More runs. broadcast great Al Michaels joins the HardBall More hits. No errors. Ill Team up in the booth, with a digitized To order, visit your favorite software retailer or call description of all the action. 1-800-245-7744 The best in entertainment software. Play-by-play announcing requires 2MB of RAM Actual game screens from IBM PC VGA version of the game. Other versions may vary HardBall 111, HardBall tl and Hard Balll are trademarks of Accolade, inc. Earl Weaver il is a trademark of Electronic Arts. Tony LaRussa is a trademark of Strategic Simulations, Inc. All other product and corporate names are trademarks and registered trademarks of their respective owners.  1992 Accolade, Inc. All rights reserved HOUNDL Circle Reader Service #41 "


"the opportunity to inhabit the world of Sherlock Holmes as no a detective. There is no excuse for this ingenuity on the player's previous game has presented it. part to be met with the stock «You can't do that\" message. Even more absurd, in a later sequence there is no justification Elementary... Too Elementary for the command \"Give opera tickets to usher\" to be ignored when The laboratory sequence is a perfect example of what is wrong the poor man has just said \"Tickets, please.\" The game wants the with the game. Sherlock's is a well-appointed laboratory, com player to show the tickets to the doorman first. Until one does so, plete with burner, test tube, mortar and pestle, a table of the the game simply will not allow one to give the tickets to the usher. elements, and eight jars of chemicals; yet the player is granted no These are only two of many such examples. In many cases, there freedom in carrying out the exis a strict order of actions periment. The player does not that must be performed (for choose which chemicals to instance, when trying to mix — Holmes does. The gain entry to Scotland player does not choose which Yard). Even when there is tools to use — Holmes does. some latitude as far as the All the player does is look at order is concerned, the acthe screen, click on this and tions are still pre-set. that blindly until the sequence One has more apparent is set in motion, and watch the freedom in dialogue, beresults. cause one is often preNow, this may be a good sented with three or four thing under the circumstances. choices of what to say. Most players would be unable However, it is precisely to do as good a job of carrying Door here that one has the least out the experiment as Holmes xit Lookseve freedom, since usually does (though perhaps the game there is either a right choice could have had the player se(as when a clerk asks Hollect an experiment from one of mes, \"Was the man tall, Holmes' books and then folshort, or of average low instructions to carry it out). The problem is that the game leads height?') or one has to go through all the choices before progressthe player by the nose in exactly the same way in all the game's ing to the next scene. sequences. The player's job is never to decide what to do; it is to Don't get me wrong: the dialogue is well-written, the choices are figure out what the right next move is the computer already entertaining, and in most cases the actions the game requires the knows, always) and then, to make it. player to perform are very interesting. The story is good and the There is an illusion of choice. A menu of the usual action verbs game is a pleasure to watch. Yet, that is what one does — watch. (Look, Open, Talk, etc.) fills the bottom of the screen and one has This game wants, more than anything in the world, to be a complete freedom in terms of which location one wants to visit Sherlock Holmes movie. Though it would be a very good one if it next, selecting «hot spots\" were, it is not. Therefore, it from a detailed map of Lonis deeply and resoundingly don. However, the freedom unsatisfying. The plot unis just an illusion. If one goes folds quite well, with plenty to the wrong location one is of twists, but the player has simply unable to do anyno more control over it than thing there. If one chooses he would if he were reading the wrong action, one is told a novel. The player is, at either \"You can't do that\" or best, like an actor in a play. \"Nothing of interest here.\" Unfortunately, said player It is the computer that dehas not been given a copy of cides what things are of inthe script. He has to hit his terest and what are not. marks and say his lines by While this does ensure that figuring out the cues given the story unfolds more theatre playbill by the other characters and quickly and smoothly than it ise MOVE reading his lines off the might otherwise, speed and computer equivalent of cue smoothness are not what a cards. game should aim for. Events If this is what one wants unfold smoothly and speeda fine Sherlock Holmes ily in a movie; a game is a pastiche played out on the computer screen, with the player different animal. A game must give the player the freedom not nominally putting the lead character through his paces — fine. only to do things wrong, but to do things right in a variety of ways. \"The Case of the Serrated Scalpel\" delivers all that one could hope The goal should be to simulate the results of all possible actions, for in that vein. If one wants a game — an interactive experience not to allow only one set of actions to take place. in which one's decisions have an affect on what happens this So, when Holmes finds an iron bar and, shortly afterward, comes piece of software is likely to disappoint. across a locked dresser which, one is told, has frequently been \"The Case of the Serrated Scalpel\" is one step closer to the ideal, forced open, the player should be allowed to use the bar to force but it is not there yet. It's a great treat for the eyes and the ears...but the drawer. At the very least, if this must be prevented, the player as a game it is simply, regrettably, another misfire in the Sherlock should get a stern reproof from Watson for behavior unbecoming Holmes canon. Cow Exit Page 46 Computer Gaming World "


"A GREAT WAR. A LOST PARADISE. AN EPIC ADVENTURE, STAR CONTROL II. THE QUEST FOR EARTH BEGINS. ACCOLADE The best in entertainment software. Star Controlll is a trademark of Accolado, Inc. c 1992 Accolade, Inc. All rights reserved. Circle Reader Service #42 "


"THE PERFECT GENERAL TIST BATTLES. ES OF THE GREATEST CEN UDV Illustration by Mare Pagodin Downs 1991 Mare Pagodin Downs Oop, Quantum Mly Productions. Ina 20 new and exciting scenarios for the award winning Perfect General. Challenge the computer or your friends to some of the greatest battles of our century!  Gorgeous Playing Field  Clean and Simple Interface 3 Difficulty Levels LIST OF BATTLES:  Stalingrad Guderian  Falklands  Bataan  Malta Fulda  Suez '73  Long Bnh  Suez '67 Salgon  Kursk Shenyang  Inchon + many more \"The Perfect General» computer game is IBM PC and Amiga compatible. It can be obtained through your favorite retailer or ordered direct by calling: 1-908-788-2799 1991 QOP and White Woll Productions. All rights reserved. IBM is a trademark of International Business Machines. Amiga is a trademark of Commodoro. "


"Andrew Visscher's and Bruce Williams Zaccagnino's ... SOLITAIRES JOURNEY The Game for a iretime!! ht:11 43 1942 788 QOP Quantum Quality Productions Inc The greatest collection of solitaire games everl In addition to the 105 individual games, there are tournaments, quests and cross country journeys for a lifetime of gaming entertainment. \"Solitaire's Journey\" ranges from the simple and easy all the way up to the strategic and challenging. 105 SOLITAIRE GAMES (Most of the world's best) TOURNAMENT PLAY (Set tournaments or create your own) 4 INTRIGUING QUESTS. SEVERAL CROSS-COUNTRY TOURING COMPETITIONS. COMPLETE HISTORY AND OVERALL AVERAGES FOR EACH GAME The \"Solitaire's Journey\" computer game is IBM PC and soon to be Amiga compatible. It can be obtained through your favorite retailer or ordered direct by calling: 1-908-788-2799  Q.Q.P. All rights reserved. IBM is a trademark of International Business Machines. Amiga is a trademark of Commordore, Circle Reader Service #95 "


"HORROR ON EXHIBIT Accolade's Waxworks by Chuck Miller IIIIII TITLE: Waxworks SYSTEM: IBM, 386sx 16MHz or Better Recommended, Mouse Required PRICE: $59.95 GRAPHICS: VGA SOUND: All Major Sound Cards PROTECTION: Codewheel DESIGNERS: Horror Soft PUBLISHER: Accolade San Jose, CA If Boris Weren't Bad Enough In Waxworks, the player assumes the role of nephew to Uncle Boris, a ghoulish relative who has recently died. Worse still, Uncle Boris bequeathed his entire estate, including the Waxworks, to said nephew. Unfortunately, that is not the sum of his legacy either, as an ancient curse placed on the family 500 years prior (whenever twins were born, one would serve the forces of evil) now envelopes the player in a life and death struggle to reverse the curse and rescue his malevolent twin brother from the evil within. To accomplish the task ahead, the player must venture into five different dimensions -ancient Egypt, 19th Century London, an underground mine, a graveyard and the Waxworks itself -combating and defeating the evil twin from each time period. The story culminates when the player finally faces his own twin brother, Alex. In traditional HorrorSoft fashion, this is no job for the squeamish as indicated by the customary \"Intense Graphic Violence» warning on the box. T Talloween came and departed as usual, with nary a touch of excitement. Just a bout of melancholy memories of the good (or is that bad) old days of trick or treating, a time when All Hallow Even provided a requisite dose of \"safe,\" haunting fun and festive pranks. Well, as concerns the state of our society, those days are sadly no more. This Halloween, however, was a little more disappointing than most. The long anticipated arrival of two particular adventures failed to occur in time for the witching hour. Of course, I speak of The 7th Guest from Virgin and Waxworks from the Accolade and Horror Soft duo. Waxworks, the subject of this review, made a limited debut for the appointed day, reaching a few gamers in time for a Halloween treat. Nevertheless, for most, the holiday passed away quietly as most retailers did not have copies of Waxworks on their shelves until the following week. PARENTAL WARNING!! Intensn Graphic Violence! A New Coat of Wax Those familiar with the Elvira series, previous bestsellers from Horror Soft and Accolade, will feel strangely at home with this Page 50 Computer Gaming World "


"COMING FEBRUARY 1ST ! WARNING! You are about to embark on an adventure so mysterious, it would rattle the nerves of the bravest individual. If you are weak of heart, read no further. For this electronic diversion combines the suspense of classic thrillers with the startling realism of real-time 3-D animation in 256 vivid colors and spellbinding stereo music and sound effects. Once you're totally 1 absorbed in solving the mystery of the macabre mansion, you will ) find yourself surrounded by experiences modeled after H.P. Lovecraft's world. The results are electrifying. ALONE IN THE DARK FREE DEMO DISKS. will only be sent to those who complete this release: _, do solemnly swear, not to hold I'motion responsible for any nightmares, attacks of paranoia, loss of sleep, or mental lapses that result from experiencing the thrilling suspense of ALONE IN THE DARK. To receive your free demo disk, write the words, \"I have taken the ALONE IN THE DARK oath\" on a 3x5\" card along with your name, address, and zip code. Enclose two first-class postage stamps, and mail to: Interplay 17922 Fitch, Irvine, CA 92714 Offer limited to supply on hand. For PC compatibles. O 1992 Lmotion, Inc. All rights reserved. T.MOTION Distributed by Interplay. (714) 553.6655 Circle Reader Service #66 "


"game an easy matter. I am still struggling with an extremely difficult and frustrating sequence in 19th Century London. latest offering, as little has changed in game design from Elvira II: The Jaws of Cerberus. This is both the game's boon and bane. Waxworks remains virtually unchanged from its predecessor with regard to its interface; the layout is basically identical to that of Elvira II. The Player Character is represented on the top left with Navigational Device, Ascend/Descend Icons and Character Hits Indicator below. The right-hand portion of the screen displays the Function Icons (a Crystal Ball replaces the Spellbook, providing a magical link with Uncle Boris), Object Actions List and Enemy Hits Indicator. Center screen displays the Exhibit Window, Inventory Display Box and Status Line. The only noticeable change is in navigation. The player can now switch freely between direction arrows and a compass, the latter being an addition for this game. A less visible change is the way damage is calculated with regards to hit points. Rather than damage being divided among specific body parts as in Elvira II, hit points are now subtracted from an overall total as in the original Elvira. SASA RO All IV 09 1 764 Tesy Earwax Removal Waxworks does have several weaknesses, the chief being the lack of an automapping feature, an amenity which has become standard fare for CRPGs ofrecent origin. Most role-playing games have become complex enough that it is simply too distracting and time consuming for the player to map each step as he or she goes. The time has arrived to lay pencil and graph paper to rest. One possible reason for the absence of automapping is that too much of the game play in Waxworks revolves around exploring relatively small locations in search of a few items necessary for solving the game's puzzles, while under frequent attack by opponents. If automapping were provided, overall length of play would be significantly reduced. The game needs more areas to explore and puzzles to solve, without the additional combat (most of the combat in the game is not excessively tough, though the player is advised to save often, as death is an ever-present companion). In addition to the above concerns, the game engine needs some modification with regard to game save and restore functions. Once the player has several pages of saved games to contend with, saving and restoring becomes a management nightmare as the earliest pages are always displayed first, rather than the page containing the most recent save. Also, only the direction arrows have keyboard equivalents. All other activity requires mouse control. At the very least, save and restore functions should have assigned hotkeys. HEE29 09090 TE 258 Waxing and Waning Graphics in Waxworks are on par with previous HorrorSoft offerings, which means that they are adequate. At a time when most designers are making full use of 256-color graphics, Waxworks' images appear more like those of Amiga 32-color graphics (quite probable since an Amiga version is also planned). While this means that little graphic conversion is necessary for the Amiga version, it does not speak all that highly of what the MS-DOS gamer has come to expect. Keep in mind, the images are not bad, just not as colorful and detailed as they could be. Audio is another story. Background music is very atmospheric and contributes immensely to drawing the player into the game world. It adds greatly to the suspense, lending that \"creepy\" feel expected of a good horror story. My only wish is that there were more musical selections provided during play (each dimension has basically one background selection with variations). ADE Kola A Hot Wax and the Masochist Those who like to tough it out against all odds will find combat in Waxworks challenging, to say the least, as many of the creatures encountered pack quite a wallop. Unless the player learns a few combat tricks early on, only masochists will really enjoy this part of the game. In fact, after completing Egypt and the graveyard, I actually came close to calling it quits with Waxworks while in the underground mine. Fortunately, I learned the proper method of dispensing with its denizens. As such, it is vital to understand that each dimension requires a slightly different offensive approach. Egypt and the graveyard require hand-to-hand combat. The mine and London, however, call for a different tactic: avoidance of physical contact with the enemy. Even knowing this, though, will not make completing the 36 TLEV 0 TYP 0000 LPS Burning the Candle... So, when all is said and done, when the candle has burned down to a mass of melted paraffin, how does Waxworks fare as a CRPG? Page 52 Computer Gaming World "


"THIS OPPONENT IS PROGRAMMED TO BE CHALLENGING. this one wants to rip your lungs out. If you think you're good at games, then let's have some people are terrific, and even the prices are competitive. So real fun. When you're online with GEnie Multi-Player put some new life into your joystick, and sign on. We'll see Games, you're playing real people, in real time. Some of just how good you are. Sign up now: 1. Set your modem the best players around the world. Splash a bandit in Air for half duplex (local echo) at 300, 1200 or 2400 baud. Warrior, and you've just taken out eight other guys, who'll 2. Dial toll free 1-800-638-8369. Upon connection, enter be back gunning for you. Blast a MechWarrior in Multiplayer HHH 3. At the U# = prompt, enter XTX99327,BLAST Battle Tech, and who knows? Could be that jerk from the then press RETURN 4. Have a major credit card or your coast. Could be a mercenary who's looking for a few good checking account number ready. For more information friends. With GEnie, the possibilities are endless, the in the U.S. or Canada, call 1-800-638-9636. 1 GEnie Kera multi-player games 100% ORGANIC OPPONENTS AIR WARRIOR MULTIPLAYER BATTLETECH STELLAR EMPEROR SMKESM41 corporation Air Warrior is a registered trademark and Stellar Emperor is a trademark of Kesmai Corporation. Multiplayer BattleTech is a trademark and MechWarrior and BattleTech are registered trademarks of FASA Corporation Circle Reader Service #64 "


"Well, better than most, but lacking in relation to some. Graphics are a little disappointing, as is the lack of automapping. Puzzle solving and combat seem unbalanced, weighted a bit too heavily toward the latter. In addition, while most puzzles are relatively simple, some are overly trying. Q10 Wax Attacks Only those who want some playing hints should read on. Otherwise, bypass the following. Remember, Uncle Boris can often provide essential help when progress seems impeded. In Egypt, find the weak spot for each opponent and hack away. Also, make sure to search thoroughly and carefully. Some necessary items are well hidden. It is also essential to knock down all the support beams (one on each level). This opens up passages on the levels above. When in the graveyard, use the same plan of attack on all zombies. First, aim low on their arms to cut them off. Then, decapitate their head. This way they cannot continue to claw as they are being dispatched. While exploring, be sure to locate the family tomb and check its state of disrepair. The underground mine calls for chemical and flame attacks, as the creatures are too strong to take on hand-to-hand. When the chemical sprayer runs out of chemicals, locate the generator and fill the sprayer with fuel in order to create a flame thrower. Work quickly so as not to lose any fuel. If careful, the player will be able to fill the sprayer and two empty bottles from the generator tank. Use one of these bottles to refill the sprayer when it runs empty and the other to fill up the drill. In London, make the primary effort to locate some rope and a plank. Checking the alley behind each store is always a good idea. However, avoid everyone until gaining access into the Tailor Shop and acquiring a disguise. Said disguise should enable the player to move about more freely. CGW EMP 36 ILEV 01 EXP 0000 IPSY However, Waxworks does manage to scare up some enjoyable (though often frustrating) relief for the terror-starved gamer. Quality adventures with a horror theme have been lacking for much too long a time. With a little more attention to detail and the elimination of the above weaknesses, a sequel to Waxworks could truly send chills down one's spine. As it currently stands, while Waxworks may not appeal to some fantasy role-players, it will certainly fill the void for those who revel in the macabre. For anyone who enjoyed the Elvira series, Waxworks continues to satisfy the bent toward the supernatural. COR* COMPUTER SPORTS GAMES PREMIUM TEMPLATES\" Do you enjoy \"flying\" the super-sophisticated PC flight simulators available today? Is \"keyboard confusion\" your worst enemy-you know, frantically hunting keys to switch views, activate defenses, launch weapons, etc., (not to mention llying the plane)just to survive the mission? KEYBOARD COMMANDER CORPSB flight simulator keyboard templates can end that overload and let you concentrate on flyin' and shootin'. Our high-quality, color templates turn any AT101 Enh keyboard into a realistic control panel for your favorite sim and our standardized, color-coded layout flattens the learning curve from one sim to another. -Watch yer W Forget \"Keyboard Confusion\", just remember.sk AAA Www IBM  APPLE I C-64 THE MOST REALISTIC STRATEGY/SIMULATION COMPUTER GAMES ON THE MARKET TODAY! 3 IN 1 FOOTBALL Unmatched statistical accuracy Stats compiler. Full team and player statistical breakdown. You call the plays and timeouts Compare scouting reports. Use the two-minute rule. Over 500 teams included, pro and college from 1948 to present! BASKETBALL THE PRO GAME You're the coach and you choose line-ups, shot selection, style of play and much more. Stats compiler. Full team and individual player stats kept for up to an 82 game schedule. All players rated by actual statistics and tendencies. 25 current teams and over 190 great teams from the past included! Available!! XT LAYOUTS COMING SOON.. NODOODCOCODE Falcon 3.0 A-10 Tank Killer Aces of the Pacific F-15 Strike Eagle II Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe F-117A Nighthawk Jeftfighter I & II Megafortress B-17 Flying Fortress ATP CY Air Combat Flight Simulator 4.0 * High-quality , 3-D graphics * Standardized format *Logical, color-coded layout * Affixes to keyboard *Fits all AT101 Enh. keyboards * Sturdy, laminated stock Hurry! Get 'em at Introductory Prices!!! 1 $11.95 Please Print. Check Enclosed sed Money Order enclosed Monoy Order enclosed. Any 2 $21.50 Master deliver Any 3 $30.00 4 or more $9.25 onch Name Country S& H add $3.00 or C.O.D. add $6.00...CALL Address KCC, Inc., Dept C State/Province Zip/Postal Code 4839 SW 148 Ave., #402 Davie, FL 33330 Items (Discounts per order only: Allow 2-4 Weeks) DEALERS WELCOME 1-800-262-6066 ORDER TODAY! Mail check or money order for $39.95 each for Apple II and C-64 or $49.95 for IBM. You may call in and order with VISA or Master Card. Please add $3.00 for shipping and handling For more information, call or write for a free brochure. City LANCE HAFFNER GAMES P.O. BOX 100594. NASHVILLE, TN 37224 615/366-8088 Circle Reader Service #73 Circle Reader Service #78 Page 54 Computer Gaming World "


"Trade Up! The Game You Grew Up With Has Grown Up Too! IC OOO A WINDOWS  version IBM PC version BEEH MONOPOLY DE LUXE UPMH 303 132 ?HS 004 ico WINDOWS  version IBM PC version that keeps track of all previous moves and the ability to play by traditional or custom-designed rules. It's more mercenary than your lawyer, shrewder than your accountant, greedier than the IRS and tougher than your granny. Get ready for the most challenging game of Monopoly you've ever played with MONOPOLY DELUXE. GO GAMES Combining 90's technical knowhow with plenty of good oldfashioned fun, the bestselling board game of all time is back and better than ever with completely Enjoy the thrill and excitement of wheeling and dealing as you amass, or reluctantly part with, great fortunes buying and selling railroads, utilities and properties of all types. This game's a must for the library of any TRUE gamer or future real PARKER estate tycoon! BROTHERS revamped levels of difficulty and greatly enhanced graphics for your computer! You'll get more deluxe for your bucks with dazzling animation of all ten official tokens, easy as-pie interface, a game activity log MONOPOLY DELUXE with the ultimate easy-to-use point-and-click interface will be available this foll in PC ond WINDOWS versions. WINDOWS version features all of the DELUXE features listed above plus the added bonus of easier-to-use point-and-click interface. For more information, pricing and orders, please call 800-VRG-IND7. VISA, MASTERCARD, AMERICAN EXPRESS ond checks occepted. MONOPOLYS and RICH UNCLE & design are registered trademarks of Tonko Corporation. Rich Undeo 1936, 1992 Porker Brothers. All rights reserved. Monopoly 1935, 1992 Parker Brothers, Inc., a division of Tonka Corporation All rights reserved Licensed to Virgin Games, Inc.  Virgin Gomes, Inc Virgin is a registered trodemark of Virgin Enterprises, Lid WINDOWS is a trademark of Microsoft Corporation Circle Reader Service #112 "


"watu Does It Play Better If It Looks Better? Creating Graphics for the Jack Nicklaus Golf Design Module by Mark Allen Willett The Victorian Hole 1 ROTATE POATE F2 EXIT F10 N or the past two issues, we've had our that capability, those designers with Objects electronic hard hats out as we paced graphics packages that support scanned 1 golf courses in the Jack Nicklaus Sig images can use black-and-white, AH-ERs: Learn to borrow. JNSE's \"Imnature Edition (JNSE) design module. Be grayscale and color scans for additional port Object\" function allows one to \"steal\" yond the construction of the course itself, results. objects from any of the 200+ courses available on-line. In this way, a fine colhowever, the surrounding environs definitely affect the extent to which a golfer, Designing Persons lection of trees, buildings, shrubs, and so or computer golfer, enjoys the game. Who on, can be built quickly. Beautiful courses I tend to divide designers into three catecan imagine Pebble Beach without its have been created with objects that were gories: the \"artistically handicapped\" oceans, the shaded loveliness of Augusta all borrowed from other designers. Here is (AH) group, those who love to work on without its flowers and trees, or the further food for thought: the best hobbyruggedness of the British linksland courses but don't seem to have the knack ist-designers also borrow objects in addifor drawing a straight line with a ruler; the courses without heather and gorse? tion to creating new ones. Why spend a general hobbyists (JUST FOLKS) who are With the JNSE design module, one can half-a-night, a full night or, even, several more than happy to use the ample tools set a course in any parkland setting, the nights creating a terrific silver maple tree provided by the JNSE software itself; and South Seas, the desert, or wherever the when a terrific silver maple is already the rest of us JNSE-FREAKS who launch imagination leads. With some 200 plus available? Further, instead of being ofourselves into our favorite supporting JNSE courses available for the cost of a fended, designers like to have their objects graphics technology. Here are a few phone call to a JNSE BBS, it is no surprise borrowed. Though small, it is still an tips...some for each group and some for to find that courses have been set virtually honor to have someone think enough of an all of them. object to borrow it for their own across the planet. 8J222711 51832220LE course. Trust me on this... Beyond the form and finish of the C course itself, there are four other baJUST-FOLKS: Here's a trick OPTIONS sic components that the designer can for trees. Learn to use the control in JNSE: objects (like trees \"straight-line\" feature in the and buildings), backgrounds, the LASINIFI JNSE object editor to sketch in drawing of adjacent holes and color. trunks and branches. Don't worry These can work simply to fill out a if they look a bit too straight becourse or to assist the designer in cause 90% of those lines are godeveloping a course into the most ing to be covered with foliage, marvelously complex endurance test IMPORTF? anyway. Then, when it is time to that is possible. DDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDD CHANGES 18 add the foliage, try this one: using In addition to the object and back O LET PER the cut-and-paste tool, cut out a ground editors contained in JNSE, CHAPES TO good-size slice of leaves from anAJDOO ZZPOOK the designer can import work from DXIT F10 other tree object. It is possible to graphics packages which store imA typical building object from The Victorian. Designed by the author. cut and paste and recut and reages in PCX or LBM format. Given paste that slice over and over 01133 LOBBEZEN 200M 00000000 Page 56 Computer Gaming World "


"again to create all the foliage needed for any given tree. FREAKS: One should use the \"arc\" tool from a commercial graphics package to create branches, but it is better to experiment with the package's \"spray gun\" tool to build multi-colored, in-depth groupings of leaves for foliage. Finally, if the commercial package has a screen-capture program, one can use that program to \"steal\" favorite screen images from other programs and use those images as a guideline or template for custom JNSE objects. EXPORTBG, both may be found on BBSs which support JNSE. Factoid: to save some tedious counting, background graphics files are 1200 pixels long by 47 pixels high. Learn to explore and exploit all of the techniques in whatever graphics package is chosen. I use Deluxe Paint II Enhanced from Electronic Arts. Its SMOOTH, SMEAR, and TRANSLUCENCE techniques have allowed me to create some stunning cloud-filled sky effects that I could never have done otherwise. Another Deluxe Paint device makes the shrinking of objects a snap so that one can easily fill the background with little pictures of the same objects which have already been created/borrowed for use on the course. Why draw little trees when I can shrink the big objects I've already drawn or borrowed? If the designer wants a brighter ocean, darker sand, bluer sky, PALEDIT makes it possible with just a little effort. This is a utility for everyone. Course Overhead EVERYONE: When done, it is possible to \"dress up\" the course overhead. Go to EDIT PLOT. Fill the land with heavy rough. Choose ADD HOLES, and a miniature copy of the course will be added to the plot. Go to ROUTING and select OPTIONS. Make all the terrain features \"transparent.\" In doing so, JNSE will not redraw over the holes that you just added to the plot. Return to EDIT PLOT, and touch up those miniature holes. Then, add a title and nameplate to the course. The gamer's first introduction to the course can be a very attractive graphic. Mulligan's Point Alhambra Scorpion Victorian ESNAS IELA A sampler of the author's background works, each showing a combination of \"hand drawn,\" cul-andpaste, and Deluxe Paint II Enhanced techniques. ** The Victorian ole 1ChanPe Tee572 yaso Ladies Tee 602 Uds.  OUTO CHORUS Adjacent Holes EVERYONE: JNSE only puts one hole in each hole-edit window. By looking at the course route, however, one might notice that the holes tend to lie alongside each other. Is it possible to design a hole so that the golfer can see one hole in the distance from the one that's being played? Yes, it's easy! Draw it in on the hole overhead. Drawing in the adjacent holes not only makes for exciting views that seem to extend across a real golf course, but causes the hole overheads that are seen when playing to be more vibrant to look at as well. One can use mylar or acetate (I use elcheapo sheet protectors) to draw outlines of each hole. Then, it is a simple task to tape them to the monitor and use them as a guide for drawing the adjacent holes. Also, don't forget to create a pin-and-flag object to put on that adjacent green. A hole overhead from The Victorian showing the placement of the adjacent 10th Hole. Drawn in by hand, adjacent holes add visual interest to the display. ? Piet Brush Tech Sten Font Misc Pref Backgrounds AH-ERs: Again, there is nothing wrong with borrowing. Those 200+ courses out there should provide a designer with almost any earthly setting imaginable. As with objects, backgrounds can be imported from one course to another. Remember, too, that once they are in the design module, they can be modified to suit. Want to borrow one of my pine trees? Neat! Want to make it better? Neater, still! JUST-FOLKS: Cut-and-paste is as effective for backgrounds as for objects. The background for my first JNSE course, Scorpion, has an entire forest that was created from...one little pine! Five pixels wide and seven high, I cut-and-pasted that one tree into a row of trees. Then, I cutand-pasted that row into entire hillsides of trees. Yeah, it really pays back a lot for a little effort on this count. I did the same thing with some of the rock-outcroppings and rolling hills there. Sooner or later, the average designer is likely to find a need for a little workspace in which to draw something. The \"sky\" will work just fine. It is a great place to work and it is possible to cut-and-paste the drawing down on the course as soon as it is completed. This would mean that the creation of clouds and other sky effects would be best left until last. FREAKS: JNSE hobbyist, John Kunyik, has created two freeware utilities which allow gamers to transfer PCX background files from their graphics packages to JNSE and vice versa. Called IMPORTBG and LENOVOARE # CES CLOUDS & SKY_Here, done using Shear and Smooth feature of Deluxe ouve Paint II Enhanced. THE TREES in the foreground Here shrunk from Around objects THE MOUNTAINS were drawn in \"by hand.\" Evergreen object by I Have Finished My Course Once one has finished course, background, objects and overhead, it is time to share the new course and enjoy the courses of others. Here are the telephone numbers for my three favorite BBSs which support JNSE. All three can be trusted, and all three are free. ACCOLADE (CA) Paul Conrad, JNSE lib-op: (408) 296-8800 DOUBLE EAGLE (FL) Ted Maiden, sy-sop: (407) 259-9771 THE 19TH HOLE (MD) Keith Holzapfel, sy-sop: (301) 869-2389 What's been written here barely scratches the graphics potential in the JNSE design module. If it has been enough to spark interest or create new questions, the invitation is wide open to join me and many other JNSE hobbyists on the PRODIGY Interactive Service. We can be found on the Game Center bulletin board or in the Prodigy Network Golf Tour Clubhouse. A section of The Victorian background as viewed in Deluxe Paint II Enhanced. A commercial graphics package allows for even greater techniques to be employed for INSE artwork. Colors Hands down, the best accessory to use in JNSE design is still another freeware utility created by John Kunyik. Called PALEDIT, it allows the designer to change any or all of the 256-colors in the JNSE palette. Does it play better if it looks better? You betcha! CGW February 1993 Page 57 "


"BEST REST of the Out of the Doldrums & Out of This World by Chuck Miller The world of shareware Tnless living somewhere out West or in the sunny South, most gamers reading this column are probably in the midst of the winter doldrums, with cold winds howling outside and a blanket of mostly-white snow covering the ground below their computer room window. Whatever the case, now is as good a time as any to pull out that unfinished game and dive in once again, or begin a new one for that matter. In this installment, I will focus on several game editors that will breathe new life into some unfinished quests and a scenario-based wargame for Windows guaranteed to keep the gamer busy for a good while. New to Our Editorial Staff ... Okay, it is a given that some adventures, especially those of the role-playing variety, can be just a bit daunting, even to the point of wearing the player out before the quest is completed. I know that I have placed several such adventures on the shelf because I simply lack the time to develop my characters to the point where they might survive the constant onslaught of the devious denizens of these digital dungeons. portraits (this is the only editor to my knowledge that allows the player to select a different portrait for each of his characters). Role-players still struggling through the deadly levels of Darkmoon will find this game editor a welcome relief, its only drawback being the need to enter hex codes for items found in character backpacks. Selection by item name would have been much more user-friendly. Nonetheless, $10 buys the player a very capable program. The editor for Planet's Edge, Hartman's other offering, operates in a similar fashion. Upon loading the program, the player is presented with a menu offering three selections: Edit Crew Stats, Edit Raw Materials and Edit Crew Backpacks. When editing crew stats, selecting a crew member will enable the player to edit many of that member's characteristics, including hit points, intelligence, agility, luck and skills. In fact, many of the game's restrictions are removed. So, even though characters are limited to only six skills each, they can be assigned up to 100 percent in all sixteen skills. Editing raw materials is also available in the freely redistributable version of the editor. Thus, making rare materials easy to procure. As with the editor for Eye of the Beholder, becoming a registered user opens up an extended feature in this case, the ability to edit crew backpacks. This allows the player to add, delete or recharge any item carried in the crew members' backpacks, including items such as ship plans and technical plans. If you would like to receive a registered copy of either of these editors, just send a check or money order in U.S. funds in the amount of $10, for each editor requested, to Hartman Game Utilities, P.O. Box 73706, Houston, TX 77273. Both character editors are an exceptional value. Wiman Dean CHOOSI! A CRUNCHER  127 [127) WILuan Dean Rota Merahova Rolson Nasladatu Usal Tsakafuchi BU 90 Holp window www ! 11 165 Maxinan Hit Points Intelligence Agility Luck Astrogation Slily Buan Wuapulis Ship Bolt Woapono Ship Pros Inapona Luadurslily Communication Diplonary Shly Repair Iton Repair Computers Light Weapons Heavy Weapons Hand Wearans First Aid Surgery Xenobiology ODOCOJ DODA Max HP Puty range from 0-127. Current HP va iue is shown in hrackets. Entering any value fur Max HP will raku Current HP oul t  . intelligence. agility and luck ray range from 9-127. Skills may range from 9-100 Hit (ESC) to save and exit. Well, if this is the case with Eye of the Beholder II or Planet's Edge, some much needed assistance is available from Jack Hartman of Hartman Game Utilities, who has written two very useful and downright affordable shareware game editors for the abovementioned CRPGs (with more on the way early next year). Both are well-designed and offer all the basic functions for editing save game files. Hartman's editor for Eye of the Beholder II is a full-featured program allowing all six save game files to be accessed at one time for instant editing of character aspects, including saved game name, character name, ability scores, hit points, race, sex, class, alignment, levels and experience. In addition, not only can existing characters be edited, but new characters can be created to fill the two open NPC slots. All these editing features are available in the freely redistributable shareware version of the editor. So, as with most shareware products, you can try before you buy. However, in addition to the above, registered users have access to several extended features: access to the spellbook, backpack and character Character Stats Window Evaluation Copy Saved Came Name : RIDDLE HARTMON MAKE UTILITIES for Character Name : CHANDRA Ene of the Deholder Coput laht 1992 buch Barthon Strength : 18/99 Intelligence : 18 He Window Wisdon : 18 Dexterity : 10 To Modiru Constitution : 18 ADDITIONAL STRENGTH, Charisma : 18 type in a now value. HIL Points: 200 of 268 Only fighter tupou can Race/Sox: Human Female have additional strength. Class : Paladin Alignment : Lawful Good The acceptable range for additional strength is Class Level Experience A through 180. Paladin 12 157923 00000 80000 0000000000000000000000000000000000000 SPELLBOOK EQUIPMENT PORTRAIT : 12 the currkur to MOVESC when finished It's Very Cold in Space Picking up on our look at Windows shareware from last issue is a game that arrived too late for inclusion, Stardate 2140.2: Battles on Distant Planets by Glacier Edge Technology Associates. Page 58 Computer Gaming World "


"D UN EII The Building of A Dynasty MENJAJT TUNJWNS Creats 1 | 1993 Only one house will prevail. Atreides Trike. MISSILE TANI DMG ATTACK PIOVE RETREAT GUARD Uredits 999 Cost 300 Hindtrap OH23 Control all aspects of combat and construction. BUILD THIS LOSONIC TYP Select and build varieties of installations. Acquire valuable information from your Mentat. Conquer Arrakis this fall on your IBM PCI Eor more information pricing and orders please call 800-VRG-IN. Visa, Mastercard, American Express and checks accepted. Westwood Distributed Ukeins vely by SCI-FI EPIC OF ALL TIME! A SIMULATION OF THE BEST SELLING GAMES HUNEL ldemark of Dint he Laurentiis Corporation and licensed to MGAOniverzal Merchandising Inc 1984 Dino De Laurentiis tporation Alleichus reserved. 019 Westwood Studios, Lit. All rights reserved urcle Reader Service #119 "


"nareinare Come oleme van STADATE 2102. Batez on Pisa Panare STARDATE 2140.2: Battles On Distant Planets Game Options Quit Help World Map Orders Info History End Turn similar to Omnitrend's Rules of Engagement/Breach 2 interlocking game system. Stardate 2140.2: Battles on Distant Planets is $15 shareware (including the first two scenarios), with the licensed version requiring a payment of $43 (for all five scenarios). Those who derive their enjoyment from tactical diversions will find a good value in Battles, though I believe that a few more scenarios should be included in each version in light of the requested payments. For example, Battle Isle, a commercial release, contains 16 one-player and 16 two-player scenarios for a retail price of $49.95. I will admit, however, that the mouse-based interface in Battles on Distant Planets is much better than the joystick-driven one emploved in Battle Isle. For more information or to place an order, contact Glacier Edge Technology Associates, 4820-E East Kentucky Avenue, Glendale, CO 80222 or call (303) 782-9252. Unit List TRANS 1 TRANS 2 TRANS 3 TRANS 4 ESCORT 1 ESCORT 2 ESCORT 3 ESCORT 4 STARDATE 2140.2: Battles On Distant Planets Game Options Quit ESCORT 1 18 MP Help World Map MOVING First Battle End Turn Orders Info History Oo 08 Unit List 1st Inl 1 st Armor 2nd Armor 3rd Armor 1 st Air 36 Battles is a scenario-based wargame similar in many respects to UBI Soft's Battle Isle, pitting the player against an opponent (either human vs. human, human vs. computer or computer vs. computer) in a tactical conflict for military supremacy. Each scenario presents the keyboard kaiser with a new tactical problem to overcome in futuristic warfare. Included in the shareware version are two such scenarios, \"First Battle\" and \"A Night on Rangor.\" The licensed version contains these scenarios, plus adds three more — «Desert Counter Attack, \"The Princess\" and \"Netherworld\" — for a total of five separate conflicts. Combat, as in most games of this genre, is turn-based, the player making all offensive and defensive moves prior to ending his or her turn and allowing the opponent to counter. Several unique units, weapons and lifeforms are available for deployment, each being directed individually. Battles supports Windows-compatible audio cards to supply the sounds of war, providing requisite explosions and gun fire. Unfortunately, this is about the limits of the digitized audio supplied. A few more sounds would have enhanced play, offering some additional \"Windows\" dressing. Battles on Distant Planets allows the player to save games in progress, which is good as some games can be quite long. On-line help is also provided for each scenario. In fact, all documentation is of the on-line variety through Windows help files. Additional scenarios are also planned, including a linkable game Stardate 2140.2: Crusade in Space — which will allow battle linking STARDATE 2140.2: Battles On Distant Planets Game Options Quit Help World Map Nethcrworld End Turn Orders Info History Well, it looks as if I have run out of space once again. Unfortunately, there is simply too numerous a collection of notable shareware games on too many platforms to include everything I would like in each column. Only the most exceptional entertainment products can be reviewed each month. So, until next time, great gaming to one and all! Send Us Your Best If you have authored a shareware or public domain game and would like to have it considered for review in this column, please send two complete copies (preferably on 3.5\" disks) to: Best of the Rest, c/o Computer Gaming World, 130 Chaparral Court, Suite 260, Anaheim Hills, CA 92808. Games reviewed in Best of the Rest are COMPUTER WARGAMES available through nuHistorically Accurate...Easy To Use merous distributors of For IBMT PC and Compatibles shareware and public domain software, as BIG THREE la GRANDE well as on many na(V 2.01) ARMEE tional and private teleWWII Strategy Game Napoleon's Campaigns Seven Scenarios, Map Seven Scenarios, Map communication World-Renown New Release services. If you do not Hard Drive Required Challenging, Intense have access to these European Theatre Austerlitz to Waterloo services, you can, in $25 Each. Send check or money order to: most cases, write or SDJ Enterprises, Inc. call the game develDepartment C (314) 966-5602 oper for an evaluation 1551 Fawn Valley Dr. St. Louis, MO 63131 Evenings Only copy. CGW Specify 3.5\" or 5.25\" disk 9 Unit List TRANS 1 TRANS 2 TRANS 3 TRANS 4 TRANS 5 TRANS 6 TRANS 7 TRANS 8 BATTLE 1 BATTLE 2 BATTLE 3 BATTLE 4 BATTLE 5 BATTLE 6 23 Circle Reader Service # 99 Page 60 Computer Gaming World "


"Games For Everybody RODEO GAMES ABES RABBITS ARMADA ONTARGET  TURN BURNS CASINO CRAPS 7 MMDUO 7 CARD STUD NEW EXCITING TITLES PUBLISHED REGULARLY The Coffee Break Series COMPUTER GAMES for IBM PC & Compatibles ONLY ($1295 NOT COPY PROTECTED MADE IN SUGGESTED RETAIL PRICE U.S.A. Sie da . Look for this special display at your favorite retailer. BLACKJACK MIQUO A FUN TO PLAY by yourself or with friends. ENTERTAINING play for minutes or hours. Addictive! EASY TO USE play from diskette or hard disk. GREAT GRAPHICS supports most graphics formats. AFFORDABLE... and high quality! DUAL PACKED 5.25\" plus 3.5\" disks. 7 CARD STUD ARMADA COMBINATION PIA COMPUTER GAMES COFFEE AND DOUGHNUTS NOT INCLUDED FOR IBM PC & COMPATIBLES Galled hek bertes & VRACASO Software Villa Crespo Software = 1725 McGovern Street Highland Park, IL 60035.708-433-0500  1992, Villa Crespo Software, Inc. Circle Reader Service #111 "


"Scorpion's View as told by Scorpia (USINS CRUSADERS of the DARK SAVANT Scorpia is an experienced and respected adventure game expert. CGW is pleased to provide this forum for her distinctive and often controversial prespective. Whichever beginning you get, your merry crew is not on its home world, but on the planet Guardia. As you quickly learn from the introduction, there is an artifact even mightier than the Cosmic Forge (the pen that, whatever it writes, causes the events written about to come to pass the Astral Dominae. Your task is to find the Dominae and keep it safe until the emissary of the Cosmic Lords comes by to pick it up. NORANULF MOMrusaders Of The Dark Savant is the direct sequel to Bane of The Cosmic Forge, picking up at the exact point where Bane left off. That point varies based on which of the Bane endings you completed, so the start of the game will not quite be the same for everyone. Regardless of starting point, you will have to do pretty much the same things and solve the same puzzles. It just may be necessary to approach some situations differently. Those who did not play Bane, or who played it but no longer have a save file for transferring characters, can create a brand-new party of adventurers. These new characters enter the game at level 1 and DANG come with some basic equipment, so they aren't exactly defenseless. Imports from Bane will have their levels reduced rather drastically — down to about level 5. Their attributes and skills will likewise suffer a reduction, although their inventory remains mostly intact. I was pleasantly surprised to see that the mighty Muramasa Blade, the Spear of Death, and the Holy Basher made the transfer, along with many potions and other items my team had picked up in the previous game. It is definitely better to bring characters over from Bane. VIHavuz FZRAWLUC FM the Savant for most of the game, he is still the main force to be reckoned with when all is said and done. In the meantime, you have to deal with the Trang (a nasty spider-like race), the Dane (tall blue humanoids), the Rattkin (rodents, of course), the Umpani (along the lines of a bipedal rhinoceros), the Gorn (something like Ores), the Munk, and the Helazoids (these last two being the most humanappearing of the inhabitants). Naturally, there are also NONE hosts of non-sentients eager to gnaw on your bones, including moths, vultures, slimes, tyrannosaurs, piranhas, jelly stingers, giant worms, dragons, weevils, and a few other critters besides. Guardia isn't exactly a friendly place. However, that doesn't mean you kill everything in sight. There are many important NPCs you need to talk to for information or from whom you can buy crucial items. A little diplomacy and tact, as well as hack and slash, are necessary to get through the game. Lying through your teeth, on occasion, also works well. This brings up an important aspect of Dark Savant: it is the first Wizardry that has a real-world feel to it. Previous entries were mainly along the lines of 65) That in itself is quite a job and it's made tougher by the fact that you aren't the only one after the \"Astral Doodad.\" Others want to get their hands on this item and chief among the competitors is the Dark Savant, whose legions have already taken over the town of New City. While you don't see very much of Page 62 Computer Gaming World "


"BOTTA ARMAUR-GENRAA *  EBBR EL FERRE MT LAST suum cul j Ieft right down  g as Uz USE ARMOUR-GEDDON To order Armour-Geddon and protect the people of EDEN, visit your favorite software retailer or call 1-800-GET-PSYG The Balkan War of 1997 devastated the earth... Decades later, two conflicting factions survive: The hostile and combative surface dwellers, and the subterranean Society of the Earth Defense Network (EDEN). As a warrior member of EDEN's High Command, it's your swom duty to defend your civilization from the marauding surface dwellers and destroy their deadly laser beam cannon before it annihilates your people. Armour-Geddon puts you in the front line! Plan the attack and leap into combat, battling the enemy from the cockpit of six different high-tech vehicles. Striking from the air in your stealth fighter, bomber or helicopter you eradicate the enemy's power grid. Decimating enemy installations, you retrieve their advanced weapons systems in your fleet of surface attack vehicles. Assembling the captured technology, you develop the only weapon on earth powerful enough to crush the enemy's aggression: the Neutron Bomb. Armour-Geddon takes realism a step further with high speed computer graphics, heads-up cockpit displays, full soundboard support and the sophisticated head to head serial link option that permits two EDEN warriors to simultaneously coordinate their attack. Any closer to the action and you'd need body armor! Psygnosis, 29 Saint Mary's Court, Brookline, MA 02146 Tel: 617-731-3553 Circle Reader Service #124 "


"PAGE PRIEST \"find the ultimate item» quests, under get to a *MAP* before you do. It's been ground rambles through hordes of hos known to happen. tiles until you finally won out and Sprinkled throughout the game are acquired whatever it was you were supwhat can be described as \"cosmologiposed to grab. The claustrophobic concal philosophical observations,\" ponfines of the dungeons seemed to exist derings about this odd world in which in some mysterious limbo, complete in your party finds itself. After all, while themselves and with no relation to anything else. you, the player, live in a sophisticated high-tech world, your characters come While Dark Savant has its dungeons, from a far different environment, enough (more than enough) combat, where magic, not machinery, is the and an Artifact as its ultimate objective, technology. the action takes place in an actual So every once in a while, the game world. There are towns, ruins, wilderbreaks out with musings on the strange ness, mountains and even a small sea. devices the party comes across, the These areas are inhabited by the differmarvel of the great silver birds that ent races who are plotting, scheming, cross the empty regions of space, or the allying, and warring with each other, wonderment of an unending universe and who, one way or another, embroil filled with perhaps thousands or even the adventurers in their machinations. millions of inhabited worlds. It is certainly possible to become entangled with hardly any effort at all. At one time, I had agreed with the Rattkin Mafia to find out when the next Trang shuttle would PAGATER land (so the Rattkins could hijack it and expand their operations to other worlds), while promising a T'rang assassin that the party would murder an Umpani Scout, at the same time we had joined the UmDAWG pani Scouts to track down Trang spies, and those very RSGATE SPELL 3 BUGS same spies (when found) of PERRY MUSE OVER EQOXER fered a nice chunk of cash for the location of the orbiting Umpani While at times this is laid on a bit mother ship. It was about then that I thick, it adds an extra dimension to decided that matters were becoming Dark Savant and reinforces the feeling just a trifle too complicated, and re that the party is operating in reality turned to an earlier save position. rather than some isolated dungeon. Still, this illustrates the types of situThis is a rare and unusually good touch for a CRPG. ations you can become caught up in if you aren't careful about what you agree The graphics are an improvement (or don't agree) to do for someone. It is over Bane and have been sped up in also necessary to be careful about combat. Now, when a group of mon\"trading lore\" with NPCs. Aside from sters moves to the front, it no longer the Dominae itself, you are also look takes slightly less than forever. The ing for *MAPS*. These items, with outdoors are done well, although with names always displayed in upper case all the forest around, sometimes it beand bracketed by asterisks (i.e., comes a little monotonous. The sun *CRYSTAL MAP*), are not diagrams moves across the sky during the day, but text paragraphs that contain, in a and the moon during the night (the roundabout way, clues to solving cer moon even has phases). tain puzzles. One of the biggest complaints about Without these clues, some puzzles Cosmic Forge was the inability to drop are almost unsolvable. Since the chain something when you found treasure of puzzles will eventually lead to the and everyone's inventory was full. Astral Dominae, the *MAPS* are valuThis created a situation where you had able items, and those competitors are to reboot the game if you came across looking for them, too. When you \"trade a critical item, as the game wouldn't let lore\" with an NPC, you learn all he you leave such an object behind. knows, but he learns all you know at the same time. Trade information with the That has been rectified in Crusaders. wrong person, and someone else might Now any item can be dropped, including those necessary for completing the game. Fortunately, objects you drop usually stay where they are and can be picked up again later. There was one exception to this: items dropped on the same square as the chest tended to vanish later. A couple of times the party returned to a location where goodies had been left on the chest square and everything was gone. So leave your stuff in a different location (the chest itself vanishes after it's opened). The interface is designed primarily for the mouse, although the keyboard can be used, and operates smoothly. The main icons for Camping, Spellcasting, Using an item, Opening a locked door or chest, Searching a location, and Disk Options (save, restore, etc.) are arranged in a circle under the main window and are easily available at all times. However, as with most games, Crusaders also has its drawbacks. One of these is the auto-map feature, which is only barely adequate. The quality of the display is tied to a new mapping skill; the higher the skill, the more detail you see. That's fine, but even at the highest level of skill, the area displayed is far too small, showing little more than the party's immediate vicinity. Further, since the map can't be scrolled, you have to call it up frequently, and this can be a tiresome process, as you have to wade through the character's inventory, then click on the map, and finally on the \"use\" command before you see the display. A hot key for bringing up the map would have been welcome, and the ability to scroll the map even more so. While the game did not crash or show any major aberrations, there is a minor but irritating technical problem involved with carrying around a lot of maps. From time to time, the program will freeze, often for as long as fifteen seconds, during which time commands and actions are locked out. You just have to sit there and wait until the game \"comes back\" before you can go on. The easiest way around this is to carry only maps you really need and dump the ones you no longer require. Or you can set up a cache in some convenient location and leave extra maps there; dropped items don't disappear when you let go of them. Sir-Tech is aware of this problem, and a patch for it is available on many online networks and local bulletin boards. If you Page 64 Computer Gaming World "


"To CHALLENGE THE EMPIRE IN AN X-WING, YOU NEED DESIRE. BURNING DESIRE. STAR WARS Climb into the cockpit of an X-Wing and battle for freedom. The galaxy is being plundered by the Dark Side, and you are desperately needed by the Rebel Alliance. Take the controls of the X-Wing, Starfighter-now! Experience the incredible realism of polygon graphics and bit-mapped special effects as you fly against deadly TIE Fighters and menacing Star Destroyers. Be swept along by the interactive musical score and digitized Star Wars movie sound effects. At last, a new generation of space combat technology to challenge the evil Empire. Destroy the Emperor's ultimate weapon and end his tyranny. Visit your local retailer or call 1-800-STARWARS New Integration of polygon graphIcs and bitmapped special effects 17 different views from any of three cockpits Star Wars is a registered trademark of Lucasfilm Lid. All rights reserved. Used under authorization. X-Wing game 1992 LucasArts Entertainment Company. IuKaats is a trademark of LucasArts Entertainment Company. Advanced 3-D modeling of spacecraft TIE lighters' unique roar, one of many digitized movie sound effects Cinematic sequences Infamous characters LUCAS        R               W, nis "


"Ferromn sien the solution to the Six Swords puzzle in the Rattkin Funhouse happened to be in Nyctalinth. Instances like these are common throughout the game. ARGE PRIEST don't have a modem, call Sir-Tech's hotline and ask about getting the patch. The main problem with Dark Savant, though, is its apparently open design, which is very deceptive. While you can, for awhile, go almost anywhere, sooner or later you run into a dead end, as the items and inIGHTER formation you need to solve puzzles or enter certain areas have been tucked away somewhere else. And it is not always obvious where to find them. Few things are more frustrating than getting almost to the end of a sequence or dungeon only to learn that you have to backtrack and go halfway across the countryside to obtain what you need to finish -and that's when you know where to go, which you often don't. You could easily spend hours in a fruitless search of the vicinity, scouring the place top to bottom, for something that isn't there. It certainly wasn't fun to reach the top of Dane Tower only to discover that a crucial item was back at Orkogre Castle. It was no more pleasing to learn that On the whole, Crusaders of the Dark Savant is certainly an improvement over the last couple of games. The feuding races, some after the Dominae, others with different agendas, and the party's interactions with them, mark the beginning of the maturation of the Wizardry series, and this is a good thing to see. Puzzle design needs tightening up, and much of the excessive running back and forth (to no real advantage) eliminated; this game is big 3323 enough without all that extra travel time. Combat for beginning teams needs to be easier; all too typical for a Wizardry game, low-level parties will have a difficult time getting a foothold in the game. This is, indeed, a large, tough adventure and not recommended for the novice CRPG'er. However, Wizardry fans and experienced gamers (who are willing to put up with some of the frustrations) will get more than their money's worth from Crusaders. Cow The worst of the lot is the Isle of Crypts, which is essentially the end game. You will have to go in and out of this place one, two, or possibly even three times before finishing it. This is just plain silly. The game should have been designed such that all necessary items are obtained before you enter, especially considering the complicated teleport maze you have to go through further down in the dungeon. TWIN ENGINE GAMING PRESENTS: Out Time Days Space Combat a game of Time Travel in an alternate dimension a game of pure tactical combat... in a rather unique environment THE EXPERIENCE: OTD is a game of life on a strange world. Although populated by a variety of 5 You'll be fighting in an edgeless contest zone aboard livsemi-humanoid races, it is nothing like the Earth ing crcaturcs. Space Combat is almost all combat, with that your character left behind. Gone is the industrisome room for diplomacy. Offensive actions include al might of large nations. The multi-talented worker thc crcature's Psychic Scrcams to mentally disrupt is a thing of the past. Even your famed Time Jumpothers, launching Inverse Mincs that will implode ing skills have been checked to a certain degree. .... near your enemy, freeing Sporcs to destroy interHowever, you do happen to be one of the few Time nals, using Nerve Pulses to paralyze posky scouts, Jumpers on this world, and that in itself is a major strength. and Virally Infecting your opponent in the hopes of You'll choose one of several sects to work with, or attempt to taking over their alien. Each tum comes with a special full-page graphic create your own from scratch, which will help set your general methprintout of your ending position to aid od of operation. As each new time opens, there are new discoveries to you in planning. make, new lands to chart, and new people to meet. The world awaits change, and you are the catalyst. Spacc Combat was designed to be casy to learn, but difficult to master. OUT TIME DAYS is a highly interactive role-playing Play-By-Mail Every game starts with ton players, game with turns processed weekly. It has received excellent reviews, and as cach is climinated, the chances notably from Flagship and Paper Mayhem. Turn cost of the game ending will increase. is $5.00. The game is open ended and 99% computer Turnshccts are custom music on a lasr moderated. The rulcbook may be obtained for $5.00 printer to aid you in filling out your (refundable with startup). A special startup is next turn. The games run about 12-18 available that gives you the rulebook, the startup turns. Cost is $3.50 per turni. A rulcturn, and five turns for only $15.00. book (required before you can join) is $1.00 (frcc if you mention this act!). Dependable, weekly, error-free turns since 1984 pol $ Twin Engine Gaming; Dept 631; 3254 Maple Leaf Ct.; San Jose, CA 95121 Page 66 Circle Reader Service #109 Computer Gaming World "


"SPRINT IS PROUD TO BE THE OFFICIAL SPONSOR OF THE * MOST EAGERLY-AWAITED WINTER GAME. It's an olympic marathon of fun and adventure! Find out how you can get Space Quest V: Roger Wilco in The Next Mutation FREE when you switch your long-distance service to Sprint. Sprint. * SIERRA Call **1-800-767-4547 Circle Reader Service #100 "


"The Rumor Bag By Eustace Lee Savanarola Beauregard III rt was a crisp, autumn day in northern Virginia. I stood atop Henry Hill, not _far from where a commander with the same surname had stood some 130 years before. I stood beside a Confederate cannon and remembered First Manassas. I was supposed to meet a contact who had promised to give me the scoop on Sid Meier's next game. I looked at my watch impatiently and realized the misadventures that had brought me thus far. I had been wandering past the statue of Stonewall Jackson and heard a muted, \"Pssst!\" Such a verbal cue is SOP in my business, so I backtracked around the base of the statue. I needn't have bothered. It was merely a trenchcoated fellow with stubble showing a video game magazine to one of the park rangers. He was showing some pictures of Electronic Arts' Tony La Russa Baseball on the Sega Genesis, but he didn't seem to know much about it. It seems the ranger played the IBM version of the game and wanted to know how one could draft a team on a cartridge. The guy didn't know that the game would have a battery save and that one can save an \"All-Star\" team to play through a 162 game schedule. He didn't seem to know that there will only be four stadiums in the product (Wrigley Field, Camden Yards, Dodger Stadium and, probably, the Astrodome). Of course, I wasn't about to fill him in. He read that other magazine. Let him find about from that other magazine about Haunting (working title), EA's cartridge game where the player is a ghost who has to scare the family out of several different houses. In fact, let him find out from them about what EA is temporarily calling Blood & Guts Football (sort of a Blood Bowl meets an undead John Madden). It would serve him right not to find out until next spring I was going to let both the ranger and the stranger rest in their ignorance until the ranger said, \"I mostly play computer games. That's why I read Computer Gaming World.\" I couldn't leave a loyal reader without a rumor, could I? I told them both that Interplay is working on a CD-ROM version of their Lord of the Rings games that will include animation from Ralph Bakshi's classic film. Yet, they couldn't be satisfied. They pestered me from the statue to Henry House and back to Henry Hill trying to find out about Sid's new game. I was getting ready to turn some of the antique artillery on them. I told them that I had heard that Steve Jackson Games was getting ready to license their G.U.R.P.S. (Generic Universal Role-Playing System) series to a major software publisher and that I thought it would be great to transfer characters from the era of G.U.R.P.S Scarlet Pimpernel to G.U.R.P.S. Cyberpunk and back to G.U.R.P.S. Robin Hood or G.U.R.P.S. Wild Cards. Of course, it will probably take the G.U.R.P.S. Illuminati to decide which G.U.R.P.S. environment will appear first. They kept backing me toward the Confederate artillery and my foot slipped on the wet grass. My head, protected only by its plain brown wrapper, smacked against the mouth of the cannon and I blacked out momentarily like one of those endless access times on a low-grade CD-ROM product. When I opened my eyes, both the ranger and the stranger looked like they were made out of polygons. Maybe I had been playing too much of Alone in the Dark or had spent too much time anticipating the Call of Cthulhu sequel that is supposed to be released through Imotion, but it looked like both of my antagonists/admirers had turned into 3-D polyfilled characters. I thought for a second that they might be contestants in Electronic Arts' upcoming ATP Tour Tennis (Distinctive Software's 3-D tennis game that was originally going to be published by Broderbund). In addition to the fluid 3-D action, gamers are supposed to be able to assume the attributes of 96 ATP Tour professionals, plus have the capacity to create a player. Since I seemed so disoriented, my \"friends\" elected to leave and I managed to stand up by grabbing the wheel of the cannon's undercarriage. It was then that I checked my watch. My contact was late. Perhaps, she had seen the two pestering me and elected to bail out. I paced beside the cannon like an officer of old, but soon grew tired of the charade. I leaned on the cannon's muzzle and, improbably, it moved toward the ground. I straightened up and examined the muzzle. There was a paper inside. The paper told me what I needed to know. Sid's next project is a Civil War game. It will be a wargame that telescopes in scale from strategic through operational and on to tactical battles. The paper hinted that the game would have a \"miniatures\" feel, complete with: formations, terrain effects and animated figures. Of course, there will also be a \"Quick Combat\" system for those who don't want to fight out the tactical battles. There were even some scribbles that indicated that the game would be accelerated real-time with point-to-point movement and covering the entire war (with scenarios for those who don't wish to play the entire campaign). The anonymous source wasn't sure how much of the political aspects would be reflected in the game (i.e. Emancipation Proclamation and foreign intervention), but seemed certain that Sid would cover all the \"interesting\" aspects of the war. \"Hummph!\" I said to myself as I rubbed my head through the bag, \"he hasn't even programmed the game yet and he's already had one casualty on the battlefield.\" Ah, well! Such are the perils of being The Rumor Guy. CGW Page 68 Computer Gaming World "


"ACES T.I.M. A puzzle-solving, inventor's workshop for the mind. «The puzzle game to buy in 1993.\" Video Games and Computer Entertainment «This is one of the best games of the year!» Computer Game Review THE INCREDIBLE THEATER PRET SCORE BONUS SCORE ONUSPOONUS 2 2-3152536.6333 Combine zany animated parts to create working machines! Over 80 puzzles will challenge your creative skills. 12 SCONG D OMUS UOMUS R&CORENDOHUSET BONUS WHILE SIERRA Free-Form mode offers unlimited tools for sheer fun! Who ever thought logic and physics could be so much fun? A Mechanical Wonder is Set into Motion! Introducing The Incredible Machine, a wacky electronic workshop from the mind of designer, Jeff Tunnell. Using parts and gadgets from the electronic toolbox, you construct machines to solve one of 80 different puzzles or create your own incredible masterpiece in Free-Form mode. There are gears, pulleys, cats, balloons, dynamite and about 40 other animating tools for use in your creation. It's all new, slightly demented fun that you won't be able to put down. It's The Incredible Machine and it's in stores now! Circle Reader Service #101 Excellence in Innovative Gaming SIERRA To get your copy now, call: 1 (800) 326-6654 "


"A Full House of Video Poker Games Computer Gambling with Less at Stake by Michael S. Lasky TITLE: Dr. Wong's Jacks + Video Poker PLAYERS: SYSTEM: IBM PROTECTION: None PRICE: $12.95 DESIGNER: Stanford Wong PUBLISHER: Villa Crespo Software Highland Park, IL DR WONG'S ACKS+ yhile it is theoretically possible to take the computer out of the casino, it is apparently impossible to take the casino out of the computer. Video poker and other games of chance seem to be having a renaissance these days and that just might have something to do with our worries about the economy and our personal fantasies to strike it rich. Whatever the reason, the solitaire games do supply hours of fun and, best of all, even when one makes the wrong bets, there is no real money lost. This reminds me of W. C. Fields' great line in the classic comedy, \"My Little Chickadee\": when asked at a card game, \"Is this a game of chance?\", he rejoindered, \"Not the way I play it!\" That, of course, is both the joy of computer casino games and the reason they can get boring quite fast. With no money on the line, there really is no suspense. If one wins, that's nice — if one loses, it's no big deal. Most of the games allow the gamer to customize the odds—to either match true casino action or to actually win frequently for a change. While we don't lose any cash, we don't make any either. We do pick up some sound strategies, however, that could possibly be put to use for our profit in real casino machine play. Dr. Wong's Jacks+ Video Poker is an abridged version of Villa Crespo's Stanford Wong Video Poker (reviewed in CGW #92, p. 33). While this $12.95 version does not contain the elaborate utilities and strategies its full size $49.95 version does, it nevertheless packs a generous portion of that exhaustive video poker simugamer see if it would have been any better if the deal had been played differently. Holding just the Ace, I got a Seven, a Queen, a King, and another Ace in the draw. That would have been the way to go. The interface of Dr. Wong's Jacks+ is a tad arcane, relying totally on the function keys. With limited mouse support and the intricate F-key requirements, it takes some time to get used to Dr. Wong's setup. Expert advice can be adjusted to either requested or always supplied. The graphic screens emulate actual video poker displays. Sound can mercifully be left off. When on, we are treated to the din of a casino on a Saturday night. That's not particularly pleasant in reality and much less so as generated through the tinny PC speaker. Dr. Wong's Jacks+ Video Poker cannot be played from Windows and, in fact, will crash a system completely. It is truly one of the only programs I have ever encountered that is so Windows unfriendly, but video poker fans are urged not to let this stop them from purchasing this bargain package. VOLUME Cotee Break Series a Crespo Software lation and strategy workhorse. For under $13, this is a great bargain. What makes it truly clever is its \"What if?\" scenario that lets a gamer find out just what would have happened if the hand were played differently. I drew a hand with an Ace, Two, Three, Four, and Queen. I wanted to get a Five for a straight. So I held the Ace through Four cards. In the second deal, I bought a Seven. The odds weren't in my favor. Yet, I couldn't help but wonder what would have happened if I had just kept the Ace and asked for four more cards? In the casino, one never finds out what would happen. Here, one does. A replay option let's the For Addicts Only Video poker machines are addictive. They now comprise the single most popular gambling game of not only any slot machine, but of any legalized casino game in America. While people pop coins in the video poker and blackjack one-armed bandits, hoping to win the progressive jackpots, they also play because it's just plain fun. They are the only slot machines that are truly interactive. The gamer gets to choose which cards to hold; the machine's Page 70 Computer Gaming World "


"The Best-Selling Sensation from Europe!  BEST GRAPHICS AWARD Paris Supergames Show 1992 Pilot your golden starship into amazing outer space battle simulation. Take on space-age Spanish Conquistadors with swords and phasers. Advanced video capture makes this an interactive motion picture. One of the oldest mysteries known to mankind is now the future of computer gaming. Set out on a mystic mission across space and time in this high-powered combination of complex puzzle-solving, mythical role-playing, and outer space battle simulation. You are the champion of the lost Inca empire, rocketing across galaxies, battling space age Conquistadors, and unraveling intricate and ancient mysteries. Stunning simulation technology lets you soar through winding canyons, 'hostile star systems, and lost ruins This is an epic adventure that catapults you through space and time. Inca is an interactive motion picture where cultures clash and legends live. For IBM PCs. Also available on CD-ROM, Circle Reader Service #102 Excellence in Innovative Gaming SIERRA Available at a software retailer near you, or call: 1 (800) 326-6654 "


"computer randomly deals the second round to fill in what is not held. games evaluated here is that they are boring. This lackluster set runs in five separate modules installed in Windows. Other than some simple user customizations such as card back designs, chip denominations, and maximum bets, there are no controls for playing odds. TITLE: Strategic Video Poker #PLAYERS: SYSTEM: IBM PROTECTION: None PRICE: $49.95 DESIGNER: Louis Sinoff PUBLISHER: LWS Software Broomall. PA found in Las Vegas and Atlantic City gambling rooms, Video Poker for Windows (VPW) is an intricate, even enlightening, game about how to play the odds. There are so many different ways a player can customize the program that there is little chance of it getting boring or predictable too quickly (as noted earlier, one of the liabilities of computer versions of video poker) TITLE: Vegas Games Entertainment Pack for Windows PLAYERS: SYSTEM: PROTECTION: PRICE: DESIGNER: PUBLISHER: RPSTRATEGIC VIDEO POKER     IBM w/ Windows 3.0 or higher None $29.95 Nanosolt New World Computing Woodland Hills, CA TITLE: Video Poker for Windows PLAYERS: SYSTEMS: IBM W/Windows 3.0 or higher PROTECTION: None PRICE: $54.95 DESIGNER: Lenny Frome PUBLISHER: Masque Publishing Englewood, CO GO FOR THE ROYAL FLUSH! MASQUE\" VIDEO POKER for Windows ENTERTAINMENT PACK FORINDOWS CNJIGA I SLOTS ANO KERHO LETTE DEO NIKER LWS Software's Stategic Video Poker lets players learn strategies for their real ventures into the casinos while they play on their own computer. Payouts from slot machines are based on preset mathematic odds. This package lets gamers manipulate them and select even the type of machine (i.e. Jacks or better, two pairs or better, Jokers wild, etc.) and the payoff odds. A running tally can be kept to see just how the plays went. The player's mistakes can be tallied as well by a simple click on the well-designed pull-down menus. Fortunately, the documentation is thorough and clear, since there is no on-line help facility. Like other video poker games, Strategic Video Poker offers simple, unspectacular graphics that simply and straightforwardly simulate actual slot machine displays, complete with the option to insert one to five coins. I found it best to select Maximum play to speed up each round and avoid having to click five times to pretend I was inserting five coins. That gets tiring very quickly. Vegas Games Entertainment Pack offers more than just video poker. This integrated package for Windows from New World Computing includes five popular video games: regular slot machines, keno, blackjack, roulette, and, of course, video poker. What sets them apart from the other NEW WORLO COMPUTING T Further, the preset odds are not in the player's favor. If a real casino were to carry these odds, they would have no customers. Whether it was regular slot machine play, roulette, video poker, or video poker, the computer was the winner almost every time. When the player wins, the returns aren't enough for cab fare. The package contains no documentation. Instead there is a card with the rather brusque statement: «New World Computing Customer Support will not provide instructions on how to play each game, or strategies and hints. Please press the F1 key for online help.» Well, I tried that and pressing F1 got me zilch. The player must click on the Help bar at the top of the screen. Then, the information provided is rudimentary and actually reveals how uninvolving this quintet of games are. For my money, I am going to another casino. Luckily there is a fabulous one in Masque's Video Poker for Windows, one of the best video poker games around. Learn to play Video Poker like an Expert! In addition to selecting the multitude of game strategies (Jacks or Better for Las Vegas, Jacks or Better for Atlantic City, Deuces Wild or Joker's Wild Las Vegas, and Two Pairs or Better Atlantic City), Expert Play recommendations are always available from Lenny Frome, a video poker columnist and strategy maven. Gamers can have their play evaluated statistically and errors pointed out. Expert Strategy Tables are provided in pop-up windows to reveal which current play options will most likely produce the best payoff. A hand evaluation option lets players see how a hand can be played based on the cards they select from a complete onscreen deck. There is even a tournament round and more statistical screens and reports than anyone might care to ever see. Odds on Winner With complete game strategies that match machines which could easily be Masque's VPW, like the earlier Blackjack for Windows is one of the best reasons to install Windows on a computer. Now, if my computer would only spit out some quarters, I'd never have to travel to Nevada or Atlantic City. At least now I'm ready for those trips when it's time. CGW Page 72 Computer Gaming World "


"History records the evolution of man's journey to the skies... ...Now you can relive it. A19 A C1:S THE PACIFIC Reo Blast your way through dangerous, low-level attacks. (RBMB) Sink enemy ships with torpedoes and dive bombs if you can. (Aces of the Pacific) Baron . AST SIM MiSSION  SPA-C-ES. 2  COMPUTE SIKILIW CHOICE AIVARAS DYORIOS Hang on as enemy fire rips through your cockpit. (WWII: 1946) Take on the great Axis and Allied aces in one-on-one duels. (Red Baron) The Great War Planes Series Excellence in Flight Simulation One From the mud-filled trenches of WWI to the smoking ruin of Pearl Harbor, the evolution of flight is celebrated in Damon Slyes epic Great War PlanesTM series of historical flight simulations. Beginning with the award-winning Red Baron?, the series: continues with WWII Pacific Thenter combat in Aces of the Pacific and moves into modern-day action over the Persian Gulf with A-10 Tank Killer 1.500. Now the excitement continues with all new expansion disks for Red Baron and Aces of the Pacific. The Red Baron Mission Builder updates the classic WWI simulation with new planes, new aces and a powerful mission builder that allows you to create your own historic missions. For Aces of the Pacific comes WWII 1946'm an expansion disk that explores the new planes and missions of an alternate future where the atomic bomb was never dropped and WWII continued past the boundaries of history Dynamix PART OF THE SIERRA FAMILY 1* To get your copy now, call: 1 (800) 326-6654 Circle Reader Service #103 "


"Over There . IN S tates A CGW's British Ageat Reports on European Military (Game) Build-uje by Robin Matthews by Robin Matthews ME THE ASSASSINS THE MINE RESCUE Startberiut To departure this month from the usual light and frothy' news and gossip, for a more in depth look at some of the best recent releases from Europe. The Over There column will occasionally provide such an approach, especially when some products are worth a more detailed look. Recently the column has had a very French flavor, but this month, British products come under the spotlight. Breach Too The first title is the excellent Laser Squad from Krisalis Software of Rotherham. This is a squad-level tactical sci-fi wargame in which you control individual troopers. It can be played as a one or two player game. Each unit has its own name, characteristics and abilities — each is equipped from a choice of weapons and armor, the cost of these being deducted from a general pool. This allows you to design your own squad, having to weigh up the pros and cons of rocket launchers, sniper rifles, grenades, etc. Laser Squad consists of five missions which get progressively longer and more difficult. Mission One, sub-titled The Assassins, is an attempted hit against the arch baddie Sterner Regnix; Mission Two is Moonbase Assault; Mission Three is Rescue from the Mines, etc. Each scenario requires its own techniques and tactics, but in the end the objective is always the destruction of the computer opponent (rather sive and of good variety — the rocket than the accomplishment of a special launchers being particularly devastatobjective). Where Laser Squad really ing. Armor is also included, but the comes into its own, however, is in the product does not become bogged down two player option. This gives almost with hundreds of items, most of which unlimited variety, and provides the best This one is particularly good fun with lots to commend it. On the technical side, it's not bad either. It is currently available on IBM compatibles with MOONAASCASSAULT VGA only, 520K free memory (+128K EMS for SoundBlaster), will only run on hard disk, and needs more than 9 MB of space. The London Blitz Virgin is busy at the moment, at work on a new historical flight simulator set in World War II. Its release title Laser Squad is Reach for the Sky (title is borrowed from a well known game of its type available on IBM combook by Paul Brickhill, based patibles. on the life of the famous British fighter ace Douglas Bader—the fellow with no The graphics are of good quality, legs). Reach for the Sky, the software, sound board support is high, and the is set around the time of the Battle of interface takes a little getting used to, Britain in the 1940's, and allows the but is then very smooth. All is icon player to take on the role of either the driven with smooth scrolling screens. RAF or the Luftwaffe. Some missions are better achieved by splitting your party, and the system easIn the RAF you can pilot Spitfires or ily allows you to flick from one unit to Hurricanes, in the Luftwaffe you are another, even if they are on the other able to pilot the Ju87 Stuka, side of the map. Messerschmitt 109's and 110's, or as a gunner in a Junkers 88, Heinkel He 111 Laser Squad also features line-of or Dornier Do 17 (this is a first for any sight and infra-red viewers in combat, flight sim putting you inside these methe targeting being particularly effec dium German bombers including the tive. The weaponry is suitably impres famous 'Flying Pencil'). The individFall TAP PUKY HADAP BBDDK GITY Page 74 Computer Gaming World "


"Magic Candle II Overcast T3X15 19 19:024 A Gate OR 2000 Lukas B  Karko 43 19 ore Lukas Cont 'Firatou SE return the roat Scarter to Urkabet. clear HP 1992-2001 97064 + TY:04 Herrington Lukas 31 #5 OK Use 19 Talk Notes Camp Formatnl Whisper Sheathe Sep 3920 L Overcast 19:341012 Library LUKA 51 40 OK Sark. E1 42 OR The librarian says: Ahat is your subject ( he ancient Solian lands have new arrivals: weapons and magic-and, most of all, their wits-to Monsters of the Blight! survive and defeat the Blight! The Blight is consuming the ancestral homes of Delightful 256-color graphics, glorious music and the elves and humans, halflings, goblins and orcs. digitized sound effects, and a compelling story with It's up to you and your chosen heroes to slay the fascinating characters make The Magic Candle III Blight's monsters and solve its mysteries! your key to many hours of enjoyment. With The Magic Candle III, Mindcraft continues its tradition of excellence in fantasy role-playing. MINDCRAFT Your party will have characters handcrafted by you, marching side by side with the friends old and 2291 205th Street, Suite 201, Torrance, CA 90501 new your hero meets along the way. They will need (Actual screens may vary.) Circle Reader Service #83 "


"zore on corresponde the RAF/Luftwaffes tactics on a daily basis and then fly missions. The RAF Controller will be concerned with moving planes from factory to airfield, airfield to airfield, and also decide which squadrons to commit to the fray, and which to defend the airfields, cities, and factories and then pilot the missions before it all goes around again ... UND Laser Squad ual flight models are not bad, but occasionally you need to take an external view just to remind you which plane you're in. Play is possible at \"practice,\" \"pilot\" and \"controller\" level, the first giving a welcome learning curve, the latter a full-blown campaign game. Select which air force you wish to enlist in, then the phase of the battle (it covers the actual stages of the real Battle of Britain from July to September of 1940 and stretches from the attack on convoys, through raids on the radar stations, then direct assault on the RAF airfields, to the Blitz on London). The phase selected will govern the aircraft and missions available, and also the general tactical considerations. The controller mode takes this to another dimension as you initially plan TIROB Reach For The Sky The Luftwaffe Controller will decide what to attack, with which squadrons, how many, at what time, and, like his counterpart, pilot the aircraft. Note that if you can reverse the course of history and guide the Luftwaffe to victory, you will be rewarded with a graphic of British Prime Minister Churchill boarding a plane to leave for Canada. Never in the field of human conflict ... The graphics are probably better than Reach For The Sky SWOTL standard, but not quite up to those in Aces of the Pacific. The flight controls are very responsive and, although it has all been done before, (most noticeably by LucasArts in their three superb products: Battlehawks 1942, Their Finest Hour and SWOTL), Reach for the Sky has its own charm and its own appeal. One nice touch involves radio messages broadcast via the sound card, such as \"Spitfeurs on your tail!!!\" and the \"all clear\" klaxon sounded at the end of a dogfight. The IBM graphics are in both 16 color EGA and 256 color VGA and the game features full sound board support, including a Roland/SoundBlaster combination. Reach for the Sky is initially planned for IBM clones, but it is anticipated on both the Amiga and Atari ST (1 MB only) in the near future. CGW QUEST OF THE GREAT JEWELS In Quest of the Great Jewels, choose to be one of four races: The Azoni, builders of great citadels; the Quntag, rulers of vast empires; the Riris, hoarders of great wealth, or the Slenth, destroyers and ravagers of the land. Begin as the ruler of a single province and send your armies out to fulfill your race's destiny. Quest is a fantasy wargame combining elements of strategy and tactics with a healthy dose of magic. Over 90 magical talismans abound in the game, each granting its owner the ability to bend the rules in some way. THE ULTIMATE ROLE-PLAYING AID Introducing The Ultimate Character Editor. This exciting new product features full mouse and keyboard support, online context sensitive help and a complete windowing system (does not require MS Windows to run). This editor allows you to edit most of the games listed below (including all of the Might and Magics, all of the Ultimas, all of the SSI games, all of the Bard's Tales, and more). The price for this editor is $59.95. So, for the price of 3 editors, you will be getting approximately 30 editors. Upgrades will be available to handle new games as they are released for only $9.95. CHARACTER EDITORS $19.95 each Might and Magic (1, 2, 3 or 4), Drakkhen, Pool of Radiance, Hard Nova, Bard's Tale (1, 2 or 3). Wasteland, Dragon Wars. Space Rogue, Wizardry (Edits 1-3). Wizardry 4, Wizardry 5, Bane of Cosmic Forge, Crusaders of the Dark Savant. Treasurers of the Savage Frontier, Sentinel Worlds I, Knights of Legend. Secret of the Silver Blades, Curse of the Azure Bonds, Champions of Krynn, Space 1889, Keys to Maramon, Mega Traveller (1 or 2), Keef the Thief, Darklands, Escape from Hell, Ultima (3, 4, 5, 6 or 7), Dark Heart of Uukrul. Savage Empire. Tunnels and Trolls, Lord of the Rings (1 or 2). Countdown to Doomsday, Martian Dreams, Eye of the Beholder (1 or 2). Death Knights of Krynn, Fountain of Dreams, Magic Candle (1 or 2), Pools of Darkness, Ultima Underworld, Twilight 2000, Planet's Edge, Dark Queen of Krynn, and Prophecy of the Shadow. 1 ** WINNER --BEST FANTASY PLAY-BY-MAIL GAME ORIGINS 1985 & 1986 * * Flying Dutchman Send $15 for the rules, setup information, and the first three turns, or $5.00 for the rules alone. HINT BOOKS $9.95 each Might and Magic 1. Knights of Legend, Curse of the Azure Bonds, Champions of Krynn, Legacy of Ancients, Dark Heart of Uukrul. Wizardry (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, Bane or Crusaders). Eye of the Beholder 2. Might and Magic 3 (12.95). Flying Dutchman Games Dept. C P.O. Box 957434 Hoffman Estates, IL 60195 IBM listed. Apple, C64 and Amiga versions also available. Please add $4.00 for shipping and handling. Open from 9AM 9PM every day for your convenience. GMÉS VISA GOSSELIN COMPUTER CONSULTANTS P.O. Box 1083  Brighton, MI 48116. (313) 229-2453 MasterCard Circle Reader Service # 62 Circle Reader Service # 65 Page 76 Computer Gaming World "


" Fly In The Face Of Reality. AXX VIRTUAL PILOT i Whether you're diving blind through fog to find a runway or loop-de-looping to save your tail, get your VIATUAL PILOT hands on VIRTUAL PILOT, the flight yoke that looks and feels exactly real... because it is. Designed by an airplane builder, VIRTUAL PILOT flies any simulation or game that supports a joystick. Works with all IBM and compatibles. And you won't have to fly halfway around the world to buy it. Just buzz your local store. VIRTUAL PILOT PRODUCTS Circle Reader Service #49 970 Park Center Drive Vista, CA 92083. Phone: 619-598-2518  FAX: 619-698-2524 "


"ime uimte Scorpion's Mail Monkey Island II Ultima Underworld Spellcasting 301 Legend of Kyrandia Darkseed Ultima VII Clouds of Xeen The Summoning I Tere we are in the depths of winter, and the depths of the mail room, too. You may notice the place seems a little larger. Fred and I decided it was easier to make the room bigger than to haul out all those mail sacks (and laziness had absolutely nothing to do with it! Honest!). So settle in and we'll peruse some of the correspondence. However, before we get to the letters, there are a couple of things to be gone over. First, Origin has related to me that, because of a misunderstanding in my Ultima VII article a few months back, people have been sending in disks to be \"fixed\" when it wasn't necessary. So I'm going to clear that up right now. The problem shows up in the final dungeon on Avatar Isle. Beyond the throne room, in the tunnels by the jail cells, are two doors. The first is retracted into the ground, the second one isn't. As you approach the second door, it should slide down while the first one slides up (effectively \"trapping\" the party). This is the trouble spot, as the doors work properly only if you went into the Codex shrine and read the scroll there before entering the dungeon. So don't send your disks to Origin for \"fixing\" unless you are stuck at these sliding doors by the cells. The doors in the throne room are not a problem, as there is a switch hidden behind a secret wall that opens them. Another correction needs to be made to something I said about Clouds of Xeen (Might & Magic IV). The game is not (ahem) quite as bug-free as I mentioned. It turns out there is a problem with the \"Save As\" feature not properly recording your progress in the game. So you could, for instance, complete a quest, only to find on a later restore that the program has forgotten all about it and thereby forcing you to do it over). This didn't happen to me because the memory patch New World sent me also included a fix for the \"Save As\" problem, which I didn't know at the time my article went to press. It was only later that I found out about this particular bug. Sigh. So if you've been having trouble with \"Save As\" not saving your position correctly, you can obtain the patch from most on-line networks or local bulletin boards, or you can call NWC's tech line to ask about obtaining one direct from them. Okay, on to the good stuff! Monkey Island II: This one has proved popular, and folks are still having a little trouble with that drinking contest. Ya can't win if ya play (drink?) honestly. Now, a little near-grog, that would help. Of course, Kate isn't going to cooperate, so you have to be sneaky here. Ever looked closely at those flyers she hands out? Such a nice picture of her on them. Far too nice to keep hidden away; you ought to show it to the world. Legend of Kyrandia: Some people are having a hard time getting through the dark caves. Alas, there is no quick and easy way to do it. First, map as you go, or you'll have an even harder time of it. Then proceed along as far as possible with the fireberries, save the game, and guess which way is safe to go next (ie, leads to another bush). Expect to restore a lot during this part of the game, but with careful mapping, you should be able to make it through. Ultima Underworld: A few complaints have shown up from folks who have been unable to make the big leap across the chasm on level 7 (the one where magic doesn't work). This one is a puzzler, and I don't have a solution, sorry to say. It is a difficult jump, but by far the majority of players (myself included) have been able to get across, sometimes after many tries, but we certainly made it over. My own technique was to use the \"running broad jump\" method, and leap at the very last possible moment (with the ring of jumping equipped, of course). Eventually, this succeeded and I was past the chasm. If no manner of jumping will get you across, the only thing I can suggest is a call to Origin; they may be able to provide some tips, or possibly an alternate means of getting over. Darkseed: Some adventurous souls have found themselves stymied by the monster dog guarding the bridge on the dark side. There isn't much you can do about it until you've had your little get-together with the lawyer. After that, you just might be able to stick it to that annoying mutt. Ultima VII: Several Avatars are having a hard time getting through their own dungeon, hehe. In particular, the throne room (no relation to the first one at the beginning of the dungeon) has them stumped. They sit in the throne and nothing seems to happen. Seems is the key word here. So don't just sit there, go out and explore. Look around. Things may not be the way they appear. Spellcasting 301: Flopping at the Belly Flop contest? Maybe what you need is a little roc and roll (or was that roc and blow?). Whatever you call it, just make sure that you do, hehe. Clouds of Xeen: There is a cure for those who become old before their time. It's just not easy to obtain. Investigate the outdoors and turn the seasons. That will fix up anyone who is suffering from early gray. The Summoning: On End Level 5, there are a number of magic mouths that ask for items. It is not necessary to \"feed\" all of them. Only a couple are really important, and the items they request can be found as you make your way through the fortress in the center of the level. The rest of the mouths are optional, and you don't have to give them items if you don't want to. And that's about it for this look into the mailbag. Remember if you need help with an adventure game, you can reach me in the following ways: On Delphi: Stop by the GameSIG (under the Groups and Clubs menu). On GEnie: Visit the Games Round Table (type: Scorpia to reach the Games RT). By US Mail (enclose a self-addressed, stamped envelope if you live in the United States): Scorpia, PO Box 338, Gracie Station, New York NY 10028. Until next time, happy adventuring! CGW Page 78 Computer Gaming World "


"CACHE ROM C&T 286 IPX DRIVERS UMB 386MAX OUALITAS BLUEMAX 486SX BUFFERS MODEMS EGA BIOS FAX BOARD It's one thing to be shot down in the middle of a game, but without adequate memory you'll never get off the ground. 29 PREPARE TO ABANDON SHEP C&T 286 DOS 5.0 HMA WINDOWS VGA MOUSE DPMI BIOS HIGH DOS TSRS NETWORKS XMS INITIALIZERAM MEMORY TSRS MOUSE XMS HIGH DOSEGA INITIALIZE HMA WINDOWS 640K NETWORKS 386SX PAGEFRAME CACHE LIM EMS DPMI CD ROMS UMB 386MAX RAM Insufficient Memory WARNING 000007 BLUEMAX 386 486SX EGA DRIVERS 486 o get today's hottest computer games up and running, your computer needs increasingly vast amounts of conventional memorythe first 640K of memory found on nearly every PC compatible system. The same memory your mouse, CD-ROM and other peripherals compete for, as well. Adding memory chips won't help. And running DOS 5 usually isn't enough. What you need is 386MAX. It's the highly advanced memory management software that recovers wasted memory on your system, so it can make more memory available to games and other programs that need it. Best of all, it does it more easily and reliably than any other way. Just type \"maximize\" and 386MAX does the rest, automatically analyzing your system and configuring it for maximum memory and optimum performance. Which is why we call it The Intelligent Memory Manager. And why BYTE Magazine said \"it's so easy to use and offers such significant benefits that it should be part of every system.\" So, if you want to play today's most challenging games, but you don't want to run out of memory, run out and get 386MAX. Or call 1-800-676-0386 to order. At just $99.95, it's by far the best flight insurance money can buy. The Intelligent Memory Manager\" RAM PAGEFRAME BIOS MEMORY VGA MOUSE TSRS HIGH DOS EGA INITIALIZE DPMI MODEMS 640K FAX BOARD 386SX BYTE BYTE 9 1999 Qualitas. Qualitas, 7101 Wisconsin Avenue, Suite 1386, Bethesda, MD 20814. All company and product names are trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective owners. System Requirements: Any 386, 3868X, 186 or 486SX PC or PS/2, min. 256K of extended memory, DOS 3.0 or higher, and hard disk drive. (386MAX also supports 286 machines with Shadow RAM, or any PC with EMS 4.0 hardware with 256K memory. Feature availability and memory recovery may vary on these systems.) ore Pesta Circle Reader Service #97 "


"CHAUVINIST PIGS Rex Nebular and the Cosmic Gender Bender from MicroProse by Jeff James Title: System: Price: Protection: Designer: Publisher: PEXEBULAR Rex Nebular and the Cosmic Gender Bender IBM $59.95 Documentation look-up MPS Labs graphic adventure group MicroProse Hunt Valley, MD And The Cosmic Gender Bendert The year 1992 will be remembered by some computer gamers as the year that MicroProse ventured forth from its staple product line — military simulations into new gaming territory. With the introduction of Darklands, MicroProse sought to shed some new light on the often hackneyed CRPG world of dragons and hobgoblins, dropping the mythical pseudo-medieval setting found in most CRPGs and opting instead for an exhaustively researched background of medieval Germany. Now, MicroProse continues this offensive into new markets with the introduction of Rex Nebular and the Cosmic Gender Benders (Rex), an adventure game which takes aim squarely at the market dominance of its competitors, Sierra On-Line and LucasArts. The plot in Rex is nothing new; indeed, the setting is roughly similar to Free Spirit Software's Brad Stallion adventures, wherein a promiscuous space-hopping hero journeys across the universe, surmounting obstacles presented both by hostile xenoforms and beautiful spacevixens. Rex also shares some similarities with Sierra's Space Quest series, with Rex Nebular behaving much like a bumbling, over-sexed Roger Wilco. To get things started, a lengthy animated introduction provides the background information to help players understand Rex's plight. The story begins with Rex piloting his redoubtable star-faring vessel, the Slippery Pig, to an enigmatic planet known as Terra Androgena in search of a ICROPROSE priceless vase. Upon assuming orbit around the planet, a vessel crewed by wrathful Amazon women slips out of hiding and nearly blasts the intrepid Rex into space dust, forcing him to make a crash landing on the surface of Terra Androgena. Now, the player enters the scene, guiding Rex about the Slippery Pig in search of equipment to help him escape his damaged vessel, explore the planet and find the vase. Outer Space Interface Central to this endeavor is MicroProse's new adventure game interface, generated with the help of the MicroProse Adventure Development System (MADS). A no-typing interface along the lines of those used by Sierra and LucasArts, this interface supplies a small list of actions which the player can utilize to give Rex commands. A unique feature of Rex is that every object placed in inventory has it's own special list of custom verbs. For example, a tape player found in the game may have the custom actions \"eject tape,\" \"play tape,» and \"disassemble\" associated with it. This specific treatment of special objects makes manipulating puzzles much easier to deal with Indeed, much of the game is easier to deal with than most other adventures. The player can set the difficulty level of the game (novice, advanced or expert), but even the expert level isn't that challenging. Another feature which makes Rex less arduous to play is the \"auto-resurrection\" that occurs every time Rex meets an untimely end. Instead of having to restore a saved game or restart, the game will simply place Rex in the position immediately preceding his death. This makes attempting risky actions less of a hassle than the \"experiment, die, restore» formula that some adventure games fall victim to. All in all, Rex should be well received by novice and intermediate adventurers. Part of Rex's biggest appeal is the impressive treatment of sound and graphics. The imDisassemble pressive introductory animation (nearly ten minutes in length) is loaded with digitLool Talk to Take Give Push Pull Open Close Phi Thun Log Timer module Binoculars Shield modulator | Page 80 Computer Gaming World "


"reportedly consulted with a professional comic writer for the dialogue, and for the most part, it shows. At times, however, it feels as if the game is trying too hard to get a laugh. MicroProse should look to the acerbic wit and dead-on comedic timing I FENER ized speech, and doesn't take up 10 MBS of hard drive space to do so. The bulk of game is filled with nicely done sound effects and music, with lavish VGA graphics providing the \"Leisure Suit Larry: Lost in Space\" feel that MicroProse was seeking. Indeed, the treatment of graphics and animation in Rex is where MicroProse is thumbing its nose at its competitors, with a robust use of 3-D objects and rotoscoped animation. This translates into an inventory control screen with spinning, 3-D objects and smoothly walking, life-like characters. Even the text window at the bottom of the screen is filled with animation; depending upon where Rex is in the game, animation will be there as well. An animation of birds flying through trees will appear when Rex is in the jungle; fish will be seen swimming en masse when he is underwater, et cetera, all in the background of the text window. thoughtfully added two levels of gameplay: Naughty and Nice. Naughty is roughly comparable to a modern R-rated movie, while Nice falls somewhere in the PG-13 camp. There is even an option to install the game in \"Locked Nice» mode for nervous parents. From sex to violence, everything in Rex is treated with a tongue firmly planted in cheek; only very sensitive gamers should be offended by the adult content of Rex. XY, Because We Like You Infrequent appearances of bland dialogue aside, Rex is a solid move into the adventure gaming genre by MicroProse. Rex displays the same attention to detail that has won MicroProse raves in other products, with an emphasis on impressive graphics and sound. MicroProse is far from being an old hand at adventure games; Rex doesn't quite attain the state of the adventuring game art as evinced in LucasArt's Monkey Island II or Virgin's Legend of Kyrandia, but it's close. If MicroProse can follow up Rex with another MADS-created product that features more challenging puzzles and another solid plot, Sierra and LucasArts may find themselves looking over their shoulders more often than they would like, cow Disassemble Take Talk to o L091 Giue Timer module Pull Binoculars Push Funny You Should Program It The game abounds with inside jokes and jabs at Sierra and their adventuring products. In the abandoned city, the player can guide Rex to \"Macho-prose\" software, where a slow-selling brand of entertainment software called \"Sahara Off-Line\" is priced to sell at 90% off retail. MicroProse displayed in LucasArts Monkey Island series for a guide on how to make computer dialogue a little more humorous. While it's not the funniest adventure game yet, Rex isn't bad. The combination of self-deprecating humor and genderbending double entendre serves the game well, making it good for a few chuckles here and there. Parents should be warned, however, that Rex does feature a considerable amount of sexual innuendo and gruesome violence. MicroProse has 18.95 16.95 18.95 \"The Informative PBM Magazine\" Do your know what PBM (Play-By-Mail) gaming is? If you don't, we can help you explore the world of PBM gaming. Paper Mayhem has been leading the way for over 9 years by informing people about PBM gaming. Articles, reviews, biographies and more fill each issue. Not to mention the ratings of PBM games and companies that our readers participate in. Paper Mayhem has been improving with the ever expanding hobby of PBM gaming since 1983. Each bimonthly issue brings you the latest on PBM news. So why delay and miss out on all the fun? Read Paper Mayhem and take advantage of PBM gaming. Send subscriptions to: PAPER MAYHEM Dept CG 1518 Adams Street Ottawa, IL 61350-4770 US Subscriptions: Single issue $5.00 1 year $24.00 2 year $42.00 SIDELINE SOFTWARE orders 1-800-888-9273 only Your European PC Connection DISCOUNT TITLES NEW TITLES TYPE $ 4D Sports Boxing 18.95 4 Sports Driving Advanced Destroyer Sim Robocop 3 Arcade Adventure 38 Arkanoid 2 16.95 Alone in the Dark Arcade Adventure Armor Alley 16.95 Austerlilz 16.95 Curse of the Enchantress RPG Bard's Tale 3 WWF, T2, The Simpsons: all Arcade Strategy BAT Baltlechess Pushover Arcade Strategy Balletech 2 Cool World Arcade Adventure Bloodwych Battletoads Arcade Adventure Centurion 18.95 Colorado 14.95 Ishar: Legend of the Fortress RPG Conan the Cimrmaron First Samurai Arcade Strategy Conflict: Europe Die Hud 2 16.95 Moonstone Arcade Strategy Drakihan 18,95 Ween the Prophecy RPG 16 Falcon 19.95 A 320 Airbus Flight Sim Flight of the Intruder fools Etrand Daemonsgate RPG Greg Norman Golf Indiana 4 the Arcade Game Arcade Strategy Heart of China Hoverforce Laser Squad War Strategy Imperium Wizkid Arcade Strategy Jack Nicholas Greatest 18 World Wrestle Federation 2 Simulation Killing Cloud King of Chicago Mig 29 Fulcrum Monty Python euromancer   Boxing Paperboy 2 Get the latest news on the best PC titles from Europe! Pit Fighter 18.95 These high gloss, full color magazines also feature a ABI Baseball 2 14.95 demo-packed playable cover disk with each issue! Sherman M 4 1495 14.95 Shufflepuck Cate PC Format or PC Review. $10 each. Sleeping Gods Lie Spot SHIPPING (UPS Ground) For up to 3 pieces, by payment Star Saga One 14.95 Stunt Car Racer 16.95 Mastercard & Visa $5.00  CO.D. (Cash Only) $10.00 Super Off Road 16.95 Next day & second day air available! Call for prices on special Three Stooges 16.95 Shipping Shipping times not guaranteed T.V, Sports Basketball 14.95 Price & Availabilily subject lo change! TV Sports Football 14.95 Vollied 16.95 No refunds or exchanges. Defective products exchanged with Wing Commander 19.95 same item Products warrantied through Sideline Wolfpack 18.95 Super Space Invaders 18.95 FAX ORDERS CALL (305) 491-6134 Shadowlands 18.95 Sands of Fire Need Info? Call (305) 491-9519 Deluxe Strip Poket 16.95 Fireteam 16.95 840 N.W. 57th Court, Ft. Lauderdale, FL 33309 Genghis Khan 18.95 8B8%99% EUROMAGS 16.95 1000 16.95 FOREIGN SUBSCRIPTIONS: 1 year Canada $31.00; 1 year to Europe $51.00: 1 year to Australia $57.00. All Subscriptions to PAPER MAYHEM are to be paid in US funds and drawn from US banks. Foreign subscriptions are asked to use International Money Order in US funds. 12.95 Circle Reader Service #91 Circle Reader Service #119 February 1993 Page 81 "


"CGW STCCI WATCH A monthly look at the Computer Entertainment Stock Market 8 Broderbund 8 NASDAQ symbol BROD Weekly bars starting 11/29/91 8 Lit $ Per Share 8 LHARES TALENTA 8 *C4/po /91/hr/ 0 6 0 o 0 7 Dec 1992  Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov The Print Shop Still Prints Money At Broderbund Software Like many NASDAQ stocks, Broderbund continues to do well. Although Broderbund (NASDAQ: BROD) continues to publish very few pure entertainment software products, its strong edutainment base and distribution of entertainment titles continues to impact the computer gaming hobby. Though the company and its primary affiliated label, Maxis, mutually agreed to end their long-term distribution agreement (much like the amicable parting of Origin and Broderbund a few years before), the distribution arm recruited New World Software as their new flagship affiliate. Broderbund's core business, however, continues to depend upon nonentertainment titles. The Print Shop series continued to contribute 29% of net corporate revenues (compared with 33% at the time of the Initial Public Offering) and the popular Where [IS] Carmen Sandiego? series provides 25% of the corporate income (down 1% since the company went public). To Revenue no one's surprise, the comOther pany's early learning prod13% ucts (Kid Pix, Early Learning The Playhouse and The Treehouse, Affiliated Labels among others) has contributed 14% to net income and should increase in the coming year. Investors seemed to be happy with Broderbund's fiscal year results. Net income per share increased from $.75 at the end of August, 1991 to $.99 at the end of August, 1992. For comparison purposes, we offer the yearend results of the previous three years (all at the end of August): 1990 ($.34), 1989 ($.36) and 1988 ( $ : 62). Obviously, a quick glance at 29% Print Shop the stock perfor mance chart indicates that Carmen Sandiego Broderbund is selling (at press Fiscal 1992 time) at almost three times the per share value of the Initial Public Offering (which hit the market at the high end of the projecte d range ca. $11.00). 19% 20% Page 82 Computer Gaming World "


"ZERO'S & ONE'S PC WAREHOUSE 3 6472-B Windy Road, Las Vegas, NV 89118 (800)788-2193 (orders) 8-6 M-F, 9-4 Sa (702)897-1571 FAX *** (702)897-2797 Tech Support ALL IBM COMPATIBLE BEAT THE WINTER DOLDRUMS AND E-X-P-A-N-D YOUR WORLD! Ask About Our COMPUTER STARTER KITS BOARD CASINO HOME, MUSIC, OFFICE, PAINT AND PRINT SOFTWARE MM HARDWARE ENTERTAINMENT SOUND BOARDS SOFTWARE FLIGHT STICKS RUDDER PEDALS MODEMS Save the Prince VIDEO CAPTURE or Princess with our BOARDS state of the art adventure games. SHOW GAMES SOFT\" ******* * * * WINDOWS PROGRAMS ...n..d.. UTILITIES SPORTS Baseball Basketball Football Golf Soccer Summer games Winter games ....n..d.. GAMES Flight Sim & War GAMES * * * **** **** EDUCATIONAL SOFTWARE ----Come FLY with our large selection of FLIGHT SIMS ! Adventure And FUN CD ROM Drives & & Software: Art Files & Programs Education Call or Write for full Price List. Wide range of MM and Entertainment Hardware, CD ROMS, and Software. While Learning ! ° Games Research Shareware CALL For Pricing & Availability.  Utilities VISA Prices and availability subject to change. All sales final. We do not guarantee compatability. All software is factory fresh and unopened. We are not responsible for manufacturer's defects. Contact publisher regarding defects, Shipping: 1st game $5; add'l games add $1 each in Cont US. 2nd Day Air $6 1st game, add'l games add $1 each in Cont.US. COD add $4, All prices are US S. MasterCard Circle Reader Service #122 "


"or Do Android Gladiators Sweat Electric Bullets? A replay of Maxis' RoboSport by Martin E. Cirulis cover. Six 'bots and a five minute time limit per turn should keep us sharp but not make any of the less experienced players too tense. The game will run eight turns, two game minutes at fifteen seconds per turn. And so, after each player programs their clever opening plays, there is the ominous hum of the transporters and... to maximize speed and player privacy. It ran with nary a hiccup. Enough of this technical jargon, though, there is a grudge match to analyze and robot parts to sweep up. Let us meet our four antagonists and examine the playing field. The Players Marshalling the Red team and starting in the upper right corner is Immanuel Gambiel, fondly known as Izzy. He is renowned as the child of the Blitzkrieg. Stephen Graham, plays the Greens in the bottom right. He is an experienced RS player and the man kind enough to let us use his Quadra for the brains of our network. Mike Firman commands the Purple team in the bottom left corner. He is a dyed-inthe-wool wargamer but an RS novice. A E SI -----------------I---IRES Cadeau pe 120 \"Rifle One slowly advanced in a half crouch, barely a 'bong' coming from his bouncing legs as he crossed the debris strewn remains of the lawn. His receptors itched; at any moment the scream of an incoming missile could come or a piercing burp of auto fire. But he was a soldier and he had his orders....\" ecently, the Metro Seattle Gamers (MSG) held a computer gaming day; I decided to check in and see how Maxis' RoboSport held up under the intense scrutiny and play of a roomful of shouting wargamers-a notoriously critical crowd. Since RoboSport(RS) has an intentionally \"light\" feel to it, I was concerned that I might have trouble finding three willing opponents among these hardnosed wargamers. I need not have worried. As it turned out, I had about as much problem finding players as I would finding unemployed Republicans. A couple of Mac owners had already set up their machines back-toback, so we decided this would become the blood(oil?)-pit. With the connection of a few cables and the rise of AppleTalk, the network was established and, with the odd file-sharing command to set the stage, RoboSport's elegant communication routines had us up and running in moments. The ease of this set-up impressed most of us who are acquainted with the slightly more arcane multi-computer games we've tried to set up before, with varying degrees of success. Maxis has made it as simple as possible to play this game in a multi-user environment; it seems to handle different machine speeds without a hitch. We used a Quadra 700 as the master unit with a standard Mac+ as the other terminal and, later, we added an SEII and a PowerBook Seid ut paulis ta se can chection Dus in Rome Two LET THE GAME BEGIN!!!! Turn 1 begins, as most games of RS seem to do, with the almost constant roar of gunfire and explosions. The Blue team launches a furious storm of grenades at every opening in the rubble of the Red home area; unfortunately, not a single red robot shows an antenna to the east. Meanwhile, it seems that both the Green and Purple teams have decided to rush the center and try to gain control of the board. Unfortunately they slam into each other in the clearing below the central building and the massive firefight blows Purple Autol and the Green Missleman to 'bot heaven. Tough break for Green. Purple guards his right flank with a lone Missleman and succeeds in blasting Blue Auto2 out of his own guard position. Range and accuracy make all the difference here. Green loses his Autol to Red in a similar manner. At the end of the fifteen seconds both Blue And Purple are down a 'bot, while Green has lost his best two weapons in his gambit for the center. Red has come through with only a few minor dents. Izzy has surprised us all by playing defensively and coming out the big winner for the turn. Green has solid control of the center building shell but it has cost him, after the first turn, the health of his team totals only 391. Purple's not much better. I'm not thrilled with Blue team's performance, but neither am I heartbroken. We are in a solid number two position. Turn 2 is one of defense and debacle. Finally, hunched up in the top left corner and admiring his shiny Blue troops is yours truly. I've never faced three human opponents in RS and but I'm looking forward to it. The Pit The name of the game is Survival and the level is Standard Battle. The field will be Rubble3, a bombed out ruin of a suburb with the blasted shells of buildings as our Page 84 Computer Gaming World "


"Red, sensing a combined attack Izzy in Rubble Three from both the Green and Blue Eile Movie Bobots Arena teams pulls back into even KIDD112 Frames/Sec tighter defensive positions within the building in his home zone, minimizing possible grenade and missile attack while maximizing his own effectiveness. It works well. Green, deciding he has taken too much collateral damage to survive a prolonged firefight, rushes the Red home zone and is annihilated in a storm of burst and auto fire before the robots can cross the open ground; Izzy the Red has successfully guessed which side the main rush would come 2014 from. The Blue feint succeeds in slipping a lone rifleman into Red's defenses but, out of grenades, his rifle is too weak to be more than an inconvenience. team is reduced to one cowering rifleman with a health of eighteen. In the now far less crowded center, Blue Witnessing the virtual destruction of the and Purple scouts encounter each other Green team, I realize that I am far too from opposite sides of a room and annihispread out over my corner to resist the late each other. Another purple scout try attack from the left that is sure to come. ing to slide up the right side of the arena is For the next turn I will attempt a desperate picked off by the Blue Missleman. The consolidation while maintaining some sort remaining Purple robots consolidate their of guerrilla offense against Red. position in the center building. Red is a Turn 3 is the first turn of relatively little more chewed up but still holding a subtle tactics. The only excitement is full compliment of 'bots, while the Green when Red cautiously blasts the intruding ve Blue rifleman into atoms with a massed grenade attack. A Blue burster takes advantage and slips behind Red lines but his final position only allows him to slag Red Autol, the first Red loss of the game. Meanwhile Green retreats its lone 'bot quickly back to its own home zone and holes up in the best corner to be found. Purple moves up screen very cautiously and in force. Red must come to me now and I hope to move up my Missleman to take advantage of the confusion my infiltration is causing amongst his ranks. And yet, I cringe trying to figure out when Purple will arrive. Turn 4 is a study in frustration. The Blue Missleman does catch the Red team in the open but its missiles veer wide and do little damage. The Red return fire does not suffer from this little curse of bad luck and the Blue 'bot goes up in flames. The rest of the Red team continues to play hide and seek with the Blue infiltrator behind his lines. Green still hides and will do so for the rest of the game. Purple, expecting some The ULTIMATE Play-By-Mail Offer FLAGSHIP magazine, with Ark Royal Games, C2 Simulations, Capitol Consulting, Deltax Gaming, Flying Buffalo Inc, Flying Dutchman Games, Graaf Simulations, Inner Dimensions, Rolling Thunder Games Inc and Twin Engine Gaming, is proud to make what may be the most exciting offer in PBM history. For $19.99. we'll give you: (a) A 4-issue trial subscription to FLAGSHIP, PBM's leading international magazine, with 56 pages ked with news, reviews, and uncensored player comments. Every issue includes a sheet of discount coupons worth many times the cost of the magazine. (b) A coupon entitling you to $20 value of rules and/or turns in any of these games: Against All Odds, Adventurer Kings, Cluster, Continental Rails, Domination, El Mythico, Feudal Lords, New Order, Quest of the Great Jewels, Shadow Lords, Sirius Command, Space Combat, Space 101, StarGlobe, Starquest, Subterrania, Victory!, World Emperor II and Warriors & Wizards. You choose where you want to use the coupon: to help you, we will include an impartial description of each of them! The only condition is that you should not have played with that particular gamemaster before. Last but not least, if you are disappointed with the first FLAGSHIP, let us know within one month and we'll refund you the entire $19.99 by return. No handling fee, no requirement to return anything yes, you can still use the coupon. To try it, send $19.99 to FLAGSHIP, CGW special offer, PO Box 6105WSS, Gainsville GA 30504 Circle Reader Service #61 "


"sort of Blue attack, has held it's defensive position for the entire turn. I can feel the end coming at the hands of the Red juggernaut; the only issue is how high a price I will force him to pay. Turn 5 is the Blue swan song. The Blue autol blazes away at the approaching Red team from the relative safety of the Blue home zone, but the grenade conservation of the Reds has worked well and the autogun is silenced with a round of explosions and no Red losses. Back in the Red home zone, the last remaining Blue 'bot cautiously scans for enemies in all directions, eases through a blasted wall and is ignominiously cut to pieces. Blue is out at the minute and fifteen second mark. Purple moves it's last three 'bots up slowly and positions itself for an assault on the top of the arena. With my last robot gladiator in fragments, my only satisfaction is in the realization that I have reduced many of the Red team to rolling junk. With five robots left, Red's total health is only 319. I begin to cheer for the Purples who have caused me less grief. Turn 6, surprisingly, becomes the blazing finale for all intents and purposes. With Blue gone, Purple realizes that there is now an uninhabited home zone to defend from, and rushes up to snatch this important tactical objective. Unfortunately, the Red horde has decided the same thing. The two remaining powers slam into each other in a cataclysm of firepower. When the smoke clears, two Red 'bots have yelled their last 'Arrrrgh!', but of the Purple team, there is no trace. Meanwhile, down in the forgotten bottom left of the arena, Green still hides. Turns 7 and 8 are a study in stealth as Green continues to hide from the Red team, and much to everyone's surprise, succeeds in running out the clock and survives. And the winner is... RED! With an overwhelming 2250 points. Izzy has beaten us all by cleverly contradicting our expectations. Next is the glad-just-to-be-alive Greens with 950 points. The overconfident Blues and cautious Purples are tied for last with 600. Captain, Stephen Graham, and I agreed we had ignored these tactics to our own peril. Mike Firman just groused about his luck, he never dreamed he'd be facing a nearly complete Red team when he finally made his way to the top of the arena. Many IBM users were also surprised they had never heard of the game and it was decided this was due mainly to the fact most stores sell it in the Windows section instead of the Entertainment Software racks. RoboSport vets expressed an interest in an update disk for the game, which would contain such features as a robot and terrain editor and terrain that is affected by explosions and gunfire. Before we were kicked off the network by impatient Spectre players, more than a few people had been introduced to the game and mastered the simple interface in the course of a short melee. A game that kept a whole roomful of wargamers entertained just playing the basic scenario is definitely one that deserves more exposure in the multi-user environment. Next computer-gaming day, the MSG is planning a \"Capture the Flag» tourney. Me, I think I'll dig up a few old Sgt. Rock comics and see if I can pick up a few pointers. I would like to thank the Metro Seattle Gamers for making this article so enjoyable to research. cow Coach's Corner After viewing the movie using RoboPlay and after hearing numerous 'should have's and 'if only's, many people who had never heard of RoboSport were commenting on how well the game reflected small arms and combined arms tactics. It simulated arms tactics much better, in fact, than many computer wargames dedicated to the subject. Both the Green 281 YEARS AGO.. THE HYPERSPACE BOOSTER IS DISCOVERED Impressions Software is expanding its American development teamand is looking for the best! In 2095 CE a huge alien artifact was discovered in the far reaches of the Tau Ceti starsystem. It was a hyperspace booster, a device with the capabilitiy to \"push\" spacecraft thousands of lightyears through hyperspace. In subsequent decades, the booster was used to send colonists on a one-way trip to a cluster of stars dubbed the Local Group, far from the rapidly overcrowding worlds of the Home Cluster. For years the Local Group had been receiving Development Assistance packages from the Home Cluster, to update their technology and assist them in constructing new colonies. Fifty four years ago, the shipments mysteriously stopped coming. The next ten years were known as The Great Panic, a period of interstellar war and piracy that nearly destroyed human civilisation in the Local Group. Fortunately, at the peak of hostilities, a hyperspace booster was discovered inside the Local Group. The knowledge that two-way communication with the Home Cluster might be established acted to calm the Local Group. A monumental plan was put into action to move the booster, entirely at sublight velocities, into orbit around Cetus Amicus. But, during the twenty-plus years the move required, the Local Group again fell into turmoil, this time to emerge divided into two mutually hostile governments: the Federated Worlds(FW) and the United Democratic Planets(UDP). Programmers experienced in C/C++ and Assembly language on IBM PC compatibles, and Graphic Artists experienced in VGA work wanted for exciting new games development, creating leading edge strategy games. We offer a fun working atmosphere in pleasant New England offices. Competitive salaries will be paid according to experience; successful applicants will also benefit from a comprehensive benefits package. Interested? Please send your resume to us at the address below; Graphic artists should also send samples of their work on floppy disk. The Game Design Studio Impressions Software, Inc. 7 Melrose Drive Farmington 06032 To Be Continued... Impressions SMN EN? The war escalates this Spring. TWARE Impressions Software is an equal opportunities employer. Circle Reader Service #71 Page 86 Computer Gaming World "


"THE BEST IN GAMES 26 STAL G ER FERTURING HYLO STEAHITZ HISTA THEBLES Tres CAME IS SHAREWARE SCORE OYASI Mitas VALE PECSEREPE CRYSTAL CAVES (F262) $4.00 WOLFENSTEIN 3-D (F323AB) $8.00 COSMO'S ADVENTURE (F315AB) $8.00 SCORT 00009400 PUTTETS 399022 HEALTH 180 M:8068 BI0000 TELEFOUR TAULATC2:1 40 2055TTOBRIS COMMANDER KEEN IV (F290AB) $8.00 DUKE NUKUM (F252) $4.00 GALACTIX (F321) $4.00 (CWD CWI Information Services Po Box 4851 Anaheim, CA 92803 Order TOLL FREE 1-800-777-5636 PLEASE SPECIFY 5/4\" OR 312\" DISKS FOR FAST DELIVERY CALL 1-800-777-5636. VISA/MASTERCARD OR, MAL CHECK OR MONEY ORDER SORRY NO COD. ADD $400 SHIPPING & HANDLING FOR ENTRE ORDER CALIFORNIA RESDENTS ADD 775% SALES TAX ALL TITLES ARE SHAREWARE. CONTINUED USE OF SHAREWARE REQUIRES SEPARATE PAYMENT TO AUTHOR (HONOR SYSTEM). CWD Free The Best Place shareware catalog QUALITY low-cost software Over 1000 titles listed Circle Reader Service #54 "


"Red Sky At Night Spies Delight Virgin's New Graphic Adventure, KGB by Robin Matthews TITLE: SYSTEMS: REVIEWED ON: PRICE: GRAPHICS: SOUND: DESIGNER: PUBLISHER: KGB Amiga, IBM IBM (runs fine on 12Mhz) $29.99 VGA Adlib, Soundblaster, Roland Cryo Virgin Games Irvine, CA D and ask additional questions or to access new areas. As a result locations are re-visited and NPCs re-interviewed as the facts are revealed. This is classic adventuring that does sound a bit linear, but the general interface and presentation is so good that it successfully avoids the feeling of being cramped or of being forced down a oneway street. Each of the locations is full of objects and scenery (this must be where all those old pictures and statues of Lenin have been sent!) and much of the game is spent examining each item and almost every square centimeter of the screen. This may prove tedious to those used to \"lighter products, but adds enormously to the sense of depth and to the general atmosphere, so much so that when one leaves certain areas one almost gives a sigh of relief as Maksim breathes the fresh Moscow air again. GAMES Tith all the recent changes in the Soviet Bloc it is possible that this V V latest release from Virgin could become a nostalgic piece of software, dealing as it does with all the scheming and machinations of the old state intelligence organization that made the CIA look like a mother and monsters' coffee morning club. In serious terms the KGB was the most effective and feared instrument of terror, state control and of course corruption in the old Soviet System, but at least it got the trains running on time (as they say in old Petrograd). Virgin has used the same French software house which coded the graphically stunning Dune, Cryo, and they have produced an unusual variant of the graphic adventure/whodunnit genre. The plot involves the player, as Maksim Rukov, joining the KGB's Department P and being employed to investigate decadent Western style corruption and avarice within the Soviet State. This is achieved by a series of mini-quests, which eventually add details to the main plotline which involves... (Ed: deleted due to inadequate security clearance on the part of CGW readers). The trail starts with Maksim's first case; to investigate the murder of a former KGB agent called Golitsin. KGB is set in the summer of 1991 against the backdrop of the creaking Communist system and the flavor is well captured, with Golitsin apparently being involved in all sorts of shady shenanigans such as murder, drug Inspect the dossiers. dealing, moon shining, computer hacking, etc. The wider picture, however, is more sinister, with plots against good 'ole Gorbie, coups with military hardliners, etc. The gaming system is simple, but well presented. The core interface consists of a series of static screens full of items and characters, accessed by means of an 'intelligent' cursor. When one moves over a door, the cursor automatically changes to \"Open.\" When one moves over a nonplaying character, it alters to \"Talk.\" When the player decides to interrogate, eh, sorry, chat to NPCs, he is presented with a series of menus. These allow one to engage in general tittle-tattle, to ask about important Soviet matters (like Soccer or the role of women in the Soviet higher echelons) or to question them on specific topics relating to Maksim's investigation. This is the main method used in KGB to gather facts and question witnesses. Then, when a new piece of information is uncovered, it resets a series of flags in the code which allow the player to progress further 16.00 The external locations are superbly drawn, especially the views of the Kremlin and Red Square at night, and these screens also allow movement around the suburbs of Moscow. The internal locations are also well crafted, giving a sense of the austerity of day-to-day life within the failing ideological system (times are tough -neither a Sega nor a Nintendo in sight). KGB also has a simple but effective Page 88 Computer Gaming World "


"Advertisers List ES 97 up hiding in a doorway somewhere on one of the screens. Give me your report by 6 p.M. Bearing in mind the limitations Waste no time on this routine imposed by mostly static task, comrade. I want no screens, the graphics are of a high CONplaints from the Militia standard, with some excellently about KGB heavy-handedness. sketched gritty Muscovites and shadowy characters penned in almost a caricature style. These wonderful characters react as the gamer talks to them and some of them are almost hypnotic Voulou's office must go back and see the unfor16:07 tunate widow Golitsin someday. KGB also has some very useful features, including a video reauto-mapping facility which shows the currently available locations and an option corder which allows the player to fast forto automatically restore back to a position ward through long waits or to rewind back inhabited just before entering the current to earlier conversations or events. This location. This is a very welcome feature reduces the amount of note taking required which all products could benefit from; in and continues the book similarities of pophow many games does the phone ring, pen ping back to Page 202 to re-read that chaprun out, cup of tea arrive, or the roof blow ter about the Russian air force general and off just as a 'one-off,' never-tothe new car. (They were going to deliver be-repeated conversation or event takes place? Well in KGB there is no need to restore a save from three days ago, one just goes back to when the scene began and hope for no further interruptions (it's quite fresh and breezy without the roof anyway!). This quick restore function also encourages the player to try out different approaches and tactics, Inspect Voulou's office. knowing that if they are unsuc16:07 cessful, it is painless to jump back a couple of minutes and try another tack. The storyline is his new car on July 20th, 1995, but the quite tight, so the right approach will beplumber was due to call that day...) come self evident, and it seems that most The main plot line appears to be eventproblems and puzzles have only a single triggered, so that the player cannot stray solution, but these can mostly be comtoo far from the correct course, and one is pleted in any order. given the occasional signpost by being KGB is set in four chapters' and the killed! (Please note that if this does occur book style is also reflected in the feel of one has done something wrong — one KGB i.e. very much in the John Le Carre should go back a step or two, drink two mold, with lots of hidden intrigue, deep large Wodkas and try again!). As per resubterfuge and criss-crossing plot lines. cent adventures the player cannot proceed One almost expects George Smiley to turn to the next chapter unless he has completed all the current tasks -at least giving one some confirmation that he's on the right track. Halt, comrade! Your papers! So, with nice graphics, a pretty Are you a relative of Golitsin? good gaming system, and an unusual feel that packs more impact than a Kalashnikov, KGB may not be likely to appeal to all, but Who are you? if one wants an engrossing and Captain Rukou. KGB. atmospheric product with more I'll ask the questions, comrade. depth and attention to detail than You are commendably diligent, comrade. offered by most of the latest vred october street graphic adventures, KGB is not 16:49 likely to make one see red! Cow SIDE Accolade 45, 47 Activision Adanac Command 144 Amtex Software 155 Blue Valley Software 108 CH Products CWI Products Cape Cod Connection CereBel Information Arts Chips & Bits 133, 135, 137, 139, 141, 143 Combat Entertainment Compsult Computability Computer Express Computer Learning Foundation Covox Creative Labs Deltax Gaming Digital Dungeon 127 Disk-Count Software Electronic Arts 7, 10-11 Enchanted Horizons Flagship Magazine Flying Dutchman Games Formgen The Gamer GEnie Gosselin Computer I motion Impressions 27, 29, 31, 33, 86 Inner Circle Software Interplay Keyboard Commander Koci Konami 39, 41, 43 Lance Haffner Games Legend Entertainment LucasFilm Games Machiavelli Maelstrom Games Media Vision Mindcraft Software 75, 103, 109 Mission Control 123 MPG Net 112-113 New World Computing 163 Nova Logic Origin Systems Paper Mayhem Point of View Psygnosis 5, 63 QQP 22-23, 48-49,117 Qualitas Reality Simulations SDJ Entrprises Sideline Software Sierra On-Line 67, 69, 71, 73 Simulations Canada Sir-Tech Strategic Simulations Supersoft Three-Sixty Pacific Thrustmaster Twin Engine Gaming UBI Soft Villa Crespo Viking Software 118-119 Virgin Games 55,59 Zeros & Ones 1OON DESSA 151 February 1993 Page 89 "


"A NEW PIECE OF REAL ESTATE FOR BRITANNIA Origin's Forge of Virtue by C. J. Suddarth TITLE: Forge of Virtue SYSTEM: IBM (386SX or better, 2 MB RAM, VGA, and 21+ MB hard disk) PRICE: $24.95 PROTECTION: Requires Ultima VII The Black Gate be installed PUBLISHER: Origin Systems Austin, TX Ultima 11 FORGE VIRTUE rf Lord British were to open a health club strictly for the purposes of pumping up the \"average\" Avatar in Britannia, Forge of Virtue (the first add-in disk for a computer game from Origin Systems, Inc.) would be a good start at accomplishing precisely that. Forge of Virtue is a set of four quests that are added to the Ultima VII world. The Avatar and his party can complete any or all of the quests any time. With the assistance of these Hans and Franz quests, the Avatar can trade his/her fleshy, flabby muscles for a magnificent Strength of 60 and \"pump up\" all other attributes to 30. No more girly Avatars! Of course, the Forge of Virtue isn't designed simply to smith improved attributes; it also serves to fashion and edge a powerful new weapon. The Avatar can now wield the most potent sword to ever appear in the entire Ultima saga, but he or she must forge it, as well. The Shade Blade cuts a double-edge swath of magic. It is powerful enough to kill an otherwise unslayable dragon, but bears the same insatiable thirst for blood, impossibility of separation from its wielder and ability to communicate with its possessor as Stormbringer, that dark blade wielded by Michael Moorcock's Corum. The first three quests deal with the virtues of Avatarhood: truth, love and courage (sort of an Ultima IV re-run.) The Avatar can complete the quests in any order. I suggest saving the test of Courage till last, as I felt it was definitely the most fun. The quests themselves are easily completed in a gaming session. The fourth is where all the loose ends are tied together. of Virtue, they experience an earthquake. This sets up a visit to Lord British to find out the cause of the disturbance. Lord British tells the party that the Isle of Fire has risen from the sea. This is the same island that Exodus emerged from (aka Ultima III) before it sank beneath the waves. Lord British instructs the party to travel to the Isle of Fire and offers them a ship as transportation. Once there, the true Avatar is expected to visit the three Shrines of Virtue and pass the tests necessary to secure an amulet from each one. After getting each amulet, the party is returned to the shrine's location; the oracle within the shrine speaks to the Avatar; and an attribute increase is bestowed upon the Avatar. The test of Truth begins by talking to the shrine's statue. The party is then teleported to the test's location. The ABORIGIN testing area consists of a large network of caverns and rooms. Once the amulet is recovered, the party is transported back to the starting point. The Avatar is then given the reward of having intelligence maxed to 30. This quest produced the only major criticism I had for the entire project. My party went through the caverns, then ended up stymied with no clue on what to do next. Unfortunately, there were no clues within the game itself. A quick call to an acquaintance at Origin solved the mystery of acquiring the amulet, but made me groan at what I considered an example of poor puzzle design. I felt that finding the amulet required blind luck rather than any kind of skill. I abhor those kinds of puzzles, and I imagine most players feel the way I do. The next Shrine, Love, instructs the party to enter a teleportal to begin the test. The party is transported to another part of the island. There, they meet a stone golem standing watch over a broken comrade. He implores the party to save his brother. This quest is a \"do this, then do that\" sort, but its unique nature made it one of We create ito:L:: Forging A Plot The first time the party is loaded after installation of the Forge Page 90 Computer Gaming World "


"my favorites. Successful completion gains the amulet of Love, and the reward is the Avatar's attribute of dexterity being raised to 30. The Shrine of Courage also sends the party to a teleportal. After getting through a locked gate, the Avatar and his party go head-to-head with an enemy mage, assorted headless denizens and skeletons. After this fight, which can be tough for lower level parties, there is more combat and a few puzzles to be solved. Here is where the party learns of a powerful weapon needed to complete the test and acquires an item to help complete it. After heading back, and talking to the resident blind mage, the Avatar completes another task. Then, begins the crafting of the Shade Blade. The process is not complicated, but can be time-consuming. One final detail completes the process, and the Avatar ends up with a real live(?) talking sword. The party finishes the job started in the Courage test and acquires the amulet. The Avatar is then rewarded with strength rising to 30. Once the fourth and final quest is completed, the party is ready to head back to Lord British. He is so pleased with the job the Avatar has done that he raises the Avatar's strength to 60. Successful completion of the four quests leaves the party with a complete set of magical armor, a couple of glass swords, some miscellaneous weapons and armor and, of course, the newly forged Shade Blade. Also, the Avatar's attributes are raised to the game's maximum (even though everybody else helped, they only gain in experience). In addition, the Avatar has headed off a possible future problem for Britannia and has shown that he or she is made of the \"right stuff.\" Forging An Installation Installation of Forge of Virtue is simple. It installs directly into the Ultima VII directory, and requires 1 MB of hard disk space. However, 4 MB will be required during installation for unpacking archived files. Hardware requirements are the same as for Ultima VII. There are two options for installation. The first will update a gamer's version of Ultima VII totally. A note of caution is warranted, however. If the game's .EXE file is updated, all previous saved games are deleted. This may not appeal to a player who has spent two months playing the current party. Origin recommends changing executable file's (.EXEs) if a player has had problems in the past. The other option is to have Forge of Virtue install itself but not upgrade the THE NEXT EMPIRE LEES H R PLAY BY MAIL ARAPRINTOUTS 000N 1899 EVERY EVERY TURN! KRY ...the only game that sends you fabulously detalled maps like this one, showing your fleet's sensor views every turn ...along with clear, complete stats on each starship you design, build, and maneuver Individually using up to 21 different onboard systems...plus status reports on starbases, probes and asterolds you controll The Next Empire Is a completely computer-moderated game, over 6 years In the making. Each universe is a unique, complex gaming environment populated with 21 alien players itching to blow the hulls off anyone who gets in their way! FREE SET-UP AND RULES!  $7.50 per turn; no hidden fees or double turns  fast game (two weeks per turn) or slow game (three weeks per turn)  clear, concise rules; our complexity comes from your gaming freedom  FREE SET-UP AND RULES! Recently voted 81 PBM game in a nationwide player magazine survey! 151 Reality Simulations, Inc. P.O. Box 22400 Tempe, AZ 85285-2400 (602) 967-7979 Circle Reader Service #98 February 1993 Page 91 "


"SELE executable. Once Forge of Virtue is installed, all saved games are converted. This means they will not work with the regular Ultima VII game unless Forge of Virtue is also installed. They both also need to be loaded if reinstallation is ever required. Documentation is minimal, but adequate. Truthfully, not much is needed. A four page \"Guide To The Isle of Fire\" is included to provide some background for the newly risen island and ties it to the Ultima universe nicely. A quickstart list tells the steps to take to get to the Isle of Fire. Play is the same as in the standard version of Ultima VII. The view is identical, as well as the way characters interact. The Isle itself looks like any other part of Britannia and fits seamlessly in its new location south of Vesper. Forging Into Game Play There did seem to be several improvements in game play. The first big difference I noticed was combat. The Avatar doesn't seem to stand around as much and takes a much more active role. His or her combat role can be set the same as the other characters, so he or she will attack the most powerful or weakest monster first, etc... There also seemed a decrease in the frequency of characters inadvertently creaming other characters with their weapons. While it still happened occasionally, especially with thrown weapons, characters went down more from monsters than from friendly fire. Movement also looked quicker, with the characters following along a lot smoother. In addition, they could all sit down on their very first try whenever using vehicles. One thing Forge of Virtue does not provide is a major addition in game time. Forge of Virtue will add only an estimated three to ten hours of playing time (depending on the gamer) to Ultima VII's estimated 200+ hours. There is no significant increase in territory to explore, nor huge quests to undertake. This in no way denigrates the product, but gamers should be aware of what Forge of Virtue was designed to be. Indeed, Forge of Virtue is sort of a \"cheat\" program that enables the main quest of Ultima VII to be accomplished easier by boosting the Avatar's attributes and giving him or her the most powerful weapon in the Ultima world. It was designed to be an add-in to Ultima VII and to provide gamers with a side quest. It was also designed to be completed at any stage of the game. So, if Ultima fans are looking for a significant amount of additional playing time, they will have to wait for the upcoming release of Serpent Isle. Forge of Value? Forge of Virtue is for gamers looking to maximize the Avatar and gain a powerful weapon for use against the Guardian. It will also fix several bugs in older versions of Ultima VII. Forge of Virtue makes a great game even better. At least, it was worth the \"club membership\" to know that my Avatar will be facing the Guardian with the Shade Blade firmly ensconced in my gauntlet. CGW :LL THE POTENTIALS OF THE NEAR FUTURE. THE ACTUALITIES OF THE PAST. HAVE YOU EVER WONDERED WHY THOSE OTHER GAMES IGNORE THE FACTS? PERHAPS, WHILE DOING MORE PRETTY PICTURES THEY FORGOT ABOUT RESEARCH, TESTING, & DESIGN. WE DIDN' . PACIFIC STORM: THE SOLOMONS CAMPAIGN, Operations In The South Pacific, 1942-1943. FLEET MED, Tactical Naval Combat In The Med. 1939-1943. MALTA STORM, The Battle For The Mediterranean, 1941-1942. KRIEGSMARINE, Tactical Naval Combat In The Atlantic, 1939-1944. NORTHERN FLEET, Modern Naval Operations In The Atlantic Ocean. GRAND FLEET, Tactical Naval Combat In The North Sea, 1906-1920. IN HARM'S WAY, Tactical Naval Combat In The Pacific, 1943-1944. LONG LANCE, Tactical Naval Combat In The Pacific, 1942. SEVENTH FLEET. Modern Naval Operations In The Pacific Ocean. FIFTH ESKADRA, Modern Naval Operations in the Mediterranean Sea. GREY SEAS, GREY SKIES, Tactical Modern Naval Combat. SIMULATIONS CANADA... FOR SERIOUS WARGAMING NAVAL COMBAT: New RED SKY AT MORNING, Naval Strategy In The Modern Era. In this first of our worldwide naval studies, we examine the very confusing current Situation at sea. RSAM was designed as a modern period global command Simulator, such as would be used for Staff Studies or naval command training exercises. The political and military Standings of every major world naval power can be brought into play and adjusted prior to the start of conflict. Situation and intelligence briefings are prime elements in a game that concentrates on plan formulation and execution via command and control. Your staff will always provide detailed recommendations, which you may accept. reject, or modify. And for the historical gamer, scenarios from the potential situations of 1973, 1982, and 1991 are presented. Amiga, Atari ST, & IBMPC. LAND COMBAT: *New*MAIN BATTLE TANK: MIDDLE EAST, Modern Tactical Armoured Combat. The Middle East seems to forever be in turmoil. And il recent history is any indicator, this situation will not be changing in the near future. MBT:ME, our third MBT game in design for two years and delayed to incorporate data from the recent Gull conflict provides the terrain of the Middle East deserts and the forces of the local powers, as well as intervention countries, in a command oriented simulation that allows for past, current, and future combat situations. Prebuilt scenarios and a \"build your own\" system are provided. Amiga, Atari ST, & IBMPC. BATTLE TANK: KURSK TO BERLIN, Tactical Armoured Combat In The East, June 1943 May 1945. MBT: NORTH GERMANY, Modern Tactical Armoured Combat. BT: BARBAROSSA TO STALINGRAD, Tactical Armoured Combat In The East, June 1941 May 1943. MBT: CENTRAL GERMANY, Modern Tactical Armoured Combat. ROMMEL AT EL ALAMEIN, Battles For Egypt. 1 July to 6 November, 1942. MOSCOW CAMPAIGN, Typhoon & White Storm, Aug 1941 to Feb 1942. TO THE RHINE, The Allied Advance In The West, 29 Aug to 11 Dec, 1944. ROMMEL AT GAZALA, Battles For Tobruk, 26 May to 27 June 1942. STALINGRAD CAMPAIGN, The Turning Point in Russia, Jun 1942 Feb 1943. KURSK CAMPAIGN. Operation Zitadelle, Summer 1943. OPERATION OVERLORD, The Invasion Of Europe, 6 June 28 August, 1942. GOLAN FRONT, The 1973 Arab/israeli War In The North FALL GELB, The Fall of France, Spring 1940. New\"MAN OF WAR. Grand Tactical Naval Combat Under Sail, 1765 tial game of a new system, we place the player on the deck of the flagship of a fleet of Ships Of The Line about to enter into battle. MOW is a fleet level study of the height of the age of sail. Ships, from England, France, Spain, Holland, and the United States, are represented individually, using a turn structure of 4 minutes per interation. The game system concentrates on command, combat, maneuver, Sailing ability, and crew quality. 12 historical scenarios ranging from Ushant to Trafalgar, as well as a scenario builder to create custom actions, are provided. Amiga, Atari ST, & IBMPC. PACIFIC STORM: THE MIDWAY CAMPAIGN, Operations In The Central Pacific, 1942. ORDERING INFORMATION, PLEASE READ CAREFULLY: All games are $60.00 each for Americans, 580.00 each for Canadians (GST included), and 565.00 each for purchasers outside North America. We will let cheques clear before shipping (6 weeks!), so, money orders are preferred. PLEASE be sure to tell us which computer you own. Purchasers from outside of Canada should send payment in U.S. funds.\" Nova Scotia residents must add an extra 10% of the total for Provincial tax. SIMULATIONS CANADA, P.O. Box 452, Bridgewater, NS, Canada, B4V 2X6. Page 92 Circle Reader Service #104 Computer Gaming World "


"Deuren Polishing The Diamond with Microleague Baseball's Microleague Baseball 4 by Joe Sherfy MICROLEAGUE BASEBALL4 TURES LIVE-ACTION VIDEO RAY-PLAY GARE SUMMAET BEYA noward the end of any baseball season, those heartless thugs in the press [Ed: Hey, now!] begin to speculate about which managers are unlikely to have a job at the end of the season and those who are unlikely to have their contracts renewed. If a manager is fortunate, these opinion-makers in the media may excuse his performance on the basis of bad trades initiated by his general manager, but this is rare. Most fans recognize that the easiest way for general managers to cover up their mistakes is to fire the manager. In Microleague Baseball 4 (MLB4), firing the manager is not likely to cover up any mistakes, since the simulation puts the player in the position of both general manager and on-field manager. Gamers get to make all of the front office moves and call all the shots on the field, but unlike other games, have to watch from the computer \"dugout\" (sans chewing tobacco) when play actually commences. When the action starts, it is the job of the on-screen players to execute, not the human player. Of course, if it sounds too easy, we might just have to poll all of those out-of-work managers in the unemployment lines of major league baseball. tracking the statistics from all of the games played. Would-be general managers may develop an expanded roster, just in case one of their original rostered players looks like he needs some seasoning in Triple A ball or the gamer needs some extra help in the bullpen. One of the best additions to the gaming system is the ability to generate unique computer coaches. With this feature, one can replay a series realistically, even in solitaire mode. One simply creates a coach that uses running aggressively to handle teams like the St. Louis Cardinals of 1985 or a conservative, cigar-chewing coach of a home run oriented team like the 1970 Baltimore Orioles. The routine lets gamers dictate when a team will have the green light to steal a base or hit and run. It also allows one to define the circumstances in which a pinch hitter would be brought in, a pitcher given the hook and much more. CUSA TODAY ALI SED ON Microleague Baseball IBM compatible SYSTEME HPLAYERS: PRICE PROTECTION DESIGNER $49.95 Document Lank Up Jim Nangana Ei Daniels and Skip Haughay Microleague Sports Nowarka DE PUBLISHER: detailed, right down to the ivy on the walls or the checkerboard patterns in the grass. In addition to the enhanced ballpark graphics, the game includes digitized vidcos which pop up during the course of play in order to give one a close-up feel of the action. Unfortunately, diskettes can only hold so much data and, while the videos are quite impressive when one first gets the game, the lack of variety (due to space considerations) is such that gamers will probably elect to turn them off after only a few games. Expanded Playbook Since some gamers felt that the original MLB featured limited decision points, it will be welcome news to most that the generic playbook has been expanded. Gamers have more control over defensive positioning and play. Best of all, gamers can put their preferences together in a number of different combinations to create a unique set of \"signs\" or playbook to use during the game. For instance, assume it is the bottom of the ninth with the game tied, no outs and the bases loaded. One can now choose to play the infield in and outfield shallow and aggressive with one simple entry. On offense, players can choose how aggressive to be on the basepaths based on the field to which the ball is hit. In this way, one can easily take advantage of those fielders with weak arms. Another nice MLB4 features is the capacity for gamers to access the USA TOday on-line network's statistical database and download the latest (they are updated weekly on the service) straight into one's game. Now, one need not wait for those \"year-end\" data disks of entire seasons, but can play games based on current statistics.      They've Got The Look! The first thing the gamer is liable to notice about the game is that Microleague Sports has not spared on the graphics. One could almost swear that they really were playing at Wrigley Field. The game comes with the choice of four ballparks (others are, naturally, available for purchase on a separate data disk) and they are incredibly Front Office Funhouse For those familiar with the Microleague Baseball system, MLB4 has come a long way, particularly with regard to allowing the gamer to fill the shoes of the general manager. There are routines to set up leagues with one, two or four divisions; for scheduling; and to assist the gamer with February 1993 Page 93 "


"soy NY 1927 1 +BROOK SS 0 1 1 Oru REMSHING ON OLLO J.ROODSON S5000PS ETUD CAMPANELLA SINGLED TO CENTER Minor League Seasoning Even with all of these solid advances over the previous releases in the series, there is still room for improvement. This reviewer owns both MLBI and MLB2 and has logged many an enjoyable game on both. Unfortunately, except for the stadium backgrounds and the videos, the actual graphic depiction of the game in MLB4 has not improved significantly since MLB1 and 2. In fact, the actual plays during the game seem less varied than in those earlier versions. This tends to cause the game to go stale after repeated play. Gone are the occasional infield hits in the earlier version, so one automatically knows that any ball hit in the infield will result in either an error or an out. Also missing are the quirky injuries and ejections which took place in MLB2, even if yours truly was once treated to the highly improbable scenario where Cal Ripken, Jr. was ejected for arguing with the umpire. This reviewer would love to see these random events brought back to the game. Further, even with all the detail crafted into the ballpark views, the program does not really take advantage of the uniqueness to be found in the different ballparks. There are no strange caroms off the walls at Fenway or balls stuck in the ivy at Wrigley. It certainly would have enhanced the enjoyment of the game to make the effects of different ballparks more evident, even if it was necessary to do so at the expense of the digitized videos. Finally, one cannot resist noting a bug related to an extra inning game. With the bases loaded in the bottom of the 10th, the home team got a base hit and the program allowed two runs to score for a final score of 7-5. It seems such a minor incident, but it is frustrating in that it undermines the suspended disbelief necessary to enjoy a computer game. Late Box Score In summary, Microleague Baseball 4 has come a long way. From a stand-alone game which required an additional program in order to generate a box score to a complete system which includes the ability to not only generate boxscores, but which provides play-by-play descriptions of a game at the touch of a key. From the use of very basic statistical data in the original to the much expanded statistical database of MLB4, the game has definitely come of age. From just a few basic offensive and defensive options to a greatly expanded menu of options, Microleague Sports has shown a commitment to providing a truly outstanding product. cow SOUND MASTER II Special Announcement! The Most Compatible Sound Card In The World What: The 7th Computer Game Developers' Conference When: April 17-20, 1993 Where: Westin Hotel Santa Clara, CA  MIDI interface with simultaneous input and output. Includes PC-LYRA music composition software.  Audiophile sound quality. Low noise, 100% AdLib Compatible. precision engineered electronics. Exclusive SMULATOR\" sound file  4-watt amplifier with volume control. conversion software. Operates Extensive software tools, including \"Sound Blaster\" compatible titles, digital compression and editing utilities. WITH IMPROVED SOUND QUALITY! Supported by the largest library of VOICE COMMAND SOFTWARE. software titles in entertainment, Covox Voice Master, Speech Thing», business, music, and education. MIDI Maestro compatible.  Dual 3-inch speakers, 6 foot MIDI cable, 8 bit DMA sound digitizer. Sample and internal speaker bypass included. rates to 25 Kbytes/sec with direct to . Made in USA by Covox -THE microdisk\" record/playback options. computer audio specialist since 1975. Your Best Choice For Multi-Media Sound. ONLY $229.95 (plus $5 Shipping & Handling) ORDER HOTLINE: (503) 342-1271 Mon-Fri, 8 AM to 5 PM PST VISA/MC/AMEX phone or FAX orders accepted. NO CODs. 30 Day Money Back Guarantee if not completely satisfied. One year warranty on hardware. TRADE-UP OFFER: Your current PC sound card brand is worth $$$ toward the purchase of a Sound Master II. Contact Covox for details. CALL OR WRITE FOR FREE PRODUCT CATALOG COVOX INC. 675 Conger Street  Eugene, OR 97402 Phone (503) 342-1271  FAX 503-342-1283 Who: Science Fiction Author Harlan Ellison and Famous Game Designers For More Information, Call: (408) 374-4340 Circle Reader Service # 52 Page 94 Computer Gaming World "


"CAPE CO D CONNECTION'S SCROLL TO ADVENTURE  STRATEGY. SIMULATION 26 WINdoci Soon?? MS-DOS Simulation MS-DOS Strategy Uncharted Waters...... $37.07 Software MS-DOS Role Software VFor Victory ............... $41.27 Rox Nobular............... 537.07 Seven Cities of Gold II Membership Prices listedonly. Alinein/Sand.. .... $21.17 Western Front .......... $31.77 Playing & Seven Citios ll .............. tba Sim Life Ploase Califor Non-Membor AncArtWar/Sky...... $31.77 Adventure Games Spellcraft . ......... $31.77 Star Control2 Pricing!! Action Sta. Util........... S11.12 MS-DOS Sports AD&D Coll. 11............. $41.27 Shadowlands ........... $26.47 Striko Commander A-Train........... ..... $37.07 Action Stations....... $26.47 Software AD&D Starter Kit......... 541.27 Spaceward Ho!........... tba Tank 2.0 (Spec. Holo) APBA Baseball.......... $21.17 Amazon............... $37.07 Summoning.............. $35.37 Third Reich Carl Lewis Challen ..... $26.47 Cobra Mission.... ... $42.37 Two Towers..... ..... $31.77 Ultrabots Sanction Earth F-15 III from Duork's BBall Encyl.... $21.17 Crus. Dark Savant...... $37.07 STRIKE EAGLE Micropose. Fly high Fant. Football92 ........ $21.17 DaggarAmon Ra....... $37.07 and last with this one. Greens................... $31.77 Dark Queen Krynn..... $29.47 Gretz. Hockey III......... $31.77 Darklands.............. State of the art flight $37.07 Hardball III .......... $31.77 Dacmonsgate........... $37.07 simulator with Hardball 3 Toams....... $13.22 Dune............... $31.77 revolutionary new J. Nick. Sign. Golf ....... $37.07 Dungeon Master ....... $26.47 visual system. Two J. Nick. Course 1.......... $13.22 Forgoof Virtue......... 513.22 player capability T.LaRussa BBall2......... tba Gemfire.................... $26.47 makes this a must. Links 386 Pro.............. $37.07 1.Jones Fate Atl. ........ $31.77 CCC Member Precision Flight Control Price $42.37 MICROPROSE In the QQP Tradition of from CH Products is now in quality comes a game that your hands for the low blends strategy and tactics Aircraft & Adven. F...... S26.47 Battlechess 4............. $26.47 Virtual Pilot CCC Member Price Acesinthe Pacific...... $42.37 Battle islo ........... $29.47 in a Medieval World, Nine $65.00 Airbus A-320 .......... $42.37 Battle Isle Scen's....... $20.62 scenarios, random map Airbucks................. $31.77 Battles of Destiny...... $31.77 generator, 21 levels of play The Underworld.......... $42.37 Aircraft & Adven ......... $26.47 Bridge 7.0................ $26.47 and campaign option. CDROM Titles Air Force Comman..... $31.77 Buzz Aldrin's Rac...... $37.07 Ultima VII.................... $42.37 Multi-MediaUpgrade Better yet, pick this game Anc, ArtWar/Sky......... $31.77 Campaign................. $31.77 Ultima VIII........... ..... tba as a CCC Member at the Pro 16 EXT...................5924 A.T.A.C. .............. $31.77 Carrier Strike........... $37.07 best price in the industry. Mult-Media Upgrade Pro 16 B-17 Flying Fort......... $37.07 Carriors at War ......... $37.07 MS-DOS Games Yet Internal Internal........................5924 BirdsolPrey .............. $29.47 Castles. ................... $31.77 CCC Member Price To Be Released CDPC........ ........... $995 F-15111 ..................... $42.37 Castles North Ca....... $15.87 $31.77 Lost Treas. Infocom.......$50 F-117A. Look For Them ..................... $42.37 Castles Il. ........ ..... $31.77 Sec. Monkey Isll........... 550 Falcon 3.0.............. $42.37 Chossmaste 3000..... $29.47 Madden FBallll .......... $29.47 Kings QuostVI.. .......... $42.37 Soc. Weap. Luff. ..........$65 Falcon 3 Missions....... $21.17 Chess 3for Wind........ $35.37 Microsoft Goll............. $51.00 KGB .......... 515.87 AH-64 (Spec. Holobyte) Ult. Underg/w Com2..... $55 FS Pro (Mallard) ......... $21.17 Civilization. $37.07 NFL Chall.3.0............. $26.47 Leather Goddessil..... $37.07 Air Force Pilot Trainer W.Comm. llw/all Data ....55 Grand Canyon Sce..... $15.87 Civ. Collectors ......... $42.37 NFL Video ProFB ....... $42.37 Legend................... $37.07 Avenger A10 (Spec Holo) Great Naval Bat.'s ...... $41.27 Conflict: Korea......... $31.77 Celtic Legends Cape Cod gives Gunship 2000 .......... $37.07 Conflit:M-East .......... $31.77 Conquestof Japan careful Gunship 2 Scen.......... $21.17 Conq. Kingdoms....... $31.77 Hawaii Scenery.......... $15.87 Crises Kremlin.......... Dark Sun (SSI) Control air, ground and $37.07 Dragons Lair III consideration to the Hero's 357th .............. $29.47 Cyber Empires.......... $29.47 naval combat forces in this Fleet Commander (RAW games its lists. Hyperspeed............... $31.77 Grigsby Pac.War....... $42.37 \"Conquer the World Harpoon Gold Mantis. ExpFight........ $37.07 GlobalConquets.... $31.77 strategy game. Up to four Games listed in this Harpoon Patriot Mantis Spch Acc......... $15.87 Global Effect ............. $29.47 human players or up to Jump Jet (Microprose) ad are the newest Oper Lightning Str.... $15.87 Harpoon .......... $35.37 three computer opponents Liberty or Death (Koei) and best titles in our Railroad Tycoon ........ $15.87 Harp. Designer.......... $29.47 can slug it out at the low Magic Candle III RedBaron................. $37.07 High Command ........ $45.00 CCC Member Price Pacific War (SSI)........$42.37 opinion. Other Red Baron Miss.D...... $15.87 Monopoly Delux........ $31.77 Pirates Gold titles can be Rescue Air 911 ........... $13.22 Nob. Ambition ll ....... $31.77 $31.77 Pirates of Realm Spaco obtained!! Scen. Enhancer Ed.... $21.17 Powermonger........... $29.47 PTO: Pacific Theater of War Sec Weap.Lull........... $37.07 Power Politics Win .... $26.47 Rules of Engagement Sec. W. Miss. 1...........$15.87 Railroad Tycoon ....... $15.87 ProLeaguoBBall....... $31.77 Leg. Kyrandia............. $31.77 Sec. W.Miss.2........... $15.87 Ramparts Summer Chall............ $29.12 LostFiles S.Holme..... $41.27 The Cape Cod Connection Membership ................. 523.57 Sec. W. Miss. 3.......... 515.87 Shadow President..... $37.07 Strato-Mat-BBall........ $21.17 Lost Treas. II............ $26.47 Plan gives YOU: Soc.W.Miss. 4.......... $15.87 Siege...... ........ $35.37 TomLandry FBall....... $26.47 Lure of Tomptre: SimAnt .... .......$31.77 Spaceward Ho....... $31.77 Magic Candlell .......... $35.37 A way to cope with the RECESSION and Sim Antfor Window .... $31.77 Solitaire Journey...... $31.77 You've worked Magic Candle III ............ba HIGH PRICE combination! Task Force 42..... ... $37.07 Spoils ofWar........... $31.77 Hard All WeekM&M Clouds Xeen ..... $37.07 Tahiti ScenUpgr. ....... $21.17 Star Trek Anniv........ $31.77 Pirates Gold............... $37.07 Software, Tabletop Games (War and Role Toam Yankeo2 ......... $26.47 The Perf. General ...... $31.77 Treat Yourself to a Piratesroalm Spac........ba Playing, Miniatures, Old tyme Baseball Traconfor Window..... $31.77 Per Gen Scen's ........ $18.52 Came. Questfor Glory III........ $37.07 Caps, and more!! The LostAdmiral....... $31.77 Realms...... .......$15.37 The Cape Cod Connection Membership Club CCC's Answer To The Recession, Recessionary Pricing!!! CAPE COD CONNECTION has essentially evolved into a Membership Club. Simply the finest club in the industry today. Club members receive the Best Price, the Best Service, and the Best Information. For that reason the product prices listed above are for MEMBERS ONLY. Join the club with your first order. It's only $20 for a FULL YEAR. You do not have to become a CCC Member to order from us. Please call for Non-Member Pricing. CCC offers every electronic means known to mankind for ordering. We are open Monday Friday 10 AM 8 PM and Saturday 10 AM 5 PM. CCC now has a store location at 845 Main St., Falmouth, MA 02540, drop in and browse. All phone numbers are the same. Overseas Dealer Inquiries welcome. (Prices and availability may vary.) CCC policy is to replace defective software with the same. MAIL TO: 21 PLEASANT VIEW AVENUE FALMOUTH, MASSACHUSETTS 02540 VOICE ORDERS 1-800-729-6733  1-508-457-0738 . FAX 1-508-457-4558 Circle Reader Service #47, "


"Sega Petitions for Rehearing of Accolade Case HOOLDE vs. SEGA step in the development of a competing product, it seems highly unlikely that the court will look favorably on further action. Sega is pinning their hopes for further action on the section of the appeals court ruling which stated that regulation with regard to reverse-engineering for the purpose of developing software is a \"relatively unexplored area in the world of copyright law.\" sort of a Top Cat meets Garfield style of animation (he's smooth and fast, with unexpected moves, but his facial expressions run the gamut of possibilities like a Garfield out of control). Accolade hasn't billed this product as a Sonic-killer, but one would be hard-pressed to ignore both the similarities and differences. Since Bubsy should go head-to-head with Sonic 2, it will be interesting to observe what gamers feel about the relative merits of the two games. n October 21st, Sega of America's corporate counsel, Riley Russell, announced that Sega had filed a petition for rehearing in the case against Accolade. Sega had won a ruling in a lower court which stated that Accolade's reverse-engineering of Sega cartridges in order to produce and market competitive (and unlicensed) cartridges was a case of infringement upon proprietary technology. The lower court ruling had significant financial repercussions on Accolade, as they were restrained from shipping either existing or new titles. Retailers were permitted to sell their existing stock, but could not reorder. The U.S. Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals recently ruled in Accolade's favor, effectively reversing the lower court's ruling and allowing Accolade to start shipping their Sega compatible cartridges once again. Sega would like to stop such unlicensed merchandising before it spreads to other publishers, so they have asked for a rehearing More Pirates Sunk in SPA Broadside On September 28th, the Software Publishers Association (SPA) initiated legal action against TrendTec BBS, a bulletin board system in Bollingbrook, IL, which distributed pirated software. More than 250 subscribers would pay $50 per year in order to be given access to a special section of the bulletin board which had copies of about 200 copyrighted programs. Allegedly, part of the sysop's promotion of the board was the fact that more than $100,000 worth of programs were available to those who accessed the pirate section of the BBS. 35 902 (p The Bubsy design team. Whether Accolade's reprieve from potentially heavy damage assessments and exclusion from the Sega marketplace will continue is highly dependent on whether a higher court agrees with Sega's contention (that the TMSS protects consumers from shoddy products and Sega from unscrupulous competitors) or not. The Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals ruled that the purpose of the TMSS was \"the discouraging of other competitors from manufacturing Genesiscompatible games.\" The appeals court claimed that the lock-out characteristic of the TMSS would be clearly unlawful, assuming that \"locking out\" was its purpose. If a higher court does not step in, the Spring of 1993 could feature an interesting showdown of products that may determine whether there is anything \"shoddy\" about unlicensed product or not. In March, Accolade is scheduled to release both a SNES and Sega product featuring their new animated action character, Bubsy. Bubsy, as he appears in Claws Encounters of the Furred Kind, is an animated bobcat with Accolade's \"Bubsy\" — Sonic killer? Interestingly enough, however, the appeals court ruling suggested that Sega's proprietary use of the Trademark Security System (TMSS) violated the objectives of free competition. Since Sega's primary contention in petitioning for further court action is predicated on the idea that Accolade deliberately copied Sega's copyrighted code (the TMSS) as a preliminary Estimating that the TrendTec BBS was responsible for the loss of hundreds of thousands of dollars to the software industry, SPA Executive Director Ken Wasch reiterated the SPA's intent to actively pursue pirate bulletin boards and continue to lobby for felonization of such copyright infringement. If the SPA's recommendations are heeded, the penalty would be raised to up to five years imprisonment and a $250,000 fine. Such felonization would also allow prosecutors to let some pirates \"plea-bargain\" their sentence down by revealing where the software was coming from. This could enable companies to tighten their own security and ensure that no further unauthorized software was leaving via in-house leaks. Cow Page 96 Computer Gaming World "


"Lowest deliverd prices with great customer service. 5 800 800-448-6658 DISK-COUNT SOFTWARE 119 37 41 99 37 31 #8888 30 44 883 31 31 21 36 A7 25 31 Ba8& 31 61 37 32 37 19 37 45 24 38 Vior Victames Wind, 30 Wind Comm2 druid 49 45 74 Cakewalk 35 22 MASTERCARD, VISA, DISCOVER, AND AMERICAN EXPRESSACCEPTED WITHNOSURCHARGE. SHIPPINGIS ONLY $4.00 PER ORDER, PRODUCT INFO & OTHER BUSINESS:  908-396-8880 Laffer Ulilily 2 2 Phonics Plus 25 Studyware LSAT 30 Illustrated Shakesper27 | Fontmonger Leather God Phb 2 42 Sound Cards Pinball Intl Bus & Econ Atlas 39 Studyware for SAT 30 Geoworks Pro Legend Pitfighter StuntIsland Intro to Game Fren 79 Grammatik 5 57 Ad Lib Sound Card 65 Legend of Kyrandia 35 Plan 9 Outer Space Summer Challenge 34 Intro to Games Span79 Hijaak DOS or Win 129 Ad Lib Gold 1000 179 Legion's of Krella 37 Planets Edge Summoning 38 139 Jones in Fast Lane 37 Info Select 87 IATI Stereo F/X Leisur Suit Lar Bndl 39 Playroom w/ Sound 31 Super Tetris Kings Quest 5 42 Language Assistant VGA StreoFIX 1MB 369 Leisur Suit Larry5 37 Police Quest 3 Take a break X-Word 29 Languages of World 99 Fr. Gr.Hebital Span 42 Covox Snd Mster II 145 Lemmings Pools of Darkness 38 Pool Learn to Speak Span 69 Laplink 4 Pro Gravis Ultra Sound 129 Oh No More Addon 22 Populous 2 38 Tank (new version) 37 Library of Future 99 Lotus Works 99 Media Vision Lemm. Oh No More 31 Power Hits Sports 32 Task Force 1942' 39 Loom Microsoft Qck Basic 65 Audio Port L'Empereur 37 Sci-Fi Team Yankee M-1 Tank Platoon 62 Microsoft Quick C CDPC Lexicross Battletech-Mech 32 Tengens Arcade Hit 25 MacMillian Child. Dict.49 MS DOS 5.0 47 Pro Audio Spec+ Liberty or Death Powermonger Terminator Manhole MS DOS 5.0 Upgrd 62 M.M. Upgrade Kil 165 Life and Death 2 32 Principles of Biology 25 Terminator 2 37 Magazine Rack 45 Norton Desktop v2. 95 Pro Audio Spec 16 198 Links 25 Principle of Calculus 25 Tetris Classic 28 Marketing Master 39 Norton Dsktp DOS 115 Pro 16 Multimedia Links 386 Pro 39 Principle ofChemsty 25 Theatre of War 31 Mavis Beacon 39 Norton Utilities 111 Course Diskea Print Shop Deluxe 16 45 Thunderhawk MIG 29/ MIG 29M 62 One Write Acct. 95 100 Thunderboard 3 or more (ea) Graphic Coll. (ea) 30 Time Riders America35 Mixed Up Mother Gse37 Pacioli 2000 v2.0 31 Thunder & Lighing 229 99 Loney Tune Prnt Ply 19 Print Shop, New 36 Time Treks 36 MS DOS Archives 35 PC Animate Plus 115 Sound Blaster Lord of Rings 2 37 Graphics (ea) 22 Tom Landry Football 30 Presidnt:It Start Geo 105 PC Anywhere 4 115 Snd Blast Pro MCA 259 Lost Admiral 35 Print Sp Companion 31 Tony LaRussa Base. 17 Prince Persia/Nam'6565 PC Kwik Powerpak 72 Sound Blaster Pro 189 Lost File Sherick H 41 Privateer LaRussa addon 15 Railroad Tycoon 62 PC Paintbrush 5 + 99 SB Multimedia Kit 560 Lost Treas Infocom 42 Pro League Baseball 35 Tracon 2 31 Red Strm/Carr Cmd 62 PC Tools 109 SB MM Starter Kit 459 Lost Treasures 2 29 Quest for Glory 1 Tracon Windows 37 Reference Library 80 Peachtree Basic 75 SB CDROM Intel 360 Magic Candle 2 38 Quest for Glory 3 Treasure Cove 35 Shakespeare 37 PFS: First Choice 75 SBCDROM Extrl 429 Main St Creatvity Kit 17 Ragnarok Treasure Math Storm35 Sherlock Holme Cnslt42 PFS: First Publisher 75 Sun, Moon, Star w/ Sony Manhole 31 Railroad Tycoon Treasure Mountain 31 Sleeping Beauty 599 37 PFS:Prospect 75 CD, SB Pro, S/W Mantis Mantis 39 Rampart Treasure Savg Frnir 32 So Much Software 59 PFS:Publisher Wind 75 Roland SCC-1GS 375 Mario Teaches Type 25 Random Hs Encycl Treehouse 35 Sophisticat Santa Fe 45 PFS: Window Works 75 Sound Canvas 559 Martian Memorndm 32 Reader Rabbit Tristan Pinball Space Quest 4 37 PFS:Write w/Grmtk 69 Roland MA-12Cea 105 Marvin Moose 1/2 31 Reader Rabbit 2 37 Trump Castle 2 Spirit of Excalibur 37 Presention Task Frc119 SPEAKERS Shielded 28 Math Blaster Mystry 29 Read 'n Roll VGA 31 Trump Castle 2 Delx 42 Stat Pack 83 Print Shop 36 W/3 band Equilizer 45 Math Blaster Plus 29 Red Baron Twilight 2000 Stellar 7 37 Procomm Plus 2.0 Altec Lansing 200 219 Math Blaster Wind Mission Disk Ultima 7 Strange Bedfellows 39 Procomm/Window 82 ACS300 w/subwof 299 Math Rabbit Realms Forge of Virtue 17 Street Atlas Pyro Screen Saver 35 MIDI Interface Math Zone Rex Nebular Ultima7P12 45 Time Mag Almanac 129 QEMM Matrix Cubed Midiator 101 Serial 95 32 Riders of Rohan Time Table History 69 Ultima Trilogy 1 Q DOS 3 Mavis Beacon Type 32 Risk for Windows Ultima Trilogy 2 47 PC Midi Card Time Table Science 59 Quicken 6.0/Win 45 MOX-32 Mavis Beacon Wind 38 Risky Woods 25 Ultima Underworld 47 Quicken Quick Book 84 Ultima 1-6 8 MPU-IPC 135 McGee at Fun Fair 25 Road & Track Pres 35 Ultrabots Ultimate Basketball 35 Sitback DOS or Win 59 Mean Streets Road to Final Four 37 Cakewalk Apprentic145 U.S. or World Atlas 49 U.S.Atlas 42 Stacker 78 The Miracle 325 Medieval Lords Robosports Wind Stacker 16 Bit Card 179 Utopia Vintage Aloha Mega Fortress Romance 3 King 2 Vlor Victory #1/42 44 Wild Places Superstore 79 MIDI Software Mission Disk Rorkes Drift Vegas Games Wind. 19 Wing Comm & Miss 45 TurboCadd v2.0 79 Ballade Mega Traveller 1/2 37 Rules Engagement 37 Vengeance Excalibur30 Wing Com/Ultima 6 45 Word Perfct5.1/Win249 Band in a Box Mega Man 3 17 Rule Engagment 2 38 Warlords 31 Wing Comm2 49 Windows 3.1 92 Cadenza Mental Math Games 35 Scrabble Deluxe Wyn Gretzky Hcky2 35WC 2/Ulti. Undrwld 49 Winfax Pro Merchant Colony 31 Scrabble Dix Win Western Front 38 World Atlas MetroGnome Music 31 Mice & Truckball Cakewalk Pro Sea Rogue 30 What's My Angle World View Michael Jordon Flight42 Second Front Where Crm San Diego Wrath of Demon Appoint MousePen 70 Cakewalk Window 85 Drummer Mickey ABC's. Secret Monkey Is. 2 38 Adults Only Must be 21 Microsoft Mouse Color or 1-2-3's 25 Scrt Weapon Luftwt 42 in Europe 30 Animation Fantasy 65 Mouseman Serial 69 Encore Mickey's Crossword 19 no Piano Works Dornier 335 20 in Time 30 Trackman Serial FAO Set 79 Play it by Ear Mickey Jigsaw Pzl 31 P-38 Mission Dsk 20 in USA PC Pix Vol 1 or 2 Modems & Fax Master Tracks Pro 249 Mickey ABC Combo 37 P-80 Shoot Star 20 in USA Deluxe 45 Private Collection MaxFax 9624 Fx/Md 99 Music Printer Plus 419 Mickey Word Advent 25 Heinkel 162 2 0 in World Deluxe 49 Priv. Pictures 1 or 2 65 Maxlite 9624PC189 Music Time Micro Cookbook 31 Sesame St. Lin Clas 31 Wild Wheels 32 Storm 1 or 2 349 Musicator Maxlite 96/96 Microleagu 4 BaseB 39 Sesame St. Publish 25 Wing Comm 1 Dixe 49 Visual Fantasy 65 Maxlite 14.4/14.4 419 Quick Score Deluxe 99 Microleague FB Dlx 42 Sesame St. Vol.1 17 Wing Commander 2 49 Volcano Practical Peripherals Recording Studio 75 Microsoft Golf Sesame St Vol.2 17 Special Oper Disk 25 Caddies 7.95ea. 3/$ 19 PM 2400 Internal 129 Rhythm Ace Midnight Rescue 30 Seven Cities of Gold 38 Speech Disk Utilities PM 2400 External175 Songwright5 Might and Magic 3/4 38 Shadow Prophecy 30 Wizardry Trilogy 60 Sportster 2400 Ext. 149 Trax for Windows Millennium 2200 25 Shanghai II Word Muncher 386 Max Sportster 2400 Int. 129 Milliken Storyteller . Joysticks 32 Shuttle 36 Adobe Type Mgr Wordtris 59 Sportstr 14.4 v.42bis309 Mike Ditka Ultimt FB 37 Sierra Starter Bndl 39 World Circuit After Dark for Wind 29 67 CH Flightstick Zoom External Mixed-Up Fairy Tale 30 Silent Service 2 37 Writer Rabbit Al Type 65 CH Game Card 3 31 Zoom Internal Mixed-Up Mother Gs 30 Sim Ant Autodesk Explorer 119 Your Prsnl Train SAT30 CH Mach3 Monopoly Deluxe 34 Sim City 30 Zoo Keeper 36 Bannermania Scanners Eliminator Game Cd 26 Moonbase Sim City Graphic Zug's Spelling Adv 22 Calendar Creator+ 55 Microtek 600G 829 Gravis Joystick 35 Muncher Bundle 30 Sim City Windows Advof Eco Island 22 Carbon Copy Microtek 600Z 1359 Gravis PC GamePad21 Murder 29 Sim Earth Dinosaur World 22 Central Pt AntiVirus 84 Scanman 32 160 Kraft KC3 Joystick 18 Mutanoid Math Chlg 31 Simpson Adventure 31 Race Thru Space 22 Choas Scanman 256 265 Kraft Thunderstick 28 NFL Challenge Prem59 Snap Dragon Colorix CD ROM NFL Print Pro Skins & Pads Maxx Flight Yoke 69 Copy II PC Snoopy Game Club 29 Maxx Pedal Dust Covers NFL Pro League FB 35 15 3D Cnstrct/Castl Mst 62 Solitaires Journey Corel Draw v3.0 35 379 32 Nigel's World 31 Space Ace 2:Bort 36 Aloha Hawaii Data Ease Personal 68 Grounded Wrist Straps 9 Mouse Yoke Ninja Turtle Arcade 25 Quickshot Aviator 5 32 Space Quest Bundl 39 Atlas Pack Desqview 2.4 Keyboard Skins Ninja Turtle: Adventr 31 Space Quest 4 Amer Bus. Phnbk. 39 Quickshot Game Cd 14 Desgview 386 Static Pads Nobunagas Ambition 37 Amer Hert Pict Dict 75 Space Quest 5 Quickshot Intruder 5 30 DOS Fax Large-System 15 louickshot Warrior 18 No Greater Glory 42 Speedball 2 Audubon Mammals 37 Dvork on Typing 31 Wist Pads Omar Sharif Bridge 37 Thrustmaster Fight 69 Speedreader 31 Express Publisher Autodesk Explorer 119 99 Stax (Dust Repellent) 5 Thrustmaster Pro Operation Neptune 35 109 Spell-a-saurus 30 Barney Bear School 26 Facelift StabxComplete Cleaning Weapons Control 79 Oibils Spellbound Far Side Calendar 49 Batik Designs System 15 Thrustmaster Pedal 109 Oregon Trail Spellcasting 301 Battlechess Hours: M.F 9AM to BPM Origin FX Beethoven Ninth Sat 10AM to 3 PM Spell Craft 59 Spell-it Plus Store Hours: M F Bible Library AM to 6PM Once Upon Time Sat 10AM to 3 PM Spel Jammer Out of This World Store: 1060 Randolph Ave. Rahway N.J. 07065 Bookshelf Outnumbered Spirit of Excalibur Britanica Family Chc 75 Overlord Spoils of War Britannica Family Dr 59 TERMS AND CONDITIONS Pacific Islands Sports Adventure Business Master 39 Paladin 2 Sprout! Master Card, Visa American Express & Discover Accepted. No Carmen World Dixe 65 Star Control 2 Paperboy 2 37 Cautious Condor Surcharge on Credit Cards. By mail: P.O. Box 3. Carteret. N.J. 45 Star Trek 25th Aniv. 37 Patriot CD Game Pack 07008. All Salos Are Final. NO REFUNDS! Exchange on defective 55 PC Globe Stickybr Math Tutor 30 merchandise with the same item only. No exceptions. All CIA World Fact Stickbr Pre-School 30 PC USA Products are new. We do not guarentoe compatability. Shipping Compton Encycpd 409 Stickbr Read Tutor 30 PC Study Bible charges: 48 contiguous states, $4 per order. Alaska, Hawaii. Conquest Longbow 37 Penthouse Jigsaw Stickybr Spell Tulor 30 Corel Draw Upgd and Puerto Rico $10 ist pe.. $i ca. add. APO/FPO and P.O. Boxes 149 Strip Poker 3 S6 lst pc. Si ea. add. Canada Se 1st pc. $1 Perfect General Electronic Cookbook 75 a. add. Hoavio Strip Poker Data (ea) 17 Dala Disk Font Master items extra. Foreign orders call for shipping charges. N.J. 39 Strike Commander 45 PGA Tour Golf Food Analyst Residents add sales tax. 49 Call for current price and Storybook Weaver 34 PGA Golf Windows 38 Game Collection availability. GOVERMENT AND SCHOOL P.O.'S WELCOMED. 45 Does not Studyware for ACT 30 Course Disk include closeouts, liquidations. Or limited quantities and Game Master Studyware GMAT PGA Golf Complete 49 30 Golden Immortal product must be shipping for your protectiori. We will only 28 Studyware GRE 30 Gunship/Midwinter 62 ship to the address the credit card company has on file. nt Mouser B5 Encore 4D Boxing 20 Dr. Quandry 31 A Train 39 Dragon's Lair Construction Set 22 Dragon's Lair 2 A320 Airbus Dragon Lr:Sing Cst 37 ABC Wide Wild Box 30 Duck Tale:Qst Gld 15 ABPA Baseball Duerk BaseB. Encyl 20 Aces of the Pacific 39 Dune Mission Disk Dungeon Master 29 Action Stations Dusk of the Gods Addon Disk 22-45 14 Dynamix Bundle AD&D Collect Ed 2 44 Earl Weaver 2 AD&D Starter Kit 44 Commisioner Dsk 12 Adv Willy Beamish 37 Play & Mgr. Disk 12 Air Buck's Earthquest Air Force Command 36 Eco Phantoms Alge Blaster Plus 30 Eco-Quest 1 Algebra Made Easy 25 Elvira 2:Jaws Amarillo Slim DICK 32 Entr Pak Win (ea) American Gladiators 25 Eye of Beholder Ancient Art War Sky 35 Eye of Beholder 2 38 Animation Studio69 EZ Cosmos Are We There Yet? 18 F-14 Tomcat Armada 2525 F15 III Armourgeddon F 15 111 Master Edit. 49 A.LA.CA F117a Stealth Fighter41 Automap 49 Facts in Action Automap Windows 48 Falcon 3.0 Automap Europe Oper Fight Tiger 25 B-17 Flying Fortres 39 Family Tree Maker 42 Back to Future 3 25 Far Side Calendr Backgamn By Geo 26 Farm Creativity Kit Bane Cosmic Forge 36 Femme Fatale Barbie Design F.F. Data Disk Barbie Fashion 25 Fighting for Rome 29 Barbie Adventure 25 Final Conflict Bart Simpson Hous 30 Flames of Freedom Battlechess (allver) 30 Flight of Intruder Battlechess 2 Flight Simul A.T.P. 37 Battlechess 400 39 Flight Simul(M.S.) 41 Battle Isle Arcft/Scen Dsgn 28 Battles of Napoleon 31 California 37 Battlestorm 31 Flight Planner 25 Berenson Bear Cnt 19 FS Pro Berensin Bear Color 25 Great Britian Berensin Bear Lettr 25 Hawaii Berlitz Interpreter 37 Instant Facit Loc. 26 Bicycle Poker 37 Instrumnt Pilot Scen Bill Elliott NASCAR 30 East/West U.S. 59 Birds of Prey Scenery Set 37 Blitzkrieg Scenery Set B 37 Bloodwych Scenery Enhn Ed 25 Bo Jackson Basel Sound & Graphic 25 Bodyworks Tahiti Bridgemaster Western Europe 19 Bug Bunny WrkShp 31 Floor 13 Buzz Aldrin Fly Grand Canyon 37 Captain Comic 2 Follow the Reader Carl Lewis Chaling Four Crystal Trazer Carrier Strike Free DC Carriers at War Front Page Sports Casino Pack 1 Gateway Castles Global Conquest Northern Campgn 19 Gobblins Castle 2 35 Godfather Castle of Dr. Brain 30 Gods 25 Cathy Daily Planner 43 Gold of the Aztec 31 Ching Ancient Emp 30 Gold Sheet ProFB 37 Challenge 5 Realms 35 Grand Slam Brdge 231 Champions Great Naval Battles 44 Champions of Krynn 20 Greens Chemistry Works 38 Gunship 2000 36 Chessmaster 30XX0 32 Scenario Disk 24 Chessmstr 3000 Win 38 Guy Spy Children Writ & Publ 39 Hardball 3 Chip'n Dale Data Disk Civilization Hare Raising Havoc 29 Civilization MPE Harpoon Classic 5 Headline Harry Coaster Heimdall Comic Book Creator 17 Heros of 357th Conan: Cimmerian 30 Hole in One Golt Conflict: Middle East 32 Hong Kong Mahjong 32 Conflict Korea Hoyle BK Game 1/2 22 Conquest Longbow 39 Hoyle Bk Game 3 30 Conquest of Japan 35 Humans Crime Wave Indiana Jones 4 37 Crisis in the Kremlin 39 Island of Dr. Brain 29 Crossword Magic 32 Jack Nicklaus Signtr 42 Cruise for a Corpse 33 J. Nick. Crse 3,4,5 14 Daffy Duck P.I. 15 J. Nicklaus Clip Art 17 Dagger of Amon Ra 39 Jetfighter 2 39 Dark Half Adv. Mission Disk 19 Dark Queen Krynn 32 Jobhunt Darklands 39 John Madden 2 31 Darkseed Jump Jet 39 Dark Sun Kid Pix Dealh Knight Krynn 32 Kid Pix Companion Dlx Paint Animation 85 Dix Paint || Enhncd 85 Kings Quest Bundle 39 Design Yr Own Hm 39 Kings Quest 1 VGA 37 Design Your Railrd 35 King's Quest 5 Railroad Robbery 19 King's Quest 6 Designasaurus II 23 Knowledge Advent 47 Disney Ented in Pk 47 Konami NFL FOOTB 3.0  19 BERDA2889 RRERABERDEGRALSKE.788 15 65 65 88 15 31 31 35 129 34 17 59 15 37 125 auswurms 8888888 47 w228  42 Circle Reader Service #117 "


"111111111 COMPANY REPORT No «Impressions\" Of Lion Tamers For U.K. Expatriate David Lester Ithough his adult career was begun as an A.C.A. (Associate of the Institute of Chartered Accountants), that bland and I colorless species often satirized by the Pythons, Impressions President and Managing Director David Lester insists that \"I do not want to be, nor have I ever wanted to be, a lion tamer.\" By bringing British software into the U.S. market, however, Lester may have chosen a profession which is as hazardous to one's mental health as lion taming could be to one's physical health. Yet, Impressions was not founded to import British software into the U.S. On the contrary, David Lester and Edward Grabowski established their company because they were unhappy with the European games scene. They felt like their entire market was saturated with lousy arcade action games which only sold because of film licenses. To be sure, the two principals had been working together since 1984 when Lester coded his first game, Just Imagine ...! (a strategy game about managing a software house), and Grabowski designed the graphics for the game. Although he had been playing games since the days of the Commodore Vic 20 and Clive Sinclair's Spectrum (the Timex computer in the U.S.), Lester was currently serving as a chartered account with the giant accounting firm, Arthur Young. Since he was working with fast-growing businesses, it wasn't long before Lester imagined he was an entrepreneur and running his own software house. Grabowski was working as a systems analyst/data processing manager at the time and, between the two would-be entrepreneurs, they knew several struggling developers (known as Black Knight) who were trying to find a publisher willing to invest in their ideas. Unfortunately, the existing publishers didn't want to publish much of anything that didn't have a high-profile license. So, Lester suggested putting up some cash to publish a few titles independently. He set up a deal with Zeppelin Games to distribute the new titles for a fee. Unfortunately, in spite of a huge hit and a number one sales position during the summer of 1989, the relationship foundered. Hence, Impressions rose from the ashes of an aborted affiliation and emerged as a distinct brand name. Yet, the line was beginning to emerge as a strategy game publisher rather than the arcade game publishers that were most successful in Europe at the time. Rorke's Drifi, the first product in Impressions' line of miniatures style games, turned out to be a phenomenal success. Indeed, it was enough of a success to encourage the two partners to decide in late 1990 to specialize in strategy games. Such specialization, of course, alienated the publisher from the mainstream of European computer games, but they attracted a very dedicated following and started to grow. At the same time, the MS-DOS world began to make great strides in Europe and the company decided that they should support the MS-DOS environment to the hilt. Of course, the strategic aspects of the design and the availability of the games on the strongest U.S. platform brought Impressions to the attention of U.S. publishers and distributors. Several U.S. publishers attempted to interest Lester and Grabowski in licensing deals but, as a former accountant with no desire to put his head into the mouth of lion without first surveying the size of the incisors, Lester elected to investigate the North American market thoroughly. He attended several Consumer Electronics Shows, had several interviews with CGW's editors and others, as well as weighing the offers from U.S. publishers. As a result, Impressions decided to transform \"The British are coming!» from a negative into a positive and establish their headquarters in the United States. Ironically, they elected to settle in New England. Their interest in strategy games and consideration of U.S. software talent led them into an association with Tom Carbone of Omnitrend Games. Since Omnitrend is a Connecticut-based publisher (Universe, Breach 2, Paladin 2 and Rules of Engagement) that has gone both the independent and affiliate routes (but never actually reached the sales plateau for which they were striving), Impressions elected to enter into a publishing partnership with the U.S. company and located their corporate headquarters near OmniPage 98 Computer Gaming World "


"Do You Have What It Takes To Win The Crown? CASTI ESII SIEGE & CONQUEST. CASTIESTI SIEGE&CONQUEST. \"King Charles dead, gather gold and grain, mine for iron, trade for timber and stone, research new weaponry, and pay the church for indulgences ...just a few of the fun things that go into a good, medieval day's work! A completely new military, diplomatic and administrative strategy game based on the best-selling CASTLEST Multiple computer players Ability to attack and defend Different story lines based on which personality you play Multiple ways to play and win Digitized movie footage VGA graphics and complete sound board support To order CASTLES II: SIEGE AND CONQUEST\" call 1-800-969-GAME, or see your local retailer. Coming Soon on MS-DOS! King Charles of Bretagne is dead, without a clear successor to the throne. In the Middle Ages, this means WAR! It's a war you intend to win, and a crown you intend to wear. Unfortunately, other inhabitants have the same idea. CASTLES II: SIEGE AND CONQUEST' is a game of medieval diplomacy, treachery, and power. To win, you must survive. To survive, you must scout the surrounding territories, defeat the native militias, subjugate the land with castles, feed and maintain the people, forge diplomatic alliances, appease the church and unite the land under your iron fist. Did we forget to mention the other power hungry barons? They're out to gain the same crown and you sit squarely in their path. CASTLES II: SIEGE AND CONQUEST is a completely new game system, based on the best-selling CASTLES\". In addition to building castles, you can now siege, attack and destroy them. Forge political and military alliances with the other computer players, or fight and conquer them in the fields or in their castles. Scout unknown territories, spy on and sabotage enemies, recruit infantry and cavalry, At through Bretagne and Europe, local (ords gathered their forces to stake claim    BioCar Interplay Productions 3710 S. Susan, Suite 100 Santa Ana, CA 92704 (714) 549-2411  1992 Interplay Productions. All rights reserved. CASTLES: SIEGE AND CONQUESTTM and CASTLESTM are trademarks of Interplay Productions, Inc. MS-DOS Screens l'ictured. Circle Reader Service #123 "


"trend's offices. Now the company maintains a small staff in the U.K. and is planning on producing about three-fourths of their upcoming products in the U.S. We talked to David Lester in his Farmington, CT office about the lessons that they were learning from their U.S. venture and he noted that U.S. gamers are less forgiving than European gamers when it comes to historicity, presentation and inadequate hardware support. For example, many European games do not even have mouse support for MS-DOS titles (since most of the machines are keyboard only), so clunky mouse support is considered better than none. In the U.S., inadequate mouse support will get a game clobbered. Nonetheless, Air Bucks and several other titles which did reasonably well in Europe were substantially overhauled prior to the U.S. release. \"Our goal,\" stated Lester, \"is for Americans not to think of our products as European games. We want to develop games that meet North American standards in every way.\" Then, he immediately demonstrated their upcoming Caesar for us. We were very impressed, but made a certain number of suggestions that we believed would improve the game. By the time we received the beta copy for the sneak preview (p. 140 of this issue), every suggestion had been implemented (and implemented well!). Lester did express some frustration, however, \"It seems the case that our good points are ignored and our bad points exaggerated, but that's probably life.\" He did pledge, however, that the future of his company would be built on quality strategy games, \"Games which players can enjoy without having to fight to get to the good parts and games that don't crash or give stupid results. It also means games which are good-looking and easy-to-use.\" Further, Lester underscored the company's commitment to Omnitrend's Interlocking Game System. He showed us the new offices where Breach 3 would be coded and allowed Carbone to demonstrate Paladin 2 and the editor for Rules of Engagement 2. Carbone waxed eloquently about the importance of artificial personality for providing satisfaction in future role-playing products. To demonstrate what he meant, Carbone invited CGW readers to submit photos and character resumes for consideration as characters in Rules of Engagement 2. The sidebar describes the process for \"enlisting\" as a character in the upcoming game. Finally, Lester pledged a unique set of strong titles (including Caesar) in 1993 and acknowledged that development work is occurring with regard to CD-ROM. As for the future of the company, the chartered accountant portion of Lester's make-up is not likely to let him miss hedging a bet. So, one can almost wager that Impressions will have solid distribution into Japan by the end of 1993. Yes, David Lester may not want to be a lion tamer, but he sure doesn't mind placing his head in the maw of a brave new world. CGW FYIF Conviction: 84 Religious Belief: Monotheism Conviction: 80 NAVCOM ENCODED TRANSMISSION Experience: (Experience listed in chronological order) CODED LEVEL: ARCHER ABLE THREE Qualifications: (Description of unique characteristics that are TO: LOCAL GROUP ASSOCIATED PRESS CORP beneficial to command of a starship. 15 sentences or less) FM: Admiral V. Bresheliah, Marine Operations, HQ Axia Note: The numerical ratings in the personality profile are from zero MG: to 99 with higher meaning that the individual has more in the cateThe Federated Worlds Armed Forces is actively seeking personnel gory. for command of select starships in our fleet. As such, all press are no Applications must be postmarked by February 28, 2372. In the tified that photos and resumes for qualified individuals should be event that this transmission were to fall through a time warp, entries submitted. Currently, there are 15 command positions to be filled. must be postmarked by February 28, 1993. Fifteen winning entries The positions available are aboard some of the finest starships in will be selected. our fleet. Successful applicants will captain a ship as part of the third The fate of the Local Group lies in your hands. Apply Today! fleet task force against the UDP. The war with the UDP goes well and Adm. Vikotor Bresheliah, Fleetops, Ft.A. we need additional qualified personnel to insure our final victory for END TRANSMISSION freedom of the Local Group. Remember, it is not just a job, it's a way Contest Rules: of life. Entries must be postmarked by February 28, 1993 and include a Applicants must submit a color photo and a resume. A sample recompleted resume and a color head shot (passport-style) of the ensume is provided here: trant's face. 15 winners will be selected on the basis of originality and Personal Information: realism of the character portrayed in the resume. There, resumes of Name: Christophe De Cour \"ideal\" or \"perfect\" captains are conSex (if any): Male sidered equally with those of 'insubAge: 57 LOAD SAVE AS NEW DELETE ESC ordinate\" or \"incompetent\" captains. Race: Human STATS. PHOTO TEXT RECRD PSYCH Winners will have their photograph Home Planet: Ivilose digitized into Rules of Engagement 2 Personality Profile: NIZOWA SERVICE RECORO NEQ-BCUS 0000 FWAFPEF#768HL34 along with their name and resume inAggressiveness: 89 NAME:YOUR NAME HERE YEAR BORN: 2323 CE JOUR formation. When released in the Ingenuity: 44 ENTERED SERVICE: 2351 CE FACE ALTO TI DVERTYFE Spring of 1993, a complimentary SERIAL NUMBER: 5F3510-AX78401 Bravery: 87 ALT-I TO INSERT HERE CURRENT copy of the game will be sent to all Leadership: 69 winners. Winners will be notified by Diplomacy: 34 or VIA PSYCHOLOGICAL PROFILE NFF-BCMO 0000 return mail. All decisions are final FWAFPSY#990HLOE Loyalty: 23 AGGRESSIVENESS 89 1 INGENUITY 89 1 and will be made by the staff of OmExperience: 43 BRAVERY 23 LEADERSHIP +44 + nitrend Software, Inc. and ImpresStamina: 27 DIPLOMACY N45 NI LOYALTY N: 78 sions Software, Inc., Omnitrend Humility: 89 EXPERIENCE 33 STAMINA 32 + Software, Inc. reserves the right to HUMILITY +94 57 Temperament: 81 TEMPERAMENT use all entries in future campaign Admires Most: Guile POLITICS BELIEF SYSTEM disks. Entries should be sent to: ImAdmires Least: Wealth LEANING: REPUBLIC LEANING: S MONOTHEISM pressions Software, Inc., 7 Melrose Political Leaning: Republic CONVICTION: 89 + CONVICTION: 49 Drive, Farmington, CT 06032. CGW Page 100 Computer Gaming World "


"LA Perilous Adventure of Galactic Proportions! THE V KOSHAN CONSPIRACY Fend off surprise attacks Meet strange beings from other worlds A new generation, programmable B.O.B. FEATURES:  Incredible futuristic VGA/SVGA graphics  Over 250 characters and more than 1,000 animated objects  Create your own Character or choose an existing one 4 flight simulators and one driving simulator Two combat options  Test your skill playing games in the arcade In the 22nd Century, a rare and precious alloy, Echiatone 21, is used to manufacture high end electronics and advanced weapons. The unscrupulous Koshan have managed to secure almost total control over the availability of this material and are using their position to gain more power and influence. The Bureau of Astral Troubleshooters, of which you are an agent, has been hired to release the stronghold the Koshans have over the Echiatone 21 supply. One agent has already failed, will you be able to stop them in time? UBI S TIL Published by UB! Saia  1992 1505 Bridgeway, Suites Sausalito, CA 94965 (415) 332-8746 Developed by Computer's Dream Now Available for IBM RC & Amigal Circle Reader Service #110 "


"Macho Women With Bows Amazon: Guardians Of Eden from Access by Allen L. Greenberg TITLE: Amazon: Guardians of Eden SYSTEM: IBM PRICE: $69.95 PROTECTION: None DESIGNERS: Clinis lones and Doug Vandegrift PUBLISHER: Access Salt Lake City, UT KALDIANS GUARDI Basic ACCESS In the year 1541, the Spanish explorer Francisco de Orellana proved to the Lworld that insanity, even when temporary, can be used as a viable marketing technique. He did so by naming a South American river the \"Amazon\" after, he insisted, he had been attacked by an army of female warriors resembling those of Greek mythology. The notion that this river's incredible rain forest actually concealed some supernatural force which could, if provoked, intrude on modern, industrialized society, became extremely popular during the early part of this century: first, in literature and later, on film. The latest entertainment to draw inspiration from these alleged Greek fighters from South America is Amazon: Guardians of Eden, an action-adventure game from Access Software. Presented in the multi-chapter format of the 1940's movie serials — most often associated with Republic Pictures it boasts a good, solid story and an outstanding presentation, The player controls the actions of Jason Roberts, a recent college graduate whose older brother, Allen, has been lost during an expedition in South America. Although the story unfolds from this masculine perspective, there are several sequences in which the player is able to control the actions of Maya, Jason's mysterious leading lady. The story does include several recognizable plot devices including a mysterious package in Jason's mail, for which his apartment is ritually searched and ransacked at precisely the moment the package is not there. There is also a villain whose taste for foul play is exceeded only by the amount of sweat and oil he secretes, as well as a local town-lord whose brain might best be described as several beans short of a burrito. Amazon is a moderately difficult game to complete — at times approaching the complexity of some of the later releases from Infocom. Novice-level players may take advantage of on-line hints. These are \"purchased\" with \"hint points,\" 170 of which are available as the game begins. The most explicit hints are also the most costly. Players who complete the game with less than 100 points remaining will be rewarded with a slightly less gratifying conclusion to the adventure. manages to avoid the insulting, often embarrassingly sophomoric fashion in which women are reduced to objects of bestial lust, as is commonly the case in this genre. When the female warriors appear, they manage to do so with as much dignity as an appearance in a movie serial will allow. Although there are moments of graphic gore, parents who are only concerned with a game's sexual content need have no concerns over Amazon. The resemblance between Amazon and the serials by Republic or Columbia Pictures is only a superficial one. At times, the story's complexity and elaborate settings more resemble the mega-budget wonders presented in Paramount's Indiana Jones films than the old serials. The serials were often characterized by endless stretches of California desert interspersed with the cheapest of movie sets and props. Furthermore, although Amazon is divided by chapter headings, the trademark \"cliffhanger» junctions in which a leading character appeared to have been seriously killed until the next chapter — are conspicuously absent. However, Access has clearly carried their excellent story far beyond anything produced by Hollywood in its naive years. HOM E 4 LEXTIL TOIMEE42EXT Amazon challenges the player to peel back the layers of subterfuge and mysticism which protect a powerful secret, hidden in the Amazonian River Basin, from those who would use it in the service of evil, wealth and power. To its credit, despite the obvious sexuality of the characters who share the game's title, Amazon Amazon is also a very time-sensitive game which often requires the player to complete certain tasks with only seconds to spare. In addition, there are several sequences in which Jason is required to pilot a canoe down the game's title river. This low-key arcade exercise may prove frusPage 102 Computer Gaming World "


"General Tegel has plans for some covert operations. Not things he could order someone to do... but things he could pay someone to do. And, as it happens, you-and your colleagues can be bought IR NE JETTER DOTI CIBO SPAZOS OTELLE NOST ST LET 15 CARA SOLO FRASE HORRESTED NEBOLOUS CONCESI35 CESSFER OFERTORE BlueTESNICIO Mindcraft presents: Tegel's Mercenaries ... an intriguing concept in futuristic strategy gaming. You lead a squad of interplanetary mercenaries picked from twenty of the most notorious men, women and aliens this side of the Magellanic Clouds.  Belk Otem, with his Delaser rifle and cybereye \"Smokey\" Okrara, the green-skinned, two-trunked chlorophant \"Bombshell\" Divan, \"Tunes\" Krakowski, and 16 more! Start with a \"diplomatic\" mission to the ice planet of Nueva Nevada, then go wherever the general sends you next. Just remember the most important thing: you're in it for the money! When you are through with Tegel's tours of duty, strike out on your own! Use the Scenario Kit & Working Interface Developer to build missions to challenge the most hardened mercenaries. A new level of excitement, from the makers of the award-winning Magic Candle and Siege! MINDCRAFT 2291 205th Street, Suite 201, Torrance, CA 90501 (Actual screens may vary.) Circle Reader Service #85 "


"TWIN trating for more literaryminded adventurers and, once again, raises the question as to whether the presence of an action sequence serves to enhance or detract from the entertainment value of a non-arcade program. The mouse-driven interface works quite well in Amazon, although a combination of both mouse and keyboard input is highly recommended. Either device may be used to guide Jason or Maya across the screen. Other commands are constructed by first clicking on an \"action\" icon such as \"take\" or \"talk to,\" and then on the object or person involved. As with many programs containing highly detailed graphics, players are often forced to search the screen for pixel-sized objects, without which Jason will fail in his quest. Similarly, the crowded and convoluted terrain often makes simple movement of the characters a frustrating ordeal, particularly during the time-dependent sequences. The graphics may be challenging, yet there is no denying that they are masterfully produced. Painted pictures and digitized photographs are combined la N EW EXT9 are able to switch back and fourth between normal and SVGA modes at any time during the game. Even without the advantages of SVGA, Amazon loses none of its playability or entertainment value. Amazon will run on a 286 CPU at 12 MHz, although a 386 at 20 MHz is recommended. Likewise, while many sound boards are supported, a SoundBlaster or compatible board is also recommended. SVGA users must be sure to have a VESA driver available. About 10 megabytes of hard drive space are required for the program. An unlimited number of games in progress may be saved to disk, and these rapidly occupy additional room. Greek, female, mythological warriors from South America as well as movie serials from several decades ago and the already highly-tribuatried Amazon River have all been uniquely honored by this outstanding piece of work from Access. It's refreshingly challenging story, matched only by its top-of-the-line presentation, make Amazon easily recommendable. CGW seamlessly. Clever animations are liberally incorporated into the story-telling for eye-popping effect. Finally, digitized music, sound effects and human voices are scattered throughout the program, making for a presentation which will prove difficult to surpass, by any standard. In addition to increased resolution, users of super-vga systems will enjoy several benefits, including \"chapter summary\" icons. These will trigger a replay of specific events from earlier in the drama. SVGA users will also enjoy more rapid access to items being carried in Jason's inventory. For no apparent reason, players PORTINIUM) ENCHANTED HORIZONS ANNOUNCES: A new, low cost version of the original PORTINIUM Play-By Mail game is now available. PORTINIUM Il incorporates all the features of the original game version. Players receive five standard game units on each of the primitive and medieval levels of game play. Timetravelinto the conventional and futuristic technology ages affords players the opportunity to capture additional pieces to equal or surpass levels of conquest in PORTINIUM. The struggle to become a dominant player and participate in \"The Gathering of the Four\" remains a challenge for the strategy-minded player. Receive over twenty double-sided pages of high-quality Laser Graphics output per turn. Over 24,000 sectors to explore. No hidden costs. $10.00 per turn. 3-week turnaround. ALSO AVAILABLE: PORTINIUM, the original time-travel P.B.M. fantasy at a new, reduced price. The PORTINIUM Hi-Tech and Lo-Tech games offer many of the larger game features, in one age of play. PORTINIUM $15.00 per turn (4-week turnaround) PORTINIUM HI or LO-TECH $5.00 per turn (4-week turnaround) One-time, LIFETIME setup fee of $25.00 includes: 198-page Hi-Gloss Player's Guide,startup packet, free start-up turn, plus free turn and subscription to game newsletter. ... Write or call for free brochure ENCHANTED HORIZONS P.O.. Box 9897 Spokane, WA 99209-9897 (509) 325-6941 Circle reader service # 60 Page 104 Computer Gaming World "


"SUBVERSIONTM 1.0 War has been declared! As Commander of the Attack Submarine \"Nautilus\", your mission is to engage any and all enemy vessels within the region and obliterate them. Warning! They are armed with high-tech equipment and they are out to sink you! Chase down and sink destroyers with either a speedy torpedo or a nuclear-tipped missile. Blow enemy submarines out of the water as they close in on you. Dodge the cumbersome but sensitive mines -snaga cable and it's off to a watery grave. Send out your frogmen for some demolition work. Watch your resources! With only two supply ships, you'll have to be careful. Use them unwisely and you may find yourself sinking helplessly towards an implosive end. SubVersionTM is a challenging balance of strategy and tactics. With 10 levels and over 300,000 combinations of game play, Sub Version is sure to provide you with hours of destroyer-bashing fun. orpedo Sonar Missile 21861 15 Status Crew 16 Supply Depth 56 Convert 19 Engine 5048 You destroyed 2 mines, Captain Nemo. You sank 2 destroyers, sir. Depth charges! Light damage Captain Nemo Your supply ship was sunk by gunfire! Score 470 Timer 0500 Ships 24 Level 5 Auxiliary Controls Available for Macintosh and compatible machines. Coming soon for IBM PCs and other computer systems. Macintosh 16 color screen shown See your local retailer or call: Game Created by: Captain Byte's Bit Shop Point Of View Computing, Inc. Box Artwork by: Josh Stigers 5050 Edison, Suite 221 Computer Artwork by: Steve Laveirge Colorado Springs, CO 80915 719 591 5320 Copyright  1992 Captain Byte's Bit Shop. All rights reserved worldwide. SubVersion is a trademark of Point Of View Computing, Inc. Circle Reader Service #92 "


"Lurking Deep Within The Shadowlands A Detailed Look At Domark's Role-Playing Release by Robin Matthews | SELLOWLANDS tion's Alone in the Dark breaks the mold, but the rest all share common ground. Shadowlands is a role-playing game that doesn't exactly break new ground, but it does have an approach that is unique and features that set it apart from the rest. First, though, we must introduce the plot. The main baddie, the Overlord, i.e. Cthul Tol Anuin, decides to release a horde of nasties from his dungeon domain, eponymously known as the Shadowlands. As a result, amidst the rape, pillaging and burning of the Sapphire of Kuranos, Vashnar was slain. Nevertheless, his spirit lives on and, if the gamer can reach the dark temple with the Altar of Regeneration and place Vashnar's bones on said altar (in the middle of the Shadowlands, past the dungeons and temples, the undead and the dogs of hell, beyond the mazes and pyramids), Vashnar can be restored and, of course, everyone will live happily ever after... A party of four adventurers become guided by the spirit of Vashnar and undertake the mammoth task. This is all fairly standard CRPG stuff, but it is the Shadowlands system that is out of the ordinary. The actual approach is that of an off-set isometric view from above, and looks very similar to the combat and exploration system subsequently used in Micro Prose's controversial Darklands, but is much simpler and far more playable. Each of the four party members can be individually controlled and sent off on their own or in parties with other party members. This totally flexible approach means that several quests can be underDOMARK TITLE: SYSTEMS: GRAPHICS: SOUND: PRICE: DESIGNER: PUBLISHER: Shadowlands Amiga, IBM EGA, VGA Adlib, Sound Blaster, Roland $49.95 Dean Lester Domark San Jose, CA It's been available in Europe for some months now, but Shadowlands has just been officially released in the US. Since the IBM platform has been around for quite a while, it should be no surprise that most of the ground rules have been established for the major game genres; aircraft simulators, golf games, football software, graphic adventures and role playing all have their own similar basic concepts. Once in a while, a release like Origin's Ultima Underworld or ImoFRIEST Page 106 Computer Gaming World "


"STEVE MERETZKY'S SPELLCASTING 301 VGA 256-COLOR follow the sun and the scent of coconut oil straight to Fort Naughtytail where Ernie Eaglebeak parties hardy with his fraternity pals in this high energy seaside romp. Ernie is hoping to find sand in all the wrong places, but ends up battling a rival fraternity from back home in a series of zany beach contests complete with gorgeous babes, Wet T-shirts, mud wrestling and body surfing. Welcome to the Royal Intesta Hotel.. VESA compatible Super VGA support. nie must use his wits and a healthy dose of magic to save the honor of his fraternity. There's a lot to do, and the Ft. Naughtytail Police Dept is desperately trying to keep everyone from doing it! ..where you can relax after a day on the beach. Richly detailed environment allows unlimited exploration. 256-color VGA! Stunning original art plus digitized \"Girls of Spring Break.\" or enjoy the finest in evening entertainment. W LEGEND @ 1992 Legend Entertainment Company Spellcasting 301: SPRING BREAK is a trademark of Legend Entertainment Company. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. Actual VGA graphics shown ENTERTAINMENT COMPANY 14200 Park Meadow Drive, Chantilly, VA 22021 Distributed by Accolade, Inc. To order, visit your local retailer or call 1-800-245-7744 Circle Reader Service #79 "


"meulen taken at any one time, or several different solutions applied to one puzzle at the same time. Combat also becomes very varied, as one can attack multiple enemies, attack from completely different angles or, even set complicated ambushes. This multi-player approach sounds terribly complicated, but this is not the case. The Shadowlands interface revolves around the main screen and the four character portraits in a very simple manner. The standard portrait is the Action Portrait, which shows the full outline of the character split into arms, legs and head. Each of the arms and heads has a specific function — as one examines the portrait, the left hand is the Action Hand, the right hand is the Transit Hand. Similarly the left leg is the Lead Leg, the right leg is the Walk AGION leg. One of the hallmarks of Shadowlands is the innovative use of Photoscape, a real-time system that realistically lights all areas of the game world, casting shadows...and light. This results in light playing a major role in the game, with areas becoming illuminated (and plunged back into darkness) as one explores. Many items, monsters and traps cannot be seen without illumination, and light will even affect the behavior of foes and traps (rats for example are attracted to light). Torches, magic and explosions all provide light. Hence, the ebb and flow of darkness during the game gives meaning to the name Shadowlands. Within the dungeons, some walls might obstruct the view of the party or of essential items. Fortunately, this is dealt with in a novel way, by removing the wall and replacing it with a red line. For all intents and purposes, it acts as a wall, but its removal allows greater use of the gaming world and very little lost space. The puzzles are not that difficult and sometimes the characters' artificial intelligence is a FRIEST! bit dim. For example, to get from A to B the party must walk around a corner. If one tries the straight line method, they just plough into a wall and stay there until re-directed. Also, when opening doors it is possible to trap a character behind the door as it opens! These are minor grumbles and really the only ones that can be levelled against Shadowlands. Frankly, its approach and gaming system offer a nice mixture of the familiar and the original. That, in itself, is no mean achievement nowadays. Cow ARRIO Selecting the Action Hand allows one to engage in hand-tohand combat or allows one to use an item in that hand. The Transit hand is always free of items, but is used to collect, drop, throw or operate. Any item picked up is collected by the Transit hand and transferred automatically to the Action hand and/or inventory. Selecting the Walk leg puts the character into walk mode, and he will follow the cursor. The Lead leg performs a similar function, but when invoked it causes ALL other party members within the character's line of vision to follow (i.e. puts those members into squad mode). The portraits also provide other information, changing when appropriate from Action Portraits to Facial, Reversed or Skull Portraits. In the Facial, the body outline changes to a full face; this means that the party of four has become split for some reason, and that this character is not within the visible range of the active character. When they do come within range it will change to an Action Portrait. This range is relevant as it is only then that the squad mode can be used. The Reversed mode is a further development, meaning that not only is the character out of range, it is also on another level of the game. Skull Mode, as one might expect, means that the character has died and joined the great game master in the sky... The Head mode has two functions, reading and eating, both of which are essential. Character statistics are well presented, with levels for Health, armor, food, water and force, as well as growing experience levels for Combat and Magic. The magic system requires the use of scrolls, and there is a wide choice of spells as the game progresses. Combat is kept relatively short and sweet; Shadowlands does not have the repetitive hordes of monsters found in the SSI games, but there are enough regular punch-ups to keep gamers on their toes. \"Powerful programs of growth and adventure\" THE MAGIC MIRROR ... a toolbox for your mind. E. Kinnie, PhD., Clinical Psychologist. $39.95. MAGIC MIRROR II ... experiences for your mind. $39.95. MERLIN ... an apprenticeship. $29.95. I CHING... ancient Chinese wisdom and prophecy. $29.95. THE MAGIC MOUNTAIN ... a journey into another reality. Not for children. Male and female versions. $39.95. Blue Valley, 29 Shepard St.. Walton, NY 13856 MasterCard/Visa 1-800-545.6172 (after 5 p.m.) IBM/Compatibles Circle Reader Service # 46 Page 108 Computer Gaming World "


"Trevor Sorensen's Sorensen's STAR LEGIONS virul . ** by Supernova Creations and Mark Baldwin 19191 ene FALB can Hike SININ SATURDAT From the creators of the Star Fleet series, Star Legions puts you in control of a mighty Imperial fleet invading the hated Alliance. Your warriors fight for the glory of the Empire, to earn battle honors for their legions, and to wipe democracy from the galaxy. Only the strong should survive to rule! Each new planet is a fresh challenge. Bombard it with your battlecruisers and destroyers. Assault its critical sites with your elite shock troops, then follow them with waves of heavily armored warriors. Lead your troops at the strategic or tactical level as they conquer in the name of your emperor. Then on to the next planet! Your victories bring rewards and honors, leading you to your ultimate goal of gaining the Empire's most noble rankImperial Tribune! Star Legions provides deep and exciting real-time game play in a truly advanced space war simulation with a unique \"Invasion Command Console\" graphic interface by Brett Keeton. Your legions will conquer an almost unlimited variety of planets, frozen or scalding, barren or drenched. Hours, months and years of enjoyment are yours as you command the Star Legions. MINDCRAFT 2291 205th Street, Suite 201, Torrance, CA 90501 (Actual screens may vary.) Circle Reader Sondico #84 "


"COMPUTER WARGAMING WORLD «I Came, I Played, I Conquered» Broadsides & Gripeshot The Parable of the Prodigy Son by Alan Emrich et me begin by hoping that the holidays were filled with love and joy for everyone. I've said repeatedly (and will die saying it, I suppose) that wargamers, more than any other computer gaming niche, need to strengthen their gaming and friendship bonds by being connected to each other via modem. Fortunately for all our readers, I do not have to preach this sermon today. Allow me, instead, to cite an example that may hit every wargamer reading this a little closer to home. Our own writer, Richard Savage, posted the following note up on the Prodigy network to the wargamers there on December 5th: \"Guys; Christmas just came three weeks early for me today. I came home from work and there, sitting on my kitchen table, was a package for me sent by Dan Thielen. I was puzzled, as I hadn't talked with Dan for a while on Prodigy. In fact, I thought Dan might harbor a little ill-will for me.... Curious, I opened up the package and there, in all its resplendent glory, was Guderian's Blitzkrieg by The Gamers the one board wargame I wanted for Christmas! There was also a nice Christmas card and a note wishing me a happy holiday from Dan. l'll tell ya, I was choked up. No lie. My wife had asked me what I wanted for Christmas and it came down to either Conquered Kingdoms or Guderian's Blitzkrieg. Finances being what they are nowadays, having both just wasn't in the cards. I just wanted to use this board to publicly thank Dan and let you all know what kind of guy he is... I guess what I'm trying to say is that this [on-line bulletin board is really a lot more than a few guys just gabbing about the latest products on the market. I consider a lot of you my friends, if you know what I mean. Every time I read a note from Arthur Kimes, or 'the Major or JEB (Joe Bellerose), it's like hearing from an old friend. We may not always agree on everything, but we sure do have a good time and a lot of lively discussions. Every night after my daughter is tucked into bed, I make a beeline to see what's up with the gang' and get the latest scoop on what is happening in our hobby.... I appreciate the friendships I've made on this board and lively discussions we've had. Let's never let this camaraderie end. And thank you from the bottom of my heart, Dan T.\" What did Dan Thielen reply? «... If you will, please allow me to fill in the rest of the story. A few months ago, while the Honorable Mr. Savage and I were discussing various topics of interest, he discovered that I have a particularly fond interest in the period of the \"Great War.\" And from the kindness of his heart, the Honorable Mr. Savage sent to me an unplayed, unpunched copy of an aged AH game, 1914. For doing this he asked nothing in return-no dollars, no next-ofkin-only that I enjoy the gift he presented. So, even though I am greatly touched by the honors you all have given me, it is my humble opinion that the one who deserves the honors is Richard. I was merely returning the favor he bestowed to me....\" See? I'm not just talking here about the on-line wargaming community and what you're missing (besides unexpected gifts) if you're not a part of it. Let me end with one final and very personal experience of what had recently happened to me through computer networking. Even as I write this column, two weeks before Christmas, I know that I'll be receiving a very special gift this year thanks to The Sierra Network, a bride! Julie and I are to be married on December 27th, 1992. She lived in Michigan and I live in Southern California and, through our messages, we found true love and will both be getting married (for the first time) at age 33. Granted, that is a fairly rare example of what a dedicated wargamer can do when he's connected via modem to a computer network, but the friends, feelings and fellowship are real. If you've finally decided to connect up, check our opponents Wanted section on page 126. That will help you get into the first CGW Inter-network computer gaming tournament which, I'm happy to report, got a tremendous response from our readers. I'll be busy organizing the event and will announce what game will be played, along with the tournament rules, a couple of issues from now. CGW Art by Rodger MacGowan; Copyright 1993 RBM Graphics HOMPUT WARGAMING WRhd In this issue ... Strategy Notes for Castles Il.... 114 Conquered Kingdoms Tips and Notes .. 124 Opponents Wanted 126 Strategies for V for Victory: Utah Beach 128 Multi-Player Red Baron ..... 136 Caesar Sneak Preview ...... 140 Page 110 Computer Gaming World "


"Machiavelli Designs presents the PC version of: New World Order Need an Opponent? Pick One! QAQE When: World War II (1939-45+). Choose from scenarios or the campaign game. Where: Earth global simulation with multiple zoom levels. Toggle units, weather and place names. Who: 1 to 5 (smart?) human or intelligent computer players. You select difficulty and complexity. What: Realistic, historical simulation of strategic, military, diplomatic, economic, political, scientific and social factors. Detailed specifications of all major weapons and production systems. How: As Churchill, Hitler, Roosevelt, Stalin or Tojo, you struggle to shape the future of humanity. Can you forge your will into a New World Order? FREE SERVICE SAVE! Pre-order before Feb. 1 and we pay shipping. You save $6! | MDIT List Fill out and send us this coupon and we will match you up with gamers in your area. This is a totally free service... just what we think the hobby needs. I wish to be enrolled in MDI's gamers' matching service. I Name: release MDI from any liability for providing me with this First Middle Middle Last service. (No purchase necessary). Street Signature City State Zip Country (we need your release to enroll you) Arca code Phone I play: Strategy/Military Role playing Fantasy/Sci. Fiction Other: Please send me copies of NWO at $59.95 each. I want players for: (list in order of preference) Add $6 shipping and handling. California residents add sales tax. Disk type: 3 1/2\" 5 1/4\" Check enclosed Master card Visa Discover MACHIAVELLI DESIGNS INC. Credit card # Exp. date Send coupon to: Machiavelli Designs, Inc. 2550 Ninth St., Suite 204 Berkeley, CA 94710 or Call: 800-955-4MDI FAX510-480-0032 Signature (required for credit card authorization) New World Order copyright 1992 by Machiavelli Designs, Inc. New World Order trademark 1992 by Machiavelli Designs, Inc. Circle Reader Service #81 "


"A New Dimension Tim Tyler a.k.a. 'Tyre\" Toronto, Canada \"Merlin, I'll cast a cure spell on you.\" Ed Avis a.k.a. \"Merlin\" Camden, NJ \"Tyre! Help! I'm wounded.\" DRAKTER CETASR STAR CRUISER Guli says, 'Heu. Balar, why don't you open the door El and we'll ouer the rear\" 00 ....liai 100 xonen door north cheat c limb tap Chat and play games with people from around the world without ever leaving your home. MPG-NET gives you something you can't find on floppy disk; on-line realtime contact with the most puzzling and challenging entity of all time. Another human mind. Play pulse-pounding, intriguing, forever challenging games with stunning graphics and vibrant sound. Games that are constantly improving so they won't get stale. Form strategies, share secrets and solve puzzles with up to 100 folks from around the world, twenty-four hours a day. In addition to our games we have Bulletin Boards so you can write public messages to other players, and Electronic Mail to send private messages. We also have Chat Rooms in which you can shoot the breeze LIVE with people from around the world. All you need is a modem, a phone line, and a computer, IBM-PC compatible, Macintosh, or Amiga. ome visit a land where dragons roam free, rodents grow to unusual size, and adventurers are the endangered species. Team up with players from around the world. Together, explore mysterious lands, armed only with your enchanted weapons, psionic spells, and wits. You'll find untold riches and glory while solving intriguing puzzles, and destroying the mightiest of beasts. MPG-NET brings you the ultimate in fantasy role-playing. The year is 2300 A.D. We've I discovered stardrive and colonized hundreds of new solar systems. In the process, however, we pissed off some very nasty aliens. To say they hate us is an understatement. They'll do anything to eliminate us from space. No compromises. This is all-out interstellar war. We need your help! Based on GDW's classic space combat game, MPG-NET brings you the on-line version of Star Cruiser a 3D, multi-player campaign of splitsecond action.  1992 MPG Net Inc Multi Pryer Games Network and MPG-Net are service marks of MPG-Net, Inc. The Kingdom of Drakkar is a trademark of Drakkar Corp. Empire Builder is a trademark of Mayfair Games, Inc. Operation Market Garden and Star Cruiser are trademarks of GDW Games, Inc. All other brand and product names are trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective holders "


"in Entertainment ...Your Multi-Player Games Network. Brad Elk a.k.a. \"Sauer\" Louisville, KY \"If you need some help, just page me.\" Lori Zini a.k.a. \"Diana\" Waco, TX 'What tore you up, Merlin?\" EMPIRE OPERATION IMARKET-GARDEN 12:46:05 MPG-NET is accessible from over 600 cities in the United States and over 80 cities internationally. It costs less than you think. Fees range from $2.00 to $3.00 per hour. Send the reply card or call 800-245-0317 and we'll send your account number, password, start-up kit and 10 free hours — right away. It's easy to enter this remarkable new dimension, your Multi-Player Games Network Three elite Allied paratroop divisions drop into enemy territory. Their mission, to seize the bridges leading up to the Rhinethe last obstacle of Allied advancement into the heart of Germany. They almost succeed. Scattered remnants of Axis forces already defeated in France must guard the Rhine — the first-line of defense for the Third Reich. They almost lose. MPG-NET brings you the on-line version of Operation Market-Garden, GDW's classic two-player war game, based on the biggest airborne operation in history. FO 'ombining two great American loves: Railroads and Money! Now you can capture the entrepreneurial spirit of America and build your own railroad empire. The wheels of progress are you and up to five other players from around the world, locked in a power struggle of epic proportions. It takes planning and ambition to build a railroad empire. And only the best will endure. Experience MPGNET's on-line version of Mayfair Games award-winning, classic board game. MPG-NET Your Multi-Payer Games Networks 800-245-0317 Circle Reader Service #87 "


"The Armchair Strategist's Guide To Interplay's Castles II: Siege & Conquest by Vince DeNardo, Interplay Productions, Inc. William C. Fisher, Quicksilver Software, Inc. ecoming King in Castles Il demands careful planning and resource management. It also requires a clear understanding of the rules of the game. In this article, CGW has granted us the space to publish an expanded version of the Armchair Strategist's Guide that appears in the Castles II manual. WARNING: This guide offers specific hints and playing techniques for Castles II. Players who prefer to learn the subtleties of the game on their own should not read beyond the Artificial Intelligence section of this document. General Playing Hints Some subtle aspects of Castles II may be lost in a first reading of the manual. Here are some pointers to underscore these aspects. 1. Use the right-hand mouse button to speed up the clock while waiting for an event to occur. This works in both the Strategic and Tactical modes. 2. Defending military forces are always approximately one-half the size of a player's total military force. The number of soldiers that a territory can muster in its defense is based on the total size of the army owned by the controlling player. To be precise, the number of each type of unit is equal to one-half of the number of such units in the player's army, rounding up. For example, a player with three infantry and five archers would defend with two infantry and three archers. The defender still has an edge, however. The strength of each individual defensive unit is adjusted upward slightly to account for the defender's superior knowledge of the terrain. The defender also gets to choose where the battle will be fought. This offers a significant advantage to the clever player. The attacker will have a very difficult time winning unless the odds are greater than 2:1 in its favor (this includes morale, which is not immediately measurable, just as in real life). The battle system works both ways: when the player is attacked, the player defends with half of the total force allotment. Should the battle be lost, the player may launch a retaliatory attack on the computer player, who will defend, in turn, with half of whatever forces remain after the first attack. Also, remember that every unit lost to either player removes one unit of that type from the player's forces. However, since the defender only fields an army half the size of its total force, it can never be wiped out in a single battle. The attacker, however, can be completely eliminated by a solid defender. A counterattack after such a rout is usually devastating to the once-proud aggressor. The intent of this design is to encourage back-and-forth skirmishing. It also places the greatest risk of loss on the player who has the most to gain — the attacker. This design applies to both the computer players and the human players, they abide by exactly the same rules. This includes the rule which provides at least one Infantry and one Archer to a player with no military forces. We assume that any territory, human or computer, is capable of offering some defense to an attacker, however meager. 3. An army's morale is based on the Happiness of the kingdom's population. Battles may be won and lost solely on morale. It has a very strong effect on the outcome. The wise leader keeps the Happiness of his or her people at least as high as that of any neighboring kingdom. Artificial Intelligence Castles Il employs two multi-level artificial intelligence engines for the computer players; one for Strategic mode, another for Tactical mode. Only the Strategic Al is discussed in this analysis. Page 114 Computer Gaming World "


"All those who think \"Patriot\" is the ultimate Gulf War simulation, please raise your hands.  PATRIOT The experts agree. PATRIOT is more than the most authentic re-creation of Desert Storm ever made. PATRIOT is the definitive land warfare simulation for the IBM PC. With its initial Battleset, you'll engage in the mother of all battles\" as Coalition forces meet battalion-tobattalion with the defiant troops of Saddam Hussein. Command over 2000 units from either the Coalition or Iraqi side the most lethal high-tech arsenal of firepowereverto scorch the face of the Earth. Stunning 256 color Super VGA graphics capture the fury of modern ground warfare as never before. Astateof-the-art database, interface and mapping system Harpoon and Patriot are registered trademarks of Three-Sixty, Inc. All other product and corporate names are trademarks and registered provide authenticity that other wargames can only dream of. And future Battlesets make PATRIOT expandable: always combat-ready for future global conflicts. Like World War III in Europe or land wars in Asia and South America. A revolutionary simulation as current as the morning headlines. That's PATRIOT. But what else would you expect from the creators of HARPOON ? To order, visit your favorite software retailer or call 409-776-2187 trademarks of their respective owners. 1992 Three-Sixty, Inc. All rights reserved. PHOTO REUTERS BETTMANN Circle Reader Service #40 "


"The Best Deal Around... MOKU POLY DELUXE A-C-L:S  WWE:1946 Miutinuutiirluu utili HANTAR EERE Now Only: $ 1800 la v oiture Dynamix: Aces of the Pacific WWII:1946 Now Only: $360 Velocity: Spectre Now Only: $3600 Virgin: Monopoly Deluxe Japan surrendered unconditionally to the United Nations in 1945, ending the cataclysm of WWII. But what if things were different? In WWII:1946 you will fight battles that could have been if the U.S. had launched a 1946 invasion of Japan. Fly prototype aircraft (including the first jet fighters), and participate in a fictional scenario of Operation Olympic, the Allied plan for a fullscale assault on the beaches of Japan! (Add-on disk, requires Aces of the Pacific) (For IBM DOS) Experience virtual reality when you drop into the cyberpunk battleworld. Search out and destroy smart Enemy Robot Craft, while at the controls of a customizable BatlleCrafl -a fully armed and armored futuristic tank-like vehicle. Shoot your enemies, collect flags, recharge your shields and race against the clock as you bolile your way through ever increasing levels of astounding game-play. (For Mac) Combines 90's technical know-how with the oldfashioned fun of the best-selling board game of all time! You'll get more deluxe for your bucks with dazzling animation of all ten official tokens, easy interface, a game activity log that keeps track of all of your previous moves and ability to play by traditional or custom-designed rules! (For IBM DOS & Windows) DRAGON'S LAIR IT: CURSE MORDREAD MAVU Now Only: $360 ReadySoft: Dragon's Lair III The Curse of Mordread In revenge for her brother's destruction, the evil Now Only: $4200 Access: Amazon 90BG Also Availabl SOFTWARE Databases CAD/Graphics Communication Tax Preparation Accounting/FAX Home Productivity Desktop Publishing Languages/Utilities Operating Environments Spreadsheets/Integrated CD ROM/MULTIMEDIA HARDWARE & ACCESSORIES Printers/Monitors Modems/Scanners Mice/Joysticks Storage Devices wilch, Mordread, has captured your beloved Daphne and the children. You must test your skills in a frantic quest through time before your family is trapped forever in the Vortex of Eternity (For IBM DOS) Journey back in time to the year 1957 on an expedition to the dark heart of the Amazon Basin. A desperate, crazed message sends you on a perilous search through a land where legends come to life, danger hides behind every corner and incredible treasures wait to be discovered. Features VGA graphics, full musical score, multiple windows and more. (For IBM DOS) E U Ki -YE--OFAX 10011-508-443-5615 -: LD 70007 15 34 + For Orders And A Catalog, Call 1-800-228-7449 VISA 180 MasterCard COMPUTEExpress Orders accepted on our loll free number Mon-Sat 8:30 to 5:30 EST. Visa, MasterCard & Discover card accepted. All credit card orders processed within 24 hours. Continental US shipments: UPS ground S5, Airborne Overnight $7. Corp, Gov't, Educ, APO, FPO, International orders accepted. No soles tax except for Mass add 5%. Personal checks will delay shipment 5 business days. Products covered by manufacturer's gutrantee. Defective software replaced immediately. No COD's. Item availability & price subject to change witout notice. 15% restocking fee for non-defective returns Shop our on-line stores located on PRODIGY, CompuServe, Genie, Delphi, LA Online and America On-line. PRODIGY CompuServe, Genio, Delphi, LA Online and America Online cic Modemarks of their respective companies Circle Reader Service #115 DUCOVER Savoy Products, Inc., 31 Union Avenue, Sudbury, MA 01776 "


"The Strategic Al consists of mediumlevel and high-level portions. Actions are initiated through the same task mechanism used by the human players. In fact, the AI players were tested by letting one of them run the game in place of the human, even displaying results on the same user intertack, Build Castle, Saboteur, Spy and Diplomat are high-level Al tasks. The computer evaluates each task based on a large number of variables. It may decide to attack a particular territory because it contains a commodity that is in short supply, or it may back off if it finds a castle there. It weighs all of the possibilities and chooses the one which best achieves its goals. face. Starting the Game At the beginning of the game, the player's focus should be on grabbing territory. This cannot be done in a haphazard manner, though. The most important goals should be: 1. Building a solid, defensible perimeter; 2. Ensuring a supply of all four types of resources; and 3. Cranking the kingdom's economy up to top speed as soon as possible. Most of the players begin in one corner or another of the map. The best strategy for these players is to aim for an initial size of five or six territories. It is advisable to conquer a few immediately, building a \"wall\" of player-controlled territories, behind which may be a few that have not yet been conquered, but are inaccessible to the other players (the other players cannot \"leapfrog\" and get to them). Then, these other territories may be conquered at one's leisure. Territories will revolt if not subjugated by a show of force. One must therefore begin building castles once control of four or five territories. It is good to try to build just one castle, preferably in a territory which borders every other territory owned. If one is very fortunate, or has planned well, the territory in which the castle is built will have Gold as a resource. Said castle should be, at least, 100 points strong, so that it will prevent revolts in all neighboring territories. The castle will not prevent revolts until it reaches an appropriate level of completion, though. So, the wise player will start construction early enough to ensure that the serfs will not be up (in arms) before the castle reaches this critical size. One good way to speed up the construction process is to skip the moat: it slows the construction process significantly. Politics also plays a critical role in the game, even at this early stage. Solid leaders keep their people are happy; make sure that the Pope likes them; and try to keep their enemies at bay by buying them off occasionally (at least, until their own arStrategies of the Month Vol. 17 A monthly column to improve the quality of play During the six months of playtesting for Castles II, many of the Al algorithms were rewritten several times until they had the versimilitude desired by the designers. Fortunately, the computer players use the same tasks as the humans. The tuning factors were based on empirical adjustments derived from human playtesters. The result is a series of opponents who play at a level equivalent to that of an expert human player. The Easy and Impossible difficulty levels in the game were created by adjusting more than a dozen factors in the playing style of each opponent. The medium-level Al maintains appropriate levels of commodities and military forces, and ensures the safety and security of the kingdom. It issues Gather and Recruit tasks whenever it decides to increase the level of a commodity or increase its military strength. The medium-level Al can send Merchants. (This is a good way to find out if a computer player is experiencing a shortage of a given resource, by the way). The medium-level Al also starts a Happiness task when the morale of the population drops, sends Scouts to neighboring territories and Polices the realm if it is being Sabotaged or Spied upon. The medium-level Al does not think very often. During playtesting, this Al was found to be extremely agile in its response to changing conditions in the game unfortunately, more agile than one could expect a reasonable human opponent to be. Hence, the frequency of its thinking was reduced to compensate for this. One other adjustment was made. Since the computer players do not get the benefit of plots or random events, which often give \"freebies\" to the human player, the Als were given the ability to obtain one unit of a given resource, provided that no units are available in their stockpiles and the computer wants to run a task that requires that item. This also compensates partially for problems which arise due to their reduced frequency of thinking. This only applies, however, if they are completely out of that commodity. The computer players cannot pile up large stocks of goods in this manner. Also, they do not possess this special ability at the Easy difficulty level. The high-level Als handle the more complex thinking in the game. They use a modified version of a traditional Al approach to prioritization of their various options. This keeps them from becoming locked into simple patterns of action. AtBATTLES OF DESTINY: Drones (missiles) are powerful defensive weapons, You must build a radar station before you can build missiles in that city. Once missiles have been built, you can fire them by manually addressing that city. You might find it convenient to leave one active unit in each missile city, pressing the space bar cach turn that you don't want to fire a drone. Also, the higher your industrial level in the production center where your missiles are located, the wider the range for the missiles. A great challenge Play the scenario Andropoli without the use of air transport. CONQUERED KINGDOMS: Use those exotic units such as dragons and wizards. They add a tremendous amount of depth and richness to the game play. If you are shying away from using these units, try picking only one type per game. Learn all the intricate uses of that one piece before you try the next one. I can't emphasize enough the value of these units. Wizards (through teleporting) can jump with a small force to far off castles (neutral or cncmy) and render that surprise attack. Dragons can double attack each combat (both units in a square) and fly over anything. Phantoms, with their scare thing can virtually double a small army. Etc. Etc. SOLITAIRE\"S JOURNEY and THE LOST ADMIRAL: These games continue to get awards and award nominations (Electronic Gamer). They are great. If you haven't tried them yet, go for it, we don't think you will be disappointed. Quantum Quality Productions 1046 River Avenue, Flemington, N. J. 08822 (908) 788-2799 Circle Reader Service #96 February 1993 Page 117 "


"VKNG D) SOFTWARE, INC. Key: I=IBM PC and compatibles; M=Macintosh; A=Amiga Adventure/Role-Playing IMA IMA IMA IMA 39 37 39 aimplgruppe 39 . Might & Magic !!! Might & Magic IV M&M Clouds of Xeen Merchant Colony Pirates Gold Pool of Darkness Prophecy of the Shadow Quest for Glory! (VGA) 35 . 20 . 20 37 37 39. 32 . 6/93 . 38 38 38 38 22. . Ultrabots Wing Commander II Special Operations Special Operations 2 Speech Pack X-Wing 15. 34 33 33 34 Nova 9 Out of this World Planet's Edge Powerhits: Sci-Fi Privatcer Rex Nebular Rise of the Dragon (VGA) Space Quest I Space Quest IV Space Quest V Spelljammer Sur Control 2 StarFlight StarFlight 2 Star Trek 25th Anniversary Star Trek Next Generation Strike Commander Twilight: 2000 Twilight 2001 | Compaign Quest for Flory II Quest for Glory III Ragnarok Realms Secret of Monkey Island Secret of Monkey Island 2 Secret of the Silver Blades Shadowlands Shadow Sorcerer Spoils of War The Summoning Tales of Magic Treasures Savage Frontier Ultima VI Ultima VII Forge of Virtue Ultima VII Part 2 Ultima Trilogy 2 Ultima Underworld Ultima Underworld 2 Uncharted Waters Veil of Darkness Warriors of Legend Wizardry Trilogy Wizardry 6 (Bane) Wizardry 7 (Crusaders) Tactical & Stralgie Wer Simulation 36 . 30 . . Past IMA AD&D Starter Kit AD&D Collector's Edition 39 . AD&D Collector's Edit.2 43.. Betrayal at Kronder 42. . Black Crypt 32. 34 Castles 36 20 36 Northern Camp Castles 11 Challenge of Five Realms 42 Champions of Krynn 19. . Conquests of the Longbow 42 . 37 Curse of the Azure Bonds 34 34 Darklands 39 . Art Disk w/HB 15 . Dark Queen of Krynn 34. 34 Darkside of Xeen 20.. Dark Sun 49. . Daughter of Serpents 32 Death Knights of Krynn 19 . Dragonlance Collec. Ed. 43.. Eye of the Beholder 19.34 Eye of the Beholder 2 38 38 Eye of the Beholder 3 3 /93 . Four Crystals of Trazere 34 34 Gateway Savage Frontier 31. 34 Heimdall Inindo King's Quest Enhanced King's Quest IV King's Quest V(VGA) King's Quest VI 42 . King's Ransom 2/93 2/93 Legacy Legacy of Necromancer TBA.. Legend of Kyrandia Legends of Valor Lord of the Rings 36 36 Lord of the Rings 2 Lost Vikings Magic Candle 2 38 . Magic Candle 3 Kampfgruppe A classic platoon-level tactical game of combat on the eastern front from 1941 to 1945. Historical scenarios: Stalingrad, Berlin, Kiev, and Bryansk, or make your own. \"Kampfgruppe is the tactical wargamer's dream.\" (CGW #98) IBM $19 32. Fall 1/93. . Hint Books AD&D Clue Books 10-12.. Chuck Yeager Handbook 16 . Civilization Darklands HB wlArt Disk 15 . Eye of the Beholder 2 Falcon Air Combat Lord of the Rings Lucasfilm Air Combat Harpoon Battlebook Magic Candle 2 Might & Magic III Planet's Edge Railroad Tycoon Rex Nebular Run 5 Magurine 1-17 Sierra Hint Books Star Trek 25th Anniversary Ultima VII Ultima Underworld Wing Commander Wizardry 6 (Bane) 2/93.. naeugoss noisoon5 0 39. 39 42.. Present empire Campaign This tactical and strategic war simulation allows you to take command of 3,000 vehicles on over 20 historically accurate maps in size ranges of 625 to 10 million square kilometers. Locations range from the Sahara and Russian steppes to the Battle of the Bulge in the Ardennes. Includes a map editor, over 150 vehicle types, and covers all aspects of combat (land, air, and sea). Control either Allied or Axis forces. IBM $37 38 . 33 37 1/93 . . . Amazon Castle of Dr. Brain Classic Adv. Pak (LucasArts) Creepers Digeneration Dagger of Amon Ra Elvira 1 Elvira 2 IMA 3193 . 37 37 39 39 39 43 . 43 53 . . 42 38 42.. 42. 42 38 . . 42 . 43 43 43. 43 Freddy Pharkas Heart of China Indy Jonesi Fate of Atlantis Jaws of Cerberut Leisure Suit Larry Trilogy Leisure Suit Larry 5 Lost Files Sherlock Holmes Lost Treasures of Infocom Les Manley/Lost in LA The Manhole Maniac Mansion 2 Oh No! More Lemmings! Out of this World Police Quest 2 Police Quest 3 Rocketeer w/Sound Source Sivage Empire Sea Rogue Waxworks Willy Beamish MERCENARIES X-Wing Fly an X-wing, A-wing, or Ywing for the Rebel Alliance against the Imperial Empire. Includes combat training and tours of duty, pilot promotions, decorations, replay camera. Digitized speech, dialogue and music directly from the film, 3-D polygon, 256-color graphics. IBM $37 Hardware Adlib 49 CH-Flightstick 49 Gravis Eliminator Gamecard 29 Gravis Joystick Gravis Ultrasound 130 Pro Audio Spectrum.16 239. SoundBlaster Pro SoundBlaster Pro Basic 150 SoundBlaster Mierochannel 269 Thunderboard Thrust Master flight stick 69. Thrust Master throttle 99 January Specials IBM Ami Future MINERAR Viking Ratings < < Breach 2 Buck Rogers 2 Centurion Champions of Krynn Conflict: Korea Death Knights of Krynn Eye of the Beholder Kampfgruppe Keyboard Templates MI Tank Platoon Tony LaRussa Ult. Baseball Yeager Air Combat «  Mercenaries You've just graduated from the marine academy and are offered the position of commander of your own group of mercenaries. You'll take your grup on top-secret interplanetary missions that even the military doesn't know about. Experience a tour of duty on your home planet or other world locales. Create your own squad members. Also includes scenario builder. IBM $37 ArmourGeddon 37 . . Bartletech 2 19 . Buck Rogers 15. 33 Buck Rogers 2 34. . Breach 2 21  33 Cyberspace 1793 1/93 Dune 37. 37 Dune II 37 . 12/1 Epic Elite Plus Free D.C Gateway Hard Nova Jonny Crash Leather Goddesses Phobos 2 Legions of Krella/Star Legions 37. . \"M\" Mantis Martian Memorandum Megatraveller Megatraveller 2 39. 37 Megatraveller 3 393 . Battles of Destiny Conquered Kingdoms Front Page Sports: Football Pacific War Stunt Island Shadow President Comanche: Max. Overkill King's Quest VI Ragnarok Star Control II Air Bucks Spaceward HO! (Windows) Summoning Spelljammer B+ B+ B+ B+ 15 . M "


"For information and release dates To place orders in U.S. and Canada 1-(800) 852-6187 SAME DAY SHIPPING depending on availability. Hours: Mon-Fri 10am-10pm Eastern (6am7pm Pacific). UPS $4.00 (AK & HI= $11) COD $8.00. Second day air: $2.50 extra. SHIPPING OUTSIDE OF U.S. is $12 & UPS Foreign available. UPS OVERSEAS:3-day shipping time! Prices are subject to change so please call first! PHONE: (404) 840-7906 24 HR. FAX: (404) 840-7925 2890 Lake Colony Drive, Suite 12, Norcross, GA 30071 Please have credit card ready! Open Saturdays 10-5 for your convenience. Key: I=IBM PC and compatibles; M=Macintosh; A=Amiga Strategy FRONT PAGE SPORTS O PROU IMA Sports IMA 12/9. 22. . 36 36 Jump Jet \"Ace Pack\" KGB MI Tank Platoon Megafortress Mission Disk 1 or 2 Megafortress Megapack Pacific Islands II Patriot Shadow President Special Forces Utopia 37.. 2893.. I w%#bmnnn . SimCity 2000 SimFarm SimEarth Sim Earth (Windows) SimLife SimLife (Windows) Solitaire (Windows) Solitaires Journey Spoils of War Stunt Island Super Tetris Theatre of War Tristan Virtual Reality Studio 2 12/15 . Football 37. 42. . 32. . Pre-WWII IMA Ancient Art of War Skies 37 .. Battles of Napoleon 36 . Blue and the Grey 4193.. Caesar Civil War Vol. 1.2 or 3 27. Conquered Kingdoms 37. Conquest of Japan Discovery of Columbus 37. Genghis Khan 37. Gettysburg Gold of the Americas L'Empereur Liberty or Death 37 . Merchant Colony 32. . No Greater Glory 43 . 43 Nobunaga's Ambition 2 Paladin 37 . . ... 3/93. Red Baron (VGA) Mission Builder 20 . Romance of 3 Kingdoms 43 . Romance of 3 Kingdoms 2 4242 Siege Dogs of War 19. . Warlords/Enhanced 32. 32 . 32.. Sci-Fi 1 /93 . Front Page Sports: Football Already receiving an \"A\" rating is this superior football game from Dynamix. Excellent animation and sound effects. control leagues with up to 28 teams and 1400 players. One and two player modes. Instant replays, 47 man roster with injured reserve, drafting, trading, training camp, free agents and more. Best action football game yet! IBM $42 STRIKE ENGLE Armada 2525 Battlefield 2000 Breach 2 Cyber Empires Firetcam 2200 Imperium Mantis Speech Pack Reach for the Stars Robosport (Windows) Rules of Engagement Rules of Engagement 2 Second Conflict (Windows) Space Inc Spaceward HO! (Windows) Spaceward HO! (D05) Star Legions Tegel's Mercenaries When Two Worlds War IMA All-Amer College Ftbl 92 37 . Car and Driver Front Pg Sports: Football 42.. Front Pg. Sports: Baseball 3/93 . Front Pg. Sports: Bsktball *93. . Games: Summer Challenge 35 . Games: Winter Challenge 36. Greens Hardball 3 MLBPA Player Disk 15. Stadium Disk Jack Nicklaus Sig. Ed. Golf 42 Course Disk #2 1893 John Madden Football II Links 39. 39 Links 386 Pro Course Disks 1-7 16 ca. . MicroLeague Baseball 4 33.. NCAA College Football '92 37 . NFL Challenge 42. NFL Pro League '92 37. Pro League Baseball PowerHits: Sports 32 . Tony LaRussa Ult. Baseball 19 . Add-On Disks 15ea . Tony LaRussa 2 Wayne Gretzky Hockey2 36 36 Hockey League Sim. 28. 28 World Circuit 37. 34 Patriot Land-based tactical combat from the creators of Harpoon. Incorporates logistics, engineering, air transport, artillery, and tactical air support. Command 2,500 military units down to the batallion level with SVGA graphics and polygon-based topographical maps. First BattleSet covers the Gulf War with multiple \"what-ifconfigurations. Modem-play. IBM $42 MICROPROSE 38. 38 39. 39 4193. . 34 . . 6/93. . 37. . 93 .. 37. . 293.. F-15 III Using a revolutionary new visual system, F-15 III will create the most realistic dogfighting so far. 2-player ability via modem or direct link will allow formation flying, head to head combat or pilot/RIO teams. 32. IMA V for Victory Market Garden 3793. V for Victory Casserine Pass 2020 V for Victory. Stalingrad 3Q3Q Victory at Sea 1993Western Front 37 . 32 General Keyboard Overlays A-10 Tank Killer AT.P. Aces of the Pacific 10 . B-17 Flying Fortress 10 . C. Yeager Air Combat 10 . . F-15 Strike Eagle 11 F-117A Nighthawk Falcon 3.0/3.0.1 10 . Flight Simulator 4.0 10. Jetfighter I and II 10 . . Megafortress Secret Weapons Luftwaffe 10 . A-Train Construction Set Air Bucks Battles of Destiny og iOS IBM $47/42 FOR VICTORY CD-ROM World War II Aces of the Pacific 42 WWil: 1946 25 . RAF in the Pacific IQ.. Aces Over Europe Campaign Disk 1 20 Action Stations v3.2 Data Disk 17. 17 B-17 Flying Fortress 38. : Battletank Barbarossa Bismarek Campaign Carriers at War Carrier Strike Fire Brigade Fleet Commander Fleet Med Grand Fleet Great Naval Battles 42 Expansion Disks 19.. In Harm's Way Malta Storm 39 39 MBT Central Germany MBT Kursk 39 39 New World Order 293.. Pacific War Panzer Battles Patton Strikes Back 17 . Prelude to Jutland 29 . Second Front . 37 Secret Weapons Luftwaffe 44 . DO-335 plane disk 20. . HE 162 P-38 P-80 Seventh Fleet Silent Service 2 Silent Service 2 Classic Task Force 1942 39. . Their Finest Hour 44. 19 Third Reich 28. 28 V for Victory Utah Beach 43 . . V for Victory. Velikiye Luki 42 42 . . IMA BattleChess 4000 (VGA) 12/1. . BattleChess 4000 (SVGA) 37. . Buzz Aldrin's Race to Space 12/92. . Civilization 38 42 38 Civilization Master Edition 45. Classic 5 IQ2Q. Classic 5 (Windows) Command HQ Classic Dominant Species El-Fish IQEmpire Deluxe Eric The Unready Global Conquest Heaven and Earth 32 . . Hong Kong Mahjong 33. . Incredible Machine 32 Lemmings 2 28932793 Lost Admiral 38 . Lost Admiral Enhanced 1292.. Monopoly 28 .. Monopoly Deluxe DOS/Win 37. . Perfect General 38 38 WWII Scenario Disk 22 22 Great Battles 20th Cen. 25 Populous 2 World Editor Powermonger WWI Scenario Disk Power Politics PowerHits: Movies Risk Risk (Windows) Sargon V Sharif On Bridge Slurid On Bridge (Windows) 32 Shuttle 38.. 38 38 SimCity 34. 34 Sim City (Windows) 38. Modern 7th Fleet 39. 39 A-10 Warthog 12/93A Line in the Sand 27 . . ATAC 34. . Air Force Commander 37 . Comanche: Max Overkill 43. Expansion Disk 1 Conflict: Korea Conflict: Middle East Crisis in the Kremlin F-117A Nighthawk (VGA) F-15 il Classic F-15 II F-15 III \"Ace Pack\" Falcon 3.0 45 . Operation: Fighting Tiger 25. . Falcon MC Global Effect Gunship 2000 Campaign Disk 1 Harpoon v1.3 Battleset 2 or 3 Bartleser 4 Harpoon Designer Series Harpoon Scenario Editor 28 Harpoon Challenger Pak 43.52 Harpoon Challenger Pak SE. 50 . Harpoon II 1993 . Harrier Assault Jump let 42. . .. 57 2/93 9/93 3/93 42 7/93 3/93 V for Victory: Velikiye Luki Second game in the V for Victory series is even better than the original. Divisional and regimental strategy wargame on the Russian front. Reviews of this product are excellent. If you liked the first V for Victory, you'll love this one. IBM $43 The 7th Guest Battle Chess Buzz Aldrin's Race Into Space Campaign Challenge of the Five Realms Chessmaster 3000 Cyberspace Dark Sun Dune Eco Quest Great Naval Battles King's Ransom The Legend of Kyranda Loom Lost Treasures of Infocom II Mantis Manhole Murder Makes Strange Deadfellows North American Indians Pacific Islands II The Secret of Monkey Island Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe Sharif on Bridge Shuttle Space Quest IV Star Trek 25th Anniversary Edition Total Baseball Willy Beamish Wing Commander + Secret Missions 1 & 2 Wing Commander/Ultima VI m0mHQH SimAnt Circle Reader Service #121 "


"mies are strong enough to fight the enemy troops effectively). maintenance costs will drag down one's economy, should the army become too large. Diplomats are useful for \"buying off» hostile enemies. They remember friendly actions and are less likely to attack if they have reached a diplomatic agreement recently. Unfortunately, they cannot recall armies who are already in the process of attacking, so it is possible to send a Diplomat too late to be effective. Also, Military Might Many players initially try to win the game through brute military force. The following hints should assist the determined militarist: 1. Obtain Knights as soon as possible. Build up to a Military Ability Rating of 6 by recruiting and attacking. Don't Police the realm unless it's essential. Take a risk in order to build up forces more rapidly. 11 Tough Choices Once those initial territories are under control, players may choose any one of several approaches to the game. The game can be won through military conquest, administrative power or political expertise, although the obvious military approach is the easiest. It is best to make a decision at the very beginning as to which overall strategy to use and stick to it as long as possible. The game will place far more demands on one's resources than they can support. Thus, one must decide whether to make the general populace happy, build alliances with one's neighbors, build castles, or build a dominant military force. The overall strategic choice will determine the player's appropriate emphasis. There are a few general pointers that apply to any strategy. The player who doubts their importance should simply remember that the computer opponents are using them. 1. Use every available ability point. Even if one is not engaged in a Military task, for example, it is possible to apply the otherwise unused Military ability points to another task, such as a Gather. This serves the dual purpose of increasing the speed of the gather task and giving one the extra push toward raising your ability rating. The player's Military ability will not increase as quickly as if he/she were running Military tasks, but any contribution in the right direction is helpful One should stay friendly with the Pope, regularly monitoring relations between church and state. Remember that attacking a friend of the Pope (noted by the word \"Blessed\" next to that player's name in the Council display) causes one's own relations with the Pope to decrease by one point. It is very easy, therefore, to become excommunicated through carelessness. It is wise to stay friendly, or at least on neutral terms (Relations of 4 to 6), with one's neighbors. The better one's relations with one's potential enemies, the less likely they are to unilaterally commit aggression or sabotage. Also, Merchants are likely to get better deals if they are dealing with friendly parties. Unless one Maintains a reasonable army size, one may discover that neighboring powers are attacking because they presume they have found an easy mark. Also, note that the 2. 6. enemies remember hostile acts much longer than they remember the nice ones. Think in terms of small campaigns. Before launching attacks, pick a small number of territories to capture, build up a good-sized army and go! Also, after grabbing a couple of provinces, it is wise to consolidate gains, rebuild the army and erect castles for defense. Never get greedy; an over-extended empire crumbles very quickly! Always harvest the available resources. They tend to dissipate rapidly since everything the player does inevitably costs money and/or goods. Try to resist building a castle until one's Administrative Rating hits 5, allowing a second task in that category. Then, keep harvesting as the building proceeds apace. Even without a good mix of commodities in the territories owned, one can still have a good economy. One should try to harvest the commodity most in surplus, then trade them for the commodity needed. Build just enough castles to prevent revolts. One can build them without moats if necessary to facilitate construction. It is absolutely vital to have plenty of Iron and Wood initially, in order to build a big army. Then, make sure there is plenty of Food and Gold to pay for these forces. If forces are lost due to failure to pay, it can cost one the game. Choose enemies carefully. Only attack one at a time. Trying to conquer two at once will almost certainly end in disaster. Send plenty of Diplomats to the other players to keep them off balance. Ambush a weak opponent. Call a Council and see who is at war with whom. Then, attack a neighbor who is busy fighting someone else. Don't attack Blessed players unless there is no other choice. The Pope will cause such ignominious attackers a great deal of grief. 5. 6. Administrative Prowess In addition, a player with six well-chosen territories and many castles can prosPage 120 Computer Gaming World "


"How To Order Indexes and Older Back Issues are Available Back Issues: $4 each Please add 15% for shipping In the center of this magazine there is a detachable order envelope. Simply use the blank lines on the order form to specify issue numbers. As some issue numbers are in limited supply, please list one or more alternate selections (this will expedite your order in the event one of your requested issues is sold out). CGW Indexes CGW Article Indexes for the years 1987, 1988, 1989, and 1990 are now available. Please send a large self-addressed stamped envelope and $1.00 per index (specify which years) to: Computer Gaming World, Index Dept., P.O. Box 730, Yorba Linda, CA 92686. Older Back Issues For a list of older CGW back issues and their prices, please send a large self-addressed envelope to: Computer Gaming World, Archive Dept., P.O. Box 730, Yorba Linda, CA 92686. Please allow four weeks for delivery. Note: to avoid unnecessary delays, do not include a request for both indexes and older back issues in the same letter. Please send separate requests. #80 THE SAVAGE EMPIRE; Links: CES Report (Part 1); Imperium; Command HQ Replay (Part 2); Full Metal Planet; Dragon Lord: Space 1889; Spellcasting 101; King's Quest V; Magic Fly; Pharaoh's Tomb; and more! #81 MEGAFORTRESS: Power Monger Review; The Lord of the Rings: More Command HQ Designer Notes: Stealth Affair; CES Report (Part 2); Test Drive III; SimEarth Setup Hints; Red Baron Review; Hard Nova; Thunderstrike; Computer Game Artist Portfolio; Quest for Glory Desinger Notes; Warlords; and more! #82 MIGHT & MAGIC III; Covert Action Review: Spirit of Excalibur; More Their Finest Hour Tips; Setting up Multiple Ultima VI and Savage Empire Saved Games; PRODIGY's Baseball Manager; Das Boot; Elvira; and more! #83 TIMEQUEST;B.A.T., Eye of the Beholder: Flight Simulator 4.0; Falcon 3.0; Battles of Napoleon Scenario; WWI Air Combat Survey: Modem-to-Modem F-16 Combat Pilot; Lemmings; Moonbase; Overlord; Galleons of Glory: Educational Games Survey: Road & Car; and more! #84 MAGIC CANDLE I; Continuum; DarkSpyre; Nuclear Submarine Tactics; Virtual Reality, Red Baron Tactics; Lexi-Cross; Awesome Tips; Willy Beamish Preview; Wing Commander Secret Missions; Robots in SimEarth; and more! #85 CHUCK YEAGER'S AIR COMBAT; Summer CES; On-Line AD&D; Star-King; Pick'N Pile; Harpoon Strategy; Medieval Lords; Centurion Strategy Second Front Strategy; and more! #86 This issue is sold out! #87 ULTIMA VII: Heart of China; Role-Playing Game Survey; Behind the Screens at Lucasfilm; Might & Magic/Faery Tale Adventure Cartridges; UMS II; Conflict: Middle East; Medieval Lords Strategy: Xenocide; Martian Dreams, Armada 2525; and more! #88 ROCKETEER; Tenth Anniversary Issue; Computer Games History; Wing Commander II; Games of the Year; The Sierra Network, Toejam & Earl; Tony La Russa's Ultimate Baseball; Wargame Paiktography, 1900-1950; Second Conflict; Western Front; and more! #89 STAR TREK 25TH ANNIVERSARY; Earl Weaver II: Making of Links Course Disks; Gunship 2000; Educational Software Survey: F-117A; Objection!; Amarillo Slim's Dealer's Choice; Rules of Engagement; WordTris; Holiday Buying Guide; SPA Report, and more! #90 The New CARRIERS AT WAR; Vengeance of Excalibur; Virtual Reality Conference; 4-D Boxing; ABC Wide World of Sports Boxing; Secret of Monkey Island II; Martian Memorandum; Might & Magic III; Intertainment '91; Police Quest 3; NFL Pro League Football; Dragon's Gate On-Line Game; Conflict: Middle East Replay; Patton Strikes Back; No Greater Glory: The Lost Admiral; and more! #91 WIZARDRY VII; Predator II; The Black Crupt; Conan the Cimmerian; The Games: Winter Challenge; Riders of Rohan; The Perfect General tips; Gunship 2000 tips; Megafortress scenario disk; and more! #92 ACES OF THE PACIFIC, January CES, Stanford Wong's Video Poker; Are We There Yet? SimAnt; Public Domain Role-Playing Games; Murder! L'Empereur, and more! #93 CHAMPIONS; January ES Part II; Falcon 3.0; Bloodwych; Lost in L.A.; Nova 9; The Miracle Piano Teaching System; Millenium; MicroLeague Football: The Coach's Challenge; The Next President: Global Conquest; The Romance of the Three Kingdoms II; Sid Meier's Civilization Strategy; and more! #94 DARKLANDS; Computer Acquire; Free D.C.; Shuttle; Mike Ditka Ultimate Football; Uncharted Waters; Star Trek: 25th Anniversary, Super Tetris; NFL Football; Spelunx; Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe Strategy, Sid Meier's Civilization Update; and more! #95 LAURA BOW IT; SPA Report; Populous II; Genus Game System; Uncharted Waters tips; CD-ROM Report; Twilight 2000; Celtic Legends; Crisis in the Kremlin Preview; Sound Card Survey: Computer Game Design Abstracts; Wild Wheels; Solitaire's Journey Preview; Action Stations! module; Multi-Player BattleTech; Modern Warfare Paiktography: Birds of Prey: and more! #96-GRAND PRIX UNLIMITED; Sea Rogue; Planet's Edge; Ultima Underworld; Lemmings tips; Roberta Williams interview; Populous World Editor, World Circuit; Computer Game Developers Conference; Gods; Big Three; Castles tips; Fleet Commander Designer's Notes; MBT: Middle East; Fighter Duel; and more! #97 STUNT ISLAND; Summer CES Report; Jack Nicklaus Signature Edition Golf; Spaceship Warlock; Chessmaster 3000; Out of This World; Computer Game Developers Conference Part II; Legends of Future Past; Virtual Reality Studio; Magic Candle II; APBA Baseball Products; Federation II; Carrier Strike Preview; Theatre of War Preview; Computer Third Reich; Global Conquest Replay; and more! #98 AMAZON; Omar Sharif On Bridge; A-Train; Summer CES Part II; L-Zone; Dune; Indiana Jones & Fate of Atlantis; Wolfenstein 3-D: Air Bucks Preview; Dusk of the Gods: Ultima VII; Darkseed; High Command; Carrier Strike Replay; Conflict: Korea; Napoleon l; and more! #99-X-WING FIGHTER;Laura Bow II; World Series of Poker, Global Effect; Gateway: Solitaire's Journey: Sea Rogue tips; The Two Towers; Waxworks Preview; Lemmings tips; Nemesis!: Aces of the Pacific tips; Galactic Frontier; Carrier Strike Replay; Fireteam 2200 Replay; Spoils of War Preview: The Lost Admiral tips; Fighter Town U.S.A., Siege; Siege tips; Conflict: Korea Replay; and more! #100 COLLECTOR'S EDITION; 3900 Games Later; Legend of Kyrandia; Jack Niclaus Signature Course Design 1; Crisis in the Kremlin; Magnetic Scrolls Collection: The Dark Half; Tetris Classic; Hong Kong Mahjong; Links 386 Pro; Grandmaster Chess; Games of the Year Awards: Science Fiction Paiktography; Computer Game Design Abstracts; Guy Spy; Napoleonic GAP Program; 100 Years War Preview; PBEM Diplomacy: Carriers At War Design Notes and more! #101 BUZZ ALDRIN'S RACE INTO SPACE; Holiday Buying Guide; Jack Nicklaus Course Design Il; John Madden II & NFL Football: Heaven & Earth; SPA Report; Darklands tips; Robosport; Mantis; Floor 13; Cruise for a Corpse; Shareware; Dune Il Preview; Warlords tips; Team Yankee: Air Force Commander; A Line in the Sand Preview, and more! #102 ULTRABOTS; King's Quest VI; The Games: Summer Challenge; Quest for Glory 3; Plan 9 From Outer Space; Realms; NHLPA Hockey for Sega; Darklands tips; Spear of Destiny; Spellcasting 301: Spring Break; Red Baron Mission Builder; B-17; Great Naval Battles in the North Atlantic; Theatre of War: Operation Fighting Tiger, and more! "


"become increasingly aggressive toward the \"pretender.\" Claiming reduces relations with all other players. This can rapidly force one into warfare. Make sure that the loss of points due to the drop in relations, plus the drops due to the inevitable attacks to be repulsed, will not be so severe that the Pope rejects the claim entirely. Second, note that deciding when to Claim is a tricky decision. If the gamer is the first to try, everyone will take their shot at knocking you down. Waiting for someone else to claim first is also a tricky path to follow, because the human player might not have enough time or power to knock him down and, if more players claim in the meantime, it'll turn into a free-for-all. (Actually that becomes quite a fun endgame to be involved in. So, maybe that's not such a bad idea after all!) 6. 1. per and win without spending enormous amounts of effort on military campaigns. 1. The key to an administrative victory is maintaining the happiness of one's people and becoming allies with the other players. Run Happiness tasks and send plenty of Diplomats to the neighboring powers. Focus on obtaining Gold territories. This is because it takes gold to buy off one's neighbors, much less the Pope. 3. Build a moderate-sized standing army. If a neighboring power should suspect that one only has a small army, they are more likely to attack. Related to this, remember that losses affect the attacker more than the defender (since the defender will never lose more than half of his army in any given battle), so one can do a great deal of damage to someone who dares to attack. When attacked, send Diplomats. If relations improve, the enemy will temporarily be less willing to attack again. Keep up a steady stream of Diplomats and it just may avert a second attack from ever occurring. Send lots of Merchants and Diplomats. Political Ability points are the most difficult to achieve, but there will be plenty of time to acquire them later, since the kingdom will be spending fewer resources on military actions. When enjoying the advantage of other ruler's friendship (Relations of 8 or 9), trade becomes much more advantageous. It is possible to make a profit on trade if one works hard enough at it. Every unit in one's stockpile brings one closer to victory. Don't forget that friends turn against anyone who Claims. Relations will drop by one point with every other player. This makes the human player suddenly serve as the target of numerous Saboteurs and Attacks. Be prepared. Just before claiming, build up a substantial army with plenty of Knights and Archers. 7. Let the army starve or go without paychecks. Why, a real military man ought to go six, seven years without eating. Yeah, and they ought to be able to eat rocks, too. And be paid in sticks! Yeah, wet sticks! After all, one only loses one military unit on the first delay. Why should a real ruler care? Even if it happens to be the best unit? After all, real rulers have more Knights than they can use. Further, real rulers don't worry about losing double the units after every further delay. There are more important considerations than maintaining an army. Ignore a commodity because it's not important. Who needs Food, except to feed the army, recruit Knights, and make people happy? Who needs Timber, except to build castles, recruit Archers, and make people happy? Who needs Iron, except to build castles and recruit Infantry? Nobody needs Gold, right? Right? Well, Gold maybe... Don't build castles. The name of the game is Castles II, but that has nothing to do with it. Real rulers are too busy conquering neighboring territories to worry about those pesky revolts. And who needs double commodities anyway? (see above) One can always reconquer any lost territories. Those neighboring powers would never even think about trying to capture a neutral territory that was once under someone else's control, would they? And how much protection can one really get from a pile of stone? Ten archers posted on the walls can't possibly be very useful. Why would anyone ever imagine that they might be safer up there or able to shoot arrows further? Never, ever Claim the throne. Better yet, Claim early, immediately after reaching a score of 7001. Yeah, that'll show everyone! Those sniveling, wimps. Change strategies every year or so. Yeah, keep duckin' and weavin'. Move slowly and in different directions all the time. Those computer players won't know what to do. Who needs to focus on a consistent strategy? Planning never worked for Wile E. Coyote. Never send Scouts and Spies. Never call a Council. Why bother looking at one's neighbors? They aren't planning any hostile actions. Just ignore them. Real gamers always win on Impossible level, anyway.Cow Ten Sure Ways to Lose at Castles II Attack two or three other players at once. Yeah, the more, the merrier, It's fun to send troops in every direction, grabbing territory as quickly as possible. It's fun to lose troops faster than replacements can be recruited. It's fun to beat back counterattacks every two weeks. It's fun to restart the game every ten minutes! Ignore the Pope. Attack Blessed players. Get Excommunicated. So what? Human players are too tough to expect their people to be happy. Besides, no iron-fisted ruler worth his garde-robe worries about those Holy Romers. And don't worry about the precipitous drop in the army's morale because the populace is unhappy. Who needs a big army? Who needs those stinkin' Merchants? Never send Diplomats. Diplomats are pansies. They can be killed when they arrive in the player's kingdom, why bother wasting resources on sending them to neighbors where Relations are always so bad anyway? Who needs any stinkin' friends? A scorched earth policy that's more manly. Take no prisoners. Just build an army and kill everyone at once. No problem. They'll never have time to mount a counterattack. Who cares if they're attacked by everyone? Trade inefficiently. Rely on the Black Market for scarce goods. Trade with hostile neighbors. What's so bad about an occasional 2:1 or 3:1 swap for something that's really needed? Losing one or two units per trade doesn't really add up to much over thirty or forty trades, anyway. Besides, how could anyone possibly plan ahead in this game? 3. Long-Live The King! (Long Term Strategy) The goal of Castles II, ultimately, is to survive long enough to become King. Once one's initial fiefdom is established, it is time to put one's overall strategy to the test. Regardless of the strategy chosen, a few general pointers may be relevant for the latter portion of the game. First, Build a buffer of extra points before Claiming. Once the other players get wind of the pending coronation, they will 10. Page 122 Computer Gaming World "


"SOFTWARE HEADQUARTERS A wide selection of software and accessories for the IBM.. Specialists in International Sales  Competitive Pricing  Same day shipping GAMES AirBucks.......................... Amazon. Armourgeddon................. 32 Barbie's Glamorous Quest....... ..27 Lemmings ..... . ...34 Lemmings 2.......... Life & Death II: The Brain ........27 Lord of the Rings ll: Two Towers 37 Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes...47 Lost Treasures of infocom.........43 Links: Mauna Kea Course Disk 20 Links:Bountiful Course Disk......18 Links:Dorado Beach Course ...... 18 Links Firestone Course Disk......18 Links: Barton Creck Course....... 18 MicroLengue Baseball 4...........42 Mavis Beacon Typing 2............32 SOUNDCARDS Ad Lib Gold 1000.. ..........179 Ad Lib Music Card ...................49 Sound Blaster Pro .................199 27 SOFT W Mario is Missing A captivating adventure with new twists and turns leading tou to the surprise finale! MARIO IS MISSING! Discover the world as you collect clues, return artifacts and outsmart the Koopas. And in the end, only you can help Luigi save Mario. A lesson in geography that the whole family will enjoy! by Software Toolworks ........$37. Super Tetris... .......... 32 Terminator 2029...... Theatre of War. Time Treks...... Tracon for Windows. Tracon 2:Air Traffic Controller....43 Treasures of Savage Frontier.....33 Trolls ...... Trump Castle 3 Turtles:Arcade Game....... 32 Turtles: Manhattan Missions......32 Ultima 7: The Black Gate ..........47 Ultima 7's Forge of Virtue.. ...20 Ultima 7: Serpent Isle..............47 Ultima Underworld... Ultima Trilogy 2....................47 Waxworks... ....... Wayne's World....... Wheel of Fortune w/ Vanna.......27 Where America's Past Carmen . 37 Where in Time is Carmen..........32 Where in USA is Carmen..........32 Where in World is Carmen VGA 47 Wing 2 Special Operations 1....27 Wing 2 Special Operations 2 .....27 Wing Commander 2. Wing Commander 2 Speech Pak 17 F-19 Stealth Fighter..............22 Falcon 3.0... Genghis Khan... Great Naval Battles:193943....47 Global Conquest Gunship 2000 VGA... Gunship 2000 Scenario Disk Harpoon... Harpoon BattleSet #2 or 3..... Harpoon BattleSet #4........... Harpoon Challenger Pak. Harpoon Scenario Editor .... Heroes of the 357th. Kampfgruppe. Land, Sea Air Tlogy 2 L'Empereur. LHX Attack Chopper Liberty or Death Line in the Sand Lost Admiral MegaFortress: Flight of Old Dog 40 N.A.M. No Greater Glory Patriot Perfect General Pirates Gold P.T.O. 3 CD's to Choose from or Order All Three and Save. Disk 1 contains 5,268 explicit VGA pictures in ARE GIF format, 87 animated movies, 574 stories. tales & jokes and 1200 viewers, games and utilities. Disk 2 is an exclusive collection containing over 900 Super VGA pictures and over 400 VGA pictures. Disk 3 is another collection of over 650 mb of the hottest pictures available. One for $89. Two for $140. or Three for $199. 47 Tura da COMPUTER MARIO IS MISSING! Sound Blaster Pro Basic........CALL Sound Commander GOLD .......169 UltraSound Card....... ....... 139 ACCESSORIES NCAA:Road to Final Four 2.....CALL NFL Pro League Football ..........47 NFL Full Motion Video............47 PGA Tour Golf ........ Pro League Baseball '92..........37 Pro Football Analyst Summer Challenge Tom Landry Football .32 Team USA Basketball ..........CALL Tony La Russa Baseball... Wayne Gretzky Hockey 3...........37 Hockey League Simulator 2 ...CALL World Class Soccer .......... 27 EDUCATIONAL 32 Bard's Tale Construction Set.....34 Lost Treasures of Infocom 2......37 Bard's Tale Ill........... .....31 The Lost Tribe.. Bart Simpson Ascade Game ......32 Lure of the Temptress...........32 Bart Simpson House Weirdness 32 Magic Candle 2. ,40 Batman Returns ...... Martian Memorandum .... ....27 Battle Chess Mantis:Experimental Fighter......43 Battle Chess II. Megatraveller 3....... Battle Chess 4000 VGA Mercenaries........ Black Crypt Might & Magic 3.... Bridge 7.0 Might/Magic.Clouds of Xeen.....43 Buzz Aldrin's Race Into Space..43 Monopoly Deluxe.. .37 Car & Driver ....40 Oh No! More Lemmings! (Add)...22 Castles 2: Siege & Conquest....37 Out of this World ... Challenge of the 5 Realms...... 37 Paladin II Civilization Pitfighter.. . Coaster... Planet's Edge..... Conquest of Longbow...............43 Police Quest 3...... Creepers... Powerhits: Battletech Crisis in the Kremlin.... Powerhits: Sci Fi.... Crusaders of the Dark Savant....42 Powerhits Sports.... Cyber Empires..... Powermonger....... The Dagger of Amon Ra Prophecy of the Shadow The Dark Half... Quest for Glory 3 Daemonsgate... Railroad Tycoon.... Darklands..... Realms..... DarkSun:The Shattered Lands ..47 Rex Nebular..... Design Your Own Railroad.........37 RoboSport for Windows..........37 Gary Grigsby's Pacific War Pacific War simulates the true WWII experience with a detailed database listing every land, air. and sea unit under the player's command. Realistic graphics display up close combat scenes complete with bomb and torpedo explosions. Virtual Pilot Virtual Pilot puts firepower right under your thumbs, gives you advanced aileron and elevator trim controls and extra throttle control for high-powered games. It's as close to reality as you can get without leaving your computer. by CH Products .........$69. Gameport Auto CH Products.......34 Gameport (MicroChannl) by CH.48 Gamecard (80 mhz)......... controller for PC .. .... 9624 Internal Fak/Modem .........89 96/24 Portable Fax/Modem ...199 9600 Fax/9600 Modem .........329 Computer Cleaning & Vacuum...35 JOYSTICKS APS 2001. Analog Sabre ..... Analog Plus....... ...... Flight Stick by CH Products ... GFORCE Yoke........ Gravis Joystick for PC........ Mach Ill by CH Products...... Mouse Wheel................... Mouse Yoke .................... Wing Commander Deluxe ..........47 WARGAMES Romance of Three Kingdoms 2.43 Spectre 3.... Task Force 1942... Top Gun:Danger Zone............ V for Victory X-Wing . SPORTS Algeblaster Plus..... Earthquest Grammar Gremlins Headline Harry VGA Kid Pix... Kid Works 2.... Mario Teaches Typing Math Blaster Plus Math Blaster Plus Windows......37 Number Munchers Legenus alnis 688 Attack Sub Combo.............28 Air Force Commander Air Warrior Ancient Art of War in Skies... A.T.A.C.. . A.L.P. Flight Commander... Aces of the Pacific.. Allied Forces Bundle... Ancient Art of War.. B-17 Flying Fortress...... Birds of Prey... Campaign... Carrier Strike... Carriers at War.... Chuck Yeager's Air Combat.......40 Command HQ... Combat Classics.. Conquest of Japan.... Conflict in Korea... 4D Boxing. Action Sports Soccer.............27 All American College Football....37 Andretti's Racing Challenge.... A.P.B.A Baseball Bill Elliot's Nascar Challenge.... 32 California Games II Car & Driver..... Carl Lewis Challenge..... Front Page: Sports Football......43 GREENS Hardball 3 Hardball 3: Park Disk... Jack Nicklaus:Signature Ed........43 Legend of Valour Legend of Valour sets a new standard with the smoothest, most life-like screen scrolling in fantasy adventures. Explore two huge worlds: 28 miles of overworld town and underground series of dungeons and labyrinths. Never before has any world ben so massive or fully developed. The dynamic, evolving music further heightens realism by Strategic Simulations, Inc...$40. by Strategic Simulations Inc.....$47. 32 37 Weapons Control A hands on throttle with seven independent controls includingradar mode, weapons select, waypoint select and counter measures ...........589. Flight Control The best joystick for Flight Simulators. Compatible with all flight simulator packages as 2 button joystick ..........................$69. Flight Control Pro ................... $115. Rudder Pedals ...........................$115. 239 F15 Strike Eagle 3..................47 F15 Strike Eagle 3 Ace Pack....52 John Madden Football 2........... Links 386 PRO......... Dragon's Lair 2: Timewarp........43 Rules of Engagement 2.............40 Dragon's Lair 3.... Sargon 5... ..... Dragon's Lair: Singe's Castle....37 Scrabble Deluxe.... Dune 2...... ..... Secret of Monkey Island ..... Eco Quest 2 Shadow of the Sorcerer .... Empire Deluxe ... ShadowLands......... Expert Home Design... Shanghai 2.Dragon's Eye.... Expert Pet Care...... Sharif on Bridge ...... Eye of the Beholder 2 Shuttle Space Flight Simulator 32 Fables & Fiends Kyrandia Sim Ant Gemfire. Sim City.... Global Effect....... Sim City for Windows.......... Grand Slam Bridge 2 Sim City Graphic:Ancient Cities. 24 GODS Sim City Graphic:Future Cities ...24 Guy Spy Sim Earth... Heaven and Earth... Sim Earth for Windows..... ....43 Heimdall..... Solitaire for Windows.... Home Alone 2 Space Ace 2: Bort's Revenge ....37 Hong Kong Mahjong Pro... Space Quest 4.. Hoyles Book of Games 3 Speedball 2 The Humans..... Spellcasting 301.... Indiana Jones 4:Fate of Atlantis.40 Spellcraft:Aspects of Valor Island of Dr. Brain ....... Spelljammer ............ KG.B. Star Control 2......... King's Quest 5..... .. Star Trek 25th Anniversary .......37 Populous 2 As one of the many sons of Zeus, you approach your father with aspirations of immortality. He accepts your request but insists you must prove your merit by defeating 32 of his most powerful deities. Begin your quest for immortality on the battlefields of ancient Greece. Clash forces with such legendary Greek gods as possidon, Apollo Prometheus and even Zeus himself! by Electronic Arts........$40. Oregon Trail..... .... Quickshot Aviator 5.... PC Globe 5.0 or USA 2.0... Quickshot Intruder 5. Read & Roll VGA Quickshot Warrior 5....... Reader Rabbit 2....... Virtual Pilot............ Reading Adventures in Oz. Reading & Me CD-ROMS Storybook Weaver ... Speilit Plus Talking The Animals Super Spellicopter Battlechess.. . Super Munchers.. Beauty & the Beast... Snap Dragon..... Compton's Encyclopedia..... Time Riders in Am History Guinness Disc of Records ..... ...69 Treasure Cove... Grolier's Encylcopedia......... Treasure Math Storm... Grammy Awards.... . TreeHouse... Grolier's Encyclopedia ..... .249 What's My Angle KGB/CIA Factbook........... Word Munchers. Loom.. . Zookeeper... Secret of Monkey Island .. . Secret Weapons of Luftwaffe.....57 PRODUCTIVITY Sherlock Holmes Detective 2...45 Sleeping Beauty.............. Animation Studio......... .79 Software Jukebox............... AutoMap Wing Commander/Ultima 6.......47 AutoWorks... m.47 Wing Commander 2 Deluxe....CALL Body Works .. 47 WC2/Ultima Underworld........CALL Chemistry Works... Wing Commander Deluxe ..........47 Get a Rcal Feel to Flight! Maxximum Presents! by Maximum Maxx Yoke gives you the precision you always wanted. It's a full sized multifunctional aircraft joystick for your PC ..... .....$69. Maxx Pedals are floor style modular attachments which are fully assembled and ready to plug in and play...........$39. Maxx Yoke & Pedal Bundle....$99. 39 Call us and use your MC, Visa or Discover .57 800-999-7995 In NY State 212-962-7168 Fax 212-962-7263 Methods of Payment: We accept Visa, MC. Discover Card & Money orders. Personal checks allow 14 days to clear. School, State & City purchase orders accepted. Shipping: UPS Ground ($5 minimum)/ UPS Blue ($7minimum) APO&FPO{ $6/CANADA, HI. AK & PR (Airborne $12). Overseas minimum $30 shipping (please fax orders) NY residents add 8.25% Sales Tax. Send money orders or checks to: MISSION CONTROL, 43 Warren St.. Dept. CGW293. New York, NY 10007 Please send $2.00 for catalogue (free with order) Overseas & Military Orders given special attention! King's Quest 6............. ....47 ........37 Leather Goddesses Phobos 2...43 Legend of Kyrandia. Legions of Krella Leisure Larry 5.... 37 Strike Commander .................47 Strip Poker 3 Stunt Island... The Summoning........... Super Jeopardy. Super Space Invaders..... .....27 Dvorak's Top 30............... 37 Floor Plan Plus... Fast Pack Mail..... Form Tool Gold... Legal Letter Works ....... Mavis Beacon 2 Windows .........37 Not responsible for typographical errors.Check compatibility before ordering. All Sales Final. Defectives replaced with same item only. Circle Reader Service #118 "


"Conquering Kingdoms: Tactics 101 An Examination of QQP's Fantasy Strategy Game by Alan «Playing the Long Game\" Emrich In the world of magazine publishing, there is something known as \"lead time\" for a story. Here at Computer Gaming World, that lead time is about three months. Shortly after I did a sneak preview of Conquered Kingdoms, QQP released it in its finished form. So, I would like to take just a few paragraphs and flesh out the preview to call attention to the game's evolution since it appeared in issue #102, before launching into some important rule clarifications, tips, and tactics for this absorbing strategy game. A Medic for the Docs The documentation is the weakest component of Conquered Kingdoms. Done in passable, low-cost black and white, there was an abundance of typographical errors and poor grammar. What problems I had with the content of the rules themselves I've noted below with clarifications included. Finally, I'm sure that I was not the only one disappointed by the lack of the promised play-by-email feature for Conquered Kingdoms. While I know the play-by-modem element works very well, long campaigns might be best played by exchanging files via electronic mail. QQP indicated that they sacrificed the feature in the initial release in order to get the product out in time for Christmas, but they have said that the feature will be included in a forthcoming patch. (Maybe they can put the song \"Patches» in the next version of the game). It will be made available free to all registered owners and posted up on some of the computer networks and bulletin boards (certainly on CompuServe). Hearing is Believing Perhaps the thing that struck me first and foremost in the finished version of Conquered Kingdoms was the music. While the introduction was a fine \"to battle\" kind of march, the tunes which came up at the beginning of player turns and to announced messages when playing by modem threw me for a loop. After all, songs such as \"Ain't She Sweet\" and \"I'm In The Mood For Love\" seem a bit out of place in what is, essentially, a wargame. While the sound effects weren't anything to write home about, the battle maps included in the game box were. Drawn in an artistic abstract, I only noticed a couple of minor errors (such as the town of Cornerstone on map 7 being worth 1000 points per turn, rather than its crucial 1400 points), but they're still useful in the heat of battle. I was also pleased to see so many ways to access unit information during set-up and play. player selects an area to be contested adjacent to any of his controlled areas. On that area is a number or the letter 'R' which indicates the map number to be fought over (R' being random) and a second symbol indicating any special bonus awarded that area's owner for all future battles in that campaign — note that an ampersand (@) indicates a throne area. If the person who picked the area wins, they get that area plus any non-enemyowned bonus areas which the winner might receive for a decisive victory. If the person who didn't pick the area wins, they receive a territory adjacent to one which they already own (thus, not revealing exactly where the enemy is), plus any bonus territories for a decisive win. In a Cascatia Campaign, leaders are also introduced, including one's King (who, in actuality, begins as a Cavalier). Other leaders are awarded by conquering territories with a pound sign (#) in them. If one's leader pieces survive, they will earn points toward becoming bigger and badder. What this means in practical game terms is that their command radius and damage points grow, although their combat and healing effects remain unchanged. The Nuances of Notches The tougher the opponent beaten (and the more soundly they are trounced), the more \"notches\" will be awarded the victor and lost by the vanquished. While I don't have the formula for awarding and losing notches, a table of one's stature and the notches required to achieve it is given below. Note that \"going over the top» on Compass-Like Clarifications From what I've gathered on the bulletin boards (from my vantage point as CGW's on-line editor), there are some questions floating around which I may be able to answer. My organization in addressing them may seem a bit chaotic, but try to follow along. When playing a Cascatia campaign, the object is to control 60% of the provinces when playing without \"thrones.» One Page 124 Computer Gaming World "


"CONQUERED KINGDOMS 15 Valeo Frictions the highest level and earning extra notches past it will only give that player a «notch cushion\" which can be absorbed before losing that greatest of all titles. Level Notches Required Serf 0 10 Sheriff 11 22 Nobleman 23 35 Grand Duchy 36 50 Marquis 51 66 Chief Magistrate 67-84 Arch Duke 85 102 Regional Magistrate 103 122 Emperor 123 142 Overlord 143 164 Master of the Realm 165 189 SCENT OR WAR ST enough to hold my own against the highest Al levels and even the designer, Bruce Williams Zaccagnino. Here are a few of my secrets: The Cryptic Symbology Revealed! Many have wondered what some of those tiny symbols mean that occasionally appear on the large unit icons in the lowerright portion of the screen. Some may be obvious, but here they all are:  A ship means the unit is embarked on a boat. (Pretty clever, eh?) A wall means the unit is safely behind the castle walls and is enjoying its combat benefit of -2 damage when attacked. A spiral shows that the unit is under the influence (within 3 spaces) of an enemy phantom and, thus, is only inflicting 1/2 damage when it attacks. A banner indicates the unit is under an officer's command. If human, it will be healed at the rate of 2 points per turn. Note that being under the command of multiple officers (or under the spell of multiple enemy phantoms, for that matter) causes no additional effect. A unit will never be healed more than 2 points per turn nor have its combat effectiveness dropped below 1/2. Finally, among my notes, no terrain has any effect on combat, except for castle walls and keeps, and the rules regarding sieges and the prevention of unit production in enemy cities are not correct. I don't know if this is a bug or a misstated rule, but having units inside an enemy castle isn't always enough to prevent it from producing new units! My Better Bashing Basis Bias In, perhaps, the same way as a Jedi feels the force flowing through him when holding a light saber, I feel that I have a particular penchant for playing Conquered Kingdoms. Being fortunate enough to play it many times during its development, I've learned my way around the board well Why Spy? Spies not only make good scouts, they also make great assassins. Trading off a spy to kill an officer, phantom, or to finish off a damaged enemy wizard, is usually a good ploy. Also, they're great for negating an enemy's ability to score points for controlling a multi-square town. Finally, spies are great for running around behind enemy lines and upsetting their permanently controlled resources. Of course, an enemy player might also use these devilish tactics. The antidote? Have your wizards cast the occasional «far sight\" spell. It reveals enemy units, including enemy spies, within 15 spaces. The Navy's Case The best thing a fleet can do is to load up at least half of its ships with archers. They'll provide anti-dragon and anti-rog firepower, plus give a credible \"shore bombardment\" strength to ships. Enemy archers and ogres will have little effect shooting back, but beware of rogs, catapults and wizards when cruising the waters. game), consider making multiple wizard teleports by having each one \"do his teleport thing on the same turn. It's a lightning maneuver that, when backed with even a tiny amount of supporting strength, can often prove decisive. «Go Away or We Will Taunt You a Second Time!» Finally, it is plain that sieges are no picnic, particularly for the computer player. To undo the game's artificial opponent (or to stymie a human one), hole up in a castle and let him come after you. The computer opponent has a tendency to go for defending units rather than bombarding the keep, so leave some cannon fodder on the walls to distract the enemy dragons, wizards and catapults. In that manner, by holding the keep and adding reinforcements, a castle can hold out almost indefinitely. Also, whenever possible, leave a couple of missile units (archer, wizard, catapult or dragon) in the castle keep spaces. Having the ability to fire at the enemy units from the safety of a castle keep is a tremendous advantage. Teleport, Teleport, Teleport! Wizards in close proximity to each other can make multiple teleports together in a single turn (one at a time, of course). Thus, for long range sneak attacks (or the quick grabbing of a distant objective early in the Points on Winning Finally, be aware of the time remaining and where you stand in points. Sometimes it is better to sacrifice a loss of productivity (i.e., a \"resource grab\") late in the game to go for desperately needed points. If you can't get 'em, at least try to deny them to the enemy by contesting important towns with cheap units wherever possible. Good luck, and may you raise your score many notches! CGW February 1993 Page 125 "


"Opponents Wanted Those wishing to place their own (free) ads need only send us a postcard (or use the Notes section of the RID card), letter, FAX 1714-283-3444] or E-Mail (Prodigy [EXPT40B], CompuServe 176703,622], GEnie and America On-Line (CGW]). Generally, we run them only once, so send another each time if you want to keep your name listed! The ads themselves should serve as reasonable examples as to how to write your own. However, Include a brief description of the types of opponents and games you are interested in playing. Games being played other than direct by modem can be listed (trading save game disks or even face-to-face). At least one (possibly more) telephone number(s) must be included. Do not forget the area code and mention whether they are Home, Work or Modem numbers. Include your city and state so that people who call you will both: a) have a clue as to what time zone you are in and b) recognize it when they see it on their phone bill. We reserve the right to edit all Opponents Wanted ads to our standards of taste (such as they are). self-addressed envelope to our new address at: HUG, PO Box 5138, Bryan, TX 77805-5138. The World of Windows is looking for some great game players like you! Try your skill and compete for monthly prizes. Sports: Drag racing excitement at The Motor City Raceway, a fishing tournament at The Freshwater Fishery, play in the Tournament Golf game or even pick your favorite NFL team and play some Pro-Bowl Football. In RPGs there is the post-apocalyptic horror in The Land of Devastation, warriors collide in The Pit, explore Sin Band's Dungeon or conquer the galaxy during Trade Wars 2002. For Strategy games, try our ChessMagic chess tournament, deluxe versions of Scrabble and Blackjack or solve a murder at the Who-Dun-It Hotel Modem settings are 8-N-1, 300-38400! There is free access and thousands of Windows games to download for off-line enjoyment. Call today at (305) 751-3117. Space Station Aragon welcomes all adventure gamers to call (206) 277-5489 in Bellevue, WA. This unique board features free downloads of the latest deoms from many major software companies and text files on subjects like Star Trek and Star Wars. Take part in our forums to discuss and get hints on the latest games. Take a break and play one of our adventure doors. Sysops llibard and Tiern. Dune BBS is secking modem gamers like you! Modem warrior message area and on-line games. Running on remote access 1.1+. Operates 24 hours/day, 7 days/week. Located in the Milwaukee, WI area: (414) 571-0584 at 2400 14.4k; 8,NI. Networks The Sierra Network from Sierra On-Line brings people together \"for serious fun and games.\" For a flat fee of $12.95 per month for 30 hours of evening and weekend access. Players gather to meet and play (or watch others play and just kibbitz\" during) real-time games of 20 different on-line, multi-player games including: Red Baron, Bridge, Chess, Poker, Mini Golfand their new real time FRP The Shadow of Yserbius. Using an interface anyone could learn with no instruction whatsoever and featuring the quality gamers have come to expect from Sierra, this network is worth exploring. For more information, call (800) SIERRA-I. CompuServe is a great international information system which offers a Modem Games Forum, Challenge Board and the MTM Lobby for full modem gaming support. Avid modem gamers will find player directories, bulletin boards, huge gaming libraries for file exhanges, conference rooms for real-time interactive meetings, a modem-to-modem via CompuServe connection service and many ongoing tournaments of your favorite modem games. Begin your adventures after logging on by typing GO MODEMGAMES. If you are not currently a CompuServe subscriber, you can join by calling (800) 848-8199 and mentioning that you are interested in Modem Gaming. Digital Dreams Network welcomes you to enjoy exciting fantasy adventures in its acclaimed role-playing epic Legends of Future Pasi. In Legends, you will interact with other people from around the country while assuming the role of a character, ranging from a dark sorcerer to a gallant warrior, as you explore the expansive and detailed land of Andor. When you give that rose to a beautiful maiden, she'll be a real person, not a computerized, pixellated cartoon. When you confront the vile necromancer lord, he'll be a living, breathing gamemaster ready to privide you with new quests every day. To join the adventure, set your modem to 8N1 and dial (800) 825-8852. To speak to a service representative, call (800) 274-2814. Conventions Adventure GameFest 93 will be held May 21-23 in the Portland, Oregon area. Board, computer and miniature gaming of all genres, both tournament and open gaming, will be featured. There will be door and event prizes, a games auction and a miniatures painting contest. Pre-registration is $15 for 3 days, $12 for 2 days or $7 for 1 day. To be held at the Oregon Convention Center, 777 MLK Jr. Blvd. (Union Avenue), Portalnd, OR. Contact: Adventure Games Northwest, Inc., 6517 NE Alberta, Portland OR 97218; 503-282-6856 or 206-574-GAME. The Computer Game Developers Conference is where the insiders meet to discuss the technical aspects of creating computer games. For more information, call or write: Dev Con, 5339 Prospect Road, Suite #289, San Jose, CA 95129; (408) 374-4340. The Gen Con Game Fair will be held August 19-22, 1993 at the MECCA Center in Milwaukee, Wisconson. For more information, write to Gen Con Game Fair, PO Box 756, Lake Geneva, WI 53147 or call (414) 248-3625. Origins '93 will be held July 1-4, 1993 at the Tarrant County Convention Center in Fort Worth, Texas. For more information, write or call: Gemco, PO Box 609, Randallstown, MD 21133; (410) 298-3135. By Area Code Seeking opponents (particularly local ones) in the Groton, CT area for Global Conquest Command HQ, Perfect General or Falcon 3.0. Call Robert Gordy voice at H (203) 446-1183, weekdays after 6pm EST or anytime on weekends. Amiga Games Enthusiasts (AGE) are looking for game players like you! If you own an Amiga and like playing games on it, then this is the club for you. Call or write to the address below for a FREE newsletter (when you send a self-addressed, stamped envelope) letting you know all about AGE and how to join. Get hints, reviews, cheats and more from other Amiga gamers from across the country in this quarterly newsletter/magazine called Massively Amiga. Send a SASE or call today! AGE, 18016 40th Avenue NW. Stanwood, WA 98292; H (206) 652-5426. Ask for AGE founder John Reinier. I am seeking the computer literate for a variety of games including Tetris Classic. Theatre of War, etc. I am also interested in shareware games. Please, call Scott in Tracy, CA at H (209) 833-1209 before 8pm PST. Modem gamers wanted in the Omaha area for Command 11Q, 688 Attack Sub and F-29 Retaliator. Contact Greg Seewald at H (402) 597-2837. Yank and bank, turn and burn. Looking for local area Falcon 3.0/ opponents. Radio Sid \"Shakespear\" Maurer in Columbus, OH at H (614-294-1861. Check six! Local opponents wanted for The Perfect General or other modem games. I am also seeking Links 386 players who want to exchange rounds from any of the courses. Call Ranley Killian in Belleville, IL at 11 (618) 236-1403. Dallas/Ft. Worth Texas area opponents sought for Global Conquest, Command HQ and Tom Landry Football. Competitors needed to take on the Best.\" Please leave a message for David Dreiling at (817) 784-0184. Attention football fans! I am trying to start a PBM football league using NFL Pro League Football. If you are interested, please contact Kirk Carrol, 985 View Drive, Alford, FL 32420; or call at H (904) 579-2737. Opponents wanted for Falcon 3.0. Perfect General (WWW2). 688 Attack Suh, Tank, All American College Football (I'll take BYU '90), Knights of the Sky. Fire Brigade or Panzerkrieg for Windows. I am also interested in PBEM opponents for Carrier Strike, Western Front and Typhoon of Steel. Contact Rick Billings of Abilene, TX at H (915) 698-6853. For PBEM gaming, my on-line addresses are: AOL RickBill] and GEnie (R.Billings2). CGW Bulletin Board Systems Intracorp/ Capstone has survived hurricane Andrew and is proud to announce that their BBS is back up and operational. Demos, sneak previews of upcoming products, tech support and on-line doors which feature many popular games are available. Configure your modem for 2400, N-8-1 and call (305) 471-8962. Thunderbolt! BBS in Chicago, IL now offers online entertainment with Poker, Blackjack, Bingo, Galactic Empire, Zorgon, Quest for Magic, The Arena and Flash Games (\"The Next Generation\" of online gaming). Play RPGs with online multi-sided dice! Eric Spanitz. SYSOP. Modem settings 8-N-1, 300/1200/2400. Phone (312) 248-4822. Hack and slash your way through the real-time, multi-user game Legends. featured on The Batboard TBBS in Columbia, MO! True AD&D action awaits, as well as over 30 other on-line gaming challenges... including ANSI Pro Football, role-playing, strategy, trivia and casino games. Prizes awarded for top scores, full access on your first call (and it's FREE!). Over I gig of free downloads, FidoNet echoes (including GAMING) and the superb adult role-playing game The Wild Side. Call (314) 446-0475, 24 hours a day. HARPOON USERS UNITE! The Harpoon Users' Group (HUG) invites you to join the ranks of its members. HUG publishes the quarterly newsletter C31 which features articles on design tips, game strategy and tactics, weapons platform information, Harpoon product development and much more. HUG also operates the Harpoon Scenario Warehouse BBS where members have access to hundreds of user-created Harpoon scenanarios. Our BBS can be reached at (718) 746-7466. Information on joining HUG is available on the BBS or by sending a stamped, Page 126 Computer Gaming World "


"FIND OUT WHAT HACKING REALLY MEANS... ...It means that we've hacked our way through hundreds of titles to find the best, then we slashed our prices. So you spend less time trying, and more time flying! Here are some of the games we're playing this month... $39 DIGITAL Cabare B-17 Flying Fortress.......$39 Links 386 Pro ................$42 Out of This World ..........$36 Ultima Underworld ........$47 Yeager's Air Combat.......$38 Global Conquest......... Indiana Jones 4........... ... $37 Gunship 2000 ...............$39 THE SOURCE FOR SOFTWARE, THE GUIDE TO GAMES 1-800-624-8228 Internat'l Fax/Phone: 1-718-624-8228 HOURS: 12PM 12AM EST, M-F ADDRESS: Digital Dungeon 45 Duffield St., Brooklyn, NY 11201 TERMS: We accept money orders, personal checks, wire transfers. Credit Card and CASH/CERT C.O.D.'s from established customers. SHIPPING: We charge by shipping weight/class + 15%. We use U.S. Mail, UPS, Federal Express & Airborne Express. APO's are no problem, charged 1st class mail rate. Foreign shipping by weight & courier + 25%. N.Y.S. residents add 8.25% sales tax. All products are new and guaranteed. Call for exchange/return policy. NOT RESPONSIBLE FOR TPOS! Circle Reader Service #56 "


"Strategy Notes on V For Victory: Utah Beach 1944 Or, Touring the Cotentin Peninsula on 3000 tons a day with the VII Corps Jayhawkers by James Lowerre Ttah Beach is, by doctrinal definition, a tactical game with an operational scope. The game replicates, at the battalion and company levels, the American VII Corps' campaign to secure the Cotentin Peninsula and the opposing efforts of the German 7th Army during June and early July 1944. The two sides plan their operations in four hour turns using limited intelligence and then, combat and movement are executed simultaneously. After playing the scenario several times and having a go at the campaign game, some key points for success quickly highlight themselves. Here are some tactical pointers to sharpen gamers' schwerpunkts. Managing Morale: When committing units and fire support to an attack, watch the odds window closely. Occasionally, a unit with low morale will actually decrease the odds due to its low morale. Obviously, one does not want to commit those units to that attack. Beating the Bocage: Achieve, at least, 6:1 final odds against a hex in the weakest section of the enemy defensive line (not necessarily the weakest enemy unit) using high morale units and as many odds column benefits as possible (armor, engineer, regimental integrity). Achieve, at least, 1:1 odds on any adjacent enemy units (to reduce their Zone of Control [ZOC) effects on the soon to be vacated enemy position). Plan tactical movement for exploiting units (those with greatest mobility in the given terrain (not necessarily those units with the highest movement allowance) through the primary attack hex into the rear of the adjacent enemy units. Attack the surrounded units next turn and continue to widen the gap in either direction. Sophisticated tacticians will recognize such activity as Liddell Hart's 'Expanding Torrent theory of attack. The Big Thump: On particularly crucial battles, the Americans ability to mass artillery, air and naval firepower can be particularly effective. This overwhelming concentration of firepower should be used whenever friendly ground units are attacking an enemy HQ. The Sharp End of Combat (Offensive Operations) Priority of Engagement: Enemy HQs, artillery, maneuver units (infantry, armor and engineers) should be priority targets. Wherever and whenever possible, one should attack to destroy the enemy's division HQs. The effect of cut supply lines on the eliminated HQ's subordinate units is a dramatic lowering of combat effectiveness. The lowered enemy strength and morale are worth the effort every time, not to mention the bonus of capturing and using enemy supplies (even though the eliminated HQ automatically regenerates at the beginning of the next day's first daylight turn). Fire Support: Artillery is the most flexible and reliable system one has as the ground commander in influencing combat. To maximize an artillery unit's combat effectiveness, position it in the available bunkers and build field fortifications for them. This raises the artillery's morale and thus combat effectiveness (especially useful in getting anything worthwhile out of the \"Nasty Ninetieth's\" Div Arty). Generally, confine pure artillery, naval or air strikes to those targets that get a green light on the 'quality of intell' indicator. In these strikes, always try to achieve at least 1:1 odds to attrite the enemy unit (the target will still be fatigued even at less than 1:1 odds and may have its activity slowed or movement interdicted). Note: When attacking, start with the artillery as far forward as possible. Avoid having more than half of any division's/regiment's supporting artillery in non-ready mode. Bunker Busting: First, fatigue enemy units occupying bunkers with extended bombardment. Fire on the targeted hex every turn, but don't use the same firing unit(s) every turn. When the enemy's fatigue exceeds 12, attack with at least three engineer battalions in separate hexes with average to high morale infantry and artillery in support (as the VII Corps commander one will probably want to form a semi-permanent task force to deal with German units by-passed in their concrete holes during the U.S. breakout). A Friendly Reminder: Generally, only two battalions (or their equivalent in individual companies and batteries) can attack or defend from one hex. If one is not stacking exploiting and attacking units in the same hex, don't stack with more than is needed. Obviously, there is no combat benefit to having more units stacked together than can participate in combat (all they do is make a better artillery, air or naval target). Page 128 Computer Gaming World "


"SuperSoft... 1-800-285-1881 Orders Outside the U.S: 206-542-1518 HOURS: 10 A.M to 5 P.M. PST M-F BUNDLE PACK SPECIALS: -$15 06188 DOO AMICA: Classics Tril.......... (Midwinter, StarGlider 2, Carrier Command) Combat Classics........... ....30 (F15-3, Team Yankee, 688 Attack Sub) Tengen's Arcade Hits.........23 (Klax, Hard Drivin', Toobin) IBM AD&D Pool/Curse/Sec....$38 AD&D Trilogy 2 Allied Forces........ Altered Destiny...... Amazon Guardians.... Ancient Art of War... Bar Games.... Battle Isle....... Battle Tech. Trilogy...... B-17..... Crusaders Drk.Savant........ Cyber Empires...... Dark Sun........... .....MAR.'93 Dragon Strike.......... Eye of Beholder 3........SPRING '93 Falcon:Op.Fight. Tiger...24 Gemfire........ Great Naval Battles.... Gunboat...... Heroes of 357th...... Hook.... Humans...... KGB... Kings Quest 6....... .46 Legend of Kryandia Lemmings 3... Line In Sand..... .DEC Lost Files Sherlock............. Might & Magic 4......... 43 NFL Video Pro.......... Pacific War............ Prophecy of Shadow....... Red Baron/Rise Dragn/KngsQ5...46 Realms... ....20 Search for the King.........10 SpellJammer:Pirates. Star Control 2...... .36 Stunt Island........ Twilight 2000 VGA............10 UltraBots........................DEC Ultima Underworld....... Ultimate Challenge Golf.......36 V for Victory..... War in Middle Earth. Wax Works.... Wayne Gretsky 3...... Wing Commander.... * OMNOSSA .46 .35 The Blunt End of Combat (Defensive Operations) Look to the Future: Try to plan and prepare defensive lines in advance of need (like around Carentan for the Americans), since one cannot dig in an enemy ZOC. If one must, defend forward while positions are prepared further to the rear. Then, fall back into them. Terrain — Use it and Improve it: Plan to defend behind and between the flooded swampy ground along the rivers. Make the enemy wade through the mess before he's even in a position to attack friendly forces. Dig-in right at the edge of the swamps. Where there's little terrain advantage, defend in depth in lines of prepared positions two or three deep (the bunker positions east and west of Cherbourg (not south] are fair examples of defense in depth). Spade Work: Whenever a unit is idle, rested and not in an enemy ZOC, it should be digging, Engineers are particularly useful for their ability to fortify positions. Keep a close eye on the digging unit's fatigue and rest them whenever the fatigue level dips below 6. Otherwise, keep them turnin' dirt. Use low morale units (remember the \"Nasty Ninetieth?\") to dig prepared positions for artillery and future higher morale defenders. Always try to keep occupied field fortifications (dug-in and fortified positions) with another unit when they are vacated by a previous tenant (why waste all that work?). Best Defense is no Offense: Sometimes, the best defense (against the AI, at least) is to keep the potential attacking odds at less than 2:1 (the AI won't knowingly attack at odds lower than this). The Sucker Punch: The defender should deliberately set up a situation that encourages the enemy to attack a certain hex in a given turn after he has positioned units immediately behind the vulnerable unit(s) (the units positioned behind need to be of mobility equal to or greater than the attacker's units) and given them orders to move into the threatened hex that turn. In this way, the enemy will plan his assault at favorable odds, but friendly unit(s) will move in before combat, making the odds turn drastically away from the attacker (ruining his plan and disrupting his assaulting units). Note that this technique does require some luck, so it should not be used as one's main defense. CPU CRT IBM: Battle Tech Trilogy.. (BattleTech 1&2. MechWarrior) Classic Pak....... Jet Fighter 2 Bndle... (Jet Fighter Adven.2, Mission disk, Hint Bk.) Max Pak... McGee Series................30 (McGee, Fun Fair,Katies Farm) MegaFortress Pak................30 JAN ..30 ......38 ...43 AMICA 000 . ......46 DU00 000000 NUN MAC 3 30 AD&D Tell. Pool/Curse/Secret....$38 Addams Family... Altered Beast.. Black Crypt.. Bravo-Romeo-Delta... Breach 2..... Campaign.... Castles Campaign....... Civilization...... Crusaders Drk. Savant. Cyber Empires...... Cytron.......... DragonForce... Dune 2. Epio. Fighter Duel Pro... Flames of Freedom.. 4D Sports Driving..... KGB. Legend of Kryandla.... Legends of Valour....... Lure of Temptress. Mega Traveller 1.. No Greater Glory.. Pinball Dreams... Populous 2... Premlere.. Pro Footbil Sim 3.1.. Projeotile.. Realms.... Road Rash.. Robocop 3D.. Spider Man... Tracon 2... UMS2...... ATrain.......... Club Raquetbll. Guy Spy............. Heaven & Earth......... Indiana Jnes 4........ Mission Leyte......... Hook.....** .22 -6: UN CUNNAwwwwwww OOOOOOONONOOOOOOOOOO We also carry Game Cartridges for: SEGA Genesis, Super Nintendo, Gameboy, Game Gearl CALL for titles and prices. Product availability/Prices Subject to change The Missing Link: The only important element of documentation missing in Utah Beach is a basic combat odds chart (the ol' CRT in boardgamer parlance). A CRT is useful in estimating the chances of success for any single attack (this is especially important to the GerMail to: 110 N. 201 St. Seattle, WA 98133-3012 TIP: $7.00 S/H covers up to 3 Lbs.! That means you can order approx. 3 boxes for the same shipping price. NO C.O.D. Products are waranteed through Manufacturer CALL FOR MORE TITLES, CDS,PRODUCTS! Circle Reader Service # 120 February 1993 Page 129 "


"attack and defense strengths when deciding what supply level to allocate to an HQ. Table B Supply Effects on Combat Strength TYPE OF SUPPLY Attack General Defensive Minimal None ATTACK STRENGTH EFFECT 1.5 1 .5 25 .25@ DEFENSE STRENGTH EFFECT 1.5+ 1 1 .5+ .5+@ @ *x.5 for armored units (tank, TD, mech recon) +x/ vs pure artillery, air or naval strikes @x.25 for artillery man who must be a risk taker to win big). Keith Zabalaoui, one of the designers, readily agreed to provide the basic probabilities for the simplest potential outcomes given pure integer odds. The results are listed below. Table A Combat Result Table Odds: 1:5 1:4 1:3 1:2 1:1 2:1 3:1 4:1 5:1 6:1 7:1 8:1 9:1 Result: D> A 0 8 16 25 33 42 50 58 67 75 84 92 100 A>D 100 92 84 75 67 58 50 42 33 25 16 8 0 Notes: 1. Results are in terms of the probability that the defender's loss factor (not actual losses) will be greater than the attacker's (DA) and vice-versa (AD) at the given integer odds. 2. The probability of retreating is the same as having a higher (or lower) loss factor. Retreats are generally one hex, except at odds of 7:1 or greater. 3. The 50/50 point for assault-mode attacks (as illustrated above) is at 3:1 odds. The 50/50 point for probe attacks (generally, lower loss factors than for assaults) is at 4.8:1 odds. The 50/50 point for All-Out Assaults (generally higher loss factors) is at 1.2:1 odds. 4. Remember that these numbers represent the probability of the event occurring in some magnitude (i.e. Def retrt the probability at those odds that the defender is forced to retreat. The actual distance could be one, no or three hexes). More than one result is possible in a given combat and so the column totals normally exceed 100%. 41 47 18 1 47 w 87 30 Inevitably, in the generation of combat power at the critical point, Peter gets robbed to pay Paul (Sorry Bub, we all wish we could be in attack supply all the time, but that ain't the way it works, in peace or war). In order to achieve a given supply state for a certain HQ, some battalions which are deemed non-essential to accomplishing the division's mission for that day (i.e. artillery, especially towed, in a pursuit situation) might have to be detached to an HQ at a lower supply state. Each type of battalion requires a different amount of supply for each different supply state. Although the requirements vary with unit strength, some general information is useful in determining the number of battalions that can be supported at a higher supply state (i.e. 90 Div HQ in phases 2 and 3 of the campaign plan below) given a total available tonnage. Table C Daily U.S. Tonnage Requirements by Supply State and Type of Battalion. (or full strength units, plus or minus a few tons) TYPE SUPPLY STATE: BATTALTON: Attack General Defensive Minimal Airbome Infantry 15 Glider Infantry 32 Regular Infantry Armor (Tnk, TD) Reconnaissance 107 SP Artillery 131 Motorized Artillery 88 (data for 105mm, values greater for larger caliber guns/howitzers) Semi-Motorized Engineers 52 36 21 1 7 \"Laudace, Laudace, Tojours Laudace\" (Morale) Let the Good Times Roll: Morale is a weighted average of all units involved in a combat, including artillery. The benefits of having a superior composite morale are applied directly to the odds ratio. It's important to know what's good for morale (bring in those dancing girls!) and bad for morale (Jeez, I haven't had a break from this digging for 48 hours!). Field fortifications and bunkers have the greatest positive impact on a unit's morale while fatigue and disruption have potentially the greatest negative effect on how the boys are feeling about themselves and things in general. Table D Morale Modifications MODIFIER Dug. FortiIn Bunker Fatigue Fatigue Attack in fied /Fortress /Disrup/DisrupSupply Supply tion > 6 tion >12 AFFECT +1 ON MORALE o 70 . The Big Picture (Logisties) +2 +3 Like Patton said, \"I don't know what logistics is, but if Bradley's got it, I want some too.\" Believe this gamer, so do you! Everyone knows that unit combat effectiveness drives the final odds in individual combats and ultimately, the collective campaign results, but not enough realize that there are two major contributors to this performance: supply and morale. Utah Beach quite realistically (to Three Sixty's credit) makes the player/commander very conscious of logistics, just as the real Corps and Army Commanders were then and the successful ones are today. Plan on personally managing supplies. Confirm or reallocate supply levels each 6:00 AM turn for each Div HQ depending on the division's mission and the over-all supply tonnage available. Know the effects of supply on individual unit Steady Boys: Naval and air morale remain constant throughout the game. Naval morale is 7, while Fighter Bomber morale is 6 and Light Bomber morale is 4. As The Caissons, Go Rolling, Along Movement) In it for the Long Haul: In strategic movement, higher mobility Page 130 Computer Gaming World "


"...no other game, no matter how graphically advanced, captures the true essence of roleplaying like this one.\" (Compter Game Review, Oct. 1992) \"...a remarkably rich playground for modem-owning role-players.\" (Compter Gaming World, Aug. 1992) Do yo own  modem? Then live out your favorite roleplaying fantasies in the finest multiplayer interactive fiction game ever Legends or of quture of past NICOLE LEE92 Every day, the intrepid, the romantic, the imaginative and the adventurous meet as player characters in the Shattered Realms, a virtual fantasy world created from shared imagination on the Digital Dreams Network Explore the dark reaches beneath the Teeth of Shartan or enjoy a casual stroll with friends through the enchanted Grymwood Forest. Become a champion of justice, or a force for darkness. Delve into political intrigue or play the lone wolf on a personal quest. Share adventures and make friends with people calling from across the country. Skilled authors create special quests nightly that allow you to become part of an ongoing plot within a never ending tale. Call 800-937-7644 to join the adventure (1200/2400 bps, 8N1, full duplex) or 800-274-2814 for more information (voical As low as $3.00 per hour all day every day Visa . MasterCard  American Express Circle Reader Service #72 Legends of Future PastTM is available only on the Digital Dreams Network, a service of Inner Circle Technologies, Inc. Other features include forums containing thousands of files and featuring discussions on a wide range of topics from science fiction to PC computing. Other entertainment products, teleconferencing, nationwide matchmaking and news serviceas are also available. "


"units move out of a stack first (but maybe not as far, watch an HQ and infantry mix). The stacking limit, for units using strategic movement, is one unit per hex and all units using the same path move only as fast as the slowest unit ahead of them. So, be certain that slower units (those which do not go as far in one turn) don't delay the faster ones, particularly along heavily traveled roads. Traffic management and congestion avoidance are staff functions which the gamer has to pay careful personal attention to. Note: Don't use strategic movement into enemy ZOCs, even when occupied by friendly units, unless the U.S. forces develop a penchant for being ambushed. Ya Gotta 'Ave A Plan The VII Corps commander has three objectives: Capture Cherbourg, clear the rest of the peninsula, and kill Germans, in that order. Not surprisingly, the indirect approach works well, here. The best way to accomplish the first objective is to rapidly achieve the latter two. Below is a broad outline for a multi-phased campaign plan that does just that. Air Forces — 9th Air Force: Assign the unit to moderate interdiction and tactical ground support against located enemy Div HQs whenever practical. Generally, concentrate ground support into eight hours of the best weather each day. Naval Forces All ships: Initially, interdict movement of enemy units moving S out of Carentan and along the coast toward the beachhead. Once enemy units have closed from the N, battleships and cruisers should monitor and support friendly ground forces in close fighting (i.e. adjacent hex combat and independent strikes where odds of 1:1 are assured). Light cruisers and destroyers should concentrate on bombardment of enemy units in bunkers (odds 1:1) to fatigue those units for eventual assault by friendly ground units, assist in the close fight as necessary. DET A rbe Within the same turn, clear enemy controlled terrain with units by using tactical movement and follow them with units in strategic movement. This will save the units using strategic movement the fatigue of moving through \"Indian Country\" in long, vulnerable, indefensible, administrative, fear-inducing columns. Between the Hedgegrows: Plan tactical moves by uncommitted units in second echelons to exploit anticipated retreats by enemy units in nearby combats. Leapfrog attacking and exploiting units, alternating the roles of each to maintain the momentum of the attack (a single defending unit \"rolled\" like this over several turns loses all its vinegar). The Poor Bloody Infantry: Remember that infantry movement is unaffected by the division's supply status and thus, infantry units in low supply states are ideal for \"liberating\" uncontested enemycontrolled real estate (one of the few things the \"Nasty Ninetieth\" units can handle). What about those Caissons anyway?: Plan artillery movement carefully so as not to waste ready time. The best time to move is during the first night turn when artillery effectiveness is reduced and one can reserve the second night turn as time to rest and reestablish the fire support net. Ground Forces: Phase 1 101st Take Carentan, screen/isolate 6FJ (clear the village 5km W-NW of Carentan and use the resulting clear road net to move units behind 6th Fallschirmjaeger into Carentan). 82nd Defend along river line (Merderet River) SW, W and NW of St. Mere Eglise. 4th Defend from 82nd's flank to the coast. VII Corps Defend beaches from enemy air attack. Phase 2 101st — Eliminate resistance via Carentan. Extend southern Corps defensive line out to La Haye du Puits. 90th Detach organic infantry and artillery battalions to VII Corps and 101st Div, attach Corps armor/TD, artillery and engineer battalions, 101st AT batteries and two regiments (strengthened by replacements) of airborne infantry (notice how all these units are mobile or elite parachute infantry), cross N over the Douve River (coming up between St. Saveur le Vicompte and St. Mere Eglise) immediately W of the Merderet. Envelop enemy from the rear attacking Division HQs and artillery in that order. End with all but Cherbourg German forces cut off and pinned against the defending 82nd and 4th Divisions. 82nd Defend (Merderet) river line. Assist 90th Div where possible. Be prepared to detach two airborne infantry regiments (strengthened with replacements) to 90th Div. In General No Rest for the Weary: Use every turn for unit activities except the second night turn. During the second night turn is the only time one should plan to rest the majority of units, though individual units may need to be rested or undisrupted over several turns (like armored units involved in night attacks against stiff resistance, in the bocage, on a cloudy, moonless night). Dem Bleepin' Hexes: Try to use the hex grid to advantage. Surround enemy units in three non-adjacent hexes before attacking, that way if he only retreats a single hex, two units will still have him surrounded. Defend in line with the grain of the hex pattern to concentrate defenses and avoid dispersion. Page 132 Computer Gaming World "


"CHIPS & BITS CALL 800-753-GAME IBM MAC & AMIGA GAMES FOR LESS PO Box 234 Rochester, VT05767 Fax 802—767-3382 802—767-3033 800-753-4263 UPS Ground S5 perorder. PO Box, APO, FPO,$6 per Order.2 Business Day Airs7 por Ordor. Europe Alr Mall S12 First Item plus S6 Each additionalltem. Air Mall to Canada $6 por Order.HI, AK, PR, Mail s7 per Order IBM STRATEGY IBM STRATEGY IBM WARGAMES $19 S42 $38 $23 $34 $32 $29 $29 $34 $29 WARS $44 $17 $14 $38 $34 $21 $32 $59 SPACE COUSAT SUSUNITOU Unit Tillands Hisund tibia $34 $32 $22 'X WING' presents the epic space battles of Star Wars with advanced graphics, sound, and space combat technology. Pilot X-wing, Y-wing and A-wing fighters against TIE fighters, Star Destroyers, and finally the Death Star. Features instant replay, over 50 missions, a photo-packed companion book, & digitized movie soundeffects. $46 $38 $12 $19 $15 $42 $ 9 $18 $19 $36 $39 $45 $19 $38 $34 $29 $36 $34 $39 $46 $26 $36 $36 $36 $45 $19 $36 $24 $25 $19 $24 $32 $27 $49 $44 $36 $37 $27 $19 $17 $32 $12 $19 $34 $42 $37 $38 $34 $38 $38 $19 $34 $29 $34 $15 $23 $15 $41 $42 $41 $41 $39 $36 $17 $38 $32 $42 $36 Perfect General 2 Populous Populous Promise Land Populous 2 Power Monger PowerMonger WWI Pushover QQP Bundle Railroad Tycoon Rampart Reach for the Stars 3 Realms Red Zone Renegade Legion Intrcpt Rider of Rohan RoboSport WIN Romanc 3 Kngdm 1 or 2 Rules of Engagement Rules of Engagement 2 Second Conflict WIN Seven Cities of Gold 2 Siege Siege Expansion Disk Sim Ant SimCity SimCity for Windows SimCity Graphic 1 SimCity Graphic 2 SimCity Terrain Editor SimEarth DOS/WIN SimEarth 2000 Sim Farm Sim Life Special Forces Star Control 2 Starfleet 1 Starfleet 2 Star Legions Strategic Forces Sword of Aragon Task Force 1942 Theatre of War Theatre Sets Traders Unnatural Selection Utopia Viking Fields of Congst Visions of Aftermath Warlords Warlords 2 Worlds at War $34 $36 $28 $12 A Train A Train Constructn Set Air Bucks Air Force Commander Ancient Art of War Ancient Art War at Sea Ancient Art War in Sky Armada 2525 Bandit Kings of China Battle Isle Battle Isle Scenario Battles of Destiny Big Business Breach 2 Enhanced Breach 2 Scenario Disk Buzz Aldrin Race to Spc Carrier Command Castles Castles Disk 1 Castles 2 Civilization Civilization Master Ed. Command HQ Conquered Kingdoms Conquest of Japan Control of the Seas Crisis in the Kremlin Dark Seed Dark Star Dino Wars Diplomacy Discvry Steps Columbus DRAGON Force Dragon Lord Dune Dune 2 El Fish Empire Deluxe Fighting for Rome Final Conflict Fire Team 2200 Fire Team Const Kit Fort Apache Gemfire Genghis Khan Global Conquest Global Effect Gold of the Americas Imperium Inindo Koshan Conspiracy Lemmings Lemmings Data Disk Lernmings 2 L'Empereur Liberty or Death Lost Admiral Lost Admiral Scenario Lost Admiral Enhanced Lost Patrol Medieval Lords Medieval Warriors Mega Lo Mania Mercenaries Merchant Colony Microcosm Millenium Monarch New World Order Nobunaga 1 or 2 Nuclear War Objection Objection Enh Omega Operation Combat Overlord Pacific Theater of Oper Paladin 2 Perfect General Perfect General Disk 1 Perfect General Disk 2 THE ULTIMATE FANTASY DRIVING GAME 'CAR & DRIVER' lets you test drive 10 of the best performance cars like the Porshe 959, Test Drive Shelby Cobra, and Ferrari Testarossa. Ten of the Best Features 10 different tracks, bitmapped landscapes, drive in any direction on or off road, head to head competition via modem, instant replay with multiple views and Hi-res 256 color VGA. $38                3 Decision at Gettysburg Dreadnoughts Dreadnoughts: Bismark Dreadnoughts: Ironclads Fifth Eskadra Fire Brigade Fleet Commander Gary Grigsby Pacific Wr German Raider Atlantis Gettysburg: Turning Pnt Golan Front Grand Fleet Great Naval Battles Grt Naval Battles Exp Grey Seas, Grey Skies Halls of Montezuma Harpoon Harpoon Set 2 or 3 Harpoon Set 4 Harpoon Designr Series Harpoon Editor Harpoon Challngr Pk SE High Command In Harms Way Kampfgruppe Kursk Campaign Line in the Sand MacArthur's War Main Bttle Tank C Grm Main Bttle Tank N Grm Main Bttle Tank ME Malla Storm Man of War Mare Nostrum Marianas Turkey Shoot Midway Moscow Campaign Northern Fleet Operation Overlord Pacific Storm Midway Pacific Storm Solomons Panzer Battles Patriot Patriot Battle Sets Ea. Patriot Editor Patton Strikes Back Prelude to Jutland Red Lightning Return to the Falklands Rising Sun Rommel at El Alamein Rommel at Gazala Rommel North Africa Rorke's Drift Second Front Seventh Fleet Spoils of War Stalingrad Campaign Storm Across Europe Third Reich To The Rhine Typhoon of Steel UMS 2 UMS 2 Civil War UMS 2 Desert Storm UMS 2 Planet Editor V for Victory Utah Beach V for Victory Velikiye Luki Victory at Sea War in the Falklands Warship Changed Hist Waterloo Western Front White Death $38 $24 $29 $36 $36 $36 $36 $36 $26 $24 $26 $36 $36 $36 $36 $36 $22 $44 $24 $17 $19 $28 $39 $32 $21 $19 $32 $31 $37 $12 $24 $42 $24 $27 $16 $26 $12 $28 $26      N IBM WARGAMES 8   $34 $36 $23 $44 $12 $12 $27 $14 $36 $12 $ 9 $31 $38 $17 $32 $24 POWERED PARTNERS 622 by Acoustic Research do the job of both a speaker and amp. Plug them into any sound source with line level or headphone output: computers, TV's, or keyboards. Features magnetic shielding, a 30 Watt subwoofer, frequency range of 50Hz20kHz, & volume control. $239 Action North Atlantic Action off River Plate Action Stations Action Stations Scenario Air Raid Pearl Harbor Amer Civil War 1-3 Ea Battle of the Atlantic Battle of Austerlitz Battle Stations Battles of Napoleon Battleship Bismark Battle Tank Barbarosa Battle Tank Kursk Blitzkrieg Ardennes Borodino Bravo Romeo Delta Campaign Carriers at War Carriers at War Expan Pk Carrier Strike Carrier Strike Expan Pk Charge Light Brigade Civil War SSI Conflict: Korea Conflict: Middle East Conflict in Vietnam $26 $26 $29 $14 $26 $22 $36 $ 9 $26 $24 $26 $36 $39 $24 $30 $34 $34 $37 $19 $24 $24 $28 $44 $37 $37 $26 $26 $12 $36 $24 $42 $19 IBM ADVENTURE $21 $42 $34 $32 $21 $23 Visa & MC Accepted. CODs $5. Checks Held 4 Weeks. Money Orders Treated as Cash. Most Items Shipped Same Day. Shipping times not guaranteed. Check compatibility before you buy. Defectives replaced with same product.Price & availability subject to change. All Sales Final. Circle Reader Service #114 $34 $42 $36 $36 $12 Advnts Willie Beamish Advnts Willie Beamish 2 Altered Destiny $34 $39 $34 CGW1 "


"ALLOTE Od @ 4th Defend from 82nd's flank to the coast. Assist 90th Div where possible. VII Corps Defend beaches from enemy air attack. Phase 3 9th Relieve 101st of defense of Carentan. Orient S, defend from S of Carentan W to (Douve tributary) river line and 101st flank (use attached 90th Div battalions to dig defensive positions). 101st Orient S. Defend from La Haye du Puits E to 9th Div. 90thPursue N along coast and destroy or isolate any elements not entrapped. 82nd Detach units to 4th Div as necessary. Clear enemy terrain out to Carteret. 79th — Move to area W Cherbourg. 4th Reduce and destroy remaining resistance. VII Corps — Defend beaches from enemy air attack. Phase 4 9th Defend S of Carentan to 101st. 101st — Defend W from 9th Div to 82nd Div. Hold La Haye du Puits. 82nd — Move S and defend from flank 101st to W coast of peninsula. 79th-Close on Cherbourg from the W. Take W Cherbourg. 4th -Close on Cherbourg from the S. Take S Cherbourg. 90th-Close on Cherbourg from the E. Take E Cherbourg. VII Corps -Defend beaches from enemy air attack. Begin the elimination of isolated enemy units holding out in bunkers. Phase 5 9th Defend S of Carentan to 101st. 101st Defend W from 9th Div to 82nd Div. Hold La Haye du Puits. 82nd — Defend from flank 101st to W coast of peninsula. Envelop enemy flank. 4th — Redeploy from Cherbourg to vic 82nd. Be prepared to detach Div Arty to 79th for not more than a day. Be prepared to attach airborne infantry from 90th for next phase. 90th Eliminate resistance E of Cherbourg. 79th Complete capture of Cherbourg. Eliminate resistance W of Cherbourg. VII Corps Defend beaches from enemy air attack. Phase 6 All units Clear the peninsula of enemy units. Who knows? The campaign might even be over by 27 June! Of course there are any number of alternatives and variations that might work just as well. Experiment and see. Try waiting and building up the bridgehead and then break out. Try using all air power for ground support or vice versa. CGW Discover the pbm game sweeping the nation! LORDS OF DESTINY the game of galactic empire building, legendary beings, and cataclysmic battles! Embark on an introductory journey to the fantastic world of play-by-mail gaming, with a game specially designed for newcomers to the hobby i U of play-by-mail gaming., ilman Lords of Destiny is a 100 % computermoderated play-by-mail game where many players compete in a galaxy packed with features like: INTO THE * 12 MAELSTROM \"ha FREE RULES! FREE SETUP! many different ship types; economic and military tech levels planetary defense shields composed of individual ground units ancient artifacts with special powers known only to the owner hundreds of named characters with abilities such as exploring, spying, researching, governing, diplomacy, psionics, combat, ... Players begin each game having one leader with special locations to utilize such as black holes, secret societies, four followers. Your quest is to amass enough power to proclaim training academies, worin holes, and the 7 wonders of the galaxy! yourself king. Along the way you must persuade powerful beings neutral empires ranging from primitive cave men to advanced and monsters to join your cause and fight many battles. You must elder races; possessing their own forces, characters, and artifacts decide which regions to concentrate your recruiting efforts, each region having different natives who may join your cause. Do you Turns are only $3.75, no \"double\" turns or hidden fees ever dare enter the mystical whirlpools and journey to the unknown? Games last about 27 turns; with 7, 14, or 21 day turns Why try play-by-mail games? Basic version available which provides an easy-to-learn game AND MORE! 1. There is never a problem finding people to play against. Players across the country can compete in the same game. A detailed combat system with free battle reports; updated galactic maps 2. Sophisticated games are a breeze to play since the included with every turn; and customized fill-in-the-blank order sheets population, factories, industrial complexes, crew types, plundering, computer takes care of all the nitty gritty details. alliances, power plays, long-range scanners, multi-class characters... 3. They realistically create the \"fog of war\" since a player NO OBLIGATION! sees only that information available to his own forces. 4. You can plan strategy anytime; whenever its convenient! Mention this ad SPECIAL STARTUP PACKAGE and receive free RULES, SETUP. 2 TURNS: ALL FREE! rules and setup! There is no obligation, simply mention this ad. Turns are only $3.25 with never any extra, hidden costs. Maelstrom Games; PO Box 5461; Oxnard, CA 93031 Maelstrom Games; PO Box 5461; Oxnard, CA 93031 Circle Reader Service #86 Page 134 Computer Gaming World "


"CHIPS & BITS CALL 800-753-GAME IBM MAC & AMIGA GAMES FOR LESS PO Box 234 Rochester, VT05767 Fax 802-767-3382 802—767-3033 800—753-4263 UPS Ground S5 per order. POBox, APO, FPO, 56 per Order.2 Business Day Alr $7 per Order. Europe Air Mall S12 First Item plus S6 Each additional item. Alr Mall to Canada S6 por Order. HI, AK, PR, Mall S7 per Order IBM ADVENTURE IBM ADVENTURE IBM SPORTS ATTLLO $39 $42 $37 $25 $32 $15 $39 $15 $15 $36 $34 In'BATTLES OF DESTINY' you must seek out and destroy up to 3 opponents in order to conquer the world. Features modem play, air, ground and naval combat, challenging artificial intelligence, 22 different units to construct, more than 20 worlds to conquer, campaign style play, and a complete player history. $38 $31 $24 $15 $36 $32 $25 $39 $39 $34 $24 $32 $32 $24 $37 $24 $29 $23 S17 $32 Plan 9 from Outer Space Police Quest 1 Police Quest 2 Police Quest 3 Power Hits: Movies Prince of Persia Rex Nebular Cos Gen B Riftwar Legacy Rise of the Dragon Risky Woods Robocop 3 Rocketeer Search for the King Secrt Monky Isind 1 Secrt Monky Isind 2 Sex Olympics Sex Vixens from Space Sierra Adventure Bundle Space Quest 1 Space Quest 2 Space Quest 3 Space Quest 4 Space Quest 5 Space Quest Bundle Spaceward Ho! Spellcasting 101 Spellcasting 201 Spellcasting 301 Star Trek 5 Star Trek 25th Aniversry Star Trek Nxt Generatn Summoning TMNT Arcade Terminator 2029 Time Quest $38 $24 $12 $39 $16 $15 $34 $36 $39 $36 $38 $19 $36 $37 $29 $19 $34 $32 $ 9 $28 $32 S6 $ 9 $ 9 $34 $24 $32 $ 3 $19 $ 9 $24 $ 6 $32 $32 $15 $27 $32 $ 9 $34 S32 $17 $32 $32 $34 $12 $34 $46 $38 Amazon Attack Pack Castle Wolfenstein 3D Chambr Sci Mutant Prst Coaster Code Name: Iceman CodeName : Iceman 2 Colonel Bequest Conquests of Camelot Conquests or Longbow Conspiracy Deadlock Countdown Covert Action Crime Does Not Pay Crime Wave Cruise for a Corpse Cybercon 3 Dark Half Dark Heart of Uukrul Demon's Gate Deja Vu 2 Lost in LV Die Hard Dog Eat Dog Don't Go Alone Earthrise East v West:Berlin 48 Eco Quest 1 Elf Epic Felony Free DC Future Wars Galleons of Glory Gamma Force Gateway Godfather Gold Rush Grail Quest Hare Raising Havoc Harley Davidson Heart of China Heaven & Earth Heimdall Hired Guns Hook Hostage HUMANS Indy Jones L Crsd vga Indy Jones Fate Atlantis Jack the Ripper James Bond Stealth Aff KGB King's Quest 1 Enhncd King's Quest 2 or 3 King's Quest 4 King's Quest 5 vga King's Quest 6 vga LA Law Lane Mastodon Laura Bow 2 Leather Goddesses Leather Goddesses 2 Legend of Kyrandia Leisure Suit Lrry 1 vga Leisure Suit Lrry 2 Leisure Suit Lrry 3 Leisure Suit Lrry 5 Leisure Suit Lrry Bundle Loom Lord of the Rising Sun Lost in LA Lost File Sherlck Hms Lost Treasures Infocom Lost Treasures Infocom2 Magnetic Scrolls Bundle Manhunter NY Maniac Mansion Martian Memorandum Nebulas Oregon Trail Out of this World Train 'CONQUERED KINGDOMS'allows you to invade castles and fly over mountains as you battle for control of the world. Features nine scenarios, a random map generator, human and fantasy combat troops, 21 levels of difficulty, modem play, several full campaign conquests, and complete game scoring history. $38 $25 $42 $12 $6 $ 9 $34 $32 $12 $19 $37 Fast Break $ 6 Front Page Football $39 Games Winter Chling $34 Grand Prix Circuit $17 Greens $34 Gretsky Hockey 2 $34 Gretzky Hockey 3 $39 Gretsky League $26 Hardball 2 $28 Hardball 3 $32 Hardball 3 Player Disk $19 Hardball 3 Stadium Disk $19 Hole in One Mini Golf $12 Hole in One Course Dsk $ 7 Indianapolis 500 International Sports Ch $29 J Conners Pro Tennis S32 Joe Montana Football $31 John Elway's QB $ 6 LH 3 in 1 Football $36 LH Boxing $36 LH Boxing Contenders $16 LH College Basketball $36 LH Full Count Baseball $36 LH Hockey $36 LH Pro Basketball $36 LH Team Disks $16 LH League Leaders $16 LH Utility Disks $16 Links Golf $29 Links Disk 1 Bountiful $17 Links Disk 2 Firestone $17 Links Disk 3 Bay Hill $17 Links Disk 4 Pinehurst $17 Links Disk 5 Dorado $17 Links Disk 6 Brtn Creek $17 Links Disk 7 Troon Nrth $17 Links 386 Pro $35 Links 386 CD 1-6 Each $20 Low Blow $12 Madden Football $17 Madden TD 89 & 90 $18 Madden Football 2 $32 Magic Jhnson Fst Brk $6 Mario Andretti Racing $17 Michael Jordan Fit Sim $44 ML Basbll 4 USA Today $31 ML Basbll 4 Fantasy Mg $25 ML Basbll 4 General Mg $19 ML Basbll Mngr's Chling $19 ML World Series Disks $17 ML TD 1982 1990 Ea. $17 ML All Stars $17 ML Franchise Disks Ea. $20 ML Basketball $28 ML Personal Pro Golf ML Football Deluxe $39 ML Football 2 $39 Microsoft Golf WIN $39 Mike Ditka Football $32 Mini Putt S 9 MUDS NASCAR Challenge $31 NFL Challenge NFL 1984 1987 Ea. $15 NFL 1988 1991 Ea. $22 NFL Preseason Disk $22 NFL All Star Teams S22 NFL College Alumni $22 NFL Dream Teams $20 NFL Greatest Teams $22 NFL Roster Editor $20 NFL Situation Editor $20 NFL Challnge Prem Ed $59 NFL Football $31 NFL Proleague Football NFL Proleague Football 2 $24 Nicklaus Signature Edit $39 Nicklaus SE Clip Art Nicklaus SE Course 1 $19 Nicklaus Greatest 18 $27 CGW2 $29 Uninvited Universe 1-3 Each Walker War in Middle Earth Warriors of Legend Where Amrcas Pst CSD Where Europe CSD Where USA CSD Where USA CSD Dix Where World CSD Where World CSD Dix Where Time CSD Weird Dreams Wonderland Zak McKracken w/HB Zombie $29 $6 OP$49 $29 $49 $29 $12 $16 $18 $12 $21 $27 $38 $38 $29 $17 $19 $15 $34 $36 $45 $34 IBM SPORTS The Perfect General $28 $ 9 Si The Ultimate Challenge of Strategy and Tactica! $36 $12 $42 $35 $12 $15 \"PERFECTGENERAL' is a turn based ground war game. Features great maps in VGA, easy to use mouse or keyboard interface, 14 scenarios, very strong artificial intelligence, hidden movement, line of sight option, in depth player ranking system, full career history as you play, 1 or 2 player, modem play, and sound boardsupport. $32 $17 $6 $32 $34 $26 $36 $15 $21 $24 $29 $32 $29 $21 $34 $14 $60 4D Boxing 4th & Inches ABC Boxing ABC Mon Night Action Sports Soccer All American College Fb All Star Sports Pak American Gladiators APBA Baseball APBA General Manager APBA Micro Manager APBA Stat Master APBA 1908 91 Ea. APBA Basketball APBA Bowling APBA Football Basketball Challenge B ball Ch. 1987-88 Ea. Bball Ch. 1989 90 Ea. Bo Jackson Baseball Cycles Grand Prix Daily Double Horse Days of Thunder Dirk's Baseball Encycpd Espana Games $15 $24 $36 $39 $19 $34 $37 $44 $42 $32 $21 $34 $28 $13 $17 -OOP$28 $32 $18 $37 $27 $28 $36 $24 $28 $19 $24 $19 $24 Visa & MC Accepted. CODs $5. Checks Held 4 Weeks. Money Orders Treated as Cash. Most Items Shipped Same Day. Shipping times not guaranteed. Check compatibility before you buy. Defectivesreplaced with same product.Price & availability subject to change. All Sales Final. Circle Reader Service #114 "


"Multi-Player Red Baron Red Baron On TSN by Timothy L. Trimble .  This one's for every gamer that finds out that the artificial Red Baron does I not like to do inside loops for every gamer that feels like he has what it takes to shoot down the packaged version of Red Baron in every confrontation. In fact, this one's for those who feel so confident in their flying and combat skills that they think they are ready to go up against \"real\" pilots! Well, this is what I thought also, until I flew against real, living, breathing, Red Baron players on TSN (The Sierra Network). TSN from Sierra On-Line, Inc., is the provider of a multi-player version of their popular WWI flight combat product-Dynamix' Red Baron. Sierra has taken the graphics, flight dynamics, and thrills of their stand-alone Red Baron product and incorporated it into their high-quality gaming network. Two to four players can dogfight each other in bouts of 10 minutes or three crashes/kills, whichever comes first. 14040 120180240.00 Un 4111 You've been tuit! of shadows prancing around the Red gets higher than two thousand feet, which Baron game machine and, just as natu means that one really needs to keep an eye rally, clicking on said game machine gives on your altitude. As noted above, each access to the game's waiting room. flight session lasts for ten minutes or until From within the waiting room the player the player dies three times three times a can talk to other would-be pilots who are charm?). At the end of the flight session, awaiting their chance to enter the fray or the score and total number of kills is disjoin an open game of Red Baron. Three played. levels of difficulty are available: novice, There are also some constraints due to normal and expert. At the novice level, the technicalities of playing across a large flight characteristics make handling the multi-player network. One strange permuaircraft fairly easy. Inside loops, steep tation relates to phantom bullets resulting turns and split-s turns can be performed from the time delay between each player's without a significant reduction in altitude computer trying to talk to the other's. I and loss of airspeed. Target aircraft have encountered this on several occasions and a larger hit area for damage as well. At the was actually shot down after passing the normal level, flight becomes a little more target aircraft on a head-to-head run. realistic and the hit area for target aircraft (\"Where did those bullets come from?\") is a little smaller. Finally, at the expert Another feature of the networking time level, handling of the aircraft is very real delay is \"warping\" of the aircraft. This can istic. Steep turns can result in a loss of be seen by watching the flight path of the altitude and airspeed, sun blindness and aircraft as it is flying along smoothly and gun jams can occur and, as one would expect, the hit area for the target aircraft becomes more realistic. Exotically decorated Pfalz D.III Climbing Into The Cockpit Getting into the networked Red Baron is very intuitive. Players gain access to the game from the Sierra Land section of TSN (which is presented as a landscape with various buildings and gaming areas). With a mouse-controlled icon in the shape of feet the player selects the Arcade building and the next screen will show the inside of a coin-op arcade, replete with various game machines. Other players within the arcade are displayed as featureless shadows hovering around their favorite machine. Naturally, it is not uncommon to find a large group In The Air All players start their flight in a randomly assigned aircraft at the local airfield. There is a 30 second safety timer for giving pilots a chance to get off the ground and into the air. This usually results in a lot of low-level dogfighting that rarely The Fokker D.VII was the best overall fighter Page 136 Computer Gaming World "


"CHIPS & BITS CALL 800-753-GAME IBM MAC & AMIGA GAMES FOR LESS PO Box 234 Rochester, VT 05767 Fax 802—767-3382 802-767-3033 800-753-4263 UPS Ground $5 per order. POBox, APO, FPO, $6 per Order.2 Business Day Airs7 per Order. Europe Air Mail S12 FirstItem plus $6 Each additional Item. Air Mall to Canada $6 per Order. HI, AK, PR, Mall $7 per Ordor IBM SPORTS HINT BOOKS IBM HARDWARE $17 $15 Thrstmstr Pro Joystick Thrstmstr Ruddr Pedal Thrustmstr Weapn Cntrl Thunder Board SndBrd Thunder Board for WIN Thunder Board Spkrs Video Blaster $99 $109 $79 $84 $109 $15 $349 $ 9 $32 $38 $17 $45 $26 $32 $24 $18 $37 $12 $12 $15 IBM AD&D $10 $16 $16 $10 $10 $10 $13 $10 $10 $10 $12 $16 $12 $16 \"CO MANCHE MAXIMUM OVERKILL' is a glimpse into the future of military avionics and exactingly accurate simulator of the Bening-Sikorski 66 Comanche Helicopter. Features actual terrain rendered in real time 3D, fly mutiple missions in 1999, complete Thrustmaster support & 256 color VGA graphics. $44 $19 $15 Nicklaus Unlimited Golf NG Clip Art NG Course Disk 1-5 Ea. Over the Net Volleyball Pete Rose Baseball PGA Tour Golf PGA Tour Golf WIN PGA Tour Golf Disk 1 PGA Tour Golf Ltd Edt Playmaker Football Power Hits: Sports Pro Football Analyst Pro League Baseball Road to the Final Four Reel Fishin Serve & Volley Skate or Die Sport of Kings Summer Challenge Super Car Pack Team Suzuki Tennis Cup Tie Break Tennis TKO Boxing Tom Landry Football Tony LaRussa Basebil TLaRussa AL Stadiums TLaRussa NL Stadiums TLaRussa Classic Stad TLaR Teams 1901-68 Weaver Baseball 2.0 Weaver Commisnr 2.0 World Circuit World Class Soccer $16 $12    $34 $37 $15 $32 $12 $10 $12 $10 $16 $10 $16 $12 $21 $10 $10 AD&D Collectors Ed 2 AD&D Starter Kit Champions of Krynn Curse of Azure Bonds Dark Queen of Krynn Dark Sun Death Knights of Krynn Dragon Strike Dragons of Flame Eye of the Beholder Eye of the Beholder 2 Gateway Savge Frontr Heroes of the Lance Pool of Darkness Pool of Radiance Secret of Silver Blades Shadow Sorcerer Tales Magic: Prophcy S Treasurs Savage Frontr War of the Lance   $6  N $14 $15 $29 $24 $15 $15 Lost Files of Sherlock H LucasArts Adventure LucasArts Air Combat Magic Candle 1 or 2 Manhunter NY or SF Maniac Mansion Martian Dreams Matrix Cubed Mean Street Might & Magic 1 Might & Magic 2 Might & Magic 3-5 Ea Official Sierra Hint Bks Patriot Planet's Edge Police Quest 1 3 Ea. Pool of Darkness Pool of Radiance Populous 1&2 Officl Str Power Monger Power Mngr Strategy Bk Prophecy of the Shadow Quest for Clues 2, 3or4 Quest for Glory 1-3 Ea. Railroad Tycoon Rex Nebular Rise of the Dragon Run 5 Issue 1 20 Ea. Savage Empire Search for the King Secret Mnky Isind 1or 2 Secret of Silver Blades Simcity/Simearth Space Quest 1-4 Ea. Spellcasting 101 or 201 Starflight 1 or 2 Star Trek 25th Anniv Strategy Plus 3-11 Ea. Strategy Plus 12-26 Ea. Strike Commander Stunt Island Summoning Time Quest Treasures Savage Frntr Tunnels & Trolls Ultima 4 7 Ea. Ultima Avatar Advntures Ultima Underworld Ultima 7 & Underworld V for Victory Wizardry 6 Cosmic Frg Wizardry 7 Crusade Yeager's Air Combat $10 $15 $12 $38 $15 $15 $32 $17 $12 $16 $34 $28 $ 6 $10 $10 $10 $10 $20 $10 $10 $10 IBM ROLE PLAYING $24 'AMAZON' recaptures the fun and excitement of the 1950's drive-in movies. Travel to unexplored regions of the Amazon, fight 10 foot ants, and find emeralds stolen by Cortez. Amazing cinematic effects such as multiple camera angles, flashbacks, zooms, pans, and fades. Features full digitized voices & sound effects. $39 HINT BOOKS $10 $ 8 $10 $16 $19 $10 $16 $16 $10 $10 $16 $10 $16 $10 $16 $16 $12 $10 $10 $10 $10 $14 $37 $16 $12 $10 $16 i $10 $10 IBM HARDWARE     688 Attack Sub Advnturs Willy Beamish A Train Bard's Tale 1 3 Ea. Buck Rogers 1 or 2 Castle of Dr Brain Champions of Krynn Civilization Colonel Bequest 1 Conquests of Camelot Conquests of Longbow Curse of Azure Bonds Dark Queen of Krynn Darklands Death Knights of Krynn Drakkhen Dungeon Master Dynamix Great War Pin EcoQuest Elvira 1 or 2 Eye of Beholder 1 Eye of Beholder 2 Fountain of Dreams Free DC Gateway Savage Frntr Global Conquest w/Disk Gobliiins Gunship 2000 Hard Nova Harpoon Battlebook Heart of China Hero's Quest 1 3 Ea. Immortal Indy Jones Lst Crsade Indy Jones Fate Atlantis Island of Dr Brain Jetfighter 2.0 King's Quest 1 5 Ea. Laura Bow Leisr Suit Larry 1 5 Ea. Lemmings w/Disk Loom Lord of the Rings 1 or 2 %%% 2400 AD Bad Blood Bard's Tale 2 Bard's Tale 3 Bard's Tale Cnstrctn St Battletech 1 Battletech 2 Black Crypt Bloodwych Buck Rogers 1 Captain Blood Captive Celtic Legends Challenge of 5 Realms Champions CHARACTER EDITORS Cobra Mission Conan Corporation Cybergenic Ranger Cyber Empire Cyber Space Darklands Daughter of Serpents Drakkhen Dragon Wars Dungeon Master Dusk of the Gods Elvira 1 Elvira 2 Flames of Freedom Fountain of Dreams Four Crystals of Trazere Gods Heaven & Earth Hero's Quest 1 Hero's Quest 2 Hero's Quest 3 Immortal Keys to Maramon King's Bounty Knights of Legend Legacy of the Necrmncr Legend Legend of Valor Lord of the Rings 1   $12  $34 $24 $10 MAXX COBRA FLIGHTSTICK brings together the thrill of a joystick and the versatility of the keyboard. Features molded casing for left or right handers, 7 button pistol grip joystick, 25 programmable functions, exact auto-centering, and true circular directional control. Game port not necessary. $54 $28 $15 $26 $26 Ad Lib Sound Card Ad Lib Gold 1000 Adlib Progrmrs Manual Adlib Surround Sound Adlib Telephone Module Ad Lib Visual Composr Ad Lib Speakers Flight Stick Flight Stick w Falcon Game Card 3 Gravis Ultrasound Brd Champ Joystick Maxx Control Yoke Maxx Rudder Pedals Mouse 3 Button Pro Audio Spectrum 16 Pro Audio Spctrm Plus Sound Blaster Sound Blaster Pro Sound Bistr Pro Basic Snd Blaster Speakers Snd Blaster Voice Edtr Sound Star Snd Board Thrustmaster Joystick $21 $10 $16 $10 $16 $10 $10 $10 $10 $10 $10 $16 $10 $10 $10 $21 $10 $10 $59 $179 $27 $64 $64 $75 $15 $33 $42 $39 $129 $24 $59 $39 $29 $179 $139 $89 $169 $139 $15 $54 $14 $69 $32 Visa & MC Accepted. CODs $5.Checks Held 4 Weeks. Money Orders Treated as Cash. MostItoms Shipped Samo Day. Shipping times not guaranteed. Check compatibility before you buy. Defectives replaced with same product. Price & availability subject to Circle Reader Service #114 $15 $30 $17 $31 $39 $32 Cow "


"Looney Lane Elliott Venom SierroLand VZH Hoiting Room CharlieTA DautheGiff John Hall PUSSELLA LOOK fed Boron Invitation CH Rob ? @ Alone de Cancel Invite Keni STEVE Davide Wotch jasong JeffP JeffP MOT Go to 68 to taking advantage of the extra altitude for some tricky maneuvers). Time of the flight can be set to the actual time, or the player can select the time of the flight, enabling one to have night or day flights regardless of when the network is actually accessed. Realistic weather will also be provided, allowing for some peek-a-boo action in the clouds. Finally, the menacing presence of zeppelins and spotter balloons will be available for shooting practice. The 2.0 software will still only support two to four players per session, but anyone who has tried the on-line game will find that this can be quite enough to handle in an intense dog fight. Meanwhile, Back at the Aerodrome The only problems that I encountered with the program was the loss of engine 17:48pm 6361 Options then \"warps\" ahead all of a sudden. (Hiccup hyperdrive?) A Sierra representative informed me that part of the problem is due to the fact that the current speed of 2400 baud modems is not enough to keep up with the processing speed of the on-line computers used for the actual infrastructure of the network. 9600 baud modems will help to reduce the problem in the future, and some new programming for version 2.0 of the TSN software has helped to reduce the problem as well. Speaking of TSN Version 2.0, it should be out by the time this column hits the newstand and will provide many new features to on-line Red Baron. Instead of being randomly assigned a plane, the player will be able to choose from a broader assortment of aircraft. The starting position can also be selected as a takeoff from the airport or start in the air (which means sound after being hit by a bullet and some problems with calibration of the Advanced Gravis joystick. (The Thrustmaster FCS worked fine.) These problems should be resolved with the 2.0 version of the software. Overall, Red Baron on TSN is a real pleasure and a great opportunity for some sweaty palms. One of the best on-line gaming values yet. Once again, this is Timothy L. Trimble, From the Cockpit, flying the skies high over Sierra Land. So, here's a warning for all gamers to keep their eyes open on your \"six\" for the \"Timinator!\" The Sierra Network can be contacted for further information and rates at: The Sierra Network Box 1550 Oakhurst, CA 93644 Or call 1-800-Sierra-1 CGW Spad 13, the best French scout during the war. LOOKING FOR A SPORTS TITLE? CALL FOR CURRENT PRICING AND SAME DAY SHIPPING PANZER SALIENT THINK SPORTS THE PLAYBOOK OF SPORTS-RELATED SOFTWARE | If you're a computer sports fan, you want to know what software is available, how similar titles compare, and you want the latest releases at attractive prices. That's why our complete Playbook describes dozens of strategic simulations, awesome action games, and specialized utilities from little known sources. We want to be your source for hi-tech sports. The Playbook is free with all phone and mail orders. >> Or simply send $1.00 for your copy today! BASEBALL BASKETBALL > BOWLING EDUCATION CALENDARS $) FISHING CARD COLLECTING FLIGHT GAMES FOOTBALL HANDICAPPING GOLF TRIVIA HOCKEY SIMULATORS HORSERACING STATISTICS MOTORSPORTS OLYMPICS CEREBEL SAILING 800 747-0908 617 576-6700 SKIING Montortor 675 Mass Ave  Cambridge MA 02139 A TENNIS TAKE YOUR BRAIN OUT TO THE BALLGAME Circle Reader Service # 50 Page 138 (BATTLE OF THE BULGE) ISS LIA Combat Enterprises, Inc. proudly Tiger announces its newest computer simulated play-by-mail wargame called \"Panzer Salient\" that is based on the 1944 Battle of the Bulge campaign. Combat is at 501 lv PZ battalion level with full-color maps and a Ath Arm historical division order of battle. Players are assigned either a tactical role |(Division Commander) or a strategic role (Army Commander). Whatever your role, you will be playing in a game where 53 Arm in violent combat took place among all the combatants. \"Panzer Salient\" uses the proven game system found in our popular Crisis in the West\" game. The editor of Fire & Movement (#83) wrote, \"The maps X Bomber are beautiful... offers players the many ME-262 joys of partaking in an umpired game with its good fog of war rules... give serious thought\": Your 1st turn costs $45. II This includes the cost of your 1st turn, a Jagdkorps fullcolor player's manual, full-color maps, Junits, order of battle worksheets, and a performance rating at the end of the game. Follow-on turns are $20. We also offer discount prices for books and games. To begin playing, send a check to, or for information, write to C.L PO Box 763, Bel Air, MD 21014 or call (410) 838-7602. All inquiries welcome! Circle Reader Service # 48 Computer Gaming World "


"CHIPS & BITS CALL 800-753-GAME PO Box 234 Rochester, VT 05767 Fax 802-767-3382 802-767-3033 800-753-4263 IBM MAC & AMIGA GAMES FOR LESS UPS Ground S5 per order. PO Box, APO, FPO, 56 per Order.2 Business Day Air S7 per Order. Europe Air Mall $12 First Item plus $6 Each additional Item. Alr Mailto Canada S6 per Order. HI, AK, PR, MailS7 per Order IBM ROLE PLAYING CHARACTER EDITORS IBM SIMULATION Lord of the Rings 2 Loremaster Lure of the Temptress $37 $39 $37 $45 $12 $24 $38           Escape from Hell Eye of Beholder 1 or 2 Fountain of Dreams Hard Nova Keys to Maramon Knights of Legend Lord of the Rings 1 or 2 Magic Candle 1-3 Each Megatraveller 1 or 2 Might & Magic 1-3 Each Planets Edge Pool of Radiance Prophecy of the Shadow Secret of Silver Blades Sentinel Worlds Treasures Savage Frntr Tunnels & Trolls Ultima 4-7 Ea. Ultima Martian Dreams Ultima Savage Empire Ultima Underworld Wizardry 4 or 5 Wizardry 1-3 Wizardry Cosmic Forge $16 $16 $16 $16 $16 $16 $16 $16 S16 $16 $16 $16 $16 $16 $16 $16 $16 $16 $16 $16 $16 $16 $16 S16 $12 $29 $27 $34 $34 $12 $12 $38 JUMP JET' is a state of the art flight simulator based on the most unique aircraft in the world today. Features up to 6 sorties per day, fatigue factor in combat, digitized views of weapons and the ability to hover, fly backward and land vertically. $39 $27 $24 IBM SIMULATION $29 $ 9 $29 $29 $ 9 $38 $24 $34 $30 $19 $39 $38 Magic Candle 1 Magic Candle 2 Magic Candle 3 Matrix Cubed Mechwarrior Megatraveller 1 Megatraveller 2 Megatraveller 3 Midwinter 1 Might & Magic 1 or 2 Might & Magic 3 Might & Magic 4 Might & Magic 5 Mines of Titan Murder Obitus Pirates Gold Planet's Edge Prophecy 1 Questron 2 Ragnarok Rings of Medusa Sea Rogue Sentinel Worlds Shadow lands Sleeping Gods Lie Space 1889 Space Hulk Space Inc. Space Rogue Space Wrecked Spellbound Spellcraft Aspct of Valor Spell Jammr Pirts RS Spirit of Excaliber Starflight 1 Starflight 2 Star Saga 2 Sword of the Samurai Tangled Tales Terran Envoy Third Courier Times of Lore Tunnels & Trolls Twilight 2000 Twilight 2001 Ultima Martian Dreams Ultima Savage Empire Ultima Trilogy Ultima Trilogy 2 Ultima 4 Ultima 5 Ultima 6 False Prophet Ultima 7 Black Gate Ultima 7 Forge of Virtue Ultima 7.5 Serpent Isle Ultima Underworld Ultima Underworld 2 Uncharted Waters Vengeance of Excalibur Waxworks Wizardry Trilogy Wizardry 4 Wizardry 5 Wizardry 6 Cosmic Frg Wizardry 7 Crusaders 'CONQUEST OF JAPAN'is a miniature-style war simulation in which you start with 5 randomly placed cities and hire armies in order to conquer Honshu, Japan's main island. Features real time combat colorful animation, authentic troop formations, strate gic planning, and individual troop movement in VGA graphics. $34 $39 Harrier Combat Sim $ 6 Heatwave $25 Heroes of the 357th $32 Hoverforce $31 Hunt for Red October $19 Hyperspeed $34 Jet Fighter 2 $39 Jet Fighter 2 Missn Disk S19 Jump Jet $39 Knights of the Sky $29 Land, Sea & Air 1 or 2 $39 LHX Attack Chopper $17 Life & Death 1 or 2 $23 Lightspeed $12 M1 Tank Platoon $24 Mantis Exprmnti Fghtr $39 Mantis Speech Pack $19 Maximum Overkill $44 Megafortress $12 Megafrtrss Mission 1 $26 Megafrtrss Mission 2 $26 Megafortress 3D Editor Megafortress Mega Pk $38 Mig 29 Fulcrum S32 Orbits $37 Power Boat Simulator $39 Power Politics WIN $34 Privateer $49 Rapcon $29 Reach for the Skies $31 Red Baron S36 Red Baron Missn 1 or 2 Red Storm Rising $14 Road&Track Grand Prix $37 Sailing Instructor CGA $199 Sailing Simulator CGA $39 East Coast Voyages $34 West Coast Voyages $34 Sailing Instructor VGA $239 Sailing Simulator VGA $42 East Coast Voyages $39 West Coast Voyages Scenery Collectn A or B Secret Weapons Litwff S Weapons Exp1 P38 S Weapons Exp2 P80 $21 S Weapons Exp3 He 162 S Weapons Exp4 Do335 $21 Shadow President $44 Shuttle Silent Service 2 $34 Strike Aces S19 Strike Commander $45 Stunt Driver $15 Stunt Island Tank $34 Team Yankee $34 Team Yankee 2 $29 Test Drive 2 $30 Test Drive 2: Collection $29 Test Drive 2: CA Challg $15 Test Drive 2: Euro Chlig $15 Test Drive 2: Supercars $15 Test Drive 3 $29 TD3 Road & Car Disk $19 TFH & BH1942 $44 Thunderstrike $27 Top Gun Danger Zone $31 Tracon 2 $29 Ultrabots $37 Virtual Reality Studio $49 Voice Commander $18 Wing Commander 1 WC1 Secret Mssn 1 or 2 $19 WC 1 Bundle 1 S45 Wing Commander 2 $45 WC2 Opertn Mod 1 or 2 $27 WC2 Speech Pack $15 Wolfpack $15 X Wing Yeager's Air Combat $38 CGWA S44 $21 $21 $26 $19 $46 $34 $42 $27 $27 $46 $27 $27 $46 $29 $29 $29 $39 $19 $37 $32 $ 9 $37 $38 $16 $12 $16 S6 $29 $39 $19 $29 $42 $19 $17 $44 $24 $39 $32 $19 $45 S24 $30 $15 $42 $35 $12 $24 $18 The Lost 688 Attack Sub A10 Avenger A10 Tank Killer 1.5 Aces of the Pacific Aces Pacific Mission 1 Aces Pacific Mission 2 Aces over Europe Aces Europe Mission 1 Aces Europe Mission 2 AH 64 Helicopter Allied Forces Bundle ATAC ATP B17 Flying Fortress Battle Command Battlefield 2000 Birds of Prey Blue Max:Aces WWI Campaign Strat Flight S Car and Driver Cardinal of the Kremlin Carrier Command Conqueror Multi Tank Crash Course Design yr own Railroad Dynamics Bundle Elite Plus Eye of the Storm F117A Nighthawk F15 Strike Eagle 2 F15 SE2 Scenario Disk F15 Strike Eagle 3 F19 Stealth Fighter F22 ATF F29 Retaliator Falcon AT Falcon 3.0 Falcon 3 Scenario 1 Fire & Forget 2 Flight of the Intruder Flight Simulator 4.0 Aircraft Scenry Design Airport Facilities Directr Flight Planner New Facilities Locator Scenery Collection CA Scenery Hawaii Sound, Graphics Upgrde Fly Grand Canyon 3D Gunboat Gunship Gunship 2000 Gunship 2000 Scenario $ 6 $28 $15 $34 $39 $37 $34 $35 $45 $35 $35 $39 $46 $21 $46 $48 $46 $42 $16 $34 $32 $19 $26 $34 $39 $34 Cor Infocom Pertand in Interactic 'THE LOST TREASURES OF INFOCOM'isaa compilation of 20 infocom games. Including Infedel, Lurking Horror Suspect, Ballyhoo, Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy. Suspended, Starcross, Deadline, Witness, Moon Mist, Planet Fall, Station Fall Enchanter, Sorcerer, Spell breaker, Zork 1-3, Beyond Zork, Zork Zero. $42 Wytry. Haatavad Screer Firtin Mester CHARACTER EDITORS S39 InfoCON $37 Bard's Tale 1-3 Ea. Champions of Krynn Curse of Azure Bonds Dark Heart of Uukrul Dark Queen of Krynn Death Knights of Krynn Drakkhen $16 $16 $16 $16 $16 $16 $16 $16 $27 $45 $33 $12 $39 $46 Visa & MC Accepted. CODs $5. Checks Heid 4 Weeks.Money Orders Treated as Cash. Most Items Shipped Same Day. Shipping times not guaranteed. Check compatibility before you buy. Defectives replaced with same product. Price & availability subject to change. All Sales Final. Circle Reader Service #114 $24 "


"TIME TAKE PROD NO. SCENE DATE DIRECTOR PRODUCED BY Athens Wasn't Built In A Day, Either Sneak Previews are not designed to be reviews. They are feature articles based on \"works in progress\" that CGW's editors have deemed worthy of early coverage. These articles are not intended to provide the final word on a product, since we expect to publish appropriate review coverage when the game is finished. (But in Caesar, Players Can Column as They See 'Em) A Sneak Preview by Alan \"Pax my Gluteus Maximus!\" Emrich It appears that the saying \"impressions of ancient Rome\" is about to become a sly, double entendre. Software publisher Impressions, having settled over here in the States after several years in the UK, is about to erect a gaming monument as a tribute to the glory of the ancients. Their forum will be a computer game (of course), this one entitled Caesar. The time is around the birth of Christ. The place is the entire Roman empire, in all its vast, expansive glory. In Impressions Caesar, one does not earn their way up the ladder of imperium through conquest by adding new provinces to the empire. Rather, it is the player's task to consolidate Rome's vast territorial holdings and \"civilize\" the foreign provinces by improving their land and building fine capital cities, second in grandeur only to Rome itself. industrial and commercial zones, Caesar scores well with me for the wide variety of sites from which players can choose for construction. It is definitely a builder's banquet. While the temples (anachronistically bearing a cross icon on the \"select\" button), hospitals, prefectures and amphitheaters translate almost directly to SimCity's churches, hospitals, police stations and stadiums, Caesar offers the urban planner of yesteryear considerably more options. Schools, oracles, theaters and hippodromes are all considerations for the Imperial Governor as city planner for, not only must one's urban dwellers be kept content (or they will literally take to the streets and riot I love these animations!), they must also be educated. The player's task is, after all, to civilize the provinces. A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to Prosperity One of the most interesting features that affects property values (yes, there are little mini-maps a la SimCity for crime, prosperity, et al) is the proximity of residents to a forum. These social centers come in a wide variety of sizes and costs, each offering a wider range influence over its adjoining neighborhoods. It is the essential center to every major city and suburb thereof. No ancient urban planner would open up a new sub-division without first carefully considering where its forum will go, and making sure that all roads lead to it. As an added feature, road squares can become their own little mini-forums when a player opts to convert them to plaza squares. Frankly, I'm not sure of the exact impact of this conversion yet (or of a lot of these different tiles which one can build, truth to tell), but I'm having a great time building them and trying to sort it all out! What struck me is the historical feel of ancient urban sprawl. Ancient cities seemed to be built willy-nilly when one studies their ruins, apparently without a lot of thought to such bureaucratic The Ancient Art of SimCity About 80% of a player's time, while attempting to rise to the rank of Caesar, will be spent covering a huge map full of undevelel oped land with the civilizing architecture of Imperial Rome. In this regard, most of the game is played much like SimCity — in real time with annual announcements marking an advance in the calendar. Frankly, I found Impressions' graphic look (evolving from their Merchant and Discovery games) to work much better in practice in Caesar. In this game, having \"little men moving around a dynamically changing map\" was both pleasing and appropriate. The urban graphics palette, to be sure, is quite dazzling, if for nothing else than its sheer variety. Not only do houses TWIVU evolve from tents to shacks to apartments to luxury villas, but the \"factories\" stockpile goods to show their prosperity, marketplaces animate with considerable hubbub and the amphitheater occasionally fills with huge throngs (although I didn't notice if the Christians were playing the Lions that afternoon). While many of these building \"tiles\" can be translated directly to SimCity's residential, 13 Baths Page 140 Computer Gaming World "


"CHIPS & BITS CALL 800-753-GAME PO Box 234 Rochester, VT 05767 Fax 802-767-3382 802—767-3033 800—753-4263 IBM MAC & AMIGA GAMES FOR LESS UPS Ground S5 por order. PO Box, APO, FPO, S6 per Order.2 Business Day Air 57 per Order, Europe Alr Mall S12 First Item plus $6 Each additionalltem. Air Mail to Canada $6 por Order.HI, AK, PR, Mall $7 por Order IBM TRADITIONAL IBM TRADITIONAL IBM ACTION/ARCADE $ 25 $ 34 $32 $19 UUS $ 12 $ 24 $ 12 $ 15 $ 10 $ 10 $ 12 $ 34 $ 10 S21 $ 12 $ 9 $ 27 $19 $ 22 $12 $32 S 32 $ 24 'CARRIERS AT WAR' brings to life six crucial carrier battles of WWII: Pearl Harbor Coral Sea, Midway, Eastern Shores, Santa Cruz, and Great Marianas Turkey Shoot. Seek out and destroy enemy carriers, fleets, air forces. Features hun dreds of individually modeled ships and aircraft from that period. $37 $ 29 $ 25 $10 Shogi Master Solitaire WIN Solitaire Royale Solitaires Journey Sorry Space Vegetables Spot Stratego Strip Poker 3 Strip Pokr 3 DD 1-6 Ea. Super Jeopardy Super Tetris Terminator Chess Tetris Classic Trump Castle 2 Trump Castle 3 Trump Castle 2 DD 10r2 Turn-n-Burn Vegas Entrtmnt Pk WIN Video Pokr by Masque Video Pokr A'la Carte Video Poker WIN Waynes World Welltris Wheel of Fortun 1-3 Ea Wheel of Fortune Gold Wordtris Wrld Chmp Backgamn Wrld Chmp Cribbage S20 $32 $38 $ 21 $ 15 $ 10 $ 15 $ 31 $31 $ 19 $ 27 $ 29 $34 $ 27 $ 19 S 34 $ 12 $ 10 $20 $ 19 $ 24 $ 12 $ 26 $ 15 $ 9 S 15 $ 27 $24 $ 24 $ 19 $36 ERGIA $ 29 $ 34 $ 24 $ 12 $32 $ 15 $ 29 $ 29 S 10 $32 $ 10 $ 24 $ 12 $ 15 $ 26 $18 $ 18 $ 18 Nevermind Night Shift Ninja Rabbits Nova 9 Oil's Well Pac Man Pick N Pile Pipe Dream Pitfighter Powerdrome Power Hits: Battletech Power Hits: Sci Fi Punisher Roller Babes Rotox S.C. Out Savage Sierra Arcade Bundle Silpheed Simpsons Arcade Game Sliders Space Ace 1 or 2 Space Wars Speedball 2 Stellar 7 Super Off Road Super Pac Man Super Space Invaders Swamp Gas Take a Break Crosswrd Take a Break Pinball Take a Break Pool Taking of Beverly Hills Teenage Mint Nnja Trtl TMNT Manhattan Miss TMNT Arcade Terminator Tetris Classic WIN Tinies Tristan Pinball Troika Vaxine Viking Child Volfied Wild Streets Wild Wheels Wrath of the Demon X Men 2 Xenocide CARRIERS AT WAR $ 24 $ 21 $ 31 $ 27 $ 34 S 37 $25 $ 21 $ 15 $9 $ 25 $ 38 $ 29 $ 29 $ 29 $24 $ 25 $31 $24 IBM ACTION/ARCADE   $21 'THE CARRIERS AT WAR CONSTRUCTION KIT provides an infinitely flexible tool for creating a particular battle or an original scenario. Build ships and planes, organize squadrons, draft maps, position air bases and adjust the artificial intelligence used by the computer. 3 new scenariosincluded; Wake Island, Guadalcanal, & Tarawa. $37 $ 34 $ 27  3D Pool 3 in 1 Players Pack Acquire Advance to Boardwalk Armada Amarillo Sim 7 Card Std Amarillo Slim Poker Backgammon WIN Battle Chess 1 or 2 Battle Chess WIN Battle Chess 4000 Blackjack DOS/WIN Bridge 7 Bridgemaster Casino Craps Casinos of the World Centerfold Squares Check Mate DOS/WIN Chessmaster 3000 Chessmaster 3000 WIN Chess Net WIN Chess X Collossus Classic 5 DOS/WIN Clue Master Detective Crossword Magic Dealers Choice Poker Demon Blue Dr Thorp's Blackjack Dr Thorp's Mini Blckjck Ewd O'Thorpe Bickjck Electric Jigsaw Faces: Tetris 3 Femmes Fatale Femme Fatale DD 1 Femme Fatale DD 2 Femme Fatale DD 3 FS Pro Game Maker Games People Play GO Master 5 DOS/WIN GO Master 5 DIX GO Master 5 DIX WIN GO Joseki Genius GO Junior GO Scribbler GO Tactical Wizard GO Master Toolkit Grand Slam Bridge Grand Slam Bridge 2 Grandmaster Chess Home Alone 2 Home Casino Spectaclr Hong Kong Mah Jong Hoyle's Games 1 Hoyle's Games 2 Hoyle's Games 3 or 4 Ishido Jeopardy 1 or 2 Jeopardy 25th Anniv Jeopardy Super Talking Jigsaw Pinups Living Jigsaws Lotto Gold Lexicross Monopoly Deluxe Omar Sharif on Bridge On Target Peanuts Penthouse Jigsaw Pictionary Pinball WIN Planet of Lust Price is Right Prime Time Hits 1 or 2 Risk Risk WIN Rodeo Games Sargon 4 or 5 Scrabble Scrabble Deluxe Shanghai 2 $ 68 $21 $ 39   $109 $109 $ 39 $ 9 $ 32 $ 9 S 28 $ 12 $ 15 $ 15 $ 24 S 31 $37 $32 $19 $ 12 $ 28 $ 17 $38 $ 9 $ 24 $32 $ 24 $34 CONSTRUCTION KIT $31   $ 39 $ 39    S 17 $32 $37 S6 $ 26 $ 29 $ 24 IBM CD ROM $ 15 $32 $ 21 $19 $ 29 $ 17 $ 10 $ 15 $ 21 $ 27 $19 Airborne Ranger Aliens ate my Babysitter Amazing Spiderman Arachnaphobia Artura Back to the Future 2 Back to the Future 3 Bargon Attack Bart Simpsn House Wrd Battle Master Battlestorm Bill & Ted's Excllnt Adv Blockbuster Brain Blaster Budokan Cogito WIN Colorado Continuum Cool Croc Twins Crackdown Dark Century Day of the Viper D Generation Dig Dug Dr Doom's Revenge Dragon's Breath Dragon's Lair 1 Dragon's Lair 2 Drgn's Lair Singe Csti Freakn Funky Fuzzballs Galactic Conqueror Galactic Empire Galaxian Gauntlet 1 or 2 Gobliiins Gold of the Aztecs Gremlins 2 Guy Spy Hard Driving 2 Hare Raising Havoc Home Alone Killing Cloud Knight Force Light Corridor Loopz Monty Python Ms Pac Man Mystical noun ) $ 27 $ 21 $ 24 $42 $ 12 $ 29 $ 24 $ 34 S 19 S 31 $ 27 $46 37 S6 $ 9 een A A $24 7th Guest S56 12 Roads to Gettysburg $48 Aesop's Fables $32 Battle Chess DOS/WIN S46 Buzz Aldrin Race Space $59 Capstone Game Collect $45 Chessmaster 3000 $46 Conan $21 Cnqst Robin Hood WIN Dune $35 El Grito Del Jaguar WIN Guy Spy $29 Jones in the Fast Lane $42 King's Quest 5 WIN $42 Legend of Kyrandia $49 Lost Treasurs Infocom Lost Treasurs Infocom 2 $46 Mantis Expermtl Fighter $45 Omar Sharif on Bridge $46 Secret of Monkey Island $39 Secret Weapon's Luftwff $46 Shuttle $24 Space Quest 4 $42 Star Child $32 Star Trek 25th Annivrsy $46 Ultima Bundle $59 White Horse Child $32 Wing Commandir Bundle $45 GGW 5 $46 $ 29 $19 $ 15 $25 'GEMINI JOYSTICK'features a full size handle, Glarge tactile buttons, dual axis trim adjustors for precision control, turbo fire, 4 stabilizing suction cups, & testing disk. Fully compatible with high speed PC's (PC, XT, AT, 386, 486, & compatibles). $24 A CASCADA $ 19 $ 29 A A $ 24 $ 15 A $ 24 A $26 Viso & MC Accepted. CODs $5. Checks Held 4 Weeks. Money Orders Treated as Cash. Most Items Shipped Same Day. Shipping times not guaranteed. Check compatibility before you buy. Defectivos replaced with same product.Price & availability subject to change. All Sales Final. Circle Reader Service #114 $ 24 "


"cneak freue confinements as zoning. In Caesar, because of the widely varying towns in the province and a mix of various untamed terrain features sizes of the building tiles and their needed access to roads, cities as well. It is here where more strategic planning can be made and will be difficult to build neatly. Anal retentive types (like yours greater prosperity and security obtained. truly) will have to live without perfectly gridded city blocks and For example, one would do well to build a Roman highway from nice cross-shaped intersections. \"Trivia\" (literally, three roads their provincial capital to the map edge and, thus, connect it with meeting or, in game terms, a \"T\"intersection) is the builder's word the rest of the empire. Provincial roads can also be built which will for the day. connect the capital to the towns (at which time prosperity through increased trade really begins to take off). Water is Power It is at the provincial level, however, where the barbarians should Where SimCity forced players to maintain a power grid, Caesar be met and the battles fought. Yes, players can recruit legions by concentrates on the importance of the urban water supply for its constructing provincial outposts at which to station said legions, prosperity and growth. Players create reservoirs on rivers or lakes, then march the soldiers off to face the barbarians in the plains and run pipes in (like SimCity's power lines) and connect them to forest in an attempt to defeat them. If barbarians are left alone, it public fountains. This creates a radius around both the reservoir seems that word has a way of getting back to their tribal lands that and fountains for urban growth. One can also dig wells where no the player's province is easy pickings, for they seem to have a water supply is handy, but their supply radius is very small. nasty tendency to multiply unless they are engaged swiftly and Not only is having a nearby fountain defeated soundly in battle. important to urban dwellers, but one Where SimCity had earthquakes, must also build public baths to keep urbanisation floods, plane crashes and the Havana the population content and the laborGila (monster), the barbarians in Caesar ing backs of society well scrubbed. In water distribution can easily match them and, if unchecked, Caesar', infrastructure is the name of administration surpass them, disaster for disaster. While the game. battles are resolved in Caesar using an There is one other source of power road layout abstract \"chit pick\" method for simulated in the provincial capitals which playbattlefield tactics, I am told that any batTand value ers will design: military power. Cities tles generated in Caesar may be fought can also provide barracks from which trouble areas out in Impressions' upcoming Cohort II, soldiers will begin to patrol the with a tactical miniatures feel to them. streets, suppressing riots and engagThus, Caesar will be something of a ing any rampaging barbarians that scenario building engine for that game. might be walking through the plaza When the barbarians penetrate one's (Oh, did I forget to mention the barstrategic defenses on the provincial map, barians? Silly me!). To help ward off they will come home to roost on the city outside attack, cities can also erect walls, gates and towers. As each map. Here, the barracks one had the foresight to build near the new section of the town goes up, it may be wise to delineate its outskirts of the city will provide the soldiers necessary to greet the perimeter with these fortifications so that construction can be unwelcome guests before they pillage and sack too much of the undertaken in relative security. city. Those Industrious Ancients Behind all the city building, a complex economic engine is running in the background. In order to keep the marketplaces flourishing and the people employed, one must build from a myriad of manufacturing centers. These ancient factories deal in either glass, tin, copper, wine or a variety of other such industries. Different provinces offer different inherent economic opportunities. For example, a province might be in excellent wine country, so the player should build a winery in the city. However, build too many of them, and the market becomes \"saturated\" (hic), which could lead to economic ruin (and rising public drunkenness). Balance in one's factory construction, therefore, is another key to prosperity. These factories, however, need their own special area built nearby to \"supply\" them, and that is a heavy industry site. These huge tiles exist to supply the raw materials which the various industries convert to marketable goods. It is a simple arrangement for the players to deal with, but the depth of the economic model adds a remarkable game play element to Caesar and is a fascinating sub-game in its own right. Grander Designs Caesar is a grand campaign game in every sense. There are many, many provinces in the Roman Empire and players will have to placate and develop a good number of them on their way up through the Imperial ranks in order to rise to the top. Every city built and province developed by the player is rated on four different levels: prosperity, security, culture, and \"Empire\" (tribute to the Imperial treasury-good old tax farming, which is a constant drain on a city's budget). Players have their own personal salary and prestige levels which they must also be concerned with, in addition to tweaking slave and soldier recruitment levels and incentives. Although inputting one's decisions is easy via the mouse (would that be the Via Rodentia?), making those decisions can border on mind-boggling when first learning Caesar. Information can be obtained by moving to the forum screen, where a room full of advisors are perpetually on duty to offer counsel and receive orders. Clicking on the political advisor, for example, will show a graph of four rising columns representing each of the player's four goals of development. The centurion, if asked, will give the status of the troops, their pay and current conscription levels. Other advisors will give reports on the treasury, economy, business, administration and slaves. Ah, yes, slaves! They must be thought of as the generic labor pool which supports the entire infrastructure. They are assigned to such things as fire prevention, road maintenance and keeping up the provincial improvements. Because of the economic model, however, one is required to recruit «slaves\" through higher wages Beyond The City Walls When one isn't dealing with the exciting elements of urban planning (presumably while waiting for next year's tax harvest to come in), Caesar telescopes up to a larger map on which players must continue to build. This is the provincial map, where the player's capital city, being so meticulously labored over, takes up two glorious squares. There will also be a sprinkling of other small Page 142 Computer Gaming World "


"CHIPS & BITS CALL 800-753-GAME IBM MAC & AMIGA GAMES FOR LESS PO Box 234 Rochester, VT 05767 Fax 802-767-3382 802-767-3033 800-753-4263 UPS Ground $5 por order. PO Box, APO, FPO, S6 per Order.2 Business Day Air $7 per Order. Europe Air Mall$12 First Item plus $6 Each additionalltem. Ali Mall to Canada S6 per Ordor.HI, AK, PR, Mall S7 per Order MAC SPORTS MAC TRADITIONAL MAC ADVENTURE $12 $29 $30 $31 $27 $15 $31 4th & Inches Fast Break Hardball 2 Jack Nicklaus Great 18 J Nicklaus CD 1-5 Ea. NASCAR Challenge PGA Tour Golf PGA Tour Course Disk 1 Playmaker Football Tom Landry Football Wayne Gretzky Hockey Weaver Baseball $39 $39 $34 $32 $39 $34 $39 $29 $38 $32 546 $29 $36 \"LINKS 386 PRO offers SUPER VGA graphics and advanced features designed for your 386 or 486. New features include computer opponent, save game option that allows your friends to play against you in an existing game, pre-recorded games from worthy opponents, and many game modes. $35 Battle Chess 1 Battle Chess 2 Bridge 7 Checkmate Chessmaster 2100 Cribbage King Gin King Crossword Magic Go Master 5 Hoyle's Book Games 1 Hoyle's Book Games 2 Hoyle's Book Games 3 Ishido Lexicross Monopoly Omar Sharif on Bridge Risk Sargon 5 Scrabble Deluxe Shanghai 2 Solitaire Royale Stratego Super Tetris Tetris Wordtris $32 Adventrs Willie Beamish Conquest of Longbow Heart of China Indy Jones Grphc Advtr King's Quest 5 Leisure Suit Lrry1 Color Leisure Suit Larry5 Loom Lost Treasures Infocom Mutant Beach Out of this World Police Quest 3 Color Rise of the Dragon Secret of Monkey Island Sky Shadow Space Quest 3 or 4 Where Europe CSD Where Time CSD Where USA CSD Where World CSD $29 $31 S36 $32 $27 $32 $39 $21 $21 $29 $34 $32 $29 $36 $29 $32 $29 $32 $15 $31 $32 $24 $29 $43 $36 $34 $34 $38 MAC ROLE PLAYING LIN   Curse of Azure Bonds Dark Queen of Krynn King's Bounty Might & Magic 3 Pirates Pools of Darkness Pools of Radiance Secret of Silver Blades Spirit of Excalibur Starlight 1 or 2 Vengeance of Excalibur Windwalker Wizardry 1 Wizardry 2 Wizardry Cosmic Forge $38 $38 $15 $38 $34 $38 $32 $38 $29 $38 ACCESS $25 MMFFUSE CR I STNAVALLALIGCATTOOERER MACARCADE $29 $32 $28 $28 $33 $37 MAC STRATEGY $32 $32 $25 $34 $34 $34 $34 $25 $29 $21 $29 $29 $19 $36 $26 $33 $25 4D Boxing Armor Alley Crazy Cars Dragon's Lair Dragon's Lair Color Dragon's Lair 2 Dragon's Lair Esc Singe Faces/Tetris 3 Guy Spy Color Nova 9 Color Oids Pick n Pile Pipe Dream Shufflepuck Cafe Space Ace Space Ace 2 Space Ace 2 Color Starglider 2 Tesserae Thexder 1 Tristan Welltris Xerion $28 $19 $39 XO $27 $34 $34 $34 $29 \"HIGH COMMAND' is a strategic level wargame that covers the War in Europe from 1939-1945. Features numerous unit and mission types for Axis & Allies, detailed economics, production, & politics for over 40 countries and territories, Version 1.1. $44 S34 $32 $15 $48 $24 $25 $28 Ancient Art of War Ancient Art War at Sea Balance of the Planet Castles Citadel Command HQ Cyber Empire Darwin's Dilemma Genghis Khan Gold of the Americas Go Master 5 Harpoon Harpoon Set 2 or 3 Harpoon Battle Set 4 Harpoon Challengr Pck Harpoon Chllngr Pck SE Lemmings Mission Starlight Moonbase Operation Combat Railroad Tycoon Reach for the Stars Robo Sport Romance 3 Kingdoms Simcity Simcity Graphic 1 or 2 Simcity Terrain Editor Sim Earth Spaceward Ho! Strategic Conquest Uncharted Waters Warlords $32 $32 $37 $29 $109 $39 $22 $27 $59 $59 $29 $29 $29 $15 $45 $29 $35 $42 $29 AMIGA 3D Pool 4D Boxing $32 Altered Destiny $34 Atomino Bard's Tale 3 Battle Command $26 Big Business $32 Blue Max Aces Great War $34 Checkmate $36 Conflict Middle East $36 Covert Action $34 Cribbage King Gin King $28 Darkman $29 Das Boot Submarine $34 Day of the Viper Dragons of Flame $12 Elf $32 Elvira 2 Jaws of Cerberus $39 F29 Retaliator $34 Fast Break $17 Flames of Freedom $29 Godfather $12 Golden Axe $17 Greens Gunboat $33 Hard Ball 2 Hard Nova $32 Hillsfar $12 Hoverforce $31 Indiana Jones Fate Atlantis $38 Ishido $36 Jack Nicklaus Greatest 18 $27 Jack Nicklaus Unlimited Golf$39 J Nicklaus Course Disk 1-5 $15 Mean 18 Golf $30 Might & Magic 2 $38 Murder S29 Night Shift $19 Populous 2 $38 Powermonger $32 Powermonger WW1 Disk $21 Red Storm Rising $29 Renegade Legion Interceptr $12 Search for the King $37 Secret of Monkey Island $38 Star Control Starflight 2 $32 Stratego $32 Super Off Road $15 Test Drive 2 $30 Test Drive 2 Muscle Cars $15 Treasures Savage Frontier $32 Typhoon of Steel $15 UMS 2 $34 Universe 3 $34 Untouchables $24 Wargame Construction Set $12 Yeager's AFT 2.0 $26 CGW6 MACSIMULATION $31 $32 $31 $34 QOX $37 $23 $15 $46 $24 $21 $41 $37 $37 $42 $29 'BOOM BOX' is an interactive music program that puts you in control of your sound files. Add echo effects, section repeat, assorted screams, guitar rifs, and turntable scratches to in cluded song files or load your own sound files created with other programs. Requires a Sound Blasteror compat ible card. $29 $38 $39 Carrier Command Design your own Train F40 Pursuit Simulator Falcon Falcon AT Falcon Color Grand Prix Circuit Hunt for Red October Life and Death Megafortress Red Baron Color Sands of Fire Sim Ant Sim City Supreme Sim Earth Specter Tank Test Drive 2 Test Drive 2 CA Chaling Test Drive 2 Euro Chilg Test Drive 2 Muscle Car Test Drive 2 Supercars Tracon Tracon 2 $32 $35 $46 $34 MAC WARGAMES $41 Americn Civil War Vol 1 Civil War No Gtr Glry Halls of Montezuma Harpoon Scenario Editr Panzer Battles Patton Strikes Back Rommel North Africa UMS 2 UMS 2 Planet Editor V for Victory $29 $27 $29 $37 $29 $34 $29 $38 $37 $37 $27 $15 $15 $15 $15 $34 $29 $33 $32 Vette Visa & MC Accepted. CODs $5. Checks Held 4 Wecks. Money Orders Treated as Cash. Most Items Shipped Same Day. Shipping times not guaranteed. Check compatibility before you buy. Defectivesreplaced with same product. Price & availability subject to change. All Sales Final. Circle Reader Service #114 Yeager's AFT "


"IIIIIIIIII rather than capture them through conquest. So, they would prob a few trial-and-error attempts to erect a city worth its salt (and my ably be better thought of as a labor pool rather than slaves in the salary, salary coming from the Latin 'salari,' meaning salt). The historical sense. \"mini-maps\" to check property values are one thing, but knowing which buildings are really modifying what factors (and to what Taxing Matters degree, within what radius, what is modifying that new building, As in SimCity, solvency can become etc., etc.) in the equation will take conSOS POP quite a tightrope act. Every year, one IND siderably more play from this previewer has a lot of fixed expenses to pay. The Tax rate to figure out. Caesar's easily learned AD105 most important one, of course, is the AD 104 mechanics provides a simple, flat learnCity population 6912 player's own personal salary (which, HD 103 ing curve but I, for one, rapidly hit an AD102 Unemployment 30 . like Congress, one can set for them AD 101 information ceiling that could only be tax per head AD 100 av dn 014 selves). Then, there is the annual tribmoved past through a lot of experimenAD 39 ute to those parasites in Rome. Gee, for previous year tation. all the money they get, it would only denarii in taxes population 1010 seem fair that they support the legions Final Counsel but NOO0000! Therefore, the taxe industry The thing I always wished of SimCity soldiers are lined up with their hands denarii oist was that it had more \"game» to it, an out (just ahead of the slaves) before the construotion work 40 overall goal as part of a larger world. privy purse each January. operating costs tribute to rome Caesar has that \"campaign game\" eleTaxing was a little different in anment to it as players build up one provcient times. Generally, the taxes were overall gain of ince and get promoted to the next around five percent in those days (although one will find that they have an (which is probably why the Roman Empire lasted so long) and amazingly long life span and may obtain the rank of Caesar when players can set separate tax levels for the people and for industry. they are well over 100 years old). It is with this campaign game While the tax/prosperity ratio doesn't seem as sensitive in its element that Caesar particularly earns laurels with me. interrelation as it is in SimCity, players trained on that game will Finally, just as the Romans borrowed much of their \"intellectual be reticent to raise taxes very much by sheer force of habit. property\" from the Greeks, so Caesar borrows many of its clever elements from other games, most notably SimCity. Like the RoEt Tu, Brutus? mans, too, I believe that Caesar will find a way of making a lasting I found that Caesar's greatest strength, its fast paced play and tribute this time to \"Sim\"-type games. Who knows? Caesar just amazing diversity in \"building tiles\" to choose from, to be its might become Impressions' Circus Maximus, the huge accombiggest handicap. Being initially overwhelmed with choices (and plishment that looms over all their games. We'll be in our box seats the vagaries in the early pre-documentation provided), it took quite watching with great interest.cow  8 IL THE ROAD FROM SUMTER TO APPOMATTOX June 25, 1861... \"The first shots of the Civil War have been fired... Fort Sumter has fallen. Volunteers on both sides rush to their colors. Across the Union the cry mounts ... ON TO RICHMOND' te work Daily Cribune Union forces under General McLellan seize Harper's Ferry The Road From Sumter to Appomattox covers the entire Civil War from the opening guns of Bull run to the final surrender. All the military and economic might of the Union or Confederacy is at your command. FEATURES: Human or computer opponents. Naval system includes ocean and river going vessels. Over 100 individually named and rated generals. Economic system includes foreign trade and blockade runners.  Control the promotions and dismissals of those generals.  Beautiful 256 color VGA map that stretches from New Orleans Continuous-play, daily pulses, send orders-whenever to Philadelphia, from Kansas City to Bermuda. you like. Fully integrated tactical combat system emphasizing command Different unit types combine to form divisions and corps. control and quick resolution of even the largest battles. . Full control over the national production system. Scenario editor allows players to construct their own battles or  A detailed supply system using railroads, wagons and ships. play those already included. Send cheque or money order to: $54.95 ADANAC COMMAND SYSTEMS CORP.  IBM OR AMIGA 102 1345 West 4th Avenue plus $5.00 S&H  Must have: Vancouver, B.C. Canada V6H 3Y8 1 MB H.D., Mouse, Telephone: (604) 739-1162 TOTAL $59.95 US Keyboard, 286 or more Circle Reader Service #43 Page 144 Computer Gaming World "


"WANTED: Explorer Willing to Travel. UNCHARTED High seas adventure awaits you. Travel to exotic ports, navigate rough waters and fend off ruthless pirates. You must possess courage and ambition to assume the role of Captain of a Portuguese fleet. This is your chance to restore your family name to honor! Merchants will seek you out for dangerous missions as your reputation grows. Gain experience at recruiting sailors, managing fleet supplies and win the King's favor with valiant deeds. Your greatest challenge is to protect the Princess from nautical thugs. Succeed, and the Princess may accept your hand in marriage. Fail, and you will join your comrades in the murky depths. Landlubbers need not apply. SEGA GENESIS & SNES Version:  8 Meg Cartridge K RAM  Battery Back-up  1-2 players Sega Genesis screen shot shown Sega Genesis screen shot shown Sega Genesis screen shot shown gurururu wwwwwwwwwwwg wlbon. 8 >>722222222222222222 WIND Feb 23 1002Day 0 Move Debeek Look Dattle Into Order CUNT. Agen A1473 FERIDES to. Dopraln? Awesome ADI Visit ports to restock, repair ships and relax. Steer your fleet through unfamiliar waters. Rush ships at sea.  l SEGA GENESIS ! Licensed by Nintendo for Play on the Nintendo ENTERTAINMENT (Nintendo Soal of Quality We Supply the Past, You Make the History KOEI Games are available for all systems in retail outlets nationwide! If you can't find the KOEI product you are looking for, call us at (415) 348--0500 (9am to 5pm PST) Available Now for NES and IBMI One Bay Plaza, Suite 540 1350 Bayshore Highway, Burlingame, CA 94010 Uncharted Waters is a trademark of KOEI Corporation. Nintendo Nintendo Entertaiment System and the official seals are trademarks of Nintendo of America Inc. Sega, Sega Genesis and the official seals are trademarks of Sega Enterprises Ltd. Circle Reader Service #74 "


"Taking A Peek CTO HOLE Lava Bora . . 1 Aluno 10 st : others Hos 742ST dur 12.5 335 3. I dous G ! ENERGY BIOLOGICAL DISPATCH   Star Control 2 PARA SHOT Slope Lie suing Stance Spruce RISKY Aregguers 28 BARE STBAGEHT Ultimate Challenge Golf Master Edition Accolade San Jose, CA (408) 985-1700 STAR CONTROL 2: Taking the original Star Control one-on-one, ship-toship combat system and immersing it in a vast galaxy of exploration, alien communication and adventure (heavily influenced by the Starflight series), this sequel creates a gaming hybrid that may please both the action gamers and the adventurer. Players will battle the Urquan threat by scouring the galaxy for mineral resources, building ship components to add to their mother-ship, uniting alien races against the common enemy and battling enemy ships in the intense combat system. The sights and sounds are quite stunning; the game uses a refined fractal planet generator similar to that used in the Star Flight series, uses hand-painted images to depict the alien races, and has a strong musical score. IBM ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #1. Friendly Software 5955 Winslow Road Whitehouse, OH 43571 (419) 877-9195 ULTIMATE CHALLENGE GOLF MASTER EDITION: The designers of this strategic golf program weren't just putting around when they created this complex program. Different from any previous golf simulation in its approach, the emphasis is on \"course management strategies\" rather than on eye-hand coordination; players make strategic choices when making shots rather than tapping the keyboard or mouse at the appropriate time. While the simplistic graphics cannot be compared to the latest Jack Nicklaus or Links systems, the actual golf model is extremely impressive. Shots are calculated based upon a myriad of factors: club, aim, swing effort, spin, height, individual player characteristics, weather, course conditions, course speed, type of ball (liquid or solid), and complex wind effects. Serious golfers should definitely find out more about this one. IBM ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #2. ICOM Simulations 648 South Wheeling Rd. Wheeling, IL 60090 (800) 877-4266 SHERLOCK HOLMES, CONSULTING DETECTIVE II: In another digitized video visit to 221B Baker Street, the sequel to ICOM's interactive murder mystery game will offer three more scenarios for sleuths to solve: The Two Lions, The Pilfered Paintings, and the Murdered Munitions Magnate. As in the original CD-ROM whodunnit, this game is composed of 90 minutes of digitized, quarter-screen video running at 15 frames per second. The player wades through these well-acted video clips by choosing places to visit and people to interview from Holmes phonebook and files. Once players have gathered enough clues to build a bulletproof case, they go before a judge (who, unlike in the original, is a digitized actor) to try the case. The sequel improves upon its predecessor by adding some much needed features — fast forward and rewind buttons — that make fact gathering and checking much less repetitious. IBM CD-ROM, Mac CD-ROM ($69.95). Circle Reader Service #3. Impressions 7 Melrose Drive Farmington, CT 06032 (203) 676-0127 PALADIN II: Omnitrend's tactical combat/adventuring system that had its start with Breach has found new life under a new publishing partnership. The player takes on the role of Brandon, a young would-be paladin who must succeed in 20 adventure scenarios to prove himself worthy of knighthood. As in Breach and the first Paladin, players command a band of characters that must fight over a wide variety of terrain and against a mixed assortment of villains. This time, as in the original Paladin, the action takes place in a fantasy environment. The best thing about the Omnitrend games in the Breach thread is their inclusion of a scenario builder that allows players to design their own adventures and share them with others. If this game follows the pattern of its predecessors, one can expect custom scenarios to start popping up on the major networks providing the enthusiast with a huge supply of scenarios created by fellow hobbyists. IBM ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #4. Konami Buffalo Grove, IL (708) 215-5111 NFL VIDEO PRO FOOTBALL: Anyone who has ever envied those sportscasters who sit at their desks at Sports Central, preparing for their half time reports while surrounded by monitor after monitor of constant football action, should love this game. Not only can one simultaneously view digitized footage of all 14 NFL games in progress on any given weekend, but one can jump in and coach any of those games, at will. Each of the 28 teams has its own playbook that is supposed to reflect the actual playing style of that team. The game is loaded with flash good play-calling is rewarded with film footage of intense gridiron action and sound and it has a Sherlock Holmes, Consulting Detective II TANES 00:10:00 HOUSE VITALT 0% HEALTH: 100% THUHTO ATHING! 99% DETLOT! 99% SDPI161 99% AFONS: 0 BOLTS1 RES doo COEL ATE Paladin 2 Flea Flicker Red D) Wie gr LUIT TOTUD Mi16 TUSED NFL Video Pro Football Page 146 Computer Gaming World "


"Blow It Out Your Ear. Pump up the volume with Sound Blaster ! The sound card from Creative Labs. Experience the full power of 11-voice synthesized music and 8-bit sampled sound effects. Don't just hear it... let it blow you away! The scream of your F-15's engine as you elude enemy fire... the crisp crack of your bat when you hit a homerun off the screen...the echoing ring of sword against sword during your next fantasy adventure. No wonder Sound Blaster is the world's #1 seller. And why it's the sound card that more gaming software developers write for under DOS or Windows* 3.1. SB To find out more about Sound Blaster, the only sound card that's 100% Sound Blaster compatible, visit your local computer retailer or call Creative Labs at 1-800-998-LABS. Get the full blown sound capability you've always wanted for your PC-for only $149. With Sound Blaster from Creative Labs. Because... SOUND if you don't have Sound Blaster, you're really blowing it! BLASTER WUND BERRIER SOUND BLASTER\" CREATIVE MERRYT WINIXMS. Sound Blaster is a trademark of Creative Labs, Inc, Windows is a trademark of Microsoft Corporation, 1992 Creative Labs. Inc All rights reserved. International inquiries: Creative Technology, Ltd, Singapore Tel 65773-0233 Fax 65-773-0353 Circle Reader Service #53 CREATIVE LABS, INC. "


"Taking A Peek 1 Are On :00 IRST A-Train Construction Sel FORTLEPOORRO DECIRST TURURLAC TRERT IS UGEOT Ancient Art of War in the Skies BREO Canton DOA decent statistical package. The only drawback is that the size of the product did not allow for all the footage to be consistent with every possible formation (i.e. no shotgun formation). While this may not be the game for the most serious of football strategist, it is certainly tailor-made for the most fanatical. IBM ($79.95). Circle Reader Service #5. Maxis Orinda, CA (510) 254-9700 A-TRAIN CONSTRUCTION SET: Rail entrepreneurs tired of being railroaded by the constraints of the original program can re-create the world of ATrain in their own image, placing hills, fields, houses, water, apartments, stadiums, skyscrapers, trains and track. It will not, however, let players edit or redesign trains, though it does allow more flexibility in scheduling their routes. A new creative accounting feature will enable one to add 900 million dollars to his or her development budget, allowing unlimited development, though the basic economic model is off limits as far as player tinkering is concerned. IBM ($34.95). Circle Reader Service #6. MicroProse Hunt Valley, MD (410) 771-0440 ANCIENT ART OF WAR IN THE SKIES: Though designed in the spirit of the strategy-intensive Ancient Art of War line, this game is definitely the most action-oriented game to bear the AAW name. Players direct fighters and bombers in the air war over the battlelines of WWI. As players make successful bomber attacks on critical enemy structures and lines, the war on the ground will advance or collapse to reflect their efforts; the object being to advance the line such that enemy airfields and plane factories are captured. Dogfights are hot and fast action sequences, and the bombing runs are exercises in strategy and timing, viewed from the bomb bay door. As in the previous AAW games, Skies offers dozens of scenarios lo challenge the gamer's action gaming savvy and, to a lesser extent, strategic guile, and features a scenario editor which allows one to create their own airborne madness. IBM ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #7. Microsoft Redmond, WA (206) 454-2030 ENTERTAINMENT PACK 4: The score should probably read: \"Pack 4, Games 7.\" This latest Entertainment Pack includes decent Chess and Blackjack games (with the usual tutorials, tips and analysis — although most of these features has been better presented in COOLSCE games dealing exclusively with the subject. Four challenging mind game/puzzles include Chip's Challenge (formerly published by Epyx), Go Figure! (a math mind bender where the numbers and math symbols must be properly arranged to get the desired result), JezzBell (where moving balls must be trapped in ever smaller confines before they strike the player's unfinished walls) and Maxwell's Maniac (where trying to get the bouncing balls to one side of the maze by manipulating a single gate would try the patience of Job). Finally, the old English sea game, Tic Tac Drop makes a computer gaming appearance. IBM with Windows. Circle Reader Service #8. SOUNDBITS: Three glorious sets have found their way into being installed at our offices, much to the amusement (and annoyance) of the staff. SoundBits adds an audio touch to the operation of Windows applications. For example, when first beginning a Windows session, one might hear Fred Flintstone yell \"Yabba dabba doo!\" When the window is enlarged to full screen size, Humphrey Bogart will utter \"This won't do any good» (from The Maltese Falcon). The three different sets (each sold separately) include musical sounds from around the world, classic cartoons from Hanna-Barbera and classic Hollywood movies (including, among others, The Wizard of Oz, A Day at the Races and Treasure of the Sierra Madre). While not the great distraction in time that games are, adding a little spice to one's ears is sure to cause some spontaneous smiles. IBM with Windows 3.1 ($39.95 each). Circle Reader Service #9. Mindcraft Torrance, CA (800) 525-4933 STAR LEGIONS: Once upon a time in a galaxy far too similar to ours, there was a popular sequel (Star Fleet II) to a best selling game (Star Fleet 1). The best-selling game featured starship-tostarship combat in outer space and the sequel was supposed to allow captains to those very same starships to be able to conquer planets with surface invasions. Unfortunately, gamers who played the sequel never seemed to be able to reach the point in the program where those battles could take place. The program for the invasion sequence was in the game, but a bug prevented gamers from accessing it. Now, the never-played-program has been revived, revamped and released as a game in its own right. Players will lead groups of Krellan shock troops against enemy cities, fighting in up to 8 different battle zones at one time. From their command Entertainment Pack 4 Media Urowser-SoundBits: Hanna-Barbera Soundi. Hann farbeta y Son Soundt Total to Nurgatoyd 1 pented the wrong button again I'm getting punchy... I'm glad I thought of reinarter than the average beat 11 laka a bigger lain than mine Jane, stop this crary thind Jelson, you're lalel Leave uleul tage et Huttley tracker Olay, okay! About Fet Soundt Fin Internation Pictuc. Description George Jetson Helpl Jane, lep this crazy thind From The Jetona end credit Fa Naet Beljansway Du slier 77 seconde The Jetrona fe in the Skypad apaitment 01932 Hanna Barbera Produclions, Inc. Al Soundbits I TAT Star Legions Page 148 Computer Gaming World "


"CGW 2/93 Titles at the Lowest Prices 800-554-9925 ComputAbility 800-554-9925 Since 1982 1 Call Us On Our US/Canadian Toll Free Number! Consumer Electronics Call Us On Our US/Canadian Toll Free Number! HOURS: Mon-Fri 9am-9pm Sat 11am-5pm FAX (414) 357-7814  INFO (414) 357-8181  PO Box 17882, Milwaukee, WI 53217 IBM SO 8888888 Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes ...... .......42.95 Lost Treasures of Infocom 39.95 Magic Candle III 37.95 Mantis / Speech Pack ............39.95/1995 Megafortress Mega Pak 37 95 Michael Jordan in Flight 37.95 Might & Magic Ill........ ..... 34.95 34.95 Monopoly Deluxe for Win ...................34.95 Mozart's Magical Music Machine ... 20.95 MS Golf for Windows 42.95 lam 1965 1975 2995 NFL Pro League Football 4495 NFL Video Pro Football 44.95 No Greater Glory .... ....... 39.95 Omar Shariff on Bridge Windows 29.95/29.95 Out of this World 34.95 PGA Tour Goll 31.95 PGA Tour Golf for Windows 20.95 Course Disk for Windows ........ 17.95 Pacific Theater of Operations .... 39.95 Patriot... 42.95 Perfect General 34.95 Pinball for Windows 29.95 Pirates of Gold Edition 39.95 Pools of Darkness 37.95 Populous 11 37.95 Sharif on Bridge for DOS Windows ............. 29.95 Sid Meier's Bundle 29.95 Siege / Expansion Disk ... 37.95/20.95 Sim Ant DOS/Windows 34.95/34.95 Sim City DOS/Windows 29.95/3495 Sim Earth / Windows 39.95/39.95 Sim Life .39.95 Solitaire's Journey 34.95 Sound Graphics, Aircraft 24.95 Space Hulk... 39.95 Space Inc 34.95 Space Quest 5 39.95 Spaceward HO! 34 95 Special Forces..... 29.95 Spell Craft. 34.95 Spellcasting 301 ............... 34.95 Spelljammer Pirates of Realmspace 37.95 Spoils of War 3495 Star Control Il... 34 95 Star Leglons ...37.95 Star Trek: The 25th Anniversary .......... ...34.95 Star Trek Screen Savers for Win............ 32.95 Strike Commander... 44.95 Strip Poker 3/Speech Access............ 29.95/15.95 Stunt Island 34.95 Summer Challenge 34.95 Ultima VII Part 2.. Ultima Underworld Ultimate Cards Ultrabots Uncharted Waters V for Victory: Utah Beach V for Victory Il: Velikiye Luki Wayne Gretzke 3............ Warlord. Wax Works Weaver Baseball Where Carmen San Diego, Each ... Where...Carmen Past. Where. Carmen USA Deluxe ..... Where...Carmen World Deluxe White Death ........ Wing Commander II Speech Accessory Pack.. Special Operations forll............ Wing Commander Deluxe .............. Wizardry. Crusaders Dark Savant.... World Circuit Grand Prix WWII 1946 Yeagers Air Combat XWing 44.95 47.95 24.95 37.95 39.95 42 95 42.95 34.95 29.95 34.95 18.95 29.95 34.95 44,95 44.95 29.95 44.95 14.95 24.95 44.95 39.95 34.95 24.95 25.95 39.95 MUCHDOLU VISION NEW ITEM! SOUND CARDS CREATIVE MEDIA SOUND BLASTER.16 $219 CREATIVE LABS. INC PRO AUDIO MPC Multimedia PC . 16-Bit Stereo Sampling & Playback for Voice Channel  Enhanced 4-Operator, 20-Voice Stereo FM Music Synthesizer  MIDI & CD-ROM Interfaces  Windows 3.1, SB & SB Pro Compatible $189  16 Bit / MIDI Interface True 16 Bit Stereo Sound Advanced 20 Voice Stereo Synthesizer Joystick, Amplifier, Software Call for List! A Line in the Sand 24.95 Aces of the Pacific 39.95 Aces Over Europe 44.95 AD&D Collector's Edition 11 42.95 AD&D Starter Kit 42.95 Air Bucks........ 34.95 Air Support... 29.95 Air Traffic Controller. 34.95 Air Warrior 34.95 Aircraft & Adventure factory 24.95 Rescue Ait 911. Flight 685 or 701, ca 17.95 Amazon 39 95 Ambush 37.95 Ancient Art of War in the Skies .... 34.95 Aspects of Valor 59.95 ATAC 30.95 ATP Tennis 31.95 B-17 Flying Fortress 39.95 Bards Tale III 31.95 Batman Returns 39.95 Battles of Destiny 34.95 BattleChess 4000 29.95 Battlefield 2000 37.95 Birds of Prey 31.95 Black Crypt 31.95 Body Illustrated 44.95 Buzz Aldrin's Race into Space 34.95 Campaign 34.95 Car & Driver 37.95 Carrier Strike: South Pacific 39.95 Expansion Set 20.95 Carriers of War 34.95 Castles 1 or 11 .34.95/34.95 Challenge of the Five Realms. 34.95 Champions ... 34.95 Civilization 39.95 Classic Adventures..... .. 34.95 Clouds of Xeen .39.95 Cobra Mission 44.95 Comanche: Maximum Overkill... 42.95 Mission Disk 1 or 12 ...................25.95/25.95 Conquered Kingdoms 34.95 Conquest of Japan............. 34.95 Creepers 29.95 Crusaders of the Dark Savant .... 41.95 Curse of Amon Ra..... 39.95 Cyber Empires 31.95 Dacmonsgate 34.95 Darklands 39.95 Dark Hall....... 34.95 Dark Sun 47.95 Daughter of Serpentis 31.95 Discovery Columbus 34.95 Dominant Species 29.95 Dragon's Lair 3... 34 95 Dune Il 34.95 Dungeon Master 29.95 Dusks of the Gods 34.95 Elvira Il ... 39.95 Empire Deluxe...... 34.95 Eye of the Beholder 2: Legend of Dark Moon 37.95 F-15 Strike Eagle Il or lll................34 95/44.95 Fables & Fiends: Legend of Kyrandia.. 34.95 Final Conflict 29.95 Flight Assignment: Air Force ......... 39.95 Flight Simulator 4.0 39.95 Add-on Disks. CALL Front Page Football 39 95 Gary Grisby's Pacific War... 39.95 Gateway to the Savage Frontier ... 31.95 Gernfire 29.95 Global Ellect... 31.95 Grand Slam Bridge II 31.95 Great Naval Battles .....42.95 Scenario Builder/Expansion Disk.... 25.95/20.95 Hard Ball Il or lll 29.95/34.95 Player Data Disk for HB Ill... 17.95 Harpoon Signature Edition 47.95 Heaven & Earth 29.95 Heroes of the 35/th 31.95 Humans 24.95 Incredible Machine ... 29.95 Indy Jones 4: Fale of Atlantis 37.95 Island of Dr. Brain 29.95 Nicklaus Sign Golf 39.95 Data Disk 17.95 Jet Fighter Adventure Il .... 39.95 John Madden Football 2 31.95 Jump Jet 39 95 KGB 29.95 King's Quest 6......... 44.95 Laser Squad 24.95 Legacy, The 39.95 Legends of Valour 37.95 Leisure Suit Larry 5 39.95 Lemmings 29.95 Lemmings i.. 34.95 Liberty of Death 34.95 Line in the Sand 24.95 Links 386 P10 39.95 Lord of the Rings I: Two Towers 34.95 Castles Il Civil War Conquest of Japan Creepers Crusaders of the Dark Savant Cyber Empires Cytron . Daemonsgate ........ 34.95 Dark Seed ... Death Knights of Krynn 3195 Deluxe Paint IV (while supplies last) 97.95 Deluxe Paint IV AGA 119.95 Demoniak 30.95 Desert Strike....... 31.95 Discovery Columbus 34.95 Disney Animation Studio 42.95 Dragon's Lair 3 34.95 Dune... 29.95 Elvira Il Jaws of Cerberus...... 39.95 Eye of the Beholder lor ll... 37.95 Eye of the Storm ... 29.95 F-14/F-18... 29.95 Fables & Fiends Legend of Kyrandia 34.95 Fighter Dual Pro 34.95 Final Conflict 34.95 Gateway to the Savage Frontier 31.95 Global Effect 31.95 Great Navel Battles .......... 42.95 Harpoon... 37.95 Battleset 14 25.95 Harpoon Designers Series Battleset 31.95 Harpoon Signature Edition 47.95 Heimdalt 24.95 Indy Jones 4 Fate of Atlantis 34.95 International Sports Challenge 30.95 Jack Nicklaus Unlimited.... 34.95 Legend of Kyrandia Lengends of Valour ... 37.95 Lemmings 1 or 2 28.95/3495 Light Quest 31.95 Links 29.95 Firestone. Bountiful Course Disks 17.95 Lord of the Rings 1.2 or 3 34.95 Lords of Time....... 29.95 Lost Treasures of Infocom 39.95 Madden Footbal 31.95 Mantis....... 39.95 Mavis Beacon Typing... Mega Fortress........... Mission Disk 1 or 2.. Mercenaries 37.99 Megatraveller 2..... Mig-29 Might & Magic III Napoleon Navy Seals No Greater Glory.. . Oh No! More Lemmings stand alone.... Oh No! More Lemm. add-on....... Out of this World PGA Tour Golf 31.95 Golf Tournament Course disk 1795 Perfect General 34.95 WWII Edition 22.95 WWII Scenario Disk. 19.95 Pinball Dreams 24.95 Pinball Fantasy 24.95 Pit-Fighter 21.95 Plan 9 from Space 29.95 Pools of Darkness 37.95 Populous 11 37.95 The Challenge scenario disk 20.95 Powermonger 31.95 Prehistoric 29.95 Prophecy of the Shadow 37.95 Red Zone 29.95 Road Rash Rules of Engagement Secret of Monkey Island I or ll ... Shadow of the Beast Il or III Shadowlands... Sharif on Bridge Shuttle Sim Ant Sim City Sim Earth Solitaires Journey...... Space Hulk Spoils of War 3495 Star Controll 3495 Star Trek 25th Anniversary 34.95 Strip Poker 3 Tales of Magic: Prophecy Shadow Terrain Envoy The Chatlenge The Light Corridor Tom Landry Football Twighlight 2000 Ultima 6.... Utopia 29.95 Viking Field of Conquest 36.95 Warriors of Legends 19.95 Where in the ... Carmen each... 29.95 World Circuit ......................... 34.95 38& JOYSTICKS MODEMS S ZOOM 46.95 $44 $19 V.32 bis Internal/External................ $205/$219 V.32 bis Send/Receive 14,400 Int. ............. $215 V.32 bis Send/Receive 14,400 Ext ............... $245 $30 $49 $29 Advanced Gravis: Analog Joystick Eliminator Game Card .............. PC MouseStick CH Products: Flight Stick Hi Speed Adaptor Gamecard 3 Auto Gamecard 3-PS/2 MACH 3 Joystick .. Maximum: MAXX Flight Yoke ........... MAXX Pedal NEW Kralt: Kraft KC3........ Kraft Trackball w/Ft Cntir Kraft Thunderstick Thrustmaster: Flight Control Weapons Control Thrustmater Pro ............ 22 37.96 Supra Corporation Supra Fax Modem V.32 bis, Internal with Fax Software, DOS/Windows ... $219 / $219 SupraFax Modem V.32 bis, Ext. alone............ $279 with Fax Software, DOS/Win ........... $299 / $299 34.95 ....... $75 $75 $119 AMIGA 31.95 Summoning...... TA Break Pinball TA Break Pool Tales of Magic: Proph Shadow Task Force 1942 Tegel's Mercenaries....... ........ Terminator 2029........ Tetris Classic / Windows... Theatre of War Power Politics Powermonger PrintShop Deluxe Graphics Libraries: Business Graphics Libraries: Sampler Privateer . Pro League Baseball.... Prophecy of the Shadow Quest for Glory 3 Raf in the Pacific ..... Revelation Road & Track Grand Prix Unlimit. Robocop 3.D Seal Team Secret Weapons/Lutftwatte.... Expansion Disk 1,2,3 or 4 Shadow President.. Shadowgate for Windows.... ShadowLands. 29.95 31.95 44.95 29.95 29.95 47.95 ..34.95 37.95 39.95 24.95 19.95 34.95 31.95 37.95 39.95 ... 19,95 39.95 31.95 29.95 37.95 29.95 29.95 37.95 39.95 37.95 39.95 29.95 31.95 24.95 34.95 29.95 29.95 34.95 29.95 31.95 29.95 44.95 17.95  ATrain Ag Air Force Commander ..... Air Support ....... ATAC. 8-17 Flying Fortress Bard's Taile Construction Birds of Prey Black Crypt. Buzz Aldrin's Race Into Space ...... Campaign Carmen San Diego/Each Carmen San Diego America...... Castles Campaign Disk... Time Quest......... Tom Landry Football ....... Top Gun.. . Tracon for Windows ... Traders.. Treasures of the Savage Frontier Tristan Ultima VII... Forge of Virture Data Disk............... 39.95 29.95 34.95 29.95 30.95 39.95 29.95 31.95 31.95 39.95 34.95 30 95 36.95 34.95 19.96 %%%%% ORDERING INFO: Specily system. For fast delivery send cashier's check or money order. Personal & company checks allow 14 business days to clear. P.O.'s welcome.C.O.D. charges are $5.00Jn Continental U.S.A. include 55.00 for software orders 5% shipping for hardware, minimum $5.00. MasterCard and Visa orders please include card, expiration date and sign $6.00. All other foreign orders add 15% shipping, min $15.00 All orders shipped outside the Continental U.S.A are shipped first class insured U.S. mail, where available. If foreign shipping charges exceed the minimum amount, you will be charged the additional amount All goods are new and include factory warranty. We do not guarantee compatability & version #s. Due to our low prices all sales are final. All Delective relurns must have a return authorization number. Call (414)357-8181 to obtain an RA or your return will not be accepted. Prices and availability subject to change without notice. Shipping & handling are non-refundable. We ship the latest versions available to us updates must be handled by end user directly with the manufacturer Not responsible for typographical errors. In an effort to be complete, some new products may not be available from the manufacturer at press time. Circle Reader Service #116 "


"Taking A Peek ayWay e Olso Space D Galery Wade Web Spaceward Ho! Comanche Maximum Overkill post in the sky, players view the battles, direct their troops, order bombardment from orbiting battleships, and crush the pansy fighters for democracy, the United Galactic Alliance. IBM($59.95). Circle Reader Service #10. New World Computing Hollywood, CA (818) 999-0607 SPACEWARD, HO!: If ya'll be lookin' fer a multi-player shootout, then it jus might be time fer a Ho! down. This cute cowboys-in-space game of strategic conquest has made its way to the Windows environment by way of the Macintosh and designers Delta Tao. The game's style is adequately captured in calling it a tongue-in-cheek Reach For The Stars (the classic SSG spacestrategy game). Games can be played by several people over a network, or by several people on the same computer (\"hot-seating'), or less interestingly, by one human player against a group of simulated opponents. IBM ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #11. Nova Logic Tarzana, CA (818) 774-0812 COMANCHE MAXIMUM OVERKILL: The early buzz on this advanced tactical combat helicopter simulation is that its graphics are overwhelming, but the flight model is far too easy. Our veteran helicopter pilot tells us that the new advanced helicopter (the RAH-66) should be very easy to fly and should actually end up being even more agile than the flight model in this product. It may be the first time that \"realism\" has actually taken complexity away from game play. Missions take place in beautiful 3-D terrain calculated from U.S. Geological Survey maps. IBM ($69.95). Circle Reader Service #12. Philips Interactive Media Los Angeles, CA (800) 845-7301 POWER HITTER: This is the first of two products for the Philips CD-I that might be of interest to gamers. Players choose a line-up of generic baseball players to go to bat against Dave Stewart, the stolid fastballer for the Oakland A's, in what is basically an interactive batting practice. Choosing basic baseball plays (swing away, bunt, steal, h&r) and the type of pitch to look for (fastball, curve, fork), players swing away at Stewart's in-coming heaters. Each event is illustrated with choppy video clips and commentary from a pair of announcers. For the seasoned sports gamer, the mass market approach may prove to be a bit too simplistic to please, but this sort of product may provide a gentle introduction to interactivity for unenlightened boob-tubers. CD-I ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #13. TETRIS: The now classic abstract strategy game of Russian design has made the full circuit of gaming platforms, and has now landed on the Philips CD-I. The game remains the same groups of blocks fall from the sky and the player turns and positions them to create \"lines\" across the screen-but the setting has not. Now, as players struggle to manage their ever increasing inventory of blocks, they will be treated to beautiful, partially animated natural scenery and the dreamy, placid music that is called \"New Age\" by some (post-modern elevator\" by others). The game options are nearly identical to the original, and the Philips hand held controller is a bit more awkward than keyboard input, but this is the same old addictive game, set in prettier surroundings. CD-I($24.98). Circle Reader Service #14. Sierra On-Line Oakhurst, CA (209) 683-4468 THE ISLAND OF DR. BRAIN: Young gamers who passed the initiation ordeal of Dr. Brain to become his fullfledge lab assistant in Castle of Dr. Brain will now have the chance to face new intellectual challenges in their first assignment on Dr. Brain's island. While searching for Dr. Brain's battery, gamers age 12 and up will be introduced to topics in math, science, art, and language. Though the original Brain Quest was rather lopsided in its content, stressing logic and computer topics, Island will exercise both cerebral hemispheres with its puzzles involving identifying famous works of art and classic literature in addition to those involving chemistry, math, and computer topics. The colorful, bizarre, and pun-filled setting of the game and its fun-oriented approach to typically dry academic subject matter raise Dr. Brain a 'head' above its competition in the edutainment market. IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #15. Sound Source Unlimited 2985 E. Hillcrest Dr. #A Westlake Village, CA 91362 (805) 494-9996 AUDIOCLIPS: Not unlike the aforementioned SoundBits, these packages add amusing sounds to one's work in Windows. With a science fiction theme, the three packages we lent our ears to included Star Trek (from the original television series), Star Trek the Next Generation: Encounter at Farpoint (the pilot episode) and 2001: A Space OdysPower Hitter mo SCORE 00072 CIHES 000 Tetris EXICO O CELESTE The Island of Dr. Brain Page 750 Computer Gaming World "


"RES MICROPROSE STORE EAGLE Combat Flight Simulator Super 3-D Graphics With While Supp We Supplies Las IH AL 041 2.DA FOOT THUNDER BOARD. PC GAMES LIKE YOU'VE NEVER HEARD THEM BEFORE. Lend us your ear. And we'll stuff it with a calibre of sound that's ears ahead of the competition. Introducing Thunder Board from Media Vision. No other sound card out there today can soar to such incredible heights. Or plunge to such awesome lows. And Thunder Board's dynamic filtering means dynamite sound. Higher fidelity. Bigger ka-booms. And more bang for the buck. Our guarantee is that we put the quality where your ears are. And the money where our mouth is. In fact, we'll refund your money if you don't agree Thunder Board is the best sound board for your PC games. In addition, with Thunder Board you get three free PC action game samplers: Nova 9\", Lemmings\", and Lexi-Cross. Plus, free Thunder Master software that lets you record and edit sound files with a Wave Form Editor. And Thunder Board is fully compatible with all the newest PC games. Plus 100% compatible with AdLib) and Sound Blaster applications-to support the largest library of games possible. What's more, Thunder Board has breakthrough fea tures to let you break all the sound barriers. Like twice the Digitized Audio Playback and Recording Capability at an explosive 22kHz-compared to the competition's puny 11kHz. Also, you get a squadron of powerful extras. Like a Joystick Port. Headphone Jack. An 11 Voice FM Music Synthesizer that lets you score music as well as score points. And a Power Amplifier with built-in Volume Control, so you can have yourself a real blast-without blasting the neighbors. So take off-for a dealer near you. And go from static to ecstatic. Because, with Thunder Board, hearing is believing. OC MEDIA VISION Approved by 95 F SATISFAC Microprase Gunship 2000 Interplay Productions Star Trek Siera On-Line Conquest of the Logbuce Electronics Arts PGA Golf Tour Broderbund Software Prince of Persia For the name of a Thunder Board dealer or simply some good sound advice, call Media Vision. 1-800-845-5870. Media Vision, 47221 Fremont Boulevard, Fremont, CA 94538.510-770-8600, FAX: 510-770-9592. Media Vision, Thunder Board, and Thunder Master are trademarks of Media Vision, Inc. All other trademarks are the property of their respective companies. 1992, Media Vision, Inc. Circle Reader Service #82 "


"Taking A Peek Whoop IF Upl Event Syutes Event Enable Whoop It Up Syuten Events Shutdown Stop Sign Icon Question Icon Exclamation Icon Astelik icon General Protection Fun Generic Events whooplanundt Applic.min. Sound files in the way energy way erguel way C ure2.wav aicinal way Tiemcomp.way Tell Help Audio Clips Gary Grigsby's Pacific War sey. Now, instead of that annoying old \"beep,\" one's computer will speak with the voice of HAL and say \"I'm sorry, Dave. I can't let you do that.\" Did someone just open up the Windows Control Panel? (Mr. Spock just said \"Fascinating,\" which is how we know.) Opening a file might be greeted with the famous \"woosh\" of doors opening and closing on the original Star Trek. With plenty of sounds in each and every one user assignable to a specific Windows function, it's only logical that computer users who are fans of science fiction send a probe out for these. IBM with Windows 3.1. Mac ($69.95). Circle Reader Service #16. Strategic Simulations Inc. Sunnyvale, CA (408) 737-6800 GARY GRIGSBY'S PACIFIC WAR: It's about time that prolific wargame designer Gary Grigsby received title billing on one of his games. As implied by the title, this game is Gary's magnum opus, covering all of the WWII in the Pacific Theatre of Operations. It used a modified Secont Front system (which has undergone a major overhaul) with each turn representing a week of real time. Players order forces on an operational level from base to base. In addition, economics and logistics are all factored into the combat and movement results in a detailed but manageable fashion. The game even includes a special play-by-email feature for serious wargamers who want to campaign against other humans, turn by turn, via electronic messaging. Undoubtedly, this is the \"biggest\" wargame ever put on a single disk and hallmark game on the subject. IBM ($79.95). Circle Reader Service #17. SPELLJAMMER: Argh, maties! Grab yer sabres, we be going planet-side. The first product in SSI's new Spelljammer series combines the atmospheric sailing vessels of Edgar Rice Burrough's John Carter of Mars with its romantic view of Age of Sail combat and melds it with the AD&D system to create an unusual setting for an RPG. Players command a mercenary crew of 12 in their planet by planet quest to find the slave base where the evil Neogi keeps his human cargo. While piloting through space, players will battle other ships broadsides to broadsides in a rough simulator-like environment, and may end up grappling with the enemy to engage in boarding combat using SSI's adaptation of the AD&D combat system. If players succeed in dethroning the evil slave king and destroying his flagship, they'll be in good stead for the upcoming gaming in the Spelljammer line. IBM ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #18. Three-Sixty Pacific Campbell, CA (409) 776-2187 MEGAFORTRESS MEGA PAK: Despite folk wisdom, this package claims that you can teach an \"Old Dog\" new tricks. The package includes the original Megafortress, a simulation of an upgraded B-52 advanced bomber (the \"I\" variant, from Dale Brown's best-selling book, Flight of the Old Dog), the first add-on scenario, Operation Sledgehammer, and a brand new mission editor. After reading Dale Brown's book (included in the rather large box) players can play all the crew roles in this \"be-all, do-all\" game and fly the mission described in the book, in addition to several others. If the player masters all of the scenarios, he can then edit or create new scenarios with the mission editor, which is comprehensive in the editing function it supports. Set flight path, enemy radar, enemy guns, position of refueling tankers, and ordnance load-out. In what appears to be a rather poor marketing move, Three-Sixty will only be offering the editor as part of this new package — forcing owners of the original game to buy it again. IBM ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #19. Virgin Games Irvine, CA (714) 833-8710 MONOPOLY DELUXE: Translations of boardgames into the computer gaming genre have ranged in quality from poor to excellent. Fortunately, Monopoly Deluxe is much closer to the latter. By adding clever animations and sounds, the solid computer players can really challenge the best player in the house. Allowing for multiple human and computer player combinations, the real \"deluxe\" element is are the many \"home\" rules that have been grafted on to the game over the generations. Each can be toggled on or off, including putting all the fines and taxes into Free Parking, adding the maximum penalty\" (i.e., no real estate dealings) while in jail and a host of others. Better than a ride on the Reading, Monopoly Deluxe is a hotel on The Boardwalk. IBM both DOS & Windows ($49.99). Circle Reader Service #20. CGW a g us B. SONO AZN. Spelljammer EDIT MISSION MISSION NAME MISSION DESCRIPTION HAYFOINTS TATUER FOSITION TARCETS RECOMMENDED LOAD OUT Megafortress Mega Pak TITLE DEED BOARDWALK GUT Wila w House Win Houses With HOTEL 12000 Mortgage Valve 1200 House C9200.ch Tata, 1200, pues He player WAS ALL the Lists of any Cater (resp. the ratio Doubled Unimproved Lots in the group 1935 PARKER BROTHERS 1 Dunia Monopoly Deluxe Page 152 Computer Gaming World "


"a Our Keys To The Future. The Computer Learning Foundation We're helping you put kids on computers. Write to us today. We're here to help you ... Help kids key into computers ... Kids are the key to America's future. And computers are the tools of their times. By the year 2010, virtually every job in America will require some use of technology. That means we must prepare all of our youth today to take on technology tomorrow. You Won't Believe What you'll Achieve The Computer Learning Foundation helps parents and educators The Computer Learning Foundation is an international non-profit foundation taking the lead in computer literacy efforts. We are here to help parents and educators with the information and resources they need to help our children. We have involved millions in discovering the benefits of technology. Our Computer Learning Month in October is a focus for thousands of community and school programs. In addition, our lesson plan books, resource guides and information books help thousands of parents and educators each year use technology with children. For more information, write to: Computers benefit children today. Computers can enhance children's learning and unlock their creativity. They can help children be more productive and develop better communication skills. Plus, children love using computers, so children maintain a positive attitude toward learning. COMPUTER Computer Learning Foundation Dept. CGW P.O. Box 60007 Palo Alto, CA 94306-0007 The Computer Learning Foundation is a non-profit educational foundation funded by corporations. Corporate Partner: Sega Youth Education & Health Foundation Corporate Associate: IBM Corporation-EduQuest Principal Sponsors: Apple Computer, Inc. Computer Gaming World Curriculum Product News Egghead Software Electronic Learning Media & Methods Microsoft Corporation PC Home Journal Scholastic Software, Inc. T.H.E. Journal Teaching K-8 Technology & Learning "


"Letters from Paradise ? ESPANA more than 250,000. Most excellent titles only sell about 100,000 units and even an above average title may only sell about 50.000 units. By the way, are you in the pulpit or on your knees when you read CGW religiously? Moebius Writes Congratulations on your 100th Issue Anniversary! And what an issue. Though I recall spending many hours poring over the details of past issues, this 100th one has topped them all in terms of scope and content. The retrospective elements were filled with misty-eyed significance for me and your editorial views to the future were inspiring. My kudos to each member of your staff for what must have been a Herculean effort to put together this landmark publication. I want to personally acknowledge the significant contribution which CGW has made to the computer gaming industry over the years. Your tireless efforts to bring timely and succinct news and views to the community of computer game users and developers is to be commended. As the industry has grown, so has your de facto role as a leading voice of reason, direction and conscience in an arena where the line between genuine creative expression and market exploitation is easily blurred. Meanwhile, you have allowed CGW to remain a medium of diverse opinions and positions, a sign of honorable journalistic ethic and tolerance. New members in the computer gaming family soon discover that CGW is the magazine that everyone in the home, office or lab fights over when it arrives each month. I think the reasons are clear. Timely information, stimulating and often controversial product reviews, heavy focus on industry trends and developments and, of course, the first page to become tattered from wear — The Rumor Bag. From all of us at Softdisk Publishing and from all around the ever-growing computer gaming communityTHANKS! Greg Malone Vice President, Games Division Sofidisk Publishing Designer of Origin's Moebius We can't begin to express our appreciation for all the people inside the industry and within the gaming community in general who have congratulated us on the 100th issue. Your well-written missive is expressly welcome, however, since it clearly describes what we have ahvays attempted to accomplish with CGW. We're glad that a lot of readers believe we are succeeding. That we have been experiencing growing pains should be obvious 10 most of our regular readers, but we hope that the \"final product (and we have to use that term loosely in the magazine business, since we start all over every month) will be worth it. Computer gaming is a great hobby and we keep trying to cover it more and more effectively. The effort won't stop at 100, 200 or (should we live so long) 500. Platinum Plateau I read your magazine religiously and find it the most informative of any gaming magazine I read. I'm in the midst of a little dispute here and am hoping you can help me resolve it. I was recently touting to my brother the great potential I saw for the game, Lemmings. As he was playing. I mentioned that a game like it must sell millions of copies. He said, «No way, there aren't even millions of computer gaming players.\" Being the competitive types that we are, we set out to find the answer to our little question, but managed to reach dead end after dead end. People either have had no clue or have been leery of us working for the CIA or something. Anyhow, do you have any idea of how many copies a hot computer game such as Lemmings or Tetris might sell? Just curiOus. Rob Peloquin Enfield, CT The highest official designation of unit sales is the SPA's Platinum certification. It is granted when a company's records are audited by an independent auditor and indicates that 250,000 units have been sold. King's Quest III, King's Quest V and Battle Chess were the most recent certifications. Neither Tetris nor Lemmings has been officially certified as Platinum, but we expect both to finish their life-cycle at The Fuller RUSH Man I must say I was startled with your response to Mr. Morris letter (RUSH to Judgment) in the December issue. I, too, read your magazine faithfully, almost fanatically, every month. I would also be considered a «PC right-winger\" by your terms. As journalists, you must report industry news, review games and other equipment and give hints as to what we can expect in the future of our hobby. Additionally, these tasks should be performed without bias, liberal or conservative, to faithfully serve your readers. Allusions to art, music and politics must and should be made, but these comparisons should be comparisons of fact, not opinion. If a computer game based on the teachings of Rush Limbaugh were to be released, I would assume the reviewer would give me the straight scoop on the game, whether he is a liberal or a conservative. Opinions belong in the editorial column, not in reviews. Steve Phallen Mansfield, OH We can assure you that our reviewers always give readers the straight scoop on a game, regardless of the reviewer's individual political persuasion. We would do so, even if the game were a Rush Limbaugh simulator (perish the thought). The issute in question was a reader's offense taken to the fact that we used the term \"politically correct\" to suggest that something was stylishly dealing with the subject matter which the game was simulating as opposed to substantively dealing with the subject matter. Style over substance is most definitely a relevant issue, whatever the political perspective. Several other readers have correctly Page 154 Computer Gaming World "


"New! TRISTANO Pinball Available for IBM PC and Macintosh \"Best Simulation\" Finalist 1991 computers. -Software Publishers Association \"TRISTAN) should be a big winner.\" -John Sculley \"You n il frgt u r lng n a m -Miami Herald 1000 \"TRISTAN puts a new tilt on old fashion pinball.\" -MacWEEK \"Superbly lives up to its billing as solid state pinball.\" -MACWORLD Enjoy the Excitement of Real Pinball!  Authentic Ball Action  Wild Pinball Devices Fabulous Sound  TILT and much more... Solid State PINBALL TRISTAN To Order: Contact your favorite retailer or call (613) 967-7900. AAAA 28 1000 TRISTAN TRISTANIE KETI5800 KEC BALLE Compatible with Windows 3.x, Sound BlasterTM, Adlib SoundTM and 256 color VGA. SOFTWARE CORPORATION Circle Reader Service #44 Amtex Software Corporation. 206 George Street  Belleyille, Ontario Canade, k8N 3H4  voice (613) 967-7900  fax (613) 967-7902 "


"cially the parts where Mr. Emrich elucidated some of his right-wing stances, we dare say, wink, wink, nudge, nudge). taken umbrage at the hyperbole which stated that both our editor and Mr. Brooks were unlikely to listen to Rush Limbaugh without being dead. One reader suggested that a \"true liberal\" would listen to all perspectives. Dr. Wilson has since confessed that he had, indeed, listened to Rush without being dead, but had received no edification from the experience. Lt. Col. Brooks listened to Rush immediately after reading the remark that said he wouldn't. His conclusion was that Rush was humorous in an acerbic way, but presented repugnant political views. Ironically, the original letter castigated both Mr. Brooks and CGW's editorial staff for being right wingers who were imposing their political viewpoints on the readers. The real issue is whether a review can be informed by the reviewer's perspective of reality. We believe that it can be, as long as any bias is clear. We think we present the most complete and objective reviews possible with just enough subjective spice to keep the controversies brewing. Apparently, some readers agree. Consider the following letter. his letter. I guess you will now have to put a reviewer's «Political Correctness Quotient\" in the review box so we know whether we want to be \"corrupted» by them. My views on the use of nuclear energy are totally opposite Johnny Wilson's, but that did not stop me from buying and enjoying his and Alan Emrich's excellent Civilization book. The point I wish to make is this — to decide that you will no longer read a certain reviewer's article because he does not support your political agenda is totally asinine. Lighten up, people! We're talking games here! Check your politics at the door — we're here to play! Maybe I got an overdose of politics from the election (or maybe I should cut back on Rush), but I play games to take a break from the world at large. Please, let me have my \"quality\" time. Ray Stickler Paris, IL Yes, games are games and sometimes used for \"escape,\" but that doesn't mean we cannot learn from them. Dr. Wilson acknowledges that most people are not as anti-nuclear as he is, but feels that he would not have been true to himself if he had let the unrealistically positive use of nuclear power in SimCity and Sid Meier's Civilization go unquestioned. As you have noted, however, the question did not get in the way of your enjoying the book (espeThis Is A Test I have a problem and was hoping that you could help. I'm interested in playtesting for any of the software publishers, but I don't have any idea how to get started. I have a 486/DX2-66 computer with 8 MB of RAM and an NEC-84 CD-ROM drive, as well as an Amiga 500 computer. Is there any advice, help or information you could give me? Jonathan Kimrey PRODIGY User Actually, the best way to become a playtester is to write letters to the various publishers describing experiences you have encountered in playing their existing games. The companies which use outside playtesters often draw from their most vocal supporters and critics. Carefully documented gaming experiences with existing games will demonstrate to the publishers that you are likely to be thorough in working with their upcoming games. Do not be discouraged if nothing happens right away, however. The piracy problem has been perplexing to those companies who use outside testers and has reduced the rosters of playtesters at a time when the hobby needs them more than ever. CGW This letter is in response to the letter in your December issue from Jeffrey Morris. Although I DO watch Rush Limbaugh (and to paraphrase a famous debate, \"You, Mr. Brooks are no Rush Limbaugh!\"), I thought you gave a very good answer to LOOK UP Look LEFT FIRE MISSLES LOOK CENTER LOOK RIGHT L BACK FIRE GUNS Select Missles RADAR ON/OFF COMPATIBLE WITH ALL FLIGHT SIMULATOR PACKAGES AS A Two BUTTON JOYSTICK. THRUSTMASTER INC. 10150 S.W. Nimbus Ave Ste E-7 Tigard, Oregon 97223 (503) 639-3200 39 Dealer Inquiries Welcome Uhrustmaster STANDARD GAME PORT INTERFACE. FLIGHT CONTROL SYSTEM Circle Reader Service # 108 "


"COMPUTER GAMING WORLD HALL OF FAME The games in Computer Gaming World's Hall of Fame have been highly rated by our readers over time. They have been rated for their impact on the computer gaming hobby during their peak period of influence and acceptance by our readership. Note that the dates listed for each game are the copyright dates and may precede the actual release dates. Specific formats listed are those which CGW has in its possession. This month we welcome a new member to these illustrious halls, Electronic Arts' classic CRPG Interplay's Wasteland. Induction Ceremony! Wasteland (Electronic Arts/Interplay, 1986) Apple, C64, IBM The Bard's Tale (Electronic Arts, 1985) Many formats Chessmaster (Software Toolworks, 1986) Many formats Dungeon Master (FTL Software, 1987) Amiga, Atari ST, IBM Earl Weaver Baseball (Electronic Arts, 1986) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh Empire (Interstel, 1978) Amiga, Atari ST, Commodore 64, IBM F-19 Stealth Fighter (MicroProse, 1988) IBM Gettysburg: The Turning Point (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1986) Amiga, Apple, C-64, IBM Gunship (MicroProse, 1989) Amiga, C-64, IBM Harpoon (Three-Sixty Pacific, 1989) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh Kampfgruppe (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1985) Many formats King's Quest V (Sierra, 1990) Amiga, IBM M-1 Tank Platoon (MicroProse, 1989) Amiga, IBM Mech Brigade (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1985) Many formats Might & Magic (New World Computing, 1986) Apple, C-64, IBM, Mac M.U.L.E. (Electronic Arts, 1983) Atari 8-bit, C-64 Pirates (MicroProse, 1987) Many formats Railroad Tycoon (MicroProse, 1990) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh SimCity (Maxis, 1987) Many formats Starflight (Electronic Arts, 1986) Amiga, C-64, IBM, Sega Their Finest Hour (LucasArts, 1989) Amiga, Atari ST, IBM Ultima III (Origin, 1983) Apple, Atari ST, C-64, IBM Ultima IV (Origin, 1985) Amiga, Apple, Atari ST, IBM Ultima VI (Origin, 1990) Amiga, IBM War in Russia (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1984) Apple Wasteland (Interplay, 1986) Apple, C64, IBM Wing Commander (Origin, 1991) IBM, Sega Wizardry (Sir-Tech Software, 1981) Many formats Zork (Infocom, 1981) Many formats It is difficult to speak of CRPGs without invoking the venerable title, Wasteland. The game proved the value of a skill-based role-playing system and created interesting algorithms for handling the non-player characters. One couldn't simply strip the NPCs of their items, as in other games, the NPCs had \"minds\" of their own. Further, although the game was combat-intensive and used a computerized form of Michael Stackpole's Mercenaries, Spies and Private Eyes game system, it was replete with ethical dilemmas and non-combat puzzlesolving of the most devious sort. The story was written by Mike Stackpole and many of the maps were fleshed out by veteran game designers like Liz Danforth and Ken St. Andre. The delay in inducting Wasteland into the CGW Hall of Fame was precipitated by an odd series of events. First, the game rested atop all other CRPGs in the Top 100 for several months. Then, as an Apple Il game, the game suffered from the decline of the Apple Il's popularity and certain IBM format games eclipsed it. It could have rebounded with our readers when the IBM conversion was released, but a strange marketing decision caused EA to make Wasteland one of their budget games in a special sales blow-out. Many gamers wondered what was wrong with the game since it was selling at a bargain basement price. The game disappeared and some gamers felt that EA had deliberately undermarketed the IBM version because Interplay Productions, the developer of the program, had joined a rival affiliate program. Now, years later, Wasteland is still held with great esteem by CGW's readers. We are regularly asked if there will ever be a genuine sequel (most readers discounted EA's Fountain of Dreams, developed by a different creative team, as being related to the original) and the good news is that there might yet be such a product. We welcome Wasteland to the hallowed presence of other benchmark titles in the computer gaming world and trust that this long-awaited recognition will alert new readers to a classic product and rectify a long-overdue omission by highlighting a watershed design. February 1993 Page 157 "


"TIDIANA JONE Reader Poll 101 76 P OOOO AWNTop Adventure Games GAME COMPANY Indiana Jones/Atlantis LucasArts Monkey Island 2 LucasArts The Secret of Monkey Island LucasArts Legend of Kyrandia Virgin The Dagger of Amon Ra Sierra The Castle of Dr. Brain Sierra Conquests of the Longbow Sierra Quest for Glory II Sierra Space Quest IV Sierra 10 Police Quest 3 Sierra SCORE 10.12 10.05 9.72 9.31 9.16 9.11 9.04 9.02 8.98 8.97 Top 100 Games COMPUTER GAMING WORLD atrs cil Type ST SP RP Origin Ultima Underworld AC QQP RP ST AD AD SI Top Role Playing Games GAME COMPANY SCORE Ultima Underworld Origin 10.53 Might & Magic: Clouds of Xeen New World Computing 10.35 Eye of the Beholder Il SSI 9.66 Might & Magic II New World Computing 9.49 Ultima VII Origin 9.39 Eye of the Beholder SSI 9.12 Bane of the Cosmic Forge Sir Tech 9.05 Ultima V Origin 9.00 Pools of Darkness SSI 8.94 10 Elvira Accolade Accolade 8.82 WG AD ST WG,ST SP Score 10.72 10.56 10.53 10.38 10.35 10.25 10.12 10.05 9.86 9.74 9.72 9.72 9.67 9.67 9.66 9.66 9.58 9.57 9.49 9.49 9.49 9.47 9.42 9.39 9.33 . RP AC WG 24344333433434433*3*3*39834389832993 SI WG BATT RP SI WG.ST ST RP -Non Company 1 Civilization MicroProse Links 386 Pro Access 3 Ultima Underworld 4 Wing Commander II Origin 5 Might & Magic: Clouds of Xeen New World Computing 6 Solitaire's Journey 7 Indiana Jones: Fate of Atlantis LucasArts 8 Monkey Island 2: Le Chuck's Revenge LucasArts 9 Red Baron Dynamix 10 The Perfect General QQP 11 The Secret of Monkey Island LucasArts Hong Kong Mahjong Pro Electonic Arts 13 Great Naval Battles SSI Hardball III Accolade 15 Eye of the Beholder 11 SSI Wolfenstein 3-D Id Software 17 V for Victory: Utah Beach Three-Sixty Pacific 18 Falcon 3.0 Spectrum HoloByte 19 Carriers At War SSG Might & Magic III New World Computing Aces of the Pacific Dynamix 22 Warlords SSG 23 Chessmaster 3000 Software Toolworks 24 Ultima VII Origin 25 Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe LucasArts 26 Legend of Kyrandia Virgin 27 Lemmings Psygnosis 28 Jack Nicklaus Signature Golf Accolade 29 Conflict: Korea SSI 30 Second Front SSI 31 The Dagger of Amon Ra Sierra 32 Tetris Classic Spectrum HoloByte Gunship 2000 Microprose 35 The Castle of Dr. Brain Sierra 36 Siege Mindcraft 37 Chuck Yeager's Air Combat Electronic Arts Silent Service II MicroProse 39 Bane of the Cosmic Forge Sir-Tech Populous 11 Electronic Arts 41 Red Storm Rising MicroProse Conquests of the Longbow Sierra 43 Quest for Glory II Sierra 44 High Command Colorado Comp. 45 Ultima v Origin 46 The Lost Admiral QQP 47 Space Quest IV Sierra Western Front SSI 49 Police Quest 3 Sierra 50 The Adventures of Willy Beamish Dynamix Top Simulation Games GAME COMPANY Red Baron Dynamix Falcon 3.0 Spectrum Holo Byte Aces of the Pacific Dynamix Secret Weapons LucasArts Gunship 2000 MicroProse Silent Service II MicroProse Chuck Yeager's Air Combat Electonic Arts Red Storm Rising MicroProse F-117A MicroProse 10 F-15 Strike Eagle II MicroProse SCORE 9.86 9.57 9.49 9.33 9.12 9.08 9.08 AD AC 9.31 9.30 SP 9.27 9.04 WG WG 8.91 8.69 Top Strategy Games ram inco GAME Civilization Solitaire's Journey Hong Kong Mahjong Pro Chessmaster 3000 Siege Populous II The Lost Admiral Mech Warrior Rules of Engagement Hoyle Book of Games Vol.3 COMPANY MicroProse QOP Electronic Arts Software Toolworks Mindcraft Electronic Arts QQP Activision Mindcraft Sierra SCORE 10.72 10.25 9.72 9.42 9.10 9.05 9.21 9.18 9.16 9.12 9.12 9.11 9.10 9.08 9.08 9.05 9.05 9.04 9.04 9.02 9.01 9.00 8.99 8.98 8.98 8.97 8.96 8.99 AD.RP WG RP ST AD WG AD AD 8.95 8.81 8.78 9 10 883 "


"The Perfect Top Wargames Activision SSI Psygnosis MicroProse Dynamix Access Electronic Arts Spectrum HoloByte Accolade MicroPlay Mindcraft ST.SI RP AC SI AD AD SP AC.ST RP WG.ST coon CNCOMPANY QQP SSI Three-Sixty Pacific SSG SSG SSI SSI Colorado Comp. GAME The Perfect General Great Naval Battles V for Victory: Utah Beach Carriers At War Warlords Conflict: Korea Second Front High Command Westem Front Command HQ SCORE 9.74 9.67 9.58 9.49 9.47 9.21 9.18 9.01 8.98 8.81 ST SSI RP ST AD SSI 10 MicroPlay WG ST AD com DER RP SP SI Top Action Games DARY OVO AWNGAME Wing Commander il Wolfenstein 3-D Lemmings Tetris Classic Oh No! More Lemmings Super Tetris Conan the Cimmerian Out of this World Speedball 2 Battle Isle COMPANY Origin Id Software Psygnosis Spectrum Holobyte Psygnosis Spectrum HoloByte Virgin Interplay Konami Ubi Soft SCORE 10.38 9.66 9.30 9.14 8.92 8.85 8.56 8.43 7.92 7-69 51 Mech Warrior 52 Pools of Darkness 53 Oh, No! More Lemmings 54 F-117A 55 Rise of the Dragon Martian Memorandum 57 Indianapolis 500 Super Tetris 59 Elvira 60 Command HQ Rules of Engagement 62 Gateway to the Savage Frontier 63 Hoyle Book of Games, Vol. 3 64 Heart of China 65 Battles of Napoleon Battlechess Gateway 68 Starflight 11 4-D Boxing 70 F-15 Strike Eagle II 71 Action Stations 72 Typhoon of Steel 73 Armada 2525 74 Tony LaRussa's Ultimate Baseball 75 Buck Rogers Carrier Strike 77 Conan the Cimmerian 78 Megafortress 79 PGA Tour Golf NFL Pro League Football 81 Star Trek: 25th Aniversary 82 The Games: Winter Challenge Martian Dreams Shuttle 85 Bandit Kings Savage Empire 87 Global Conquest Jetfighter 11 89 Wayne Gretzky Hockey II Out of this World 91 Nobunaga's Ambition II 92 Lord of the Rings 93 Ishido 94 Powermonger Sim Earth 96 Dune 97 Flight Simulator 4.0 Loom Utopia 100 Darklands WG WG ST SP RP WG AC,RP SIST 8.95 8.94 8.92 8.90 8.89 8.89 8.85 8.85 8.82 8.81 8.81 8.79 8.78 8.75 8.72 8.72 8.72 8.71 8.71 8.69 8.68 8.67 8.63 8.60 8.57 8.57 8.56 8.55 8.54 8.54 8.53 8.50 8.50 8.50 8.48 8.48 8.47 8.45 8.43 8.43 8.40 8.26 8.25 8.24 8.24 8.20 8.18 8.18 8.18 8.15 SP Sierra Dynamix SSI Interplay Legend Electronic Arts Electronic Arts MicroProse RAW Entertainment SSI Interstel SSI SSI SSI Virgin Three-Sixty Pacific Electronic Arts Micro Sports Interplay Accolade Origin Virgin Koei Origin MicroProse Velocity Bethesda Softworks Interplay Koei Interplay Accolade Electronic Arts Maxis Virgin Games Microsoft LucasArts Konami MicroProse SP AD 10 ST.RP Top Sports Games ST SI SP AC ST.RP NM RP GAME Links 386 Pro Hardball III Jack Nicklaus Signature Golf Indianapolis 500 4-D Boxing Tony LaRussa's Ult. Baseball PGA Tour Golf NFL Pro League Football The Games: Winter Challenge 10 Wayne Gretzky Hockey 11 COMPANY Access Accolade Accolade Electronic Arts Electronic Arts Electronic Arts Electronic Arts Micro Sports Accolade Bethesda Softworks SCORE 10.56 9.67 9.27 8.85 8.71 8.60 8.54 8.54 8.50 8.43 ST ST ONO ST AD.ST AD ST RP AD=Adventure, RP-Role Playing, SI=Simulation, ST=Strategy, WG=Wargame, AC=Action, SP=Sports The Computer Gaming World Poll A monthly survey of the readers of Computer Gaming World Magazine. "


"PC Research Hits List of Top-Selling Software What You've Been Playing Lately October, 1992 The Reader's Feedback Forum Every month our mailbox fills to capacity with hundreds of Reader Input Cards from our most loyal and outspoken readers. Over the years we've found these cards to be an invaluable source of feedback. Within 10 days of the release of our latest issue we can expect to see dozens of cards begin pouring in with comments, suggestions, encouragements, tirades and many good laughs, in addition to the data for our Top 100 game poll. Through your efforts, we know which articles were hits, which flopped, how many tyypos an grammatical errors we've let slip through in addition to the many well-articulated opinions on anything and everything related to gaming. This column is set aside to give our readers a voice, and to display the results of our \"Playing Lately?\" field on the Reader Input Card. Thanks for taking the time to fill them out — and keep 'em coming! PC Games ( MS-DOS) Rank Title and Source Kings Quest VI (Sierra On-Line) Wizardry VII: Crusaders (Sir-Tech) Might & Magic: Clouds of Xeen (New World) Quest for Glory III (Sierra On-Line) Great Naval Battles (Strategic Simulations) Hard Ball III (Accolade) Links 386 Pro (Access) Wing Commander (Origin) Aces of the Pacific (Sierra On-Line) Civilization (MicroProse) Falcon 3.0: Operation Fighting Tiger (Spectrum Holobyte) Microsoft Flight Simulator (Microsoft) Red Baron Scenario Builder (Sierra On-Line) V For Victory: Utah Beach (Three-Sixty) Monopoly (Virgin Games) Sim City (Maxis) Star Trek 25th Anniversary (Interplay) Quest For Glory I (Sierra On-Line) Falcon 3.0 (Spectrum Holobyte) Powermonger (Electronic Arts) 8 UNESCO Playing Lately? Results For CGW #101, December 1992: 1. Civilization (MicroProse) 2. Wolfenstein 3-D (id Software) 3. Wizardry VII: Crusaders of the Dark Savant (Sir-Tech) 4. Aces of the Pacific (Dynamix) 5. Darklands (MicroProse) 6. V For Victory: Utah Beach (Three-Sixty) 7. Wing Commander II (Origin) 8. Might & Magic: Clouds of Xeen (New World) 9. Falcon 3.0 (Spectrum Holobyte) 10. Ultima VII (Origin) Rank cimitir Amiga Games Title and Source Civilization (MicroProse) 688 Attack Sub (Electronic Arts) Leisure Suit Larry V (Sierra On-Line) Kings Quest V (Sierra On-Line) Police Quest III (Sierra On-Line) Rank cicio aidinosa Macintosh Games Title and Source Prince of Persia (Broderbund) Award Winners: KQ V & Red Baron (Sierra On-Line) Microsoft Flight Simulator (Microsoft) SimLife (Maxis) SimCity Supreme (Maxis) CD-ROM Products Title and Source BattleChess (Interplay) Cinemania (Microsoft) Wing Commander/Secret Missions I & II (Origin) Sherlock Holmes, CD (ICOM) World View (Britannica) Street Atlas U.S.A. (Delorme) Kings Quest V (Sierra On-Line) Murmers of the Earth (Warner New Media) Where in the World is Carmen Sandiego (Broderbund) CD Game Pack (Software Toolworks) Games You'd Like To See \"Killer Klowns From Outer Space: Guide your clown from birth as a piece of popcorn through life, cocooning unsuspecting co-eds in cotton candy. Must have weird synthesized calliope music from hell.\" Midland, TX \"Great Navel Battles: A port of Japan's best-selling Sumo Wrestling Sim.\" Jon King, St. Paul, MN \"CPA Quest 1: Attack of the Mutated W-4s.\" Zach Pennington, Anchorage, AK \"Dr. Strangelove (or How to Stop Worrying, and Spend the Kids' Inheritance): From the gleam in Daddy's eye to eviction from the nest. Follow the exploits of your baby from birth to 1st date. From changing diapers, learning to walk and talk, guide your child through it all. Important decisions must be made to buy the newest CRPG or shoes for the kid. You make the call.\" Nicholas Peters, Wichita, KS [And now for the work of a tardy poet...) \"Computer game companies are playing tricks Getting this gamer into a fix Each new gaming treat Tries to make obsolete My poor old 16Mhz 386! Micheal Lavore, Nashua, NH This list is based on units sold by Software Etc., Babbages, Waldensoftware and Electronics Boutique. For more information, please contact PC Research at (703) 435-1025. Page 160 Computer Gaming World "


"match The Patch File Yomputer game programs have grown so massive and the number of possible configurations has become so huge that incompatibilities and glitches seem to be breeding at an exponential rate. Consumers and publishers are both frustrated at the need for adding patches into \"buggy\" programs, but they seem to be an interim solution that is going to be with the hobby for a while (presumably, until a standard platform configuration is agreed upon). So, until the golden age of standardized platforms and bug-free programs, Computer Gaming World will publish a regular list of the latest updates of which we are aware. These patches can usually be downloaded from either Compuserve or GEnie, but can also be obtained from individual software publisher's own BBSs and direct from the publisher (with proof of purchase). We continue to urge publishers to keep us updated on the latest versions/patches to their games. left off the 1.0 release. 05/06/92 Quest For Glory III \"B\" Patch: Corrects all known game play errors. 12/03/92 Railroad Tycoon Version 1.01 Update (Mac): The latest version for the Mac. 09/25/92 Rex Nebular Update 8.49 (IBM/VGA): Corrects the chickenbomb and poly-cement problems. 11/13/92 Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe Ver. 2.1: If you have the P-80, Do335, or He162 expansion disks, you DO NOT need this file. 02/27/92 Spelljammer Update V1.1: Latest version of the game. 11/21/92 Stunt Island Update: Fixes a minor bug in the Install program that was causing some system lockups after the hardware autodetect sequence. 11/27/92 Stunt Island Beta-Test Patch: Beta version of the patch to fix the palette shift problem some users were experiencing. (Note: Some companies release beta versions of their patches so that interested users can help test them before official release.) 12/09/92 Tom Landry Football V. 1.02 Update: Corrects problems with modem play, excessive penalities, Sound Blaster problems, and improved animation choreography. 12/03/92 Ultima Underworld Upgrade Bug Fix: Fixes disappearing item problems. 07/04/92 Ultima VII Keys Fix Patch: The fix for disappearing keys in Ultima VII. 06/01/92 Wayne Gretzky Hockey 3 Version 1.10: Fixes many bugs, including the Canadien. VOC file, the computer scoring problem, CH FlightStick problem, penalities, referees, coach's clipboard and others. 11/24/92 Air Force Commander Slowdown Patch: Makes the game playable on high-powered machines. 11/24/92 B-17 Flying Fortress Version 2 Update: Adds many new features and tweaks some of the existing ones. 11/17/92 Civilization Update (Amiga): Latest version for the Amiga. 09/12/92 Crisis in the Kremlin Version 1.01: Fixes problems reported by users since its original release. 09/26/92 Crusaders of the Dark Savant Patch #2: Fixes the \"Don Barlone\" bug. 11/16/92 Darklands Version 06: New features added, fixes various machine compatibility problems, corrects problems in earlier versions, and includes new/revised artwork for certain areas of the game. 09/24/92 Darkseed Version 1.5 Update: Latest version of CyberDreams adventure. 11/24/92 Earl Weaver 2.0 Tandy Lockup Patch: For Tandy users having keyboard and loading lockups. 03/20/92 Falcon: Operation Fighting Tiger V3.01.1 Update: Contains new installer, a fix for blank screen lockup, escort mission failures, Reg Flag buildings, PC Speaker sounds, ROE conflicts, B-52 crashes, ships in allied comm mode in Kurile Theatre, and others. 10/13/92 Full Count Baseball V5.1 Upgrade: Expands play-by-play and offers a new screen layout. For owners of V5.0 only. 12/06/92 Greens Version 02 Update: Addresses the problems reported with scoring, Sound Blasters, etc. 11/22/92 Gunship 2000 Islands and Ice Version .08: Lastest version of the I&I scenario disk. 10/10/92 Harpoon Version 1.32 Upgrade: Latest IBM version of the game. 11/14/92 Jack Nicklaus Signature Edition Rev 1.4 Fix: Fixes \"memory allocation\" error when using large brushes in the designer. All other fixes to date are included. 07/21/92 Lightspeed Version 02 Update: Fixes the trade problem that some players have experienced. 11/17/92 Links 386 Pro Update Version 1.08: Allows game to run under OS/2 and other DPMI operating systems and software. 11/14/92 Out of this World Upgrade: Includes a new WORLD.EXE file that fixes all known bugs and a README file that was accidently The PRODIGY Weekly Top Ten The Game Center section of the PRODIGY network offers its users the chance to rate their favorite games on a weekly basis. CGW provides this data as yet another indicator of what's hot in gaming, as determined by the player's votes. Please note that a PRODIGY rating is not a cumulative rating, as in the CGW Top 100 Poll, and is based upon a straight 1-10 scale. GAME PELL TOP TEN RANKED GAMES Week of Nov 27 Dec. AVR FAVR RANK SCORE TITLE H RANK SCORE TITLE 175 Wing Commander 2_621 Indy : Allanlis 2 73 Monkey Island 2 7 6.9 Star Trek: 25th Ann 3 73 Ultima Underworld 8 6.7 Castles 2 4 73 Wolfenstein 3-1 9 6.6 Links S 7.1 Civilization 10 6.0 Aces of the Pacific HHMMMMMMMMHHHHHHHHHHHHH Enroll FREE Earn points & airline mileage with our travel partners. LOOK Tools Help Exit Menu X-ref Jump Path February 1993 Page 161 "


"Marketing As Editorial by Johnny Wilson State of the Magazine: It isn't easy for an editorial staff to be objective and balanced. In fact, it is so difficult that it is probably safe to say that no editorial staff, including ours, actually achieves the ideal. Nevertheless, there is no excuse for reputable journalists not to try and present as balanced a presentation as possible. In a consumer magazine, a responsible editorial staff neither parrots the position of the industry which it covers nor simply jumps on the bandwagon of the majority. To do cither, particularly on an exclusive basis, negates the function of an independent press. Apparently, CGW must be doing something right. All too often, it seems that we face the displeasure (wrath?) of either the software publishers, the gaming public or, interestingly enough, sometimes both. Why? We simply try to present both sides of the issues that confront the hobby as we see them. At times, our stands have cost us advertising. At others, it has cost us readers. Yet, in spite of the criticism, both circulation and page count are continuing to increase as readers vote their confidence with their dollars. It is our desire not to disappoint them. With the computer gaming press, in particular, there seems to be a feeling among many gamers that on any occasion that a publication does not agree with many gamers, said magazine has \"sold out\" and bedded down with the software publishers. Since we consider ourselves to be the most independent voice in computer gaming, we often run that risk. We do not necessarily say that a game is hot because everyone else does and we do not necessarily lambast a game as being horrible because one segment of the gaming public thinks it is awful. Instead, we try to weigh each game on its own artistic, gaming and technological merit. Our goal is not to give a \"thumbs up, thumbs down\" to lead our readers by the hand either to or from their software retailer. Our goal is to provide enough solid information that our readers can make their own decisions. One fact is certain! We will not simply download marketing documents or type up feature lists and present them as editorial copy. We know of at least one magazine that published a design document for an upcoming game without even putting the phrases into complete sentences. The same publication had a recent issue where it had six different articles written by employees of the software companies that were publishing the games covered in the articles. To be sure, some of those employces were identified as such, but all of the articles touted their content as the magazine's exclusive coverage of the games. In CGW, we will occasionally publish strategy articles and design notes which are written by designers, producers or playtesters, but the articles will be clearly identified as such. We have always identified the authors of these articles in the past and we are making an effort to identify these contributors in the by-lines from this point forward. However, reviews and sneak previews are not written by the designers, they are written by editorial staffers or freelancers who have had \"hands on\" experience with at least some working code (the amount of code varies according to the way some companies put games together from discrete modules and others put them together incrementally on their networks). We also want to make it clear that our cover decisions are not made on the basis of advertisers. We look at the game first and the cover art second. We try to select games that will have an impact in either technology or genre. We do not check the advertiser's list prior to selecting a cover and, even though almost everyone in the industry advertises with us, we have had several covers in the last 15 months that depicted products which were never advertised with us. In addition, we do not allow publishers to pre-approve editorial. At times, we have fielded complaints from software publishers who wanted to know why we didn't allow them to review our articles for \"accuracy\" prior to publication. Frankly, that would be fine with some publishers, but there are some who would not stop at \"accuracy\" and would want to change the writer's thrust. We believe readers would rather hear from the publishers at a later date in the case of an inaccuracy) and be assured of an independent press than to believe there is pre-editing. The surprise of some of these publishers when we refused pre-editing for \"accuracy\" leads us to believe that some publications follow this highly questionable procedure. Finally, let me assure our readers that, with rare and often unavoidable exceptions, we try to match the reviewer/previewer to the game. We try to select individuals who have exhaustively played the games in a given genre or design style when we give them an assignment. We expect our adventure game and CRPG reviewers to finish the games (although previewers seldom can do so, since the entire game isn't usually there to finish) and our action/strategy gamers to win at the games. There is no sense pretending to be an expert if one cannot offer some sound advice to the readers. In summary, CGW does not consider itself to be either the public relations patsy of the industry or the shop steward of the consumer. Rather, because of our unique position, we get to see products and processes from both sides. As such, it would be irresponsible for us to totally identify with either side of the computer game sales transaction. We offer information and analysis. Hopefully, we offer enough of both for our readers to make informed purchasing decisions and to get enhanced value out of their gaming experiences, as well as enough comments from the perspective of the gamer to encourage software publishers to make changes in design (and, on occasion, marketing) and continue doing the things gamers feel they are already doing right. If so, we will have succeeded in our goals. If we make our readers, whether gamers or publishers, think a little, we will have exceeded them. CGW Page 162 Computer Gaming World "


"EMAIL The Modern Version Of The Award Winning Classic  An Addictive Strategy War Game  Network and Modem Compatible  Super VGA Giaphies  Advanced Scenario Edit  Superior Computer A.L.  Digitized Sound Effects  Various Difficulty Setting Soon econpletely Re-Playable By Mark Baldwin and Bob Rakosky » D . Lovaties AVAILABLE AT YOUR LOCAL SOFTWARE RETAILER OR DIRECT FROM NEW WORLD AT 1-800-325-8898 (OR 1-818-999-0607 outside U.S.) P.O. BOX 4302 HOLLYWOOD, CALIFORNIA 90078-4302) 01992 New World Computing, Inc and White Woll Productions. Empire Deluxe 15trademark of Now World Computing, Inc. New World Computing is a registered trademark of Nuw World Computing, Inc. IBM screens shown. Actual screens may vary. Circle Reader Service #88 NEW WORLD COMPUTING "


"Underworld he Thrilling Sequel to Computer Gaming World's Role -Playing Game of the Year! It's not just a dungeon game anymore! Laborinth of Worlds CRAVATTEN MA DO 00 UNDERWORLD The Stygian Abyss\" was hailed as the first in a new generation of fantasy adventures. UNDERWORLD II Labyrinth of Worlds delivers a new, sharply realistic look. With smoother animation, more detailed creatures and a spacious view window, it's the most realistic gaming environment on a PC. The world of Underworld II is more varied and engaging than ever before. We've added new terrain features (like shifting floors, water currents and thin ice), new spells (like Shockwave and Portal), new and nastier traps and puzzles, and new creatures (we'll let you discover these for yourself...) You s hop the NT WANTER FRONTER UTY Underworld Il takes you beyond the traditional dungeon environment. Deep in the earth, the Guardian's magic has cracked the walls of reality, opening the way to eight new worlds beyond Britannia: a city buried in ice, a floating castle, an ancient tomb and more... From the halls of Lord British's castle, it's time to carry the battle forward and into the LABYRINTH OF WORLD.... Actual screens may vary. ORIGIN habe 025415 om 19 We create worlas. Available at a software retailer near you or call 1-800-245-4525 for MC/Visa/Discover orders. Aa Electronic Arts Company A Looking Glass Technologies Design P.O. BOX 161750  AUSTIN, TX 78716 Ultima is a registered trademark of Richard Garriott. Origin and We create worlds are registered trademarks of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Underworld, The Stygian Abyss and Labyrinth of Worlds are trademarks of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Electronic Arts is a registered trademark of Electronic Arts. Copyright  1992 ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Circle Reader Service #90 "

