October 1991

Features
Deep in the Heart of China

Finding Gold Pieces in Carts

10

Sierra Paints the Picture of Adventure / Charles Ardai

Scorpia's Role-Playing Game Survey

16
28

Troika — Three Puzzlers from Paragon / Matt Taylor

Behind the Screens at Lucasfilm

32

The Making of Two New Graphic Adventures/Johnny L. Wilson

So Many Wars... So Much Time

36

Universal Military Simulator II in Review / M. Evan Brooks

Ultima VII: The In-Depth Preview

40

The Many Levels of Ultima VII / Johnny L. Wilson

Jihad Versus Zealots
SSI's Conflict: Middle East / Emrich & Smith

Bio Gradeable?

44
50

Monarch Manipulation Maxims

59

More Counsel for SSI's Medieval Lords / Tom E. Hughes, Jr.

Advanced Tactical Fighting
Buzzing Ocean's F-29 Retaliator / Lloyd Case

64

75

Micro Revelations' Graphic Gore Game / Charles Ardai

In Hot Pursuit on the Red Planet

82

The Mote in Donald's Castle

84

Conscious Thoughts on Origin's Martian Dreams / R. Stewart
Capstone's Trump Castle II VGA Travelogue / Michael Lasky

Freud Goes Gridiron?

86

Pro Football Analyst from Villa Crespo / Brown & Lee

Super Simulation Slugfest

92

The Few, the Proud, the Elite Plus?

96

Psygnosis' Armour-Geddon / Derek Godat
Microplay Game Turns "Trader" / Stanley Trevena

Everything for Armada 2525

Allen Greenberg Takes a Dose of U.S. Gold's Vaxine

68

Two CRPG Classics on the SEGA Genesis / Peter Olafson

Safe Side, Suicide, Xenocide

Stings and Haloes of Critical Fortune

Three's Company

Number 87

100

Review, Designer's Notes & Player Aids/Emrich, Smith, Hughes

Departments
Taking a Peek
The Rumor Bag
Scorpion's Tale (Timequest)
Scorpion's Mail
Game Ratings, Hall of Fame
Over There (European Games Report)
Editorial

6
30
52
54
56-57
72
112

Taking a Peek

Bethesda Softworks

Gaithersburg, MD
THE TERMINATOR: "I'll be back," said the
Terminator. Well, Arnold was right! This is a
first-person perspective search and shoot 'em
up game (akin to Hoverforce) painted artfully
on a wide canvas. The year is still 1984, the
place is still Los Angeles, but the player
(players if using null modem) assume either
the role of Kyle Reese or the Terminator as
they search for Sarah Connor. The sights,
sounds and "toys" one's character has to play
with all have the right feel, and the sound support is quite good. The game features surprising depth and remains fairly true to the movie;
the virtual world one plays in really opens up
a player's options. IBM ($54.95). Circle Reader
Service #1.
Dynamix

Eugene, OR
A-10 TANK KILLER Version 1.5: It's ugly, it's
mean, it's the A-10 Thunderbolt II "Warthog".
Dynamix puts the player in the driver's seat of
one of our Gulf War successes. A-10 Tank
Killer Version 1.5 brings Dynamix's successful
A-10 Tank Killer up to date with VGA
graphics, improved sound and more missions
(including seven based on the Gulf War). It is
a very playable game that puts computer
pilots in the driver's seat low over the battlefield. Ten camera viewpoints, including a
"victim's view", lets gamers watch the action
up close or from a safe distance. The goals of
each mission in the campaign game are connected: Poor performances affect missions
later in the campaign and vice-versa. IBM
($59.95). Circle Reader Service #2.
Infogrames

Villeurbanne, France
BILLIARDS II SIMULATOR: If there was ever
a program that could make an enjoyable experience out of geometric problems, this
would be it. A pool hall potpourri of games
like 3-cushion billiards, American "pool" and 8ball pool is expanded with enough futuristic
fantasy pool games to create an intriguing
variety. Naturally, two players may play and
wagers can be made. Players are concerned
with every shot's cushion friction, rebound
coefficient, spinning coefficient, etc. as they
line up the perfect stroke. Atari ST. Circle
Reader Service #3.
Innerprise Software, Inc.

128 Cockeysville Road
CYBERBLAST: What can one say about a

game that is basically Gauntlet in space?
While the game certainly has that coin-op feel,
there is something intriguing about this mazebased action game. Would-be spacefarers
choose from two different character types
before play begins, each rated for its own
speeds and strengths. Then one blasts aliens
instead of goblins for a fast-moving change of
pace from standard dungeon fare. Mac
($49.95). Circle Reader Service #4.

options presented a player are easily accessed
and clearly expressed. Six scenarios are
provided, but the "design your own" scenario
feature, combined with many variations that
may be toggled on or off, make this game
one of remarkable replay value. Basically, all
that a galactic emperor needs is included and
presented simply and clearly. IBM ($49.99).
Circle Reader Service #5.

jSOFT

Englewood, CO
CHESSNET FOR WINDOWS: Billed as featuring the most advanced communications
software of any game on the market,
Chessnet supports both modem and (Netbios
compatible) network play. While it sports all of
the usual state-of-the-art chess program features, there is also a real-time game clock,
"chat" features and an on-disk database of the
1990 World Chess Championship games.

Norcross, GA
SECOND CONFLICT: In the traditions of the
classic strategic space conquest games, now
those with Windows can enjoy something
new. Second Conflict keeps the number of different unit types to a manageable level and
also maintains an easily grasped production
and combat systems. Naturally, with a complete pull-down menu system, the myriad of

Masque Publishing

Taking a Peek

Graphics functions allow players to adjust
colors, positions, etc. of the board and pieces.
Windows 3.0 or higher required. IBM
($49.95). Circle Reader Service #6.
Microillusions, Inc.

Granada Hills, CA
DISCOVERY: This is a simple game of exploration and education that really inspires
kids to succeed. While the thrust of the game
involves the usual scrolling around, jumping,
climbing and picking up items (crystals, in
this case), the key to certain portions of the
puzzle is to listen to the digitized voice rattle
off a spelling word or a math problem (the
ship's security computer). To cross the barrier, the correct answer must be entered. For
educators, Lesson Expansion Disks are sold
separately. Amiga. Circle Reader Service #7.
MicroPlay

Hunt Valley, MD
MIDWINTER: "Cops in the Snow" might be
the appropriate subtitle for this 3-D import
from England. Full of all the polygon-filled
graphics that one expects to see in a high-end
import product, players take the first-person
perspective as they ski, hang-glide and snowmobile their way through destruction and
mayhem along humanity's last outpost of
civilization during a new-Ice Age. Very playable with a mouse and icon interface, the
large playing surface (and even larger rules
manual) will leave players exhausted for all
there is to discover. IBM ($49.95). Circle
Reader Service #8.
Space Tech Enterprises, Inc.

McLean, VA
FRANCHISE FOOTBALL LEAGUE — FANTASY FOOTBALL: For Fantasy Football fans,
this is one for the record book. Players have
complete control as they set up their leagues,
perform a "draft night," choose a starting
lineup, trade players, put players on waivers or
the injured reserve, etc. Updating the database
weekly is explained clearly (with an update service made available to purchasers) and statistics are always available. The FFL scoring system is fascinating and makes watching the
games each weekend infinitely more interesting! Just right for one's office or gaming
group. IBM. Circle Reader Service #9.
Three-Sixty Pacific

Campbell, CA
ARMOR ALLEY: Can you say "Rescue
Ranger?" If not, learn the name of Armor
Alley, because the classic helicopter strategy
game is back, at least in spirit! For one or two
players on the IBM (two players via modem),
players are pitted against each other (or can
play together in teams of two) in a combination of chess-like strategic planning across "no
man's land" and arcade action as they fly their
own air support. Macintosh users can have up
to four players connected via AppleLink. A
compelling classic with a new look and features, modem fans might want to make this
connection. IBM ($39.95), Mac ($49.95).
Circle Reader Service #10.
Velocity Development

Palatine, IL
JETFIGHTER II — ADVANCED TACTICAL
FIGHTER: Jetfighter II follows in the footsteps
of its predecessor as a state-of-the-art air combat game. The light source shading on sleek
aircraft flying through beautiful gradient skies
is impressive. Most impressive, however, is
night flight. The stars come out, lights flicker
in the cities below, office buildings loom out of
the darkness. It all looks great.

JF2 has a lot of depth for the veteran
gamer, but is very easy to get into for the
beginner. Carrier landings are very realistic
(i.e. very difficult). If the player can land on
the carrier in JF2, he knows he's good. There
are 125 missions which take the player
through the full range of capabilities of the F23 and others (dogfighting, bomb runs, etc.).
The aircraft at one's command include the F14, F-16, F-18 and F-23. IBM ($69.95). Circle
Reader Service #11.
Villa Crespo Software

Highland Park, IL
THE GOLD SHEET PRO FOOTBALL
ANALYST: This is for real football fans! While
everyone might enjoy the office pool or
second-guessing the handicappers, this
software puts serious number-crunching behind a player's betting "hunch." Users can custom-design their own prediction and trend formulas and do "what ir analyses for any occasion. With the statistics, formulas and handicapping features, this package includes every
statistician's dreams. Three methods for updating information are provided (manual, on-line
and subscription). IBM ($59.95). Circle Reader
Service #12.
Walt Disney Computer Software, Inc.

Burbank, CA
MICKEY'S JIGSAW PUZZLES: This delightful
program is designed for ages 5 and up, since
it allows children and/or their parents to set
the ideal difficulty level in order to succeed.
Fortunately, this time Disney has eliminated

the difficult copy protection entirely and put all
the pieces together for a quality children's
software package. With fifteen different puzzles
to choose from (which animate when completed as a "reward"), puzzle sizes range from
4 to 64 pieces. For smaller kids, a puzzle grid
can be shown or the puzzle can even be "silhouette" based, allowing tots to easily snap
Mickey into the place where his entire bodyshape belongs! Puzzles can be printed and the
Disney Sound Source is supported (with Mickey himself reading all the prompts, too!). To
top it off, even the box art is included as a
real jigsaw puzzle inside the box, just for kids!
IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #13.
Workman Publishing

New York
MY FIRST COMPUTER BOOK: Bialosky
Bear wants your kid! This package includes a
great piece of software for kids to point and
click away at. Music, painting, icon-driven "fill
in the blank" stories at the first grade level and
more are on the main menu for munchkin
amusement. VGA graphics are required and
the sound support will drive parents to despair
and kids to delight in no time! Better than the
software, even, is the primer book for little
kids, Bits, Bytes, Bugs & Bialosky the Bear
(How to Become a Hands-on Hacker). It's
everything about computer basics explained
simply enough for children (and many adults)
with storybook-style illustrations to help visualize the point. IBM, Apple II ($17.95). Circle
Reader Service #14.

pop corn Not Included IV

TITLE • Heart of China
SYSTEM • IBM
COPY PROTECT • None
PRICE • $59.95
DESIGNER • Jeff Tunnell
PUBLISHER • Dynamix
DISTRIBUTOR • Sierra On-Line
• Coarsegold, CA

by Charles Ardai
From the start, computer games have aspired to a style and
a degree of refinement best described as "cinematic." Only
with today's most sophisticated techniques are significant advances being made toward this goal. However, in adopting a
cinematic mode, today's games open themselves up to
criticism on a cinematic level. It is not enough to achieve
movie-quality software; one must also achieve quality moviesoftware.
It is from this critical standpoint that we will consider the
new generation of "Interactive Movies."
n 1930, China was not an entertaining place to be. Not even
twenty years out of ancient dynastic rule (and only two years
away from Chiang Kai-shek's bloody consolidation of power)
and barely a year before the Japanese invasion of Manchuria
that was the start of World War II, China was a center of international turmoil and a focus of conflicting and violent impulses.
Westerners found themselves the object of intense scrutiny and
resentment, while citizens of Asia's various countries faced growing internal hostility. The only people untouched by events were
the peasants in the remote heart of the country, living in the premodern conditions they had known for generations — and indeed, for the most part, in which they live today.

I

Heart of China could have been, therefore, a reference to the
level of Chinese society that passed through this moment in history essentially untouched by the storm brewing, and later
raging, off to the east. It could have been such a reference — but
this is not what Heart of China is about, even though it is set in
China in 1930. There are a good many peasants to be found in
the game and there is a general avoidance of the subject of
politics, but from the game's storyline one would never know

that China had ever left the period of warlordism that followed
the revolution.

switch control to Kate, when Chi and Jake are both temporarily
out of the picture.

Part of China

The challenges faced are both of the conventional adventuregame sort — how to get past castle guards, what to give Kubla
the Sherpa boy to win his cooperation — and some of the more
unusual variety. Among the latter are some conversations that
are as tricky to navigate as dense minefields. Jake generally has
to push the people he meets just to the edge of losing their
temper, their patience or their self-restraint. One push too many
and a quick 'Restore' is in order.

"Lucky" Jake Masters, an American flier cut from the Indiana
Jones mold, has to rescue a greedy industrialist's beautiful
daughter, Kate, from the clutches of a crime lord named Li
Deng. Along the way he has the help of a ninja named Chi and a
cast of supporting characters who generally do everything they
can once they hear who it is that Jake is rescuing. (Kate Lomax,
it appears, must be a cross between Mother Theresa and Kate
Capshaw, and is easily the best-known person in Asia, judging by
the number of characters who perk up as soon as one invokes
the name of "Nurse Kate.")
First as a twosome, then as a threesome (and sometimes as a
onesome), the player has to get Kate to safety. Making this difficult are the legions of goons Li Deng sets on Jake's tail and the
constant physical hardships involved in traveling from Hong
Kong to mainland China, from there to Nepal, from there to
Turkey, and from there to France on the Orient Express. There
are vicious snakes, dogs, cows and leopards in the game (all
right, the cows aren't vicious); there are planes, trains, tanks and
rickshaws; there are seedy bars, seedier bars and even seedier
bars; and there are plenty of opportunities for kicks, punches, gunshots,
swings to safety on pulled curtains and
other adventurous doings.
Does all this have anything to do with
China? It doesn't really, any more than
Tarzan and Heart of Darkness have anything to do with Africa. In fact, it may
have less, since most of the game is actually set outside of China. It is as
though Raiders of the Lost Ark had
been called "Heart of Egypt."
Aside from this quibble, however, Heart
of China is everything a good adventure
movie should be: fast-paced, tense, ingenious, witty, varied of locale and light
of plot. Above all, it is entertaining, with
all the amenities today's gamers have come to expect. (The
soundtrack is especially good.) It is as genuinely Chinese as a fortune cookie saying, but if one has to choose, it is better for a
game to be entertaining than authentic.
Wasn't it Confucius who said that?

Places in the Heart
There are three basic activities in Heart of China. One moves
from place to place by clicking on "Exit" signs that pop up while
scrolling the cursor around the screen; objects can be manipulated within a scene by clicking on them and dragging them in
and out of the characters' inventories; and one holds conversations with people met, selecting responses from multiple choice
menus.
All of this works quite smoothly, though the use of two different
types of inventory screen (one for manipulating objects on a character and the other for using objects to interact with the outside
world) takes some getting used to. When there are two or more
characters in the player's party, switching control is possible; this
also takes some getting used to, but it is crucial since each character has different skills. Jake can fly a plane, for instance, but
only Chi can speak Chinese. At one point, the player even has to

Except for a few high-tension scenes (and the game's two arcade sequences, more on which later), one can save the game
anywhere, even in flight between two locations. It is advisable to
do so (and to do so often) because, unlike some recent games
(particularly Lucasfilm's recent games), it is not only possible to
die in Heart of China, but almost impossible not to.
Not that any of the puzzles are especially difficult — it is rarely
hard to figure out how to correct a mistake — but players will
make mistakes and death is lurking around every corner, waiting
to pounce at Jake's first misstep. This is very much in keeping
with the high-adventure genre and adds tension to the game, but
players should be warned: when in doubt, save!
This is especially crucial at certain
points in the story where an innocent, ignorant act of neglect can lead to a nowin situation several scenes down the
line. Most memorable is the problem of
the two bags of medicine: after the first
few sequences in the game, Jake is in
possession of a bag of healing herbs.
(The game manual's handy walk-through
introduction will take the player through
its acquisition.) Chi starts the game with
a similar bag of his own. So far so
g ood....
However, when a crash landing in the
Himalayas requires one of the boys to go
for assistance while the other stays behind to help Kate, the one who stays behind needs both bags of medicine. The problem is that from the
moment one boards the plane to Nepal until the characters
separate, there is never a scene in which it is possible to transfer
the bag of herbs — all the intermediary scenes only permit conversation, not action. In other words, one has to transfer the bag
at some earlier point in the game, when there is no reason to
think that it would be more advisable for one character to hold
both bags than for each to hold one. There aren't many such
traps in the game, but there are a few and players have to be
prepared to fall into them.
(There is another troubling point about the Himalayan scene. If
Chi has both bags of herbs and feeds them to Kate, Jake
manages to find a villager. If Chi does not, Jake drops dead in
the snow. Why there should be a connection is unclear.
Shouldn't Jake's finding help be independent of whether or not
Chi is able to save Kate back at the plane?) There is also an aesthetic reason for copious saves. Dynamix has made real strides
toward interactivity in this game, and players who try to make it
to the end on one "life" will miss out on any number of Roads
Not Taken. Each time the player could have done something differently than he did, the game points this fact out with a "Plot
Branch" symbol. Returning to these points after finishing the
game gives players a chance to sample variant paths the story
might have taken. While there remains a single central plot to

which one has to cleave fairly closely, there are a number of points at
which one's choices lead one to different scenes and direct one toward
a (slightly) different ending.
There are a variety of immediate
endings, of course; one can get
shot by a guard, thrown in jail or buried in a snowdrift, for instance. If one survives to the very end, however, there are still a
variety of endings possible. Which one is actually seen depends
on how kind and how canny Jake has been throughout the
game. Does Jake end up rich or on the streets? Does he get the
girl? If so, do they live well or are they poor? It is all up to the
player.
This sort of interactivity is also developed in the game's conversations. Here, the player chooses Jake's responses from menus
of three or four possible answers, usually ranging from safe and
non-confrontational to dangerous and smart-alecky. There aren't
really as many possible conversations as there would appear to
be, but the conversation sequences are skillfully constructed to
hide the fact that one is always steered toward one or two central
lines of discussion.
The result of multiple solutions to puzzles, multiple plot
branches and intelligent-seeming conversations (one nice touch
being that characters remember how well the player treated them
the last time they met) is the feeling that one can determine the
course the game takes. This is an illusion, but a very agreeable
one, and a player who never goes back to test the various options is missing half the fun.
One further element of the gameplay deserves notice. This is
the pair of arcade sequences mentioned above. The first involves
driving a getaway tank from Li Deng's fortress to an airfield and
the second involves fighting bad guys, hand-to-hand, atop the
Orient Express. Both can be skipped by players who prefer their
adventure games untainted by action, but both are also simple
enough to be won by anyone with a little patience. Controls are
rudimentary, difficulty can be lowered or raised and the game offers what seems to be an unlimited number of tries to get each
sequence right. What could be more user-friendly?

Art of China
It should be obvious by now that Heart of China is not a very
hard game, nor a very long one. There is the element of
"replayability," but whether one wants to replay a game depends
on whether it is enjoyed in the first place. For all its good
qualities, Heart of China could still be a throwaway game; that it
is not is a credit to the stunning work that makes each of the
game's elements shine.
The music is excellent — this is noted above, but it cannot be
stressed enough. From the opening screen, the music immediately and firmly plants the player in the world of the game. Like
story and setting, there is nothing very Chinese about the music,
but it doesn't matter. The people this reviewer played the game
with whistled the music weeks after finishing the adventure. Next
thing you know, these games will have their own hit parade.
Not only is the music good, but it is always there, underscoring
every scene in the game, offering different music to suit different
locales and moods. In addition to the music, there are constant,
realistic sound effects to reflect one's actions. These are not
sporadic additions, sprinkled into the game like powdered sugar
on a cake — they are a substantial and integral part of the game
experience. Heart of China is one of the few games that really

use their soundtracks to full effect
and, frankly, the effect is quite
powerful. It is hard to imagine even
the CD-ROM version of the game
adding much in this area (except
for spoken text, of course).
The art is all digitized, either from
painted backgrounds or from live performers. Both sources are
well chosen. Though Andrew DeRycke, who plays Jake, is so
typical an adventure hero that he is a walking (and running and
leaping) cliche, the other actors bring delicious individuality to
their roles. A personal favorite is Demetri Liontos as the corrupt,
cringing despot of Kathmandu, but all the actors do a fine job of
keeping the fiction aloft. (Fred Ikeda brings a Jabba the Hutt
quality to master villain Li Deng that is really something to see;
and no one will want to miss the harem in Istanbul.)
Animation is at a premium, alas — one gets screen effects that
fake animation (pans, zooms, lateral movement of large portions
of an image) more often than one gets the real thing — but when
the real animation comes, it is well done and its effect is maximized. Master Wu's herb shop is basically a still picture, for instance, but the animation of her hand grinding herbs and handing out parcels gives the impression that the whole screen is
alive.
The final element of the game's artistry, and perhaps the most
important, is the scripting. Here, too, Heart of China shines. The
dialogue is clever and, sometimes, funny enough to make one
laugh out loud with much of the snap of good movie banter. It
never descends to the unfortunate excesses and desperate wit of
the game's documentation ("The Dink called Wallace Michael of
the popular news radio show, Tick, Tick, Tick."), and only occasionally to coercive sentimentality.
The story's plotting is top-notch, the puzzles are quite clever
and the character development that gets squeezed in between
bouts of action is credible. It is a pity that some of the most entertaining conversational gambits are ones guaranteed to win Jake
a punch in the nose, but heck, that's the way it is in life, too. The
story lacks the impact of, say, Raiders of the Lost Ark, with its
global consequences, but it is certainly on par with a movie such
as Tom Selleck's High Road to China, which in all other
respects is much this game's inferior.
If there is any weakness in the scripting, it is a minor one: that
the writers were unable to resist making meta-jokes that break
the fiction, such as when they lift a line and a situation from
Raiders ("Why'd it have to be snakes?") or when they allow
Jake to acknowledge that he is a character in a game. This sort
of gag was acceptable in the old days, and may still work in a
Space Quest or Leisure Suit Larry game, but in Heart of China
it just disrupts the fabric of game-reality that is otherwise woven
so finely. As Confucius did say, "He who works on a single
thread destroys the entire fabric." It makes no sense to insert
jokes if the cost is the player's suspension of disbelief.

Heart to Heart
Although lacking some of the astonishing effects of Space
Quest IV or the scope of an old Infocom game, Heart of China
offers a cinematic experience to be savored. It is a successful
entertainment, a challenging diversion and particularly a joy to
watch and to listen to. As good as Rise of the Dragon was,
Heart of China is better; and I, for one, would not be at all
averse to seeing further episodes in the Adventures of Jake
Masters.

Survey

C*R*P*G*S

Alternate Reality: The City
Datasoft

Review: #32 (November, 1986)

Computer Role-Playing Gam e Survey
by Scorpia

First of a proposed multi-game adventure,
AR: The City was a fascinating premise
that turned out rather poorly, especially in
the 8-bit versions. There was literally nothing to do beyond mapping out the city and
building up your character for the next
scenario. Of course, much was meant to
open up to you as later scenarios arrived,
but the total lack of any true goal turned
what could have been a really involving
CRPG into a tedious exercise in hack and
slash. A game for those with great persistence and patience.
Alternate Reality: The Dungeon
Datasoft

Review: #44 (February, 1988)
Second and last in the series, AR: The
Dungeon was a slight improvement, with
several little quests to be completed, assigned by an Oracle. However, the design
was very loose, and you could stumble on
quests without having been told of them by
the Oracle at all. A Devourer that showed
up to steal items when your inventory became too large did nothing to improve matters. Although there was a bigger area to explore, emphasis in the game remained
primarily on fighting. Better than the first
game, but not by much.
Ancient Land Of Ys
Falcom

W

en CGW asked me to do a survey of computer role-playing
games, it seemed a massive task.
There were so many of them! Or were
there? I started a list, which went quickly at
first. Wizardry, Ultima, Bard's Tale, Might
& Magic, the Gold Box series, Alternate
Reality, Wasteland, ummm... Elvira...
Hard Nova... ahh... hmmm... it's getting
tougher... quick, Scorp, the archives!

The compendium that follows is not all-inclusive. It would be nice if I had (and had
room for) an Amiga, Atari ST, and Mac in
addition to my old Apple and IBM-compatible. Unfortunately, that's not the case. I
can only talk about games I've played. So,
for example, Dungeon Master is conspicuously absent from the list; it seems to
be out for every computer except the ones
I have.

As it turned out, there weren't as many as
I had expected. It may not seem that way,
but it's true. Once the list was fully compiled, it presented an interesting picture.
There was a small cluster of CRPGs at the
dawn of the micro age (roughly 1978-82).
Then, aside from the occasional release of
a new Wizardry or Ultima, there was a
long dry spell that didn't end until about
1986.

Since such an overview can cover games
only briefly, I have included the issue (by
number and cover date) in which the particular CRPG was covered, either as a
review or as a "Tale." In some cases, the
game was not reviewed by me (hey, I can't
have a monopoly on all the action!); these
are marked by an asterisk.

That year marked the turning point in the
CRPG market, as suddenly publishers were
rushing to get such games out the door.
The pace has been accelerating since then,
with more of this genre appearing each
year (1990 was a banner year, with the
most new releases). That's why it seems
that CRPGs are all over the place; it's a fairly recent phenomenon that more or less
burst on the computer game scene.

Finally, a word about Foozle. This is my
generic term for the Ultimate Bad Guy (or
Gal) who is behind all the trouble. Invariably, Foozle is either an evil wizard or demon
who has unleashed the ravening hordes of
monsters that are making everyone's life difficult. Games that feature a Foozle almost always have a big battle with him (or her) as
the major goal of the game. These days,
there is a slight trend away from "Kill
Foozle" endings, but most CRPGs still include it as the "big moment".

Japanese import converted from game
machine to computer. Nintendo-style combat and graphics. A fairly simple entry with
a few puzzles to solve. Several tough battles
with major monsters (called "bosses" in the
idiom of arcade gamers), otherwise pretty
much a romp. Interesting mainly for seeing
what the Japanese do in terms of
lightweight CRPGs.
Bard's Tale I
Interplay

Review: 5.5 (November-December, 1985)
The initial game of the series is a combination of puzzle-solving and hack'n'slash set
up in a very linear approach. Dungeons
must be done in strict order for successful
completion. Getting started can be extremely difficult, and the game can be saved only
in one place, making for a certain amount

Survey

of aggravation. However, it does have many
points of interest, particularly in the puzzles,
and is definitely a game worth getting.
Bard's Tale

II

Interplay

Review: #38 (June-July, 1987)
Without a doubt, the worst of the series.
Combat reaches excessive and ludicrous
proportions, while the Death Snares are
nothing more than monotonous runarounds designed to frustrate and aggravate the player. The "big battle" is a
farce, with Foozle going down pretty quickly, but his guards taking many rounds to
dispose of. Boring and pointless about
sums up this one.
Bard's Tale III
Interplay

Review: /148 (June, 1988)
The series redeemed itself with the third installment, flawed though it was by several
seams in the game. Basically a sequence of
mini-quests, with the party visiting various
lands and times to acquire a variety of special magical items. All of this, of course, is
the prelude to the usual "ultimate combat"
at the end, which, unfortunately, is again
rather a letdown. The best parts are the
quests themselves, which have a slight "adventure game" feel to them, as the use of
different objects is often necessary to accomplish one's goal. Still too oriented
towards the "hordes of monsters" approach
to combat, along with spells of absurd
power, but otherwise worth playing.

critters) to stop the evil Myrtani from corrupting the eggs of good dragons. Standard
fare for the most part, although the final battle with Myrtani is wearisome rather than exciting. Cameo appearances by some of the
characters from the books is a nice touch.
Curse
SSI of the Azure Bonds

Sequel to Pool of Radiance, with a bit
more plot. Characters must rid themselves
of five blue tattoos that put them under the
control of evil forces. Improved combat
with fewer opponents per fight; no more hordes of critters to slow things down. More
linear than the previous game. Some interesting side bits, especially with the Rakshasa. For all that, it's still mainly
hack'n'slash leading up to the usual "Kill
Foozle" ending.
Dark Heart of Uukrul

Don't Go Alone

Review: #67 (January 1990)

Accolade

A standard dungeon-delving expedition
with some interesting points, not least of
which is the best auto-mapping feature in
any game to date. Combat is better
balanced, for the most part, than in many

Review: #42 (December, 1987)

SSI

Review: #78 (January, 1991)
A surprisingly enjoyable little game, using
the AD&D Gold Box engine with the addition of character skills. Typical plot of stopping the bad guys, but the atmosphere of
the old serials is re-created quite well. Side
bits connected to the main story add a lot
to the game; everything is related, one way
or another. Essentially a quick-playing
game, but fun nonetheless.
Champions of Krynn
SSI
Review: #70 (April, 1990)
First in the "Dragonlance" series, a slight
variant of standard AD&D, primarily in the
handling of magic. Go forth and beat up on
dragons and dragonmen (as well as other

Follow-up to Shard of Spring, pretty
much in the same style, but with an expanded engine. The world is larger, with
more to do, and dungeons now require
some puzzle-solving, but clues and directions on where to go or what to do are
scarce. Many improvements over the previous game, and an interesting plot, although combat is not as balanced as it
could be. The demon of the title is the main
foe, but the ending does not rely on the
usual "Kill Foozle" battle, which is refreshing.

Broderbund

Beyond Zork

Buck Rogers

Demon's Winter
SSI
Review: #53 (November, 1988)

Review: #63 (September, 1989)

Infocom

Infocom's only entry in the hybrid game
approach, its merging of CRPG with adventure does not mix as well as it should. Combat in particular is more a matter of getting
the "lucky hit" rather than damaging an opponent sufficiently over time to kill it. The
adventure portion is, of course, much better, as you would naturally expect from a
company famous for their adventure
games. So this one is really an adventure
game with some CRPG features rather than
a true hybrid.

thrown in with little coherence, covered
over with pseudo-Orientalism, and
developed into an extremely pointless
game. Deficient manual makes it worse.
Definitely one to avoid.

CRPGs of this type. Solving puzzles becomes important in the latter half of the
game, so this one is not for those seeking
only hack-and-slash entertainment. Has an
unusual ending for a CRPG (play it and find
out).
Death Knights of Krynn
SSI
Review: #84 (July, 1991)
Sequel to Champions of Krynn. This
time it's Lord Soth and his endless undead
legions of all varieties that are causing
trouble. Quite linear; getting to Soth is a
step-by-step process that needs to be followed carefully. However, you can take
time out to wander the countryside for interim adventures as the fancy takes you. The
showdown with Soth is standard stuff. Afterwards, two special areas open up for additional adventuring and goody-grabbing. All
in all, though, it's mainly just another chop'em-up.
Deathlord
Electronic Arts

Review: #46 (April, 1988)
Poorly designed, poorly implemented mishmash with a quasi-Ultima look. Everything
that could be taken from other CRPGs was

Review: #65 (November, 1989)
Boring trek through a haunted house.
Simplistic puzzles at best, when there are
any. Ill-described character classes, some of
whose functions are unknown. Magic is performed through the use of chemical formulae, the only point of interest in an otherwise dreary product.

Survey

Dragon Wars
Interplay
Review: #66 (December, 1989)

Eternal Dagger
SSI
Review: #40 (October, 1987)

Hard Nova
Electronic Arts
Review: #81 (April, 1991)

First of a proposed series, Dragon Wars
has a lot going for it: balanced combat and
magic (no mega-death spells), skill use, interesting subplots, and a battle with Foozle
that will not be of the "ho hum, over in two
rounds" variety. The only feature lacking is
conversations with NPCs. There isn't much
talking to be done here: most information
comes (as it did in Wasteland) from reading designated paragraphs in a separate
booklet. While the game does have a few
rough edges, overall it's a good choice
when you want something a bit more than
a standard slicer/dicer.

Sequel to Wizard's Crown, using pretty
much the same engine, with a few enhancements and minor changes. Not as good as
the previous game: Dagger is too weighted
towards magic use in combat, and opponents are far more difficult to dispose of,
making for lengthy battle sequences. Fighting in dungeons is especially frustrating. Interesting plot idea, but otherwise this game
is only for the patient.

Science fiction CRPG using an improved
variation of the Sentinel Worlds engine. Indoor locations are now fully graphic and
movement is no longer a tedious business.
Take on mercenary jobs for the Starkillers;
recruit a variety of NPCs along the way.
Good plotline with an interesting ending, allowing for two different ways of handling
the main problem. Plenty of combat (which
is well-balanced), with little of it random, except in space. Definitely worth your attention if you like space games.
Knights of Legend
Origin
Playing Tips: #69 (March, 1990)

Drakkhen
Infogrames
Japanese import with an interesting idea
but poor implementation. Take sides in a
war among dragonkind that also has
profound implications for the human race.
Odd combat style allows for little in the way
of tactics or even control during fights. Character movement is occasionally awkward
with people getting stuck at times behind
obstacles, or the party not following the
leader through doorways. Sparse documentation does not provide enough information.
Terrible character generation system requires creating the party together; one poor
set of stats and you may well have to start
it all over again. This one is only for the
patient.
Elvira
Accolade
Review: #82 (May, 1991)*
Beautifully graphic CRPG with many gory
close-ups; not for the squeamish or faint of
heart. This is true of combat as well, where
much blood goes flying as you fight your
way in and around the castle. Plenty of combat, using a variety of weapons and spells
(cooked up for you by Elvira herself with ingredients you have to find). Lots to do and
explore; this is a tough game and will not
be finished in a few sittings. If you don't
mind gruesome visuals, it's definitely worth
playing.

Eye of the Beholder
SSI
Review: #83 (June 1991)
First in a new series from SSI, this one features a totally new engine and graphics,
based on the Dungeon Master model. Excellent visuals and use of sounds to create
a "you are in a dungeon" feeling. Emphasis
is on puzzles over combat, a big departure
from the Gold Box series. The combat portion, however, needs work, as controlling
up to six characters during real-time fighting becomes unwieldy at times. Nonetheless, an impressive first effort that bodes
well for the future.
Fountain of Dreams
Electronic Arts
Review: #78 (January, 1991)
Horrid post-nuke loser with a quasi-Wasteland interface. Inane plot, ridiculous combat, terrible ending. Not worth anyone's
time or money.

Tactical wargaming with a thin veneer of
role-playing. Well-done backgrounds and
NPCs are buried by the weight of incessant
combat: twenty quests, all in the same
mold (bring back an item stolen by some
type of creature), tend to become tedious
after awhile. The game emphasizes battle
techniques over all else. Only wargamers or
devoted hack'n'slashers are likely to enjoy
this one.
Legacy of the Ancients
SSI
Review: CGW #43 (January, 1988)
CRPG in the Questron style, with many
similarities. Not surprising, as it was done
by the same people. The only novelty is the
museum with exhibits you enter by depositing the proper coins. Plot is almost identical
to that of Questron II: destroying a scroll of
evil spells. Primarily a hack'n'slash epic of
moderate interest.
Legend of Faerghail
Rainbow Arts
Review: #79 (February, 1991)*
German import that should never have
crossed the Atlantic. Poorly translated
manual has several mistakes. Graphics are
ugly to tolerable. Combat is absurd: characters in the rear rank can be hit by opponents nowhere near them (opponents
that do not use missile weapons). There is
nothing new or of interest in the game; a
mediocre effort at best (the COW review
presents a quite different picture of this
game and makes me wonder if we were
looking at the same product).
The Lord of the Rings
Interplay
Review: #81 (April, 1991)*
Probably the best so far of the Tolkien
adaptations, though not without weak
points. Follows the first book (The Fellowship of the Ring) fairly closely in its main
aspects, but also has a lot of side stuff
added. The terrain covers a huge area, and
walking around can be a bit much at times
— especially as many things can be found
only by stepping on the right spot, which
makes for a lot of hoofing. Since new
material has been added to round out the
game (this being only the first of three
parts), those familiar with the original story

Survey

may find themselves a little bewildered now and then. It is best to
go through LOTR slowly and carefully; this is a big game and will
not be completed quickly, however
well you may know your Tolkien.

astonished at how quickly they
reach the typical "Kill Foozle"
endgame. Fewer dungeons to visit,
so the world seems smaller.
Monsters, of course, are even nastier than before, but the game can
be finished with characters of lower
level than usual. Still, the final battle is a toughie, and the final
rewards are very nice, so the conclusion ends up being satisfying, if
perhaps a little too brief.

Magic Candle 1
Mindcraft Software
Review: #58 (April, 1989)
CRPG in the late Ultima style,
with much trekking around and
gathering of information, as well as
multiple mini-quests to perform.
No endless stream of monsters or
extraneous combats; this is not a
hack'n'slash game. Careful notetaking is a must. Superior nonviolent ending; one of the few
CRPGs that does not depend on
"Kill Foozle" for the denouement.
CGWs Computer Role-Playing
Game of the Year for 1989, and
deservedly so.
Martian Dreams
Origin
Review: #86 (September, 1991)
Second in the "Worlds of Ultima" series,
using the same engine as Ultima VI. Visit
Mars in the 1890s. Nice re-creation of Victorian science fiction, with an interesting
story line. However, this is more an adventure game than a role-playing game, as
character stats have relatively little importance in accomplishing the mission. Overmuch walking about and backtracking, with
no means of easy travel, is a weak point.
Game demands patience and careful attention to detail, but is otherwise enjoyable.
Megatraveller
Paragon
Review: 476 (November, 1990)*
This computerized version of the popular
Megatraveller role-playing game comes off
rather poorly. Its most serious flaw is the
atrocious combat system, which makes
fighting an experience of excruciating
frustration. Much time must be spent in
earning money to get on with the game.
Nowhere near as good as it should have
been. Only for the devoted Megatraveller
fan with a high tolerance for exasperation.
Might & Magic I
New World Computing
Review: //36 (April, 1987)
Extensive CRPG, rivaling (possibly even
surpassing) the Ultima series in the size of
its world. Map-making is a must; expect to
have 50+ by the time you're finished. Plenty
to do besides cartography and exploration,
with many mini-quests to complete and puzzles to solve. One of the few in this genre
that has a nonviolent ending. Biggest difficulty is getting started, as combat in the
early stages is unbalanced. However, it's
well worth the effort.
Might & Magic II
New World Computing
Review: /157 (March, 1989)
Not as good as the previous game on

Pool of Radiance
SSI
Review: #49 (December, 1988)*

many counts. Worse is the excessiveness of
the combat, which turns this one into a
"Monty Haul/Monster Mash" extravaganza.
Weak plot padded with many extraneous activities, leading to a "kill Foozle" encounter,
followed by a real-time solve-the-cryptogram
finale. Graphics are much better, and the
party can be filled out with various hirelings, but overall, this one is only for the
devoted hack-and-slash crowd.
Phantasie I
SSI
Tale: 5.4 (September-October, 1985)
A surprisingly good little game, with many
interesting features: auto-mapped dungeons, multiple parties (only one at a time
can be out), dropping off of characters in
different towns, and monsters that can
(sometimes) be bribed to leave you alone.
Combat is a little weak, as party members
are strung out across the bottom of the
combat screen when fighting begins, but
this is not too serious a drawback most of
the time. Standard "Kill Foozle" ending, but
he is tough to defeat.
Phantasie 11
SSI
Review: #30 (August, 1986)
Tough follow-up to the first game. Almost
exactly alike in terms of engine and interface; the same manual is used for both I &
II (with a card to detail the few differences,
which are very minor). The world is smaller,
but the monsters are nastier, so getting
through this one will be hard slogging. Also,
this isn't exactly a "Kill Foozle" epic, and
the rewards afterward are fun and better
than in many games of this type. A good sequel to the previous game.
Phantasie III
SSI
Review: 438 (August-September, 1987)
This one closes out the trilogy, and is by
far the weakest in the series, even with the
changes to the basic engine. For one thing,
it is quite short, and players may be

Initial entry in the Gold Box
series; the game that started it all.
Multi-quest format, leading up to
the standard "Kill Foozle In The
Big Battle" ending. Has a more
open format than later games. Biggest drawback to this otherwise
well-designed slicer/dicer is the inordinate number of creatures to fight as the
game progresses. Combats become drawnout and tiresome, with no way to avoid
them or speed up the action. Patience (possibly of Job) required to get through this
one.
Prophecy
Review: #59 (May, 1989)*
Another of the Nintendo-style, single-character CRPGs, with a plot heavily borrowed
from Star Wars (your character is the son
of a Jedist, sent into hiding with relatives
for safety). Follow a chain of quests that
leads to the inevitable "Foozle Fight" at the
end. Fast-paced arcade fighting and magic
use (your character can use both magic
and weapons). A fun one for those who like
their action hot and heavy; those who
aren't into arcade-type combats, however,
may want to avoid this one.
Quest for Glory I: So You Wanna Be a
Hero
Sierra On-Line
Tale: #67 (January, 1990)
Cute hybrid of adventure and role-playing;
one of the few that are truly replayable. Multiple solutions to many puzzles, depending
on character class. Several different quests
in the game, but no overall "Kill Foozle"
plot, quite a nice change of pace. Great
graphics, particularly the animations. Lots
of humor. Essentially a beginner's game,
but can be enjoyed by all.
Quest for Glory II: Trial by Fire
Sierra On-Line
Tale: #79 (February, 1991)
Second in the series, this one is more
structured and linear than its predecessor.
Not as replayable, as many events are timedependent with little to do in between after
you've gone through the game once. Slightly harder than the first game, but not by
much. Save the home town of the Kattas,
and "Kill Foozle" at the end. Each "Foozle"
battle is different, depending on character
class, with the thief ending being the most

Survey

more oriented towards puzzle than role-playing, although there is a fair amount of combat to be done along the way. Not too difficult, but occasionally tricky. Good for filling in the hours while you wait for the next
real Ultima.
Scavengers of the Mutant World
Interstel
Review: #59 (May, 1989)

difficult and involved. Has one of the best
"reward" sequences around.
Questron
SSI
Review: #4.3 (June, 1984)*
Something along the lines of an early-U///ma clone (a license had to be obtained
from Lord British for this game to be published), but with its own points of interest.
Monsters roam the outdoors in specific
places and require particular weapons to
kill them. Travel is accomplished in a
variety of ways, including by ship, llama
and giant eagle (the most fun way to get
around). Three nasty dungeons to traverse
before the big one with Foozle. This one is
a bit old, but it still has one of the neatest
reward endings in the genre.
Questron II
SSI
Review: #50 (August, 1988)
Reprise of a familiar theme; pretty much
the same stuff as the previous game, although somewhat easier. Here you're out to
destroy the evil book of magic by going
back in time, a plot device rather reminiscent of Mondain and his evil gem in Ultima
/. Mainly hack'n'slash with some dungeondelving; no puzzles to speak of. Auto-mapping is available in some dungeons. Overall, not as good as the first Questron; this
one is a mediocre effort at best.
Realms of Darkness
SSI
Tale: #37 (May, 1987)
CRPG of only moderate interest at best.
March through various dungeons on little
quests, solving obvious puzzles along the
way. Not as well-balanced as it could be in
matters of combat. Extremely linear setup,
requiring completion of one quest before
moving to the next. Overall, a game for
beginners more than anything else.
Savage Empire
Origin
Review: #80 (March, 1991)*
First in the Worlds of Ultima series, using
the Ultima VI engine and graphics. Avatar
and friends are pulled by accident into a
jungle world and must find a way to get
home. This requires uniting a variety of native tribes who are all more or less at war
with each other. Like Martian Dreams,

tion relating to magic and occupations.
Overall, good for a change of pace, if you
can stand the arcade "thing" and get the
hang of the magic system.
Space: 1889
Paragon
Review: #80 (March, 1991)*

Another post-nuke disaster that should
never have seen the light of day. A game
with ugly graphics, incredibly awkward interface, killer-dungeon mentality and truckloads of aggravation. Pass it by.

Paragon's attempt to bring this paper RPG
to life falls flat on its face. Uninspired
graphics, disorganized plot, irksome interface, terrible combat system, and humdrum
ending. While not a total disaster, it is likely
that only the most hard-core Space:1889
(paper version) fans will enjoy this.

Secret of the Silver Blades
SSI
Review: #75 (October, 1990)

Times of Lore
Origin
Review: #55 (January, 1989)

Sequel to Azure Bonds. The party is summoned (sans equipment) to help a mining
town besieged by monsters in the mines.
Of all the Gold Box games, the most combat-intensive and also the most boring.
There is virtually nothing to do but kill almost everything in sight. For hard-core
slicer/dicers only.

A minor CRPG in the Nintendo style,
notable mainly for the use of an icon interface and simplicity of play. This one is essentially for the beginning CRPG player,
and is in fact a good introduction to the
genre if you haven't played anything like
this before, or found the more complex
games a bit bewildering. Experienced
players, however, will find little of interest
here.

Sentinel Worlds I: Future Magic
Electronic Arts
Review: #54 (December, 1988)
Interesting science-fiction CRPG, once you
get past the slow beginning; it takes awhile
before the good stuff starts to happen.
Good plotline, with several smaller stories inside the large one. Biggest drawbacks to
the game are the incredibly tedious indoor
movement system, and the terrible ending
("Okay, you won! That's it! Done, over,
next.") If you can live with that, this is a
good game to play.
Shard of Spring
SSI
Review: #33 (December, 1986)
Typical hack-and-slash romp as your
party attempts to retrieve a magical gem
(the shard of the title). Ramble across the
countryside and through dungeons (most
of which are small, except the final one).
Numerous battles, leading up to the usual
"big confrontation". This one is not bad for
its type, and better than some.
Sorcerian
Sierra On-Line
Yet another Japanese import, with an interesting feature or two. Instead of the usual
long adventure, this one sports fifteen
separate small quests. This allows for a certain amount of variety, and will appeal greatly to those who find the epic-type games
too much. The down side is the magic system, which is complex and unique, as
spells are not acquired directly by magic
users. Potions must be concocted and
items enchanted (which takes a long time)
in order for spells to be cast. Also, the action is arcade in style, which is typical for a
Japanese game, and some will find this
irksome. On the other hand, this is not just
hack-and-slash, as there are puzzles to be
solved along the way. The manual is thick,
but is skimpy on some important informa-

Tunnels & Trolls: Crusaders of Khazan
New World Computing
Review: #79 (February, 1991)
Perfect example of a good game gone
wrong (see the article for details on why
that happened). Poor programming and/or
playtesting allowed far too many bugs in
the game. Very loose design, with little direction for the player on what to do or where
to go. Unbalanced combat, especially late
in the adventure. Overall, a big disappointment; for the hard-core T&T fan only.
2400 A.D.
Origin
Tale: #44 (February, 1988)
Science fiction cartoon pretending to be a
real game. Hokey graphics and simplistic
play destroy any feeling of excitement or
suspense. Shallow, bland, and not particularly imaginative. Good for a summer afternoon or rainy day when you want something that isn't mentally taxing or especially
involving.
Ultima I
Origin
Review: #2.1 (January-February, 1982)
This first game in the series is truly epic
in scope: aside from a large land (with dungeons) to explore, eras pass from primitive
to high-tech, providing ever-better weapons,
armor, and transportation. There is even an
outer space combat segment! The basic
goal is to eventually go back in time and
destroy Mondain and his evil gem of power.
One of the first games of its time to have a
real outdoors; most in the genre were busily
pushing you through underground passageways. This game also introduced talking to people to pick up clues, although in
a much more rudimentary form than the
current Ultimas. Biggest problem in the
game (which was not really fixed until IV) is

Survey

the unbalanced combat system. Otherwise,
a classic not to be missed.

tions that are less combative in spirit, a
trend that has continued through Ultima VI.

Ultima ll

Ultima IV

Origin

Origin

Review: 3.2 (March-April, 1983)*

Review: #25 (January-February, 1986)

In this game, Lord British began tightening up the design. Here you're after Minax,
the protege of Mondain. There is still some
flying around in space (which could well
have been omitted), and moongates are introduced for the first time, but there is also
considerable scaling back in the structure,
with a trend towards more plot. Aside from
the uneven combat, and the fact that dungeons tend to be extraneous excursions, a
good sequel to the original game.

Still my personal favorite of the series.
The only game on the market where personal development of the character, beyond
mere fighting skill, is the heart of the plot.
This theme makes the game occasionally
difficult for those who are only used to the
typical slicer/dicer where the sole matter of
importance is the body count of monsters.

Ultima III
Origin

Review: 3.6 (December 1983)
Best of the first trilogy. Time travel and
space stuff have been dropped; the emphasis is on fantasy alone. Plot and structure are more developed. First Ultima to feature party adventuring, with a group of up
to four, and a revised combat system with
individual depictions of monsters and characters. Destroy Exodus, offspring of Mondain and Minax, in a surprisingly quiet and
nonviolent fashion. This marked the turn of
the Ultima series away from the standard
"Kill Foozle in a Big Battle" ending to resolu-

Structure is very tight, but the format is
open: this is by no means a linear game,
and you have much freedom to roam and
explore. Combat is better balanced here
than in previous Ultimas, so even the beginning character alone is in no danger of
being trounced by over-powerful opponents.
A class act throughout.
Ultima V
Origin

Review: #47 (May, 1988)
A more somber theme prevails in this
one, with the land of Britannia crushed
under laws enforcing pseudo-virtues. Lord
British is missing, and the Avatar is called
back to set things to rights again. A worthy
follow-up to the previous game, although
the manual is surprisingly poor, omitting
much basic information of importance. The
Underworld is likewise a disappointment,
being vast but essentially empty, and rather
a tedious place to move around in. The
structure of the game also seems a bit
loose, and there is a slightly unfinished feel
to it. For all that, Ultima V is the logical
continuation of the previous game, with an
involving storyline, and is not to be missed.
Ultima VI
Origin

Review: #71 (June, 1990)
The ground-breaker that ushered in a new

Survey

era in Ultima graphics, with a world and interface so completely different it comes as
a shock to veteran players. The size is
single scale, with no more "zoom-ins". Virtually all items are tangible and can be
manipulated some way or other. Overall,
the real-world feel to this one is astonishing,
and takes a little getting used to. This is enhanced further by putting all the monsters
in dungeons, so that combats on the surface are few and far between. The plot
wraps up the first trilogy, as well as the
second, reveals the secret of the Codex of
Ultimate Wisdom, and provides some lessons on getting along with those who are
different. The weak spot is the middle portion and the hunt for the pirate map, which
is more a time-waster than anything else.
Regardless, this one is definitely worth your
time.
Wasteland
Electronic Arts

Tale: #48 (June, 1988)
Really the only decently-designed postnuke game on the market. Desert Rangers
investigate strange happenings in the
deserts of Arizona and discover more than
they bargained for. Bang-up ending, although not exactly in the "Kill Foozle"
class. Interesting subplots, with multiple
solutions to many situations. Emphasis on
skills (although this part was not as well

thought out as it could have been) as well
as stats. Has, perhaps, more combat than
is really necessary, but fighting is better
balanced generally than in many games of
this type. A good one to choose.
Wizardry I: Proving Grounds of the Mad
Overlord
Sir-Tech

Review: #2.3 (May-June, 1982)
The original classic, and the first CRPG to
give you a full party of individuals to control, instead of the usual single character
roaming alone in dangerous places. Also
the first to provide for heavy-duty magic
use, with reams of spells for mages and
priests. Delve into a ten-level dungeon to
retrieve Trebor's (the Mad Overlord) amulet
that was stolen by Werdna. 3-D
point-of-view, with mediocre graphics: walls and
floors are line drawings without color or
decoration; no visible objects on-screen
(stairs, for instance, have to be stepped on
to find out they're there); static monster picture (although in full color) during encounters. All-text combat resolution.
Of course, Wizardry was never noted for
its graphics, but for the quality of its game
play. Moving through the dungeon levels
was exciting, and occasionally frustrating,
thanks to Dark! areas (where no light
worked), Fizzle! areas (where no magic
worked), spinners, teleporters, pits, and

other nasty contrivances, not to mention all
manner of hostile critters. This was in addition to the tricks and puzzles, most of
which were solved mainly by having the
right item equipped, and a host of
mysterious magical objects whose uses
were determined by trial and error. While
mainly hack-and-slash, it's still a grand expedition, even today.
Wizardry II: The Knight of Diamonds
Sir-Tech

Review: #2.4 (July-August, 1982)
Disappointingly weak follow-up. Tiny (comparatively) dungeon with only six levels.
Pick up the pieces of the Knight of
Diamonds armor that are scattered around
through the dungeon. Playing Wizardry I
first is a necessity, as characters must be
imported in from that game. Nothing really
new or innovative to be seen here, although
the non-Foozle ending is a nice touch; best
for the hard-core fan only.
Wizardry III: Legacy of Llylgamyn
Sir-Tech

Review: #3.6 (December, 1983)*
This one is not a true sequel, as you start
out with level one characters. Essentially,
Legacy is Wizardry I all over again, with a
few bells and whistles added. The object is
to obtain the Orb of Llylgamyn from the

Review

A Triscuit, a Troika
Three Flavors in Paragon's Puzzle Trio
by Matt Taylor
TITLE:

Troika

here are certain advertising practices which
SYSTEM:
IBM (with 640K)
N PLAYERS:
1 (or 2 in "Rebel Planets")
are simply, to say the least, disingenuous.
PRICE:
534.95
One of them is comparing a (Russian-born or
COPY PROTECT: Documentation Look-Up
DESIGNER:
Dima Pavlovsky
otherwise) puzzle game, especially undeservedly,
PUBLISHER:
Paragon Software
to Tetris. The box copy for Troika boasts "three
Greensburg, PA
times the fun of Tetris." Tetris was a ground-breaking mind-boggler that spawned scores of sequels,
noyance: there is no provision to describe which file is which, so
prequels, spin-offs and rip-offs because of its uniquely addictive
better keep pen and paper handy.
play. Troika, in contrast, offers three different games: "Metal
Ivan suffers from several fallacies. First, the objective is to comHearts," "Ivan's Time Machine" and "Rebel Planets." All three fall
plete all ,the levels, but there's no way to know how many
into the puzzle/action genre, with planning as much as thumbremain. There are multiple paths, but the option screen map is
twitching required for success. The documentation is satisfactory,
an incomprehensible collection of Really Big Numbers which
and even goes so far as to spin some ridiculous background
communicate diddly-squat. Second, while it's based on a sound
tales. The graphics are functional, as are the PC sounds, but not
concept, there isn't any provoking new material. This lack of
much more. A mouse is recommended, but not required, for two
"oomph" may lead some to the conclusion that Ivan plays close
of the games.
to a shareware game.

T

Metal Hearts Can Be Broken
First on the list is "Metal Hearts," a puzzler in the classic Pipe
Dreams tradition. Inside a block grid are "Metal Hearts," blue
and green pipes, which are destroyed by connecting gold pieces
of tubing to them and shooting a projectile through the whole
shebang. The greens are optional and simply award extra points,
but the blues must be shattered in order to advance to the next
round.
All plumbers need pipe pieces, and these are to be had from
generators which surround the four sides of the grid. Just to give
the player a nervous breakdown, it's impossible to know which
variety (vertical, horizontal or elbow) will be produced.
Once formed, it travels down its side of the board until the
player decides to discharge it into a desired location. The elbows
may be rotated once they come to rest.
After a suitable network is assembled, a bomb must be blasted
through to demolish it. The destruction procedure is similar, only
a different button is pressed to launch a pipe as a projectile instead of as a building block. A limit is placed on how many
bombs may be used. If the grid fills up and there's no place left
to place a piece, it is automatically used as a projectile, thus hastening one's demise. Mistakes can be eliminated when the occasional destroyer appears, which kills a misplaced piece free of
charge. "Metal Hearts" looks similar to other track-laying titles on
the surface, but is really a totally original, fast-paced creation.

Smurfed in Time
"Ivan's Time Machine" is similar to a half-dozen (or more) other
block pushers which have played across computers and dedicated game machines alike. The main character, Ivan, is drawn
to resemble, well, a lovable, fuzzy Smurf. He's trapped in some
unknown time and space, and must flee across 100 boards. In
each level, he crosses from one end of the room to the exit(s),
and deals with the obstacles along the way. Tiles need to be
flipped, blocks moved and black holes avoided. With the cash he
earns, Ivan can purchase useful items at shops. Each stage is
progressively more difficult, and saves are allowed. One an-

Here We Zap Again
Those who thought they had seen the last of "Space Invaders"
need to guess again. "Rebel Planets" bears more than a passing
resemblance to those slide-and-shoot coin-ops of yesteryear, including Gorf and Galaga. As with the other entries in the Troika
collection, however, there is more here than meets the eye.
Players control a ship and its lone weapon, a small capsule.
When weighted by the capsule, the ship dives down, so the capsule must be released before the craft crashes. Once the drone is
fired, the ship rebounds and ascends, whereupon it recaptures
the capsule and begins the cycle again.
The alien targets aren't specifically hostile (i.e. they don't blast
out Hyper-Powered Photon Torpedoes or kamikaze into the
player's ship). So, how does one bite the anti-matter? The
aforementioned capsule must strike either the topside or underbelly of the alien, or it will be destroyed (and with it the ship). As
can be surmised, expert timing is necessary. Once killed, the
enemies may release bonus items, including cash, Stoppers
(freeze the capsule in mid-air at will), Shifters (alter the flight of
the capsule), extra lives and Rockets (fired from a separate instal
lation as supplemental weapons). There are three "rebel planets"
to conquer, and a password is awarded after each is completed.
Overall, "Rebel Planets" didn't run shockwaves through this zapmeister or even prove more than mildly engaging. It is a new
twist on an old theme, but not much of one. It takes more skill to
master this game than it would to accomplish the same level of
expertise on a typical console shooter, but it spirals downward
into the horrid pit of repetitiveness pretty quickly.

What Good's a Troika?
Although each of the offerings has a certain merit, this reviewer
only had eyes for "Metal Hearts." All are structured in a
reasonable, user-friendly way, with a save, password or stage
select. Yet, one cannot help but think that, even with three
games in one, Troika may be an interesting product, but it
doesn't come close to Tetris.

Industry News

Rumor Bag
by Sal "Shifty" Rizzuto
tell ya, it's not easy runnin' around
But I digest... dis rumor
the country with a bag over youse
guy has either overhead and tryin' ta glean dis rumor and
dosed on Norm Crosby
dat rumor from dese or dose circumstanconcerts or been reading
tials in which one finds oneself when one
Robert Asprin's M.Y.T.H.
is not particularly circumscribed to one's
Inc. in Action and da
own personal safety. To wit, dis rumor
Damon Runyonesque
guy was following dis zig-zag pathway tru
speech pattern managed
da terminal at McCarron Field. Da
to stick. Of course,
reasons fer dis circumstantial was dat he
speaking of the unbufhad grievously offended a particular busifered Asprin, did youse
ness type wit da rumors dat dis rumor
know that da first Ulguy was spreadin' and in da actualities of
tima novel, Forge of Virda situational, was avoidin' a "hit" in da
tue, was written by da
opposite of da intended meaning from
mythmanager's spousal
whence da computer game industry
persona, Lynn Abbey?
usually refers to said propositional.
Da Asprin-dispenser says dat dere are
gonna
be more Ultima books and even
So, I'm tip-toeing past da banks of slot
put lolo in da latest Myth book.
machines in da terminal and wondering

I

why my editor had published my innocent remark dat RAW Entertainment
was thinking about publishing a game
called Warfare in da magazine's CES
report as though it was a done deal. Da
magazine is usually so perspicacious in
determining da actual situational before
going to press, but dis time, da editor
messed up and da specialized employees
(sometimes ungratuitously referred to as
"kneecappers") were attempting to use
dis rumor guy's head as da place to
plant da exclamation mark when dey
say, "Don't do it again!" So, how dey
gonna react when dey find out dat the
MS-DOS versions of all RAW's wargames
were listed as being from da European
publisher instead of da one in da States.

To make a long story even longer, I
make my way past da baggage claim
with da fancy screens toutin' da hot
shows on da strip (not ta be confused
with the strip shows at some of da places
what cater to da less perceptible clientele) and on to the cab stand. Just as
youse favorite rumor mongrel gets to da
cabs, dis cop starts hassling da driver
about his hack license. Licenses are
strange things, ya know. I heard dat
Kesmai's multi-player MechWarrior
game may get a new attribution due to
Mediagenic opting not to renew da
BattleTech license. Dis must be renewal
time, 'cause Interplay has allowed
Neuromancer to go out of print rather
than to renew da license. Come to
cogitate on da propositional, dere is a
lotta talk in da industry about Sierra
showing a concerted interest in da classic Infocom games, but we don't know
whether dis would be a purchase to
remake da games with graphics or a
license to republish da games with
several games on a disk.
Da cabbie and da cop manage to solve
dere problem and I happily hop in da
cab, mutterin' something about a cabbie's taxi bein' his castle. So's he hits da
brakes and asks me how I know dis tidbit he just heard from an Interplay salesman. "What tidbit?" I ask in all innocence.
"You know," he says, "about Castles 2."
I was sure da joker was talkin' about
the first and second campaign disks da
company is about to release. Dere supposed to have new plotlines, new
economic features, new combat features
and da additional of new graphics. He cor-

rected me, howsomeever, to
indicative that he was talking about a completely new
product, set in a new
geographic locale.
We pulled away from da
cab stand and I failed to
notice dat my pursuers were
entering da cab immediately
behind us. My eyes were
pulled upward by the
whoosh of a low-flying plane
and I remembered what I
had been told at Electronic
Arts. It seems dat EA is
doing a flight simulator for
the Sega Genesis machine,
complete with polygon-filled
graphics; HUD with dynamic
gauges; red-outs and blackouts; day and night missions; in-air refueling; carrier- and land-based missions and
four theaters of war (USA, USSR, Iraq
and Korea). Da game's attribution is F-22.
I told da cabbie and he turned out to be
a veritable sprout of information about
computer games. He told me dat Villa
Crespo and Ninga are publishing a
combo pack of da Canadian company's
Backgammon and da U.S. company's
older Poker and Blackjack games.
He even bespoke da fact dat Buzz
Aldrin, one and da same with da personage what walked on da moon, is supposed to be doin' a space race simulation for Interplay. Da idea of da game is
dat da player will make the economic
decisions concerning the cold war situational and da play would be integrated
with video and audio footage from da
era. Da design team is reputed to have
ten years of NASA experience.
I happened to look to da rear behind
my august personage and spot dat da
aforespoken kneecappers in da cab behind me. I told da cabbie dere was an
extra C-note if he could lose dose guys
and he proceeded to show me da back
roads of Vegas like I never knew dey existed. All da while, da cabbie was talking
about all da spies what he has conveyed
in various and sundry situationals. So, I
told him dat Robin Antonick (original
designer of John Madden Football) was
working on a game to be called Shadow
Presidency, da game of realistic presidential politics where da shadow government
may be more real dan da visible one. Antonick is working with a doctoral student
in International Policy and Diplomacy
what really knows where da bodies are
buried. Speaking of where da bodies are
buried, dose guys weren't givin' up.
(To Be Continued)

Behind the Screens

Rising Out of the SCUMM
The Evolution of a Lucasfilm Graphic Adventure
by Johnny L. Wilson

omething of the distinctive humor
associated with the early days at
Lucasfilm Games may be
captured when one realizes that all of their
graphic adventures are built from a set of
tools named after body fluids. The system is called SCUMM and it is presently
in its fifth incarnation, complete with
SPUTUM (the interpreter for the language), FLEM (the code used to identify
objects and set boundaries where the
character can and cannot walk), BILE
(the cel-based animation emulator which
uses separate boxes to control each
body part of a given character) and
more. Given the fact that even the
software tools used to build the games
have such colorful names, CGW
wondered what the real story might be behind the production of a graphic adventure at Lucasfilm.

Corporal Acknowledgement
Once upon a time, designers only had
to convince a couple of persons that a
game was worth doing. Now, Lucasfilm
Games has grown as a division from
under 25 employees to over 100
employees and the process is somewhat
more rigid. Now, would-be designers (no
matter how experienced) must convince
a majority of the division's directors that
a project is worth doing. They formally
present a design document to Howard
Phillips (Creative Director). Howard is
charged with sharpening the design concept and will probably consult with Noah

Falstein (Associate Creative Director) at
this stage in the process. Then, knowing
how many projects the company can
feasibly have on the boards at the same
time (sometimes called "slots"), he
presents the best options to fill those
slots to two other key persons in the company: Lucy Bradshaw and Kelly Flock.
Then all three consider the merits of the
proposal.
Howard is primarily concerned with the
technological and design side; Lucy is
primarily charged with targeting resources in terms of logistics (i.e. can the
project be done within limitations of
budgets, personnel and scheduling) and
Kelly is primarily focused on marketing
possibilities and positioning. Once this informal triumvirate is convinced of a
game's viability, the proposal is taken
"upstairs" to Doug Glen (General
Manager) and his financial experts. If all
systems are still "Go," a schedule is
"built" and the full design concept is
fleshed out.
Building the schedule and fleshing out
the design concept requires recruiting the
full team, deciding on rough due-dates
and coordinating between artists and
scripters. A Lucasfilm team usually consists of one project leader, two to three
scripters, three to four artists and two

composers. Everyone does not work on
the project throughout the entire course
of the schedule, so the finished game
averages about eight man-years
(equivalent to one person working fulltime for one year) per product.
Building the schedule may be somewhat simpler than it sounds, however,
since it is based upon rough averages. If
a Lucasfilm adventure game is to have
100 locations (called "rooms" in honor of
the early history of adventure games), for
example, one would schedule one to two
days per "room," simply on art.

Pass or Play
Lucasfilm adventure games are
developed in three "passes." On the first
pass, everything is programmed as quick
ly as possible. The second pass polishes
and "cleans up" the work performed in
the initial pass. Finally, the third pass
puts in the absolute finishing touches.
On the first pass, the pencil sketches of
the room may take as little as an hour
and a half to sketch, but by the time they
are colored in on the second pass, one
may have a full day invested in the work.
Once the pencil sketches are in for the
first pass, the scripters (sometimes affectionately known as SCUMMIets) take

Behind the Screens

over and "wire" the rooms. This means
determining the boundaries in which the
characters can walk, handling the
dialogue choices (either with real
dialogue or place holders), programming
objects (according to one programming
team, it takes about nine man-months to
program objects in the game, even with
object-oriented programming short cuts
in the latest version of SCUMM).
Lucasfilm is currently using two different methods to generate artwork for
the games. In Indiana Jones and the
Fate of Atlantis, the team is using the
classic Deluxe Paint method of painting
the backgrounds and characters on
screen with DPaint. Even in this method,
the first pass looks like pencil sketches
and the colors and details are "painted"
in at a later date.
In The Secret of Monkey Island II, the
artists sketch the original backgrounds in
pencil. They are scanned into a Sharp
Color Scanner in order to bring the picture in digitized form in Photo Shop (like
Deluxe Paint, another industry standard
used by virtually every publisher). Photo
Shop was originally developed by an Industrial Light & Magic employee, so it
is appropriate that Lucasfilm Games uses
the product. Photo Shop allows the artists to manipulate the backgrounds and
foregrounds in order to give the impression of depth. The digitizing process also
seems to soften the lines of the paintings
or sketches and give them a pleasant
finish. The Secret of Monkey Island II
also uses a gouache and colored marker
finish on the "painted" backgrounds to
create its rich, colorful palette.
Secret of Monkey Island II is using
Deluxe Paint Animator to create the
basic characters, since the design team
wants that animated style on the project.
Artists draw four frames for characters
who stand still, but have some "stage
business" with their hands. They use a
basic eight frame animation for those
who walk somewhere and sometimes
even more for special case animation
(those scenes which only occur once). In
the new Indiana Jones game, some of
the characters have been rotoscoped
from video-tape, using a frame grabber
in order to "naturalize" the walk. Even in
this technology, Noah Falstein says that
they have learned lessons about multimedia. "We found that we had a very
small window to work from with regard
to using natural light. After a certain time
of day, the shadows were too conspicuous to let us use the rotoscoping
technique. Now we know how movie
makers must feel."

To Market, To Market
Once everything is basically in working
order for the first pass, the programming
team and the artists are starting on the
second pass. However, this is really the
first time the marketing department really knows for certain what it is dealing
with. Some of the in-house employees
and their significant others get together
for a pizza orgy and play the game in its
black and white incarnation (with characters from other games walking through
the scenes). The pizza orgy is like a
talented focus group and may introduce
a few design changes at that time.
When the second pass is complete and
the colored backgrounds and some of
the animated characters are operational,
the marketing department really gets to
work. They start to take screen shots, get
betas to magazines like CGW, prepare
trade show demos and prepare for focus
group sessions. There is also, usually, a
second pizza orgy to celebrate the fact
that the product is coming together.
Gamers who complain about package
art and early advertising might take note
of what happens in which pass. The package cover painting is usually rendered
after the marketing department has seen
the first pass of the game. The back
cover is held until the second pass, to
get screen shots as close to the final version as possible. These boxes must be
printed three to four weeks prior to shipping if the packages are to ship on time.
Advertisements are started at the
second pass, as well. They have to be
designed and produced even faster, since
magazines typically have a three-month
lead time in order to get to press before
the cover date. Hence, any delays or
time changes after the ad schedule is set
may force the company to run ads
before the product is finished.

Afterthought
When Lucasfilm started the two newest
adventure game products, they honestly
believed that using the scanning technique would allow them to speed up
production. What they have discovered is
that it is a mixed blessing. The programmers can get to the first pass easier, but
there are trade-offs. The bad news is that
Lucasfilm adventure games will still take
nearly twelve months from concept to
conclusions, but the good news is that
Lucasfilm has more adventure games on
the drawing boards for next year than
ever before. Here's hoping our readers appreciate the process a little better after
reading this short synopsis.

Review

NAME:
U.M.S. II: Nations at War
SYSTEM:
IBM, Mac
REVIEWED ON: IBM (386-20)
# PLAYERS:
0 to Multi-Player
COPY PROTECT: None
PRICE:
$59.95
$29.95 (for Desert Storm scenario disk)
PUBLISHER:
MicroPlay
DESIGNER:
Ezra Sidran

U.MS

U.M.S. II: NATIONS AT WAR
by M. Evan Brooks

I:NationsWr s the second generation of desigi
ner Ezra Sidran's Universal Military Simulator — a wargame design kit and scenario generator for personal computers. With a broader scope than its antecedent, UMS II allows
both land and naval campaigns. However, due to contractual
obligations and publishing deadlines, UMS II does not allow one
to design his own scenarios. Instead, one must purchase the
UMS II: Planet Editor, currently in the final stages of production.
Thus, UMS II is a stand-alone product having three scenarios
(the Campaigns of Alexander the Great, the 1805 Campaigns of
Napoleon and an introductory scenario of Operation Overlord,
the Allied invasion of Normandy during World War II). A separate
scenario disk, Desert Storm, covers the recent employment of
U.S. and coalition forces against Iraq.
The overarching question is, "Can UMS II be all things to all
people or, in fact, has the game attempted to cross a bridge too
far (pun intended)?" This review seeks to answer that question.

Going by the Book
The documentation is professionally done and somewhat
voluminous. Special attention is paid to weather, logistics and national policy (often parameters overlooked in other simulations)
as well as the more traditional ground, naval and air movement
and combat. Much of the manual is devoted to design

mechanics, which is somewhat anomalous given that the
scenario generator is not yet available. Indeed, it appears that
the manual was printed before the game was published and, in
fact, that is true. The distributor, MicroPlay, needed the manuals
completed by October of 1990, although the game itself was not
published until later. Interestingly enough, the game's release occurred in this geographic order: Australia, New Zealand, Germany, Italy, France, the United Kingdom and, finally, the United
States.
Much of the manual provides interesting reading — on artificial
intelligence, design parameters and the historical scenarios.
Sadly, the game mechanics are not as clearly delineated, and the
lack of a written tutorial is sadly missed. While the scenarios are
interesting in and of themselves, there is a certain unfinished
quality to them: objectives are poorly defined, and no ending
date is given (Overlord ends on 31 August 1944; Alexander on
30 June 331 BC; Napoleon on 31 August 1805; Desert Storm on
26 February and 1 March 1991). The simulation can be played
by multiple players. In fact, most scenarios have more than two
entities (Napoleon, 6; Desert Storm, 12; Alexander, 16). Most of
these allies have a relatively minor role, but the documentation is
silent as to any of their roles. While most users would be aware
of the roles of Saudi Arabia or France in Desert Storm, how
many would have any idea of the role of Malli, the Sacae Minor
Kingdoms or the Kingdom of Musicanus in Alexander?

Review

Terrain Camouflage
Graphics are reminiscent of UMS I. Units are generally welldefined, and geographic locations easy to see. However, occasional use of glaring reds and blues can make the visual effect
somewhat disconcerting. Terrain views can be easily, albeit slowly, changed from seven-mile hex parameters to orbital. Similarly,
units may be viewed at division level through corps, army and
army groups.
The mapped terrain is a fascinating aspect of programming.
However, the orbital view appears to be reminiscent of a "Stupid
Computer Tricks" segment one might see on David Letterman,
in that the perspective is absolutely useless for anything (except,
possibly, impressing one's colleagues with what the program can
do). Usually, one will work through the corps level, and drop up
or down as the situation demands in terms of strategic and tactical considerations.

Nuts and Bolts
As noted above, the omission of a tutorial is troubling. However, the "Overlord" scenario is a relatively easy one to utilize for
comprehension of mechanics. Production, land, sea and air movements can be input by mouse or keyboard. The artificial intelligence may be easily modified in terms of diplomacy, behavior,
naval/ground emphasis, strategic posture, objectives, etc.
Units and their subordinate elements are easily accessed, although movement orders can be confusing. Special care must
be exercised when the Allied invasion fleet sorties out from Portsmouth; a broad objective may cause the computer to attempt a
land crossing by naval elements on a small island peninsula.
Battles may be viewed in depth, with a detailed battle report option. Unit reports may be hard-copied, as well as map locations
from different perspectives.

Warning: Writing to disk continually occurs in UMS II. Thus,
loading and playing a scenario also saves the changes to one's
disks or hard drive. One should immediately rename a scenario
upon loading so that the original remains available. Alternatively,
one can reload from the master disks every time that one wishes
to attempt another scenario.

Maneuver
But the critical question is, "How well does the simulation
play?" The operative word in UMS II is slooowwwlllyyyy. This
reviewer was unable to fully test out all scenarios because of
time constraints. On a 386 20-MHz machine, UMS 11 is very slow.
While Overlord is a relatively quick play (one to five hours), the
other scenarios take much longer. In a way, this is the perfect
family game — one can input his turn, go up for dinner with his
family, have a small after-dinner party, and return to the computer relatively confident that his next turn will almost be ready
to begin.
Certain software experts blame the slowness of execution upon
the use of floating-point mathematics; designer Ezra Sidran notes
it as a function of how much the computer is attempting to do in
terms of mapping, strategy (30% of the source code is based on
a heuristic computer Al) and, most of all, on the inherent limitations of the MS-DOS machine. Since an MS-DOS machine can
only access 640 kilobytes at a time, Mr. Sidran feels that this accounts for much of the delay, and that execution is faster on the
ST, Amiga and Macintosh machines. Whatever the reason, there
is no question that UMS II is not a quick play.

Review

UMS II was contracted by the UK arm of the publisher. When
the domestic parent corporation marketed the product, there
seems to have been some dispute between it and the designer.
Currently, the latest version is 1.2.6 (dated 5 June 1991) and it
runs 40% faster than earlier versions. However, the newest versions are available only from the designer. The distributor contends that the later revisions have not been thoroughly playtested and are subject to crashes. The designer disputes this and
makes the latest revisions available to customers who send in
their older disks. Whatever the situation and whoever is at fault,
the end-user ends up paying the price.
There are some quirks in play. For example, victory conditions
are based on outnumbering the enemy force as well as destroying his "national will" (generally by seizing a capital). While UMS
II allows one to modify victory conditions as well as virtually
every other parameter of warfare, a cautious Allied player in
Overlord can win by simply sitting in England and building up an
army. At the conclusion of the scenario, his forces outnumber
the Axis, thereby giving him a "win." Such a result does not unduly alarm this reviewer, since such a strategy is only suitable for
REMFs. But what is worrisome is the fact that Paris is the Axis
strategic locus. An Allied airborne division using a lightning
thrust can often reach this objective within four days following
the invasion. Seizure will result in an Axis surrender, notwithstanding the fact that an Allied unit attempting to break out of Normandy without supplies would have quickly been overwhelmed
by its inherent lack of logistics.
Operation Desert Storm is obviously topical. Having recently
returned from Kuwait City and active duty, this reviewer was
naturally interested as well. By popular demand, Scud missiles
are present and they target military targets. Watching the 1980s
version of a V-2 rocket destroy the 24th Mech Infantry Division
simply destroys any credibility of simulation. The Scud is a terror
weapon, suitable for employment against civilian targets. Its
value against military targets is minimal. This reviewer recommends a quick adjustment to the Scud potential, wherein they
are eliminated or made combat ineffective. The overall order of
battle is adequate given the information available as of the time
of design. But overall, Operation Desert Storm does not have a
real potential for simulation.

Pass in Review
UMS II is not a design kit; release of the "Planet Editor" will fix
this problem, however. An early look at the editor reveals it to be
a detailed "paint" program. Assuming that one wishes to do the
necessary research to determine an interesting battle, detail in all
the geographic and military parameters, then a semi-viable result
may ensue. This reviewer feels that the end result may not justify
the enormous time and expenditure of effort required.
This simulation won two "Academy of Game Critics" Awards at
the 1991 National Wargaming Convention, Origins. Given with
tongue in cheek, the garnered trophies were the "Bulk Eraser
Award" and the "Most Superfluous Enclosure in a Game Package" (in this case, the disks). This reviewer does not fully concur
with these awards. Somewhere, there is a game in UMS II — the
difficulty lies in ferreting it out.
This reviewer would like to quote from his initial review of UMS
/ (CGW, No. 51, September 1988, page 39). "Overall, UMS is impressive, but its flaws are apparent.... This first generation simulation is an interesting design; its third or fourth generation descendant may prove essential." UMS II is the second generation; this
reviewer stands by his original prognostication.

Sneak Preview

rigin Systems has a "Wall of
Fame" along one corridor of their office complex with an amazing
variety of letters from Ultima players. One
letter is a touching plea from a little girl of
elementary school age. Having played Ultima VI, she asked Lord British to please
remove the gargoyles because they
frightened her. The letter has a particular
poignancy because Ultima VII: The Black
Gate (U7) will be even darker and, hopefully, more frightening than Ultima VI. The
latest chapter in the Ultima series Is not
and cannot be a product for that innocent
child who was so frightened by the gargoyles. This chapter in the saga of fabled
Britannia explores the depths of ultimate
evil, a subject matter well suited for its "MP13, for Mature Players" rating.

O

Probing the Depths
by Johnny

I've Got a New Altitude
U7 throws readers into the midst of a complex story, an enriched game world and
numerous ethical dilemmas. The game is
designed so that experienced Ultima
players can take nothing for granted in the
latest installment and novice players can
simply leap into the game. The game does
not begin with character creation. That
would be irrelevant to the story, since 200
years have passed since the last installment. Rather, the player as avatar is drawn
into the story from the outset by being challenged by the guardian and thrown into the
streets of Trinsic (the initial locale which, of
course, is inTrinsic to the overall plot).
On 386 processors and faster, players will
experience a full-screen world from the outset. Players still direct their characters from
an overhead perspective, but the terrain is
very different. U7 is no longer tile-based.
Now that the program requires a hard
drive, the landscape graphics do not have
to be stored as efficiently as was once the
case.
The world is made up of layers of terrain,
programmed so that any locale or object
can be at one of sixteen different progressive altitudes. The altitude factor enables
the game to offer multi-storied buildings in
which characters can actually be seen climbing the different altitude levels to the upper
floors. This capacity also makes mountains,
hills, swamps and other terrain features
function more realistically in the game context.
In addition, all trees, cacti, swamp scum,
etc. (carefully rendered by Bob Cook, a
true perspective landscape artist hired
specifically to give U7 an incredibly authentic look) are handled as three-dimensional
objects, so characters actually move
through a three-dimensional world. There
are three-dimensional spatial collision
routines in operation and the three-dimensional spatial imaging is extremely impressive. Add more than 1,000 operable objects
(some of which combine to form other
operable objects) and one has an extremely
convincing world. Herman Miller, an experienced programmer who has not only
played all the Ultimas, but is credited by

Lord British as knowing the world of Britannia as well or better than its "creator" himself, developed the data structures and
physical laws to support this sophisticated
object-oriented playing environment.
All commands are input via the two
mouse buttons available on an IBM mouse.
One mouse button represents the on-screen
character's feet and the other represents
the character's hands. A double-click on the
"feet" button will cause the character to find
the best path to a desired location on the
screen. (Zachary Simpson has done a
fabulous job with artificial intelligence
routines for "path-finding" optimal routes

for the avatar and "follow" code for the rest
of the party so that the characters neither
play "follow the leader" in a straight line
nor wander into dangerous terrain.) A
single click on the "feet" button directs the
on-screen character to walk a short distance in a straight line (as opposed to "pathfinding") and dragging the mouse while
holding the "feet" button causes the character to continue walking in the appropriate
direction.
In a similar fashion, double-clicking with
the "hand" button allows the on-screen character to "get" an object, while clicking once
on the "hand" button allows characters to

Sneak Preview

played by veteran "bad guy" Bill Johnson.
Johnson played "Leatherface" in The Texas
Chainsaw Massacre 2, and his character is
the only one in U7 who presents his lines in
full audio.
The process is very interesting, as this
writer discovered when he taped the lines of
"every guard in Britannia" for the CD-ROM
version of Ultima VI. Martin Galway, audio
director at Origin and composer himself (many of Ocean Software's
scores from a few years back and
Chris Roberts' Times of Lore
soundtrack), explained the process as
being a direct-to-disk recording.

of Ultimate Evil
L. Wilson

Origin's sound studio features absolutely no reverberation, due to the
fact it is covered with top-of-the-line
professional insulation. The actor
speaks his lines into the microphone,
and the data is captured in 16-bit form
at 32 KHz. It provides a "near-CD"
(which is 44.1 KHz) quality, according
to Galway and, with some effort, they
can even record at CD quality. Right
now, however, most of the data is
being used as 8-bit Sound Blaster
data, so recording at higher quality
would be superfluous. Martin edits the
sound samples to use the most signal
available and maximize the headroom.
Each line is stored in a separate
sound file and implemented later into
the game itself.

"use" an object. Dragging the mouse
while holding the "hand" button down
enables the character to drag an object from one location to the next.
So the bottom line of the new interface is the fact that the entire game
can be presented in "real-time" game
time. Off-line activities such as character creation are unnecessary and even
non-player characters are
programmed for changing jobs/activities on the basis of "real-time"
game time rather than the artificial
time-lines of Ultimas past. Conversations appear much more integral to
the game, appearing on-screen
without the artificial presence of a text
"window." Only the player character's
conversational choices pop up in an
artificial window. Inventory is handled
through a separate system, GUMPS
(the acronym for a "customized" windowing
system is a parody of the Steve Jackson
Games acronym for their Generic Universal Role-Playing System (GURPS). In Ultima VII, the GUMPS look like decorative
customized boxes, bags, crates and chests.
Such object-oriented containers are capable
of holding a limited number of items,
depending on the characteristics of the
items themselves.

The Color of Your Guile
There are also some graphic enhancements that will distinguish 07 from previous Ultimas. Besides being exquisitely
rendered under the direction of Origin
veteran Jeff Dee and his staff, one will
notice a depth of extra detail in the animation and portraiture. Former comic artist
Glen Johnson (see CGW #81, p. 67) has
brought incredible monsters to life and is
using his vivid imagination to help distinguish Ultima monsters from the standard
monsters of the CRPG and pen-and-paper

The use of digitized voice becomes
all the more amazing when one considers that it takes 192K for each
second of sound. That means less
than a minute of full-digitized speech
would fill the average 40MB hard drive.

role-playing genre. Johnson also draws
most of the figures for humans, animals
and monsters. Some of his DPaint files
look like a do-it-yourself computerized
"paper doll" set. The team also features hip
commercial artist Michael Pierce, a recent
addition to the staff who is impressing
everyone with his ability to create fascinating faces for the non-player characters.
Add to these touches the extra attention
to non-player character animation (each
NPC has at least 64 frames of special
animation compared to the average game's
eight frames of animation), the addition of
roofs which are visible whenever characters
are outside (and disappear whenever characters enter the buildings) and landscapes
with slopes and inclines. This gives one an
idea of how much the look of U7 has improved over its predecessors.

The Sounds of Violence
The soundtrack for U7 is a major project.
The Ultimate Bad Guy, the guardian, is

Bill Johnson is not the only horror
film veteran working on the Ultima VII
project. Dana Glover, a former
genetics instructor at the University of
Southern California, was ghost composer for such films as Hellraiser,
Misery, The Lost Boys and
Nightbreed. Now, Dr. Glover has
turned the dark overtones of his undead
keyboard toward the Ultimate evil of U7.
Dana has answered the challenge of computer game scoring beyond the call of duty,
but he has also instituted a major change
in production schedules at Origin for future
projects.
For example, Dana scored a marvelous
piece which progressively reflects uplift,
suspicion, pain, comfort and uplift. The
cycle is very important to the plot line and
the music effectively conveys the experience. Unfortunately, the original piece
has had to be edited down considerably.
This is because the current production
schedule has music and programming
functioning side-by-side. In the future,
Origin plans to use post-production musical composition, just like it is done in
Dana's film experience.
In addition to the score and direct-to-disk
voice-over, Origin's Marc Schaefgen has
been using Wing Commander 2 and UI-

Sneak Preview

tima VII to build a sound effects tool
set that will deliver even more versatile sound effects in the future.
Many sound effects in U7 feature
directional cues (wind direction,
shoreline, etc.) and two-part time-sensitive sound effects (drawbridge dropping at the player's machine's clock
speed, falling objects and others).
Nenad Vugrinec, a native Yugoslavian,
is also bringing to bear his experience
at developing sound effects for
animated features.

The Story of Blood
As usual with a sneak preview of an
Ultima, it is difficult to speak of the
story without giving too much away.
Suffice it to say that not only has the
technology of the game changed, but
Britannia is significantly changed in
the world of U7. Avatarhood is out of
fashion, but the player character is still
the avatar. No longer is avatarhood
"checked" by the program, but there
are still those who know of the
avatar's past deeds. The trouble is,
not very many people believe the
player Is the avatar any more. Why, it
is even possible that the avatar could
have trouble convincing an artist of
one sort or another that he even
looked like the avatar of legend. Indeed, there might even be someone
else claiming to be the avatar within
the confines of Britannia. Hence, U7 is
not slated to be the kind of game
where everyone is instantly aware of
the player's reputation or even kindly
disposed toward the avatar if they are.
Sometimes it is good to be the avatar.
At other times, it is an inconvenience.

There's Know Business
Like...
It may be that the most significant
difference between U7 and its
predecessors is the way the nonplayer characters, the remainder of
the party and monsters are handled.
The bad news is the fact that the
player can no longer take control of
any member of the party except the
avatar. The good news is the fact that
non-player characters seem significantly more intelligent than those
of yesteryear.
The reason for the improved intelligence is that a considerable number
of man-hours have been invested in
the "artificial intelligence" of the nonavatar characters. In the "follow"
routine, the party takes a symmetrical
shape based on the number of characters in the party. It sorts the party
based on a "buddy system" and the
routine evaluates obstacles and terrain in
order to determine how to move. Basically,
the party will squeeze together to avoid nonpreferred terrain (like swamps) or obstacles
(like walls, rocks, cliffs and slopes) and
then return to the symmetrical formation
when it is possible. The design team spent
three weeks of using pennies and grid
paper in order to test out the algorithms for
this routine.
Another major "artificial intelligence"
routine was developed by Tony Zurovec.
Tony has developed combat routines in
which each character determines the right
approach based on its analysis of the combat situation. At times, the prime directive
will be to attack the nearest opponent; at
other times, it will decide that it is better to
attack the weakest or strongest opponents.
If one of the members of the party cries out
that he/she needs help or if a member is
knocked unconscious, the other members
of the party will protect the weaker, injured
member of the party. If the Al routine determines that the party has a speed advantage
over its opponents, it will perform a flanking maneuver. Also, under certain conditions, the NPCs in the party will go into
pure defensive mode or into berserk mode.
One vital mode that is often missing from
combat routines in CRPGs is the "Flee"
mode. Combat is not always to the death in
Ultima VII, since a person would have to
be crazy to keep thrashing away when escape was possible — discretion and all that.

Since characters who decide to flee are apt
to be higher motivated to get away than
those inflicting the damage might be to
chase them, the possible success of fleeing
characters is enhanced by applying a lower
movement cost (instead of requiring the
same six dexterity points per turn to flee
that the program requires for a character to
move, it only takes four dexterity points to
flee). Also, NPCs know when they are outnumbered and this will often offer motivation to get them to flee.
Another factor that enhances the reality
quotient of U7 is the fact that NPCs and
monsters have their own agenda. There are
specialized monsters with specific jobs. This
helps the player to understand why a
monster is in a particular locale instead of
merely expecting the automatic role-playing
assumption that there is always a monster
present in a particular locale.
The richness of the towns and villages is
increased by what Ken Demarest (the lead
programmer who has to make sure all
these neat routines and objects fit together
properly) and Lord British call "barking."
Barking is, like the patter of a carnival
pitchman, conversation uninitiated by the
player character. Unlike the pitchman's patter, this conversational gambit is not
directed at the player, but is intended to
add atmosphere and offer occasional clues.
Indeed, some of the "barking" is keyed to
what the avatar has already managed to accomplish in the game.

Then, there is The Guardian. He is a
bit of a problem. One automatically assumes that he is evil from the opening
set-up. He emphasizes a new age of
enlightenment and positions himself
as the new guardian of Britannia. Yet,
just when one is ready to write him off
as the incorrigible embodiment of evil,
he warns the avatar of danger around
the corner or offers a helpful suggestion. He
constantly keeps the player off balance in
terms of wondering if this guardian is merely functioning as a "Satan coming as an
angel of light" or if there might be some
truth in the guardian's position.
Indeed, what is the avatar to do with
regard to The Fellowship? It is full of honest
and good people who seem genuinely helpful. The druid who created the fellowship
was reputed to have done this with Lord
British's full knowledge and approval. Their
philosophy seems to be positive. The Triad
of Inner Strength teaches everyone to:
1) Strive for Unity
2) Trust Thy Brother and to know that
3) Worthiness Precedes Reward.
What could be the downside to such positive teachings? The avatar must decide
whether to join such a group or not.
In all, there are twelve subplots within the
main plot for Ultima VII, twenty different
town plots and 256 characters with conversations and dialogue in the game. Has Nicodemas, a mage from previous installments
who has now gone crazy, become a
menace? Who is this lovely Nastasshia and
what is her relation to male avatars? Was
the gravedigger of Empath Abbey lifted
from Shakespeare? In fact, which of the
characters are the thirteen contest winners
from the Ultima VI contest? It is worth finding out.
(Continued on page 47)

Review

The Hate Canal
by Alan Emrich and Gary E. Smith

Y

om

Kippur... the Day of Atonement... the Hebrew High Holy
Days.... No moment in modern Israeli history is more remembered than
those fateful October days in 1973. As
the temples were filling with the faithful,
so were the ranks of the IDF (Israeli
Defense Forces) as units were mobilized to meet the threat of Egyptian
and Syrian armies rolling across the
borders. Israel faced yet another hour
of possible extinction.

This is the setting for SSI's new computer wargame based on the 1973
Arab-Israeli war, Conflict: Middle East.
For one to two players (at the same
machine; no modem play is provided
for), Conflict: Middle East either
places one in the grim Israeli position
of fighting a devastating two-front war
or, as the "Overall Arab Commander,"
one must send large, brittle brigades
into the breach. The military challenges
presented are formidable for either
side. As the Israelis, one must hold narrow fronts to keep Arab forces from
flooding into the promised land while,
as the Arabs, one must be as the
spear, penetrating the Israeli frontier to
crush its very nationhood. Here, a true
test of generalship can be measured.

TITLE:
Conflict: Middle East
SYSTEM:
IBM
PRICE:
$59.95
COPY PROTECT: Document Check
DESIGNER:
Norm Koger
PUBLISHER:
SSI
Sunnyvale, CA

unit. Airborne assets can be dropped
by either side, but weather considerations can effect all aspects of combat,
with aircraft the most affected.

Countless as the Sands
Each army's basic unit of maneuver
is the brigade. In the 1973 scenario, for
example, Egypt has 63 brigade-type
units to Syria's 36 and Israel's 47. Unfortunately for Israel, many of their
units are "fort" and "garrison" types,
reservists best suited for static warfare.
One of the Israeli "aces" up their proverbial sleeve, however, is their rapid
mobilization and tactical unit flexibility.
The fact that they have some hellacious tank units doesn't hurt, either.

Across the Sinai in Less
Than 40 Years

This flexibility is a key element of
play in Conflict: Middle East. Arab
units can be chewed up and spit out
like date pits, becoming useless. Israeli
units, however, when ground down in
battle, can have their various component elements (tank, artillery, infantry, anti-tank, mortars, helicopters,
etc.) merged into other formations to
recombine into "combat effective"
units. Like Second Front, the "big
units" (brigades in this case) are made
up of several smaller formations, with
each of these troop types rated for
their own unique survivability (defense)
and maneuver lethality (offense) ratings.

Conflict: Middle East is a brigadelevel simulation with game turns representing a half-day of action (AM and
PM). The game is played on a hex-grid
map which covers an area from, basically, Damascus to Cairo (including a
portion of western Jordan) at 10
kilometers per hex. This scale really
gives a player some perspective on
how small the state of Israel really is
(slightly smaller than the state of New
Hampshire). Air assets in the game are
operated at an oversized squadron
level of five to thirty-two planes per

Conflict: Middle East compares with
a couple of previously published
games. One is SSI's own Red Lightning, from which much of the computer
mechanics have been taken (although
the addition of mouse support greatly
eases use of the interface). In fact,
many of the grievances that were hung
on Red Lightning's game system were
addressed and corrected in Conflict:
Middle East. Board wargamers from
the old school will find comparisons
with Conflict's (later GDW's) Bar Lev
game. With its wild orange-hued hex

Review

grid, the scale and unit density are virtually identical.

"Look! Up in the Sky!"
Airpower, although abstracted, is still
handled like the land formations (although rated individually, aircraft perform
their functions in squadrons). Though the
air operations can be toggled for computer control, players should not have
too much trouble managing this rather
enjoyable aspect of the campaign. Planes
are sent on various missions including interdiction, air superiority, air strikes and
close air support. Each has distinct repercussions in the overall war effort in the
supplemental role that air power plays. In short, use the planes
right and one will more likely win, squander opportunities and
risk losing. (Saddam, take note!)
Gaining air superiority, of course, will make future strike and interdiction missions easier. This takes time, something neither
player seems to have much of, especially in the very early turns
when the Arab opportunity to create a breakthrough is greatest.
In the 1973 scenario, the Israeli Air Force is much more capable
in night (PM turn) operations. The Arab player is best advised to
let his planes "rest" on the ground during these turns (which,
remember, are half of the game!).
The Arab "equalizer" to the superior Israeli Air Force is their ad

vantage in artillery. There are only five
stand-alone Israeli artillery battalions, for
instance, to 25 combined Arab artillery
regiments. That is a ratio of about 4:1.
While the Israelis spread their firepower
throughout their formations, the Arabs
mass it Soviet-style. This enables the latter to mount punishing barrages in the
early stages of the assault in order to create those breakthroughs necessary to the
invasion's success. Artillery is handled
automatically by the computer for all battles (a real time saver), adding to both
the attack and defense factors (as appropriate) for all combat within approximately three hexes of the guns. As
Arab tanks and troops get chewed up in battle, their primary
hope is that their air cover will keep their artillery protected
enough to help press the advantage over the weakened Israeli
front lines.

You Want Combined Arms? We Got 'Em...
Aside from the usual tank, infantry and mechanized infantry formations, Conflict: Middle East includes several specialized formations for players (particularly those commanding the Arab side)
to use. Egyptian commandos, for example, are the only Arab forces that can attack into Suez Canal/Bar Lev hexes. Once they
gain such a hex, they will "bridge" them for the remainder of the
Egyptian army. (Note: These units draw Israeli fire like a blow-

Review

torch attracts drunken moths!). Also, the more bridges built
across the canal, the easier the logistics will be for the Egyptian
forces. Egypt also has an amphibious armored unit (PT-76
tanks) for their initial foray across the Suez or upper Red Sea.
In the 1973 scenario, both sides may make a single airdrop per
turn of airmobile forces. For the Arab player, this means deciding
which front should make an airdrop. The 1990s Nightmare game
allows for far more airmobile operations. Warning: SAMs and
AAA fire are far more numerous and deadly in the 1990s
scenario, too! For either player, additional movement points are
expended to enter and leave hexes adjacent to an enemy, as well
as to stack with friendly units (congestion becomes a major
movement obstacle with a stacking limit of only two per hex). As
a point of reference, the Syrian front is only six hexes wide while
the Suez Canal line is but fourteen. One doesn't have space to
maneuver here and certainly lacks both the time and space
necessary to lazily swap brigades around and create the most optimal attack situations. So, just as in real battle, players must get
it right the first time and support their main thrusts with all the artillery and airpower possible. Stalemates will be bloody.
Victory points are generated by holding territory. As the Arabs,
one must (and that means must) get his act together on the first
three turns or start ironing the white flag. Sloppy planning will
allow killer Israeli tank and mechanized forces to converge, cut
off (now, where have we heard that before?) and hammer
penetrations. Arab commandos, artillery and tank/mech units
must be matched up for the most optimal attacks that can be
mustered, or it will be "Goodbye, Tel Aviv; Hello, Cairo."

What's Up, Docs?
SSI is notorious in some circles for their often Spartan, usually
cryptic, wargame rules. Celebration is almost in order when one
reads the documentation for Conflict: Middle East. It scores well
in the three Cs for conciseness, completeness and clarity. Further, a game map, several tables and complete orders of battle
are included for player reference. More importantly to hardcore
players, many of the actual combat formulae are also included in
the appendices, as well as explanations on why certain points
are handled as they are. Two big "thumbs up" from these
reviewers for the documentation!

The Never-Ending Battle
Conflict: Middle East has been expanded to include a contem
porary hypothetical "1990s" scenario (which presumes a hostile
Egypt). Since this game is played from the purely military
standpoint (politics is largely out of the player's hands), this is
presented as a straight military study. For diehard wargamers,
Conflict: Middle East offers a smooth interface, excellent
documentation and a tense, challenging situation in the classic
"hexagon" ilk.

Documented warfare has gone on in this region for over 4,000
years; Conflict: Middle East allows one to explore the more
recent battles there and in some highly polished detail. It also offers insight into the great Israeli nightmare "what if" (another
war). One can see the effects of that "no land to trade for peace"
mentality at the peace conferences making today's headlines.

Sneak Preview

Ultima VII: The
black Gate
(Continued from page 43)
It seems like nearly every character in Ultima VII has experienced some type of personal tragedy or weakness and it seems
like nearly every character has been assisted in making an adjustment through the
fellowship. What does this mean for the
avatar?
Ultima VII may offer an even more important story than the one presented in Ultima
VI. Raymond Benson, the lead writer on the
team, has created a main story that paints
the dark side of reality in the most frightening images imaginable. Garners who experience Ultima VII will learn anew the
dangers of accepting simple answers at
face value and making quick decisions with
regard to who is friend or foe. U7 will unveil
some of the helplessness of humanity, as
well as some of the strengths of the human
spirit. U7 will underscore the necessity of
operating with positive motives and critical
thinking.
The writing team does not allow matters
to stay in the dark at all times, however.
Whether it is the balanced medieval touch

Maybe we missed something, but it
seems like some magazines are touting
"exclusives" in a sense we don't quite understand. When CGW uses the term "exclusive," it means that the article in question contains material that cannot be
found anywhere else. We would not use
the term to describe our CES Report, for
example, because we assume that all of
the magazines which cover computer
games will be seeing the same games in
the same basic condition that we are
seeing them. We would not use the term
to describe a review, because we assume
that all of the magazines get the same
game.
Our Ultima VII coverage should be considered an exclusive because CGW is the
only magazine that has the means and
has taken the time to glean the
behind-the-scenes coverage provided in this article. The editors of CGW consistently
strive to bring unique coverage from new
perspectives to our readers. Any other
kind of so-called "exclusive" is empty
hype.

of the dialogues (overseen by Beth Miller);
the ominous philosophy of Batlin (the druid
who founded the fellowship) as it is handled
by experienced comics writer Jack Herman
(Elementals, Robotech and Death's Head)
or the comic relief of Andrew Morris'
gravedigger, the story offers plenty of diversion. After all, one would not want to be
caught in the "Catch-22" of the main plot
all the time and the creative team is very
much aware of this fact.

Ultimate?
At one time, this editor wondered how
long the Ultima series could continue. He
was skeptical of the ability of Lord British to
start each Ultima anew with brand new
technology and he was skeptical of the
ability of the series to grow in story and
characterization. Now the Ultima series is
being revitalized. The creative team has expanded (it filled up a banquet room in a
local Austin eatery during an Ultima-team
luncheon) and it has brought new potential
from the technological toolkit upward
through the potential for new stories.
Frankly, if the next Ultima team is half as
talented and dedicated as the one who has
put together Ultima VII, this editor wonders
if the Ultima series will ever die. It certainly won't fade away!

Review

TITLE:
Vaxine
SYSTEMS:
Amiga, Atari ST, IBM
PRICE:
539.95
COPY PROTECT: Non-repro Code Wheel
PUBLISHER:
U.S. Gold
San lose, CA

A Shot in the Arm

W

by Allen L. Greenberg

ere CGWs eminent "wargame-ologist," M. Evan Brooks,
to evaluate Vaxine, he would undoubtedly point out that
the program does not resemble a true war against a
virus even one tiny bit. Thus, to satisfy my distinguished colleague Evan and other immutable sticklers for reality, this
reviewer must hastily point out that Vaxine is not the same as
vaccine.
"But," points out our Mr. Brooks (hypothetically), "viruses do
not resemble basketballs; bouncing stars are not part of the viral
replication process and the interior of presidential personages do
not resemble an endless display of kitchen floor tiles." To this
must come the smug reply, "How do you know?"

Presidential Antidote
Vaxine is a fast-moving, graphically stunning, shoot-'em-up arcade program imported from Europe by U.S. Gold. The premise
of the game, as is the case with many European arcade games,
serves as mere candy-coating for the real action to be found
within. For the record, however, a miniaturized hero has entered
the body of the U.S. President in order to combat a life-threatening virus.

Vaxine takes place on a seemingly endless play field with the
familiar checkerboard floor pattern. The player's point of view is
from within an invisible vehicle which glides effortlessly in all
directions. The vehicle's movement can be controlled by a
choice of either mouse, joystick or keyboard. Indeed, the movement of the vehicle is apparently free of friction or drag of any
kind and one of the first skills the player must master is how to
avoid the dizzying momentum the vehicle can obtain and hence,
bring it to a complete stop at the necessary point.

Colored "Shots"
Appearing like a troop of well-trained basketballs, the enemy arrives on the playing field after a short grace period. These bouncing spheres are what the player must destroy, using an invisible
cannon without the aid of cross-hairs or any other aiming
devices. The invaders come in one of three different colors and
each one may only be destroyed by a missile which is of the
same color. For this purpose, the player is, naturally enough,
equipped with three sets of differently colored missiles.
Scattered about the play field are small domes that represent
the friendly home bases which must be protected. Left alone, the

Review

enemy will bond together and form deadly clusters which will surround the domes and destroy them. When all domes are annihilated, the game is over. The game will also conclude if the player
exhausts any one set of the three series of differently colored missiles.
A round of Vaxine may be considered successfully completed
when all viruses on the play field have been eliminated. With
each of these successes, play becomes more difficult in the next
round — the enemy becomes noticeably more aggressive and,
after some time, two new creatures appear. "Spitters" are very difficult to kill and roam the play field producing new enemy cells,
while "hatchers" explode into an entire swarm of the bad guys.

White Cell Counts
With the exception of a 90-day limited warranty, the publishers
of Vaxine have included precious little to comfort the player in
his campaign against the invading hoard. Bouncing stars and
"star-trees," when properly attacked, will restock one color of the
hero's ammunition. The player may also elect, at great expense
of ammunition, to send out strands of connected missiles which
may charm some enemy clusters into self-destruction. Of questionable value are black gateways which appear and disappear
throughout the game. They don't actually lead anywhere, but
flying through them will cause all enemies to freeze on the spot.
The effect does not last long and the creatures return to life
much nastier than before their brief hibernation.
Vaxine will also attempt to alert indecisive players as to where
the enemy is to be found. It does this by instantly erecting

billboard notices on the play field which advertise movement in a
particular direction. More often than not, however, this reviewer
followed these signs to find no action at all. Finally, certain sound
effects will also give clues as to what the enemy is up to.
Animation enthusiasts who enjoy the computer-generated illusion of fluid, three-dimensional movement should be particularly fond of how well this effect is achieved in Vaxine. Objects
which float across the screen do so with such grace as can only
be compared to that found in live-action movies featuring Fred
Astaire and Ginger Rogers.

The Prescription
Potential purchasers should be aware, however, that Vaxine is
an arduous arcade exercise and probably not for the casual
player. The bouncing balls are not at all easy to kill and the
player has only a short period of time to do so before the play
field becomes saturated with multiplying enemy creatures. Unfortunately, the player's missiles, the attacking viruses and the
friendly bases are all sphere-shaped and this, of course, adds to
the confusion.
Both IBM and Amiga versions of Vaxine will install on a hard
drive — a rare treat for Amiga owners for whom European arcade games almost never make this concession. Copy protection
is via a non-reproducible code wheel which uses black printing
on black cardboard. Vaxine is clearly a product for hard-core arcade fanatics who enjoy wonderfully abstract graphics. Sensitive
students of biology and immunology (and Evan Brooks) should
avoid even reading the manual.

Game Hints

Scorpion's Tate
Legend's Timequest

A

utumn is just about here, and

none too soon. Some people may
like summer, but this past one
was a bit too hot for my liking. Even
Fred, who doesn't mind the weather
much, was getting a little grumpy (or
more grumpy than even a grue would
usually be). All I can say is, it's about
time things cooled down... and speaking
of time....
There's nothing like a jaunt through the
centuries to remind you that the world
has a past that goes back beyond last
week. Maybe. The past, as well as the
present and future, might not be around
much longer. Not if a certain nihilistic
Temporal Corps renegade has his way.
For reasons that are never explained
(unfortunately), a certain Lt. Vettenmeyer
has decided to go back in time and mess
up recorded history. You, a raw recruit,
are detailed to stop him. There are ten
specific eras where Vettenmeyer (or V for
short) has been gumming up the works,
so there's no guessing about what has to
be fixed.
Seeing to it that everything happens the
way it's supposed to, however, is another
matter entirely. TimeQuest is one of
those deceptive games that seems
simple, then hits you over the head with
complications.
Aside from the Big Ten, there are
another thirty-nine eras to visit, so the
task is not exactly a straightforward "go
here, fix it up, go there, fix it up" type of
job. There's a lot of bouncing around between the centuries. In addition, V leaves
you little love notes in different places,
and you have to collect all of them to

find out where he is and how to get to
him. Make sure you write these messages down as you find them.
In short, you've got a lot of work to do
here. The manual recommends that you
make a chart of all the times and places
to visit, and I heartily agree with that.
Fifty-four locations, with something or
other in most of them, can overwhelm
you if you're not careful. So make up the
chart before you begin.
Five places you can "X" out immediately, as there is nothing of importance
in any of them: Mexico 1588, 1798,
1940; Baghdad 1940; and Cairo 1940.
All the others need to be visited at least
once, and sometimes more.
In the ten special eras, there is always
someone (Caesar, Sir Francis Drake, Attila, Mussolini, etc.) who is wearing a special bracelet. These are "gifts" from V.
When you foil his plans, these bracelets
vanish. Don't worry about that; it's just a
sign that you've done your job and history is proceeding on course.
At this point, things become difficult, at
least for me in terms of writing this
column. Unlike most adventure games,
which tend toward linearity with a single
straight storyline, TimeQuest is composed of "chains" of eras. For instance,
Rome 44 BC (Caesar) is complete in itself, but also starts a chain that ends in
both Baghdad AD 800 (Haroun AlRashid) and Peking AD 1215 (Genghis
Khan).
So it isn't possible to do a typical stepby-step journey through this one and
noting the actual parts to the chains
would give away a bit too much. With

that in mind, then, I am just listing out
the various eras with some hints for each
one. Those that have nothing in them, or
contain only a message from Vettenmeyer (which is always very obvious and
easy to find) are omitted, with one exception. Remember that these eras are mentioned in numerical order only. It's up to
you to figure out how they connect with
each other.

1361 BC
Rome: Visit the Academy. Talk to the
old man, and note carefully what he says
to you. Keep it in mind as you go up the
line.
Cairo: Few things will be royal enough
for the boy Pharaoh. When you figure
out what will do, don't let it go to your
head.
Peking: Don't drink the poison (unless
you want to end the game very quickly)
Read the tablets. Rather Zen-like, eh?
This is something to really think about.
Dover: The solution to Stonehenge
should dawn on you sooner or later. Be
sure to talk to the old man (not the same
one as at the Academy). Visit all places
here.
Baghdad: Enjoy the top-down view of
the Hanging Gardens. The Tower comes
later.
Mexico: Cannibalism and sun worship;
what a nasty combination. I know about
a cover-up; do you?

44 BC
Rome: One of the Big Ten. You must
win the right race to visit Caesar. Every-

Game Hints

thing you need is at hand; nothing
comes from anywhere else in this one.
Don't forget the lady's invitation.
Cairo: (ahem!)
Peking: Visit the Great Wall. Blow your
brains out (heh).
Dover: Just go all over.
Mexico: Tricky. A visitation from a god
is necessary. What to put on the cushion
requires some headwork.

AD 452
Rome: Another of the Big Ten, involv-

ing Attila the Hun. Handle this one with
care, or it might blow up in your face.
Peking: It is better to give than to

receive.
Dover: Be extremely careful here, as

you can die very quickly. You have only
one chance to do something. If you don't
manage it, restore the game; do not save
after getting out. Save only when you
have been successful. Mexico: When you
go through the maze (easy in daylight),
write down the steps. In later eras, you'll
have to go through here again, and there
won't be any light.

don't need an army, just money and a
lascivious mind).

to go to Egypt. That shouldn't be too
hard. He's always wanted to be Emperor.

Dover: The only stand-alone,
do-it-most-anytime Big Ten scenario. You don't
need anything from anywhere else, and
you don't get anything you need
anywhere else. This one is really pretty
simple. And remember, monks can read.

Cairo: Pyramid closed? No sweat, just
pass on in, so to speak.

Baghdad: Chinese merchant turning up
his nose at your offered treasures? Well, I
suppose a man of the east wants something really special.
Mexico: If you look like you, of course
the priest is going to kill you for interrupting the sacrifice. No weapon? Obviously,
you haven't been in the Mexican hot tub
yet (hehe).

1519
simple, it's almost not worth
mentioning. Talk to the vendor, visit the
church.
Rome:

So

Rome: Charlemagne, yet another of the
Big Ten. Part of the longest and trickiest
chain in the game. This and Napoleon
must be done simultaneously. Save them
for the end. Getting the crown out of the
chapel is only a third of the puzzle. If you
find that hard, you might want to sleep
on it.

Baghdad: Trial and error here. Saving

and restoring in the harem is the best
way to go about it. Don't forget the veils.
It should be pretty obvious to you at
least who's been fooling around with one
of the wives. Now prove it.
Mexico: Go ahead, don't be afraid of

Baghdad: No drachma? Come back
when you have one. Talk to the mother.
Make a date with a girl to urn her
brother's admiration.
Mexico: If you set things up properly
earlier, all you need to do is hang out
and watch the show.

the dark.

1588

1215

Dover: Good Queen Bess, of the Big
Ten. Staunch Protestant and Defender of
the Faith. By the way, that sailor down in
the bar is a lot more literate than he
looks or you might suspect.

Cairo: You have to make the dark a bit
lighter to see your way. That's the easy
part. Deactivating the trap is another matter. Now, who would know something
about the internal arrangements of a
pyramid? Pity you can't get through the
crack, though. Maybe some other time.
Peking: Genghis Khan, another of the
Big Ten. Getting the gates open (from
the inside, of course) requires big bucks
(or yuan... yuan what army? No, you

Dover: This one is really easy. Just
prove to Nelson where Nappy is going
next. Nelson's literate, too.

1940
Rome: This place requires several
visits. It helps to look in here before
moving on to Dover. You'll have to come
back a couple more times after that. Pay
attention to the exhibit.
Dover: You need to stop by here a
couple of times, too (two?). If you've
been to Rome, you should have a pretty
good idea of what to do during the
broadcast. The second visit is just a pick-up.
Peking: I wouldn't go outside until afternoon, if I were you, and take a good look
at that Molotov cocktail! It may not be
what you think.

AD 800

Peking: Philanthropy has its rewards.

Peking: Is the Forbidden City forbidden
to you? My, my. I guess your fate is
sealed then. Would a conk on the head
help?

Baghdad: No badge? Well, if you didn't
make a jackass of yourself earlier, that
won't be a problem.

1798
Rome: Napoleon, another of the Big
Ten. Getting in to see him is easy (think
lullaby). Now convince this slip of a man

The Endgame: This is where things really get bizarre. Infocom veterans who
have played Sorcerer may find it a little
easier, since they know all about what
happens when younger and older selves
start running around the place. The key
to this section is careful and correct use
of the two time portals, plus making note
of what's said and what's happening at
every instance. Exact duplication of actions is vital. Be sure to save the game in
the portrait hallway before going up the
stairs (and no, you don't need any of the
bracelets).

Whew! All this time travelling and running around with multiple selves was
quite a trip, eh? I hope (for the sake of
the world, and possibly even the
universe) you made it through safely.
While you catch your breath and rest up
for the next extravaganza, remember that
if you need help with an adventure
game, you can reach me in the following
ways:
On Delphi: visit the GameSIG (under
the Groups and Clubs menu). On GEnie:
Stop by the Games RoundTable (type:
Scorpia to reach the Games RT). By US
Mail: (you must enclose a self-addressed, stamped envelope if you live in
the United States) Scorpia, PO Box 338,
Gracie Station, New York, NY 10028.

Until next time, happy adventuring!

Game Hints

Scorpion's Mai(

T

he back room is certainly filling up

fast again. In spite of the low number of releases this summer, the old
mailbox has rarely been empty. Just as
well that the letters go to a box instead
of being personally delivered; I'd hate to
think of all the mail carriers who'd have
hernias by now (grin).
Before we get to the good stuff, I have
to comment on a certain phenomenon.
Over the past several months, there has
been an astonishing rise in questions
about the old Infocom games: the real
old ones, such as Zork, Trinity, Deadline, Sorcerer, etc. — and not all from
the same person, either (just in case you
were wondering!).
It makes me feel good to know there
are still people out there who can appreciate and enjoy quality text adventures in this day of fancy graphics and notype interfaces. Not that there's anything
necessarily wrong with graphic adventures... just that there was something special about those Infocom games that set
them apart from all the others, graphic
or not.
This is proven especially by the fact
that the most-asked question in the letters is "where can I get more of these
games?" Alas, I wish I had a real answer
to that one. Unfortunately, Infocoms are
rare these days and likely to become
more so as time goes on, unless the
Rumor Guy happens to be right in his
speculation that Sierra might be buying
the rights to republish them from
Mediagenic.
If he's wrong, he'll not only have to
watch out for our old buddy, Fred, but
that will mean that pretty much the only
way to get them is from a friend who
might have 'em, to find a few at computer show flea markets, on the dusty
back shelves of your local computer
store or at a computer club where some
of the members may have an Infocom or
two they're willing to trade or sell.
So getting your hands on them is going
to be a tough job, but those classics are
worth the effort. And, of course, I've
played them all myself, which means
even if Invisiclues aren't available, you
can still get help when you need it (grin).
Okay, on to the mail!
Bane Of The Cosmic Forge: One
thing I didn't mention in my previous hint

column is that Bane has more than one
ending (aha!). For instance, when you
get to the final showdown, you don't
necessarily have to kill Bane and Rebecca. Something quite different happens instead. The trigger for this interesting diversion is back in the tombs under the Isle
of The Dead. After you receive a certain
item, get rid of it immediately. This has
to be done immediately or the trigger
won't go off and you'll get the standard
ending instead (standard meaning having
to kill Bane and Rebecca).
Indiana Jones and The Last
Crusade: Getting into the tomb of the
knight in the catacombs of Venice need
not be difficult. Just remember that
there's left to right, and left to right. It all
depends on your point of view (and you
did read the computer diary, right?).
The Fool's Errand: A couple of puzzles in this one have folks tearing out
their hair. Since we don't want anyone
going prematurely bald (after all, hair replacement isn't cheap and the money
you save can be spent on more games!),
a little helping hand is necessary. In "The
Thief' (aka "The Eye In The Sky"), don't
let horizontal thinking get you down. Try
taking a new direction or two, and see
what turns up. For "The Boat," the first
three words require only simple anagramming. You don't need to exchange letters
between them; if you do that, things may
become hopelessly scrambled. Just work
with each set of letters as is (and the
words are ordinary ones, too).
Martian Dreams: The mysterious
laboratory you hear about is something
you won't be able to enter until you are
very far into the game. The only way to
get in is to melt some of the icecaps and
it's a long road to that event. So if you've
been puzzling over this part of the game,
leave it for now.
The Secret of Monkey Island: Yes,
we have no bananas... or, at least, some
people feel that way. There do not seem
to be enough bananas around to satisfy
that monkey. What a pity. If only you get
could some more bananas from the tree.
While you ponder that, take some time
out to admire the local native art. After
all, it's only a stone's throw from the
beach. Or is that the other way around?
King's Quest V: As some players have
discovered, it's not so easy to get out of
the Forbidden Forest once you're inside.

Presuming you've dealt with the witch
(an absolute must to safe egress),
remember the old saying about catching
flies. I hope you can bear it.
Savage Empire: Several people have
reported difficulties with large, carnivorous dinosaurs of the T. Rex variety,
particularly when trying to visit the Urali
tribe. Life can be much easier (not to
mention, much prolonged) by taking a
cruise on the lake first. Ya never know
who ya might meet. Even if he does
have rocks in his head.
Eye Of The Beholder: By the time
you read this, the Beholder Bonus contests for the IBM and Amiga will be over.
So, I am now able to answer questions
(via mail) and give hints about the hidden quests in the game. One in particular that has given people trouble is
the bonus for level six, the place where
all the Kenku roam. This one requires all
the Kenku eggs. Don't miss a single one.
After you've figured out what to do with
them (no, not omelettes!), it's okay to
use them for other purposes. The eggs
don't regenerate. So, if you mess up
here, you'll never get the bonus.
Ultima VI: Several readers have written
to tell me that the bug regarding 8th
level spells has been fixed. Previously,
even when you did the correct thing in
the game, Xiao would not offer you any
8th level spells. Now, you are able to buy
them. Unfortunately, none of my correspondents thought to mention the version number of the game they were playing (ouch). So, the only way to find out
which one you have is to see if Xiao will
sell the spells to you or not after you
satisfy her requirements. If not, then you
may want to send your disks back to
Origin for an upgrade. Note, however,
that 8th level spells are not required for
finishing the game.
That's it for this look into the mailbag.
Remember if you need help with an adventure game, you can reach me in the
following ways:
On Delphi: stop by the GameSIG
(under the Groups and Clubs menu). On
GEnie: visit the Games RoundTable
(type: Scorpia to reach the Games RT).
By US Mail (enclose a self-addressed,
stamped envelope if you live in the
United States): Scorpia, PO Box 338,
Gracie Station, NY NY 10028.
Copyright 1991 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

Computer Gaming World's
The Categories
Strategy (ST): Games that
emphasize strategic planning
and problem-solving.
Simulation (SI): Games based
on first-person perspectives of
real-world environments.
Adventure (AD): Games that
allow you to take an alter ego
through a storyline or series of
events.
Role-Playing Adventure (RP):
Adventure games that are
based on character
development (usually
involving attributes).
Wargames (WG):
Simulations of historical or
futuristic warfare from a
command perspective.
Action/Arcade (AC):
Computer games that
emphasize hand-eye
coordination and reflexes.
Games are often listed in more
than one category. In this
case, the first listed category is
considered primary. In order
to be recognized as the "Top
Game" in a given category, a
game must be listed as being
primarily of that specific type.

Top 100 Games

The Games in CGW's
Hall of Fame Have
Been Highly Rated by
our Readers over Time.
They are Worthy of
Play by All.

Strategy

The Quest for the Holy Grail
Rare Insights Into SSI's Medieval Lords, Part 2
by Tom E. Hughes, Jr.
n the previous installment of the secret insights into SSI's
Medieval Lords, formulae were offered
which might help an advisor to better understand the "mathematical" workings of
medieval society (as
presented by this game).
Again, with the help of
designer Martin Campion, here are some further insights into the actual formulae and
thought processes used
by the computer in determining the fate of empires in Medieval Lords.
As before, knowledge of
these insights might be
considered a violation of the "spirit of the game" (where a little
knowledge is all that's expected of a player), but for those who
make a study of history, as Dr. Campion does, here is a look
into the "inner workings" of medieval society.

I

Before the Age of Science (Revisited)
What is presented in this article are several exact formulae used
in Medieval Lords. To better present them, some abbreviations
have been used as follows:
Bs
= Bureaucracy strength
Ns
= Nobility strength
NI
= Nobility's loyalty
Ts
= Town strength
TI
= Town loyalty
Pop
= Population of the province concerned
Castles = Number of castles in province concerned
Dist
= Distance from army's location to province concerned
DF
= Distance Factor (see paragraph below)
Rule
= Leader's Rulership value
Warlike = Leader's Warlikeness value
Char
= Leader's Charisma value
Gen
= Leader's Generalship value
Rand(#) = a random number from zero to #
Many formulae include a "distance factor" element which reads
"DF." More exactly, that formula is: "Distance x (19 - current Century [which ranges from 11 to 16]) / 2." Without getting out a
calculator, what this element means in a nutshell is, if one can
easily move the army to the province concerned (i.e., if it is not
over a body of water), move it there first, then perform the
desired action (this "distance factor" always lessen one's chance
for success). Remember, moving (except across bodies of water)
is a "free" action, and the upshot of this formula element is to
emphasize that success is more readily obtained if ruling is performed "in person" rather than from a distance.

Elements in [brackets] are explained in the line below the formula. When a Leader is off on a Crusade, his default ratings are
all "3s" when it comes to domestic actions.

Buckets Full of Ducats
Money is good. More money is better. To this end, it behooves
a player to have a large tax base and shear those sheep with
great efficiency.
One's tax base in each province is the town strength times the
population (Ts x Pop), which can be thought of as one's "gross
income" on a 1040 form. These ducats are plundered by the
local nobles (which "disappear") and what remains is the "King's
share" which the player receives. To this is added ducats
received from an Assembly, if one is present in the player's empire and it is greater in strength than one. (Those debating
societies are useful for their deep pockets!) This formula is:
(Ts + Assembly strength) / 4 x Pop = Additional income
The "King's share" of this tax booty is equal to the "gross income" less a comparison between the King's Rulership and
Bureaucratic strength (which increase the "King's share") and
the Noble's strength and Town strength of the area (which
reduces the "King's share"). The exact formula is:
Increasing Taxes Kept
"King's share" = "King's parts" / (Ns + Ts/2 + "King's parts")
"King's parts" = Rule / 2 + (Bs + 1) x (Bs + 1)
Thus, even though Town strength (Ts) both creates and "takes
back" some of the taxes it generates, Town strength creates
much more than it takes back, whereas the Nobles create no income, but take a good deal away.
Other types of income include "off-map" income, "New World"
income (for the owners of Lisbon or Seville after 1500) and "Imperial" income (for owning key "trading" provinces).

The Slings and Arrows
If, in one's most cynical moment, it can be supposed that war
is a mathematician's true calling, Medieval Lords raises combat
formulae to an art form (presumably giving a new twist to the
phrase "art of war"). Here, then, are several key combat formulae for combat:
Determining an Army's Attack Factor:
"Attack Combat Factor" (ACF) = Vassals + (Nobles + Mercenaries + Household + Nomad) x 2 + Gen x 3 + Tactical rating x
5 - [(Warlike - Gen) x 2]
[if Warlike is greater than Gen]
Determining an Army's Defense Factor*:
"Defense Combat Factor" (DCF) = Nobles + (Vassals + Mercenaries + Household + Nomad) x 2 + Gen x 3 + Tactical rating x
5 - [(Warlike - Gen) x 2] - [[(Dist -4) x 2]]
*When defending with King's army as opposed to local forces.
[if Warlike is greater than Gen]
[[This is used if the distance the King's army traveled to defend
this province is greater than four]]

Strategy

Determining the Defense Value of "Local Forces":
((Ns x Pop / 2)[/2] + (Ts x Pop / 3)) x 5 / 4 +"Local Leader" x 3
[if the King's army includes any vassals in it]
This is the value if there is either no rebellion in the province or
both the nobles and towns are in revolt.

The value of the "Local Leader" is based on the following table:
Value Chance
2
5%
3
10%
4
15%
5
20%
6
20%
7
15%
8
10%
9
5%
These ACF and DCF are compared to determine the attacker's
percent chance of winning (as displayed to the player). That formula is: ACF - DCF + 50

Swords at Their Throats
Naturally, in a game like Medieval Lords, conquest of new
provinces is paramount to building up the might of the empire. It
is one thing to be able to win a battle, it is another to own the battlefield after a bloody day. Note that this is one of the few formulae where castles have any applicable value (reducing the
chance of conquest from zero to an eight percent maximum).
Here's the magic formula to ultimate victory in conquest:

40 - Dist x 2 + (Household + Mercenary) x 3 / 2 + Nomads +
Nobles / 2 - (Ts x T1) / 2 - (Ns x NI) / 2 + Siege Advantage x 5 +
(4 - "Battle Result") x 10 - Castles x 2 - (Actions per turn allowed actions used this turn already) x 5
"Battle Result" Table
Overwhelming Victory
Ordinary Victory
Marginal Victory
Marginal Defeat
Ordinary Defeat
Disastrous Defeat

Value
1
2
3
4
5
6

The Peasants Are Revolting! (You Can Say
That Again)
Yes, despite one's best efforts for maximum taxation and recruitment of their sons to war, the peasants and nobles don't always
perceive the greater needs of the empire. Occasionally, they will
revolt and distract a busy monarch who would rather be
slaughtering his neighbor's peasants and nobles, rather than his
own. Here are the indicators that a revolt can be crushed:
Chance of Crushing a Rebellion:
50 + (Household + Mercenary) x 2 + (Nobles + Nomads) +
Vassles / 2 - [10] - Dist x 2
[if the rebellion has been going on for more than three years]
These, then, are a few key secrets for ye counsellors of the Middle Ages. Whisper wisely into thy liege's ear that the empire
might flourish!

Review

T

he computer gamer's hangar must be getting full, this year.

So far, 1991 has seen the release of Red Baron, Jetfighter
II, F14 Tomcat, Chuck Yeager's Air Combat and F-29
Retaliator. Still to be released this year are: Secret Weapons of
the Luftwaffe, Falcon 3.0, Wing Commander II, F117 Stealth
Fighter 11, Gunship 2000 and Strike Commander. Whew!
All this activity surely must have produced games suited to the
differing tastes of gamers. While some games strive for an extremely high level of realism, like Falcon 3.0, others strive for an
easier, more minimalist approach. Like the automobile business,
there are full-featured games ("luxury cars" which are "loaded"),
mid-sized games with a good mix of features ("mid-sized, family
cars") and compact games ("econoboxes"). F-29 Retaliator is
definitely an economical choice — $49.95 versus the projected
$69.95 retail of Falcon 3.0 — and, while it may be "strippeddown" with regard to features, F-29 still offers a solid game-playing experience, within its limitations.
When the player first fires up F-29, there are some introductory
graphics screens to set the mood. Even the copy protection
screen, asking the player to type in a sector number from any
one of the four combat theaters, helps maintain the overall atmosphere of the game. Then the player is prompted to create a
pilot character and choose a rank (it's best to start as a
lieutenant). One of two fighters can be chosen: the F-22 (recently
chosen as the next generation Advanced Tactical Fighter — ATF
— by the Pentagon) and the F-29, a purely experimental,
forward-swept-wing aircraft. Weapons loads are also variable, and need to
be chosen carefully before the mission commences, based on
the mission facing the player.

F-29 Retaliator
Or the ATF on a Budget
by Loyd Case, Jr.

At this point, the would-be pilot is at the main menu. Selection
six is called "Zulu Alert," and is essentially a free-flight arcade
mode. At this setting, the fighter has infinite ammo (but only 8
chaff and flares!) and flies around until either running out of ammunition or fuel. This scenario offers an excellent way to get a
feel for the game, because no harm can come to the pilot character and, take it on faith, there is going to be a lot that can harm
the pilot.
Other menu selections allow the player to pick the theater of
operations (including the Arizona Test Range, Pacific, Middle
East and European missions, in ascending order of difficulty). All
of these missions allow the pilot to advance in points — but
points are never actually displayed. Rather, the character is automatically promoted at certain intervals. Early missions allow an
"instant landing" option, but it's best to figure out how to land
early in one's career because later missions require the player to
land the game before the mission is complete — and the switch
from "no landings" to "landings required" happens abruptly.

Sierra Hotel (The Good Stuff)

TITLE:
F-29 Retaliator
SYSTEM:
Amiga, IBM
COPY PROTECT: Document Check
$49.95
PRICE:
PUBLISHER:
Ocean Software, l td.
Manchester, UK

Except for occasional glitches, F-29 is one of the smoothest
scrolling flight simulators around. Even when there are multiple
bogies in the air, the frame rate remains rock steady. The
graphics, within the game's limited world, (see below) are good,
polygon-rendered drawings. It's also refreshing to see realistic
buildings, including control towers, skyscrapers, radar screens
and features beyond the usual "Great Pyramid" mountains. The
soundtrack and sound effects significantly add to the atmosphere
of the game (that is, when using a sound card). Another nice
touch is the scrolling map in one of the displays on the fighter
console. It's very easy to keep track not only of the fighter's location, but its relative direction as well. The controls are fairly
simple and well laid out. The return key selects the current
weapon and the mnemonics required for various activities are
mostly logical ("G" for landing gear, "F" for flaps, and so on).
The joystick control is straightforward as well; button 2 locks
onto a target and button 1 fires.

.

Review

The flight model is also reasonably good. Sharp turns decrease
speed (unlike what occurs in some flight sims), landing gear is
damaged if lowered at too high a speed and, while there is no
rudder, sharp turns are performed by pulling the stick back as
well as pushing it left or right. The only tricky part to F-29 is landing: landings are very unforgiving, with no crash landings allowed. The player either lands the plane correctly or is dead.
In addition to these features, there is a head-to-head mode available for players with modems.

It's a Small, Small World
As stated earlier, F-29 Retaliator is an economical choice. For
the most part, this is fine, but there are some areas in which the
minimalism detracts from gameplay and realism. The most annoying of these limitations is the size of the "world." F-29 combats are fought within a 100-square mile area. If the plane is
flown outside of this "world," the pilot falls off the edge (good
thing Columbus didn't fly airplanes). Well, not quite, but that
might as well happen. Actually, the map screen on the control
panel turns black. Worse, if the player is chasing an enemy
plane that happens to fly off the screen, the enemy plane disappears! More than once, this reviewer was in hot pursuit of an
enemy plane, closing in for the kill, only to run out off the edge
of the world and lose the target. To top it off, when the jet is
flown back into known airspace, more often than not, the previously targeted enemy is now on the player's six!
There are other less annoying but still frustrating problems. The
program tends to lock up the system occasionally in the entry
and exit screens (though this was never experienced during

flight). Also, once the system froze while it was saving the
progress file, losing all progress during that session (save early
and save often). Every time a new mission starts, the game
defaults to keyboard control. The joystick must be manually
selected at the start of every mission, not simply upon boot-up.
Also, the game is very unforgiving. The player's pilot character
can be killed very easily — and there is no save feature, so hitting the reset button is often necessary. Note that progress can
be saved for successful pilots, but everything starts over every
time a new pilot is created. This may be more real, but detracts
from gameplay. This author found the "try it again" feature in Jet
fighter 11 to be much more satisfying on this account.
As befits the game (and is typical to imported software), the
manual is also minimalist. Nearly half of the rather thin documentation is taken up with mission descriptions. There is a list of
available weapons, as well as a catalog of controls, but almost
no information on how to use them! For example, there is a
panel display for Beyond Visual Range Radar (BVR), as well as
weapons that could be effective BVR — but no clue as to how the
combination works together.

Small is Beautiful
Despite its flaws, F-29 is an enjoyable diversion. Its relatively
low cost and ease of entry is a boon for those who are either on
limited budgets or want a taste of what combat flight simulators
are about without reaching the level of complexity in some of the
genre leaders. While its handling of the limited flying world and
lack of more sophisticated features might turn off the flight sim
grognard, F-29 Retaliator is a good game for those ready to
enter "basic training" in the combat flight simulator category.

Review

"Console"ing Your Imagination
With the Might and Magic of a
Faery Tale Adventure
by Peter Olafson

ter and for worse — but each has been
subtly improved in terms of playability

A Whale of a Tale

Tale Adventure)

C

omputer games converted to con-

sole format sometimes seem like
adults who, arriving late for a big
family dinner, are relegated to seats at
the children's table. It is not so bad down
there (as long as there's enough dessert
to go around), but they feel obliged to
scale down their conversation to fit in better with their surrounding nieces and
nephews, and they keep bumping their
knees against the low table. They're just
a mite out of their element.
As consoles become more like computers, computer translations are, naturally, becoming more like sitting up with the
grownups. Such is the case with two
recent Genesis releases: Faery Tale Adventure and Might & Magic: Gateway
to Another World (which is actually
Might & Magic II), both converted by
New World Computing and released by
Electronic Arts.
They not only retain much of the flavor
of the computer originals — both for bet-

(Faery

FTA's appearance is an especially
happy event. This landmark game was
quite unlike anything the computer
gaming world had seen or heard when
Microillusions released it for the Amiga
in 1987, and its considerable charm and
style are almost fully intact on the
Genesis in 1991.

The heart and soul of the game is spectacular graphics and music, and these
have been left virtually untouched. FTA's
vast continent of Holm — grasslands to
mountains to tilled fields to forests to
bosky village to paranoid city — is as

lush as a well-watered lawn. (Only the
people lack definition.) The player peers
down from another one of those securitycamera angles at one of three brothers
searching the continent for his village's
missing talisman, and one might as well
be looking into one's own backyard. FTA
has a happy, familiar tang to it right from
the start. Oh, there's no place like Holm.
Size may have something to do with it.
One could walk through this game for a
half-hour or more and still not get to the
original destination. Holm's hard-edged
landscape scrolls smoothly in eight directions with only the slightest of pauses for
loading, and it feels as though it goes on
forever.
It's also a definite pleasure to find a
game that emphasizes the joys of travel
and that underplays combat (just seeing
what there is to see and not trying to kill
it first). To be sure, there is a good deal
of fighting and the brothers three will die
a lot during the early play sessions of the
game, but this awkwardness is of decided
ly short duration and small-scale, featuring four villains at a tune, tops. (The principal requirement for a successful attack
is simply staying on the same linear
plane as one's opponent and, in defense,
staying away from it.)
Another delight is the music. It contributes immeasurably to making Holm a
place, not simply another cardboard
cutout continent (which is, of course, ex-

Review

rob FTA of some of the pleasure of discovery (much as did the guidebooks accompanying the giant Genesis RPGs
Phantasy Star II and Sword of Vermillion) and it is hardly an acceptable substitute for investing the game with
enough information to permit its solution
by the ordinarily industrious player. It
couldn't have required any substantial
recoding to put some of these clues into
the mouths of a few additional roadside
non-player characters.
Of course, one does not have to look
at these hints and the manual does warn
off the reader, but it is difficult not to
look (they are not encrypted in any
way). Indeed, players will eventually
have to look since the clues contain infor
mation that can be found nowhere else
in the game.

actly what it is). The baroque themes by
designer David Joiner — here credited by
his on-line pseudonym, Talin — has been
brought over largely intact from the
Amiga version. Players will be humming
the melodies long after they've stopped
playing the game, and the contrasting
motifs are as effective in creating a jaunty, on-the-road atmosphere or an
in-danger-lemme-outta-here atmosphere as
one would expect in a film score. In this
respect, FTA, along with Sword of Vermillion, breaks new ground by offering
something more than the standard
"Music To Kill Creatures By" disco-thrash.
Moreover, New World has not simply
left well enough alone, but has sought to
correct problems in the original game in
the conversion. The teleportation system
in the original was complicated enough
to be of questionable use. It relied upon
the direction the character was facing
within a circle of stones and, since
nowhere in the game was the process
described, success relied on blind luck
and experimentation. Here, it's been
reduced to a menu, with all destinations
clearly stated, and the mammoth distances in the game have become far more
manageable.
Indeed, there was little information of
any kind in the original FTA and after a

certain point, the game rather lost direction. Here, that information is available
via a walkthrough in the documentation.
That is, at once, a blessing and a
liability. It is lovely that players can finish
the game, but the practice also tends to

Unfortunately, some of the mechanics
are a bit ill-considered. The characters
still look as though they're conducting orchestras instead of swordfighting. The
party is still able to kill monsters through
fences, but no longer through stone
walls, thank goodness. Yet the same
ability is not conferred upon the enemy.
The weapon button doubles as the trigger for bringing the second panel of a
non-player character's speech. This
means, sadly, that players will occasionally murder the voluble old men and beggars found beside the roads and give
new meaning to the old saw about stabbing first and asking questions later.
Some elements of the game seem like
discarded ideas that were neither fully
fleshed out nor wholly removed. This
means that role-players convinced that
they must mean something may suffer
mightily over such red herrings.
The save and restore mechanism is
another sore point. One can do either
operation quickly and efficiently at any
point within the game except for combat
or within the endgame. However, if a
player desires to resume a saved game

Review

at a later date, it requires the player to
jot down a 36-character code.
Such codes are standard practice for
games that don't use a battery backup,
as M&M conveniently does. However,
one has to wonder if this is necessary for
a game which is not disk-based, since it
is limited in the number of saved game
possibilities and cannot be duplicated.

M&M in a "Shell"
Might & Magic, by contrast, will not
win any awards for originality. It is a
rather conventional three-dimensional
basher, but it has never looked better or
played more easily. The colors are
luminous and vivid, the music unfailingly
lively (though not quite in the same class
as FTA's) and the animations charming.
It is also very, very large (it's stored on a
six-megabit cart using something called
"ultra-compression") and there is a great
deal to do in the land of Cron (not the
least of those things being to police
one's six-character party's ever-increasing supply of loot, spells and skills in
order to make sure everybody is healthy
and well-fed).

Saving is more convenient than in FTA,
but it is only possible when the party
checks into an inn. (Shades of early
Wizardry.) Moreover, the band splits up
whenever the player saves or quits and
must be reassembled when play is
resumed. This means that changes in
marching order will never survive those
visits.
So, how's the gameplay? Sad to say,
most of what one ends up doing is fighting, preparing for fighting or repairing
after fighting. While this places M&M
squarely in the console RPG mainstream,
it also imparts a workmanlike quality to
the game — that airless feeling that one
is plugging ever larger numbers into an
equation until its results exceed a hidden
sum.
Now, a persuasive argument could be
made that this rather depressing perspective is the nuts and bolts of most any
RPG. However, the designer's task is to
clothe the equation in story, puzzle, and
character interaction, and the camouflage here seems more than usually
transparent — for, however grand the
scale, this is very much the same old

sort of thing. M&M is populated with the
usual crew of monsters who have nothing better to do with their Sunday afternoons than squat at this one particular
dead end in an underground maze waiting to beat the tar out of the player's
band of widowmakers. It is impossible to
negotiate with them and it is impractical
to try to run away from them consistently enough to make it a worthwhile tactic.
To add insult to injury, there is no autocombat. Players have to sit there and
watch the combat results go by while the
monster animations cycle tirelessly.
Now, there is a certain amount of fun
to be had exploring any world as large as
this one. It is easy enough to do so with
the Genesis' controller, since the direction pad and fast loading give the game
a pleasant, constant flow that one
doesn't recall it having on computer. Yet,
the ease of play and the game's mild
beauties wear off after a time, and that
peculiar airless feeling never does. This
M&M doesn't melt anywhere — certainly
not in the cartridge slot — and certainly
not in the hearts and minds of garners.

Foreign Correspondence

The map covers an area from the north
of Arnhem to within the Belgian border.
Scenarios include the march on Eindhoven, Operation Garden and Operation
Market, with the "A Bridge Too Far"
debacle forming the final episode. Available for the PC and Amiga now for
£19.95.

Over There
Enhance Your "Hex" Life
by Paul Rigby

he

UK software house Impressions
obviously believes in burning the
midnight crude, because they have
a small bucketful of new releases crowding the shelves at this moment. Just
released for the Amiga and ST is Afrika
Korps. Designed by Ken Wright, Afrika
Korps simulates the desert campaigns of
World War II. Either side can be played
and, in fact, separate disks are provided
for each side and never the twain...

T

Up to six units comprise one division,
combat units being reinforced from the
strategic reserve. Each divisional commander is given orders, then those commanders interpret the orders according
to their individual strengths and other variables including terrain. Based on the classic overhead design (from boardgames)
using representative 'tokens' for individual units, Afrika Korps retails at
£29.99.
Arnhem — The Market-Garden Operation, from the UK outfit CCS and

designed by R.T. Smith (one of the UK's
more successful wargame designers), is
a one- to three-player re-creation of that
infamous battle. In the three-player
mode, one player is allocated the
American forces while a second takes
control of the British and Polish units.

Moving swiftly onwards... in fact, let's
"Go" to the next product which is, after
that quite inept link, Go, from UK
software house, Oxford Softworks.
Available on all formats for £24.99, Go is
the old, old strategy puzzle game in
which one must encircle unoccupied
regions of the board with one's stones.
To win, the player must simply own
more regions than his opponent. Simple,
that is, until it is played. However, such is
the way with the majority of oriental
strategy games with a 1000-year-old
pedigree. This particular version of the
old stager includes various levels of difficulty (from 0-100). In a similar method
of play to many chess games, the higher
the skill level, the longer the computer
player takes to move. Other handy features include a handicap feature (less
skilled players are given a head start with
more stones on the board) and a hint feature, plus an option to move back and
forward through previous moves, personalize names, the size of the board and
save game preferences to disk for instant
future use. Out now.
Napoleon 1, from Storm in the UK, is a
wargame that places the player in the
position of commander-in-chief of the forces of either the Coalition or the French
Empire. The game covers the campaigns
between the Emperor Napoleon and the
sovereigns of the other popular powers
that took place in central Europe from
1805 to 1814. The screen display is in
three parts: the menu line, the information window and the map window. The
map depicts central Europe from Paris to
east of Warsaw, from the North Sea to
Italy. Terrain, rivers, sea, hills and mountain terrain are all depicted. Cities are interspersed throughout. Each set of units
is colored to represent individual nations.
The movement sequence is as follows:
the weather is checked (affecting both
movement and attrition); each city is
scanned for ownership and supply; supply of each army and :individual corps is
then checked. The intelligence section is
then utilized. Corps commanders check
the condition of their forces; attempts are
then made to reach a nearby army;
morale is then scanned; administration is
looked at including replacements based
upon the economic strength of the nation; Al is then considered with orders in-

Foreign Correspondence

cluding many variables (supply, objectives, contact modes); the army HQ then
decides upon orders for each corps.
According to Storm: "The quick execution combat system of Napoleon I is
based on the QJMA model introduced by
Colonel Trevor Dupuy in the book Numbers, Predictions and War. From this for
mula came the relative strengths of the
various unit types against each other,
plus that of numbers, mobility, terrain,
morale, training and leadership."
There is also a tactical battle system in
order to conduct a miniatures battle. A
tactical combat screen is then accessed,
showing the battle map, menu bar and information area. As the play is in real
time, orders are issued after interrupting
play.
Campaigns include 1805, 1806-7, 1809
and 1813-14. ST and Amiga versions
may be available now. A PC version is
still in development.
Chaos in Andromeda is a new CRPG
from On-Line a relatively new software

house manned by a number of industry
"vets" — and they have the scars to

prove it! Produced, initially, for the Amiga
with other version on the way (priced
£24.99), Chaos asks the player to drop
in on a strange planet to rescue an important scientist-type chappie. Character
creation includes the usual old favorites,
plus intuition and quickness, provided to
spice the usual list of stats. Using a lookdown viewpoint, one's character has
metaphysical abilities, including many
psychic powers (offensive and defensive). Three robots can also be controlled
to aid the quest.
That's all for this month. Next month
will see full details of an intriguing new
"serious" civil flight simulator from German software house Thalion based
upon the Airbus and designed with the extensive help of an active German civil
pilot. Thalion has voiced their intentions
to spread ATP in the general direction, allowing for excessive turbulence, of the
four winds.
Also due to appear is a new wargame
based upon the "Charge of the Light
Brigade" plus (as the old saying goes)
much, much more!
Incidentally, if any you would like to

contact me, why not buzz me on CompuServe (75300,1503) or by mail to 20 Malvern Road, Liverpool, England, L6 6BW
(please include an SAE if you would like
a reply).
Note: The above games, and any of the
other games mentioned in "Over There"
in past issues, can be obtained from...

Computer Adventure World, 318 Kensington, Liverpool, England, L7 OEY.
Telephone: 01144-51-263-6306.
Miles Better Software, 219/221 Cannock Road, Chadsmoor,
Cannock, Staffordshire, England, WS11
2DD
Telephone: 01 144-543-466-577/8/80;
Fax: 01144-543-466-579.
Premier Mail Order, Trybridge Ltd., 8
Buckwins sq., Burnt mills, Basildon,
Essex, England, SS13 1BJ.
Telephone: 01144-268-590-766; Fax:
01144-268-590-076.
All of the above telephone numbers assume you can dial direct. If you have any
trouble, contact the international
operator.

Review

The Good, The Bad Blood, and The Ugly
Micro Revelations' Xenocide
by Charles Ardai

TITLE:
Xenocide
SYSTEM:
IBM
PRICE:
$44.95
COPY PROTECT: Documentation Look-Up
DESIGNER:
Brian Greenstone
Brian Lent and
Dave Triplett
PUBLISHER:
Micro Revelations

rson Scott Card's new novel is titled Xenocide. It is a sequel to Ender's Game and Speaker for the Dead (both
of which received science fiction's highest honors) and it
is likely to win awards itself. In Xenocide, humanity faces a painful dilemma: in order to preserve our existence, we may have to
eradicate an intelligent alien species. This is the meaning of the
book's title — "Xenocide" is genocide of aliens, the extinguishing
of an entire extraterrestrial race. It is a terrible act (though perhaps necessary) and a terrible decision to make; and far from
making it lightly, Card's characters spend much of the novel
deliberating and trying to find ways to avoid it.
Micro Revelations' new game of the same title is in no way
connected to Card's novel, but the latter is brought up as a point
of reference. The novel is a powerful one, sensitive to the
ramifications of its premise and imaginative in addressing complex moral issues. Card has selected a soul-rending problem to
explore and he is up to the task.
With all due respect to Brian Greenstone, who has devised and
programmed a very exciting action game, he is no Orson Scott

Card. His treatment of the subject of xenocide in Micro Revelations' new game ranges from the insensitive to the propagandistic and the bloodthirsty, exemplified by the ghoulish war cry,
"Lock and load, it's time to commit Xenocide!" The scenario he
presents, and which he has players enact, is simply repugnant.

Give No Quarter
This is probably more of a reflection on the callousness of the
game's publisher rather than on the game itself. Although the
game explores familiar territory, it is a fine game. Xenocide is, in
fact, so much a colorful and well-crafted arcade game that one
lacks only cigarette burns and a slot for quarters on one's computer to complete the illusion. The familiar territory mentioned
above is as old as such games as Scramble and Vanguard, with
bits of Moonsweeper and Gauntlet thrown in for good measure.
There are three different viewpoints (first-person, side, and overhead) in four different levels on each of three alien-infested
moons — twelve game sequences in all, after which the human
colony on "Argenia" is considered saved.

Review

The first sequence has one piloting a hovercraft over a moon's
surface, collecting ammunition cannisters, avoiding or destroying
obstacles and, finally, docking at the entrance to Level Two. This
is the first-person sequence, with events viewed through the front
windshield of the hovercraft; a nice "atmospheric" element is that
collisions with giant alien bugs leave splattered blood on the
windshield, obscuring one's vision.
The next two sequences offer Scramble-style side views as one
first flies and then swims through caverns measureless to man,
collecting bombs for the final assault, opening doors with keys,
and blasting baddies. The best thing about these scenes is that
they are big, with lots to do and a variety of menaces to face.
The worst thing about them is that they are as old hat as an
Easter bonnet, enlivened by only a single innovation: special
weapons and defenses are acquired by running into glowing
balls, with each collision cycling a highlight through a menu of
"Options" such as "Flesh Freeze" (which freezes all enemies on
the screen) and "Mega-Shield" (which strengthens one's shields).
One has to collide with the right number of balls to highlight the
Option one wants, and then activate it before colliding again. Of
course, video game players have even seen these features before.
Last, but not least, the player has to navigate the aliens' underground laboratory, planting bombs in nuclear receptacles and
then teleporting out before the explosion destroys the lab, the
aliens, and the moon itself. This is the top-down segment of the
game and easily the most entertaining. Here, one's laser beams
ricochet off the walls, one's weapons include land mines and a
flame thrower and one's enemies are legion. A partial map of

one moon's laboratory is included with the game; for the others,
players are on their own.
There are further complications, of course, adding strategic possibilities to the game and making the action that much more frenzied. There are time limits as well as limits of other sorts — only
one option can be active at a time, for instance. There is even a
rudimentary Save/Restore feature, though it allows only a single
Save position, which gets updated automatically after each level
is cleared and wiped each time a new game is started.
In typical arcade game fashion, there is plenty that makes no
sense. Why are there convenient refueling stations scattered
around the alien environment which the player can use with impunity? Why doesn't destroying a planet's three moons damage
the planet? These questions have no answers. One may as well
ask why Elmer Fudd can (sometimes) walk on air.
The graphics and sound recall nothing so much as the glory
days of the Atari 800 and the Colecovision. Whether this is a
good or a bad thing depends largely on one's taste for nostalgia.
All in all, Xenocide is a strong, hardcore arcade game for
meat-and-potatoes gamers and a treat for gamers who get misty-eyed
when they remember their first time on the coin-op game
Defender.

Taking Cides
Whatever one thinks of the game, however, the story that goes
along with it is morally reprehensible. Undoubtedly, there will be
garners who enjoy it — but that's what worries this reviewer.
Mass murder, whether xeno- or geno-, is no laughing matter. Its
presentation in Xenocide is gleeful, thoughtless and irresponsible.
The aliens are described as reptilian and, like the reptile aliens
of the TV series "V," they like to dine on human flesh. They are
invading; peaceful negotiations have been spurned and now the
only hope for human survival is war. That's good enough for this
reviewer — whoever wrote the manual should have stopped there.
He didn't. It is not war that the instruction manual calls for, but
xenocide. It is not enough to halt the invasion — every single
one of the aliens must be killed. No thought is given to the possibility of divided factions or rebels among the aliens. (Even "V,"
congeries of cliches that it was, gave lip service to that possibility.) The game's draconian policy would not even spare the
proverbial single righteous Sodomite.
There never has been and never will be an intelligent race,
whether human or alien, deserving of utter annihilation. Any call
for such an extreme act is inherently suspect; an insistent,
zealous call such as this game presents doubly so.
At its worst, the game's documentation sounds like fascist
propaganda. It is as though a position paper had accompanied
Space Invaders warning that if the aliens were allowed to land
they would start marrying our daughters — ugly and gratuitous.
No one forced Micro Revelations to call the game Xenocide or
to provide anything but a throwaway one-paragraph back-story
to set up the action. They chose to come up with the marketing
angle they did and, without imputing sinister motives, one has to
wonder why.
Encouraging players to take pleasure in indiscriminate killing
can have no good end. One need not call for censorship, claim
lasting harm to players or even direct people away from this
game — Xenocide is quite enjoyable as a game and deserves to
be played — but one can certainly register disapproval of the
game's fiction and do oneself a favor by ignoring pages two and
three of the manual and leaving of them unread.

Review

lie Angry Red Planet
A Review of Origin's Martian Dreams

Martian Dreams
TITLE:
IBM w/ EGA/VGA
SYSTEM:
COPY PROTECT: None
DESIGNERS:
Warren Spector
and Jeff George
PUBLISHER:
Origin Systems
Austin, TX

by Roger Stewart

To look around, though, one might not at first realize that this
is America. The huge, white Neoclassical buildings that have
given the fair its nickname, the "White City," might well belong
to Athens or Rome. Down side streets off the Midway, a visitor
may catch glimpses of China, Morocco, Turkey and other distant
lands. Those of adventurous spirit and prurient tastes (is there a
gleam in gentle reader's eye?) may choose to explore the infamous Street of Cairo, where exotic Egyptian women
demonstrate the "genuine native muscle dance."
What sights the eye may behold! An elephant made of walnuts,
the "Moving Sidewalk," the Golden Door of Louis Sullivan's
Transportation Building, balloon rides, trained animals, and...
machines! Though the novelist Thomas Love Peacock referred to
the Victorians as the "gas-enlightened race," we are far enough
along that electricity is coming into use. Indeed, electricity is
everywhere at the Exposition, running the machines, great and
loud! And the greatest, most eye-popping machine of all is the
wheel built by G.W.G. Ferris of Pittsburgh, PA. This, the mother
of all Ferris Wheels, is 250 feet in diameter, and each of its 36
cars can hold 40 passengers.

A Secret History
The creators of Origin's Martian Dreams tell us, however, that
the Columbian Exposition of 1893 held a marvel even greater
than the fabulous Ferris Wheel. The space cannon, forgotten to
history until now, was capable of firing into the aether between
planets a capsule the size of a railroad car. The cannon derived
its tremendous power from Phlogistonite, an explosive substance
discovered by the astronomer Percival Lowell. In the game's
opening sequence, we see the space cannon discharged ahead
of schedule by what appears to be the hand of a saboteur.'

artian Dreams, the second game in the Ultima Worlds of
Adventure series, is decidedly larger in scope than its
predecessor, The Savage Empire. Dreams is an epic adventure of rescue and resurrection that has all the depth and
complexity of the Ultima series. In addition to its entertainment
value, the game's creators even manage to slip in a healthy dose
of history. (Watch out, Carmen Sandiego!) Using the versatile interface developed by Richard Garriott for Ultima VI, Martian
Dreams manages to be accessible to even a relative newcomer
while sacrificing nothing in quality of play.

M

Set the Wayback Machine...
The year is 1893. The place is Chicago, near the shores of
Lake Michigan. Out on the water floats a full-sized replica of the
Santa Maria. We are at the World's Columbian Exposition,
celebrating the 400th anniversary of Christopher Columbus' discovery of America.

As fate would have it, an astounding number of the Victorian
era's leading figures were aboard when the unscheduled firing occurred. Newspaperman William Randolph Hearst, filmmaker Georges Melies, inventor Thomas Edison, novelists Mark Twain and
H.G. Wells, frontier woman Calamity Jane, physicist Marie Curie
and horticulturist George Washington Carver were just a few of
the luminaries among the group who made the trip to the Red
Planet. Percival Lowell himself headed the expedition.
When the game's opening sequence has passed, the wise
player will select Run Introduction from the menu. Taking up
after the events recounted in The Savage Empire, Dr. Johann
Spector tells us how he and the Avatar were contacted by the eccentric genius, Nikola Tesla 2. History records (see the Encyclopedia Britannia) that Tesla believed he was receiving signals from another planet at his laboratory in Colorado. Realizing
the signals to be a distress call from the survivors of the 1893 expedition — now marooned on Mars — Tesla assembles a team of
would-be rescuers that includes himself, newspaperwoman Nellie
Bly 3, psychoanalyst Sigmund Freud, and a specialist in oxygen
remedies who calls himself Dr. C.L. Blood 4 . The team is rounded
out by Spector and the Avatar, who have been summoned from

Review

the future. (Spector is, of course, obviously a fictional creation
who bears no resemblance to any real person, living or dead.)

Under the Moons of Mars
As the game begins, the 1895 rescue team has landed (at coordinates 28 South, 146 East) on the surface of Mars in Tesla's
capsule. All has gone according to plan, save for one small
detail: the cabin door has been jammed shut by the impact. The
Avatar must borrow a prybar from Tesla's cowboy bodyguard,
Garrett, and use it to open the hatch. Tesla will ask an irritating
question at this point, necessitating that the Avatar perform the
action twice to be successful.
Before disembarking, the intrepid explorers would do well to
provision themselves with tools, camping gear, weapons, ammunition and navigational aids (all of which were thoughtfully
stowed in the ship's hold). Dr. Blood will begin preparing his
oxygenated air cartridges to provide relief in case the Avatar succumbs to the planet's harsh conditions. Assuming Tesla's calculations to be correct, the party will head east to find the 1893 capsule. They will carry lots of warm clothing because the nights on
Mars can be deadly cold.
Members of the expedition should have their weapons ready at
all times when crossing the Martian plains. The native "plantimals" are, more often than not, distinctly unfriendly. The Avatar seems to be the
only member of the expedition sufficiently trained in the use of weapons to be
able to control the Belgian combine that
was stowed aboard the ship. Dr. Spector,
while never especially handy in a fight,
has a distinct preference for elephant
guns. (Dr. Freud may well shake his
head at this.) Everyone else seems to do
best with a pistol in each hand. Some
clothing, such as helmets, gloves and
boots, will serve as protection against attacks. While much of the opening game
consists of learning to survive, the explorers will eventually find ways to
bypass some of the planet's inhospitable
surface.
Eastern exploration will eventually lead the team to the site of
the 1893 landing, where Lt. Dibbs stands guard over the original
space capsule. Years of relative isolation have loosened Dibbs'
lips so that he is a veritable fountain of information as he rattles
on and on about one subject after another. In addition to his
value as a source of information, the loquacious Dibbs is a good
man to have around in a fight. He should be added to the rescue
team as they search the 1893 capsule for more supplies.
Among other things, the explorers will learn from Dibbs that
those enterprising Americans, Calamity Jane and Buffalo Bill,
have set up a trading post somewhat to the north and further
east. For humans, the most valuable medium of exchange on
Mars is "oxium," which can be found, among other places, in the
abandoned dwellings of Martian cities and on scalable plateaus.
Oxium is a gelatinous blue substance that, when chewed,
releases oxygen into the bloodstream. Without it, no one can
long survive in the thin Martian air.
Jane and Bill have berries for sale at the trading post. These
aren't food, however. The purple, green, and brown berries confer upon the user various kinds of telekinetic and extrasensory
powers. (Blue berries have their uses too, but skip the red berries
that grow in various parts of the planet). The traders also have a

supplier of oxium named Cooter McGee. Cooter has disappeared, so the intrepid explorers strike out to the east, once
again, in search of Cooter's cave in the mazelike canyons of the
Noctis Labyrinthus. The telekinetic powers conferred by the berries will prove useful in freeing Cooter from his prison. In return,
Cooter will tell the explorers how to find a map to the motherlode
of oxium.
The map will also lead to even greater things: the power stations that run the machines of the ancient Martians. Those big
levers the rescue party has encountered sticking out of the
ground are just waiting for the power stations to be activated.
The canals, too, are waiting — to be filled once again with water
melted from polar ice! But first, someone must be found who
knows how to repair the conveyor belt that carries coal to the furnaces.

Green Dreams
This reviewer would do the reader a disservice were he to
reveal much beyond this point. The story opens out in ways that
are both unexpected and marvelous. Potential Martian dreamers
will not want to have these surprises ruined by journalistic indiscretions. Suffice it to say that what appears in the beginning to
be a straightforward rescue mission turns out to have far greater
scope and significance. Winning the
game is much more than a matter of
rounding up a few stray Victorians and
building a space cannon.
Along the way, the player will learn
much about the ancient Martian race. Furthermore, the appropriateness of having
the author of The Interpretation of
Dreams on the rescue team will become
clear. And while it may not always be
strictly necessary, the player should always talk to the Victorian figures to learn
more about their lives. The game
provides a wealth of historical and
biographical background.
The story of Martian Dreams was
originally conceived by Warren Spector.
It was further developed with input from Lord British (Richard Garriott) who set the restriction that the outcome of the game could
not contradict history as we know it. The project was eventually
handed over to director Jeff George, who shaped the story into
his own vision. The surface and features of Mars are the work of
Origin's master world builder, Phil Brogden, while the whimsically
clever plantimals are the work of artist Jeff Dee. Kudos go to
everyone involved in the development of this outstanding game
project.
Be warned that one may have to make a boot disk to free up
memory (instructions for doing so are even included with the
documentation). The game requires 570K of free RAM to run
with VGA graphics and 575K for EGA. (If the mouse isn't compatible, one can toggle between windows using the Tab key).
There is no CGA version of the game. In fact, Origin is moving in
the direction of requiring VGA and 2MB of memory as a minimum configuration for running the games. Like H.G. Wells' Martians when they gazed upon the Earth, the intellects at Origin Systems are "vast, cool and unsympathetic" toward older and lesser
computers.
A final hint: unlike terrestrial mirrors, Martian mirrors do not
reflect the surface of things. Instead, they reveal the inner reality

Review

of anyone who stands before them. It never hurts to know who
your friends are.

Footnotes
1. Perhaps it was this "accidental" discharge of the space cannon that caused the fire that is known to have destroyed part of
the Exposition in the summer of 1893 and may have destroyed
the cannon itself.
2. Westinghouse used Tesla's alternating-current method to
light the Columbian Exposition. Tesla believed electrical power
could be broadcast from towers, much like the strange constructions found on Mars.
3. Elizabeth Cochran(e), an early feminist and reporter for
Joseph Pulitzer's New York World, took her pen name, Nellie
Bly, from a popular song of the day.
4. Blood was an actual, though little-known, historical figure
whose "remedies," which included "oxygenated air," were reviled
by his orthodox colleagues in the medical profession.

A Brief Bibliography of Science Fiction Set
in the Victorian Era
The scholarly people at Origin Systems have included in the
documentation an extensive bibliography of sources that were
used in researching the world of Martian Dreams. The interested
player may turn to those sources to learn more about Nikola
Tesla, Nellie Bly, the Columbian Exposition, and every other subject touched upon in the game. For those who would find their

enjoyment of the game enhanced by reading fiction that touches
upon the era or the setting of Martian Dreams, the following suggestions are offered:
The War of the Worlds, H.G. Wells (1898). In this classic invasion-from-space novel, Victorian England is helpless before the
might of the Martian war machines.
I he first Men in the Moon, H.G. Wells (1901). Roles reversed;
the Selenites find their world threatened by potentially dangerous
visitors from Earth.
The Lost World, A. Conan Doyle (1912). A group of upstanding British gentlemen do battle with dinosaurs and cavemen in
this ripping yarn set in the Amazon basin.
A Princess of Mars, Edgar Rice Burroughs (1917). The
greatest of all Martian dreamers, Burroughs never let petty scientific facts stand in the way of the rich pageant of his imagination.
This book was the first of a twelve-volume series about John
Carter of Mars.
From The Earth To The Moon, Jules Verne (1865). This book
described a trip from the earth to the moon which Verne conceived of being exactly 97 hours and 20 minutes in duration. In
1870, the book was republished with a sequel, And A Trip
Around It.
The Difference Engine, William Gibson and Bruce Sterling
(1991). This contemporary novel asks the question, "What if Victorian England had had computers," and provides the answer:
steam-driven cyberpunk!

Review

onald

Trump's flashy, splashy
Trump Castle was the premier
hotel casino in Atlantic City,
New Jersey until Taj Mahal Hotel
Casino, another of Trump's pleasure
palaces, opened. Trump Castle ll is to
Capstone's Ultimate Gambling
Simulation what the "Taj" was to the
"Castle" — a highly improved version of
the original. What Trump Castle ll offers is a versatile computer-simulated
collection of the "Big Six" games of
chance one would expect to find in
either casino: Baccarat, Blackjack,
Craps, Roulette, Video Poker and Slots.
Ostensibly, the computer versions follow the same rules found in the actual
gaming halls.

D

What the package actually deals out
in this product with five loaded 360K
5.25" disks is one giant slick advertisement for Trump Castle that happens
to have games as well. Included in the
package are a Trump Castle $20 discount coupon for a stay at the hotel
and a Trump Castle Gaming Guide
that doubles as the "key" for the
elaborate and annoying copy protection scheme.
Players navigate the game starting
from the lobby of the hotel. A
point-and-click interface escorts players to any of
the six gaming spots ( i.e. slots,
roulette, etc) or into the west and east
hallways (which offer digitized photos
of the various parts of the hotel). The
photos allow one to vicariously journey
into a hotel suite, peek at the pool and
the health club or go to the bar, the restaurant and the nightclub. In each location, there are a number of places to
point, click and watch a character say
something via comic strip-type balloons
that pop up on the screen. These comments are always inane and often
sexist. After one tour of the hotel
facilities, the casino is the only place
most players will ever want to go again.
Note also that the digitized photos are
not visible in CGA mode. Even in EGA
graphics mode, they appear as surreal,
almost psychedelic, images. A gamer
will need a full 640K of RAM in order to
view the digitized photos. Also, without
the optional Ad Lib or Sound Blaster
cards, no special sound effects or
voices are heard. Further, in order to
get the program to work in VGA mode,
which does offer the best images, most
garners will have to begin with a vanilla
computer (i.e. booted with a DOS disk
from drive A). Otherwise, the EGA
mode is the default.
Each casino game allows up to four

Betting With the Shooter
Capstone's Trump Castle II
by Michael S. Lasky

TITLE:
SYSTEM:

Trump Castle II
IBM with 512K
(CGA, EGA, Tandy 1000)
IBM with 640K (VGA)
PRICE:
$49.95
COPY PROTECT: Documentation Look-Up
PUBLISHER:
Capstone Entertainment
Miami, FL

Review

players, and various table minimum/maximum bets can be
made using either function keys or mouse clicks. Graphic representation of the actual games varies. The digitized table games,
such as Blackjack and Craps, are uncannily true to form. Slots
and Video Poker are less so.
As for the odds, one can only say that, "If Trump Castle in Atlantic City operated like this game, they would have only onetime visitors." The slots games offer poor to lousy payoffs, which
vary depending on the amount bet. Video Poker is much the
same: the player wins one and loses one, never really gaining
much or losing much. This reviewer played one round for half an
hour and came out with exactly the same amount of money that
he started with.
Also, if anyone playing in CGA mode who happens to go
bankrupt will find that they are automatically given another
$1,000. This no-loser-approach certainly takes the fun out of
multi-player competition. At least in the higher graphics mode
play, the player must return to the lobby, go to the cashier, click
three times, while saying "There is no play like Trump Castle"
and then is rewarded with another $1,000.
Card games such as 21 start with a digitized set of dealers shuffling and dealing the cards. They look real enough, but the
sound! The sound of the shuffling is a cross between a dungeon
in Castle Dracula and someone installing snow chains on tires.
Blackjack is the best game in this package but is not without
flaws. The dealer offers insurance when the house card shown is
an ace. Only those players who insure their hands win if the

dealer actually has 21. If the house has 21, the dealer must show
it and the round is over. TC2 allows players to continue even
when the dealer has 21 and there is no way to win.
Roulette is the game to play in order to make money. In almost
every round played by this writer, the winning number was from
the first row (1-34). 34 red came up three times in a row, as did
7 red. When betting anew, the player must remember to clear
the field because the cursor defaults to the zero. This reviewer inadvertently placed bets on zero a number of times before realizing what was happening.
Player controls for betting, dealing and decision-making are all
built around function keys and Alt-letter combinations. A mouse,
however, makes for smoother and quicker action.
If it is possible to get beyond the gimmicky and brazen advertisements in the lobby, Trump Castle ll offers a modicum of
casino fun without any risk of losing one's shirt. Indeed, the multiplayer function, together with the save game feature, enhances
this package. For players contemplating a trip to a real casino,
this is an innocuous way to learn one's way around the gaming
floor. For experienced gamblers, Trump Castle ll will probably
not offer the same stimulation that real play does.
Exiting Trump Castle, players descend the moving escalator
where the bus awaits. As one is driven off, a panoramic view of
the castle reminds the gamer that the "trump card" of this game
is that this casino is like any other: it exists to make money and
that, to get yours, it pays to advertise.

Review

The Midas Touch
The Gold Sheet Pro Football Analyst
by Bill Brown and Wyatt Lee

W

en one works late hours, one occasionally uses the talk
shows on late night radio as a constant companion on
the long trek homeward. This is true for this gamer and
often means that he ends up playing radio roulette on the
homeward route. On occasion, he has picked up a Las Vegas
radio station with several programs on sports betting. Not being
a sports bettor himself, one would think that he would hit the
tuner and move on. Instead, he has repeatedly listened with fascination to the detailed number-crunching and statistical analyses
that handicappers use to "set lines" and determine their plays.

As a casual sports fan, he would probably never have thought
about comparing "points per hundred yards" with "total yardage"
and a thousand other formulae that the professional handicappers use to prepare for upcoming games. He also was amazed to
find out how good some of those radio handicappers were. Yet,
no matter how good the professionals are, everyone thinks he
has a better system. This writer kept thinking, "There's no reason
to have that statistic in there" and "That's stupid!" Yet, he had
never bothered to create a database and had no intention of chasing down the numbers necessary to test his own system. That is,
until The Gold Sheet: Pro Football Analyst came along. With
The Gold Sheet, he could test his handicapping skill without
risking his wallet.

A Gambler's Perspective (from Bill Brown)
Bill Brown is the editor and publisher of The Western

Gambler, a Las Vegas-based publication. He is a noted author
and recognized expert in the use of computers in gambling.
The typical gambler spends hundreds of hours searching
through stacks of papers and piles of books — sorting, compiling
and analyzing — looking for the magic formula to "beat" professional football. Many have long since given up the quest because
the time spent never produced the rewards they were looking for.
Now, the introduction of computers to sports handicapping allows bettors to access valuable databases and obtain statistics
useful to the goal.

TITLE:

The Gold Sheet:
Pro Football Analyst
SYSTEM:
IBM
PRICE:
$59.95
COPY PROTECT: Non-Repro Look-Up
DESIGNERS:
MicroBrothers
PUBLISHER:
Villa Crespo Highland
Software
Park, IL

The Gold Sheet: Pro Football Analyst provides two full
seasons of statistics, as well as an optional Statdisk (data on
every team since 1983), the opportunity to download statistical
updates from Villa Crespo's own BBS on a weekly basis (this is
a free service for the first year and $24.95 per year thereafter) or
the tried and true possibility of receiving updates every three
weeks in hard copy by U.S. Mail (for the same $24.95). Naturally, the database would be of little value to anyone without a
method to access and manipulate its records. What this product
does that no other software which has come to our attention has
ever done before is to allow the user to create his own handicapping formula by manipulating 28 different offensive and defensive statistics. By assigning a percentage to any or all of these
statistics, one creates a formula. The program massages the
data and tells the player how he/she would have done over the
course of: a) all historical data, b) last season, c) season to date
or d) a rolling average of the latest four weeks of data.
Players who wish to concentrate on a particular team can use
the "Trend Analysis" feature to set parameters for predicting the
performance of that specific team. One can determine whether

Review

all opponents are important or simply those in conference, out of
conference, in division or on Monday night. It is possible to factor
in stadium type, game situation (after winning, after losing, after
a Monday night game), favorite status and win-loss record
against the spread or straight up. One can even concentrate on
a specific match-up, isolating on the win-loss history of
categories which are specific to that game, including the win-loss
record in the type of stadium and type of turf.
Once one is through creating or massaging his formulae, the
program runs the data through the formulae and presents the
customized predictions in several ways: straight up, against the
spread, a ranking as to the prediction's usefulness in office pool
selections, over/under calculation and detailed predictions for a
single-game matchup. These can be displayed on-screen or
printed out for future reference.
This reviewer found that once he learned how to create a formula and apply it to past and present games, he just couldn't
walk away from the computer without trying to finesse the formula just a little bit more. Fortunately, it can take less than a
minute to adjust one's formula and test it on the data available.
As a gambler, programmer and editor and columnist for gambling publications, this reviewer contends that the flexibility and
power of The Gold Sheet Pro Football Analyst is unmatched by
any other football software on the market. Its only drawback is
its addictiveness.

The Gamer's Perspective (Wyatt Lee)
Even people who don't like to bet on sporting events can get a

lot of value out of The Gold Sheet: Pro Football Analyst. Those
who risk nothing to try to win free connect time in the sports
pools on GEnie or the USA Today Sports Network may want
to let the program pick their choices each week; those who want
to make sure they have the right statistical fit for their style in a
computerized football league may want to use The Gold Sheet
to crunch numbers before selecting their team and those who
simply want to amaze their friends by prognosticating either the
entire weekend's games or one particular game may want to
print out the predictions of The Gold Sheet.
Some would suggest that The Gold Sheet was not designed as
a "game," yet this reviewer just can't stop playing it. The program comes with four expert formulae saved to disk. Users (dare
they be called "gamers?") can save plenty more of their customized formulae to disk, as well. What this means is that one
can keep trying to beat the experts. One can even have friends
design their systems and have the program run their custom formulae through the database. It is yet another way to determine
who knows the most about football (and doesn't even require
garners to wait until the season starts to begin challenging each
other's unique formulae).
To be sure, The Gold Sheet: Pro Football Analyst is not a
game, but this writer certainly felt like a Las Vegas radio personality when he finished analyzing last weekend's games. 61%
accuracy may not be that good on GEnie, but it sure beats the
38% scored by one of the on-disk "experts." Anyone serious
about sports and addicted to statistics will certainly want to be
aware of The Gold Sheet.

-

2

I

Review

Saving the
World Through
Mass Destruction
Psygnosis' Armour-Geddon
by Derek Godat
TITLE:
Armour-Geddon
SYSTEMS:
Amiga, IBM, Atari ST
PRICE:
$49.99
# PLAYERS:
One or Two (serial link)
COPY PROTECT: None
DESIGNERS:
Paul Hunter, Ed Scio
PUBLISHER:
Psygnosis
Brookline, MA

ntil recent months, Liverpool-based Psygnosis
Software has remained
a "quiet" company to most
American consumers. Despite many successes, the software
house has never been widely acclaimed outside of Europe.
Psygnosis' trademark style, a fusion of exotic art, atmospheric
techno-rock and thumb-numbing action, has met with mixed
results on these shores. The fast action, joystick-jerking crowd
devour the games, spit out the bones and then clamor for more.
On the other hand, armchair pilots and deck-punching wargarners have been disappointed with the hot graphics, hot
sound, "instant gratification" formula used by Psygnosis. In a
classic case of form versus substance, hard-core strategists
would virtually all agree that all flash and no depth had made
Psygnosis a "dull" publisher.
Whatever the case, Psygnosis is taking long strides to please
garners of all "creeds" and "colors." Their '91 lineup has expanded to include not only Psygnosis' signature shoot-'em-ups,
but wargames, role-playing adventures, puzzlers and even Armour-Geddon, a first entry into the bloody and brutal "pure"
simulation arena.

Same Sighted, Sank Sim
It goes without saying; the simulation side of gaming has been
extraordinarily ripe for some time now. Any disk-flipping Joe with
his eyes in the usual place can see the hordes of new sims battling for shelf space these days. As a game-playing public, we've
seen sailboat simulators, UFO simulators, even dragon-flying
simulators! If it's even remotely marketable, it's been "simmed."
So what can Armour-Geddon possibly offer that a dozen other
sims cannot?
It certainly isn't plot. Sadly, for all the flashy technology that a
game can flaunt, storylines still date back to the early Atari days
of hack and blast. Luckily, there's no wizard-slaying or girlfriendrescuing to be found here. In Armour-Geddon, as in a hundred
other titles, terrorists have gotten their claws on some hot new
weaponry. As is typical of their lot, these bloodthirsty baddies intend to deep-fry the Earth. While decent citizens crisp on the
planet's surface, the terrorists will bunk out in subterranean shelters, waiting for the smoke to clear.

Mission: (Even More) Impossible
As always, the player starts out at the targeting end of some industrial-strength doomsday weapons. Resources are limited, time
is nearly up, and all the smart money is betting on the terrorists.

If military might and some flawless strategy don't surface soon, it
will be time to ration out the radiation suits and lead umbrellas to
the planet's doomed masses.
Fortunately for mankind, last-minute salvation may be an option. The usual government scientists working round the clock at
the usual top secret bunker discover the existence of another formidable weapon; the neutron bomb. If lobbed at the terrorist
weaponry in time, this bomb will eliminate the threat altogether.

Recipe for a Suicide
Of course, it won't be as easy a task as that. To make things
dicey, the neutron bomb has been disassembled and scattered
across a monstrous piece of real estate. Naturally, enemy forces
infest this landscape; trigger-happy skimmers prowl the skies and
unfriendly cannons litter the plains. While combing every inch of
the 6400-square-kilometer game map for sections of the bomb,
the player will have to dodge or destroy legions of hostile war
machines, juggling precious fuel and supplies all the while.
Armour-Geddon is decidedly tough. It is not the sort of game
that will give up after a few nights, or even weeks. Neither is it a
series of unrelated skirmishes. It is, in fact, a full tour of duty.

Storyline and genre aside, what Psygnosis has done with the
game is pure innovation. No longer is the sim fan restricted to
piloting one type of military vehicle. Armor-Geddon's weapons include six unique simulated vehicles of war: three aircraft (jet
fighter, helicopter and bat-like stealth bomber) and three ground
weapons (light tank, heavy tank and hovercraft). These are
treated as "generic" vehicles not based on any real-world models,
but each can be customized to the player's specifications.
Armour-Geddon is divided into two sequences: the headquarters section and the actual piloting of vehicles.

Review

From the player's HQ, a number of options
allow one to spy on the enemy, develop an ar
senal and keep an eye on the sprawling game
map. All facets of the headquarters section are
accessible through a friendly point-and-click in
terface.
The Research & Development screen gives
the player full control over the industrial
aspects of war. From a limited pool, scientists
can be assigned to develop weaponry or combat vehicles. The more scientists working on a
particular piece of hardware, the faster it will be ready for construction. Once their task is complete, scientists automatically
return to the pool and can begin work on other projects. Once
developed by the scientists, engineers take up the task of
manufacturing equipment for the field. Unlike scientists, engineers do not return to the pool on their own. If left with a particular project, an engineer will simply crank out vast quantities
of surplus gear.
The number of gadgets and devices available for construction
necessitates some tough decisions. From plain "vanilla" cannon
shells to teleportation pods and cloaking devices, all sorts of techno-goodies and armaments must be prioritized. For example, if
the player pours engineering might into the building of helicopters, he may find himself without night-sights to fly them by!
With the right choices, the gamer will have just enough to con
tinue the fight. One wrong move, however, and precious time
and resources will be wasted making useless scrap. Armour-Geddon does allow weapons to be recycled, but this will not turn
back the clock. One can afford to lose a battle, but never a
minute.

A Neutron in a Haystack
From the HQ, an Intelligence screen allows players a look at
the area map. Zoom controls give an accurate portrait of enemy
installations through a number of different possible magnifications. Looking at the game map for the first time, this reviewer
knew exactly what he was up against. The sheer bulk of square
kilometers is enough to intimidate anyone new to the simulation
genre and enough to excite any sim fan looking for a game with
real depth.
With a knowing gesture, the developers have included mobile
beacons that guide any vehicle to any one of seven different locations. These beacons can be placed anywhere along the map
and are an invaluable aid in the struggle to avoid becoming hopelessly lost.
In preparation for combat, an Equipment screen lets one customize and equip up to six vehicles for war. Providing that the
R&D teams have been busy, tanks and fighters can be loaded
with ammunition, lasers, extra fuel and other necessities. Again,
tough decisions are in order, as each craft can carry a maximum
payload of only three items.
From this point, the player is ready to leave the safety of the
HQ and enter the ongoing fray. Unlike most games, the enemy
does not sit idly while the player scratches up a battle plan.
From the start, terrorist squadrons are in the air, hunting for the
gamer's headquarters. The sounds of their strafing serves as a
constant reminder that time is running out.
Upon emerging into the war zone upon a gigantic lift, the
player will find one of two cockpits staring back at him. To combat confusion in the heat of battle, Armour-Geddon uses a single
cockpit display and head's-up display (HUD) for all aircraft.

Another, quite similar, cockpit and HUD graces
all tanks and hovercraft. By avoiding the
specifics of realistic models, Psygnosis has
made the business of armored warfare much
more easily understood. For this, Armour-Geddon may catch flak from devout sim "jocks"
who cannot suspend their disbelief unless they
know exactly what sort of aircraft or tank
they're sitting in. This reviewer (coming from
the action gamer's perspective, of course) does
not share that opinion, however, and found that
the simplified control system makes Armour-Geddon a very approachable game.
The battlefield side of Armour-Geddon is pretty typical stuff.
Filled-polygon graphics are the current sim standard and, as far
as polygons are concerned, Armour-Geddon has no new tricks
to teach. One would think that Psygnosis, the force behind
Shadow of the Beast and Blood Money, would find some unique way to make a jagged polygon world easier to swallow.
Think again. It's not a lack of talent at Psygnosis, per se, but
rather a shortcoming of the entire simulation genre.
Speed, it seems, is the crucible from which simulations either
rocket into glory or tumble into anonymity. Armour-Geddon passes the "speed test" with flying colors. In fact, at times, the game
moves so quickly that the player can only hang on and hope for
the best!

Fast Forward
Adjustable camera angles are an option, though there is no
"VCR playback" function. In other words, there is no way to save
bone-breaking crashes and flawless strikes to disk for future
"ooohs" and "aaahhs." More graphic candy comes in the form of
a weapons camera and a satellite view. The weapons camera is
great fun, letting the gamer watch from afar as homing missiles
sniff out enemy afterburners. The satellite view is a more serious
tool. It gives an adjustable look at the surrounding terrain and
any unfriendlies which might be lurking out of sight.
In stark contrast to the point-and-click HQ sequence, the battle
sequences rely extensively upon keyboard commands. Until a
low-priced flight yoke can sit next to every computer user's deck,
intricate keystrokes will be a necessary evil. Armour-Geddon
eases the burden somewhat by including a fold-out chart of the
keyboard. It's not an actual overlay, but does point out the hot
keys (in four languages, no less). Until the keystrokes have been
safely committed to the player's memory, it is best to have this
sheet within frantic grabbing reach.
Documentation for Armour-Geddon is especially well done. It is
neither the typical napkin-sized European documents nor the encyclopedic bibles that haunt jargon-heavy simulations. With the
aid of the 24-page booklet, this reviewer was able to start wrecking vehicles within minutes. Beginners should count themselves
lucky for finding such easy-going, non-technical documentation.
Hardened experts can read the manual backwards if they find it
written too clearly.
All things considered, Armour-Geddon does much to recommend itself to anyone looking for a well-balanced sim. For the
jaded master, Psygnosis has added enough twists and innovations to the classical simulation to warrant a hard look. The sixvehicle team and research and development aspects are definitely new, "'90s" improvements on this sort of game. For the raw
beginner, Armour-Geddon offers much under one roof and does
it all with a slick, yet friendly, interface. Not bad for Psygnosis'
first dwelling in the Sim city (groan).

Review

Elite-ist or DElite? T
Microplay's Elite Plus
by Stanley Trevena
TITLE:
Elite Plus
SYSTEM:
IBM
PRICE:
$49.95
DESIGNER:
Chris Sawyer
COPY PROTECT: Documentation Look-Up
PUBLISHER:
Microplay
Hunt Valley, MD

he original Elite had a devoted group of fol-

lowers. Back in 1986, a game of Elite's
size and complexity gave the average
gamer a huge universe to wander around in and
explore. So, following the logic of sequels and
remakes, it would only make sense that Elite
could fly once again with a little dash of 1990s
color and sound, right? Then, if extra missions
are added, the game is even more likely to succeed. Of course, like any other "can't miss" formula, there is plenty of room for miscalculation.

Be One of the Few, the Proud,
the "Elite"
Elite Plus bills itself as a game with "a brilliant
combination of outer space exploration, intergalactic trading and political intrigue." The goal
of the game is to graduate from the initial starting position, in which the player starts out with a
stripped-down model of the Cobra Mark Ill trading and combat craft, to a position with the bestequipped craft and the highest status level,
"Elite."
To imply that the player starts at the lowest
possible level would be the understatement of
the millennium. With a ranking of "Harmless," a
ship equipped only with a few missiles, a pulse
laser and a meager 100 credits (the universal
form of currency), there is nowhere for the
player to go but up. Fortunately, there are
several ways to get credits in Elite Plus. Commerce, bounty hunting, piracy and asteroid mining are but a few. However, even though bounty
hunting and piracy seem to offer the most colorful careers, new pilots are cautioned to build up
both their ships and pocketbooks before getting
too ambitious in these fields of high risk/reward
ratios.
Instead, the wise pilot begins as something of
an intergalactic "bean counter." With eight
galaxies and several thousand possible planets
to explore, the first task is to record trading
prices and availability of goods for each planet.
In this way, pilots can explore a few neighboring
planets and discover that there is a definite
economic system based on supply and demand
to be serviced. If the novice pilot can find a few
planets to set up a trade route and start running
goods between, said entrepreneur should be
able to increase profit margins and enhance the
bottom line. As the credit balance grows, one
can move on to more expensive items with
larger profit margins. This is the safest and best
way to start the game. Getting too trigger-happy
too early will only result in an early death.
Unfortunately, the initial starting position may
try the patience and enthusiasm of even the
most long-suffering gamer. Indeed, the lack of initial resources and low profit margins at the outset may ultimately cause many to return to the
place of the game's purchase rather than to explore the game's universe.
While this writer found that it is wise to make a

Review

pressing (F6) will eliminate all active missiles. Note, however,
that the player must press the ECM key again for each successive missile which is launched. This detracts from the combat by
requiring the player to keep one hand constantly on the keyboard when ECM should continue functioning until it is actually
switched off. It takes plenty of keyboard presses to succeed in
combat, so those who like games where everything can be input
via joystick are bound to be disappointed.

cargo bay extension one of the very first purchases (in order to
increase carrying capacity), the fact that the designers decided to
make the player manually dock the ship at every space station,
pay a 50 credit fee to have a pilot dock the ship or purchase a
docking computer for over 1500 credits may determine one's initial purpose. For those who are "do it yourself" types, here is a
suggestion for handling the manual docking sequence. The
stations' landing bays face the planet surface and are spinning.
So the best strategy for docking is to head straight for the
planet's surface, turn up before getting too low in altitude, center
the docking bay on the screen, maneuver closer to the space station, cut speed, synchronize rotation and glide in without hitting
or getting out of synch. This may be both interesting and challenging the first time through, but it gets old very fast and the
player is forced to save the game after each successful docking.
Hence, many will opt for a docking computer early on in order to
rid themselves of this bothersome repetitious nuisance.

Join the Elite, See the Universe
Fortunately, hyperjump travel is simple. Pressing (F4) brings up
a short-range navigation chart, and a shaded red circle indicates
the current fuel range. The player moves the pointer to any
planet on the screen and presses (F11) to get information on
that planet. A planet profile contains vital information on the
government, world type, GNP, tech level, population and
dominant life-form, as well as a sentence describing the world in
question. The GNP allows players to size up the financial state of
the world, while government and world type will usually be good
indicators of the potential for import and export goods. After
selecting a suitable planetary destination, the player engages the
hyperdrive (F6) and is deposited in that system.
The universe, naturally, is as wide open as the wild, wild west of
American frontier legend. So, once the player builds up the
Cobra's weapons and equipment, the battles can begin. Aside
from the docking computer mentioned above, the player's early
investments should include a beam laser, ECM system, missiles
and fuel scoops. Fuel scoops can not only be used to gather fuel
from around suns, but also for picking up debris and cargo from
destroyed ships. Lasers can be fitted to the front, rear and sides
of the Cobra. Front and rear lasers are a must for survival.
There are 18 ship types in the galaxy, each having unique flight
and weapons capabilities. The ships are blocky solid filled
polygon shapes and hard to identify at a distance. The easiest
way to identify a ship is to prime a missile (F7). That way, when
the target is acquired, the ship type will be displayed. Pressing
(F8) at this point will launch a missile at the target. ECM
operates via a function key in much the same way. When a missile is launched at the Cobra, a message alerts the pilot. Then,

Another aspect of the game that will not sit well with most
gamers is the "roll and dive" method used for steering the Cobra.
To acquire a target, the player rolls the ship until the enemy is
above or below the sights. Then, the pilot must climb or dive to
line up the shot. Many of the ships maneuver wildly in front of
the Elite pilot and require quick joystick jockeying in order to
line them up for a kill. For the hard-to-hit targets, the player is bet
ter off to let them get behind and then blast them with the rear
lasers. Some of the most evasive ships will fly right into the rear
sights to get blasted into hyperspace.
Another hole in the game logic concerns the safety zones
around the space stations. The space around a station is
protected and ships cannot fire on one another. However, there
is no real penalty for the player if he sits inside of this safety
zone and picks off other ships. They will make attack runs at the
player with their guns silent. This practice really pays off around
Feudal or Anarchist worlds. Not only will the pilot collect a bounty for knocking off fugitives, but by using fuel scoops the pirate
cargo can be scooped up and fenced at the local base. The only
real penalty is a temporary fugitive legal status.
Elite Plus claims to have six missions in the new version of the
game (as opposed to the three in the original). This will be news
to most gamers, however, since even the first mission comes
very late in the game. Apparently, the first mission is triggered
when the player has made 32 hyperspace jumps after getting to
the second galaxy. The purchase price of an intergalactic hyperdrive is close to 5000 credits! If one was even to make a bee-line
across the first galaxy, building up credits along the way, it could
take 15-20 jumps. Then, the second mission kicks in 56 jumps
after mission one. These missions are too few and too late for
most garners. With all the alien races and worlds in the game, it
is a real let-down that the only interaction with them rests in a
spreadsheet-like trading screen or combat.

Plebeian or Patrician?
All in all, Elite Plus is more work than fun and most garners
will tire of play long before they near the end of the game. This
reviewer found advancement to be slow, combat repetitive, trad
ing tedious and rewards few. Plus, the graphics and sound are
simply not up to par with other offerings on the market today.
In today's market, it takes more than a little color and sound to
make a game a hit. A sure-fire formula that worked five years
ago may fall flat on its disk today. A game that is marketed as
"256-color" is targeted squarely at the high-end user with a fast
machine, large hard disk, sound board and VGA graphics. Users
with such machines demand fast action, smooth flight characteristics, efficient career tracking and satisfying character interaction. Frankly, Elite Plus lacks the "right stuff" to make it with the
discriminating garners of today.
Players of the original game may find it enjoyable to take a trip
down memory lane with this new version of their old favorite, but
most garners probably won't have the time or space for this program in their software collection. Like the heated debate that surrounds the colonization of classic films, some classics are best
left in their original form and not artificially modernized.

Player Aid

Review

Your Ships Have Come In
Armada 2525
by Alan Emrich

S

pace... the gaming frontier. For
those who like their strategy
games grand, nothing compares
to the vastness of galactic empires connected across light years by hyperspace
technology. The number of computer
games on the subject may not seem as
vast as the heavens, but such venerable
titles as SSG's Reach for the Stars
(RFTS), SSI's Imperium Galactum,
Delta Tau's Spaceward, Ho! and
jSoft's Second Conflict (not to mention
Changeling's forthcoming Pax Imperia)
all share the largest visions of galactic
domination. Each of these games is one
of planetary exploration and conquest;
scientific research and technological
breakthroughs; weapons and ship production and of course strategic space battles.
Add to their ranks, now, Interstel's Armada: 2525. Perhaps closer in kindred
spirit to Reach for the Stars than any of
the other aforementioned titles, Armada:
2525 has its strengths and weaknesses
compared to all of these games.
Whether building, researching, colonizing
or conquering, the key word to keep in
mind to describe this game is:
simplicity. Designer R. T. ("Bob") Smith
of Liverpool, England, has clearly learned
the values of simplicity and diversity in
his years as a board, computer and miniatures wargamer. By keeping a set of simple symbology and using mathematical formulas that one can
easily remember, players are only burdened with the
challenge of playing well, rather than the challenge
of understanding how to play.

mada, income and expenditures have
been boiled down to their simplest (and
most manageable) levels. A planet's
population plus its factories equals its
build points. There's a limit that factories
cannot exceed the population, and there
are "rich" planets which double a
planet's income and "poor" planets
which halve the industrial output.
RFTS and Imperium Galactum have
more limited "shopping lists" of things to
buy. While one cannot design his own
ships as in IG, there are such a wide
variety of things to discover in Armada
that one does not feel cheated in the
least. Players will discover and purchase
Death Stars, Doomwingers and Nemesis
fleets and wield them with undeniably
maniacal intent. Costs range from two
points for a "worker unit" (which is a
single "saved" build point that can be
used later and/or transported to another,
struggling planet) to 200 points for an artificial planet (which are great to take
into battle and hide behind!).

R & D and Thee

TITLE:
Armada 2525
SYSTEM:
IBM
COPY PROTECT: Document Check
PRICE:
549.95
DESIGNER:
R.T. "Bob" Smith
PUBLISHER:
Interstel
Webster, TX

Time Warps for No Man
Each turn of Armada: 2525 consists of a Production Segment
(which also includes research and discoveries), followed by four
Movement and Combat Phases. For comparison, Reach for the
Stars has a Movement and Combat Phase each turn, and a
Production Segment every other turn; Imperium Galactum has
Production followed by a pair of Movement and Combat Phases.
Thus, there is the feeling of either more maneuver or less production, depending on how one looks at it, in Armada: 2525.

Galactic Economics
Money, as always, makes the universe go 'round. In RFTS, the
formula was basically double a planet's population plus a blending of the industry times its social level. In Imperium Galactum,
the economics were a bit more detailed, with "Industrial Output,"
"Military Output," mines, agriculture, traders, etc. all serving as
part of the complex economic infrastructure of the game. In Ar-

Armada: 2525's long suit has got to be
all the discoveries one can make. Over
60 distinct breakthroughs and advance
will be unveiled over time. The laundry
list is not only extensive, but also adds
such elements as biological and psychological warfare to the strategic space conquest game genre.
There's nothing like watching enemy ships flee in
battle because of a "mind" attack, or seeing one's
foes swept by a virulent plague from the latest batch
of "death virus" cooked up in the labs.

The labs, of course, are the key. "Research Centres," as they're
called, get assigned to the eight different sciences and technologies. Each turn, they add to a running total in hopes of pushing it high enough to achieve the next "tech" level. The more Research Centres assigned to a particular science, the faster the discoveries will be. Many discoveries require a combination of advances in various R&D sectors, so some judicious planning must be
made in order to discover the right combination of breakthroughs required for the items one wishes to purchase.

Fleet Battles
As with other games of this genre, battles take place when
ships meet at stars. Both fleets deploy over the top of a generic
planet, then slowly maneuver towards each other, firing projectiles back and forth across the screen in a pseudo-arcade sequence. Ships can be given orders before the battle to attack,
(Continued on page 103)

Designer's Notes

Armada 2525

Designer's Notes

with thanks to R.T. ("Bob") Smith

H

ere is a quick "how to" guide to get

players started enjoying Armada 2525
quickly. Some initial strategies for
colonizing, research and production are offered. More importantly, the difference in playing a two-player game are described for those
who seek a challenge of a more human nature.
At the start of the game, one needs to
spread out quickly. Choose terran or large
habitable planets to land upon in order to maximize population growth. If there is a shortage
of nearby good planets, begin research into
planetology immediately. Try not to settle onto
too many poor planets.

Planets, Planets Everywhere...
Colonies that are near each other are easier
to defend, so try to keep the empire from
being too far-flung. If a player must settle an
isolated planet, wait until a fleet is built to
defend it. Indefensible planets constitute an
open invitation to other players to attack them
Try to have a clear plan of colonization, and
be careful to build Colony Bases at the correct
time! If one settles a rich planet, fill it up quickly and build a full complement of factories.
However, before developing that single planet,
make sure that there are several other planets
going with healthy population growth rates.
After about turn ten, less pleasant planets
will have to be settled. When planet populations become too high, their growth rates
quickly fall to next to nothing. Therefore, a
player should siphon off some surplus population in order to enable those left behind to
begin to grow in number again. Once the
population is developing over several planets,
the game will have reached a point where
players may have the technology to improve
their planets' habitability ratings. Thus, large
and huge planets are very useful, however low
their initial habitability ratings might be.
Once level four in any science is reached, try
to plant a colony on a neutron star and develop it as quickly as possible. The "supertech"
ships built there are much more effective than
those built elsewhere. Remember, it takes at
least five Research Centres on a neutron star
to develop this special "neutron" technology.

Initial Production Strategies
There are four basic strategies for one's
opening builds. One can build six Corvettes
and try for a quick conquest. This can be
devastating if an opponent is not expecting it,
but is rather risky. Building twenty Research
Centres is also somewhat speculative, but
guarantees rapid technological advancement.
A fairly safe option is building fifteen factories
since the extra production is always useful.
Finally, one can build twelve transporters
which will enable the shipment of population
to better planets and give a player a better initial population growth rate around the galaxy.
In practice, any combination of the last three
of these strategies works well.

One should build plenty of factories early on,
since the earlier they are built, the more
benefit will be derived from them over the
course of the game. However, building too
many factories too early on one's home planet
limits the number of people that can be
moved off to colonize other stars! One must
also balance the need for factories with the
need for security (e.g., warships and missiles).
If a player has plenty of transports, he can
ship missiles from the home planet to those
further forward, thus speeding up their development. It is best to have plenty of missiles on
important planets, even if they are being
defended with a fleet (sooner or later, that fleet
will be needed elsewhere). On some planets, it
may be best to settle first with a small population and ship lots of missiles in. If one is allowed to complete the defensive build-up, then
one can safely ship more people there.

Space Arms Race
Don't be tempted to rely entirely on missiles
for defence, even though they provide better
value initially than ships. The balance between
attack and defence tends to ebb and flow
throughout the game as technology develops.
Make sure to maintain an adequate fleet.
When in a defensive posture, build ships with
high attack values to shoot down as many
enemy ships as possible. When in an offensive
posture, build ships with good defenses and
ground attack values. Once invented, make
sure that the fleet contains several carriers!
However powerful one's fleet might be, a
player can still only attack enemy planets
within ten squares of his own colonies. Since
these are likely to be heavily defended, an effective tactic is to plant a colony with one
population point as far into enemy territory as
possible. This forward base will allow one to
strike at the (usually) less well defended interior planets of an enemy's empire. The
enemy's home planet is usually a good target.
When attacking enemy planets, try to time
the attack to arrive on the fourth movement
phase. This way, even if the attack should fail,
so long as at least one warship with a ground
attack ability survives, the planet will be besieged and have its production halved.

Test Tube Tactics
Throughout the game, make sure to spend
enough on research. As technology levels increase, so do the number of research points required to reach the next higher level. Thus, in
order to keep advancement going apace, keep
building Research Centres.
In general, it is best to research into all sciences while giving priority to one or two. During
the early stages of the game, some sciences
might have to be neglected completely since
spreading out the research too thin will only
delay breakthroughs everywhere. Remember,
many desired inventions require advancements in more than one science.

Which science to give priority depends on
one's situation, but there are three good candidates to start the game with. If one has few
good planets nearby, or discovers a rich
planet, planetology is a natural priority (otherwise, leave planetology for later). Weapons research is a safe choice, but needs to be backed by commitments in construction, force
fields and hyperspace. Making pyscho science
a priority will pay off in the medium term. Useful inventions from pyscho sciences don't really start until hitting level three, but investing
heavily and early before other players develop
countermeasures can yield useful advantages.
The other sciences provide less useful
benefits in the early stages, but will need to be
researched later on.

The Two-Player Game
The usual number of players is six, but it is
worthwhile playing with only two players (particularly if they are both human). Instead of
the cagey six-player game, the two-player
game is total war. If one chooses positions opposite each other across the short side of the
map, then the game can be decided in two to
three hours (or even less if playing the computer). Alternatively, starting in diagonally opposite corners will give a long game with plenty of time to experiment with technology.
Games with three, four or five players will
give players more room for development than
the six-player game and will tend to take
longer. However, this gives more room for
long-term development strategies and gives
players the chance of making a comeback
after earlier misfortunes. Games with three
human contestants can last a very long time,
thus allowing opportunities to experiment with
new tactics using high-level inventions.
In a two-player game, aggression pays. Try
to fight battles over enemy territory. If one
loses, he loses only his fleet. If the enemy
loses, he loses a planet. By forcing the enemy
to use his fleet to defend his own planets, one
keeps those enemy ships away from friendly
stars. This aggressive strategy means one can
economize on missiles and build more ships.
However, the defender does have an advantage in that he is building ships where the action is, while one's own ships spend a turn
moving up to "the front." This often means
that the defender will win more battles than he
loses. The key, therefore, is to sustain the attack. As one fleet is beaten back, another
should be on its way. This forces an opponent
to burn resources building missiles, and
sooner or later a weak spot will be discovered.
By the same token, try not to avoid a passive defense. If the opponent is flinging a
never-ending stream of ships at a player, chances are his planets are lightly defended or
have no missiles at all! A raid with small forces can pay huge dividends. Clippers are well
suited to surprise attacks, due to their speed.
If playing from diagonally opposite corners,
then getting into the center quickly is paramount. It is vital to deny this rich area of
planets to the opponent, even if one is unable
to colonize it. Make sure to plant forward
bases quickly to enable scouts to reach into
the center and beyond.

Player Aid

Armada: 2525 — Players' Aids

I

by Alan Emrich and Tom E. Hughes, Jr.
nterstel's intriguing new galactic conTo Battle!
quest game Armada: 2525 is full of
Certain notes about combat are in
everything an enthusiast of the genre
order, first. When combat occurs, units
could want. Comparing favorably to
compare their attack and defense facSSG's venerable classic Reach for the
tors. If both numbers are equal, each
Stars, Armada: 2525 certainly excels in
shot has a 10% chance to kill its target.
one particular regard: the field of reOtherwise, divide the attack strength by
search and development. For players
the defense strength and multiply by that
who love to "discover" the sciences and
10% to get the chance to kill. For each
technologies that will give their empires
level of technological superiority one's
an edge over their opponents, Armada:
battle computer has above those of an
2525 has what it takes.
opponent, an extra 10% chance is added
While all the information about the
to the successful kill percentage. Converavailability of a certain new unit or techsely, each level of technological supenological discovery is available after a
riority cuts the percentage chance of
player researches it, it is not really
one's opponent hitting by a reciprocal
recorded anywhere. It is up to players to
10%. In addition, a superior level of battle
remember that they have a psionic adcomputer technology also affords one an
vantage or that a Titan class ship is a
earlier option to retreat from disadmore powerful Dreadnought. (How much
vantageous situations. Note that Force
more powerful, though?)
Shields and Total Energy Shields have
no combined effect.
This article presents some useful tables
with all the information about all the
Hi, Tech!
"pieces" and discoveries one can make
during a game of Armada: 2525. AddiAdvancement in tech levels is handled
tionally, there is information about other
through the use of a running total for
important formulae used in the game
each science. Each turn, the number of
(presented in table format). It should
Research Centers allocated to a given
serve as a player's aid and handy inforscience are multiplied by a number bemation sheet.
tween 0.5 and 1.5 before being added to
the total. When the aggregate total

(Continued from page 101)

defend, hide, penetrate or go kamikaze. After a short time,
players will be given the option to either retreat, fight or make an
"all-out attack." Planetary bombardment portends another arcadelike sequence reminiscent of Space Invaders. Players don't wiggle any joysticks in these battles, they just look like arcade
games and, fortunately, can be skipped entirely by hitting the
ESC key and just getting the end of the battle round results.
Technology really shows in battles. The advent of monster
ships in combat, or the discovery of hyperspace missiles,
neutronium beams and sun beam technology each has a major
impact on space combat. Likewise, heavy missiles and planetary
shields affect space-to-ground actions.

One cannot directly court a computer player in Armada: 2525
(as in Imperium Galactum), but one can alter their personalities. Computer players each have three ratings: one for
strategy (industrialists, technologists, ecologists, militarists or expansionists); one for tactics (cautious, prudent, reckless or
manic); and one for political stance (peaceful, isolationist, defensive, aggressive and xenophobic). These traits may be set by the
human player(s) and even randomly "scrambled" as desired
from time to time during the game! A "War Table" is a pop-up
feature which shows each player's stance towards another, which
ranges from peace to war and even feud (very nasty)!

reaches the number necessary to achieve
the next level in that science, the total is
reset to zero and begins anew towards
progress on the next level. Thus, over
time, a single Research Center could
reach level 6 technology, but it would
take a long time!
The number of points necessary to
reach the tech levels are as follows: 1 =
8; 2 = 16; 3 = 32; 4 = 64; 5 = 128; 6 =
256.
Additionally, on the first turn when new
Research Centers are added, only the
square root of the number of new
Centers actually adds to the running total
on that turn (fractions round down).
Their full value is added to the running
total normally each turn thereafter.
Once the necessary technology levels
have been reached, an item has a 50%
chance of "being discovered" each turn,
except that discovery is automatic if all
levels are above the minimum required.
The items on the Unit Description Table
below are divided by their primary technology type. The tech levels are
presented in the order in which they appear in the game — namely Weapons
Tech, Construction Tech, Hyperspace
Physics, Force Field Physics, Biotechnology, Planetology, Information Science
and Psycho Science. Ship's values are
presented in the following format:
Attack-Defense-Planetary Bombardment-Movement.

Sub Space
Where Armada: 2525 could have really used some help is in
its save-game feature. It is simple enough to save a game, but it
can only be done after production sequences by hitting the ESC
key. Thus, the save-game feature is useless for players who play
by e-mail through transferring saved game files. With no modem
support either, the only way to play with multi-player humans,
therefore, it to "hot-seat it" in front a single computer. The Al is
challenging enough to warrant repeated solitaire play, but better
connectivity would have added a lot to the value of the package
and, for $50, those "value added" features can make or break a
purchase decision. Also missing were more "toggleable" features:
random events, varying star formulae, etc. With one planet per
system, a player is often flung into contested sectors of space to
scrap over what planets look promising early in the game.

Raising Shields
What Armada: 2525 is, therefore, is another worthy addition to
the strategic space genre. Offering its own unique twists, Armada is not the end-all substitute for Reach for the Stars (one
must speculate if only SSG could produce that). Armada: 2525,
however, does deserve a prominent place on the shelf of those
who are enthusiasts of strategic space conquest games. Those
gamers will be thrilled to have another quality game available on
the subject, especially one with Armada's refreshing simplicity,
diversity and ease of play.

Player Aid

Player Aid

Survey

C*R*P*G*S
(Continued from page 20)
dungeon. This requires running two parties
alternately, one good and one evil. Aside
from that novelty, and a change in the
monster graphics, there is little to distinguish it from the previous two games.
Wizardry IV: The Return of Werdna
Sir-Tech
Review: #41 (November, 1987)
Wizardry IV is an inverse: instead of
being the good guy, you play the evil
Werdna, making his slow way up through
the dungeon to retrieve the amulet of
power. Along the way, you can summon a
variety of nasty critters to help you in your
fights against wandering bands of adventurers who want to keep you down. In addition, there is a raft of diabolical puzzles to
solve as Werdna treks upward to the exit.
When he gets there, the second half of the
game begins. This one is involved and complicated, with multiple endings, and by no
means linear. It was designed primarily for
the experienced, hard-core Wizardry player
and is not for the novice gamer. Wizardry
fans who want a good workout shouldn't
miss this one.

previous Wizardries, with a lot of objects
(not necessarily magical) to be used in different places and posers to unravel; however, the majority are not difficult. Interesting use of multiple endings, although how
to get to them is somewhat obscure, as
there are no clues. Combat in the latter part
of the game tends toward imbalance. Weak
in parts, but better than Wizardry V.
Wizard's Crown
SSI
Review: #31 (September-October 1986)
A better-than-average hack'n'slash game,
featuring tactical combat and other interesting points. Fighting is extremely detailed
with many options, but also somewhat timeconsuming. A quick combat mode is available for the speedy dispatch of weaker opponents (done in text mode with the computer running both sides). No levels as
such; experience is traded for increases in
skills and stats, a very intelligent way of handling things. Good balance of
magic/weapon in combat; spells do not become overwhelming. Very tough fight with
Foozle at the end. A good game for the
bash'em crowd.

Wizardry V: Heart of the Maelstrom
Sir-Tech
Review: #56 (February, 1989)*
A better game than II or III, although it
does away with the neatly sized dungeons,
making for a lot of aggravation in mapping.
This one is a combined rescue mission/kill
Foozle expedition. Combat is not as well
balanced as it should be, and there is a lot
of silliness in the game. Monster pics are improved over previous Wizardries, but the
dungeon graphics are still lines. This one
began the trend of actually using objects
during play, instead of merely having them
with you. Most puzzles, however, are
simple, once you have the right item (or
right instructions, as the case may be). One
of the better features is (are?) critters you
can talk to as you progress through the dungeon, who will provide information and/or
have important items for sale; it's refreshing
not to have to kill everything you come
across. Overall, a medium effort: better
than some, not as good as others.
Wizardry VI: Bane of the Cosmic Forge
Sir-Tech
Review: #79 (February, 1991)*
Tale (tips): #82 (May, 1991)
At last, the series breaks out of the linedrawing mold and starts to get into real
graphics. The bleak and colorless walls are
finally a thing of the past (and about time,
too). While there isn't that much variety, it's
still better than outlines. This one is not a
sequel to Maelstrom, as you have to create
a brand-new group, although character creation isn't much different from before, except
in some of the classes and races you can
have. Much more puzzle-oriented than most

by today's standards, but the concepts they
introduced have been incorporated into
most of the modern CRPGs. So take a look
and see what was going on in "the good
old days" when Apple was king and 64K
RAM was a huge amount of memory (heh).
Akalbeth
California Pacific
This was Lord British's first published
game. Bluntly, it wasn't all that terrific. Ultima fans may find it hard to believe, but
the outdoors were absolute, unrelieved
black. The only features were the little fivesquare symbols that represented towns
(and carried over to early Ultimas), big X's
that looked like scars (and represented dungeons), and way, way down on the righthand side, a castle. In the castle was a lord
who kept sending you out to kill particular
monsters, after which he would raise you in
rank (you started as a peasant). That was
the whole "plot" of the game.
The main point of interest (other than it
being Lord B's first) was the dungeoneering. This is where all the graphical efforts
went. The dungeons were point-of-view, 3-D
perspective, and you could see monsters in
the distance, approaching you, becoming
more defined as they got closer. What
makes this especially noteworthy is that
Akalabeth was the first CRPG to use this form;
other dungeons typically had the overhead,
bird's-eye-view look. Otherwise, Akalabeth
was a pretty standard hack-em-up.
Adventure to Atlantis
Odyssey: The Complete Adventure
Wilderness Campaign
Synergistic Software

Wrath of Denethenor
Sierra On-Line
Review: #37 (May, 1987)
An Ultima II look-alike, right down to the
graphics, only not as good as the game it
copies. Trek around the world to find out
how to bring about the downfall of the evil
Denethenor of the title. Lots of tedious backtracking, with nothing particularly new or inventive in the game. If you didn't play it,
you didn't miss much.

Moldy Oldies
These games are old (really old) and it's
doubtful you will come across any of them
these days. Even if you did, most are likely
to be unplayable, since they were written
mainly for the old Apple II and TRS-80
lines, although some might run on the IIGS.
This collection of the first CRPGs may
surprise you a little. Not all of them were of
the endless hack-and-slash variety, and
some contain features you might not expect in games that were designed to run on
small machines. Many were slow in terms
of play speed, and their graphics primitive

This trio of games by Robert Clardy, published sometime between 1979-81, were
some of the finest of the early CRPGs.
While mainly along the "Kill Foozle" lines,
they incorporated an astonishing range of
features: true wilderness, with swamps,
mountains, jungles, etc., that had hazards
of their own to overcome; travel by horse,
ship, magic carpet or teleportation; sailing
by the wind (which required re-rigging the
sails when the wind changed); nonhostile
travelers such as merchants to buy from or
mercenaries to recruit; temples, ruins,
crypts and castles to explore; a bunch of
items arid magical objects to use; and
monsters that inhabited specific areas (so
you knew pretty much what you'd be up
against in many locations), among others.
Not only that, but success required a lot
of people on your side, especially for the
final battles. Wilderness Campaign, for example, recommended that you have 50-75
warriors — a veritable army — in your party
before going to take on Foozle. And you
thought you had it good if your present-day
groups were six or eight characters strong!
More amazing yet, this type of detail was
squeezed into games that were designed for
48K RAM Apples. Sometimes it makes me
wonder about the modern CRPGs that require 640K or more, and what's using up
all that space (grin).

Survey

Beneath Apple Manor
The Software Factory
N/R
One of the earliest (1978!) CRPG-type
games for the Apple. Used ASCII graphics
(letters, numbers, and symbols) for the display. A single character fought through successive levels of nastiness beneath Apple
manor to recover the fabled golden apple.
Written in Basic, it was terribly slow even
by the standards of the day, but it was fun
nonetheless. Interesting points: experience
was traded for stat increases, gold for
"brain scans" that were essentially savegame positions, and your character was
able to use both weapons and magic. Even
more, each new game created a random
dungeon over which you had some control,
such as choosing number of rooms per
level and the difficulty factor (how tough
the critters were). Not bad, for a game that
was designed to run in as little as 16K of
memory! The big drawback (aside from the
slowness) was that the game had to be
played in one sitting, as the save game was
good only for the current session.

scenario who would join you for the duration of the adventure. Interestingly,
monsters had a chance to either like you
(and go with you), or ignore you (as long
as they weren't bothered), as well as rush
to rip out your throat. After the original
game there were six different scenarios,
with #7: Hall of Alchemle ending the series
(the master diskette was #1), and each
being more difficult than the last. The
master disk was required to play any of the
follow-up adventures, but the scenarios
were complete games in themselves. It's a
pity that Swordthrust did not survive into
the graphic era, as it had great potential.
Galactic Adventures
SSI
Review: #3.4 (July-August, 1983)
This was a sort of follow-up to Galactic
Gladiators, which was mainly tactical wargaming with a science-fiction flavor. Adventures kept the tactical combat and added a
bunch of little quests for the party to complete, thereby giving a bit more to do than
merely bash. It was actually quite involved,
for all that the adventures themselves were

Bronze Dragon
Twisted Speare
Commonwealth Software
Review: #32 (November, 1986)*
Hybrid adventure/CRPG in the
Swordthrust mold, but a little more sophisticated, as you could create a new party
right from the start and go adventuring with
them. Aside from the main scenario, there
were twelve others that you could play.
These were somewhat like Beneath Apple
Manor, in that you had control over their
creation and difficulty. This did not change
the plots of the scenarios, but did confer
some advantages in having an idea of what
you were up against. Twisted Speare was
a follow-up with more scenarios to play, set
in the Twisted Speare tavern. Most interesting was having NPCs drop in now and then
to give clues and information about the
various quests. It was another fun series
that did not survive the graphics onslaught.
Eamon/Swordthrust Series
CE Software
Eamon was one of the first (if not the
first) of the adventure/CRPG hybrids, blending standard role-playing features with puzzle-solving. You created a character with
physical and mental attributes and sent him
out into different scenarios. These scenarios
required a combination of fighting (and a little magic) and regular adventure game puzzle-solving to complete.
This game was eventually released into
the public domain, along with utilities for
creating your own adventures. It survives to
this day, and both the utilities and new
scenarios can often be found on local bulletin boards (by this time, there may be
other versions besides Apple floating
around, but Apple Eamon is still the most
prevalent).
Swordthrust was a revised and enhanced
version of Eamon. Still all-text, it allowed
you to pick up other characters in a

for more and more decline, etc). Overall,
this one was better than Apshai, but not by
too much, since the game considered the
queen "just another treasure" and there was
no special message for getting her out of
the dungeon. Two follow-up scenarios for
the Apple were published, The Keys To
Acheron and Danger in Drindisti; as with
the Apshai add-ons, they were only extra
adventures with not much new about them.
Telengard
Avalon Hill
Review: 3.3 (May-June, 1983)*
Another of the early "hack'n'slash with no
main goal" extravaganzas. Create a character and explore ever deeper into the dungeons below the surface. Very much influenced by Dungeons & Dragons, as
shown by: a) the attribute range of 3-18; b)
the requirement for getting treasure out of
the dungeon before it counted towards experience; c) one level at a time advancement, regardless of the amount of experience acquired; and d) the spells available for use. (Do names like "Magic Missile," "Cause Light Wounds," "Phantasmal
Force" and "Power Word Kill" sound
familiar?) Interesting for its time, the game
would be pretty dated today, especially with
the advent of SSI's Gold Box series. Back
then, however, it was hot stuff, and a fun
way of passing the time.
Temple of Apshai
Epyx
Review: #30 (August, 1986)

simple, with people to hire (they had to be
paid and fed), skills to perfect, and various
planets to visit. Also, like several other
games mentioned in this section, you had
control over creating the scenarios themselves. Of course the main part of the game
was still the combat, and this one (if you
can get it) is likely to appeal more to wargarners than anyone else.
Hellfire Warrior
Epyx
This was the true sequel to Temple of Apshai. It brought in some improvements,
such as the game being able to remember
how much gold you carried, and having an
actual goal, this time rescuing a sleeping
warrior queen, a quest lifted pretty much
right out of Wagner's Ring cycle. It played
almost the same as the previous game, although this one brought in the use of
magic potions to temporarily enhance attributes. The interesting kicker to this was
that some of the potions were addictive: if
you used them too much, your permanent
stats began to decline, forcing you to use
the potions more and more (and making

This game caused a sensation when it
first appeared, being one of the earliest
graphic CRPGs. A fully defined character
was maneuvered through a series of corridors and rooms in a four-level dungeon. It
was a hack-and-slash game, with no particular goal beyond killing monsters and
grabbing treasure. The programming was
not as polished as it could have been, since
the game could never remember how much
gold you carried, and always asked on
replays what you had (a really powerful incentive to, ahem, pad a trifle). It was also
very slow, being another done-in-BASIC
game. However, in a day when most
CRPGs were text (like Eamon) or had
graphics but text-only combat, it was a marvel to be able to see the fighting, especially
when your character lunged at a critter. The
game was later ported over to the Atari 800
line with several improvements in the way
of speed and graphics. Two add-on scenarios for the Apple were also released, Upper Reaches of Apshai and Curse of Ra,
but they didn't add much new, being just
extra adventures to take your character on.
One of the more interesting aspects of Apshai was its use of paragraphs to describe
the various rooms of the dungeons (the
Apple graphics being rather Spartan). This
feature was later taken on by more modern
games such as the Gold Box series from
SSI and Wasteland (to name just a few),
but, so far as I can tell, Apshai had it first.
(These paragraphs, by the way, were a
great means of ensuring that you didn't
miss any rooms on a particular level!)

Editorial

On Silvery Disks of Splendor

S

ometimes a journalist feels
downright Dickensian as he tries
to make sense of the fast-moving
events and advances he covers. One is almost tempted to start an editorial like
this one with "They are our best of
hopes; they are our worst of hopes." CDROM, CD-I, CDTV, MMPC and DV-I all
seem to blend together in this tale of
more than two technologies, this revolution in an industry which is barely over a
decade old.

Rumors are rampant everywhere. The
grapevine tries to pass off its overripe
fruit of partially correct information in a
horrid vintage of "doom and gloom" gossip. We hear that a major publisher,
strong enough to be traded publicly, is in
dire financial straits because of their expenditures in optical research; we hear
that an important publisher with deep
pockets in their parent corporation is getting out of computer games altogether
and we hear that several publishers have
spent so much money trying to develop
CD-based products that they do not really stand a chance to make any money at
all on the first generation of products.
Such a fate is typical in many industries,
but has been almost unheard of in our industry (unless significant tool-building
took place in the development process).
Rumors of our industry's imminent collapse are relatively exaggerated. It is true
that, like the mild economic recovery expected worldwide over the next 12-18
months, the original wave of CD-based
games will probably net less than would
have been expected at an earlier date. It
is also true that research and development has hurt several bottom lines.
However, it is also true that many
software developers and publishers have
been smart enough to learn on OPM
(other people's money). They have
financed their optical storage education
on the research and development
budgets of Commodore, Fujitsu, NEC
and Philips. Hence, they do not have to
make as much money per unit as they
would in the floppy disk-based, or even
cartridge-based, market.
The frightening reality is that the imminent arrival of CD-based storage technology has upped the ante on art, music
and game size (number of locations in

an adventure or role-playing game, number of missions in a campaign for a simulation) that game development budgets
are moving past the three-quarter of a
million dollar mark. Even at $60.00
(retail) per unit, an average game now
has to clear 40,000 units to break even.
Fortunately, alert publishers have
caught one major break in this flurry of
difficulty. The international market is
growing and expanding. Lucasfilm
Games estimates that nearly 50% of
their profits on The Secret of Monkey Island, for example, came from their international versions (in 11 different languages). CD technology already has
made it easier to do multi-lingual text versions, but it looks like it might be a
"mixed bag" for the "talkies" of the next
generation.
The prognosis for our industry from this
editor's perspective is that we will have a
small upturn in revenue over last
Christmas season. The trend will continue through the spring sales season of
next year, but should explode as the new
platforms begin to take hold and move
past the initial penetration level by
Christmas of 1992. The last time this
editor put a date on an industry
economic trend, he was a year early. If
this projection is a year early, the belated
growth may be "too late" for any publisher who has relied on their own capital for
R & D rather than OPM. The upshot is
that most of the companies gossiped
about will probably still be here. It's the
ones who are seldom mentioned that
may be in trouble.
State of the Magazine: This issue continues our current practice of inducting
one venerable title per month into the
Hall of Fame. This issue, appropriately
enough, it is SimCity. Maxis has been intelligent enough to develop a CD-ROM
version of the game with OPM and has
actually marketed some of the design
developments as support products. Sometimes called a "god game" and sometimes called a software toy (Maxis is
trademarking the designation), SimCity
has captured the hearts and minds of
more than a third of a million garners.
Will Wright's brainchild created a genre
and has inspired many of us to become
more active in our own real cities. Congratulations, Will.

