May 1988
Number 47

FEATURES
Scorpion's Bite

7

An Editorial on CRP Games / Scorpia

Inside the Industry

8

News, Notes and Quotes

Ultima V

12

Becoming a "Warrior of Destiny' / Scorpia

Trust and Betrayal

18

"Have I Lied To You... Recently?" / Regan Carey

Panzer Strike

22

SSI's WWII Construction Set / Bob Proctor

The Future of Computer Role-Playing

24

"Dungeons & Dragons" Co-Creator Muses / Dave Arneson

Journal of Computer Game Design

26

Game Design Insights / Chris Crawford

Wasted In The Wasteland

28

A "Hot" Adventure Game from EA / William "BM' Kritzen

Echelon

31

Voice Actuated Fire Control for C-64/128 / Hosea Battles

The Train: Escape To Normandy

32

A New Accolade Adventure / David M. Wilson

The Rumor Bag

34

Ruminations, Rumblings, and Rumors from the
Resident Rummy

Scorpion's Mail

38

Personal Answers From Your Poisoned Pen Pal / Scorpia

Maniac Mansion

40

An Appointment With Terror / Charles Ardai

Soko-Ban and Tetris

42

Two Titles From Spectrum Holobyte / Roy Wagner

Origins Awards 1987

44

Vote For Your Favorites

Ports Of Call

46

Down To The Sea In Ships / Roy Wagner

DEPARTMENTS
Taking A Peek
Letters
Reader Input Device
CGW Hall Of Fame
100 Games Rated

4
10
55
55
56

TAKING A PEEK
Activision, Inc.
2350 Bayshore Parkway
Mountain View, CA 94043

C-64, and IBM ($37.95, $34.95).
Circle Reader Service Card #1.

RAMPAGE: The "monster mash"
doesn't have to be a "graveyard
smash" any longer. Activision has
licensed the Bally Midway coin-op hit
where players control an animated
giant gorilla, lizard, or wolf in climbing metropolitan skylines, swatting
helicopters, stomping innocent bystanders, bashing cars, and devouring helpless humans. If the monsters
are not successful before time and
energy runs out, a metamorphosis
occurs which transforms them into
helpless people who can be consumed by the other monsters. Apple,

Broderbund Software, Inc.
17 Paul Drive
San Rafael, CA 94903-2101
WHERE IN EUROPE IS CARMEN SANDIEGO: This product is
the latest in an incredibly successful
series. The mechanics are essentially
the same, but the interface has become friendlier because of the online data base. This release comes
with a special edition of the Rand McNally Concise Atlas of Europe,
published especially for this product.
Apple, C-64, IBM ($44.95, $39.95).
Circle Reader Service Card #2.

Cosmi
431 No. Figueroa St.
Wilmington, CA 90744
CAVERNS OF KHAFKA: This arcade adventure game is part of
Cosmi's "Celery Software" line of bargain priced software. From $5.95$7.95 each, these games should
provide plenty of "bang for the
buck." This one is a treasure hunt
built around an ancient Egyptian
mythos. Atari 8-bit, C-64 ($5.95).
Circle Reader Service Card #3.
MONEY BAGS: How do current
events affect the world of international finance? Do you have what it takes
to be a successful "arbitrager" in the
international currency markets, stock
markets, commodities markets (gold
and lumber), and world bond
markets? This simulation offers four

(Continued on page 6)

TAKING A PEEK
(Continued from page 4)
levels of difficulty and fast-paced
decision making. Similar to Inside
Trader, the game uses the function
keys for a fast, clean interface. IBM
(no price). Circle Reader Service
Card #4.
Electronic Arts
1820 Gateway Drive
San Mateo, CA 94404
BARD'S TALE III: Tarjan, the Mad
God, should be a familiar name to
veterans of the Bard's Tale adventures. This time, adventurers must
face the psychotic "deity" himself in
order to release their world from
ruin. This sequel adds auto-mapping, two new spellcasting classes

CONVERSIONS
RECEIVED
For the Apple:
Strike Fleet (EA)

For the Atari 8-bit:
Sons of Liberty (SSI)
Video Title Shop (Datamost)

For the C-64/128:
Blackjack Academy (Microillusions)
Hunt for Red October
(Datamost)
Panzer Strike (SSI)
Patton vs. Rommel (EA)

B-24 (SSI)
Defcon 5 (Cosmi)
Superstar Soccer (Mindscape)

(Chronomancers and Geomancers),
and more animation than ever to an
already successful adventure formula. Apple ($49.95). Circle Reader
Service Card #5.

INTELLITYPE: Shouldn't there be
a typing tutor for adults? After all,
there are typing tutors which blast
spaceships and race automobiles in
order to teach typing skills to
children. Couldn't someone create
such a program to appeal to adults?
Moses Ma accomplished just that
with this program. Using artificial intelligence routines and an actionpacked (never flagging) storyline, this
one offers lots of incentive. It may
not be strictly a game, but it is interactive. Amiga ($49.95). Circle Reader
Service Card #6.

Front Runner Software Co.
P. 0. Box 435
Collinsville, CT 06022-0435
CAMPAIGN PROMISES: This
game could well be called the
"Monopoly" of presidential election
games. Up to six players have to
land on the right states (color-coded
by size) in order to build campaign
organizations. Election results
depend on a combination of campaign promises (from a list of vague
and general ones, just like a real life
platform), organizational effort, and
luck. In addition, the game allows for
random use of 25 "dirty tricks" from
rumored mob connections through
accusations of plagiarism. IBM
($40.00). Circle Reader Service Card
#7.
(Continued on page 52)

SCORPION'S BITE
An Editorial on the CRPG Genre
by Scorpia

n

a previous article (June-July '87), I
commented on the current state of
computer role-playing games (or
CRPG's for short), with the emphasis
primarily on the lack of the role-playing
element in most of them. This time, we
will look at another important factor,
game balance as it relates to combat.

I

It is a sad fact that many CRPG's are
not well-balanced. At one extreme, the
party has a very difficult time getting
started; at the other, they become so
powerful that they can blast away anything in their path with little trouble or
thought. Typically, it is only in the midportion of the game that all its elements
function in harmony.
Assume a standard party of six, fresh
from the creation utility. They have no
weapons, no armor, and very little gold.
Pooling all the funds available may be
enough to get the frontline fighters halfway equipped, but certainly not in any
really satisfactory manner.
This miserliness usually leads to the
practice of "muggee", where the player
creates a number of extra characters,
whose sole purpose is to give their
money to the actual party, then vanish
forever from sight. After a sufficient number of these ephemeral nobodies have
come and gone, the party has enough
gold to equip themselves properly.
When players feel forced into actions
like these, something is definitely wrong.
Remember, we aren't talking about
magic items and goodies (which may
not even be for sale), just ordinary
armor and weapons. For far too long,
too many designers have worked under
the mistaken idea that it should be hard
for the player to get started in the game.
There is no reason for this to be so,
particularly as many adventure groups
walk out to face some very nasty encounters right from the beginning.
Anyone who has ever started a group
from scratch in Bard's Tale I or Might &
Magic (to name only two) knows all
about this. Monsters frequently come in
multiples, with several types mixed
together. This is not something an illequipped, low-level group needs. It is
not a challenge, but torture and frustration.

Each combat is a struggle, followed by
a quick saving of the game (and perhaps a back-up of the save, as well) so
that the miniscule progress gained isn't
lost in the next fight. After this procedure has been followed enough times,
the party finally advances to the point
where the mages have some decent offensive and defensive spells, fighters
have good weapons and armor, and the
player can at last begin to enjoy the
game.
Compare that to a game such as Ultima IV, where the monster groups are
carefully scaled to the adventure party. A
beginner need not fear being overwhelmed by powerful or numerous opponents. Encounters are tough but fair,
enough to make the fight challenging
and dangerous, but not necessarily fatal.
Later, as the party becomes stronger, so
do the monsters, but always in the same
balanced fashion.
One reason this worked so well in Ultima IV was the limit on both monsters
and characters. A character reached
level eight, and that was it. Additional experience brought no further benefits of
any kind. In the same manner, balrons
and daemons were the most powerful
monsters, and a high-level group could
handle them, although not without
some difficulty. Of course, hack-andslash was not the primary emphasis in
this game, merely one element of the
whole.
Most other CRPG's, however, allow for
unlimited advancement of characters.
True, as the characters reach the upper
levels, more and more experience is required, but enough combats will provide
it. Thus, as the game reaches its late
stages, one of two things happens:
either (a) the group is now so strong
that they can literally wipe out most opponents in a round or two; or (b) the
monsters keep getting stronger and
stronger until they are almost impossible
to kill, and each encounter with such
creatures often leaves several party members dead or in other unpleasant circumstances.
This often results from the "more is better" philosophy, in which designers, for
lack of anything better, cram hundreds

of monster types into the game. This is
downright silly, and adds very little to the
adventure. There are, after all, only so
many ways a monster can attack. After
weapon/tooth/claw/spelt/poison/paralysis/
level drain/petrifaction/madness/aging
there isn't much else they can do to you.
Therefore, most of these monsters
tend to be nothing but more powerful
versions of earlier ones, masquerading
under different names. They are simply
harder to hit and harder to kill, and have
several attack modes instead of one.
This is not necessarily bad, if the number of monster types is restricted, but
too often designers just keep sticking in
"new" monsters until they run out of
room or can't think of any more to add.
When this is combined with a large
number of dungeon levels, as is often
the case, the game starts turning into
runaway hack-and-slash, particularly as
the frequency of encounters in CRPG's
of this nature is also high. Combat then
overshadows everything else.
Why does this occur? Why is it that
many otherwise-well-conceived games
degenerate to this low level? Primarily because the designers forget about the
overall objective of the game, and never
seem to consider the optimum level of
experience the party needs to overcome
the major adversary.
Consider your typical CRPG goal,
which is almost always "destroy the evil
wizard" (which is not, after all, a bad
goal). The nefarious mage Bubu is
placed at the bottom of a dungeon or
top of a tower or some other
hard-to-reach location. Having done this, the
authors then go merrily on their way,
constructing dungeon level after dungeon level, populating them with all
manner of weird and bizarre creatures,
and forgetting all about poor Bubu.
There is no doubt that Bubu has been
forgotten. From my own experience,
from comments made by CGW readers
and others, one fact stands out: that
when the party finally reaches Bubu,
90% of the time he turns out to be a
wimp. He is nowhere near as difficult to
despatch as all the monster groups
ahead of him. Werdna? Mangar?
Mondain? Minax? Lagoth Zanta? These
were all duck soup compared to what
the party fought through to get to them.
Thus, going through all those endless
encounters makes the characters so
powerful in relation to the evil wizard
that the final showdown is often anticlimactic, and ultimately unsatisfying.
What should be the biggest, toughest,

(Continued on page 52)

INSIDE THE
INDUSTRY
News, Notes and Quotes From the Computer Entertainment Industry
Computer
Entertainment
Industry Shines in
1987 Excellence in
Software Awards
At the Spring Symposium
of the Software Publishers
Association, held at the
Claremont Hotel in
Berkeley, California, the
1987 Excellence in Software
Awards were presented.
These awards, like the
Academy Awards for the Motion Picture Industry, are
selected by a vote of representatives of the software industry itself. As such, they
may represent a different
perspective than that of the
consumer (even as many
Oscar winners are more critically than commercially successful). Nevertheless, the
awards do present a
yardstick to measure a
product's achievement by.
The first presentation was
for Best Packaging. The
nominees included: 4th &
Inches (Accolade), Ancient
Art of War at Sea (Broderbund), Designasaurus
(Britannica), Dondra: A New
Beginning (Spectrum
Holobyte), and Sub Battle
Simulator (Epyx). Ancient
Art of War at Sea (with the
painting used on the cover
of Computer Game Forum
#2) was the winner.
The award for Best
Graphics went to Adobe Illustrator (Adobe Systems),
but California Games
(Epyx), Deluxe Paint
(Electronic Arts), Falcon
(Spectrum Holobyte), and

Shadowgate (Mindscape)
were also nominated.
From a field of nominees
which included Deluxe
Music Construction Set
(Electronic Arts), Falcon
(Spectrum Holobyte), Jam
Session (Broderbund),
Shadowgate (Mindscape),
Test Drive (Accolade), and
World Games (Epyx), the
Best Sound award went to
Jam Session. This was to
be the first of three awards
for the popular music
program from Broderbund.
Nominees for the Best Action/Strategy Program included: Ancient Art of War
at Sea (Broderbund),
California Games (Epyx),
Deep Space: Operation
Copernicus (Sir-Tech), Falcon (Spectrum Holobyte),
and What They Don't Teach
You At Harvard Business
School (Reality Technologies). The winner was
Falcon.
The list of products
nominated for Best Adventure or Fantasy/Role-Play-

ing Program was impressive. In addition to the winner, Sierra's Leisure Suit
Larry in the Land of the
Lounge Lizards, the
nominees were: Beyond
Zork (Infocom), Maniac
Mansion (Lucasfilm Games),
Pirates! (Microprose),
Shadowgate (Mindscape),
and Wizardry IV: The
Return of Werdna (Sir-Tech).
There appeared to be
something of an upset in
the Best Technical
Achievement category. Of
the five nominees, only
Chuck Yeager's Advanced
Flight Trainer (Electronic
Arts) and Falcon (Spectrum
Holobyte) came from the
entertainment side of the industry. Against Letraset's
Image Studio, Microsoft's
OS/2 for the PC and Windows/386 for the PC, the
prospects for an entertainment product's victory
seemed remote. Spectrum
Holobyte's Falcon was the
victor, however.
The competition for Best
Simulation Program was a

dogfight between Electronic
Art's Chuck Yeager's Advanced Flight Trainer,
Spectrum Holobyte's Falcon, Microprose' Gunship,
Epyx' Sub Battle Simulator,
and Accolade's Test Drive.
Falcon emerged victorious
once again.
The nominees for Best
Entertainment Program
were: Ancient Art of War at
Sea (Broderbund), California Games (Epyx), Chuck
Yeager's Advanced Flight
Trainer (Electronic Arts), Falcon (Spectrum Holobyte),
Jam Session (Broderbund),
and Leisure Suit Larry in
the Land of the Lounge
Lizards (Sierra). The surprising winner was Jam Session.
An analysis of the awards
indicates that products with
Macintosh versions had an
edge in most categories.
The final tally with regard to
entertainment products indicates that Falcon and Jam
Session walked away with
three awards each and that
Broderbund garnered more
awards as a company (four)
than other entertainment
companies.
Computer Gaming World
Editor Russell Sipe and
CGW Adventure Game
Editor Scorpia were each
nominated for an SPA Excellence in Journalism
Award. But, alas, the award
for "Best Review" went to
Bob Lindstrom of A+
Magazine. Bob also beat out
Editor Sipe and Assistant
Editor Wilson to win the
President Elect 1988 Tournament hosted by SSI last
June in Chicago. Hey, Bob!
Lighten up—Ok!?

MICROPROSE
WINS
REPRIEVE IN
WEST GERMANY
It was good news/bad
news for Microprose
Software on the eve of
their court hearing in the Administrative Court of
Cologne where the company would appeal the ban
from marketing Silent Ser-

CHICAGO
YOUTH SOCCER
TEAM WINS
MINDSCAPE
CUP
On February 27, 1988,
an all-star team composed of youth soccer
players from Chicago
defeated a similar team
from Cleveland by a score
of 4-1 in the final match
of a double elimination
tournament. Teams from
as far away as Baltimore,
Dallas, and San Diego participated in the tournament.
Mindscape president and
CEO Roger Buoy
presented the Mindscape
Cup to the team on
February 28. At the
brunch, Buoy vocalized
the company's support in
promoting youth. The
CEO stated, "Mindscape is
dedicated to supporting

vice. On that night, the
Federal Office for Examination of Harmful Publications
(BPS) removed the ban. The
good news is that this
means that Silent Service
may once again be advertised and sold in West Germany. The bad news is that
Gunship and Airborne
Ranger are still recommended for ban and that
the company lost the option
of making the Silent Service
case a test of the BPS procedures. Now, without a
banned product, no appeal
can be made in the court
system.
With the Gunship hearing
set for June 9, 1988, the
West German distributor of
Gunship was able to place
some advertisements in
magazines. With no hearing
date set for Airborne
Ranger, magazines will not
accept advertisements for
the product because they
could be forcibly removed
from sale if a ban went into
effect while the magazine

and promoting youth
sports, and I'm a firm
believer that soccer is an
exceptional way to bring
young people together."
At the same brunch, the
executive reaffirmed the
company's commitment
to sponsoring the
Mindscape Cup.

was "on sale" with advertisements for a banned
product. Microprose hopes
that the BPS will settle the
Gunship question on June
9th. On the two previous
hearing dates, the BPS simply postponed their decision
and left the product in limbo.
Microprose insists that the
company respects the German government's desire to
protect its youth from offensive publications. However,
the company is fighting the
ban because, according to
Mike Harrison of
Microprose, "BPS guidelines
effectively prevent banned
products from being sold to
adults. Once a product is
banned for sale to youth, it
cannot be advertised in any
German medium and may
be sold only in retail establishments with an adultsonly entrance." Further,
"The BPS uses questionable
criteria and procedures in
evaluating products for possible banning."

"What do you want
in your computer
game?" My answer:
Fog of War, yes ability to understand
and control my purchased game and
knowledge of why
and how things
work - absolutely! If
you are unwilling to
provide such information. I say to you,
"Tough!" (It's only a
game.)
J. Dale Hight
Los Angeles, CA

"Hole"y Controversy
I don't know what version of World
Tour Golf the Wilsons play, but the
IBM version comes with 22 complete courses, not just an assortment of holes. WTG also uses much
higher resolution graphics than
Mean 18, if fewer colors. For the
IBM, I think WIG is qualitatively
equal to Mean 18, but the 22 courses and computer opponents make
WTG the better value.
Jeff Petraska
New Boston, MI
According to Paul Ritchie, one of
the programmers on WTG, early
versions of the game had a
peculiar oddity. The copy protection which was on-disk worked
such that if a drive operated slightly differently than IBM standard,
the program would think that a
demo disk was running, so it
would only offer the first two holes
of each course. The Wilsons played
the game on a clone with one of
those old disks. Hence, the confusion.

Icy Comment, Eh?!
I'd like to see a stat-based hockey
game and more modern naval combat for the Apple II series. Please encourage!
John Heffernan
Port Monmouth, NJ
We'd like to see that too, eh!

Foggy Article Breakdown
Regarding Newberg's Fog of War:

"Fog of War:" Remarkable! Continue the series, please.
W. G. Dunn
Berkeley, CA
We are in the process of gathering
responses to the opening round of
discussion. Stay tuned.

Costly Observation
Do you realize it costs more to subscribe to this magazine than it does
to subscribe to: The New Yorker,
The Sporting News, Harper's, Atlantic Monthly, Rolling Stone, A+, Incider, Personal Computing, New
England Journal of Medicine, any
number of comic books, on and
on? The only periodical I can think
of - off the top of my head - that's
more expensive is The Wall Street
Journal! C'mon, give your subscribers a break! One month, just
one, list a bigger discount rate!
Dennis Owens
Old Town, ME
Frankly, we find our magazine
more interesting than the New
England Journal of Medicine. Of
course, we could raise the price to
equal the Wall Street Journal if
you'd like.
(Continued on page 37)

Ultima V

all by harsh laws ("Thou shalt speak the truth, or
thou shalt lose thy tongue"), and the three
Shadowlords spread fear and evil throughout the
world as Blackthorn's agents.

Ending the Inquisition,
Beginning the Expedition

Becoming a
"Warrior of Destiny"
by Scorpia

L

ong years have passed since the Avatar

walked the lands of Britannia; years in which
a restless figure haunts a lonely ring of
stones, waiting for a call. Hope springs eternal, but
as the quiet months roll by, even the strongest
hope can dim. Perhaps, indeed, all that
went before was only
a dream, a dream
whose bright edges
are slowly beginning
to fade. Then, one
night in the dark
hours before dawn,
the summons comes.
Light floods the room,
radiating out from the
Codex symbol floating
overhead. Britannia
calls at last for her
Avatar, but it is a
Britannia much
changed and not for
the better .. .

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

Ultima V: Warriors of Destiny
Apple II
Solitaire
$59.95
Lord British
Origin Systems
Londonderry, NH

Ultima V - Warriors
of Destiny, picks up
the story several years
after the Avatar has
left Britannia. The
complete details are in
the documentation
and program itself
and are certainly must
reading before actually starting play. Briefly,
Lord British has
vanished on an expedition into the newly-discovered Underworld below the
surface and his sovereignty has
been usurped by one Blackthorn, a would-be Avatar with
his own ideas on promoting
public good.

Blackthorn's reign, as might
be suspected, has not turned out to be for the
good of all. In fact, matters have deteriorated to
the point where some of your old friends, Shamino
and lolo, take it upon themselves to summon the
one person who may be able to set things right
again, the true Avatar of Britannia. So, you step
through into a land now filled with suspicion and
tyranny, where the eight virtues are enforced upon

There is a lot to do in this one: first dealing with
Blackthorn and the Shadowlords, then voyaging
through the Underworld to discover the fate of
Lord British. Fortunately, you won't have to do this
alone. All your old companions from Ultima IV are
still around and they are ready and waiting to join
you on this double quest. You won't have to ask
them to come with you; all of them are eager to
take up the old trail of adventure once again. Your
biggest problem will be in deciding which ones to
have along, because party size has been reduced
to a total of six.
You do not have to have played Ultima IV to play
this adventure, but it helps.
If you have played the earlier game, your Avatar
character, regardless of previous profession in Ultima IV, has gained magical power. This is true
even if you start out with a newly-created one.
Transferring your Avatar over from IV, though,
does get you off to a better start in the game.
Naturally, some changes will be made in the
transfer (your character stays on the IV disk and is
merely copied over). Don't expect to get a full 8thlevel character, though. Experience points from the
Ultima IV character will be divided by 10, so that
one with maximum points (9999) comes over with
999. Thus, your Ultima V character becomes 5th
level. In addition, the Strength, Dexterity, and Intelligence numbers will be halved. This is not as bad
as it sounds, since in V the maximum for any of
them is 30, and there are many opportunities in
the game to build them up to that figure.
Another change is in the matter of professions,
which have been boiled down to three from eight.
The only ones left are: Fighter (which includes the
former Paladin, Ranger, and Shepherd classes),
Bard (including the Tinker class), and Mage (including the Druid class). Thus, Julia the Tinker is now
Julia the Bard, Jaana the Druid is now a Mage,
and so forth. This also means that Dupre and
Shamino are now mere Fighters and have lost
their magical abilities.

Speaking of Clues
Ultima V plays much as the previous game: information is gathered by visiting the various towns
and talking to the inhabitants. Most of the towns
and villages are, however, surprisingly underpopulated. Compared to IV, some of them seem to be
almost deserted. Skara Brae, for example, is practically a ghost town. [Ed.: It suddenly occurs to
some of us that many people are probably
wondering why the town of Skara Brae exists in
both the fantasy world of The Bard's Tale and Ultima IV and V. The reason for this crossover rests
in the person of Roe R. Adams III. If that name
sounds familiar, it is because he is one of the

designers of Wizardry IV: The Return of Werdna.
Actually, Roe did consulting on both The Bard's
Tale, and Ultima IV; in addition to writing the
storyline for Wizardry IV. His gamer's alter ego is
the famous "Hawkwind" of the Ultimas and that
character hails from Skara Brae. So, the city exists in more than one game.]
Other places have a few more people, but overall
the number of people to talk to (aside from merchants, who only buy and sell) is much reduced
from Ultima IV.
On the other hand, this also means that a given
individual may have a lot say about different
things. Obtaining one scrap of information from
someone doesn't mean he doesn't have more to
tell you. Talking more than once to people is a
definite necessity.
As before, conversations hinge on keywords that
you pick up from the initial remarks a person
makes. Pencil and paper may be needed to note
down likely keywords, as people are much more loquacious than they used to be and talk in whole
paragraphs (occasionally, several in a row). If
you're not careful, you could easily miss an important word or two.
All eight towns, the three castles of Virtue
(Lycaeum, Serpent's Hold, Empath Abbey), the
castle of Lord British, Codex Island, three of the villages (Paws, Cove, Buccaneer's Den), and most of
the shrines are in roughly the same place as they
were in the previous game.
New places include: the three tiny villages of
East, North, and West Britanny, which have
sprung up around Lord British's castle;
Blackthorn's island, complete with castle; several
lighthouses (which can be entered); and a number
of small keeps (miniature castles) and huts scattered throughout the world.
The moongates are still there, although they
operate a little differently now. After sunset, all
eight gates open, and remain open until a little
before dawn. By noting the moon positions on the
screen, you can easily determine where a gate will
take you, although you may have to wait awhile for
the right moon phase to get to a particular place.
The drawback to using the gates is that they appear only at night. All towns, and some villages,
lock up for the evening after sunset. Therefore,
using a moongate to travel also means spending
the night camping outdoors. This can be
dangerous, since monsters (although far fewer
than previously) still roam the land and might ambush your group while asleep. Fortunately, you
can designate one member of the party to stand
watch and a wise player will do so.
Dungeons, of course, are still with us, eight in all.
This time around, they function primarily as conduits to the underworld, each one leading to a different spot of that vast, underground area. The
secondary purpose of the dungeons is to provide
experience for the party members since there
aren't quite so many monsters on the surface.
However, getting into the dungeons will not be

all that simple. After the Avatar left, the Council of
Mages decided it would be a good thing if all the
dungeons were sealed off and that is exactly what
they did.
Thus, you cannot just go waltzing into them. You
must first find the way to open them up again.
Even before that, you have to find the dungeons
(one of the few things not on the map that comes
with the game). Still, previous experience with Ultima IV will tell you that the logical place to look is
among the mountains, and that is where they are.
As before, each dungeon is
eight levels deep. Also, each has
a ladder at the bottom level
that leads to the Underworld.
This is not an area to visit with
a low-level group. It is full of
lakes, rivers, swamp and, most
especially, mountains. It is obviously an easy place to become lost in, when you recall
that it's the same size as the entire surface world.

Enormous
Differences
The magic system has been completely redone.
You still need to purchase reagents to cast spells,
but now you can buy (at stiff prices) those elusive
components nightshade and mandrake, although
if you know when and where to look, you can also
find them growing wild in the outdoors.
For the rest, spells are divided into eight "circles",
each circle corresponding to the spell-caster's
level. Thus, a first-level character can use only
spells of the first circle; a
second level character can cast
spells of the first and second
circles, and so on, up to level
eight (which is the highest level
obtainable for a character).
Many of the spells will be
familiar from Ultima IV, but the
naming system is quite different, structured around syllables that are strung together
to make the spells. For instance, "Mani" is the standard
healing spell. This restores 130 hitpoints. There is a more
powerful spell, "Vas Mani," that restores all hitpoints. Similarly, "In Lor" is the standard light spell
which provides a small amount of light for a short
period of time, while "Vas Lor" provides more light
for a longer period of time. A detailed spell guide
comes with the game, showing the spells, effects,
and reagents needed. To cast a spell, all that is
necessary (aside from properly-mixed reagents) is
to type in the first letter of each syllable of the
spell. The program will do the rest.
Combat has changed enormously from the previous games. First (and guaranteed to bring
cheers), you can now strike at a monster from any

angle, not just the four cardinal directions. A targeting system is in effect, using a large cross-hair on
the screen, which is manipulated by the arrow (or
letter) keys onto the desired target. The program
also remembers which character is targeting which
monster. If the opponent isn't killed by the first
strike, the cross-hair will automatically appear on
the same opponent on that character's next turn
(it can, of course, be moved if you want to target a
different monster).
Distance weapons now have
limiting factors. Slings, for example, do not go as far as
bows, bows do not go as far as
crossbows, and crossbows do
not go as far as magic bows
and axes (which can reach
anywhere on the battlefield).
There is a variety of hand
weapons and shields available.
Some hand weapons, such as
morning stars and halberds,
can reach two squares instead
of one. Spiked shields can be used not only for
defense, but as a weapon, too. The limitation here
is strength. All weapons require a certain minimum
strength to be wielded.
This also applies to armor. Minimum strengths
are necessary to wear different types. However,
don't be in a hurry to deck everyone out in plate
mail, because the weight of the armor affects
which weapons you can use. A character who can
use a halberd in leather may be
unable to do so in chain mail.
Therefore, choices which
balance armor protection vs. offensive abilities must be made
and they are not always easy
choices to make.
One major difference from Ultima IV is that weaponry and
armor are no longer restricted
by class. Any character can use
any weapon or wear any armor
if he or she is strong enough.
This includes magic bows and
axes (axes being by far the best), as well as plate
mail,
Ultima V also features more in the way of goodies
than previous games. Rings of Protection,
Regeneration, and Invisibility (this one is really
neat!), mysterious potions, scrolls of magical spells,
magic keys (to open magically locked doors),
amulets of turning. These and others will be found
throughout play to help you along on your quests.

Monstrous Similarities
Monsters, alas, are pretty much the same old
crew: orcs, ettins, trolls, slimes, gremlins, bats,
dragons, daemons, etc. Many of these will also be
found in the Underworld, which sports (by my
count) only three new monster types, which is very
disappointing. I had expected many more original
creatures to be roaming around down there.

At the same time, daemons and wisps have a
new power, which is extremely nasty: the ability to
possess members of the party and turn them
against you. When this happens, the daemon or
wisp vanishes from the screen, and the possessed
character turns and starts hitting other party members.
Sea monsters and pirate ships continue to make
ocean voyages somewhat perilous. The serpents,
with long-range fireballs, and the pirates, with cannons, are especially dangerous and should be
avoided whenever possible. Sharks are not much
of a problem if you have distance weapons and
spells, but squids and seahorses have their own distance weapons and can be quite formidable.

"Ultima"te Improvements
Since you start as an Avatar, there is no need to
prove yourself as in the previous game. Yet, the
program is still watching you, although in a more
subtle fashion. It is possible for you to steal horses
or food, or lie to people, without losing your status
as an Avatar. However, such un-Avatar-like behavior has its own drawbacks, and you may be unable to finish the game if you do the wrong things.
As there is no Hawkwind this time to give you any
hints, you will have to decide from the actions of
those around you whether or not you are doing
the proper actions.
The graphics in the game are much improved
over Ultima IV. The detail is finer, the range of motion greater, and there are many little niceties,
such as waterfalls; ticking clocks (look close
enough, you can even tell the time!); movable
items (such as chairs and barrels); curved
coastlines; lighthouses that actually work at night,
sweeping the area with their beams; little pools of
light around lamps in towns and villages; and
many more.
Time is important in the game. Some events will
only happen at certain hours and you might miss
them if you aren't in the right place at the right
time. This is also true in regard to the townspeople
and villagers. Merchants open at a particular hour
(not the same for everyone), go to lunch, close up
at night, and so forth. Non-merchants can usually
be found in particular places at particular times.
Fortunately, you don't have to go rooting around
in obscure corners to find them.
One other feature that will bring smiles of relief to
all is the ability to save in the dungeons, as well as
other places. No longer is it necessary to plow
through an entire dungeon in one sitting. You can
stop anywhere and come back again later. Also,
once a dungeon room has been completely
cleaned out of its unfriendly residents, they will not
regenerate; the room stays empty.

Poisonous Tales
Yet for all that, Ultima V is not without its flaws.
The combat system can be very irritating in the
length of time it takes to kill monsters, especially at
low levels. One would expect that no more than

one or two swipes with a longsword would be
enough to put away something as trivial as a giant
rat, but this is often not the case.

might guess this to be the case, those who have
not played the previous game might not figure this
out right away.

Many times it will take several blows, ranging in
effectiveness from "barely wounded" to "lightly
wounded" to "heavily wounded" to "critical" and
finally to "killed". Combat therefore becomes something of a long-drawn-out affair, which is exacerbated by the number of times the characters miss
their targets.

Combat tends to be somewhat glossed over. The
manual doesn't tell you that you could hit your
own party members in hand-to-hand fighting, and
much of the material is a bit vague. The Quick
Reference Card lists armor and weapons (but not
magical ones), showing weight, attack value, and
defense value, but does not show what the minimum strength is to use any of these things, nor is
it mentioned anywhere that heavy armor may
restrict the character in regard to usable weapons.
It also leaves you to figure out on your own that attack values for weapons are maximums only, and
that they can do far less damage than is listed on
the card. And finally, nothing is said about the fact
that any class can use any weapon or armor, subject to strength limitations.

Even worse, when engaging in hand-to-hand
fighting, there is a very large chance that a blow
will go awry and strike another member of the
party. The closer the monsters are, the greater this
chance becomes. While it is realistic to assume
that one member might hit another on occasion, I
found these occasions far too frequent, particularly
as the front line is composed of fighters, who
would be expected to know how to handle their
weapons in close quarters.
Horses are another problem. The program simply
does not remember about them. If you leave your
horses in a town, go out, then come back in
again, they will be gone, forcing you to either acquire new ones or do without them. Always bring
your horses into a town or village, and always
leave with them.
One puzzling aspect of the game is the use of
secret doors and passages that lead to nowhere
and nothing. For example, there are two secret
doors in Skara Brae, each leading to a little plot of
land otherwise unreachable. However, there is
nothing at all to be found on either of them, and
you can wait through an entire twenty-four hours,
but no one will show up.
These and other doors are by no means easy to
find; you really have to search for them. Yet, they
have no real purpose. One or two might be considered as red herrings, but there are just too
many of them for that. It seems as though there
were supposed to be people or objects of importance in these areas that were never put into the
game, that were somehow overlooked or forgotten. It gives Ultima V a certain unfinished look, as
well as aggravating players who may spend fruitless hours looking for something or waiting for
someone that doesn't exist.
The manual, while nice, omits some important information. It does not mention that holing up in
the outdoors (or dungeons) does not always restore hit points and magic points. Sometimes the
party is rested after camping, sometimes not.
Since resting is the only way to restore magic
points, this ought to have been in there. Also,
sleeping for the night in a bed in town will not restore any points, unless you've actually paid an innkeeper for the room.
Nothing at all is said about experience levels, or
how high a character can advance in the game (it
happens to be level eight, as before), or how much
experience is needed to go from one level to the
next. In addition, the manual does not mention
that going up a level means gaining a new set of
spells. While those who have played Ultima IV

Another fact that is not mentioned is how to find
secret doors in castles, towns, and some dungeon
rooms. On the walls where a secret door exists, is
a very tiny red dot. Unless you're looking for it, this
dot is very easy to miss. An extremely observant
player might notice one, but it is more likely that it
will never be noticed (secret doors in dungeon corridors, however, will always be revealed by the
magic mapping gems).
Perhaps the most glaring omission in the
documentation is the lack of a warning to those
who have only one drive. If you are playing Ultima
V on a one-drive system, always, always wait for
the program to prompt you when it's time to swap
disks. If you try to anticipate and put the disk in
too soon, you will cause the game to crash. Let
the game tell you when to exchange disks, and
you will have no problems (many thanks to Roe
Adams, who found this one out the hard way on
his Apple //c).
On the plus side, the cloth map is beautifully
done, and shows the locations of all towns, villages, and shrines (except one), as well as Codex Island, Blackthorn's Island, Buccaneer's Den, etc.
Only the dungeon locations, as noted earlier, and
the keeps and huts, are not displayed.
The runic alphabet has been expanded, with symbols for all letters of the English alphabet, including Q, U, and V. On the screen, it is sometimes difficult to distinguish certain runes, especially if the
figures are close to one another in configuration,
but with practice reading them is not too hard. As
there are parts of the game where reading the
runes is a must, keep the alphabet handy.
Ultima V comes on four double-sided diskettes
(l), supports one or two drives (checks automatically for presence of the second one), and also supports the following music boards (on 128K Apples): Mockingboards A&C; Sound I & II;
Sound/Speech I; Phasor; and Apple Midi Interface
(with Midi synthesizer). [Ed: Lord British let us
view the game with the Midi Interface in use and
the soundtrack was awesome.]

(Continued on page 54)

HAVE I LIED TO

YOU ...
RECENTLY?
Chris Crawford's "Trust and
Betrayal: The Legacy of Siboot"
by Regan Carey

he

only thing that is really predictable about
Chris Crawford's game designs is that he will always produce something that is a step beyond
the level of games currently out there. So it should
come as no surprise that his latest effort doesn't fit
into any convenient category.

T

Trust & Betrayal
opens with the
ominous warning "Persons who play this
game without reading
the rules and the novella are wasting their
time!" What's more, it's
a valid warning. It takes
time to appreciate all
that goes on in this
game—and it is the subtleties that really make
it interesting.
A novella, authored by
Crawford, accompanies
the game. While it is
not the level of science
fiction that wins Hugo
Awards, it does provide
relevant background
and a wealth of clues
on the inner workings
of the designer's plot
when he built the game
system. The game can
ha installed on a hard
TITLE:
SYSTEM:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

Trust and Betrayal
The Legacy of Siboot
Macintosh
Solitaire
$49.95
Chris Crawford
Mindscape
Northbrook, IL

disk, but it has a "key disk" copy
protection scheme.

The Shepherd is Dead!
Long Live the Shepherd!

The location is Kira, a moon that
orbits a planet named Lamina. Now,
Lamina has seven sapient races sharing its surface
and they don't always get along with each other. All
seven races are also present in a small colony on
Kira and they don't always get along with each
other, either.
The novella tells of the escalation that led to a
rather unfortunate thermonuclear exchange down
on Lamina. On Kira, the only thing that prevented a
continuation of the hostilities among the races on

Kira was the intervention of Siboot. Through careful
negotiation, appeals to common sense, and the introduction of a rudimentary telepathic language that
permitted better interspecies communication, Siboot
led the Kirans to peace and understanding. Siboot
became the first Shepherd.
Each succeeding generation has added to the
knowledge of the telepathic language, called Eeyal.
Feslym, the Fourth Successor of Siboot the Founding Shepherd has just died. It is now time for all the
acolytes to compete with one another to determine
who is best qualified to take over leadership, as the
new Shepherd. In playing the game, you take the
role of Vetvel, a young male Jomkar, who is his
species' acolyte for the position of Shepherd. You
are a generally nice guy with intelligence, wit, and
wisdom. Sure.
As there are seven races, so there are seven
acolytes. Kira has a small population, so you are
well acquainted with your rivals. In fact, most of
them are your friends. Your best friend is Skordokott, a Tayran that looks like a carnivorous penguin. Kendra is a rather flighty Klast who bears a
striking resemblance to a seahorse. Another good
friend is Wiki, representing the feline Ripi. The rather
superior Gardbore is a Frem and looks like an
aardvark. The most human-looking of the group is
Zubi, the female Srol. Locksher, the Lokweel, is
simply a mass of furry wrinkles with eyes and a long
nose.
The spectrum of relationships between the
acolytes varies from love, through disinterest, to outright hatred. You are generally liked by most. This
can get a little tense, however. For instance, two of
your best buddies, Wiki and Skordokott, dislike each
other intensely. Further, the interrelationships
change through out the game as actions speak
louder than words. If you play as a dedicated selfish
lout, you can migrate into everyone's bad books.
Equally, it is a major pleasure when you can win
another over to close friendship.

An Aural Fixation
Each being on Kira has three auras--tanaga (fear),
katsin (trust), and shial (love). The Shepherd must
have all three in perfect balance, and maximized at
level eight. How do you gain power in auras? By
combat, of course.
The auras have distinct relationships to each other.
Fear conquers trust; trust conquers love; and love
conquers fear. If you think it sounds like the old
paper, scissors, and rock game, you're right. When
you win over another's aura in the nightly astral
competition, you gain one level of whatever aura
you defeated.
Now, this creates some interesting tactical
problems. If you need to gain a level in a particular
aura, you must defeat the same aura. Therefore,
your attack is telegraphed and easy to defend
against. So, you outmaneuver your opponent—he
thinks that I think that he thinks, so . . . .
This is complicated by daytime interaction between
the acolytes. Every morning, each acolyte wakes up
with knowledge of one aura level of each of the

other acolytes. This valuable intelligence is bartered
back and forth during the day to parley up your
store of knowledge about your opponents. The
more you know by nightfall, the better you are
prepared to prevail in the nighttime competition.
Nevertheless, there is a cost to gaining this useful
information. You have to trade for it and whenever
you tell one acolyte about another acolyte's aura,
you are technically betraying that person. Of course,
you're not supposed to betray your friends—especially if they find out about it!
Sometimes, however, you find that one or more of
your friends have betrayed you! Well! Now you can
betray them, right? So, onward it goes in an escalating spiral worthy of the Laminans that wasted their
original world in self-righteous politicking.

Eeyal Come Back Now, Hear!
Another twist is that each race speaks a different
language. Therefore, all communication must take
place in a telepathic language that is represented in
the game by a graphic, icon- based language called
Eeyal. This language was Siboot's great contribution
to peace and love on Kira and skill in Eeyal is the
mark of a good Shepherd.
Each concept in Eeyal is shown as an icon. For
those beginners that haven't mastered the meanings yet, simply clicking on any icon will bring up an
English translation. However, it really doesn't take
long until the translations are unnecessary. Like any
well designed icons, these are intuitive. The syntax
of the language is simple and straightforward.
As an icon is selected, representing an action like
"tell" or "ask", the menu of possible icons is
automatically adjusted to provide only those choices
that would be appropriate. A popular theme in
science fiction is that it is hard to lie in telepathic
communication. This is the case with Eeyal. Your
choices for communication are selected from a
menu that only permits truth to be said. You simply
cannot speak nonsense or lie.
The sensitivity of the menu choices to context and
current levels of character knowledge makes communication in Eeyal reasonably straightforward. The
skill in this game is knowing what to say, to whom,
and when. You won't get bogged down in the "how"
of speaking Eeyal.
An important part of communication are the visual
clues that come from watching a person's face.
Crawford incorporates this by providing a stylized
face with appropriate expressions on-screen. As
there are over thirty different facial expressions possible, some of the communication is quite subtle.

Artificial Flavoring Added
The game keeps track of your actions, and uses
them to adjust the reactions of your opponents accordingly. Among the greatest achievements of this
game are the different artificial personalities
developed by Crawford. Once you play a few times,
your fellow acolytes start to assume the mantle of
reality. You will develop your favorites, and the way

you treat them will be reflected in the way that the inhabitants of Kira treat you.
There are other personalities
to be dealt with, as well. Walking
down the street, Vetvel can
come face to face with his old
teacher, or be pestered by the
hero worship of an aspiring
youngster. These meetings are
presented as stories, sometimes
quite lengthy ones, that you can
react to by selecting from four
possible responses. Some of
these episodes are designed to
refine your relationships with
others or simply clarify your own
personality. Some are purely introspective. Sometimes your actions during an encounter can
affect your standing in the game.
Just in case you start to take
the game too seriously, several
of the random events involve
Chris himself. These encounters
are rarely straightforward. More
often they are vehicles for the
Crawford sense of humor. Chris can be seen lurking
in alleyways, or loitering in a zoot suit to the sounds
of a big band. You haven't lived
until you have been buzzed by a
flying Chris Crawford who
misspells messages to you in
sky writing. Behind the whimsy,
however, there is usually some
good advice on game play.
Don't talk back to him, however.
After all, he is the designer and
he doesn't take kindly to disrespect.

The Bottom Line
It is possible to have unrealistically high expectations of a new
game, just because it is a Chris
Crawford design. T&B is a case
in point. It is a step forward in
game design. The artificial personalities are good enough to
make game play insidiously habit-forming. The context sensitive icon-based language is a technical
achievement and deserves praise.
Continuing the theme of Balance
of Power, Trust & Betrayal provides
a mechanism to make players think
about the nature of conflict. It exhibits the innovative thinking that is
the hallmark of Chris Crawford.
However, little things disappointed
me. The graphics are interesting, but
not superior. The opening sequence
of screens presents some fine animation, but then uses text that is 24 and
36 point Times font. If the game is
run on a system that doesn't have these fonts installed, the graphics are outshone by singularly

rough text. The animated graphic sequences during nighttime aural combat lose their appeal after one showing. I guess I expected better.
Like "Rommel vs. Patton", the
sound is definitely ho-hum. It doesn't
contribute to the game in any way.
With more and more software coming out that utilizes digitized sound,
garners are becoming a demanding
audience. If sound doesn't add to the
game by enhancing communication
or by providing entertainment,
leave it out.
Picky. Picky. Let me put these complaints in
perspective. Trust & Betrayal is an extremely challenging and entertaining
piece of software. It is a fine piece of
game design and definitely not
boring. Just don't expect excitement.
This is the kind of software that I play
with when I need an interesting puzzle and some intellectual effort, not
when I want adrenalin flow.
While I won't nominate it for the
game Hall of Fame, I would definitely
say that Trust & Betrayal deserves a
place in your software collection.

ILLUSTRATION #1: Most game interaction takes
place on this type of screen. The lower right shows
that Zubi has just turned down a proposed by Vetvel. The left margin shows Eeyal icons that Vetvel
could use in response. The stylized face shows that
Zubi is suspicious. Her love and trust for Vetvel are
pretty low and her fear of him is relatively high.
ILLUSTRATION #2: It is mid-morning on Day One
and Skordokott has just made a deal with his friend
Vetvel. Skordokott told Vetvel about the level of
Locksher's Shial in return for Vetvel's info on
Locksher's Tanaga. Now Vetvel is proposing a
similar exchange of information about Kendra.
Skordokott's expression is scheming, and his love of
his friend is high. The left column is empty of Eeyal
icons because the player has yet to press the "do it"
button and actually put the deal to his friend.
ILLUSTRATION #3: At any time in the game, Vetvel can check on his current state of knowledge
about his fellow acolytes. With this screen, he sees
that Kendra is at Skordokott's house and Gardbore
is on his way there, too. Wiki is visiting Locksher,
and Zubi and Skordokott are at their own homes.
He also sees that Kendra's Katsin is at level 6,
Gardbore's Shial is at level 8, and so on. As the day
passes and info is traded, Vetvel will build up his
knowledge of his rivals' auras and use that information to plan his nighttime combat.

PANZER
STRIKE!
By Bob Proctor

'though Panzer Strike (PS) at first reminded
me of earlier SSI games, especially the
popular Kampfgruppe, once I started to play
I found myself comparing it with Avalon Hill's
popular board game, Squad
Leader. Even though PS is
played on a computer and SL
on a board, this comparison is
inevitable. Both simulate small
unit combat in Europe in
WWII. Both have interesting
detail—units represent individual vehicles and guns with
realistic ranges, armor thickness, speed and so on. Both
have flexibility—you can play a
small scenario in 15 minutes or
a huge one that takes days.
Best of all, both have variety—
different victory objectives, different nationalities (even Finns
and Belgians!), and infinite
combinations of terrain. This is
what it takes to keep a game
popular for over ten years.
Panzer Strike is the first computer game that even approaches Squad Leader in
variety and interest; if you enjoy
SL then you should buy Panzer
Strike ASAP.
I Whoa! Go read it
again - that's review number one! Notice I'm
Name:
PANZER STRIKE
not saying that Panzer Strike is a comSystems:
Apple, C-64/128
puterized version of SL. It's a different
# Players:
1-2
Price:
$49.95, $44.95
game system with both pluses and
Designer:
Gary Grigsby
minuses. The computer makes it
Publisher: Strategic Simulations Inc.
much easier to play than any board
1046 N. Rengstorff Ave.
Mountain View, CA 94043
game, even with highly detailed
ammo limits and command limitations, but it lacks the breadth of the Squad Leader
system (no rules for amphibious or airborne assault, for example). PS has a
design-your-own-scenario routine that emphasizes speed and convenience but does not give you complete control
over every variable the way SSG's Battlefront system does. There's no way to create new terrain or
weapons for example, but then there are a LOT of
choices already here. It will keep you playing happily until something better comes along no matter
how many years that takes.

For the Rest of Us
It's easy to understand the historicity of games
that portray famous events and use a map that is
recognizably the place where these events happened: a game of D-Day on a map of France, for
example. Such games reenact the events of many
months and the outcome has a clear effect (well,
usually) on the course of History.
Games like Panzer Strike, that deal with smallunit tactics, are historical in a different way.
They attempt to portray how a relatively small
group of men, armed with various kinds of
weapons, can accomplish some simple task. An experienced player will develop a complex "tactical
doctrine" which can be applied no matter what the
quality of the troops, the type of weapons available, the type of weather and terrain present, or
the type of goal to be reached. If the game is realistic, the methods that work best will be similar to
those used by the successful commanders of the
period. They will also have to be modified as new
weapons and new techniques change the face of
battle.
Panzer Strike succeeds very well in this regard. In
a Campaign game, you can command a small
force through the entire 7 years of WWII, upgrading your equipment to match the enemy. You will
need a balanced mix of weapons and units to
meet a variety of situations. Are you facing a small,
mobile tank platoon or entrench infantry backed
by artillery? Are you trying to capture a crossroads
or hilltop, or just get around the enemy and get off
the map?
The morale and skill of your troops are at least as
important as their weapons. PS rates both of these
factors separately. While skill changes only between scenarios (more on campaigns in a bit)
morale ebbs and flows during battle. Units under
fire begin to collect "suppression points" which will
eventually cause them to retreat or rout if
neglected. Getting them into cover helps, as do
other friendly units, but it is the rallying effect of
HQ units that restores morale quickest. If a unit
does break, it is controlled by the computer and
may continue to fight independently.

What's in the Box?
The game comes with two double-sided diskettes, two manuals, and a start-up card. One disk
side is a scenario builder. The others are game
disks, each containing a different front: East, West
and North Africa. This is an ingenious way to get
all of the data needed for Europe onto 140K disks,
as well as allow for different weather and terrain.
So North Africa, for example, pits the Germans
and Italians against the British, has sand instead of
wheat fields, and favors you with duststorms instead of snow. Gee thanks.
North Africa can also be awkward to play since it
is on the opposite side of the scenario disk (immaterial if you only have one disk drive). You can
and should make copies of all disks; there is no
copy protection. (Apple owners will need a bit-

copier since SSI uses a non-standard DOS.) To discourage people from playing with illegal copies,
you are required to answer trivia questions based
on unit data about once per game. Examples are:
"What is the front turret armor of the French Char
B1S?" or "What is the cost of a Finnish ski
squad?". All of the answers can be found in the
Briefing Manual so as long as you have the
documentation replying is easy. The idea seems a
reasonable compromise and is unobtrusive; some
people even thinks it's fun! My manual had several
blank pages, including some of the needed
answers, so make sure yours is complete.

Ready in the Ranks!
The Rule Book is 50 pages long and very
complete. Fortunately, you don't have to read much of
it to begin playing. After about four pages of introduction, you can skip to the tutorial and start playing. The game is very similar to others by Gary
Grigsby in that each turn (representing one minute
of time) is divided into an Orders Phase and a
Combat Phase. Each Combat Phase is broken into
3 pulses and many sub-pulses so that movement
and combat are, in effect, simultaneous. The Orders Phases are normally skipped and action is
continuous unless you hit the "0" key, which will
cause the game to enter an Orders Phase at the
end of the current turn. Scenarios are either 30 or
60 turns long and you can end them early but not
extend them.
The map is laid out using squares instead of the
more familiar hexagons. This is perfectly acceptable since the computer allows for the fact that
moving diagonally means a longer distance than
moving to an adjacent square. It also means there
are 8 possible facings instead of 6. Each square is
50 yards on a side and the east-west dimension of
the map is always 60 squares, or just under two
miles. The vertical dimension can be any multiple
of ten from 10 to 60. There are two screen views:
10x20 squares, called "Tactical" and 20x40, called
Strategic. The Z key toggles between the two. I
use the latter to get the big picture when giving orders but I like to switch to the smaller one for Combat. The nice large squares make it easier to spot
the unit being attacked.
There is quite a variety of terrain in PS. There are
five levels from 0 to 4. Level 1 is normal ground
level. Swamps, rivers and depressions are lower
than this; rough and slope are level 2; hilltops are
level 3. Most features, like forest, buildings and
roads, can be either level 1 or 3. There are no
multi-level buildings, so no good way to simulate
fighting in larger cities. You can create a beach or
a wide river but there are no boats and no rules
for amphibious assault. The three terrain sets—
European Summer, European Winter and North
African—give a different look on-screen and also
allow for regional and seasonal differences. Thus
the boggy European swamp is much more passable when frozen and becomes an African oasis
further south.
Each unit on the map represents a single vehicle,
gun or squad of men. There is an incredible

variety of units as you can see from this table.
There is some duplication because the minor Axis
countries use a number of German weapons, but
even there a German Tiger tank costs less and is
available sooner.
The USA is notable by it's absence. There are
plenty of American-made tanks and guns in the
British list, but only common ones. Several
varieties of tanks and infantry weapons like the
bazooka are absent. A
pseudo-American force
could be put together for
either the Western or
African front, but not
with the same realistic
detail as other nations'
forces.

Aim!
Scenarios come in
several types. An Assault
scenario begins with both sides in prepared positions. One side will always be designated as the attacker and will have a force that is 2 or 3 times
larger than the defender. A Pursuit scenario is a
more mobile situation where neither side has had
time to dig in. The attacker will have a stronger
force, but only about twice as big. A Meeting
Engagement is a Pursuit scenario where both sides
are attacking and have relatively equal forces.
The mission of both attacker and defender can
also vary. As attacker, you might be trying to capture a piece of
ground (Clear),
destroy enemy
units (Engage), or
exit off the far end
of the map
(Bypass). The
defender has corresponding Hold,
Engage, and
Delay missions.
Victory conditions
are measured by
points (a unit's VP
= build cost) with
bonuses and multipliers. For example, an attacker with a Bypass mission loses
double points for each unit destroyed but gets 5
times the points for each unit exited off the far
edge. If the defender has a Delay mission, these
factors jump to 4 times and 10 times or if the
defender is trying to Hold a crossroad then there is
a 100 point bonus for doing that.
There are 7 historical scenarios included in the
game:
Although the scenarios offer good variety, most
people who buy PS will spend more time playing
scenarios generated on the spur of the moment.
Many games have had "Design Your Own" features
but PS breaks new ground in generating interest-

(Continued on page 53)

he

current state of role playing,
whether utilizing the computer or
not, may be summarized in the
phrase, "hack and slash." Even pen and
paper games do not tell
players how to set up adventures. Campaign building instructions are minimal, at
best. After a dozen years,
there is still no decent set of
introductory rules for role
playing games (RPGs), nothing to meet the needs of a
novice. In spite of all the
space that RPGs take up in
the shelves of game stores
across the country, there is
still a lack of quality.

T

message comes up that "You need a
key!" Perhaps, I have the wrong key. So,
I try all of them and get the same message. "Rats!" I mutter, "I must have

than the thrill of discovery. Indeed,
beyond the parser problem, we have an
expression of one of the most significant
problems in most CRPGs today. Role
playing should not be held
captive by the "If it moves,
kill it" syndrome.

The Future of

Computer
Role-Playing

Therefore, even though I
believe that computers will
never replace a decent Dungeonmaster at anytime in
the foreseeable future, let
me state that I do believe a
good computer role playing
game (CRPG) can still accomplish a lot. By this I
mean that a good CRPG
could: 1) teach lots of
people how to play RPGs;
2) teach players how to set
up their own campaigns/quests; 3) supply
reasonably interesting situations while doing this teaching; and 4) give instruction
about using role playing in
games. Yet, we have not
seen CRPGs accomplish
this.
Perhaps an examination of
how RPGs and CRPGs interacted in, the past can point
the way towards a mutually
beneficial future. For example, computers were
doing "find your own adventure" text games long
before publishers filled the
shelves with these books.
These books did what the
computer "text" games
could not do, provide more
words to describe events.
"Text" games could not go beyond the
bare bones messages. Words take up a
lot of programming space! Books are
also able to include artwork or neat
maps. This makes the books more
graphically appealing, but what about
the computer games?

The Co-creator of "Dungeons and
Dragons" Assesses the Genre

One major marketing ploy on behalf of
computer games is "the thrill of discovery." Yet, is it always a thrill? For example, when my character takes a key
in his hand. I hope that it will open the
door that he is standing in front of. The

David L. Arneson
missed one . . ." Off I go, killing guards
and searching rooms. Later, I "accidentally" discover that the proper command
to use a key was to "Operate" the key,
not use the key to "Unlock" the door.
Silly me.
No, this little tidbit was not in the "rule
book." No, I did not feel any "thrill" at my
discovery of the proper command word
to use. The aroma emitting from the
corpse-filled corridors of the castle
seemed more accurate. Thus, in my
book, we have more the stink of the feet

Good Graphics
or a Good Game?
Another common problem
in CRPGs may be an emphasis in glitz and glamour
rather than substance. If it is
pretty, the assumption is
that people will buy it.
Whether in the print media
or in computer games, this
seems only too true. Ask
any sales or marketing
department. The question
is, however, do these beautiful graphics really add anything substantial to the
game? Seldom is this a consideration by the publisher.
Today, the adventurer's
figure moves across the
screen in an incredible sixteen color, three-dimensional masterpiece. It took
hours to program and uses
lots of memory space on
the disk. Too often in the
rush to get the product out
the door, the programming
was sloppily done and the
figure took up more space
than was expected. Time is
always short, however, so . .
.. Of course, the figure
moving across the screen is
the information being conveyed to the player. Now, a
one color figure with limited
animation conveys that information in a lot less program
space. The additional
memory could be used to
further enhance the game itself. Unfortunately, such an
attitude does not sell games.

Frankly, computers crunch numbers
beautifully. They can form intricate
patterns in less time than you can
read this sentence. Words and pictures
take up a lot of memory, so shouldn't
designers have computers do what they
are good at instead of what they are less
adept at.

Morale Check
In any given battle, our surrogate warriors will beat each other to a pulp until

one side or the other comes out on top.
If the player wins, loot is gathered,
wounds healed, and experience points
gained. If the nasty Nazis (or supply your
own villain) win, they just vanish back
into the nether regions that spawned
them.

I

n Dungeons and Dragons, there is a
rule called "Morale." This deals with
the situation where creatures see that
they are going to get killed. Then, they
pack up their claws and scamper off into
the shadows rather than be slaughtered.
It is a pretty basic and simple rule.
Each creature has a certain courage
rating. Then, when losses reach a certain percentage, a die is thrown. If the
courage number is exceeded, the critters
take off. The same procedure is used for
large numbers of human troops and adventurers.
Players don't like it. They, and the
referee, consider it to be one more number to keep track of. Besides, you don't
get any experience points when the bad
guys run away. Of course, a "good"
referee (speaking of efficiency, not alignment) will still award the players points,
even though such an event is not specifically mentioned in the rule book(s). On
the computer, working such an equation into the program should be no
problem at all. It also ought to be able
to award partial points, even if the
goblins did run away. Most experience
points should come from the treasure,
anyway, not in killing the monsters.
Of course, some players won't like it
when their "friends" leave them to face
the music. "Well, tough noogiesl" Nonplayer characters would have their
morale affected by the Charisma of their
leader. This, in turn, could be affected
by the leader's "Reputation" which would
be an evaluation of how well that leader
has been in the past.
A
Another problem would involve
division of the spoils. Max of
Marysport may be better with a sword
than Felix, but will Felix really just hand
his new magic sword over to Max. No!
Felix's actions will be based on Group
Loyalty or Personal Loyalty. This may
sound like a complex problem, but it is
one a computer can crunch numbers to
handle. The Group Loyalty evaluation
would be a numerical estimate of how
successful the group has been to that
point, which indicates how likely it is that
there will be more loot in the future. The
Personal Loyalty quotient would be a
numerical calculation which determines
how much the NPC likes the group's
present leader.

Fortunately, CRPGs are becoming
more interactive. In days of yore, one
delved into the dungeon's depths. Then,
CRPG emerged into open country and
villages. Today, they are vivid animated
graphic spectacles. Yet, players must still
hack and loot again and again in order
to gain experience.
In general, characters in CRPGs only
develop their fighting techniques or
learn more spells. A character's alignment is represented only by
occasional comments from the
computer to
"Not be such a
goody two
shoes." A
character's
profession is
still
Fighter/Magic
User/Cleric/Thief.
Players get to
name their surrogate robot . .
. er . . . adventurer, assign a
few numbers, and give the character its
marching orders. Whoopee! .. .
Many players and reviewers have
reflected on this robotic mentality.
Another deficiency is games that overemphasize "Combat Mechanics." When
major player decisions revolve around
whether Marfeldt the Barbarian will use
his #3 Axe or #7 Mace to deal with
monsters, it hardly seems like role playing (rather "roll" playing).
Hope was expressed that Ultima IV
would break new ground. It did give the
character more depth and new text
games have given the characters more
choices. Unfortunately, rather than
being harbingers of a new age, these
games have stood pretty much alone as
quirks instead of trend setters.
Today, many new games claim to be
the "cutting edge." Among them are
Strategic Simulations, Inc.'s Advanced Dungeons and Dragons and
Electronic Arts' Wasteland. Each will
shortly be released. Both are touted as
being "state of the art." Each does contain "new" features.
In the SSI product, a new feature to
CRPGs is that of NPC character alignment and objectives. NPCs will actually
leave the party, due to alignment or because their "personal" goals have been
achieved. In other areas, AD &D will
only be a refinement of existing features.
Better graphics, more magic spells, etc.
will be available, but the product will

turn out to be a cross, in many respects,
between Questron and Wizard's Crown
presented in a new setting.
Wasteland promises to provide something quite different in the area of NPCs,

skills, and information gathering. Mike
Stackpole, who assisted Alan Pavlish in
the design, has an extensive background as a respected designer of RPGs
and scenarios. Thus, he is well qualified
to add aspects of "Live" RPGs to CRPGs.
Wasteland contains some of the best features of Ultima IV mapping and Bard's
Tale combat. In the game, characters
have skills, but the only way to improve
them is to use them. Also, NPCs will
refuse to march off to death and glory
like little robots. Beyond this, Wasteland
contains a vast amount of information.
It is the 200 paragraphs of text in the accompanying booklet that set it apart. It
looks like players will really be able to
communicate with the creatures of Wasteland. All this and graphics, too.
Where is character development taking
place in CRPGs? Each of the newer
games mentioned brings in a significant
addition to the CRPG scene. Will there
be more improvements, additions, and
expansions? Or are we still dealing with
quirks?
Only tomorrow will tell, but it would be
nice to see all of these RPG features in
the same game! That would be a real
step forward. Then again, maybe that
would make it too much like the real
thing.

ABSTRACTS FROM
THE JOURNAL OF
COMPUTER GAME
DESIGN

r
i
s
C

Crawford is a game designer
who has attempted to be on the
cutting edge of game design from
his early Eastern Front to his most
recent Trust and Betrayal: The Legacy
of Siboot. As editor of The Journal of
Computer Game Design, he is attempting to engage other designers in a colloquium concerning the present state of
and future directions for game design.
JCGD is published six times per year
and costs $30 per year (The Journal of
Computer Game Design, 5251 Sierra
Rd., San Jose, CA 95132). In this issue
of Computer Gaming World, we will be
abstracting from issues #4 and #5 of
JCGD.

Blowing My Siboot-Horn
by Chris Crawford (Author of Eastern
Front, Legionnaire, Balance of Power,
Trust and Betrayal, and others)

T

he fascinating thesis of this article

is that designers need to take
more pain to place characters into
computer games. Crawford distinguishes
between the "cardboard" caricatures in
earlier games and his current definition
of a character. "A good character is
somebody with whom I can have a rich
emotional interaction. A good character
has a distinct personality that I can get
to know, and will behave in a manner
consistent with that personality, even if it
isn't always predictable." In challenging
his fellow designers toward that end,
Crawford enumerates two distinct and
"gigantic" problems to be solved: artificial personality and a language of interaction. Though Crawford feels that Trust
and Betrayal comes closer to accomplishing the task of realistic character development than earlier games, he
admits that his solutions are "pioneering" and "clumsy."
Crawford prefers the term, "artificial personality," to the more common, "artificial
intelligence." The latter deals with
academic problem solving, according to
the designer, but the former " . . . is concerned with the capturing of human nature in algorithmic form, and is more
properly treated as lying in the field of

the arts rather than the sciences." He explains that his current artificial personality module uses seven invariant personality traits (e.g. integrity, gullibility,
desire to be liked, pride, etc.), three
relationship variables (love, trust, and
fear), and three short-term moods (shortterm versions of love, trust, and fear).
Using 1,100 lines of Pascal, Crawford
wrote a set of equations that determined
the character's emotional response to
any possible interpersonal event. Then,
the character would choose, depending
on his personality, mood, and relationship, a behavior.
Though this is complex, the second
problem is even more so. Recognizing
that any given English word has a significant amount of emotional baggage
that comes along with it (e.g. A brick is
hard, massive, and red, among other
possible characteristics), he contends
that "Language does not exist in isolation from reality." As Crawford notes,
"We live in an immensely complex world,
and short, simple words such as 'brick'
carry much of that complexity with them.
When you see something called a brick
in a regular text adventure game, you
know it isn't really a brick; it should
more properly be called 'the thing you
throw through the window in the log
cabin to get inside,' because that is the
true operational reality of the thing, and
its ONLY reality in the text adventure."
Most games use a sub-set of English,
restrict the vocabulary to a few thousand
words, keep grammar and syntax to
sixth-grade level, and make the game environment very simple. This often
creates a frustration for the player because it distorts the image of the game
world by suggesting traits that do not
exist. Crawford's solution in Trust and
Betrayal was to create a special-purpose
language for the game. This language
uses icons as words and allows the
player to build graphic representations
similar to a sentence diagram by clicking
on icons. Direct objects are always to
the right of the verb, indirect objects are
underneath the verb, etc. These icons
are presented on the screen after
Crawford's "inverse parser" has already

examined the player's situation and
determined all the possible words that
the player could choose for that position
in the sentence. This system, which involves a single boolean expression
which would print over an entire page in
length, eliminates the possibility of
semantic mistakes and useless expressions. Crawford notes that there are only
80 words in the entire language, but
points out that each word is fully operational and the full vocabulary defines a
complete social system. He estimates
that it took two full months to get the inverse parser routine working smoothly.

Multi-Player Games
by Dan Bunten (Author of Computer
Quarterback, Cartels and Cutthroats,
M.U.L.E., Seven Cities of Gold, Robot
Rascals, and the forthcoming Sport of
War)

I

n this article, Bunten chronicles his ef-

forts in trying to write the Monopoly
or Clue of the computer game field.
He expressed his frustration at the lack
of success that multi-player games had
received to this point, pointing out that
his own best-seller was Seven Cities of
Gold—a solo game. Yet, he truly
believes that the computer offers more
advantages than board games. Among
others, he lists animated playing pieces,
adjustable maps/gameboards, bookkeeping and refereeing assistance, algorithms more complex than a die roll, and
handicapping. He also listed disadvantages: difficult interfaces, abstract
playing pieces, inaccessibility of actual
computers, and screen size which forces
players to examine "status screens" and
reduces the ability to keep secret information.
Sport of War is one approach to solving some of the logistics problems listed
above. It uses modems to connect two
human opponents, solving the problem
of moving the computer, finding a 'computer literate' opponent, and allowing
hidden information. The idea of the actual game is that each player is in a
mobile command center (comcen) from
which they are directing small armies of
robots. The objective is to either score a
"knockout" by disabling the player's comcen or take enough terrain and inflict
enough damage to "win on points." The
display may look like that of a solo
game, but the player is forced to remember that there is a human opponent at
the other end of the telephone line.
Players can even communicate across a
"chat line" as they direct their forces, fly
drones, fire missiles and repair damage
for 15-30 minutes. Bunten believes that

(Continued on page 49)

their credit and it's been a while since you've been
to the barber, hasn't it?
You start the game with four pre-generated
characters or create four characters of your own.
Each character is rated for strength, intelligence,
luck, speed, agility, dexterity, charisma, skill points,
rank, constitution, money, sex and nationality.
Each characteristic enables you to do certain
things.

by William "Biff' Kritzer

T

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

he moisture dripping from the subterranean
cavern's ceiling echoed eerily in the shrouded
distance that loomed ahead of Hell Razor and his
battered party. Retracing their path back up to
the surface was out of the question as long as An- gela Death
was still unconscious.
Snake Vargas had
used his
medical
skills to stabilize her
condition
but time
was the only
healer for Angela now.
Until she
came to, no
one dared
go forward
or back.
After all,
Angela's perception and
climbing
skills had
gotten them
this far. Hell
Razor
vowed to
build up his own skills so this
Wasteland
wouldn't happen again.(If
Apple II, C-64 (soon)
Solitaire
they got out of this mess
$49.95
alive!)
Alan Pavlish
Electronic Arts
San Mateo, CA

Wasteland is Electronic
Arts' new interactive role play-

ing game based on a pseudo Road Warrior future, set in the southwest deserts of a postholocaust United States. The player directs a party
of Desert Rangers, out to protect survivors and
rebuild some semblance of society. While undergoing this often arduous task, you come upon
several situations that hint at sinister goings' on
that are beyond the scope of your original assignments. It's up to you to then follow the various
leads to a fitting conclusion, or death. It's rough
out there! Dozens of monsters, machines and
criminals are just waiting to add a few scalps to

Intelligence is the most important because it allows the characters to learn invaluable skills that
are necessary to complete the various tasks in the
game. Strength helps in opening closed doors,
moving obstacles, hitting people, etc. Killing
monsters gives you experience points as in most
role playing games. At certain experience point
levels you get promotions. Each promotional level
gives you two intelligence points that can then be
cashed in to gain skills and raise skill levels. For example, with two intelligence points you could add
two skills such as assault rifle and picklock, or you
could raise your skill levels on forgery or medical
from two to three. This is the heart of the character generation system and having the proper mix
of skills is absolutely necessary to overcome the
many obstacles and problems in the game. The
various other characteristics affect combat,
negotiating ability, physical task solving, etc. The
party of four the computer gives you initially is a
well rounded group that I used to finish the game,
but you have the ability to customize your own
group if you like.

E

xploring dangerous catacombs was not
Hell's idea of a good time, but being a
Desert Ranger was not the safest of jobs in this
post-holocaust world. Hell, along with Angela,
Snake and Thrasher had volunteered to solve the
mysterious deaths in the region and the trail led
into a cyborg ambush hundreds of feet below the
Las Vegas country club. Fortunately, Angela's Ke
vlar vest had stopped the killer cyborg's spray of
bullets from penetrating and killing her, but when
she awoke she would be bruised and sore. If
Thrasher's Uzi hadn't jammed on his first shot the
party probably could have gotten by without
much damage, but Snake's AK 47 stunned the
metal monster long enough for Hell's well thrown
grenade to finish it off "There really is safety in
numbers down here", thought Hell. This comforting thought was quickly dispelled as the echoes
of a Slicer/Dicer rang out up ahead. "Grab Angela
and let's blow!", snapped Hell to no one in particular. "I'll give back cover, Snake, take point.
Let's move, now!"
Each player-character can carry up to thirty items,
including weapons, ammunition and armor. These
can be bought, sold or traded as players see fit.
Matching the proper tools with the proper skills is
important. The ability to use assault rifles doesn't
help much if you're using a submachinegun. The
types of useable weapons cover a wide range.
There are pistols, rockets, submachineguns, laser
weapons, grenades and other modern weapons in
your arsenal and they all come in handy. To finish
the game your crew will probably be using some

heavy weapons. These don't come cheaply, in
terms of money or blood.

Ramming

his last clip into the NATO assault
rifle, Hell had a glimmering thought of how
lovely the desert must be right now - hot, radioactive and full of mutant lizards. Maybe it wasn't so
bad down here after all! Just then, Hell heard
Snake's cry of despair. Turning quickly, he saw a
glittering hulk of metal towering over Snake, its
laser tipped arms locking in on the ravaged
party. As they scurried for cover, Hell heard the
reassuring chatter of Thrasher's Uzi. "Unjammed
at last," Hell thought, moments before a stream of
bullets threw him against the crumbled remains
of the sewer wall. Darkness drowned out the
party's cries and shouts as Hell drifted down into
the first rest he'd had in weeks.
This is a bloody game. You'll meet a wide variety
of nasties out there, ranging from radiation rats to
mutant metal monsters. Knowing when to gun
and when to run will keep you alive, for a while.
You'll also be interacting with many non-player
characters. With the proper charisma or skills, you
may even get some of them to join your party.
There is room for three more in addition to your
original four and there is safety in numbers in this
game. Don't count on finding solitary monsters
out there, they travel in packs and you should too!
Once your party is assembled it's out into the
great unwashed desert. The first community you
visit should be Highpool, a nice quiet little community that should get your party acquainted with
the surrounding countryside and its inhabitants.
There you'll pick up the first pieces of the puzzle.
There are several courses open to you at all times
and there is always more than one way around
every puzzle in the game, so you're not locked in
to any particular order of missions, except in the
broadest sense. You will need certain items to get
to different stages of the game, but there are always several ways to get what you need. It is a
great feature that makes the game move swiftly. In
fact, the 80-100 hours it takes to finish the game
really do move along rapidly. I spent many nights
awake until 1:30 or 2:00 AM before grudgingly
powering down to await the next day's session.
Wasteland uses a paragraph system to flesh out
the clues given by NPCs in the game. It really gives
a nice depth to the plot. These paragraphs are
printed in a booklet which is included with the
game and they save plenty of disk space without
sacrificing plot depth. It's a nice hybrid that you will
probably be seeing in most games of this genre in
the future. Also, if you decide to peek at the
paragraphs out of order, there is a false subplot
hidden in them that makes it very difficult to cheat.
In fact, when finished, the paragraph book is
"must" reading.
I like the fact that there is no magic or food to
deal with in this game! You don't have to scrounge
around for food every twenty minutes and you
need not spend time thumbing through a book of
arcane magic to find the right spell to throw.
Those features may add atmosphere to some

games, but it is refreshing to play a game that concentrates on being skillful enough to disarm an
alarm, instead of putting monsters to sleep.
If you like sophistication in your simulations, grab
this one. Its ease of play, richness of plot, problem
solving requirements, skill and task system, and
graphic display all make this one of the best
games I've ever played. It wins my vote for "Adventure Game of the Year."
he desert really is quiet and peaceful at sunset, reds and purple blend into a cool black,
hiding death below the ground.

Desert Ranger
Survival
Handbook:
1. Don't be in a hurry to waste
everyone you meet. Some of those
unruly looking characters can really
help by joining your party.
2. Always make sure you have
plenty of ammo. When you run low, get more.
AK47s are great weapons, but clubs are just as
good if you're out of ammunition.
3. Try to get your party to have all the skills between them. You'll need almost all of them to
solve the game. Also, you can never have too
many members with medical skills.
4. Practice makes perfect, if you try a skill that
should work but it doesn't, keep trying. Eventually
it will and your levels will go up with
successful use.
5. Write down everything anyone
tells you. You'll need the clues they
give to solve problems downline.
6. When low on constitution, go
into the deepest part of the desert
to recover. No one will bother you
out there while you're healing. Just
be sure you have plenty of water
with you!
7. Be careful of diseases and radiation sickness. Doctors are expensive and your
medical skills only work for wounds. Radiation suits
are worth their weight in gold!
8. Go everywhere, clues are hidden in the least
likely spaces.
9. Save the game often! It's easy to die and you'll
be restored to your last save when the game restarts. Back up your disks! The game writes to disk
whenever you enter a new location, so keep that
in account when venturing into unknown territory
with a depleted party.
10. Use the print utility on the key disk to keep a
list of personnel and their skills. It makes it easy to
quickly see who should be attempting various
tasks.

REACHING
THE UPPER
"ECHELON"

screen). This adds to the excitement
by offering the thrill of flying a
model plane by remote control.

The graphics are vector-like and
very good for an 8-bit game. The
RPV, C-104, and enemy ships are
easily distinguishable and there are
plenty of items of interest (rivers,
roadways, mountains, alien structures, and artifacts) to keep one
stimulated. Exploration is exciting.
You never know what you will find
and no two artifacts are alike. Certainly, a feeling of depth is portrayed
in the game and a zoom feature allows players to take close looks at
objects, structures, or artifacts.
Game play and screen update are
slowed when many objects appear on
the screen. However, the trade-off is that
pirates will not attack the player if the
area contains many objects, so this may
be a good time to take a breather from
those attacks. When there are too many
objects on the screen for the game to
progress at the pace the player desires,
the speed can be enhanced by turning
off the grid which shows the outlines of
the sectors on the screen.

Access' 3-D Space Combat
Simulator
Reviewed by Hosea Battles
sis is the tenth planet in our solar system. It was
discovered in 1996; functioned as the site of
the major battle in the Alphan War (2043); and
has been the suspected locale of pirate activity
since 2083. It is now 2096. A C-104 Combat Exploration Vehicle has been deployed in a patrol
zone which includes Isis. You are the pilot of that
spacecraft. Your mission is to find the pirate base.

I

This is the setting for Echelon. At first, this looks
like another 3-D flight simulator, but looks are
deceiving. It is a flight simulator, but it is much
more! The first factor that sets the game apart is
the Lipstick. An innovative fire control mechanism,
the Lipstick fits onto the player's head like a headset. By speaking into the microphone, you can fire
the weapons of your spacecraft. As simple as it
sounds, weapons can be fired by simply speaking
the word, "Fire," into the microphone. The only
problem with the Lipstick is that the headset may
not be adjustable enough for some and thus can
be uncomfortable.
The second factor that sets this game apart from
other space combat simulators is the exploration/adventure elements. It is possible to set the
combat option at any time during the game. You
can set it anywhere from easy (light enemy activity)
to hard (continuous enemy attacks). This enables
players to adjust the game to maximize their major
interest (i.e. combat or exploration/puzzle solving).
Speaking of adventure game elements, players
must explore the planet grid by grid and "flesh out"
the Pirate Map which is kept by the computer so
players don't have to draw a separate map (There
is a hardcopy map included in the documentation,
however, for those who like to be careful). These
pirate maps are extremely important to the game.
Each time players find an artifact (indicated by a
flashing screen), they find a clue. The game includes a Pirate Code Worksheet and Clue Sheets
to make this part of the game easier.
The third factor that sets this game apart is the
Remote Pilot Vehicle (RPV) option. This adds a
new dimension to the game. By launching and
controlling the RPV, you can fly your spacecraft,
the C-104, by remote control. You can watch the
C-104 fly under bridges, around structures, and
over the RPV (by switching to the RPV control

The manual includes a Timeline History (as well as a mini-history of the
planetary federation and the tenth
planet, respectively); explains every control in the game (in illustrated format);
lists areas of interest with special structures to look for; and provides a tutorial,
Trouble Shooting Guide, Pirate Code
Worksheet, and Clue Sheets to aid in
solving the puzzles.
Game play itself is more than blowing up enemy
ships. Each artifact you find will bear a strange symbol, followed by a map color (Blue, White, Purple,
Red, Gray, or Green). These should be copied,
along with any other clues encountered, on the appropriate clue
sheet. Then, you can find the meaning of the symbols inscribed on
structures scattered throughout the
patrol zone. There are six patrol
areas within the patrol zone. Each
area consists of 14 rows by 14
columns (196 sectors). Each sector
is equal to 10,000 square meters or
140 kilometers. This means it will
take many enjoyable hours to explore the surface of Isis and complete Echelon.
Overall, it seems safe to say that
Echelon will be a very successful title for Access.
Considering the fine job accomplished with
graphics and game play on the C-64, the Amiga
version (which is expected to be released soon)
should be exceptional. If you like arcade action,
flight simulation, space combat, exploration,
mystery, and adventure, this game is for you.

TITLE:
Echelon
SYSTEM:
C-64/128
# PLAYERS:
1
PRICE:
$49.95
DESIGNERS: Brent Erickson
Roger Carver
Bruce Carver
Access Software
PUBLISHER:

PLANES,
TRAINS AND
GUNBOATS
Hijacking "The Train" For the
Honor of France
by David M. Wilson

d

A

Adolph Hitler really knows how to tick people
ff. As if starting World War II wasn't bad
enough, now that the Allies are bringing the
war toward a decisive end by means of the Normandy invasion, the Germans are retreating with
the famous French art
collection. They plan
to use the art as a bargaining chip in the upcoming surrender
negotiations. To the
'French people, of
course, this is the
most heinous crime of
the entire war.
The art treasure has
been placed on a special train which is due
to depart for Berlin
momentarily. As the
steam builds in the
boiler, a group of
angry Frenchmen
stealthily approach the
train. Their goal is to

a hijack the entire
rain and rush it to
he Allies.

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

The Train: Escape
to Normandy is
another actionoriented game from
Accolade. Players must asThe Train: Escape to Normandy
sume the role of a resistance
C-64/128
fighter in the French UnderSolitaire
ground in order to fight Nazi
$29.95
Artech Digital Entertainments
soldiers, operate a steamAccolade
powered locomotive, man antiCupertino, CA
- aircraft guns (in order to make
messes of Messerschmitts, junk out of Junkers,
etc.), and bombard German gunboats with trainmounted artillery.
Play begins at the Metz train station where the
player will cover for his companions with submachinegun fire. This is perhaps the simplest task

of the game. Players will simply spray the windows
of the stationhouse with bullets as each window is
illuminated with return fire. Since all shooting is targeted on the windows, the "Nazi" soldiers are never
viewed on the screen. This made the opening sequence less than thrilling. After all, even the oldfashioned "bloodless" war movies and television
programs showed the bad guys falling to the
ground.

Everything's Under Control
Nevertheless, the game does get better. Once
the train is under the control of the resistance forces, Le Duc (their leader) will call for players to
climb aboard and operate the train. Le Duc has
some experience with railroading, but he is injured
and cannot run the train. He will advise the player,
though. If one becomes too abusive with the
brakes, for example, he will be warned by Le Duc
to go "Easy on the brakes." If he allows steam pressure to climb to a dangerous level, Le Duc will
prompt him saying, "Better let off some steam!" Le
Duc will help in watching the gauges and route,
but wise engineers will not rely heavily on him.
After all, the man is wounded and bound to be a
bit slow in noticing things.
The joystick moderated interface is used to access the various controls of the train. The cab
screen displays these controls. Moving the joystick
either clockwise or counter-clockwise, depending
on which is more efficient, will move the indicator
around to the proper control. Some warnings
about the controls should be considered. Never
slide the forward/reverse lever while in motion. This
will cause the gears to become stripped so that the
train may only move in the direction it is proceeding at the time this action occurs.
Steam pressure is a prime consideration. The
player must keep the furnace temperature high
enough to produce the proper amount of steam
by accessing the furnace door and shoveling coal
with a realistic left-right motion of the joystick.
liberathno Blowing off steam when the pressure builds too
treasu.Thipln high is accomplished with the steam-blowoff lever.
If the pressure builds too high, the boiler will blow
and disable the train. If the pressure is too low, the
Normandyet locomotive loses speed. Keeping the proper
balance is a constant and delicate chore.
Believe it or not, the whistle is an important control and plays an essential part in this game. It is
used in conjunction with the cab indicator lights.
These lights demonstrate the direction that upcoming track switches are set. Engineers use the
whistle to communicate to the resistance fighters
which way they need the switches set. Since the
heavy battles have caused some track sections to
be damaged, players must strive to choose a safe
route. Using the whistle is the means by which the
labyrinth of safe track is negotiated.

On Not Getting Sidetracked
To keep things exciting, German fighter planes
will attack the train. Players must dispatch them
quickly or the art cargo could be damaged, result-

ing in lower scores. In order to defend against
these planes, players use front and rear mounted
machine guns (utilizing two different screens). If
the plane flies by the front screen, the player can
switch to the rear screen in order to fire on it as it
circles for another pass.

the bridges, players must train the sights of their artillery onto the gunboats sitting on the river. The
joystick moves the adjustments by degrees. This is
the most complex part of the game and it is still
simple compared to other action games.

There is a map screen to indicate progress of the
train as well as assist in plotting strategy. The
same map is provided in the documentation, but
grabbing a manual in the midst of a game is
easier said than done. Players will want to use the
on-screen map.

The Terminal Layout

As the train approaches each station, the
decision as to whether to stop or not must be
made. Most stations are, in fact, held by the
enemy, but are fairly simple to capture. Advantages to capturing stations include: obtaining
repairs to damaged locomotives, reading German
intelligence reports, and sending messages to the
resistance. Resistance fighters will capture the next
bridge or station, if asked. Capturing the station is
performed in the same manner as liberating the
train. One must lay down a covering fire while
one's companions enter. Asking the resistance to
arrange for repairs is usually the best option.
Taking out the gunboats and capturing bridges
is a pleasure that players will want to reserve for
themselves. Players must halt at enemy bridges or
the game ends immediately. When players half at

The graphics of the game are better on the cab
screen than on the others, yet none of the
graphics are as outstanding as we have come to
expect from Accolade and the sound effects are
pretty standard fare. The sound used for the burning furnace, for example, should be familiar to
Apollo 18 players. It is, after all, the sound effect
used for re-entry.
While the game should not be taken as a serious
simulation, it is a rousing action game. The action
is there, but some will not like the fact that the engineering sequences take up more time than the
normal shoot-'em-up type action game. The engineering segments, however, are an outstanding
part of the game. They bring the game to a higher
level than the straight action game.
Forget about that old electric train up in your
closet (some of the track pieces are missing,
anyway). This game will obviously not make model
railroading obsolete, but if offers a lot of the same
kinds of satisfaction.

THE
RUMOR

BAG
This guy said they will have Audrey
Meadows and the original set from the
television show as part of their booth.
Both projected products will be graphic
adventures.

by John Jacob
Jingleheimer Schmidt ll

t's

rough keeping up with a growing
industry, especially if you are travelling incognito. Take the recent Spring
Symposium of the Software Publishers
Association, for example. My editors
stayed at the Berkeley Marina Marriott.
My hotel reservation was lost, so I spent
a lot of time hiding from hotel security.
Of course, nobody ever bothers to
check storage closets before they talk
about deep dark industry secrets, so I
picked up a few nice rumors.

I

In fact, I was trying to figure out how
to keep my suit from smelling like floor
wax when I overheard someone say
something about First Row Software.
First Row is a new player in the entertainment software business that is storming
onto the scene with potentially hot
properties. Take their Twilight Zone
product, for instance. According to the
conversation I overheard, they are planning a Friday the 13th (May 13, 1988)
release in Philadelphia (where Rod Serling started at the CBS affiliate).
Designed by a physician (Dr. Michael
Breggar), Twilight Zone is expected to
be a graphic adventure with a "super parser."
When the listener suggested that the
Twilight Zone license must have been expensive, the fellow with First Row said,
"It did not come cheap!"
It must not be too bad, though, since
the company also plans to unveil
another licensed product, The
Honeymooners at the Summer Consumer Electronics Show in Chicago.

I finally decided to go to the welcome
reception, "eau de floor wax" notwithstanding. After all, some tipsy
software executive would probably spill
wine on me and cover up the smell,
anyway. I had no more than placed
some Brie on a slice of sour dough than
I bumped into Andrew Greenberg of
Wizardry fame. I knew that Andrew had
created his own company, MasterPlay,
and was getting ready to release Star
Saga: One Beyond The Boundary. I
knew that their key word was "playticipation" and that the game was supposed
to be multi-player role-playing
moderated by the computer, but I didn't
see how it could be workable. As he explains it, the computer game master
referees the game by directing player
characters to "textlets" (paragraphs of information printed in separate booklets)
according to the moves input on the
computer (and corresponding to sectors
on the map).
Andrew politely brushed a lurking mop
string off my shoulder and introduced
me to Tod Zipnick of ICOM. Tod said
that they were considering a hybrid
board/computer game with regard to
their license of Sherlock Holmes: Consulting Detective. Maybe these hybrid approaches are the wave of the future.
I had to beat a quick retreat from the
reception because someone had told
several software publishers that I was
Scorpia. After some of Scorpia's recent
less-than-complementary reviews, that
wasn't a safe identity to assume. I ended
up hiding under a table in the lobby
where some of the SPA members'
promotional literature was being distributed. The angry publishers lost track
of yours truly and I was just about to
return to the reception when a pair of
pinstriped trousers and some well-filled
nylons stopped at the table. The female
voice was lamenting the lack of science
fiction role playing games on the computer and the male voice told her that
Spinnaker Software is developing one

on a grand scale. Starlords is supposed
to be an IBM game (VGA required)
which will offer twelve different worlds to
explore. When I heard that the game
was going to be VGA required, I was so
taken aback I nearly bumped my head
on the table and blew my cover. How
many gamers have VGA capability?. The
male voice also shared the fact that Spinnaker is working with American Interactive Media on CD-I projects (including
their Sargon chess program, two as yet
unrevealed game titles, and a Scholastic
Aptitude Test preparation program). In
fact, he said, Spinnaker is one of four
authoring stations for AIM in the entire
country.
When I finally got out from under the
table and headed for the broom closet
for the evening, I noticed a intriguing
group huddled together like U. S. Congressmen in the infamous "cloakroom."
Personalities associated with Interplay
Productions, New World Computing,
and Origin Systems were "caucusing."
Drat it all! I was just sneaking into
eavesdropping range when I slipped on
a leftover canape and tumbled loudly to
the floor. The fellows were nice when
they asked me to leave, but you have to
be curious about what three leading
companies in the computer role-playing
field might be cooking up together.
Nevertheless, I did find out that Origin
Systems will release Times of Lore
within the year. Designed by Chris
Roberts, this game is completely joystick
driven. The visual aspect is something
like Gauntlet but there is much more
variety and animation than the arcade
game. The game is not as in-depth as
the Ultima series, but a pop-up menu is
accessed in determining actions and a
pop-up menu for conversational
keywords appears. Apparently, players
will be able to simply hold down the button on their joysticks until their preferred
action or conversational keyword is highlighted. Then, they let up on the button
in order to make their selection. The
game will be released on disk for U.S.
consumption and on cassette for British
Commodore owners. I also noted that
this game is easily adaptable to Nintendo cartridges and follows the arcade fantasy role playing formula so popular in
Japan.
Later, I didn't mind it so much when
hotel security caught me sleeping in the
linen closet, but it really bothered me as
my editors pretended that they didn't
know me when I was forcibly removed
from the hotel. Well, such is the life of
an investigative reporter and rumormonger in a security conscious industry.

I

(Continued from page 10)
computer RPG to
date. It may be
worth the price of
an ST to play it! —
Rick Gridley, Ravenna, OH.
Dungeon Master is
by far the best
game I have ever
played. — John
Thorning, Bayonne,
NJ.
Several other
readers agreed with
your opinion.
Unfortunately, magazine publishing is like any other business—
higher volume means lower unit
costs. We may eventually compete
in price with those you have mentioned, but for now, we simply
provide the finest quality publication we can afford to print at the
best price we can afford to offer.

"Value"d Opinion
CGW is always a welcome arrival at
my house. It is the only magazine I
always read from cover-to-cover. I
even re-read articles. CGW is getting
better (I've been a reader since
1984). Keep up the good work.
Tom Chance
Ventura, CA
Gee, thanks . . . Ummm.., Tom,
could you drop a line to Dennis
Owens up in Old Town, Maine . . .

Brief Comments From
R.I.D. Cards
Suggestions
You should list the machine used
for the review in the review summary
box. — Tom Cannen, Germantown,
MD.
When reviewing games for the IBM
state which graphics cards are compatible. — John Friedman, Yuba
City, CA.
Good suggestions. We will try
them out in CGW #48.
Dungeon Master
Dungeon Master may be the best

Brooks Fan Club
The Strike Fleet review in CGW
#46 is the best review I've seen in
CGW. It should be used as a model
for all of your reviews. — John
Coombs, Salem, OR.
I totally concur on M. Evan Brooks'
excellent review of Strike Fleet, especially the "Minuses" and the "Might-

Have-Beens". — R.F. Williams, Endicott, NY.
Miscellaneous Comments
I still think Rogue is a wonderful
game. I am sad that Epyx is no
longer selling it. — Steve Hartman,
San Jose, CA.
Panzer Strike illustrates that
Grigsby has made another quantum
leap in tactical design. Wonderful. –
Greg McCarty, Woodbury, MN
The CGW Hall of Fame is a good
idea. I'm glad M.U.L.E. made the
grade. — J. Kelso, Kelso, WA.
Retire Seven Cities of Gold to the
Hall of Fame
D. Bunten, Little
Rock, AR (just kidding Dan, actually
the card was signed, Walter Mulder,
U.S. Air Force Academy, CO).
I give Microprose game high
markes because they have excellent
graphics, documentation, and replay
value. — R.L. Talbert, Highland, CA.

S.
Summer is creeping up on us
and Fred is already counting
the days until the great Annual Grue Convention in August (to
be held, as always, in the Dark
Room of Colossal Cave). So don't
worry if he seems a little absentminded; he still remembers your
favorite and will pour it out just as
soon as you get settled in your chair
(right, Fred? Fred??
FRED!!!). Sigh. Anyway,
let's move on to talking
about this month's subject . . . me.
Of all the non-game
questions that turn up
in my mail, the mostasked is usually along
the lines of "Gee Scorp,
how do you finish all
those games so fast
(without hint books,
too?!)?".
Well, I hate to give
away all my secrets
(grin), but the answer is
time and experience.
Playing games is what I
do for a (somewhat
precarious) living; while
most people are out
slaving away in the real
world, I'm sweating over
a computer monitor,
trying to finish a game
before deadline time
rolls around.
That usually allows for
a lot of hours, although
sometimes game companies make my life harder by releasing titles a
couple of weeks before
the next issue's deadline. In the case of CGW, "next
issue" really means two months
from now. For instance, I'm writing
this on a cold March evening, but
you won't read it until May.
Still, time alone isn't enough. This
is where experience comes in. I've
been playing computer games now
for over seven years (ouch! that long
already?), and you accumulate a lot
of know-how over such a long
stretch. Most of that know-how really can't be put into words; it's the experience of hundreds of hours of

game-playing that gets tucked (or
stuffed) into the brain. After awhile,
certain things just come automatically, because you've been through
them so many times before.
Of course, I haven't always been
the omniscient (heh!) Scorpia. There
was a time in the dim, dark past
when I, too, was a novice (yes, real-

from easy. Not many computers
were in use yet, and word of mouth
recommendations tended to be few.
I only knew one person who had an
Apple and I didn't subscribe to any
magazines yet.
So I walked into the computer
store one day, looked over the offerings, and made some purchases.
Naturally, you're all
wondering what I
bought on this historic
occasion. Well, not
knowing any better (and
having never played a
computer adventure
before), I snapped up
Zork, Original Adventure (Colossal Cave),
Wizard and the Princess, and Pyramid of
Doom. I don't think I
could have picked four
harder ones to start with
if I'd tried.
But I was happy (when
I wasn't yelling, screaming, and cursing at the
screen in frustration),
and I was certainly
hooked. Adventure
games were such neat
things! Even though it
was quite a struggle to
get through those first
adventures (no hint
books in those days; no
handy BBS to dial into,
as I didn't have a
modem yet), and it took
me a long time, I
wanted more. Let's face
it, adventure gamers are
gluttons for punishment
(grin).

Scorpion's Mail

ly, believe it!), chortling gleefully over
my very first computer, an Apple II+
with 48K of memory.
Those were the days when most
computer games came in ziplock
bags with hastily-printed or Xeroxed
documentation, which consisted
mostly of single-page instructions
for boot-up and saving, and little
more. "User-friendly" hadn't quite
reached the game market yet.
With the market still so new, it
wasn't always easy to distinguish
good games from bad, or hard ones

After that, there was no stopping
me; having learned from the lumps I
took in those first games (and you
can raise quite a few lumps from
banging your head against the wall),
my adventure sense gradually
developed as I played more and
more games, both adventure and
role-playing (ok, I'll admit that I also
have a certain aptitude for this sort
of thing; that probably helps, too).
Of course, that doesn't mean I can
simply whip through any old game

in an afternoon; unless it's a really
easy one, it could take me anywhere
from a few days to a couple of
weeks or more to finish (besides, I
don't have the luxury of taking my
time with a game; there's always that
deadline lurking up ahead).
Except for the most difficult of Infocoms, the ones that usually take
longest to complete are the role-playing games, mainly because of all the
time needed to raise characters up
in level; puzzles in games of this
type are usually weak and don't
often give me much trouble.
One habit I developed back then,
and which I've kept up to the
present day, is to always read the
documentation thoroughly before
booting the disk. No matter how
long or short the manual may be,
I've read it at least twice before starting play, and I keep it handy afterwards; it saves me a lot of time and
trouble later on.
Mapping, however, was a habit I
had a hard time getting into, especially when dealing with mazes. I absolutely hated the ones in Zork and
Original Adventure, and to this day I
still look upon mazes with suspicion
and dislike. This feeling did not help
when I started getting into the
CRPG's and their dungeons.
Wizardry, for instance. I mapped out
part of the first level, and then gave
it up. The only level I mapped entirely was three, and only because of
those obnoxious pits all over the
place. It was the same way with the
next two in the series; I made my
way through the levels pretty much
on visual memory alone. Only
Wizardry IV was completely mapped
out to the last detail.
But the times they were a-changin'.
In 1983, I began writing for CGW,
and game playing turned from
being an amusement (or torture) to
a job (or torture). No longer could I
afford the luxury of blithely ignoring
maps; if someone wrote four
months later with a question, I had
better be able to answer it (by that
time, visual memory would have
faded considerably).
So I buckled down and really
mapped (well, most of the time). It is

still the most tedious part of any
game, particularly in dungeons. Go
a step, draw a line, fight the
monsters, go a step, draw a line,
fight the monsters . . . well, you've
been there, too and you know what
it's like. Sometimes I really can't
blame people who buy hintbooks
with maps in them; it takes a lot of
patience to do mapping.
Still, I've done it enough now that
it's no longer so much hard as just
boring, and rather automatic. With
practice, you can almost keep one
eye on the screen and one on the
graph paper, fighting monsters and
mapping at the same time without
hardly skipping a beat.
So that's what it all comes down
to, folks: reading the docs, an eye
for detail, patience (LOTS of
patience), and playing games,
games, games, to accumulate that
reservoir of experience that changes
you from a novice to a seasoned adventurer. An aptitude for gaming
helps, of course; most people who
don't enjoy these types of games
usually stop playing pretty quickly. It
has nothing to do with a game
being hard or easy, just that it's not
for them. That still leaves quite a few
adventure players out there (grin).
In a way, I've been very fortunate:
my work is not only something I'm
good at, but enjoy doing as well
(most of the time!), and is also something that allows me to share what I
know with others, which gives me
great satisfaction. Not many people
can say that about their jobs.
Well, I see we still have a little bit of
space left, so let's take a peek into
the mailbag for a few quick questions.
Bard's Tale I (an enlightening liquor for a minstrel's magical laryngitis):Although I mentioned something about this in Computer Game
Forum #2, a lot of people missed it
(judging by the number of times this
query has shown up in my box).
When giving a multiple-word answer
to a magic mouth, simply enter one
word at a time. As long as you keep
entering the correct words, the
program will prompt you for the next
one.

Beyond Zork (a helmet full of
homemade hints to keep adventurers out of the hash): A lot of folks
are having a hard time getting that
helmet (not surprising, as this is the
hardest puzzle in the game). The
horse can't be moved from the
trench and there's no way to get
into it yourself. Ergo, there is no way
to obtain the helmet at this spot.
However, this isn't the only place on
the timeline; you might be able to
think of another area where the helmet might be found, if only you had
some way of knowing its exact location. A friend can be helpful here.
Return of Werdna (a bewitching
brew to battle boredom): Some
people have been searching
desperately for all the witch items
before going up into the cube.
That's not going to work out. You'll
have to make your way entirely
through the cosmic cube before
you'll have everything you need
(figuring out how to get back to the
witch, tho, is something I'll leave to
you).
Ultima IV (a salubrious salad of
sacrificial solutions): It's interesting
how many players are having difficulty in obtaining Avatarhood in the virtue of Sacrifice. Giving away gold to
beggars does not help you very
much in this case. Donating blood,
however, will certainly help.
Sacrifice, after all, means giving of
oneself, not one's possessions (at
least as far as the game is concerned).
That seems to be about it for now;
remember if you need help with an
adventure game, you can reach me
in the following ways:

Until next time, happy adventuring!
Copyright 1988 by Scorpia, all
rights reserved.

THE DOCTOR
IS IN:
AN APPOINTMENT WITH TERROR
IN ACTIVISION'S MANIAC
MANSION
by Charles Ardai

T

he crickets chirp, the stars twinkle, night falls,

a meteor with thoughts of global domination
plummets to Earth, and suburbia goes on
sleeping. Dr. Fred and Nurse Edna are the first to
find the meteor—or does it find them? No matter.
They're under its power now.

Shop of Horrors back through Young
Frankenstein to Abbott and Costello meet Dr.
Jekyll and Mr. Hyde. Yet, for all its value as an
homage, the game stands strongly on its own
merits.
The comic frenzy is ignited when a key left under
a doormat allows Dave and his friends entrance to
the mansion. From there, the pace rarely falters.
It's not seat-of-the-pants action, but the story unfolds briskly with few awkward moments. There are
always a handful of doors still to be tried and new
sections of the house to be charted. The puzzles
range from the obvious to the moderately challenging, their purpose here being merely to enhance,
rather than to obstruct, one's passage through the
story. Unlike many works of interactive fiction,
Maniac Mansion spins a coherent and interesting
tale without frustrating the player. The game is so
successful, in fact, at sucking players into its seamless surreality that it quickly converts those who
didn't bat an eyelash when facing Werdna in mortal combat into nebbishy Ghostbusters-in-training
who look over their shoulders as they tiptoe past
Chuck the Plant.

Laughing Gasps
TWENTY YEARS
LATER . . .
The crickets chirp, the stars
twinkle, night falls, and a gallant teen trio sets out to rescue
one of their own from the
clutches of the nefarious doctor. Why was Sandy kidnapped? Who knows? All that
is certain is that Dave isn't
going to let some slimy
monster devour his girl!

Title:
Maniac Mansion
Systems:
Apple II, C-64
Players: 1
Price:
$34.95
Designer: Lucasfilm Games
Publisher: Activision
Mountain View, CA

So it begins, this newest opus
from the fecund and only slightly twisted minds at Lucasfilm
Games. Maniac Mansion is a
blend of new techniques, oldstyle gags and enough campy
lunacy to fill a season of Batman re-runs. Will Dave save
Sandy from the Purple Tentacle? Will Bernard confront Dr.
Fred's son, Weird Ed? Will Razor get out alive in
time for her next gig with 'Razor and the
Scumettes'? Will the nuclear reactor in the basement explode before the Meteor Police arrive? Do
you seriously have any doubts? Just tune in tomorrow, same Bat-time, same Bat-channel.
What's going on here? All in good time, my
friends. First, a word from our sponsor. Maniac
Mansion is a worthy addition to the Activision
catalogue. Composed in the best comic horror
tradition, it is as much a loving tribute to an all-but
lost genre as George Lucas' Star Wars and
Raiders of the Lost Ark were.
Fans will have fun spotting in-jokes, like the Star
Wars poster tacked up in the game room, and
catching references to all the classics, from Little

Best of all, Maniac Mansion not only masterfully
navigates the pitfalls associated with adventure
games, but also strikes the necessary and
precarious balance between laughs and suspense
that so many comic horror films and novels lack. It
is not enough to be silly or to exaggerate the horrific side of things; there must be a synthesis of
both, gasps following close on the heels of chuckles, as it were.
Lucasfilm achieves this atmosphere through
meticulous plotting and the insertion, from time to
time, of 'cut scenes,' short animated sequences
that tell players what's going on elsewhere. One
starts as soon as the players enter the house; in
Fred's lab, the snaggle-toothed mad scientist tells
bikini-clad Sandy of his plans to have his new invention suck her brains out. "Help!" Sandy wails.
"Heh, heh, heh," says Fred.
Some of the sequences are so well executed that
the player really gets the feeling of being part of
the story and of dealing with an intelligent
program. For instance, the first door on the left
leads to the kitchen and a surprise: one of the
maniacs in the mansion has left his chainsaw
mixed in with the carving knives.
The absurdity of stumbling onto a bloody chainsaw hanging on Fred's cutlery rack is balanced by
the equally absurd, if predictable, punchline: the
trail of blood leads up to the refrigerator and some
broken ketchup bottles. Then, as the gag begins
to wear thin and the chainsaw fails to attack, the
game cuts to a scene of Weird Ed muttering to
himself that he's hungry—and if you're the typical
packrat, grab-anything-that's-not-nailed-down adventurer, you'll have just raided the fridge of everything edible.
Ed heads downstairs at a double clip while you
try to decide whether you have time to put the

food back. If you run, you may well bump into a
dead end—or into a Green Tentacle who wants to
be a rock star, but who, more than that, wants to
eat you. Did you pick up the box of Tentacle
Chow along the way? The record featuring tentacle
mating calls? No? Well, you still have two characters left .. .
Actually, no one dies in Maniac Mansion; getting
caught just means incarceration in a stone chamber that sports a sign marked "Seckrit Lab -."
None of the scary scenes are really out to give you
a coronary, either. Whether this is a
blessing or a curse depends on your tastes. If
you want straightforward chills, Infocom's The
Lurking Horror may be more your speed. Maniac
Mansion has more in common, both in tone and
gameplay, with the old Broderbund release, The
Castles of Dr. Creep. Were Maniac Mansion's
adept storyline pitted against Dr. Creep's multiscreen puzzles, however, the former would win
hands down as the more well-rounded entertainment—in all areas except music, but more on that
in a minute.
In Maniac Mansion, Lucasfilm introduces a new
game mechanic. The top of the screen holds a
graphic of the environment, the bottom a menu of
available commands and a scrolling inventory. By
positioning a crosshair over a command, an onscreen object or a character, you access a command line. The computer makes grammatical sentences out of your joysticking and a click of approval sets your words into action. What could be
simpler?
Once an action is initiated, you can either watch
one of your three on-screen surrogates carry it
out, or you can abort it by substituting another
command. Should your characters split up, you
can switch from one's viewpoint to another's via
the 'New Kid' command. This, theoretically, makes
it difficult to fall into tedious no-win situations;
even if one character gets stuck, there are always
two others to help out, or to explore different
areas. Of course, I ended my first game with Dave
and Syd left to rot in the dungeon and Wendy locked out of the mansion, but I have a talent for getting into scrapes like that. For the most part,
Maniac Mansion runs smoothly, seemingly having
been based on the same principle of 'interactivity
without the pain' that went into lnfocomics.

Let Go My Lego!
The graphics are serviceable, sometimes better,
sometimes worse. The villains look great (Weird Ed
is a dead ringer for every anarchist Buster Keaton
ever tangled with), and the rooms are all distinct
and interestingly furnished, but our heroes—the
player picks three out of a group of seven chums—
look like Lego people with Charlie Chaplin walks.
Forgivable? Yes, especially considering the quality
of the gameplay and the story—but Defender of
the Crown spoiled me too much to accept with
quiet grace a bikini-clad damsel who suffers from
the jaggies.
A few nagging, technical shortcomings also

detract from the game's impact. There should be a
way to move all three characters at once, so that
you wouldn't have to ferry them around one at a
time. This would be especially helpful in the opening, when you have to drag each character to the
mansion.
Also, for some reason characters occasionally
take unnecessarily long detours to get from one
place to another (they keep walking all the way
around the piano, for instance, and behind the furnace), which is usually just irritating, but which can
be disastrous when a character is being chased.
Then there's the issue of the vocabulary, which is
adequate only because 'USE' can mean anything.
There were times when I would have killed for
more commands, not to mention for the option of
typing in the name of an object rather than trying
to position the over-sensitive crosshair accurately.
Worst of all, barring an uninspired, standard-fare
cacophony at the start of the title sequence, the
game has virtually no music. A few sound effects,
yes, like the crickets and the sounds of water in
the faucets, static on the radio and the ticking of
Fred's grandfather clock, but that's not music—
and even the sound effects are few and far between. Why couldn't Lucasfilm have gotten John
Williams to write a theme? I would even have settled for the Liszt used in Dr. Creep.
On the other hand, Maniac Mansion does have
its share of good points. The documentation is
entertaining and the size of the mansion alone
guarantees that you won't soon run out of things
to see. When the characters speak, their lips move.
The movements are not synchronized but, heck,
Lucasfilm can keep that effect on file in case they
ever write a tribute to kung-fu films. The characters all have unique personalities and skills which
come into play during the game, and each possible team has different puzzles to solve—only if
your team includes budding novelist Wendy, for instance, will the typewriter two flights up come in
handy. The fact that events proceed in realtime is
also nice, as is the internal consistency: when Ed
moves from one room to another, it takes him as
long as it would you and he has to open all the appropriate doors on the way.
The best point of all, of course, is the top-notch
scripting and programming. The story betrays a
genuine affection for the genre that comes
through in every encounter and, my gripes aside,
the interface is one of the most comfortable ever
devised.

Veni, Vidi, Verdict
The verdict, then, is thumbs up, with very few
reservations. Maniac Mansion is a clever and imaginative game. It is also a successful stylistic experiment. A little toning up will, no doubt, make
the format a popular and long-lived one.
Maniac Mansion should have a enviable future.
We need more like this one. Are you listening,
Lucasfilm?

PUZZLING
ENCOUNTERS
Two Titles from Spectrum

HoloByte's International Series
by Roy Wagner

S

pectrum HoloByte has imported several new
games for the US market. Two of these are
somewhat similar to non-computer shape
puzzles, but totally new from anything currently on
a computer. These games are
very simple in concept and
play, but also addictively challenging.

Samurai
Warehouseman
Soko Ban comes from Japan.
It is similar to the classic 15-puzzle where you have a square 4
by 4 frame with fifteen square
tiles in it. Your object being to
move the tiles about into a
Ned final pattern. This game
takes its start from this idea,
but carries it quite a bit farther.
Each game screen shows an
overhead view of a warehouse
floor plan
with several
walls and
rooms.
Scattered

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
# PLAYERS:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

square
crates. One area of
Soko Ban
the floor plan is
C-64/128, IBM
marked with
1-4
ASCII Corporation
squares to identify
Spectrum HoloByte
where all the crates
Alameda, CA
should be stored. You are represented
on the floor plan as a small figure (a "soko ban,"
Japanese for "warehouseman").
Your object is to move the
crates to their storage location.
However, you are only able to
push the crates. Walls, doorways, and other crates makes
this process challenging. It is
quite easy to push a crate into
a position where it is trapped.
For this situation, the game will
let you go back one position,
but only if you do it before making any other
moves.

You must plan several moves ahead in order successfully complete each level. The game comes
with 50 progressively more difficult levels. When
you complete a level, your score takes into consideration the number of times you pushed each
crate and the time taken to move them all to the
storage locations. The top three scores are saved
to a "vanity board." At higher levels, there is less
margin for any wrong moves. You must plan your
every move.
The game is very flexible and will let you begin at
any level. If you have hopelessly trapped yourself
or have no chance for successfully completing a
level, you can press a key to begin that level again.
The game also comes with a construction option
that will let you build your own screens.
There is a tournament option that will let up to
four players challenge the time to complete one or
more levels. The first player to complete the level
sets the time for the others to beat. You can even
set a time limit for each level, which does make
things even harder.
The opening game screens are quite nice on the
C64, but somewhat less spectacular for the game
action screens. These latter screens look better on
a monochrome IBM compatible. However the
game is still very playable and very addictive. Show
this game to anyone. Then let them sit down and
try it. You will have a distracted visitor for as long
as they have time. Some stay even longer.
Verdict: The game is pure and simple, very playable and mentally challenging.

From Russia With Love
Tetris comes from Russia.
The concept was invented by
a 30-year-old Soviet researcher and programmed by
an 18-year-old Moscow student. Brought to the US,abouthe the
are
concept was reprogrammed
sevral
for MS-DOS and also ported
to the C64. Like Soko-Ban,
Tetris is simple in concept,
simple to play, and a unique
design. It is similar to the
shape puzzles where you have
a frame and several pieces of
varied patterns created using squares. Your object
being to fit all the pieces back into the frame once
they have been removed and shuffled.
The game begins, on the C-64, with a "vanity
board" of the top fifteen scores. On the IBM version, one views the outline of the U.S.S.R. when
choosing speed and levels. Either way, you initially
pick from ten speed levels which act as a scoring
factor (the higher speed level, the higher points
scored). You can also select to have music or
sound effects during play.
The play screen shows an empty rectangular
frame, 10 squares by 20 squares. The rectangle is
on a background graphic screen. There is only

one graphic for the C64 version, but one for each
level with the MS-DOS version. There are six possible shapes made by using four squares in various
combinations.
Randomly, one of these shapes will appear at the
top of the frame and begin to descend. You are
able to move the shape left or right and to rotate
the shape in 90 degree increments as it moves
downward. Your object is to
position the shapes at the bottom of the frame to fit
together with no gaps between shapes. For each solid
layer of shapes you complete,
the stack of shapes disappears below the frame. You
must prevent the stack of
shapes from reaching the top
of the screen where it will end
play.
You score for the number of
layers you complete and
receive more points for doing
it at speed levels where the
shapes are descending at a faster pace. As you
complete a certain number of lines, the speed
level is increased. Once you have positioned a
shape for placement, you can send it to the bottom of the frame for higher points.

The play screen shows your current
points and the next shape to appear.
This can help you plan your moves.
After a little play it is rather easy to
quickly rotate and position each piece
and drop it into place. Your challenge
then becomes the ever increasing
speed level.
It is disappointing
to note that the
very nice graphic
image screens
from the IBM version were not included with the
C64version.Oth
minor options were
also left out of the
C64 version. The
two graphic
screens for the C64
version, though in
monochrome, are I-nice and the missing features do not distract from the basic game.

Verdict: Tetris is deceptively simple and insidiously addictive. It is certainly worthwhile.

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

Tetris
C-64/128, IBM
Solitaire
$34.95 (IBM)
$24.95 (C-64/128)
Alexi Paszitnov
Spectrum HoloByte

to CGW readers. Note that "Adventure
Gaming" refers here to whole spectrum of
gaming, not just role-playing games.

to the Academy and send the copy to us
(CGW, PO Box 4566, Anaheim, CA
92803). We will extend your CGW subscription by one issue for participating in
the poll. Non-CGW subscribers can get
$2.00 off a CGW subscription by sending
the copy of their ballot with a subscription
order.

We encourage your participation but
realize there may be some resistance to
the $2.00 "poll tax". So here is the deal.
Send in for the ballot. Photocopy your
completed ballot, return the original ballot

It is not necessary to vote for CGW as
"Best Professional Adventure Game
Magazine" in order to receive the credit.
However, we would be pleased to have
your vote.

Origins Awards 1987
Printed below is the ballot for the 1987
Origins Awards. Sponsored by the
Academy of Adventure Gaming Arts and
Design, the awards will be selected this
year by you, the gamers. Unfortunately
the Academy will charge you $2.00 to
vote (postage and handling). Categories
15 through 18 should be of direct interest

"Down To
The Sea In
Ships!!
by Roy Wagner

with each ship's location marked. A different
colored marker is used for each company. On the
map, a number of markers represent the wind
strength (on the Beaufort scale). For the player,
these wind markers only represent a randomized
and unavoidable obstacle (wind effects your travel
time).
Several "gadgets" (buttons identified with icons
and text) can be selected via the mouse. "Action"
starts or stops the simulated passage of time.
"Globe" lets each shipowner determine the global
location, route, and ETA (Estimated Time of Arrival) for their ships. "Office" takes you to your office to review and modify your financial transactions. "Broker" is used to buy and sell ships.
Withsoundfeagl trmpshi'

horn, a load of cargo is lowered to the
dock signifying the arrival of cargo into
another port of call. Tramp ships carry whatever
cargo that might make a profit for the owner.
About 20% of the world's
shipping is done by tramp
ships.
Ports of Call from Aegis
attempts to bring a simulation of this life to the
home computer. The
simulation is based on actual data from the
maritime world. Real life
factors have been greatly
simplified to provide a very
playable game. It is not
necessary to graph all the
parameters or make complex economic calculations
to enjoy this game. It can
be easily played by
children eight or older. All
players must play at the
same degree of difficulty
(Beginner, Expert, Genius).
The only conspicuous difference between these
levels is the time allotted
for "manually" entering or
leaving port.

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

One to four shipowners
may participate. The game
plays well in both solitaire
and multi-player modes.
You start off by registering
the fleet owner's name and a
Ports of Call
name for your shipping company.
Amiga
Then, you select a home port
$49.95
Rolf-Dieter Klein and Martin Ulrich
from a list of twenty-eight world
Aegis
wide ports. The home port
Los Angeles, CA
selected will influence some of
your background operating expenses. You are provided with a starting capital of $5
million from which you must buy ships and pay for
operating expenses.
After all the players have provided the information
above, a "World Simulation Display" (WSD) screen
will appear. This screen shows a map of the world

In Port
At the beginning of the simulation, each player
must visit the "Broker" to buy at least one ship.
This selection brings up a very nice graphic screen
of an elevator lobby, followed by the elevator
panel. The "Consulting Division" on the first floor
is always closed, but does advise you of what is
available on the other floors. The second floor is
the "Sellers Market" where ships that have no
mortgages may be sold. Floors three to five have
"Low Cost", "Pre-owned," and "High-Tech" ships for
sale, ranging in price from about $1 million to $60
million dollars. Low cost ships must be paid for in
full, while the higher priced ships have mortgages
that require a deposit of 40 to 50 percent. A
graphic rendition and detailed information is
provided for each available ship. This includes the
ship's cargo and fuel capacity, engine horsepower,
maximum velocity in knots and fuel usage, and
cost per day in operating expenses.
Also shown on the WSD screen is a small bar
chart representing the relative assets (accumulated
possessions) for each shipping company and an
elapsed time indicator. As it changes with the passage of time, ship and wind markers move about
the world map. After awhile, one marker will blink
indicating that some specific action must be taken
for a ship.
At the beginning and each time you enter a port,
the "Captain's Cabin" screen is displayed. Here you
will see a view of the port from your porthole. On a
chalkboard will be some factual information pertaining to the port. In another area, the status of
your ship will be shown. This includes the money
in your bank account, the condition of your ship,
and the fuel in your bunker (tanks). From a clipboard you select various orders to perform. These
include: repair, refuel, charter, lay up, and load.
Selecting "Repair" brings up a screen that indicates the current percent of your ship in good
shape, the cost per percent for repairs, and the
total maximum cost to fully repair your ship.
"Refuel" brings up a screen showing a cut away
view of a fuel bunker with markers at 25%, 50%,
75% and 100% and your current fuel level. The
price per ton of fuel, tons bought, and dollars
spent are also displayed.

Selecting "Charter" brings up an option screen
that displays a list of ports and cargoes. Clicking
on a specific port and cargo will display the distance, in nautical miles, to that port and the rate
(dollar value) paid for shipping that cargo. After
considering daily operating expenses, fuel costs
over distances at various speeds, travel hazards,
and potential new cargoes at your destination port,
you must determine what you think would be the
most profitable selection. The real success of the
game is based on this strategy and the ships you
have bought.
If you cannot find an economically viable cargo,
you can select "Lay Up" which lets you specify the
number of days (up to 99) that you wish to remain
anchored in safe waters outside the port, waiting
and hoping that the laws of supply and demand
bring higher cargo rates.
Some cargoes will specify a certain number of
days in which the delivery must be made and a dollar penalty for every day that the cargo is late.
These deliveries are usually quite difficult to make
on time, but they can still be quite profitable due
to the high rate being paid for the shipment. Pay
close attention to the days and distance for these
shipments.

Casting Off
Once your cargo has been loaded, you are ready
to cast off to sea. At this point, somewhat of an "arcade" element enters the game. You can pay for a
tug's help ($2000 - $9000) or attempt to steer by
hand. Sometimes, the tugs will be on strike and
you will be forced to steer by hand so you had better put in some practice. The manual option
brings up a very nice aerial view of the port. A
mouse controlled navigation control panel is displayed to provide forward or reverse acceleration
and left or right rudder. A speed indicator shows
your actual speed. On the aerial view, you will see
your ship and where you must exit the port.
Manual steering can be quite challenging at first,
but becomes fairly easy with some practice. The
design is different for each port, though it never
changes for a specific port. Some ports are very
easy, some very difficult. This part of the game
reminded me of a miniature golf course with it's
varying designs for each hole. If you hit the dock,
you will end up having to pay for damage repairs
and tug fees.
Leaving port is usually far easier than entering
port. A lot of programming and screen design
work went into this segment of the game. Some of
the easier ports are: Singapore, Buenos Aires,
Lima, Monrovia, and Cape Hope.
After leaving a harbor, a screen will display information on your destination, freight on board, distance to travel, and time limits, if you have one. A
variable display (slider) of speed will display the
tons of fuel used and the days to reach your destination at each value of knots. If you plot this
curve, you will find it to be somewhat optimum to
select a speed a few knots down from maximum.

This will take longer, but your fuel usage will be
much less. So you must determine the tradeoffs of
fuel consumption versus fixed operating expenses.
Of course, if you have a time limit, it may be advisable to select the maximum speed possible.

Out At Sea
Once at sea, your challenges are just beginning. You
must periodically "Stop Action" and click on "Office" to
visit your office. You may not
think you have a reason, but
if you don't, you will find that
someone has dipped into the
till and taken around
$250,000. Other reasons to
visit your office are to check
on your income and expenses, possessions, view a nice
graph of the value of your
property, check your bank accounts, note ship details, view
a ranking list of other players, raise or payoff a
mortgage, obtain or repay credit, or change your
home port (which costs a flat $1 million). Each of
the four shipowners have a different office screen.
Many random events occur while at sea and require "hands on" control of your ship. Icebergs and
reefs may be encountered and displayed as an
aerial view. Your stopped ship will be shown with a
safe exit point identified. You
must power your ship
through the danger. Take it
slow and easy and you
should make it. You might
also be required to do a rescue pickup. This is pretty
tough to successfully accomplish.
Another instance requiring
your manual control will be
when radar spots another
ship on a collision course
with your own. Actually, the
safest maneuver is to immediately put your ship into
full reverse and try to steer
clear. What seems to be a bug in the program will
trigger a radar situation when you are in lay up.
Since you are in the outer road of "safe" waters
outside of port, this situation could actually occur,
but it would be very unlikely that you could power
up your engines in time to escape from such a
situation.
Other occurrences are: clearing rats from an
agricultural shipment ($10,000), canal fees
($70,000), and pirates (loss of entire cargo). A
storm at sea will give you the option of sailing
round or attempting to pass through at risk to
damage to your ship. Before you leave port, you
might be asked to carry a confidential cargo for
$10,000, $50,000 or $100,000. If you do, your
ship may be stopped for inspection and receive

subsequent penalties. In most instances, it does
seem that "crime" pays.

Bringing It Into Port
This game has some excellent graphics done by
R.E. LaBarre and Jim Sachs.
Jim is one of the top Amiga
graphic artists and previously
did the artwork for Defender
Of The Crown and Arazok's
Tomb. The digitized sounds
are excellent. The manual is
well written, though it does
not define all the shipping
terms used in the game. The
game play is certainly challenging and it will take some
very good decision making to
be able to buy yourself a $60
million super high-tech ship.

Bumping The Dock
The requirement to periodically visit your office

got to be a major interruption of game play, especially when playing alone. I would have gladly paid
someone to watch the office while I was busy sailing the seas. The periodic tug strikes which required manual docking maneuvers can also get
somewhat frustrating. Leaving port is fairly easy,
but entering a docking berth can be very difficult.
With only 512K, the program is very disk access
intensive. It would even access the disk again if the
same option was selected. With more memory, the
various program segments remain in memory.
Since a player is often controlling several ships, it
would have been nice if the ship's name and current money in the bank were displayed on every
screen requiring an economic decision, but it is
not.

Sailing Home
Ports of Call provides plenty of challenge without
being bogged down with lots of economic details.
The game has a "Save" game option, but it was
very hard to drop anchor and come back at
another time. I always wanted to set a course to
just one more port of call.

The Journal Of
Computer Game
Design
(Continued from page 26)
the modem approach may yet suggest
hope for the future of multi-player
games—even if it is through the back
door.

Modem Games
by Rob Fulop (Author of Rabbit Jack's
Casino for Quantumlink)
After some personal notes, Fulop
defines two different environments
or modem games. One type is
the direct connect environment (as in
Sport of War) and the other is the network game (as in Rabbit Jack's Casino
on Quantumlink or Islands of Kesmai
on Compuserve). He states a positive
preference for the latter and that, of
course, is what he designs for. The most
interesting part of the article dealt with
design considerations. "Multi-Player

modem games probably offer the
greatest opportunity for innovation. The
question you must ask yourself is, 'What
is a good game that can be played by as
few as two people, or as many as
5,000?" From this point, Fulop notes
three basic problems with modem game
design proposals that he has encountered. The first problem is overly
ambitious designs. This may be avoided
by limiting the game concept to that
which can be expressed in one sentence. Second, support issues are often
not addressed. Trivia games, for example, might require developing
hundreds of new questions every week.
The cost of data creation and maintenance for this project would have
been prohibitive. Third, there are often
no realistic budget considerations.
Modem games take longer to alpha test.
Most designers fail to take development
time into consideration.

An Alternative to
Copy Protection
by Jeff Johannigman (Associate
Producer at Electronic Arts)

nitially, Johannigman estimates that
for every copy of a game sold, two to
ten copies are given away. He goes
on to suggest that, particularly in the
MS-DOS world, " . . . it's impossible to
create an effective copy-protection
scheme that works on all clones." He further suggests that disk-based copy
protection is ultimately undesirable.
Therefore, he advocates a packagebased theft protection. The advantages
to such protection are: 1) it allows users
to back up their disks, especially onto
hard drives; 2) does not require
knowledge about DOS arcana to
develop said protection; and 3) it can be
a creative extension to the game environment.

I

The article listed several guidelines for
package-based STP (software theft
protection).
Plan the STP components far enough
ahead for the publisher to be able to research, design, manufacture and implement them.
Plan the STP components as an intrinsic part of the game design.

(Continued on page 51)

The Journal Of
Computer Game
Design

He notes that decoder wheels must be
taken apart to be photocopied.
The interface should be user-friendly,
but with minimal feedback.

(Continued from page 49)

STP should allow users to play enough
of the program to be an incentive to buy.

(Examples cited included the item
cards in Robot Rascals, cross-street
reference and map in Amnesia, and
decoder wheel in Captain Goodnight).
He suggested that the "What is the x-th
word on the y-th line of page z of your
manual?" approach adds nothing to the
fiction of the game or value of the
product.

Make the program's implementation of
security checks difficult to crack.

The actual cost of the STP components should be less than 50 cents
per package.
STP components should be difficult to
replicate.
He notes that text can be sent via bulletin boards, but graphically based STP
cannot.
Color coding makes traditional
photocopying more difficult.

Process Intensity
by Chris Crawford

T

his article attempts to define the

term, "process intensity." Simply
defined, "Process intensity is the degree to which a program emphasizes
processes instead of data." Crawford perceives that the entertainment value of a
program increases with the "crunch per
bit ratio." He defines this ratio as operations per datum. Assuming that an
operation is any process applied to a
datum (addition, subtraction, logical
operation, boolean inclusions or exclusions), so the more extensive the
computations applied to a datum the
higher the crunch per bit ratio. Crawford

suggests that satisfaction comes from
entering a small amount of data and triggering extensive responses. As an example, he cites a flight simulator. In
flight simulators, very little data is
entered, but many calculations result.
Crawford notes the failure of those ubiquitous "checkbook balancing
programs." He suggests that they were
not used extensively because they did
not do enough (low crunch per bit—one
operation per datum) with each datum.
Crawford posits that any program with a
low cpb will fail.
If so, why are there more data-intensive
than process-intensive programs? Crawford suggests that many programmers
substitute tables of data for algorithms
in order to speed up processing. Further, he notes that data storage capacity
has increased faster than processing
capacity. Third, he lectures that the
most powerful resistance to process intensity is mental laziness. Process intensity requires all those hours of working
with equations. Since the work is indirect, one is not quite certain how it will
look. Data intensity is, according to
Crawford, the path of least resistance.

TAKING A PEEK
(Continued from page 6)
Logical Design Works
780 Montague Expressway Suite
403
San Jose, CA 95131
CLUB BACKGAMMON: Here is
the gambling strategy game where
you do not have to trust the computer with your dice rolls. The game
comes equipped with a pair of dice
and players can enter the results of
their dice rolls as one option in this
sophisticated simulation of the
popular boardgame. Apple, C-64,
IBM, Atari ST, Amiga, and Apple IIGS
($29.95, $34.95, and $39.95). Circle
Reader Service Card #8.
Mindscape, Inc.
3444 Dundee Road
Northbrook, IL 60062
BLOCKBUSTER: At first glance,
this game looks like a simple clone
of Arkanoids, but the game has
more creative potential than that.
The game allows for 48 userdefinable screens and provides a
Screen Designer (construction kit)
with the product. Play is essentially
the same as Arkanoids, but the
game itself seems more flexible.
Amiga, C-64, IBM ($29.95, $39.95).
Circle Reader Service Card #9.
Polarware, Inc.
1055 Paramount Parkway Suite A
Batavia, IL 60510
DINOSAURS ARE FOREVER:
The latest release in the "Electric
Crayon" series of computerized coloring books features 26 different
dinosaurs and the capacity to create
calendars, posters, and banners
based on their efforts. Apple (with
128K) and IBM ($29.95). Circle
Reader Service Card #10.
subLogic
713 Edgebrook Drive
Champaign, IL 61820
STEALTH MISSION: Whether the
player flies the F-19 Stealth fighter, X29 with its forward-swept wings, or
the current F-14 Tomcat preferred by

the Navy, this simulation offers the
graphic excellence and technological
realism one has come to expect from
subLogic. The simulation offers a
variety of missions, the features
players are familiar with from Flight
Simulator II and Jet, and the ability
to use all of the subLogic Scenery
Disks. C-64 ($39.95). Circle Reader
Service Card #11.

Strategic Simulations, Inc.
1046 N. Rengstorff Avenue
Mountain View, CA 94043
QUESTRON II: Since the player
begins the game with the aptly
named Evil Book of Magic in his
possession, one would be right to expect that it cannot simply be
destroyed. Hence, the player's
character must travel back in time
and destroy the book by making certain that it is never created. The plot
may sound complex, but the use of
auto-mapping makes play simpler
than the original game. C-64
($39.95). Circle Reader Service Card
#12.

STAR COMMAND: From the
designer of the Phantasie trilogy
comes a sophisticated science fiction
role playing game. Combat occurs
on both the man-to-man (or is it
humanoid-to-humanoid?) and
ship-to-ship level and involves both
planetary exploration and exploration
of other structures (space stations,
buildings, etc.). IBM ($49.95). Circle
Reader Service Card #13.

Scorpion's
Bite
(Continued from page 7)
most exciting fight of the game turns
out to be a one-sided trouncing.
What all this means is that the typical
CRPG features too much combat. The
essential purpose of fighting is to bring
the characters up to a level where they
will be able to take on the major adversary. Once that level has been reached,
further encounters become superfluous, and make the party too strong.
Combat, therefore, needs to be more
graduated and infrequent as the characters become more powerful. It is not
necessary to actually restrict the level
that characters can attain, but once
they have reached the point where they
are able to successfully fight Bubu, encounters with random monsters should
become much more rare.
Game designers really need to sit
down and reassess the role and nature
of combat in their games. More
thought should be given to what fighting actually accomplishes, both for the
characters and the game as a whole.
The "every combat a life-or-death struggle" for new parties should be
eliminated; beginners need to face
more reasonable opponents.
Consideration should also be given to
keeping all party members on a par.
Too often, only the spell-casters are effective by the later stages of the game
with the fighters unable to do much of
anything.
This, in turn, means a re-evaluation of
the monsters, both by type and number, that appear in the CRPG. Instead
of just adding all sorts of "neato new
creatures", designers should put them
carefully into the game, with some
thought as to their true function.
It is time that authors realize "less is
more"; it is not necessary that a CRPG
be stuffed with endless varieties of endless monsters for the game to be enjoyable. With more attention given to plot
and ingenuity, and less to generating incessant combat, playing a CRPG would
become a more satisfying experience.
Copyright 1988 by Scorpia, all rights
reserved.

(Continued from page 23)

PANZER
STRIKE!
ing new scenarios quickly and easily. You can use
an old map or build a new one. PS will generate a
map with the amount of forest, swamp and rough
you tell it to use. If you want to add a town, you
don't need to do it square by square. Just hit a key
and a random assortment of wood and stone structures appears near the cursor.
Got your map? Now choose the time period and
which side you want to play. You can pick your forces or let PS do it based on a broad hint about
what size it should be and a preference for armor
or infantry. If you're playing against the computer,
the size of the enemy forces will be proportional to
what you've selected—larger than yours if you're
on the defensive, smaller than yours if you're on
the attack. You can place each unit individually on
the map or choose auto-deployment and let the
computer do it.
The result of all this automation is that you can
boot the game, choose the type of game you want
(say a medium-sized panzer force attacking in
France in 1940 in lightly-forested terrain) and be
playing an original, reasonably balanced scenario
in two minutes! The computer will play either side,
neither, or both.
The best of all is the Campaign Game. You can
select a small force and command it through many
scenarios. When you win, the morale and skill
levels of your force are increased. Losses can be
replaced between scenarios and you can upgrade
your units with better weapons as they become
available (although this also lowers their skill rating
one level). You can also choose to switch fronts so
it is possible to fight in Poland in '39, France in
'40, Libya in '41, Russia in '42 and so on. At the
start of each scenario you get a summary of your
assignment: mission, date, location, visibility. You
then get to select extra support forces suitable for
that time and place. These units are "on loan" to
you and while their loss still counts in the current
scenario, they are somewhat more expendable
than your permanent cadre.
While Campaigns are the pinnacle for the
devoted PS player, you should plan to play quite a
bit before you are successful in them. The low
morale caused by early losses leads to further losses in a vicious circle that is hard to break. The
size of the enemy force is roughly proportional to
yours but sometimes you can be outclassed.
When this happens, the mission becomes simple
survival and you will be elated to come away with a
draw and avoid loss of morale. These "victories"
can be the sweetest of all!

Fire!
In spite of all of this praise, PS is not a perfect
game. Perhaps there will be a sequel that gives us

American forces and weapons so we can do Kasserine Pass or Bastogne scenarios. If there will be
a sequel, there are a few problems I'd like to see
fixed.
When you're building your own scenario and it's
time to place your forces on the map, there is no
way to check lines of sight between squares that
aren't on the screen at the same time. In the Orders Phase, everything works as it should. You can
select a unit, scroll to the other end of the map,
and use the View command to
highlight all of the squares that
the unit can see. In Deployment, even with a unit
selected, View shows the view
from the cursor's position, not
the unit's position. When the
screen is never more than 40
wide and an 88 has a range of
80, how am I going to tell what
it can see?
There is no chart to explain
what the different terrain symbols mean. A few are instantly
recognizable—forests and
roads for example. Others, like hills and buildings,
you must figure out by observing how they block
lines of sight. Learning the difference between
rough and depression or between swamp and field
will take even longer. The only way to learn what
they look like is to go to the scenario builder,
choose to create a new map, and create a square
of each terrain to see what it looks like. You have
to do it once for Europe and again for Africa. A
chart would be easier. I don't expect it to be in the
manual because it will vary for different types of
computers but a reference card makes sense. It
would also be neat if there was a way edit terrain
so that new types could be created, say a denser
forest?
There is no way to scroll the map manually
during Combat Phase. It scrolls automatically to
show any unit being fired at, but there are times
when you want to watch the progress of a certain
unit that's not being shot at. It would be nice to do
this without going back to an Orders Phase constantly. Perhaps if we could scroll the map during
pauses?
A final warning about SSI's DOS (used on most
of their Apple games), always use the "Catalog"
command to make sure there is room on a disk
before you save anything. If there isn't enough
space, the system will hang. There is no warning
and no way to recover from this. This is especially
important if you've just spent an hour creating a
particularly complex scenario and you don't want
to lose it!

It's A Hit!
While you can always think of more things to
add, there is an enormous variety in Panzer Strike.
The ease of generating new scenarios and the
ability to string them together in a Campaign
game make this my favorite tactical WWII game on
a computer.

the previous game: Ultima IV demonstrated the
need for virtue and goodness; Ultima V shows
what happens when that goodness is taken too far
and becomes oppressive evil.
Bottom line: Not to be missed!

(Continued from page 15)

Copyright 1988 by Scorpia, all rights reserved

Hail, Britannia!
Overall, in spite of the flaws in the documentation, and some weak points in the combat and
design, Ultima V is a game that has been well
worth the wait. Aside from the greatly-enhanced
graphics, the storyline is a logical continuation of

"Ultima"te Gamesmanship
Warning! Hints on playing
Ultima V follow. Read at
your own risk.

E

xperience will be difficult to come

by; far fewer monsters roam the
outdoors now. Thus you should
start going into the dungeons fairly
early in the game, where creatures are
more plentiful. Make sure, however,
that at least several members in the
party have distance weapons such as
bows and crossbows before venturing
down too deep. Be especially careful of
bats; they come in large flocks and can
do a surprising amount of damage,
even to those in plate mail. The best
way to handle them is to use a Confusion spell, and let them kill each
other.

Don't trust everyone you meet; some
people in Britannia may not have your
best interests at heart. The less
trustworthy will usually reveal themselves in conversation, so pay attention to
what everyone tells you. Your old comrades from Ultima IV are reliable; others
may or may not be.

Money will be something of a
problem at the very start; you get
some, but not very much. One way to
build up cash is to sell surplus
weapons and armor. Any armorer will
buy your used equipment, whether he
sells those items or not. Always have
the most intelligent person in the party
buy or sell goods; the prices will be better.

When new people join the party,
check them out to see what they come
with; you might have better weapons
or armor to give them, and you can
then sell their old stuff. Gold will become less of a problem as you start
making your way through the dungeons; you can pick up an astonishing
amount of things to sell very quickly.
The most important first level spells
are An Nox (cure poison) and Mani.
Keep a good number of these spells
on hand. It is cheaper in points to cure
poison or heal damage done by opening chests than to use the second-level
spell that opens chests safely. Also
keep a lot of An Xen Corp (repel undead) ready. Those undead that are
not repelled become much easier to
kill (especially handy against skeletons).
The Gray Por (magic missile) spell isn't
really worth much; it does little damage
and requires the expensive black pearl
as one of the reagents.
Wait until you can afford a ship
before visiting the shrines (it will be
necessary to visit all eight of them).
They will send you to the Codex, and
you can't get there without a vessel to
cross the ocean.
When you take a moongate to a
place that is near the shore (such as
Jhelom or Magincia or Skara Brae),
camp out immediately and wait for
daylight when you can enter the town
or village. If you just stand around waiting, you will begin to attract any number of sea monsters to the vicinity. At
night, when waiting for the right moonphase, camp an hour at a time to keep
yourself safe from attack by sea creatures.

If you enter a town, and find yourself
surrounded by an air of hatred, falsehood, or cowardice, get out immediately! A Shadowlord is lurking somewhere
in there, and you don't want to meet it.
They are especially nasty opponents
and cannot be killed by ordinary
means. Even if you manage to sneak
into town and avoid it, the
townspeople will not treat you too well
while the Shadowlord is around.
Finally, if you are worried about your
horse while sleeping in town overnight
(and you're feeling kinky), take it to
bed with you. Just ride straight up to
the bed on the pillow side (actually, if
you hitch your horse to a post before
retiring, it will still be there in the morning, but I mention this in case you'd
like a completely unique experience .
. grin!).

On this page, a number of games and articles are listed
for evaluation and some general interest questions are
asked, as well. For each game which you have played or
article you have read, place a 1 (terrible) through 9 (outstanding) next to the appropriate number.

The Computer Gaming World Hall of
Fame honors those games that over the
course of time have proven themselves
to be top rated games by the readers of
CGW. Members of the CGW Hall of
Fame are chosen by the staff of COW.
Once inducted into the Hall, the game
will be retired from the current Game
Ratings List. As a consumer you can be
assured that any game in the CGW
Hall of Fame is an all-time favorite.

Game Ratings
Science fiction titles rest atop the ratings list on both sides.
"Starflight" continues to accelerate the warp drive on the Action/Adventure side and "Empire" continues its imperialistic
dominance on the Strategy side. In the Action/Adventure
category, Microprose has deployed "Stealth Fighter" and "Gunship" to provide air superiority for their "Pirates" title as the
products line up in second, third, and fourth positions respec-

tively. "Might and Magic" and "Bard's Tale II" continue to
garner impressive loyalty from our readers.
On the Strategy side, the veteran armies of "Gettysburg" must
now get ready to withstand naval bombardment from a
modern "Strike Fleet." Meanwhile, Abner Doubleday himself
would be proud of "Earl Weaver Baseball" and its fourth place
position. Also on the strategy side, SSG seems determined to
demonstrate the staying power of its titles by placing three
products in the top 10.

