"Spelljammer  Star Control 2 Car & Driver $3.95 $4.95 Canadian Rated Number 104 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 100 Games The Premier Computer Game Magazine March 1993 Spectrum HoloByte's The Iron Helix DP2 REMOTE DATA LINK PROSTHETIC ARMA DEPLOYED 03 Also in this issue: Battles of Destiny Three New Football Games Comanche: Maximum Overkill Crusaders of the Dark Savant Hints o29074 12158 AUDIO "


"Surar of Destiny Kolienstein 3D Graphic Adventure lll III II II III I HORN FLOOR 8 SCORE LIUES 4400 3 HEALTH ANNOT 36% 23 FLOOR 5 SCORE LIVES 2900 3 HEALTH AMINO 17% 83 FLOOR 9 SCORE LIVES 2800 3 HEALTH AMMO 80% 43 Virtual Reality Spear of Destiny brings virtual reality to the PC, hurling you into an intense battle between good and evil in which only you can save the world! A breathtaking musical soundtrack sets the mood, while amazing first person\" visual perspective and spectacular digital stereo sound effects give an experience like no other game you've ever played! lientioned * spectacular VGA virtual reality system I breathtaking musical soundtrack for Adlib, Sound Blaster digitized stereo sound effects for Sound Blaster, Sound Source over 20 complete floors to cover 4 levels of play difficulty * special extra challenges for advanced game players saves multiple games in process t fe) (a 5 the player is 'there' like no game I've ever played...\" 'the sound and the visual action, is frighteningly realistic...\" # I can't remember a game making such effective use of perspective and sound and thereby evoking such intense physiological responses from its players.\" Game by id Software. Published by FormGen Corporation, Box 279, North Andover, MA, USA, 01845-0279 (800)263-2390 (416)857-4141 Fax: (416)857-4531. Circle Reader Service #58 "


"A Fantasy Role-Playing Simulation by D.W. Bradley Wizardry : CRUSADERS of the DARK SAVANT BFOSSIL DINHO Welcome to the sequel to Bane of the Cosmic Forge and the only game that could possibly follow its lead. It's everything Bane was...and more. 256 Colors Outdoor Campaigns. Full Musical Score & Sound Effects  Auto Mapping True Point & Click Mouse Interface. Unprecedented depth of story SIR-TECH Ogdensburg Business Center, Suite 2E Ogdensburg, New York 13669 To order or for a dealer nearest you call 1-800-447-1230 Circle Reader Service #99 "


"Features COMPUTER GAMING WORLD The Iron Helix from Spectrum Holobyte Action/Adventure Meets CD-ROM on the Macintosh by Johnny L. Wilson A Whale of a Tale From CES The CGW Editorial Staff Winters in Las Vegas Fingerpainting The Bit Fantastique Electronic Arts Opens up a Software Division for Kids Tips For The Savvy Savant Scorpia Follows The Yellow Brick Road to Wizardry VII is the one Reiche for the Stars Paul Reiche's Star Control 2 From Accolade by Stanley Trevena A Star to Steer by For Star Control 2 Roger \"Star Tzu\" White Offers Some Stellar Tips For Building Up During the Early Game Iron Helix pg. 8 A CGW Bridge Game Survey (Avec \"Slams\") Are Micro Bridge Companion, Grand Slam Bridge II and Omar Sharif on Bridge Trumps or Dummies? David E. Lindeman Puts His Cards on the Table so Football? You Bet! Front Page Sports Football, Tom Landry Strategy Football and NFL Video Pro Football Blow-By-Blow Descriptions from Wallace Poulter's Geist OUTFIT STARSHIP se t SHIPYARD DOPORT STAREASE Everything Old is Reviewed Again Even Rich Uncle Pennybags Might Buy Virgin's Monopoly Deluxe by Allen \"Chance\" Greenberg Star Control 2 Pg. 38 File Game Dee Here Comes Eric, Ready or Not! Johnny L. Wilson (Jester That He Is) Takes a Merry Preview Look at Legend's Eric the Unready TITLE DIED BOARDWALK RENT 950 Wie Illesse Bio Sailing Through a Spelljammer Review The Pirates of Realmspace Pass Under The Watchful Guns of «Jammin'\" Jeff James ORT P lace Wil Haven wa & Heves with IOIEL 12000 Mortgage Value $200 Houses con 1200 Each Ilotels $700.plus chevies oplever the lots of any Color Grethe Tested U poved Lata is the greep. WISS WROTHERS The SEB Owner Ret BEEEEEE Peering Through the Shadow of the Beast III Psygnosis' Arcade Sequel by Chuck \"The Beast We Can Offer\" Miller led blu Monopoly Deluxe pg. 54 A \"Fast\" Review of Car and Driver Electronic Arts Puts the Pedal to the Metal by Ken \"Crash Dummy\" Brown Stunt Island Rushes Disney Software's Film-Making Simulator Provides Interview Fodder for Tim \"The Timinator\" Trimble Wendes shall remain dhed Emes et Wien arcumstances dictate otherwise 86 What Could be More Elementary? Why, Sherlock Holmes Consulting Detective Volume II, Of Course! A Review Deduced by Chuck & Millie Miller Eric the Unready pg. 58 "


"SEE THE SHOW OF SHOWS The excitement continues. This summer, once again, the Consumer Electronics Show will be open to the public. Top name manufacturers will return to Chicago to share the latest technological advances in consumer electronics products. And the shows within the show are as exciting as the show itself. Interact with the everchanging world of Multimedia hardware and software. Immerse yourself in the technical magic being displayed through CD-ROM. Talk-along, sing-along, playalong and even teach-along through every multimedia device ever created. It's all here and all the major players are involved. See special displays like Innovations '93 featuring, the \"Best of the Best\" in consumer electronics, Technologies of the Future, and many more. Take part in the extremely valuable seminars hosted by well-known speakers and celebrities within the consumer electronics industry. Come see an even more exciting Consumer Electronics Show in 1993. Just call 1-800-388-6901 for show information or TICKETMASTER at 312-559-1212 for advance tickets for the CES Consumer Day-Sunday June 6th. Experience the show of shows. THE 1993 INTERNATIONAL SUMMER CONSUMER ELECTRONICS SHOW McCORMICK PLACE. McCORMICK CENTER HOTEL CHICAGO HILTON AND TOWERS JUNE 6TH-TRADE/CONSUMER DAY. JUNE 3RD THROUGH 5TH-TRADE DAYS "


"90 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD Summon Chanted Evening or The Summoning? Samuel B. Baker Cooks Up a Dramatic Review of SSI's Fantasy Role-Playing Game 96 Omnitrend a Role-Playing Greenberg It Helps To Be a Paladin Il Omnitrend Sallies Forth Again With a Sequel To Their Popular Role-Playing/Strategy Game by Allen \"Born to Adventure\" Greenberg 100 A Siren's Call for Lure of the Temptress? A \"Virtual Theater\" Review by Robin Matthews, CGW \"Virtual Critic\" Computer Wargaming World 114 Point of Attack Launches New Wargame Company M. Evan Brooks Rides a Desert Storm 116 Flying into 1946 With the Aces Expansion Disk Answering the Question, \"What If...?\" by Doug \"Fear of Flying\" Fick 122 Fulfilling Battles of Destiny Planetary Conquest from the Overlords at QQP William R. \"Globe\" Trotter Reviews 124 Novalogic's Comanche Maximum Overkill Bryan Walker Yells \"Geronimo\" 128 A Campaign To Make an \"Everything\" Wargame Empire's Strategic/Tactical WWII Game by \"General\" Dana L. Cadman Publisher Russell Sipe Editor Johnny Wilson On-Line Editor Alan Emrich Managing Editor Ken Brown Assistant Editor Chris Lombardi Art Director Susan Zurawik Graphic Artist Jack Rodrigues Marketing Manager Diane Miller M.I.S. Manager Gene Allen Assistant M.I.S. Manager Mike Weksler Editorial Assistant Caitlin Ackelson Ad Manager Jlm Messing Subscriptions Kathy Garcia Contributing Editor (Adventure Games) Scorpia Contributing Editor (Wargames) Evan Brooks Ad Director Jay Eisenberg Computer Gaming World (ISSN 0744-6667) is published monthly by Golden Empire Publications, Inc. 130 Chaparral Cl. Suite 260. Anaheim Hills, CA 92808. Second-class Postnge paid at Erlanger, KY 41011 and additional mailing offices. Permit #672-910. Contents are copyrighted by Golden Empire Publications, 1993 Postmaster: Send address changes to Computer Gaming World, P.O. Box 601, Mt. Morris. IL 61054 8052 The subscription rate for twelve issues (one year) is $28.00. Canadian and foreign surface subscriptions add $11.00, Foreign air subscriptions are $78.00 per year. All payments must be in U.S. dollars, made by check drawn upon a U.S. bank, Visa, MasterCard, or money order. Psalms 9:1-2 CompuServe(76703.622) America On-Line: CGW Prodigy: EXPT40B GEnie: CGW Subscription Dept. 1(800) 827-4450 Telephone: (714) 283-3000 Fax: (714) 283-3444 Foreign Subscribers: (815) 734-1113 For advertising information only, call: JE Publishers' Representative Company 3415 S. Sepulveda Blvd., Suite 320 Los Angeles, CA 90034 (310) 572-7272 For newsstand circulation, call: Kemco Publishers Services (603) 924-0224 130 An Ancient Art of War in the Skies Fly By Review Stanley Trevena Proves He Can Straighten Up And Fly \"Lite\" Comanche Maximum Overkill pg. 124 Aces Expansion Disk pg. 116 Departments: 28 The Rumor Bag (Ludicrous 108 Over There: European Maximus) Software Report Scorpion's Tale: 110 Best of the Rest (Shareware) Spellcasting 301 112 Computer Wargaming 82 Scorpia's View: World Editorial Transferring Characters 134 Taking a Peek 94 Once Upon A Time: 141 CGW Hall of Fame Star Trek Games 142 CGW Poll: Top 100 Games 102 Company Profile: Bethesda Softworks 144 What's Hot! 104 Letters from Paradise 145 The Patch File "


"GO AHEAD. INDULGE YOURSELF. TIIE ULTIMATE DIVING GAME CAR DRIVER Test Drive Ten of the Best 400 Line Hi-res 256 Color VGA Graphics 2 Player head-to-head play via modem or network ELECTRONIC ARTS store Now's your chance to test drive ten of the world's sleekest, fastest exoticars on ten of America's most breathtaking highways and race courses. You choose: will it be the Porsche 959, Ferrari F40, Corvette ZR1, Lotus Esprit Turbo, Eagle Talon, Toyota MR2, 1957 Ferrari Testarossa, Mercedes C11 prototype racer, Shelby Cobra, or Lamborghini Countach? You can't even afford the insurance on some of these cars. We're offering you the keys and unlimited mileage. To order: Visit your local retailer or call 1 (800) 245-4525 anytime. Car and Driver is available for IBM and compatibles for $59.95. IBM screens. IBM is a registered trademark of International Business Machines Corp. By Lerner Research. Car and Driver is a registered trademark of Hachette Magazines Inc., used under license by Electronic Arts. The trademark of the respective products are the products of their respective corporate owners, all of which have no affiliation with Electronic Arts. This product is not endorsed or sponsored by any of the respective automobile manufacturers Circle Reader Service #55 "


"review di prevnen TIME TAKE PROD NO. SCENE PROCENE WALE DATE DIRECTOR PRODUCED BY I SEE A BAD PROBE ARISIN Spectrum HoloByte Unleashes The Iron Helix by Johnny L. Wilson Sneak Previews are not designed to be reviews. They are feature articles based on 'works in progress\" that CGW's editors have deemed worthy of early coverage. These articles are not intended to provide the final word on a product, since we expect to publish appropriate review coverage when the game is finished. CONNECTIONS TOU1009 c ix stories tall and still dwarfed by the space that surrounds it, the ship took shape and then took over my viewscreen. As D i maneuvered my rusting, dilapidated probe into the levia than ship's landing bay, I felt swallowed up by the dark maw of this malevolent ship. The massive cargo o Roster of destructive power continued to knife through space en route toward its venue of mutually assured destruction when it would deliver its lethal load and trigger the retaliation that would destroy, not one, but two sentient ruces. Ii's an old story. The 20th century worried about the \"Fail Safe\" devices on the Strategic Air Command bombers, and we should have worried about the consequences of our so-called \"defense\" establishment. What was it my professor of Pre-Stellar History said? I think it was something like: \"Those who fail to learn the lessons of pre-stellar history are trapped in a disintegrating orbit with its failures.\" He was right. \"The Iron Helix\" is ready to deliver the death blow to humanity and its closest analog, the aliens who have been our enemies. The ship's crew is dead and our own \"Fail Safe\" device, those security probes, are routinely activated on an \"as needed basis to ensure that the ship actually makes its deadly delivery. I just received a sub-space message. The big boys, the military guys, need my help. Imagine that! The big, bad defense department needs help from a naturalist with a worn-out observation probe, an unarmed probe at that. All I have to do is get access to the secure parts of that huge vessel and shut down its automated attack before the security probes blast my own unarmed probe or the ship launches the attack. Sounds simple enough, doesn't it? It just takes a miracle! The extended fiction used to introduce this sneak preview is designed to set the stage for describing Drew Pictures The Iron Helix, a CD-ROM release from Spectrum HoloByte. Shipping on the Macintosh around March of 1993, it is expected to debut on IBM compatibles prior to the summer months of the same year. As the fiction should have implied, this is not a leisurely \"busy-bath\" exploration of a 3-D gaming environment. Instead, the gamer will have a limited amount of time (possibly defined by the gamer himself as part of the difficulty toggle) to disarm the ship. Further, the fiction underscores how a design constraint became an integral design element. The designers wanted to have smooth scrolling through 3-D rendered environments without sacrificing detail or game speed. As it is, the 3-D graphics window scrolls at 6-8 frames per second off a CD access time of 1.51 seconds. By limiting the action to the small graphics window and using the fictional background that the player was having to explore the ship via a remote-controlled probe, the design team was able to interweave the technical limitations of CD-ROM access time with the gamer's suspension of disbelief. Then, when the interface of the game itself took on the appearance of a dilapidated control panel, the small action window became a moot issue. In addition, the designers were concerned about some of the poorly executed and slow responses to be experienced in other CD-ROM entertainment titles. They decided that, rather than Page 8 Computer Gaming World "


"al @ @ player probele OBS fooling with a limited parser and the lag time caused by accessing the gamer that a trace of organic material may be near. If the too much data, they would design a story where the crew was dead. player's probe is far enough away from the security probe, one can As the player accesses computer terminals, he or she will eventu scan the area and find out if that sample is one of the hundreds of ally find video logs for some of useless finds or one of the eight or so important the crew members. When these om 12 restart finds that are a key to winning the game. are discovered, a Quick-Timestyle movie unveils some interMission Im-Probe-Able esting and/or vital information The key to the game not being just another and the gamer is not stuck with busy-bath CD-ROM product, however, is the trying to figure out what to ask artificial intelligence for the security probe. One and how to outguess the parser. does not have unlimited time to explore because Also, the video logs and diaries every time the good probe accesses a computer get the most mileage per byte of terminal or opens a door, its position is updated data, since they only play about for the bad probe. The bad probe's artificial 30 seconds of data at a time beintelligence divides the ship up into hierarchical fore the player must get the good trees. The routine lists all nodes which can be probe on the move and start tryaccessed (for opening or accessing) in a pyramiing to avoid the bad probe, again. dal structure and searches both up-tree and This means that the player must CUT CAVE PAIEMEU down-tree to determine where the player's probe pay close and quick attention to is currently standing. Then, the bad probe uses these segments as soon as he/she accesses them. There is On 02 Dover its knowledge of the no time for busy-bath exploration in this game. The player ship's layout to try to must keep that probe on the move. cut off the player's Finally, the design team didn't want to have to develop probe and waste it. an entirely new set of tools in order to create this game. The observation They used off the rack\" programs like Macromind Diprobe doesn't have any rector and an animation system from Electric Image to weapons (except for develop The Iron Helix. Curiously, all of the probe's the possibility of disnavigation is handled via a text parser and interlocking covering a virus that databases. When one sees it work, it is actually rather can be Emailed to the amazing bad probe via the secuMy Mother The Alien rity officer's desk), so the player must guide The game play in the Iron Helix feels like a cross his/her probe through between the film Wargames and an old Avalon Hill the corridors in such a computer game called The Alien. The film posited a way that the bad probe non-military type (a hacker, DM 2 0 urter never gets a direct line of sight. Once an LOS is to be specific) trying to use established, the bad probe automatically shoots and his computer skills to stop never misses. If the player can successfully perpethermonuclear war. As noted trate the neutralization of a security probe, however, earlier, the game has a lima new probe is launched in four or five minutes. ited time in which the player as protagonist must work The Naming of the Drew through the probe interface Drew Pictures has to be proud of the fact that (i.e. the computer) to stop the they were able to move beyond technological conwar to end all galaxies. straints and turn them into design features. They The Alien game had the have proven that slow access time does not have to player strategically searchbe an insurmountable problem, as long as one aping an abandoned ship full of proaches the design logically. They have shown alien biological samples in that a beautiful looking and potentially fine playing order to halt their metamorgame can be created using \"off-the-shell\" developphosis into lethal creatures. ment tools. Finally, with Spectrum HoloByte's In The Iron Helix, the gamer must send the unarmed Con D olar backing, they should have a observation probe through the corridors in a search solid marketing plan behind for DNA samples before the good probe is terminated the product. Finally, with by the bad probe (i.e. the security probe becomes sort both Macintosh and IBM of a cyberalien. The DNA samples, in turn, allow the versions of the game schedplayer's probe to have access to sensitive areas and uled. The Iron Helix even computers where the clues necessary to stop the has a chance to be one of the attack can be collated. Interestingly enough, the ship first multimedia entertaindiagrams depicted in the upper right hand corner of ment products that can bethe probe interface (i.e. monitor) screen look a lot like come a good-seller. Now, the simple white-on-green line diagrams of the early let's hope it reaches its full potential and more games Apple II game. take its lead in getting away As the player sends the probe through the six levels from the busy-bath school of corridors, the message bar on the interface informs Cu (SAVE PAUSE HELP of game design. CGW ODDID. CODDIO, March 1993 Page 9 "


"inside the industry CGW and the Whale SOUTHWEST Special Report from the Winter Consumer Electronics Show Part 1 Sea World N3348W. from the CGW Editorial Staff EA design team Richard Hilleman and Randy Breen confer with World Chess Champion Garry Kasparov. Tt was a dark and stormy day. The rain had dampened our clothes and our spirits I enough that we felt like a crew of Jonahs disgorged by a Southwest Airlines whale. The image wasn't all that inappropriate. One of us did get boarding card #13, and several of us were ready to answer the invariable avalanche of queries on the state of the industry with dour tidings of doom and gloom, along with our editorializing admonitions to \"Repent! The vengeance of the consumers is at hand! Yet, three fiscal quarters and entertainment software shall be destroyed!\" Well, maybe not that strongly, but we knew consumers were frustrated at: delays (many of the products we saw at the show were supposed to have shipped at Christmas '92 and at least one was supposed to have shipped at Christmas '91), bugs (the technological leaps in processor speed, memory management, sound card proliferation, et al.), machine obsolescence (the Amiga sales drops causing many U.S. publishers to quit publishing Amiga titles and minimum requirements which do not support 286-based IBM compatibles) and the lack of follow-through on the promise of ground-breaking CDROM titles (since most of the present generation of CD-ROM games are either shovelware or minimally enhanced versions of successful MS-DOS versions). Frankly, the consumers were mad and we were feeling the edge. Like Jonahs, we came to the city of heathen (Las Vegas, Ninevah, whatever it takes!) expecting more trouble than promise and, also like Jonah, we found that authentic voices (whether prophet or pundit, seer or scribe) must keep an open mind. Here, then, are our impressions of this year's Winter Consumer Electronics Show. Buyers and publishers alike seemed pleased with the Christmas '92 season, and both entities seemed optimistic about the and the licensee. The good news is that this is changing in many circles. At WCES, we were particularly impressed by the involvement of World Chess Champion Garry Kasparov in both the design and promotion of Electronic Arts' Kasparov's Gambit and by the level of cooperation between Tsunami Software (prior to this year's releases, this company formed largely of ex-Sierra employees, had only published software for the Sony Bookman) and stimulating science fiction/fantasy author Larry Niven on the Ringworld game (originally scheduled to be published by Electronic Arts, but now distributed by Accolade). In both cases, the celebrity has had plenty of hands-on with the game as it has evolved. Kasparov eloquently expressed the rationale for what initially appeared to be \"another chess program.\" He noted that most chess programs on the market can beat 99% of the players and expressed his disappointment with the fact that chess programs are currently being written in order to satisfy only 1% of the chess-playing population. Also, Kasparov is an advocate of advancing the hobby so that it includes a broader base of coming sales year. We felt pleased because there seems to be evidence that the technology is consolidating, and an emphasis on game play could be shaping up. At least, that's what this bunch of salty old Jonahs converted into Saint Johns perceived (at least that seer concluded his vision (the Book of Revelation) with an optimistic perspective!). The Stars Come Out (Celebrity Involvement) Celebrity licenses have been around for a long time. Often, one simply purchases the license and creates a game around the characters, universe, situations or celebrity that makes the license valuable. The licensing agency checks the work at several points during the process, and if the game hasn't broken any fundamental rules for the agreement, the game is published as is. Sometimes, the developer has to change a pose in a shot because it is unbecoming to a celebrity or remove a scene or puzzle because it doesn't fit the \"image\" of the licensed celebrity or world, but it is generally a case of very little cross-fertilization between the licensor AINGWORLD Larry Niven, creator of Ringworld, displays its latest incarnation. Page 10 Computer Gaming World "


"Trade Up! The Game You Grew Up With Has Grown Up Too. SEADE BE 2 WINDOWS  version IBM PC version LZBEH. 03:45 SISE MONOPOLY DELUX CO TO JE QOL PALE NGRIRI 1 COCO SECER mothert Real Estate Trade -E2233 IBM PC version WINDOWS  version that keeps track of all previous moves and the ability to play by traditional or custom-designed rules. It's more mercenary than your lawyer, shrewder than your accountant, greedier than the IRS and tougher than your granny. Get ready for the most challenging game of Monopoly you've ever played with MONOPOLY DELUXE. GO GAMES Combining 90's technical knowhow with plenty of good oldfashioned fun, the bestselling board game of all time is back and better than ever with completely Enjoy the thrill and excitement of wheeling and dealing as you amass, or reluctantly part with, great fortunes buying and selling railroads, utilities and properties of all types. This game's a must for the library of any TRUE gamer or future real OR PARKER estate tycoon! revamped levels of difficulty and greatly enhanced graphics for your computer! You'll get more deluxe for your bucks with dazzling animation of all ten official tokens, easy as-pie interface, a game activity log BROTHERS MONOPOLY DELUXE with the ultimate easy-to-use point-and-dick interface will be available this fall in PC and WINDOWS versions. WINDOWS version features all of the DELUXE features listed above plus the added bonus of easier-to-use point-and-click interface. For more information, pricing and orders, please coll BOO-VRG-INO7. VISA, MASTERCARD, AMERICAN EXPRESS and checks accepted. and RICH UNCLE design are registered trademarks of Tonko Corporation. Rich Unde 1936, 1992 Porker Brothers. All rights reserved. Monopoly 1935, 1992 Parker Brothers, Inc, a division of Tonko Corporation All rights reserved. Licensed to Virgin Games, Inc. 1992 Virgin Games, Inc. Virgin is a registered trademark of Virgin Enterprises, Lid. WINDOWS is a trademark of Microsoft Corporation MONOPOLY Circle Reader Service #107 "


"players. So, the focus of Kasparov's Gambit is to provide the type of interactive experiences that would explain to the 99% why they are losing to computer chess games. In addition to his long stint as World Chess Champion, Kasparov is ideal for the task because he was integral in the creation of a computerized chess database (work began in 1986) and understood the decison-making processes of the software. In fact, he defeated 32 different chess programs in 1985 (using what he self-effacingly described as \"tricks\" which disrupted the algorithm's logic) and IBM's Deep Thought in 1990. This translates into Kasparov's Gambit where the information from 500 annotated World Championship matches and Garry's own audio-video advice are available as the game is being played. One can quickly access information to answer questions like: \"What would Fischer do?\" or \"How would Spassky counter that move?» as well as hear Kasparov's advice. In a different vein, Larry Niven wasn't expected to be as involved in the Ringworld project as he has become. The license was originally a deal where the designers would use Niven's universe, but none of Niven's characters. Hence, the plotline was set up where the main characters would not directly interact with the player's characters. As it stands, Niven has played every version of the game all the way through and is tremendously pleased with the way Tsunami is developing it. He is allowing them to use some characters from the game (e.g. The Highmost) and with his characteristic generosity says that those in the Tsunami crew have become almost as good at telling stories as he is. As prolific and ingenious as Niven is, one had better read that \"almost\" as being fairly significant. Another upcoming product with celebrity involvement is Strategic Simulations Inc.'s Tony La Russa Baseball Il where the Oakland A's manager gets co-designer credit with Beyond Software's Don Daglow. Tony's contribution was primarily to the designer's understanding of his managing philosophy and the database for Tony's analysis and suggestions. The sequel to CGW's 1992 Sports Game of the Year will feature more of an old-time baseball feel (when appropriate), as well as new camera angles and digitized voice commentary by syndicated sports commentator, Ron Barr. Finally, Accolade announced licensing agreements with Brett Hull for a hockey game and Pele for a soccer. Hull has already met with Accolade and provided numerical evaluations of NHL players for the design team, but we do not know how much additional input he will provide for the overall design nor what Pele's involvement in the soccer will be. In addition, Spectrum HoloByte will publish Sega's David Robinson's NBA Action for the MS-DOS market, but no information is available as to the extent of any possible celebrity involvement. TV Magic Games (Smart TV?) On the hardware front, two new platforms will try to get gamers to hook-up interactive technology to their television sets. Both products have a lot of technological pizzazz to offer, but the success of either will depend on the companies delivering products compelling enough to encourage consumers to purchase them. Pioneer Electronics has built upon its laser player technology to create a unit they call LaserActive. This unit would allow game developers to use the capabilities of a standard laser disc to store analog data for up to 108,000 images and 60 minutes of FM sound, as well as 540 MB (equal to CD-I storage) of digital information or images (up to 7,000 images). This enables one to have broadcast quality backgrounds and animation/film sequences with the interactive aspects overlaid in digital images. In Japan (where the unit will debut), the master unit A's Manager Tony La Russa plays his game with Don Daglow. PORTINIUMII ENCHANTED HORIZONS ANNOUNCES: A new, low cost version of the original PORTINIUM Play-By Mail game is now available. PORTINIUM II Incorporates all the features of the original game version. Players receive five standard game units on each of the primitive and medieval levels of game play. Timetravelinto the conventional and futuristic technology ages affords players the opportunity to capture additional pieces to equal or surpass levels of conquest in PORTINIUM. The struggle to become a dominant player and participate in \"The Gathering of the Four» remains a challenge for the strategy-minded player. Receive over twenty double-sided pages of high-quality Laser Graphics output per turn. Over 24,000 sectors to explore. No hidden costs. $10.00 per turn. 3-week turnaround. ALSO AVAILABLE: PORTINIUM, the original time-travel P.B.M. fantasy at a new, reduced price. The PORTINIUM Hi-Tech and Lo-Tech games offer many of the larger game features, in one age of play. PORTINIUM $15.00 per turn (4-week turnaround) PORTINIUM HI or LO-TECH $5.00 per turn (4-week turnaround) One-time, LIFETIME setup fee of $25.00 includes; 198-page Hi-Gloss Player's Guide,startup packet, free start-up turn, plus free turn and subscription to game newsletter. ws.com Write or call for free brochure ENCHANTED HORIZONS P.O.. Box 9897 Spokane, WA 99209-9897 (509) 325-6941 Circle Reader Service #56 Page 12 Computer Gaming World "


"S.C.OUT NEW It's a nasty job... but someone but someone has to do it. To re-activate the abandoned moonbase, S.C.OUT must first seek and destroy the alien infestation. The base's entire arsenal is at your disposal: bombs, SAMS, force mirrors, cannons and even atomics. But first you have to find them using all the ingenuity and strategic powers at your disposal. Then attack! But be careful...the enemy has some nasty surprises of its own: mazes infested with worms, PEBDDDDDDDDE viruses, explosives and the sinister fe \"Slime\". Dazzling graphics and driving soundtrack add to the fun of your mission. THI THI HOIHIHIHIEU Tuninin amm im immm But remember, we warned you! 8 B B B B BB Check out our other hot new games Cogito and The Tinies! A Kalisto game by INLINE DESIGN To order, visit your local retailer or call: 308 Main Street Lakeville, CT 06039 1-800-453-7671 S.C.OUT is available for IBM compatible (VGA) and Macintosh systems. Circle Reader Service #111 "


"0 1 ba Pioneer's LaserActive will retail for approximately $700, and the consumer can add three other units (approximately $350 each) onto the system so that it can play Sega Genesis CD games (Mega LD), NEC's (TTI in the LLS.) Turbo-Grafx 16 CD games (LD-ROM') and Pioneer's own Karaoke discs, respectively. The 3DO Company, a multi-venture from companies with plenty of entertainment experience (like Electronic Arts and Time Warner), is also launching a platform that allows one to interact with television-quality images. One can play music discs, photo discs and MPEG standard video discs on the 3DO machine, and its suggested (Fall of '93) retail price is $700. The machine uses a 32-bit RISC processor, 2 MB of RAM, a multi-tasking operating system and a fast (the company claims \"double speed\") CDROM drive. Video images and sounds are handled via separate custom processors. With 27 bit planes and the capacity shown in the demo of presenting real-time light-sourced 3-D images, the potential is great. The ROM Stranger (CD-ROM Games) CD-ROM games are ready to hit the shelves in all shapes and sizes. In addition to The Iron Helix (see this issue's cover story) from Spectrum HoloByte, a Mac game that is soon to be converted to the MS-DOS world, new player Pop Rocket is just about ready to ship Total Distortion. The concept behind the game is that the player explores various worlds and assembles graphics and sound in order to create a music video gone wild. The edited version of the video is sent back to earth and one's potential wealth and fame is predicated on the result. Finally, multimedia veteran ICOM is preparing a Macintosh only title which follows in the wake of their old Macventure series (published by Mindscape). The new \"Macventure\" is called Beyond Shadowgate. It features 3-D graphic adventure in a Sierrastyle, offers full speech and 26 different environments. Purists may be put off by the heavy amount of action sequences that are tantamount to other horizontal scrolling, running and fighting games. On the MS-DOS side, games run the gamut from multimedia versions of existing games to CD-only titles. Interplay plans to publish a SimCity CD-ROM game with lots of video and a few game design twists, as well as a new Star Trek game that will feature William Shatner and Leonard Nimoy. They have also filmed the tutorial material for a multimedia version of their successful Omar Sharif on Bridge. They also plan to develop a multimedia version of Three-Sixty Pacific's Harpoon. Also, Origin has hinted about a CD-ROM version of their long-awaited Strike Commander game. In the same vein, LucasArts will release the Indiana Jones and the Fate of Atlantis \"talkie\" and Virgin will release the CDROM version of Dune (with more footage from the film to provide cinematic segues, new 3-D rendering of landscapes and a significant amount of audio dialogue to replace the text screens). In the same way, the CDROM versions of the Adventures of Willy Beamish (Dynamix) and Space Quest IV (Sierra) are expanded talkie versions of their hit MS-DOS predecessors. Kasparov's Gambit (Electronic Arts) will also be available as a CD product which will have more video and audio. Novalogic is also developing a CD-ROM version of WolfPack, their World War II destroyer game, originally published by Broderbund. Access took a different approach to \"creating\" a CD-ROM version of Links. They licensed the game to Compton's New Media as part of their Compton's Multimedia Golf Guide: California/Hawaii Edition. This combination reference/game product allows the gamer to peruse over 750 courses and then, play Links (the Torrey Pines course). Compton's New Media is also experimenting with \"distribution\" by allowing potential customers to rent their CD-ROM products through video stores. Major Video Concepts will provide the distribution to video stores. Activision's Return to Zork design team said that the CD-ROM version of Return to Zork will feature a 7th Guest style that would enable the gamer to \"walk through\" a 3-D environment, but featuring the capacity for gamers to turn off the animations and conversations after experiencing them once. They have already captured more than 45,000 digital images of the professional actors featured in the product. The goal of the programmers is to create a \"boot and play\" game that doesn't require the kind of room on the hard drive that many CD-ROM games have demanded in the past. I. Total Distortion Circle Reader Service #98 Page 14 Computer Gaming World "


"As opposed to these CD-ROM versions, there are a number of new products which will be initially released as CD-ROM titles. ICOM's GGA Tour Earth Invitational is the most improbable golf product ever, sort of a \"massive\" instead of miniature golf. Players attempt to conquer wacky golf courses made from internationally famous terrain (edges of volcanoes, Mt. Everest, etc.). To add to the players' entertainment, goofy commentators give shot-by-shot analysis. GET crashes, deaths, etc., they will still get 30 minutes of non-repeating animation by playing the game straight through. Microcosm is a product from Psygnosis that uses custom film footage to take player's through the human body (and take control of a human body) via a probe. To be available on MS-DOS, this 500 MB plus game features footage that looks like a cross between the movies Fantastic Voyage and Inner Space, with some portions where the scrolling is up to 60 frames per second. Virgin's The 7th Guest is a game whose introduction almost needs no introduction. The publisher has been showing bits and pieces of the game for quite a while and the stunning visuals and tremendously effective soundtrack virtually guarantee a success for this CD-ROM only product. The game play is not very rich, but the exploratory experience is sure to have most CD-ROM owners buying the adventure as a showcase to impress their friends. THIS Shield Level *** Score 002465 Rebel Assault SPACE QUEST V CONERAS DOUN ATITUS CUNT RELAND CUN OS CUNG TANGER UW GOUISE SUITE STEED Jutland The movies are another source of inspiration and source material for CD products. Rebel Assault is a 3-D Star Wars shoot-'emup from LucasArts. Expected to be available on both MS-DOS and Sega (under the JVC label) CDs, the product will feature 15 levels of fast-paced action, as well as sound effects and full-motion video digitized from the original Star Wars film. Then, in another genre, Psygnosis (on the MS-DOS) and Sony Electronic Publishing (on the Sega Genesis CD) are developing Bram Stoker's Dracula. Although the basic game is largely a horizontal scrolling \"shooter,\" the cinematic segues are taken directly from the Francis Ford Coppola film and the sets/backgrounds are rendered from the actual blueprints for the film's sets. Although we are not aware of Renovation's design team, Japanese software developer Wolf Brothers, using any actual film ASIERF Finally, a wargame enters the picture. San Diego-based Software Sorcery is ready to release Jutland, a very cinematic and visually rich wargame based on World War I naval combat. The player responds to digitized voice commands and participates in six major engagements (encompassing dozens of scenarios and small actions) in order to earn possible knighthood, statues, parades and historical impact as opposed to death or, worse yet, humiliating defeat. Finally, for something completely different, the Revell-Monogram company is publishing a series of CD-based products called the Power Modeler Series. Each will feature information and a simulation for four model cars/planes and will include a Skill Level 2 or 3 model, animated step-by-step instructions, the ability to check out possible paint jobs and see what to paint while the model parts are still on the parts trees, modeling tips and a sophisticated 3-D simulation in which the modeler will get to turn into a gamer and actually drive or fly the model in a sophisticated 3-D simulation that looks very competitive with other driving sims on the market. The first release in the series (Spring) is European Racers, followed by American Muscle Cars (Summer) and HighTech Aircraft (Fall). muo Road Avenger When you switch to the crystal clarity of Sprint: footage, their Sega CD driving game, Road Avenger, features cartoon quality Japanimation in a fast-moving and violent driving game. If a player is good enough to do everything right at maximum speed and hence, not see the different animation sequences for Circle Reader Service #98 Page 15 March 1993 "


"SuperSoft... Porsche 911 TOOLS YOU NEED 1-800-285-1881 Orders Outside the U.S: 206-542-1518 HOURS: 10 A.M to 5 P.M. PST M-F PICK A COLOR IBM 10 BUNDLE PACK SPECIALS: RETURN 10 ...$15 Dw Power Modeler Series .49 AMIGA: Classics Tril... (Midwinter, StarGlider 2, Carrier Command) Combat Classics...............30 (F15-3, Team Yankee, 688 Attack Sub) Tengen's Arcade Hits........23 (Klax, Hard Drivin', Toobin) 10 . 34 AD&D Pool/Curse/Sec....$38 AD&D Trilogy 2............ Allied Forces................. Altered Destiny.............. 10 Amazon Guardians.............42 Ancient Art of War...........3 Bar Games..... Battle Isle. Battle Tech. Trilogy. B-17......................4 Crusaders Drk.Savant....... Cyber Empires................36 Dark Sun..................MAR.'93 Dragon Strike....................10 Eye of Beholder 3........SPRING '93 Falcon:Op.Fight. Tiger...24 Gemfire..... ...32 Great Naval Battles.... ..49 Gunboat.. Heroes of 357th..... Hook................ Humans............. 29 . 20 Kings Quest 6..................46 Legend of Kryandia............. Lemmings 3. .................JAN Line in Sand.................DE Lost Files Sherlock... Might & Magic 4...............43 NFL Video Pro................4 46 Pacific War............ .46 Prophecy of Shadow... .......38 Red Baron/Rise Dragn/KngsQ5...46 Realms....... ......20 Search for the King.........10 SpellJammer:Pirates..........43 Star Control 2........ Stunt Island... .36 Twilight 2000 VGA UltraBots......... DEC Ultima Underworld...................46 Ultimate Challenge Golf..... V for Victory ...................49 War in Middle Earth........ 10 Wax Works........ Wayne Gretsky 3.......... Wing Commander......... .35 IBM: Battle Tech Trilogy.. (Battle Tech 1&2. MechWarrior) Classic Pak.. Jet Fighter 2 Bndle.......... (Jet Fighter Adven.2, Mission disk, Hint Bk.) Max Pak.............................30 McGee Series.. (McGee, Fun Fair,Katies Farm) MegaFortress Pak......... O AMIGA **.36 O Face Off! (Interface Trends) Interface technology continues to improve. Current design philosophy wants the interface to be as invisible as possible, while being as accessible as possible. Several techniques are becoming standard. For example, the graphic menu screen. Seen as early as the set-up phase for the original Starflight and the main menu screen for Silent Service, this approach was enhanced in 688 Attack Sub and the original Wing Commander. It is a screen environment where the \"hot spots\" indicate one's menu choices. Typically, one clicks on a doorway to enter the training facility, storage bay (to equip) or briefing room (to start a mission). Naturally, Origin's Strike Commander and LucasArts' X-Wing Fighter use this technique, but even a dissimilar product like Revell-Monogram's Power Modeler Series uses the graphic menu for everything from database information on the cars (click on sales poster) to modeling instructions (click on the shop door) to the simulation (click on the overhead door leading out of the showroom). Another standard technique is the use of pop-up windows. Whenever a decision needs to be made, the gamer can always call up just the right menu to deal with the situation. Electronic Arts' SEAL Team uses this technique with opaque pop-up menus, as does Novalogic's Comanche: Maximum Overkill and its new mission disk with the semi-transparent pop-up windows that enable one to see the entire screen (which we first saw in Interplay's Star Trek: The 25th Anniversary Game). According to Novalogic's John Garcia, it is significantly more memory-intensive to provide the semitransparent windows than to use the standard opaque ones. This memory requirement may explain why Interplay is not using the semi-transparent windows in their full-screen, firstperson perspective, 3-D rendered role-playing game, Stonekeep. Instead, they are attempting to keep the pop-up menus very incidental so that not only do the menus not pop-up until the player needs them, but they show up on the periphery of the screen in icon form. Activision took a different tack in Return to Zork. As noted in last issue's \"Behind The Screens\" look at the product, the interface is MAC $42 30 AD&D Tril. Pool/Curse/Secret....$38 Addams Family.. Altered Beast.. Black Crypt......... Bravo-Romeo-Delta Breach 2.. Campaign... Castles Campalgn..... Civilization.......... Crusaders Drk. Savant Cyber Empires.. Cytron.... Dragon Force...... Dune 2... Epic....... Fighter Duel Pro.. Flames of Freedom.. 4D Sports Driving.... Hook. KGB.. Legend of Kryandia... Legends of Valour...... Lure of Temptress... Mega Traveller 1... No Greater Glory..... Pinball Dreams. Populous 2....... Premiere. Pro Footbll Sim 3.1 Projectile.... Realms........... Road Rash.. Robocop 3D.. Spider Man... Tracon 2... UMS2..... A Train.. Club Raquetbll Guy Spy... Heaven & Earth.............. Indiana Jnes 4......... Mission Leyte............ W: WWWNNAMONOWWWWWWW. O00WOONWNOOOOOOOOQ 1000000 22 We also carry Game Cartridges for: SEGA Genesis, Super Nintendo, Gameboy, Game Gear! CALL for titles and prices. Product availability/Prices Subject to change Mail to: 110 N. 201 St. Seattle, WA 98133-3012 NO C.O.D. Products are waranteed through Manufacturer TIP: $7.00 S/H covers up to 3 Lbs.! That means you can order approx. 3 boxes for the same shipping price. CALL FOR MORE TITLES, CDS,PRODUCTS Circle Reader Service #101 Page 16 Computer Gaming World "


"DUN E II The Building of A Dynasty MENJAJ TIUJ WNS FRAIS U 191913 Only one house will prevail. Atreides Trike. MISSILE TAN DMG ATTACK HOVE i | GUARD Credits 11939 Pandirap Cost: 310 ONE Control all aspects of combat and construction. BUILD THISN ITEITYICIA Select and build varieties of installations, Acquire valuable information from your Mentat. Conguer Arrakis this fall on your IBM PC! For more mformation pricing and orders please call 898-VRG-INO7 Visa, Mastercard, American Express and checks accepted. STUDIO Distelbuted Exclusively by SCI-FI EPIC OF ALL TIME! A SIMULATION OF THE BEST SELLING DUNE altele Lacin Companion licensed Aniversal Merchandising Inc Jorpora com a nighteered Wood Scian. Ito all nights reserved BED in Delattrentiis GAMES Cole Reader Service#108 "


"diamond-shaped, pops up wherever the cursor happens to be on the screen and allows the player to \"point and click on the animated icons that represent actual game commands. agement of menus and sub-menus on a single screen. In addition, the systems management for the pilot/vehicle interface is as well-designed as their mission-planning screen. SEL AEREO SILTUM OTTOMANS 080011 C EI Agred  XUL101390 EYE OF THE BEHOLDER UNUMITED ADVENTURES R ESPIX Armored Fist Cyber Space Strategic Simulations' booth at WCES Another interesting approach is being tried by Canadian-based Empire Simulations. Their cyberpunk role-playing game, CyberSpace, is based on the Iron Crown Enterprises \"people and paper\" game of the same name. It is a polygon-filled game which assumes that everyone's perspective has been \"cyberized.\" The fiction allows the entire screen to have something of a perpetual H.U.D. (Heads Up Display) combined with the 3-D \"virtual\" worlds created on the fly and should keep cyberpunk fans jacked into the fiction of the game. Spectrum HoloByte's Tornado has the Novalogic's Armored Fist uses a system analog approach i.e., where the on-screen \"hot spots\" graphically conform to the systems which they emulate) to specific tank controls/cockpits as their pilot/vehicle interface, as well. The fascinating addition to this product, however, is the object-oriented editor that will allow gamers to create terrain and deploy platoons prior to playing out each battle. The game (originally entitled Battlefield 2000) also features a pull-down menu for selecting AI tactics for the tanks which the player is not controlling directly. Finally, one cannot write of interface issues without considering the use of interface most elegant mission-planning interface we have seen. Where other flight sims require gamers to page through screen after screen of menus in order to set-up a mission, Tornado allows them to select as many different options as possible through the unique manA time when the world seemed more fantastics and anything was possible! ourney back These serials were made in time to the year 1957 on an expedition to the dark heart of the Amazon Basin. A desparate, crazed message sends you on a perilous search through a land where legends come to life, danger hides behind every corner, and incredible treasures wait to be discovered. AMAZON is designed in the style of the serials of the 1940's and 50's such as Flash Gordon, The Lost City, and Rocketman. up of intriguing, fast paced episodes which placed the hero in unbelievable peril. AMAZON contains 14 exciting episodes filled with plot twists, mysterious charac ters and heart stopping cliff-hangers. You haven't had this much fun since the drive-in days! RIES 2011 Metal monsters seek your destruction! "


"devices. Even the Nintendo Entertainment System now allows use of a mouse, and it considerably facilitates the play of games like ASCII's Spellcasting: Aspects of Valor. We noticed that more and more joystick companies were offering flight yokes and understand that Thrustmaster is introducing a Weapons Control System Mark II. The latter will eliminate the need for dip switches and will be programmable with the company's new interface card. Perhaps the most impressive use of an interface device, however, was the 3-D Mouse prototype from Logitech. Interplay used the so-called \"flying mouse\" to demonstrate Stonekeep. Programmer Peter Oliphant stood in front of the computer and used the infrared device to control his journey through the 3-D rendered dungeon. With the \"flying mouse,\" he looked just like he was swordfighting with the mouse. Even with a prototype 3-D mouse and the program running on a 386/33 Mhz computer, the motions seemed natural and the game play more vivid than it would have if one were playing the game with the traditional \"flat\" mouse. Strategic Heir Command (Strategy Games) Strategy games will appear in all shapes and sizes throughout 1993. Chess games will be released by several companies with several different agendas. In head-to-head competition with Interplay's established Battle Chess and upcoming Battle Chess 4000 (new animation sequences which parody scifi classics like 2001: A Space Odyssey and use their Checkmate algorithms), Spectrum HoloByte plans to release their National Lampoon's Chess Meister 5 Billion and I parody of all computer chess games; Capstone intends to publish Terminator 2: Cyber Chess; and Gametek adds a variation with Ragnarok, an old Viking boardgame with Batile Chess-style animation. Spectrum HoloByte's game uses rotoscoped full-figure animation and promises to offer the most scatological humor and graphic gore such as any Python fan might enjoy. It is also billed as the only game that will \"cheat\" up front and personally. Capstone's product does not follow any of the movie script, but picks up on the idea of cyborgs dueling it out on the field of honor. It is expected to use the algorithms from their current chess game. Gametek's Ragnarok not only features the animated sequences, but looks like a challenging and well-balanced game, complete with tutorial and plenty of room to save games. Those more serious about chess are expected to gravitate toward Kasparov's Gambit (Electronic Arts). In addition to the tutorial and database features described earlier, the game will feature three different 3-D chess sets in SVGA graphics and allow the gamer to customize the artificial opponent. Where most earlier chess games adjust the difficulty levels by simply giving the artificial opponent more or less time to make a move, Kasparov's Gambit lets the gamer modify the opponent's aggressiveness, creativity, attentiveness, orthodoxy and strength. Such factors really change the face of the game, since orthodoxy will often determine whether the opponent will be in the classical style of taking the center or in the hypermodern style where one boldly snipes from the side. The default artificial opponent plays at a 2185 Elo rating). Strategy gamers who enjoy business simulations will enjoy several new strategy games. Impressions is preparing a new VGA version of Air Bucks which will feature the types of bells and whistles that some of ChessMeister 5 Billion and 1 A Multimedia Entertainment Extravaganza! Super VGA and VGA Modes. Rich Characterizations. A Cliff Hanger around every corner! From the designers of the Award Winning Martian Memorandum. ACCESS SOFTWARE INCORPORATED ACCESS Software, Inc., 4910 West Amelia Earhart Drive Salt Lake City, UT 84116. (801)359-2900  (800)800-4880 EXIT SELAMA Battle for your life at the Bridge of Death!\" Pulse pounding excitement with full motion video sequences and synchronized speech. They grow them big in these parts! EXIT 23. DAAAA Gasp in disbelief at the lost tribe of Amazon women!* *Actual Amazon VGA screens. Circle Reader Service #35 "


"Spectrum HaloByte Stan EK 81718,2 1 ICCOL DE SSH RAONAID CAESAR AVA A TAE PARTICUS Entertainment software booths at WCES. the owners of the original Air Bucks wanted. Koei tentatively plans to convert their Aerobiz SNES product into a VGA strategy game on MS-DOS in the Fall. Would-be magnates don't have to build airlines to get rich, though. Interplay's Rags to Riches provides a humorous, but detailed economic model of an up and coming investor. There are humorous encounters with shady characters and plenty of strategies to use in attempting to parley one's investments into millions. The game is based on a boardgame called Speculate! Whale of a Good Time (Conclusion of Part I) If one combines the trends described earlier in this article with games using SVGA graphics, announcements of new sound cards/technology and more emphasis on user-customizability, it is difficult to hang on to a pessimistic perspective. In the Bible, Jonah built a booth to protect him from the sun and went outside of Ninevah to watch it fall. God surprised him. As readers should be able to tell from the booths pictured in the article, there is a lot of excitement and optimism surrounding the entertainment software industry in 1993. Instead of pouting like Jonahs, we definitely left the show with a host of new revelations. Next month, we will provide genre-by-genre rundowns and plenty of pictures about all the new action, adventure, role-playing, strategy, simulation, sports and war games which we saw at the show. We think everyone will have a whale of a good time. CGW Page 20 Computer Gaming World "


"WWERTO THE NEXT GENERATION IN TWO. PLAYER SCIENCE FICTION STRAT GY ENTERTAINMENT. Coming Soon Circle Reader Service #62 "


"Computers Don't Teach; Software Does The Philosophy Behind EA*Kids EA * Kids THE KIDS SOFTWARE EXPERTS rn 17th century England, even common cobblers, tailors, weavers and carpenters would teach the village children how to read. Usually, these abecedarians would give the children a hornbook or battledore with the basic letters and numbers printed (or posted) on them and require the children to memorize the basics by rote. A few of these abecedarians came up with some creative notions, however. They carved letters into blocks so that children might learn spelling, or they developed rhymes as a mnemonic device. In Colonial America, many of these hornbooks offered theological lessons (since religion was the most important thing in the world to the Puritans) where A was for Adam (\"In Adam's fall, we sinned all.\") rather than the Apple of today's pre-primers. mation-sifting skills that cannot be learned by rote. These skills can only be learned by doing. With computers becoming omnipresent tools in accomplishing these research skills, it continues to become more and more vital to involve children in computerized learning activities. Such a need is readily discernable. This is why more and more software publishers are mobilizing to meet these needs and why Computer Gaming World now has a sister publication focused on Kids & Computers. The most obvious result, for purposes of this article, is Electronic Arts foray into the \"edutainment\" genre. Installation of programs and removal of programs from the hard disk can all be handled (by parents) through this front end. Further, the entire line uses on-line help pals to ensure that children do not get bogged down in the gaming/learning environments. These colorful cartoon characters serve much the same function as an inspiring teacher in that they provide assistance and encouragement as necessary, without intruding on the player's independence. CUCKOO ZOO   PING THE PANDA However effective these abecedarian methods may have been in teaching skills with limited scope, they didn't do much toward teaching children how to think and how to solve more abstract problems. It is also likely that the methods turned off as many students as they inspired. Of course, that didn't make too much difference, since they only needed to read enough to conduct basic business. Except for the nobility (who usually had private tutors). there was really no reason to learn to research or be motivated to read widely, since the libraries of the common man were largely restricted to the Bible, Foxe's Book of Martyrs and occasional pamphlets. In today's era of information explosion, an abecedarian approach is dangerous. Children need problem-solving and inforThe Digitized Hornbook Taking their initial cue from a line by Marshall McLuhan, the Ur-prophet of media, those responsible for shaping this new line of \"edutainment\" software take seriously the idea that \"Those who draw a distinction between education and entertainment don't know the first thing about either.\" That is why the company has expended the amount of resources necessary to make sure that discovery and surprise are major elements within the formulae used to create each product in the series. That is why there is tremendous emphasis on providing animated and verbal reward sequences to reinforce the child's efforts. It is also why every product is presented to an advisory board that includes: school superintendents, learning specialists, educational psychologists, computer educators and parenting advocates. Another distinction between EA*Kids and its antecedents is that the entire product line uses a common set-up/access interface. Children love to go to the movies and to play their own videotapes of favorite movies, so all of the EA*Kids products begin at the EA*Kids theater. The theater is, essentially, a graphic menu that allows children to select their favorite programs by double-clicking on the movie posterstyle icon for a given program. The side of the theater that says, \"Now Playing\" allows access to the programs for the children without ever forcing them to use a C: prompt, and the side of the theater that says, \"Coming Attractions\" presents previews of upcoming games or products. Ping and Kooky's Cuckoo Zoo is an early learning product which allows children to drive a train in first person perspective) through four environments. The technology used to depict the train's motion is surprisingly sophisticated for a \"learning\" product. That was an unexpected surprise. Also, the animals to be found in these habitats are not depicted realistically (since realistic animals are sometimes frightening to young children, as anyone who has seen crying children at the zoo is likely to be aware), but as warm and cuddly caricatures of animals that are designed to become animated friends of the child. That was an unexpected, but appreciated, design decision, as well. Through interaction with the animals in these four habitats, early learners are likely to learn to recognize colors and how to count. As a game element, however, they are also likely to have to learn how to match elements to each other whenever Kooky (a bird who is probably a distant cousin of the Cocoa Puffs cuckoo bird) flies through the scene and mixes up spots, Page 22 Computer Gaming World "


"CAESAR ROME WASN'T BUILTINA DAY -HOW LONG WILLITTAKE YOU? QELUT ILGAN ULUGUDE See A LIITTIMET AN JIH All TUTTI IITT MATAN TAMANN MEETURI Com JA WEWTOOTERO COMO RI A s governor of a province of the Roman Empire you must A build cities for the good of your people. Fortify your cities with walls & towers but should your defences fail, you must command legions to crush the hostile barbarian tribes! Success will lead to promotion and ultimately, the very best may rise to become... Caesar! Battles may also be fought out in detailed, animated combat using a much enhanced version of Impressions Cohort (Cohort II will be available separately). Die PF 109 (EU 2017 PEN TE 20 K FT 1700 Grow your city with ampuheatres, forums, temples, aquaducts, roads, baths & workshops and much, much more! Impressions kespear frostile tibes with cross country walls to match The Great Wall of China Committed to Excellence in Strategy Entertainment Impressions Software, Inc. 7 Melrose Drive, Farmington, CT 06032 Circle Reader Service 163 "


"not make sense or cases where clues are withheld. Pole somebody stole tachomion sloteboord from Shredd's Eile ond Slote JA Shop! And the tournament tomorrow stripes, limbs and heads so that the young child has to set chaos right again. For children who are a little older, Scooter's Magic Castle allows them to explore a castle with an on-screen friend. The game actually reminded us of an updated Little Computer People (the classic Activision busy-box software program) with an educational agenda. Counting, matching and creativity comprise the scope of this product and, as in all of the products, on-line help is available through an on-screen companion. In this case, the companion is Theo, a wise old owl who offers advice which is much more useful than, for example, the pedantic esoterica disseminated by the owl in the Winnie the Pooh stories. Theo is a friend, not an obstacle. The most intriguing innovation in the line, however, is the colorbook adventure of Peter Pan. Remember Maurice Molyneaux? He is the artist who developed the spaceship control interface for the original Rules of Engagement (Omnitrend/Mindcraft). A paintbox full of animated drawing accessories sit at the bottom of the screen like the musical staff in Loom. Whenever Peter gets into difficulty onscreen, the child selects the drawing tool by pointing and clicking on the tool and the object to be acted upon. When a useful selection has been made, a delightful animated sequence takes over and the story continues. Artistically, this product is absolutely resplendent. For children over seven years old, Kid Vid allows children to create their own music videos. We thought of this as Cartooners with more tricks and a simpler interface. Also for older children (8-13 years old), there is Eagle-Eye Mysteries. This product should do wonders for improving reading comprehension and problem-solving skills. Think of it as Scooby-Doo without all the goofiness. The program assumes that pre-teens can think and doesn't insult them with plots that do Report Card Naturally, with these products yet to be released, it is difficult to see how successful they will actually become. One thing seems certain, however. EA's entry into the edutainment arena, along with Sierra's entry into the same arena, means that Broderbund will no longer be the sole mainstream consumer publisher producing edutainment titles. This should be good news for parents, since it likely means that educational publishers and consumer publishers alike will push each other to a new level of excellence. Cow TWIN ENGINE GAMING PRESENTS: Out Time Days Space Combat a game of Time Travel in an alternate dimension a game of pure tactical combat... THE EXPERIENCE: OTD is a game of life on a in a rather unique environment strange world. Although populated by a variety of You'll be fighting in an edgeless contest zone aboard livsemi-humanoid races, it is nothing like the Earth ing crcatures. Space Combat is almost all combat, with that your character left behind. Gone is the industrisome room for diplomacy. Offensive actions include al might of large nations. The multi-talented worker the creature's Psychic Screams to mentally disrupt is a thing of the past. Even your famed Time Jumpothers, launching Inverse Minos that will implode ing skills have been checked to a certain degree. . ncar your enemy, freeing Sporcs to destroy interHowever, you do happen to be one of the few Time nals, using Nerve Pulses to paralyze posky scouts, Jumpers on this world, and that in itself is a major strength. and Virally Infecting your opponent in the hopes of You'll choose one of several sects to work with, or attempt to taking over their alicn. Each turn comes with a special full-page graphic create your own from scratch, which will help set your general methprintout of your cnding position to aid od of operation. As each new time opens, there are new discoveries to you in planning. make, new lands to chart, and new people to meet. The world awaits change, and you are the catalyst. Space Combat was designed to be easy to learn, but difficult to master. OUT TIME DAYS is a highly interactive role-playing Play-By-Mail Every game starts with ton players, game with turns processed weekly. It has received excellent reviews, and as cach is climinated, the chances notably from Flagship and Paper Mayhem. Turn cost of the game ending will increasc. is $5.00. The game is open ended and 99% computer Turnshccts are custom made on a laser moderated. The rulebook may be obtained for $5.00 printer to aid you in filling out your (refundable with startup). A special startup is next turn. The games run about 12-18 available that gives you the rulebook, the startup turns. Cost is $3.50 per turn. A ruleFirst turn, and five turns for only $15.00. book (required before you can join) is Dependable, weekly, error-free turns since 1984 $1.00 (free if you mention this ad!).  Twin Engine Gaming; Dept 631; 3254 Maple Leaf Ct.; San Jose, CA 95121 @ VEC Circle Reader Service #104 Page 24 Computer Gaming World "


"\"The best simulator J've ever seen! Rick Zalud Computer Game Review TER INTO \"Makes the term virtual redundant!\" Dave Moskowitz, Video Games and Computer Entertainment REALITY! DESIDENTE DE SE THE ENVELOPE \"Sets a totally new standard for helicopter simulations! Arnie Katz, Electronic Games Redefines the state-of-the-art in computer simulation graphics! Computer Gaming World COM A NO From NovalogicTM, the creators of WOLFPACKIM COMANCHETNIMUM OVERKILLT.IS the promise of gulation action come true! You come the ultimate in 21st Century Attack Hélicopters the Boeing Sikorsky RAH-66 Comanche, not just over. but in and around ultra-realistic 3-D terrain. Can it be true? Absolutely! Thanks to NovaLogic's radical new simulation environment VOXEL SPACET, which produces graphics 500 times more detailed than any of those tired old polygon graphic games. You'll dive from mountain peaks, dart through winding canyons, and roar through pulse-pounding combat in stunning cloud-filled skies. So Thally for awesome graphics, unprenadeniet Speed, and sweaturing, toefl elenching walite-kinekle excitement unlike wwthing you've ever experienced on a personal computer Tear out to your nearest software dealer and tear into a new reality! OBB ABD BY Smista ihasterra Stenia elexime simulation NA Simulator with real-time contrats al RAH-66 Comanche Unsurpassed speed and maneuverability Real-time fly-bys through actual terrain data 2 One-minute learning curve Superb musical score and sound IM WOOC ACTUAL SCREENSHOTS CHAT:22 PLAAD 30 FLARE:12 Ford GMP3SX ograna 986.686 32 bit mo 2018 w ganwas awardessed potwo? Wallack. Comanche Maximum OvarkiVOXEL SPACE Novalogic and the Novalagielono are ademais 12510 Vantura 5d. Ste. 200. Tarzana, CA 91856 7992 by Novalogic, Inc. All rights reservad ownloaines Circle Reader Service #81 "


"UNGDOM Become the World's Greatest Conqueror! sela 39 137.19 TLLET ELLELLITE HT HERE oop. mamy Productos wid Plunge into a medieval world to conquer Cascatia, an untamed land of conquest & glory. Invade castles, fly over mountains, and use the forest to your advantage as you battle across the Cascatian Realm, to become the reigning king. Just about the best strategy and tactics game you will ever play.  NINE BEAUTIFUL SCENARIOS.  A RANDOM MAP GENERATOR.  UTILIZE BASIC HUMAN UNITS, THE FANTASY UNITS OR BOTH.  21 LEVELS OF PLAY (STRONG AI). MODEM PLAY.  COMPLETE GAME SCORING HISTORY. RICH IN STRATEGY AND TACTICS. SEVERAL FULL CAMPAIGN CONQUESTS. The \"Conquered Kingdoms\" computer game is IBM PC and soon to be Amiga compatible. It can be obtained through your favorite retailer or ordered direct by calling: 1-908-788-2799  Q.Q.P. All rights reserved. IBM is a trademark of International Business Machines. Amiga is a trademark of Commordore. "


"BATTLES CETNY 20 OOP: Conquer the world in \"Battles of Destiny.\" Seek out and destroy up to three opponents in this state of the art global conquest simulation. It's simple to play, but only a true master will reign in \"Battles of Destiny.\" Challenging Artifical Intelligence (9 levels of difficulty) Air, ground and naval combat 22 different units to construct Modem play Over 20 beautiful worlds to conquer Complete player history Dynamic scoring system Campaign play Several dudes holistie gaming The \"Battles of Destiny\" computer game is IBM PC. It can be obtained through your favorite retailer or ordered direct by calling: 1-908-788-2799  1992 Q.Q.P. All rights reserved. IBM is a trademark of International Business Machines. Circle Reader Service #87 "


"The Rumor Bag by Bagzilla and Hobbes s I stomped through Tokyo Harbor on my way to Tokyo proper, I brushed aside ships with the wake from my brobdingnagian torso and my gargantuan tail. Pleasure yachts and commercial shipping vessels alike capsized in the wake of my wrath. Ordinary humans might have to play MicroProse's Task Force 1942 in order to sink so much Japanese tonnage, but film monsters don't have to play games to perpetrate destruction. There is currently a lot of interest in Pacific Theater games, but you wouldn't find us movie monsters getting excited about an alleged deal between the designers of High Command and Three-Sixty which would put a scenario-builder and a Pacific Theater version of the game (Pacific Command?) on the market within the next 12 months. That may bode well for all concerned, but it's not as much fun as frying a destroyer by exhaling. We movie monsters are made of sterner stuff. You wouldn't find us interested in the possibility of Gary Grigsby updating Second Front into a Second Front II by adding some of the Pacific War innovations. You wouldn't find us wondering if he were going to redo his 1985 CGW Game of the Year and bring out Kampfgruppe II. No, we monsters simply step on ships and tanks or any other weapons of destruction with our Size 10 feet that we defy Nike to shod. I thought over all the upcoming naval games and briefly wondered what Software Sorcery's Jutland would look like. An SVGA game of World War I naval action with digitized voice commands and digitized video clips should be rather interesting. Put it on CD-ROM and it should be even richer in both data and graphics. The madness took me over once again and I no longer cared about games, even when they are based on my favorite naval era. The Japanese assembled their most modern technology in order to stop my rampage. I couldn't understand the orders being given in the streets, but everyone seemed very excited about something that sounded like General Midi, a new chipset that is being incorporated into the existing sound boards of several manufacturers. In fact, the madness receded for a moment and I remembered that Creative Labs is supposed to be unveiling the Wave Blaster at the Winter Consumer Electronics Show; a card that will provide real MIDI sound for roughly $250. That stopped my rampage for a moment because I realized that John Ratliff's new (as yet unnamed) flight simulator is supposed to have more general midi music (scored by no less than George Alistair \"Fat Man\" Sanger himself) than any other published game, except for Virgin's The 7th Guest. The new flight sim is expected to totally immerse the gamer in a world of sound which adjusts to the action a la Wing Commander's \"Tense-o-Meter\" approach. The madness returned. No wall of sound, no matter how versatile, could stop me! Movie monsters are characters of legend. I faltered, somewhere in the back of my reptilian mind I remembered that National Videotext had landed British Legends II, the sequel to the popular multi-player game that kept users hooked on Compuserve for so long. They also plan to run a version of Jim Dunnigan's Hundred Years War parallel to the games which are currently running on GEnie. I left the harbor awash as I crunched the pier structures beneath my feet. Huge supertankers bobbed in the water like a fighting sail ship in a typhoon. I kicked in the wall of a warehouse in frustration that Simulations Canada's Man O' War game hadn't shipped. Then, I remembered that I was too big to care that it was supposed to ship in March, 1993, along with the World War III game, Red Sky At Morning. I also set a small fisherman's vessel afire with a sigh when I realized that SimCan plans to quit publishing Amiga and Atari ST games, marking the end of an era. From now on, SimCan games will feature modest VGA graphic situation maps and no more printed maps and markers. Finally, I remembered what had set off the rampage. I stormed through Tokyo. I ripped up rail lines and scattered commuter trains from Shibuya Station to Yokohama. I was absolutely furious about the misinformation I'd written in a previous column. The deal for Tearaway Thomas and Ugh!, the two Amiga arcade games to be published by RAW Entertainment, had fallen through after we had gone to press. I stepped on dancing teenagers in the streets of Harijuku. Then, I discovered that Ringworld is not going to be published by EA at all. It is going to be developed by Tsunami and published by Accolade. Another source told me that the on-line flight simulator that was supposed to accommodate campaigns with up to 2,000 pilots would no longer be funded. I shoved a building over and watched it fall. The next thing I expected to hear was that the rumor that Nintendo's CD-ROM unit was going to turn the SuperFamiCom into a 32-bit processor that runs under Unix was false. I pushed over another building. It landed on my foot — my modest size 9 foot, not a size 10 foot — and it wasn't a building, it was a filing cabinet. I looked around in vain for some puny mortals to terrorize. There were only unsympathetic co-workers frowning as my tantrum subsided. I started to clean up the disaster, so embarrassed about my \"Calvin and Hobbes\"style fantasy that I didn't even get to tell them which network is supposed to be building an on-line version of Star Fleet Battles. Ah, well! Plenty of time for more rumors after I get myself under control. CGW Page 28 Computer Gaming World "


"T.I.M. A puzzle-solving, inventor's workshop for the mind... «The puzzle game to buy in 1993.» \"This is one of the best games of the year!?? Video Games and Computer Entertainment Computer Game Review 8 BHK g THE INCREDIBLE EMOGA NEL BOMULL SELLE LEHE -RAPE Combine zany animated parts to create working machines! Over 80 puzzles will challenge your creative skills. ap 3 BONUS UDNIU HHHHHHAHISI WHERE SIERRA Free-Form mode offers unlimited tools for sheer fun! Who ever thought logic and physics could be so much fun? A Mechanical Wonder is Set into Motion! Introducing The Incredible Machine, a wacky electronic workshop from the mind of designer, Jeff Tunnell. Using parts and gadgets from the electronic toolbox, you construct machines to solve one of 80 different puzzles or create your own incredible masterpiece in Free-Form mode. There are gears, pulleys, cats, balloons, dynamite and about 40 other animating tools for use in your creation. It's all new, slightly demented fun that you won't be able to put down. It's The Incredible Machine and it's in stores now! Circle Reader Service #93 Excellence in Innovative Gaming SIERRA To get your copy now, calle 1 (800) 326-6654 "


"Game yumts Scorpia's Travel Guide For Crusaders Or, How to See the Realm on Under 100 HPs a Day magic skill at level gain time to obtain the best results. This is because the spells offered at level gain are tied directly to the score in the relevant magic skill. That holds true for all classes capable of magic. The higher the score in Thaumaturgy, Alchemy, Theology, or whatever, the better the spells your characters will have to choose from. Never stint on putting points into magic skills. mom-adiem c ir-Tech's Crusaders Of The Dark Savant is a tough game in many ways. Typical of the Wizardry series, it has an excessive amount of combat, so you need to be prepared from the start with the best possible team. If at all possible, bring your party over from Bane of the Cosmic Forge. As noted in my article last month, the characters will come in at level 5, and retain some of their equipment, including such gems as the Muramasa Blade and Holy Basher (presuming they had those items, of course!). If you didn't play Bane, or have no team to bring over, then you must start from scratch. The one advantage to this is that you can give the members some points in the skills of Swimming, Climbing, Mapping, and Diplomacy right from the start. Only one person needs Diplomacy, and only one requires Mapping, but all characters will have to work on Swimming and Climbing, which are quite important. As to the actual make-up of the party, there is no one \"perfect mix.\" Different combinations work for different people, so you will just have to experiment a bit to find out what's best for your style of play. In general, classes that have spell abilities as well as fighter abilities (Samurai, Lord, Valkyrie, etc.) are better than the straight fighter type. They go up a little more slowly in level but they will be worth the wait. Ninja are better than thieves any day and no party is complete without at least one Bishop. Bishops need to be developed carefully for maximum effectiveness. After first level, they gain Priest spells on the odd levels and Mage spells on the even ones. Therefore, it is best to put all the Academia points into the appropriate a Priest to a Lord. That will give the character access to the better equipment, although he or she is back at level one and has to be developed all over again in the new profession. Still, some players find this a good way of working up a powerful party, so choose whichever method suits your inclinations. Speaking of weapons, remember that the people in the back ranks can fight, too. Get extended or long-range weapons (quarterstaffs, bows, slings, whips) into their hands as soon as possible. Spell power is going to be pretty limited for some time, and there's no reason to have half the party standing around doing nothing during combat. One thing you may have problems with later in the game is spell failure. Even my 30+ level mage with 100 Oratory and 100 Thaumaturgy had 7th level spells fizzle out far too often (ditto for other classes). You can generally avoid this by having several people cast spells at a lower level. Two or three Nukes at power level 5 can do just as much, if not more, damage than one 7th level Nuke. Casting at lower levels is also less draining on stamina and spell points an important consideration. Once you get into the game proper, you will soon find there is much more to be done than mere fighting (although combat is a major part of Crusaders). Many puzzles must be solved, items obtained, and NPCs dealt with along the trail to the Astral Dominae. This is the point where people can start running into problems. The game's \"open design\" allows the party to go almost anywhere, provided they can handle the hostiles in a particular area. Unfortunately, this means that players can wander around for a long time, gaining character levels, but not progressYou should have at least one Fighter, Lord, or Valkyrie in the party. Sorry to say, most of the good top-drawer stuff is designed for that trio, with a few things thrown in for Bards and Rangers. Neat Items (not to mention decent armor) for Samurai are few and far between. The situation is worse for Bishops, Priests, Alchemists, Psionics and Mages, who have even less to choose from in the way of weapons and armor. All you can do there is hope that something usable by those classes will turn up from time to time. The alternative is to bring a character along to a certain point, then switch class to something else; for instance, switching Page 30 Computer Gaming World "


"Wolfenstein 30 Hottest Shareware Game \"...more like an interactive movie than an arcade game.\" Shareware Update \"Almost single-handedly justifying the existence of shareware...\" Video Games & Computer Entertainment \"The first game technologically capable of...immersing the player in a threatening environment.\" Computer Gaming World Imprisoned in a Nazi Fortress In an act of desperation you overpower your cell guard. Standing over his fallen body, you frantically grab for his gun. Deep in the belly of a Nazi dungeon, you must escape-or die trying device 962 19; 500 3 907 19 LCHE SE USCATHA 300 3 9 Experience a 256-color, smooth scrolling virtual reality Hear professionally composed music with an AdLib, Sound Blastert, or compatible Four levels of game play make it enjoyable for the novice to the experienced player Battle with knives, pistols, and machine guns Easy to start playing, and instantly absorbing 197 53 15600 Call Toll Free 1-800-GAME123 For the cost of shipping and handling, only $4.00, you'll receive Episode One, Escape from Wolfenstein. Or download Episode One and pay no shipping and handling. Call the Software Creations BBS and check out our FREE Apogee file section. BBS Phone Lines are:  (508) 365-2359:2400 BAUD  (508) 368-7036:2400-9600  (508) 368-4137:2400-14.4K Episodes two through six are sold separately and can be purchased by calling Apogee's toll-free number, shown above. APOGEE P.O. Box 476389 Garland, TX 75047 SOFTWARE Not Recommended for Younger Viewers Due to Realistic Depictions of Violence Wolfenstein 3-D requires an IBM or 100% compatible computer with 640K RAM, a VGA graphics card, and a hard disk drive. Extended memory (XMS), expanded memory (EMS), joystick, and mouse are optional. IBM is a registered trademark of International Business Machines, Inc. Sound Blaster is a registered trademark of Creative Labs, Inc. Adlib is a registered trademark of AdLib, Inc. Circle Reader Service #33 "


"ing very far towards the game's objective. Everything is so spread out among different locations that finding any sort of path through the game can be difficult. The ultimate goal is the Isle of Crypts. You need Wikum's Boat (complete with power globe), the Wand Majestik, the Key of Dragons, the Legend Map, the Crystal Map and Vitalia's Device. If you lack any of these items, stay away from the Isle. Otherwise, you'll just be making a lot of extra work for yourself running back and forth to pick up what you're missing. Collect everything first, and life will be a little easier in the crypts. the Well Riddle. Find your way to the Land of Dreams and go through it. The pipe and pastille are very important. All of the items offered at the end are good; save early and check each one out, then restore to pick the one you like best. Find the four special gems (swimming necessary). Hidden Temple (under Munkharama) Explore thoroughly with an eye out for wall buttons. Visit (heh) the Lord of the Dark Forest (Munk's Key needed). Be sure to enter all the little side rooms. Do not enter the pit/lever/grate room until after you have taken out Lord DF. Watch out for a very nasty trap in the power globe room. Dane Tower This is the only standalone dungeon (nothing needed from outside). Buy two bags of Jonga powder. You will have to take out both the Demon and Magna Dane; Magna is better done first. Ukpyr Join the Scouts and follow orders. Search thoroughly after the attack. Rattkin Ruins -(Orkogre, Nyctalinth, Sacred Grove) Join Thieves Guild. Stop in at Bertie's and buy the unusual item. In the Funhouse, the most difficult puzzle is the water slide. The rope/bar must be in place before you fiddle with this. Only three levers need to be pulled. Visit the Razuka; Don Barlone can help with the Condemned Area in New City. needs no power packs and does terrific damage against killer robots (good as a general weapon, too). Take the Crusaders test. Save yourself a lot of time; break down the second door (Strength 18+ for each party member necessary). Search the ship completely. Witch Cave (Giant Cave, Haunted Forest) — Simple matter of rambling through and defeating the four evil witches. The Giant Cave is south of this one; the forest is west of the north road from Ukpyr. Giant cave must be done first. Haunted Forest must be visited at night. Whirlpool Cave (Curio Museum, Witch Cave) The Sphinx Map will tell you what needs to be done here. Be sure to search carefully and do some swimming. Isle of Crypts Nasty, nasty place. Traps on the upper levels, so go carefully. Some can be avoided, others can't; eventually, you can turn them off as in Dane Tower, but it will be awhile. Below crypts is the Chamber of Gorrors; there are six Gorrors, all optional (the best stuff is in those chests). Ra-Sep is the easiest (a true wimp); the Beast of 1000 Eyes almost impossible (even in \"easy\" mode). The rest are very tough but possible. You must find the Jewel Of The Sun here (not in a Gorror room). Further down is the infamous teleporter maze; patience required. You want to end up in the Crystal Room, where solving the puzzle leads to the final DANG level. GMTER II MAGE PRIEST SAN Probably the best place to start is New City. Imports from the \"trash Bane\" ending of Wizardry VI and newly-created teams start in the vicinity of the town. Imports will have to find a way around the orchid patch (level 10 or better needed to cross safely); new teams can walk right in, but do stop off in the beginner dungeon first for some experience and explore the outdoors for the map kit (to enable automapping). Not everything will be open to you. The Trang House, Umpani Detache, Condemned Area, and Forbidden Zone must wait until later in the game. The Twisted Heads Puzzle in the Museum must likewise wait for later. These areas aside, you should be able to get in everywhere else. Be sure to buy some bananas at the inn and check out the statue in the fountain. After that, you have several choices on where to go next. Below is a list of major locations with some highlights for each place. Areas in parentheses indicate places that you should do beforehand, either to save time or because they have items you need in the current location. Orkogre Castle (New City) Visit the barracks under prison level. Pick up a jar of Munk Innards (icky, but you need it later; one is enough). You must get into Murkatos' Sanctums (Outer and Inner); the steelplate will help. Talk to the king. Munkharama (New City) Answer Nyctalinth — Talk to H'Jenn-Ra twice (accept or decline Shritis' offer as you please; be sure to open the chest!). Clear out the town. Wake the Savant Guards in the cellar. Dig around in the graveyard. There are two ways up from the great caverns, you must find both. Dragon Mountains (Curio Museum, Rattkin, Dane Tower) — Can only be entered at night. Be prepared for *BROMBADEG*. Explore the caves thoroughly. City of Sky (Dragon Mountains) Many invisible walls here so get out the graph paper and make your own map. Pick one item from the museum (after you have the Key of Light). The Light Sword is best; This place is guarded by killer robots, who are mean opponents. You must go all over the level (every spot) before you can enter the Tomb Of The Astral Dominae. At this point, assistance is needed to reveal the Dominae itself. The party should be at its peak, with protections up. If things go very badly, use the Elysiad. Finally, a word or three about maps. These items are important; hidden within the elegant language are clues to solving several of the puzzles in the game. The name of each map indicates what puzzle it is needed for the Temple Map, for example, tells you how to get into the Hidden Temple of Munkharama, and the Serpent Map how to get into Dragon Mountains. Only the Legend Map has no text; it is the one map that is physically used (and must, therefore, be in your possession). Maps are generally found in chests, but on occasion, someone else may have gotten there first. In that case you will need to use the Trade option when talking to NPCs (stationary or wandering) to see if they have a map for sale. Maps can be discarded after they have served their purpose. Good luck! Cow Page 32 Computer Gaming World "


"THIS OPPONENT IS PROGRAMMED TO BE CHALLENGING, this one wants to rip your lungs outo If you think you're good at games, then let's have some people are terrific, and even the prices are competitive. So real fun. When you're online with GEnie Multi-Player put some new life into your joystick, and sign on. We'll see Games, you're playing real people, in real time. Some of just how good you are. Sign up now: I. Set your modem the best players around the world. a Splash a bandit in Air for half duplex (local echo) at 300, 1200 or 2400 baud. Warrior\", and you've just taken out eight other guys, who'll 2. Dial toll free 1-800-638-8369. Upon connection, enter be back gunning for you. Blast a MechWarrior in Multiplayer HHH 3. At the U# = prompt, enter XTX99327,BLAST Battle Tech, and who knows? Could be that jerk from the then press RETURN 4. Have a major credit card or your coast. Could be a mercenary who's looking for a few good checking account number ready. For more information friends. With GEnie, the possibilities are endless, the in the U.S. or Canada, call 1-800-638-9636. FEURO GEnie. 100% ORGANIC OPPONENTS multi-player games AIR WARRIOR 1 MULTIPLAYER BATTLETECH STELLAR EMPEROR Syy piks.corporation KESMAL Air Warrior is a registered trademark and Stellar Emperor is a trademark of Kesmai Corporation Multiplayer BattleTech is a trademark and MechWarrior and BattleTech are registered trademarks of FASA Corporation Circle Reader Service #59 "


"Devneud Accolade's Star Control II hley Treveria TITLE: Star Control II SYSTEM IBM AT, PS/2 $ 100% Compatibles PRICE: $59.95 PROTECTION: Star Map Look-up DESIGNER: Fred Ford, Paul Reichell PUBLISHER: Accolade San Jose, CA C cquels are rarely as good as originals, and hybrid games are often less than the sum of their parts. Yet, Star Control Il from Accolade not only goes where no sequel has gone before, but proves that with the right synergy and technology, a sequel can be exponentially greater than the sum of its parts. Star Control II is as much of a sequel to the Starflight series as it is to the original Star Control. This should be good news to lovers of the award-winning Starflight series, since there are no announced plans for a third installment to the series and Star Control Il is the closest one can get to the rich, whimsical universe inspired by the capricious and irrepressible Greg Johnson. Caught in an Ur-Quan-dry Although introductory fiction is typically quite mediocre in computer games, usually only read after the game has been played a few hours and background information becomes necessary to understand the story, this is definitely not the case in Star Control II. Though the plot is a rehash of many 'star saga' themes, it is well-written and engaging. The story picks up at the end of the war between the Alliance of Free Stars and the Ur-Quan with their Hierarchy of Battle Thralls. In 2134, faced with eventual defeat at the hands of the Hierarchy, Captain Burton led a task force of heavy cruisers on a deep recon into previously friendly territory. Unexpectedly, the group was ambushed by an elite force of Androsynth Guardian com500 Points of Light The known game universe consists of 3,000 planets in 500 star systems, lavishly presented in 256-color VGA graphics (not only is VGA a requirement, but a 20Mhz +386 is recommended, as well). Gone are the crude patchwork worlds of the Starflight series. Instead, fractal-generated planets are stunningly rendered and the player's ship orbits around them as they revolve. Scattered about these planets the player will discover 20 different alien races with which to interact. Speaking of interaction, the interface is elegantly simple, using either a joystick or keyboard. All interaction is done in a point and click manner. In fact, when playing from joystick, the only time a player needs to touch the keyboard is when typing a save game name. (It is strongly recommended that the player save his game often.) Further, with the Starflight tradition behind the design team, it should not be surprising that the game requires 9.2 MB of disk space to handle the more than 100,000 words of dialogue that enrich the character interaction, as well as the graphics. The universe may be vast but time is of limited quantity. The player starts his/her quest in February of 2155. It is soon discovered that the current timeline will lead to destruction in March of 2159. There is no time for a leisurely tour of the star systems. It is the players primary goal to systematically explore surrounding worlds, make alliances with other races and ultimately stop the aggression of the Ur-Quan. CATATIT ALEHTKUS a nearby system and landed on the planet Vella II. Here the small group of humans would spend the next twenty years of their lives, marooned and disconnected from the events unfolding back at home on Earth. The Hierarchy won the war and began to systematically destroy or enslave the various worlds throughout the known universe. Conquered races were given the choice of fighting for the Ur-Quan as battle slaves or being quarantined on their homeworlds, encased in an impenetrable planetary shield. As Burton's crew struggled to survive, their homeworld was encased by the Ur-Quan. Little did the survivors know, but the planet they crashed on contained ancient technology of a long vanished race known as the Precursors. Professor Farnsworth would uncover a robotic Precursor starship factory. There were limited resources and only the skeleton of a great starship was able to be built. With this starship, twenty years later, the player's character carries the only hope of freeing Earth and defeating the Ur-Quan once and for all. STAREESE CONNAROER OUTFIT STARSHIP LES SHIPYARD DEPART STARBASE TEENCRAL ENERGY ETOLOGICAL CRIT HERO bat vessels and the task force was all but destroyed. Captain Burton's ship was badly damaged but escaped destruction by creating the appearance of burning up in a close flyby of a nearby sun. With the Androsynth ships off their tail, the Tobermoon limped to Horatio Alger of the 22nd Century The first phase of the game can best be described as dragging one's self up out of the Page 34 Computer Gaming World "


"WELCOME TO THE WORLD'S FIRST CYBERSPACE THEME PARK FOR ADULTS ONLY! THE HOT NEW PLACE TO INTERFACE! Your hosts, Leisure Suit Larry and Passionate Patti, are proud to announce the opening of the world's first totally adult, totally outrageous on-line experience. Now, for less than 60 cents* an hour, you can enjoy LarryLand, the newest addition to The Sierra Network, the nation's fastest growing games-only, on-line service. And it works with your PC and modem! 63 GET READY FOR A NIGHT ON THE TOWN! Start your visit to fabulous LarryLand by doing a little \"character building.\" Design your own \"on-line persona\" from a selection of hundreds of heads and facial features, then select your evening attire from dozens of possible clothing combinations. Shoma G eber Hobbiesinterests Frum Men Gourmet Food GET SET TO INTERFACE IN CYBERSPACE! Once you have yourself together, dive face first into the lively land of Larry! Put together a quick list of your favorite games and pastimes, and you'll find yourself in a crowd of 100's of people just like you! It's instant partytime nationwide! Shoung, 23. Sensational Single 13 BIOCRIA CR Slots Roulette Poker Your hosts, Passionate Patti and Leisure Suit Larry. Go Back OIKE ARDUO GO CRAZY IN A NEW ON-LINE WORLD! You can check out\" anyone on-line with just the click of a button, and talking to them is as easy as tappin' the keyboard. Talk freely with anyone and everyone Larryland is a friendly place where fun-loving people get together to get friendly. But friendly conversation is only one of the many pleasures in LarryLand. Darion GAMBLE THE NIGHT AWAY AT OUR CASINO! Participate in a game of Poker, Blackjack or other gambling games with your new friends from all over town or across the U.S.A. Try your luck at the LarryLand slot machines, or play a little \"truth or dare\" in the LarryLand bar. You won't run out of things to say or do! It's lots more fun than television! Becourt 10 JEW LARRYLAND ON THE SIERRA NETWORK! TRY IT NOW  NO OBLIGATION Circle Reader Service #94 CALL 7800) SIERRA-1 of Circle Reader Service #94 Offer #00238 * Rate based on standard TSN membership with LarryLand access. You can access The Sierra Network toll-free in most of the continental United States! Must be 18 or older and own a PC and modem. "


"Deuneinn SIYLADEC 4 H Man In An Alien Starship How Fascinating! readers, they need not worry, there is a Cyber setting in the combat menu of Star Control Il that allows the computer to handle all the battles. Travel between systems is done in Hyperspace. Hyperspace is another dimension that transcends normal space. While in Hyperspace, the player will not only have to monitor for other systems, they will have to be on the lookout for other ships. A collision with another hyperspace pocket will result in an encounter, be it friend or foe. Hyperspace travel will take the player quite a ways into Star Control II. A Starmap is always available to the player. The Starmap shows an updated display of all systems, spheres of influence of known races, and has an autopilot feature. One need only select a target location, press button #1, then button #2 and one's ship will proceed to the selected location unless intercepted by another ship. TU. Fan the-ur= Quan Kolic-Ah. Dong ZORT gutter of interstellar poverty. Equipped with a bare skeleton of a starship and a handful of planetary landers, the player must set out and prospect new worlds for the raw materials needed by Starbase to build new components for the starship. The starship can dock up to 12 escort vessels to assist in combat when it becomes necessary. At first the modules are basic (additional landers, thrusters, attitude adjusters, etc.), but as new alliances are forged, newer ships and modules will be produced. Once the starship is at a minimum readiness, the player will want to strike out in search of friendly oppressed races waiting for a leader to free them from their slavery status. This stage of the game is best described as the diplomacy phase. Being diplomatic not only means knowing what words to use, it is also knowing when not to mince words and rather draw one's sword. The combat system for Star Control II is taken directly from Star Control I. Gravity and inertia are major physical influences placed on your ship in battle. Planets and asteroids litter the combat area, and it is best to steer clear of planets, as collision can severely cripple or destroy a ship. Almost all ships have a primary and a secondary weapon. Mastery of these weapons is essential for success. A separate program is provided for honing combat skills. This game, Super Melee, is a stand alone program that is executed separately from the Star Control Il program. Not only will Super Melee allow the player to set up different mixes of ships and wage war between them, a modem option is provided so teams can play head to head in cyberspace. If all this arcade action scares some One of the first alien races to be encountered are the Melnorme Traders. This race, like the discovery of Quasi-space, is vital to the successful completion of the game. The Melnormes do not use the currency of the player's race. They pay for information and then sell information back to the providers of this information. The Melnorme are interested in the locations of rainbow worlds and data on alien life forms. The player is well advised to collect as much data for the Melnorme as possible--there is no way around trading information with them. They will also sell technology for upgrading both the player's starship and landers. Much like that in the Starflight series, Star Control II has some of the best dialogue ever encountered in this genre. The storyline is well developed and occasionally takes byways through the absurd, always with tongue-in-cheek. This reviewer enjoys a good mix of comedy with his games, but must warn gamers new to this game's universe that the humor is sometimes silly and broadly drawn (sometimes, even as sophomoric as the bad puns in CGW's subheads and article titles). Star Control II has been placed on this reviewer's top ten list of all time. This has been one of the most enjoyable games to review all year. It is not often that such a perfect balance is struck between role playing, adventure, and action/arcade. Often, with this sort of hybrid one of these components is lacking and ends up being a distraction, detracting from the overall enjoyment of the game. With a sequel hinted at in the end of the game, this reviewer looks forward to more installments with great anticipation. CGW Feelin' Quasi In order to complete the game in the allocated time, mastery of another dimension known as Quasi-space will be necessary. There are only two ways to enter Quasispace, one is a technology that will have to be discovered in the wreckage of an Ur-Quan ship, and the other is a warp nexus to the Arilou homeworld (those pale E.T.'s with the big black eyes that occasionally make the evening news in current day Earth; yes, present day E.T.'s are explained in this game). This warp nexus will appear as a star in Hyperspace once a month for a period of three days only. Discovery of this warp nexus and Quasi-space are vital to the game. Page 36 Computer Gaming World "


"Themew face Or horror. lunge into a chilling maze of terror where vampires, werewolves and zombies prowl the dead of night. Confront Kairn, whose lethal powers flow from the blood of his murdered family. Will you emerge as the final victor? Or become his final victim? Your fate will be sealed within the Veil of Darkness. Unravel terrifying riddles. Fulfill bone-chilling quests. Clash in a deadly face-off with the vampire Kairn. Live the horror with heart-stopping graphics and animation, stunning cinematic sequences, haunting music, and blood-curdling sound effects. 'Fight for your life in one of three combat 'levels. Use the right weapon to destroy each ghoul, werewolf, and zombie. Or die. Meet a host of spectral characters whose dark secrets reveal more of the mystery. Sink deep into this gothic nightmare with stateof-the-art game play. Immerse yourself with the easy-to-use Real Time Visual point-and-click interface. Record every step you take with line-of-sight auto-mapping and print-out feature. For more information, call SSI at 408/737-6800. SEL Veil of Darkness Wyra tre v Durat TALA IBM 256-color VGA of Dess Vine X toman BE PHIE  Strategic Simulations, Inc. All rights reserved, "


"Eame gits 2_ Mastering Star Control 2: Blasting Ur-Quons_ishll everything, be it's the only thing! by Roger \"Star Tzu' White BARREL 525 P06652 140 T Tpon starting a galaxy-spanning adventure in Star Control 2, the default starship can fly and shoot, but it doesn't do either well. So, the initial goal is to find efficient ways to improve the mother ship's potential (in other words, make it a real \"mother\"). To make this happen, there are two places that have to be visited, often: Earth, orbiting Sol, and Alpha Centauri (the super giant star nearest to Earth). At Earth, a starbase circling the planet supplies one with fuel, crew and manufacturing facilities in exchange for minerals; at Alpha Centauri, the Melnorme are alien traders who provide fuel, information and technology in trade for biological specimens and the locations of \"rainbow planets.\" In turn, these minerals, biologicals and rainbow planets are found by exploring the planets circling stars, and Sol is a good place to start. Hint: don't try Venus at this point; it'll toast the lander within seconds of landing, but Mercury has some valuable ore deposits that need to be harvested at this point. The wise player will use the first minerals brought to the starbase commander to purchase a speed improvement for the ship. Things happen quickly in this galaxy and the faster one can get from place to place, the more time there will be to prepare for the coming Ur-Quon Armageddon. Speed also makes it easier to run from enemies that one isn't yet strong enough to fight. Once the ship is fast, it is necessary to enhance the mother ship's other capabilities. Increasing the carrying capacity and fuel supply enables one to stay out exploring longer and hence, accelerate the rate of improvements for both the mother ship and the star ship. Mining for Fun and Profit perature and tectonics of the worlds before landing. Pass by those those that are The most productive stars to start with greater than Class Three as too hostile. are the middle-sized stars, then the smaller The good news is that the crew limitation stars. Planets around the large stars are the will not last forever. After one solves the richest of all, but conditions are usually so Shofixti mystery, unlimited crew reserves hostile on the surface that the lander gets will open up. destroyed before it can get the goods loaded. As soon as a couple of planets worth of biologicals are successfully harvested, the next step is to buy techoutfit Starship Starbas nology from the Melnorme to inFLAGSHIP ZON Dawg crease the efficiency of planetary ZON exploration. One of the things they FUEL RES sell are lander improvements so one's lander can resist storm, earthquakes, biologicals and heat. It is worthwhile to spend all early biological cargo on Melnorme technology. Once one's efficiency at collecting minerals and biologicals is improved, it becomes cost effective to land on all kinds of planets with impunity and then, one can afford to buy information. SAL During this first phase, it is not FUEL + MODULE necessary to interact with any aliMARIMUM VELOCITY: --MODULE ens other than the Melnorme tradTURNING RATE: GAME COMBAT ENERGY: 60 ers. Take the time to find cargo, MAXIMUM FUEL: ERIT MENU buy technology and fill out at least Ifa world has valuable goods-radioachalf the modules on the mother ship before moving on to Phase Two — tives or exotics — but is hostile, it is alien interaction. possible to profitably pluck off ore deposits by landing, running over a single deGetting Help from posit, then boosting off before the entire crew gets killed. As the captain sang in the Friends...and Enemies old MAD magazine musical parody of Star Once the mother ship is reasonably Trek, it's nice to have \"A Crew That's equipped, it's time to find out what's hapDispensable\" (sung to the tune of \"Age of pening in the galaxy. To do this, simply Aquarius\"). head for one of the dotted circles on the In the early stage, gamers will find them Hyperspace star map and find an alien to selves expending a lot of crew, fuel and encounter. Once again, save time by startlanders for cargo, but one should not be ing with the closer races. profligate in this spending. The potential There is one exception to this \"start near\" crew supply, in particular, is limited be rule of thumb: the Spathi, whom players cause there are only 2000 crew available are destinted to meet if they are diligent on the starbase. Explore the worlds close about exploring the Solar system, have a to Sol in order not to use up too much fuel clue that can lead one to the Arilou. Since or time. Carefully study the weather, tem the Arilou have a tool that can help one Page 38 Computer Gaming World "


"EN The Modern Version Of The Award Winning Classic  An Addictive Strategy War Game  Network and Modem Compatible  Super VGA Giaphies Advanced Stenario Editor  Superior Computer A.I.  Digitized Sound Effects  Various Difficulty Settings ceompletely Re-Playable By Mark Baldwin and Bob Rakosky -2 Cra Locatie AVAILABLE AT YOUR LOCAL SOFTWARE RETAILER OR DIRECT FROM NEW WORLD AT 1-800-325-8898 (OR 1-818-999-0607 outside U.S.) P.O. BOX 4302 HOLLYWOOD, CALIFORNIA 90078-4302) 1992 New World Computing, Inc and White Wolf Productions. Empire Deluxo is a trademark of New World Computing. Inc. New World Computing is a registered trademark of New World Computing, Inc. IBM screens shown. Actual screens may vary. Circle Reader Service #77 NEW WORIO COMPUTINE» "


"Rame limits Shipyard Starbas 3 Dawg SHIPS 1100 Earth, Cruiser WOO move quickly about the galaxy, making the Spathi homeworld one's first alien visit can be very profitable. Each alien has an interesting story to tell and each story provides clues for solving puzzles with some other alien race. Hence, it is always wise to initiate contact with a diplomatic effort, even if war is likely. About half the races to be encountered start out as enemies. They will talk for a while, then fight. About half the races start out as friends. They will talk for a while, then leave, unless they are provoked or engaged in prolonged foot-inmouth choices during interactive conversations. tween shots. Crew pods give ships more damage-absorbing capacity. Trackers turn shots into homing \"missiles,\" but they take enough energy that one cannot shoot as often. It is possible to mount weapons front, aft and sideways, but the more guns mounted, the larger the amount of energy expended with each shot. Conversely, one may want to collect cargo instead of fighting, so there is a tradeoff between having a lean, mean fighting machine or one that can bring home lots of goods. Fortunately, when at Earth Starbase, one can exchange modules without penalty, so prior to each expedition you can outfit to match your goals for that excursion. IG CAPTAINE ALERTRUS Luna LEKTROS Orbit: 454 MOT Vacuum TEND 14. c. Heatherton Tectonic's class 1 Masstwo! Radiusi Gravity: Day: 2 days  Submat or be destroyed! What can you femme about Un Scies Shop front Earth. con pegee. Hereach out for appendage in friendship What is gewtoresponsc? Goodbye prob CHEROY ZIOLOGICAL DISERTOR mining\" as a way to fill those \"hungry cargo bays. Space mining is looting the hulks of ships which one encounters and destroys in space. Of course, one must destroy them before they can be looted. This is where tactical-level Star Control 2 begins. It's much like the original Star Control, but the computer opposition has been improved a bit, so hot shots who waltzed through the original should be prepared for a surprise. These siliconbrained boys can fight! Fortunately, players who adequately equipped their mother ships before venturing off into alien space will discover that it is their most formidable fighting ship. It is wise to plan on sending it into all the battles. Gamers also have the option of buying more daughter ships during their equipping phases. They are a good investment, but only after the mother ship is performing at an optimal level. Spathi daughter ships are the best because they hold the most crew. As the game evolves, however, players are faced with plenty of interesting tradeoffs to consider. Dynamos reduce the recovery time beEncounters with each kind of alien are basically of two types: a home world encounter and a non-home world encounter. It is easy to tell when it is a home world encounter because the screen fills with uncounted enemy ships (well ... not quite uncounted, there are 44, but I've killed as many as fifty llwraths at their home world and they just kept coming, so there are an uncounted number waiting off-screen.). The stories told by aliens are different when they are on their home worlds and home worlds are the venues where any special events dealing with the race will take place. So, visits to the home worlds are worthwhile, but combat at a home world is virtually useless. If the parley erupts into a fight, discretion definitely becomes the better part of valor. Combat is more efficacious at non-home world encounters. Most home worlds, and most unusual worlds of every sort, are the innermost planets of a star system. When looking for something unusual in a star system, start with the inner world. Beyond Phase 2: Solving the Puzzle Once the mother ship is well-outfitted, the game's goal shifts to saving the galaxy. This is the \"solve the puzzle\" part of Star Control 2. Talk to the aliens; listen for clues. Shoot up those that are hostile and deliver information or items to those that are going to become friends and allies for Ur-Quon Armageddon. All those fun things that are a day in the life of a savethe-universe starship captain. But, that's another story. CGW Fighting for Fun and Profit When travelling through hyperspace, it doesn't take long to discover that there are other black blobbies traveling there, too. This means that one is free to try \"space Page 40 Computer Gaming World "


"MEGALOMANIA If you've always dreamed of ruling your own planet, then this game's for you! The quest for ultimate supremacy is endless. Everybody craves it, lusts after it, but only a few ever really attain it. The road to power is a rough one, but if you can withstand the opposing forces of evil, the rewards are definitely worth it. Power, control, domination... what else could a megalomaniac ask for? As civilization evolves, so does the level of technology. They progress at varying speeds, so it's not uncommon to see armies from various time periods battling it out with different weapons. It's possible to have cavemen battling it out with jet fighters, WWII soldiers shooting bows and arrows and romans firing nuclear missiles! So all you megalomaniacs, gather round and begin your quest for ultimate control! OD TH EPITH CTIONS PLAY ISLAND 100% Choose your player and meet your Direct your followers to bulid castles, cruel and conniving adversaries mines, factories and laboratories. u bil SOFT 1505 Bridgeway, Suite 105, Sausalito CA 94965 Sensible Circle Reader Service # 110 (415) 332-8749 "


"çurvey TV GURU When You Whist Upon A Heart Three Top Computer Bridge Games by David E. Lindeman ing out when to unblock suits (playing high cards under high cards in the long suit to allow one to take every possible trick), but also tending to ignore the player's discards. The New Breed It was a long time coming, but competition finally arrived. Each is supported in some fashion by a well-known bridge master: Grand Slam Bridge II has practice hands from Mike Lawrence, Micro Bridge Companion has hands by Alfred Sheinwold, and Omar Sharif on Bridge has the name of Omar Sharif. The question, of course, is which plays like it? r'm not quite sure how it came to be, but Contract Bridge has developed an aura similar to that surrounding polo or croquet a game played by dilettantes or an earlier generation. Even my friends who are avid players of games such as Hearts, Spades, and Pinochle seem intimidated by the complexities of bridge auctions, much to the dismay of the American Contract Bridge League. Fortunately, there are a number of fairly recent computer bridge games to help the player work out the kinks in his or her bidding before visiting the local bridge club. We'll talk about the top three: Omar Sharif On Bridge, Grand Slam Bridge II, and Micro Bridge Companion. Before I get started, I should point out a few things about the review. Bridge is first and foremost a game of communications and those who play quickly develop a whole series of partnership agreements on the meaning of certain bids, leads and discards. A person with a different set of agreements might react differently to the pre-programmed bidding and play patterns of the games included in this review. I consider myself an intermediate bridge player and I have written this review presuming a basic knowledge of Contract Bridge. I personally consider bridge to be the best card game going and one of the finest games of any type known to humanity. I heartily encourage anyone considering bridge as a hobby to buy one of these products, learn the basics, find a partner and go visit the local bridge club. It's definitely worth one's while. TITLE: SYSTEM: PRICE: DESIGNERS: PUBLISHER: Omar Sharif On Bridge IBM (MS-DOS & Windows) $49.95 CP Software & Thomas Decker Interplay Irvine, CA Omar Sharif On Bridge Omar Sharif, besides being a well-known actor, is a bridge master of no small accomplishment. It is quite possible that one's local paper carries the bridge column that he coauthors. Unfortunately, he seems to have had little else to do with the game that bears his name. The game, written by Chris Emsen and published by Interplay, is visually attractive and features Mr. Sharif's digitized voice announcing dealers, contracts and leads. The opening menu is very simple: select a play mode (random, manual, or saved) and begin playing. Scoring is done as rubber bridge, which is to say that every time the player selects \"play,\" he plays hands until one side scores two games. Each player can be human or computer. The game uses pulldown menus and hot keys, and provides hints upon request. Trouble begins during bidding. The manual describes opening bids up to 1 notrump, State of the Art using strong notrump (16-18) and recommending five card majors for 1-level openings in major suits. It also describes initial responses, the Stayman convention for 1 notrump responses and the Blackwood convention to ask for aces. It doesn't describe the Blackwood convention asking for kings, the Gerber convention for aces when playing notrump hands or much of anything else about its basic philosophy. Nor does it say if it plays strong or weak 2 openings, strong or weak jump overcalls, or if it understands cue bids. Further, its bidding is set in stone. No options can be configured, so if (for example) the player wants to use the popular two-over-one bidding style, he is just plain out of luck. After some experimentation, I can answer these questions, but I found it extremely irritating to have to conform to someone else's bidding style in order to reach sensible contracts. Equally disturbing, it does not play a very good game of bridge. Like the first edition of Grand Slam Bridge, it ignores lead-directTOSKAP 13 bant 9d2727 The first \"big-time\" bridge game was the original Cybron Software's Grand Slam Bridge, published in 1986 by Electronic Arts. It set a standard for appearance and playability. GSB supported a variety of bidding options, simple sound effects, and had very legible EGA graphics. With selectable deal modes to help work on weak spots in the player's bidding and play, it stood on top of the pack for five straight years. It was not without faults, having not only an unpleasant tendency to ignore the selected bidding conventions at times and a very hard time figurKRA RIYO TUDIO7769 Page 42 Computer Gaming World "


"no «Catch a dragon? No sweat!» ERIC UNREADY o The Torus Inquirer ERIC ABDUCTED BY UFO! THE UNREADY SOM Ooor baby You took NICE Here's what the experts are saying about Eric the Unready. \"A comedy adventure full of whimsy and wonder\" -Computer Gaming World \"Eric is flat-out funny. There's comedy for everyone and a good quest to boot.\" -Computer Game Review \"A wonderfully hilarious adventure\" -Game Bytes Magazine Eric the Unready established his reputation by impaling his instructor during jousting class. Then, when Princess Lorealle the Worthy is kidnapped, Eric begins a madcap quest through this hilarious fantasy world packed with dragons and dwarves, wizards, unicorns, and the most fearsome beasts of all, the dreaded Attack Turtles. Every player will find at least one favorite movie, TV show or adventure game that has been struck by Bob Bates' pen! From the award-winning author of TIMEQUEST. 256-COLOR VGA ALEGEND TEATEATASMENT COMPANY Breathtaking fantasy art! 256-color VGA Awesome soundtrack New menu-driven system for conversing with characters Intriguing mix of interfaces creates a constantly changing graphical scene \"I laughed till my pants fell down!\" Larry Laffner \"More fun than a barrel of monkeys!\" Guywood Threepbrush W LEGEND 22 my do You can indah ple who mm E GHEE BENE Ger 02. blizilazi bisa Er hat die BE You onth ENTERTAINMENT COMPANY 14200 Park Meadow Drive Chantilly, VA 22021 Distributed by Accolade, Inc. To order, visit your local retailer or call 1-800-245-7744  1993 Legend Entertainment Company. ERIC THE UNREADY is a trademark of Legend Entertainment Company ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. Actual VGA graphics shown. Circle Reader Service #73 "


"( LVBU the hand just specified. GSB2 will score rubber bridge or single hands, which is much more convenient when one is assigning cards. rapid la BRIDGE ing discards. It may also ignore attitude signals, shows no sign of following count, and seems to ignore the dummy's hand when considering leads on defense. When playing solitaire and one's computer player is the declarer, it offers the player the chance to play both sides rather than watching the computer play. Unless one is looking for ideas on how to approach a hand, it's a good idea to try it oneself. During play, the game allows the player to take back cards, which is very helpful when one is searching for that perfect line of play. The game never plays any of the player's cards for him, even when he has only one card left in the suit lead. The documentation, like the game, is physically attractive but lacking in depth. It covers every menu and feature but fails to give much explanation of any of it. For instance, the section on manual mode hand construction says that the player may assign cards to a hand by first selecting the player, then selecting the card. It does not explain that one may move a mis-assigned card in the same fashion. This is the sort of single sentence that distinguishes good documentation from that written by a programmer (as a programmer, I feel justified in making that statement). Further, it has no section on play at all, leaving one to discover by trial-anderror what its standard leads are. At 23 pages, this manual is the shortest of the three and it shows. Omar Sharif on Bridge also comes with 10 tutorial hands, each designed to illustrate some specific part of bridge bidding and play. When in tutorial mode, the game will only accept the \"correct\" pre-programmed bids and card plays. These hands cover basic principles and will be of more use to beginning bridge players than to those who are already familiar with standard play. player to describe hands based on shape, points, controls, quick tricks, or losers, which is useful for practicing trouble areas in one's bidding and/or play. There isn't much hint in the brief plug as to what the Mike Lawrence Bridge Dealer will do. The documentation is good. Besides covering the menu options and including cute entry names like \"bellying up to the menu bar,\" it doesn't cover the game's response to card play, but does a fairly good job explaining how the game interprets the bidding options. It includes illustrations and a reasonably detailed summary of bridge bidding and play. GSB2 also comes with tutorial hands, which it calls samples. Sample hands are bid and played like regular hands except that a commentary provided with the hand is available. As with Omar Sharif on Bridge, the samples cover basic principles. ELECTRONIC ART TITLE: SYSTEM PRICE: DESIGNERS: PUBLISHER: Grand Slam Bridge 11 IBM $49.95 Gerry Rempel. Hanno Lemke Electronic Arts Menlo Park, CA Tennis, Anyone? Grand Slam Bridge II (GSB2) is Cybron's update to its 1986 classic. It supports music (with selectable songs in the style of Solitaire's Journey) and basic VGA graphics. Like the original, it has settings files (called profiles) to allow multiple people to share the same game while still using their favorite conventions. The graphics are an attractive, if not spectacular, representation of a bridge table, with hands holding the cards so that only the current player's cards are visible. The music is very pleasant. Selectable bidding options provide support for cue bids, weak 2 bids, 4 and 5 card major suits, Jacoby transfers, unusual notrump, and the gambling 3 notrump bid. Rather than an opening menu, the game goes straight from the title screen and shuffling animation to a dealt hand. This is a little confusing, because if the player wants to assign specific cards or hand constructions to one or more players, one must do the assignments and then select \"redeal\" to get Despite the improved graphics and music, GSB2 should be considered an evolutionary rather than revolutionary product. It plays better than its predecessor, but still ignores the dummy and most attitude signals. The interface is slightly different, as well. During play, the mouse pointer is positioned in the middle of the suit led, or in the middle of the player's cards if one is void in the led suit. This is probably a handy feature for those without a mouse, but winds up forcing one to manually reposition the mouse on the pad every so often. Also, there are still those hands where one wanders about trying to figure out how to get GSB2 to bid the contract one thinks is right. GSB2 is designed to coexist with a companion product called Mike Lawrence Bridge Dealer, which will be sold separately. The manual hand setup feature that is built into the game is functional, but not as simple as the graphic click-on-a-card scheme used by Omar Sharif On Bridge. GSB2 also has a feature that allows the But a Great Personality Last but not least, there is 1990's Micro Bridge Companion by Thomas Throop, published by Great Game Products. Never heard of that company? Neither had I, but I intend to go find their catalog. MBC isn't the prettiest face, but is a darn fine bridge program. The graphics are EGA (clean and attractive, but still quite simple). There is no sound of any kind, and the documentation is clean but simple. On the other hand, it is the most complete product in terms of features. It has support for a wide range of bidding conventions. Its basic conventions are strong 1 notrump, 5 card majors, strong opening 2-bids, Stayman, Blackwood, unusual 2 notrump, and 4 notrump over al or 2 notrump open to invite a 6 notrump slam. Optional conventions include forcing I notrump, weak opening 2bids, weak jump overcalls and negative doubles. MBC has three other unique features. The first is a hand-evaluation hot key to give a quick summary of how MBC evaluates hands. The second is a hotkey that gives MBC's current evaluation of each player's hand based on the bidding so far, a very nice feature which allows the player to interactively adjust his bid until he can tell the program what he wants to. The third unique feature, and my personal favorite, is a hot-key that summons the game's bidding flowcharts. MBC comes with a complete set of flowcharts that show how it makes each decision in bidding. This eliminates the guesswork from bidding with the computer partner. Did your partner make a bid you didn't understand? One can ask MBC for its current hand evaluation based on the bidding, and see what lie one told with the last bid. Unsure how to describe the hand? Call up the flowchart and see how MBC would make its decisions. Playing is very satisfying. MBC will allow one to play single hands or matches of four RESEN-SO CONTACT: HT DECLARET: NEI Neitber Enter NORTH'S cards Page 44 Computer Gaming World "


"DO YOU HAVE WHAT IT TAKES TO FULFILL The Prophecy TM You Have Only 3 Days ... The Kingdom of the Blue Rocks is in peril. The Great Eclipse will come in 3 days and the evil wizard Kraal has plans to take over. Prophecy proclaims that Ween can save the kingdom if he can find the missing pieces of the Revuss of Time. The Prophecy pulls you into a magical, sometimes frightening adventure where you'll encounter extremely challenging puzzles, fast-paced scenarios, and a menagerie of bats, rats, gargoyles, humorous sidekicks, and wicked wizards. The no-typing interface is the only easy part of this game. It has a European style of romance, danger and old world language, combined with brilliant VGA video-like character action and an exciting soundtrack. For IBM PC's. HINT BOOK AVAILABLE! You will journey through strange lands, and cross oceans to fulfill the prophecy. The Evil Kraal The Wiseman Obkram There are fearsome monsters and awesome puzzles to battle and beat. Excellence in Innovative Gaming. Available at a software retailer near you or call: 1 (800) 326-6654 Circle Reader Service #95 TM designates aindemark of Sicrm On-Line Inc. desirnates arristered trademark of Sierra On-Line Inc SIERRA "


"curvey Alfred Shein wolel Presents Alfred S In duplicate bridge, a player's score is based on the difference between how he and his partner performed on a hand and the way other partners playing N-S performed. For this purpose, the computer rebids and replays every hand after the player does, and compares the scores. If, for example, one plays 4H not vulnerable, making 4 for 420 points and the computer plays 3 notrump making 4 for 430, one's score in IMPs would be based on the difference. -10, which is o IMPs. Which is to say that the player's performance has to be substantially different than the computer's for anyone to score points. IMP's is then given along with a verification number, which one can send into Great Games Products. The highest scores each month, the manual says, will be given credits towards purchase of other GGP products. The player is also given the numbers of the hands he played, so that he can go back later and figure out how to handle that horrible trump split in the 4th board. BRIDGE Coutanieve 06/03 Cetricts Dealer Heat Vull Al NEW FEATURES: * NEW GRAPHICS! NEW CHALLENGES! So What's the Scoop? For the purpose of comparison, I wrote down a couple of hands and played them in all three games. The results were interesting. Despite different bidding paths, the end contracts were usually quite close. There were wide differences in the play, however. Overall, I felt that MBC played more consistent bridge, but each game had strengths and weaknesses. I would not recommend Omar Sharif on Bridge, but the choice between GSB2 and MBC is more complex. If one plays duplicate or is thinking about it, I'm confident that MBC will be the superior product. If one is strictly a rubber bridge player and might find the lack of graphics and sound disturbing, one may be happier with GSB2. As an intermediate bridge player, I would recommend MBC to my bridge-playing friends and sometimes partners, but I think most people would find either enjoyable. CGW 39 SCI Iris Talon 10 Most In the telek. Proses lang! TITLE: SYSTEM: PRICE: DESIGNERS: PUBLISHER: Micro Bridge Companion IBM $59.95 Thomas Throop Lifestyle Software Group Saint Augustine, FL (904) 825-0220 MBC also has a monthly competition feature. When this is selected, one plays 8 hands of duplicate, first with the computer as partner and then watching the computer play, with all of the \"take back\" bids and reveal cards\" features disabled. The final score in or more hands. It scores using the IMP point system, which is used for duplicate matches. THE NEXT EMPIRE E R PLAY BY MAIL TURN! ...the only game that sends you fabulously detalled maps like this one, showing your fleet's sensor views every turn ...along with clear, complete stats on each starship you design, build, and maneuver individually using up to 21 different onboard systems...plus status reports on starbases, probes and asterolds you controll The Next Empire Is a completely computer-moderated game, over 6 years / In the making. Each universe is a unique, complex gaming environment populated with 21 alien players Itching to blow the hulls off anyone who gets in their way! FREE SET-UP AND RULES!  $7.50 per turn; no hidden fees or double turns Recently voted #1 PBM game in a nationwide player magazine survey!  fast game (two weeks per turn) or slow game (three weeks per turn) 251  clear, concise rules; our complexity comes from your gaming freedom . FREE SET-UP AND RULES! Reality Simulations, Inc. P.O. Box 22400 Tempe, AZ 85285-2400 (602) 967-7979 Circle Reader Service #89 Page 16 Computer Gaming World "


"Play the best and we'll send you $8.00 (See details below.) FRONT PAGE SPORTS SONT PAGE SPORTS JOHN | FOOT MIKEL HATIMATE: 14 Football TOM LA No matter what computer football game you've played (or even if you haven't played any), you'll find nothing compares to the total pro-football experience of Front Page Sports Football. From drafting teams to forming leagues to designing plays and running the action, only Front Page Sports Football has it all. And now you can get $8.00 just for treating yourself to the the best. Here's how: 1. Buy a copy of Front Page Sports Football from your local retailer. 2. Fill out the coupon below and send it and your original purchase receipt to us. 3. We'll send you a check for $8.00. 4. Enjoy the best computer football season you've ever had. PlayMaker KONAMI KONANI\" NH byen YOU WANT MORE IRURALISM. YOLDILLAVI \" SUIT UPON SUNDAY ALTERNOON NAUGHTER Dybertuk will, \"... the best animation I've seen in a football game... The action is fluid and casy to control... There is no better football game on the market!\" -Computer Game Review \"In play creation and editing, Front Page Sports Football can't be touched...the game that brings everything to the field...\" -PC Games Magazine \"...one of the most visually stunning and realistic simulations of the sport... It is a rare example of a football game that will appeal to everyone, from the casual arcade player to the die-hard rotisserie league fanatic.\" Video Games & Computer Entertainment Yes! Send me a check for $8.00. Here's my coupon and my original sales receipt for Front Page Sports Football. Name Address City State Daytime Phone Terms & Conditions: 1.) This offer is valid only for Front Page Sports Football games purchased between Feb. 15, 1993, and June 30, 1993. 2.) This offer not valid with any other coupons or promotions. 3.) One rebate per household. 4.) This offer expires July 10, 1993. 5). Mail this coupon and your original Front Page Sports\" Football sales receipt as proof of purchase to: Football Rebate Offer, Sierra On-Line, P.O. Box 185. Coarsegold, CA 93614. Offer #368 Excellence in Sports Simulation. ** Dynamix I PART OF THE SIERRA FAMILY "


"çurvey Triple coverage Three Computer Football Games by Wallace Poulter Wallace Poulter is an employee of LucasArts Games. Though CGW does not usually tap writers from the ranks of those who work within the entertainment sofiware industry, we make an exception with Wallace because of the scope of his knowledge of professional sports and the fact that LucasArts does not publish computer sports simulations. h, football, the game invented by the colonies because rugby was too tough for them. And just to confuse everyone it was called \"football\" because the players used their hands to carry and throw the ball. As different as football is to rugby, so to each other are the latest three football games to grace CGW Stadium. 6 yards on the play. Back to the drawing board for the Coach and his new plays. Front Page Sports Football represents the first foray into sports by the Dynamix, part of the Sierra stable. A better debut would be harder to imagine. Admittedly, I approached this product with some apprehension. Nor was I mollified by the following quote: \"Our intention was to create the most complete, the most realistic football simulation ever made for the personal computer.\" Rather than trying to excel in one area of a product, whether it be action, stats, simulation etc., on a first time effort, Dynamix was putting in everything and the kitchen sink. However, I jumped in with both feet and took advantage of the \"Quickstart\" option. First impressions were very favorable, as the player controls were logically defined, the graphics smooth (if a little slow), and, most importantly, the computer Al and randomness factors appeared to be well thought out. TITLE: SYSTEM: GRAPHICS: PRICE: PROTECTION: DESIGNER: PUBLISHER: Front Page Sports Football IBM VGA $69.95 None Patrick Cook Dynamix/Sierra Coarsegold, CA Aintzak 36:39 FRONT PAGE SPORTS ETNOSTNE1 Front Page Sports Football Week 14 of the season. Playoff spots are still up for grabs. In the South Division, Atlanta and Miami are tied at 14-14 in the final quarter. In the North East division, Philadelphia is comfortably ahead of New England 27-3 and here, out West, Anaheim trails Seattle 24-21 with only 3 minutes to go in the game. Anaheim is at Seattle's 35 yard line 2nd and 2. Time for the new play from the Coach. Pro Set backfield, Turner in motion from left to right. The snap from Horton taken by the QB Oates. Oates hands off to Burrows sweeping right with the Left Guard and Tackle pulling in front of the play. Burrows hands off to Turner coming back toward him for a reverse and Turner gets buried by Oliver, the Free Safety, who didn't buy the play for a moment. Loss of Front Page Sports Football has two modes of play: Playcalling and Action. Within each are three levels of difficulty: Basic, Standard and Advanced. The Playcall mode determines the screen display for each play. Basic mode lists the play type by name (run left, run right, etc.), Standard mode shows a diagram of the play, while Advanced mode uses only a number code to identify the plays. In the Action mode, the Basic setting is coaching only, Standard allows the gamer to take control of a player from the computer, and Advanced requires one to do almost everything. Simple and effective, yet the Football \"YOU WANT MON BALISM, YOU'LL DAVI SUIT UP ON SUNIAN ERRNOON  ., VGA Dypenix Page 48 Computer Gaming World "


"The Best-Selling Sensation from Europe! BEST GRAPHICS AWARD Paris Supergames Show 1992 Pilot your golden starship into amazing outer space battle simulation. Take on space-age Spanish Conquistadors with swords and phasers. Advanced video capture makes this an interactive motion picture. One of the oldest mysteries known to mankind is now the future of computer gaming. Set out on a mystic mission across space and time in this high-powered combination of complex puzzle-solving, mythical role-playing, and outer space battle simulation. You are the champion of the lost Inca empire, rocketing across galaxies, battling space age Conquistadors, and unraveling intricate and ancient mysteries. Stunning simulation technology lets you soar through winding canyons, hostile star systems, and lost ruins, This is an epic adventure that catapults you through space and time. Inca is an interactive motion picture where cultures clash and legends live. For IBM PCs. Also available on CD-ROM. Circle Reader Service #97 Excellence in Innovative Gaming SIERRA Available at a software retailer near you, or call: 1 (800) 326-6654 "


"Cur 93?), Front Page Football will be a contender for best Sports game on the market. It already has the award for the best football game on the first attempt. To quote from the Designer's Notes in the manual. \"We found ourselves wanting to play computer football, but we wanted the best: one sports game that had it all action, stats, management, seasons everything. We couldn't find it. We decided to build it.» Normally one could dismiss such a statement as a bunch of hype. Not this time. Patrick Cook and crew built it—the Super Bowl of Football Simulations. Tom Landry Strategy Football Early in the first quarter. Houston has the ball at their own 45, 2nd and 8 yards to go. Time for some defensive strategy help from Tom Landry. A nickel defense is Dallas. Of course I may be a little biased. The 1981 NFC Championship game between Dallas and San Francisco was my first real taste of football and the game was against the \"hated\" Cowboys. First impressions are very positive as a pleasant introduction leads into the best sports game interface I have ever seen. This interface is the model of simplicity and the screen \"feels» completely uncluttered, yet all the information needed to select a play is depicted. More importantly the interface is completely logical, allowing for the setting of formation, coverage, shift, blitz, double teaming and primary receiver. What's really incredible is that those choices are just the defense. The offensive side allows for five different categories of plays, three different lengths of pass, play action and primary receiver. All of course pretty standard in a football product, but the effective use of buttons\" makes the choices effortless. AS TITLE: SYSTEM: GRAPHICS: # PLAYERS: PRICE: TOY Tom Landry Strategy Football IBM VGA 1-2 Modom Option) $49.95 Documentation Look-up Kerry Balls Merit Software Dallas, TX DESIGNER: PUBLISHER: option allows any style of football game fan to enjoy the product. My personal preference was to leave the game in Standard difficulty on both modes. Once into the game, the graphics are very impressive. In the past, collision detection in football games has been haphazard at best. Usually the graphic depiction would jump from two characters approaching each other, to the two characters lying on the ground. Again, not the case in Front Page Football. The game claims over 8000 frames of rotoscoped animation and it certainly seems that way. The players react in realistic ways and the tackles, blocks, catches and runs seem natural. Once into league mode, Front Page Football continues to shine. Multiple league configurations, stadium and surface options (finally we can outlaw Astroturf from the league), trading, college draft and team statistics are just some of the components available. Dynamix really did put everything they could think of into this product. It is possible that every single stat category, some 300, that a sports fan could ever wish for is in this game. Yet, the play possibilities, stats and graphics are secondary to the real breakthrough that Front Page Football has made. Now, finally, there is a game with a play editor which allows the user to craft any and all plays that they wish. As an armchair Bill Walsh, more than anything else, I want the ability to diagram my own plays. Both offensive and defensive plays can be crafted in the Front Page Sports Football play editor. More than any other part of the product, I have spent the most time crafting defensive scheme after defensive scheme. Blitzes, stunts, multiple coverages can all be tried. The editor also offers the ability to practice the play against different of fenses. Again, the Dynamix crew has resisted the temptation to take the easy out. If I set up a free safety blitz against a medium pass, I get a multitude of outcomes. Two QB sacks, two completed passes for a first down and most impressively of all, a QB scramble for a first down when a running lane opened up for the QB and all receivers were covered downfield. Now, before I gush too much, there are a number of nagging problems. With a 386/33 and 2 megs of RAM, the animation speed was slow. More importantly the program takes forever to simulate a single game and simulating an entire weekly schedule is terribly slow. The manual, while a complete looking 120 pages and full of tutorials and reference material, could actually use more information and more diagrams. However with a little bit of fine tuning (Front Page Sports Football 140 STRATEGY Once a play is selected, the play is shown in a side view. The player animations, while not state of the art, are more than adequate for the job. More than one user has commented on play representations that show a defender virtually stride for stride with an offensive player but making no effort to tackle. While this seems a visual graphic problem rather than an AI problem, it does look somewhat strange. The computer Al is smart enough to pick out secondary receivers, but will occasionally force the ball into coverage. No control of individual players is available, as this is first and foremost a coaching challenge. To emphasize the coaching aspect of the product, a Scenario Editor is included which allows the setting up of specific situations. One memorable situation I set up was San Francisco trailing by 4 points against Pittsburgh with 2 minutes left in the game and San Francisco at the 50 yard line. San Francisco marched methodically down the field taking little time off the clock only to be picked off at the 5 yard line on a Corner Back interception. However with strategic use of time outs and a superb defensive effort I was able to hold Pittsburgh to 3 downs and out. With under a minute to go, an all out attack was made on the subsequent punt. San Francisco blocked the punt, the ball being suggested with a double team on the top receiver. The snap, the Quarterback fades back and launches the ball to the Wide Receiver running a Fly pattern down the left sideline. The receiver is triple covered and the ball falls incomplete. Flag on the play. Defensive pass interference against San Francisco, Ist and 10 Houston at the San Francisco 30 yard line. I found Tom Landry an interesting choice for a licensed product. While his accomplishments are many and his 1990 Hall of Fame induction richly deserved, there was a definite sense that the game had passed him by in his final few years in Page 50 Computer Gaming World "


" Fly In The Face Of Reality. VIRTUAL PILOT Whether you're diving blind through fog to find a runway or loop-de-looping to save your tail, get your VIALURORILOR hands on VIRTUAL PILOT, the flight yoke that looks and feels exactly real... because it is. Designed by an airplane builder, VIRTUAL PILOT flies any simulation or game that supports a joystick. Works with all IBM and compatibles. And you won't have to fly halfway around the world to buy it. Just buzz your local store. VIRTUAL PILOT PRODUCTS Circle Reader Service #46 970 Park Center Drive. Vista, CA 92083 Phone: 619-598-2518  FAX: 619-598-2524 "


"curvey TITLE: SYSTEM: # PLAYERS: PRICE: PROTECTION: DESIGNER: PUBLISHER: NFL Video Pro Football IBM 1-2 $79.95 None Park Place Productions Konami Butalo Grove, IL MULTIMEDIA FOOTBALL picked up by the punter, who then scooted down the side line for a Pittsburgh Ist down. Argh! Whether that could happen in real life is debatable but as a game experience it provided a great set of highs and lows. Tom Landry Strategy Football also contains a number of \"chrome\" features. The most obvious and enjoyable is the help one can receive from Tom Landry himself. Here Landry's Hall of Fame knowledge and abilities come to the fore and even the most experienced armchair general will learn new strategies from the Coach. It is very noticeable that today's coaches have trouble managing the clock effectively. Tom Landry also adds this option along with weather, scouting and substitutions. The 40+ page manual, while well laid out, could use a lot more diagrams and information. An improved league system and more plays would enhance this product even more. Specifically the lack of corner and safety blitzes limits the defensive options. As noted in the manual, Kerry Batts first conceived, designed and programmed the game as a project for his Masters. While occasionally the coaching aspects outshine the game aspects, this is an excellent educational tool as well as an enjoyable game. The simple yet sophisticated interface is easy to grasp, yet contains all the information needed. While the more experienced gamer may wish for more, this is the perfect package for teaching the rudiments of football (both real life and computer). Score this one a pre-season touchdown. the currently highlighted game where he or she can take charge of the home team. Once in the Stadium, there are six basic offensive and six basic defensive alignments that can be set. Within those alignments are numerous individual play patterns. While the interface is easy to use and logical, its \"look\" is rather gaudy. Once chosen, the play is then depicted in video—which brings us to the central component of NFL Video Pro: the video itself. A note from the creators is ominous. \"The video used to depict the outcome is the CPU's best approximation of what actually occurred. We have stretched the available video as far as possible using several techniques such as real time film splicing and flipping, however there are situations where the video is somewhat inconsistent with the actual event.\" \"Somewhat inconsistent\" is definitely in the running for understatement of the year. A play up the middle has the running back bursting through the line and tackled by linebackers. Result? A one yard loss! Or the hand off goes to one running back and immediately cuts to another completely different running back. Or one sees a successful video completion in the endzone when the play is actually a completion at the 30 yard line. The \"flipping\" mentioned also results in players numbers being backward and Quarterbacks throwing right handed in one quarter and left handed in the next. Somewhat inconsistent? It's a joke. The biggest question to ask of this product is \"Why?\" There is no game to speak of, and no challenge. Again to quote the manual, \"and you get the real experience of multimedia entertainment.\" As another old saying goes, \"Come the revolution, the lawyers will be the first against the wall.\" Hopefully whoever came up with the term \"multimedia\" will be a close second. Multimedia is a word that attempts to convey the merging of a number of good ideas and technologies into a cohesive product and meaning. It is a banal, ineffective term that conveys virtually no meaning whatsoever to the average consumer. NFL Video Pro and multimedia were made for each other. ANTS as Marcus Allen and the Charger's Gary Anderson are easily recognized. This is particularly frustrating because this was a phenomenal idea. \"Let's do a football game and use real NFL footage to represent the plays.\" That's a superb idea. I can only assume that part way into the project, reality set in. The game is 22 megs, yet the number of video clips seems limited. As mentioned in the notes, \"NFL Video Pro is the first multi-media sports game...that does not require a CD-Rom drive,\" the problem being that it obviously does require a CD-ROM to store all the video clips needed to make this a quality product. PERS NFL Video Pro Week 1 of the NFL season, Green Bay verses Houston. Green Bay Quarterback Dan Fouts goes back to pass and throws left handed over the middle to Gary Anderson who picks up the first down. «When is a door not a door?\" the old saying goes. When is a football game not a football game? — when it is a multimedia entertainment experience. First impressions are not particularly positive. The blurred box cover is an accurate representation of the video quality and the box copy is ambiguous at best. Checking out the Team Player Rosters, a graphic football card is displayed when clicking on a player. Regardless of the team the same photo is used usually a San Diego Charger from the early 80s. In fact, once one gets into the game, this Charger fascination becomes a real problem. While this product may be using «film footage from the NFL Films archives,\" this seems to consistently translate into games between the Chargers and the Raiders from the early 80s. The QBs are obviously Dan Fouts and Jim Plunkett, and Raiders such Der Dul WSSN Preu LINE C4 RUDY DITETATIK Once in the Video Studio, 14 screens carry the action of every game being played. Three other choices are available on the Video Studio Screen. The newspaper button pauses the games and allows roster changes, viewing of league stats, etc. The stats button shows the stats of the current highlighted game, and the Stadium button takes the player into the stadium of Post Game Show As I noted at the beginning of this piece, three products that are so very different; NFL Video Pro is instantly forgettable, Tom Landry Strategy Football is the best football teaching product on the market and an excellent start for the new sport/football fan, and Front Page Sports Football is one of the top product releases of 1992. Only MicroProse's World Circuit can challenge it for the title \"Sports Game of the Year.\" [6w Page 52 Computer Gaming World "


"THE BEST IN GAMES ATTAL AVER La EATURIND PHYLO STEARHITZ S an \"TROUBLES WITH UEBLES\" THIS CAREERS SHAREHRE DWA SEXON MUMS BOKS STANS (20600 KULTET CRYSTAL CAVES (F262) $4.00 WOLFENSTEIN 3-D (F323AB) $8.00 COSMO'S ADVENTURE (F315AB) $8.00 SCORC 80009400 398072 HCA DATE TO 100 M:6068 8:8088 Trita PRESSTATAS COMMANDER KEEN IV (F290AB) $8,00 DUKE NUKUM (F252) $4.00 GALACTIX (F321) $4.00 CWI Information Services Po Box 4851 Anaheim, CA 92803 Order TOLL FREE 1-800-777-5636 PLEASE SPECIFY 5/4\" OR 3/4\" DISKS We are shareware catalog FOR FAST DELIVERY CALL 3-800-777-5636. VISA/MASTERCARD. OR, MAL CHECK OR MONEY ORDER SORRY, NO COD. ADD $400 SHPPNG & HANDLING FOR ENTIRE ORDER CALFORNA RESDENTS ADO 775% SALES TAX ALL TITLES ARE SHAREWARE CONTINUED USE OF SHAREWARE REQUIRES SEPARATE PAYMENT TO AUTHOR (HONOR SYSTEM) The Best Place To Find It! QUALITY low-cost software Over 1000_titles listed Circle Reader Service #52 "


"Advance Token to Boardwalk Virgin's Monopoly Deluxe by Allen L. Greenberg VARA \"Why did we name our son MARVIN GARDENS?\" Danny Kaye MONOPOLY DE LUX TITLE: SYSTEM; PRICE: PROTECTION: PUBLISHER: Monopoly Deluxe IBM MS-DOS & Windows) $59.95 None Virgin Games Irvine, CA GAMES ecreationologists—those scientists who study and explore the origins Lof humanity's most classic and beloved pastimes—have managed to trace the earliest form of the Monopoly game as far back as the year 7000 BC. Up until that time, pure survival had been the only issue on the human mind. This, however, led one ambitious individual to adapt \"survival\" into history's first role-playing game—now thought to have been called \"Hunter-Gatherization.\" As the game enjoyed rapid popularity, food and shelter became scarce as real-life survival became secondary in importance to this new concept of recreation. With the introduction of the inevitable \"Hunter-Gatherization 2,\" players were challenged not only with their own survival, but also with providing shelter for someone else after charging a considerable sum, or \"rent,\" for doing so. From this early design, we may easily see how Monopoly continued to evolve so that even Plato is said to have played the game on a map of an Atlantis city. Okay, all kidding aside. Almost everyone knows the real story. With the icy fingers of economic depression clasped tightly at its throat, 1930's America yearned, once again, for the feel of money in its hands. It can hardly be surprising, therefore, that Monopoly, the work of an unemployed heating engineer, should have proved such an instant success. We can easily picture depression-era players as they amassed simulated wealth, traded tate investor or experienced entrepreneur. While keyboard commands are available, the program is very clearly designed to be used with a mouse. Most of the screen is used to display an overhead view of the classic Monopoly game-board. Icons for most of the common commands, such as \"roll dice,\" are easily accessible. However, the use of a somewhat cramped, pulldown menu is occasionally necessary. In addition, there are icons for summoning a detailed picture of a participant's portfolio, or assets still held by the bank. Finally, a scrolling window provides an ongoing description of each move made in the game. The only awkwardly-designed element of MD is a real-time sequence in which players bid for a property which has been placed on the auction block. For this, each player must place a finger on a number key at the top of the keyboard (the numeric keypad may not be used) and press his or her key when a desired bid appears on the screen. This represents a very small space in which to crowd eight anxious bidders, several of whom are likely to be on very intimate terms once the final gavel has sounded. Traditionally, once that sacred document—the instruction leaflet-had been lost from the Parker Brothers box, numerous confrontations have been known to occur over which set of rules are to be regarded as gospel. By playing \"banker,\" ile Game Decision Help Manoply DK properties with over-mortgaged opponents and readied deadly traps whose poison-tipped barbs took on the innocuous appearance of houses and hotels. While the game's initial success may not be difficult to comprehend, it is somewhat astounding to note the enthusiasm with which Monopoly has been embraced by later generations of game-players, including the baby-boomers, for whom wealth has often been no mere fantasy. With our economic future once again in doubt, Monopoly is, not surprisingly, doing as well as ever. A series of spin-off products intended for younger players have appeared on the market, as well as the latest attempt to establish the game on the personal computer. In Monopoly Deluxe (MD), one can customize the rules to allow a huge variety of popular, yet unofficial, options. But what will probably draw the most attention, are the extensive sound effects and animations which now embellish the already well-known game play. MD allows up to eight players to compete in a game, any number of which may be controlled by the computer as it simulates a novice, intermediate level real es-------HC1712 OU IC Ca . 170 te Dom and Wales Wake Get oudfree Page 54 Computer Gaming World "


"CHIPS & BITS CALL 800-753-GAME PO Box 234 Rochester, VT 05767 Fax 802—767-3382 802—767-3033 800-753-4263 IBM MAC & AMIGA GAMES FOR LESS UPS Ground SS per order. PO Box, APO,FPO, S6 per Order.2 Business Day Alr $7 por Order. Europe Air Mall S12 First Item plus S6 Each additional Item. Alr Mall to Canada $6 per Order. HI, AK PR, Mall s7 per Order IBM HARDWARE IBM WARGAMES IBM WARGAMES Paladin || OSNO $24 'PALADIN 2'isan easy-to-play role playing game. Form a party of brave warriors and encounter all manner of foe in castles, open fields, and dungeons deep in the earth. Only bravery and skill will allow you to advance through the ranks of the Order of Paladins. Features 20 challenging quests, & a quest Impressions builder. $34 3 Button Dexxa Mouse AdLib Sound Card $59 Adlib Gold Sound Card $169 Advancd Gravis Ultrasound $139 Champ Joystick $24 Flight Stick Joystick $36 Flight Stick w Falcon $46 Game Card 3 Automatic $39 Maxx Control Yoke $59 Maxx Rudder Pedals $39 Pro Audio Spectrum 16 Pro Audio Spectrum Plus $139 Quickshot 123 Joystick $16 Rudder Pedals Driving $39 Sony SRS7 Speakers $15 Sony SRS9 Speakers $20 Sound Blaster Sound Card $89 Sound Blaster PRO Basic $139 Sound Blaster PRO $169 Sound Star Sound Enhancer $14 Thrustmaster Flight Control $79 Thrustmstr Flight Cntrol Pro $119 Thrustmstr Rudder Control $119 Thrustmstr Weapons Control $89 Thunder Board $84 Thunder Board for WIN $109 Video Blaster $349 Storm Across Europe Third Reich To The Rhine Typhoon of Steel UMS Original UMS 2 $19 UMS 2 Civil War UMS 2 Desert Storm Scen $24 UMS 2 Planet Editor $28 Under Fire V Victory : Velikiye Luki $44 V Victory: Utah Beach $44 Victory at Sea $37 Vulcan $34 War in the Falklands $26 Warship that Changed Histry $26 Waterloo $12 Western Front $36 White Death $24 S12 OMNIGER IBM ADVENTURE IBM EDUCATIONAL $26 \"COMANCHE MAXIMUM OVERKILL' is a glimpse into the future of military avionics and exactingly accurate simulator of the Beoing-Sikorski 66 Comanche Helicopter. Features actual terrain rendered in real time 3D, fly mutiple missions in 1999 complete Thrustmaster support & 256 color VGA graphics. $46 $32 S24 Battles of Napoleon $24 Battleship Bismark $26 Blitzkrieg Ardennes $24 Borodino Napoleon Invades $30 Bravo Romeo Delta CW No Greater Glory Campaign $39 Carrier Strike S42 Carrier Strike Exp Pak $19 Carriers at War Carriers at War Exp Pak $37 Charge of the Light Brigade $34 Conflict Conflict in Vietnam $9 Conflict: Middle East $16 Conflict: Middle East S36 Conflict: Korea $36 Crusade in Europe $12 Decision at Gettysburg $19 Dreadnoughts $42 Dreadnoughts Bismark $29 Dreadnoughts Ironclads S29 Dreadnoughts Deluxe $89 Fall Gelb $36 Fifth Eskadra $36 Fire Brigade $34 Fleet Commander $39 Fleet Med $36 Frontline $34 Gary Grigsby Pacific War $46 German Raider Atlantis $26 Gettysburg: Turning Point $36 Golan Front $36 Grand Fleet $36 Great Naval Battles Great Naval Battles Exp Pak $19 Grey Seas, Grey Skies $36 Halls of Montezuma Harpoon $25 Harpoon Battle Set 2 $19 Harpoon Battle Set 3 $19 Harpoon Battle Set 4 $24 Harpoon Challenger Pak SE $49 Harpoon Designer Series $32 Harpoon Scenario Editor $27 High Command In Harms Way $36 Kampfgruppe $59 Kriegsmarine $36 Kursk Campaign $36 Line in the Sand Long Lance MacArthur's War $29 Main Battle Tank C Germany $36 Main Battle Tank Middle East $36 Main Battle Tank N Germany $36 Malta Storm $36 Man of War $36 Mare Nostrum Marianas Turkey Shoot $24 Midway $19 Moscow Campaign $36 Northern Fleet $36 Operation Overlord $36 Pacific Storm Midway Cpgn $36 Pacific Storm Solomon Cmpn$36 Panzer Battles $22 Patriot $44 Patton Strikes Back $16 Prelude to Jutland $26 Red Lightning $12 Return to Falklands $28 Rising Sun $26 Rommel Battles For N Africa $24 Rommel at El Alamein $36 Rommel at Gazala $36 Rorkes Drift Second Front Seventh Fleet Special Forces $39 Stalingrad Campaign $36 Auto Map $64 AutoWorks $49 Body Works Boom Box Castle of Dr Brain Chemistry Works $45 Cuckoo Zoo Eagle Eye Mysteries $32 EcoQuest 2 Lost Sort Rain F $34 EcoQuest $32 Fatty Bear Birthday Surprise $32 Incredible Machine $29 Island Of Dr Brain $29 Jones Fast Lane $24 Mario Teaches Typing $24 Mavis Beacon Teach Typing $26 M Beacon Teach Typing WIN$29 Mixed Up Faery Tale Mixed-Up Mother Goose $29 Mozart Magic Music Machine $18 Never Ending Story 2 Crayon $9 Orbits Voyage Solar System $39 Oregon Trail $24 Print Shop Deluxe $39 Print Shop Dix Busins Graph $29 Quarky Quaysoos Turbo Sci $29 Rodneys Funscreen $32 Scooters Magic Castle Twisty History $29 Wacky Funster $18 Where in USA Carmen Dix $45 $45 $32 $24 $39 $15 wakher   James Bond Stealth Affair S29 Advent Willie Beamish EGA $34 Advent Willie Beamish VGA $34 Advent Willie Beamish 2 VGAS39 All Dogs go to Heaven $17 Altered Destiny $34 Amazon $39 An American Tail Attack Pack $42 B.A.T. $19 Cadaver $27 Castle Wolfstein 3D $37 Chamber Sci-Mutant Prstss $25 Coaster $32 Codename Iceman $15 Code Name Iceman 2 VGA $39 Colonels Bequest $15 Conquests Robin Hood EGA S34 Conquests Robin Hood VGA $36 Conquests of Camelot $15 Conspiracy Deadlock Files $34 Covert Action $24 Crime Wave $37 Cruise for a Corpse Cybercon 3 $29 Dark Half $19 Dark Side $28 David Wolf Secret Agent Day of the Tentacle Deja Vu 2 Lost in LV Demons Gate Diehard Dog Eat Dog Don't Go Alone Earthrise Elf Epic Eric the Unready Felony Free DC Future Wars Galleons of Glory Gateway Godfather Gold Rush GrailQuest Hurnans Heart of China Heaven and Earth Heimdall Hired Guns Hook Hostage Hound of Shadow $17 Inca $42 Indy Jones 4 Fate Atlantis $38 Indy Jones Grfx Adv EGA $21 Indy Jones Grix Adv VGA $27 CGW1 A COMPLETE PC SOUND KIT $26 'SOUND MACHINE'brings together 2 of the most popular computer add-ons in one inexpensive package. Features a genuine sound blaster chipset, digitized voice input/output full duplex MIDI interface, built in 4W amp. volume control, a pair of 3\" magnetically sheilded speakers, and a Quickshotjoystick. $ 89 $32               IBM WARGAMES JOTITICK $26 $29  SPEAKER STITI SOFTWARE Action North Atlantic Action Stations Action Stations Scenario 1 Action off River Platte Air Raid Pearl Harbour Ambush American Civil War V1 American Civil War V2 American Civil War V3 Banzai Battle Stations Battle Tank Barbarossa Battle Tank Kursk Battle of Austerlitz Battle of the Atlantic $14 $26 $26 $42 $22 $22 $22 $12 $26 $34 $36 $36 $36 $39 $9 $36 Visa & MC Accepted.CODs $5. Checks Held 4 Weeks. Money Orders Treated as Cash. Most Items Shipped Same Day. Shipping times not guaranteed. Check compatibility before you buy. Defectivos replaced with samoproduct. Prico & availability subject to change. All Sales Final. "


"DPUPID MD will eliminate most of those squabbles. However, by allowing an almost infinite number of variations on the traditional rules, far more severe playroom conflicts may result. The \"free parking\" space may now be used as a collection plate for all fines and taxes, which are then turned over to the first player who lands there. Another option allows the player to collect a windfall sum at that same spot, determined by a roll of the dice. serving property trades — the type only a suicidal opponent would agree to. Strangely, it will not condescend to bid on a property which is up for auction. Taking advantage of this eccentricity (\"cheating,\" as one of Virgin's technicians referred to it) a player may never have to pay more than $1.00 for any property during a solitaire game. For an honest game with the computer, it is suggested that the \"no auctions\" option be selected. Manapely Deluxe Monopoly Deluxe File Game Decision Help == == = 113470 [Canh Dt board once before purchasing any properties proves a welcome innovation. \"Spoiled\" players (those who grew up without other children around) even have the option to recreate the thrill of cheating by transferring whatever funds or property they wish from the bank directly to their own account. Replacing the feel of those original metal tokens and cardboard deeds are MD's sounds and pictures. Starring the minimalist entrepreneur \"Rich Uncle Penny Bags,\" brief animations pop up whenever a player passes \"Go,\" builds a hotel, or initiates the many other well-known Monopolistic events. Sound effects are also lavishly distributed throughout the game, including a surprising variety of music, bells, whistles, grunts and exclamations. Users are given a high degree of control as to which animations and sound effects they wish to experience. Easily the most entertaining sequences involve those familiar tokensthe iron, wheelbarrow, ship, car, dog, thimble, shoe, hat, cannon and pony-all of whom circle the board with grace, charm and digitized dignity. The computer becomes an aggressive, although relatively predictable, opponent for a solitaire game of MD. Generally, it will continue to invest in property until bankrupt. Further, the computer will flatly refuse to consider any but the most selfTome O TIME 1318 313120 TITLE DEED DOARDWALK BENT 950 with those 2700 Wien 2 Houses ve with Houses Wide & Hauses W HOTELS Mangage Value $293 Heels cost $760, cach lateks. 1908 plus 4 hours He player was the lots of any Color Group. the entis Deubleden Unimpreved Lots in the group. 11935 PARKER UROTIRAS HP: 9400 Owner: Dawg DI Bew Heak Hood SSBOD 2012 , Paing at the bo odre =? BE For those preferring a simpler game, property auctions may be eliminated, deeds may be distributed at the beginning of the game, or a game time-limit may be imposed. Other options allow players to limit their ability to negotiate trades or collect rent while in prison. When large numbers of players are involved, an option which requires all players to circle the It has obviously been with a great deal of care and attention to detail that this version of Monopoly has been rendered on the personal computer. The program is ideal for bringing newcomers into the game, as well as pleasing older, more nostalgia-minded players. Recreationologists everywhere will be pleased that Rich Uncle Penny Bags has finally been shown proper respect by electronic media. Cow The ULTIMATE Play-By-Mail Offer FLAGSHIP magazine, with Ark Royal Games, C2 Simulations, Capitol Consulting, Deltax Gaming, Flying Buffalo Inc, Flying Dutchman Games, Graaf Simulations, Inner Dimensions, Rolling Thunder Games Inc and Twin Engine Gaming, is proud to make what may be the most exciting offer in PBM history. For $19.99, we'll give you: (a) A 4-issue trial subscription to FLAGSHIP, PBM's leading international magazine, with 56 pages each issue packed with news, reviews, and uncensored player comments. Every issue includes a sheet of discount coupons worth many times the cost of the magazine. (b) A coupon entitling you to $20 value of rules and/or turns in any of these games: Against All Odds, Adventurer Kings, Cluster, Continental Rails, Domination, El Mythico, Feudal Lords, New Order, Quest of the Great Jewels, Shadow Lords, Sirius Command, Space Combat, Space 101, StarGlobe, Starquest, Subterrania, Victory!, World Emperor II and Warriors & Wizards. You choose where you want to use the coupon: to help you, we will include an impartial description of each of them! The only condition is that you should not have played with that particular gamemaster before. Last but not least, if you are disappointed with the first FLAGSHIP, let us know within one month and we'll refund you the entire $19.99 by return. No handling fee, no requirement to return anything yes, you can still use the coupon. To try it, send $19.99 to FLAGSHIP, CGW special offer, PO Box 6105WSS, Gainsville GA 30504 "


"CHIPS & BITS CALL 800-753-GAME IBM MAC & AMIGA GAMES FOR LESS PO Box 234 Rochester, VT 05767 Fax 802-767-3382 802-767-3033 800-753-4263 UPS Ground $5 per order. PO Box, APO, FPO, $6 per Order.2 Business Day Air S7 per Order. Europe Air Mall $12 First Item plus $6 Each additionalltem. Air Mall to Canada $6 per Order.HI, AK, PR, Mall 67 per Order IBM ADVENTURE IBM ADVENTURE IBM ROLE PLAYING LEGACY REALM OF TERRORY $32 $17 \"LEGACYREALM OF TERROR'isa 3D animated horror adventure game. You must find & destroy the entity which has taken control of your house. Features auto-mapping, ten levels with up to 40 rooms perlevel, detailed yet easy to use magic and combat systems, pointand-click interface, and amazing audio effects. $41 Transylvania 3 $15 Troika $6 Uninvited $9 Universe 1-3 Each $34 Walker $32 War in Middle Earth $12 Warriors of Legend $19 Weird Dreams $9 Where in World Carmen $32 Where World Carmen Delux $52 Where in America's Past $37 Where in Europe is Carmen $29 Where in Time Carmen $32 Where in USA Carmen Delux $45 Where in USA is Carmen $29 Wonderland Zak McKracken w H Book $18 Zeliards $15 Zombie $12 $32 $24 IBM ROLE PLAYING $31 ODIANS OMA $39 $18 %82 $12 Inspector Gadget Jack the Ripper $38 KGB $17 King's Quest 1 ENH $19 King's Quest 2 or 3 $15 King's Quest 4 $34 King's Quest 5 VGA $36 King's Quest 6 VGA $45 King's Ransom $38 Kristal $12 L.A. Law $34 Laura Bow 2 $36 Leather Goddesses $12 Leather Goddesses 2 $42 Legacy: Realm Of Terror $41 Legend of Faerghail $34 Legend of Kyrandia $35 Leisure Suit Larry 1 VGA $15 Leisure Suit Larry 2 $15 Leisure Suit Larry 3 Leisure Suit Larry 5 VGA $34 Leisure Suit Larry Bundle 1 $39 Loom $19 Lords of the Rising Sun $34 Lost Files Sherlock Holmes $44 Lost Treasures of Infocom $42 Lost Treasures of Infocom 2 $32 Lost in LA $37 Magnetic Scrolls Bundle $21 Manhunter New York $28 Manhunter San Francisco $15 Maniac Mansion Martian Memorandum Mean Streets Metal Mutant Moebius Murder Club Murder by the Dozen $15 Out of this World $36 Plan 9 from Outer Space $31 Police Quest 1 $24 Police Quest 2 $15 Police Quest 3 $34 Power Hits:Movies $32 Prince of Persia Putt Putt Joins Parade $32 Rex Nebular Cos Gen Ben $39 Riftwar Legacy $39 Ringworld $36 Rise of the Dragon $34 Risky Woods $24 Robocop 3 $32 Rocketeer $32 SDI Screen Antics WIN Search for the King Secret Monkey Island 2 $38 Secret Monkey Island Sex Olympics Sex Vixens from Space Shadowgate WIN $34 Shogun $12 Sierra Adventure Bundle 1 $39 Space Quest 1 $19 Space Quest 2 Space Quest 3 $34 Space Quest 4 $36 Space Quest 5 $39 Space Quest Bundle Spellcasting 101 $19 Spellcasting 201 Spellcasting 301 Spring Brk $34 Star Trek 25th Aniv Star Trek 5 $12 Star Trek: Next Generation $46 Stellar 7 $21 Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtls $25 Terminator 2029 $42 The Train $6 Theme Park Mystery Time Quest S12 'AMAZON' recaptures the fun and excitement of the 1950's drive-in movies. Travel to unexplored regions of the Amazon, fight 10 foot ants, and find emeralds stolen by Cortez. Amazing cinematic effects such as multiple camera angles flashbacks zooms, pans, and fades. Features full digitized voices & soundeffects. $39 Fire King $19 Flames of Freedom MWII $28 Fountain of Dreams $15 Fountain Dreams Char Edit $16 Four Crystals of Trazere $26 Gateway Savage Frontier Gods S26 Hard Nova Hard Nova Char Edit $16 Heaven and Earth $32 Hero's Quest $21 Heroes of the Lance $12 Heros Qst 2: Trial Fire $21 Heros Quest 1 Heros Quest 3 $36 Hillsfar $15 Immortal Joan of Arc Keys to Marimon Keys to Maramon Char Edit $16 King's Bounty $15 Knights of Legend $30 Knights of Legend Char Edit $16 Legacy of the Necromancer $17 Legend Legend of Valor $39 Lord of the Rings V1 $32 Lord of Rings V1 Char Edit $16 Lord of the Rings V2 $37 Lord of Rings V2 Char Edit $16 Loremaster Lure of the Temptress $37 M $45 Magic Candle 1 Magic Candle 1 Char Editor S16 Magic Candle 2 $21 Magic Candle 2 Char Editor $16 Magic Candle 3 $38 Martian Dreams $37 Martian Dreams Char Editor $16 Matrix Cubed $32 Mechwarrior Megatraveller:Zhodani Megatrullr:Zhodani Char Edit $16 MegaTraveller 2 MegaTraveller 2 Char Editor S16 Mega Traveller 3 Midwinter $12 Might & Magic 1 $12 Might & Magic 1 Char Edit $16 Might & Magic 2 $12 Might & Magic 2 Char Edit $16 Might & Magic 3 $34 Might & Magic 3 Char Edit $16 Might & Magic 4 Clouds Xeen $36 Might & Magic 4 Char Editor $16 Might & Magic 5 D Side Xeen $42 Mines of Titan $12 Mission: Impossible $19 Murder $29 Obitus No Shirt Paladin:Scrolls Talmouth Dsk $16 Pirates Pirates Gold $39 Planet's Edge $34 Planet's Edge Char Editor S15 Pool of Radiance $15 Pool of Radiance Char Editor $16 Pools of Darkness Prophecy 1 $12 Questron 2 Ragnarok Rings of Medusa Savage Empire Savage Empire Char Editor $16 Sea Rogue $29 Secret Silver Blades $15 Secrt Silver Blades Char Edit $16 Sentinel Worlds $9 Sentinel Worlds Char Edit $16 Shadow Sorcerer $12 CGW2 $19 S25 $19 $39 2400 AD $24 ADD Collector's Edition 2 $45 ADD Starter Kit $35 Autoduel $26 Bad Blood $31 Bard's Tale 1 Char Editor $16 Bard's Tale 2 $19 Bard's Tale 2 Char Editor $16 Bard's Tale 3 Bard's Tale 3 Char Editor $16 Bard's Tale Construction $19 Battletech $12 Battletech 2 $31 Black Crypt $32 Bloodwych $15 Buck Rogers Countdown S12 Captain Blood $9 Captive $30 Celtic Legends $32 Challenge of 5 Realms $44 Champions $37 Champions of Krynn $21 Champions Krynn Char Edit $16 Cobra Mission $49 Conan $16 Corporation $19 Curse Azure Bonds Char Ed S16 Curse of the Azure Bonds $15 Curse Azure Bonds Char Ed $16 Cyber Empire $32 Cyber Space S38 Cybergenic Ranger $9 Dark Queen of Krynn $32 Dark Queen Krynn Char Ed $16 Dark Sun $37 Darklands $39 Darkspyre S32 Daughter of Serpents $32 Death Knights of Krynn $21 Death Knights Krynn Char Ed $16 Dragon Strike $15 Dragon Wars $12 Dragon Wars Char Edit $16 Dragons of Flame Drakkhen $37 Drakkhen Char Edit $16 Dungeon Master $34 Dusk of the Gods $24 Elvira Mistress Dark $29 Elvira 2 Jaws Cerberus $27 Escape from Hell $17 Escape from Hell Char Edit $16 Eye of the Beholder $19 Eye of Beholder Char Edit $16 Eye of the Beholder 2 $38 Eye of Beholder 2 Char Edit $16 Eye of the Beholder 3 $39 Eye of the Horus $24 $23 $19 S12 $27 'POWERED PARTNERS 622 by Acoustic Research do the job of both a speaker and amp. Plug them into any sound source with line level or headphone output: computers, TV's. or keyboards. Features magnetic shielding, a 30 Watt subwoofer, frequency range of 50Hz 20kHz, & volume control. $239 $9 $15 S9 $36 $38 S36 8832 $36 $15 Visa & MC Accepted. CODs $5. Checks Held 4 Weeks. Money Orders Treatodas Cash. Most Items Shipped Same Day. Shipping times not guaranteed. Check compatibility before you buy. Defectivesreplaced with same product.Price & availability subject to change. All Sales Final. Circle Reader Service #40 "


"TIME queak preveu TAKE PROD NO. SCENE DATE DIRECTOR PRODUCED BY When Knights Were Rotten And Eric Was Unready Legend's Eric The Unready by Johnny L. Wilson Sneak Previews are not designed to be reviews. They are feature articles based on \"works in progress\" that CGW's editors have deemed worthy of early coverage. These articles are not intended to provide the final word on a product, since we expect to publish appropriate review coverage when the game is finished. Yometimes, say the sages, it is better to be lucky than good. This is certainly the case in Legend's Eric the Unready, a new adventure by Bob Bates in which the least intelligent knight with the least physical prowess has to save the kingdom through a series of misadventures. It is Mel Brooks meets Camelot in a raucous tour de farce where games, television, films and legends (or should that be Legend?) are all subject to Bob Bates' powerful Parser of Parody. Whether one is solving one of the simple puzzles in the early game or groaning at the puns in the endgame, fantasy fans are likely to find themselves experiencing the same type of esoteric chuckles to be found in one of Piers Anthony's Xanth books or Robert Asprin's Myth Adventures. No pop cultural icon and no industry entity is safe from Bob Bates' Wand of Witticism. appear), pointing and clicking on the graphics windows, or using the compass rose, the designers have now introduced a number of different interface technologies. When one pilots Captain Smirk's raft, one works from a dynamic animated map screen; when one plays the \"Concentration\"-style game at the carnival, one works with full-screen point and click; and when one initiates a conversation, one gets a menu of verbal ripostes to toss in conversational sparring matches. acter, Eric is assigned the task of rescuing the beautiful princess and saving the kingdom. Unfortunately, the gamer soon finds out that Eric has been selected precisely because the villains do not believe he is able to fulfill the quest. That's when it starts to become better to be lucky than good. If gamers think that they've \"said it all\" when they say, \"Bud Wizard\" or can't figure out why that castle looks like it might have been designed by Lord Brutish, Eric the Unready is not for them. If they get offended by Elvis sightings (has anyone ever noticed how closely Eric and Elvis sound?) and have little patience with tabloid journalism, they probably will not enjoy being tantalized by the titters and giggles that seductively lure gamers through the puns, sight gags and badinage of Eric the Unready. Gamers who have to have a Meretzky-sized injection of titillation in order to play an adventure game are also forewarned. Some suggestiveness is present, but bawdiness is not the overriding goal of this game. Textual Variant Legend believes that CGW has been grossly unfair in describing their games as text adventures. They believe that this undervalues the efforts which they have made to present intriguing adventures using a variety of technologies. In a sense, they are right. We have called the games \"text adventures\" because they did not present the full-screen parserless environment of leading edge graphic adventures. The games do contain a lot of text, sometimes wonderful text, but they also contain more. In addition to the input available in previous games: command line, reverse parser (where gamers click on each element of the sentence as lists of words The shop steward glances down at the paper in his hands and says. Here's the perfed thing. this morning a farmer came into the Union Hall and said that a passing wilch had turned his only daughter into a pig. Your quest today. Sir Eric. is to go to his larm and break the enchantment by kissing the pg. Here is your work slip I don't want lo see your face again until the task is done. in addition, ye may not vomit Barfing hurling, and puking likewise shall not be countenanced. Nor shall thou spew, nor loss thy cookies Blowing chunks is right out The set-up is deceptively simple. Eric is trying to prove himself as a knight of the romboid table. To do so, he must successfully solve some simple quests. If the gamer is good enough, Eric solves those quests, but ends up creating more chaos in a few command lines or mouse clicks than Lucy could conjure in a half-hour television show. Just when many gamers would wonder if they were playing the right charYet, interface is not the only non-textual addition to Legend's bag of tricks. There is a full-screen cinematic sequence that introduces the game's hero and there are animated full-screen transition sequences that serve as cut-scenes to advance the plot and provide a certain amount of dramatic (well, actually melodramatic) tension between various puzzles. At one point, the entire screen takes on the appearance of the original Zork. At other points, the player accesses a newspaper and a large representation of a tabloid fills the screen for the player's perusal. At another point, the raft interface or memory game fills the screen graphically. So, it is true that Eric the Unready has lots of text, but it is also true that much of that text is very funny. In particular, we Page 58 Computer Gaming World "


"CHIPS & BITS CALL 800—753-GAME IBM MAC & AMIGA GAMES FOR LESS PO Box 234 Rochester, VT 05767 Fax 802-767-3382 802-767-3033 800-753-4263 UPS Ground $5 perorder. PO Box, APO, FPO, S6 per Order.2 Business Day Air S7 per Order. Europe Air Mall$12 First Item plus $6 Each additionalltem. Air Mall to Canada $6 per Order.HI, AK, PR, Mall $7 per Order IBM ROLE PLAYING IBM STRATEGY IBM STRATEGY S34 Beede Were Gris Compare! $34 $27 $30 'CONQUERED KINGDOMS'allows you to invade castles and fly over mountains as you battle for control of the world. Features nine scenarios, a random map generator, human and fantasy combat troops, 21 levels of difficulty, modem play, several full campaign conquests, and complete game scoring history. $38 $39 S42 $34 S9 $34 $38 S6 $29 $12 $34 Shadowlands $29 Shadows of Mordor Sleeping Gods Lie Sorcerian $15 Space 1889 S9 Space 1889 Char Editor $16 Space Hulk $38 Space Inc $34 Space Rogue Space Rogue Char Editor $16 Spacewrecked $19 Spelcraft: Aspect of Valor $38 SpellJammr Pirates Rim Spc $38 Spellbound $39 Spirit of Excalibur Star Saga 2 Starflight 1 Starflight 2 Summoning $38 Sword of the Samurai Tales Magic Prophcy Shadw $38 Tales Magic Pr Sh Char Edit $16 Tangled Tales $21 Terran Envoy $12 Third Courier Times of Lore $28 Treasures Savage Frontier $32 Treasure Savag Frtr Char Ed $15 Tunnels & Trolls $15 Tunnels & Trolls Char Edit S16 Twilight 2000 Twilight 2001 $39 Ultima 4 $35 Ultima 4 Char Edit Ultima 5 $35 Ultima 5 Char Editor $16 Ultima 6 False Prophet $39 Ultima 6 Char Edit S16 Ultima 7 Black Gate Ultima 7 Char Editor $16 Ultima 7 Forge of Virtue $21 Ultima 7.5 Serpent Isle $46 Ultima Trilogy $35 Ultima Trilogy 2 $45 Ultima Uworld Stygian Abyss $48 Ultima U Slyg Abyss Char Ed $15 Ultima Uworld Styg Abyss 2 $46 Uncharted Waters S42 Unlimited Adventures $32 Veil of Darkness $42 Vengeance of Excalibur War of the Lance $9 Wasteland Char Editor Waxworks Wizardry (1-3) Char Edit $16 Wizardry 4 Wizardry 4 Char Edit $16 Wizardry 5 $26 Wizardry 5 Char Edit $16 Wizardry Cosmic Forge $34 Wizardry Csmc Frg Char Edit $16 Wizardry 7 Crusaders $39 Wizadry 7 Crusdrs Char Edit $16 Wizardry Trilogy $32 $16 3382 In'BATTLES OF DESTINY' you must seek out and destroy up to 3 opponents in order to conquer the world. Features modem play, air, ground and naval combat, challenging artificial intelligence, 22 different units to construct, more than 20 worlds to conquer, campaign style play, and a complete player history. $38 946 $37 $37 %% Battle Isle Scenario Disk S22 Populous Promised Lands $14 Battles of Destiny S38 Powermonger Bermuda Square $21 Powermonger World War 1 $21 Big Business $12 PushOver $32 Breach 2 $19 QQP Bundle $59 Breach 2 Scenario Disk $15 Railroad Tycoon Buzz Aldrin Race into Space $42 Rampart Caesar $36 Reach for the Stars $24 Carrier Command $9 Realms $17 Castles S18 Red Zone S32 Castles 2 $36 Renegade Legion Interceptor S12 Castles Northern Campaigns $19 Riders of Rohan $19 Centurion Defender Rome $17 Robo Sport WIN $34 Civilization Romance 3 Kingdoms $42 Civilization Master Edition $45 Romance 3 Kingdoms 2 Command HQ $19 Rules of Engagement $37 Conquered Kingdoms $38 Rules of Engagement 2 $38 Conquest of Japan $36 Second Conflict WIN Control of the Seas $32 Seven Cities Gold 2 Crisis in the Kremlin $42 Shadow President $34 Dark Seed $34 ShadowGate WIN Dark Star $36 Siege Defender of the Crown $12 Siege Expansion Disk Designasaurus 2 $28 Sim Ant Dino Wars $28 Sim Ant WIN $34 Diplomacy $12 Simcity Discovery Steps Columbus $34 Simcity Graphic Set 1 Dragon Force $19 Simcity Graphic Set 2 Dragon Lord Simcity WIN Dune S24 Simearth Dune 2 $44 Simearth 2000 El Fish $41 Simearth WIN Empire Deluxe $39 Simfarm Fighting for Rome $12 Simlife Final Conflict $17 Spaceward Ho! Fireteam 2200 $24 Special Forces Fireteam 2200 Constrctn Kit $25 Spoils of War Fort Apache $34 Star Control Gemfire Star Control 2 Genghis Khan Star Legions Global Conquest $37 Starfleet 1 Global Effect $32 Starfleet 2 Gold of the Americas $19 Strategic Forces $19 Imperium $26 Sword of Aragon $28 Inindo S37 Task Force 1942 Koshan Conspiracy $32 Theatre of War $32 L'Empereur $37 Theatre of War Set 1 $21 Lemmings 2 $32 Traders $19 Lemmings Datadisk $19 Unnatural Selection $32 Lemmings $32 Utopia $31 Liberty or Death $37 Vikings Fields of Conquest Lost Admiral $24 Visions of Aftermath $12 Lost Admiral Enhanced $44 Warlords $24 Lost Admiral Scenario Disk $23 Warlords 2 Lost Patrol $12 Worlds at War Medieval Lords $14 Medieval Warriors Mega Lo Mania IBM SPORTS $31 Mercenaries Merchant Colony $17 4D Boxing $17 Microcosm $32 4th & Inches $4 Millenium $24 4th & Inches Team Const $10 Monarch S38 ABC Monday Night FB $37 New World Order ABC Wide World Boxing $32 Nobunaga's Ambition $37 APBA Base TD 1908-91 Ea $21 Nobunaga's Ambition 2 $37 APBA Baseball $24 Nuclear War $7 APBA Baseball General Man $29 Objection S34 APBA Baseball Stalmastr 2.0 $29 Objection Enhanced $79 APBA Baseball Wizard 2.0 $29 Ogre $19 APBA Basketball $34 Omega $30 APBA Bowling $14 Operation Combat APBA College Basketball $32 Overlord $21APBA Football S34 Pacific Theater Ops $42 APBA Micro Manager Paladin 2 $34 ATP Tennis $34 Perfect General $32 Action Sports Soccer Perfect General 2 $44 All American College Ftbli $36 Perfect General Scen Disk $21 All Star Sports Pak $15 Perfect General Scen 2 $23 American Gladiators $21 Populous $17 Basketball Challenge $28 Populous 2 $38 Bo Jackson Baseball $32 CGW2 $38 $16 $37 $16 $34 THE PERFECT GENERAL $19 $9 GTSEATEST S38 'GREATBATTLES OF THE 20TH CENTURY'brings 20 new scenarios for the Perfect General game. Includes 1967 & 1973 Suez conflicts, Kursk, The Moscow Push Stalingrad, Malta, Long Binh Inferno, Crete, Falklands, Inchon, Operation Sea Lion, Pusan Per Saigon, Bataan, Fulda, Dnepr Br.. Guderian Forward & more. $23 IBM STRATEGY 3%83% @op. A Train A Train Construction Set Air Force Commander Airbucks Ancient Art War Sea Ancient Art of War Ancient Art of War Sky Are We There Yet Armada 2525 Balance of Power 1990 Balance of the Planet Bandit Kings Ancient China Battle Isle $32 $34 $25 $17 $29 $35 $19 $37 $32 Visa & MC Accepted. CODs SS. Checks Held 4 Weeks. Monoy Orders Treated as Cash. Most Items Shipped Same Day. Shipping times not guaranteed. Check compatibility before you buy. Defectivesreplaced with samo product. Prico & availability subject to change. All Sales Final. Circin Pondor Conce "


"  Constellation Class Swamp Rahl NCC-1071 recommend that gamers peruse every portion of the newspapers. Not only are there clues for solving the puzzles, but esoteric jokes based on literature and computer games (even a well-placed barb at the Rumor Guy's expense). Further, the conversations are the wittiest we've seen this side of Monkey Island. In fact, one wonders where Fran the Rock Salesman and the Columbia School of Piracy might have originated. Naaah! It's punfully (and delightfully) obvious. Roddenberry, Pepsi-Cola and BaskinRobbins are just a few of the victims of Bob's barbs which I can remember. There are many more. Who would you expect to be the monk in charge of copying manuscripts when one enters the abode of the gods and their sacred library? \"Air-IK, Ericster, doin' the copyin' thing!\" Dr Carl Wert The Torus Inquirer W41.19 Issue 90 que Paper for a Rovec Ward BUNDAY Trade Newt Hend any cod consip recently Wank is painit ang? Girevi a call We gume cewe gety Cards Cerro Wel hee been wiring to the r e d the Golden Lieferanth of Century CA CGV RUMBAGS Ask for HS Det BERTEM Talleredar URES zles which rely on the gamer doing nothing at precisely the right time. The trouble is that the clues that one should wait are not always obvious. I personally find the timing puzzles less than satisfying, but that may be because I am such an impetuous gamer that I tend to prod instead of pause. The timing puzzles and occasional spelling errors were the only hindrances to my enjoyment of the game. Eunin PT . WE HEBBEN Iwa hili Net Det ply You are up to our knee in... atat. A rope hanging fren alene prowes the only exit. A started ply is ere, in wrily. PELLEFTETITUTETIT Tort-Lare work salt IL ll achala at coupectate You loss hack the marky liquid in one nighty allow. Your Ides instantly imp r ulonach puckers, and your lowels send word they're closed for the season. Seconds later. Le flask cuddenly vanish into this air. Heir-head Hero Doin' The Parody Thing Most of the puzzles are not only clever and challenging, but they lead into some puns or comedic dialogue that advances the plot and heightens the A.P.I. (aggregate pleasure index). If I had to quibble about any puzzles, they would be the timing puzzles. Gamers like to be active, not passive. I can understand the necessity of being passive if there is some obvious reason to be passive. As in Timequest, however, Bates shows that he likes puzZork, Ultima VII, Monkey Island, Star Trek, Computer Gaming World, Saturday Night Live, Fantasy Island, Gilligan's Island, Camelot, Lord British, Elvis, Gene In short, Eric the Unready is a delightful comedy adventure, more challenging than cute and full of whimsy and wonder. It succeeds on many different levels and creates high expectations for Legend's upcoming game based on Xanth (another punful world). CGW \"The Informative PBM Magazine\" Do your know what PBM (Play-By-Mail) gaming is? If you don't, we can help you explore the world of PBM gaming. Paper Mayhem has been leading the way for over 9 years by informing people about PBM gaming. Articles, reviews, biographies and more fill each issue. Not to mention the ratings of PBM games and companies that our readers participate in. Paper Mayhem has been improving with the ever expanding hobby of PBM gaming since 1983. Each bimonthly issue brings you the latest on PBM news. So why delay and miss out on all the fun? Read Paper Mayhem and take advantage of PBM gaming. Send subscriptions to: PAPER MAYHEM Dept CG 1518 Adams Street Ottawa, IL 61350-4770 US Subscriptions: Single issue $5.00 1 year $24.00 2 year $42.00 THE ULTIMATE ROLE-PLAYING AID 1 Introducing The Ultimate Character Editor. This exciting new product features full mouse and keyboard support, online context sensitive help and a complete windowing system (does not require MS Windows to run). This editor allows you to edit most of the games listed below (including all of the Might and Magics, all of the Ultimas, all of the SSI games, all of the Bard's Tales, and more). The price for this editor is $59.95. So, for the price of 3 editors, you will be getting approximately 30 editors. Upgrades will be available to handle new games as they are released for only $9.95. CHARACTER EDITORS $19.95 each Might and Magic (1, 2, 3 or 4), Drakkhen. Pool of Radiance, Hard Nova, Bard's Tale (1, 2 or 3), Wasteland, Dragon Wars, Space Rogue, Wizardry (Edits 1-3). Wizardry 4, Wizardry 5, Bane of Cosmic Forge, Crusaders of the Dark Savant. Treasurers of the Savage Frontier, Sentinel Worlds I, Knights of Legend, Secret of the Silver Blades, Curse of the Azure Bonds, Champions of Krynn, Space 1889, Keys to Maramon, MegaTraveller (1 or 2), Keef the Thief, Darklands, Escape from Hell, Ultima (3, 4, 5, 6 or 7), Dark Heart of Uukrul. Savage Empire, Tunnels and Trolls, Lord of the Rings (1 or 2). Countdown to Doomsday, Martian Dreams. Eye of the Beholder (1 or 2). Death Knights of Krynn, Fountain of Dreams, Magic Candle (1 or 2). Pools of Darkness, Ultima Underworld, Twilight 2000, Planet's Edge. Dark Queen of Krynn, and Prophecy of the Shadow HINT BOOKS $9.95 each Might and Magic 1. Knights of Legend. Curse of the Azure Bonds. Champions of Krynn, Legacy of Ancients, Dark Heart of Uukrul. Wizardry (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, Bane or Crusaders), Eye of the Beholder 2 Might and Magic 3 (12.95). FOREIGN SUBSCRIPTIONS: 1 year Canada $31.00; 1 year to Europe $51.00: 1 year to Australia $57.00. All Subscriptions to PAPER MAYHEM are to be paid in US funds and drawn from US banks. Foreign subscriptions are asked to use Intemational Money Order in US funds. VISA IBM listed. Apple, C64 and Amiga versions also available. Please add $4.00 for shipping and handling. Open from 9AM 9PM every day for your convenience. GOSSELIN COMPUTER CONSULTANTS MasterCard PO Box 1083  Brighton, MI 48116 (313) 229-2453 Circle Reader Service #60 Computer Gaming World Circle Reader Service #83 Page 60 "


"CHIPS & BITS CALL 800-753-GAME IBM MAC & AMIGA GAMES FOR LESS PO Box 234 Rochester, VT 05767 Fax 802-767-3382 802-767-3033 800-753-4263 UPS Ground $5 per order. PO Box, APO, FPO, $6 per Order.2 Business Day Air $7 per Order. Europe Air Mall $12 First Item plus $6 Each additionalltem. Air Mail to Canada S6 per Order.HI, AK, PR, Mail $7 per Order IBM SPORTS IBM SPORTS IBM TRADITIONAL VAL ALLOCATION $60 $39 S12       $17 \"HIGH COMMAND' is a strategic level wargame that covers the War in Europe from 1939-1945. Features numerous unit and mission types for Axis & Allies, detailed economics, production, & politics for over 40 countries and territories, Version 1.1. $45 $28 $12 $16 NFL Challenge NFL Chall Col Alumni Teams $22 NFL Chall Pre Season 90 $22 NFL Chaling TD 1984-87 Ea $15 NFL Chaling TD 1988-91 Ea $22 NFL Challenge All Star Team $22 NFL Challeng Dream Teams S20 NFL Challenge Premium Ed $59 NFL Challenge Roster Editor $20 NFL Football NFL Pro League Football $19 NFL Pro League Football 92 $24 NFL Video Football $43 Nascar Challenge $31 Over the Net $9 PGA Tour Golf $32 PGA Tour Golf WIN $38 PGA Tour Golf Course 1 $17 PGA Tour Golf Ltd Ed $45 Playmaker Football $26 Power Hits: Sports $32 Pro League Baseball S18 Pro Tennis Tour 2 $32 ProFootball Analyst 92 Editn $24 RBI 2 Reel Fish'n $12 Road to the Final Four $37 Serve & Volley Shufflemania $34 Skate or Die $15 Sport of Kings $12 Summer Challenge $34 Summer Chaling World Class $15 Super Car Pak TKO $4 Team Suzuki $15 Tennis Cup $32 The Games Winter Challenge $34 Tie Break Tennis $12 Tom Landry Football $24 Tony La Russa Baseball $24 Tony La Russa Baseball 2 $36 Tony LR Fantasy Manager $15 V LR Classic Stadiums $15 Tony LaRussa AL Stadiums $15 Tony LR Fantasy Manager $15 Tony LaRussa NL Stadiums $15 Tony LaR Teams 1901-68 $15 Wayne Gretzky Hockey 2 $34 Wayne Gretzky Hockey 3 939 Wayne Gretzky League $26 Weaver 2.0 commemorative $41 Weaver Baseball 1.5 $19 Weaver Baseball 2.0 $17 Weaver Commissionr Disk 2 $16 Weaver Team & Player 90 $12 Wilson Pro Staff Golf $23 World Circuit $34 World Class Soccer $28 $37 $16 Carl Lewis Challenge ewis Challenge $32 Cycles Grand Prix $28 Daily Double Horse Racing $19 Days of Thunder $24 Face Off Fast Break $6 Front Page Football Future Sports $28 Grand Prix Circuit $17 Greens $34 HardBall HardBall 2 $28 Hardball 3 $34 Hardball 3 Players Disk $19 Hardball 3 Stadium Disk $19 Harlem Globetrotters $15 Hat Trick $9 Hole In One Mini Golf $12 Hole In One Mini Golf Crs Dk $7 Indianapolis 500 International Sports Chall S29 Jack Nicklaus Clip Art $12 Jack Nicklaus CD 1-5 $15 Jack Nicklaus Greatest 18 $27 Jack Nicklaus SE Course 1 $19 J Nicklaus Sign Ed Clip Art S24 Jack Nicklaus Signature Ed $40 Jack Nicklaus Unlimited Golf $27 Joe Montana Football $31 John Elway Quarterback $6 Lakers vs Celtics $17 LH Baseball League Leaders $16 LH Boxing Contenders LH Col Bball Team Disks Ea S16 LH Col Bball L Leaders LH Col Bball Utilities $16 LH Football L Leaders $16 LH Football Utilities $16 LH Pro Basketball $36 LH Pro Baskeball Utilities $16 LH Pro Basketball L Leaders $16 LH Pro Basketball Utilities $16 Lance Haffner Baseball $36 Lance Haffner Boxing $36 Lance Haffner College BBall $36 Lance Haffner Football $36 Lance Hafner Hockey $36 Links $29 Links Courses 1 Bountiful $17 Links Courses 2 Firestone Links Courses 3 Bay Hill $17 Links Courses 4 Pinehurst $17 Links Courses 5 Dorado $17 Links Course 6 Barton Creek $17 Links Course 7 Troon North $17 Links Pro 386 Golf $32 Links Pro CD 1-6 Each $20 Low Blow $12 MUDS $12 Madden Football $17 Madden Football 2 $32 Magic Johnson Fast Break $6 Magic Johnson MVP $15 Mario Andretti Racing $17 Mean 18 Famous Courses V2 $1 Michael Jordan Flight Sim $44 ML Baseball 4 USAT Edition $31 ML Basbll 4 Fantasy Managr $25 ML Basbll 4 General Managr $19 ML Baseball All Stars $17 ML Baseball Franchise Disks $20 ML Basketball All Stars $34 ML Football 2 $39 ML Personal Pro Golf $28 ML Wrestling 1990 $28 Microleague Football Deluxe $39 Microleague Baseball $28 Microleague Basketball $28 Microsoft Goll for Windows $39 Mike Ditka Power Football $32 Mini Putt $9 'CARRIERS AT WAR'brings to life six crucial carrier battles of WWII; Pearl Harbor, Coral Sea, Midway. Eastern Shores, Santa Cruz, and Great Marianas Turkey Shoot. Seek out and destroy enemy carriers, fleets, air forces. Features hundreds of individually modeled ships and aircraft from that period. $37 Casino Craps $10 Casino Game Pak WIN $32 Casinos of the World $29 Ceasars Palace Centerfold Squares Checkmate Chess Net WIN Chess X Colossus Chessmaster 2000 Chessmaster 3000 Chessmaster 3000 WIN Classic 5 Clue Clue Master Detective Combination Lock Cribage Gin King Crossword Magic Dealer's Choice Demon Blue $10 Dr Thorp's Blackjack $32 Dr Thorp's mini Blackjack $10 Dr Wand Dr Wong Jacks & Video Pokr $10 Edward O'Thorpe Black Jack $9 Electric Jigsaw $12 FS-Pro S21 Faces Tetris 3 $15 Family Crossword Puzzles Femme Fatale $26 Femme Fatale DD 1-3 Each $18 Floor 13 $15 Game-Maker $68 Games People Play $21 Go Master Ver 5 $39 GO Master Ver 5 WIN $39 Go Master Junior Ver 5 $19 Go Master Junior Ver 5 WIN $19 Joseki Genius $39 Go Master Tool Kit $39 Go Master Tool Kit WIN 53 $79 Go Master Dix Ver 5 $99 Go Master Dix Ver 5 WIN $109 Grand Slam Bridge S17 Grand Slam Bridge 2 $32 Grandmaster Chess $37 Hollywood Squares $15 Home Alone 2 $26 Home Casino Spectacular $15 Hong Kong Mah Jong Pro $32 House of Cards $12 Hoyle's Book Games V1 $21 Hoyle's Book Games V2 $19 Hoyle's Book Games V3 $29 Hoyle's Book Games V4 $29 Ishido Jeopardy Jeopardy 2 Jeopardy 25th Aniversary $15 Jeopardy. Super Talking $21 Jigsaw Pinups Laffer Utilities WIN Lexicross Living Jigsaws Lotto Gold Lotto leverage Manhole $32 Mental Blocks $15 Monopoly Deluxe Monopoly Deluxe WIN Oligopoly $34 Omar Sharif on Bridge $37 Omar Sharif Bridge WIN $32 On Target $10 Peanuts $31 Penthouse Jigsaw $24 Pictionary $19 Planet of Lust $12 Pool Shark $15 Price is Right $15 Prime Time Hits $25 Prime Time Hits 2 $25 Punisher S9 GARLIER $17 CARRIERS AT WAR IBM TRADITIONAL 'THE CARRIERS AT WAR CONSTRUCTION KIT provides an infinitely flexible tool for creating a particular battle or an original scenario. Build ships and planes, organize squadrons, draft maps, position air bases and adjust the artificial intelligence used by the computer. 3 new scenariosincluded: Wake Island, Guadalcanal, & Tarawa. $37 $29 $12 $12 $12 $10 $10 $12 CONSTRUCTION KIT 3D Pinball 3 in 1 Players's Pack Acquire Amarillo Slim's Poker Amarillo Slims 7 Card Stud Armada Villa Crespo CB At the Zoo Backgammon WIN Baseball Facts Battle Chess 4000 Battle Chess 4000 SVGA Battle Chess Battle Chess WIN Blackjack Blackjack WIN Bridge 7 Bridgemaster Caesars Palace $10 $32 $36 $19 $29 $12 $12 $32 $29 $15 Visa & MC Accepted. CODs $5. Checks Held 4 Weeks. Money Orders Treated as Cash. Most Items Shipped Same Day. Shipping times not guaranteed. Check compatibility before you buy.Defectives replaced with same product.Price & availability subject to change. All Sales Final. wa "


"meu KHAMBERED MAUTILOID SSI's SpellJammer: Pirates of Realmspace by Jeff James Advanced Dungeons Dragons SPELAAMME PIRATES OF REALMSPACE TITLE SYSTEMS: REVIEWED ON: PRICE: PROTECTION: DESIGNERS: Publisher: Spelllammer: Pirates of Realmspace Amiga, IBM IBM $59.95 Ducumentation Look-up Cybertech Systems SSI Sunnyvale, CA and other celestial objects. In a similar vein, the U.S.A.'s own Edgar Rice Burroughs pictured Martian warriors flying through the limited atmosphere of that planet via sky ships which were analogous to fighting sail vessels. Jammin' Tot ready to rest upon its fantasy role-playing laurels, Strategic Simulations Inc (SSI) takes fantasy gamers on a voyage into the final frontier with the release of SpellJammer: Pirates of Realmspace (SJammer). While not exactly science fiction, SJammer does offer fans of SSI's Advanced Dungeons and Dragons computer products a unique opportunity to take to the spaceways while retaining all of the monster-slaying, spellflinging appeal of more conventional AD&D products. Boldly going where no AD&D adventure has gone before, SJammer is rooted in the Forgotten Realms gameworld, home to such other AD&D adventures as Eye of the Beholder I & II and the two Forgotten Realms gold box series (Pool of Radiance and Gateway to the Savage Frontier, et al). Yet, while these adventures take place in the Forgotten Realms gameworld on the planet Toril, SJammer allows players to journey through Realmspace and visit the seven other planets in Toril's solar system. Crossing through the \"wildspace\" between planets is made possible by the use of vessels equipped with a magical device which allows a cleric or magic-user to essentially will the ship into motion. Moving a vessel in this fashion is called Spelljamming. Although venturing out into space will be a new experience for the traditional fans of SSI'S AD&D adventures, the fiction upon which it is loosely based is nothing new. Indeed, science fiction legends H.G. Wells and Jules Verne both envisioned 19th-Century adventurers journeying about the solar system by way of specially prepared ships designed to sail through the seas of \"luminiferous ether» which supposedly separated Earth from the moon Moving a vessel throughout space isn't the only task players have to accomplish. SJammer consists primarily of three game segments. The first involves moving the vessel through wildspace and docking at ports, which contain pubs, weapons shops, temples, et cetera. The second portion of the game ship-to-ship combat occurs when, and if the player happens to run into another vessel while journeying through space. Finally, boarding combat occurs when the player's party gets up close and personal with the crew of enemy ships. The first game segment is where the behind the scenes work of maintaining a Spelljamming vessel takes place. In addition to voyaging between the eight planets in Toril's solar system through Realmspace, players can dock at ports located on most of the planets. At these ports, ships are repaired, rumors heard, crew hired and jobs taken. Each world offers a unique set of port facilities, with bustling Toril and its Waterdeep port, as the most active. Page 62 Computer Gaming World "


"CHIPS & BITS CALL 800-753-GAME IBM MAC & AMIGA GAMES FOR LESS PO Box 234 Rochester, VT 05767 Fax 802-767-3382 802-767-3033 800-753-4263 UPS Ground $5 per order. PO Box, APO, FPO, S6 per Order.2 Business Day Air $7 per Order. Europe Air Mall S12 First Item plus $6 Each additional Item. Air Mallto Canada $6 per Order. HI, AK, PR, Mall $7 per Order IBM TRADITIONAL THE ULTIMATE FANTASY DRIVING GAME IBM SIMULATION IBM SIMULATION CARAN DRIVER $25 $27 $26 Test Drive Ten of the Best 'CAR & DRIVER' lets you test drive 10 of the best performance cars like the Porshe 959, Shelby Cobra, and Ferrari Testarossa Features 10 different tracks, bitmapped landscapes, drive in any direction on or off road, head to head competition via modem, instant replay with multiple views and Hi-res 256 color VGA. $38 $33 $19 $19 $45 Strapsourself into the classic Lamborghini Countach, Ferrari F40 or Porsche 959 and tear up California's serpentine Highway 1. Or take the inside lane at Monterey Raceway in a Lotus Esprit Turl Mare insile $29 Puzzle Gallery 1 $19 Puzznic Rack'em $12 Risk $21 Risk WIN Sargon 5 $34 Scrabble $24 Scrabble Deluxe $26 Scruples $28 Shanghail 2 $29 Sharkey's 3D Pool $12 Shogi Master $34 Sierra Family Fun Pak Solitaire Royale Solitaire WIN $32 Solitaires Journey $34 Sorry $12 Space Vegetables $10 Spot $12 Stratego $31 Strip Poker 3 $31 Strip Poker 3 DD 1-6 Each $19 Super Tetris $29 Swap $29 Terminator Chess $34 Tetris $15 Tetris Classic Trump Castle 1 $25 Trump Castle 2 $19 Trump Castle 2 DD 1 or 2 $6 Trump Castle 3 $34 Turn-n-Burn $10 Vegas Entrtnmnt Pak WIN $20 Vegas Games Pak WIN $19 Video Poker AlaCarte $34 Video Poker Villa Crespo $19 Video Poker WIN $12 Video Poker by Masque $12 Virtual Reality Studio 2 $64 Wayne's World $26 Welltris $15 Wheel of Fortune $6 Wheel of Fortune 2 or 3 Wheel of Fortune Gold $15 Word Tris $27 World Champ Backgammon $24 World Champ Cribbage $24 $30 $27 $31 $28 'LINKS 386 PRO offers SUPER VGA graphics and advanced features designed for your 386 or 486. New features include computer opponent, save game option that allows your friends to play against you in an existing game, pre-recorded games from worthy opponents, and many game modes. $35 Elite Plus $19 Scenery: Tahiti $16 Eye of the Storm Fit Sim S29 Seal Team $42 F117A Stealth Fighter $42 Search for the Titanic F14 Tomcat $19 Secret Weap Luftwaffe $44 F15 Strike Eagle 2 S19 Secret Weap Exp 1 P38 $21 F15 Strike Eagle 2 Scen $17 Secret Weap Exp 2 P80 $21 F15 Strike Eagle 3 $44 Secret Weap Exp 3 He 162 $21 F15 Strike Eagle 3 Aces Pak $52 Secret Weap Exp 4 DO335 F19 Stealth Fighter $24 Shuttle $26 F22 Advanced Tactical Fghtr $39 Silent Service 2 $34 F29 Retaliator $32 Sky Chase $25 F40 Pursuit Simulator $31 Snd, Grphos & Arcrft Upgrad $27 Falcon 3.0 $42 Stormovik $15 Falcon 3 Scent Fighting Tgr $24 Strike Aces Falcon AT $19 Strike Commander Fire & Forget 2 $30 Stunt Driver Flight Planner $24 Stunt Island Flight Simulator 4.0 S42 Stunts $15 Flight of the Intruder $15 Tank $34 Fly the Grand Canyon $45 Task Force 1942 Grand Canyon Scenery S16 Team Yankee Great Naval Battles Exp Pk 2 $21 Team Yankee 2 Grt Naval Battles Scen Build $28 Test Drive 1 $17 Gun Boat $33 Test Drive 2 Gunship 2000 $39 Test Drive 2 Muscle Cars $10 Gunship 2000 Scenario Disk S24 Test Drive 2: The Collection $29 Gunship $12 Test Drive 2:CA Challenge $15 Harrier Combat Simulator Test Drive 2:Euro Challenge $15 Hawaiian Odyssey $22 Test Drive 2:Muscle Cars $15 Heatwave $25 Test Drive 2:Supercars $15 Heroes of the 357th $32 Test Drive 3 $29 HoverForce Test Drive 3: Road & Car S17 Hunt for Red October $19 Their FH Battlehawks Bundle $44 Infiltrator 2 Thunderhawk $21 Japan Scenery Disk $22 Thunderstrike $27 Jet Fighter 2.0 $39 Top Gun Danger Zone Jet Fighter 2 Mission Disk 1 $19 Tracon Jump Jet $39 Tracon 2 Knights of the Sky $29 Tracon 1 or 2 WIN $34 LHX Attack Chopper $17 Ultrabots Sanction Earth $37 Land Sea Air 2 $39 Vette $15 Land Sea Air Trilogy $12 Virtual Reality Studio Life and Death S19 Voice Commander $18 Life and Death 2 $23 Wing Commander $39 Lightspeed $9 Wing Commander 1 Deluxe $45 Mantis Experimental Fighter 539 Wing Commander 2 $45 Mantis Exp Speech Pak $19 WC 2 Operation 1 Maximum Overkill $44 WC 2 Operation 2 Maximum Overkill Mssn Dk 1 $28 WC 2 Speach Mod Maxiumm Overkill Mssn Dk 2 $28 WC Secret Mission MegaFortress S12 Wa Serre WC Secret Mission 2 Megafortress Mega-Pak S38 Wolfpack Megafortress Miss Disk $26 X-Wing Megafortress Miss Disk 2 S26 Yeager's Air Combat Miami Enforcer $39 Mig 29 Fulcrum $32 Orbits $37 IBM HINT BOOKS Power Politics WIN $34 Pacific Islands 2 $30 A-Train $16 Power Boat Simulator $39 Advent Willie Beamish $10 Privateer $49 Bard's Tale 1-3 Each $10 Rapcon $29 Buck Rogers Countdown $10 Reach for the Skies $31 Castle of Dr Brain $10 Red Baron VGA $36 Champions of Krynn Red Baron Mission Builder $24 Civilization Red Storm Rising $14 Codename Iceman Road & Track Grand Prix U $37 Colonel's Bequest Sailing Simulator CGA $39 Conquests Robin Hood $10 Sailing Simulator VGA $42 Countdown $10 Sailing S East Cst Voy CGA $34 Curse of the Azure Bonds $10 Sailing S East Cst Voy VGA $39 Dark Queen of Krynn $10 Sailing S West Cst Voy CGA $34 Darklands $14 Sailing S West Cst Voy VGA $39 Darkspyre $10 Sailing Instrctr Pack CGA $199 Death Knights of Krynn $10 Sailing Instrctr Pack VGA S239 Dragon Wars Scenery Collection Set A $37 Dragons of Flame Scenery Collection Set B $37 Drakkhen $10 Scenery Colltn California S37 Dungeon Master $10 Scenery Collin Great Britain $37 Dynamix Great War Planes S16 Scenery Enhancement Editor S21 EcoQuest Search For Cetus $10 Scenery: Hawaii $16 Elvira 1 or 2 $10 $54 $9 $27 ACCESS Ayu IBM SIMULATION $15 838 688 Attack Sub $19 ATP Flight Simulator $29 A.T.A.C $34 A10 Avenger $46 A10 Tank Killer 1.5 Enh $34 AH-64 Helicopter $46 Aces Over Europe $46 Aces Europe Mission Disk 1 $27 Aces Europe Mission Disk 2 $27 Aces of the Pacific $42 Aces Pacific Mission Disk 1 $27 Air Warrior $35 Aircraft Scenery Design $35 Allied Forces Armour Geddon Assignment Miami B17 Flying Fortress $39 Battlefield 2000 $37 Birds of Prey $32 Blue Max Aces Great War Campaign Strategc Flight Sm $37 Car and Driver $38 Cardinal of the Kremlin $16 Carrier Command $12 Combat Classics $29 Conqueror Multi Tank $16 Crash Course Das Boot Submarine $12 Design Your Own Railroad $29 Dynamix Bundle 1 $39 \"MAXX COBRA FLIGHTSTICK brings together the thrill of a joystick and the versatility of the keyboard. Features molded casing for left or right handers, 7 button pistol grip joystick, 25 programmable functions, exact auto-centering, and true circular directional control. Game port not necessary. $ 54 uni $12 $29 $9 S8 S6 Visa & MC Accopted. CODs $5. Checks Held 4 Weeks. Money Orders Treated as Cash. Most Items Shipped Same Day. Shipping times not guaranteed. Check compatibility before youbuy. Dofoctivos replaced with same product. Price & availability subject to change. All Sales Final. "


"DUBihin Catapults and Kilrathi Ship-to-ship combat occurs only when another vessel is encountered in wildspace. This portion of SJammer loosely resembles the format used in Wing Commander, with bitmapped vessels and projectiles zooming about the game screen. But while Wing Commander allowed players to move in three dimensions (up/down, left/right forward/back), SJammer restricts players to a level playing field, as if all of the vessels sailed on an invisible sea: no diving or climbing PED Donne Om994703 prona SPALIO Dr. D. SELLE HE S TORE host of other less-important (though annoying) defects. First among these foibles was the lethargic hard-drive performance. Some of the simplest actions in the game, such as generating a set of six, two-digit character attributes, caused the hard-drive to spring into action for several seconds. Loading a saved game often took more than a solid minute of continuous harddrive operation. From loading the program to entering combat, SJammer is sure to give the ol' hard drive a workout. Gia HEATIE Set E -NI KOUL IS DEAD MASTER HIT 2 TIME FOR 4 DAMAGE! B on viza us: allowed. Combat usually involves only the player's vessel and one enemy, although about half of the ships encountered during this reviewer's sojourn into Realmspace were non-hostile. If the enemy ship does prove to be hostile, a number of weapons are available for taking the fight to the enemy. Ship-mounted ballistas, catapults, jettisons (useful for clearing crew from the deck of an enemy ship), and bombards (crude cannons) are available for striking down foes. In addition, players can attempt to shear the rigging from an enemy ship (slowing it down), or can even physically smash the enemy into space debris by ramming. Finally, a grappling option allows gamers to close with an enemy ship and board it. Once successfully grappled, the game shifts to the boarding combat screen. cale). Each officer is represented by a single on-screen character, while crewmen are displayed as a soldier figure with a number hanging at his feet ranging from 1 to 5, indicating the number of soldiers represented by that figure. The player can control each of his officers and crewmen by accessing a bank of icons located in the upper right corner of the screen. Characters can be directed to move, cast spells, view inventory, be placed under computer control, and even can parley with the enemy. In true AD&D style, each of the combat turns consists of a collection of short rounds in which combat takes place. I found this segment of SJammer to be the most enjoyable, with plenty of tactical options and maneuvers to try with one's assembled forces. At times, combat can be overly tedious and time-consuming (with large numbers of units on both sides); fans of miniature wargaming will welcome the detail and tactical options. The SpellJammer's Prime Directive Most of SJammer involves ferrying cargo from planet to planet for a fee, picking up an odd mission or two along the way. Only by tackling as many missions as possible (and by avoiding space combat like the plague) will players have much hope of advancing beyond the first portions of the game. Finding larger, more powerful vessels with which to carry one's intrepid band of swashbucklers through Realmspace is essential; massive ships such as the Man-O-War, Hammership and the awesome Neogi Deathspider are required equipment for finishing the game. SJammer begins by offering players a few scattered missions here and there to build up a surplusage of funds and experience. As the game progresses, more challenging obstacles such as defeating space pirates, raiding slave trading vessels and exploring ancient dwarven space-fortresses will help prepare players for the ultimate goal: defeating the evil Neogi, who have planned to unleash a vicious campaign of brutal conquest across the solar system if the player fails. In addition to the aforementioned harddrive problems, SJammer suffers from a host of other minor defects. During boarding combat, I discovered my characters (including those under computer control) to strangely unready their weapons in the face of combat. Spellcasting has its share of problems, too: on several occasions I found characters with a sudden bonus of more than 200 first level spells, all of which were available to be cast and used. Even the inventory of my characters wasn't safe, with the computer often renaming a character's \"Longsword +3\" as a non-magical Longsword in the heat of battle. With all of these problems, one can't help but think that SJammer was rushed out the door to meet the Christmas buying spree without a suitable amount of beta-testing. BE e RR PORSIES SED STTIOT SPELLH OM: 399 DETHOTEL LOCATION LDSPARTE SPEEDO Hithodico DESTIGLON KEHL LOCATIONSHILOSTIVO LD, AIA ALEPLEHISHED. HE WAVE THOUGHTON 5 MONTHS, AMD IT DAVS ll IL Bash 'em and Thrash 'em The boarding combat segment appears much like a stripped-down version of Ultima VI, with an isometric overhead view displaying all of the action. At the start of combat, the player's characters (also called officers) and crewmen (0-level soldiers) are scattered across the gamescreen (which usually consists of a ship's deck, the tunnels of a dwarven space-fortress or some other loLost in Realmspace As challenging as completing the game was, getting SJammer to work properly on my machine was an even greater challenge. My first attempt at playing SJammer resulted in the program locking up immediately after the copy protection had been correctly entered. SSI's technical support stated that the first version of SJammer (1.0) was having trouble running on some systems, so they shipped me a patch disk to upgrade the program from version 1.0 to 1.1. Installing the patch fixed the loading problem, but left open a As it stands, SJammer is a product with a good deal of promise, thwarted by an unfortunate number of defects. AD&D role-playing stalwarts who can look past the problems and enjoy SJammer as an alternative to the usual SSI AD&D products should find the game to be an enjoyable one. As for the rest of the gaming public, SJammer is still a few updates away from being a product worth playing. CGW Page 64 Computer Gaming World "


"CHIPS & BITS CALL 800-753-GAME IBM MAC & AMIGA GAMES FOR LESS PO Box 234 Rochester, VT 05767 Fax 802—767-3382 802-767-3033 800—753-4263 UPS Ground S5 per order. POBox, APO, FPO, $6 per Order.2 Business Day Air $7 per Ordor. Europe Air Mall $12 First Item plus S6 Each additionalltem. Alr Mall to Canada $6 per Order. HI, AK, PR, Mall $7 per Order IBM HINT BOOKS IBM HINT BOOKS IBM ARCADE Tunnels & Trolls $16 Twisty History Hint book $10 Ultima 4-7 Each $10 Ultima Underworld Stg Abyss $10 Ultima 7 and Underworld $16 Ultima Avatar Adventures $16 V for Victory $16 Wasteland $10 Wizardry Cosmic Forge $12 Wizardry 7 $12 Yeager Air Combat Handbk $16      S16 $38 $8 Space Ace 1 or 2 Space Wars Speedball 2 Stellar 7 Super Off Road Super PacMan Super Space Invaders $25 Swamp Gas Windows Take-A-Brk Crossword WIN $29 Take-A-Brk Pinball WIN $29 Take-A-Break Pool WIN $29 Teenage MNT Manhattn Mn $31 Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles $25 Tengen's Arcade Hits $25 Terminator $34 Tetris Classic WINDOWS $27 The Tinies $29 Thexder 1 or 2 Treasure Trap Tristan Pinball Turbo Outrun Viking Child Volfied Wild Streets IBM ARCADE $16 \"GEMINI JOYSTICK'features a full size handle, 6 large tactile buttons, dual axis trim adjustors for precision control, turbo fire, 4 stabilizing suction cups, & testing disk. Fully compatible with high speed PC's (PC, XT, AT, 386, 486, & compatibles). S24 $38 IBM CD ROM Dreadna $29 The most EXCITING SEA BATTLES ever fought! ooo Eye of the Beholder $10 Eye of the Beholder 2 or 3 Fascination $10 Free DC $10 Gateway Savage Frontier $10 Gobliiins $10 Gold Rush $10 Gunship 2000 Harpoon $16 Heart of China $10 Hero's Quest 1-3 Each $10 Hillstar Immortal $10 Indy Jones Grix Adv $10 Indy Jones 4 Fate Atlantis $10 Island Of Dr Brain $10 Jetfighter 2.0 Keel the Thief $10 King's Quest 1-6 Each $10 Knights of Legend $10 Laura Bow 2 HintBook $10 Leisure Suit Larry 1-5 Each Lemmings w/disk $21 Loom $10 Lord of the Rings V1 $10 Lord of the Rings V2 $6 Lost Files Sherlock Holmes $10 Lost in LA $10 LucasArts Adventure Book $16 LucasArts Air Combat Strat $16 Magic Candle 1 or 2 $10 Manhunter New York $10 Manhunter San Francisco $10 Maniac Mansion $10 Martian Dreams $13 Matrix Cubed Mean Streets Might & Magic 1 Might & Magic 182 $16 Might & Magic 2 $12 Might & Magic 3-5 Each $16 Off Book Leisure Suit Larry $12 Off Book of Ultima 2nd Editn $15 Off Bk Roger Wilco's Advntrs $12 Off Guide of King's Quest $10 Off Book of Police Quest $12 Patriot $16 Phantasy Star 3 $14 Planet's Edge $16 Police Quest 1-3 Each $10 Pool of Radiance $10 Pools of Darkness $12 Power Monger Strategy $16 Powermonger $10 Quest For Clues 2-4 Each $21 Quest for Glory Strategy Gd $19 RUN5 Issue #1-19 Each $6 Railroad Tycoon $10 Railroad Tycoon Off Guide $10 Rex Nebular Cos Gen Ben $14 Rise of the Dragon $10 Savage Empire $10 Search for the King $10 Secret Monkey Island 1 or 2 $10 Secret Silver Blades $10 Sentinel Worlds 1 $10 Shadow Sorcerer Simcity/Simearth Book Simearth $16 Simlife Official Strategy $16 Space Quest 1-4 Each Spellcasting 101 Spellcasting 201 Star Trek 25th Aniv Starflight 1 or 2 $10 Strategy Plus Issue 12-26 Stunt Island $16 Summoning $16 Tales Magic:Prophecy Shad $12 Time Quest $10 Treasures Savage Frontier $10 DREADNOUGHTS accurately models the looks, specifications and tactics of fighting fleets during the great age of the battleship. Includes 7 scenarios such as; Coronel (1914). Falklands (1914). Jutland (1916) and Dogger Bank (1915). Features a menu interface for entering commands, external 3D view, & hidden movement. $42 $38 $35 $31 $9 Airborne Ranger $9 Aliens Ate My Babysitter $32 Amazing Spiderman $9 Artura $4 Back to the Future 2 or 3 S15 Bar Games $10 Bargon Attack $24 Bart Simpsn House Weirdnes $31 Batman Caped Crusader $28 Batman the Movie $24 Battle Storm $32 Cogito Windows Combat Classics Cool Croc Twins $24 Crackdown $17 Crazy Cars $25 D-Generation $32 Dark Century $27 Day of the Viper $19 Dig Dug $6 Double Dragon 2 $15 Double Dragon 3 $12 Dragon's Lair 2 Time Warp $34 Dragon's Lair 3 $34 Dragon's Lair Esc Singe Cast $34 Fast Track $25 Freakin Funk Fuzzballs $19 Galactic Conqueror Galactic Empire $27 Galaxian S6 Gauntlet 1 or 2 Gobliiins VGA $24 Gold of the Aztecs $29 Guy Spy $29 Hard Drivin' 2 $38 Home Alone Hyperspeed $34 Killing Cloud $19 King Graham Board Games $9 Knight Force $29 Laffer Utilities Larry's Casino S9 Laura Bow Parlor Games S9 Monty Python $15 Ms Pacman $6 Ninja Gaiden 2 $12 Ninja Rabbits $10 Nova 9 $21 Oil's Well $12 Out Run Pac Man $9 Paper Boy 2 $27 Pipe Dream Pit Fighter Power Hits: Battletech Power Hits: Sci Fi $32 Punisher $9 Quix $25 Rampage $28 Roger Wilco Space Games Rollerbabes Rotox $20 Savage $19 Sierra Arcade Bundle 1 $24 Silpheed $21 Simpsons:The Arcade Game $31 $27 Second Conflict $21 12 Roads to Gettsyburg WIN $48 7th Guest $56 A Christmas Carrol $18 Advent Willie Beamish $45 Aesop's Multimedia Fables Battle Chess WIN & DOS $46 Buzz Aldrin Race Space $59 Campaign $35 Capstone Game Collection $45 Chessmaster 3000 $46 Conan $21 Cyber Space Don Quixote $32 Dune El Grito Del Jaguar WIN $46 Fascination WIN $39 Fatty Bears Birthdy Surprise $38 Gofer's Winkel Advet WIN $35 Guy Spy S29 Impersionist Sources WIN $69 Jack and the Beanstalk S34 Jones In The Fast Lane WIN $42 Jungle Book Win $34 King's Quest 5 WIN $42 King's Ransom $38 Legend of Kyrandia $49 Library of Art: Renaissance $60 Loom $48 Lost Treasures Infocom 2 $46 lost Lost Treasures of Infocom Mantis Experimental Fgtr $45 Multi Media: Vivaldi WIN S34 Omar Sharif Bridge $46 Putt Putt Joins the Parade Rodney's Funscreen $46 Secret Monkey Island $39 Secret Weap Luftwaffe $46 Sherlock Holmes Consul Det $44 Shuttle $24 Space Quest 4 WIN $42 Spirit of Excaliber S21 Star Child Star Trek 25Any $46 Stellar 7 WIN $42 Team Yankee 2 $29 Ultima Bundle $59 Where in the World Deluxe $66 White Horse Child S32 Wing Commander 1 Deluxe $45 Wing Commander & Ultima 6 $60 Wing C & Ultima Undrworld $60 Wolf Pack $39 Wrath of the Demon S29 CGW6 The Galactic Conflict Continues... $46 'SECOND CONFLICT' is a game of interstellar strategy & conquest for windows. Control all aspects of the economy, military, and civilian population. Allocate resources to produce battleships, planetary defenses, stealth ships, transports and missiles. Features multiple human & computer players, & a scenario editor. $34 $42 $28 $10 $20 $19 $22 $32 $10 S32 $5 Visa & MC Accepted. CODs SS. Checks Held 4 Weeks. Money Orders Treated as Cash. Most Items Shipped Same Day. Shipping times not guaranteed. Check compatibility before youbuy. Defectives replaced with same product. Price & availability subject to change. All Sales Final. "


"Devreun LURKING IN THE SHADOWS Psygnosis' Shadow of the Beast III by Chuck Miller TITLE: SYSTEM: PRICE: PROTECTION: DESIGNER: PUBLISHER: Shadow of the Beast III Amiga (512) $59.99 Disk-based Reflections Psygnosis Lid. Liverpool, United Kingdom excellent. There is no lack of quality mood music in Beast II. Exceptional soundtracks have become a hallmark of the Beast series as well as almost all Psygnosis releases, and the tradition, thankfully, continues. Digitized sound effects are also very good and realistically reproduced. SHABBE OF THE Aarbron's appearance had changed to that of a Cro-Magnon man. This time, however, his mission against the Beast was the rescue of his infant sister; a more satisfying and higher goal than revenge. Now, in Shadow of the Beast II, Aarbron's goal is to strike the final blow and rid the world of the Beast once and for all. With the help of a magician named Rekann, Aarbron must locate four items that will enable him to face and destroy the Beast. PANAS D eginning life as a side-scrolling arcade feast featuring bright colored backgrounds, smooth animation and superb multilevel parallax scrolling, the Beast series from Psygnosis has taken Aarbron, and the player, from a beast himself to a clone of that intrepid adventurer, Indiana Jones. In the third and final game in the Beast trilogy-Shadow of the Beast M1-Aarbron looks like a shirtless Indy with backpack and a rather comical hat reminiscent of those donned by members of a barber shop quartet. Beast Your Eyes... Anyone who saw the original Shadow of the Beast remembers the beautiful graphics and exceptional parallax scrolling it offered. It is still, in my opinion, the best of the Beast series in appearance and play. With Shadow of the Beast II came more advanced puzzles than those offered in the first game. However, it also exchanged the bright colors and superb parallax scrolling of the initial product for dark, ominous tones and more simple parallax effects with bi-directional scrolling. In an effort to combine the best of both previous releases, Shadow of the Beast III incorporates the brighter colors and multilevel parallax scrolling of the original and the more advanced puzzles of Beast II. The results, I believe, are mixed. While backgrounds in Beast III are more colorfully appealing than those in the previous release, the foreground and character colors are still too dark and drab. They need more pizzazz. Granted, the design called for a sinister feel, yet \"sinister\" doesn't necessarily require muted, heavy shades to convey its message. Still, the graphics are very good overall and the improvement in the parallax effect comes across well, while maintaining bi-directional scrolling. ...And Beast Your Ears As usual, the musical accompaniment is A Puzzled Beast at Best As did most players, I found the puzzles in Shadow of the Beast II far too difficult. This criticism has been addressed by the programmers to a limited extent. According to the documentation, the puzzles in Beast III begin \"very easy\" and become \"gradually more difficult» as the game progresses. That the initial puzzles are very easy, I will gladly concede. However, I would not classify the increase in difficulty as all that gradual. They appear to shift from easy to difficult very quickly. Apart from the first few puzzles in each of the four main sections of the game, the puzzles are still too difficult overall, especially when failure to correctly solve one results in the need to start the level over again from the beginning in many cases. Some puzzles are still difficult enough that many players will give up before finishing the game. The Beast of Your Worries While Shadow of the Beast III has much to commend, it still suffers from some problems that have followed the series He's Such a Beast The original Shadow of the Beast began the trilogy with Aarbron enslaved by the Beast Lord as a tormented servant in beast form himself, programmed by will-sapping drugs. After regaining control, Aarbron sought revenge on the death of his father and his own torment. When Shadow of the Beast Il arrived, Page 66 Computer Gaming World "


"EINS MICROPROSE TREAGLE DE! Combat Flight Simulator Super 3-D Graphics With While Supplies Pplies Last L 041 00 THUNDER BOARD. PC GAMES LIKE YOU'VE NEVER HEARD THEM BEFORE. Lend us your ear. And we'll stuff it with a calibre of sound that's ears ahead of the competition. Introducing Thunder Board\" from Media Vision. No other sound card out there today can soar to such incredible heights. Or plunge to such awesome lows. And Thunder Board's dynamic filtering means dynamite sound. Higher fidelity. Bigger ka-booms. And more bang for the buck. Our guarantee is that we put the quality where your cars are. And the money where our mouth is. In fact, we'll refund your money if you don't agree Thunder Board is the best sound board for your PC games. In addition, with Thunder Board you get three free PC action game samplers: Nova 9\", Lemmings\", and Lexi-Cross.\" Plus, free Thunder Master software that lets you record and edit sound files with a Wave Form Editor. And Thunder Board is fully compatible with all the newest PC games. Plus 100% compatible with AdLib\" and Sound Blaster applications-to support the largest library of games possible. What's more, Thunder Board has breakthrough fea tures to let you break all the sound barriers. Like twice the Digitized Audio Playback and Recording Capability at an explosive 22kHz-compared to the competition's puny 11kHz. Also, you get a squadron of powerful extras. Like a Joystick Port. Headphone Jack. An 11 Voice FM Music Synthesizer that lets you score music as well as score points. And a Power Amplifier with built-in Volume Control, so you can have yourself a real blast-without blasting the neighbors. So take off-for a dealer near you. And go from static to ecstatic. Because, with Thunder Board, hearing is believing. TAM VISION Approved by . ORN   Microprose Gunship 2000 Interplay Productions Star Trek Sierra On-Line Cmquest of the Longbow Electronics Arts PGA Golf Tour Broderbund Software Prince of Persia For the name of a Thunder Board dealer or simply some good sound advice, call Media Vision. 1-800-845-5870. Media Vision, 47221 Fremont Boulevard, Fremont, CA 94538.510-770-8600, FAX: 510-770-9592. Media Vision, Thunder Board, and Thunder Master are trademarks of Media Vision, Inc. All other trademarks are the property of their respective companies. , Media Vision, Inc. « Circle Reader Service #71 » "


"DPUN uu through from the beginning. For starters, disk-based copy protection is still employed. As such, Beast III cannot be installed on a hard drive. What makes this all the worse is that disk access is painfully slow, even on an Amiga 3000. Mix this with the traditional \"death scene\" (which I quickly tired of being forced to view) and most players will add numerous gray hairs before they ever finish the game. Loading and reloading time is too slow from floppies! This is understandable in a coin-op product. It is, however, unacceptable in a product for home use. I have grown tired of playing and replaying the same section of a game over and over 20 or more times, simply to have yet another unsuccessful try at the same puzzle. Why designers of arcade games cannot fathom the term \"save game\" or provide a means to do so is beyond my comprehension. Is this too much to ask? the effort required. In fact, I experienced the same love/hate relationship with Beast III as I did with Electronic Arts' The Immortal, another game sporting superb graphics, audio and atmosphere, but with a frustration level too high to enjoy playing it for any length of time. While some may think that I am being overly hard on this product, I have simply grown tired of arcade games that punish the player rather than reward them for their efforts. LES Documentation, while barely adequate, is like that provided with most Psygnosis products—so brief it is a joke. What is supplied in 20 pages (in very large type) could have easily fit onto a single twosided quick reference card. This has been a longstanding problem that Psygnosis is aware of, but has failed to address. Shadow of the Beast III also suffers from one of the same failings of many arcade adventures a lack of any save feature. The Beast Thing Going? From the start, the Beast games have been popular products. Yet, I wonder if the key to their popularity lies more in their \"look and feel» than in their play. As mentioned above, Shadow of the Beast III is the third and last game in this series. Perhaps it is best that the Beast is finally being laid to rest. True die-hard joystick jockeys who thrive on an intense, relentless onslaught of digital opponents, and who do not mind replaying the same level to excess until an offending puzzle is solved will probably love it. However, average gamers may find the game overly frustrating and even annoying to play. Unfortunately, Shadow of the Beast III, in my estimation, provides more glitter (it does have that Psygnosis charm) than gold, falling low on the playability scale with the reward for playing insufficient to If one lives and dies by the joystick, enjoys facing near-insurmountable odds and takes relish in repetitive play, go ahead and drop the bucks on Shadow of the Beast III. Otherwise, the player should rest his or her joystick finger until something more rewarding comes along. There is no sense in turning oneself into a beast just to play it. CGW COMPUTER LOOKING FOR A SPORTS TITLE? CALL FOR CURRENT PRICING AND SAME DAY SHIPPING. BASKETBALL PORTS IBM  APPLE I  C-64 THE MOST REALISTIC STRATEGY/SIMULATION COMPUTER GAMES ON THE MARKET TODAY! COURT-SIDE COLLEGE BASKETBALL Included are 286 teams from the most recent season and 70 all-time greats  Player statistical accuracy from ability to tire and foul to overall contribution factor Stats compiler . You determine style of play, whether to press or use 45 second clock, weather game played at home court or neutral site and much more! BASKETBALL THE PRO GAME You're the coach and you choose line-ups, shot selection, style of play and much more. Stats compiler. Full team and individual player stats kept for up to an 82 game schedule. All players rated by actual statistics and tendencies 25 current teams and over 190 great teams from the past included! THE PLAYBOOK OF SPORTS-RELATED SOFTWARE If you're a computer sports fan, you want to know what software is available, how similar titles compare, and you want the latest releases at attractive prices. That's why our complete Playbook describes dozens of strategic simulations, awesome action games, and specialized utilities from little known sources. We want to be your source for hi-tech sports. The Playbook is free with all phone 74> or simply send $1.00 for your copy today! BASEBALL SE BASKETBALL BOWLING  ACTION EDUCATION CALENDARS $ FISHING FLIGHT GAMES FOOTBALL HANDICAPPING GOLF TRIVIA HOCKEY SIMULATORS HORSERACING STATISTICS MOTORSPORTS OLYMPICS CEREBEL SAILING 800 747-0908 617 576-6700 SKIING 675 Moss Ave  Cambridge MA 02139 N TENNIS TAKE YOUR BRAIN OUT TO THE BALLGAME Circle Reader Service #103 Computer Gaming World ORDER TODAY! Mail check or money order for $39.95 each for Apple II and C-64 or $19.95 for IBM. You may call in and order with VISA or Master Card. Please add $3.00 for shipping and handling. For more information, call or write for a free brochure. LANCE HAFFNER GAMES VASA P.O. BOX 100594. NASHVILLE, TN 37224 615/366-8088 Circle Reader Service #68 Page 68 "


"3 ZERO'S & ONE'S PC WAREHOUSE 6472-B Windy Road, Las Vegas, NV 89118 (800)788-2193 (orders) 8-6 M-F, 9-4 Sa (702)897-1571 FAX *** (702)897-2797 Tech Support ALL IBM COMPATIBLE ******* * * * \"DELETE\" WINTER DOLDRUMS, 'INSTALL\" MULTIMEDIA HARDWARE, AND 'INSERT\" NEW AND EXCITING GAMES! Ask About A Sweetheart of a Deal on COMPUTERSTARTER KITS BOARD HOME, MM HARDWARE ENTERTAINMENT MUSIC, CASINO OFFICE, OFFICE, SOUND BOARDS SOFTWARE PAINT AND FLIGHT STICKS PRINT RUDDER PEDALS SHOW SOFTWARE MODEMS Save the Prince GAMES VIDEO CAPTURE or Princess with our SPORTS BOARDS state of the art WINDOWS Baseball adventure games. PROGRAMS Basketball EDUCATIONAL Football ....n..d.. Golf SOFTWARE UTILITIES Soccer Flight Sim ....n..d.. Summer games GAMES & War Winter games * * * GAMES Call or Write Come FLY for full Software: with our Price List. Art Files & large Adventure Wide range Programs selection of of MM and And FUN !! ° Education FLIGHT Entertainment ° Games Hardware, Research CD ROMS, ° Shareware CALL For Pricing & Availability  Utilities Software. ***** 83**** 00: CD ROM Drives & ----in Learning! SIMS! and VISA Prices and availability subject to change. All sales final. We do not guarantee compatability. All software is factory fresh and unopened. We are not responsible for manufacturer's defects Contact publisher regarding defects. Shipping: 1st game 55, add'l games add $1 each in Cont US, 2nd Day Air $6 1st game, add'l games add $1 each in Cont.US. COD add $4. All prices are US $. MasterCard Circle Reader Service #109 "


"63 A Spring Break Report from fort Naughtytail MODNI As told by Scorpio bit so the HDPs come off looking like champs. Then The Judge pops up, goes into her act, and everything is set for the contests. This is where it gets tricky. Time is important throughout the game. Ernie better keep his eye on the clock, so he doesn't miss any events...or even things that go on between the events. And he better not be too far from his room (with its delightful view of the dumpster) late at night; the boy starts to get tired around 10:30 PM. Cytep right in and warm up by the fire. Winter is still with us, even if it is getting on towards March. And after March comes April, that time when a young man's fancy turns to thoughts of booze, babes, and bashes (at least it does if you're Steve Meretzky, hehe). That's right, the time of Spring Break! Yes folks, he's baaaaack! Everyone's favorite nerd sorcerer, Ernie Eaglebeak. This time, though, the books and classrooms are left far behind as Ernie and his Hu Delta Phart brothers live it up at Fort Naughtytail during Spring Break in Legend's Spellcasting 301. Well, maybe \"living it up\" isn't quite the phrase. See, there's another frat from another school, the Getta Loda Yu boys, who don't want the HDPs on the beach (or anywhere else). So, a curvaceous blonde, calling herself The Judge, sets up a bunch of contests for the rivals. Whoever has the most points at the end is «King Of The Beach\" and whoever loses has to pack up and go home. Since the GLYs are athletic studs, and HDPs are mostly brainy nerds, the Yus look like a shoo-in...unless, of course, our boy Ernie works his magic tricks to, ummm, give he and his frat brothers a little edge. Okay, it's cheating, but hey, it's for a good cause! Getting to Fort Naughtytail is half the fun, since Ernie is Carpetmaster and drives the magic carpet to the resort. It's not hard if he follows the directions (part of the game's Seepy...err, CP, or copy protection, heh). Just 'cause there's a few malfunctions along the way doesn't mean they won't get there. Ernie simply throws a little something off here and there, that's all. Of course, he's gonna have to track all that stuff down later, but think of it as a good way to see the sights (and he should find those things as quickly as possible). Anyway, it isn't long after arrival that the HDPs and GLYs have their first confrontation. Ernie just needs to lighten up a Ernie has to be prepared. Each time he gets nabbed, there's a way out...but it only works once. There's no special order here, it's just whatever Ernie has in the way of spells or items at the time. Jailbreaker's choice <grin>. Just to make things even more interesting, there's a special spell that changes other spells. So when Ernie grabs that one, he should fool around (save the game first!) and see what happens when he uses it. Some of those \"transmuted\" spells are gonna be important later on. Now, it gets hard. There are things Ernie needs to do between contests, but exactly when is another matter. Sol'll just indicate the deadline in a general way and Ernie can squeeze it in wherever he finds the time in his busy schedule. All right. The first contest is Sunday night, so that gives Ernie time to walk around, check things out, and buy a few items (don't pass up any spells), not to mention, find as much as he can of the stuff he dumped from the carpet. Speaking of the Sunday night Kick-Off Party, nothing attracts women (at least the women around here) like studs. With the HDPs winning the first contest easily, Ernie can get to work on the Sandcastle Contest Monday afternoon. Since the contest is judged at 1 PM, early arrival is advised so our boy can give Sid a little help. Sometime between Monday afternoon and Tuesday morning, the bridge has to be fixed, and any time before Tuesday night, Ernie has to visit Hillary Tickingclock (we all remember Hillary the Inexhaustible, right?). Save time; don'buy a ticket from the dispenser. Also, some time before Tuesday night, Ernie's gonna have to get into that mysterious mansion. You know, the one with the dog at the gate. Good thing it's the other side, from the look of him. I have a haunch Also, there's lots of stuff to pick up, but only so much can our hero carry at once. Some of it has to be stored in some convenient location until it's needed. Fortunately, most items (outside of spells) only have to be used once, so after something's been used, it can be dumped and forgotten (but Ernie may need that shovel twice). Ernie has to buy some items along the way, and his money may start to run out pretty fast. Then he'll have to try his luck at the Casino. Looks like a pretty crooked place to me: Ernie oughtta straighten it out before he gambles his gold away. Just keep in mind that even in an honest game, he can have bad luck (ya can't save in the casino, so if Ernie is making a pile, hop out now and then to save the game). I should mention the cops. Anytime something gets smashed or broken. you know who they're gonna tab for a \"cellular\" vacation. Right, our hero! This could happen maybe seven times (or less). So Page 70 Computer Gaming World "


"that being nice could do Ernie a hole lot of good (heh). Once inside. Ernie should see about making the place more cheerful; all this blue stuff is, well, kinda depressing, eh? There's hardly any real color around here. And when Ernie gets downstairs, he should pay close attention to what's down there (besides the lady, that is). Speaking of color, there's the Huemaze. That has to be done, one way or another. If you're not good with color tricks, or you have a monochrome monitor, or you just don't want to be bothered, you can pay the 100 gold and be done with it. But it's more fun to do the maze (easy mode recommended). But that's only because there's more to come (you didn't think it would be over this soon, did you?). Now the HDPs have to find the Prokturingham Bull. First though, Ernie better have four seahorses. Is he missing one? Maybe our hero needs a conch on the head. or possibly he didn't drink his soup like a good boy in the first place, or perhaps he didn't know that things aren't always what they're cracked up to be. A light source is handy, too. Then, it's Spelunking time. Oooo, look at that giant squid! MOMMY! (No silly, not yours.) Anyway, before you can say \"Indiana Jones, Ernie and friends (the HDPs are with him. I hope) are in the fabled city of Sitnalta. This is where the scroll is necessary, as automapping won't be much help here. During his rambles, Ernie may have come across a spell box he can't open. Sorry Charlie (oops, Ernie), you have to be level 4 to open it. That means a trip to the lighthouse and running a few errands for the Presiding Sorcerer. Get at least the first one done before Thursday morning (preferably well before). Don't bother picking up the spell box, just use it where it is. After the big splash, Ernie should come back with four items (berries not included). So it's Tuesday AM and time for the Belly Flop contest. Here's where a little roc and roll (or was that roc and drop?) comes in handy. You could say Ernie calls the shots here, and pulling this one off would be a real feather in his cap (or was that Vince's?). Then, it's the big liquor bash Tuesday night, and BIG is the word for it. Can Ernie make the world's largest daiquiri...and then, drink it without collapsing? Sure he can with the right spells and the right items (this is a pretty easy one, if Ernie's hit all the shops by now, and he certainly should have!). Well, the week sure is moving along fast, huh? Let's hope it hasn't moved along so fast that Ernie didn't get a chance to see the women wrestlers. A little favor for one of them will be repaid at Wednesday morning's Wet T-Shirt contest. True, the lady isn't exactly well-endowed, but Ernie can do something about that. He can even help Mona (who almost doesn't need it, but doing that is extra points). Wednesday certainly is a busy day. Alter the T-shirt contest, there's a little bullfighting late in the afternoon. Ernie ain't exactly a matador, so it's time for more dirty tricks. What that bull needs is a little \"get up and go\" feeling. A small distraction is advisable, though. I'm sure if Ernie thinks about it hard enough, the right idea will float into his head. And the day isn't done yet. Here are the HDPs, looking for a little real fun at Club Club, when who should walk in but those nasty GLYs. In no time at all, a fight breaks out. Good thing Ernie's not directly involved, since it gives him a chance to throw a spell or two to good effect. One thing you can say about these spring breaks, there's never a dull moment. Hardly has Ernie recovered from Wednesday, when it's time for Thursday morning's Body Surfing contest. This is one that Ernie has to do himself (presuming, that is, he got that Bigfinno spell box open). Well actually. Ernie and Fred (FRED??? Oh, not my Fred, whew!). Too bad Fred is out like a light. If the HDPs wanna win the Surfing contest, Ernie is just gonna have to find a way to bring sleeping beauty back to consciousness. Drying off after that hardly leaves any time for the afternoon Tanning bout. True, by now and probably long before) Ernie's found the case of suntan lotion, but that lotion doesn't quite have the oomph necessary to beat the GLYs. Remember, we don't want our side looking like lemons, right? There's nothing else scheduled for today, so our boy has a little free time for himself. One thing he can do with those leisure hours (ha) is have a chat with the rummy in the groggery (grog, for those of you who were wondering, is rum diluted with water). Sorry to say, he won't fork over until Ernie forks over 500 gold. Ya gotta do it, Ernie, and it has to be done before tomorrow. That's because Friday morning is the Volleyball contest, and we want our HDP team to win. With the right spells in alternation, deflating the GLYS should be a snap. This leaves a few hours for pyramid practice, and we know Ernie wouldn't want to miss that. So now it's time for the mystery event. Huh? What? Sheer destruction? Y'know, this don't sound exactly kosher. Still, Ernie's gotta go through with it, for the sake of dear old Sorcerer U. and the HDPS. And our hero is practically led by the nose to the right act of vandalism, thanks to the dropped key. Just follow the map along, doing the right thing with the seahorses, and in no time, Ernie will be at the fabled Throne. What now? Well, it's a seat, Ernie (hint. hint). Uh oh... There's the bull, and it doesn't look happy. Luckily. Ernie has just the right spell for that. UNluckily, guess who just showed up? Yep, none other than Joey Rottenwood (you were expecting him, of course). While Joey gives the usual \"Villain's Spiel To The Hero Before His Plans Come Undone.\" Ernie needs to think fast and do something else about the bull (poor thing, you can hardly hear its piteous cries). THAT will take care of Joey, at least until Spellcasting 401 rolls around. Whew! Good thing spring break comes only once a year. And good thing that you were around to help Ernie through this one. Speaking of help, if you need a hand with an adventure game, you can reach me in the following ways: On Delphi: visit the GameSIG (under the Groups and Clubs menu). On Genie: Stop by the Games RoundTable (type: Scorpia to reach the Games RT). By US Mail (enclose a self-addressed, stamped envelope if you live in the United States): Scorpia, PO Box 338. Gracie Station, New York, NY 10028. Until next time, happy adventuring! CGW March 1993 Page 77 "


"A New Dimension Tim Tyler a.k.a. 'Tyre\" Toronto, Canada \"Merlin, I'll cast a cure spell on you.\" Ed Avis a.k.a. \"Merlin\" Camden, NJ 'Tyre! Help! I'm wounded.\" DRAKKAR STAR CRUISER CRUISER un soll. Waard dowly the door an themu 23 001...lihl 09 Va INIT Chat and play games with people from around the world without ever leaving your home. MPG-NET gives you something you can't find on floppy disk; on-line realtime contact with the most puzzling and challenging entity of all time. Another human mind. Play pulse-pounding, intriguing, forever challenging games with stunning graphics and vibrant sound. Games that are constantly improving so they won't get stale. Form strategies, share secrets and solve puzzles with up to 100 folks from around the world. twenty-four hours a day. In addition to our games we have Bulletin Boards so you can write public messages to other players, and Electronic Mail to send private messages. We also have Chat Rooms in which you can shoot the breeze LIVE with people from around the world. All you need is a modem, a phone line, and a computer; IBM-PC compatible, Macintosh, or Amiga. Come visit a land where dragons -roam free, rodents grow to unusual size, and adventurers are the endangered species. Team up with players from around the world. Together, explore mysterious lands, armed only with your enchanted weapons, psionic spells. and wits. You'll find untold riches and glory while solving intriguing puzzles, and destroying the mightiest of beasts. MPG-NET brings you the ultimate in fantasy role playing. The year is 2300 A.D. We've discovered stardrive and colonized hundreds of new solar systems. In the process, however, we pissed off some very nasty aliens. To say they hate us is an understatement. They'll do anything to eliminate us from space. No compromises. This is all-out interstellar war. We need your help! Based on GDW's classic space combat game, MPG-NET brings you the on-line version of Star Cruiser -a 3D, multi-player campaign of splitsecond action. 1992 MPG-Net Inc Multi-Player Games Network and MPG-Net are service marks of MPG-Net, Inc The Kingdom of Drakkar is a trademark of Drakkar Corp Computer network versions of Empire Builder. Star Cruiser, Operation Market Garden, and the Kingdom of Drakkar are designed and developed by Tantalus Inc. All other brand and product names are trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective holders "


"in Entertainment ...Your Multi-Player Games Network. Brad Elk a.k.a. \"Sauer\" Louisville, KY \"If you need some help, just page me.\" Lori Zini a.k.a. \"Diana\" Waco, Tx \"What tore you up. Merlin?\" EMPIRE RATION) MARKET-GARDEN be ARI VELE MPG-NET is accessible from over 600 cities in the United States and over 80 cities internationally. It costs less than you think: $4.00 per hour in the continental US and $3.00 per hour in the N.Y. city area. These costs are all inclusive. There are no hidden communication fees, BLEU BAR Dial toll free 800-GET-GAME and we'll send you your account number, password, start-up kit, and 5 free hours right away. For more information call 800-245-0317 Three elite Allied paratroop divisions | drop into enemy territory. Their mission, to seize the bridges leading up to the Rhine the last obstacle of Allied advancement into the heart of Germany. They almost succeed. Scattered remnants of Axis forces already defeated in France must guard the Rhine the first-line of defense for the Third Reich. They almost lose. MPG-NET brings you the on-line version of Operation Market-Garden, GDW's classic two-player war game, based on the biggest airborne operation in history, Blo HD Combining two great American loves: Railroads and Money! Now you can capture the entrepreneurial spirit of America and build your own railroad empire. The wheels of progress are you and up to five other players from around the world, locked in a power struggle of epic proportions, It takes planning and ambition to build a railroad empire. And only the best will endure. Experience MPGNET's on-line version of Mayfair Games' award-winning, classic board game. MPG-NET Your Multi-Payer Games Networks 800-GET-GAME 800-438-4263 Circle Reader Service #76 "


"Devreu) DRNING NEED FOR SPEED Hopping In EA's Car & Driver is a Gas by Ken Andretti Brown TITLE: Car & Driver SYSTEM: IBM PRICE: $59.95 PROTECTION: None DESIGNER Looking Glass Technologies PUBLISHER: Electronic Arts Menlo Park, CA THE ULTIMATE DRIVING GAME CARD DRIVER Test Drive Ten of the Best hy do people buy driving simulations? Because they can't drive leV V gally? No, because they can't drive 200 mph legally. Because mere mortals don't have Nomex suits, Bell helmets and Formula I cars in which to go jetting around town. Sure, you can don a helmet to drive to the grocery store, but there won't be anyone in the frozen foods section to lay garlands around your sweaty neck and plant glistening lipsticky kisses on your cheeks. Actually, that's one of the few drawbacks of Electronic Arts' new Car & Driver: no garlands. Although you might get a sweaty neck tearing the joystick loose from its mooring, there won't be any exhilirating victory lap in front of 100,000 cheering fans. Nor, though, will you be pinned into a 110 degree cockpit with three-inch safety harnesses to a seat designed for something other than the human spine. The experience, says Indy 500 winner Bobby Rahal, is like being in a sauna for four hours while someone beats you with a garden hose. Car & Driver does, however, deliver some thrills and surprises of its own, not the least of which is safe, economical access to some of the world's most salivant sports cars. No sense generating any more saliva, so here's the menu: Porsche 959 (sure you were going to drive one this weekend at your aunt's house), Toyota MR2 (Mr. Two), Ferrari F40 ($1,000 per horsepower), Lotus Esprit Turbo (good cnough for Sharon Stone, good enough for us), 57 Ferrari 250 Testarossa, '66 Shelby Cobra (power-to-weight ratio gone mad), Lamborghini Countach (hold the bald Italian in gold chains), Eagle Talon TSi (a sportscar with common cents), Corvette ZRI (if you must), and a full-blown racer, the Mercedes C11 IMSA car (what Car & Driver refers to as \"1,000 horses in a small, sweaty box\"). There's the stable, and a fine assortment of sheetmetal, fiberglass and carbon fiber it is. That's $1,547,750 worth of machinery for you to take out and clobber repeatedly on the track of your choice. Or 4116 horses in a small software box. The game is played much like opening the pages of its namesake. One enters at the cover, nips to page two, and has the aforementioned steeds indexed like the C&D table of contents. Discriminating drivers whose minds are as thirsty for knowledge as their joysticks are IBM IDIY Strap yourself into the classic Fond Cobra, or the ultrah mi ch050, antep Califmi pontine Heway 1. Or take the inside lane at the fantes Menteny Raceway in a Lotus Esprit Turhe. More inside! and certainly offers more cars and courses to choose from. Accolade's Road & Track Presents Grand Prix Unlimited gives the EA gaming engine a stiff run, but the Accolade sim is a different animal-Formula One cars on Grand Prix courses. What if you want to drive 160 mph on the Pacific Coast Highway, risking head-on collision, vaulting off a cliff, or plowing into a bridge? Car & Driver is for you. After learning the dynamics of the game and dusting the Al cars, this driver went the extra mile to teach a rookie racer. An experienced driver, though possessed of a decidedly belowaverage intelligence, my roommate, um...the test subject provided an illuminating study in learning to drive C&D. He found himself without his Isotoners in a 1,000 horsepower IMSA car (the Merc CIL) barreling 180 mph down the oval track straightaway. Soon into the first turn, he rose up high on the 40 degree bank and flew effortlessly into the diaphanous heavens. The instant replay looked like an experimental jet taking off in Flight Simulator. Dusting off his airfoil, the overzealous rookie was remanded to a ZRI at Mahomet Dragstrip. The lights descended on the hallmark starting tree, and he was off with a roar. Time for the shift, and the car moaned to a crawl. You wanna drag race, you gotta shift. You no shift, you no go. One can choose between manual and automatic shifting in the game setup, but manual shifting is required on the dragstrip. Shifting is accomplished with the keyboard or with the joystick fire button. Steering with Colorado Spectrum's intriguing Mouse Wheel and possessed of the aforementioned below-MSRP intelligence, the rookie neglected to shift and paid the ultimate price. Returning to the oval, he soon proved intelligence is not required to drive the ZR1 adequately (as in real life), and laid down some decent times with top speeds of 162 mph. Yet, the real test of driving skill is under \"difficult\" settings on tracks like the EA Speedway, the Monterey Raceway or New York Highway 97. These are roads as challenging and curvaceous as any go-go dancer, and harder to master. The EA Speedway is two miles long and delivers a gloveful of fast corners as well as some deceptively tight twisties. It is a savory treat for undiscovered closedcourse speed freaks, who like having to judge speed into corners, powering out of them for jumpy for juice may flip to C&D feature articles describing each vehicle in detail, complete with specifications, \"Counterpoints\" and \"The Verdict.\" The all-star machinery obviously engenders praise from Car & Driver's writers, and offer some insight into the handling characteristics of the real thing. Next, the driver chooses from an assortment of tracks to warm his or her wheels on: Monterey Raceway, \"Dobbs Raceway,\" the San Dimas Mall Parking Lot (doughnut city), the EA Speedway, an oval track, the Mahomet Dragstrip, New York Highway 97, Arkansas Route 1 (ingratiatory nod to Bill?), and an autocross course. Some of the tracks are there to acclimate you to your new vehicle, some for cheap thrills, and the rest to prove your mettle against three competing greaseballs. The driving simulation is as realistic as polyfilled graphics allow, and becomes decidedly more challenging as the player progresses up the difficulty level. Suspension becomes twitchier, wheels lose their grip, shifting is easier to blow. The simulation is more rewarding than games like Accolade's Test Drive 3, Page 74 Computer Gaming World "


"Win $500 Worth of Computer Software!! Help us name our company! The name will change from No-name Software to ...?? Here's the details: 1) Mail or FAX your entry to us, or give it to us over the phone when you place an 5) All decisions are final. order. Sorry, entries will not be accepted over the phone without an order. 6) Winner agrees to have their name and hometown printed in a future ad. 2) Deadline for entries extended to January 15, 1993 7) We retain all rights to the new name. 3) A winning entry will be selected from all entries by the management. 8) The winner has until Dec. 31, 1993 to order all free software. 4) In the event of multiple winning entries, one will be chosen at random to be the 9) We'll pay the shipping for the software. prizewinner. 10) Have fun! No-name Software  800-788-GAME (4263)  FAX: 205-980-1953 For Fax orders please include MC/Visa credit card number, expiration date, and shipping address. $39 .$40 $35 $17 ......* Star Trek: 25th Anniversary..........$35 The Two Towers (\")..... .......... $35 KOEI Gemfire ....................$31 Nobabunaga's Ambition 2.......... $36 Romance of the Three Kingdoms 2....$41 Uncharted Waters ................$41 LEGEND Gateway................... $40 Spellcasting 201 ............... TimeQuest LUCASFILM Indiana Jones 4: Fate of Atlantis ......$35 Secret of Monkey Island 2.......... Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe. $40 $44 3822 $35 .$35 ACCESS Amazon Links $27 Links 386 $40 Bountiful CC Course ....... Firestone CC Course .......... $17 Bay Hill CC Course ........... $17 Pinehurst CC Course.......... $17 Dorado Beach CC Course ....... ..$17 Barton Creek CC Course ..........$17 Troon North CC Course ...........$17 ACCOLADE Elvira 2. Hardball 3 Hardball 3 Data Disk $18 Mike Ditka Ultimate Football $33 Spellcasting 301 $35 Star Control 2 $35 Super Space Invaders..... ACTIVISION Leather Goddesses II ............ .$40 Lost Treasures of Infocom (*) .... $40 Lost Treasures of Infocom 2()...... BRODERBUND Prince of Persia (') ...............$25 The Ancient Art of War ()........... $27 The Ancient Art of War at Sea (*) ... $27 Eye of the Beholder 2 ............. $40 Gateway to the Savage Frontier ..... Pool of Darkness Prophesy of the Shadow ....... Spell Jammer......... The Summoning ....... .. Treasures of the Savage Frontier ... A Line in The Sand ... Buck Rogers: Matrix Cubed .. Carrier Strike Cyber Empires Great Naval Battles: North Atlantic 1939-43............$47 No Greater Glory ........... THREE-SIXTY Harpoon. Harpoon Battle Set #2 ........ Harpoon Battle Set #3 Harpoon Battle Set #4 Harpoon Challenger Pak........ Patriot ....................... $47 V for Victory ......................$45 $45 $40 $35 $35 X-Wing 3833 $25 $36 $31 $35 $30 $20 $35 $40 $25 VIRGIN GAMES Dune 2 .......... $35 Heimdall.......... Magnetic Scrolls Collection...... Overlord....................... $25 Spirit of Excalibur ............. $20 Vengeance of Excalibur ......... . $20 Ultima Underworld............... Wing Commander 1. Secret Missions 1... $20 Secret Missions 2..... $20 Wing Commander 2..... $45 Special Operations 1... Special Operations 2...........$25 $25 Speech Accessory Pack ..........$15 PARAGON Mantis ... ............ $40 Mantis Speech Pack .............$20 Twilight 2000 VGA.............. $35 PSYGNOSIS Armourgeddon Atomino (*) ...................... $30 Lemmings VGA .................. $30 Lemmings Additional Levels ().....$23 Oh No! More Lemmings()..........$30 QQP Battles of Destiny..................$35 Conquered Kingdoms .... ..$35 Solitaire's Journey.... The Lost Admiral $38 The Perfect General ............. $38 SIERRA ON-LINE Conquests of the Longbow VGA.....$39 EcoQuest........................$35 King's Quest 5 VGA..............$40 King's Quest 6.......... $45 Leisure Suit Larry 5 VGA......... $39 Police Quest 3 VGA.......... $35 Quest for Glory 3......... + Space Quest 4 VGA ....... $39 The Dagger of AMON RA SIR-TECH Bane of the Cosmic Forge.......... Crusaders of the Dark Savant........$40 SPECTRUM HOLOBYTE Falcon 3.0....... ....... $45 Operation: Fighting Tiger......... Super Tetris $30 Tetris Classic ................. $30 Tetris for Windows ............. SSG Carriers at War ...................$39 Reach for the Stars .......... Warlords .... SSI AD&D Collectors Edition 2 ........ AD&D Starter Kit ......... Dark Queen of Krynn...... Dark Sun Eye of the Beholder .............. $23 .$45 $40 $35 $44 $35 MAXIS SimAnt(*) ........ SimCity (\") ....... SimEarth()............ $42 SimEarth for Windows (*) ......... $41 MICROPLAY Challenge of The Five Realms ..... .$35 Command HQ. $35 Global Conquest .. Megatraveller 3.... Twilight 2001 .................. .$40 MICROPROSE ATAC $34 B17 Flying Fortress..... $39 Civilization ........ $39 Civilization MPE ....... Darklands $39 F-15 Strike Eagle 3..... Greens $30 Jump Jet $40 Rex Nebular Task Force: 1942....... ... The Ancient Art of War in the Skies ...$35 MINDCRAFT Magic Candle 2.................. Siege ... ......................$35 NEW WORLD COMPUTING Might & Magic 3................ $35 Might & Magic: Clouds of Xeen..... Planet's Edge ................... Spaceword Ho! .................$36 ORIGIN Strike Commander ..... $45 Ultima 6....... Ultima 7........ .$45 Forge of Virtue... .$17 Ultima 7 Part 2-Serpent Isle ....... $45 ...$35 $25 $35 $35 $39 $25 DYNAMIX A-10 Tank Killer Enhanced (-)........$35 Aces of the Pacific ..... .$45 Castle of Dr. Brain ............ $30 Nova 9(*) ....... $22 Red Baron VGA.......... $40 Red Baron Mission Builder $20 Rise of the Dragon VGA (*)....... Willy Beamish .... ELECTRONIC ARTS Birds of Prey .............. Chuck Yeager's Air Combat .......$35 Earl Weaver Baseball 2............ $32 Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes....... $46 IMPRESSIONS Air Bucks ............... Conquest of Japan $35 $35 Paladin 2....................... $35 INTERPLAY Battlechess 4000...... Buzz Aldren's Race into Space.......$35 Castles 2 ..... Future Wars.... Lord of the Rings ...... .....$32 Out of this World ()....... Power Politics (Windows 3.5\" only) .. $30 $25 MISC Aspects of Valor ................. $36 Cobra Mission ....................$45 Demon's Gate ................. Front Page Sports Football ...... Goblins ........ Legend of Kyrandia...... Lure of the Temptress .. Micro League Football 2... Plan 9 From Outer Space .... Ragnarok (') .............. Terminator 2029 .............. Tom Landry Football .. Tristan Pinball (*)....... The Dark Half .......... Utopia SOUND BOARDS Sound Blaster Pro ................$155 Pro Audio Spectrum Plus..........$135 Pro Audio Spectrum 16..............$195 $35 ......$35 $30 Discovery...................... $30 ... $25 ......$35 $42 $35 $30 $40 .... $35 .....$35 $53 *Both 3/2\" and 5/4\" disks included. Order all other titles by specifying the proper disk size. No-Name Software. P.O. Box 381463. Birmingham, AL 35238-1463 Orders/Info: 800-788-4263 FAX (24 Hrs): 205-980-1953 Hours: 9 AM 9 PM Central Time 7 Days We accept MC, Visa, Money Orders and personal checks (held 10 business days). No surcharge for MC/Visa. Orders received before 2 PM shipped the same day whenever possible. Pre-orders for new releases shipped 2nd day air for $5 Continental U.S. only. Shipping rates: UPS: UPS: $4 for the first item plus $1 for each additional item. Defectives replaced with the same title. 2nd Day Air: Add $3 to UPS shipping rate. Alabama residents add 4% tax for hardware & books. Overnight: Add $6 to UPS shipping rate. We have lots more not listed. Call our 800 number for a quote. Circle Reader Service #80 "


"IMPURINN needed traction, and crossing the checkered linc first. The cars behave well, exhibiting characteristics of acceleration, top speed, understeer, oversteer, etc. They don't sound different, as they would on the track, but they feel different, and they certainly look different when viewing the race from inside the car. simulation is realistic there is a greater sense of speed than with our earlier Sneak Preview version (CGW #100) — and is surprisingly \"natural\" with a joystick; it is also fun to drive with Colorado Spectrum's Mouse Wheel, but you still have to accelerate and shift with the keyboard. The game offers more interesting UB:23 Lamborghini Countach 5000 Quattrovalvole Welcome the big red varmum cleaner MEN wel hu dey. Adelin wystary Syd road/track in the corners. There is a setting in the game to disable off-road driving, but choosing settings like that, as well as \"invincible\" settings preventing collision damage, take too much of the challenge out of driving. Start off in the \"easy\" driving setting, with no competitors, in auto-shift mode and just practice staying on the course until your finish times start to rise. If your car strays from the pavement, usually preceded by red type indicating \"front wheel skid\" or \"rear wheel skid\" or both, one can drive back on road or simply touch 'Q' and return instantly to the track. After driving a course successfully, it's as much fun watching the replay. C&D offers a number of interesting replay vantage points, including in-car, chase car, nearest camera, chase chopper, blimp and finish line, and they help show the driver any errors of his ways. A minor flaw is that during the replay the car often disappears behind slices of the filledpolygon scenery. A thoughtful detail, though, is the way one's taillights come on when the car was braking during the course. There are other touches in courses like the Dobb's Raceway where helicopters and jets fly over the course to amuse/distract you. C&D takes a checkered flag on a number of points, and could use improvement in only a couple areas. The choice of cars, tracks and excellent articles referring to both enhance the enjoyment of this new gaming engine. The fimul det One may choose from four driver views before or during a race: inside car with dash and instruments in view: low res, inside car with high res, outside car high res or default field of view. I preferred the outside view for a more exciting immersion in the game. Graphic representation of the car's interiors is up to the standards one would expect from an EA game. Learning to drive these courses won't empty your wallet or your tank. The hardest part is just keeping the car from belting off the cars than any competing driving software, and can become more demanding by choosing manual shifting and higher degrees of difficulty. Let's lay the laurels on C&D for this year's contest, and await the next \"Ultimate Driving Simulation\" to take us to the next level with greater graphic realism. Until then, rey up your engines and may the glistening lipsticky kisses be yours in the winner's circle. CGW KABOARI) COMMANDER CORIZ SIDELINE SOFTWARE orders 1-800-888-9273 only Your European PC Connection DISCOUNT TITLES NEW TITLES TYPE $ Arcade Adventure 38 PREMIUM TEMPLATES 45 Do you enjoy \"flying\" the super-sophisticated PC flight simulators available today? Is \"keyboard confusion\" your worst enemy-you know, frantically hunting keys to switch views, activate defenses, launch weapons, etc., (not to mention flying the plane)just to survive the mission? KEYBOARD COMMANDER CORPS flight simulator keyboard templates can end that overload and let you concentrate on flyin' and shootin'. Our high-quality, color templates turn any AT101 Enh keyboard into a realistic control panel for your favorite sim and our standardized, color-coded layout flattens the learning curve from one sim to another. 1 Watch yer Forget \"Keyboard Confusion\", just remember.si Robocop 3 Alone in the Dark Curse of the Enchantress WWF, T2, The Simpsons: all Joe and Mac Cool World Harrier Assault Ishar: Legend of the Fortress First Samurai Moonstone Ween the Prophecy A320 Airbus Daemonsgate INCA Laser Squad Wizkid World Wrestle Federation 2 Arcade Adventure RPG Arcade Strategy Arcade Strategy Arcade Adventure Flight Sim. RPG Arcade Strategy Arcade Strategy RPG Flight Sim. RPG RPG War Strategy Arcade Strategy Simulation AANS WWE Available!! 4-D Sports Boxing18.95 Advanced Destroyer Sim 16.95 Arkanold 2 16.95 Armor Alley 16.95 Austerlitz 16.95 Bard's Tale 3 18.95 BAT 14,95 Battlechess 18.95 Battletech 2 16.95 Bloodwych 16.95 Centurion 18.95 Colorado 14.95 Conan the Cimmaron 18.95 Conflict: Europe Deluxe Strip Poker 16.95 Die Hard 2 16.95 Drakkhan 18.95 F16 Falcon 19.95 Fire Team 2200 16.95 Flight of the Intruder 18.95 Floor 13 18.95 Fool's Errand 16.95 Genghis Khan 18.95 Greg Norman Goll 18.95 Heart of China 18.95 Hills Street Blues 18.95 Hoverforce 14.95 Imperium 18.95 Jack Nicholas Greatest 18 16.95 Killing Cloud 16.95 King of Chicago 14.95 Mig 29 Fulcrum 18.95 Monty Python 16.95 Neuromancer 16.95 Panza Kick Boxing 18.95 Paperboy 2 16.95 Pit Fighter 18.95 RBI Baseball 2 14.95 Realms 18.95 Sands of Fire 13.95 Sherman M-4 14.95 Shadowlands 18.95 Shufflepuck Catc 14.95 Sleeping Gods Lie 16.95 Spol 16.95 Star Saga Two 14.95 Stunt Car Racer 16.95 Super Oft Road 16.95 Super Space Invaders 16.95 Three Stooges T.V. Sports Basketball 14.95 T.V. Sports Football 14.95 Wing Commander Winter Super Sports '92 16.95 Wolfpack 18.95 World Class Leaderboard 14.95 XT LAYOUTS COMING SOON OOOOOOOOOOO Falcon 3.0 A-10 Tank Killer Aces of the Pacific F-15 Strike Eagle 11 Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe F-117A Nighthawk Jeftfighter I & II Megafortress B-17 Flying Fortress ATP CY Air Combat Flight Simulator 4.0 EUROMAGS Get the latest news on the best PC titles from Europe! These high gloss, full color magazines also feature a demo-packed playable cover disk with each issue! PC Format or PC Review, $10 each. SHIPPING (UPS Ground) For up to 3 pieces, by payment: Mastercard & Visa $5.00.C.O.D. (Cash Only) $10.00 Next day & second day air available! Call for prices on special shipping. Shipping times not guaranteed. Price & Availability subject to change! No refunds or exchanges. Defective products exchanged with same item. Products warrantied through Sideline. FAX ORDERS CALL (305) 491-6134 Need Info? Call (305) 491-9519 840 N.W.57th Court, Ft. Lauderdale, FL 33309 * High-quality, 3-D graphics * Standardized format *Logical, color-coded layout * Affixes to keyboard * Fits all AT101 Enh. keyboards *Sturdy, laminated stock 1 Hurry! Get 'em at Introductory Prices!!! @ 1 $11.95 Please Print Check Enclosed Money Order enclosed. Any 2 $21.50 Wister deleon Any 3 $30.00 4 or more $9.25 each IN a me Country S & H add $3.00 or C.O.D. add $6.00...CALL Address city KCC, Inc., Dept C State/Province Zip/Postal Code 4839 SW 148 Ave., #402 Davie, FL 33330 toms Discounts por order only: Allow 7.4 Weeks) DEALERS WELCOME 1-800-262-6066 Circle Reader Service #92 Circle Reader Service #66 Page 76 Computer Gaming World "


"\"...no other game, no matter how graphically advanced, captures the true essence of roleplaying like this one.\" (Compter Game Review, Oct. 1992) \"...a remarkably rich playground for modem-owning role-players.\" (Compter Gaming World, Aug. 1992) Do yo own  modem? Then live out your favorite roleplaying fantasies in the finest multiplayer interactive fiction game ever of future Legends past NICOLE LEE 92 Every day, the intrepid, the romantic, the imaginative and the adventurous meet as player characters in the Shattered Realms, a virtual fantasy world created from shared imagination on the Digital Dreams Network Explore the dark reaches beneath the Teeth of Shattant or enjoy a casual stroll with friends through the enchanted Grymwood Forest. Become a champion of Justice, or a force for darkness. Delve into political intrigue or play the lone wolf on a personal queste Share adventures and make friends with people calling from across the country. Skilled authors create special quests nightly that allow you to become part of an ongoing plot within a never ending tale. Call 800-937-7644 to join the adventure (1200/2400 bps, 8N1, full duplex) or 800-274-2814 for more information ivorce As low as $3.00 per hour all day every day Visa  MasterCard  American Expres Circle Reader Service #65 Legends of Future PastTM is available only on the Digital Dreams Network In, a service of Inner Circle Technologies, Inc. Other features include forums containing thousands of files and featuring discussions on a wide range of topics from science fiction to PC computing. Other entertainment products, teleconferencing, nationwide matchmaking and news serviceas are also available! "


"D IN) Se hele annonces Sant Island A Star Is Made! An \"Interview\" with an Accomplished an Accomplished Stunt Pilot and Film Producer Film Producer by Timothy L. Trimble TITLE: SYSTEM: PRICE: PROTECTION: DESIGNERS: Stunt Island IBM Compatible $59.95 Document Look-Up Adrian Stephens and Ronald Fortier Walt Disney Computer Software Burbank, CA PUBLISHER: STOLYINGINULATION nce again this reporter has the exclusive privilege of presenting a personal interview with the fabulous Mr. Timothy Trimble just after the preview of his new motion picture, \"The Timinator.\" CGW: Mr. Trimble, that was an incredible movie! I understand that you not only flew the stunts but you built the movie sets, did the filming, and then did all of the editing and special effects. That's a lot of work for just one person. How did you manage to do it all? TT: Well, it was all very enjoyable. There were a few of the stunts that were very tricky and required a lot of skill to fly, but the risk was well worth the effort. The sets took quite a while to build, but I wanted to make sure that they were just right for the filming of the stunts. Plus, I couldn't have done it without my assistant, Stunt Island. CGW: Of course! Stunt Island from Walt Disney Software. Our magazine did a Sneak Preview in our August 1992 issue (#98). For the benefit of some of our new readers could you give us an overview of what Stunt Island is? TT: Sure, I'd be glad to. Stunt Island is a movie-making and stunt flying simulator. It allows any avid pilot or movie maker to design sets and stunts, fly the stunts, and then do the post-production process of editing the various camera films, adding special effects, sound tracks, and then, producing a full length (up to 20 minutes) motion picture. CGW: You mean you were able to do this entire movie with Stunt Island? TT: Yes! Without Stunt Island I would not be the star that I am today! CGW: Since Stunt Island can do so much in just one product doesn't this limit the amount of features and capabilities? TT: Actually, no! For example, in the pre-production process of building sets and creating the stunts I was able to select from over 800 complex objects and place them anywhere on or above the island location. Things like vehicles, animals, plants, buildings, and of course some very famous landmarks. Plus, I can utilize and modify any of the 34 existing film sets or create my own completely from scratch. CGW: I noticed in the film that you had some vehicles moving among the buildings in your city-in-the-sky set. TT: Yes, it was a very difficult set to build and create but well worth the effort. Once an object has been selected for placement on the set I can then set various parameters for movement and \"events.\" There was one scene where I drop a bomb on a moving vehicle. The vehicle exploded and another vehicle swerved off the road and tumbled end over end. I handled all the action by programming special events for each of the objects on the set. CGW: It all sounds like a very complicated process. TT: Actually, the process is not very hard at all. All of the event commands are provided via on-screen selections and the format is very simple. It's just as easy as saying IF collision with bomb THEN explode. It's that easy! CGW: How were you able to manage all of the different camera angles for the stunts? TT: Well, the first eight objects that are placed on a set, including the aircraft, become points from which you are able to film the scene; that is, they become \"cameras.\" During the design and building of the set each object can then be configured for camera angle, zoom, and tracking of the object being filmed. CGW: What about the airplanes? I noticed that you flew a lot of different planes in the film. TT: That was my favorite part of making the movie, flying the planes. Stunt Island provides 45 different types of aircraft, ranging all the way from WWI to modern day fighters and commercial aircraft, and even the space shuttle. One of the trickiest parts about flying the various types of aircraft for this film is learning the handling characteristics of each of the planes. After flying the Lear around the city-in-the-sky for awhile, I then had a difficult time adjusting to the handling characteristics of the 747 for the final departure scene of the movie. Aside from learning how each plane handles, the actual flying of the aircraft is very easy. Not a whole bunch of technical controls or instruments, just the pure joy of flying by the seat of your pants. The opening scene with the SR-71 coming in at dawn was my most enjoyable light. CGW: Do you have to be flying a stunt in order to fly the aircraft? TT: No. I did all of the location scouting by just flying around and learning the various sites around the island. There are a lot of good sites for scenery on the island. Trees, mountains, canyons, cities, towns, bridges, farms, a military base, and even the movie studio is on the island. If I see a good site for a scene then I turn on a special film recorder and then look at the film again later in the editing room. Flying around freely also gave me a good opportunity to become familiar with some of the different aircraft. CGW: Once you were done with the filming how did you handle the editing process? Puge 78 Computer Gaming World "


"meuneIn TT: The whole post-production process is one of my favorite activities in film making, after flying of course. Like they say, you can make or ruin the quality of a film during the editing process. Stunt Island allowed me to incorporate eight different camera shots into one major scene. be glad to hear that! I also noticed that the graphics were wonderful, with the light source shading, panning and smoothness of movement. Does this require any special equipment? TT: Well, it is recommended that you use an IBM compatible, 386SX at 16MHz or better. The movie that you watched was all done with a 386DX at 33MHz on a 256-color VGA monitor. EGA, MCGA, and Tandy 16-color is also supported. Stunt Island also requires a minimum of 13MBs of hard disk space. The requirements are reasonable for the quality that you get. CGW: So, Mr. Trimble, with the accomplishment of creating a motion picture, flying the stunts, and distributing the film, what other activities will you be pursuing next? TT: Well, I'm getting ready to enter the Stunt Island Stunt Competition which is also a part of the package. There are 32 different contest stunts. The competition requires that 26 of the stunts are completed and I will be attempting to do them all in the first take. there are already plenty of potential film students and stunt pilots just waiting to take my place. Just to demonstrate how easy it is to get involved with this product I would like to mention that my wife, who has never sat down to use any of my flight packages, decided to take the Lear for a spin around the island. And she thoroughly enjoyed it! CGW: Sorry, ladies, but it sounds like this stunt pilot and film maker is spoken for! Well, Mr. Trimble, this has been a wonderful interview, and I'm sure that our readers will be looking forward to seeing your films and maybe even making their own. Do you have any final thoughts that you would like to add? TT: Actually, yes I would. I have been very pleased with this product. I feel that it represents the future of simulation products and helps to set some new standards for entertainment software. I expect that this will also be a step towards a future where films can be created completely on the microcomputer for distribution and viewing to the general movie viewing public. Disney Software always seems to be a step ahead when it comes to entertaining the masses and I feel that they have done this with Stunt Island. My only desire is for rudder pedal support but Disney has assured me that they are working on it and will have it available soon. And, as I mentioned earlier, Stunt Island has made me a Star! For a little while anyway. CGW: It's been a great interview, Mr. Trimble, and I'm sure that your fans will look forward to the distribution of your film \"The Timinator\" on most local BBSs and Information Services. For those of you who are interested, Stunt Island is a prodlict of Disney Software and is available now at your local distributor. KK Ext 10ed707 Timing of the changes between camera shots is critical but the editing facility of Stunt Island allows full control over the film footage with its VCR type controls. This is also where the special effects, titling, and sound track are added. CGW: Your movie had a great soundtrack. How were you able to incorporate this into the film? TT: The editing booth allows for the addition of sound tracks and sound effects. There is a lot of pre-recorded music, sound effects, and common sounds that are available within the Stunt Island package itself. Plus, with the support for various sound boards, sound and dialog can be recorded through a microphone and used within the package. There are two channels for the sound track with four volume levels, allowing for playing a musical sound track along with the sound effects. The editing booth also allows the addition of titles, credits and some visual effects, such as coloring, fade and film speed. CGW: So the editing booth allows you to take the film footage and create the entire motion picture? TT: Yes, that's correct. Once I am satisfied with the final footage then I save the end result as a film. I can either preview the film in the editing booth or view it in the theater. And, of course, the audience in the theater always loves my films! CGW: So with the viewing of your film today, does this mean that the Stunt Island package is required for viewing the movie? TT: No, that's one of the best things about this package. Once the film is completed I can distribute the film to any of my fans along with a viewing program called Playone. Best of all, there are no royalties required for distribution of the films! CGW: I'm sure our readers will really 20101.00 KA KUTOK Song Moroto Scene Mork.Go to Ens sur ce MonDo Enca Monte CEO Lics 29 [Sh: Emai a, cuc anal Previe-. TRAINTNLC Film Destination Dack 3 D EX.Delete Recundo LOCB1516719 . Loed Print ESSE CGW: The first take? Why the pressure to do it correct the first time? TT: The bonus pay is better if the stunt is completed on the first take. The main object of the competition is to make the most money from doing the stunts by the end of the competition. I've had to do some practicing, however, on some of the stunts since the stunt coordinator is not always clear on what he wants done during the stunt. CGW: So, what do you get for winning the competition? TT: Rumor has it that the winner of the contest gets the airfield named after the pilot at the Stunt Island first anniversary party. CGW: Well, that does sound like a nice prize. It seems that you've been able to accomplish a lot as a result of using Stunt Island for your film project. Would you recommend to anyone else who is interested in making movies or flying stunts that they use this package? TT: Oh yes, of course! I expect that LLLL STUNT COORDINATOR You can contact the Tim \"The Timinator\" Trimble fan club via Compuserve at 76306,1115 or via Internet at ttrimble@timinator.win.net. Once again, this is your roving CGW reporter, bringing you the latest and greatest, saying \"So long until next time.\" Cow March 1993 Page 79 "


"VKNG ) SOFTWARE, INC. Adventure/Role-Playing Past IBM Mac IBM Mac CARRIERS AT WAR IBM Mac 37 37 42 42 42 . Might & Magic IV M&M Clouds of Xeen Merchant Colony Pirates Gold Pool of Radiance Pool of Darkness Prophecy of the Shadow Quest for Glory I (VGA) Quest for Glory II p gfc  Bmm 32 Spoils of War The Summoning Tales of Magic Treasures Savage Frontier Ultima VI Ultima VII Forge of Virtue Ultima VII Part 2 Ultima Trilogy 2 Ultima Underworld Ultima Underworld 2 Uncharted Waters Veil of Darkness Warriors of Legend Wizardry Trilogy Wizardry 6 (Bane) Wizardry 7 (Crusaders) . 36 3Q Space Quest III Space Quest IV Space Quest V Spelljammer Star Control 2 StarFlight 1 StarFlight 2 Star Trek 25th Anniversary Star Trek: Next Generation Strike Commander Terminator 2029 Twilight: 2000 Twilight: 2001 Ultrabots Wing Commander 11 Special Operations ! Special Operations 2 Speech Pack Wing Commander III .:: Corolla 100% COSIOTRUCTION KIT :: de 19 X-Wing Chuck Yeager Handbook Civilization Clouds of Xeen Dagger of Amon Ra Darklands HB w/Art Disk Dungeon Master Dungeon Master Scrolls Elviral Elvira il Eye of the Beholder 2 Falcon Air Combat Falcon 3 Strategic Guide Legend f Kyranda Lord of the Rings Lucasfilm Air Combat Harpoon Battlebook Magic Candle 2 Might & Magic III Planet's Edge Pools of Darkness Powermonger Quest for Clues 5 Railroad Tycoon Rex Nebular Ringworld Run 5 Magazine 1-17 Secret of Monkey Island I Secret of Monkey Island II Sherlock Holmes Sierra Hint Books Star Trek 25th Anniversary Summoning Ultima VI Ultima VII Ultima Underworld Wing Commander Wizardry 6 (Banc) IBM Mac AD&D Starter Kit 43 AD&D Collector's Edition 39 . AD&D Collector's Edit. 2 43 . Bards Tale III 31 . Bards Tale Conser. Set 32 Betrayal at Krondor 10 . Black Crypt Castles 36 20 Northern Camp. 19 . Castles 11 37 30 Challenge of Five Realms 38 . Champions of Krynn 19 . Conquests of the Longbow 42 Curse of the Azure Bonds 1537 Darklands 39 . Art Disk w/HB 13 . Darklands MPE 3193 Dark Queen of Krynn 34 37 Darkside of Xeen 42 . Dark Sun Daughter of Serpents Death Knights of Krynn 19 Dragonlance Collec. Ed. 43 Eric the Unready 37 . Eye of the Beholder 19 Eye of the Beholder 2 38 Eye of the Beholder 3793 Four Crystals of Trazere 34 . Gateway Savage Frontier 31 . Heimdall Inindo King's Quest 1 Enhanced 34 . King's Quest 1-111 King's Quest IV King's Quest V (VGA) 42 42 King's Quest VI King's Ransom Legacy Legacy of Necromancer TBA Legend of Kyrandia Legends of Drakka 7793 Legends of Valor 37 . Lord of the Rings Lord of the Rings 2 Lost Vikings Lure of Temptress Magic Candle 2 Magic Candle 3 Might & Magic I&II Might & Magic III 39 37 Present Carriers at War Construction Kit This kit allows modification of existing CAW scenarios or the creation of new scenarios. New scenarios includeWake Island, Guadalcanal, and Tarawa IBM $37 ::::::: 37 . . : . Magic Candle III This sequel in this popular series is much improved over its predecessors. Improved gameplay, graphics, and sound accompany you on a new quest to save the lands around the Solian Sea. IBM $37 Amazon Batman Returns Carmen San Diego: Past . Carmen San Diego: Europe 34 Carmen San Diego: Time 34 Carmen San Diego: USA 34 Carmen San Diego: World 34 Carmen San Diego: Deluxe 49 Carmen San Diego: Amer. Past 38 Castle of Dr. Brain 33 Champions 293 Classic Adv. Pak (LucasArts) 37 Creepers Digeneration Dagger of Amon Ra Deja Vu 1 & 11 Eco Quest 2 Elvira ! . . . Steve Fawn KLORDS IBM Mac Lost Treasures of Infocom 1 37 37 Les Manley/Lost in LA 38 . The Manhole 32 Maniac Mansion 2 Oh No! More Lemmings! Out of this World Police Quest ! Police Quest 2 Police Quest 3 Rocketeer w/Sound Source Savage Empire Sea Rogue Seal Team Waxworks Willy Beamish 42 42 Wolfenstein/Spear Des. 42 . CAMA Hardware Quest for Glory III Ragnarok Realms Return to Zork Ringworld Secret of Monkey Island Secret of Monkey Island 2 Secret of the Silver Blades Shadowgate Shadowgate (Windows) Shadowlands Shadow Sorcerer Spellcraft Warlords Enchanced This classic wargame has been on top of CGW's Reader Poll for 2 years. Addictive medieval strategy game with 1-8 human computer players. A+ rating IBM $19 39 15 37 37 Adlib CH-Flightstick CH-Virtual Pilot Gravis Eliminator Gamecard 29 Gravis Joystick Gravis Pro Gravis UltraSound 130 Pro Audio Spectrum.16 239 SoundBlaster Pro 180 Sound Blaster Pro Basic 150 SoundBlaster Microchannel 269 Thunderboard Thrust Master flight stick 69 Thrust Master Pro 114 Thrust Master Rudder Pedal 109 Thrust Master throttle 79 Thrust Master TSR'S 12 15 . February Specials Hint Books AD&D Clue Books 10-12 Avatar Adventures Bard's Tale III Chaos Strikes Back Ami Future Armour Geddon 37 Bartletech Powerhits Buck Rogers Buck Rogers 2 Breach 2 Cyberspace 2/93 Dune 37 Dune il Epic Elite Plus Free D.C. Gateway Hard Nova Jonny Crash Leather Goddesses Phobos 2 46 Legions of Krella/Star Legions 37 . Terminator 2029 One of the best action games out. Excellent graphics, MIDI music, and digitized sound FX. Features: Promotions, 19 scenarios, 20,000+ map locations IBM $42 ann.. A+ Fall \"M\" Hard Nova Int. Sports Challenge Links/Bountiful Course Disk MBT. Cen. Germany Monty Python No Greater Glory Overrun Red Baron Robosport Secret of Monkey Island I Second Front Sim City Add-ons 1 & 2 Space Quest IV Stratego Team Yankee Test Drive II: Supercars Warlords Western Front Yeager Air Combat Thrustmaster TSR's 15 39 Viking Ratings Dogs of War: Seige Expansion Dune II Stunt Island V for Victory #2 Front Page Sports: Football Pacific War Wayne Gretzky 3 Aces: 1946 High Command Task Force 1942 A.T.A.C. Special Forces 3/93 . .manom. Mantis Martian Memorandum Mechwarrior 2 Megatraveller Megatraveller 2 Megatraveller 3 Nova 9 Out of this World Planet's Edge Powerhits Sci-Fi Privateer Rex Nebular Rise of the Dragon (VGA) Space Hulks Space Quest 1-16 25 37 Elvira 2 Floor 13 Freddy Pharkas Heart of China Indy Jones/Last Crusade Indy Jones Fate of Atlantis Jaws of Cerberus Leisure Suit Larry Trilogy Leisure Suit Larry! Leisure Suit Larry 5 Lost Files Sherlock Holmes Lost Treasures of Infocom 37 39 43 53 37 . . cedo 42 42 42 42 . 42 . "


"For information and release dates To place orders in U.S. and Canada Fax 1-(404) 840-7925 SAME DAY SHIPPING depending on availability. Hours: Mon-Fri 10am-10pm Eastern (6am7pm Pacific). UPS $4.00 (AK & HI= $11) COD $8.00. Second day air: $2.50 extra. SHIPPING OUTSIDE OF U.S. is $12 & UPS Foreign available. UPS OVERSEAS:3-day shipping time! Prices are subject to change so please call first! PHONE: (404) 840-7906 24 HR. FAX: (404) 840-7925 2890 Lake Colony Drive, Suite 12, Norcross, GA 30071 Please have credit card ready! Open Saturdays 10-5 for your convenience. Strategy Pre-WWII Sci-Fi IBM Mac CONFLICT: KOREA 1950-51 32 32 ... .1995 High Command Spoils of War Stunt Island Super Tetris Super Tetris (Windows) Theatre of War Tetris Tristan Utopia Virtual Reality Studio 2 Welleris Wordtris 37 .. IBM Mac Ancient Art of War Skies 37 . Blue and the Grey 5/93 . Caesar Civil War Vol. 1, 2 or 3 27 32 Cohort 2 Conquered Kingdoms Conquest of Japan Discovery of Columbus Genghis Khan Gettysburg Gold of the Americas L'Empereur Liberty or Death Merchant Colony No Greater Glory Nobunaga's Ambition 2 Paladin ! PTO Rampart Red Baron (VGA) Mission Builder 19 Romance of 3 Kingdoms 42 Romance of 3 Kingdoms 2 42 Siege Dogs of War Warlords Enhanced Waterloo IBM Mac Battlefield 2000 Breach 2 Cyber Empires Firctcam 2200 Global Effect Imperium Mantis Speech Pack Mechamander Reach for the Stars Robosport (Windows) 38 37 Rules of Engagement Rules of Engagement 2 4 /93 Second Conflict (Windows) 34 Space Inc. Spaceward HO! (Windows) 37 Spaceward HO! (DOS) 37 Star Legions Star Legions 2 Tegel's Mercenaries 37 When Two Worlds War 3793 . 3/93 ........ Conflict: Korea Conflict: Korea concentrates on the first year of the Korean War (195051). Several scenarios with campaign game. Also: Hypothetical 1995 sce|| nario, 6 difficulty levels. IBM $19 . . 32 High Command Best WWII grand scale game yet! Covers 19391945 and models three aspects of war: military, political, and economic. Also: EGA graphics, 200+ page manual. IBM $44 Sports All.Amer. College Ftbl 92 37 ATP Tennis 31 Bill Elliot. Nascar 32 Car and Driver Complete PGA Tour Golf 31 IBM Mac Earl Weaver Baseball . 31 Front Pg Sports: Football 42 . Front Pg Sports: Baseball 3/93 . Front Pg Sports: Bsktball 93 . Games: Summer Challenge 35 Games: Winter Challenge 35 Grand Prix Greens Hardball 3 MLBPA Player Disk Stadium Disk Jack Nicklaus Sig. Ed. Golf 42 Course Disk #2 20 John Madden Football II 33 Jordan Flight Links Links 386 Pro Course Disks 1-7 21 ca Microleague Baseball 4 33 . NCAA College Football '92 37 . NFL Challenge NFL Pro League \"92 3 7 NFL Video Pro Football 47 . PGA Tour Golf PGA Tourn. Crse. Dsk. 15 15 PGA Tour Golf (Windows) 37 PGA Tourn. Crse. Disk 15 Pool Shark 22 Pro League Baseball Power Hits: Sports Tony La Russa Ult Baseball 19 Add-On Disks Sea Tony LaRussa 2 3 7 Wayne Gretzky Hockey 2 36 Hockey League Sim. 28 Wayne Gretzky Hockey 37 Wilson Pro Golf 293 . World Circuit . WWWSYNN FRONT .... General IBM Mac V for Victory. Casserine Pass 20 20 V for Victory: Stalingrad 30 30 Victory at Sea 1993 : Western Front 22 . World War II 25 Modern 1 39 . 34 A.Train Construction Set Air Bucks Battles of Destiny Battle Chess Battle Chess (Windows) BattleChess 4000 (VGA) BattleChess 4000 (SVGA) 37 Buzz Aldrin's Race to Space 10 Caesar's Palace Caesar's Palace (Windows) 22 Chessmaster 3000 Chessmaster 3000 (Windows) 43 Civilization 38 Civilization Master Edition Classic 5 Chassic 5 (Windows) Command HQ Classic Design Your Train Design Your R.R. Design Your Landscape Dominant Species Dominion El Fish 38 . . AS 42 Second Front Western Front Two of the most detailed WWII strategy games available. Both include every historic division. Each available at $22 only while supplies last. IBM $22 Keyboard Overlays A-10 Tank Kiler AT.P. Aces of the Pacific B-17 Flying Fortress C. Yeager Air Combat F-15 Strike Eagle 11 F-117A Nighthawk Falcon 3.0/3.0.1 Flight Simulator 4.0 Jetfighter I and II Megafortress Secret Weapons Luftwaffe 10  SAR CD-ROM IBM Mac Empire Deluxe 37 Eric The Unready 37 . Facetris III 17 17 Flight Sim 4.0 40 39 Sound and Graphics Global Conquest Grandest Admiral Grand Slam Bridge II Heaven and Earth Hong Kong Mahjong Hong Kong Mahjong Pro 31 Hoyles/Classic 32 . Incredible Machine 32 Ishido . 34 Lemmings 32 32 More Lemmings & Game 33 More Lemmings Lemmings 2 37 37 Lexi-Cross 27 32 Lost Admiral 38 Lost Admiral Enhanced 12/93 . Monopoly 28 . Monopoly Deluxe DOS/Win 37 . Perfect General WWII Scenario Disk 22 . Great Battles 20th Cen 25 . Perfect General Enhanced 8893 . Populous 2 37 . World Editor 3/93 . Powermonger 34 . WWI Scenario Disk Power Politics Power Hits: Movies Reach for the Skies 22 . Risk Risk (Windows) Sargon V Scrabble Deluxe (Windows) Sharif On Bridge Sharif On Bridge (Windows) Shuttle SimAnt SimCity SimCity (Windows) SimCity Supreme ! SimCity Supreme II SimCity 2000 SimEarth SimEarth (Windows) SimFarm SimLife SimLife (Windows) Solitaire (Windows) Solitaires Journey  Aces of the Pacific WWII: 1946! RAF in the Pacific Aces Over Europe Campaign Disk 1 Action Stations v3.2 Data Disk B-17 Flying Fortress Battletank Barbarossa Bismarck Campaign Carriers at War Carrier Strike Expansion Disk #1 Fleet Commander Fleet Med Grand Fleet Great Naval Battles Super Ships Atlantic 19 Scenario Builder 3793 America/Atlantic High Command In Harm's Way Malta Storm MBT Central Germany MBT Kursk New World Order Pacific Theater Op. Pacific War Panzer Battles Patton Strikes Back Prelude to Jutland Rommel North Africa Second Front Secret Weapons Luftwaffe 44 DO-335 plane disk 20 HE 162 P-38 P-80 Seventh Fleet Silent Service 2 Silent Service 2 Classic Task Force 1942 Their Finest Hour/Belhwks. 44 . Third Reich V for Victory. Utah Beach 43 39 V for Victory: Velikiye Luki 43 43 V for Victory Mkt. Garden 3/93 3/93 7th Fleet A 10 Warthog 12793 A Line in the Sand ATAC Air Force Commander 37 Allied Forces 29 Comanche: Max. Overkill Expansion Disk 1 Expansion Disk 2 Conflict: Korea Conflict: Middle East Crisis in the Kremlin F-117A Nighthawk (VGA) F-15 Il Classic FISINI Falcon 3.0 Operation: Fighting Tiger Falcon MC Global Effect Gunship 2000 Campaign Disk 1 Harpoon v1.3 Battleset 2 or 3 Battleset 4 Harpoon Designer Series 32 Harpoon Scenario Editor 28 Harpoon Challenger Pak S.E. 49 Harpoon 11 Harrier Assault Jump Jet Jump Jet \"Ace Pack\" KGB MI Tank Platoon Megafortress Mission Disk 1 or 2 Megafortress Megapack Pacific Islands 11 Patriot Shadow President Special Forces Utopia IM 57 . 47 47 4747 20 . . 57 wwHmmm Caesar As governor of a province of the Roman Empire you must build and fortify cities and expand your influence through conquest. Cities built up with ampitheaters forums, aquaducts, etc. IBM $37 The 7th Guest Battle Chess Battle Chess Enhanced Blade Buzz Aldrin's Race Space Campaign Challenge of Five Realms Chessmaster 3000 Creepy Castle Cyberspace Dark Sun Destination-Mars Dune Eco Quest Great Naval Bartles Iron Helix King's Ransom King's Quest V The Legend of Kyrandia Loom Lost Treasures Infocom II Mantis Manhole Murder Makes Strange Deadfellows North American Indians Pacific Islands 11 The Secret of Monkey Island 47 Seeret Weapons of Luftwaffe 57 Sharif on Bridge 10 Sherlock Holmes Cons. Det. 1 43 Sherlock Holmes Cons. Det. 11 43 Shuttle Spaceship Warlock Space Quest IV Star Trek 25th Anniv. Edition Total Baseball Total Distortion Willy Beamish Wing Commander+ Secret Missions 1 & 2 Wing Commander Ultima VI 57 Wolfpack 42 3/93 57 37 42 . . . 3193 Circle Reader Service #106 "


"Scorpion's View Scorpia is an experienced and respected adventure game expert. CGW is pleased to provide this forum for her distinctive and often controversial perspective. Are Role-Players Getting It In The End? or Just What Are Just Desserts? centives for the player to keep on with the game. So, getting there, as the saying goes, is certainly half the fun. Sometimes. We are all familiar with the \"give it all now and take it back later\" feature of far too many CRPG's. The reason is simple: the mechanics of most of them aren't designed with the future in mind. They are constructed to give the characters maximum development in a sinTESTRO A Fantasy Adventure Game ver the years, I have on occasion taken games to task for being unfair to the player in one way or another. More than once, my complaint has been the lack of suitable rewards for playing and completing the game. It is time to look into this matter in greater detail. Why this clamor for reward? Primarily because reward is a basic facet of human behavior that designers tend to overlook, particularly in the game finale. There is hardly a field of endeavor that does not provide some sort of award, some recognition of merit. Pulitzer. Nobel. Oscar. MVP. Hugo. Emmy. Medal of Honor. Game Of The Year. With very little effort, a long list of awards could be compiled. Bashing the Dark Savant, for example, may not be on a par with finding a cure for cancer, but the principle is the same; something outstanding has been accomplished and must not go ignored. Games actually have several levels of rewards and satisfactions. These can be thought of as \"milestones' along the path to ultimate victory. Solving a difficult puzzle, winning a tough fight, watching the party grow in strength and power; all these and more provide ingle game. Wizardry is a good example of this. The Wizardries (except IV) allow for unlimited advancement of the party. I am personally acquainted with a player whose party in Dark Savant had reached the 120th level, with the game only about half-completed. Obviously, bringing characters of such God-like stature into a sequel would make playing that sequel a farce. Even well before such elevated levels have been attained, the characters have reached the maximum possible for their skills and attributes, and have acquired most, if not all, of the spells available. So, even if the characters were allowed into the follow-up as is,\" character advancement, an important feature of CRPGs, has almost no meaning and provides little in the way of satisfaction. The only action possible, then, is to reduce the character levels when the party is transferred into the sequel. Not, perhaps, down to level one, but certainly low enough to make it seem almost like starting again from scratch, with the same characters who, only moments before, were tough, competent, experienced adventurers. Page 82 Computer Gaming World "


"FLIKIYE LUKIMA MARKET GARDEN UTAH BEACH VE FOR VICTORY TH BEACH VEL VELIKIYE LUKIM MARKET GARDEN GIU FOR VICTORY FOH VIETORY FOR VICTORY WARGAMING WITHOUT COMPROMISE Strategy Plus Game of the Year V FOR VICTORY: UTAH BEACH THREE-SIXTY PACIFIC 2105 S. BASCOM AVENUE CAMPBELL, CA 95008 408-879-9144 AVAILABLE AT BABBAGES, COMPUTER CITY, COMP USA, EGGHEAD SOFTWARE, THREE-SIXTY DIRECT SALES: 800-653-1360 IN THE U.S. 800-697-2360 IN CANADA ELECTRONICS BOUTIQUE, WALDENSOFTWARE AND OTHER FINE SOFTWARE RETAILERS. Circle Reader Service #30 "


"Which brings us to that ultimate moment of a game: the ending. Foozle, the evil sorcerer/demon/enchantress/whatever has been killed or otherwise disposed of, and the player is ready to reap the rewards of having once again saved the world, or a good portion of it. All too often, the reward is minuscule, or not even present. Since nothing drives it home like a good example, consider the perspective of the game designer: You spend a year, two years, maybe more, on a product. You sweat over it, curse over it, dream about it at night. Finally the day arrives when the product is in the box, out the door, and on the racks. Then along comes Scorpia who says, in so many words, «This game is a turkey.\" How do you feel about that? Pleased? Happy? Satisfied? Obviously not. All that work, all those hours, and your reward is what could be termed \"a slap in the face.\" QUEST for GLORY Trialby pre Strategic Simulations, Inc. skipped around that difficulty in their gold box games by limiting advancement. «Thus far may you go,\" they said, \"and no more until the sequel.\" Some players were not happy about that, but it was a reasonable approach to a knotty problem, and for the most part, it worked well. It provided a much better sense of continuity; the same team went from adventure to adventure, from strength to strength, much the same as players do in live gaming. There was no depressed feeling of watching those tenth-level characters, achieved through much hard work and many hours of play, suddenly broken down to wimps again. They remained, as it were, their true selves. Where SSI dropped the ball was in the matter of inventory. You could expect, without fail, that most of the better items obtained in one game would be taken away under some specious explanation at the beginning of the next. Even Pools of Darkness, which allowed the \"good stuff\" to come through, was a trick. Half the time, the characters had to leave those items behind when they traveled to \"other planes,\" where they then had to sweat and fight to obtain temporary replacements temporary because those items couldn't make the return trip. A more idiotic convolution would be hard to imagine. Players in a live game would never stand for that. As a one-time thing, a novel experience, maybe. However, if at the beginning of each new adventure the DM said, \"Well boys and girls, this time all your good stuff has been magically stolen by thus-and-so,\" that is one DM who wouldn't have players for very long. To put it in the simplest terms, consider this: \"Well Mr. Nicholson, we hope you've enjoyed your Oscar, but you have to give it back now that you're starting a new movie.\" Doesn't make very much sense, does it? Viewed along these lines, then, most CRPG's provide some satisfaction in the short term, but in the long run, as parties transfer into sequels, losing experience, items, or both, the joy of achievement rather palls. There really isn't a whole lot to like about treading over the same ground again and again. Sometimes, it seems the only real reason to bring over the \"old team» is to avoid the time and trouble of creating a new one. NSAN endings. I still remember with fondness an old game called Questron. By today's standards, it would be considered fairly mediocre. The finale, however, was another matter, which began with the hero (it was a single-player game) marching into the throne room as trumpets blare, to receive recognition from the monarch. This sequence was all the more enjoyable for being so totally unexpected, especially in a 48K game played off floppies. More recently, Sierra, as usual, caught on sooner than most. The majority of their games feature elaborate end sequences, of which my favorite is Quest For Glory II. Oddly enough, it happens to be another throne room scene. The hero stands in the Sultan's chamber while all the people he has helped or shown kindness to during the game stand up and give a brief recitation of his deeds. The icing is provided for Paladins, anyway-when Rakeesh hands over the Sword of Fire. FTL added a brand-new ending to the IBM version of Dungeon Master which was not in the original release. This showed the destruction of the Firestaff and the revitalization of the surrounding land now that Lord Chaos was gone. It's always nice to see some positive results from the party's actions. Endings do not necessarily have to be elaborate productions. The final moments of The Summoning are very short when compared to the above. Almost along the lines of \"one screen and off to the system prompt,\" yet it is not disappointing, because the ending is, in my experience, unique. Short but sweet can be enough, too, if it is done with a little imagination. So, we come to the final assessment. Game mechanics need to be designed not only with the current product in mind, but also the sequel. Giving away everything now only to be forced into taking it back later is not a good concept. Intelligent seeding of «neat stuff\" is another consideration; providing enough to finish the game, while not unbalancing future scenarios is something of an art, but it can be learned. And the finale, the piece de resistance, the ultimate moment of glory, must be carefully thought out to provide suitable recognition and reward for all that the player has accomplished in the game. Taken together, these can make playing the game, and its sequels, a much more enjoyable experience for all of us. Cow SEQUEL ONDARRERAS SIERRA Now see the player: here is someone who has spent $40-70 dollars on the game. He or she then spends weeks, months, possibly a year or more (as I know from the letters) on completing it. What is the final resolution? A screen that says \"Congratulations, you won!\" or \"Your names will be inscribed in the Hall of Heroes forever,\" followed by the system prompt. That, too, is a slap in the face for all the time and effort put into playing the game, particularly when we know what's going to happen in the sequel. These situations are opposite sides of the same coin. Both want something for their investment: the designer, good reviews and good sales; the player, a good time and suitable recognition. There are, of course, a number of games that have provided satisfactory Page 84 Computer Gaming World "


"SOFTWARE HEADOUARTERS A wide selection of software and accessories for the IBM.. Specialists in International Sales Competitive Pricing. Same day shipping SOFTWARE HEADQUARTERS MISSION MISSLON CONTR GAMES 37 .43 Leather Goddesses Phobos 2...43 Legend of Kyrandia................37 Leisure Larry 5...... ....37 Lemmings 2...... Life & Death II:The Brain ........27 Lord of the Rings II: Two Towers 37 Ait Bucks Air Force Commander Amazon A Train 37 Super Tetris... ... Tengen's Arcade Hits... Terminator 2029.... . Theatre of War... 33 Time Treks..... 37 Tracon for Windows... .17 Tracon 2 Air Traffic Controller....43 Jack Nicklaus Tour Disk 1.........20 Jack Nicklaus Tour Disk2.........20 John Madden Football 2........ 33 Links 386 PRO 42 Links: Mauna Kea Course Disk 20 Links Bountiful Course Disk ...18 Mavis Beacon Typing 2.............32 Print Shop Deluxe for Windows..47 SOUNDCARDS Ad Lib Gold 1000...................179 Ad Lin Music Card ...................49 43 32 Star Trek: The Screen Saver For Windows W.4 Prevent screen hum in! Includes 15 incredible graphics, sigital sound, multimedia support wallpaper creator, message display.runs on color and B/W monitors. Now your monitor will live long and prosper by Berkley Systems ........$37. Commanche: Maximum Overkill 47 Conquest of Japan...................37 F15 Strike Eagle 2 Classic.....22 F15 Strike Eagle 3....................47 F15 Strike Eagle 3 Ace Pack......52 F-19 Stealth Fighter... .22 Falcon 3.0... Great Naval Battles:193943 ....47 Global Conquest......................37 Gunship 2000 VGA................42 Gunship 2000 Scenario Disk.....27 Harpoon............. . ...30 Harpoon BattleSet #2 of 3...... Harpoon BattleSet #4.. Harpoon Challenger Pak....... Harpoon Scenario Editor ..........28 Heroes of the 357th.......... 34 Jump Jet ...... Land, Sea Ait Trilogy 2. L'Empereur.... LHX Attack Choppet... Liberty or Death Line in the Sand.. Lost Admiral... MegaFortress. Flight of Old Dog.40 NAM .....32 No Greater Glory.... .....37 40 3 CD's to Choose from or Order All Three and Savc. Disk I contains 5.268 explicit VGA pictures in GIF format, 87 animated movies. 574 stories, tales & jokes and 1200 viewers, games and utilitics. Disk 2 is an exclusive collection contain ing over 200 Super VGA pictures and over 400 VGA pictures, Disk 3 is another collection of over 650 mb of the hottest pictures available. One for $89. Two for $140, or Three for $199. Trump Castle 3..................... Turtles:Arcade Game...............32 Turtles Manhattan Missions......32 Ultima 7: The Black Gate..........47 Ultima 7's Forge of Virtue.......20 Ultima 7: Serpent Isle..............47 Ultima Underworld Ultima Underworld 2...............47 Ultima Tropy 2 Ultrabots. Virtual Reality Studio 2.0...... ..57 Wacky Funsters Waxworks... Wayne's World............... Wheel of Fortune w/ Vanna... Where America's Past Carmen 37 Where in Time is Carmen Where in USA is Carmen Where in USA Carmen Deluxe 47 Turn On CIRUT Sound Blaster Pro.. 199 Sound Blaster Pro Basic CALL UltraSound Card...... . 139 ACCESSORIES NFL... A-Train Construction Set..........25 Barbie's Glamorous Quest...... 27 Bard's Tale Construction Set....34 Bard's Tale li.........................31 Bart Simpson Arcade Game 32 Bart Simpson:House Weirdness 32 Batman Retums........ Battle Chess..... Battle Chess l... Battle Chess 4000 VGA Beat the House. Black Copt Bridge 7.0... Buzz Aldnn's Race Into Space.43 Caesar... Car & Driver........ .. Castles 2: Siege & Conquest ....37 Challenge of the 5 Realms....... 37 Civilization.............. Cobra Mission......... ..47 Conquest of Longbow..... Conquest of Japan....... Creepers. Crisis in the Kremlin ........ ..37 Crusaders of the Dark Savant... 42 Cyber Empires..... The Dagger of Amon Ra... .....43 Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes 47 Lost Treasures of Infocom 43 Lost Treasures of Infocom 2 37 The Lost Tribe..... Lure of the Temptress. Magic Candle 3. Martian Memorandum Mantis Experimental Fighter Megatraveller 3 Mercenaries.... 40 Might/Mapc:Clouds of een Monopoly Deluae..... On No! More Lemmings! (Add) Out of this world....... Paladin II Populous 2 Powerhits: Battletech Powermonger....... Putt Putt Join the Parade.... Quest for Glory 3..... Railroad Tycoon Classic... Realms. Rex Nebular... RoboSport for Windows..... Rules of Engagement 2.... Sargon 5... Scrabble Deluxe... Virtual Pilot Virtual Pilotputs firepower right under your thumbs.prve you Advanced aileton and clevator trim control and extra throttle control for high-powered games. It's as close to cality as you can get without leaving pour computer. by CH Products .......$69. Links:Dorado Beach Course...... 18 Links Firestone Course Disk...... 18 Links: Barton Creek Course....... 18 MicroLeague Baseball 4........ NCAA.Road to Final Four 2.....CALL NFL Pro League Football...... 32 NFL Full Motion Video....... PGA Tour Golf 32 Pro League Baseball '92 Pro Football Analyst Sports Card Inventory System.40 Summer Challenge Tom Landry Football... 32 Tony La Russa Baseball.........32 Wayne Gretzky Hockey 3........37 Hockey League Simulator 2...CALL EDUCATIONAL Gameport Auto CH Products 34 Gameport (MicroChann) by CH 48 Gamecard (80 hrs. controller for PC 9624 Internal Fax/Modem...89 96/24 Portable Fax/Modem. 199 9600 Fax/9600 Modem.... Computer Cleaning & Vacuum...35 JOYSTICKS 40 Patriot... 47 Where in World is Carmen VGA 47 Wing 2 Special Operations 1....27 Wing 2 Special Operations 2.....27 Wing Commander 2.................47 Wing Commander 2 Speech Pak 17 Wing Commander Deluxe ..........47 Algeblaster Plus... Grammar Gremlins Headline Harry VGA Kid Pax.... Kid Pix Companion Kid Works 2 APS 2001 Analog Sabre... Analog Plus Flight Stick by CH Products G FORCE Yoke. Gravis Joystick for PC ..... Mach Ill by CH Products Mouse Wheel Mouse Yoke ....... 34 Perfect General Pirates Gold P.TO. CALL Romance of Three Kingdoms 2.43 Silent Service 2 Classic Spectre 3..... Task Force 1942 V for Victory ...... X Wing SPORTS SOUND MAGIS . Genuine Sound Blaster Chipset  An Ergonomically Designed Joystick High l'erformance Speakers . Bundled Software includes: VOXKIT Voice Utilities. Talking Parrot FM Intelligent Organ. Juke Box for Windows 3.1. Castle Wolfenstein. 2 other shareware games!! by Bondwell...............599. WARGAMES 688 Attack Sub Combo.............28 Air Force Commander.. . Air Warrior Ancient Art of War in Skies....37 A.T.A.C... A.T.P. Flight Commander...37 Aces of the Pacific... Ancient Art of War... B17 Flying Fortress........ Birds of Prey... 33 Campaign............ Cartier Strike ....... Carriers at War Chuck Yeager's Air Combat........90 40 Boxing Action Sports Soccer All American College Football....37 Andretti's Racing Challenge...22 AP.B A Baseball Bill Elliot's Nascar Challenge.....32 Car & Urver. 40 Front Page: Sports Football.......43 GREENS: Ultimate Golf............37 Hardball 3...... .37 43 32 33 22 37 37 37 Weapons Control A hands on throttle with seven independent controls includ ingradar mode, weapons select, waypoint select and counter measures ..........$89. Flight Control The best joystick for Flight Simulators. Compatible with all flight simulator packages as 2 button joystick ..........................569. Flight Control Pro ..................$115. Rudder Pedals.. S115. Legend of Valour Lerens Legend of Valour sets a new standard with the smoothest, most life-like screen scrolling in fantasy adventures Explore two huge worlds: 28 miles of overworld town and underground series of dungeons and labyrinth. Never before husany world been so massive ut fully developed. The dynamic.cvolving music further heightenis tcalism by Strategic Simulations, Inc...$40. Mario Teaches Typing..........32 Quickshot Aviator 5......... Math Blaster Plus Quickshot Intruder 5 Math Blaster Plus Windows....... 37 Quickshot Warrior 5..... Number Munchers.............. Virtual Pilot Oregon Trail Deluxe..... PC Globe 5.0 or USA 2.0..... CD-ROMS Read & Roll VGA 32 Reader Rabbit 2 American Heritage Dictionary Reading Adventures in Or. The Animals..... Reading & Me....... .. 32 Basies Electronic Cookbook Storybook Weaver ........... BattleChess Spell it Plus Talking.......... Beauty & the Beast Super Munchers... Guinness Disc of Records .69 Snap Dragon.... ....... Grolier's Encylcopedia 239 TreeHouse. KGB/CIA Factbook What's My Angle.... Word Munchers... Lost Treasures of Infocom... 47 Zookeeper.. . 37 Lost Treasures of Infocom 2...47 Secret of Monkey Island ...........47 PRODUCTIVITY Secret Weapons of Luftwaffe.....57 Sherlock Holmes Detective 2....45 Animation Studio............79 Software Jukebox.. AutoMap U.S.A. Wars: Civil War AutoWorks U.S. Presidents............. Body Works Wing Commander/Ultima 6......47 Chemistry Works..... Wing Commander 2 Deluxe....CALL Get a Real Feel to Flight! Maxximum Presents! by Maxximum Maxx Yoke gives you the precision you always wanted. It's a full sized multifunctional aircraft joystick for your PC 32 32 Loom.. Command HQ Classic...............22 Combat Classics .. .... 37 Daemonsgate.......... ... 37 Secret of Monkey Island Il.........40 Darklands... Shadow of the Sorcerer..... Dark Sun:The Shattered Lands. 47 Shadowlands Daughter of Serpents Shadow President Design Your Own Railroad Shanghai 2 Dragon's Eye Discovery: Steps of Columbus 37 Sharif on Bridge Dragon's Lair 2 Timewarp Sharif on Bridge for Windows Dragon's Lair 3. Sim Ant... Dragon's Lair: Singe's Castle..37 Sim Life Dune 2 Sim City... . Eco Quest 2 Sim City for Windows Empire Deluxe Sim City Graphic:Ancient Cities 24 Eric the Unready Sim City Graphic:Future Cities.. Gateway Sim Earth Gemfire Sim Earth for Windows Global Effect Solitaire for Windows Grand Slam Bridge 2 Space Ace 2: Bor's Revenge GOOS Space Quest 4 Guy Spy....... Spaceward Ho! Heaven and Earth... Speedball 2 Heimdall Spellcasting 301.... Home Alone 2...... Spellcraft:Aspects of Valor... Hong Kong Mahjong Pro Spelljammer Hoyles Book of Games 3... Star Control 2 The Humans............. Star Trek 25th Anniversary......37 The Personal Astrology Planner Set up your birth horoscope  Design composite horoscopes for more than one person  Create special horoscopes for more than one person. Project your horoscopes for a specific date or time frame. Print out your entire astrological chart along with an exact evaluation of your horoscope by SMC...... .... ..$17. Hardball 3: Park Disk...........Call lack Nicklaus Signature Ed........43 TODIACSIGNS Call us and use your MC, Visa or Discover 800-999-7995 International 212-962-7168 Fax 212-962-7263 Methods of Payment: We accept Visa, MC, Discover Card & Money orders. Personal checks allow 14 days to clear. School, State & City purchase orders accepted. Shipping: UPS Ground ($5 minimum) UPS Blue ($7minimum APO & FPOI $7 minimum) Overseas minimum $30 shipping (please fax orders) Send money orders or checks to: MISSION CONTROL, 551 Valley Road Suite 166 Dept. CGW393, Upper Montclair, NJ 07043 Please send $2.00 for catalogue (free with order) Overseas & Military Orders given special attention! ...$69. Maxx Pedals are floor style modular attachments which are fully assembled and ready to plug in and play..............539. Maxx Yoke & l'edal Bundle....$99. . Indiana Jones 4:Fate of Atlantis.40 Inspector Gadget.................37 Island of Dr. Brain.... K.G.B...... King's Quest 5.. King's Questo Strike Commander ....... Strip Poker 3...... Stunt Island...... The Summoning Super Jeopardy. Super Space Invaders..... Dvorak's Top 30......................37 Floor Plan Plus......... Fast Pack Mail Form Tool Gold. Legal Letter Works . .........47 Mavis Beacon 2 Windows....37 WC2/Ultima Underworld........CALL Not responsible for typographical errors.Check compatibility before ordering. All Sales Final Detectives replaced with same tom only "


"CO-ROM Deview) Sleuth or Consequences Sherlock Holmes, Consulting Detective Volume II from ICOM by Chuck & Millie Miller Sherlock Holmes Consulting Detective Volume II CD-ROM IBM and Macintosh 150KB Transfer Rate, 380ms Access Time, Continuous Read $69.95 VGA Sound Blaster or Media Vision Compatible Sound Card None PROTECTION: ICOM Simulations, Inc. Electronic Arts San Mateo, CA rmchair detectives have long enjoyed the adventures of Sir Arthur Conan Doyle's famous sleuth, Sherlock Holmes. The analytical skills of this larger-than-life character have been portrayed in print, on film and, most recently, on digital media. While Holmes' earliest computer appearances took the form of text adventures, they still held great appeal as the interactive \"novels\" that they were. Nevertheless, in more recent days with the entrance of graphic extravaganzas and CD-ROM technology, the world's most renowned and loved investigator (with the possible exception of Columbo) has taken on a more colorful and lively, even animated, visage. VOLUMII INTERACTIVE VIDEO MYSTERIES must solve, each being a game TITLE: within itself. As such, they can SYSTEM: CD-ROM: be tackled in any order with no PRICE: GRAPHICS: bearing on each other. SOUND: All three cases follow a tradiDESIGNER tional mystery theme-murder, PUBLISHER: theft or both. Case one, The Two DISTRIBUTOR: Lions, revolves around the death of two circus animals and a man. In order to solve this case, the player-as-sleuth must determine if there is any relationship between the death of two lions and a man by the name of Stephen Lyons. In The Pilfered Paintings, investigative skills must be turned toward uncovering the events behind the theft of several valuable paintings. What was the motive for the theft? Could it have been an inside job? The third and final case requires the player to confront issues of greed, fidelity and political intrigue as he or she strives to solve a back-alley murder. Uncovering the motive and culprit in the case of The Murdered Munitions Magnate offers a difficult challenge. SEE ICOTT CD-ROM SHERLOCK HOLMES CONSULTING DETECTIVE THOL Consulting Detective Dec.CT TIE ACTION AS YOU MUCH WITs Wii THE MUSTER SLEUTH AND SEX SCXUTXXX TO THOSE INTRIGUING CARS When is a Game Afoot? Sherlock Holmes Consulting Detective II (Sherlock Holmes II) is, of course, the sequel to ICOM's first whodunit on CDROM. Like the original, Sherlock Holmes Il features three cases which the player Welcome to Video Mystery Theater What sets Sherlock Holmes Consulting Detective apart from other games featuring the inimitable Holmes, is the style of presentation. Both volumes of this series are classified as Interactive Video Mysteries, and with good reason. A major portion of game play is devoted to the player's directing of the action as Holmes and Watson proceed to solve the case at hand, while viewing video clips of the conversations taking place between the characters Page 86 Computer Gaming World "


"A HardBall III takes a full cut at major league realism. A power line-up that includes printable stats, standings and box scores, the ability to import data from HardBall ll\" Earl Weaver /l\" and Tony LaRussa\": plus a Team & Player Editor that allows you to alter everything from team logos to a player's ability 113 CE) HTTP. Sod ..212 A HardBall III zooms in on the bang-bang plays Five camera angles cover the entire ballpark. Watch instant replays and save the best for your own personal Highlight Reel. LET 'EMPLA BASEBALL. WE PLAY HARDBALL\". A Hard Ball III leads off with digitized players and 256 color VGA graphics. Nobody beats this double play combo.Visuals as eye opening as a line drive up the middle. Animation as smooth as a Gold Glove shortstop. From fresh mowed grass to ivy covered walls, details that capture The Show. PRESENTING THE ALL-NEW HARDBALL I 345 HardBall III plays textbook \"team effort\" defense. The strongest fundamentals in the game. Outfielders back up one another and infielders act as cut-off men coming out to take the throw. HardBall III tests each hitter's power with eight real ballparks. Famous fields from both major leagues, Your catcher may have just enough pop to put it out of Chicago's \"friendly confines, but can he go deep in Toronto? League Play Oaxtond | July 1921 AL MICHAEES ANNOUNCES HardBalen SACS maa ces B Next Moan A HardBall III thrusts you into the heat of a pennant race. It's a 162 game, major league season-complete with road trips and an all-star game. Compile good numbers along the way and maybe you'll make the roster The only computer game with Hall of Fame credentials. You don't outsell every baseball title in history by standing pat in the ACCOLADD off-season. New HardBall lll redefines computer baseball once more with real play-by-play announcing: unprecedented graphics, A HardBall III has the realism and playability: plus more of the authentic baseball best play-by-play man in the business Network nuances that serious fans want in a simulation. More runs. broadcast great Al Michaels joins the HardBall More hits. No errors. III Team up in the booth, with a digitized To order, visit your favorite software retailer or call description of all the action. 1-800-245-7744. The best in entertainment software, Play-by play announcing requires 2MB of RAM Actual game screens from IBM PC VGA version of the game. Other versions may vary HardBall III, HardBall Il and HardBalll are trademarks of Accolade, Inc. Earl Weaver it is a trademark of Electronic Arts Tony LaRussa is a trademark of Strategic Simulations, Inc. All other product and corporate rames are trademarks and registered trademarks of their respective owners. 1992 Accolade, Inc. All rights reserved animales en overense CCOL DE Circle Reader Service #34 "


"Deview WLOICE <x< <allale volz the Baker Street Irregulars and the Court. Accessing the associated information or objects is just a mouse click away. Play is quite simple. For example, to travel to Scotland Yard one selects Holmes' Directory. Doing so causes it to open in the center of the screen. From here, one turns to the listings under \"S\" and selects Scotland Yard. Then, with a click on the Carriage icon... voila! Holmes and Watson meet with Inspector Lestrade for a brief discussion. Game play continues as long as necessary for the sleuth-in-training to solve the case. Though there is no time constraint on play, each action does involve a point penalty being added to the player's score. When one believes that he or she has oped a consistent, intuitive design which requires little LA St. Bartholomew's Hospital B St. Thomas Hospital explanation. C Sanger, John Following a brief introD Scotland Yard duction, the player is preE Criminology Department sented with the Casebook F Criminology Lab Sharp, Wallace from which he or she reShinwell, Porky ceives instruction, views SHIPPING COMPANIES Holmes' general introducAberdeen Navigation Co. tion to play, or selects the Adelaide Southampton Co. case to solve. The player Jardine, Matheson & Co. also Lloyd's Shipping Register returns here periodically to save and load the game in progress. SCO M ESAR WELT When a case is selected, involved and keeping one's eyes and ears the player is presented with open for vital clues. Both are very impor an introduction to that particular mystery tant as live video action and digitized and is then taken to the main interface voices are employed in the unfolding of screen where most of the the story. game's action transpires. Of course, all this is possible because of This screen, comprised of a the media employed CD-ROM. As a re map of London bordered sult, a fair amount of video footage is with icons, provides access provided (over 90 minutes), giving the to Holmes' Casebook, his whodunit a theatrical feel and providing Notebook of suspects and the player with a sense of almost being witnesses, a Directory of involved in the action. places and people, The London Times (which is Elementary, My Dear Watson also provided in printed Although solving the mysteries in Sher form), a Carriage for travel TIMES lock Holmes Il requires a good dose of throughout the city, Holdetective work, understanding and using mes' Files containing the interface does not. ICOM has devel background information, TIMES PODE 281 YEARS AGO... THE HYPERSPACE BOOSTER IS DISCOVERED Impressions Software is expanding its American development team. and is looking for the best! In 2095 CE a huge alien artifact was discovered in the far reaches of the Tau Ceti starsystem. It was a hyperspace booster, a device with the capabilitiy to \"push\" spacecraft thousands of lightyears through hyperspace. In subsequent decades, the booster was used to send colonists on a one-way trip to a cluster of stars dubbed the Local Group, far from the rapidly overcrowding worlds of the Home Cluster. For years the Local Group had been receiving Development Assistance packages from the Home Cluster, to update their technology and assist them in constructing new colonies. Fifty four years ago, the shipments mysteriously stopped coming. The next ten years were known as The Great Panic, a period of interstellar war and piracy that nearly destroyed human civilisation in the Local Group. Fortunately, at the peak of hostilities, a hyperspace booster was discovered inside the Local Group. The knowledge that two-way communication with the Home Cluster might be established acted to calm the Local Group. A monumental plan was put into action to move the booster entirely at sublight velocities, into orbit around Cetus Amicus. But, during the twenty-plus years the move required, the Local Group again fell into turmoil, this time to emerge divided into two mutually hostile governments: the Federated Worlds(FW) and the United Democratic Planets(UDP). Programmers experienced in C/Chand Assembly language on IBM PC compatibles, and Graphic Artists experienced in VGA work wanted for exciting new games development, creating leading edge strategy games. We offer a fun working atmosphere in pleasant New England offices. Competitive salaries will be paid according to experience; successful applicants will also benefit from a comprehensive benefits package. Interested? Please send your resume to us at the address below; Graphic artists should also send samples of their work on floppy disk. The Game Design Studio Impressions Software, Inc. 7 Melrose Drive Farmington 06032 To Be Continued... Impressions OMNITRENE The war escalates this Spring. Impressions Software is an equal opportunities employer. Circle Reader Service #64 Page 88 Computer Gaming World "


"A GREAT WAR. ALOST PARADISE. AN EPIC ADVENTURE. STAR CONTROL II. THE QUEST FOR EARTH BEGINS, ACCOLADE The best in entertainment software Star Controlllis a trademark of Accolado, Inc. C 1992 Accolado, Inc. All rights reserved Circle Reader Service #31 "


"meu Hitili Music, when pro eight to ten hours to complete. With the vided, is also very good. much longer play time offered in other Unfortunately, too little disk-based products, this concern needs to is available to \"tickle the be addressed by lengthening the play time ear\" in this game. Digit for each case or adding additional cases ized audio accompany (five would be more appropriate). ing the video clips is clear and undistorted, Rendering a Verdict with a high degree of fiAs it stands, Sherlock Holmes Consultdelity maintained. ing Detective Il is a good product, and one Sherlock Holmes II of the few multimedia titles developed shows other refinements specifically for CD-ROM. Adding more TIMES over the first volume, as extensive note taking and some backwell. For example, the ground music, and increasing the play close buttons for all WEETS TRAITHFR WETT time would make this offering an ideal books and information solved the case at hand, one proceeds to entertainment value. screens are now the same shape and in the Court. However, the player's investigaStill, fans of the famous sleuth from same location (an earlier inconsistency), tion had better be thorough as he or she 221B Baker Street will enjoy playing and the player's score is now presented at will be questioned on all the key points of ICOM's latest release, as will those who the top of the main screen so progress can the case. One wrong answer and it's back love a good mystery. The player should be checked as desired. out to continue sleuthing. Answer all the note, however, that it is not a graphic or questions correctly and the judge will Cloak and Stagger animated adventure. Those who prefer Sicommend the player and tell him how well erra-or LucasArts-style games would be he did in comparison to Holmes. In most Actors, for the most part, have been well better off with Electronic Arts' The Lost cases, there will be a significant difference selected and provide believable perform Files of Sherlock Holmes. in scores with Holmes far in the lead. ances. The sets are quite authentic, as well. So, if one does not have a fireplace and From a theatrical standpoint, Sherlock a comfy armchair in which to relax with a Where's My VCR Remote? Holmes II succeeds admirably. THE TIMES, Tuceday, June 10, 1890 The most interesting portions of the However, there are 1....... . game, and those critical to solving each some significant weakcase, are the interactive video scenes pronesses that need to be Page 2, Column 3, Article 13 vided in the small quarter-screen video mentioned. One is the BEST HAVANA CIGARS at IMPORT PRICES. monitor that appears when one arrives at noticeable absence of The greatest connoisseurs, the Keenest an important location. Some are quite background music in the buyers, the best judges of value now short, lasting only a few seconds, while purchase their cigars at DUNHILL'S, 2 game. It is almost comothers run for as long as several minutes. Regent-street, Picadilly Circus, London. pletely lacking during Good foreign cigars, 123., 168., 20., 223. Fortunately, to aid the player in digesting play. There is also no onO the information presented so that no vital K . KA line facility for taking exclues are missed, a set of VCR-like conhaustive notes, sometrols are provided at the bottom of this thing required to sucmonitor. VCR-like \"buttons\" enable the cessfully solve the player to return to the beginning of the crimes under investigaSTATTEFR WF.LT clip, play the video, pause and stop the tion (names can be added action. Missing from the first volume but favorite Holmes' mystery or watch a Basel to Holmes' Notebook, but no specifics can included here is a scroll bar beneath the Rathbone rendition on the VCR, Sherlock be supplied). main controls which allows the player to Holmes Consulting Detective Il is the next jump to any point in the clip without havThe chief failing, however, is identical best thing. It will provide several captivating to play the entire piece over again. This to that of the first volume—the overall ing hours of armchair investigation in the comes in extremely handy as some of the brevity of playing time. Neither case takes Sir Arthur Conan Doyle tradition. Pipe actor's accents make it difficult to identify longer than three hours to solve, while all and magnifying glass not included. Cow certain words without listening repeatthree will take the average player only edly. ZIZI Examining the Evidence Graphic quality is good, presented in \"Powerful programs of growth and adventure\" standard 256-color VGA mode. However, THE MAGIC MIRROR ... a toolbox for your mind. E. Kinnie, the quality of the video (though it only fills PhD., Clinical Psychologist. $39.95. a small part of the screen) is very good, MAGIC MIRROR II ... experiences for your mind. $39.95. being noticeably improved over that of the first volume. Images are now brighter and MERLIN ... an apprenticeship. $29.95. MasterCard/Visa clearer, exhibiting less distortion than beI CHING... ancient Chinese wisdom and prophecy. $29.95. 1-800-545.6172 fore. (Hopefully, continued improvement (after 5 p.m.) THE MAGIC MOUNTAIN ... a journey into another reality. in video compression technology will Not for children. Male and female versions. $39.95. IBM/Compatibles eventually allow for even larger, higher Blue Valley, 29 Shepard St, Walton, NY 13856 resolution displays.) ZZZ Circle Reader Service #36 Page 90 Computer Gaming World "


"CAPE COD CONNECTION'S SCROLL TO ADVENTURE  STRATEGY. SIMULATION Xings MS-DOS Simulation MS-DOS Strategy Software Software VFor V Russian....... $41.27 MS-DOS Role Mombership Priceslistodonly. Alinein/Sand........... $21.17 VFor Victory .............. 541.27 Rex Nebular ............... $37.07 Seven Citiesol Goldll Please Callfor Non-Member Action Sta. Util........... $11.12 Western Front ............ $31.77 Playing & Seven Cities Il ............... tba Sim Lite $31.77 Pricing!! Star Control2 Action Stations.......... $26.47 Spellcraft Adventure Games A-Train.................. ... $37.07 Battlechess 4.......... $26.47 MS-DOS Sports AD&D Coll. II............. 541.27 Shadowlands............ $26.47 Strike Commander Spaceward Ho!.......... tba Tank 2.0(Spec. Holo) CH Flight Stick Software AD&D Starter Gt......... $41.27 Summoning............... $35.37 Third Reich Your off to the wild blue APBABaseball........... $21.17 Amazon .......... $37.07 Two Towers............... $31.77 Ultrabots Sanction Earth ........... $42.37 Carl Lewis Challen ..... $26.47 Cobra Mission. with this flight stick. Quality Cape Cod Connection is pleased to and precision make sim Duork's BBall Encyl.... $21.17 Crus. Dark Savant ...... $37.07 flying a pleasure. I've used Fant. Football92 ........ $21.17 Daggar Amon Ra......... $37.07 announce the OPENING OF CCC-EUROPE FrontPago FBall......... $37.07 Darklands $37.07 it and love it Rob at CCC. Greens....................... $31.77 Daemonsgate.. ... $31.77 Daemonsgate........... $37.07 European Customers are encouraged CCC Member Price Gretz. Hockey III......... $31.77 Dragon's Lair 3.......... $31.77 to contact: $42.00 Hardball III ............... $31.77 Dunell $31.77 $26.47 Pascal Stadler Hardball3 Toams...... $13.22 Dungeon Master ........ $13.22 J. Nick. Sign. Golt....... $37.07 Forgool Virtue.... Cape Cod Connection (EUROPE) <Course 1......... $13.22 Gemfire........ CP72 T.LaRussa BBall2......... tba .Jones Fate Atl.......... $31.77 1422 Grandson 1 SWITZERLAND Kings Quest VI from Sierra. Swiss Tel. & Fax (024) 71 10 28 Aircraft & Advan. F...... $26.47 Battle Isle ............ $29.47 Flexible game design, for information and orders Acasinthe Pacific...... $42.37 Battle Isle Scen's...... $20.62 more puzzles and variety. (boardgames only) Airbucks.................. $31.77 Battlosof Destiny....... $31.77 Air Traffic Control ....... $31.77 Bridge 7.0.. and multiple paths and different ondings make this Ult. Underworld.......... $42.37 Air Force Comman..... $31.77 Buzz Aldrin's Rac ...... $37.07 CDROM Titles Ultima VII.. adventure the best in the Air Warrior................. $31.77 Campaign.... ............. $42.37 ....... $31.77 Multi-Media Upgrade Ultima VIII............... tba Anc. ArtWar/Sky ........ $31.77 Carrier Strike. Pro 16......................... $924 ........... $37.07 series, A.T.A.C.... .. ..... $31.77 Carriors at War ......... $37.07 CCC Member Price + CDPC....................$995 B-17 Flying Fort.......... $37.07 Castles. MS-DOS Games Yet .... MS-DOS Games Te Multi-Media Upgrade Kit ...... $31.77 $42.37 F-15111...................... $42.37 Castles North Ca....... $15.87 To Be Released ....................$560 F-117A..... ..... $42.37 Castles Il ................ $31.77 Look For Them Lost Treas. Infocom......$50 Falcon3.0............... $42.37 Chossmasto 3000..... $29.47 Sec. Monkey Isll............$50 Falcon 3 Missions....... $21.17 Choss 3 for Wind........ $35.37 Soon?? Links 386 Pro.............. $37.07 Kings Quos VI........... $42.37 Soc. Weap. Luff............. $65 Fit.Adventure G8S ..... $13.22 Civilization... $37.07 Microsoft Golf............. $51.00 KGB........................... $15.87 AH-64 (Spec. Holobyte) Ult. Underg/w Com2..... 555 FS Pro (Mallard) ....... S21.17 Civ. Collectors ......... $42.37 NFL Chall.3.0............ $26.47 Leather Goddossil..... $37.07 Air Force Pilot Trainer W.Comm. llw/all Data ....55 Grand Canyon Sco..... $15.87 Conflict: Korea..... .... $31.77 NFL Video ProFB ....... $42.37 Legend....... .......... $37.07 Avenger A10 (Spec Holo) Great Naval Bal's ...... $41.27 Conflit: M-East $31.77 Celtic Legends Cape Cod gives Gunship 2000........... $37.07 Cong. Kingdoms....... $31.77 FRONT PAGE SPORTS Conquestof Japan..... $31.77 Gunship 2 Scen.......... $21.17 Conq. of Japan.......... $31.77 Front Page Football from careful Dark Sun (SSD) Hawaii Scenery.......... $15.87 Crises Kremlin.......... $37.07 Dynamix. More realism Dragons LairIII......... $31.77 consideration to the Hero's 357th .......... $29.47 Cyber Empiros.......... $29.47 more options with one or Fleet Commander (RAW) games it lists. Hyperspeed............... $31.77 Grigsby Pac. War....... $42.37 two players or computer Harpoon Gold Games listed in this Mantis, Exp Fight....... $37.07 GlobalConquets....... $31.77 control play design Harpoon Patriot Mantis SpchAcc........ $15.87 Great Bat. 20th C. ...... $21.17 Jump Jet (Microprose) ad are the newest capability, instant replays Opor Lightning Stm.... $15.87 Harpoon ............... $35.37 Liberty or Death (Kooi) and more, make this the Railroad Tycoon ........ $15.87 Harp. Designer.......... $29.47 Magic Candle lll...... $35.37 and best titles in our best for football fans. Red Baron...... opinion. Other Pacific War (SSI) ........ $42.37 .... $37.07 High Command ........ $45.00 Red Baron Miss. D...... $15.87 LA. Law............. CCC Member Price ............... $31.77 Pirates Gold titles can be Rescue Air 911............ $13.22 Monopoly Delux........ $31.77 $37.07 Pirates of Realm Space obtained!! Scen. Enhancer Ed.... $21.17 Power Politics Win .... $26.47 PTO: Pacific Theater of War Sec.Weap.Luft.......... $37.07 Railroad Tycoon ....... $15.87 Pro League BBall........$31.77 Leg Kyrandia............. $31.77 Soc. W. Miss. 1........... 515.87 Shadow President..... 537.07 The Cape Cod Connection Membership Summer Chall........... $29.12 Lost Files S Holme..... $41.27 Sec. W.Miss. 2.......... $15.87 Siege. . .......... $35.37 Plan gives YOU: Strato-Mat BBall........ $21.17 Lost Treas. II............... $26.47 Sec. W. Miss, 3 ............. $15.87 Siege Expansion....... $17.67 Tom Landry FBall....... $26.47 Lureof Temptress Soc.W.Miss. 4......... ... 515.87 Spaceward Ho.......... $31.77 Magic Candlell.......... $35.37 A way to cope with the RECESSION and SimAnt ................. .. $31.77 Solitaire Journey...... $31.77 You've worked Magic Candlelll......... $35.37 HIGH PRICE combination! SimAntfor Window.... $31.77 Special Forces B. ...... $26.47 Task Force 42............. 37.07 Spoils of War ............ $31.77 Hard All Week M&M Clouds Xeen ..... $37.07 Pirates Gold.............. $37.07 Tahiti ScenUpgr. ....... $21.17 Star Trek Anniv.......... $31.77 Treat Yourself to a Piratesrealm Spac..... $35.37 Software, Tabletop Cames (War and Role Team Yankoo2 ......... $26.47 The Perf. General...... $31.77 Game. Questlor Glory III........ $37.07 Playing, Minatures, Old tyme Baseball Traconfor Window.... $31.77 Per. Gen Scen's ......... $18.52 Realms...................$15.37 TheLost Admiral ....... $31.77 Caps, and more!! The Cape Cod Connection Membership Club CCC's Answer To The Recession, Recessionary Pricing!!! CAPE COD CONNECTION has essentially evolved into a Membership Club. Simply the finest club in the industry today. Club members receive the Best Price, the Best Service, and the Best Information. For that reason the product prices listed above are for MEMBERS ONLY. Join the club with your first order. It's only $20 for a FULL YEAR. You do not have to become a CCC Member to order from us. Please call for Non-Member Pricing. CCC offers every electronic means known to mankind for ordering. We are open Monday Friday 10 AM 8 PM and Saturday 10 AM 5 PM. CCC now has a store location at 845 Main St., Falmouth, MA 02540, drop in and browse. All phone numbers are the same. Overseas Dealer Inquiries welcome. (Prices and availability may vary.) CCC policy is to replace defective software with the same. MAIL TO: 21 PLEASANT VIEW AVENUE FALMOUTH, MASSACHUSETTS 02540 NEW BBS 1-508-540-8732. Voice Orders 1-800-729-6733 . 1-508-457-0738. Fax 1-508-457-4558 Circle Reader Service #37 "


"pevneu) Thou Hath Been Served A Review of The Summoning by Samuel B. Baker TITLE: SYSTEM: PRICE: PROTECTION: DESIGNERS: PUBLISHER: The Summoning IBM $59.95 Documentation Look-up Chris Straka and Thomas Holmes Electronic Arts San Mateo, Ca. The Party of the First Part Hear ye, hear ye! It is once again time to slay the mighty and infamous Foozle or in this case the Shadow Weaver. He has raised a large army of cutthroats and villains and will soon take over the land. The first army and fleet that the Council sent to defeat the Shadow Weaver's island fastness has been destroyed. The Council plans to commit a second army to the task, knowing it will fail, to serve as a distraction for your covert entry into the Labyrinth. THE HUONG to restore a game, the saved games are listed in order with the newest save appearing at the top of the list. The automapping feature is an improvement even on the beautiful maps of Origin's Underworld. The maps are multicolor and show all features plainly. When levers are flipped or pressure plates activated, any doors opening or teleporters which become active are shown on the map if the player has explored that area. They can even be printed. Notes cannot be written in the margins though. The extensive NPC interactions may be printed also. The graphics are pleasing and well presented for this type of game. Small animated windows open up to show important events. I particularly liked the one that depicts the player falling into a pit. Sound effects through my Sound Blaster Pro were adequate when they were there. Unlike most games, sound effects are limited to events, rather than a constant susurrus. Music is only heard during important moments, but was easy on the ear. For once, I wish there had been greater use of music in a game. Usually, I turn it off after a few minutes. The Evidence At first, I was annoyed by the real-time aspects of combat. Not an arcade fan, I find the complexities of working an interface and determining the best tactics and switching weapons to be a chore. The electronic critters don't have this problem. After a bit, I found that the combat was quite manageable. There are many different strategies that may be pursued, depending on the strength and speed of the foe, the methods at hand and one's own tastes. I found that floating like a butterfly and stinging like a bee paid dividends when there were many adversaries. Combat for the most part is brief and intense. Some experimentation will be necessary to determine what weapons are the best tradeoff between speed of use and damage delivered. Weapons may be used in both hands and shield bashing is a welcome possibility. As was mentioned in the preview (CGW #100), the screen is split into two parts: the field of play and the character management screen. To equip an item, one places The Party of the Second Part The Summoning is a single character CRPG that runs in real time. All activity takes place indoors. One looks at the many corridors and rooms from an overhead and slightly oblique angle. Commands may be issued and inventory manipulated by a mouse, the keyboard or a combination. There are six characteristics. Strength will produce more damage when in melee and let the player carry more. Agility sets the rate at which the player moves and how fast one recovers from the previous action. Endurance is a measure of staying power, both in combat and when moving heavy objects, such as the large moveable blocks that are sometimes used to weigh the many pressure plates found in the game. Accuracy details how well the player can hit the mark with missile weapons. Talent will determine how many spells can be memorized in each of the four spell categories at one time. Power is the magic equivalent of strength. It will make spells last longer and do more damage. Characters may be generated by random roll, by direct allocation from a pool or a combination of the two. I found the method that produced the most powerful character was direct allocation. It is possible to create a character that has the maximum value for four of the six attributes and a 19 out of 20 for fifth, leaving the sixth at zero. Personally, accuracy seemed to be the least useful stat. It can be useful, but means are provided within the game to increase stats as the game progresses. After creating a set of stats that meets approval, one is specially trained in one class of weapon and one category of magic. The four classes of magic from which to choose are Wizardry, which induces damage; Sorcery, which manipulates oneself and the environment; Enchantment, which protects one from harm; and Healing. Discovery The features and interface of The Summoning may be summed up in one phrase: creature comforts. Everywhere one looks through the game, one can see that great effort has been made to ensure that the player is playing the game and not making maps, taking notes or shouting at the designers of the interface. When one moves Page 92 Computer Gaming World "


"IDBI Binil DECO it on the large wooden mannequin on the left hand side. If the item is worn as opposed to held in the hands, such as a mace, it will appear in its proper place. There is a third screen which stops time when invoked that allows one to memorize spells through the assembly of a series of hand movements. Whenever a new spell is acquired the letters corresponding to the hand movements should be written down in the space provided in the back of the manual. Johansen Almost every item in the game has a limited lifespan. Weapons will break, shields will wear out, and special items will use up their magical charges. This means that one is constantly trucking around with a massive quantity of junk in order not to be at a loss at some future time. The upside of this, however, is that the player can be given some rather neat items which would seriously imbalance the game otherwise. Eventually, the player may have the opportunity to use an area in the game as a permanent stash so that problem may be eased. In the end, one does not get to fight the Shadow Weaver. All action takes place through set-piece animation and dialogue. I would have preferred a more active role in the denouement, but I did enjoy what transpired. Certainly some of the fiercest fighting took place on that last level, which was some compensation. tiple saves, particularly at the beginning of each new section, many may find their hard disks filling up precipitously. y Ramals Syar. to kaayo and ve you sok land are The Verdict Instructions to the Jury This game arrived in my mailbox on the same day as my storebought copies of Great Naval Battles of the North Atlantic and Crusaders of the Dark Savant. I played all three games that day, but as time passed I found myself more and more involved with The Summoning, playing it not out of duty, but of pleasure. There are few satisfactions in life to compare with the \"I've got it!\" stroke of inspiration or perspiration that allows one to unlock a puzzle. I was sorry to finish this game. To those not put off by real time combat and who have the space, this game may well find a place of honor on the hard disk. Cow In addition to those points of irritation mentioned above, the space required for saved games, as time passes, deserves notice. At the end, my save game files were exceeding 750K each and had been over 500K for some time. Since their own hint line and my experience recommend mulOOP's Strategies of the Month Vol. 18 The Issues Items needed to activate a door or give to an NPC are usually found close at hand. There are three exceptions that should be noted: The first is that the player needs to find a total of three pearls in the areas preceding the knights' domains before continuing. Two pearls are used near where they are found. The third must be carried all the way into the Citadel or else one may not finish the game. As indicated in Scorpion's Tale (CGW #101), Scorpia had to go on a long quest back to retrieve this last pearl which she had left in some stash earlier in the game. Needless to say, she wasn't happy. The second is that the player should save one of everything except keys for a location near the Citadel or else spend a great deal of time playing scavenger hunt. Take it from one who knows. The third concerns the many teleporters. If the player, a monster or a large object goes through a teleporter and there is a monster or large object at the landing zone, the object or monster landed on will disappear. This may lead to important items being lost. Monsters wander around and will periodically find a teleporter on their own. The puzzles in the later stages of the game should prove a challenge to most players. Many have a proper solution and a \"creative\" one which may be found through the possession of certain objects or the useful arrangement of them. For example, I was able to pass by a series of teleporters that go off and on in sequence by using dead bodies to shorten the path of the rolling ball that triggers them on and off. A monthly column to improve the quality of play BATTLES OF DESTINY: A parade to the front lines is not as effective as collecting a small force and then attacking with multiple units. Using bombers to soften the enemy's front lines can also make the job of destroying your opponent that much easier.  The Challenge: In the map «Compete», do not utilize any air transports. CONOUFRED KINGDOMS: Fighting dragons can be tough, but it can be done effectively. Things to remember about the dragon: it cannot range fire if there is a unit in the same square, its nemesis is the archer but knights and cavalry are also effective, and dragons cannot attack a unit in the keep of an occupied castle (but they can bombard the keep). Attacking with or defending against dragons incorrectly can be any player's achilles heel. THE PERFECT GENERAL The all new \"Greatest Battles of the Twentith Century\" Scenario Disk is available. \"The Hollywood Dream\" pits you against the Japanese, who invade the west coast of the U.S. This scenario is not meant for the weak hearted. Using mobile 88's and artillery will help to defend the homeland. Defend these units well though, because they are easily killed.  A Great Challenge: Try defeating the attacker on «Dnepr Bridgehead\" without using any medium or heavy tanks. Quantum Quality Productions 1046 River Avenue, Flemington, N. J. 08822 (908) 788-2799 Circle Reader Service #88 March 1993 Page 93 "


"Once Upon A Time STABEK STAR TREK The upcoming mall-based Star Trek: games in their licensed Star Trek series: Star Trek: First Contact the Next Generation entertainment (1988) and Star Trek: The Rebel Universe (1988). Earlier titles 1 centers, a joint project of Paramount in the series were Star Trek: The Kobaysashi Alternative (1985) Pictures, Edison Brothers, and Spectrum and Star Trek: The Promethean Prophecy (1986). Unfortunately, HoloByte is but the latest computer gamnone of these games were cutting edge designs. Failing to capture ing license of a Star Trek product (See the minds and wallets of computer gamers, they have become (in CGW #101 December 1992 for a detailed the world of Star Trek) as forgotten as Jeffrey Hunter (Christoaccounting of this propher Pike in the original Star Trek pilot, The Cage). ject). Five years ago, SiOne wonders how many computer game \"outsiders» purmon and Schuster rechased these games on the strength of the license and failed leased the third and fourth to be drawn into the world of computer gaming as a hobby The Promethean Prophecy because the designs were not compelling as games? We will never know. What we do know, however, is how a company with no reputation for computer game publishing got what could have been the hottest license in the history of the First Contact hobby. You see, Simon and Schuster Inc. and Paramount Pictures at the time were both owned by Gulf & Western. Thus, S&S had the inside track for the license (an extension of the book licenses). Too bad for gamers. The movie license for Star Trek V: The Final Frontier went to Mindscape prior to it's merger with Software Toolworks. Unfortunately the game was not any more compelling than the S&S Trek games. But all is not lost. In 1990 Konami, who had the \"electronic games\" license for Star Trek games hired Interplay Productions to produce VA a Star Trek cartridge game for the Nintendo 8-bit system. As part of the agreement, Konami signed over the rights for Star Trek computer games to Interplay. Interplay's first computer game release under this arrangement was last winter's Star Trek: The 25th Anniversary. That product has done so well that Paramount and Interplay signed a new contract going through the year 2000, giving Interplay the right to do a variety of Star Trek games. Simon and Schuster also produced a Next Generation title, THE NEXT GENERNTON The Transinium Challenge. However, Spectrum HoloByte now has that license and will be producing, not only the mall based product already mentioned, but a line of Star Trek: The Next Generation games as well. As gamers, we hope that Interplay and Spectrum HoloByte can take the Star Trek series of computer games to a place that none of them have gone before: success. Footnote: More than one computer game manufacturer has asked STAR TREK CGW in recent days if we knew who ZTHANNIVERSARY got the license for the Deep Space Nine computer game products. As of press time, we did not know. The top five games ten years ago SOFTWARE TONEM, TAND, AND COMPATIBLES this month according to the February 1983 CGW Poll were: Wizardry I (Sir-Tech), Choplifter! (Broderbund); Knight of Diamonds (Sir Tech); Guadalcanal Campaign (SSI); and Olympic Decathlon (Microsoft). The top five games five years ago (February 1988) were Ultima IV (Origin); Gettysburg the Turning Point (SSI); Wizardry I (Sir-Tech); Starflight (EA); and Kampfgruppe (SSI). CGW SPORTREK TRANSINIUM CHALLENGE PRAHATIC, HEW, ANIMATED EPISODE Computer Gaming in Days Gone By Page 94 Computer Gaming World "


"HACKING wus DELO REALLY MEANS. ...It means that we've hacked our way through hundreds of titles to find the best, then we slashed our prices. So you spend less time trying, and more time flying! Here are some of the games we're playing this month... $37 B-17 Flying Fortress.......$39 Yeager's Air Combat.......$38 Links 386 Pro ...............$42 Global Conquest.............$37 Out of This World ..........$36 Indiana Jones 4............ Ultima Underworld ........$47 Gunship 2000 ................$39 THE SOURCE FOR SOFTWARE, THE GUIDE TO GAMES 1-800-624-3228 Internat'l Fax/Phone: 1-718-624-8228 HOURS: 12PM 12AM EST, M-F ADDRESS: Digital Dungeon 45 Duffield St., Brooklyn, NY 11201 TERMS: We accept money orders, personal checks, wire transfers. Credit Card and CASH/CERT C.O.D.'s from established customers. SHIPPING: We charge by shipping weight/class + 15%. We use U.S. Mail, UPS, Federal Express & Airborne Express. APO's are no problem, charged 1st class mail rate. Foreign shipping by weight & courier + 25%. N.Y.S. residents add 8.25% sales tax. All products are new and guaranteed. Call for exchange/return policy. NOT RESPONSIBLE FOR TPOS! Circle Reader Service #53 "


"UID HAVE MOVEMENT POINTS, WILL TRAVEL Omnitrend's Paladin 2 by Allen L. Greenberg TITLE: SYSTEMS: PRICE: PROTECTION: DESIGNERS: PUBLISHER: Paladin 2 Amiga. IBM $59.95 Documentation Look-up Chris Bamford, Thomas Carbone Omnitrend/Impressions dial these professions. These indicate the character's ability to fight, aim weapons from a distance or detect danger. Other numbers show the party member's health and the degree to which he is encumbered by a heavy inventory. Most importantly, the player must be aware of the number of movement points a character has left. At the beginning of each turn, a character is allowed a certain number of these which depend on his condition. Each action — from taking a step to swinging a weapon must be purchased with movement points. Once these are gone, that character is unable to move until the next turn. The turn concludes by allowing the computercontrolled, evil opposition to have its turn. Nighting evil, so long as a movement point yet remains within them, OmI nitrend's paladins are computer gaming's most dependable wind-up toys. Armed with only a sword and a wristwatch-like intelligence to guide each of their mechanical steps, these Lilliputian heroes battle to the end of the earth or, at least, to the end of their turn. \"Real time\" is but an illusion; \"three dimensions\" suddenly fall flat; \"virtual reality\" is as real as it ever was. The paladins-along with their Buck Rogers analogues, the Breachmen — eschew such contrivances. Like timeless legions, they stand steadfast ... until someone instructs them to walk away. Having proved their worth many times in the original Paladin, they again stand ready in Paladin 2. Players of the original Paladin will find much which is familiar as they begin Paladin 2. Using the phased command/movement system which is normally reserved for computer wargaming, Paladin 2 contains a series of miniature fantasy roleplaying quests. The various goals and parameters for each mission are available both on-line and in the game's detailed documentation. The Paladin 2 package contains 20 different missions along with a quest-building program. These individual quests may also be linked together in order to form more involved campaigns. As in the past, a floppy disk containing an additional 20 scenarios is also available. For each outing, the player becomes the game's title character — an altruistic knight in command of a \"mission impossible\" party of secondary characters. While the membership of the adventure party changes from one scenario to the next, the paladin himself will remain constant, provided he is able to survive. With THD: 02:10:00 A PANGES POLE: 1 PITAL: 10% HEALTH IUTE: 0 KIT TO DI PICT: 3D EXO OMNITRONE Impressions AOA EU 12 0 IN D Math and Magic each victory and success, he will become an increasingly adept hero. A \"green\" paladin may be generated at any time, or he may be carried over either from the first Paladin series or from Breach 2. The various missions are ranked according to difficulty, but need not be tackled in a specific order. Each quest may be played at \"beginner\" or \"advanced\" level. The advanced level offers less vulnerable enemies as well as a less omnipotent point of view. The paladin, of course, is an apprentice knight. The various party members may be a swordsman, ranger, thief or mage. Each is given a set of statistics which reflect While the tactical challenges presented by this system are immediately obvious, many players have also been sensitive to the substitution of simple mathematics for the feel of real time combat. By carefully counting steps, so that a turn begins with the hero just out of an adversary's reach, it is possible to demolish the poor villain without giving him a turn to fight back. This particular advantage, however, has been somewhat offset in Paladin 2 by a Page 96 Computer Gaming World "


"Lowest deliverd prices with great customer service. 800-448-6658 DISK-COUNT SOFTWARE UR  31 &&&888 PO e PUP 36 115 37 printsper 22 115 gaseball 31 62 35 31 26 16 37 79 88888 47 37 19 42 24  74 Cakewalk 14D Boxing 20 Dr. Quandry A Train Dragon's Lair Construction Set 22 Dragon's Lair 2 A320 Airbus DragonLr:Sing Cst 37 ABC Wide Wild Box 30 Duck Tale:Qst Gld 15 ABPA Baseball Duerk BaseB. Encyl 20 Aces of the Pacific 39 Dune Mission Disk 25 Dungeon Master Action Stations 29 Dusk of the Gods Addon Disk 22-45 14 Dynamix Bundle AD&D Collect Ed 2 44 Earl Weaver 2 AD&D Starter Kit 44 Commisioner Dsk 12 Adv Willy Beamish 37 Play & Mgr. Disk Air Bucks Earthquest Air Force Command 36 Eco Phantoms 31 Alge Blaster Plus 30 Eco-Quest 1 Algebra Made Easy 25 Elvira 2:Jaws Amarillo Slim DICh 32 Entr Pak Win (ea) American Gladiators 25 Eye of Beholder Ancient Art War Sky 35 Eye of Beholder 2 38 42 69 I EZ Cosmos Animation Studio Are We There Yet? 18 F-14 Tomcat Armada 2525 30 15 !! Armourgeddon F15 III Master Edit. 49 .... 35 F117a Stealth Fighter41 Automap 49 Facts in Action 31 Automap Windows 48 Falcon 3.0 45 Automap Europe 74 Oper Fight Tiger 25 B-17 Flying Fortres 39 39 Family Tree Maker 42 Back to Future 3 25 Far Side Calendr 49 Backgamn By Geo 26 Farm Creativity Kit 17 Bane Cosmic Forge 36 Femme Fatale Barbie Design F.F. Data Disk 21 Barbie Fashion 25 Fighting for Rome Barbie Adventure 25 Final Conflict Bart Simpson Hous 30 Flames of Freedom 31 Battlechess (allver) 30 Flight of Intruder Battlechess 2 Flight Simul A.T.P. 37 Battlechess 400 Flight Simul (M.S.) 41 Battle Isle Arctt/Soen Dsgn 28 Battles of Napoleon 31 California Battlestorm 31 Flight Planner 25 Berenst Bear Cnt 19 FS Pro Berenstn Bear Color 25 Great Britian 37 Berenstn BearLettr 25 Hawaii Berlitz Interpreter 37 Instant Facit Loc. 26 Bicycle Poker Instrumnt Pilot Scen Bill Elliott NASCAR 30 East/West U.S. 59 Birds of Prey 32 Scenery Set A 37 Blitzkrieg Scenery Set B 37 Bloodwych Scenery Enhn Ed 25 Bo Jackson BaseB Sound & Graphic 25 Bodyworks Tahiti Bridgemaster Western Europe 19 Bug Bunny WrkShp 31 Floor 13 Buzz Aldrin Fly Grand Canyon Captain Comic 2 15 Follow the Reader 29 Carl Lewis Chaling 29 Four Crystal Trazer 32 Carrier Strike Free DC Carriers at War 35 Front Page Sports 39 Casino Pack 1 Gateway Castles Global Conquest Northern Campgn 19 Gobblins Castle 2 Godfather Castle of Dr. Brain 30 Gods Cathy Daily Planner 43 Gold of the Aztec Ching Ancient Emp 30 Gold Sheet Pro FB 37 Challenge 5 Realms 35 Grand Slam Brdge 231 Champions Great Naval Battles 44 Champions of Krynn 20 Greens 35 Chemistry Works 38 Gunship 2000 Chessmaster 3000 32 Scenario Disk 24 Chessmstr 3000 Win38 Guy Spy Children Writ & Publ 39 Hardball3 Chip'n Dale Data Disk Civilization Hare Raising Havoc 29 Civilization MPE 47 Harpoon Classic 5 Headline Harry Coaster Heimdall Comic Book Creator 17 Heros of 357th Conan: Cimmerian 30 Hole in One Golf Conflict: Middle East 32 Hong Kong Mahjong 32 Conflict Korea 29 Hoyle Bk Game 1/2 22 Conquest Longbow 39 Hoyle Bk Game 3 30 Conquest of Japan 35 Humans Crime Wave Indiana Jones 4 Crisis in the Kremlin 39 Island of Dr. Brain 29 Crossword Magic Jack Nicklaus Signtr 42 Cruise for a Corpse 33 J. Nick. Crse 3,4,5 14 Daffy Duck P.I. J. Nicklaus Clip Art 17 Dagger of Amon Ra 39 Jetfighter 2 Dark Half Adv. Mission Disk 19 Dark Queen Krynn 32 Jobhunt Darklands John Madden 2 Darkseed Jump Jet Dark Sun Kid Pix Death Knight Krynn 32 Kid Pix Companion Dix Paint Animation 85 Kid Works Dix Paint II Enhncd 85 Kings Quest Bundle 39 Design Yr Own Hm 39 Kings Quest 1 VGA 37 Design Your Railrd 35 King's Quest 5 42 Railroad Robbery 19 King's Quest 6 Designasaurus II 23 Knowledge Advent 47 Disney Entertain Pk 47 Konami NFL Foo18_30 MASTERCARD, VISA, DISCOVER, AND AMERICAN EXPRESS ACCEPTED WITH NO SURCHARGE. SHIPPING IS ONLY 54.00 PER ORDER, PRODUCTINFO&OTHER BUSINESS: NOT PERITEM 908-396-8880 Laffer Utility 22 Phonics Plus Studyware LSAT 30 Illustrated Shakesper 27 Fontmonger Sound Cards Leather God Phb2 42 Pinball Studyware for SAT 30 Intl Bus & Econ Atlas 39 Geoworks Pro Legend Pitfighter Stunf Island 37 Intro to Game Fren 79 Grammatik 5 Ad Lib Sound Card 65 Legend of Kyrandia 35 Plan 9 Outer Space Summer Challenge 34 Intro to Games Span79 Hijaak DOS or Win Ad Lib Gold 1000 179 Legion's of Krella Planets Edge Summoning Jones in Fast Lane 37 Info Select ATI Stereo F/X 139 Leisur Suit Lar Bndl 39 Playroom w/ Sound Super Tetris Kings Quest 5 42 Language Assistant VGA StreoFIX 1 MB 369 Leisur Suit Larry 5 37 Police Quest 3 Take a break X-Word29 Languages of World 99 Fr. Gr.Heb,ItalSpan 42 Covox Snd Mster II 145 Lemmings Pools of Darkness Pool Learn to Speak Span69 Laplink 4 Pro 99 Gravis Ultra Sound 129 Oh No More Addon 22 Populous 2 Tank (new version) 37 Library of Future 99 Lotus Works 99 Media Vision Lemm.-Oh No More 31 JAudio Port Power Hits Sports Task Force 1942 Loom 39 Microsoft Qck Basic 65 139 L'Empereur Sa-Fi Team Yankee 37 M-1 Tank Platoon 62 Microsoft Quick C 65 CDPC 999 Lexicross Battletech-Mech 32 Tengens Arcade Hit 25 MacMillian Child. Dict.49 MS DOS 5.0 Pro Audio Spec+ 139 Powermonger Liberty or Death Terminator Manhole 49 MS DOS 5.0 Upgrd 62 M.M. Upgrade Kit 765 Life and Death 2 Principles of Biology 25 Terminator 2 37 Magazine Rack 45 Norton Desktop v2. 95 Pro Audio Spec 16 198 Links Principle of Calculus 25 Tetris Classic Marketing Master 39 Norton Dsktp DOS 115 Pro 16 Multimedia Links 386 Pro 39 Principle ofChemsty 25 Theatre of War 31 Mavis Beacon 39 Norton Utilities 111 Upgrade Kit Course Diskea 16 Print Shop Deluxe 45 Thunderhawk MIG 29/MIG 29M 62 One Write Acct. 100 Thunderboard 3 or more (ea) 15 Graphic Coll. (ea) 30 Time Riders America35 Mixed Up Mother Gse37 Pacioli 2000 v2.0 31 Thunder & Lighing Loney Tune Prnt/Ply 19 | Print Shop, New Time Treks 36 MS DOS Archives 35 Sound Blaster PC Animate Plus Lord of Rings 2 Graphics (ea) Tom Landry Football 30 Presidnt:It Start Geo105 PC Anywhere 4 Snd Blast Pro MCA 259 Lost Admiral Print Sp Companion 31 Tony LaRussa Base. 17 Prince Persia/Nam'6565 PC Kwik Powerpak 72 Sound Blaster Pro 189 Lost File Sherick H 41 Privateer LaRussa addon 15 Railroad Tycoon 62 PC Paintbrush 5+ 99 SB Multimedia Kit 560 Lost Treas Infocom 42 Pro League Baseball35 Tracon 2 31 Red Strm/Carr Cmd 62 PC Tools SBMM Starter Kit 459 SB CDROM Intrnl 360 Lost Treasures 2 29 Quest for Glory 1 Tracon Windows 37 Reference Library Peachtree Basic 80 Magic Candle 2 38 Quest for Glory 3 Treasure Cove 35 Shakespeare 37 PFS: First Choice 25 S B CDROM Extrnl 429 Main St Creatvity Kit 17 Ragnarok Treasure Math Storm35 Sherlock Holme Cnslt42 PFS: First Publisher 75 Sun, Moon.Star w/ Sony Manhole Railroad Tycoon 32 Treasure Mountain 31 Sleeping Beauty 37 PFS:Prospect 599 75 CD, SB Pro, S/W Mantis 39 Rampart 26 Treasure Savg Frntr 32 So Much Software 59 PFS:Publisher Wind 75 Roland SCC-1GS 375 Mario Teaches Type 25 Random Hs Encyd 559 Treehouse Sophisticat Santa Fe 45 PFS: Window Works 75 Sound Canvas Martian Memorndm 32 Reader Rabbit Tristan Pinball Space Quest 4 37 PFS:Write w/Grmtk 69 Roland MA-12C ea 105 Marvin Moose 1/2 31 Reader Rabbit 2 37 Trump Castle 2 Spirit of Excalibur 37 Presention Task Frc119 SPEAKERS Shielded 28 Math Blaster Mystry 29 Read 'n Roll VGA Trump Castle 2 Delx 42 Stat Pack 83 Print Shop 36 W/3 band Equilizer 45 Math Blaster Plus Red Baron Twilight 2000 37 Stellar 7 Procomm Plus 2.0 69 Altec Lansing 200 219 Math Blaster Wind 36 Mission Disk Ultima 7 47 Strange Bedfellows 39 Procomm/Window 82 ACS 300 W/subwof 299 Math Rabbit Realms Forge of Virtue 17 Street Atlas Pyro Screen Saver 35 MIDI Interface Math Zone 31 Rex Nebular 39 Ultima 7P12 Time Mag Almanac 129 QEMM 9 Midiator 101 Serial 95 Matrix Cubed Riders of Rohan 31 Ultima Trilogy 1 Q DOS 3 Time Table History 69 Mavis Beacon Type 32 Risk for Windows PC Midi Card 29 Ultima Trilogy 2 Time Table Science 59 Quicken 6.0/Win 45 MOX-32 Mavis Beacon Wind 38 Risky Woods 25 Ultima Underworld 47 Ultima 1-6 Quicken Quick Book 84 IMPU-IPC 49 McGee at Fun Fair 25 Road & Track Pres Ultrabots Ultimate Basketball 35 Sitback DOS or Win 59 Mean Streets Cakewalk Apprentic145 Road to Final Four U.S. or World Atlas 49 U.S. Atlas Stacker 325 The Miracle Medieval Lords 38 Robosports Wind Utopia Vintage Aloha Stacker 16 Bit Card 179 Mega Fortress Romance 3 King 2 Vior Victory #1182 44 Wild Places Superstor 79 MIDI Software Mission Disk 27 Rorkes Drift 34 Vegas Games Wind. 19 Wing Comm & Miss Turbo Cadd V2.0 79 Ballade Mega Traveller 1/2 37 Rules Engagement 37 Vengeance Excalibur30 Wing Com/Ultima 6 45 Word Perfct5.1/Win249 Band in a Box Mega Man 3 1 7 Rule Engagment 2 Warlords 31 Wing Comm2 49 Windows 3.1 92 Cadenza Mental Math Games 35 Scrabble Deluxe Wyn Gretzky Hcky 235 WC/Ulti. Undrwld 49 Winfax Pro Merchant Colony 31 Scrabble Dlx Win 30 Western Front 38 World Atlas MetroGnome Music 31 Sea Roque What's My Angle 30 World View Mice & Trackball Cakewalk Pro Appoint MousePen 70Cakewalk Window 240 Michael Jordon Flight42 Second Front Where Crm San Diego Wrath of Demon (D Mickey ABC's, Secret Monkey Is. 2 38 in America's Past 36 Adults Only -Must be 21 Microsoft Mouse 85 Coloror 1-2-3's 25 Scrl Weapon Luftwf 42 in Europe 30 Animation Fantasy 65 Mouseman Serial 69 encore Mickey's Crossword 19 Piano Works Dornier 335 in Time Trackman Serial FAO Set 79 Play it by Ear Mickey Jigsaw Pz! 31 P-38 Mission Dsk 20 in USA 30 PC Pix Vol 1 or 2 65 Modems & Fax Master Tracks Pro 249 Mickey ABC Combo 37 P-80 Shoot Star 20 in USA Deluxe 45 Private Collection 65 MaxFax 9624 Fx/Md 99 Music Printer Plus 419 Mickey Word Advent 25 Heinkel 162 20 in World Deluxe 49 Priv. Pictures 1 or 2 65 Maxlite 9624PC 189 Music Time 169 Micro Cookbook 31 Sesame St. Lrn Clas 31 Wild Wheels Storm 1 or 2 65 Maxlite 96/96 349 Musicator 375 Microleagu 4 BaseB 39 Sesame St.Publish 25 Wing Comm 1 Dixe 49 Visual Fantasy 65 Maxlite 14.4/14.4 419 Quick Score Deluxe 99 Microleague FB Dlx 42 Sesame St. Vol.1 17 Wing Commander 2 49 Volcano Practical Peripherals Recording Studio 75 Microsoli Golf 39 Sesame St Vol.2 17 Special Oper Disk 25 Caddies 7.95ea. 3/$ 19 PM 2400 Internal 129 Rhythm Ace Midnight Rescue 30 Seven Cities of Gold 38 Speech Disk Utilities PM 2400 External 175 Songwright5 Might and Magic 3/4 38 Shadow Prophecy 30 Wizardry Trilogy Millennium 2200 Sportster 2400 Ext. 149 Trax for Windows 25 Shanghaill Word Muncher 386 Max 61 Sportster 2400 Int. 129 Milliken Storyteller 32 Shuttle Joysticks Adobe Type Mgr. 59 Wordtris Sportstr 14.4v.42bis 309 Mike Ditka Ultimt FB 37 Sierra Starter Bndl 39 World Circuit After Dark for Wind 29 Zoom External Mixed-Up Fairy Tale 30 67 CH Flightstick Silent Service 2 All Type Writer Rabbit 47 65 CH Game Card 3 Zoom Internal 31 Mixed-Up Mother Gs 30 Sim Ant Your Prsnl Train SAT30 Autodesk Explorer 119 CH Mach3 Monopoly Deluxe 34 Sim City Zoo Keeper Bannermania Scanners Eliminator Game Cd 26 Moonbase Sim City Graphic Zug's Spelling Adv 22 Calendar Creator + 55 Microtek 600G 829 Gravis Joystick 35 Muncher Bundle 30 Sim City Windows Adv of Eco Island 22 Carbon Copy Microtek 60OZ 1359 Gravis PC GamePad21 Murder Sim Earth Dinosaur World 22 Central Pt AntiVirus 84 Scanman 32 160 Kraft KC3 Joystick 18 Mutanoid Math Chlg 31 Simpson Adventure 31 Race ThruSpace 22 Choas Scanman 256 265 Kralt Thunderstick 28 NFL Challenge Prem59 Snap Dragon Colorix CD ROM NFL Print Pro Skins & Pads Maxx Flight Yoke 69 17 Snoopy Game Club 29 Copy ll PC Maxx Pedal NFL Pro League FB 35 Solitaires Journey 3D Cnstrct/Castl Mst 62 Corel Draw v3.0 Dust Covers 379 Mouse Yoke 32 Nigel's World Space Ace 2:Borf Aloha Hawaii Grounded Wrist Straps 9 45 Data Ease Personal 68 Ninja Turtle Arcade 25 Space Quest Bund! 5 Quickshot Aviator 5 32 Atlas Pack Desqview 2.4 79 Keyboard Skins Ninja Turtle: Adventr 31 Space Quest 4 Amer Bus. Phnbk. 39 37 Quickshot Game Cd 14 Desgview 386 125 Static Parts Nobunagas Ambition 37 Amer Hert Pict Dict 75 Space Quest 5 DOS Fax 15 Quickshot Intruder 5 30 51 Large-System 15 Quickshot Warrior No Greater Glory 42 Speedball 2 25 Audubon Mammals 37 18 Dvorkon Typing 31 WristPads Omar Sharif Bridge 37 Thrustmaster Fight 69 Speedreader Express Publisher Autodesk Explorer 119 99 Stax (Dust Repellent) 5 Thrustmaster Pro Operation Neptune 35 109 Spell-a-saurus Barney Bear School 26 Facelift Stax Complete Cleaning Weapons Control 79 Orbits Spellbound 31 Balik Designs 45 Far Side Calendar 49 System 1 5 Thrustmaster Pedal 109 Oregon Trail Battlechess Spellcasting 301 35 49 Spell Craft Origin FX 35 Hours: M-F 9AM to 8PM Beethoven Ninth Sat 10AM to 3 PM Spell-it Plus Store Hours: M F 9 AM to 6 PM Bible Library Once Upon Time Sat 10AM to 3 PM Out of This World SpellJammer 37 Bookshelf 129 Store: 1060 Randolph Ave. Rahway N.J. 07065 Outnumbered Spirit of Excalibur Britanica Family Chc 75 Overlord Spoils of War 35 Britannica Family Dr 59 TERMS AND CONDITIONS Pacific Islands Sports Adventure Business Master 39 Paladin 2 Sprout! Master Card, Visa American Express & Discover Accepted. No Carmen World Dixe 65 Paperboy 2 Star Control 2 Cautious Condor Surcharge on Credit Cards. By mail: P.O. BOX 3 Carteret, N.J. 45 Star Trek 25th Aniv. 37 Patriot CDGame Pack 07008. All Sales Ate Final. NO REFUNDS! Exchange on defective 55 Stickybr Math Tutor 30 PC Globe CIA World Fact merchandise with the same item only. No exceptions. All 39 Stickybr Pre-School 30 PC USA Products are new. We do not guaxentee compatability. Shipping Compton Encydpd 409 Stickybr Read Tutor 30 PC Study Bible charges: 48 contiguous atates. $4 per order. Alaska, Hawaii. Conquest Longbow 37 Penthouse Jigsaw Stickbr Spell Tutor 30 26 and Puerto Rico $10 1st pe.. $1 ca. add. APO/FPO and P.O. Boxes Corel Draw Upgd 149 Strip Poker 3 Perfect General 32 $6 Ist po. $1 ea. add. Canada se ist pc. Si ea add. Heavier Electronic Cookbook 75 Strip Poker Data (ea) 17 Data Disk items extra. Foreign orders call for shipping charges. N.J. Font Master PGA Tour Golf Stnke Commander 45 Residents add sales tax. Call for current price and Food Analyst Storybook Weaver 34 PGA Golf Windows 38 Game Collection availability. GOVERMENT AND SCHOOL P.O.'S WELCOMED. 45 Does not Course Disk Studyware for ACT 30 include claseouts, liquidations, or limited quantities and Game Master Studyware GMAT 30 PGA Golf Complete 49 Golden Immortal 28 product must be shipping for your protection, we will only Studyware GRE 30 Gunship/Midwinter 62 ship to the address the credit card company has on file.  19 20 88ASH 32 65 w 31 36 30 22 Anetype Explorer 38N 36 129  31 indl 39 59 29 47 884888888 A8A889888888 09232 19 Circle Reader Service #54 "


"DUDE TIHD: 01:10:00 AT RODILY HOURS: 13. VITALIS HEALTH: 50% greater variety of spell-throwing demons who may attack from a distance. While one might wish for a slightly more elegant combat system, this is still a more challenging game of \"math and magic\" than presented by its predecessor. The 20 scenarios included cover a fairly wide range of difficulties and each one may be changed or edited using the quest builder program. Quest objectives may in11136: 20% TETOOT 15% South BEROUS BOLTE: 00 EDE 213 TIME! 011.30:00 AF RANGER MOVISTA VITAL: x HEALTH: 5. ENOUMI! 0 TIILID! 20% AIMING: 0% DLTDOTI 15% rest assured that its game manuals will always put those from other countries to shame! AEROUS! 0 DODTS: 0 now permitted. Using the mouse, players indicate either a character's next action or a course of movement. Unfortunately, the character currently under control is not highlighted. This can cause some confusion, or even lead to the inadvertent assault against an adjacent, fellow party-member. Command icons available allow a player to pick up, drop or use inventory. Other icons call up a list of possible spells, show an area map, and list the quest objectives, indicating those which have already been accomplished. Paladin 2's graphics are simple, yet they are very adequate. Some animation of the various characters is available as an option when the program is first booted. Some of the sound effects sound as though they were produced by a dying group of barnyard animals, though others do add a nice touch. One of the game's most outstanding features is its documentation. A brief yet thorough tutorial makes the game accessible to any newcomer. In addition to an introduction to each scenario, there are also descriptions of each of the various spells, creatures and paraphernalia which appear throughout the program. A technical supplement also guarantees that no one will have any trouble using the quest builder program. Should the United States make no other cultural contribution to the remainder of the civilized world, we may AOH 1? IN E clude rescue operations, the destruction of a portion of the enemy, the capture or destruction of certain magical scrolls or the takeover of specific sentry posts. There are a variety of terrains which the party must cover, and \"teleportation squares\" will also complicate progress. Omnitrend's icon-based, point-andclick interface has been nicely upgraded since the original Paladin. Most noticeably, diagonal movement and attacks are Paladin, Paladin, Where Will You Roam? While it is true that most fantasy roleplaying games have been advancing state of the art presentations at a frenzied pace, it has not necessarily been true that their results have met with universal approval. Unfortunately, many players may accidentally miss out on Paladin 2 because of the deluge of products which scream more loudly for attention, yet offer far less in entertainment. Although one might hope for more interesting combat interaction, there is no shortage of reasons to recommend this product to strategy-minded role-players of all levels. This particular wind-up toy clearly continues to prove its worth on the field of battle. CGW SOFTWARE CLOSEOUTS PANZER SALIENT The Battle of the Bulge Continuing it's tradition for excellence, COMBAT ENTERPRISES INC. proudly announces their newest computer simulated play-bymail WW2 wargamc--\"PANZER SALIENT\" depicting the Battle of the Bulge. SHOP $ 9 HD a 0:00: 00 IBM. AMIGA, APPLE, COMMODORE 64/128, ATARI ST. MAC & MORE IBM ARCADE GAMES: IBM SPORTS SIMULATIONS: SUPER BUNDLE FOR C-64/128 Arkanoid 11 $14.50TV Sports Football $14.50 10 GAMES FOR $14.50 Bubble Bobble $14.50 T.V. Sports Basketball $14.50 Includes: Demolition Mission Operation Wolf $14.50 Super Sunday $ 9.50 Army Moves, Bad Street Brawler. $14.50 NBA Basketball $ 9.50 Rambo III $14.50 Blades of Steel $16.50 Tai-Pan, Fist, Tai Ceti, Mutants. Renegade $14.50 Double Dribble $16.50 Cyrus Chess, Doc the Destroyer Sky Shark $14.50 Monday Night Football $29.50 & Uridium. Less than $1.50 each! Harmony $16.50 John Elway's Football $ 9.50 Cycles $16.50 Sharkey's 3D Pool $19.50 SUPER BUNDLE FOR AMIGA Pick 'n Pile $16.50 Pro Tennis Tour 1 $16.50 10 GAMES FOR $14.50 The Ball Game $ 5.00 Microleague Football $14.50 Vampire Empire Sky Blaster, Triple X Savage $14.50 Microleague Baseball $14.50 Crystal Hammer, Final Mission Little Cybergenic Ranger $14.50 Tennis Cup $16.50 Final Orbit $14.50 Grave Yardage $14.50 Dragon, Eskimo Games, Powerstyr Spin Barman Caped Crusader $14.50 Subuteo Table Soccer $ 9.50 World & Clever and Smart Treasure Trap $16.50 Downhill Challenge Skiing $14.50 IBM STRATEGY GAMES: Superbike Challenge Ci 50 IBM ADVENTURE GAMES: $19.50 Championship Waterloo Football $19.50 $14.50 Puck Rogers 1 First Over Germany $19.50 Championship Baseball $14.50 Heroes of Lance $19.50 Sons of Liberty $19.50 Championship Gold $14.50 Dragons of Flame $19.50 Red Lightning $19.50 Pro-Beach Volleyball $16.50 Question II $16.50 Under Fire $12.50 Superstar Indoor Sports $ 950 War of the Lance $19.50 Gull Strike $19.50 $14.50 Superstar Hockey Roadwar Europa $16.50 IBM FLIGHT SIMULATORS: Phantasie III $14.50 Mid-Winter $19.50 F-15 Strike Eagle $16.50 Time & Magk $14.50 $16.50 Firezone $14.50 Solo Flight $19.50 S.D.I. $14.50 Gunship $16.50 Tomahawk Berlin 1948 $ 9.50 $14.50 Fireteam 2200 $16.50 Super Huey 11 9.50 Defender of the Crown Dambusters $ 950 Star Glider II $ 16.50 Navcom 6 $ 9.50 Xiphos $14.50 Leather Godesses of Photos $1450 Das Boot U-Boat Simulator $19.50 Carrier Command $ 1450 Sands of Fire $16.50 Sky Chase $14.50 IBM_CD-ROM SOFTWARE: IBM TRADITIONAL GAMES David Woll Secret Agent $14.50 Barney Bear goes to School $19.50 Amarillo Slim's Real Poker $14.50 Blue Angels $14.50 CO Grab Bag $ 15,00 Friday Night Poker $14.50 Rocket Ranger $14.50 CD Game Collection $19.00 Blackjack Academy $ 9.50 Air Strike U.S.A $14.50 Phossaster 3000 $4400 $16.50 Blue Max Jigsaw $19.50 CO ROM Collection w CIA $29.001 BatticChess 11 $19.50 IBM EDUCATIONAL_PROGRAMS: Golden Immortal 5 39.00 Super Password $ 9.50 President Elect $ 950 Great Cities of the World $49.00 WILD & COOL GAMES: World Geography $ 9.50 found of the Baskervilles $49.00 $16.50 U.S. Geography Continuum $ $39.00 9.50 Jones in the Fast Lane $19.50 Barney Bear goes to School Drakkhen $ 29.00 $14.50 King's Quest 5 $ 49.00 $ 5,00 Discover Numbers 3DGamemaker Weird Dreams $14.50 Discover Alphabet $ 500 Med up Mother Goose $39.00 Sex Olympics $24.00 $16.50 Discover Math $ 5,00 Ton Shareware 20 Sex Vixens from Space $14.50 Grade A Math 1-2-3 $16.50 Secret of Monkey Island 549.00 Holmes Consulting Detective 1000s more items for all so Much Shareware VISA/MC ORDERS CALL TOLL-FREE $39.00 different computers... Apple, Ultima 16 Bunde 1-800 676 6616 $39.00 Atari, Amiga, C64/128, MAC, MGA Spectrum Wng Commander Bunde $490al Credit Card Orders Only!!!! ($25 minimum) lots more TOM MS-DOS! Wing Commandation 6 Bundo $4900 TO ORDER: Send check or money order including shipping charges of $5 for U.S.A $8 for Canada $16 all others. Californians must include 7.25% sales tax. P.O. BOX 5160 To receive our complete catalog of over 2,000 items for all computer types, send SAN LUIS OBISPO $2 in cash or stamps to the above address. The catalog is FREE with any order. CA 93403 To check for an item not listed here.call(805)544-6616. $16.50 PAT $16.50 Star Saga $14.50 Dragonlord $ $14.50 Peales! $14.50 Mines of Titan $5.00 LOOM Players may choose tactical (Division) or strategic (Army) commands. Whichever role you chose, you will find yourself in a highly interactive, intensely fought wargame where your gencralship skills will be tested to the maxl PANZER SALIENT uses the proven game system found in our popular \"Crisis in the West\" game. Fire & Movement (#83) writes, \"Thc maps arc beautiful...offers players the many joys of partaking in an umpired game with its good fog of war rules...give serious thought\". Initial startup costs $45 which comprises your first full turn, full color situation maps, full color manual, unit sheets, OB worksheets and a performance rating at the end of the campaign. Follow on turns are $20. We also offer a variety of books and games at discount prices. For sign up or information, write Combat Enterprises Inc., PO Box 763, Bel Air, MD 21014 or call (410) 838-7602. All inquiries are welcome. In the works: WARSHIPS Naval surface actions the heavies. Circle Reader Service #47 Computer Gaming World COMPSULT Circle Reader Service #49 Page 98 "


"Blow It Out Your Ear. Pump up the volume with Sound Blaster ! The sound card from Creative Labs. Experience the full power of 11-voice synthesized music and 8-bit sampled sound effects. Don't just hear it... let it blow you away! The scream of your F-15's engine as you elude enemy fire... the crisp crack of your bat when you hit a homerun off the screen...the echoing ring of sword against sword during your next fantasy adventure. No wonder Sound Blaster is the world's #1 seller. And why it's the sound card that more gaming software developers write for under DOS or Windows 3.1. To find out more about Sound Blaster, the only sound card that's 100% Sound Blaster compatible, visit your local computer retailer or call Creative Labs at 1-800-998-LABS. Get the full blown sound capability you've always wanted for your PC—for only $149. With Sound Blaster from Creative Labs. Because... if you don't have BLASTER Sound Blaster, you're really blowing it! SOUND BLASTER\" CREATIVE SOUND BLAST SYND BARRIER SB WWNFL WINIXMS Sound Blaster is a trademark of Creative Labs, Inc Windows is a trademark of Microsoft Corporation 1992 Creative Labs Inc All rights reserved International inquiries: Creative Technology. Ltd., Singapore Tel 65773-0233 Fax 65-773-0353 CREATIVE LABS. INC. Circle Reader Service #51 "


"neve nein 1 Liye 25 E Konami's Lure of the Temptress by Robin Matthews TITLE: Lure of the Temptress SYSTEM: Amiga, IBM PRICE: $49.95 PROTECTION: Documentation Look-Up DEVELOPER: Revolution Software PUBLISHER: Konami Buffalo Grove, IL \"LURE OF THE Temptress rn literature, there is George MacDonald Fraser's anti-hero, Harry Flashman, who has the worst of intentions but the best of luck. Fantasy literature even has Robert Asprin's Myth-Adventures (Hit or Myth, Little Myth Marker, etc.) in which an inept apprentice becomes a sitcom version of a master magician. He doesn't do anything intelligent, but it all works out hilariously well. In computer games, there is Space Quest's Roger Wilco and Bob Bates' unwitting hero in Eric The Unready (see page 58 of this issue), both of whom have the best possible luck and desperately need it because of the situations they get dragged into. Similarly, the player's character in Konami's Lure of the Temptress, Diermot, is unwittingly dragged into the plot of this new graphic adventure. After all, Diermot is living quite happily in his little village when, along comes the King and his courtiers. Like Charles I, hunting is the primary item on his majesty's agenda and Diermot sees a chance to garner some royal coinage, so he decides to enlist in the King's party as a beater. Suddenly, the King hears news of a revolt started by a mysterious Enchantress who has taken over the nearby town. The King rides off. Diermot, in the tradition of those unwitting heroes listed at the beginning of this article, isn't interested. Nevertheless, his uncontrolled horse drags him into the midst of this escapade. The next thing the player knows, Diermot is in a Skorl prison and the game's afoot. asked where the Blacksmith can be found, they will instruct the player to go to the forge or suggest that the Blacksmith is partial to a drink. So, the Blacksmith is most likely to be in the forge or the bar, but might even go on a different errand somewhere else. Another principle feature of Virtual Theatre is the intelligence of the characters. One can string together commands using the \"Tell\" feature to certain \"servant\" characters. Which means that complex, dual-character puzzles are possible. Conversations can also be overheard when the player sits in the bar, for example, as background information. However, because Revolution can't guarantee that the player will be listening, these incidental characters don't offer any vital information. The speech may be relevant to the plot, but not necessarily vital to progress in the game. The text is written in a very humorous way, so it is definitely worth exploring. Text-wise, Revolution has lots of little gems hidden around and lots of funny situations. There is no way that everyone is going to see all of it, as there are well over 2000 blocks of text included. Most of which no one player will ever read. However, Revolution wanted to reward the player for exploring. Another plus for the Revolution system is something called \"autorouting.\" This means that an independent character can walk from one point in the room to another, no-matter what obstacles lay before him. If somebody or something gets in his way, he mathematically works out the best way of walking around it. Which means that five or six people can appear on the screen at once and they'll all walk around each other sensibly. As they are doing this, KONAMI Revolution has developed for Lure of the Temptress is a system they call \"Virtual Theatre.\" They bill the system as the first of its kind, but it amounts to the way NPCs are handled, a la Ultima VII. Non-player characters wander around a \"real world\" and perform simulated actions, usually talking to one another and performing their daily tasks according to their own daily schedules. For example, the Blacksmith that the player needs to find at the beginning, will go to his forge and hammer away. If the village characters are Myth-Perception In order to convey the feeling of being swept along for the heroic ride, what Page 100 Computer Gaming World "


"Deuneund Myth-Statement Also, where character interaction is concerned, the questions one asks are geared towards the objective. The more people interrogated the clearer that objective becomes, which almost serves as a help function. The questions themselves are listed as in Monkey Island, but at the top of the screen instead of at the bottom. Those questions can relate to object manipulation or character interaction. However, the only time the building up of a sentence is utilized (using the lists of verbs and nouns) is when one wants someone to do someAnother bug-bear for Lure is the speed of some of the on-screen action. For some obscure reason there is an occasional delay while performing seemingly ordinary tasks which triggers a clock signifying a loading period for the new sequence. This may be understandable on slow machines, but not on the faster versions. I wonder Ratpouch Dierrot Hey, Ralpouch, wait! thing. they may comment to each other with such badinage as \"Get out of my way!\" or \"Excuse me\" and so on. Myth-Connection Commands are issued by floating the cursor over a person one wishes to issue commands to and clicking the left mouse button (the cursor changes shape depending upon what action is required). This then accesses all the verbs that are associated with that noun. So, if the cursor is moved over Ratpouch, the player's servant, one can click on \"Tell.\" The program recognizes Ratpouch, so it prints \"Tell Ratpouch to ...\" and then the player chooses from a verb list which can be scrolled up and down. From the list the player could select (Go To, Open, Lock, Close, etc.). If Go To is selected, all of the rooms appear in list form. However, the player can't tell somebody to do something until the character knows about it first. This means that a character cannot be told to go to a room unless the room is known about. If Ralpouch is told to go to the guardroom, the player either gets a choice of \"And Then,\" in case additional actions are required, or \"Finish\" to end the command string. If the phrase \"And Then\" is selected, more verbs appear and so on. In that way a very complicated set of instructions can be linked, but in a very simple way. Characters also have a memory of sorts. So, if Character A is given instructions to talk to Character B (who isn't in the immediate area) then Character A will remember that he has been given the instructions as he strolls around. Thus, when Character A is in a room when Character B re-appears, Character A will eventually talk to him. Hence, Character A completes his task. Myth-Direction Graphically, the game is very atmospheric. The introductory sequence is well directed and animated, displaying neat touches that exude realism. The actual game graphics are similarly well-presented with plenty of \"perceived value\" effects. That is, looping and triggered animated effects inserted to enhance the gaming atmosphere. In addition, the graphic Door ematen whether the problem lies in the game-engine itself or the reluctance by Revolution to utilize extended memory to buffer event loading and so on. However, it is important not to emphasize the loading speed problem because, to be fair, the sporadic waiting does not spoil the game. Also, the game speed itself (ie: sprite movements, etc) is perfectly acceptable. In addition, the Virtual Theatre (VT) system itself has not been fully implemented to its full design specifications. For example, the potential for rumors to spread around the game-world sprouting from actions and so forth is very possible in VT but never fully executed. Hopefully further Revolution productions will fill the boundaries of the game engine. One irritation of VT is the auto-routing character movement. This semi-intelligent PC/NPC movement, described earlier, can become a little cumbersome because, on occasion, the characters sometimes take such extended diversions to traverse the course from A-B that one sometimes wonders why the character didn't just push the obstructing character out of the way in the first place! Though it is clear that Lure of the Temptress is not a truly excellent game, it is by no means a poor game. There are too many good points to award to Lure for that to be the case. The gameplay is largely freeform, the presentation is excellent. Puzzles, while not too much of a challenge for adventuring grognards, are ideal for the adventuring beginner. In addition the game does not force the player down particular puzzle paths. One can wander the area with impunity soaking up the atmosphere and investigating less important characters and areas. Lure of the Temptress is a fine first release from this developer and bodes well for the future. CGW viewpoint is shifted depending on certain actions. Thus, close-ups, first-person perspectives, and the ability to look through objects are introduced, often with changes in the physical screen size. For this review the game was played via a Roland LAPC-1, although both Adlib and Soundblaster cards are also supported. Music is rather good in Lure and is well supported by the gamut of sound effects. The sound effects are well structured and very impressive, offering a similar mood to Dungeon Master in that approaching events or off-screen events can be overheard. Look at Straw pile This pile of stinking straw has curved as your bed since your BIROUE Another positive aspect of the Lure of the Temptress system is that there are no blind alleys. One way this objective is acheived is that, when the player moves to the next section, the game forces them to have all the objects that they will need before the new section is entered. Myth-Judgment Lure of the Temptress might be an honorable first release for Revolution, but it is by no means perfect. Play is enjoyable but there should have been more of it. The game could have done with a few more puzzles, more locations and more characters. One just gets into the swing of things when the end appears. March 1993 Page 101 "


"TTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTT111 13 COMPANY REPORT The House That Gretzky Built Bethesda Softworks were than the time they spent at their own offices. Further, the corporate philosophy is much more of a group philosophy than an individual philosophy. Indeed, the Japanese emphasis on small teams for planning and production is used to positive effect from the very outset of cach project. Bethesda believes in group decisions and group responsibility. The corporate philosophy also encourages innovation. The company was founded on a \"contrarian principle.\" Rather than designing just another football game, the concept was to develop a physical environment which adhered to physical principles. Gridiron was born and, to this day, is one of the most popular games among the company's employees. So, it is no wonder that programmers regularly suggest new ways of handling design problems and receive the go-ahead to experiment with their potential solutions. hris Weaver, President and CEO of Be direction of the company. One such influence thesda Softworks, once worked for a was the time that Weaver spent living in Japan technology company that had its head while studying under a fellowship. The other quarters in the office space where Bethesda is the show business background of both Chris currently resides. Naturally, that means that he and his family. is going to do everything he can to make sure The Japanese influence can be seen in both that such a fate is not in store for his company. the corporate philosophy His risk management phiand the working environlosophy is simple. Where ment. The lobby of the many executives stop at conbuilding is practically an tingency plans A, B or C, he arboretum and the interiors moves on to D, E and F. of each office are customWhere many companies feel ized to reflect the needs of the pressure to keep on exthe individual(s) who work panding, he believes that within them. Bethesda's companies quickly reach a management believes that point of diminishing returns too many employees (in too by getting ahead of the bell many companies) have to curve too rapidly. So, he has fight the work environestablished a definite limit to ment, so they require that how large he will allow the VP of Finance every work area be wellcompany to grow year by Constance Gachowski conceived enough that proyear. ductivity is enhanced Where many company presidents leave cost rather than discouraged. Therefore, costs take analysis to their accounting and production a back seat to function at Bethesda. For examdepartments, Weaver, with the assistance of ple, one finds more expensive towels in the his Vice-President of Finance (Constance shower room at Bethesda's offices than one Gachowski) keeps tabs on the cost of disks and labels to the decimal points of the penny. finds in most hotels. The rationale for such an Weaver calls Gachowski his financial wizard. extravagance? The company believes that any That's not what the people on the other end of time a programmer or artist is working long her hard-nosed negotiations call her, but that's enough hours to need to spend the night in the probably why she seems like such a wizard. office, they need to be able to clean up and Where many companies are finding themrefresh themselves in style. selves forced to delay shipments, Bethesda has A premium is placed upon unobtrusive storshipped two of its last three products exactly age space (e.g. a wall of custom-sized files on time (largely as a result of having Chris behind wooden facades in the finance departmicro-managing the schedule via his knowlment) for some and display space (e.g. walls edge of software engineering). Ironically, the all around the room which are designed for third product in the equation shipped late beposting images, schedules, color proofs etc. in cause of a problem with printing the manual the art and programming departments) for othrather than programming the software. ers. Indeed, many independent contractors Turning Japanese who have performed services for Bethesda at the company's offices have noted how much Two major influences seem to shape the more productive their few hours at Bethesda Another Openin', Another Show The second major influence comes, not only from the Weaver heritage in the worlds of music and theater, but from his experience in television and video production. Weaver was once associate producer of NBC News and moved to ABC as a technology forecaster. He applied his experience to computer game production and establishes project time-lines in much the same way that screenplays or shooting schedules would be developed in network television production. Weaver admits that television news production is a fascinating example of triple-time scheduling where information comes in so fast that one almost doesn't have time to manage it, but observes that it is an excellent place to come to grips with techniques that work fast and efficiently. At Bethesda, the entire process begins with a pre-production meeting where the writers present their concepts and the team Page 102 Computer Gaming World "


"smoothly on most configurations, but tended to lock up with some of the tested platforms when a CD-ROM drive or higher drive than D was added to the mix. Though Bethesda says they have fixed all of the bugs which have been brought to their attention, the company continues to refine their testing program in order to strive for that ephemereal ideal of the \"bugfree\" computer game. This is part of the company's commitment to quality. members who would be pares to continuity responsible for producscripts used in motion ing a game try to tear picture production holes in those concepts. (which keep tabs on It is almost a devil's adproperties and costumes vocate-style meeting used in particular scenes, because the company's 205 just in case there have to philosophy is that the be re-shoots). people who are going to The entire process beexecute those concepts came easier to manage need to believe in them. when Vijay Laksham So, it is important that came to Bethesda from they have a chance to his work with the govaccept or reject them Ken Mayfield, manager of the art department. ernment. Laksham is an from the beginning. excellent manager, unThat way, they have derstands software demore of themselves invested creatively in the velopment and oversees the bulk of all Beprocess. thesda's current projects. Once the concepts are agreed upon the entire game is written up from a \"shooting script\" Testing 1, 2, 3 perspective (complete with ideas for back The company is encouraged by their current grounds and camera angles). Once the script is teams and the way production is progressing, agreed upon by both the writer and the team but they are not satisfied. Right now, the prileaders, the group dissects the project into mary consideration is developing a testing promodules. The team responsible for each mod tocol. Though each product is somewhat ule creates a schedule for completion so that different in terms of what needs to be tested, backgrounds are finished by the time anima the company uses both outside testing houses tions need to be tested against said back and an in-house testing team to consider a grounds and statistics are available by the time broad matrix of configurations and conditions. a function that uses those statistics is ready for After Wayne Gretzky Hockey 3 was released, a test run. Keeping up with this delicate chore the matrix was broadened to reflect the presography between teams and team members ence of CD-ROM drives, drives beyond D and requires project sheets that the company com phantom drives. This is because the game ran Society Page Part of Bethesda's corporate philosophy also wants to give back something to society. Currently, the company donates software to children's hospitals within the area and would like to encourage other software publishers to do the same in order to provide \"non-partisan\" assortments of computer games. They are also hoping to get hardware donated for some of the children's hospitals that cannot afford it. Bethesda Softworks is willing to coordinate the wider effort if other software publishers are interested. In short, Bethesda Softworks may well be called the \"House that Wayne Built,\" in much the same way that Yankee Stadium is called the \"House that Ruth Built.\" Both the publisher and the stadium provided venues for superstar properties, but they also provided arenas for further achievement. In both cases, the additional achievement is brought about by one word-achievement. CGW THE ROAD FROM SUMTER TO APPOMATTOX June 25, 1861.... \"The first shots of the Civil War have been fired... Fort Sumter has fallen. Volunteers on both sides rush to their colors. Across the Union the cry mounts ... ON TO RICHMOND.\" Nellork Daily Tribune Union forces under General Hotellan seize Harper's Ferry The Road From Sumter to Appomattox covers the entire Civil War from the opening guns of Bull run to the final surrender. All the military and economic might of the Union or Confederacy is at your command. FEATURES: Human or computer opponents. Naval system includes ocean and river going vessels, Over 100 individually named and rated generals, Economic system includes foreign trade and blockade runners. Control the promotions and dismissals of those generals. Beautiful 256 color VGA map that stretches from New Orleans  Continuous-play, daily pulses, send orders-whenever to Philadelphia, from Kansas City to Bermuda. you like.  Fully integrated tactical combat system emphasizing command Different unit types combine to form divisions and corps. control and quick resolution of even the largest battles. Full control over the national production system. Scenario editor allows players to construct their own battles or A detailed supply system using railroads, wagons and ships. play those already included. Send cheque or money order to: ADANAC COMMAND SYSTEMS CORP. 102 — 1345 West 4th Avenue Vancouver, B.C. Canada V6H 3Y8 Telephone: (604) 739-1162 $54.95 plus $5.00 S&H TOTAL $59.95 US  IBM OR AMIGA . Must have: MB H.D. Mouse, Keyboard, 286 or more March 1993 Circle Reader Service #45 Page 103 "


"etters ll Letters from Paradise a ESPANA Vaporman! As a subscriber of your magazine from the first issue, please let me begin by stating how much I enjoy each issue of Computer Gaming World. I always look forward to receiving my issue each month. Your increased number of pages, with the corresponding increase in content, has been a blessing to subscribers. Although I don't particularly like every portion of each issue (I'm not a wargame fan), there is usually more than enough to keep me satisfied. One of my favorite parts is the \"Letters to the Editor\" section. I know that you banned any further discussion on the subject of \"vaporware,\" but I have an interesting comparison for you, even if it doesn't see print. In addition to being a computer fanatic, I also collect comic books. In the world of comic books, the desirability of a comic is most attributable to the artist (more specificially, the penciller). Recently, a group of \"hot,\" i.e. extremely popular, artists quit work at Marvel Comics (the top-selling comic book publisher) and formed their own company, Image Comics. Their reasoning? To give themselves ownership of their creations and artistic freedom. What does this have to do with vaporware, you ask? There is a striking similarity between Image's inability to meet deadlines and the \"vaporware\" track record of some software companies. I purchase my comics from a mail order comic book service; each month, when I receive my monthly order, I also receive a list of items that have not been included due to the fact that they have not been shipped on time. On my back order list for December, there were 36 items; 17 of them were from Image. In fact, one issue (Youngblood #4) was supposed to ship on September 22! Image's deadline problem has provoked quite a dialogue between comic distributors, dealers, professionals and fans. Many recommendations have been made, the most common being not to buy Image comics. Although this would be the most appropriate method, I don't foresee this solving the problem. These artists are so popular that people will buy their books no matter how late they are. However, one suggestion about this issue has some merit and it could easily be adapted by your magazine to cover the similar problem of \"vaporware.\" As I stated earlier, I purchase my comics via mail order. When I receive my monthly order blank, I also receive a newsletter from the service which provides a description of each item available for order. Beginning soon, this newsletter will have a monthly \"report card\" monitoring each comic book company's record on meeting deadlines. In this first \"report card,\" I am sure that Image will receive a very low grade, quite likely an \"F.\" Will this practice put an end to Image's deadline problem? Well, it can't make it any worse. My mail order service has quite an extensive client base and it is possible that this could influence Image to give thought to taking steps toward solving the problem. I would like to suggest that you adopt this type of \"report card\" into your magazine. Tell us which companies are doing a good job of meeting their deadlines (there have to be some, don't there?) and which companies are not (can we all scream, \"Origin?\"). The software companies seem to have a healthy amount of respect for your magazine (e.g. your \"Top Advertisement\" contest) and perhaps, a \"report card\" as I have suggested could lead them to think twice before announcing a game for August of 1991 and, perhaps, delivering in March of 1993 (Strike Commander). I understand the points you have made about how some of the problems that lead to \"vaporware\" are hard to control. However, one point you made no longer \"holds water.\" I believe that you once stated that software companies did not foresee the incredible increase in time needed when switching from 16 color EGA graphics to 256 color VGA graphics. At the time you made that statement, there was no doubt that it was true. Shouldn't companies be aware of the time needed for extensive graphics by now? What was the last game to come out that didn't support VGA graphics? Many articles have been written about what will cause the demise of the computer game industry. Software companies tell us that if something isn't done about piracy, there will be less and less software available. The solution for piracy is just around the corner with CD-ROM software. As a consumer, though, I have a different view about the demise of the Page 104 Computer Gaming World "


"ELS you CHOOSE le zone awareses and alerts nize Files Au air calendar deng TM yo nat THE LINES WARE COMING.. ou name itu. n. Link any samo manually, even if ach hard disk. No na vur files up to date! Sy in a schedule you defi background anytime y ders from the simple Fi ting features to automat e, location, name, file copied files, lets you ed since the last sy :p one or both vers nsparently dea The Tinies are mischievous, hairy The Tiny Controller lets you maneuver beings from the planet Sklumph. the Tinies back to their sleep pods, Cute but unruly, the Tinies are but your mission will not be easy! messy creatures whose highest Tinies are single-minded and cultural achievement is uncooperative, and strange the practical joke. And devices lurk aboard their now a group of the messy ship. Teleporters, craziest Tinies arrow chutes, explosives, have decided to and other goodies hinder take a trip to Earth. your progress as you Unless you stop them maneuver the Tinies they will turn our around walls, traps, planet upside down... house plants and You have been chosen by each other. the King of Tinies to find The little beasts these boisterous critters, will heckle you every and put them back in their step of the way. By the color-coded sleepers the only time you realize that you place where they will lie down are descending into madness, and shut up. it may be... too late... To Order, See Your Local Retailer Or Call 1-800-453-7671 solutic 308 Main Street Lakeville, CT 06039 203-435-4995 Fax: 203-435-1091 r Available for IBM PC and compatibles and Macintosh. The Tinies is a registered trademark of ATREID Concepts, S.A.\" Anthly, or in the iect files and fol Circle Reader Service #67 powerful scrip bination of dai thing C mm "


"ELLCIS ottoric But it broke my concentration as I fought to save my bod. And now I pull the nose up, and now I push it down, And now the air is shattered by a terrible, dreadful sound. Longer Dramatic Pause Oh, somewhere in this favored land the sun is shining bright. The band is playing somewhere and somewhere hearts are light. And somwhere men are laughing and somewhere children jump; But there is no joy in A-B-Q for Randy has blown up. industry. I feel that if companies don't stop: i) promising software in June and delivering it in December and ii) releasing software that hasn't been tested properly, I soon will find something else to occupy my time and abandon computer games entirely. I understand that you must walk a \"line line\" when trying to satisfy both your subscribers and the software companies which provide free software for you to review. Please consider my recommendation; if anything, it could possibly make us frustrated consumers feel a little better. Joe Ankenbauer Council Bluffs, IA Although I'm more inclined to purchase a comic because it is written by Roy Thomas, Len Strazewski, Steve Miller or Mark Waid than because it is pencilled by a particular artist, I agree with your analogy and the implied concerns. However, the reason the software industry pays attention to CGW's \"Top Ad\" awards and monitor's our game ratings so closely is because these are not arbitrary ratings assigned by the editorial staff. Instead, they represent the aggregate opinion of their existing and potential customer base. So, we have decided to let the readers grade the software publishers on their timeliness. By responding to the CGW Poll, readers can have their say and we will print the results in an upcoming editorial. Then, we will follow up with a new \"report card\" every six months or so. Late, But Not Ignored We received this delightful pastiche after our informal contest had been adjudicated. However, since we had to read it, About The Author I'll be 49 in January and have decided that when I grow up, I want to be just like the kid in the movie \"Big.\" In the mean time, I work at a national laboratory and design and develop real weapons for real wars. They let me blow things up and shoot things down sled tracks and even drop them out of airplanes, For doing this, they give me money. Suckers! I've attached a photograph taken just before this historic mission. Well, maybe not this exact mission. we thought our readers should have to do so, as well.--Ed. Randy on the Mat by Randy King (with apologies to Ernest Lawrence Thayer) The outlook wasn't brilliant for a tour of duty that day. I'd barely survived my twenty-fourth with but one mission left to play. I'd spent months building wing men each with a very high score Plus, I've \"almost\" completed this tour seven times before. In honor of the occasion, I've decided to dress the part. I've donned my \"Big War\" surplus before I sit down to click start. With \"Mae West\" inflated and cap in a fifty mission crush, I just look plum beautiful. I might even have to blush. The headphones from my Ad Lib add character to the scene, And the RAF blue blazer makes me look real \"mean.\" Sounds of battle fill the air from my stereo hi-fi amp. Since I've been fighting for twenty minutes, my clothes are really damp. You see, I'm about to buy it and the sweat is really rolling 'cause my heart is doing warp eight and the adrenaline is overflowing. A pesky Bf 109 is floating high while two Focke-Wulf's are chewing up my tail. He's waiting for my one mistake, so he can pounce and drive the final nail. The cockpit's full of holes, and all my gauges are well into the red; Except the RPM, of course, 'cause my engines are nearly dead. Quickly I assess the situation, and come up with a plan Slow roll, split S, shallow dive toward England and a nice soft place to land. I grip the stick and as I begin executing that decision, I'm jarred by a little hand, and a voice that says, \"Daddy, can I fly a Mission?\" Dramatic Pause Twas but a moment's hesitation as I gave him a loving nod, Randy King Albuquerque, NM So, come on, Randy! Who took the picture? We know your wife and children must have left you missions ago. No More Girly References I take offense at B. Walker's final line in the Wolfenstein 3-D review. \"Girlygamers?\" I am a girly gamer. Jennifer Landon Baltimore, MD We confess to overusing the \"girly gamer\" line (twice in #102 and once in #103), but would like to protest that several of our readers did not understand the reference to Saturday Night Live's pretentious body-builders, Hans and Franz. We used the satirical phrase to exaggerate the masculine qualities of the games being reviewed, but didn't realize how many readers we would have that would not understand the reference. We normally make a special effort to refer to gamers as he or she in order to avoid the idea that all gamers are male and we have several female contributors to the magazine. So, we aren't really sexist. We were just guilty of \"flabby\" editing. Cow Page 106 Computer Gaming World "


"CGW 3/93 Titles at the Lowest Prices 800-554-9925 (omputAbility 800-554-9925 Since 1982 Call Us On Our US/Canadian Toll Free Number! Consumer Electronics Call Us On Our US/Canadian Toll Free Number! HOURS: Mon-Fri 9am-9pm Sat 11am-5pm FAX (414) 357-7814 INFO (414) 357-8181  PO Box 17882, Milwaukee, WI 53217 39 95 IBM Links 386 Pro.......... 39.95 Mauna Kea..... 19.95 Lord of the Rings Il: Two Towers............34.95 Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes .42.95 Lost Treasures of Infocom . ...39.95 Magic Candle Ill 37.95 Mantis/Speech Pack............ 39.95/19.95 Manis Missing 34 95 Megafortress.. CALL Megafortress Mega Pak.......... ... 37.95 Megatravelerilor lll 349539.95 Michael Jordan in Flight 3795 Might & Magic II 3495 Monopoly Deluxe for Win 34.95 Mozart's Magical Music Machine ..20 95 MS Golf for Windows 42.95 | War 1965-1975 ... 29.95 NFL Pro League Football 4495 NFL Video Pro Football 44.95 No Greater Glory... 39.95 Omar Shariff on Bridge Windows .....29.95/29.95 Out of this World Pacific Theater of Operations..............3995 Rex Nebular 39.95 Robocop 3-D .... 31.95 Seal Team .......... 37.95 Sucret Weapons/Lufttwalle... 39.95 Expansion Disk 1.2.3 or 4 . 19.95 Shadow President 39.95 Shadowgate for Windows.......... 31.95 ShadowLands 29.95 Sharif on Bridge for DOSWindows 29.95 Sid Meier's Bundle 29.95 Siege/Expansion Disk 37.95/20.95 Sim Ant DOS Windows ...... 34 9534.95 Sim City DOS Windows 29.95/34.95 Sim Earth / Windows 39.95 39.95 Sim Life 39.95 Solitaires Journey 3495 Sound Graphics, Aircraft 2495 Space Hulk 39.95 Space Inc... 34.95 Space Quest 5 39.95 Special Forces 29.95 Spell Craft .... 34.95 Spellcasting 301 ................................ 34.95 Tnstan.. Ultima VII..... Forge of Virture Data Disk Ultima VII Part 2 Ultima Underworld Ultrabots... Uncharted Waters...... V for Victory Utah Beach V for Victory Il: Velikiye Luki Wayne Grethe3... Wax Works Where.. Carmen San Diego, Each Where Carmen Past Where Carmen USA Deluxe Where Carmen World Deluxe White Death ..... Wing Commander ! Speech Accessory Pack Special Operations lotil Wing Commander Deluxe Wizardry Crusaders Dark Savant... World Circuit Grand Prix XWing 29.95 44,95 17.95 44.95 47.95 37.95 39.95 42.95 42.95 3495 34.95 29.95 34.95 44 95 4495 29.95 44.95 14.95 2495 44.95 39.95 34.95 39.95 SSR 88888888 VISION LOTTO SOUND CARDS TE CREATIVE | MEDIA SOUND BLASTER.16 $219 CREATIVE LABS, INC. NEW ITE PRO AUDIO MPC Multimedia $189  16-Bit Stereo Sampling & Playback for Voice Channel  Enhanced 4-Operator, 20-Voice Stereo FM Music Synthesizer . MIDI & CD-ROM Interfaces  Windows 3.1, SB & SB Pro Compatible . 16 Bit / MIDI Interface True 16 Bit Stereo Sound Advanced 20 Voice Stereo Synthesizer Joystick, Amplifier, Software Call for List! A Line in the Sand ..24.95 Aces of the Pacific ..39.95 WWII 1946 add on disk. 19.95 Aces Over Europe 4495 Air Bucks 34 95 Air Support 29.95 Air Traffic Controller 34.95 Air Warrior 3495 Aircraft & Adventure Factory 2495 Rescue Ar 911. Flight 685 or 701.ca Amazon 39.95 Ambush 37.95 Aspects of Valor 59.95 ATAC 34.95 ATP Tennis 31 95 B-17 Flying Fortress 39.95 Batman Returns. 39.95 Battles of Destiny 34.95 BattleChess 4000 29.95 Battlefield 2000 .37.95 Birds of Prey 31.95 Black Crypt 31.95 Body illustrated 44.95 Butz Aldrin's Race into Space 34.95 Campaign ... .34.95 Cat & Driver 37.95 Carrier Strike: South Pacific 39.95 Expansion Ser 20.95 Carriers of War 3495 Castles for 11 34.95/34.95 Challenge of the Five Realms 34.95 Champions 34.95 Civilization 39.95 Classic Adventures... 34.95 Clouds of Xeen 39.95 Cobra Mission 44.95 Comanche Maximum Overkilt. 4295 Mission Disk 11 of 2 25 95/25.95 Conquered Kingdoms.. .... 34.95 Creepers 29.95 Crusaders of the Dark Savant 4195 Curse of Amon Ra 39.95 Cyber Empires 31.95 Daemonsgate 34,95 Dagger of Amona 39.95 Dark Queen of Krynn 31.95 Darklands 39.95 Dark Hall 34.95 Dark Sun 47.95 Daughter of Serpentis 31.95 Dinosaur Adventure 29.95 Dominant Species 29.95 Dragon's Lair 3.... .. 34.95 Dune Il 34.95 Eagle's Rider 29.95 Empire Deluxe ....... .34 95 F-15 Strike Eagle Il or lll..... ..... 34.95/44.95 Fables & Fiends: Legend of Kyrandia... ..34.95 Falcon 3.0 44.95 Disk 1 Operation Fighting Tiger 24.95 Family Entertainment Pack 29.95 Final Conflict.... 29.95 Flight Assignment: Air Force.............. 39.95 Flight Simulator 40 39.95 Add-on Disks CALL Frederick Pohi's Gateway 34.95 Front Page Football 39.95 Gary Grisby s Pacific War .39.95 Globs Effect 31.95 Grand Slam Bridge 11 31.95 Great thaval Battles 42.95 Scenario Builder/Expansion Disk... 25.95/20.95 Hard Ball ll or Ill 29.95/3995 Harpoon CALL Harpoon Signature Edition 47.95 Heaven & Earth 29.95 Heroes of the 357th... 31.95 Humans 24.95 Incredible Machine 29.95 Indy Jones 4 Fate of Atlantis..... 34,95 Island of Dr. Brain 29.95 Jump Jet...... 39.95 King's Quest 5 Enhanced.... 39.95 King's Quest 6 44.95 Laser Squad 24.95 Legacy. The 39.95 Legends of Valour 37.95 Leisure Suit Larry 5 39.95 Leisure Suit Larry Bundle 1.2.3. Lemmings 29.95 Oh No! More Lemmings (add-on) 21.95 Lemmings 34.95 3495 Carmen San Diego/Each 30.95 Carmen San Diego America 36.95 Castles..... Campaign Disk 19.96 Castles Il 34.95 Civil War 37.95 Conquest of Japan.... 3495 Creepers Crusaders of the Dark Savant Cyber Empires Cytron Daemonsgate Dark Sued.. ... .. Death Knights of Krynn....... Deluxe Paint IV (while supplies last; Demoniak 30.95 Desert Strike 31.95 Discovery Columbus... 34.95 Dragon's Lair 3 34.95 29.95 ECO Phantoms 24 95 Elvira Il-Jaws of Cerberus 39 95 Eye of the Beholder or Il... 37.95 Eye of the Storm 29.95 F-14 F-18 29.95 Fables & Fiends: Legend of Kyrandia 34.95 Fighter Dual Pro. 34.95 Final Conflict...... 34.95 Gateway to the Savage Frontier 31.95 Global Effect 31.95 Great Naval Battles 4295 Harpoon. 37.95 Battleset 4 ............. .. 25.95 Harpoon Designers Series Battleset 31.95 Harpoon Signature Edition 47.95 Heimdall 2495 Indy Jones 4: Fate of Atlantis 3495 Jack Nicklaus Unlimited 34.95 Legend of Kyrandia 34.95 Lengends of Valour 37.95 Lemmings 1 or 2............... 34.95 Light Ouest 31.95 Links.... .... .... 29.95 Firestone, Bountiful Course Disks 17.95 Lord of the Rings 2 or 3 34 95 Lords of Time.... 29.95 Lost Treasures of Infocom 39.95 Madden Footbal 31.95 Mantis 39.95 Mega Fortress 37.95 Mission Disk #1 or 2 25.95 Mercenaries 37 95 Megatraveller 2 3495 Mig-29 30.95 Might & Magic III 34.95 Napoleon 29.95 Navy Seals 25.95 No Greater Glory 39.95 Oh No! More Lemmings stand alone 29.95 Oh No! More Lemm add-on 21.95 Out of this World 4695 PGA Tour Golt 3195 Golf Tournament Course disk Perfect General . .. .... 34.95 WWII Scenario Disk... 19.95 Pinball Dreams.... 24.95 Pinball Fantasy 24.95 Pit-Fighter 21.95 Plan 9 from Space 29.95 Pools of Darkness 37.95 Populous / Populus II.... ........31.95 37.95 The Challenge scenario disk... 20.95 Powermonger 31.95 Prehistoric Prophecy of the Shadow Realms Red Zone Road Rash Rules of Engagement Secret of Monkey Island I or Il Shadow of the Beast Il or lll Shadowlands Shanton Bridge Shuttle Sim Ant Sim City Sim Earth ... ..... Solitaires Journey 34.95 Space Hulk 3195 Spoils of War 34.95 Star Control Il Star Trek 25th Anniversary Strip Poker 3... Tales of Magic: Prophecy Shadow Terrain Envoy The Challenge The Light Corridor Tom Landry Football...... Treasure of the Savage Frontier Twighlight 2000 Ultima 6 Utopia Viking Field of Conquest Where in the Carmen each World Circuit JOYSTICKS MODEMS ZOOM $75 V.32 bis Internal/External.................. $205/$219 V.32 bis Send/Receive 14,400 Int. ............... $215 V.32 bis Send/Receive 14,400 Ext ............. $245 Advanced Gravis: Analog Joystick ..$32 Eliminator Game Card PC Mouse Stick CH Products: Virtual Pilot NEW! ... $69 Virtual Pilot Pro NEW! ..... $89 Flight Stick ......... $39 Hi Speed Adaptor $19 Gamecard 3 Auto $30 Gamecard 3-PS/2 .... MACH 3 Joystick $29 Maximum: MAXX Flight Yoke .................. MAXX Pedal Kraft: Kraft KC3 Kraft Trackball w/Ft Cntir. $55 Kraft Thunderstick S27 Thrustmaster: Flight Control.... Weapons Control. Thrustmater Pro. ...................... $119 565 $17 Supra Corporation Supra Fax Modem V.32 bis, Internal with Fax Software, DOS/Windows ... $195 / $195 SupraFax Modem V.32 bis, Ext. alone............ $279 with Fax Software, DOS/Win ......... $299 / $299  S75 ... $75 AMIGA & Patriot ... 42.95 Perfect General 34.95 Pirates of Gold Edition 39.95 Pools of Darkness 37.95 Populous II...... 37.95 Power Politics........... 29.95 Powermonger... 3195 PrintShop Deluxe 44.95 Graphics Libraries Business 29.95 Graphics Libraries: Sampler 2995 Privateer 47.95 Pro League Baseball .34 95 Prophecy of the Shadow............. .37.95 Quatky Turbo Science 29.95 Quest for Glory 3 39 95 Rampart 25.95 Spelljammer: Pirates of Realmspace...........37.95 Spoils of War ......... 34.95 Star Controlll...... 34.95 Star Legions 37.95 Star Trek Screen Savers for Win 32.95 Strike Commander 44.95 Strip Poker 3/data disks ........... 29.95/15.95 Summoning 37.95 TA Break Pool 29.95 Tales of Magic: Proph Shadow 37 95 Task Force 1942 39 95 Tegel's Mercenaries 37.95 Terminator 2029 39.95 Theatre of War 31.95 Tom Landry Football 29.95 Traders 29 95 &&& ATrain Agony Air Force Commander Air Support ATAC B-17 Flying Fortress Ball Game Bard's Taite Construction Battle Toads Birds of Prey Black Crypt Boombox Campaign 39.95 29.95 34.95 29.95 30.95 39.95 24.95 29 95 2495 31.95 31.95 36.95 34 95 &883 88 ORDERING INFO: Specity system. For fast delivery send cashier's check or money order Personal & company checks allow 14 business days to clear. P.O. s welcome.C.O.D. charges are $5.00in Continental U.S.A. include $5.00 for software Orders 5% Shipping for hardware, minimum $5.00 MasterCard and Visa orders please include card / expiration date and signature. Wi residents please include 5% sales tax. HI, AK, FPO, APO, Puerto Rico and Canadian orders, please add 6% shipping, minimum $6.00. All other foreign orders add 15% shipping, min $15.00 All orders shipped outside the Continental USA are shipped first class insured U.S. mail, where available. Il foreign shipping charges exceed the minimum amount, you will be charged the additional amount All goods are new and include factory warranty. We do not guarantee compatability & version is. Due to our low prices all sales are final. All Detective returns must have a return authorization number. Call (414) 357-8181 to obtain an R.A. or your return will not be accepted. Prices and availability subject to change without notice. Shipping & handling are non-refundable. We ship the latest versions available to us updates must be handled by end user directly with the manufacturer, Plot responsible for typographical errors. In an effort to be complete, some new products may not be available from the manufacturer at press time. Circle Reader Service #50 "


"foreign correspondence Over There A. .. Great Caesars, Ghosts by Robin Matthews WA M Startbericum This month three titles hot from Europe, one British strategy product to resolve combat and then return to the more strategic game, and two first class products from France, both of level of Caesar until another conflict occurs, much like the Interwhich look to cause quite a stir... locking Game idea from Omnitrend, Computer game ideas seem to be produced in phases. A couple of years ago there was that entire regiment of tank simulations, The graphics in Caesar are good, but the interface takes a little then a squadron of World War I flight games, now it seems it's getting used to. Fortunately, the whole game hangs together well. time for gladiators, cohorts and all things Roman! Two recent There are a lot of these 'god' type games around, but Caesar releases will try to have gamers wearing the old laurel leaves; one deserves to be considered one of the finest Romans of them all.\" is Rome from Millennium, using a substantial revamp of the Caesar is available in both IBM and Amiga versions. engine used in their Robin Hood game. Rome should be available On a different tack, but still with an 'Empire' connection is the as the reader holds this issue. gorgeous looking Inca from Coktel Vision. This graphic advenThis month we'll have a peek at the other Roman product, which ture uses the legends of the old Peruvian civilization as its backis Caesar from the British wargaming specialists, Impressions. drop, but then combines this with elements of space travel/combat Impressions is one of the busiest UK companies and is regularly and a dungeon exploration game. featured in these pages. This is not one This all sounds a bit untidy, so here of their 'Miniatures' series, but is more is the basic storyline. In the late a cross between Sim City, Populous W ATU WWW 1500's the Inca's knew their race was and Civilization. on the way out (something to do with In Caesar, the player takes the role those troublesome Europeans, rumor of a minor Roman official in charge of has it). So, being the forward-looking some little backwater town in the lot they were, these last ones tripped Greater Roman Empire. One starts down to Lake Titicaca and hid all the building up their modest settlement, secrets and Peruvian artifacts they and, as the population grows, must could in a secret place. This was bebuild walls, aqueducts, baths and a cause they had received this sort of range of Roman structures. All is not prophecy (they probably read it in an peace and happiness, though, and atearly version of CGW) that the old SU tention must be given to protecting Golden one (had to expect that El one's loyal plebs from the marauding Dorado fella' would pop up one day) Barbarians. This creates the classic diand restore the Empire, bring back lemmas of how to use limited resuccess and wealth, eliminate emsources, making crucial decisions, FM ODDO EF 19888 ployment, cut taxes, etc. legions or butter, etc. Caesar Now then, the coincidence is that If players are successful in the local the player gets to \"become\" this El province, they are promoted to a new region which provides a Dorado geezer and all he or she has to do is find three gems that tougher test. This continues until one gains enough prestige to do all the business. Sounds easy, doesn't it? Well yeeessss, but at become the main man, the Emperor of the Roman Empire. the same time that old El Dorado was invented, so was this evil alter ego type (Newton's 10th Law Conservation of Dualism?) An interesting feature in Caesar is the facility to link with the called Aguirre, and he's pretty keen to grab these gems for his own forthcoming Cohort 2 (a total rewrite of Impressions' Roman-cra dark purposes. miniatures wargame), allowing players to drop down into that So its the ol' \"you versus him,\" in a treasure hunt for the goodies. worst ED De Page 108 Computer Gaming World "


" The hardware includes a Wing Commanderish space ship, with lots of quick and fast combat. Other areas have almost an Ultima Underworld feel, with the graphics being impressive throughout. Inca Sound Board support is also of a high standard with digitized speech (but no Roland support!!) and some spectacular audio/visual effects (shades of Terminator 2 but Coktel has sworn me to secrecy regarding the details). Due as you read this, Inca looks to be the best release yet from the French outfit and should be well worth a look. Yet more software from the other side of the Channel is the atmospheric Alone in the Dark from prolific French software house Infogrammes (previewed in issue 103). This is a scary mystery/thriller set in the house known as Derceto. The owner, Jeremy Hartwood, died a couple of days ago, supposedly taking his own life. The butler (Ah ah, the butler eh? make a note of that, 'the butler') confirmed that his master had been suffering from acute depression exacerbated by his master's attempts to decipher the ancient manuscripts found in the mansion's library, and, in fact, was becoming so unhinged that he seemed to be convinced that there was a presence in the house.. Derceto is now unoccupied (well, it is devoid of life), but strange lights appear in the house at night, eerie noises are heard, and the player's character is strangely compelled to go to the house, to enter its forbidding domain and to be...Alone in the Dark. This is a delightfully sculptured piece of software, combining all the best aspects of gallic imagination and flair, but for once possessing (a bad choice of words) real playability. The graphics are superb, with probably the best use yet, in any PC adventure, of weird and unusual camera angles—many in the best Alfred Hitchcock tradition. The animation is by way of filled polygons set against bit-mapped backgrounds and creates yet another interesting variation on the 3-D theme. The atmosphere is tautthere is a real sense of menace-leaving all previous 'horror type games in the graveyard. US Alone in the Dark distribution will be handled by Interplay, so keep your eyes out for this one, if you dare play it with the lights off! Finally, lots of noises and rumors from Lemmings creators Psygnosis about a couple of new products. No hard details as of yet, but word has it the PC version of Armageddon is due, plus something about Tomatoes (fruit or vegetable?) and something else about Creepers????? Cw FCS (Joystick) What Do PC Jet Jockeys Want? Hair-Raising Sorties Death Defying Maneuvers Heroics Victory Realism HOTASTM And.. ThrustMaster Controls WCS\" (Throttle) Used in conjunction with your joystick is RCS (Rudder Pedals) 10150 S.W. Nimbus Ave. STE. EZ Tigard, OR 97223 Phone (503)639-3200 Fax (503)620-8094 Circle Reader Service #102 March 1993 Page 109 "


"BEST V of the sedenou Totally Spaced-Out REST by Chuck Miller The world of shareware I must admit that I have always experienced a certain propensity toward arcade games with a stellar motif (a favorite of my wife, Millie, as well). Between us, many quarters surrendered their lives to the likes of Galaga, Galaxian, Robotron and Defender. So, this month I am devoting Best of the Rest to a favorite genre of shoot'em ups. Don your blasters and may the Force be with us all. audio are excellent. Animation is smooth and fast. The asteroids even appear to be rotoscoped, rotating as they travel through space. Music is among the best I have heard in Amiga games, providing a throbbing, upbeat backdrop to game play. Digitized audio is incorporated for a computerized voice which informs the player of game status. The whole package comes across as what one would expect in a true coin-op product. As such, all documentation is provided on-line. Cybernetix: The First Battle is an excellent offering that even the novice gamer will enjoy. It requires a joystick and runs on all Amigas, including accelerated systems. As a shareware game, a fee of  is requested (approximately $8-10.00 U.S. depending on exchange rate). To register Cybernetix send the required amount Defender Meets Asteroids Many Defender and Asteroids clones have hit the commercial and shareware markets on the Amiga since its release, ranging in quality from mediocre to excellent. Most shareware versions I am familiar with occupy the former category. However, until now, I had not seen them combined into a single game, and certainly not of the quality exhibited in Cybernetix: The First Banile Amiga RT #17436). to: ZUP UP 00004200 301-55 . B01165 ENTERINC SECTOR. Vision Software Unit 10, St. Kevins Arcade Karrangahape Road Central Auckland New Zealand A Case of Overkill Those with fond memories of vertical scrollers like Alpha Mission will find a nostalgic cord struck with Epic MegaGames (yes, another release from this prolific group) Overkill [IBMPC RT #31042). Overkill, created by Ste Cork and Tech-Noir Prowww THERESELLERDELE B0002920 WEAPON DIAGONAL an CONTOUR MISSILES | FIRENOSE GADGETS Cybernetix, by Vision Software of New Zealand, is one of the most unique and classy shareware offerings I have seen on the Amiga in recent months. As indicated, it combines elements of the classic games Defender and Asteroids. Like the latter, large cosmic particles cross the screen from top to bottom (and vice versa), exiting one edge of the screen and reappearing on the other. Destroy these astral rocks and they will often leave small blue crystals that increase the player's score when collected. As in Defender, primary ship movement and waves of alien attacks take place horizontally across the screen. Delay too long in clearing a sector and an Assassin will appear to destroy one's ship. When a sector is completely cleared, the player is advanced to the next. All this action combines to make an enjoyable and very addictive game. As with many overseas programming teams, graphics and FIGHTER UPGRADES ductions, provides the MS-DOS gamer with that tried-and-true multilevel, vertical scrolling action experienced in many arcades and courtesy of numerous game consoles. As usual with this type of game, precision and patience are required. Once again, some race of evil aliens (and how many do not fall into this classification?) have wreaked havoc, this time destroying Page 170 Computer Gaming World "


"the player's home world. As the last of one's race and out for revenge, the player must battle his or her way through six massive levels packed with danger (freeing six planets in the process) and destroy the aliens' heavily armored Battle Star at the end of the sixth level. Dangers the player will face include meteor storms, space fortresses, hideous creatures and ships of incredible power. Fuel and weapons are limited, but can be collected along the way by picking up pods jettisoned by alien crafts and creatures destroyed during one's journey. Those lucky enough will be able to construct the ultimate battle cruiser, a craft of immense fire power readied for the final battle. Though Overkill only sports EGA graphics (even in VGA mode), it still provides a graphically nately, Cosmo's parents have been carted away to serve as reluctant hors d'oeuvres for some cannibalistic alien feast. Cosmo, accordingly, must find and rescue them before they end up as part of an alien smorgasbord. At his disposal, Cosmo's only resources are his unique suction-cup hands, bombs accumulated along the way and the ability to \"stomp\" his opponents into submission. Graphics are good even though they are of the EGA/VGA variety (I would like to see Apogee upgrade to true VGA in future releases), with animation and screen scrolling as smooth as usual. The soundtrack is quite an upbeat affair lending an appropriate comical flair to play. Sound effects, though, are little more than generic boinks and beeps. Nonetheless, those who enjoyed Commander Keen will find Cosmo much to their liking, as will the player who takes pleasure in a good, side-scrolling platform game with a high degree of cuteness. It definitely offers hours of pleasure without excessive destruction. Cosmo's Cosmic Adventure requires CGA, EGA or VGA graphics and a 286 or better PC compatible, with support provided for joysticks (including the Gravis PC GamePad) and Sound Blaster and Ad Lib audio cards. The shareware version includes episode one. To register Cosmo and obtain all three episodes, send $35.00 plus $4.00 shipping and handling to: Apogee Software P.O. Box 476389 Garland, TX 75047 (800) 426-3123 UMTUMIA LLLLLLLLLLLL 0009250 FASTLRS WEAPON 90-90 MISSILES. GADGETS WALLS HUPGRADES 50 attractive package. Music and sound effects are also handled capably. As indicated above, however, play is difficult and requires persistence and a quick trigger linger. As a result, those who like challenging play will feel right at home in the cockpit of this quality arcade blaster. Overkill requires CGA, EGA or VGA graphics, 512K RAM and DOS 3.0 or later. Support is provided for joysticks and for Sound Blaster and Ad Lib compatible sound cards. The shareware version includes the first two of six planets, while a registration fee of $30.00, plus $4.00 shipping and handling obtains for the player the full six planet version, including a hint sheet and cheat code. Those who would like to take on yet more hostile aliens in a tough but playable game should send their registration to: Epic MegaGames 10406 Holbrook Drive Potomac, MD 20854 or call (800) 972-7434. Epic MegaGames also runs a BBS which can be reached by modem at (508) 365-2359 (2400 Baud), (508) 365-9825 (9600 Baud) and (508) 365-9668 (14.4K Dual HST). Shareware versions of all their games are available for downloading. Climbing the Walls Many gamers are familiar with Apogee Software because they distributed Id Software's ground-breaking Wolfenstein 3D. Others are well acquainted with the company's Commander Keen series. However, much less publicized, but still every bit as enjoyable (and definitely more lighthearted than Wolfenstein) is their clever and cute Cosmo's Cosmic Adventure IBMPC RT #27891). This especially playable and extremely addictive arcade quest features a cute little green alien (a friendly one for a change) by the name of Cosmo (who resembles a cross between a frog, chicken and kangaroo) with the unique ability to climb walls with his red, suction-cup hands. It seems that Cosmo and his parents have been stranded on a strange and dangerous planet. UnfortuSCORE HEALTH BUMBS STADS 6700 2. PRESS B. FOF HELP Powering Down the Engines Well, \"space\" has run out once more even though shareware continues to appear in stellar proportions. Unfortunately, constraints allow me to only comment on the most exceptional titles that cross my path each month. So, it goes. Until the next time, enjoy and great gaming to one and all! Send Us Your Best If you have authored a shareware or public domain game and would like to have it considered for review in this column, please send two complete copies (preferably on 3.5\" disks) to: Best of the Rest, c/o Computer Gaming World, 130 Chaparral Court, Suite 260, Anaheim Hills, CA 92808. Games reviewed in Best of the Rest are available through numerous distributors of shareware and public domain software, as well as on many national and private telecommunication services (GEnie Round Table locations and file numbers appear in brackets). If you do not have access to these services, you can, in most cases, write or call the game developer for an evaluation copy. cow March 1993 Page 111 "


"COMPUTER WARGAMING WORLD \" I Came, I Played, I Conquered» Broadsides & Gripeshot When You're Odd, The Odds are With You by Alan Emrich work in an effort to download it. Surprise, it's no longer there! According to Scorpia, who runs the area of GEnie where this GAP was archived: \"At the request of Avalon Hill, we TGEnie] have pulled the program from public access. This was done shortly after the publication of Computer Gaming World #102, which featured an article about the utility. To those of you who have looked in vain for the file, our apologies for the inconvenience. \"Avalon Hill plans to bring out a similar utility for ASL some time in the future. Any question about this program, or the ASLGAP utility matter, should be directed to Avalon Hill in this topic... So, the Games Round Table, Category 21, Topic 6 from message #210 on heated up with a bit of animosity toward the venerable Avalon Hill Game Company. While we're sorry for the flap our review caused, and this has been expressed to AH's Jackson Dott, our position is that we don't make these programs, we just review what we think will interest our readers. Frankly, we would love to see an \"official\" ASL-GAP, but no such product has been formally announced yet, so we don't anticipate a release in the near future. Art by Rodger MacGowan; Copyright 1993 RBM Graphics WARGAMING WORLD After last issue's holiday sentimentality and the previous issue's interview with Roger Keating, it is time to lay out some navigational beacons for issues ahead, and deal with issues of the day. Before we get to the heart of this editorial, however, let me share that, soon, I'll be locking down the details for the first Computer Wargaming World inter-network strategy gaming challenge. While details will be forthcoming, I will let you know that the game selected for the first competition will be Empire Deluxe. Yes, an official \"CGW Tournament Scenario\" (custom designed by yours truly) will be included in the finished version of the game. Again, details will likely be included next issue. I was recently asked why I didn't just write an editorial to open the Computer Wargaming World section each month rather than using different types of articles as my textual schwerpunkt. It is my purpose, within this introductory space, to bring gamers enough news, personalities and opinions to stir their interests and passions. While half the time this column sounds of my voice (as echoed from high atop whatever soap box 1 happen to be perched upon at the moment), the rest of the time I try to glom onto some fascinating tidbit or another and share it with you. It might be a brief, to-the-point interview (as we've done here with White Wolf Productions and Roger Keating of SSG), an exchange of electronic mail (such as Jim Dunnigan exchanging notes with Chris Crawford on the demise of \"wargaming as we know it') or even the occasional op-ed piccc from the likes of our own wargames editor, Evan Brooks. In every instance, I strive to keep our readers informed (and, occasionally, entertained). In other words, think of the news, tidbits and interviews as ranging shots, the harderhitting editorials as broadsides and the \"mow-'em-down,\" passionately-felt personal comments as gripeshot preparatory to an editorial \"call-to-action\" (boarding parties, as it were, in which we expect our readers to participate and play their part as the swashbuckling scourge of our hobby which they are). Noticing A G.A.P. After reading our article on the GAP (Game Assistance Program) for Avalon Hill's boardgame Advanced Squad Leader, many of you plugged into the GEnie netIn this issue.. Point of Attack .. 114 Aces WWII:1946 Expansion Disk.. 116 QQP's Battles of Destiny Review 122 Nova Logic's Maximum Overkill Review.. 124 Outlaw Wargames and Only Outlaws Will Have Them Finally, beware of bureaucratic public do gooders.\" l'll let Johnny Wilson score the touchdown in his editorial concerning the banning of lead minatures in the state of New York and the anti-war toy propoganda on the news and in the recently released movie Toys. Let me toss the ball to him, though, with this story: A wargaming friend of mine, John Leggat, whom I see faithfully at gaming conventions (both regional and national), ran into his own small battle with \"public decency.\" His wife tried to get him the ultimate Christmas gift, a vanity license plate from our own state of California with (what else?) WARGAMR imprinted on it. Well, the state rejected it as being \"tasteless and derogatory.\" Funny how Madonna's Sex book and Ice T's Cop Killer album are so passionately protected here, but wargaming isn't. Who else remembers the controversial op-ed piece from the early days of Fire & Movement magazine entitled The Wargamer as Nigger? What a world.... CGW Empire Software's Campaign ..... 128 MicroProse's Ancient Art of War in the Skies 130 Page 112 Computer Gaming World "


"Machiavelli Designs presents the PC version of: New World Order Need an Opponent? Pick One! When: World War II (1939-45+). Choose from scenarios or the campaign game. Where: Earth global simulation with multiple zoom levels. Toggle units, weather and place names. Who: 1 to 5 (smart?) human or intelligent computer players. You select difficulty and complexity. What: Realistic, historical simulation of strategic, military, diplomatic, economic, political, scientific and social factors. Detailed specifications of all major weapons and production systems. How: As Churchill, Hitler, Roosevelt, Stalin or Tojo, you struggle to share the future of humanity. Can you forge your will into a New World Order? FREE SERVICE SAVE! Pre-order before Feb. 1 and we pay shipping. You save $6! Last MDI Fill out and send us this coupon and we will match you up with gamers in your area. This is a totally free service... just what we think the hobby needs. I wish to be enrolled in MDI's gamers' matching service. I Name: release MDI from any liability for providing me with this First Middle service. (No purchase necessary). Street Signature City State Zip Country (we need your release to enroll you) Area code Phone I play: Strategy/Military Role playing Fantasy/Sci. Fiction Other: Please send me copies of NWO at $59.95 cach. I want players for: (list in order of preference) Add $6 shipping and handling. California residents add sales tax. Disk type: 13 1/2\" 5 1/4\" Check enclosed Master card Visa Discover Credit card # Exp. date MACHIAVELLI DESIGNS INC. Send coupon to: Machiavelli Designs, Inc. 2550 Ninth St., Suite 204 Berkeley, CA 94710 or Call: 800-955-4MDI FAX 510-486-0632 Signature (required for credit card authorization) New World Order copyright 1992 by Machiavelli Designs, Inc. New World Order trademark 1992 by Machiavelli Designs, Inc. Circle Reador Convice #69 "


"Deview WHAT'S YOUR POINT? HPS Simulations' Point of Attack by M. Evan Brooks NAME: Point of Attack SYSTEM: IBM Compatible HARD DISK SPACE: 1.3 MB GRAPHICS: EGA PLAYERS: 1 2 PRICE: $54.95 (plus 54.00 shipping handling) Imail order only: specify disk size! PROTECTION: Documentation Look Up DESIGNER: Scott Hamilton PUBLISHER: HPS Simulations PO Box 3245 Santa Clara, CA 95055-3245 (408) 554-8381 MODERN TACTICAL COMBAT IN THE MIDDLE EAST tutorial would have been appreciated. Unlike most wargames, the potential of artillery is emphasized. Both \"on-call\" and \"PPD\" (pre-planned) artillery fires are available and essential to success in combat. These, together with counter-battery fire, must be plotted with variable delays; nothing will ruin your day faster than advancing into an area only to be hit by \"friendly fires\" -an incident which is all too likely to happen — even in reality. POINT OF ATTACK HPS Introduction Point of Attack (POA) is a simulation of modern tactical combat in the Middle East that accurately represents battalion/task force operations on the contemporary battlefield. Designed and marketed by Scott Hamilton, it is a \"traditional\" wargame with all the implications thereof. A detailed simulation, it is not a game per se, but rather a product which could easily be utilized by the Army's Command and General Staff College. Its strengths are the detailed interrelationships between combined arms on the modern battlefield. The work that has gone into these parameters is obvious. However, its weaknesses are that it is not a \"state-of-the-art\" computer simulation — sound support is minimal, graphics are EGA, user input is via keyboard only and it is very slow in execution. For those familiar with Alan Zim's Action Stations (a detailed simulation of naval tactical warfare from 1922-1945), however, Scott Hamilton's Point of Attack may well be the modern land equivalent. Visual and Aural Target Acquisition The graphics are minimal. The visuals may be seen from a strategic map overview (10x18 km) or a detail map (2000x3400 m). Unit appearances may be described as \"functional,\" Combat reports are historically limited, and often results are described as \"probable\" casualties. If graphics are minimal, sound support is less. Only the inherent PC-speaker issues forth its occasional bleats and bursts of combat. But then again, would better rendered explosions make that much of a difference? A succinct description of combined arms tactics and the battlefield is provided, and the user will be able to grasp the finer points. However, I would suggest that a casual gamer might well find himself lost. A basic understanding of military capabilities is recommended and prior military experience will prove useful. While additional scenarios may be easily designed, a \"Map Builder\" add-on is available for an additional $15. This allows the user to customize a map rather than playing on a semi-random geographic location. A TEC (Terrain Effects Chart), unit/weapon symbols and a very detailed weapons characteristics chart completes the documentation. The documentation makes it clear that POA is a descendant of Avalon Hill's famous board game Squad Leader-even down to having \"broken\" and \"berserk» units (although the unit of maneuver is actually more comparable to Panzer Blitz). Hence, board wargamers will find the system very familiar. The manual details how to play, but a Keyboard Tactician All game input is via keyboard. Each unit must be individually accessed and a series of keystrokes will suffice to set it on its way. Among the decisions that the player must make are facing, firing on the move, priority of fires (headquarter units versus combat units), rate of fire, smoke, speed, etc. Random scenarios are created from the boardgame antecedents. Each side receives so many unit \"points,\" and the player can mix and choose his own combat task force. Depending on the size of the scenario selected, a task force can range from 20-60 units. Nationalities represented include American, Soviet, British, French, Israeli, Syrian, Egyptian, Jordanian, Saudi, IraPlain Brown Documentation There is nothing fancy about the documentation plain vanilla may best describe the contents. The manual is 65 pages of \"how to play\" coupled with an additional 19 pages of appendices detailing weapons systems, formations and descriptions of the five \"built-in\" scenarios. This is not to say that the manual is vague. Page 114 Computer Gaming World "


"hin nian and Iraqi. Scenarios may be designed as offensive, defensive or meeting engagements. Force capabilities may be modified as the player wishes, and include air superiority, communication (ECM/ECCM (electronic countermeasures/ electronic counter-countermeasures, i.e. jamming)), morale and ammo supply. The errata (version 1.1) notes that Perhaps POA's greatest strength is user support. The designer plans to continue updating his design, and user input is welcome. When this reviewer noted that armored vehicles in the desert were not creating dust clouds, the designer responded that he had initially included this combat obfuscation, but had deleted it from the final product because it created too much \"map clutter.\" A day later, a revised product arrived in the mail: Mr. Hamilton had reflected that the visual denigration was more than offset by the combat reality and was now including the \"desert dust\" option to all registered users. All future upgrades (including a VGA option and mouse input) will be provided at cost to the user. A 1 UMFt U ells Points Composition Arror CO 16 CO 10.3 Tank PLTE Michanized coB CO NO Mech PLTS Support Units) 3 CO HQ 3 Inf PLTS SpUaitis) Marine lat co 5 5 COHQ 3 Marine PLTS. Spt Unlt(s) Airborne In CO 6 B C O HO  3 Abn Inf PLTS Spl Unit() Pored Cave Tank PLT Mechanized TLT 2 3 3 AFV. 24 Int. BMW 2 * Recon PLT Murter PLT Light Aety PLT Medlem rty PLT 1 Heavy Arly PLT 1 1 4 Recon Vehicles 4 Morlarg 2 SP or Towed Dans 2 SP or Tourd Cuns 2 SP or Towed Curs N 5 6 P Sol SEC Air Defense SEC 1 Truck SEC ** 1 $ Towel Rrty PLT 1 1 4 Anti-Aircraft Misse-Tubes Vehicles 5 Trucks (2 1/2 or 5 Ton) 2 How Itzers (105m or 122m) 1 2 units representing individual squads and platoons) often force the player to overcontrol his forces. A brigade/battalion commander will issue orders (or \"commander's guidance\") to his forces, and they will execute the mission. Here, the plaver both decides how to execute the mission and then drops down to lower levels to actually implement the task. Is this realistic? Of course not, but what are the alternatives? SSG's Battlefront system was an attempt to restrict the player to the proper level of command. However, the AI often attempted implementation in less than optimal\" methods. Even more importantly, wargamers are notorious for micro-management they want to handle all decisions. Thus, POA clearly caters to these desires. Game play, however, is slow. While turns reflect a period of one minute, liser input can take up to twenty minutes and actual resolution is similarly slow. This can become frustrating as one waits to see how a combat plan develops, but even reducing the combat reports to minimal time still requires patience by the user. In the \"canned\" scenarios, one can only play one side. Unfortunately, there is no provision for \"zero\" players. This reviewer encourages designers to allow a \"zero\" option; it provides a ready tutorial. When I discussed this with Mr. Hamilton, he responded that he felt that a \"computerVS.-computer\" option only aggravates the failings of the Al. While this is true, a \"zero\" option also allows the player to gain a basic understanding of what is happening and possibly, what should be happening. An even more important consideration is as a teaching tool device. Units kenalangi 58 points Renalaing: 75 PLTS Select Unit 15 TA TU S), or whea FINISHED NUO UT CUIUSUR GOLPES PUNUTTONSHORE INFORMIR MEX DATAE rounds are assumed to be optimal. Thus, if a tank were to fire its basic load (40 rounds) at armored targets, all the rounds would be considered to be Armor-Piercing. For more realism, the designer suggests reducing the ammunition load to 40-60% of normal. While the unit would run out of ammunition faster, the overall effect would be to more accurately simulate the results of the basic load.\" Target selection may be automatic or manual. More importantly, targets are selected by impact side (front, side, rear, top). This reflects the strengths and weaknesses of armor and emphasizes flanking operations to defeat the weaker rear armor. Input is not automatic. Each order has its own delays, and orders which looked so attractive when input can become obsolete when ready to execute. Thus, one should expect the confusion of battle and he who responds most flexibly will be the victor. Game Play Game play emphasizes a proper allocation of combined arms. Weapons systems range from laser-guided to conventional and, when one adds smoke, minefields, improved positions and limited visibility (due to weather/time), the modern battlefield seems to be accurately recreated. The first scenario (\"Desert Storm\") is the only one with units already deployed on the map. It is a good learning exercise. Other scenarios include \"Golan\" (IsraelSyria, 1992), \"Along the Shatt Al Arab\" (Iran Iraq War), \"Grab for the Oil\" (Iraq does not stop with Kuwait), \"Stab in the Back\" (Iran invades Iraq after Desert Storm). Perhaps the largest problem facing POA is the scale. Task force level games (with The designer is willing to respond to customer requests. Thus, POA is capable of growth. While it will never achieve the commercial success of a MicroProse or SSI release, it validly fills a niche in the marketplace. With a simulation at this level, it is difficult to offer concrete tactical guidance. Small unit tactics are so much more situationally dependent than operational or strategic operations. But one should carefully examine the ranges and lethality of his weapons systems and those of his opponent and seek maximum advantage. If your stand-off capability is better than your opponent, engage at maximum range; if less, seek to close and engage as rapidly as possible. IMETOUCO POSITION POINTS REMAINING NUM FRU: ROVE CURIOR CULT ON PLESOREL V OICE S THOROUED POSITICH IN DE A Hint of Grognard XEY 16X DATA ELEVELSER This simulation could be a valuable tool in a military environment (Command & General Staff College, the Officer Advanced Schools, or even a CPX (Command Post Exercise)), but with limited time, one could not use it in class. A \"zero player\" option would allow the students to see the program in action and interest generated thereby could encourage them to attempt it in an \"after hours\" program. Point of Attack is much more of a simulation than a game. Designed and marketed by the designer, it lacks the bells and whistles of contemporary game design. Yet, it makes up for the lack of visual appeal by its detailed rendition of contemporary combat. For the casual gamer or one entranced by graphic capabilities, POA would be of little or no interest; for the grognard or serious student of the modern battlefield, POA becomes virtually mandatory. CGW March 1993 Page 115 "


"Deyneurs What If? A Flight Into the Hypothetical With Dynamix' Aces of the Pacific Expansion Disk by Doug Fick TITLE: WWII: 1946 SYSTEM: IBM PRICE: $39.95 DESIGNER: Damon Slye PUBLISHER: Dynamix/Sierra Coarsegold, CA The decision to end World War II with a nuclear punctuation point was not an easy one. It came after a lot of deliberation by American statesmen and soldiers on the likely outcome of a more conventional invasion of the Japanese mainland. What if the decision to drop the bomb had been different? What if the war both on the ground and in the air had continued into 1946? Aces of the Pacific: WWII:1946 soars past history into the ultimate \"What if?\" OF THE PACIFIC record. The F2G-2 Corsair was the natural outgrowth of more powerful engine technology applied to an already proven airframe. The straight winged P-80 Shooting Star was the first operational jet the U.S. fielded. While not blindingly fast for a jet, its straight wings gave very good turning performance. Less is known about the Japanese aircraft as each was in only the early stages of development at war's end. Early prototypes were taken to the U.S. for evaluation and surprised many of the test pilots that flew them. The J7W Shinden was one of the first canard equipped aircraft; so designed to destroy the American heavy EXPANSION DISK WWII:1946 HAR F8F BEARGAT PATTY TO TIMATE US-DOS Dynamix THE Orcot AT to the Fodtic in Auf 1945. and soon become o 519ndard watt Mars. It was unbeata under 15,000 4 PREVIOUS CONTINUE In this \"What if?\" the war wages on throughout 1946 as massive land forces struggled to gain control of the Japanese homeland and each nation's aircraft fought for control of the sky. During this period of time, new aircraft that were in development in 1945 would have reached operational status and would have played a role in both country's war efforts. WWII:1946 brings seven new aircraft to the Aces lineup: the F7F Tigercat, F8F Bearcat, F2G-2 Corsair, J7W Shinden, Ki83, and the first of each nation's operational jets, the P-80 Shooting Star and Japanese Kikka. The F7F Tigercat had the early earmarks of a standout performer. Fast and highly maneuverable, the aircraft would have been a match for anything in its day. The F8F Bearcat was the answer to the engineer's question, \"What if we put this huge engine into this tiny airframe?\" Horsepower to weight ratio in this little fighter was incredible, and even today a modified Bearcat holds the piston powered speed bombers that were ravaging Japanese cities. This unique aircraft can be confusing to fly against at first because it seems to be flying backward with the tail in front of the wing. The Ki-83 is truly a killer. It's a twin engine design very similar to the U.S. TigPage 116 Computer Gaming World "


"Stop playing with yourself. Try interactive on-line games with a money back guarantee With interactive games, you're not playing with yourself or against a computer... you're head to head with a living, thinking human being who's playing for keeps. And NVN brings you the best interactive value, with the most popular on-line games at lower rates. Travel to the Island of Kesmai\" in a role-playing, multi-player game that will stretch the limits of your imagination ... create your own character in the fantasy world of Aradath and fight off magical spells and fierce martial arts warriors ... or manipulate space and time in your quest to conquer a planet in Galaxy II, the ultimate test of your strategic and logistic skills. ** So quit playing with yourself. How to register Membership is just $5.95 a To register on-line, set your comm software to 1200, 2400 or month*; AND YOU HAVE A 9600 bps, N-8-1, and full duplex. Dial 1-800-336-9092. When MONEY-BACK GUARANTEE. connected enter CG93RR and press <RETURN>. Then enter Plus, our premium on-line name, address and Visa, MasterCard, Discover Card or American Express number: Your Starter Kit will be mailed charges are only $6/hr nonright away. prime time, and $9/hr during For more information, call 1-800-336-9096. prime time! Risk-free. Satisfaction guaranteed. NATIONAL VIDEOTEX \"Membership fee refunds are limited to $536 and do not apply to connect charges for Premium services or connect and surcharges for Premium Plus services Additional charges due to seccess of Premium Services Oder applies to first time Members One per Membership per household Subscription le is $5.8 per month Prices and senice content are subject to change. National Videotex is a service mark of National destes Network Corp. All others are for identification purposes only and belong to their respective companies or organizations Indicates Premium Service Circle Reader Service #90 "


"WWII:1946, I left the program feeling that more could have and should have been included. The Red Baron Mission Builder (RBMB) did for Red Baron what 1946 does for Aces of the Pacific, added aircraft and aces, but the Red Baron add-on provided a very powerful mission builder that brought new life to the program. Without an equivalent in WWII:1946, the Aces addon should be considered more of an aircraft expansion disk, like those for the LucasArts SWOTL system, than any sort of program addition. It serves as a nice add-on for devoted Aces fans, but is not essential to enjoying a game that is already very good. cow : 0255 900 Kn 392 'historical scenarios' have been written, and all the new aircraft and aces are available for single mission flights. What sets WWII:1946 apart from Aces of the Pacific (which is required to play 1946) is the first look at jet combat. All of the newly added aircraft are far more powerful machines than their predecessors included in the Aces game, but the jets are a whole new breed of combat aircraft. With top speeds nearly 100 miles an hour faster than propellor driven aircraft, air combat both with and against jets takes on a more high speed style of hit and run. Taking my jet and ripping through my opponent's piston-powered pugilists gives me a nice sense of power. Of course, trying to mix it up in a close-in furball while flying a jet changes the story, especially with the Kikka. This plane is so slow in roll response that the only real way to fight with it is to keep the speed up and slash through the opposition. At low speeds and high g's, the advantages of jet propulsion are wasted and propellor driven aircraft once again reign supreme. Even though I thoroughly enjoyed flying the new machines presented in ercat and its firepower and overall performance is awesome. The Nakajima Kikka is the Japanese version of the German Me-262 With the addition of the new aircraft comes a whole new campaign starting in late 1945 and continuing until the hypothetical land invasion is resolved. Additionally, players who had pilots retire at the end of the Aces of the Pacific campaign can recall these war veterans to once again defend their nation over the skies of Japan. While the dates, aircraft and aces have changed, the missions provided for career play are the same as in Aces of the Pacific. Along with the career options, several new NEW! FROM Computer Company The WARGAMER'S HPS ATTACI POINT OF SIMULATIONS AIDE DE CAMP Authentic weapons capabilities with authentic combat results. Take ANY board wargame and play it on your PC. Play-by mail or modem. Unmatched detail down to individual rounds resolution. Save floor space and playing time. S W YORUM c ore Over 100 weapons from 11 nations. Set in the volatile Middle East, Point of Attack operates on Create colorful maps, up to 30,000 hexes, by using the a platoon-section level. Create custom engagements, or drawing editor to design terrain and units. Multiple explore one of the five scenarios. Features night combat, user-defined zoom levels. Permanently save game set-ups adjustable weather conditions, morale and other intangible as well as turns including movement and combat for later factors, advanced artillery, and lots more. review/replay. Compatible with all game systems, theaters, scales and eras. Design your own game. The most realistic PC tactical combat simulation Imagination is your only limit. available! Requires a hard disk, VGA display, and at least 600K of RAM. Requires an EGA display and at least 512K of RAM. Mouse optional. IBM only $54.95 IBM only $79.95 Available only by mail. Mail checks/money orders to: CA residents add state sales tax. Please add $4.00 shipping and HPS Simulations, P.O. Box 3245 Please specify disk spec when ordering. handling. Santa Clara, CA 95055-3245 Page 118 Circle Reader Service #61 Computer Gaming World "


"MICHAEL WINTERBAUER ILLUSTRATION DESIGN Ninja Taro Might and Magic WWW 603 2400 WLASTER PAR: PT PKN Larar Lauts, 23 NO Si Wing Commander 1220 LYNDON STREET #22 SOUTH PASADENA, CA 91030 Spaceward Ho When you need the finest in computer game illustration, call Michael Winterbauer. Partial client list includes: New World Computing, American Sammy, JVC, Taito, Bandai America, CSG Imagesoft, The Software Toolworks, and Atlus. TELEPHONE 818 799-4998 FAX 818 441-3086 "


"pevneun Building Upon An Empire QQP's Battles of Destiny by William R. Trotter Battles of Destiny IBM TITLE: SYSTEM: PLAYERS: PRICE: GRAPHICS: SOUND: PROTECTION: DESIGNERS: PUBLISHER: BATTLES $59.95 EGA VGA Sound Blaster, Adlib Documentation Look-up Several Dudes Holistic Garning QQP Flemington, NJ ULETINY The simplest way to review this game would be to say: \"If you liked Empire you'll love Battles of Destiny.\" Battles of Destiny (BOD) plays, in fact, as though an Empire fan-club had put their heads together and revised the basic game system to include every bell and whistle anybody had ever wanted to see in the original game. The resulting hybrid is not, therefore, as much of an \"original\" game so much as it is a very classy variation on some classic wargaming themes. It's been done so carefully, so lovingly, that one tends not to even waste time debating whether or not it's a rip-off. After all, Empire fans have been clamoring for a new edition for years and if QQP hadn't published it, some other game company would have, only probably not as well. Te durder M urtaband ! Troduction Periton Lavel 6 crank out battleships in 18 turns, instead of the poky 40 or so it takes in Empire. Cities rated level 2 or higher can eventually build anything, but level 1-rated cities aren't good for anything except infantry. Prolonged bombing or shelling can reduce a city's production level and heavily fought-over centers are usually reduced to their minimum when one captures them. The variables of speed, range, and firepower as distributed amongst the 22 unit types — are exquisitely balanced. In addition to the standard types of weaponry, there are aerial transports (helicopters able to carry one unit only, but very useful for guerrilla raids and long-distance reinforcement), hydrofoils, escort carriers, tank destroyers (very fast but generally doomed when thrown against entrenched infantry), frigates, and three different types of transport. One major distinction between BOD and Empire is the importance of ranged fire. Every ship larger than hydrofoils can conduct shore bombardment, but only battleships can equal the range of land-based artillery. Artillery range is up to six hexes and each battery fires twice per turn. A well supplied and dug-in artillery can slaughter anything within range, and the cunning deployment of shore batteries can interdict shipping on vast stretches of ocean. de rare parts Oy feet Production Yearl Harbor Levels S orine ICHISO K Prtlery Tank Destroyer Art Transport Bultfilding Mat D ari Det e ntino recat irtillery rover ITAI D Tohter three computer enemies. Unlike Empire, however, BOD's worlds are entirely visible from the beginning of play; if this design choice takes away some of the mystery that shrouded the first two-dozen turns in Empire, it does give the player the chance to start planning a coherent strategy from the get-go. Twenty worlds are included with the game, some of them realistic and some abstract, obviously designed to present bizarre strategic possibilities. There is a map editor program included, too, which allows players to design their own worlds (it functions almost identically to the Empire editor), but one still can't specify where one wants to start when playing on a custom map. This is one revision that the Holistic Dudes should have included; otherwise, the map editor adds considerably to the game's replay value. There are 22 different types of units that can be built and each production center is rated for its industrial capabilities, from level 1 to level 6. Instead of tasking cities to churn out units right away, players can \"invest for the future\" by building their manufacturing capacity to maximum value. This takes a long time, but once a city reaches production level 6, it can Maitinert border rotucat Plus while were BOD was not originated in-house at QQP (it is the creation of an intriguingly named outfit called \"Several Dudes Holistic Gaming\"), but like all QQP products issued thus far, it loads and plays flawlessly and it looks great. The basic premise of the game is just the same as Empire's: starting with one, two, or three cities, the player begins producing military units and trying to conquer the world. Up to four human players may compete or one player may fight up to Page 120 Cities with a production level of six can construct radar systems (useful to prevent sneak attacks, especially by aerial transports) and use them to guide missiles. It takes many turns to reach the missile-producing level, but once there one can crank out a missile per turn and launch as many Computer Gaming World "


"New! TM TRISTAN Available for IBM PC and Macintosh color, \"Best Simulation\" Finalist 1991 computers. -Software Publishers Association \"(TRISTAN) should be a big winner.\" -John Sculley \"You can easily forget you are playing on a computer -Miami Herald 1000 \"TRISTAN puts a new tili on old fashion pinball.\" -MacWEEK \"Superbly lives up to its billing as solid state pinball.\" -MACWORLD Enjoy the Excitement of Real Pinball!  Authentic Ball Action  Wild Pinball Devices Fabulous Sound  TILT and much more... Solid State PINBALL TRISTAN To Order: Contact your favorite retailer or call (613) 967-7900. 1000 EWING 00000 EXTRISTANIA WISHOD GALLEE Compatible with Windows 3.x, Sound BlasterTM Adlib SoundTM, and 256 color VGA. SOFTWARE CORPORATION Circle Reader Service #32 Amtex Software Corporation  206 George Street  Bellevile, Ontario Canada k8N 3H4  voice (613) 967-7900  fax (613) 967-7902 "


"DUBIN wolders celebrate of them as possible against land, sea and air targets. The missiles are only accurate about 40 percent of the time, but they pack an Exocet-like punch and are fully capable of sinking even a battleship. Missile-cities are valuable for sealing off choke-points, especially narrow waterways, or for guarding exposed island outposts. There is a generous total of nine difficulty levels (the Al at the higher settings is sadistically hard to beat) and one can either \"scatter\" or \"cluster\" their initial cities if one chooses to start with more than one. There is no running cumulative total of losses (something that should have been adopted from Empire for sure!), but after each enemy turn the player receives a quick replay of each engagement. The player can elect to skip that and just get a Fulfilling Your \"Destiny\" Any city that is not in immediate danger of enemy attack should be put to work increasing its own industrial production rating. Doing so takes that city off-line for a frustratingly long time, but once it's reached Level 6, it can crank out units with amazing speed. Hydrofoils make wonderful sea-borne cavalry. They're fast enough to outrun anything big enough to hurt them, and powerful enough to sink enemy transports with one strike. They're quick to make, and a roving squadron of two or three can really wreak havoc on enemy convoy routes. One caution however these little boats are so fast that one has to be careful where one orders them to go. If the mouse-arrow is one hex off and one inadvertently orders the hydrofoil into a coastal hex, it will run aground and be destroyed. When launching an amphibious strike against a heavily defended port, send in a wave of empty transports to draw enemy missile and artillery fire, while keeping the full transports just behind them, and close enough to land during that same turn. The enemy will not know the first wave of transports is empty and will probably expend most of its available firepower sinking them, leaving the player with a real landing force intact and ready to pounce. If the player is fighting two or more enemies, and finds he is consistently losing, try using the \"diplomacy\" option to make a truce with the least threatening foe. Sometimes it works. It may not last, or course, but one may gain valuable breathing room, and time for one's cities to increase their production levels. \"Large\" transports carry a lot, but they are slow to build and one may have to send them to two or three ports to fill them up. Generally speaking, a lot of small transports will do more good than a handful of big ones. One good tactic for the early stages of a game is to \"go deep\" with aerial transports, to the maximum range, if need be, then expand as rapidly as one can in the classic \"ink blot» manner. Even if the player doesn't hang on to the farthest cities, he'll disrupt his opponent's plans; if he does manage to hang on to them, he can systematically link up between each seeded area and, viola!. find himself controlling a good sized piece of the planet. Don't send tank destroyers against dug-in infantry without softening up the target first by air, naval, or artillery bombardment; one may lose the entire force if he does. On the other hand, tank destroyers move very quickly and are ideal for exploiting breakthroughs or turning flanks. A player can never, ever, have too much artillery. Since carriers basically act as refueling stations, players are usually better off with a half-dozen escort vessels rather than two or three super-carriers. WANTED: GAME DEVELOPERS Looking Glass Technologies is a computer game design house that creates original role-playing games and simulations, our well-known titles include Ultima Underworld, F22, and Car and Driver. We are seeking talented and creative individuals to join a team designing next generation games. If you are an outstanding project leader, programmer, or artist, who wants the challenge and satisfaction of working on some of the best games in the industry, please send your resume and references to: statistical summary of losses, but one may miss spotting an enemy build up if one does. Some games, played on tight little maps, are short and bloody; others, such as the one I started on Thanksgiving Day and finished on December 6, are epic conflicts in the best Empire tradition. COMPUTER WARGAMES Historically Accurate...Easy To Use For IBMT PC and Compatibles BIG THREE la GRANDE (V 2.01) ARMEE WWII Strategy Game Napoleon's Campaigns Seven Scenarios, Map | Seven Scenarios, Map World-Renown New Release Hard Drive Required Challenging. Intense European Theatre Austerlitz to Waterloo $25 Each. Send check or money order to: SDJ Enterprises, Inc. Department C (314) 966-5602 1551 Fawn Valley Dr. Evenings Only S. Louis, MO 63131 Specify 3.5 or 5.25\" disk Graphics throughout are superior: realistic terrain, superbly crisp unit icons, excellent charts and graphs. Occasionally, little animated windows pop out and show bits of combat (including one startling bazooka attack scene in which one soldier gets his brains blown out!) but one can opt to shut them off if they become irritating. The game is perfectly playable by keyboard, but the mouse interface is so friendly it practically purrs. Movement and combat are handled by simple pointand-click routines, and there are pulldown menus for just about any function one might wish to perform, including the establishment of regular patrol routes for aircraft and naval units. In short, Battles of Destiny is seductively easy-to-learn and quite addictive to play. As a fan of Empire, it was natural that I would become obsessed by Battles of Destiny. I would be surprised if this were not true of most Empire devotees. CGW CGW Ad Looking Glass Technologies, Inc. 420 Bedford Street, Suite 320 Lexington, MA 02173 Circle Reader Service #91 Page 122 Computer Gaming World "


"The magic Candle II Gate Cukas SI BE OK 21040 Kark Balta 43 84 ORI Lukas TR] NOLOS Pass Draw For matnl Whisper Sheathe Cont tratu must return this royal Scarter to Urkabul. P3110 B Herrington rukas 5T 350 Bi. 19 DE SKI Recal use Notes Talk Draw Formatn! hisper sheachel Sep 3 920 L 1999XH061 17:037 Library LUL 31 40 OK Bark. 1 43 OK The librarian says: of interest, sir? he ancient Solian lands have new arrivals: weapons and magic-and, most of all, their wits—to Monsters of the Blight! survive and defeat the Blight! The Blight is consuming the ancestral homes of Delightful 256-color graphics, glorious music and the elves and humans, halflings, goblins and orcs. digitized sound effects, and a compelling story with It's up to you and your chosen heroes to slay the fascinating characters make The Magic Candle III Blight's monsters and solve its mysteries! your key to many hours of enjoyment. With The Magic Candle III, Mindcraft continues its tradition of excellence in fantasy role-playing. MINDRAFT Your party will have characters handcrafted by you, marching side by side with the friends old and 2291 205th Street, Suite 201, Torrance, CA 90501 new your hero meets along the way. They will need (Actual screens may vary.) Circle Reader Service #78 "


"UPID NovaLogic's Comanche Maximum Overkill by Bryan Walker TITLE: Comanche Maximum Overkill SYSTEM: IBM (386sx or greater, 4 meg ram, 12 meg of HD space, VGA adapter, 3.5\" drive required) PROTECTION: None COST: $69.95 DESIGNERS: Kyle Freeman, John Garcia PUBLISHER: NovaLogic, Inc. Tarzana, CA OVERKILL Comanche scout/attack helicopter. While no real Comanche currently exists, CMO has leapfrogged the defense industry by giving gamers an eye-popping glimpse into 21st century helicopter warfare. Earthly Delights Every flight simulator game I've played up to now has failed to convey the thrill of low-altitude flying. Filled-polygon PC graphics just don't convey the \"you are there\" feel of the military simulators I'm used to. When CMO arrived, claiming to surpass military simulators, I put it to the test. As incredible as it seems, CMO presents a more believable terrain model than the Army's Combat Mission Simulator. Within seconds after taking off, the player is immersed in a realistic graphic environment called \"Voxel Space.\" This new technology provides a gorgeous terrain, making the suspension of disbelief nearly instantaneous. It's unlikely that even the most jaded gamer's socks won't be rolling up and down when seeing these visuals! Excellent night-vision graphics can also be found, a first for PC flight sims. The game's terrain-masking features, the essence of helicopter combat, simply blow away the efforts of previous titles. At last, a fun and accurate recreation of NOE (Nap of the Earth) flight exists for the PC! The feeling of skimming the ground is the thing, and CMO's got it. Easy Does It Players intimidated by the complexity of recent PC flight simulators will find deliverance in CMO. The manual is well-written and easy to understand. The game's Comanche is also very simple to fly. The bird is extremely stable, thanks to an automatic altitude-hold feature much like the terrain-following radar on many modern combat aircraft. The game's flight model is so stable that the Auto Hover feature may never be used. With this docile handling, I easily used some real attack helicopter tactics that required a flurry of keystrokes in other chopper sims. The Heads Up Display symbology is notable, being very similar to a real AH-64 symbology mode. This helpful feature shows some heads-up research by the game's designers. Actions such as popping chaff and flares can be performed manually, but the helicopter's computer does a fine job all by itself. The cockpit layout has remained faithful to the Army's MANPRINT idea of simplified crew-stations using multifunction screens. This reduces clutter, and makes the helicopter's operations easy to learn. The player can select from many different functions or views to appear on either or both of the cockpit's two viewscreens. This feature is quite user-friendly, and adds system redundancy in the event one screen is destroyed in combat. The standard external views are available, along with an innovative \"Drop Camera.\" An external viewpoint is established on the ground beneath the helicopter where this function was activated. The \"camera\" automatically pans to follow the player's bird, and several cameras can be dropped during the game. Sound is an important aspect in making a believable sim, and CMO delivers the goods. A variety of voices, from the onboard computer's impassive female voice, to the copilot's frantic \"Pull up!\" are present. The weapon-launch noises are faithful, and the explosion effects are excellent. Following a growing trend in PC flight simulators, CMO allows several different control options, including the Thrustmaster devices. As easy as this Comanche is to fly, most players may not need more elaborate controls. The ability to choose is always welcome, however. Weary PC gaming veterans are, by now, used to the constant \"memory wars\" that DE An avid computer game and flight simulator fan, the author is also an AH-64 Apache pilot for the U.S. Army. A veteran of the Persian Gulf war, he is currently stationed at Fort Eustis, Virginia. (Views expressed in this article are those of the author and do not reflect official policy or position of the Department of the Army, Department of Defense, or the United States government.) In the PC flight simulation market, helicopters have played second fiddle to fixed-wing titles. Dozens of high-quality jet and warbird games grace the shelves, while only a handful of helicopter titles are even worth mentioning. NovaLogic's new release, Comanche Maximum Overkill, not only bolsters the helicopter's cause, but does it with such stunning effect that the entire industry is going to take notice. Comanche Maximum Overkill (CMO) is loosely based on the proposed RAH-66 CHAFF:23 FLARE 30 Page 124 Computer Gaming World "


"Deview LITSELLER EFE TESTS : TOO TEST DU FLERE ON THE MATS ELITE ginning players will love the stability, but joystick jocks may wind up gritting their teeth. NovaLogic designer John Garcia took pains to defend the flight model. He noted that the computing power required to change the terrain's attitude in response to rapid, radical maneuvers is simply beyond the capability of today's PCs. Future releases from competing companies will test the truth of that statement. When it comes to the number and diversity of missions, CMO's plate offers some meager helpings. A total of 20 missions are available; 10 for training, and 10 more in the Operation Maximum Overkill campaign. I required about a weekend to finish all of the available missions. Since the forays have nearly identical objectives, a feeling of tedium can easily set in. Changing the terrain's color palettes and adding the occasional Mayan pyramid as eyewash doesn't dispel the sense of repetition that the limited missions bring. Since the player can't change the mission's parameters, weapons-loads, nav-points, etc., the problem is compounded. Some gamers today's complex sims have started. Memmory-management programs and \"boot disks\" have become our tools of the trade. While these tricks make the games run, they're also partially responsible for some bugs that crop up. As remarkable as it sounds, CMO doesn't require a memory manager to run. In fact, it won't even boot if a memory-managing program is detected. This has helped make CMO an extremely bug-free game. I went out of my way to find a glitch, without success. NovaLogic deserves an ovation for producing rock-solid code that can run without relying on another program's electronic t. Non-Mission-Capable Systems As rosy as these descriptions sound, CMO's gameplay has some problems. Some gamers-most likely the seasoned sim-jocks-are going to find some very dark shadows creeping within the graphic splendor. Eliminating filled-polygon graphics means that not everything animates smoothly, or is depicted clearly. The targets and aircraft in CMO appear as chunky splotches until the player is nearly on top of them. While the fluid realism of the terrain is stunning, the rough look of the vehicles can leave the gamer asking \"What's that supposed to be?!\" No rotary-wing PC sim to date has reproduced the remarkable agility of a modern combat helicopter. CMO is no exception. The game's Comanche is, frankly, a slug. It can't perform \"cyclic\" dives or climbs, and can barely achieve a 20-degree angle of bank. Evading fire is nearly impossible when CMO can't perform maneuvers more aggressive than a traffic pattern. BeREMA BECURITELE will be miffed to find that the campaign\" is really just a collection of unrelated missions. The lack of awards or congratulatory sequences is also significant when comparing CMO to other titles. According to NovaLogic, new scenario disks should be out in January, expanding the game with better missions and terrain. The enemies the player faces are limited in more ways than one: First, only three different types of vehicles are present: The SA-8 SAM, T-80 tank, and KA-50 helicopter. The Al of these enemies is also suspect. The KA-50s meander around aimlessly, only occasionally attempting to engage the player's helicopter. The ground vehicles mill about in confusion, sometimes in locations that would be absolutely impossible for anything but a helicopter to reach. Because of this, all kinds of outrageous tactics may have to be used to finish the mission, including landing near the enemy and firing at pointblack range! The enemies aren't helpless, however. Their sheer, occasionally ridiculous, numbers can simply overwhelm the player with salvos of missiles and rockets. Even so, the limited enemy types and their low intelligence makes many battles seem like an elaborate shooting gallery, as opposed to 21st-century helicopter warfare. The firepower provided by occasional artillery and wingman support is helpful and easy to use. However, the wingman actually represents nothing but extra Hellfire missiles. Engaging only targets the player designates, the wingman tags along without regard for much else. Even a KA50 on the player's six won't stir the wingman into independent action. Rubbing salt into the wound, my compatriot occasionally rammed me as he maneuvered into a firing position! With no real-life Comanche to keep the game's designers on their technically-accurate toes, CMO's RAH-66 performs more like \"Air Wolf.\" It's not uncommon to take off with weapons loads of 8 Hellfires, 12 Stingers, 500 rounds of 20mm, and 64 rockets, while still achieving level speeds of 192 knots. Hey, that's the helicopter for me! To say that such a weapons load is unrealistic is putting it MILDLY. CMO's Comanche is also unbelievably durable. This bird can withstand not only multiple direct hits, but also a midair collision or two and stay airborne! In a technical-realism fist fight against the latest versions of Gunship 2000 and Falcon, CMO quickly winds up with a shiner. Debriefing Some flight-sim veterans might sneer at CMO's limited scope and casual approach to technical detail. These same gamers may also be the ones most impressed with the new technology CMO delivers. While the sedate flight characteristics and simple controls are more suited to beginning players, nearly everyone will find something in CMO to enjoy. Hopefully, NovaLogic will work to fix the flaws and fulfill the awesome potential of this game. Even as it stands, cutting-edge graphics firepower gives Comanche Maximum Overkill the edge it needs to sweep more than a couple of competitors off the battlefield. (The author can be reached for further comment on GEnie at B.WALKER10, or America Online at WALKER34.) CGW 0031 POETS March 1993 Page 125 "


"How To Order Indexes and Older Back Issues are Available Back Issues: $4 each Please add 15% for shipping In the center of this magazine there is a detachable order envelope. Simply use the blank lines on the order form to specify issue numbers. As some issue numbers are in limited supply, please list one or more alternate selections (this will expedite your order in the event one of your requested issues is sold out). CGW Indexes CGW Article Indexes for the years 1987, 1988, 1989, and 1990 are now available. Please send a large self-addressed stamped envelope and $1.00 per index (specify which years) to: Computer Gaming World, Index Dept., P.O.Box 730, Yorba Linda, CA 92686. Older Back Issues For a list of older CGW back issues and their prices, please send a large self-addressed envelope to: Computer Gaming World, Archive Dept., P.O. Box 730, Yorba Linda, CA 92686. Please allow four weeks for delivery. Note: to avoid unnecessary delays, do not include a request for both indexes and older back issues in the same letter. Please send separate requests. #80 THE SAVAGE EMPIRE Links; CES Report (Part 1); Imperium; Command HQ Replay (Part 2); Full Metal Planet; Dragon Lord; Space 1889; Spellcasting 101; King's Quest V; Magic Fly; Pharaoh's Tomb; and more! #81 MEGAFORTRESS: PowerMonger Review; The Lord of the Rings: More Command HQ Designer Notes; Stealth Affair; CES Report (Part 2); Test Drive III: SimEarth Setup Hints, Red Baron Review, Hard Nova; Thunderstrike; Computer Game Artist Portfolio; Quest for Glory Desinger Notes; Warlords; and more! #82. MIGHT & MAGIC II; Covert Action Review; Spirit of Excalibur; More Their Finest Hour Tips; Setting up Multiple Ultima VI and Savage Empire Saved Games; PRODIGY's Baseball Manager; Das Boot: Elvira; and more! #83 TIMEQUEST:B.A.T.: Eye of the Beholder; Flight Simulator 4.0; Falcon 3.0; Battles of Napoleon Scenario; WWI Air Combat Survey: Modem-to-Modem F-16 Combat Pilot; Lemmings; Moonbase; Overlord; Galleons of Glory: Educational Games Survey; Road & Car, and more! #84 MAGIC CANDLE IR Continuum; DarkSpyre; Nuclear Submarine Tactics; Virtual Reality; Red Baron Tactics; Lexi-Cross; Awesome Tips; Willy Beamish Preview; Wing Commander Secret Missions; Robots in SimEarth; and more! #85 CHUCK YEAGER'S AIR COMBAT: Summer CES; On-Line AD&D; Star-King; Pick'N Pile; Harpoon Strategy; Medieval Lords; Centurion Strategy: Second Front Strategy; and more! #86 This issue is sold out! #87 ULTIMA VIC Heart of China; Role-Playing Game Survey; Behind the Screens at Lucasfilm; Might & Magic/Faery Tale Adventure Cartridges; UMS II; Conflict: Middle East; Medieval Lords Strategy; Xenocide; Martian Dreams, Armada 2525, and more! #88 ROCKETEER Tenth Anniversary Issue; Computer Games History; Wing Commander II; Games of the Year, The Sierra Network; Toejam & Earl; Tony La Russa's Ultimate Baseball; Wargame Paiktography, 1900-1950; Second Conflict; Western Front; and more! #19 STAR TREK: 25TH ANNIVERSARY, Earl Weaver II; Making of Links Course Disks; Gunship 2000; Educational Software Survey; F-117A; Objection!; Amarillo Slim's Dealer's Choice; Rules of Engagement; WordTris; Holiday Buying Guide; SPA Report, and more! #90 The New CARRIERS AT WAR Vengeance of Excalibur; Virtual Reality Conference; 4-D Boxing; ABC Wide World of Sports Boxing; Secret of Monkey Island II; Martian Memorandum; Might & Magic III; Intertainment '91; Police Quest 3; NFL Pro League Football; Dragon's Gate On-Line Game; Conflict: Middle East Replay; Patton Strikes Back; No Greater Glory; The Lost Admiral; and more! #91-WIZARDRY VI: Predator II; The Black Crupt; Conan the Cimmerian; The Games: Winter Challenge; Riders of Rohan; The Perfect General tips, Gunship 2000 tips; Megafortress scenario disk; and more! #92-ACES OF THE PACIFIC January CES, Stanford Wong's Video Poker: Are We There Yet? SimAnt; Public Domain Role-Playing Games; Murderl; L'Empereur; and more! #93 CHAMPIONS January ES Part II; Falcon 3.0; Bloodwych; Lost in L.A.; Nova 9; The Miracle Piano Teaching System: Millenium; MicroLeague Football: The Coach's Challenge; The Next President; Global Conquest; The Romance of the Three Kingdoms II; Sid Meier's Civilization Strategy; and more! #94 DARKLANDS; Computer Acquire; Free D.C.; Shuttle; Mike Ditka Ultimate Football; Uncharted Waters; Star Trek: 25th Anniversary; Super Tetris; NFL Football; Spelunx; Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe Strategy: Sid Meier's Civilization Update; and more! #95 LAURA BOW I SPA Report; Populous II: Genus Game System: Uncharted Waters tips; CD-ROM Report; Twilight 2000; Celtic Legends: Crisis in the Kremlin Preview; Sound Card Survey; Computer Game Design Abstracts; Wild Wheels; Solitaire's Journey Preview: Action Stations! module; Multi-Player BattleTech; Modern Warfare Paiktography; Birds of Prey: and more! #96. GRAND PRIX UNLIMITED; Sea Rogue; Planet's Edge; Ultima Underworld; Lemmings tips; Roberta Williams interview; Populous World Editor; World Circuit; Computer Game Developers Conference: Gods: Big Three: Castles tips: Fleet Commander Designer's Notes: MBT: Middle East: Fighter Duel; and more! #97 STUNT ISLAND; Summer CES Report; Jack Nicklaus Signature Edition Golf; Spaceship Warlock; Chessmaster 3000; Out of This World; Computer Game Developers Conference Part II; Legends of Future Past: Virtual Reality Studio; Magic Candle Il; APBA Baseball Products; Federation II; Carrier Strike Preview; Theatre of War Preview; Computer Third Reich; Global Conquest Replay, and more! #98 AMAZON Omar Sharif On Bridge; A-Train; Summer CES Part II; L-Zone; Dune; Indiana Jones & Fate of Atlantis; Wolfenstein 3-D; Air Bucks Preview; Dusk of the Gods: Ultima VII; Darkseed; High Command; Carrier Strike Replay; Conflict: Korea; Napoleon l; and more! #99-X-WING FIGHTER Laura Bow II; World Series of Poker: Global Effect: Gateway: Solitaire's Journey: Sea Rogue tips; The Two Towers; Waxworks Preview: Lemmings tips; Nemesis!; Aces of the Pacific tips: Galactic Frontier; Carrier Strike Replay; Fireteam 2200 Replay: Spoils of War Preview: The Lost Admiral tips; Fighter Town U.S.A.; Siege; Siege tips; Conflict: Korea Replay: and more! #100 COLLECTOR'S EDITION 3900 Games Later; Legend of Kyrandia; Jack Niclaus Signature Course Design I; Crisis in the Kremlin; Magnetic Scrolls Collection: The Dark Half; Tetris Classic; Hong Kong Mahjong; Links 386 Pro; Grandmaster Chess; Games of the Year Awards; Science Fiction Paiktography; Computer Game Design Abstracts; Guy Spy; Napoleonic GAP Program; 100 Years War Preview: PBEM Diplomacy; Carriers At War Design Notes; and more! #101 BUZZ ALDRIN'S RACE INTO SPACE Holiday Buying Guide; Jack Nicklaus Course Design Il; John Madden II & NFL Football; Heaven & Earth; SPA Report: Darklands tips: Robosport; Mantis; Floor 13; Cruise for a Corpse; Shareware; Dune Il Preview; Warlords tips; Team Yankee; Air Force Commander; A Line in the Sand Preview, and more! #102 ULTRABOTS King's Quest VI; The Games: Summer Challenge: Quest for Glory 3; Plan 9 From Outer Space; Realms; NHLPA Hockey for Sega; Darklands tips; Spear of Destiny: Spellcasting 301: Spring Break; Red Baron Mission Builder; B-17; Great Naval Battles in the North Atlantic; Theatre of War; Operation Fighting Tiger; and more! "


"Attention Dealers! The Software Company is a worldwide, full service distributor of entertainment software, CD Rom and accessories. Computer Stores, Importers, Exporters, and Resellers are welcome to contact us to set up an account. Minimum opening order of $250 is required. Then you can take advantage of our monthly specials such as buy five get one free or additional discounts on selected items. Satisfaction Guaranteed. Manufacturers and Publishers: The Software Company has an extensive network to distribute your products worldwide. Contact our VP of Sales for Info at (212) 608-9150 or fax us at (212) 608-9153. Compare & Save Strike Back, o AdLib Comhal Amazon $37.77 Autoworks $43.17. Battle Chess 4 $32.37 Buzz Aldrin Race $37.77 Carrier Strike $37.77 Castles II $32.37 Civilization $37.77 Darklands $37.77 Dark Seed $37.77 Dragon's Lair III $32.37 F-15 Strike III $40.00 Femme Fatale $21.57 Greens $32.37 Gretsky III $32.37 Jump Jet $37.77 Landry Football $26.97 Links 386 $37.77 Lemmings II $32.37 Madden II $29.97 Monopoly Deluxe S32.37 NFL Football S26.97 Sherlock Holmes $41.97 Spellcasting 301 $32.37 Strike Commander $43.17 Seventh Guest $53.97 Terminator 2029 $37.77 World Circuit Race $32.37 ACCESSORIES 2400 Internal $55.00 Virtual Pilot $59.37 Mouse Yoke $29.00 Flight Stick $39.97 Speakers $ 7.00 Hi Res Mouse $20.00 PC Gamepad $17.97 G-Force Yoke $41.97 Hannen MSC Card $42. Ad Lib Gold $169. APS 2001 Cobra $59. \" joystick Our Family of Vendors PREGINON Arsa y joystko APPLE'A IRM compatible Omega IBM Joystick $72 per dozen Abracadata Access Accolade Activision Ad Lib, Inc. Adan America Advanced Gravis Allsop Artworx Software Automap. Inc. Bethesda Softworks BLOC Publishing Bondwell Corporation Broderbund Software Capstone Software CH Products Colorado Spectrum Compton's New Media Computer Easy Creative Labs Davidson Dynamix Electronic Arts Epyx Expert Software Exponent Corporation Fisher Price Gamelek Graphic Expressions Hi Tech Expressions ICOM Simulations Imsi Corporation Interplay Interstel KOEI Konami LucasArts M-USA Macronis Mallard Software Maverick Maxximum Company MECC Software Merit Software Microleague Sports MicroProse Software Millennium Minderal My Software Company New World Computing Origin Systems Paragon Software PC Globe Psygnosis Lid. Quantum Quality Prod. Raw Entertainment Read Soft, Inc. Round Lake Publishing Sierra On-Line Sir-Tech Smartworks Software Marketing Software Toolworks Sony Imagesoft Spectrum Holobyte SSG Strategic Simulations Sublogic Suncom Three Sixty Software Thrustmaster UBI Soft Video Professor Villa Crespo Software Virgin Games Maxx Yoke & Pedals by Maxximum $85. Thrustmaster STUNNE GIVE POT INTERIE FLIGET CONTROL SYSTEM Ultra Sound Card Flight Control $62. $120. THE SOFTWARE COMPANY Weapons Control $72. 51 Murray Street New York, NY 10007-212 608 9150212 608 9153 fax Circle Reader Service #103 Wholesale Distributors of Computer Software and Peripherals for the IBM....since 1985 "


"ana Deview Conde Gulf of St. Malo Casey Bearze Campaign 2010 June Ferde Beyin Mit Scenon Rengola) Empire's Tactical and Strategic War Game Date and AT Hulberry ay.ut Ors ofbeschads punt 10-13 Jet 3 COMANDO GOLD by Dana L. Cadnan OMAHA 15 June JUNO CAM TITLE: MACHINES: PRICE: PROTECTION: DESIGNER: PUBLISHER: Campaign Amiga. IBM. Atari ST $59.95 Documentation Look-up Jonathan Griffiths Empire Soitware Richmond Hill, Ontario, Canada Llampaign 20 June Ustroops 20 jan reach out i n ferro, Romeo battles become a separate affair from the land combat. The map editor could be used to create a naval scenario, but it would be a battle with limited unit selection (battleships, cruisers, destroyers, and submarines). The D-Day scenario uses the same map for two scenarios: predictably, Allied and Axis. This is a very large map, and quite a bit of time will be consumed in scrolling and zooming as the gamer attempts to control all of the forces. Fortunately, to help keep the attack manageable, a foldout map of the beach showing the routes of each invasion group is included with the program. The Kursk and Europe scenarios are equally occupying. What's Not to Like? Since it is obvious that a lot of research went into Campaign, why is it disappointing? After all, the Equipment Factfinder book contains a wealth of information about the land and air vehicles of WWII, and the scenario maps are accurately and attractively rendered, complete with the correct force allotments for the appropriate time frame. Unfortunately, some of the effort that went into the research should have gone into the game's design and programming 661t's the thought that counts.\" Although this is a phrase often heard around the holidays, it's also a phrase that purchasers of Campaign can say to Empire Software. While the goals for Campaign were admirable, the finished product leaves much to be desired. The Simple Life Campaign is a single player strategic and tactical level simulation of the battles of World War II. The playing field ranges from simple terrain to complex scenarios such as Kursk and Normandy. There are 25 scenarios to choose from, grouped into Simple, Average and Complex levels of play. The map editor makes it possible to modify any of these. Half of the 16 Simple scenarios use a featureless landscape, while the other half include airfields and beaches. The variety in these early scenarios derives from the different types of forces used-light units in the beginning and heavier units near the end. Eight of these scenarios include artillery and aircraft and, as a result, there is a representative assortment of American, British, German and Russian equipment. Thus, players can discover that not all heavy tank units and fighter aircraft are created equal. Just Your Average Day The Average scenarios add two elements to the Simple ones: historical accuracy and production considerations. These maps encompass a larger playing field and include more units in order to recreate The Battle of the Bulge and three other WW II battles. Campaign doesn't attempt to account for every vehicle used in these battles, but gives each side a representative number of forces to recreate the feel of the battle. Divisions and brigades may contain only 60 vehicles, instead of 6,000. This keeps the game historically accurate, in a scaleddown way, and allows the game to be played in less than a month (usually one evening of actual game time). Tactical & Strategic War Simulation emtoire Production facilities are used to build new vehicles, as well as supply fuel and ammunition to existing forces. Factories can change what they produce at any time, but changing production from one item to another takes time. The larger the item, of course, the longer the changeover in industry will take. Items can be released from the factory as soon as they are created or when a set quantity of the item is available. This can be adjusted with no penalty and allows factories to release a small group of tanks to be used as replacements for battle losses or to release an entire division when it is ready for battle. Luftudirat Luitpaire II Pe Art Luftum 03. Life Gets More Complex The Complex scenarios are basically Average scenarios with more units, including naval units. The naval units, while able to contribute to shore bombardment, don't add much else to the game. Without transport ships to attack or defend, the sea While the strategic map is well designed, the tactical map is not. As opposing forces near each other on the strategic level, the player can choose an automatic battle (where the player is just informed of the results) or a manual battle. The term \"manual\" is misleading, however. When the map switches to the tactical level, the Page 128 Computer Gaming World "


"Deview tle, selecting the Retreat icon and waiting several minutes while his forces drive off the map, or selecting an automatic battle and be informed his forces have been crushed, rather than just driven away. player only controls one tank. The other friendly vehicles are still under computer control. Although the player can switch control to another tank, while the former tank is given over to the computer, this can be disappointing. The bottom line is, at the strategic level, forces go where they are commanded, but it's \"every tank for itself\" at the tactical level. As a result, it is virtually impossible to concentrate an attack or employ any organization. JOB Desert RAF 1 the speed of the game if events are occurring too rapidly. Campaign offers little in the way of feedback. When an air strike is launched against a factory or land unit, the player is informed the target has been spotted, but no confirmation of an attack is given, and no information about the damage inflicted is available, even when spotter aircraft are used. Aerial combat is equally mysterious. O Curtiss P-40 Warhauk NL H7 Priest HMC has seen Hashorn 582 EHP Fighter aircraft Top Speed (Rnxh) Total Machine Guns Number of rockets Range km Total Domb capacity (kg) e. f There are several icons that can be used to view the composition of the force in the battle, but no way to bring reserve forces out of reserve until they decide to come out of reserve. Selecting a reserve tank and driving it into battle only causes one of the tanks in the battle to go into reserve. Occasionally, a small force will run into a larger one. At the strategic level, there is no way to signal a retreat. The player must choose between going into a manual batAlso, forces can engage in combat during the night. While this isn't entirely impossible, night battles occur rather more frequently in Campaign than they should, especially considering that night vision equipment was unavailable during WWII. One of the better thought-out aspects of the game is the pause icon. At any point the game can be halted. Unlike most pauses, which entirely lock the game, Campaign allows the player to examine units, set new destinations and alter factory production. Also, after a battle between units, the game automatically pauses, allowing the player to regain his bearings. There is also an icon to control The grande faux pas occurs when the player decides he's had enough of Campaign for one day. There is no exit icon or command. Even the three fingered salute (Ctrl-Alt-Del) doesn't work. The player must power-down to leave the game. In short, the concept of Campaign is a good one, but the inconsistent interface between the strategic and tactical maps, the lack of feedback and the poorly organized manual make Campaign a fight just to play. But, it was a nice thought. Cow Discover the pbm game sweeping the nation! LORDS OF DESTINY Embark on an introductory journey to the fantastic world of play-by-mail gaming, with a game specially designed for newcomers to the hobby il of play-by-mail gaming. the game of galactic empire building, legendary beings, and cataclysmic battles! Lords of Destiny is a 100 % computermoderated play-by-mail game where many players compete in a galaxy packed with features like: INTO THE MAELSTROM FREE RULES! FREE SETUP! many different ship types; economic and military tech levels planctary defense shiclds composed of individual ground units ancient artifacts with special powers known only to the owner hundreds of named characters with abilities such as exploring, spying, researching, governing, diplomacy, psionics, combat, ... Players begin each game having one leader with special locations to utilize such as black holes, secret societies, training academies, worm holes, and the 7 wonders of the galaxy! four followers. Your quest is to amass enough power to proclaim neutral empires ranging from primitive cave men to advanced yourself king. Along the way you must persuade powerful beings elder races; possessing their own forces, characters, and artifacts and monsters to join your cause and fight many battles. You must decide which regions to concentrate your recruiting efforts; cach region having different natives who may join your cause. Do you Turns are only $3.75, no \"double\" turns or hidden fees ever dare enter the mystical whirlpools and journey to the unknown? Games last about 27 turns; with 7, 14, or 21 day turns Why try play-by-mail games? Basic version available which provides an easy-to-learn game AND MORE! 1. There is never a problem finding people to play against. A detailed combat system with free battle reports; updated galactic maps Players across the country can compete in the same game. included with every turn; and customized fill-in-the-blank order sheets 2. Sophisticated games are a breeze to play since the population, factories, industrial complexes, crew types, plundering, computer takes care of all the nitty gritty details. alliances, power plays, long-range scanners, multi-class characters... 3. They realistically create the \"fog of war\" since a player NO OBLIGATION! sees only that information available to his own forces. 4. You can plan strategy anytime; whenever its convenient! Mention this ad SPECIAL STARTUP PACKAGE and receive free RULES, SETUP, 2 TURNS: ALL FREE! rules and setup! There is no obligation, simply mention this ad. $ Turns are only $3.25 with never any extra, hidden costs. Maelstrom Games; PO Box 5461; Oxnard, CA 93031 Maelstrom Games; PO Box 5461; Oxnard, CA 93031 STROM Circle Reader Service #70 March 1993 Page 129 "


"Deynel Sun Tzu, Sunset Ancient Art of War in the Skies from MicroProse by Stanley Trevena \"The primary colors are only five in mimber but their combinations are so infinite that one cannot visualize them all.\" Sun Tzu The Ancient Art Of War In The Skies IBM AT, PS/2 100% Compatibles TITLE: SYSTEM: # PLAYERS: PRICE: PROTECTION: DESIGNERS: PUBLISHER: $59.95 Documentation Look-up Dave Murry, Joe Gargiulo, Barry Murry Microprose Hunt Valley, MD The Ancient Art of War in the Skies The Ultimate World War I Strategy & Action Game ultimate goal: total destruction of the enemy capital. The battlefield is presented in real time with a constantly shifting front, planes proceeding on their planned routes, and skirmishes occasionally breaking out into the aforementioned R/C style action sequences. In terms of presentation and customizability, attention to detail is evident throughout this game. When flying a bombing run, the water in the streams appears to be running and clouds drift along lazily below the bomber, occasionally obstructing the view of the target. Period artwork adds to the atmosphere, as does the music. The digitized voices of the opponents are crisp and clear with the proper soundboard installed. Further, custom user-controlled options affect visibility, vulnerability, fuel efficiency, and overall performance of the two side's planes. rt is human nature to categorize the things we encounter in life. This not only helps us to remember things, but provides a certain comfort of knowing and familiarity to those things that are new to us. One of the primary tasks of a game reviewer is that of placing a game into a certain classification or genre. Yet, The Ancient Art Of War In The Skies, like so many passages out of Sun Tzu's writings, keeps the consumer guessing as to its true nature and intent. When this game first hit the software shelf many people ran out and purchased it, thinking it was another flight simulator from MicroProse. Upon taking the game home and playing it, the gamer was thrown off balance. This was not a typical MicroProse flight game. Often, before the shock of unfamiliarity wore off, the game either found it's way back to the retailer or onto the top shelf of the closet and rarely ever got a fair evaluation. CHOPROSE ENTE DESECHST LCHILLED LILLED IN THE TURTLE IN THE LIST Y DESIREintentionally limited the game to two aircraft per side (simplifying both research and game play). The Green Team is given the Sopwith Camel as their fighter and the British Handley-Page 0/400 as their bomber. The Red Team has the Fokker DR.I(made famous by the Red Baron) and the German Gotha bomber. Naturally, the player can choose either side of the conflict. AAOWITS feels like a combination American Heritage boardgame (complete with a top down 3-D perspective view of a battlefield sprinkled with cities, factories, airfields, villages, supply depots, forts, bridges, mountains, and the all important capital) and radio-controlled dogfight (as though the plastic planes of the former had become R/C planes on the gamer's monitor screen). The planes are small at take-off and grow to an over-exaggerated size, complete with shadow, when airborne, but have the feel overall of Broderbund's Choplifter or Wings of Fury. One can avoid participating in the dogfights, but such a decision doesn't usually work in the gamer's favor. From scenario to scenario the player has varying numbers of bombers and fighters scattered about the map, with distribution and numbers of planes often not equal between the opponents. The player must formulate a strategy based on the \"lay of the land,\" attacking either vital resources, planes, or the front itself on the way to the PLE The Ancient Art Of War In The Skies (AAOWITS) is a cute combination of strategy and action gaming. That is, the graphic presentation and flow of play is such that it is hard to take it seriously, though it is amusing enough. Perhaps, it is best described as a (\"less filling\") \"beer and pretzels\" game because of its easy rules, undemanding play, and relatively short playing time. The backdrop for the game is the period of 1914-1918, World War I. The designers QUEEULEE URE A campaign editor is provided and also exhibits the same attention to detail as the main game. The player is taken through a sequential design process and can easily paint a battlefield, assign pilots and bombers, write the story, set the rules, and be playing in less than an hour. Unfortunately, all campaigns are exclusive of one another and the ability to link campaigns does not exist. The game ships with 20 historic campaigns and 34 fictional ones, all of which can be copied and/or modified using the campaign editor. Neither a flight sim nor a hard core strategy game, AAWITS is unlikely to appeal to devotees of either camp and, at best, can only provide a refreshing \"lite\" change to the current flood of time intensive complex simulations and wargames that invade so many hard drives. Cow Page 130 Computer Gaming World "


"General Tegel has plans for some covert operations. Not things he could order someone to do... but things he could pay someone to do. And, as it happens, you—and your colleagues can be bought. HRT: ET: NASI DICH CID oid JALO arkki HI F ULL NEON SITE RE POCRATES SOLDER FAHRE 3 .YERACTED NELLSCRET.SE LOLET PISTOTES MOET 22 POL Mindcraft presents: Tegel's Mercenaries... an intriguing concept in futuristic strategy gaming. You lead a squad of interplanetary mercenaries picked from twenty of the most notorious men, women and aliens this side of the Magellanic Clouds. Belk Otem, with his Delaser rifle and cybereye  \"Smokey\" Okrara, the green-skinned, two-trunked chlorophant \"Bombshell\" Divan, «Tunes\" Krakowski, and 16 more! Start with a \"diplomatic\" mission to the ice planet of Nueva Nevada, then go wherever the general sends you next. Just remember the most important thing: you're in it for the money! When you are through with Tegel's tours of duty, strike out on your own! Use the Scenario Kit & Working Interface Developer to build missions to challenge the most hardened mercenaries. A new level of excitement, from the makers of the award-winning Magic Candle and Siege! MINDCRAFT 2291 205th Street, Suite 201, Torrance, CA 90501 (Actual screens may vary.) Circle Reader Service #79 "


"Mudistors RECEIVED 2009 0909 File Special Window Help Examint Open Clour Speak Opernte GoHit Consume elnyer LEXUAL Uended The last thing that you remember in standing before the Wizard Lame as he gestured wildly and chanted in an archaic tongue. Now you find yourself etering eten entry which is the edge of forst. The Druld's words willing in your car Within the walls of the Centle Shadowgate then your quest the prephecies held trut, the decaded Warlock Lord will use a dark magic la miss the chemoth the deadliest of the Titans. tr e depths of the earth. You are the need of prephecy, the later the line of Ming. and enly you can stop the Warlock Lord om die in PLT WERT FOLYIL Fare the PRANENT Shadowgate MS Windows Conan the Cimmerian CD-ROM Amiga: Darkseed (Cyberdreams) Indiana Jones and the Fate of Atlantis (Lucas Arts) MS DOS: Time Treks (Davidson) MS DOS CD-ROM: Barney Bear Goes to School (Free Spirit) Conan the Cimmerian (Virgin Games) Space Quest IV: Roger Wilco and the Time Rippers (Sierra) MS Windows: Shadowgate (ICOM) Macintosh: A-Train (Maxis) Heaven and Earth (Buena Vista Software) Le Chuck's Revenge: Monkey Island 2 (Lucas Arts) SEGA Genesis: Shadow of the Beast II (Psygnosis) Super Nintendo (SNES): NHLPA Hockey (Electronic Arts) Wordtris (Spectrum HoloByte) Give Open Close Game tolat Push middle lever Use Push Pull Pick up Talk to Look at Hound 1: INSTAKES er begrytornado Indiana Jones and the Fate of Atlantis Amiga Heaven and Earth Macintosh The term \"Conversions\" refers to products which have previously appeared on other platforms, but have now been released on a new platform. 75 25 33 60 118 21. 23, 71 13, 105 148 60 147 26-27,93 46 123 76 15, 29, 35, 45, 47, 49 77 Advertisers List Flagship Magazine Formgen GEnie Gosselin Computer HPS Simulations Impressions Inline Design Inner Circle Software Keyboard Commander Lance Haffner Games Legend Entertainment Liberty International Looking Glass Technology Machiavelli Maelstrom Games Media Vision Mindcraft Mission Control MPG Net National Videotex New World Computing Access 18-19 Accolade 87.89 Adanac Command 103 Amtex Software 121 Apogee Software Blue Valley Software CH Products CWI Products Cape Cod Connection CereBel Information Arts Chips & Bits 55. 57. 59, 61.63 Combat Entertainment Compsult Computability Computer Express Computer Learning Foundation Creative Labs Digital Dungeon Disk-Count Software Electronic Arts Enchanted Horizons 68 43 No Name Software Nova Logic Origin Systems Paper Mayhem Point of View QQP Reality Simulations SDJ Entrprises Sideline Software Sierra On-Line Sir-Tech Spectrum HoloByte Strategic Simulations Supersoft The Software Company Three-Sixty Pacific Thrustmaster Twin Engine Gaming UBI Soft Villa Crespo Viking Software 3 133 137 123 113 37 129 67 120, 131 16 127 83 109 24 41 135 80-81 85 72-73 117 39 Page 132 Computer Gaming World "


"You stumbled back to your office after a long day of detective work. But before you can get cozy with a whiskey bottle, there's a message waiting on the phone machine. Cobra OICE.. MISSION \"This is a life and death emergency!! Young ladies have been disappearing left and right, and now, Donna is missing!! We need your help!! Please come quickly!!! Donna's rescue is only the beginning of this sizzling adventure. There's dozens more tantalizing women held against their will. Free them from the evil clutches of General Kaiser, Cobra's psychotic master criminal you screaming in ecstasy. overlord, and they will thank you in ways that will leave You'll be and yourself reden. 's AWES You'll be dazzled by the quality of the full screen emotionally to them! It's AWESOME!! ANIMATION graphics and find yourself reacting physically and BOND WAS HOT STUFF. SO WAS ARNIE NOW IT'S YOUR TURN To purchase your copy of Cobra Mission, visit your favorite software retailer. Or call 800-258-MEGA CA residents add 8.25% sales tax $79.95 (suggested retail) plus $5.00 shipping and handling and use your VISA or Mastercard. Or send check or money order to MEGATECH, P.O. BOX 11333, TORRANCE, CA 90501 aan System requirements: 286 or faster machine with 640K RAM; hard disk with min. 8 megabytes of available space required, mouse recommended. Graphics compatible with EGA, MCGA and VGA (VGA highly recommended). Sound support: Sound Blaster Pro, Adlib Gold CALL 800-258 MEGA R RATED R (This program is voluntarily rated due to the partially violent and adult nature of the graphic Imagery) This program is intended for mature audiences only!!! No sales to minor under 18 and where prohibited by law. omum MEGA TECH Circle Reader Service #72 "


"Taking a peek KILLER GAME] once again the rage with youngsters (according to some reports, they outsold all other toys this Christmas season!) and this product should do nothing to quell their enthusiasm for these cherubic relatives of the hobbit. Trolls is very well done for a children's action game; its gorgeous graphics and smooth-scrolling animation rivaling that of the best Nintendo cart. Young gamers will pilot their Troll babies across a rainbow palette, visiting such yummy places as Candyland and Fableland, scooping up lollipops, gumballs, and balloons, while avoiding the armies of teddy bears, toy soldiers and other baddies that have gone over to the dark side of the Force. Hunches and bunches of sticky-sweet fun to sap up one's hard drive! IBM ($44.95). Circle Reader Service #3. Terminator 2029 Bethesda Softworks 1370 Piccard Dr., Rockville, MD 20850 TERMINATOR 2029: When Dark Horse Comics does a graphic novelization, each page is crammed with detail, particularly when the subject involves a dark future with cyberpunk edges where technology has gone awry. It is no wonder, then, that when Bethesda licensed Terminator 2029 they created an impressive dark blue VGA palette and plenty of pyrotechnic special effects to convey the hard-hitting violence of that epic. The perspective is first-person; the scrolling is fast; the tactics and strategy are as reminiscent of a simulation as of an action game; and the story is tied closely to the universe of the Terminator films. The whole feel is something like MechWarrior meets the original Terminator, except that the graphics are much more lavish than the former's polygon-filled objects and the latter's combination EGA/VGA pastiche. IBM ($69.95). Circle Reader Service #1. Dynamix Eugene, OR (503) 343-0772 Home Alone 2 THE INCREDIBLE MACHINE: Those who took delight in constructing the elaborate edifice of household items in the old boardgame MouseTrap, or are just whimsically and mechanically inclined, will find many hours of delight in this Rube Goldberg-inspired puzzle game. Players can either test their wits against 80 pre-created puzzles or can create their own incredible machine in a free-form building mode. There are over 40 parts in one's tool box — scissors, light bulbs, gears, see-saws, cannons, generators run by mouse or monkey power, conveyor belts, among otherswhich one can use to create working machines; the complexity and ingenuity of which are only bound by one's creative limits. It's conceptually original and cleanly done, and will keep puzzle-loving inventors in their basements for many hours. IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #4. Trolls SCORESERVE BOWUS BOHUG 2 +420 2 586 Capstone Miami, FL (800) 468-7226 HOME ALONE 2: Oh noooo! Garanimal guerrilla Kevin McCallister returns to confound his impossibly stupid abductors in this arguably valueless dash through the streets of New York. Silly Kevin hopped the wrong jet and winds up in the Big Apple with those two bad seeds Harry and Marv. Kevin runs like a painfully slow dream, picking up objects like trashcan lids and bags of marbles to hurl at his pursuers. Run through the streets, escape the bad guys, pick up all you can, throw it at Harry and Marv, and have a yippee time. It'll keep the kids occupied for 20 or 30 minutes. And the reward is so moving Kevin reunites with Mom at the Christmas tree in Rockefeller Center. Home Alone 2 tests the great existential thesis: is life meaningless? Maybe, but this game surely is. IBM($44.95). Circle Reader Service #2. The Incredible Machine QUARKY AND QUAYSOO'S TURBO SCIENCE: Played in an arena that looks vaguely reminiscent of the junkyard in the old Bill Cosby/ Fat Albert cartoon show, Turbo Science is a race against opposing science teams toward the finish line of scientific knowledge. Using an approachable cartoonish manual and simplified explanations of natural phenomena, children will be introduced to the various topics like the properties of matter in different states, the behavior of light, basic mechanics, nuclear energy, and so on, in a hip language that kids supposedly, like, speak, ya know? The game is designed for ages 9 to 14 and has enough clever cartoon graphics and impressively animated dis+ 9 0 312 Case 11 21 TROLLS: If cuteness was a physical substance, they would have to ship this product by the truck load. Troll dolls are Turbo Science Page 134 Computer Gaming World "


"Games For Everybody RODEO GALERIE -RABBITS ARMADA BLACKJACK CASINO CRAPS IMGLOSS 7 CARD STUD NEW EXCITING TITLES PUBLISHED REGULARLY The Coffee Break Series COMPUTER GAMES for IBM PC & Compatibles ONLY $1295 EACH SUGGESTED RETAIL PRICE NOT COPY PROTECTED MADE IN U.S.A. Look for this special display at your favorite retailer. BLUEMINITY BLACKJACK FUN TO PLAY by yourself or with friends. ENTERTAINING play for minutes or hours. Addictive! EASY TO USE play from diskette or hard disk. GREAT GRAPHICS supports most graphics formats. AFFORDABLE... and high quality! DUAL PACKED 5.25\" plus 3.5\" disks. TCARD SD  ARMADA W COMPUTER GAMES NEWS COFFEE AND DOUGHNUTS NOT INCLUDED FOR IBM PC&COMPATIBLES htyret Via Cream Villa Crespo Software 1725 McGovern Street Highland Park, IL 60035.708-433-0500 1992, Villa Crespo Software. Inc. Circle Reader Service #105 "


"Taking a peek coveries to keep most any budding Bohr, Planck, or Einstein enthralled. IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #5. connect with other gamers modem-tomodem and serial link options (whether they subscribe to GEnie or not); and play the historical scenarios, duels and multiplayer battles on the GEnie network. In addition, the documentation is detailed (we loved the performance charts for every plane used in the game) and offers options that many GEnie users haven't yet discovered. Finally, the SVGA graphics are incredible. IBM ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #8. Conquest of Japan KHALID LAS KERETEK Impressions 7 Melrose Drive Farmington, CT 06032 (203) 676-0127 CONQUEST OF JAPAN: Feudal warfare takes on \"miniature\" dimensions in this somewhat strategic, though mostly tactical game of conquest. The war takes place on a small hunk of Japan where two warlords face off. On the rather thin strategic level, players must build their armies and move them into battle. Once armies are engaged, the game pops down to the tactical level where the two armies will face off in a system greatly resembling miniatures wargaming. Here, players can maneuver their groups into position, ordering them to attack handto-hand or fire their bows and arquebuses, and watch the mini samurai carry out their orders with limited animations. The miniatures system is interesting, though the strategic game seems little more than a design afterthought. IBM ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #6. TAT. TAK: SOOOO 00000 text21.30 Cogito Microleague Interactive Software 2201 Drummond Plaza Newark, DE 19711-5711 (302) 368-9990 LASER SQUAD: Robert Heinlein's Johnnie Rico (the protagonist of Starship Troopers) would feel right at home in this game of futuristic infantry combat. Like Breach, the game features small unit tactics with a variety of weapons and an element of role-playing continuity. As one would expect from a European import, however, the graphics are superior to the U.S. product, but the gameplay is tougher and there is less overall product because of the hard disk space required for the graphics. The game seems to use solid algorithms for the artificial opponents (which sometimes seem to have unfair advantage) and offers a solid enough game that wise players will save after every turn. Unfortunately, the game only includes a handful of scenarios and, unlike its U.S. competitor, no mission builder. IBM ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #9. Super VGA Air Warrior Inline Design 308 Main Street, Lakeville, CT 06039 (203) 435-4995 COGITO: If thinking is all that's required to affirm one's existence, as Descartes suggests, then this game will leave no doubt that \"you be.\" The 120 puzzle levels, which involve reconstructing geometric patterns by shifting scrambled tiles by column and row, will certainly keep one cognitively involved for some time to come. The game resembles a one-dimensional Rubic's cube in which the rule for manipulating the rows and columns gets scrambled now and again. It's the demented abstract puzzle stuff that gives gaming masochists a reason to live. Mac ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #7. IS WEAPON SHILL CLOSE COMBAT  STRENGTH ABILITY STAMINA REVELATION: This game isn't the end of the world, but may well be the end of your social life if you are determined to work through the 80 levels of puzzles in this abstract puzzle game. Players take the role of safecracker as they spin color-coded tumblers in an often vain attempt to line up the tumbler colors with the appropriate locks. This is no easy task, as the tumblers often \"chain react\" as they are manipulated, thus scrambling the whole puzzle at every turn. Special locks and bonus tiles will help players find the correct combination, after which they will be able to plunder a safe of all its goodies. IBM ($29.95). Circle Reader Service #10. Laser Squad Revelation! TUP 000000 Konami Buffalo Grove, IL (708) 215-5100 SUPER VGA AIR WARRIOR: Real men play Air Warrior! At least, that's what most of the flight simulator aficionados on GEnie tell us. Now, combatready sim pilots can find out if they like Air Warrior without having to download anything or even having to connect to the network which serves as Air Warrior's central arena for multi-player furballs. The boxed set allows players to fight in stand-alone off-line dogfights; to 148 ULTIMATE CARDS: If one doesn't know when to hold 'em, and when to fold 'em, this six-game card collection may be the player's best deal. Nothing very elaborate here, just straight playing challenge with 12 computer opponents eager to clean your clock. Draw a game of Whist, Spades, Crazy 8's, Hearts, Gin Revelation Page 136 Computer Gaming World "


"at your local retailer. NATIONAL LAMI Look for the \"Whodunit Sweepstakes\" GIESSMEISTER 5Billion1 Chemd You Don't Buy This Well Kill This Dog.* Tu terr ain de fotos! National Lampoon presents the. to Grim Reaper rooks. They'll most outrageous chess program dispatch and dismember each in the galaxy. Match wits with a other in ways even your demented perverted old ChessMeister who mind has never thought of. has more than a few unspeak But should you like your chess able tricks up his sleeve and will unadulterated, we've got that too. use them all to rattle your con In spite of all these shenanigans centration. What else has the it plays a darn good game of game got? A chess set featuring chess. Will it beat the competition? unique live-action video actors-Hey, it ain't called ChessMeister from belly dancing pawns 5 Billion and 1 for nothing! NATIONAL LAMPOON GIESSMEISTER 5BITIN.CH Not an actual VGA screen shot. You wish. Spectrum HoloByte For Visa/MasterCard orders call 24 hours a day, 7 days a week 1-800-695-GAME (Orders Only) For technical questions call: 1-510-522-1164 (MF 9am-5pm PST Spectrum HoloByte, Inc. 2490 Mariner Square Loop, Alameda, CA 94501 * HEY, IT WORKED ONCE! This photo was a Lampoon cover in 1973. We're happy to report the dog died of natural causes. Circle Reader Service #100 "


"SCORE HOTTEST oc Rummy or Oh Hell!, pick a partner and ruthless opponents, and watch the cards fly. There are six \"expert\" level players, three \"good\" players and three \"average\" players, who are no slouches at winning tricks. After the cards are dealt, players can use the sort option to organize their hands and refer to an on-screen rules box if they are in doubt. There are help and learn modes to assist the player, offering proposed moves to ace out the opponents. If all else fails, the player may use the \"cheat\" option, revealing the cards of all players. If that doesn't turn a gamer into a shark, nothing will. Digitized player remarks are supported by Sound Blaster audio cards. IBM ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #11. Ched's Tum TE Ultimate Cards Programmer's Warehouse 8283 N. Hayden Rd. Suite 195 Scottsdale, AZ 85258 (602) 443-0580 SOUND EXPLOSION: If one can judge a civilization by the quality of its beer, should one not judge its technical prowess by the number of fart sounds in a software package? Sound Explosion for Windows is a veritable tower of sound bytes for your PC. With more than 500 sounds and its own speaker driver (rendering a sound board unnecessary, but still preferable), this package delivers a cacophony of noises for your computing pleasure. Always wanted to hear a toilet flush when hitting the escape button? Dream of a Technicolor yak noise when disgorging a disk? Try those and many, many more: jungle noises, gun shots (rifle, M60, Uzi, AK47), belches, birds, spaceships, screams — name it. These are the same sound effects used for motion pictures, brags the box, and indeed they do ring true. All the sound effects are in the standard Windows .wav format, so they can be used with most multimedia applications. Honk if you love noise. IBM with Windows 3.1 ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #14. MicroProse Hunt Valley, MD (410) 771-0440 15.22 ATAC ATAC: Players take on South American drug cartels as the leader of the U.S.'s \"War on Drugs» in this hybrid simulation/strategy game. On the strategic level, players command a task force of F-22 fighter bombers, helicopters and 250 secret agents. As the undercover weasels provide information regarding the locations of important coca plantations, manufacturing facilities and warehouses, the player sends helicopters to confirm these locations in low-flying reconnaissance runs. Once the preliminaries are through, the player then takes control of an F-22 and personally bombs the snot out of the S. American landscape (just say blow) in the name of truth, justice, and the American way — burying the drug lords in the \"snow.\" IBM ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #12. Ready Soft Richmond Hill, Ontario, Canada (416) 731-4175 Task Force 1942 DRAGON'S LAIR III: THE CURSE OF MORDREAD: Don Bluth's daffy hero, Dirk Daring, continues his exploits beyond the laser-disk in this, the third game in a series of animated action-puzzles. Daphne, the career damsel in distress, has been accosted by Mordread the evil witch, and Dirk must dust off his trusty two-hander (and the gamer his arrow keys) to wade into the sea of animated peril. Players of the coin-op and the earlier computer versions know what to expect — more ingenious animation, more simplistic split-second-timing puzzles, and even more hilarious ways for poor Dirk to be suffocated and shocked, immolated and impaled, pounded and pulverized. Gamers disappointed with the length of the previous games can expect the same, as well. IBM ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #15. TASK FORCE 1942: The Tokyo Express comes to life in this first person command simulation of the Guadalcanal Campaign. As either the American or Japanese commander, players attempt to resupply their land-based troops at night or intercept their opposite numbers as they try to provision their own troops. The scrolling seems smoother than in the other recent naval simulation, SSI's Great Naval Battles of the Atlantic, but the accurate historical emphasis on night actions and tendency to engage at long range makes it difficult to compare the overall graphics approach to the game based on Atlantic engagements. The MicroProse commitment to historical accuracy appears to be firmly established in this game and its documentation. Note also that a future product is expected to integrate carrier warfare with this simulation. IBM ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #13. Dragon's Lair III Spectrum HoloByte Alameda, CA (510) 522-1164 FALCON MC: The original groundbreaking combat simulation returns to the Macintosh to the delight of the Apple-owning jet set. This program, based Falcon MC Page 138 Computer Gaming World "


"The Best Deal Around... DRAGON'S LAIR II: CURSE MORDREAD SONS E POWE STRIKE EAGLE MICROPROSE Now Only: $360 ReadySoft: Dragon's Lair III The Curse of Mordread Now Only: $32° Humungous Entertainment: Putt-Putt Joins the Parade Now Only: $47° MicroProse: F-15 Strike Eagle III In revenge for her brother's destruction, the evil witch, Mordread, has captured your beloved Daphne and the children. You must test your skills in a frantic quest through time before your family is trapped forever in the Vortex of Eternity. (For IBM DOS) Grab your car wax and get ready to buff your bumpers it's time for the annual Cartown Pet Parade! Help PuttPull fackle the local car wash, explore a toy store, rescue a lost puppy and much, much more, before heading to his front-row spot in the parede. (For IBM DOS) Squeeze into the cockpit of the F-15 Strike Eagle this time and you'll experience aerial combat so realistic you'll be gosping for oir! Because F-15 Strike Eagle III is far more than an upgrade. It's a whole new shooting match. An unprecedented line-up of features and state-of-the-art graphics will have you taking on enemy Migs and destroying torgets until your eyes are red! (For IBM DOS) Join the Law Firm of McKenz, Erickman THE INCREDIBLE CALIFORNIA SCAR The computer Game Now Only: $ 2900 SIERRA Sierra: The Incredible Machine Want to build a better mousetrap? All it takes are bike-riding monkeys, treadmill mice and a few bowling balls. Genius and junk combine to solve the convoluted contraptions in The Incredible Machine. Search for the toolbox for your own gadgetry and set up a chain reaction that will free the cat exercise the mice, or burst the balloons. You must find the perfect blend of mechanics in your solution to The Incredible Machine. (For IBM DOS or MAC) Now Only: $3600 Capstone: LA LAW Developed by a lawyer and adapted from actual cases used in the hit TV show, LA LAW: The Computer Gome delivers a realistic glimpse of the human drama, mysteries, puzzles and intrigue played out in the law offices and courtrooms of Los Angeles. Find and interview witnesses, uncover a police report thal changes your strategy, negotiate with opposing counsel, look for legal loopholes; or discover missing details to prove your clients' innocence. (For IBM DOS)\" .GIOUS Also Available SOFTWARE Databases CAD/Graphics Communication Tax Preparation Accounting/FAX Home Productivity Desktop Publishing Languages/Utilities Operating Environments Spreadsheets/Integrated CD ROM/MULTIMEDIA HARDWARE & ACCESSORIES Printers/Monitors Modems/Scanners Mice/Joysticks Storage Devices 240) Xti Pot--** :-! * FAX0011-508-443-5645 +*-:1. D. 70 007. 153For Orders And A Catalog, Call 1-800-228-7449 VISA Orders accepted on our toll free number Mon-Sat 8:30 10 5:30 EST. Visa, MasterCard & Discover card accepted. All credit card orders processed within 24 hours. Continental US shipments; UPS ground S5, Airborne Overnight $7. Corp, Gov't, Educ, APO, FPO, International orders accepted. No sales tax except for Mass odd 5%. Personal checks will delay shipment 5 business days. Products covered by manufacturer's guarantee. Defective software replaced immediately. No COD's. Item availability & price subject to change witout notice. 15% restocking fee for non-defective returns Shop our on-line stores located on PRODIGY, CompuServe, Genie, Delphi, LA Online and America Online PRODIGY, CompuServe, Gris, Delphi LA Online and America Online are trademarks of their respective companies Circle Reader Service #48 OUCOVER COMPUTER Express Savoy Products, Inc., 31 Union Avenue, Sudbury, MA 01776 "


"Taking a peek on the 2.5 version of the IBM incarnation of Falcon, will offer Mac color, new missions, expanded weapons systems, a more detailed cockpit, and a more realistically rendered flight model. Gamers should not mistake this product for a conversion of Falcon 3.0 on the IBM, as it does not include the new functionality and graphic whiz-bang (and, perhaps, none of the problems associated with the early versions) of the latest IBM build. Mac ($69.95). Circle Reader Service #16. Turn: 8Jh: 5 HF: O Player: V. Arabs V. Arabs Deploynent Phase used just over a megabyte of HD storage. Well, this product couldn't even sit at the same table with QQP's product, or many others for that matter. It sports four games, Solitaire, Poker, Cribbage, and Bridge and plays average hands with all. The Solitaire program offers only 7 standard variants, and the Poker program offers 5and 7-card draw and stud games, with very limited variant options and playing-history analysis capabilities. All told the package uses all of 750KBs of the CD's 500+MB capacity, leaving one only to surmise that this package is a \"brilliant\" marketing strategy to move a rather mediocre game collection on the fast wings of the CDROM's novelty. IBM CD-ROM ($69.95). Circle Reader Service #19. A Line In The Sand Strategic Simulations Inc. Sunnyvale, CA (408) 737-6800 A LINE IN THE SAND: As previewed in CGW #101, Line in the Sand is a faithful conversion of the TSR boardgame which features, but is not limited to, the 1991 Persian Gulf conflict. In addition to the Desert Storm conflict, the game also postulates potential ArabIsraeli wars, and a diplomatic game where up to six players strive for their individual objectives through a combination of diplomacy and force. Both easy to learn and simple to play, Line is a lightweight game of \"What Il\" that does its best to make an interesting game out of a rather uninteresting conflict. IBM ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #17. Legends of Valour Three-Sixty Pacific Campbell, CA (409) 776-2187 V FOR VICTORY: VELIKIYE LUKI-1942: Using the acclaimed boardgame-like V for Victory system, this latest release will allow wargamers to command either side of the classic Eastern Front battle that raged along a line between Leningrad and Moscow from the winter of 1942 through the winter of 1943. This is not an expansion disk for the first Utah Beach game, but is a completely new program with an artificial opponent expressly designed for the problems to be encountered during this historical conflict. ($69.95). Circle Reader Service #20. OTRERT Bicycle CD-ROM Collection | 20:21 21 Wisdom Tree Inc. 2700 E. Imperial Hwy., Bldg. A Brea, CA 92621 (714) 528-3456 Velairua LEGENDS OF VALOUR: SSI seems to have taken ques from Ultima Underworld and Wolfenstein 3-D in creating this smooth-scrolling, first-person roleplaying game. The graphics are gorgeous and rise high above the state of those in most RPGs of the day, but, unfortunately, it seems to do so by releasing a few ballasts of story depth and over-all quality. Players will explore an \"underworld\" realm of dungeons, and a city of \"28 miles\" of streets (however they measure it) filled with citizens going about their daily lives in diurnal cycles. Players will find themselves tangled in the affairs of the town as they take on 45 quests, leading to an(other) ultimate battle to end all evil. IBM ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #18. Swfte International Box 219 Rockland, DE 19732-9904 BICYCLE CD-ROM COLLECTION: We sensed a raw deal when we first saw this product — a collection of card games on a nice shiny CD-ROM. \"What,\" thought our puzzled reviewer, \"could you possibly do with a card game collection that would require the massive storage capacity of a CD-ROM?\" After all, QQP's Solitaire's Journey included 105 different solitaire games and HR22212 Vior Victory: Velikiye Luki 1942 EXODUS: Gamers may well say, \"Holy Moses! I did it!\" when they complete a level in this action game where Pac-Man meets Adonai (the Hebrew word for Lord). The action resembles a cross between the classic Pac-Man and the lesserknown Soko-Ban. In this case, however, the \"ghosts» of the former have been replaced by Egyptian magicians, soldiers and taskmasters, while it takes \"words of faith\" instead of power pills for Moses (instead of Pac-Man) to overcome the villains and obstacles on each of the game's 100 levels. As in Soko-Ban, gamers have to figure out the best way to remove or rearrange obstacles like the murmuring of the Israelites or mud of bondage. In between levels, gamers become students and score extra points by answering Biblebased questions. Exodus offers an interesting and positive twist on older game concepts. IBM ($39.95) Circle Reader Service #21. CGW ILLLILLO DOLLAL hDIO101903 LLLL 90000 Exodus Page 140 Computer Gaming World "


"COMPUTER GAMING WORLD HALL OF FAME The games in Computer Gaming World's Hall of Fame have been highly rated by our readers over time. They have been rated for their impact on the computer gaming hobby during their peak period of influence and acceptance by our readership. Note that the dates listed for each game are the copyright dates and may precede the actual release dates. Specific formats listed are those which CGW has in its possession. Each month, we will highlight at least two of these games as part of this listing. Empire Interstel, 1978 Many Formats Gettysburfamige proses A, BM Originally published on mainframes in the late '70s, Walter Bright's game of planetary conquest mixed exploration and strategy with an economic basis for unit construction. The game was revamped for personal computers in the mid-'80s. Mark Baldwin's new interface and the addition of new units enhanced a classic game system. F-19 Stealth Fighter MicroProse, 1988 IBM The Bard's Tale (Electronic Arts, 1985) Many formats Chessmaster (Software Toolworks, 1986) Many formats Dungeon Master (FTL Software, 1987) Amiga, Atari ST, IBM Earl Weaver Baseball (Electronic Arts, 1986) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh Empire (Interstel, 1978) 'Amiga, Atari ST, Commodore 64, IBM F-19 Stealth Fighter (MicroProse, 1988) IBM Gettysburg: The Turning Point (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1986) Amiga, Apple, C-64, IBM Gunship (MicroProse, 1989) Amiga, C-64, IBM Harpoon (Three-Sixty Pacific, 1989) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh Kampfgruppe (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1985) Many formats King's Quest V (Sierra, 1990) Amiga, IBM M-1 Tank Platoon (MicroProse, 1989) Amiga, IBM Mech Brigade (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1985) Many formats Might & Magic (New World Computing, 1986) Apple, C-64, IBM, Mac M.U.L.E. (Electronic Arts, 1983) Atari 8-bit, C-64 Pirates (MicroProse, 1987) Many formats Railroad Tycoon (MicroProse, 1990) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh SimCity (Maxis, 1987) Many formats Starflight (Electronic Arts, 1986) Amiga, C-64, IBM, Sega Their Finest Hour (LucasArts, 1989) Amiga, Atari ST, IBM Ultima III (Origin, 1983) Apple, Atari ST, C-64, IBM Ultima IV (Origin, 1985) Amiga, Apple, Atari ST, IBM Ultima VI (Origin, 1990) Amiga, IBM War in Russia (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1984) Apple Wasteland (Interplay, 1988) Apple, C64, IBM Wing Commander (Origin, 1991) IBM, Sega Wizardry (Sir-Tech Software, 1981) Many formats Zork (Infocom, 1981) Many formats FS STEALTH FIGHTER MICROPROSE Released prior to the government's public announcement of the F-117A, F-19 Stealth Fighter provided additional challenges beyond those of the typical combat flight simulation of its day. By creating the electronic profile of the craft and adding the element of stealth, F-19 became the first combat flight simulation where it was more fun not to dogfight than to engage in one. March 1993 Page 141 "


"Reader Poll #102 Top Adventure Games GAME COMPANY Quest for Glory III Sierra King's Quest VI: Heir Today... Sierra Indiana Jones: Fate of Atlantis LucasArts Monkey Island 2: Le Chuck LucasArts The Secret of Monkey Island LucasArts Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes Electonic Arts Amazon Access Spelicasting 301: Spring Break Legend The Dagger of Amon Ra Sierra 10 The Castle of Dr. Brain Sierra VOU AWN COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SCORE 10.46 10.40 10.03 9.99 9.72 9.71 9.50 9.36 9.16 Top 100 Games 76 Pumiet Computer Come Magazine Type VOI WNSP AD,RP RP AD AC Ultima, Underworld ST Top Role Playing Games GAME COMPANY SCORE Ultima Underworld Origin 10.46 Wizardry VII: Crusaders of Savant Sir-Tech 9.93 3 Might & Magic: Clouds of Xeen New World 9.89 4 Eye of the Beholder II SS! 9.64 5 Might & Magic ill New World Computing 9.45 Ultima VII Origin 9.39 Eye of the Beholder SSI 9.12 8 Bane of the Cosmic Forge Sir-Tech 9.05 9 Ultima V Origin 9.00 10 Pools of Darkness 8.94 AD AD RP RP SI CUM ST ON SSI AC WG AD AD RP WG SI SP WG,ST SI Top Simulation Games GAME COMPANY Red Baron Dynamix Falcon 3.0 Spectrum HoloByte Aces of the Pacific Dynamix Stunt Island Disney Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe LucasArts Gunship 2000 Microprose Silent Service II MicroProse Chuck Yeager's Air Combat Electronic Arts Red Storm Rising MicroProse 10 F-117A MicroProse OVOU AON-O00 au Game Company 1 Civilization MicroProse 2 Links 386 Pro Access 3 Quest for Glory III Sierra Ultima Underworld Origin 5 King's Quest VI: Heir Today... Sierra 6 Wing Commander II Origin 7 Solitaire's Journey QQP 8 Indiana Jones: Fate of Atlantis LucasArts 9 Monkey Island 2: Le Chuck's Revenge LucasArts 10 Wizardry VII: Crusaders of Savant Sir-Tech 11 Might & Magic: Clouds of Xeen New World 12 Red Baron Dynamix 13 Hong Kong Mahjong Pro Electonic Arts 14 Wolfenstein 3-D Id Software 15 The Perfect General QQP 16 The Secret of Monkey Island LucasArts 17 Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes Electonic Arts 18 Eye of the Beholder 11 SSI 19 V for Victory: Utah Beach Three-Sixty Pacific 20 Falcon 3.0 Spectrum Holo Byte 21 Hardball III Accolade 22 Great Naval Battles SSI 23 Aces of the Pacific Dynamix 24 Stunt Island Disney Amazon Access 26 Links Access Warlords SSG 28 Might & Magic III New World Computing 29 Chessmaster 3000 Software Toolworks 30 Ultima VII Origin 31 Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe LucasArts 32 Lemmings Psygnosis 33 Jack Nicklaus Signature Golf Accolade Terminator 2029 Bethesda 35 Conflict: Korea SSI 36 Carriers At War SSG High Command Colorado Comp. 38 Second Front SSI 39 The Dagger of Amon Ra Sierra Spellcasting 301: Spring Break Legend 41 Tetris Classic Spectrum HoloByte 42 Gunship 2000 Microprose 43 Eye of the Beholder SSI 44 The Castle of Dr. Brain Sierra 45 Chuck Yeager's Air Combat Electronic Arts Silent Service II MicroProse 47 Bane of the Cosmic Forge Sir-Tech The Lost Admiral QQP Populous II Electronic Arts 50 Red Storm Rising MicroProse SCORE 9.86 9.60 9.51 9.50 9.33 9.13 9.08 9.08 9.04 8.92 SI AD SP WG,ST RP Score 10.72 10.67 10.46 10.46 10.40 10.37 10.26 10.03 9.99 9.93 9.89 9.86 9.85 9.76 9.74 9.72 9.71 9.64 9.63 9.60 9.55 9.54 9.51 9.50 9.50 9.47 9.47 9.45 9.42 9.39 9.33 9.30 9.27 9.25 9.21 9.19 9.19 9.18 9.16 9.16 9.14 9.13 9.12 9.11 9.08 9.08 9.05 9.05 9.05 9.04 ST RP AC SP 34 AC WG WG WG WG AD AD Top Strategy Games & GAME Civilization Solitaire's Journey Hong Kong Mahjong Pro Chessmaster 3000 Populous II The Lost Admiral Mech Warrior Siege Castles 2: Siege and Conquest Rules of Engagement COMPANY MicroProse QQP Electonic Arts Software Toolworks Electronic Arts QQP Activision Mindcraft interplay Mindcraft SCORE 10.72 10.26 9.85 9.42 9.05 9.05 8.95 8.86 8.82 8.81 7 8 9 10 du t "


"The Perfect General Sierra Sierra Origin Sierra 9.04 9.02 9.00 8.98 Top Wargames SSI AD AD.RP RP AD WG AD AD ST.SI RP 8.98 8.97 8.96 SI OVO ONGAME The Perfect General V for Victory: Utah Beach Great Naval Battles Warlords Conflict: Korea High Command Carriers At War Second Front Westem Front Command HQ COMPANY QQP Three-Sixty Pacific SSI SSG SSI Colorado Comp. SSG SSI SSI MicroPlay SCORE 9.74 9.63 9.54 9.47 9.21 9.19 9.19 9.18 8.98 8.81 AC AD AD 10 Sierra Dynamix Activision SSI MicroProse Psygnosis Dynamix Access Mindcraft Spectrum Holo Byte Electronic Arts Virgin Interplay Accolade MicroPlay Mindcraft MicroProse SSI Sierra ST AC,ST SP AD ST RP WG,ST ST comandat 8.95 8.94 8.92 8.92 8.89 8.89 8.86 8.85 8.84 8.84 8.82 8.82 8.81 8.81 8.79 8.79 8.78 8.76 8.75 Top Action Games SCORE 10.37 72 AD RP 2 9.76 9.30 SSI COAC GAME Wing Commander II Wolfenstein 3-D Lemmings Terminator 2029 Oh, No! More Lemmings Super Tetris Conan the Cimmerian Out of this World Tetris Speedball 2 COMPANY Origin Id Software Psygnosis Bethesda Psygnosis Spectrum HoloByte Virgin Interplay Spectrum HoloByte Konami Conquests of the Longbow 52 Quest for Glory II 53 Ultima V 54 Space Quest IV Western Front 56 Police Quest 3 57 The Adventures of Willy Beamish 58 Mech Warrior 59 Pools of Darkness 60 F-117A Oh, No! More Lemmings 62 Rise of the Dragon Martian Memorandum 64 Siege 65 Super Tetris 66 Indianapolis 500 Legend of Kyrandia 68 Castles 2: Siege and Conquest Elvira 70 Command HQ Rules of Engagement Rex Nebular Gateway to the Savage Frontier 74 Hoyle Book of Games, Vol. 3 75 The Summoning 76 Heart of China 77 Battles of Napoleon Battlechess Gateway 80 Starflight II 4-D Boxing 82 F-15 Strike Eagle 11 83 Action Stations 84 Typhoon of Steel 85 Armada 2525 86 Tony LaRussa's Ultimate Baseball 87 Buck Rogers Carrier Strike 89 Conan the Cimmerian 90 Megafortress PGA Tour Golf NFL Pro League Football 93 Star Trek: 25th Aniversary 94 The Games: Winter Challenge Martian Dreams Shuttle 97 Bandit Kings Savage Empire 99 Global Conquest 100 Jetfighter II 9.25 8.92 8.85 8.56 8.43 8.13 7.92 ST RP AD WG 8.72 ST AD 10 Dynamix SSI Interplay Legend Electronic Arts Electronic Arts MicroProse RAW Entertainment SSI Interstel SSI 8.72 8.72 8.71 8.71 8.69 8.68 8.67 8.63 8.60 8.57 8.57 8.56 RP SP SI WG WG ST SP RP WG AC,RP SIST SP SP Top Sports Games SSI 8.55 COCONAC GAME COMPANY Links 386 Pro Access Hardball 111 Accolade Links Access Jack Nicklaus Signature Golf Accolade Indianapolis 500 Electronic Arts 4-D Boxing Electronic Arts Tony LaRussa's Ultimate Baseball SSI NFL Pro League Football Micro Sports PGA Tour Golf Electronic Arts The Games: Winter Challenge Accolade SCORE 10.67 9.55 9.47 9.27 8.84 8.71 8.60 8.54 8.54 8.50 AD SSI Virgin Three-Sixty Pacific Electronic Arts Micro Sports Interplay Accolade Origin Virgin Koei Origin MicroPlay Velocity 8.54 8.54 8.53 8.50 8.50 8.50 8.48 8.48 8.47 8.45 10 ST.RP RP ST SI Poll is based on reader survey cards in each issue of CGW and published two issues subsequent. Data on more than 100 games is archived and top ten lists may contain games which scored below the Top 100 cutoff. AD=Adventure, RP=Role Playing, Sl=Simulation, ST-Strategy, WG=Wargame, AC=Action, SP=Sports The Computer Gaming World Poll A monthly survey of the readers of Computer Gaming World Magazine. "


"What's not PC Research Hits List of Top-Selling Software What You've Been Playing Lately The Feedback Forum of Reader Response November, 1992 Rank cimonono PC Games (MS-DOS) Title and Source Kings Quest VI (Sierra On-Line) Commanche: Maximum Overkill (NovaLogic) The Humans (Gametek) Wing Commander (Origin) Sim City (Maxis) Star Control II (Accolade) Wizardry VII: Crusaders (Sir-Tech) Castles TI (Interplay) Aces of the Pacific (Sierra On-Line) Civilization (MicroProse) Monopoly (Virgin Games) Microsoft Flight Simulator (Microsoft) Links-386 Pro (Accolade) Hardball III (Accolade) Quest for Glory III (Sierra On-Line) Police Quest (Sierra On-Line) Might & Magic: Clouds of Xeen (New World Computing) Microsoft Golf for Windows (Microsoft) Falcon 3.0 (Spectrum HoloByte) Stunt Island (Disney) 18. 19. 20. cimno cosa rimi Every month our mailbox fills to capacity with hundreds of Reader Input Cards from hundreds of our most loyal and outspoken readers. Over the years we've found these cards to be an invaluable source of feedback. Within 10 days of the release of our latest issue we can expect to see dozens of cards begin pouring in with comments, suggestions, encouragements, tirades and many good laughs, in addition to the data for our Top 100 game poll. Through your efforts, we know which articles were hits, which flopped, how many tyy pos and grammatical errors we've let slip through -in addition to the many well-articulated opinions on anything and everything related to gaming. This column is set aside to give our readers a voice, and to display the results of our \"Playing Lately?\" field on the Reader Input Card. Thanks for taking the time to fill them out -and keep 'em coming! Playing Lately? Results For CGW #101, December 1992: Civilization (MicroProse) Conquered Kingdoms (QQP) Wolfenstein 3-D (id Software) Comanche: Maximum Overkill (NovaLogic) Might & Magic: Clouds of Xeen (New World) Wizardry VII: Crusaders of the Dark Savant (Sir-Tech) V For Victory: Utah Beach (Three-Sixty) Battles of Destiny (QQP) Links 386 Pro (Access) 10. Front Page Sports Football (Dynamix) The Worst Games Youve Played (The Turkey List) We received a broad range of responses to our question, \"What's the worst game you've ever played?\" Few games escaped your wrath, including some of the products in our Hall of Fame. There was, however, some consensus on a few products, and so we submit this list of stinkers. Birds of Prey Blue Max (\"...the apex of embarrassment...') Codename: Iceman Das Boot Earl Weaver Baseball 2 (\"Damn shame.\") Fountain of Dreams (\"Wasteland 2? Ha!) Global Effect Heroes of the 357th John Madden Football 2 Mantis (\"(M)ost (A)ggravating (N)auseating (T)remendously (Irritating (S)im\") Megatraveller I Sim Earth (\"No Humans Necessary\") Terminator Ultimate Military Simulator (I & II (...watch a movie and eat dinner between moves.\") Wolf Pack Amiga Games Title and Source Police Quest III (Sierra On-Line) Leisure Suit Larry V (Sierra On-Line) A-10 Tank Killer (Sierra On-Line) 688 Attack Sub (Sierra On-Line) Kings Quest V (Sierra On-Line) Macintosh Games Title and Source Prince of Persia (Broderbund) Award Winners: KOV & Red Baron (Sierra On-Line) SimCity Supreme (Maxis) Microsoft Flight Simulator (Microsoft) Lemmings (Psygnosis) CD-ROM Products Rank ciri Rank Title and Source BattleChess (Interplay) Cinemania (Microsoft) Wing Commander/Secret Missions 1 & 1l (Origin) Sherlock Holmes, CD (ICOM) CD Game Pack (Software Toolworks) World View (Britannica) Kings Quest V (Sierra On-Line) Loom (Software Toolworks) Where in the World is Carmen Sandiego (Broderbund) Murmurs of the Earth (Warner New Media) 10. This list is based on units sold by Software Etc Babbages, Waldensoftware and Electronics Boutique. For more information, please contact PC Research at (703) 435-1025. Page 144 Computer Gaming World "


"The Patch File omputer game programs have grown so massive and the Quest For Glory III \"B\" Patch: Corrects all known game play number of possible configurations as become so huge errors. 12/03/92 that incompatibilities and glitches seem to be breeding at Railroad Tycoon Version 1.01 Update (Mac): The latest veran exponential rate. Consumers and publishers are both frustratsion for the Mac. 09/25/92 ed at the need for adding patches into \"buggy\" programs, but Rex Nebular Update 8.49 (IBM/VGA): Corrects the chickenthey seem to be an interim solution that is going to be with the bomb and poly-cement problems. 11/13/92 hobby for a while (presumably, until a standard platform configSimLife Upgrade V1.02c: Fixes minor problems. 12/16/92 uration is agreed upon). So, until the golden age of standardized platforms and bug-free programs, Computer Gaming World will Spelljammer Update V1.1: Latest version of the game. publish a regular list of the latest updates of which we are aware. 11/21/92 These patches can usually be downloaded from either Star Control 2 V1.1: Fixes several small problems. 12/11/92 Compuserve or GEnie, but can also be obtained from individual Stunt Island Update: Fixes a minor bug in the Install program software publisher's own BBSs and direct from the publisher that was causing some system lockups after the hardware autode(with proof of purchase). We continue to urge publishers to keep tect sequence. 11/27/92 uis updated on the latest versions/patches to their games. Stunt Island Beta-Test Patch: Beta version of the patch to fix the palette shift problem some users were experiencing. (Note: Air Force Commander Slowdown Patch: Makes the game Some companies release beta versions of their patches so that playable on high-powered machines. 11/24/92 interested users can help test them before official release.) Amazon Raft Bug Fix: Fixes the problem getting the raft out of 12/09792 the box in the airplane. 12/12/92 Tom Landry Football V. 1.02 Update: Corrects problems with B-17 Flying Fortress Version 2 Update: Adds many new feamodem play, excessive penalities, Sound Blaster problems, and tures and tweaks some of the existing ones. 11/17/92 improved animation choreography. 12/03/92 Civilization Update (Amiga): Latest version for the Amiga. Ultima Underworld Upgrade Bug Fix: Fixes disappearing item 09/12/92 problems. 07/04/92 Crisis in the Kremlin Version 1.01: Fixes problems reported by Ultima VII Keys Fix Patch: The fix for disappearing keys in users since its original release. 09/26/92 Ultima VII. 06/01/92 Crusaders of the Dark Savant Patch #2: Fixes the \"Don Wayne Gretzky Hockey 3 Version 1.10: Fixes many bugs, Barlone\" bug. 11/16/92 including the Canadien. VOC file, the computer scoring problem, Darklands Version 06: New features added, fixes various CH FlightStick problem, penalities, referees, coach's clipboard machine compatibility problems, corrects problems in earlier versions, and includes new/revised artwork for certain areas of the game. 09/24/92 The PRODIGY Weekly Top Ten Darkseed Version 1.5 Update: Latest version of CyberDreams adventure. 11/24/92 F-15 Strike Eagle III Install Update: For those having trouble The Game Center section of the PRODIGY network offers with the install program. 12/23/92 its users the chance to rate their favorite games on a weekly basis. CGW provides this data as yet another indicator of Falcon: Operation Fighting Tiger V3.01.1 Update: Contains new what's hot in gaming as determined by the player's votes. installer, a fix for blank screen lockup, escort mission failures, Please note that a PRODIGY rating is not a cumulative ratReg Flag buildings, PC Speaker sounds, ROE conflicts, B-52 ing, as in the CGW Top 100 Poll, and is based upon a crashes, ships in allied comm mode in Kurile Theatre, and othstraight 1-10 scale. ers. 10/13/92 Full Count Baseball V5.1 Upgrade: Expands play-by-play and offers a new screen layout. For owners of V5.0 only. 12/06/92 NY Greens Version 02 Update: Addresses the problems reported with scoring, Sound Blasters, etc. 11/22/92 Gunship 2000 Islands and Ice Version .08: Lastest version of the I&I scenario disk. 10/10/92 TOP TEN RANKED GAMES \"Week of Dec. 12 Dec 17 Harpoon Version 1.32 Upgrade: Latest IBM version of the AVR game. 11/14/92 RANK SCORE TITLE P RANK SCORE TITLE Island of Dr. Brain Update: Fixes «Ooops 10\" error, music room puzzle, and several other problems. 12/23/92 176 Wing Commander 2_ 6 I ndy Allani 2 ? Monkey Island 2 7 6.7 Star Treh -25 in Ann Jack Nicklaus Signature Edition Rev 1.5: Fixes the Mini-Moss 7 Ultima Underworld 8 65 Castles 2, effect caused by several objects being placed after a hill crest. 73_Wolfenstein 3-1 9 6.4 Links 12/16/92 2 Civilization 18 6.3 Aces of the Pacific Lightspeed Version 02 Update: Fixes the trade problem that some players have experienced. 11/17/92 Links 386 Pro Update Version 1.08: Allows game to run under CETTING AROUND OS/2 and other DPMI operating systems and software. 11/14/92 There's a whole new way to get around LOON Power Politics Update: Fixes all known bugs. 12/11/92 Menu X-ref Jumo Palh Tools Held Exit GANE PSELE AUR March 1993 Page 145 "


"eng gontomal They're Only Toys n uns don't settle anything,\" said Raymond Chandler's shamus supreme (Philip Marlowe) in his last novel Playback, \"they're just a fast curtain to a bad second act.\" Of course, Marlowe was not taking a stance against the use of guns per se, Chandler's famous private eye was very capable of handling them. He simply recognized that lots of folks in his fictitious Los Angeles (as well as the real Los Angeles) tended to use their weapons first and think second. If the quotation were taken completely out of context, however, one might think that Chandler was totally against the use of guns. In the same sense, a lot of people misunderstood the editorial position on violence in computer games which was presented in a two-part editorial. Again, the intent was not to condemn the use of violence in computer games, but merely to suggest that designers provide for the use of other solutions as well. After all, Marlowe talked himself out of a lot of difficult situations and came up with many creative ways to avoid the standard shoot-out schtick used by most private detectives and law enforcement officials in the novels of the day. So, it may surprise a lot of folks when they read this editorial. The recent film, Toys, simply cries out for a response. At first, there was some thought to writing a movie review of the film. Although it might seem an unusual thought, there is a precedent. CGW reviewed the film, Wargames, in the July-August 1983 issue. In the end, the editorial page seemed a better spot for discussion, since even the earlier article did not \"review\" its subject as much as editorialize upon it. The 1983 film used its plot to juxtapose two questions: \"Is this a game or is it real?\" and \"What's the difference?\" In Toys, we are led by the hand through fantastically breathtaking surrealist sets (with many tributes to Belgian artist, Rene Magritte especially the MTV sequence) toward the definitive proposition that war toys and video games are evil. In 1983, the computer gaming/hacker protagonist is a hero who stops a potential nuclear holocaust from occurring (after setting off the circumstances which made such horror possible). In Toys, video games and other war toys are perceived as desensitizing agents (indeed, training devices that make the war machine possible. In a very real sense, the computer gamer has come complete circle from amoral hacker/hero to insensitive villain/foil. The thesis of Toys would be absolutely ludicrous, did it not reflect a growing disposition against toy guns, military models, military miniatures and both traditional board and computer wargames. Indeed, the State of New York's Department of Health unilaterally ordered the makers of lead miniatures to \"immediately cease the sale and/or distribution of said products in New York State ...\" The Order for Summary Action cited the following as its rationale: WHEREAS, lead is an environmental poison for children and lead exposure is one of the most preventable childhood health problems in New York State today; and WHEREAS, environmental exposure to even low levels of lead increases a child's risk of developing permanent learning disabilities, reduced concentration and attentiveness and behavior problems; and WHEREAS, higher levels of lead can cause mental retardation, kidney disease, liver damage and even death; and WHEREAS, experimental results have shown that lead can be easily removed from figurine surfaces, and WHEREAS, during play, young children may ingest lead transferred from a figurine to the hands or by direct oral contact with a figurine; and that such exposure may result in elevated blood lead levels; and WHEREAS, the Commissioner of Health of the State of New York, after investigation, is of the opinion that the sale and/or distribution in New York State of figurines containing lead is an activity which constitutes an immediate danger to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the State of New York and that it also constitutes a nuisance affecting the security of life and health of the people; ... Perhaps, it is simply this miniatures gamer's imagination, but is it paranoid to think that the use of the term \"immediate danger\" and \"nuisance\" in this order is slightly prejudicial? Indeed, it seems especially prejudicial in a state which has not made landlords replace existing lead pipes (that carry water that is definitely ingested rather than the \"may ingest\" allegation in the order) or considered outlawing lead fishing sinkers as well as miniatures. How are lead miniatures more of a health nuisance than fishing sinkers? What about the lead in stained glass (another hobbyist pastime)? As for the health risk, Loren Wiseman of game publisher GDW notes that workers in miniatures are regularly tested for lead accumulation and show no more lead in their systems than the rest of the population. Surely, such a health risk should be obvious among the workers in the substance. This editor simply cannot help but believe that part of the hidden agenda in this executive order was because someone in the health department is concerned about the fact that most miniatures are war toys. As one wag noted, our computing equipment is made from toxic materials. The solder on the boards is 40% tin and 60% lead; the chips contain arsenic and the PVC wiring gives off toxic chlorine gas when burned. One wonders what excuses might be used to outlaw computer games as health hazards in the future. Perhaps, the basic problem is that people do not understand the function of \"play\" anymore. Play is an attempt to try out options with no authentic risk. There is simply enough risk to encourage one to think about actions both before and after perpetrating said actions. As that 1983 reviewer suggested in his review of Wargames, the value of play rests within its purpose. \"If the purpose is simply to win at any cost, the simulation is of doubtful value. If the purpose is to learn from both correct and incorrect hypotheses, then the simulation is of immense value.\" War, like guns (to paraphrase Chandler), may provide a fast curtain to a bad second act, but play is the activity where that is best learned. How are we going to learn without the opportunity? Cow Page 146 Computer Gaming World "


"SUBVERSIONTM 1.0 War has been declared! As Commander of the Attack Submarine \"Nautilus\", your mission is to engage any and all enemy vessels within the region and obliterate them. Warning! They are armed with high-tech equipment and they are out to sink you! Chase down and sink destroyers with either a speedy torpedo or a nuclear-tipped missile. Blow enemy submarines out of the water as they close in on you. Dodge the cumbersome but sensitive mines -snag a cable and it's off to a watery grave. Send out your frogmen for some demolition work. Watch your resources! With only two supply ships, you'll have to be careful. Use them unwisely and you may find yourself sinking helplessly towards an implosive end. SubVersionTM is a challenging balance of strategy and tactics. With 10 levels and over 300,000 combinations of game play, Sub Version is sure to provide you with hours of destroyer-bashing fun. Sulillors10n Sittalion llisplan Torpedo Sonar 2 1861 15 Status Ureu 16 Supply Denih TUD 56 Convert Engine 50:18 You destroyed 2 mines, Captain Nemo. You sank 2 destroyers, sir. Depth charges! Light damage Captain Nemo Your supply ship was sunk by gunfire! Score 470 Timer 0500 Ships 2-1 Level 5 nusilioru Controls Available for Macintosh and compatible machines. Coming soon for IBM PCs and other computer systems. Macintosh 16 color screen shown See your local retailer or call: Game Created by: Captain Byte's Bit Shop Point Of View Computing, Inc. Box Artwork by: Josh Stigers 5050 Edison, Suite 221 Computer Artwork by: Steve Laveirge Colorado Springs, CO 80915 719 591 5320 Copyright  1992 Captain Byte's Bit Shop. All rights reserved worldwide. SubVersion is a trademark of Point Of View Computing, Inc. Circle Reader Service #85 "


"he Thrilling Sequel to Computer Gaming World's Role-Playing Game of the Year! It's not just a dungeon game anymore! Ultima cerwG Labyrinth Worlds Ofi Wou see ENTS You SQ a hostile vosper You see a hostile dire reaper Vou see a honing dart. UNDERWORLD The Stygian Abyss\" was hailed as the first in a new generation of fantasy adventures. UNDERWORLD II Labyrinth of Worlds delivers a new, sharply realistic look. With smoother animation, more detailed creatures and a spacious view window, it's the most realistic gaming environment on a PC. The world of Underworld II is more varied and engaging than ever before. We've added new terrain features (like shifting floors, water currents and thin ice), new spells (like Shockwave and Portal), new and nastier traps and puzzles, and new creatures (we'll let you discover these for yourself...) Otoring satse You 56.hostieto Underworld Il takes you beyond the traditional dungeon environment. Deep in the earth, the Guardian's magic has cracked the walls of reality, opening the way to eight new worlds heyond Britannia: a city buried in ice, a floating castle, an ancient tomb and more... From the halls of Lord British's castle, it's time to carry the battle forward and into the LABYRINTH OF WORLDS... BELEASE U see a nearty You see UH lantern You see a red potion black potion. Actual screens may vary. ORIGIN We create worlds Available at a software retailer near you or call 1-800-245-4525 for MC/Visa/Discover orders. A Looking Glass Technologies Design An Electronic Arts Company P.O. BOX 161750  AUSTIN, TX 78716 Origin, Ultima and We create worlds are registered trademarks of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Underworld The Stygian Alyss and Lobyrinth of Worlds are trademarks of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. A Looking Glass Technologies is a trademark of A Looking Glass Technologies Design, Electronic Arts is a registered trademark of Electronic Arts. Circle Reader Service #82 "

