November 1987
Number 41

FEATURES
Wizardry IV: The Return of Werdna

10

The Review of a Long Awaited Game / Scorpia

Make Your Own Murder Party

14

Murder Party Games by Computer / James Trunzo

Titans Of The Computer Gaming World

16

A Look at Microprose Software / M. Evan Brooks

Christmas Buyers Guide

20

A "Want List" to Give to Your Santa

Stationfall

26

Scorpion's Tale Gives Playing Tips / Scorpia

The Ancient Art of War at Sea

28

Broderbund's New Wargame / Regan Carey

A Buyers Guide to Joysticks and Mice

35

The Joy of Input / Howard Falk

Borodino:1812 (Napoleon In Russia)

38

Krentek Software's New Napoleonic Wargame / M. Evan Brooks

Shadowgate

41

Inside Mindscape's Adventure Game / Tracie Forman Hines

Deep Space

42

Katana on a Hot Spinward Loop! / David M. Wilson

Leisure Suit Larry

44

The Slimier Things of Life / Roy Wagner

Nord and Bert Couldn't Make Head or Tails of It
Infocom's New "Liebrary" of Short Stories / Roy Wagner

DEPARTMENTS
Taking A Peek
Reader Input Device
Game Ratings

4
61
64

52

Activision, Inc.
2350 Bayshore Parkway
Mountain View, CA 94043
MANIAC MANSION: Hop into the
mystery mobile, but leave the silly
dog and "Scraggy" at home in this
sophisticated teen-age mystery from
Lucasfilm. This is primarily a menudriven animated adventure which
uses short, animated sequences
called "Cut-scenes" to advance the
action. The party can be divided and
directed independently in order to
explore the strange mansion more efficiently. Apple, C-64 ($34.95).
Circle Reader Service #60.
PAPER MODELS: THE
CHRISTMAS KIT: Here is an en-

joyable productivity tool that comes
with bells on (literally). The
program assists users in developing
gift boxes, gift holders, tree ornaments, a "Dickens Village" (Humbug!), and a "Holiday Train." The
program is a re-release of the 1986
holiday special and allows joystick
or keyboard input. Apple II, C-64,
IBM ($19.95). Circle Reader Service
#61
TOP FUEL ELIMINATOR: This
action/strategy program allows
players to experience the thrills and
strategy of drag racing without risk
to life and limb (or ears!). The
racing season involves nine events
on different tracks under different
conditions. Set the timing, mix the

fuel, adjust the clutch, change the
tire pressure, adjust the "wing," and
set the supercharger before you try
the action sequences. Apple, C-64
($29.95). Circle Reader Service #62.
Accolade, Inc.
20813 Stevens Creek Blvd.
Cupertino, CA 95014
MINI-PUTT: One to four people
can compete on the zany miniature
golf course provided in this new
product from Accolade. The game
plays smoothly as an arcade version
of miniature golf, but part of the fun
is figuring out the theme each hole is
built upon. For example, one hole
may represent a famous movie,
while the next may be built upon a

previous Accolade game or a
foreign country. C-64 ($29.95)
Circle Reader Service #63.
PINBALL WIZARD: Put on the
"Overture from Tommy," get out
your dusty Elton John albums, and
cover your eyes with some cool
shades. Now, you can be a "Pinball
Wizard" at home. Not only is this an
excellent computer pinball game
with responsive flippers, bumpers,
and tilt feature, but it has a built-in
construction set and option for
multi-player games. Atari ST, IBM
($34.95). Circle Reader Service #64.
Applications Plus, Inc.
15720 Harmony Way
Apple Valley, MN 55124
BEATING THE HOUSE AT
BLACKJACK: Either an entertain-

ing tutorial or an educational simulation, this product teaches the player
how to use the "Plus-Minus" system
in analyzing every possible "Blackjack" hand. If you have ever
wondered how those "card-counting"
systems work, here is a painless way
to learn without risking real money.
Apple, IBM, Macintosh ($34.95).
Circle Reader Service #65.
VEGAS VIDEO POKER: This
stimulating tutorial not only explains
the odds related to various strategies
at video poker, but allows players to
test the theories in the cauldron of
simulated experience. Sorry,
readers. There is no money-back
guarantee for money lost in Las
Vegas or Atlantic City, however.
Apple, IBM, Macintosh ($34.95).
Circle Reader Service #66.

Barnum Software
2201 Broadway, Suite 201
Oakland, CA 94612
THE QUARTER MILE: This
educational game looks like an arcade game, but is actually a competitive racing game based on mathematics problems from single digit addition through exponentiation.
Players cause their dragsters to accelerate by answering the problems
correctly. As skills improve, the competition becomes tougher. There is
even a high scores listing to encourage players toward excellence.
Apple ($45.00). Circle Reader Service #67.
Electronic Arts
1820 Gateway Dr.
San Mateo, CA 94404
DELTA PATROL: As the title indicates, players are responsible for

patrolling the Delta Sector in this
British arcade import. Delta Sector
is not your local fraternity row,
however. It is a junkyard of lost
ships where all the unsavory types in
the universe hang out. Your assignment is to terminate all the illicit forces hiding in the sector. C-64
($19.95). Circle Reader Service #68.
HOT AND COOL JAZZ: Used
with "Instant Music," this new library
disk can turn your living room into
New Orleans' famous Bourbon
Street. Used with "Deluxe Video,"
you can have the hottest business
presentation in the office or add a
soundtrack to your animated
movies. Amiga, Apple IIGS
($29.95). Circle Reader Service #69.
SANXION: You don't have to climb
the Eiger in order to defend the
world in this game. Players must
defeat alien drones in ten different
sectors and complete the training
course which follows the action in
each sector in order to reach the
rank of Sanxion Class 1 (sort of a
double 0 "license to kill?") and move
on to another adventure (The Dark
Side). C-64 ($19.95). Circle Reader
Service #70.
Epyx
600 Galveston Dr.
P.O. Box 8020
Redwood City, CA 94063
ARCTIC ANTICS: Otherwise
known as "Spy vs. Spy III," Epyx is
launching its mid-range "Maxx Out
Series" with two games licensed
from First Star Software. This game,
with its familiar characters from the
pages of "Mad" magazine, offers
split-screen arcade action enough to

heat up a "new cold war." Players
must find a launch card plus a
uranium cube and escape in a rocket
in order to win this chilling challenge. Apple, Atari 8 bit, Atari ST,
C-64, IBM ($24.95). Circle Reader
Service #71.
BOULDER DASH CONSTRUCTION KIT: If you are one of those
that will never forget Indiana Jones'
race against the boulder in "Raiders
of the Lost Ark," you can visualize
the idea behind this arcade adventure. Now, players can design their
own slaloms of spelunking suicide
with this software tool kit. Everything from amoebas to slime and butterflies to titanium walls is included.
Apple, Atari 8 bit, Atari ST, C-64,
IBM ($24.95). Circle Reader Service
#72.
RAD WARRIOR: Travel through
the mutated forest and explore three
distinct subterranean cities with
their toxic terrors in this British import for the "Maxx Out Series."
Players must find their own weapons
and, most importantly, the flying
anti-radiation suit which will enable
heroes to reach the nuclear power
source which must be destroyed.
Apple, Atari 8 bit, Atari ST, C-64,
IBM ($24.95). Circle Reader Service
#73.
Firebird
71 North Franklin Turnpike
Waldwick, NJ 07463
KNIGHT ORC: Three progressively
more difficult scenarios comprise
this new illustrated adventure. If you
are tired of killing orcs (or reading
all that bad publicity in Tolkien's
anti-orc propaganda), you'll want to

play this adventure where a lowly,
despised orc becomes a heroic
knight errant. Stunning graphics (almost impressionistic landscapes, at
times) and more interaction and puzzle-solving than "hack 'n slash" make
this an intriguing story. Apple,
Amiga, Atari ST, IBM, Macintosh
($44.95), C-64 ($39.95). Circle
Reader Service #74.
Mindscape, Inc.
3444 Dundee Road
Northbrook, IL 60062
DRUG ALERT!: This product is an
educational package designed to be
used in the classroom. It begins with
an interactive fiction adventure
based on drug abuse, but includes
various utilities to assist in discussion and testing for a school unit on
drug abuse. Apple ($39.95). Circle
Reader Service #75.
GAUNTLET: Thor, Questor, Merlin and Thyra come to life in this
adaptation (the first of many) of the
popular Atari arcade hit. Players explore various dungeon levels trying
to destroy ghosts, grunts, demons,
lobbers (cowardly assassins who
throw rocks over the dungeon walls
and onto the heroes), sorcerers, and
the Dark Prince himself, Death. If
the party collects enough magical
items and uses them successfully,
they can succeed. Atari 8 bit, Atari
ST, C-64 ($34.95). Circle Reader
Service #76.
PAPERBOY: This is the arcade
game used to sabotage the "good
guys" in "Police Academy 3." This
time, the players can be sabotaged
Continued on page 56

Scorpia is developing a tremendous following as a result of her
ability to offer hints on adventure games without
giving anything
vital away. Scorpia
recently served as
one of the betatesters for Wizardry
N. This has
enabled us to
present this intimate look at a
timely new product.

Wizardry IV is not quite like the previous games. In Proving Grounds, in
Knight Of Diamonds, in Legacy of
Llylgamyn, you took a team of adven-

Wizardry player. Its tricks and traps
are more of a psychological nature
than anything else. The more you think
you know, the more likely you are to
fall into one or more of
the devious little snares
that have been intentionally placed in the
game to trip you up.
While there will be
plenty of combat, this
is a game for the thinking player and you will
need to do a lot of
thinking.
For all that, Wizardry
IV is eminently fair and is perhaps,
one of the most finely-balanced games
I've ever played. Every puzzle, every
encounter, every clue (and yes, there
are many in the game) has been
worked out with careful exactitude.
While luck plays a small part, it is your
knowledge of Wizardry, your ability to
learn new ways of thinking, and your
attention to detail that will get you
through.
In essence, the game is a challenge to
the expert: "you think you're good,
here's where you prove it" and the
proof of the player is in the ending.
We'll come to that a little later, though.

Wizardry IV - The Return
of Werdna
by Scorpia

I

t was the Amulet of Power. Though it
was sought by many, it could only be
held by one, Werdna, evil mastermage. Deep in the recesses of a
treacherous dungeon, he labored unceasingly to unlock its secrets. Then
one day ... WHAM! The door flew
open! In burst a team of do-gooder adventurers! Mage-mashers sliced into
his body. Tiltowaits seared his flesh.
Overwhelmed by the fierce attack,
Werdna succumbed, gasping out a
final malediction as consciousness
fades away: "Curse you, Trebor! May
your soul never find peace!" Now, all
the mage knows is darkness. Defeated
but not dead, Werdna's helpless form
is buried in the bowels of the earth,
sealed into the bottom of a new dungeon, there to remain for all time.
Quiet years have passed. Trebor has
gone the way of all mortals. Yet, down
below, in a solitary tomb ... an
awakening takes place. Werdna lives
again and he has not forgotten.
Through all the long, dark years, he
has not forgotten. Werdna wants his
amulet back and he is coming up to
get it.

A Wait is Lifted
from the myth of vaporware
Atot last,
the reality of diskware comes
Wizardry IV - The Return of Werdna.

After so long a wait, the one question
in everyone's mind is: "Has the wait
been worth it?"
The answer is a resounding "Yes!".
Be prepared, though, because

A Bier Less Filling
turers into the dungeons. You fought
endless hordes of monsters, gained experience, and eventually found
whatever it was you were supposed to
find, after which you came back to the
cheers of the crowd and received
awards for valor. These games were essentially hack-and-slash epics.
Wizardry IV, at first glance, may seem
to be from the same mold, even
though you are taking the part of the
"bad guy." Werdna starts at the bottom
of the traditional 10-level Wizardry
dungeon, and makes his way upward,
intent on retrieving his Amulet. Along
the way, he will contend with traps, pitfalls, puzzles, and teams of do-gooder
adventurers, all neatly designed to
stop him in his tracks, one way or
another.
There is more, however, much more
than meets the eye here. This game
was designed expressly for the expert

t all starts in a tiny two-by-two room
I where Werdna, lying upon his cold
stone bier, has just awakened from
years of a nightmarish suspended
animation. He is weak. He is alone. He
is ten levels under the earth with a
long way to go in front of him, a very
long way.
A lesser person might be daunted by
all that, but not Werdna. As someone
once said, "The longest part of any
journey is the first step", and it is only
a step to an object that is one of the
keys to the game: the pentagram.
Obviously, Werdna, being an outcast,
is not going to have adventurers for
companions. Who, then, can he call on
to help him? Why, monsters, of
course! Through the medium of the
pentagrams scattered throughout the
dungeon, Werdna can summon an impressive variety of nasty critters to
fight for him.

Each level has its own set of
monsters, 12 different ones in all,
making a total of 120 to choose from
by the time you get up to level 10. On
any level, you can summon creatures
from that one or below.
Each summoning will gate in three
different types of monsters (sorry, you
cannot have two or more of the same
kind). You choose the ones you want,
although you have no control over how
many of each will answer the call. Indeed, some monsters come only one at
a time and you'll never be able to have
more than one of them (demon lords,
for instance). However, it will be quite
a while before you will be able to get
one of those!
The pentagrams also have two other
functions: renewing Werdna's hit
points and raising his magical ability.
Each time Werdna reaches the pentagram on a new level, he gains
another level of spells and his hit
points increase by ten, until he reaches
the maximum of seventh-level spells
and 100 hit points. Think of it as
another incentive for upward mobility.
So, having stepped on his first pentagram (an event that cannot really be
described in words, you have to experience it for yourself), Werdna is off
on his travels through one of the most
treacherous dungeons ever devised. By
no means is it linear, however. There is
a lot of running back and forth between levels here. Solving a puzzle on
one level may require an item or items
from a level several floors up (or
down, or both). In fact, the last three
levels together form the interconnected area known as the Cosmic
Cube, where one mis-step could cause
you to wander around for a very long
time, indeed.
A Trebor in Your Mist

perience points, since your "level
gains" come from the pentagrams.
However, these adventurers often
carry around all sorts of nifty little
items, as well as gold. Some of those
items are crucial to success in the
game, others are just good to have, for
their magical or defensive qualities.
Gold is crucial, too.
You may well wonder why gold is crucial. Obviously, Werdna isn't going to
be doing much shopping in the nether
regions. But there is the Wandering
Oracle of Mron. He pops up at random times, and if you can catch him,
for a mere (!) 10,000 gold pieces, he'll
give you a vague, ambiguous hint
about something or other. What that
"something or other" is, you have to
determine for yourself, as the hints are
in no particular order and a clue you
get on level three may apply to something on level ten. It pays to keep track
of these hints.
Also, while Werdna is fighting adventurers, running frantically after the
Oracle, sweating over puzzles, and
overcoming obstacles, he needs to
keep an eye (or rather, an ear) out for
one other thing, perhaps the one thing
he fears most. It is a ghostly whisper,
floating out of the darkness: "
W-e-r-d-n-a ." Trebor may be dead, but he
isn't quite gone. Remember that
curse? Well, it certainly did its job.
Now Trebor's restless spirit roams the
dungeon corridors, ever eager to get
its hot little ectoplasmic hands on
Werdna. Should that happen, poor
Werdna gets sent back to his starting
point on level one. Nasty, very nasty.
In spite of it all, Werdna perseveres.
Through crowds of adventurers, past
the ghost of Trebor, around sly
obstacles, inch by inch, level by level,
he claws his way up . . . up . . . and out!
Then, when he gets out, the second
half of the game begins.

hile you're doing all this running
W
around, of course, you will also
be running into people who don't like

The End Justifies Extremes

you (you know, do-gooder adventurers, the sort that stole the Amulet
from you in the first place. They are all
ready, willing, and able to beat on you
and send you back to your tomb).
Now, defeating these adventurers does
not, of course, bring you any ex-

you
didn't think it was over, just beYou
you got out of the dungeon,
did you? Ho! Ho! Ho! The best part is
just starting! Now you're into the heart
of the game, for here you stand (figuratively speaking) at a junction of
pathways, each leading to a different ending.

Oh yes, there is more than one ending to Wizardry IV. How many I
won't say. That is your job to discover.
I will tell you this, though. There is one
ending that can be called the best. Roe
Adams, the devious designer, estimates that only about 5% of the
players will ever reach it. Those who
do will be well-entitled to call themselves Wizardry Grand Masters, a very
select group.
Since Wizardry IV is somewhat of a
long-playing game, you have the ability
to save in the dungeon. This has its
good points and its bad points. The
good points, of course, are the ability
to save in the first place and provision
of a means of easily retracing your
steps if you happened to miss something earlier, which is likely.
The bad points have to do with the
adventurers along the way. Each level
has only a finite number of these
troublemakers and once they're all
(ahem) taken care of, there are no
more to fight on that level, except in
two cases. If you leave that level and
return, the adventurers "come back to
life" again. They also come back to life
when you save the game, because
saving the game also ends play, which
is the same as leaving the level.
Therefore, you are continually faced
with the decision of when and where
to save position. If you've just picked
up a choice item after a hard battle
with a powerful team, should you save
or not? Saving guarantees you the
item, but will bring back that same
team, plus any others you may have already defeated. It is not always an easy
decision to make.
This is one of the features of the
game that I had trouble accepting. If
you have made your way halfway
through a level and have to stop and
save for whatever reason, the same adventurers you've already killed before
are back to plague you again when you
restore (and some of them can be pretty nasty).
Now, there is a reason for that. As
noted earlier, many of the adventurers
carry important items, some critical to
solving the game. Suppose you have no
room for an item at the time, inadvertently drop it, or have it stolen from
you? (After all, there are thieves out
there, and they will steal from you if
(Continued on page 62)

for each guest. These materials include clue booklets, guest profiles,
host materials, invitations and their envelopes. Additionally, MYOMP prints
floor plans of the surroundings where
the murder took place. All of the
printed material is quite legible and
gives a professional appearance to
your work.
Is the program simple to use? Absolutely. With some of the best
documentation seen on the software
front, MYOMP gives new meaning to
the cliche "user-friendly." If you can
read the screen, you can use this
product.
The program is loaded with little extras, too. For example, before you
"cast" your little production, you might
like to know more about the characters whom your guests will be portraying. By highlighting one of the characters to be used in the game, you get an
"up close and personal" look at the
type of person he or she is. This better
enables you to select a friend with a
personality most like (or unlike, as the
case may be) the character being
recreated.

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

Make Your Own Murder Party
Apple II/IBM/Commodore 64/128
(Requires 64K)
Ron Martinez, Bill Herdle and AnnByrd Platt
Electronic Arts
San Mateo, CA

One of the hottest fads among
now that everyone is suffering from trivia burnout, is hosting a
murder party. If you are aren't up on
what's "in," a murder/mystery party is
an elaborate game that is best
described as part role-playing and part
detective game. A group of six to eight
people assume roles (i.e. the
debutante, the playboy, the professor,
the starlet) and, with the aid of clues
and deductive reasoning, arrive at a
solution to a startling murder. Normally, the host - who can also be one of
the players and is also "in the dark" as
to which one of *hisguests is the murderer - builds the "production" around
a dinner party, making for an enjoy-

able and unique evening of entertainment. Previously, a murder/mystery
party kit could only be obtained
through a book, department or toy
store. A kit of this nature would contain all the elements needed to play
the "game": invitations, scripts, clue
sheets, hints on how to conduct a party
of this type, and sometimes, cassette
tapes with information vital to the plot.
Now, thanks to the Make Your Own
Murder Party (MYOMP) program
from Electronic Arts, a murder party
kit can be generated through the use
of your home computer. Once the
creation of the materials is completed,
however, a computer is not needed to
play the game.
MYOMP contains two fully
developed murder mysteries, each of
which can be randomized to produce
eight different outcomes. By answering a series of questions and responding to a series of prompts, the user can
produce a complete set of materials

The manual, as previously mentioned, is another highlight of this
package. Not only does it clearly and
concisely explain how to use
MYOMP, it also gives a thorough explanation of how to host such a party,
going so far as suggesting dinner
menus that might be used.
So what's the catch? Well, there is a
small one. Because of the volume of
materials that need printed, you can
look forward to a lengthy session at
the printer (not that you have to oversee it, unless you are using special
single sheet paper). A typical party
generation with a printer that does 150
to 180 cps would take between 1 hour
and 15 minutes to 1 hour and 30
minutes. However, MYOMP is worth
the wait. Electronic Arts has produced
yet another product worthy of your attention. Considering that a typical
boxed or packaged game of this type
runs anywhere from fifteen to twentyfive dollars and can only be used once,
MYOMP is a bargain at a suggested
retail of $32.95 for the C64/128 and
$39.95 for the Apple and IBM versions.

Titans
of the
Computer
Gaming
World
in the northern suburbs of Baltimore,
N estled
Maryland and adjacent to the McCormick spice

plants, Microprose simulation software is producing
some of the hottest spices extant in the computer
market. The gleanings herein are the result of interviews held with company staff personnel. I would like
to thank the following individuals for their time and assistance: Bill Stealey (President), Sid Meier (Senior
Vice-President), and Mike Harrison (Public Relations).

One for the Money!
The beginnings of Microprose has been enumerated
in countless other articles. Beginning as a local Atari
User Group, the company was the brainchild of Sid
Meier (creative design) and Bill Stealey (marketing).
From its humble beginnings, Microprose has
developed into a company
with $10 million sales in
by M. Evan Brooks
1986; sales for 1987 are expected to increase by 50%.
(Continuing a Series begun by
Even more impressive is
Charles Ardai)
the fact that Microprose
has been profitable since
its second month of existence.
Bill Stealey defines the company philosophy as follows:
(1) Are we having fun yet?
(2) Are we making any money while we're having all
this fun?
Sid Meier does the conception, while Bill Stealey
does the selling. Although Bill likes to be involved in
product development and notes that the deck gun in
Silent Service was his contribution, Bill's salesmanship
skills could well increase per capita refrigerator sales
in the Aleutians. For example, one of Microprose's earliest designs, Floyd of the Jungle, utilized all four Atari
joystick ports. Bill claimed that it was too sophisticated
for the market at the time and that he could sell it,
while no one else could. Regardless, for colorful
quotes, Bill is the celebrity at Microprose. In line with

Bill's background as a fighter pilot and the
company's involvement with flight
simulators, Microprose recently acquired
a T-28 trainer aircraft as the corporate
plane.
Both Bill and Sid note that when the fun
stops, it will be time for a change. Nevertheless, Microprose aims to produce the
"best, and not the most" new products. It
seeks high quality and feels that sales will
continue to grow, based on prior experience by consumers, word of mouth
and reviews/advertising. All development
is done in-house for two reasons: outside
designers are not felt to be as innovative
and prior experience with an outside designer proved
less than optimal (The product, based on F-15, fell
through and the designer approached another company with a "similar"-type product, resulting in another
product).
Despite Microprose's size, growth has been accomplished at an intentionally conservative rate. Bill
Stealey attributes this to his fighter pilot background.
Wait a minute - fighter pilots as conservatives? Bill's
reply is that "Of course fighter pilots are conservative.
We wait until we accumulate sufficient data and then
we wax the bad guys." Thus, Microprose has no longterm debt financing, and is a closely-held profit-sharing corporation. Refusing to release any product
before its time, Bill notes that somewhere in the company "vaults" are seven suspended game designs in
various stages of completion, but no hints of subject
matter were forthcoming.

Target Verification
Sid Meier states (with tongue firmly in cheek) that
the target audience is composed of 18-40 year old
"semi-mature to mature males," bringing to mind the
adage that he who dies with the most toys wins. In
order to reach the desired audience, Microprose targets approximately 90% of its advertising budget
(which constitutes 10% of the company's budget) to
computer magazines. Fred Schmidt (Marketing Director) notes that other usages are inefficient in terms of
reaching users. Recent articles in Time and Business
Week have spotlighted Microprose, but the cost to
reach purchasers in those magazines is simply cost ineffective at present. Aeronautical and military magazines
were considered for advertising, but it is difficult to
determine the number of computer user subscribers.
Microprose is currently designing games according
to the following machine priorities:
(1) C-64 and IBM (it is anticipated that IBM-type
machines will constitute the #1 priority within the next
2 years)
(2) Apple
(3) The Rest (ST/Amiga/II-GS, and to a much lesser
extent, the 8-bit Atari).

As Macintosh gains further business acceptance,
entertainment software will move in via the back door.
Therefore, Microprose is keeping close tabs on this
market.
Many Atari publications have noted the imminent
publication of Gunship for the 8-bit line. These
rumors/reports are false. Atari sales (both direct and
through distribution channels) are simply too limited
to justify conversion.

Silent Service went gold (100,000 copies sold) and
platinum (250,000 sales) the quickest, although
Microprose notes that more conversions were available. As to why there is no save option in the Patrol
Scenario, Sid admits this was a flaw. However, at the
time, he felt it was too dangerous to continuously write
to the game disk. In retrospect, he would have allowed
the save option.

Yo! No! Ho! Ho! No Pirate's Life For Me!
Return Fire
Microprose takes feedback seriously. Response cards
are carefully read and considered. The company
prides itself on user loyalty, and has taken pains to
remedy past omissions. However, do not call and ask
for access codes. Users are welcome, but pirates are
not.
Every Thursday night, the staff gathers to review comments and reviews. This feedback is utilized in order to
make policy decisions. Of course, this editor could not
resist asking Sid Meier's opinion on his reviews. He
suggested that this editor's reviews were atypical of
most consumers in that too much historicity is expected of the product and the products are measured
against a utopian standard.

The Wright Stuff
F-15, still a major seller, developed the basic tools
which has led to many other products. Pirates has appealed to more female gamers than earlier products.
They appreciate the puzzle and analytical aspects of
games. In fact, Pirates began 2 years ago and was put
on hold. Twice as much code as was actually used in
the game was developed. Initial plans included different town characters (4-5 per town), more intricate
sailing (involving semi-fleet actions) and a religious vs.
nobility sub-plot. All of these concepts were eventually
dropped because of memory and playability restrictions.
Similarly, Gunship was initially conceived as a Blue
Thunder terrorist/medevac/cops and robbers type
simulation. However, urban graphics proved difficult
and with the tools developed from F-15, improved
graphics offered the opportunity to expand to a
military-type simulation.
This editor queried the staff as to Gunship and the
Medal of Honor. Since few users have ever achieved
this rating, it would appear to be a difficult task. Sid
feels that people should not be playing the scoring
equations, but rather they should "be out there - blasting Commies!" Designer Arnold Hendrick offers these
contrapuntal comments: "Rank is immaterial for the
Medal of Honor, but time is critical. Both missions
must be accomplished within 20 minutes and a landing
for repairs just about ends one's chances since it is a
20-25 minute process." Well, back to the flight line for
this editor!

One could not expect a computer design company to
be apathetic about piracy, although Sid Meier has
grown less emotional about the issue.
"It's a fact of life and, possibly, piracy allows some people to see some of our
products they would have missed otherwise ... and later, they will, hopefully,
become purchasers."
On the other hand, Bill Stealey still appears to be an advocate of capital
punishment for computer pirates and
he is just as upset over cloning within
the software industry. He notes that
Epyx developed an interesting game
("Summer Games") and then cloned it
ad nauseam ("Winter Games," "World
Games," "Indoor Games," "Outdoor
Games," etc.). Even more outrageous,
Bill believes that ActionSoft has followed up on Microprose titles as follows: F-15 (Jet), Silent Service (Up Periscope), Gunship (Thunder Chopper), Stealth Fighter (Stealth).
While Jet was published by subLogic, Bill claims that
any distinction between the two entities is "bull." Sid
Meier does not feel that game cloning is a viable
market strategy. Eventually, the consumer will seek
originality and not copies of earlier efforts. Thus,
Microprose is very close-mouthed about future
projects; as Sid notes "Just because we're paranoid,
doesn't mean that no one is following us."

Future Stock
Gunship (IBM) was in final production stages the
day this editor visited the company. Release date was
scheduled for 15 September. The new releases, Stealth
Fighter, Airborne Ranger, and and Pirates (IBM) are
scheduled for an October release.
The new products are in keeping with Microprose
standards. Stealth Fighter appears to be an amalgam of
F-15 and Gunship. The graphics keep improving and
mission accomplishment requires masking one's
electronic emissions as much as possible. This flight
simulator will require one to keep a low profile and
should prove very interesting. If you thought gunship
had a full panoply of weapons systems, wait for stealth
fighter. Utilizing an advanced "historic" gunsight to
allow crossing ("deflection") shots, this product should

prove very popular. The design staff noted that ground
colors pose a problem due to excessive memory requirements, but since most of the action takes place at
high altitudes, this should not be a severe fault. With
259 separate missions, it will be a while before the possibilities are exhausted. Again, Microprose has included the "tag" at the conclusion of the mission. One
is in the Officer's Club: surrounded by his peers, if successful, and drinking despondently alone, if unsuccessful.
Airborne Ranger is more of an arcade-type simulation
a la Rambo. As an Airborne Ranger, one must drop
into enemy territory, carry out the mission and be extracted within strict time
limits. There are 12 separate missions,
involving temperate, arctic and desert
areas. No jungle or urban combat is
offered because tall structures simply consume too much memory. While this
editor normally plays detailed military
historical simulations, he must admit
that Airborne Ranger lo ked very interesting. Bill Stealey observes that people
will be surprised at how well one can
take an arcade game and add strategic
elements. How true this is may be
debatable; but the arcade aspects alone
should be sufficient to make Airborne
Ranger a hit.
A space simulation is in early design stages. Already
announced in Microprose's catalogue, the title is still
"Top Secret." When this editor asked Bill if it was
analogous to Star Fleet Empires" (a board game), Bill
grew quite defensive and wanted to know the source of
such information. Therefore, it may reasonable to anticipate a strategic space operetta a la Reach for the
Stars."

Red Storm Rising, based on Tom Clancy's novel, is
Microprose's first licensed product. While Microprose
was reticent about discussing the design (other than to
state that it had both strategic and tactical aspects),
this editor found additional details from Larry Bond.
Mr. Bond, a noted board wargame designer, assisted
Tom Clancy with Red Storm Rising. Thus, Red Storm
Rising will be a modern submarine simulation, covering both nuclear and diesel boats, with an anticipated
release date of early 1988.
Finally, Bill Stealey hinted that Microprose is working on a hardware enhancement in order to improve
the computer simulation environment. What does this
mean? Your guess is as valid as mine!!

Overseas Reconnaissance
Microprose has recently opened a London office
(now staffed with 30 personnel), as well as a Paris

branch. Overseas sales account for 10% of total
revenues. With its distribution channels being handled
in-house, joint ventures have been announced with
Origin Software (Ultima), Springboard (Newsroom),
Berkeley Softworks (Geos) and Suncom (joysticks) for
overseas marketing.
The largest difficulty in marketing overseas is the nature of the software market. The European pattern has
been to market inexpensive arcade-type products with
a shelf life of 2-3 weeks. Microprose products have a
much longer shelf life. For example, F-15 is posting its
largest sales in 1987, four years after its initial release.
Products are cheaper (c. 15%) due to ad rates and
cost of living, but Microprose has recently adjusted its
pricing structure to reflect equivalent prices in this
country and abroad.
While Bill Stealey notes the potential of the overseas
market, he also remarks on the cyclical sales trends. In
the United States, the trend was from arcade to adventure to simulations; Europe has gone from arcade to
simulations, while Japan has gone from arcade to adventure. When queried as to the viability of foreign
markets, Bill characterized them as follow:
(1) Great Britain: possesses a large user-installed
base. Spectrum, C-64 and Amstrad account for 84% of
the market. Heavy cassette utilization (e.g. of 100,000
Gunship sales, 80% have been on cassette) is still the
primary format.
(2) Germany: mainly C-64, Atari ST and Amstrad
(3) France: mainly Amstrad and Atari ST
(4) Japan: recently, Microprose signed a distribution
agreement with Systemsoft. Even though Lode Runner
sold thousands of copies in Japan, it required 34 conversions! There is simply no common machine and this
aspect, coupled with the difficulty of cracking the tight
Japanese distribution channels mean that entry into
this market is in the initial stages at present.

One Man's Microporno .. .
As has been reported previously (Computer Game
Forum #1, several Microprose products have been
banned from normal sale in Germany (note that German sales only account for 1% of total revenues).
Under a law initially passed in 1953, "works liable to
corrupt the young" which are deemed to be "immoral,
brutalizing, inciting violence, crime, racial hatred or
which glorify war" can be severely restricted. Such
restrictions include prohibition of advertising and displays and restrictions of sale to areas where minors are
denied entry. In effect, this has the chilling effect of
restricting sales to adult-type shops which specialize in
a totally different entertainment field. Thus, current
sales may well be restricted to "Dr. Muller's Shops"
along the Kaiserstrasse.
Only 30 computer titles have been banned, among
them Activision's River Raid. Both F-15 and Silent Ser(Continued on Page 54)

elcome to the CGW Christmas
Buying Guide. We know that,
given a choice, most of you would
rather get great
software rather
than a new sweater
during the
Christmas season.
This article should
serve as a software
"wish book" in order
to help you "hint"
more effectively this
Christmas season.
Place this article
under your wife's
pillow for maximum
subliminal effectiveness or hand her a
copy directly when
she asks what you
want Mrs. Santa to
bring you. We
thought it would be
most helpful to let
the companies tell
you about their
products, first.
Then, in most cases,
we give you a brief
note from our
perspective. Finally,
we note the formats
available and
prices. The term,
"Many" refers to
three or more formats with the identical price. The
Reader Service
Number is to be
used with the
Reader Inquiry Service Card at page 8.

W

races that become increasingly more difficult." - Loretta Stagnitto, Activision.
Amiga ($39.95), C-64/128 ($29.95).

ship Football is the game for you. Unlike any other football simulation, the
program provides players with
on-the-field and in-the-helmet perspectives and
features scrolling
screen animation
that makes you feel
like you are really
there." - Loretta Stagnitto, Activision.
Playing this game
really helps to
provide the player
with a new respect
for a running back's
difficulty in "finding
the hole" and a
quarterback's challenge in "reading
the defense." Its
perspective is unique. Amiga
($44.95), Apple,
Atari ST, IBM
($39.95), C-64/128
($34.95). Circle
Reader Service #11.

Christmas

Activision:
GEE BEE AIR
RALLY: "Game

THE LAST
NINJA: "The Last

Buyers Guide

players who flock to
the arcades to test
their driving skills on games like Pole
Position or Outrun will love Gee Bee
Air Rally. The game takes racing to the
sky and offers players sixteen different

Ninja is not just a
new martial arts
game. In fact, it
brings a new level of
adventure gaming
and graphics to the
category. The story is
compelling being
based on an ancient
Japanese legend,
and you have never
before seen such
great graphics on the
C-64/128." - Loretta
Stagnitto, Activision.
There is no exaggerating the graphic
excellence of this
product. C-64/128
($34.95). Circle
Reader Service #12.

Avalon Hill:
Circle Reader Service #10.
GFL CHAMPIONSHIP FOOTBALL: "If you know a football fan who

has wondered what it would be like to
be a pro, Gamestar's GFL Champion-

COMPUTER DIPLOMACY: "Even
though this game came out a couple of
years ago on the IBM, it doesn't look
like it. Many boardgame Diplomacy

players are using it to referee their faceto-face games. The new C-64 version
will have different players, that is, skills,
and a "Diplomatic Pouch" option to
enable players to negotiate in secret.
Diplomacy is a classic which translates
well into the computer format." - William Peschel, Avalon Hill.
The computer version facilitates the
adjudication of a game
which is still, at its best,
more of a social event than
a game. The computer opponents simply stay the appetite of zealous Diplomacy
players until they can
gather flesh and blood victims around their computer
screens. C-64/128, IBM
($50.00). Circle Reader Service #13.
NBA: "NBA is the basketball game for any true sports
fan. There is a lot to like
about the game from the
twenty great teams included
to the ability to save statistics. Also, in solitaire mode,
the computer provides a
great opponent." - William
Peschel, Avalon Hill.
This new offering is the
first computer game to combine graphics and statistics
routines in a basketball game. It
would have been nice were the
stat-compiler in the game was a
full-season compiler; unfortunately it
can only handle up to a three game
series. Apple, C-64/128 ($39.95).
Circle Reader Service #14.
UNDER FIRE: "The IBM version of
Under Fire is totally rewritten from the
Apple version in order to take advantage of the machine. The addition of
subtle nuances, graphics compatibility
and improved speed of play make it superior to its predecessors." - William Peschel, Avalon Hill.
This is a game system conceived in
flexibility and designed to improve
with future expansion. Apple, IBM
($59.95). Circle Reader Service #15.

Broderbund:
ANCIENT ART OF WAR AT SEA:

"The sequel to Ancient Art of War is a

real-time strategy simulation of sailing
vessels battling on the high seas. It is certain to be a success." - Ulla Thomsen,
Broderbund.
AAWS offers a powerful editing system and an enjoyable, playable game
to garners who want to design historical battles based on John Paul Jones
or Lord Nelson (as well as fictional

market at a welcome low price. Apple,
C-64/128 ($14.95 ea.). Circle Reader
Service #18.

Electronic Arts:
CHUCK YEAGER'S ADVANCED
FLIGHT TRAINER: "The technology

used in this product represents a giant
leap forward in flight simulation and gives the user a
chance to test and fly with
real and experimental
aircraft at mach speeds." Bing Gordon, Electronic
Arts.
This flight simulation allows the user to participate
in the history of modern
flight from biplanes to sleek
experimental models. IBM
($39.95). Circle Reader Service #19.
EARL WEAVER
BASEBALL: "[EWB offers]

battles based on Bolitho, Hornblower,
and Ramage). IBM ($49.95). Circle
Reader Service #16.
CAULDRON: "Cauldron is an
animated arcade game, with sequel included where both programs feature
magic, witches, and the evil 'Pump
King.' According to arcade aficionados,
this one is a challenging long-playing
game. It's different!" - Ulla Thomsen,
Broderbund.
Cauldron is an interesting arcade
game imported from England to compete in the mid-range of current
software prices. C-64/128 ($29.95).
Circle Reader Service #17.
CHOPLIFTER/DAVID'S MIDNIGHT MAGIC: "Value Priced

Software includes quality titles that have
already demonstrated exceptional critical and consumer acceptance . . . [and]
. . .will give consumers exceptional
value." - Latricia Turner, Broderbund.
Both of these games are arcade classics and worthy of further exposure to

a variety of innovative ways
for players to participate in
the national pastime, from
straightforward hit and run
action to using all the insights of Earl Weaver and
major league strategy." - Bing
Gordon, Electronic Arts.
We said it in April of 1987
and nothing has changed our minds,
"Undoubtedly the most exciting sports
simulation in years, Earl Weaver
Baseball has it all." Amiga, IBM
($44.95). Circle Reader Service #20.
LEGACY OF THE ANCIENTS:

"Great graphics and sound make
[Legacy] one of the richest experiences
available to adventurers." - Joe Ybarra,
Electronic Arts.
Legacy of the Ancients is an advancement by the design team which created
Questron. This adventure makes more
lavish use of color than its predecessor
and contains 24 dungeon levels, 12
towns, five actions games, and "combat
training centers" where characters can
build up their points. C-64/128
($29.95). Circle Reader Service #21.

Infocom:
BUREAUCRACY: "Anyone who has
had to deal with red tape and boorish

clerks will identify with this humorous
adventure in Bureaucracy from the
mind of Douglas Adams, creator of the
famed Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy
series." - Mike Dornbrook, Infocom.
A linear adventure with some very
tough puzzles in the midst of some incredible madness. Many ($39.95).
Circle Reader Service #22.

AIRBORNE RANGER: This "action
simulation" features man-to-man combat behind enemy lines, as though it
were a Commando or Rambo with
strategy included. C-64/128 ($34.95).
Circle Reader Service #25.
PIRATES: Once one gets past their
initial feeling that they've played this
game before (there are some

INFILTRATOR II: The
sequel to the best-selling Infiltrator places the player in
the role of Captain Johnny
"Jimbo Baby" McGibbits,
once again. Infiltrator II offers three completely new
ground missions as players
fly their Gizmo DHX-1 Attack Helicopters behind
enemy lines in search of the
Mad Leader's new (and
presumably improved)
headquarters. C-64/128
($29.95). Circle Reader Service #29.

NORD AND BERT
COULDN'T MAKE HEAD
OR TAIL OR IT: "You'll

challenge your wits and your
memory to come up with the
cliches, spoonerisms, and
other verbal trickeries
needed to complete the puzzles." - Mike Dornbrook, Infocom.
This is a sophisticated
game for mature people
who like wordplay. See Roy
Wagner's review in this
issue. Many ($39.95). Circle
Reader Service #23.
PLUNDERED HEARTS:

"If you'd rather be a heroine
than a hero, this 17th century adventure where the
seas were as wild as the untamed heart of a young
woman may be just the
passport to Caribbean excitement." Mike Dornbrook,
Infocom.
This is Infocom's first adventure designed by a
woman for a predominantly
female audience. If you can
give up the computer long
enough, this might be the perfect gift
for your "significant other" so that she
can understand why interactive fiction
is so fascinating. Many ($39.95). Circle
Reader Service #24.

Microprose:
"I think we have some new and innovative game designs in Pirates, the adventure simulator, and Airborne Ranger,
the action simulator. Something a little
interesting for Christmas. Of course, our
latest flight simulation, Stealth, continues the Microprose tradition of excellence. In short, we have something for
everyone." - Sid Meier, Microprose.

value. Three top quality products packaged and ready to go." - Karen Novak,
Mindscape.
Three different gift assortments from
the already economical Thunder
Mountain line of Mindscape make this
a potentially awesome Christmas purchase. C-64/128, IBM ($39.95). Circle
Reader Service #28.

SUPERSTAR SOCCER:

similarities in looks to Seven Cities of
Gold and Broadsides), Pirates will
prove to be a design with fresh approaches and much historical depth. It
is an intriguing and addictive game. C64/128 ($39.95). Circle Reader Service
#26.
STEALTH: This is a tremendous opportunity to engage in technological
speculation from a perspective of
adrenal exhilaration. This is the closest
most readers will get to the "Stealth"
aircraft in their lifetime. C-64/128
($39.95). Circle Reader Service #27.

Mindscape:
HOLIDAY STOCKING: "It's a great

"If you know Superstar Ice
Hockey, you can rest assured
that the "Superstar" series
will continually be presented
in that light. In Superstar
Soccer, we have developed
the most in-depth data base
ever to attempt the most
comprehensive sports
simulation ever, enabling
you to be coach, general
manager, or player." - Ed
' Ringler, designer. C-64/128
($39.95). Circle Reader Service #30.

Strategic Simulations, Inc.:
PHANTASIE III: "No one who has
played the previous two games in this
series will want to miss this one, the
final confrontation with the wicked
Nikademus." - Joel Billings, SSI.
Six new spells have been added
which are used in conjunction with
bow combat and there are a few new
wrinkles in this conclusion to the
CRPG trilogy. Amiga, Apple, Atari
ST, C-64/128 ($39.95). Circle Reader
Service #31.
PRESIDENT ELECT 1988: "This

product is a timely offering which is
stimulating both as an entertainment
product and learning tool." - Joel Billings, SSI.
This game design enables players to
manage presidential campaigns for
real candidates in profile or to run for
the White House as oneself. This is the
simulation CGW used to predict the
exact electoral count of the
1984 election more than two
years before it took place!
[Ed.: Those of you that are
lucky enough to have a
copy of the first issue of
CGW (Nov. 1981, Vol. 1
No. 1) can check out the
election results on page 23
of that issue.] Apple, C64/128, IBM ($24.95).
Circle Reader Service #32.

This product offers outstanding
graphics and the potential to "hook"
every Pole Position fan from Maine to
California. Amiga, Atari ST ($44.95),
C-64 ($29.95), IBM ($39.95). Circle
Reader Service #34.

Cosmi:
CHERNOBYL: "In Chernob yl. the

Epyx:
STREET SPORTS BASKETBALL: "We believe
computer game players will
enjoy taking a break from
the professional court setting
of most games and playing
at least in this case, a little
three-on-three in the neighborhood back lot, a scene
most of us can really identify
with." - Marty O'Donahue,
Epyx.
The graphics are smooth
and the action is fast in this
series, as in other Epyx efforts. Apple, C-64/128
($39.95). Circle Reader Service #37.

SHILOH: "Using the game
system given CGW's
`Strategy Game of the Year
Award,' this game and the
three which preceded it are a
must for the American Civil
War aficionado." - Joel Billings, SSI.
The three different
scenarios (each advancing
in difficulty) offer what is
potentially the best playbalance in this fine series.
Shiloh could have gone
either way and the same
delicate balance exists in
this game. Apple, C-64
($49.95). Circle Reader Service #33.

Accolade:
TEST DRIVE: "Test Drive is any
sports car lover's dream come true.
Available for Atari ST, Amiga, IBM PC
and Commodore 64/128, Test Drive is
the first driving simulation that allows
players to experience the thrill of driving
such legendary cars as a Ferrari Testarossa, Lamborghini Countach, Lotus
Esprit Turbo, Porsche 911 Turbo and a
Corvette." - Sharyn Fitzpatrick Accolade.

was a success in the arcades -- holding
the #1 spot on the RePlay' charts four
months in a row -- and is now achieving
the same level of success on home computers. Karate Champ with its fast action and challenging arcade-style adventure allows players to defend their
karate championship at home." - Kathy
Piziali, Data East. C-64 ($19.95).
Circle Reader Service #36.

Final Frontier:

player's computer simulates the central
control room computer of a nuclear
power plant. How you respond to each
new crisis and in what sequence may
determine the safety of millions of
people and hundreds of acres of real estate." - Everett Keller, Cosmi.
Designed by Paul Brown, this game
is similar to the earlier DefCon 5 in
that it hopes to project a consistent
model of reality rather than exist as a
simple arcade game. C-64/128
($24.95). Circle Reader Service #35.

SPACE M + A+ X: "Space
M +A + X is unlike any
other simulation on the
market because it models all
the problems and challenges of designing an authentic space station." - Tom
Keller, Final Frontier.
Harvard, Tulane, and Webster
Universities are using this impressive
simulation in actual course work and
the University of Arizona's School of
Engineering is using the program for a
project in lunar base studies. Apart
from with these academic credentials,
the game is challenging and fun in and
of itself. IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader
Service #38.

Firebird:
Data East:
KARATE CHAMP: Karate Champ

THE ADVANCED OCP ART
STUDIO: "The most outstanding value

per dollar has to be OCP Art Studio.
Watch out for a future contest in which
the grand prize winner will receive an all
expense paid vacation to the Louvre." Tom Benford, Firebird's Public Relations Consultant.
A versatile productivity tool which allows windows to be inverted, enlarged,
reduced, squashed,
flipped, and rotated,
OCP Art Studio is a
stunning and useful
gift. Atari ST ($44.95),
C-64/128 ($39.95).
Circle Reader Service
#39.

to be the game they've always been looking for, but never able to find." - Lance
Haffner, designer.
This fast-playing statistics-based
game has been enhanced to enable
players to select their own starting
quarterback and to slow the computer
down enough to observe computer versus computer games. Many ($39.95).

Garde':
HIGH SEAS: "Players
can assume various
roles as they search for
adventure and plunder.
As Privateers, they prey
on enemy merchant
ships. As Captains, they
command one ship of
the fleet or stand alone
against the enemy. As
Admirals, an entire fleet
is theirs to command."
Ralph Bosson, designer.
This could be the
most advanced fighting
sail game, yet. With the
intricate details included and the
scenario editor built in, this will make
Apple owners very happy. Apple
($49.95). Circle Reader Service #40.

Games Designers
Workshop:
ROAD TO MOSCOW: "It is a great

`comeback' game. People will come
back to it. Even I come back to it. 1t is
as close to a traditional board wargame
as you can get without being tedious." Marc Miller, GDW. C - 64/128 ($40.00).
Circle Reader Service #41.

Lance Haffner Games:
THREE-IN-ONE FOOTBALL:

"Football fans will find 3-in-1 Football

game design and mechanics. Those
who liked The City will love The Dungeon. C-64/128 ($39.95). Circle
Reader Service #43.

Interstel:
EMPIRE: "Don't buy Empire! It is a
Krellan plot to reduce productivity." Erin Green, Interstel.
Empire is Interstel's
game of world conquest which can be
played by one to three
players and includes a
play-by-mail mode. It is
a fascinating grand
strategic wargame,
more sophisticated
than Risk, but easier to
play than Third Reich.
Amiga, Atari ST, IBM
($49.95). Circle Reader
Service #44.

Krentek:
BORODINO 1812:

Circle Reader Service #42.

Intellicreations:
ALTERNATE REALITY: THE DUNGEON: "The Alternate Reality series

begins when you are abducted by a
spaceship and taken to this three-dimensional other world known as Alternate
Reality. You have the option to stay in
Alternate Reality or return to earth and
seek vengeance on the ones who
brought you to Alternate Reality. The
Dungeon offers players the chance to
join guilds, learn magic spells, discover
the use of sophisticated weaponry and
accept quests from mysterious wizards." Datasoft Intellicreations.
This sequel to The City is superior to
the earlier design in terms of both

"Borodino allows the
player to observe the
strengths and weaknesses of various types
of Napoleonic units better than any other game
I'm aware of because
of its focus on small
engagements. There is a
tremendous satisfaction in using one's
knowledge of authentic Napoleonic tactics to successfully respond to the inevitable, unexpected problems and
events that occur in these small engagements." - Steve Krenek, Krentek.
This wargame is a welcome contribution to a much neglected, at least in
computer games, era of warfare. Atari
8 bit and C-64/128 ($59.95). Circle
Reader Service #45.

Master Designer
Cinemaware:
DEFENDER OF THE CROWN: "It's
the number one game in the country, at
the moment, because it has adventure,
strategy, arcade action, and is just like
being in a movie. Turn out the lights; get
(Continued on page 51)

Scorpia's
regular hint
column
visits the sequel to
Infocom's
popular
Planetfall.

station and pick up some forms. You
know it is going to be very routine and
very boring. At least you won't be
quite alone, since you get to take
Floyd with you.
However, the routine suddenly becomes non-routine when you arrive at

Ahhh...it's November again, my
favorite month! When cold winds
rattle the windows, the evenings are
long and dark, and winter is just
around the corner: the perfect time to
be indoors huddled over a warm computer. Speaking of warm, let Fred
pour you a hot one tonight, because
it's pretty chilly in outer space, too.
Actually, Stationfall is not a very difficult game. In fact, I'd venture to say
it's easier in many respects than its
predecessor, Planetfall. Perhaps, this
is partially due to all the information
that's just sitting there and waiting for
you to read it. Rather early into the
game, you'll be able to figure out much
of what has happened and what is
going on, with very little effort. This, in
turn, makes solving most of the puzzles fairly easy. Experienced players
are likely to breeze through this one in
an afternoon or so.
Food is a consideration in the game,
although a fairly minor one. You
should have enough with you to get
through without starving. There is also
one food source on the station, in case
you run out, but unless you've really
been dragging your feet, you probably
won't need it.
You'll also need to sleep once or
twice during play, so it's necessary to
find a safe place to bed down for the
"night." Once you've done a tour of the
station, however, the right spot is pretty obvious.
So, here you are, a lieutenant first
class aboard the SPS Duffy. Your
heroics in Planetfall got you promoted
from mopping latrines to shuffling
papers. Dealing with forms in octuplet
may not be the most exciting job, but
it's still better than what you used to
do. Kinda.
At the moment, you've been ordered
to take a small craft to a nearby space

the station and find it completely
deserted of human life. Obviously,
something is very wrong here and it's
all the more unsettling, since there
were no emergency calls or transmissions from the station. Where did
everyone go? Perhaps, you'd better
take a look around and find out. This
is more important than forms.
Using the handy maps that come
with the game, you begin your explorations. Certainly, one of the first places
you'll want to look at is the Station
Commander's quarters, where a fair
amount of interesting information is
just waiting to be read (it's almost too
easy). On the other hand, getting the
safe open will not be so easy. The combination is nowhere to be found, but
maybe you'll think of another way to
open it, later on.
From there, it's just a matter of going
up and down as far as possible, and
seeing what else is available on the
various decks. The two lowest decks
are not immediately accessible, but the
rest are, and you should certainly
check out all of those. A few places
will be dark, but there's no need to
worry. You'll find a light source, eventually.
Some more interesting material will
be discovered in the Science submodule, by which time you should
have a good idea of just what occurred

before your arrival. It isn't too pretty a
picture, either.
As you wander around, you'll run
into a mechanical welder every so
often. I suggest you stay out of its way
whenever it shows up. This is easy to
do, and will have very positive effects
on your life span.
By now, you've put together a good
bit of information (not to mention,
picked up several items of interest)
and it takes no great leap of deduction
to determine you need to get into the
illegal village that has sprung up
around the outside of the space station.
If you paid attention to descriptions
as you approached the station, you
probably have a good idea of how to
reach it; all you need is the proper
form. This is not difficult, particularly
if you've read the log tape and have
been careful in your searching.
The village is an interesting place, for
which you will have to draw your own
maps, but that is not hard to do, and
there are no mazes to contend with.
It's all pretty straightforward.
Once there, you explore such fascinating areas as the Mayor's office, a
fortune-teller's little cubbyhole, a barbershop, a grocery store, a usedspaceship dealer's, and even a small
casino, among others. Take your time
and examine every room carefully. A
few things are hidden, and you don't
want to overlook them. There's just
one unnerving thing about this otherwise neat place. There are no humans
here, either.
However, you will find some life
here: an Arcturan balloon creature in
the pet shop and an ostrich (!) in the
doctor's office (we won't ask why an
MD would have an ostrich for a pet),
for instance. Both of them will be helpful in solving puzzles later on. All you
need to do is figure out how to take
them with you, but there is plenty of
helpful reading matter around for that.
An item you'll probably want is a
weapon. For one thing, it will make
you feel a little more secure, considering the circumstances. It could even be
useful in a couple of situations. On the
other hand, not even the exalted rank
of lieutenant first class is enough to
open the armory door. But there are
ways around such obstacles; just be
careful of junkyards.

Let's not overlook the alien ship,
either. Especially examine that message concealed in strange dots on the
wall (no, it's not Morse code). It is
definitely worth deciphering, even if
your taste doesn't ordinarily run to unraveling secret messages.
Hmmm, I see I forgot to mention
Plato. Plato is a sort of bookwormish
robot who wanders in and out from
time to time. He's very erudite, but not
especially helpful or informative
regarding the space station or what
happened there. That is, not at first.
However, Plato will eventually be
more than happy to tell you everything
you need to know. Just give him time.
So, you've read all there is to read (at
least I hope so, for your sake), collected a number of promising items
(many of them thoughtfully left in
strategic places, since you can't carry
everything at once) which you have
also carefully examined, visited the
great outdoors, and just about reached
the end game.

As you've probably guessed, this involves reaching the two lower decks,
which have been, so far, inaccessible.
Now that you're this far along in the
game, though, getting down there is
not much of a problem. You have the
key to success in your hot little hand,
and now's the time to use it.
When you reach bottom, you may
find yourself pestered by some berserk
machinery, but this is only a minor
nuisance (especially if you were careful to read all the signs you came
across).
However, there is one aspect of the
ending that may give some people
trouble. Unfortunately, there isn't anything you can do about it. Sad, but
true. You have to finish the job, unpleasant though it may be, so you
might as well do what has to be done,
and think about it later. Not all victories are sweet.
Well, you've saved the universe once
again, and you'll probably get another
promotion. I wouldn't be surprised if

you go from filling out forms to having
to read filled-out forms. The Space
Patrol is that kind of outfit (at least it
sure seems that way....).
I see by the old invisible clock on the
wall it's just about that time again.
Remember if you need help with an
adventure game, you can reach me in
the following ways (and please, don't
ask for maps or complete lists of magic
items from Wizardry/Bard's
Tale/Whatever; those are things you
have to work out on your own!):
On Delphi: Stop by the GameSIG
(under the Groups and Clubs menu).
On GEnie: Visit the Games
Roundtable (type: Scorpia to reach
the Games RT). On The Source: Send
Smail to ST1030. By US mail (enclose
a self-addressed stamped envelope if
you live in the United States): Scorpia,
PO Box 338, Gracie Station, NY NY
10028.
Until next time, happy adventuring!
Copyright 1987 by Scorpia, all rights
reserved.

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

Ancient Art of War at Sea
IBM PC
Solitaire only.
$44.95
Dave and Barry Murry
Broderbund Software
San Rafael, CA

ON THE UPROLL,
MR. BOLITHO!
by Regan Carey

Ancient Art of War was good.
Ancient Art of War at Sea (AAWS) is
better. While both of these systems
can be criticized with regard to their
accuracy as military simulations, they
are excellent war games and provide
many hours of high grade entertainment.
The action takes place in the age of
sail, with frigates, ships-of-the-line,
and the mighty 130 gun flagships.
Squadrons of up to three ships sail the
seas of the game map, following destination orders issued by the player.
When opposing squadrons enter the
same area, battle can take place. Combat between opposing vessels can be
automatically handled by the computer or directly controlled by the
player. A campaign is won by destroying the opposing forces, capturing all
the opponent's flagships, or capturing
a strategically important port (represented by a crown).
AAWS is designed for campaign
games. Each campaign map consists of
a twenty by ten grid. Terrain includes
open sea, an enormous variety of
coastlines, hills to interfere with
visibility, shallow water, rough water,
supply ports, and repair ports. Ships
take damage to sails and hulls. Only a
visit to a repair port can effect improvements to a battered vessel. Supplies can be obtained from a supply
port, from raiding an opponent's merchant ships, or from rendezvousing
with a friendly merchantman.
Certain parameters can be set in the
campaign design or altered prior to
play. The frequency of wind shifts, the
efficiency of supply and repair ports,
visibility, and the danger of rough and
shallow water are all under player control. As well, "Ye Olde Options
Shoppe" allows the player to determine whether the effect of wind is
realistic, whether cannon are manually

or automatically aimed, and whether a
realistic or instant reload time is in effect.
Three levels of viewing the action are
available: a strategic map that permits
the player to scroll over the entire
game area; an operational view which
can be chosen whenever a battle between a friendly squadron and an
enemy squadron takes place; and a tactical view which, complete with
detailed graphics of the vessels involved, allows a player to exercise
detailed control over ships in combat.
The tactical graphics change as a ship
takes progressive damage. A single
glance at the screen can tell a player
whether a ship is badly damaged or
not. Each of these tactical level battles
is like a mini version of a scenario
from SSI's Broadside or Avalon Hill's
Clear for Action, with a little less
detail. Each battle continues until one

force retreats off the operational map
or is completely sunk or disabled.
Also, once a ship is captured, it becomes part of the victor's fleet.
The hand-to-hand combat graphics
used during boarding sequences are
similar to the fight sequences in Ancient Art of War, complete with
reasonable animation and sound effects. Instead of knights, barbarians,
and archers, there are cutlass wielding
sailors and marines who not only aim
and fire their muskets, but use their
ram rods in reloading. These details
are marvelous! Further, the player has
"real time" tactical control over the
movements between quarterdeck, railing, flag, and poopdeck of their shipboard warriors.
Eleven ready made campaigns are
supplied. Six are pure works of fiction,
four are based on historical battles,
and, in a surprisingly accurate mixture

graphic palette of ninety different terrain choices, including some purely ornamental features such as Neptune
and the proverbial sea serpent. [Ed.
See the next issue of Computer Game
Forum for two custom scenarios by Mr.
Carey.]

of history and fiction, there is an
eighteenth century version of the hunt
for the Bismarck. Each campaign
varies in difficulty and play time.
The historical battles are represented by a regional map and approximations of the naval forces involved. This introduces a great deal of
flexibility in the strategic disposition of
the opposing forces. As a result, even
historical scenarios rarely follow history. For example, in the "Battle of
Quiberon Bay" campaign, the primary
fight may well not take place in
Quiberon Bay, but somewhere else in
the region.
Like Ancient Art of War, the game is
purely solitaire. However, the player is
presented with a variety of opponents
to choose from. The "easy" enemy commander is an erratic, and fictional
Viking (with cannon?) Thor Foote.
Blackbeard is there, along with his

bloodthirsty pirates that love to board
your ships. The formal tactics of Marten Tromp offer classical naval actions
and the Duke of Medina Sidonia's
Spanish marines provide a whole new
set of tactical problems. It is a brave or
foolhardy commander who attempts to
board one of the Duke's galleons.
Next, is America's naval hero, John
Paul Jones, and the ultimate seaman,
Lord Admiral Nelson. Each opponent
has his own strategic and tactical style,
as well as varying capabilities of ships
and crews.
A powerful scenario generator is included in the system. It is extremely
easy to use and almost all factors in a
campaign can be edited, even after
play. This allows the player to fine
tune a design until satisfied or experiment with existing campaigns. The
player is walked through the campaign
design. Maps are created from a

The menu approach to map design
does introduce some limitations,
however. Compass roses are only
oriented towards the top of the map,
compromising some historical campaign designs. Labels on the map must
be selected from those chosen by the
game designers. Games located in
more unusual parts of the world must
either be mislabeled, or go without
text altogether. I would like to have
seen some provision for player controlled text in the map design.
The manual is lovely piece of work. It
is 121 pages long, finished in high
quality glossy paper, with copious illustrations. The first section provides
instructions on game play and the use
of the campaign generator. The
second section provides background
on ships and enemy commanders and
a very useful discussion of the strategy
and tactics of naval war under sail.
The final section is "A Brief History of
the Age of the Fighting Sail," a beautifully illustrated survey of major naval
battles from the age of sail and a short
discussion of the evolution of the sailing warship (culminating in detailed information on the U.S.S. Constitution).
The section ends with a glossary of sailing terms. Appendices provide short
descriptions of each of the ready made
campaigns, instructions on working
with data disks, a list of ship names to
help in player designed campaigns,
and a glossary of game terms.
My single major complaint is that
Broderbund has not seen fit to cater to
the growing number of IBM and compatible systems that are equipped with
hard disks. In fact, hard disk systems
are at a disadvantage, as they are
usually limited to a single floppy disk
drive. To be fair, however, the game requires few disk swaps, even with a
single drive system.
AAWS is a great game system that
will give you many hours of action. I
thoroughly recommend that you add it
to your collection.

A BUYERS GUIDE
TO JOYSTICKS
AND MICE
by Howard Falk

ow does a joystick work? Think of the stick as a
Hfour-way
switch. Push it forward and the upswitch closes. Pull back and the down-switch makes
contact. To the right and the left are two more
switches. All these switches work on the basis of
metal-to-metal contact, like an ordinary home light
switch. Many joysticks have eight instead of four
switches and the added switches are placed at positions between the four just described. If the joystick
has a firing button, that, too, will be a simple
metal-to-metal contact switch.
To inform your computer or other game-playing
equipment of joystick actions, a wire must be connected to each of the joystick switches. These wires
run through the cable that connects to the computer.
It is, then, up to the computer, and the programs you
are using, to make proper use of the switch-closing
signals sent over these wires. For example, when the
up-switch is closed, the software moves a displayed
symbol up the screen. Then, when the switch opens,
the movement may be stopped. Later in this article,
we will take a closer look at some available joysticks,
but first let's compare their operation to that of computer mice.
The Mouse That Scores (Numerical Mice)
he essential mission of a mouse is to let you move
T
1 objects smoothly and freely around the display
screen in imitation of the way you move the mouse
with your hand. The function of the mouse fingertip
switches is to initiate action when you have reached
the right screen position. Macintosh computer users
are familiar with the convenience of moving a cursor
to a screen-displayed command, then clicking the
mouse switch to activate that command.
As you move the mouse, it generates position numbers. Just as latitude and longitude can tell a
navigator the position of a plane or ship, the mousegenerated numbers tell the computer software the
position to which a displayed object is to be moved.
Position numbers and switch closings are very different types of information. That means that mouse
position numbers will probably be meaningless to a
game program designed to interpret switch-closings
from a joystick and conversely that joystick input will
likewise be meaningless to a program designed to
work with mice. (Actually, the fingertip switches on

mice are metal-contact switches and could easily be
used to give the same sort of signals as those from
joysticks, but controlling movement on the screen by
pressing one mouse-button for "up" and another for
"down" hardly seems to make sense.)
The Mouse That Soars (Mice As Game Design
Tools)
hat the mouse does offer is a convenient means
W
for non-expert programmers to construct their
own computer games. As
we will see in the following
descriptions of various
types of mice, these
devices come with
software that makes it very
simple to set up mousecontrolled menus. With
the help of screen-drawing
packages, often supplied
together with the mice, an
aspiring game designer
can paint whatever background scene is needed,
assign an appropriate
screen cursor symbol, and
use the mouse to move the
cursor over the painted
scene. A click of a mouse fingertip switch can, then,
call a pull-down menu displaying command-choices
appropriate to the play of the game.
These mouse-oriented facilities do not eliminate
the need to do some game programming, but they
can greatly simplify and
speed development of
computer games. In the
meantime, the mouse can
be used to control almost
any existing program by
setting up mouse operated
menus from which the
commands used by that
program can be activated.
In summary, a number of
different computer mice
are available and each of
them has its own
peculiarities and strengths.
Microsoft Mouse to
Save the Day!
The mouse developed by Microsoft Corporation
has become the standard by which other mice
are judged. The mouse itself is palm-sized, rolls easily about on any flat surface, and has two elongated
buttons that can be conveniently operated by the
index and middle fingers of the hand that moves the

mouse. As the smooth golf-size ball in the mouse
rolls along, sensors create numeric signals that tell
computer software of every change in the mouse's
position.
You can control the amount of screen pointer
movement that will result from moving the mouse.
Press the right keyboard combination and a control
panel will be displayed. A marker can be moved to
adjust the sensitivity level from 0 (no response) to
100 (maximum response). Each click of the left-hand
mouse button will move
the level by five units.
Mouse software is essential to interpret signals
from circuits in the mouse
and allow users to control
mouse operation. This
software also presents
mouse signals so that they
can control game play or
other operations. To
demonstrate the operation
of the mouse, Microsoft includes a piano practice
program in the mouse
package. A group of piano
keys are displayed on the
screen. You move a pointer to the desired key, click
the right-hand mouse button, and the computer
sounds a corresponding musical note. Drag the
pointer across the keyboard while holding down the
button, and a rapid glissando of notes will sound. To
end the demonstration, move the pointer to a box
marked "Quit" and click
the left-hand button.
Microsoft Mouse comes
with software that displays
mouse menus for many
popular business-oriented
programs, but only for a
few designed for fun, such
as Flight Simulator II and
Paintbrush. If you are
ready and willing to do
some programming,
however, you can get the
Microsoft Mouse
Programmer's Reference
Guide ($25) which contains the information you
need to create your own mouse menus and use the
mouse to control virtually any program.
Microsoft Mouse comes in two versions. The
simplest to install is the one that plugs into the standard RS-232 serial connector available on virtually
any IBM PC or compatible personal computer. It
sells for $195 and comes with Paintbrush software
and a graphics presentation package called Show
Partner. If you don't want to use up a serial port for a

mouse connection, you can buy the Bus version of
the mouse. This comes with a separate circuit board
designed to mount inside the computer system box.
The mouse cable connects to a special round connector that protrudes from the rear of this board.
Anyone who is handy with a screwdriver and careful
in following directions can set up and mount the
board. The Bus Mouse sells for $175. The vendor is
Microsoft Corp., 16011 NE 36th Way, PO Box
97017, Redmond, WA 98073, (800) 426-9400. Circle
Reader Service #1.
The Preppy Mouse (Three-button Mouse)
The Logitech Bus Mouse is designed to act as if it
were a Microsoft Mouse, but it also has its own
special features. Most visible of these is a third button, which allows for a total of six different button
combinations (one at a time, plus three possible
pairs of button actions). Although the Logitech
mouse is billed as an opto-mechanical creature, it actually moves on a rolling ball, as well. The opto
refers only to the way computer signals are
generated within the mouse.
This mouse comes with software that makes it easily adaptable to virtually any existing program that
can operate from displayed menus. The software allows you to design your own pull-down menus and
sequences of menus, as well as make whatever use of
mouse button combinations you wish. The manual
that comes with the mouse is comprehensive and
easy to read.
With its plug-in circuit card, the Logitech Bus
Mouse sells for $139. A mouse-based text editing
program called Point is included, along with the
software necessary to design your own menus, get
the mouse working, and use it with the Lotus 1-2-3
business package. A version that plugs into an RS232 serial port sells for $119. The vendor is Logitech,
805 Veteran's Blvd., Redwood City, CA 94063, (415)
365-9852. Circle Reader Service #2.
No Blind Mice (Optical Mice)
hat does it mean to be an optical mouse? You
W
can glide smoothly over your special reflective
pad with its black and blue crosshatch lines. Your
light-emitting diodes shine their tiny beams that
twinkle back from the pad and excite your
photodetectors. As the hand of your owner carries
you along, your circuits track the number of padlines you see, then send signals to the computer that
tell exactly where you have been and in what directions you move.
The fact that the PC Mouse is optical means that it
has no internal moving parts to wear out, so it is expected to last through seven and one-half years of
constant use without failing, not even once. In contrast, mice that roll on balls are expected to go for

about a year and one-half before they need some
repair.
PC Mouse has three buttons. Detailed manuals contain the information needed to set up and operate
the mouse. Installation software provides for mouse
menus that go with popular business software packages. There is also a menu-based generator program
for creating mouse menus for your own software
packages. That creation takes some care, but the
directions are thorough and easy to read.
A version of PC Mouse that plugs into a standard
RS-232 serial port of an IBM/PC/AT or compatible
computer sells for $159. A bus version for the same
computers comes with its own plug-in circuit card
and sells for $179.
Macintosh and Apple owners, don't despair. The
A+ version of PC Mouse is designed for use with
your computers and sells for $119. The vendor is
Mouse Systems, 2600 San Tomas Expressway, Santa
Clara, CA 95051, (408) 988-0346. Circle Reader Service #3.
If, however, you want an optical mouse, but don't
like PC Mouse, you can turn to lookalike SummaMouse. The reflective pad for this mouse is flexible
and somewhat larger than the PC Mouse pad.
However, you will find this mouse has an annoying
cable that has to be plugged into an electric wall outlet to power the mouse.
The set-up software that comes with SummaMouse
is very easy-to-use and makes it simple to create
your own menus for the menu-driven programs you
want to run. SummaMouse is for use with
IBM/PC/AT and compatible computers. It sells for
$119 from Summagraphics, 777 State St. Extension,
Fairfield, CT, 06430, (800) 221-9244. Circle Reader
Service #4.
The mice we have described in this article are not
the only ones that can be purchased, but they are
representative of what is available to computer users
and game enthusiasts. Similarly, the discussion of
joysticks which we are commencing is only a sample
of those available for purchase.

Sticks and Clones May Break

L

ike any other mechanical gadget, a joystick will
eventually wear out. Parts that are repeatedly
flexed may crack and break. More likely, the metal
contacts of the switches will become coated with contaminants that prevent electrical signals from flowing. In other words, they will get noisy or dirty.
It is, of course, possible to open up a joystick and
clean the electrical contacts using a bit of fine
sandpaper or some chemical solvent. However, this
kind of repair job should only be undertaken if you
are familiar with electrical parts and self-confident
about digging into the unknown. An easier course is
to buy a replacement joystick unit.

My Other Joystick is Ambidextrous
or example, consider the Newport Prostick II,
F
acontrlwihmoldepastic eandstelick
with a ball on top. By twisting a collar at the base of
the stick, you can cause either four or eight Prostick
II position switches to be active. For maze games
like Pac-Man and Donkey Kong, it is preferable to
use just four switches, since these restrict movement
to the vertical and horizontal. For other games,
where more complex motion is required, all eight
switches can be activated.
Prostick II also boasts two
firing buttons, so that left
and right handed players
can use them with equal
facility. This joystick may
be used with Atari VCS
2600, 5200 (on the latest
models), Atari 400 and
800, Atari ST, Com
modore Vic-20, C-64/128,
Amiga, and the Sears Arcade Game. The Prostick
II retails for $24.95 from Newport Controls, Route 2,
Box 8, Bishop, CA 93514, (619) 872-1296. Circle
Reader Service #5.

Slik, Tac, Control
(Suncom's Line)
Suncom makes a number of different joysticks for use with personal
computers. From the inexpensive Slik Stik ($7.99)
with its ball handle and
single button on its base to
the sophisticated TacS
with its lifetime warranty
($19.99). The Slik Stik,
which passed a 35 pound
strain test, is notable for
both its economical price and its convenient
palm-of-the-hand sized plastic base. Garners who prefer a
straight, cylindrical stick rather than a ball handle
could choose the StarFighter ($11.49, Apple or IBM
models $24.99). The Starfighter passed a 50 pound
strain test.
Garners who prefer the pistol-grip handles may
choose between the Tac3 ($15.99) with its two basemounted fire buttons combined with handle-top fire
button and the TacS with its modular array of micros(Continued on page 58)

are not fully delineated and no maps
are included. The designers acknowledge that a map should have been included, but printing space limitations
prevented such inclusion. In addition,
they note that all registered owners
will receive a copy of their forthcoming newsletter, which will explain the
historical battle in further detail vis-avis the computer simulation. Actual
movement rates are not given, but observation will reveal that light cavalry
moves quickest, followed by heavy
cavalry, infantry and finally the artillery. The order of battle is very
detailed and probably the best ever
done. Sources utilized to develop the
order of battle and the game itself are
excellent, making it obvious that
Borodino was a labor of love by the
designers.

Borodino:
1812
-- Napoleon in Russia
by M. Evan Brooks

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

Borodino 1812: Napoleon In Russia
Atari (8-bit), C-64
1-2
$59.95
Steve Krentek & Stephen Beckett
Krentek Software
McAllen, TX
Circle Reader Service #75

M. Evan Brooks is an aficionado of
Napoleonic warfare. In this article, he
presents good news for those similarly
inclined.

Let Them Eat Borscht!
is a detailed simulation of
B orodino
the battle that marked the begin-

ning of the end for Napoleon I and the
First Empire. Heretofore, the Grand
Armee had had an air of invincibility.
Afterwards, Napoleon's enemies
recognized that the "Corsican Ogre"
could indeed be stopped.
Borodino marks the first wargame in
recent memory premiering on the 8-bit
Atari. Produced from a smaller company, the product is entertaining and
teaches valid lessons concerning
Napoleonic warfare, a topic generally
ignored by computer designers.
Utilizing a character set virtually
identical to Eastern Front, the graphics

are not "state of the art." Nevertheless,
they are clear and more than adequate. All orders are input by joystick,
and giving orders to units is an easy
task. Further, Borodino is a real-time
game. It is similar to Krentek's earlier
release, Napoleon at Waterloo, in that
there is no sequence of turns per se. Instead, units execute their orders simultaneously. There are, however,
numerous settings which determine
the pace of the game (from a ratio of
60 seconds per minute to 1 second per
minute) and when it is desirable, the
player may choose to play a minute of
"real time" and stop, giving an atmosphere of phased turns.

My Empire for a Map!
The documentation suggests optimal
1 time settings for each of the eight
scenarios. Setting time settings faster
than the suggested rates may well
cause the computer to have insufficient time to react properly. The
documentation is well done and explains all aspects of the simulation.
The only omissions noted were that
the historical details of the battle itself

Eight Steppes to Conquest
fight scenarios are offered, but the
'smaller ones are tutorials which
serve to accustom the player to the
proper tactical employment of infantry
and cavalry. Players should not be
frustrated by the unbalanced nature of
the smaller scenarios, since their
primary task is as a learning tool.
However, the primary scenario, the
two-day battle, is the real meat of this
product. Further, a three-day scenario
is offered which allows the player to
set up his troops as they reach the battlefield. It is suggested that players use
this to develop their unit positions and
then, save the game for future playings.
Units are infantry, cavalry and artillery. Infantry units may be deployed
into column or line. As the documentation notes, however, line formation will
rarely be utilized. Indeed, the value of
shock assault via column formations
will make it the preferred infantry formation. A fascinating aspect is that infantry formations will automatically assume a square formation whenever
cavalry units approach.
Tactically, one must utilize combined
arms. The cavalry should approach the
enemy infantry so that the infantry
forms square. At this point, artillery
should bombard the massed formation, while infantry columns assault
and cavalry pursues the broken unit.

The tactical difficulty is that the terrain does not always allow such classic
combined arms deployment.
Strategically, the French must seek
destruction of the Russian army. Merely holding the battlefield is insufficient
and leads to a strategic defeat (the historical outcome). This reviewer would
suggest forming a Grand Battery in the
center (i.e. massing the maximum number of artillery units), holding one artillery unit to cover the southern sweep.
Cavalry should be formed on both
flanks and begin an encirclement in
the north (being careful not to become
engaged). In the south, two corps
should be sent on a flanking movement
to engage and defeat the southern
front. When this is accomplished, a
center advance should be taken. While
the center advances, cavalry on the
flanks should be seeking to encircle
the Russian army in a Cannae-like
maneuver. It is difficult to accomplish,
but it can be done.
One scenario, the Davout Maneuver,
allows this to be done easily. This is a
hypothetical scenario, assuming that
Napoleon had concurred with Marshal
Davout's advice of enveloping the Russian Army. Historically, the advice was
not taken, but this does allow the user
to see the value of the advice in enabling the French corps to quickly
penetrate the Russian rear.
In terms of game play, the most important concept is time. Do not utilize
hasty assaults! There is sufficient time
to allow planned combined arms offensives. The temptation is for French
players to attempt too much too quickly. Take your time!!

Is "Impossible" a French
Word?
Victory Conditions are defined by
V achieving a certain score, based
predominantly upon the number of
casualties. One must remember that a
demoralized opponent yields many
more victory points. A winning score
should be 170,000 points which can be
accomplished at the historical settings
with judicious tactics. However, the
designers suggest that the true test of
Napoleonic genius is a 200,000 point
win. To date, even they have not been

able to accomplish this, despite
Napoleon's assertion of 1813 that "impossible" was not a French word. Initially, a winning score was to have
been 180,000 points, but this was adjusted during playtesting so as not to
unduly frustrate the user. In a 3-day
battle, this reviewer achieved a point
total of 179,975. Total losses were:
French -- 27,825 casualties, 5050 missing; Russian -- 42,625 casualties,
34,625 missing. Note that since the
Russian Army had been demoralized,
all the MIAs translated into victory
points.

Wargames Are the
Scythe of Time
Borodino was a set-piece battle.

There is little room for
strategic maneuvering. Historically, Napoleon executed a
bloody frontal assault. The designers note that Napoleon could
have won a decisive victory and
the Russian invasion with better
execution.
That proposition has been
debated ever since by historians,
and no definitive answer can be
reached. Yet, Borodino does
show the problem faced by the
French (i.e. a battlefield victory
without the destruction of the
Russian army would have been a
Pyrrhic victory). Still, achieving a
victory can be a frustrating experience. There is no way to
determine how well one is doing
in the midst of battle. Obviously,
routing of the bulk of an army is
a valid indicator. However,
demoralization of the opposing
army can occur suddenly and
without warning. While cavalry
should be employed mainly to
the flanks for envelopment and
pursuit, some units should be
retained in the center in order to
compel enemy units to adopt
square formation. Massed artillery is the key to victory.
The Russian Army is not overly
aggressive or mobile, and in
solitaire mode, the Russian
reserves are often committed
piece-meal and too late. A

limited northern cavalry offensive
should serve to limit their movement
south. A combined arms offensive
should be mounted against the Town
of Borodino early in order to negate
this bridgehead. Thereafter, slow
deliberate combined arms assaults
should yield victory.

Two o' Clock in the Morning
Courage?

B

orodino is a solid effort. While it

does not forge a breakthrough in
game development, it is easy to learn,
valid historically and entertaining. For
those desirous of learning about
Napoleonic warfare, it is recommended.

INSIDE THE CASTLE
SHADOWGATE
by Tracie Forman Hines
NAME:
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

Shadowgate
Macintosh (coming soon for Amiga)
$49.95
ICOM Simulations
Mindscape, Inc.
Northbrook, IL

uestion: What adventure game scenario
pits the player, as a relatively lowly
hero, against a vast challenge set up by an
evil wizard whose dastardly plan is to
destroy the world?
a) Ultima I, b) Ultima II, c) Bard's Tale I, d) Wizardry I, e)
Shadowgate, or f) all of the above. If you picked "f," give yourself a pat on the back and an adventurer's purple heart. All
right, so Shadowgate's basic story line is a bit, er, time
tested... but it is different from many games in that it is not a
hack-n-slash role playing game (in which characters have to
kill monsters to build experience points and get strong
enough for the final challenge). Like ICOM's previous adventures, Deja Vu, and Uninvited, Shadowgate's emphasis is on
problem solving - not sword swinging.

Q

View From The Parapet (A look at the game
system)

As

in the previous ICOM adventures, everything you can
o at any given time is indicated by the sentence parser at
the top center of the screen. Players simply click on their
command choice from the menu and then on the object
selected to perform the command upon. These icon-based adventures are perfectly suited to the Mac screen. Almost everything on the
screen can be
placed in your inventory by just
clicking and dragging with the
mouse.
As user-friendly
as Shadowgate
may be, though,
this scenario isn't
nearly as welldefined as the previous two. The instruction manual notes
that you have been chosen by an ancient, druidlike sect of
enchanters to vanquish an evil wizard and save the world. Unfortunately, there is no emotional bond here (no brother to
save a la Uninvited or need to protect yourself as in Deja Vu)
Frankly, this is a bit of a letdown for those of us spoiled by
the originality and wit in the previous games.
Shadowgate's graphics and sound effects look and sound

like Uninvited's. Nonetheless, there
is plenty of medieval atmosphere to
soak up, since the entire adventure
takes place within the walls and gardens of the castle Shadowgate, a vast
fortress populated by dragons,
demons, trolls, and an occasional
orc.
Fortunately, the game makes up in
complexity for what it lacks in special effects surprises. Shadowgate is
tough stuff. Anyone who breezed
through the other two games will be
staggered by this adventure's challenge. There are a lot of objects and
doors thrown in as red herrings and
some items that seem to be totally
useless are, in tact, crucial to the game. Of course, there are
also curveball objects like a reluctant flying broom which will
keep you up nights as you try to figure out what you are doing
wrong.
Luckily, Shadowgate affords players a lot more flexibility
than the previous adventures allowed. That doesn't mean the
game won't seem impossibly small at times, but it will only
seem so until you find one tiny clue that unlocks vast new portions of territory to explore. The time you take to solve the
game depends on how many torches you have collected (and
remembered to light at the proper times). The screen fades
momentarily, exactly three moves before your lit torch will go
out. If you are not paying attention, you will end up stumbling
around in the darkness and eventually, breaking your neck. In
other words, take (and examine) every torch that you find
and light a new one off the old as soon as the screen flickers.
As for the specific details of the scenario, giving too much
away would be like seeing a great comedy after you had already heard all the jokes. If you need help, however, or you
don't mind specific clues, you can look through the hints in
the next section.

The Daring Dungeoneer's Ditty Bag
(Warning: This section contains specific
clues that can give away solutions. Read on
when you really need help.)
he first principle is, "Not everything has a use and some
Tthings
have more than one use." The second principle is,
"There are some puzzles that can be solved by more than one
kind of item."
 No exit? Remember that not all the exits are shown on
the screen. For example, there is a secret door in the hallway
where you find the book and two candles. It is on the opposite wall and you find it by "Open"ing a stone that looks
slightly strange. Another room has an exit that is hidden behind a waterfall. To get through, all you have to do is double
click on the black space just under the waterfall. Further(Continued on page 57)

Katana on a Hot Spinward Loop!
Sir-Tech's Deep Space Combat Simulator
by David M. Wilson

NAME:
SYSTEMS:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

Deep Space
Apple, C-64, IBM
$39.95
Paul Neurath and Edward Lerner
Sir-Tech Software
Ogdensburg, NY

warships have entered
Andromedan
United Planets (UP) territory. It is
clear to all concerned that their intent
is to rape, plunder, pillage, and wreak
havoc on our outposts. Your mission,
should you decide to accept it, is to
neutralize UP space by piloting a
Katani class transport/interceptor and
eliminating the enemy.

So goes the fiction behind Deep
Space: Operation Copernicus. The
game comes in a brown accordion file
folder with the game logo and fictitious presidential seal of the Solarian
sector on the outside. In addition, the
package also bears a "Top Secret" seal.
Thus, by the time the player has
broken the presidential seal, read the
enclosed documentation (including
the fictitious press releases concerning
the ever-escalating war between the
Solarians and the Andromedans), and
booted up the game, he/she is immersed in the fiction of the game.
The game is designed to be played
solitaire, but an additional person can
be drafted in order to assist with reading the charts and provide weapon in-

structions. The player's "Katani" ship is
armed with missiles and lasers for both
defensive and offensive needs, but only
one or the other of the weapon systems may be enabled at any one time.
There are four missions to be
mastered: Outpost, Escort, Plague,
and Invasion. In
the first scenario,
players are required to fly to
outposts, collect
uranium ore and
return safely to
base with their
quota. Of course,
the trip is
hindered by the
Andromedans in
the area, but the
task is made even
more difficult by
the fact that not
every outpost
even has ore to be
collected.
The Escort scenario consists of guiding the ship from Orion safely to a
neutral base. The diplomatic ship is, of
course, much slower and more poorly
armed than the player's ship, so the
player must continually hold back and
protect the larger ship. The Plague
scenario assigns the player to clear sectors of the deadly Biotek-M micro-or-

ganism canisters which have been
planted by the evil Andromedans.
Finally, the Invasion scenario forces
the player to defend his/her home base
with their specialized fighters against
the more standardized enemy fighters
and the planet-busting Andromedan
Sword Cruisers. If not stopped, the
cruisers can reach the base in ten
minutes.
Each game has three levels of play.
The documentation suggests that
beginning players start at the Novice
level. However, players who begin at
any level lower than Expert will be disappointed. This is simply because the
game moves much too slowly in the
easier levels of the game. Nevertheless, a Novice and Medial level exists
for those who feel they are necessary.
The graphics of the game are average
for the genre. As with two other
similar combat simulations, Skyfox
from Electronic Arts and Starglider
from Firebird, the graphics are cockpit-oriented. Players are able to
monitor systems ranging from radar to
fuel, weapon, and shield systems. If
one is not careful, it is possible to exhaust fuel, shields, laser energy, and/or
missiles in a hurry if the systems are
used carelessly.
In addition, the
player may hit
his "Space Bar"
at certain points
during the game
in order to call
up his "on-board
computer" and
change weapons,
scan or magnify,
or look right or
left.
Unfortunately,
calling up the
"on-board computer" also
freezes the game.
This enables the player to take unrealistic amounts of time to select his
option and the game will remain
frozen while the decision process is
going on. In actual combat, a fighter
pilot would not be able to halt the
Space-Time continuum in order to
select an option. The game should con(Continued on page 48)

TITLE:
Leisure Suit Larry
SYSTEMS:
Amiga, IBM
PRICE:
$39.95
DESIGNERS: Al Lowe and Mark Crowe
PUBLISHER:
Sierra
Coarsegold, CA

some of the above activities in your
life, now is the chance to get out there
and experience them in game form.

Monty Python fans who think
that people who work in accounting departments do not have a
sense of humor should note that
the review of this controversial game was
written by a "bean
counter" and
wholesome family man
by Roy Wagner

Yo' Mama!
The game is Leisure Suit Larry in the
Land of the Lounge Lizards from
Sierra, a 3-D animated adventure

adults. That is accurate! It is very
humorous with many "in jokes" related
to people and places close to Sierra
and has some references to other
games. The morals may be loose, but
never really offensive. You won't really
see anything here that you probably
haven't seen before. It is really for
adults because half the fun is relating
(vicariously or not) to what
is going on as you travel by
cab from Lefty's Bar to the
Casino, Chapel, and Store
(shades of Softporn).

LEISURE SUIT LARRY
The Slimier Things of Life

ey Guys (and vicarious gals), take
H
the following quiz to "test" your
lifetime experiences. Score zero for
every experience you've had (some
may wish to score more or less depending on the question). See how low you
can score. Have you:
1) Visited a sleazy bar wherein you
have had to listen to some slime telling dirty jokes (and you can only
hear the punch lines);
2) Tried to pick up a girl who won't
even talk to to you because she's
waiting for her boyfriend (sure!);
3) Given a drunk and/or a wino a
drink and received more than you expected in return;
4) Used a filthy bathroom with
plumbing that doesn't work and
enough writing on the wall to extend
your stay (some of it quite interesting);
5) Shared a bed briefly with "girl
upstairs" after getting past her
"guard" downstairs;
6) Met that "perfect" girl, given her
all you possessed, wined her, married her and left her all in the same
evening;
7) Bribed a sexy guard with drugs to
get into the penthouse suite and experience two quite different girls;
and/or
8) Played the slots and blackjack
table to get just enough money to
continue the "good" life?
If you score zero or less, you should
skip this game, get your shots, take
your pills, and pray for a cure. Come
back next issue. If you have missed

Version Territory

game in the tradition of their popular
Quest games. This one, however, is intended for those over 18. A quiz at the
beginning will do a fairly good job of
testing you. (Assuming that most of
the readers of this magazine are mature enough, I'll let you know that if
you enter ALT-X in response to the
first question, you can get right into
the game.)
The main character of this game and
the role you assume is Larry. He is 40
years old and was thrown out the
house by his "ol' lady" (mother) when
he was 38. He's a jerk with bad breath,
but tonight he is out to experience it
all. If he doesn't, you will find out what
happens at "dawn."
Sierra describes this game as a
humorous, harmless endeavor for

The MS-DOS version of this game
1 supports CGA, EGA, and Hercules Graphic cards and the game will
also be available for the Amiga and
other computers. The MS-DOS version provides you with the game on
two 5 1/4" disks and on one 3 1/2" disk.
(Very commendable for Sierra to do
this.) It requires only 256K, one disk
drive, and uses key disk protection so
most of the game is played using your
own copy of the game.
The graphics are great, and many of
them are animated. You'll see blinking
bar signs, people moving about, cabs
going down the road, elevators going
up and down, and many more actionpacked moments. The animation is a
distinguishing mark of quality to which
Sierra adds three dimensions. Your
character moves in front of and behind
various objects that appear on the
screen. The movement can be easily
controlled using the keyboard or joystick. Other versions will even let you
use the mouse.
There is also a limited amount of
sound effects and music. Very nice!
Through use of the Function keys,
Control (CTRL) keys and Pop Up
menus, you can carry out all major
functions required to complete this adventure. The hint book, which can be
purchased separately, is the most comprehensive that I have seen. It even
contains the full text to the jokes that
are told by the guy at Lefty's.
(Continued on page 47)

I

Leisure Suit Larry

(Continued from page 44)

Getting It All!
he activities that must be comTpleted
are fairly obvious as long as

you Look at everything and, in some
cases, Repeat your previous command
until the command response repeats itself. Some of the items (see below)
that you need are rather obscure, but
if you pick up what you can, you'll
have no problem. One item that you'll
probably get will require shots, but unfortunately they are not available in
this game. Oh well, you only live once.
You did Save the game, didn't you?
(Hint: Be sure to buy a magazine at
the store and read it for a clue to getting an item that is not easily gotten or
seen, but needed near the end of the
game.) Remember, be kind to all
strangers and Get anything you can.
You use a text entry line to enter your
actions.
If you enjoy the playing the slot

machines and blackjack, you will find
the gambling portion of the game
quite enjoyable. Before you attempt to
win more money by gambling,
however, be sure to Save the game in
order to save what money you do have

to the casino to get more money.

You will gamble, because gambling is

liked in this game is that once you got
the right idea and entered
the action text, a lot of follow-up actions took place
"automatically." For example, when you buy a drink
at the bar, you automatically
pay for it. You only enter,
"BUY BEER", instead of
"BUY BEER, GET WALLET, OPEN WALLET,
PAY FOR BEER" which
you enter in other games. A
lot of other action takes
place as easily and makes the game
flow much better by eliminating
tedium. With good graphics, good
design, and good fun provided, who
needs "good taste"?

the only way you will get any more.
However, as you increase your worth,
continue to use the Save option. You
will need no more than $100 at any
one time and you can always go back

Whatcha' Want, Good
Graphics or Good Taste?
game is a lot of fun to play and
T ishisvery
humorous. What I really

(Continued from page 42)

tinue on during the "on-board computer" mode. After all, lasers and missiles do not stop for mentally
lugubrious pilots to make a decision.
Combat decisions must be made quickly under adverse conditions. A good
combat simulation should take this factor into account.
Each scenario takes place in a different quadrant. The player will need
to keep the reference cards handy so
that they can tell where the various
items or locations are in the sector.
The screen display for the quadrant is
not sufficiently detailed to give the

player all the information needed, so it
might be helpful to have another person in the room to help integrate onscreen data with the reference card
data.
The Katana fighter is bound to become damaged in the course of play.
When this occurs, players must seek
the base (not to be confused with an
"outpost") in order to initiate repairs.
When the player flies toward the
planetoid which contains a base, the
view changes to a control tower view
(as seen from the base). The player's
fighter is visible on screen from a dif-

ferent angle during the landing
maneuvers, but the ship's controls
remain the same as in the rest of the
game (although the player may become confused because of his new
orientation on the screen). A radar
screen is displayed below this exterior
view and assists in making the landing
where the fighter will be refueled,
repaired, and rearmed. If the landing
represents the completion of a mission, the player will be given an appropriate message from his commanding officer and a pilot rating.
All in all, the game is well-documented, the graphics are typical of the
genre, the combat system is logical,
and the game mechanics are simple
enough to make it playable from first
"boot." If the game's slow pacing
doesn't put the player off initially, the
game will give players a competitive
run for their money and much potential "bang for the buck" as the game
progresses.

Buyers Guide

(Continued from page 24)
out the popcorn; and have a good time."
game to get into with challenges becom- Phyllis Jacobs, Master Designer
ing increasingly more intricate and
Cinemaware.
detailed as one's experience develops.
Winner of CGW's "Special Award
Britannia is simulated in so much fasfor Artistic Achievement in a Comcinating detail that simple exploration is
puter Game," this product won the
enough to warrant enjoyment, even
Software Publishers Association's
prior to discovering the more complex
challenges in the game." - Kathryn Roy,
award for "Best Graphics" and was one
of three nominees for "Game of the
Origin Systems.
Year" at the Personal
Computer World exposition in Europe.
Amiga, Atari ST,
Apple IIGS, Mac
($49.95), C-64/128
($34.95), IBM ($39.95).
Circle Reader Service
#46.

New World
Computing, Inc.:
MIGHT AND
MAGIC: "One of the
few gifts that gives over
200 hours of Christmas
enjoyment." - Ron Spitzer, New World.
This is, indeed, a big
adventure game with
much to like and much
to explore. There is a
depth to the world
created for this adventure that everyone who
plays it will appreciate.
Apple, C-64/128, IBM
($54.95). Circle Reader
Service #47.

Omnitrend:
BREACH: "With a diversity of play options and a scenario builder that lets
you design your own game, Breach will
keep you well-entertained past next
Christmas." - Tom Carbone, Omnitrend.
Breach is based on the marine boarding sequence in Universe II. It is a
hybrid game with elements of arcade,
role-playing, and strategy games. Atari
ST ($59.95). Circle Reader Service
#48.

Origin Systems:
ULTIMA V: "Ultima V is an easy

Sir-Tech Software
WIZARDRY IV: THE RETURN OF
WERDNA: "Considered the most com-

plex, intriguing and engrossing 'expert'
challenge, Return of Werdna should be
one of the toughest and most exciting
adventures ever published." - Rob
Sirotek; Sir-Tech
Software.
If you've ever sent a
character disk to SirTech for repair or to
show what a great adventurer your character
was, you may end up
fighting yourself in this
"mirror dungeon"
where the "bad guy"
may be the "good guy."
Apple ($n.p.). Circle
Reader Service #51.

The Software
Toolworks:
CHESSMASTER
2000: "As featured in

The long-awaited sequel to Ultima
IV continues the complex plot line of
the earlier game, but the game system
and technology are strides ahead of Ultima V's predecessor. Apple ($59.95).
Circle Reader Service #49.

Time, Business Week,
and The Wall Street
Journal, Chessmaster
2000, with its "Boss
Panic Button" is the perfect gift for the executive.
We're the National
Computer Chess Champion." - Gina Montagano, The Software
Toolworks.
Amiga, Atari ST, Macintosh ($49.95),
Apple, Atari 8-bit, C-64/128, IBM
($39.95). Circle Reader Service #52.

Simulations Canada:
ROMMEL AT GAZALA: "Rommel

At Gazala is a command oriented study
of the battles culminating in the fall of
Tobruk and the retreat of Allied forces
out of Libya." - Simulations Canada.
There is much to learn in this interesting perspective on the desert war.
Simulations Canada is filling a necessary niche in the hobby with their
quality board-assisted computer
games. Apple, IBM ($59.95). Circle
Reader Service #50.

Strategic Studies Group:
RUSSIA: "I've been in this hobby for
seven years and Russia is the most challenging game I've ever played." - John
Gleason, Strategic Studies Group.
This game is a real player and should
not be attempted by casual gamers. It
is a perfect gift for the frustrated
strategy gamer who needs a fresh
design concept and challenging computer opponent. Apple, C-64/128
($40.00). Circle Reader Service #53.

EIGHT TAILS
OF NEW
CRYPTICS
Infocom's New
"Liebrary" of
Short Stories
by Roy Wagner

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

Nord and Bert Couldn't Make
Head or Tail of It
Many
$39.95
Jeff O'Neill
Infocom
Cambridge, MA

Roy Wagner served as our Commodore specific columnist for
several years. Now, he is serving
as a "critic-at-large." In this article, he offers an overview of
Infocom's recent release.

I

'll try to "hold my tongue" and get
this article write, but after the "sun's
gone down" (I've finished with this
game) that won't be easy. I'll just
shake a elbow, put my hand down, and
get an arm up to tell you all about this.
The game is a knee (thanks Sherlock)
and time will tell.
The game is comprised of eight relatively short text stories which take
about one to three hours to complete.
Each story involves various types of
word play: puns, synonyms,
homonyms, spoonerism, or other word
tricks. Seven of the stories can be completed individually and totally independent from the others. To get to the
eighth story, you must complete or
know the passwords that are provided
upon completion of the other seven.
This game is not your typical Infocom
interactive fiction. Infocom is branching out into new areas and this is one
of them.

Some new game play concepts appear in this game that may appear in
other new games from Infocom. Mapping is easier because of a "Status" line
at the top of the screen which displays
the places to which you can move. Play
is also accelerated by removal of the
"Examine Item" command. Now, you
simply enter the name of the object to
obtain details about it. A big plus with
this game is that hints are readily available when you need them (and you will
need them). Enter "Hint" or "Help"
and the game display will be replaced
with a list of subjects relating to objects you must use in completing a task
and gaining points to carry on.

Welcome To Punster
stories take place in the fictionTalhetown
of PUNSTER. You have

arrived to rescue this town from the
verbal abuse to which-it is victim.
"Go To The Shopping Bizarre": This
story involves a shopping trip to the
grocery store. You go to various aisles
in the store substituting new words for
the descriptions or names of the
various items you find. Most of this is
quite easy, except for the fellow in the
cereal section and the final end of the
story task. Remember, once an item is
changed to something else, it can be
changed back by entering what it was.
"Play Jacks": This story takes place at
the house that Jack built and involves

various objects with "jack" in their
name. The house is almost bare inside
except for a contraption that is somewhat like a very large Swiss Army
knife. Note that almost everything on it
has the syllable "jack" as part of its
name and that these various items can
be quite useful "out in the cold" where
there are more problems to solve than
inside. Once you determine what these
objects are, you must determine how
to use them to solve the various
problems that exist in the story.
Assume there was a bristly kind of
tail on the contraption and pulling it
brings some kind of mule/donkey right
there before you. Then, you could get
on this animal and ride out into the
cold forest. That isn't a real puzzle in
the story, but it is similar to those in
the story.
"Buy The Farm": This story takes
place at a blighted farm where the resident family can no longer perform
even the simplest of tasks. The situation brings to mind common expressions and proverbs. You'll find several
barnyard animals such as a tired, old
dog and a horse with a nearby trough.
Put the phrases to use in the correct
order to complete the story.
"Shake A Tower": This story uses
spoonerisms such as "munching
lobsters" being turned into "lunching
mobsters". You'll find lots of these in
this story which involves escaping
through a strange stand-alone door in
the midst of a forest.
"Eat Your Words": In this story you
are dining in a very interesting town
cafe with a very annoying waitress.
You do everything conceivable to get
her to leave you alone. Then, you finally get away from her by going in the
kitchen, but you go up against the
cook who also takes most of what you
can feed him. Getting details on each
object offers some fairly good clues,
but arriving at the correct phrase may
not be so easy.
"Act The Part": In this one, you take
on the role of an actor in a situation
comedy and are required to perform
various humorous practical jokes on
your brother-in-law. Figuring out the
correct gags is somewhat difficult.
"Visit The Manor Of Speaking": This
story revolves around a house in which
the attic is actually below the other

rooms and these rooms are, in turn,
very strange themselves. By finding
certain objects in the rooms and using
them properly, you will be able to right
the house in the correct manner.
"Meet The Mayor": This final story
can only be accessed if you have completed the seven stories or know the
passwords from them (a coded list is
provided at the end of this article).
You need to take the official decree to
the mayor of Punster to be signed and
outlaw the types of word play that got
the town into such trouble.
You start off in the town square, do a
few things outside, and enter the
townhouse wherein the mayor resides.
After picking up a six-pack
downstairs, you go upstairs and find an
interesting bathroom with lots of possibilities. Once you finally get the
mayor to sign the decree, you may rest
on your laurels. This successfully
returns Punster to its normal complacency.

can't say that I really liked this Infocom game as much as I have liked
their more complete interactive fictions. Though the stories were both
funny and challenging, I felt that something was missing. Perhaps, the con-

cept, though good, was difficult to interact with. In a game that is so involved with word play, more ideas
come to mind than each individual
story can handle. Sometimes, there
was an excellent comeback to an unused twist of wording or phase, but too
often my input went unnoticed.
Also, having eight separate stories
has both its advantages (short and relatively easy to complete) and its disadvantages (losing flow and continuity).
However, this game can probably
serve quite well in an educational environment to "teach" about the various
ways in which words can be used.
Various types of word play could be
discussed before the story is attempted, making the story much funnier and less frustrating.

Password, Please
THE PASS KEYS (Coded in ASCII
decimal equivalent)
Shopping Bizarre:
83/85/80/69/82/83/65/86/69/82
Play Jacks:
74/65/67/75/83/84/69/82
Buy the Farm:
83/79/68/66/85/83/84/69/82
Eat Your Words:
83/65/84/73/83/70/73/69/68
67/85/83/84/79/77/69/82

Act the Part:
75/73/78/71/79/70 67/79/77/69/68/89
Visit the Manor:
72/79/78/79/82/69/68/71/85/69/83/84
Shake a Tower:
75/73/78/75/69/82/73/78/71/67/79/78/71

vice have been previously
banned, but notice of the
pending ban was given
through Microprose's
European distributors and
the company did not have
time to reply within the 30day appeal limit. With the
opening of the London office, Microprose did receive sufficient notice with
respect to Gunship. A press conference was held in
May in Munich and a full hearing is scheduled for October 1. It is interesting to note that the law was aimed
at movies and passive media. No challenge has
heretofore been made with respect to computer
software and the censorship issue may prove to be an
interesting legal conundrum.

Titans
of the
Computer
Gaming
World

Any banning requires a youth agency to bring the
complaint. Several rumors in the computer industry attribute such complaints to Microprose's former
European distributors. However, company officials
were unfamiliar with such rumors and doubt the
veracity thereof, but it does make for an interesting
scenario.

Games People Play
Granted that Microprose is a major player in the
computer entertainment field, what sort of busman's
holiday do the principals enjoy? Sid Meier's favorite inhouse design is "the latest one." In terms of other
company's designs, he enjoys Seven Cities of Gold,
Pole Position, and The Sentry. He is a dedicated board
gamer, as well. Bill Stealey's favorite in-house effort is
Silent Service. Outside designs he enjoys are Beachhead, Leader Board, Hardball, and especially, Star
Raiders. Also, he is a sports enthusiast.

A Tip of the Hat to the Micro"Pros"
Microprose considers itself #1 in combat simulations, in the top 3 of overall simulations, and in the top
5 of computer entertainment companies. Note that
Microsoft/subLogic still hold a lead due to Flight
Simulator II, but there have been no recent megasellers.
Microprose has come a long way from its beginnings
as an Atari user group. If they continue to add new
spice to the computer gaming world, they will continue
to mature into the "Micro-Professionals" that Bill
Stealey has always envisioned.

Taking A Peek
Continued from page 6

by robbers, traffic, motorcycles,
tricycles, gratings, curbs, dogs, exhaustion and more. Players try to
deliver their papers to their regular
customers (the yellow houses), but
accomplishing this is harder than
"collecting" is for the real "paperboys" of the world. C-64 ($34.95).
Circle Reader Service #77.
Polarware
521 Hamilton Street
P.O. Box 311
Geneva, IL 60134
THE SESAME STREET
CRAYON: Three new offerings in
Polarware's computer coloring book
series have just been released.
Licensed from the popular "Sesame
Street" television series, these include "Letters for You" (with Big
Bird), "Numbers Count" (with The
Count), and "Opposites Attract"
(with Ernie and Bert). There are
thirty pictures on each disk, as well
as the capacity to print picture calendars and pictures in color. Children
need only "point and click" in order
to choose colors and fill-in the pictures. Apple ($19.95). Circle Reader
Service #78.
THE SPY'S ADVENTURES IN
SOUTH AMERICA: Dr. Xavier
Tortion (X. Tortion), the jewel
smuggler, international thief, and terrorist, is at it again. The player's mission, as Agent H20, is to find the
exact whereabouts of Dr. X and
recover as many stolen gems as pos-

sible. This entire series is fantastic as
a learning game for the entire family. Apple ($17.95), IBM ($19.95).
Circle Reader Service #79.

CONVERSIONS
RECEIVED

For the Apple H:
Lightning EAMON (Shever
Software)
World Class Leader Board (Access)
For the Apple IIGS:
Printix (Data Transforms)
For the Atari 8-bit:
Guild of Thieves (Firebird)
Spitfire 40 (Avalon Hill)
For the Atari ST:
The Advanced OCP Art Studio
(Firebird)
Music Construction Set
(Electronic Arts)
Tracker (Firebird)
For the IBM:
Defender of the Crown (Mstr
Desgr Cinemaware)

(Continued from page 41)

more, there are a few marked exits that are there to either kill
or confuse you, so be careful and save the game a lot.
 Dropping the guards? Two different items can disable
the guard near the well. Both are missile weapons.
 Mirror image? You can find what you need to break the
magic mirror, but you will have to look in the dragon's room.
You cannot kill the dragon, but you can rob him blind! Get
the shield, first. Then, you can pick up three more items
before the shield melts through. If you find you have to drop
something to fit the shield into inventory, do it in another
room. Otherwise, you will have to use one of those three
chances to pick it up again.
 Rope a dope? It is not as hard to get the magic rope to
obey as you would initially think. Talk to it. Read the handwriting on the wall!
 Sphinx bombs? Since the room randomly generates items
to ask you for, it is profitable to save the game just before you
go in to be sure you will be asked for something you can find
easily. If not, you can enter the room, again after restoring
the game. Among the items it might ask for are the broom
and the map you find in the library.
 Be observatory? Look carefully at everything in this
room. It is easy to overlook a crucial item.
 Wolfman shaft? The werewolf guarding the golden spike
is a pretty standard issue. Like most werewolves, he can be
killed with silver, but don't try the spear. Even though it is silver-tipped, it will not work.
 Crazy goo? You can get rid of the green goo in the
mummy room with the Goo-Gone you will find in the room
with the magic rope. Of course, if you don't open the goo sarcophagus, you won't have to bother with the stuff at all.
 Stop and scroll? Always read each scroll immediately.
However, you should always save the game before actually
"Operate"ing any scrolls, to avoid wasting them in the wrong
situations.
 Pure sparks and banshee free? The banshee can only be
banished by a special torch. Don't make the mistake of using
it before you need it.
 Sphere of icing? You can free the ice sphere from the
lake by "Operate"ing your torch on the frozen water. You will
need to use the sphere more than once.

Tome Of Truth (The reviewer's personal
recommendation)
Shadowgate is an excellent product. It is a welcome addition to any Mac owner's game library. ICOM has done a
great service by designing icon-based adventure games and it
is to be hoped that icon-based games will catch on with other
computer systems. They belong on every computer screen because they speed up the flow of the game and make the experience so much more pleasurable.

A BUYER'S GUIDE
TO JOYSTICKS
AND MICE
(Continued from page 37)
witches. Both joysticks offer a lightweight construction and smooth feel, but the TacS offers a lifetime
warranty (subject to a few relatively standard conditions) because the array of switches should keep the
controller from wearing out as fast as conventional
contact switches. Suncom, 260 Holbrook Dr., Wheeling, IL 60090, (312) 459-8000. Circle Reader Service
#6.

An Epyx Moment
The Epyx 500XJ is an ergonomically designed joystick which is available for Apple ($39.95), Atari
and Commodore ($19.95), IBM ($39.95), and Nin-

tendo ($24.95). The Atari and Commodore use four
switches in the base and one in the fire button, but
the Apple and IBM models are potentiometer based
with two microswitches in the fire button. This
design makes for smooth cursor movement and the
curvature of the base keeps gamer's hands from getting tired. Epyx, 600 Galveston Drive, P.O. Box 8020,
Redwood City, CA 94063, (415) 366-0606. Circle
Reader Service #7.

A Flightstick of Angles

Ap

ple II and IBM PC owners who enjoy Flight
Simulator, Jet, and Chuck Yeager's Advanced
Flight Trainer may be interested in CH Products'
new Flightstick (Apple $74.95, IBM $79.95). The
IBM model has a thumbwheel control which can act
as a throttle control for flight simulations (eliminating the need for a second joystick) and as a "third
axis" control for three dimensional computer aided
design software. The use of a potentiometer rather
than contact switches allows total 360 degree cursor
control. CH Products, 1225 Stone Drive, San Marcos, CA 92069, (619) 744-8546. Circle Reader Service #8.

1

RID 41 (Card at p. 8)
On this page, a number of games and articles
are listed for evaluation, as well as some
general interest questions. Please consider
PRESENTATION (graphics, sound, packaging
and documentation); GAME DESIGN (design,
playability and level of interest); and LIFE
(does the game wear well?). Please rate each
game you have played and article you have
read from 1 (terrible) through 9 (outstanding).
In the "Comments" space, please answer the
general interest question and/or feel free to
write a letter to the editor (in which case,
please include your name and home town).

Wizardry IV

(Continued from page 11)

they can.) It would certainly be unnecessary cruelty (not to mention, extremely poor design), for such items to
be "one-chance" only. You would have
to replay the game from the very beginning to obtain the item or items.
Hence, the "resurrections" of the adventurers.
However, I think this could
have been handled a little
better. I didn't so much
mind them coming back
after leaving a level, but it
seemed to me that having
them return on a restore
was a bit much. It almost
(but not quite) turns "finite"
into "infinite," and adds a little extra frustration to a
game that is already difficult
enough in its own right.
Having the adventurers stay
"dead," restore or no, until
you've left the level by going
up or down, would have
been a better way of doing
things.
Another annoying factor
was the constant disk access during
combat. There is a lot of combat.
Thus, when you figure that Werdna
may have approximately twenty
monsters with him (all of them doing
something), plus the adventurers (all
of them doing something), it adds up
to a lot of disk action, far too much.
The most aggravating occurrence happens when you have whittled a team
down to one member with only a handful of hit points left. You still have to
go through an entire combat round,
even though the first hit or spell will
put him down, which makes for even
more access. Grrrrr. Make sure your
drives are in good shape before playing!
The dungeon has the same dreary
old Wizardry graphics: line-drawn
walls,floors, and doors; no color, no
detail. Only the adventurer pictures,and some special displays, bring
any color to the game. However, the
adventurer pictures, although not
animated, are well-done, and there are
several different displays for each adventurer type (fighter, priest, thief,
etc.) which change as you go up the
levels, a nice touch.
In spite of all that, Wizardry IV is

definitely worth playing. The flaws
noted above are more irritations than
drawbacks and they do not really
detract from the overall playability of
the game. They just make things a bit
more difficult than is, perhaps, necessary.
Knowledge of the Wizardry series is

critical to solving the game. In fact, if
you have never played Wizardry I
(Proving Grounds) or if you don't
know someone who has, I can practically guarantee that you will never
finish this game. Time to dust off all
those old Wizardry notes!

A Graveyard Smash
Knowledge of the various Wizardry
Knowledge
is also important, although not crucial, as you can use experimentation to determine their
qualities. You will obviously need to
become familiar with those, since
"team management" (including proper
selection of monsters) is one of the
keys to winning the game.
In general, there is no "one right mix"
of monster groups per level. Some
combinations will, of course, be more
effective than others. Monsters that
are strictly fighter-types (Garian
Raiders, for example) are best
avoided. You want allies that can affect more than one person at a time.
Creatures with breath weapons and/or
spell-casting abilities should be high
on your summoning list.
Likewise, those that can gate in more

monsters ("A creeping coin calls for
help ... one monster appears") are
also very good to have along because
they are practically self-renewing. The
only drawback to these summoners is
they might decide to do it at a time
when you'd rather they fight.
Undead have some interesting
abilities, level-drain in particular, and many can cast
spells. However, they also
tend to be susceptible to Zilwan and Dispel, which can
be a considerable problem
at times, especially when
you're up against high-level
priests and bishops.
Don't overlook monsters
with priest spells. This is
especially important on the
early levels when Werdna
has few hit points. If he
takes damage, there is a
good chance that one or
more of the priest-types will
cast healing spells on him.
Of course, they also have
the ever-popular Montino
spell up their sleeves.
Most of all, you want lots of
monsters. With three groups, Werdna
is in the fourth rank and safely away
from physical (although not magical)
harm.If one or more of the monster
groups is totally wiped out during combat, Werdna is suddenly up front, a
very unhealthy place for him to be.
Thus, the more monsters the adventurers have to kill, the less likely
Werdna will find himself in unpleasant
circumstances.
Since you never know how many
monsters will answer your summons, it
is wise to have the status display on
before you step on the pentagram. If
you don't like the numbers (for instance, you only conjured one of each
type), just camp out on the pentagram
and uncamp again. Do this until you
are satisfied with the number of each
monster type.
Combat techniques are something
you must work out for yourself, considering you have no control over your
"companions". They make their own
decisions with regard to to casting
spells (and which ones), using breath
weapons, summoning more monsters,
physically attacking, or even running

away (yes, some of them will do that,
so be prepared). They help you out,
but only on their own terms.

Mron This Later
buy a clue from the Oracle
AoflwaysMron
when you can afford it.
While vague,they can eventually be
figured out and will provide many important hints to solving the puzzles in
the game. Try to save the game every
time you've bought a few clues. That
way, since they always come up in the
same order, you won't have to buy the
same ones over again if you should get
killed later on.
Map every level completely, and I
mean completely. Don't skip anything
and don't take anything for granted.
Pay careful attention to messages, special displays, and what teams or adventurers carry which items, as well as
descriptions of those items.

Try not to stay too long in any one
area. The longer you hang out there,
the better chance Trebor has of getting you, and he is unstoppable. If you
hear him calling your name, make
tracks for elsewhere, quickly.
The first couple of levels are fairly
simple and straightforward. This is
deliberate in order to give you a
chance to learn how to handle yourself
as Werdna, experiment with monster
combinations, and get an overall feel
for the game. Take advantage of this.
You will be glad you did, when things
get much tougher later on.
Also, be on the lookout for the many
in-jokes and puns (awful puns!) in the
game. While they may not, in most
cases, actually advance you toward the
solution, they do add a certain flavor
to playing.
About the actual puzzles in the
game, I'm not saying anything in.
public. Not this time. Wizardry IV is
unique. It was specifically constructed

to be a challenge to a particular group
and to provide certain rewards for
those who solve it.
On the other hand, no one is perfect,
and there is nothing like this game for
showing up mental blocks, blind spots,
and egoism. Even the beta-testers,
some of the best game players in the
country, tripped up somewhere
(myself included), and needed a gentle
nudge (after which, there were a lot of
heads banging against the wall).
So, hints by mail I will gladly give, but
absolutely no answers! Uh-uh. This
time, you will have to do it all on your
own (just about), because this is where
we separate the Wizardry players from
the Wizardry Masters and
Grandmasters. It is up to you to prove
just how good you are. Good luck, and
I hope you don't forget anything!
Bottom line: Unique, and not to be
missed!
Copyright 1987 by Scorpia, all rights
reserved.

Heavy interest in the Eastern Front of World War H continues to be evident
as SSG's "Russia" penetrated the Strategic Top Ten with a 7.59 rating,
"Kampfgruppe" held onto the second position, and the venerable "War In
Russia" withdrew quietly to a respectable thirteenth position. "Wargame
Construction Set" and "Defender of the Crown" are also bivouacked comfortably in the top ten. "Defender" apparently rose up from the 23rd slot by virtue of positive response to the C-64 conversion.

On the adventure side, the mist, magic and mystery seem to have evaporated
into a mundane status quo. The only real movement took place in the top
ten as "Bard's Tale II" received a slightly greater ovation from its audience
than the older software melody was granted from its patrons. Expect a future shake-up in this list, however, as "Ultima V" and "Wizardry IV" reach
our readership. Watch this space to see who will win the marketing duel arcane between these products.

