December 1987
Number 42

FEATURES
Plundered Hearts

10

Scorpion's Tale Gives Playing Tips / Scorpia

The Electronic Gridiron

16

A Survey of Computer Football Games / Wyatt Lee

1987 CGW Game Of The Year Awards

22

CGW Gives Awards at DRAGONCON '87

Project: Stealth Fighter

26

Microprose's Latest Reviewed / M. Evan Brooks

Beyond Zork

32

The Review / Scorpia

Secret Agents, Man!

35

Polarware's Spy's Adventures Series / David M. Wilson

Victory At Sea

36

A Common Sense Approach to SSI's WARSHIP / Joseph McMaster

Battles In Normandy

47

SSG's New Western Front Game / Bob Proctor

Firepower

51

A Budget Arcade Wargame / Roy Wagner

DEPARTMENTS
Editorial
Taking A Peek
Reader Input Device
Game Ratings

4
5
63
64

Editorial
An

old adage says "don't let the grass grow under
your feet." Successful magazine publishers live by
this admonition. In an ongoing quest to maintain membership in that select club (i.e. successful magazine
publishers) we have constantly looked for more efficient
means to produce a better product for you, our readers.
In 1987 we completely revamped the format and
layout of Computer Gaming World and we are
delighted with the results.
The first big change was the now legendary "machine
specific column massacre". In one fell swoop columns
died right and left. It was a bloody scene, but someone
had to do it! Unlike the early 1980's when single or two
machine titles were commonplace,
game
manufacturers now
release the
majority of
their titles on
four or more
machines.
The need for
specific
machine
columns disappeared, for
the most
part, with this
change. The space gained by this change has been put
to good use according to the letters we receive.
Concurrent with the pruning of columns was the adoption of themes for each issue (the current issue is our
"Football Issue"). This was a marketing move and we
are pleased to say, a move that has paid off in increased sales.

Next, the layout went through significant changes. Up
through Issue #38 (June-July 1987) CGW was
produced in the traditional method of pasting up galley
sheets of type. However, this is the era of desktop
publishing. In July we joined the revolution and went
"desktop". Upgrading to the IBM AT, the Hewlett Packard LaserJet series II printer, and the Micro Display
Systems The Genius 401 full page display monitor, we
jumped into desktop publishing with Xerox's Ventura
Publisher.
The results first appeared in Issue #39 (Aug-Sept
1987). Not only did the magazine look better, the time
to produce each issue dropped by 15% and our prepress production costs went down by 25%. Now, let me
guess—when you read that we have been able to cut
the cost of production on CGW you say to yourself "so
what? I don't see you lowering my cost!" Well, you are

right. In fact, the price actually went up with Issue #40.
The culprits here are inflation and a sizable increase in
paper cost this year. Nevertheless,our constant quest to
reduce production costs while improving the magazine
at the same time explains, in part, why we are the only
four-color computer game magazine still around when
once there were eighteen such magazines (1984). So,
be excited that we are more efficient now! Our gain is
your gain! CGW marches on!
Microsoft Word and our subscription to Compuserve round out the basic tools that we use to
produce each issue of CGW. A good portion of each
issue is sent to us via Compuserve. The remainder
comes to us on diskette as IBM text files. The articles
are edited using Word and then transferred to Ventura
Publisher.
In Issue #40 (October 1987) we introduced our new
logo. The combination of a bold traditional typeface
used for the word "COMPUTER" (that harkens back to
the older logo style) has been combined with a new freeflowing treatment of the words "GAMING WORLD." The
resulting logo suggests the dynamic tension between
the traditional and the progressive that exists, not only
in CGW's editorial personality, but also in the computer
entertainment industry overall.
Yet another change appears with the issue you hold in
your hand. Departing from a traditional Times Roman
typeface, which is common to so many publications, we
have adopted a new progressive, attractive typeface
called Korinna ® . We like it, what do you think?
Stay tuned. More improvements are on the way!
Russell Sipe
Publisher and Editor

ActionSoft
201 W. Springfield Ave. Suite 711
Champaign, IL 61820
THUNDERCHOPPER: One of many
recent releases of helicopter simulations, this simulation is lovingly
crafted to reflect the controls and
weaponry of an advanced Hughes
530MG Defender. The detail in this
product, supervised by a veteran Air
Force gunship pilot, is phenomenal.
Apple, C-64 ($29.95). Circle Reader
Service #1.
Activision
P. O. Box 7287
Mountain View, CA 94039
POSTCARDS: If you liked the
PAPER MODELS interface, you will

love POSTCARDS. This isn't a
game, but it is entertainment. Ever
wanted to create your own silly
postcards? This product offers
enough clip art, bizarre backgrounds, and catchy captions to
keep all of your correspondents in
stitches (or all of your enemies
angry!). Apple, C-64, IBM ($24.95),
Apple IIGS, Mac ($29.95). Circle
Reader Service #2.
Broderbund Software
17 Paul Drive
San Rafael, CA 94903-2101
WINGS OF FURY: Here's your
chance to one-up that land-based
"Black Sheep Squadron." Power-up
your carrier-based F6F Navy Hellcat
and find the nearest Imperial

Japanese target. This is definitely
more of an arcade game than combat flight simulation. Apple II w/
128K req. ($34.95). Circle Reader
Service #3.
California Dreams
780 Montague Expwy., Suite 403
San Jose, CA 95131
VEGAS CRAPS: From the colorful
dice, graphics and table to the
audible click of the chips as one
places bets on the table, this game
is as addictive as the gambling bug
itself. The only missing feature is
that there is no option for multiplayer interaction as there is on a
real table. Apple II, C-64 ($29.95),
Atari ST ($34.95), Amiga, Apple

IIGS, and IBM ($39.95). Circle
Reader Service #4.
VEGAS GAMBLER: Players will
swear they are in a casino when
they see the Video Poker screen in
this product. This product also contains a simulated Slot Machine with
five coin pay-off lines, a digitized
Blackjack table, and computer
Roulette table with authentic layout.
Apple II, C-64 ($29.95), Atari ST
($34.95), and Amiga, Apple IIGS,
IBM ($39.95). Circle Reader Service
#5.
Cosmi
415 N. Figueroa
Wilmington, CA 90744
INSIDE TRADER: This game has
more market crashes than Wall
Street had in October, 1987. Don't
be put off by the "authentic stock
trading game" billing, this one of-

fers a "real-time" element that is fun
and challenging. Correlation with
real market conditions is only coincidental, however. IBM ($24.95).
Circle Reader Service #6.
SHIRLEY MULDOWNEY'S TOP
FUEL CHALLENGE: Like many
other racing games presently on
the market, this one allows the
player to set-up the car for each of
several events and the special circumstances surrounding them. It
also has a cockpit view suggestive
of a three-dimensional perspective
and a separate "track conditions"
sequence. C-64 ($24.95). Circle
Reader Service #7.
Datasoft
19808 Nordhoff Place
Chatsworth, CA 91311
BISMARCK - THE NORTH SEA
CHASE: An action-strategy game

that plays on several different levels.
The strategic elements call for optimal deployment of British ships,
the use of different screens to
reflect various battle stations is
reminiscent of DESTROYER (from
Epyx), and the action screens offer
a more colorful presentation than
earlier games on this subject. C-64
($29.95). Circle Reader Service #8.
DARK LORD: No, players do not
face Darth Vader in this game. This
is an animated alternate world adventure. The alternate world, appropriately enough, is named Alterworld. Players do have to vanquish
the evil Warlord, Nequam, however.
Apple, C-64 ($19.95). Circle Reader
Service #9.
FORCE 7: Only one crew member
Continued on pg. 60

Scorpia's
Regular hint
column
visits the
Spanish
Main in
Plundered
Hearts.

A

h yes, it's that time of year again,
when desperate shoppers crowd
department stores, snowflakes dance
on bitter north winds, and the strains
of "Plover the River and Frotz the
Woods", "Dorn-beasts Roasting on
an Open Fire", and "I'm Dreaming of
a Dark Cavern" fill the air. So, step
right in, settle down by the fireplace,
and feel free to sing along. Just walk
carefully past the Christmas Tree
Monster in the corner (quite harmless
on an individual basis and he does
brighten up the place with his swishing tinsel and blinking lights) and
don't let Fred's traditional shrunkenhead garland on the wall upset you;
he gets terribly sentimental during
this season. Of course, if you really
prefer warmer climes, I have just the
place for you: a delightful little resort
in the Caribbean, called St. Sinistra .
Right up front, I'll tell you that when
I heard Infocom was putting out a
gak romance adventure, my stomach
did flip-flops. This is not to say that
romance doesn't have a place, just
that its place is not in adventure
games. I'm very strong-minded about
such things (there are those who
would say prejudiced, but of course
we aren't going to listen to them). Fortunately, Plundered Hearts turned out
to be not so bad as I expected. The
romantic interludes are few and far
between (whew!), and the game overall has some neat, if not too difficult,
puzzles. The piracy part, however, is
just a bit of gloss, as most of the action takes place on land rather than
on the Spanish Main.
In a departure from more typical Infocoms, your character is definitely
female. You get no choice here. Still,
considering that the lady you portray
gets to do most of the rescuing and

derring-do in the game, it hardly matters (in fact, you don't have to get
very far into the game to realize that
the whole thing is really an inverted
spoof of traditional romances).
So here you are, on a ship out from
London and bound for St. Sinistra in
the Caribbean. The name alone
should make you think twice, But
your dear father is ill and only the
sight of his beloved daughter can turn
the tide ... or so you've been told.
Of course, the whole thing is a dastardly plot, invented by the notorious
Jean Lafond, governor of St. Sinistra,

who wants nothing more than to get
his hot little hands on you. Luckily,
before the ship arrives in port, it is attacked by a pirate vessel commanded
by the equally-notorious Falcon
(Nicholas to his friends).
Nicky sweeps you off to his own
ship, allowing you the exclusive use of
his cabin, as well as giving you a letter
from your father. This missive tells
you that Nicky, at least, is trustworthy
and a gentleman, whereas Lafond
isn't. Believe it.
Daddy dear is actually in the
clutches of the perfidious Lafond
(which is French for "the bottom;"
how appropriate), and Nicky and his
pirate friends are off to attempt a res-

cue. Well, that's what they think,
anyway. In reality, it's you who will be
doing most of the rescuing here.
Nicky takes off to attend a ball given
by the villain, thoughtfully leaving you
behind for safety. Naturally, no
heroine worthy of the name is going
to accept that! So, quick as a wink,
you slip out the door where you find a
wardrobe that contains clothing more
suitable for your upcoming adventures, namely a cabin boy's outfit (no
one ever notices the reticule attached
to your wrist; perhaps such things are
standard gear for cabin boys).
It doesn't take long before you realize that the stairs going up lead to a
locked door you can't open (at least,
not from this side) and the stairs
going down lead to the hold (which
also has no exits you can open from
this side).
This is rather a ticklish situation,
since in the hold you notice that a
slow fuse is burning its way towards
the kegs of gunpowder stored inside
a wire cage. The results of the gunpowder being set off do not bear
thinking about.
What to do? I suggest finding a way
topside as soon as possible, because
there's another nasty situation up
there, as well. The ship's anchor has
been cut, and the vessel is drifting
towards the reefs (this is known as
being between a rock and a hard
place).
Fortunately, stopping the ship is fairly easy. Simply explore all the top
decks for the proper method. There
is time for this, because that fuse
below is a slow one and the reefs are
the more immediate threat (Imagine,
a shipload of experienced sailors and
not one notices the ship is drifting ..
.).
Now, you can concentrate on averting the explosion. Obviously, you
have to put out the fire somehow.
The lock on the gate can't be picked,
and there's no way you can climb
over. Examine that gate carefully,
however, and you'll see there's a
space at the top. Perhaps, that will
give you some ideas. Don't be afraid
to sacrifice some old clothes for a
good cause.
With the ship now saved from
treachery (obviously, Lafond must

have had a spy in the crew), you have
some time to go through it more
thoroughly, picking up all sorts of interesting little items. A chat with
Cooky (the ship's cook, of course)
would not be amiss.
Ok, time to head for shore. Too bad
you can't swim, and no skiffs are available (I guess Nicky took the only one).
Still, there is a means of reaching the
island, if you're not too picky about
your accommodations. Splash!
In no time at all, you reach the
lagoon near Lafond's house. Before
trying to get inside (front door NOT
recommended!), check the exterior
carefully. At this point, you have pretty much two choices: go to the ball
first and then, rescue Daddy or rescue Daddy first, and then, go to the
ball. It doesn't matter which order you
go for, as both activities must be completed before you can get further into
the game.
Since you're a well-brought-up
young lady (which explains why you're
running around in men's clothing
and doing men's work ... grin), you'll
probably want to rescue Daddy first.
Everyone knows that libraries have
secret passages in them (especially
libraries in works of romantic fiction!),
so you may want to start there.
Lafond is a tricky rascal, though, and
discovering the mechanism may take
some thinking. Don't overlook anything in the room! Try to overcome
your good manners and handle
things freely. These are desperate
times.
Opening the secret passage isn't the
only problem. Part of the way along in
the nether regions is a crocodile. He
is obviously not a pleasant fellow, but
there are two ways of dealing with
him. One is the fast and daring way
that will have him seeing red, and the
other is the more genteel method of
pleasant dreams. Either one will get
you safely past Mr. Jaws.
Daddy won't stick around very long
after you get him out. This is just as
well, since you have a ball to attend.
Of course, you know how to manage
that, right? I mean, you did find the
gown and you do have the invitation,
yes? (If no, shame on you...always
look before you throw!!)
In the ballroom, Nicky will dance

with you and tell you that so far, he
hasn't had much luck finding the dungeon where Daddy was being held
(not surprising, if all he's been doing
is spending his time here). You can
tell him about Daddy if you like.
Your next partner will not be so
enchanting: Lafond himself, in per-

son. At last, you get to meet the foul
dog behind all this intrigue! It's best
not to mention that Daddy isn't down
below any more. Just let Lafond have
his say, which includes an invitation
(or perhaps, an order) to meet him
later for a private little supper in his
private chambers.
Shortly afterwards, there is a commotion! Nicky is being dragged off by
the guards! Tch, how careless of him!
Of course we know where he'll end
up, but that will have to wait for now,
because the butler comes by to tell
you that Lafond is expecting you
upstairs in his room. Your instincts
may be against it, but you really
should go. Don't worry, virtue will be
triumphant (we hope).
He sure does have a fancy little
hideaway, doesn't he? This, of
course, is in the great tradition of all
egotistical and grandiose villains
(there aren't any other kinds), and he
talks that way, too.
But what's this? The door slams
open! Nicky, wielding a rapier, bursts
into the room! Is rescue at hand? Alas
no, the dear boy barely manages a
few words before Lafond's minions
bonk him on the head and drag him
off again (in the great tradition of all
heroes, Nicky has a hard head, which
is probably the only thing that's kept
him alive for so long).
Now, it's just you and Lafond. How
marvelous. At the moment, his back

is turned, and you may wish to try a little underhanded action of your own.
Just don't go for the too obvious.
Hmmm, that didn't seem to work as
expected. Ah well, such is life. Yet, all
may not be lost. Although Lafond is
hot to trot, I'll bet you can spice
things up even more. You could even
say a little pinch wouldn't hurt.
Whew! You have managed to save
yourself from A Fate Worse Than
Death, but the results are only temporary and I wouldn't stick around
here if I were you. Besides, there's
Nicky down below, waiting for you to
rescue him. Before you rush off,
though, don't forget the window!
Down in the dungeons again, you
find more than just a crocodile in
your way. Andy Crulley, the nasty
traitor, is tormenting a helpless Nicky
with a whip (the standard weapon of
all bad guys). Oops! He just noticed
you! Well, just don't stand there,
defend yourself! Nicky is counting on
you and besides, a trip down the hole
is definitely one way. "Take that, you
blackguard!" you say, "and that!" "Curses, foiled again!" you expect him to
respond.
With Andy out of the way for now,
freeing Nicky from his chains (and, incidentally, bringing him back to the
land of the wide-awake) is simple. Unfortunately, he takes himself far too
seriously as a hero (or perhaps he's
just embarrassed by his performance
so far) and has thoughts for nothing
else but sticking it to Lafond. Before
you can say, "Sail ho!", Nicky rushes
off once more.
Being a little brighter than Nicky,
you probably realize that in his shape,
he couldn't take on a mosquito,
much less one of the best swordsmen
going. Looks like you'll just have to
haul his ummmmm, posterior out of
the fire again.
You arrive just in time, too. Nicky
and the Big L are having it out in the
ballroom and our boy is not doing too
well. An unkind person might even
say he's losing. In fact, he just slipped
up and is lying flat on the floor with
Lafond over him, poised for the death
stroke.
Is this the end of our Nicky? Will the
(Continued on page 14)

(Continued from page 11)

nefarious Lafond prevail? Will the
spunky heroine, after all, suffer the
dreaded Fate Worse Than Death?
Gee, I sure hope not! All that will
come to pass, however, unless you
move and move very fast indeed. Just
think of the quickest way to get from
the balcony to the ballroom. That
should do it. Geronimo! (A little
anachronistic and certainly not ladylike, but these are desperate times).
Ok! Maybe now you'll be able to get
off this island in one piece. Don't bet
on it. Daddy is forcibly restraining
Nicky from giving Lafond what he
deserves (the skunk is out cold on the
floor), and urging everyone to leave.
Everyone does (Ever notice how
you're always being left behind?
Makes you wonder, doesn't it?).
So, you hop it after them and no
sooner do you reach the cove and the
skiff, than who should appear but
(you guessed it!) Lafond, with Andy
and a bunch of guards in tow. The
Big Moment has arrived! The Final
Showdown is about to start! Tension!
Excitement! Romance!
Yes, even at this penultimate moment, there is some of that romance
popping up again. Actually, Nicky just
wants to know whether or not you
love him. Awww, go on, give the poor
slob a break. He certainly needs all
the help he can get (as if you didn't
know that by now, or even much earlier).
Fortified by your professed love,
Nicky puts on a dazzling show of
swordsmanship! (How he manages
this miracle, given everything that has
already happened, especially his inept
showing only minutes earlier, will go
unremarked).
Nevertheless, even as Lafond is finally skewered once and for all, the scurrilous Crulley is hastily loading his pis-

tol for a potshot at Our Hero. Yes,
you're going to have to do it one
more time (woman's work is never
done . . .).
At last! It's all over! Daddy is free!
Nicky is still alive! You have avoided A
Fate Worse Than Death! and as the
stars twinkle in the dark Caribbean
sky, you and Nicky set sail in the
Helena Louise (Nicky's ship) for the
New World, America in the 1600's
(patriotic music swells in the background) . . . hard manual labor ... unfriendly Indians . . . a pack of squalling brats ... (pssst! Hey Cooky, what
say we dump this twit overboard, take
command of the ship, and go beat on
some Spanish treasure galleons? ...).
Well (taking a peek at the old invisible clock on the wall), I'll leave you
now to get on with your own festivities of the season. Before you rush
off to do that last-minute shopping,
though, remember that if you need
help with an adventure game, you
can reach me in the following ways:

on Delphi, visit the GameSIG (under
the Groups and Clubs menu); on
GEnie, stop by the Games RoundTable (type: Scorpia to reach the
Games RT); on The Source, send
Smail to ST1030; by US Mail (and I
say this every time, and still there are
people who don't believe me: if you
live in the United States, you MUST
enclose a self-addressed, stamped envelope to get a reply!): Scorpia, PO
Box 338, Gracie Station, New York,
NY 10028.
Until next time, happy adventuring!
Copyright 1987 by Scorpia, all rights
reserved.
Note: "Dornbeasts Roasting on An
Open Fire", "Plover the River and
Frotz the Woods", and "I'm Dreaming
of A Dark Cavern" are copyright 1987
by Infocom, Inc, and may be found,
along with other seasonal favorites, in
Beyond Zork, which, just by the
merest coincidence, is reviewed elsewhere in this issue.

T he

crack of shoulder pads,
grunts from linemen, shouted
audibles from the quarterback, verbal
obscenities from the sidelines, brassy
blare from the marching bands, and
thunderous roar of the crowd assault
our eardrums. We are visually stimulated by the bright rainbow of uniform colors,
the psychedelic patterns of the card stunts,
and the resplendent glitter of the cheerleaders'
pom-poms. It is, despite
the cynical efforts of
both NFL owners and
players, the season of football. It
is also the season when disgruntled computer owners tire
of second-guessing their college alma mater's coaches or
play selection of the alleged
professional coaches. It is time
to put one's skills and strategy
to the test on the electronic
gridiron.
Computerized football competition seems to fall into two basic
categories: action/strategy and
statistics-based strategy. Both
categories have much to offer,
but the player will have to make
the ultimate choice as to which
program offers the most for him.

dously significant when your onscreen identity is overthrown or underthrown because he ran an incorrect or imprecise pattern (the
program is very unforgiving on this).
The graphics present large, smoothflowing, colorful caricatures of foot-

I

Action/Strategy

GFL

Championship Football from Activision's

Gamestar division is one of the
most revolutionary approaches
to the action/strategy game. No
other game can offer the fan
with no organized football background such an empathetic perspective on the game. The designers refer
to this perspective as an "inside the
helmet view" and that is exactly what
the player receives. The computer
screen shows what a quarterback,
running back, or wide receiver would
see from his helmet. Tired cliches like
"finding a hole" which trip easily off
an announcer's tongue become
meaningful when your offensive line
fails to open a hole and the opposing
defense buries you. Matters such as
"running a pattern" become tremen-

the primary key to success. One can
select the proper play or defense
throughout the game and still lose because of poor execution.
If this was all the game had to offer,
it would be a popular product, but the
game offers league play, as well.
Players can draft any
one of twenty-eight
teams in four different
divisions. Teams are
ranked in eight different skill categories
(e.g. coach, offensive
line, quarterback, etc.),
so the draft is functional rather than aesthetic.
That recaps the plus yardage,
I
the minus yardage can be
stated more succinctly. The arcade aspects of the game are
difficult. Execution must be perfect (or near-perfect) by the
human player. This is fair when
two human opponents are playing, but makes for a near-impossible challenge when one plays
the computer. Further, the "inside the helmet view" may be a
unique perspective, but the twodimensional computer screen
makes it impossible for the
player to have one important
perspective that the on-field
player has, peripheral vision.
This increases the difficulty level
somewhat. Finally, since the
graphics portray the "inside the
helmet view" from the offensive
perspective, the game offers an
entirely different (and less
legitimate) feel on defense. Playing defense is extremely disorienting from this perspective.
Perhaps, a split-screen perspective would help.
Whatever one's feelings about the
game, when the plus yardage and
minus yardage is added together, this
action/strategy game is a watershed
design. It is available for Apple, Atari
ST, C-64, and IBM. Circle Reader Service #50.

ball players within the player's simulated field of vision and this adds to
the on-the-field illusion of the game.
Even if the game simply consisted of
this perspective, it would be a significant product, but the game has
strategic depth to it, as well. Both the
offensive and defensive teams have
lengthy playlists to select from and
the program allows thirty seconds between each play for these decisions
to be made simultaneously by joystick
input. Unlike most statistics-based
games, proper play selection is not

4 th

& Inches from Accolade is a
product with similar appeal, but
an entirely different feel. In this new
release, Bob Whitehead (designer of
Hardball) has provided a "game film"

type screen perspective which allows
the player to observe both teams from
the sideline/line of scrimmage frame
of reference. These graphics are
colorful caricatures of football players
and the animation is fluid. The arcade
action seems fasterpaced than GFL Championship Football because of the wider field
of view which the
screen shows and the
arcade play itself is
more forgiving than the
other game. Like the
game discussed above,
4th and Inches requires
the player to control
each individual ball
handler, but where the
former is more realistic
in terms of execution,
the latter is easier to
master on the arcade
level.

G

ridiron from Bethesda
Softworks is an action/strategy
football game which allows for an actual NFL DataDisc® to provide a
statistics base of authentic players.
Nevertheless, this is a game where

The new release is
strategically oriented, as well. The offensive playbook offers eleven formations, ten rushing plays, four kicking
plays, and fourteen passing plays.
The defensive playbook offers five
basic formations and seven defensive
plays. As in the game discussed
above, however, play selection must
be followed-up with careful execution
in order to be successful.
The minus yardage involves the lack
of league play. The game is not setup to accommodate different styles o
play and continuity of league results.
Also, the game loses some of its corn
plexity due to the fact that one is essentially playing the same team every
game. In spite of the variety in the
playbook, this essentially reduces the
over-all effect of the game to a "beer
and pretzels" effort. Of course, some
readers may consider that to be plus
yardage. The other minor problem to
be considered is that there is a disorienting screen shift on kicking and
passing plays which slows up the flow,
of play considerably. In spite of these
two criticisms, this game is a welcome addition to the genre. It is avail
able for C-64 only. Circle Reader Service #51.

both play selection and mouse/joystick manipulation are vital to success.
Plays are, as in the games described
above, executed in "real time" with
the player using his mouse to control
the ball carrier or active defensive
player. Unlike the games discussed
earlier, however, the football players
are represented by colored dots akin
to the "X and 0" diagrams one sees
on a coach's chalkboard rather than
animated figures. On offense, the

mouse controls the ball carrier until
he either pitches, hands off, or passes. Receivers are identified by a
stripe across their dot to indicate
eligibility. The basic playbook contains twenty basic offensive and twen, ty basic defensive plays,
but the game system allows users to design
their own plays and add
to the playbook. In fact,
players can load up to
28 custom playbooks
on a data disk, making
an extremely viable
league possibility.
This game has
tremendous constructability in that it contains provision for a
league draft and customizing teams. More
than the other games
listed in this category,
this game is statistics
critical. Poor receivers
make for poor probability in terms of
pass plays, etc. Pure statistics-based
players will not like it, however, because a poor arcade player can undermine good statistics in a hurry.
Yet, the game is worthy of note because it takes speed and strength into
account in determining the results of
plays where the previous games do
not. Making contact with the ball carrier is not sufficient to make a tackle
in Gridiron. The player's strength may
cause him to drag the would-be tackler along for several yards. This statistical weight isn't often observed in
computer football games.
Although this game is only available
for the Amiga and Atari ST, the
graphics are not as spectacular as
one would expect for these machines.
These machines do add one interesting wrinkle, however. The manual
suggests hooking up one's videocassette recorder to the video output of
the Amiga and connecting this with
the video input of the VCR (as well as
the audio out channels to the audio
in of the VCR). By doing this, one can
create one's own potential instant
replay of any portion of the game.
Circle Reader Service #52.

F

ootball from subLogic has been
around for a while and deserves
some mention. Even though the action sequences are easier to control
than in the other games listed in this
section, the graphics are mediocre
and, at times, confusing. The most
minus yardage comes from the fact
that it is difficult to tell one's team
members from those of the opposing
team. This problem really complicates
the idea of broken field running. Further information can be found in
CGW #30, pages 20-21, and CGW
#32, page 12. It is available for the C64 and IBM. Circle Reader Service
#53.

play announcer if observing a computer vs. computer game.
The flow of play seems realistic and
the play outcomes are satisfying.
Some Amiga owners will not like the
fact that play selections must be
entered at the keyboard by one coach
at a time, but it is the keyboard input
which allows one to customize plays

Strategy Games

H ead

Coach from MicroSearch
is an abstract stat-oriented
strategy game. It is abstract in the
sense that the players and team
names are fictional. The NFL requires
royalty payments for use of real team
and player names used in games.
Thus some football games, including
Head Coach avoid this expense by
using "typical" stats without associating "real" player names to said stats.
Head Coach has a lot of good
things going for it. For example, it has
the most stimulating sound effects of
and football game I'm aware of.
Second, even though the fictional
teams which come on the disk are
not based on either college or NFL
teams, there are several distinctive
styles and playbooks listed and the
constructability of this program would
make it possible to customize one's
favorite college or pro teams. Third,
the standard playbook for each team
is relatively thorough in that coaches
can direct which running back is supposed to run through which hole
without having to customize a play. If
the coach wants to improvise on the
fly, the program can read a specially
designed play. If the coach wishes to
customize a playbook, the program
can handle that, too. Fourth, players
can customize uniform colors to
reflect his favorite team's colors. Fifth,
each player on the field is identified
with a number. One could use this
program to practice being a play-by-

on the fly. After the offensive and
defensive plays have been input, a
graphics routine portrays an aerial
view of the numbered players going
through their paces. At times, the
graphics routine can be deceptive, as
in the case of a scrambling quarterback who seems totally buried, yet escapes to gain a few yards. However,
the results are usually visually sharp
and clear cut.
Minus yardage for this program
must focus on the keyboard interface
which, while opening up creative possibilities on the one hand, slows down
the game on the other. Minus yardage must also be applied for the lack
of easily accessible files on real NFL
teams. Circle Reader Service #54.

M

ac Pro Football from Avalon
Hill is another machine specific
product which is worthy of note. [Ed:
The description of this game was
provided by William H. Harrington.]
It is a meticulous simulation of
modern pro football with a host of features. It offers three coaching skill
levels (in descending order, Cham-

pionship, Playoff, and Contender),
and the computer opponent not only
remembers your plays, but is even
capable of changing the game plan
in the second half (unlike some NFL
coaches).
MPF teams may be selected from
either the historical matchups from
Super Bowls I to XX or by mixing and
matching teams from eras as different as Lombardi's Packers and
Ditka's Bears. There is even a "Set
Game Option" to pick up the action
at any time in any game. Now, it is
possible to find out if the Minnesota
Vikings could really have stopped the
Dallas Cowboys in the final two
minutes of the '75 NFC Playoffs, held
onto the lead, and gone on to the
Super Bowl! There are even weather
and domed stadium options. During
game play, continuous offensive rushing and passing statistics are available
via screen or printer. At the conclusion of the game, complete team
statistics are available. This detailed
display should satisfy the most
demanding sports buff.
The game has its own special
graphic pizzazz in addition to its
strategic challenges. The on-screen
graphics are superb. The top left half
of the screen depicts a football field
in profile. Beneath this display is a
window that provides a "blimp's eye"
view of the field. The offense and
defense are depicted in traditional O's
and X's with one big difference. They
are animated! Once the play begins,
you watch as the players execute your
play (watch out for that quarterback
sack!). To the right of the play action
window, another window alternates
between displaying an animated
referee who calls penalties by means
of official hand signals and a list of
current team statistics. There is also a
scoreboard and a few other surprises.
A full range of play options is available from wide open running games
featuring Draws, Dives, Traps, Slants,
Sweeps, and Quarterback Sneaks to
the aerial circus featuring classic
Drop Back, Play Action, Roll Out and
Shotgun passes.
Minus yardage must be tabulated for
the only thing missing, sound effects.
Continued on page 42

IL

ord British was
there with a
harem girl at his
side (at least, during
the masquerade
ball) and a multitude
of working Ultima V
prototypes in his
possession. Steve
Jackson was there,
brandishing his
G.U.R.P.S. Horseclans rules and smiling about the success of Autoduel
and Ogre. Gary
Gygax, co-creator of
Dungeons and
Dragons, unleashed
his Cyborg Commando game system. Robert Asprin
and Lynn Abbey
had left the
"Sanctuary" of their
Ann Arbor hideaway
for a "myth-tical"
quest into fandom. Michael Moorcock
was presented with an astonishingly
life-like replica of "Stormbringer"
during the costume competition. Bill
Leslie and Tom Carbone of Omnitrend, publishers of Breach, were
there in this strange new Universe,
rubbing shoulders with the amazingly
un-Paranoid designer, Greg Costikyan. Doug Wood offered his gentle
presence in this southern Phantasie.
How could the CGW staff resist?
Dragon Con '87 was the perfect place
to present the 1987 Computer
Gaming World Games of the Year
Awards. The date was October 2-4,
1987. The place was Atlanta, Georgia. There, under the shadow of Georgia Tech, we joined with "Trekkies"
and "techies" for a splendid weekend
of science fiction and science fact.
CGW Publisher Russell Sipe chaired a
panel on "Developing Plot in Computer Games." Richard Garriott, better
known as Lord British and as the
designer of the Ultima series, served
on the panel along with Bill Leslie
(designer of the Universe series and
Breach) and Doug Wood (designer of
the Phantasie series) Sipe began the
discussion by stating that there are
three basic elements in computer

role-playing games (or in any story,
for that matter). These are: 1) environment—the world, universe, and/or culture in which the adventure takes
place; 2) tension—the challenges,
combat, and/or puzzles which must
be resolved; and 3) plot how the
story actually develops and what the
story-line is. The designers were
asked to state the order in which they
placed these elements into their
games.
Lord British responded first. The cutting-edge computer role playing
game (CRPG) designer admitted that
he develops the environment first, follows with the tension element, and allows the story-line to evolve close to
the end. He reiterated the fact that
each new Ultima is built upon a new
technology and insisted that this is
proper because the computer media
may determine the appropriateness
of plot.
We had been under the impression
that Lord British was something of an
anomaly in this approach, but Doug
Wood concurred with this method. In
the Phantasie series, Doug suggested
that he had a basic idea of plot elements before he began the project.
However, the refined plot was the last
ingredient to go into the product. He

insisted that one
had to know what
one needed to happen and the tools
one had to work
with (i.e. what one
can program)
before he develop
the plot around
these limitations.
Bill Leslie, who is
hard at work on
Universe III, told the
audience that he
was more comfortable when he starts
with a story premise,
then develops the
programming necessary to present the
story. He noted,
however, that as he
constructed the
game, it tended to
influence the final
product. Therefore,
the capstone of the
plot is the last portion of the product
to fit into place.
Lord British summarized the answers
by suggesting that the person who
develops the plot in detail prior to
programming has a logistics problem.
Simply put, "... you don't know how
much code you're going to use for a
very small feature in the game."
Several members of the audience
wanted to know if the extended
memory capacity of the 16-bit
machines would help break this alleged logistics jam. The panel
responded that 16-bit technology
isn't going to help because of the
memory-intensive graphics. The
audience protested that there might
be too much use of graphics. One
participant called the proliferation of
16-bit "chrome" a "creeping
munchkinism." Doug Wood felt that
attitude was going too far and noted,
that "a game must capture your attention. Graphics and sound accomplish
that." The audience continued to
speculate about the need for more
sophisticated artificial intelligence in
adventure games. The discussion was
abbreviated by Lord British's admonition that "Al is not limited by the
machine, but by the programmer."

Next, Doug Wood expanded on his
development process by noting that
he does the puzzles before the plot
and allows the puzzles to help dictate
the plot. "If you've done everything
right," the modest designer stated, "it
is a straightforward process.
When the panel was asked how much
game sequels should be tied to
former plot lines. Doug Wood
answered, "I like to reward
people who played earlier
games, particularly those who
won." All three panelists
agreed that they had made
marketing decisions not to
depend too much on their previous releases. In both Ultima and
Phantasie, though, it was noted that
there were certain characters who carried over into the later products.
Sipe asked each panelist to quantify (using percentages) how important they perceive plot to be
in a CRPG. See table for their
answers.
Doug Wood followed up on his
answer by stating that he
believes that Phantasie's
strongpoint is plot. Bill Leslie emphasized that his work has
moved from trading and incidental combat (the tension emphasis) to more of a character
and plot emphasis. This means
that character development in
the Universe series is taking a
turn away from attributes and
toward decision-making, particularly ethical questions within the
gray areas of life.
CGW's chief executive also
moderated a panel on "Programming
Board and FRP Games." Sipe initiated the discussion with the question, "Why convert Boardgames to
Computer Games?" Panelist Steve
Jackson answered the question nonverbally by pulling a wad of currency
out of his wallet and waving it in the
air. That obvious reality noted, other
reasons were examined. Sipe suggested ability to add a computer opponent can play a big role. Lord
British mentioned the capacity for
adapting maps and handling bookkeeping. John Miles, one of the
bright, young talents at Origin Systems, insisted that the computer's

capability for number crunching
made it ideal for extending the possibilities of combat calculations. Steve
Jackson, designer of The Fantasy
Trip, Car Wars, Illuminati, and
G.U.R.P.S., replaced the Alexander
Hamiltons in his wallet and suggested
that the computer's ability to look-up
tables faster than the most proficient

game master made this a worthwhile
effort. Bill Leslie exhorted his fellow
designers on the point that "Com-

puter games should enhance the
design, not just copy it."
Having established the ground rules,
several of the panelists attempted to
clarify the difference between a "literal
translation" of a boardgame (a la
Ogre) and a "free translation" of a
game (a la Autoduel). Jackson was extremely complimentary of Origin
Systems' addition of a "real-time
editor" to Autoduel, for example. Jackson also observed, with regard to
Ogre, "I believe this is specious, but I
continually get the comment that the
Ogre is cheating. 'You cannot get
that many hits on a D6.' What's really
happening is that the computer is optimizing its attacks." Lord British concurred with this observation by
remarking, "Remember that the com-

puter is taking the mathematically accurate option in movement, attacks,
etc."
When pressed on specifics, Lord
British referred to the fact that the
ogre in Ogre randomizes three major
offensive stances which set the
strategic assumptions for that game.
For example, one ogre hates howitzers. Therefore, its prime targets are howitzers. Bill Leslie
stated that Omnitrend took a
different response to artificial
intelligence in Breach in that
the strategies are based on personal decisions, rather than
mathematical decisions.
Hence, the artificial intelligence bears
a simulated personality.
The value of "licenses" was discussed
with Sipe noting that Strategic
Simulations, Inc. had recently
picked up the prestigious rights
to do computerized Advanced
Dungeons and Dragons. Lord
British observed that the real
value of a license is simply name
recognition. The main effect on
the game comes in the area of
combat system and nomenclature. Bill Leslie agreed, noting
that "Designers should not
shoehorn a design into the computer, but concentrate on what
computers do best - draw maps,
roll attributes, etc."
In closing, Sipe allowed the
designers from Origin Systems
and Jackson to talk about Undead, Steve's RPG which was originally designed to be a computer game.
Although it is already published as an
RPG, Jackson insists that it has too
much bookkeeping to make it a real
success as a pen and paper game. As
a computer game, though, they think
it should be fast-moving game. The
seminar was dismissed on this positive note.
While all this profound discussion
about computer game design was
being promulgated, more than seven
hundred garners were crowding the
computer game section of the convention to actually play the games we
were talking about. More than 100
people played in the Ultima V tournament, while an Origin Systems'
programmer observed at all times

and took note of potential bugs to improve the final product. Forty different computer game tournaments
were originally scheduled, but the
computer games committee believe
that 6-10 would be sufficient. Tevex
helped the committee get cooperation from software manufacturers in
providing prizes and a local computer
dealer, Computer Works, provided
almost 40 Laser 128s for the computer room (the convention only
provided a table in the dealer room,
space in the program, and a chance
to sell computers at the convention).
Computer Software Service
provided the Atari STs for the Breach
tournament. Robert Costner, chairman of the committee and president
of one of the sponsoring user groups,
states that this group will be hosting
Origins in 1990 and doing a similar
competition at that time. We agree
with the representative from GAMA
(The Game Manufacturers Associa-

tion) who was reported to have said,
"This is the best computer gaming
room I've seen anywhere."
The final day of the convention was
the moment we had been waiting for,
The Computer Gaming World
Games of the Year Awards. The
program began with a video-tape
showing the history of the magazine
and a light-hearted view of the office
at Golden Empire Publications
where this glorious publication comes
to life. Then, the nominees and
awards were presented.
"For Adventure Game of the Year:
Electronic Arts for The Bard's Tale
//—Michael Cranford and Brian Fargo
with Interplay Productions, designers;
Electronic Arts for Starflight—Greg
Johnson, Rod McConnell, and T. C.
Lee, designers;
Infocom for Leather Goddesses of
Phobos—Steve Meretzky, designer;
Infocom for Trinity—Brian Moriarty,
designer; and

New World Computing for Might
and Magic—Jon Van Canegham,
designer.
And the winner of CGW's Adventure
Game of the Year is:
Electronic Arts for Starflight—Greg
Johnson, Rod McConnell, and T. C.
Lee, designers." [Ed: Where most
other space games do one thing well
(i.e. offer a combat motif, arcade sequence, or flight simulator),
Starflight gives a holistic experience
and a great story-line to boot.]
Next, CGW's coveted Action Game
of the Year award was presented.
"For Action Game of the Year:
Accolade for Hardball—Bob
Whitehead, designer
Electronic Arts for Marble
Madness—Atari Games Corporation,
designer (Larry Reed, Amiga version);
Electronic Arts for Earl Weauer
Baseball —Eddie Dombrower and
Teri Mason, designers (strategy by
(Continued on page 62)

For Your Eyes Only (A Brief Dossier)

Systems Analysis

P

ubtitled "America's Newest Top Secret Aircraft," Stealth
ossibly, the most serious criticism that can be aimed at
Fighter purports to put the user in the cockpit of the FStealth Fighter is that the product is a synthesis and not
19 for missions in various world "hot spots". The word "pura radical innovation. While Gunship was an innovation in
port" is utilized because no one has
computer game design, Stealth
published the actual flight specifics
Fighter is an amalgam of design
of the Stealth-type aircraft. Those in
parameters seen previously in F-15
the know are not discussing the matStrike Eagle and Gunship. In discuster candidly and in conversations
sions with local retailers, this
with Pentagon or defense-type inreviewer has been told that Stealth
dividuals, the topic is quickly
Fighter is not dominating sales as is
changed. Thus, while the flight
usual for Microprose releases. The
specifics appear reasonable to the
usual customer comment is, " ...
layman, there is no way of telling
another flight simulator??" It is a
how accurate the simulation is.
shame if this is true on a larger
Once again, Microprose has
scale, because Stealth Fighter is an
done its outstanding packaging and
interesting release. As a "ground
documentation effort. The instrucpounder", this reviewer has little in
tion manual is clear, concise and excommon with those who sleep on
tensive. A careful reading of the
clean sheets at night (e.g. the "wing
documentation will tell the user all
wipers"), but nevertheless, the effort
he ever wanted to know about the
that went into Stealth Fighter is apStealth aircraft and its utilization.
parent.
Aside from technical data (which
The most radical concept involved
most users will glance over quickly),
in Stealth Fighter is that one's
there are detailed characteristics of
fighter aircraft is not expected to be
the various weapons systems (sevena hunter-killer of the skies. Instead,
teen different ones, plus extra fuel
the program rewards careful
tanks and reconnaissance
avoidance of the enemy until the
cameras), guidance on fighter tacprimary target is destroyed. Furthertics, a careful walkthrough of a
more, with the flight dynamics of the
sample mission, and regional briefaircraft being sacrificed in order to
ings for the scenarios.
minimize its electro-magnetic
In addition, separate maps are ofvisibility, this is a fighter aircraft
fered for the various scenarios and a
whose role in life is to avoid deteckeyboard overlay is provided. With
tion, accomplish a mission and exit
over thirty separate controls (e.g. InASAP. Detailed dogfighting is an inertial Navigation System,
vitation to an early demise.
Strategic/Tactical Map, Target TrackDesigner Arnold Hendrick has
ing Mode, Threat Display, Weapons
TITLE:
made a cogent observation when he
Stealth Fighter
SYSTEM:
C-64/128
Bays 1-4, Radar Jammer, Infrared
noted that the F-19 is a "submarine
PRICE:
$39.95
DESIGNER:
Jim Synoski and Arnold Hendrick
Jammer, Decoys, etc.), the overlay is
of the skies". Submarine tactics, the
PUBLISHER:
MicroProse Software
a deeply appreciated user aid and
careful stalking to secure an unobHunt Valley, MD
makes the program playable.
served firing position, is the crux of
stealth fighter. Unlike submarine warLittle criticism can be rendered against the
fare, however, once contact is made, the user will find it
documentation and it is hoped that other desigmuch more difficult to break off and lose oneself in the "Unners might take a page from Microprose's example. As
friendly Skies." If one survives, one has the potential for
Microprose has noted, one should attempt to succeed in
rapid advancement. In fact, beginning as a second
mission accomplishment and not "fly the algorithms." While
lieutenant, one has the potential to make brigadier general
it is difficult to determine what differentiates a Medal of
and retire after 99 missions. However, given the difficulty of
Honor mission from a Silver Star mission, this is realistic. An
the program, it is the rare user who will be retiring for a desk
individual can never be sure as to how truly successful the
job as opposed to a final resting place.
mission was, but overall, mission accomplishment and a
Of course, Microprose has utilized an aircraft recognition
safe return qualify as a success, no matter what the tangible
test in order to access the program other than in a training
reward.
mode. Various military aircraft are displayed in the manual

S

and, while the identification is very difficult for the average
"grunt," it does become more facile with experience and is a
valid learning tool.
The scenarios offered are: Libya Training, Libya, Persian
Gulf, North Cape (of Scandinavia) and Central Europe. One
may fly in Cold War, Limited War or Conventional War. A
naval officer objected to the Libyan and Persian Gulf
scenarios because he maintained that the Stealth technology is simply too valuable to risk in
that area of the world. Additionally,
the criticism was raised that the
costs of Stealth development
prohibit its employment in all except conventional wars. While this
may be true, the addition of the
Middle Eastern Scenarios do offer
a timeliness that few products can
offer. Once one has read about the
latest carrier strike in the Gulf, one
may go home and try it oneself,
but this time utilizing the Stealth
fighter!
Finally, one may choose either
ground strike or air missions. The
problem facing an air mission is
that using one's air radar quickly
paints one's plane into a sitting
duck. A defense expert has noted that Stealth aircraft will
not be employed alone against air targets. While the Stealth
may go in by itself, once it has accomplished the mission, it
would be extremely rare to escape. Thus, supporting escort
aircraft would most likely be vectored in on another approach to
serve both as a diversion and as a
returning escort.

Tactical Employment

W

hile designer Arnold
Hendrick insists that the F-19
can, within the parameters of the
program, defeat opposing fighter
aircraft, he notes that the veteran enemy pilots are "really
good." This is an understatement. Rarely will one be able to
succeed against a veteran opponent.
The wily veterans will never pass in front of one's aircraft,
and will utilize an approach and break off circa 120 degrees
to the rear. Given that fuel is often a vital concern, dogfighting becomes a lesson in misdirected attacks because the
fuel consumed therein is actually that edge required to safely return home.
While the Microprose staff feels that proper air combat
techniques will yield victory, this reviewer's attempts to scissor, speed brake and otherwise obtain a shot at the veterans
was doomed to failure. Then again, this reviewer admits to
being a relative neophyte to flight combat maneuvers.
The cannon utilizes a historical gunsight rather than the
normal predicting one, i.e. the crosshairs show where the

cannon shells would have hit, assuming one fired approximately a second ago. It does take some time getting
used to, but it becomes effective against the green and
average opponents. However, even such opponents are better subjects of missile attacks than cannon. Simply put,
technology has moved beyond the aimed gun and smart
missiles can overwhelm even a good pilot.
In terms of ground attacks, one will also learn that "smart"
bombs are the rage. The "free fall"
bomb requires an expert pilot, a
willingness to fly into harm's way
for a lethal period, and a bit of luck.
As Arnold Hendrick admits, most
pilots will prefer the "smart" bombs
and only the expert looking for a
real challenge will rise to the bait of
free fall weaponry with its inaccuracy and limited range (often
one-half mile or less!).

The Return Trip

A

criticism rendered against F15 Strike Eagle was that landings were not offered. That has
been more than corrected in
Stealth Fighter. Landing options are runway and carrierbased, with difficulty ranging from none (one bounces off
the land) to easy to realistic. Even the realistic mode is slightly easier than historical, but it is VERY difficult.
This reviewer has finally managed
a ratio of one safe landing in every
five missions. There is so much that
can go wrong that Murphy's Law
seems very apropos. Even the designer admits that when he is away
from the game for more than a day
or two, he will choose the easy landing mode. Thus, be warned; realistic
landings are hazardous to one's
health!
This also points out Stealth
Fighter's biggest flaw. While one can normally access targets and receive distance readouts, this is not applicable to
friendly airfields. Arnold Hendrick notes that this was initially
in the program, but space considerations demanded its
deletion (it was replaced by the ground bombing routines).
Learning to recognize a friendly airfield is definitely not an
easy task, but familiarity will make the approach easier.
Rather than directly approaching along the INS route, this
reviewer recommends a ninety degree approach to roughly
two INS squares from the airfield. At this point, a slow banking turn (c. 26-45 degrees) should bring one into a proper
landing pattern. Remember that the field is wider and
longer than necessary. One may, therefore, land somewhat
off the center pattern.
Strangely enough, this reviewer found the carrier landings
(Continued on page 30)

(Continued from page 27)
easier than the runway ones. Since the carrier is always the
middle of three ships and there are few other terrain characteristics, the approach can be made with greater confidence
and, when the landing is finally made, the carrier arresting
hooks will quickly bring one's craft to a halt. Given the difficulty of landing, this reviewer strongly urges the acquisition of additional fuel tanks even at the expense of a
weapons system.

Debriefing
After a mission, one is suitably rewarded by decoration
and occasionally promotion. Destruction in the air will
reveal the flags lowered to half mast, and one's personal
tombstone, suitably garlanded by a wreath. Capture by the
enemy gives rise to the Tass headline noting that "Imperialist Spy (Your Name Here) will be punished for aggression against the peace-loving peoples of the regime but that
a trade has been arranged for a falsely accused Soviet
diplomat." Returning alive, but with minimal success, will
leave one drinking alone in the Officer's Club; a successful
mission will have one being congratulated by two peers;
and an extremely successful mission will show the bar
crowded with up to nine fellow pilots, all having a "good
time" with suitable comments (e.g. "Hey, who used my scarf
for a bar rag?", "Let's practice carrier landings on the bar",
"Way to go"). This is a truly entertaining ending, and one
destined to please most garners. Since success is so hard,
this reviewer feels that the scene will not quickly exhaust its
entertainment potential.

Conclusions
Stealth Fighter effectively demonstrates that the 8-bit
machine capabilities are being stretched to the limit.
The friendly airfield identification and the fact that terrain
bordering sea areas might be blue or green is attributed by
the design staff to memory limitations. The forthcoming 16bit version will correct these shortcomings, but the majority
of garners will have to suffer from an uncorrectable problem
that Microprose acknowledges, but cannot see a solution to.
Timely? It couldn't be more so. Realistic? Yes, it seems so
to this writer, but of course I can't document it. Challenging? Definitely!

S

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

Beyond Zork
Many
$49.95
Brian Moriarty
Infocom
Cambridge, MA

Tension

vibrates through the air as
though it was an almost physical
force. The Guildmaster of Enchanters
approaches the end of his quest and
that ending will also bring about the
ending of all magic. It is fore-ordained that magic must
make way for science, but
there is yet hope. If one
stalwart soul can be
found, one who can brave
unimaginable dangers
and obtain the fabled
Coconut of Quendor, then
all magical knowledge will
not be lost. Some part of it by Scorpia
can be saved for a future
time: a time beyond magic
... beyond science ...
beyond Zork

of the pre-created characters already
on disk or have one randomly
generated for you.
These are only starting values,
though, because your attributes can
go up (or, in some cases, down),
depending on your actions during
play and the results of using certain
magical items. For instance, your endurance increases each time you
reach a new level of experience; your

They Did The
Monster Bash

A Tough Coconut
To Crack

O

A

s you can probably
tell from the above,
the events in Beyond Zork
are concurrent with those
in Spellbreaker. While the
Guildmaster heads for his
final showdown that will
remove magic from the
world, you are engaged in
a desperate attempt to
find the Coconut of Quendor, within which the remnants of magical lore can be
preserved for an as-yet-undreamed-of
posterity. It will be a very hard task.
The first order of business is to read
the manual, because there are a lot of
new features in this game, not the
least of which is creating an individual
character, much along the lines of a
typical computer RPG, such as an Ultima or a Phantasie.
Characters come with six attributes:
Strength, Endurance, Dexterity, Intelligence, Compassion, and Luck. All
are initially set to a value of 1, and
you have 60 points to distribute
among them, however you like. If you
prefer, however, you can choose one

siderable drawback. You can also
start off with a low score in Compassion; this won't be needed until the
endgame portion is reached, by
which time you will have built it up to
something respectable.
Endurance is by far the most important attribute. It governs how much
punishment you can take before
dying. Some of those monsters out
there can hit (or otherwise damage
you) pretty hard. Fortunately, you can always
back out of an encounter,
go to a safe place, and
rest until your Endurance
is back to normal. This is
automatic; you don't need
anything special with
which to heal yourself, although there are items in
the game that can speed
up the process.

compassion rises if you help certain
creatures during the game; and your
strength can be increased by magical
potions, etc.
How these attributes interact with
the game situations is never revealed
to you; you can't really tell, for instance, whether the monster missed
you because you had good dexterity
or good luck. And even that could be
changing from moment to moment.
Since Intelligence is the easiest attribute to increase and likely to be the
first one to go up, you can start with a
fairly low score here. Try not to set it
too low, however, or you won't be
able to read the magic scrolls, a con-

ne thing to keep in
mind as you play
Beyond Zork is that the
monsters are not merely
monsters. Many of them
are, in a way, miniature
puzzles to solve or
obstacles to be overcome
by methods other than
sheer brute force of fighting. True, the monsters
are all of the "mindless"
variety. They simply fight
on, no matter how gravely
injured, until defeated. Defeated, by
the way, does not mean death. When
overcome, they usually crawl off
somewhere, never to be seen again,
and this can be frustrating.
That is why reading the little booklet
that comes with the game, "The Lore
and Legends of Quendor", is crucial
to success. It isn't just window dressing; it contains a lot of valuable information about monsters and other
things you will come across in the
game. Keep it with you and consult it
often, especially when confronted by
a monster (not all monsters are in the
booklet, however, and not all creatures in the booklet are monsters).

Often, careful reading will reveal to
you a way of eliminating the monster
without having to go the
hack-and-slash routine.
When running from monsters (a frequent occurrence), keep in mind that
each patrols only a certain area, and
will go no further. For example, the
cruel puppet stays in the forest and
won't go after you once you're out of
it. Also, you'll soon notice that
monsters tend to show up only in the
random areas of the world and that
each location has its own monster or
monsters, which will be found there
and nowhere else. There are no
wandering monsters, as such, in the
game.
Of course, there will be times when
only a bonk from a club or a magic
blast will do the job. You will have to
determine those times for yourself as
you become more experienced with
the game and its denizens. Overall, if
you are not familiar with RPG-style
games, your best bet is to create a
fairly balanced character, and start
with that.
However, Beyond Zork does not
really follow the classic patterns of
CRPG's, so if you do have experience
with them, don't let preconceived
ideas lead you astray. Armor is a case
in point. I went through much of the
game with no armor whatsoever,
having found, through experimentation, that in most cases, it didn't help
all that much. Certain armor can help
in certain places, but in general, you
can get by without it.
One of the niftiest features in the
game is the ability to define function
keys (some might call them macros),
to avoid the tedium of typing and
retyping repetitive commands, such
as ASK OLD WOMAN ABOUT, ATTACK MONSTER WITH CLUB (or
axe, or sword), PARRY MONSTER,
etc. Ten such function keys are available, and you can set them up any
way you like.

The Random Problem
Generator

H owever,

there are some features
of the game that will cause
people to tear their hair out. Mapping,

for one. Yes, there is a nice little partial map on the screen for you to see,
in the upper right corner, and that is
good. What is not so good is the fact
that parts of the landscape are random.
Yep, I said random. These areas always have the same rooms, but they
will be connected in different ways.
Let's take a simple example, the cellar
of the pub. You go down there, map
out the rooms (not many), overcome

the monsters (we hope), and then
find you can't get out. So you restore
to an earlier position, find something
that will help you escape, and go in
again.
You soon discover that your previous map of the cellar is useless; the
rooms are now rearranged into a different pattern, and will have to be remapped. This can sometimes have
unpleasant consequences, such as
when running from a monster, only
to find yourself in a dead end you
weren't expecting. The only way to
keep such areas stable is to go
through them and then save the
game. That will fix the pattern of
rooms and connections for a particular location (the cellar, or the
jungle, or wherever).
Randomness also extends to the
magical items. Aside from scrolls,
there is a stick, a wand, a staff, a
stave, a cane, and a rod, as well as
several potions. The properties of all
these change, within certain limits.
You never know what you have the
first time you pick something up, and
if you restore to an earlier position (or

start a new game) that item will very
likely not have the same property.
I discovered this the hard way in the
cellar. Having found a mysterious
rod, I pointed it at myself (no other targets being available) and it teleported
me out of the cellar. How nice! I
thought. Since I wasn't finished down
there, I restored the game, did what
had to be done, got the rod again,
and pointed it at me. Unfortunately,
this time it turned out to be a rod of
Annihilation. Oops.
Since potions and most scrolls can
only be used once and most rods,
etc. only twice, the wise thing is to
have them identified before you do
anything else with them. Fortunately,
this is easily accomplished by running
to the Magick Shop and asking the
old woman in charge about the item.
Hence, the wisdom of setting up a
function key for ASK OLD WOMAN
ABOUT comes into play. There are a
lot of things to ask about. Even better, there is no charge for identification!
At the start, therefore, the best thing
to do is nip around the area, one step
ahead of the monsters where necessary, picking up as much as you can,
and then drop into the Magick shop
to find out what you've garnered so
far. However, don't be in a hurry to
use it all.
There is a reason for using magic
carefully and sparingly. One of the
most frustrating experiences you will
have in the game is not only deciding
how to solve a particular puzzle (or
even if you have what you need), but
whether or not the method you have
used (there may be several solutions)
will prevent you from solving another
problem further along in the game.
The Staff (or rod, or wand, or
whatever) of Annihilation is one example. It is very handy and blasts almost any monster out of your way.
You can only use it twice, though. If
you invoke its powers early in the
game, a later point may find you up
against a critter that is just too strong
for you or too hard to kill with brute
force. Then, you're stuck. So, you
must strive to keep a balance among
magic, muscle, and trickery at all times
(Continued on Pg. 57)

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

The Spy's Adventures In Europe
The Spy's Adventures in North America
Apple II
$19.95
Mark Pelczarski
Jeffrey Jay
Polarware
Geneva, IL

As

you watch the Dallas Cowboys
football game (or cheerleaders),
a shadowy figure approaches you.
This is the contact you've been waiting for. You reach into your pocket
for a jewel so that you can pay off
your informant. He hands you a slip
of paper with the
vital clue you need
to find the infamous
Dr. Xavier Tortion
(yes, Dr. X. Tortion).
Quickly, you refer to
your dossier and assorted clues. Adding
your clue to the
others, you have
Appalachians. Even
without buying a
vowel from Vanna,
you realize that Dr.
X is hiding out in
the Appalachian
Mountains. It is a
simple matter of
flying there to apprehend him.
This is the premise
behind Polarware's
game series, The
Spy's Adventures
Around The World.
The different titles
include: Adventures in North
America, Adventures in Europe, Adventures in South America, Adventures in the Pacific Islands, Adventures in Africa, and Adventures in
Asia. Other titles are planned for the
future and enhanced school editions
of each of the titles listed above are already available.

tions are effective, even on a green
monochrome monitor.
The game is designed for one to six
people either working together or as
spy vs. spy. In the spy vs. spy version,

each player searches for a different villain, but all players compete for the
same jewels, clues, and informants.
As play begins, a map is displayed on
the monitor. The player selects the
region or country to begin searching
and that region/country is highlighted
on the display map.

raising hint, which applies to North
America only, is to look for jewels in
the Baja California desert and atop
one of the rock formations in Monument Valley, Utah
Players should note that the real skill
required it the game is not in finding
Dr. X first, but playing for the highest
efficiency rating. There are several
factors which affect efficiency ratings.
The first, and probably most important, of these factors is locating Dr. X
on your first guess (players get up to
three guesses).
Another factor is the
number of residual
jewels and dollars
the player is able to
appropriate by the
end of the game.
The residuals will
aid the player's efficiency, as will solving the clue to Dr.
X's location with as
few letters as possible.
The game's
documentation is
helpful, though
most of it is not
"hardcopy." Only a
brief description of
the rules and a
three-color map are
provided in
"hardcopy." The
thorough documentation is included in
text files as a dossier
on each region/country in the game.
The player accesses this information
via the "Escape" key at any time
during the turn. The dossier provides
a wealth of information on the
climate, capital, government, and
points of interest on each region or
country selected.
In summary, The Spy's Adventures
series is quite enjoyable, not to mention educational. The game is a must
for families with children because of
its enjoyable methods of teaching
geography, if not because it is simply
(and simple) fun. So, if you spy any of
The Spy's Adventures, appropriate
them with the residual funds in your
bank account. It will be money well
spent.

SECRET AGENTS, MAN!

Those familiar with Polarware's
(Penguin's) previous titles will not be
surprised by the graphics created with
the in-house Graphics Magician. The
numerous illustrations of real locations keep the game interesting. In
many ways, the game is much like
being actively involved in a slide
presentation of various points of interest throughout the world. The illustra-

by David M. Wilson

Once the player is in the
region/country, a list of activities or
places to visit (sort of a What's Happening In . . . like you'd find in a hotel
room) is provided. Participating in the
activities or visiting the points of interest may lead the player to a jewel, an
informant, or a clue about where to
find a jewel. For example, during one
visit to California, I visited a major
movie studio tour. During the tour, a
mechanical shark swam up as if to attack, but tossed a jewel into my lap instead. Players will find that they get
higher scores if they participate in all
the activities and visit all the places of
interest within the region. Any of
them could uncover just what one
needs to find Dr. X. Another score-

McMaster presented our readers
with extremely thorough research in
his earlier submission, "Die
Kriegsmarine: German Vessels in- -

Warship" (Computer Gaming World
#37, p. 38). This article offers further
insights.

T he

game of Warship just like actual surface naval
combat, contains a
heavy dose of luck.
While there is no way
around this fact, there
are certain rules that,
if followed, will limit
the effect of the luck
factor and should ensure victory more
often than not against
your more foolhardy
opponents. Be
forewarned, however,
that I am mot divulging any great secrets.
What follows is common sense and not
Revealed Truth. My
point is simply that
you may survive bad
luck with caution and
cunning, but your
foundering will be
even more dramatic if
you combine carelessness and ill fortune.
With those caveats in
mind, let's take a look
at the ships.

approximately four or five thousand
yards in front of your battleships and
cruisers and keeping them between
your large ships and the enemy vessels, any incoming torpedo salvo will

however, is not realized until its ability
to make smoke is employed. Against
a foe without radar (generally the
Japanese), the sight blocking
capacity of smoke can be devastating.
amain the player should form
be spotted by the destroyers and its
course reported to you. This should
a line of his destroyers between his
give you some time to turn your batmain ships and the expected aptleships directly toward or away from
proach of the enemy. With your
the course of the torpedoes and thus
destroyers' smoke turned on, wait for
your opponent to
come within range
and when your radar
locks on, open up with
all of your guns. While
radar directed fire is
less accurate than
visual fire, the enemy
without radar will not
be able to fire at your
at all. And getting the
first few hits can often
mean the critical difference between victory and defeat.
It should be pointed
out that this "duck
blind" tactic is particularly effective at
night. Under the cover
of darkness, it may
take the hapless player
several minutes of unanswered shelling just
to seek out and find
the destroyers forming
the blind. Because of
this, the Japanese
player, who will almost
always be the player
with the radar disadvantage, should use
his destroyers as
by
scouts rather than as
Joseph S. McMaster
escorts. Send them
out well ahead of your
big ships until you
drastically cut your chances of taking
have discovered the lurking Allies.
a hit. You will occasionally lose a
By the way, if you are facing a comdestroyer employing this tactic, but
puter-run Japanese opponent, I have
take solace; a sunk destroyer is alfound an interesting trick using
most always worth fewer victory
smoke. By switching your destroyer
points than a torpedo hit on a batsmoke on and off every two minutes,
tleship. And also remember that while
the computer will constantly retarget
a single torpedo will generally sink a
from the destroyers to the battleships,
destroyer, it may absorb several more
when visible, and then back to the
of that salvo's torpedoes while it is
destroyers when the battleships disapsinking.
pear again. Because retargeting rePerhaps a destroyer's true value,
quires one round of low accuracy

nn,

VICTORY
AT SEA

Destroyers

T hese

A
Common
Sense
Approach
to SSI's
WARSHIP

ships are
among the most
valuable and versatile
available in the game.
While the drooling novice will be
tempted to spend all of his "money"
on the big, powerful vessels, you
should always buy some destroyers
with your allotment of Ship Selection
Points. The key is to remember that
the purpose of destroyers is escort
duty. Have them play this role to the
hilt.
Destroyers can form a torpedo early
warning system for your larger ships.
By forming a line of your destroyers

ranging fire; you can blast away with
radar fire while the poor computer
struggles to achieve a single hit. As
this is entirely unfair, I don't use the
tactic, but if you are losing all too
often to the computer, you may wish
to give it a try.
A final use of the destroyer's escort
function is in covering advances and
retreats. For reasons which will be explained in the next section, there will
come many instances when you wish
to increase or decrease the range between your main ships and
those of the enemy. Such
range changes should, whenever possible, be accomplished
under a destroyer's covering
smoke. There is no sense in
risking potentially crippling
damage in an advance or fatal
damage in retreat. Even if your
foe can shoot through your
smokescreen with radar,
remember that radar directed
fire is much less accurate than that
which is visually locked on. Don't
worry about your destroyers. They are
harder to hit than any other type of
ship and there are methods that can
be employed to decrease the odds
even further. These are also
described later.
For all I've said so far one might get
the idea that destroyers are essentially
defensive warships. That is not a bad
way to think of them, but there are
times when you may use them offensively. This is particularly true for the
Japanese player. While destroyer
guns can be used against other
destroyers or even the occasional
cruiser that might stray too close,
their real offensive power may be
summed up in one word: torpedoes.
For the Allied player, this means
keeping an eye open for opportunistic torpedo shots. If you have a
surplus, you might even break a
destroyer or two out of formation and
go looking for an opportunity. Of
course, the American playing a 194142 scenario should probably not
bother with this due to his high "dud"
torpedo rate in those years (one
reason to, perhaps, "buy British" early
on).
The Japanese player, however, must
be more aggressive with his

destroyers. The destroyer is the one
ship type where the Japanese totally
outclass the Allies. This is entirely due
to the Japanese Type 93 torpedo.
If there is a "gamebreaker" in Warship, it is this weapon. Its range is
three-quarters of the length and
breadth of the gameboard. It packs a
warhead more than double the
strength of the most powerful Allied
torpedo. It gives the Japanese
destroyer the ability to, not just badly
wound, but to actually sink Allied bat-

tleships. That is something the Allied
destroyers generally cannot do.
Since the "duck blind" tactic is usually unavailable to the Japanese and
since Allied torpedoes represent less
of a threat, Japanese destroyers are
freer to abandon escort duty. A good
strategy would probably entail sending in your destroyers well ahead of
your big ships. After locating the main
enemy task force, send the destroyers
in for their initial torpedo runs. Survivors should return to the Japanese
battleships and cruisers and escort
them into the desired range. By this
time, reloading may have occurred
and the ships may be sent in for their
final run. Remember to try to make
your torpedo shots as perpendicular
to the enemy's course as possible.
Firing torpedoes at the fast speed setting will increase the chance of a
strike.

Battleships and Cruisers

T

hese are your main offensive
weapons. These ship types are
combined here because the tactics
for both are the same. In the small
scenarios, where you may not purchase battleships, your heavy cruisers
become de facto battleships. In the
large scenarios, cruiser fire should be

confined, for the most part, to other
cruisers and destroyers, but be aware
that the eight inch guns on heavy
cruisers can penetrate the armor of
some battleship classes at close
range. Japanese heavy cruisers
should be alert to opportunities for
firing their torpedoes. Japanese light
cruisers should be treated as "super
destroyers." They even share the
smoke-making ability.
Always begin by analyzing your objectives. While in battleline scenarios,
this is simply the destruction of
• your opponent. In bombardment scenarios, the primary
goal is for one side to exit the
map. Therefore, planning
should begin with ship selection. In bombardment
scenarios, where speed is more
important, consider buying the
faster battlecruisers and Kongo
and Repulse class battleships
rather than regular battleships.
They are cheaper than other battleships, while their guns yield equal
exit points and their extra speed may
mean the difference between exiting
the board or not.
Keep your objectives in mind. If you
are the side which is supposed to exit
during a scenario, do not stop to slug
it out unless you absolutely must!
Often, this becomes a case of abandoning the injured or standing to
fight. This decision is difficult and is
based on too many variables for me
to offer an ideal solution. Be sure that
you consider the nature and extent of
the damage you incur, especially if
main guns are destroyed ;or speed is
greatly curtailed. Is there enough time
left to exit most of your ships? Is that
enough time for the enemy to sink
the injured? How much more point
earning damage is likely to be
received by each side? How much is
likely to be repaired?
In battleline scenarios, the problem
is mostly one of selecting the proper
range at which each of your ships
should engage the enemy. At the end
of this article, you will find a chart to
aid in this determination. The chart
lists penetration values (
horizonta/vertical) for all of the guns in the game at
all ranges. For instance, let us take a
hypothetical engagement between

the American battlecruiser, Alaska,
and the Japanese battleship, Nagato.
When the Japanese ship is sighted,
the American commander will determine that it is Nagato class by the
revealed information that it is a battleship of approximately 40,000 tons.
Since the Japanese have only one
class of that size (40,000/500 = FL
80), the American knows that it is the
Nagato. Incoming 16"/45 cal.
gunfire will confirm this, as it is
also the only Japanese ship
class armed with that size gun.
Speed can also be used to
determine ship class.
Employing the chart, then,
the American player decides at
what range to engage the
Nagato with the Alaska's
12750 cal. guns. There are two
such ranges. From 24,000
yards to the maximum range of
33,000 yards, the 12" guns
muster a vertical penetration of
four or more, enough to get
through the Nagato's 4" deck
armor. Similarly, from 15,000 yards
on into point-blank range, the guns
achieve a horizontal penetration of 12
or more, sufficient to pierce the 12"
belt armor. Which should be chosen?
Unquestionably, the close-in range
area should be selected. This is further delineated by examining the
chart in reference to the 16"/45 cal.
guns of the Japanese ship.
From 24,000 to 33,000 yards, the
16" guns have enough horizontal and
vertical penetration to pass through
both the Alaska's 9" belt armor and
4" deck armor. However, by the time
the range has been cut to 15,000
yards or less, the vertical penetration
has dropped to two and can no
longer get through the Alaska's deck.
Conversely, taking the Japanese
viewpoint, the 16-23,000 yard "window" between the two ranges
described above is optimal. Here, the
Nagato's own guns can achieve
penetration, while the American's
shells will bounce "harmlessly" off her
sides and decks (although they can
still ignite fires).
Therefore, there are times in Warship when you will want to open or
close the range. If your opponent lies
at a relative bearing of 90 degrees,

however, don't simply steam toward
him on a 90 degree course. Instead,
alternate your course every two
minutes. To head on a course of 90
degrees, you might alternate courses
of 80 and 100 degrees. This makes
your ship much harder to hit. Further,
if carefully calibrated with your speed,
zig-zagging (salvo chasing) will allow
you to reach your destination in the

same time as a direct course would
have. Don't forget your destroyer escorts, either. They can also benefit
from weaving.
Take care in your route of approach. Try to stay in the opponent's
bow or stern arc. This not only
prevents him from bringing all of his
main guns to bear, it will also silence
most of his secondary armament.
All of these tactics are also useful
n retreat. Knowing when to
retreat or retire, however, is more difficult. Certainly a ship which has lost
most of its main guns or had its
electrical system severely damaged is
a candidate for withdrawal. Such a
ship is only a threat to you because of
its likelihood of taking more pointearning damage. Other types of
damage, however, make the decision
tougher. What should you do if your
only battleship takes a very early hit,
knocking out its fire control? With its
gun accuracy halved for the rest of
the game, its value is dubious. If it is
your only battleship, however, how
else are you going to fight off the
enemy's battleships? Again, there are
too many variables for an ideal solution. I don't know the answer. Just

remember, dilemmas are one of the
hallmarks of a great game. Nevertheless, allow me to present a few brief
rules for retreating and retiring ships.
First, distinguish between retreating
(exiting a ship from the gameboard)
and retiring (exiting a ship to a safer
area of the gameboard). The difference is that retreated vessels are
no longer susceptible to damage (or
repair), while retired ships can.
Generally, the Allied player
should choose to retire more
often than the Japanese player
because of the Allies' greater
facility at repair.
Ships with fire levels above 20
should consider retreating. At
that level, you will receive additional damage every two
minutes. The longer you wait,
the more you risk a
catastrophic magazine explosion.
Destroyers with flooding
damage should be retired, if
possible. This type of damage
repairs much more easily on these
small ships. On the larger ships, you
should probably begin retreating
them when their flood damage
reaches fifty per cent. The electrical
systems will begin to short out at that
point, anyway. Since flooding directly
affects speed, you will often find yourself rapidly losing the ability to retire
or retreat such ships.
Severe electrical damage (over 75%)
will probably never be repaired sufficiently to get your guns operating
again, particularly if flooding is causing more such damage. Retreat the
Ship! Damage from 30-75% calls for
retiring.
Never retreat or retire a ship because of damage to the bridge. When
you take penetrating hits, pray for
bridge damage because the resulting
impairment to maneuverability is only
an annoyance. If your rudder is
jammed straight, retire rather than
retreat. If it is jammed left or right,
you won't have any choice but to go
in circles. A jammed rudder gives
your opponent a lot of victory points
and repairs or detaches fairly easily. If
it detaches, he still gets his points, but
you regain your ability to steer.
(Continued on page 41)

(Continued from page 38)

Let

me conclude with two important thoughts. First, Warship
should be played as a series of battles
with players keeping a running point
tally. At least, have both players take
each side of a given scenario. The

hints I have given here will often only
serve to cut losses rather than obtain
victory, but cutting losses has real
value in a running series. Second,
don't continue to adhere to any rule
that has outlived its usefulness or be-

come counter-productive. Battles are
very fluid affairs. Ultimately, "Victory
At Sea" will more often go to the commander who can adapt or who dares
to take a worthwhile gamble.

THE
ELECTRONIC
GRIDIRON
(Continued from page 18)
The plus yardage described is due to
get better as additional Team Data
Disks are released. Circle Reader Service #55.

S

Super Bowl Sunday, also from
Avalon Hill, is another statisticsbased strategy game. The plus yardage for this product begins with its
availability in several formats: Apple,
C-64, and IBM. Additional yardage
can be added for the "Champions
Disk" (sold separately) which features
twelve classic match-ups from Super
Bowls past. Tack on plus yardage for
the ability of a player on offense to
select which particular running back
will carry the ball and which receiver

would be the primary target in a pass
play. Many games do
not allow this much
control in play selection. On defense,
players may choose
how many and which
linebackers to blitz,
which offensive player
to key on, or which
receiver to doublecover. Super Bowl Sun
day is a strategist's
strategy game which
would effortlessly go all
the way to paydirt if it
were not for the minus
yardage.
Minus yardage must
be assessed due to the
unexceptional
graphics. Other minus yardage must
be assessed for the limited play selections (although these are enhanced
by the ability to assign particular
players to a task). Nevertheless, the

name is worth playing and offers
realistic results. Circle
Reader Service #56.

3 -in-1

Football
from Lance Haffner Games is a unique product. This is a
text-only football
strategy that is able to
hold its own with
products produced on
a bigger budget. Plus
yardage for this game
is gained by recognition that it is available
on a multitude of
machine formats,
team data disks are
updated yearly, college and professional
data files are provided, the game is
easy-to-learn and play, and the
results are almost always realistic.
(Continued on page 52)

Name:
Battles In Normandy
System:
Apple, C-64
# of Players: 1 or 2
Price:
$40.00
Designers:
Roger Keating
Ian Trout
Publisher:
Strategic Studies Group Inc.
Walnut Creek, CA

B

attles In Normandy (BIN) is the

latest wargame from Australia's
Strategic Studies Group. BIN is
described on the back of the package
as "an exciting sequel to Battlefront".
They do use an almost
identical game system
but ownership of Battlefront is not required
to play or enjoy the
second. Perhaps, "sistergame" is a better
description. Scenarios
designed for either
game can be played
using the Master Disk
from the other. There
may, however, be some
differences in play
balance due to the changes noted
below.

many as 60 battalions under your
command. These battalions, plus HQ
units, are what show up on the map.
Combat battalions come in 14 different flavors, from airborne infantry
to tank destroyers.
Unlike most other wargames,
however, you do not give orders to
the units that you see on the map.
You must issue orders to the
Divisional and Regimental commanders who in turn give orders to

you go running off to be a battalion
commander whenever a key unit gets
in a bind.
This is revolutionary. Conventional
board games could never do this because there was no computer to act
as a subordinate commander. If that
square of cardboard represented a
battalion, you got to move it exactly
where you wanted it to be during your
movement phase. Most computer wargames have adopted the same
philosophy to date. I
guess it goes back to
chess and checkers and
is pretty deeply ingrained. Nevertheless, it
is easy to coordinate attacks when you are
moving all the units. In
the Battlefront system,
you choose an objective
(a town, hilltop, bridge,
road junction, etc.) or
an enemy unit to attack
and the battalions
choose their own route to get there
and arrive in their own time. The
result is definitely not coordinated!
You watch the screen helplessly,
swearing at idiotic commanders who
lead their battalion through a swamp
to get to their objective instead of
using a more direct road.
Is this more realistic? Obviously, it is
more realistic in a role-playing sense
for you to wear one hat instead of
many, but the issue is more complex
than this. Do your computer-controlled subordinates behave in a realistic
manner, for instance? In BIN, you
seem to get disadvantageous behavior but not the opposite. No battalion commander, for instance, will
attack a nearby enemy if his regiment
is "engaged" with another enemy elsewhere. No battalion will ever disengage from a heavily pinned enemy
to slip past and take an important
town or junction. In other words, you
never seem to get the benefits of individual initiative, only the loss of control it engenders. This situation could
be corrected by more detailed
programming and I have no doubt
that this will happen as more games
are written for computers with 256K
and more instead of only 64K.
In order to find out whether you will

SSG'S New Western Front Game
by Bob Proctor

The Corps of the Matter
(Description of game
system)

IL

ike Battlefront, BIN uses 6-hour

turns (4 per day with one being
nighttime) and a scale of 1 kilometer
per hex. Both sides issue orders each
turn, then combat is resolved and
movement takes place. The computer
will play either side for solitaire play or
can referee a game between two
human opponents. As an interesting
fourth option, the computer can play
itself. This mode is dandy for
demonstrating a computer wargame
to your Aunts and Uncles and it is
also useful in order to study the
computer's strategy in a new scenario.
The Battlefront system puts you in
the role of Corps Commander. Your
Corps has up to 3 Divisions and each
Division has up to 4 Regiments. Since
each Regiment has 4 battalions and
the Division has up to 4 extra battalions (which can be assigned temporarily to any of the Regiments),
each Division can have up to 20 battalions. You may, therefore, have as

the battalions. If you say "Attack," they
will attack with everything. If you say
"fall back in reserve," they will fall
back with everything. Sometimes, of
course, a battalion will get separated
from the rest of its Regiment. It may
get snarled in a traffic jam or be
routed by enemy attack (forcing it to
retreat regardless of orders). This
game system rigidly enforces the role
of Corps Commander and doesn't let

like the Battlefront/BIN system,
however, you need to think about
how you feel about this concept of a
single viewpoint. Imagine a game
about night-time combat such as in
the movie "Platoon." In a role-playing
sense, creating a realistic point of
view would mean the player would
not know anything but what one person could see or hear. They'd have little idea of what was going on in an
overall sense and the object may be
simply to survive. A student of military
history, however, wants to see the
overall picture clearly and know why
different attacks and defenses are the
most effective. For this, they must
know more than any single participant could know and the game system must convey the important factors in a clear, concise fashion.
It is hard to imagine a game that
would satisfy both of these points of
view. Clearly, they could not happen
at the same time. In BIN, you have
lots of control when designing a
scenario but lots of "fog" once you
begin to play. Or maybe you could
play with limited intelligence first and
then have an "instant" replay that
would fill in the whole picture.
Anyway, as the level of the game goes
from small (squad level, tactical, turns
in minutes) to medium like BIN (battalion level, operational, turns in
hours), the commander has access to
more information. It becomes easier
to imagine a single person whose
viewpoint satisfies our "student of
military history" but besides knowing
everything the student wants to be
able to control every unit to test his
theories of how things SHOULD be
done. As the level of the game goes
up and the size of the forces (and
staff) under the commander increases, the less realistic this perfect
control becomes.
So, how about BIN? As stated
above, it adheres tightly to the point
of view of a Corps commander. It
gives you data on weather, terrain,
unit strength and condition but fails
to provide any idea of combat odds
or why a particular combat result occurred. You get a feel for this only
after many games. Long experience
is, of course, how real Generals learn.
(Here's a Philosophical Volleyball for

you game designers: is it realistic to
put someone without this experience
in charge of a Corps?)
When it comes to control of individual units, BIN is too restrictive.
You can NEVER issue orders for a battalion even though some of them are
always going to end up in the "wrong"
place. The only thing you can do is
pull the entire regiment back into
reserve and then send it forward
again hoping they do better. This is
due to the limited set of commands
available on the menus. You are locked in the command trailer and can
never play Patton -- out directing traffic at the critical point. You don't even
get the satisfaction of sacking a subordinate for a particularly stupid
maneuver!
Your orders to a
regiment are limited
to just four options.
What those options
are depends on
whether the regiment
is engaged with the
enemy, in contact
with them, or not in
contact (called
"ready"). If they are engaged, there
are four levels of attack giving seven
possible orders instead of four.
Under this approach, you cannot assign a regiment to advance toward an
enemy unit or objective unless it is
completely out of contact (no battalion is within 2 "hexes" of an
enemy). There is no way to break contact or disengage except to give the
Reserve order, which will cause all battalions to retreat toward the divisional
HQ. This works as long as your HQ's
are 6-8 hexes behind the front lines
and admirably displays the use and
value of "maneuvering room." It
doesn't work well at all when you are
crowded into a tiny beachhead and
your HQ's are on the lines or still on
the ships. For this reason, the Battlefront system does not seem to be
well suited to portray an amphibious
invasion and Normandy is a curious
choice. Fortunately, only a few of the
scenarios suffer.

Beach Battle Bingo (The
Scenarios)

T here

are eight basic scenarios in
BIN; I say "basic" because each
one also has from two to four historical variants given. These are changes
to the "at start" conditions which can
be made quickly with the Design
routines. Here are the eight:
1.
Omaha
19 turns, 14x26 map
Historically, of course, this was a
contested landing and thus, this is
the most congested of all the
scenarios. The only valid strategy is to
attack everywhere.
2. Utah55 turns, 14x39 map
Utah beach, the most westward, was

not contested and a fair-sized beachhead can be grabbed if the US moves
quickly and uses the 101st Airborne
well.
3. Sword23 turns, 14x13 map
Though this was another congested
beachhead, the British also have
paratroops that can, with skill and
luck, grab a little extra space.
4. Cherbourg43 turns, 28x39 map
Thanks to the large map and the
fact that the Allies start in a fairly
cohesive line with lots of room to
maneuver, this scenario uses the BIN
system to its best advantage. An
adroit commander can do quite a bit
here. Taking enough of fortified Cherbourg will still be tough and can be
made impossible by poor weather
which not only slows the advance but
keeps the Allied air support grounded.
5. Carentan43 turns, 14x13 map
This is a long scenario, but relatively
small forces help it play quickly.
Taking Carentan is usually pretty easy
for the Allies, but they must also hold
it against a late German counter-attack.
Continued on pg. 54

Name:
Systems:
Coming:
# of Players:
Price:
Designer:
Publisher:
Distributor.

Fire

Fire Power
Amiga
C64, Ap2gs, IBM
1-2
$24.95
Reichart von Wolfsheild
Microilluslons
Activision

Power is the first in a One-toOne series of low cost arcade
style games from Microillusions.
This is a tank-to-tank shoot-'em up
within two enemy fortresses. Future
releases in this series will be Turbo,
an auto racing game with many selectable options, and Galactic Invasion,
a shoot em up in space with lots of excitement and challenges for your joystick skills.
Fire Power is well designed to
provide an individual challenge
against the computer or two player action using a split screen with two joysticks or over a modem on two
separate computers. Movement is
joystick-moderated and guns are
fixed in the forward direction. The
goal of the game is to capture the
enemy flag and return it to one's
home base.
The game comes with no printed
documentation, so the player(s) start
by selecting the play option or reading the game instructions and hints.
Then, the player(s) choose from three
tank designs with various values for
speed of movement, damage points,
fuel capacity, number of mines carried, and number of men that can rescued (Note: For modem play, only
one tank design is used).
The fire power of each tank is unlimited and continuous with the joystick button held down. Points are
scored for destroying the enemy's
tank and any enemy buildings, gun
emplacements, fuel depots, and
helicopters. In addition, points are
scored for rolling your tank over
enemy units fleeing a destroyed building. This realistic action is complete
with the sound of a gruesome splat
and a splotch of blood. [Ed.: I could
live without this feature.] It clears from
the display (but not one's mind) in a
few seconds.
The sounds used for this game are
excellent and range from rumbling
tanks and rocket-firing helicopters to
explosions of everything destroyed.

Rubble replaces structure and glowing embers remain after the explosive
destruction of cannon fire. The area
of each fortress is very extensive, but
is the same every game.
Advantage can also be gained by
rescuing any of your own men. This
is done by maneuvering your tank
near them, stopping, and then letting
them get on board. Take care,
though, because you can also run

by Roy Wagner

over your own men. When playing
against the computer, you start with
only five tanks and an additional tank
is added for every fifteen men rescued. In the two player version, tanks
are unlimited, but you can get an additional mine for every five men rescued. These men must be taken to
the Red Cross station at your base to
receive these credits.
Fuel can be obtained by returning
to your base starting location or by
destroying enemy fuel depots. If you
run out of fuel, your tank is
destroyed. Each time one of your
tanks is destroyed, you start over at
your home base.
Helicopter support for both sides is
controlled by the computer. They will
seek out any tank that is inactive. Approaching helicopters can be observed on a small radar screen of the

nearby region. It shows the location
of tanks, any helicopters, and base
flag which happen to be within radar
range of your tank. Helicopters can
be shot down easily by either tank.
It is also possible to lay mines by
pressing the joystick fire button and
pulling back on the joystick. These
are proximity mines and show no
mercy for any tank that comes near
them. In the heat of a mobile battle, it
is easy to accidentally move backward, plant a mine, and destroy
oneself.
The final goal is simply the capture
of the enemy flag. The total point
count is purely for comparison between the two players. There is no
vanity-board for top scores. At the
end of a game, a final report is posted
that shows the total casualties, total
men rescued, and the total damage
inflicted. A count is given for tanks,
men, and helicopters.
The modem option requires the use
of two Hayes compatible 1200/2400
baud modems. A null modem cable
will not work for use between two
computers in the same room. The
modem connection is initiated by
entering ATDT and a telephone number in a text box and mouse clicking
on the Call box. Then the other
modem will answer the call and a
message to that affect will appear on
each screen. One of the players must
click on the Start box and the game
begins. The split screen only displays
your movement on one side. The
other side can be used for typing messages to the other player. A third box
can be used to Hang Up the connection. The game only comes with one
disk so each modem player must buy
their own copy of the game.
The action, graphics and sound put
this game directly up there with any
arcade game - not the home computer variety, but those that take lots
of quarters to play. The game system
is somewhat challenging, but does
not offer much variety or require
much strategic thinking. I find Fire
Power to be a fair priced design with
exceptional presentation. In other
words, it is a great shoot 'em up arcade wargame.

THE
ELECTRONIC
GRIDIRON
(Continued from page 20)
Those who desire proof of the last
assertion need only review the statistical comparison printed in CGW
#5.5, p. 42. As for the game itself, it
has improved with age. A recent
replay utilized the new ability to
choose the starting quarterback or
replace the quarterback during the
game. The computer vs. computer
simulation genuinely reflected last
year's grim reality as Marc Wilson of
the L A. Raiders threw seven (count
'em, seven) interceptions in one
game. Another new feature added to
the latest version is the ability to set
the goal posts on the goal line during
a pre-1974 simulation.
Minus yardage must be noted for

those who want graphics and further
losses must be assessed for the
limited play selection. The offensive
playbook in this game is limited to 14
plays and the defensive playbook contains only 6 alignments. It is available
for Amiga, Apple, Atari 8-bit and ST,
C-64, IBM and Macintosh. Circle
Reader Service #57.

I

nstant Replay from Software Innovations is not exactly a game,
but it is worthy of note for those who
like to replay full seasons of NFL
games using the computer vs. computer mode. The game comes with
the full 1986 statistics base for all 28
professional teams and offers an attractive full-field graphic to display
field position. Each play is described
as though a play-by-play announcer
was calling the game and statistics
are available at any time during the
game. It is available for the IBM with,
at least, 320K of memory only. Circle
Reader Service #58.

is a real sleeper. Dan Bunten
designed this game to feature both a
semi-pro and professional playbook.
The interface requires paddle entry
and play selection takes place in a
real-time mode. There is even a sequence to go through in calling an
audible. Team Data Disks for individual seasons have been marketed
through the company catalog and
this is a very playable game. Why is it
on the bargain list? It has the minus
yardage of not having a graphic
depiction of plays in a graphic age.
One sees the offensive and defensive
formations, but only the ball is
animated on the field. It is available
for Apple, Atari, and C-64. Circle
Reader Service #59.

NFL

Challenge from XOR Corporation is still, to this date, the
cream of the crop. It uses authentic
NFL statistics which are updated annually and offers the most sophisticated playbook of any of the strategy

games described (with the exception
of Head Coach). Plus yardage must include the 49 different offensive options and 26 different defensive approaches. The use of chalkboard style
"X and 0" diagrams to portray the
results of plays is still effective and the
capacity for instant replay is a nice effect. The statistics-handling ability for
this simulation is still excellent and
the addition of three levels of computer coaching (Conservative, Aggressive, or Balanced) makes the Human
vs. Computer option that much more
enjoyable. In addition to the quotation
from CGW #5.5 lavishly quoted in
advertisements for the product ("If
there was such a thing as the 'CGW
Seal of Approval,' NFL Challenge
would get it."), plus yardage must be
appended for the new "roster editor
disk" which enables owners to keep
team rosters current in spite of
trades, retirements, cuts, injuries, and
line-up changes (an absolute must as
long as the Rams are in the league).

Another big gainer for XOR is the
Game Situation Development System. This disk enables the player to
utilize NFL Challenge to secondguess real game situations, establish
"what-if situations, or try out new
strategies in the same situation.
Mark down minus yardage for the
fact that the latest version of the
game still does not offer individual
statistics. Further minus yardage
should be noted for the failure to include names along with the numbers
and statistics for each NFL team.
Some readers will sack the quarterback upon learning of the $99.95
price tag for the game. Others will
give plus yardage for the newly
marketed economy model of the
game, Pro Challenge. Pro Challenge uses the same system, but is
less expensive because it pits two allstar teams together rather than the
full NFL database. The games are
available for IBM and Macintosh.
Circle Reader Service #60.

Battles In Normandy
(Continued from pg. 48)
6.
Villers-Bocage19
turns, 14x13
map
7. Goodwood19 turns, 21x13 map
8. Epsom3l turns, 14x13 map
These last three all portray attempts
by Montgomery to break through the
enclosing German ring near Caen. It
is very difficult to drive through a gap
in the enemy lines in BIN. As soon as
a single battalion makes contact with
the enemy, the whole regiment is
drawn to it and ceases to advance. A
single enemy unit in good defensive
terrain can tie up 3 regiments easily.
As a result, the designers actually
omit the main thrust in these
scenarios. About half way through, a
large force will appear in the German
rear along with some new Axis units.

Evolutionary Tide Pools
(Differences Between
Battlefront and BIN)

For

the record, the following changes were made to the Battlefront
system to accommodate the special
conditions of Normandy. Line of
Supply: Units which have their Line
of Supply cut still have a chance of
receiving supplies. This makes this inevitable situation not quite so disastrous. Initial Turn: Games do not
have to begin on the morning turn.
For example, both Utah and Sword
begin on turn 4 so that the action can
start with a night-time parachute drop.
Artillery and OffBoard Support: In
Battlefront, these are normally used
at half value. In BIN, they are only
used at FULL strength for assault and
exploit attacks. HQ Units: HQ's have
their own movement allowance. Combined Arms Defense: A special
DEFENSIVE combat bonus is given

when infantry, tanks and anti-tank
weapons are all available to the
defense.
In addition, a new factor for Climate
has been introduced. This factor
determines the overall weather pattern. It is useful only to those who are
creating their own scenarios since all
Battlefront and BIN scenarios default
to European climate.

Offshore Shelling
(Conclusion)

T he

changes to the Battlefront system seem reasonable, even welcome. I personally think Normandy
was a poor choice as a "sequel" and
only three of the scenarios (2,4 and
5) feel "right" to me. The good
scenarios, however, provide new
levels of realism for anyone who
wants to see what kind of decisions a
Corps Commander must make.

(Continued From Pg. 33)
es. Don't be surprised if you find yourself doing a lot of restoring.

Trade Deficits and Display
Windows

The

shops (besides Magick, there
is one for Armor and one for
Weapons) have items for sale, and
these can be bought with zorkmids or
traded for with various valuable objects that you find on your travels.
Note, however, that you will only get
half-price for anything you trade. For
instance, if you buy the axe, it costs
40 zorkmids. If you later sell it back,
you will get only 20 zorkmids for it,
but it would cost 40 if you wanted to
buy it again. Plan your trades and purchases with care.
The new screen layout, once you
get used to it, is quite nice. On the
Apple //e, there are two inverse "windows", one long one across the top of
the screen displaying your attributes,
armor class, and current location,
and a larger second one below the
first that displays the room description. In the upper right hand corner is
the partial map of the area, showing
your present location and which ways
you can go. The map updates with
every move.
On the 16 bit machines, the layout
is even fancier, and you can use the
mouse to move from place to place
by clicking on the map. However, if
you prefer, you can turn off the special screen displays and have everything in all-text, just like any other Infocom. Nevertheless, I recommend
using the special display (wish this
was in other games, too).
Overall, Beyond Zork is a curious
hybrid. It is mostly tough Infocom ad-

venture with a patina of role-playing
elements. While the elements are important to completing the quest, I
never had the feeling that I was, in
fact, playing an RPG-type game, in
spite of the monsters I bashed,
blasted, tricked, or otherwise
maneuvered out of my way. They
were, like everything else, simply
obstacles to be overcome, one way or
another; it was just that some
methods were atypical for a standard
Infocom.
What this means is, if you're worried
about the RPG aspects in the game,
you needn't be; for all the bells and
whistles, it's still an Infocom adventure, although with a somewhat different flavor and point of view.
Bottom line: This new approach is
tough and frustrating, but this makes
it a good one for experienced players.

New Zork, New Zork
(Warning: This urbane section of
the review gives both general and
specific hints. Enter at your own risk!)
Since the game is so random in nature and many of the puzzles
have more than one solution (for example, there are at least five ways of
getting off Zeno's Bridge), giving
specific hints for many of the situations wouldn't be of much help.
As noted before, you should try to
collect as many magical items as possible at the start of the game. In most

cases, they will be lying right out in
the open for you to pick up, so it's
pretty easy to amass a fair number of
goodies. Of course, with monsters on
your tail while you're doing this, expect to take a bit of damage now and
then, so take the item and keep on
moving.
The best thing of all to find is the
Scroll of Recall. This, so far as I was
able to determine, can be used over
and over again without losing its
power. It is extremely handy for getting you out of dead ends and other
unpleasant places. Of course, you
never know where it will turn up, so
you may not come across it for a long
time.
You will also need a weapon, so visit
the wharf for a freebie. While the
game calls it a shillelagh, you can
refer to it by the much easier "club." It
works just as well either way. Later,
when you've accumulated a few
treasure items, you can purchase a
battleaxe or a sword.
Once you've collected some
goodies, you can begin working on
the game in earnest. You might want
to save first, and experiment with the
various magical objects (after they've
been identified, of course), to get an
idea of what they actually do, and
what their limits are. Some items, for
instance, work only on living things,
while other items can affect almost
anything, living or not. Better to know

that now, than to get an unpleasant
surprise in the heat of battle.
Two areas that should be investigated early on are the pub cellar and
the lighthouse. Until you've completed those, much of the game will
be closed off to you. Make sure you
go over the lighthouse thoroughly in
your explorations. There is more here
than may, at first, be apparent. Keep
the booklet handy.
The jungle (or rather, the jewel in
the idol in the jungle) is a
more-or-less stand-alone puzzle. This one can
be done at almost any time, provided
you first get rid of the crocodile and
bloodworm and have the necessary
object or two. The sapphire is the
single most valuable treasure in the
game and will allow you to buy an
equally-valuable item you will need
later on.
You may have some trouble (perhaps a lot of trouble) with the monkey
grinder in Accardi-By-The-Sea. He is
far too nimble for you to ever land a

blow on him and he is also pretty
quick at dodging or reflecting magical attacks. That doesn't seem to
leave much, but there is a way. Read
the booklet.
When wandering through the dismal
Fields of Frotzen, keep a careful eye
on the giant corbies. Fortunately,
they don't attack, but they will prevent
you from reaching a particular spot,
unless you know how to keep them
away. Observe the scarecrows with
care, and remember you only get one
chance to visit the land of Froon.
Up in the mountains, you will find a
small village menaced by the annual
migrations of the dreaded Christmas
Tree Monsters. Swishing their tinsel,
blinking their lights, singing "Dwaarnyn The Dark-Nosed Ur-Grue", they
are kept at bay by a single glyph inscribed in snow. They are also blocking the westward path, and you'll
have to find a way past them. A caterpillar would certainly help, although
you won't find any in the immediate

vicinity. You'll have to do a little work
to get one, too. Meditate on the nature of caterpillars.
Of all the puzzles in Beyond Zork,
the single most difficult one is the
arch in the Ruins and it is probably
best left for later. Activating the arch
is no problem. A simple examination
of it will show you what you need.
After that, it gets nasty, and solving
the problem of the helmet will require
some very intense thought in your
part. All I'll say is that when you get
stuck, consider something (perhaps
more than one) that hasn't seemed to
have been of any particular use yet in
the game.

Taking A Peek
Continued from page 6
at a time can explore the six level
Energy Production Plant on Karis.
Nevertheless, players control one of
the seven crew members of a Special Forces team in trying to rescue
earth's survivors from their alien
captors. The graphics and flow of
play are reflective of GAUNTLET C64 ($19.95). Circle Reader Service
#10.
TOMAHAWK: Watch out for attack
helicopters in the sky! Datasoft has
just released this simulation of an
AH-64A Apache attack chopper.
This user-friendly game has four different difficulty levels and three
combat missions to entertain you.
Atari, C-64 ($29.95). Circle Reader
Service #11.
Epyx
600 Galveston Dr.
P. 0. Box 8020
Redwood City, CA 94063
STREET SPORTS BASKETBALL:
For those who know that basketball
is a game for back alleys, driveways,
and playgrounds, this could be the
best arcade basketball game
around. Grease spots, curbs, and
other hazards add spice to this
game which is modeled after informal neighborhood roundball matchups. Apple, C-64, IBM ($39.95).
Circle Reader Service #12.
Firebird
71 North Franklin Turnpike
Waldwick, NJ 07463
HEARTLAND: Like a scene from
"The Neverending Story," Harry

finds an old book in the attic and
enters the five lands (i.e. levels)
which make up HEARTLAND. This
arcade/exploration adventure,
moderated by a choice of joystick/keyboard controls, offers a unique and largely non-violent
perspective. C-64 ($24.95). Circle
Reader Service #13.
JEWELS OF DARKNESS: This title
is really three illustrated text adventures in one. The pictures are
simple, but do break up the text
and make it easy on the eyes.
These adventures are parser-driven
fantasy quests built off three text adventures published earlier in Britain
(Colossal, Quest, and Dungeon).
Atari, C-64 ($24.95), Amiga, Atari
ST, IBM ($29.95). Circle Reader Service #14.
SILICON DREAMS: Kim Kimberley,
Secret Agent, is the protagonist of
the first two space adventures in
this parser-driven space trilogy
(Snowball, Return to Eden, The
Worm in Paradise). Like the fantasy
trilogy mentioned above, these text
adventures were published earlier
and now find form in illustrated text
adventures. Apple, Atari, C-64
($24.95), Amiga, Atari ST, IBM
($29.95). Circle Reader Service
#15.
Microdaft
19 Harbor Drive
Lake Hopatcong, NJ 07849
SOLAR STAR: Energy is the name
of the game in this arcade game
where the player becomes pilot of
the "Solar Star" recovery vehicle
and strives to collect vital energy
crystals from a computer which has

run amok. One must pay attention
to one's instruments, memorize the
solar grids, and learn not to be too
trigger-happy in order to be successful at this game. Atari ($24.95).
Circle Reader Service #16.
Mindscape, Inc.
3444 Dundee Road
Northbrook, IL 60062
PLUTOS: With graphics as detailed
as any in the arcades and sound
which fully takes advantage of the
Amiga's capabilities, this space
"shoot 'em up" gives no quarter. If
you've always dreamed of fighting
one grand and glorious battle with
impossible odds, this may be your
chance. Amiga ($29.95). Circle
Reader Service #17.
Psygnosis, Ltd.
First Floor, Port of Liverpool Bldg.
Liverpool L3 1BY, U.K.
TERRORPODS: A sci-fi action/adventure that allows players to take
on the role of an undercover
Federation Agent and attempt to
discover the secret of the evil
Empire's Terrorpod machines, this
sixteen-bit arcade game offers a
three-dimensional background
perspective and exceptionally
detailed graphics. Those who prefer
strategy to "shoot-'em-up" space
opera will appreciate the strategic
elements necessary to be successful in one's cover as a commodities
broker in space. Amiga and Atari
($24.95). Circle # 18.
Sierra On-Line, Inc.
Coarsegold, CA 93614
3D HELICOPTER SIMULATOR: Although the simulated skies may be
full of helicopters, this simulation of
McDonnell-Douglas' "Apache"

helicopter is different. With a 1200
baud modem and a similarly
equipped friend, you can dogfight
on-line. If you don't have a modem,
you can still dogfight above scenery
reflective of the Los Angeles, Paris,
or New York skylines. IBM ($49.95).
Circle Reader Service #19.
THEXDER: Sixteen levels of fastpaced, high-resolution action make
up this Japanese arcade import.
The game's name is derived from
the name of the Thexder Super Assault Vehicle that the player manipulates through the maze in order to
disable the, guess what, central
computer which has run amok. The
twenty different types of alien
cyborgs generated by the computer
seem reminiscent of Shamus, an
earlier arcade hit. IBM PC and PS/2
with numerous graphic options
available ($34.95). Circle Reader
Service #20.
Softboards
20 Surville Place
Mairangi Bay
Auckland 10 New Zealand
CONNECT: From "Down Under"
comes the computer version of the
popular family game "Connect
Four." The computer opponent is
not to be underestimated in this
well-executed translation of the
table game. IBM ($20.00). Circle
Reader Service # 21.
Strategic Studies Group
1747 Orleans Ct.
Walnut Creek, CA 94598
HALLS OF MONTEZUMA: This
new release is a tour de force of
some of the most famous battles of
the United States Marine Corps.
Using the ever-evolving and ever-im-

proving Battlefront system, players
can deploy crack Marine troops
into battles from Mexico City of
1847 to Hue of 1968. Will your subordinates "salute smartly and
charge up the hill?" Apple, C-64
($39.95). Circle #22.

CGW Meets
Dragon Con '87
(Continued from page 24)
Earl Weaver);
Master Designer Cinemaware for
Sinbad and the Throne of the Falcon—Bill Williams, designer; and
Microprose for Gunship—Arnold
Hendrick and Any Hollis, designers.
And the winner of CGW's Action
Game of the Year is:
Microprose for Gunship—Arnold
Hendrick and Andy Hollis, designers."
[Ed: Thus far, Microprose has held
the high ground in military
simulators. Though these products
are not "flight simulators" or strategy
games per se, they offer a unique
hybrid perspective with intense excitement and emotional thrill that is
rarely experienced elsewhere. Gunship is the hottest of the lot."]
At this point in time, CGW presented

a Special Award for Artistic
Achievement in a Computer
Game. "The winner is:
Master Designer Cinemaware for
Defender of the Crown—Kellyn
Beeck, designer, James Sachs, art
director, and Jim Cuomo, musical
score. [Ed: The graphics, animation,
and sound qualities of Defender of
the Crown are so remarkable that
many computer dealers felt that this
program was selling Amigas rather
than vice-versa. The detailed
landscapes and beautiful animation
make this a product which appeals
to everyone from pre-teens onward.]
The next presentation was CGW's
Strategy Game of the Year. "For
Strategy Game of the Year:
Avalon Hill for Under Fire! and Expanded Capabilities Disk—Ralph Bosson, designer;
Mindscape for Balance of Power—
Chris Crawford, designer;
Strategic Simulations, Inc. for
BattleCruiser—Gary Grigsby, designer;
Strategic Simulations, Inc. for Gettysburg—Chuck Kroegel and David
Landrey, designers; and
Strategic Studies Group for Battlefront—Roger Keating and Ian
Trout, designers. And the winner of
CGW's Strategy Game of the Year
is:
Strategic Simulations, Inc. for Gettysburg—Chuck Kroegel and David
Landrey, designers." [Ed: Gettysburg
is a very superior game, as well as
simulation, of one of the most critical confrontations between the
North and South. Set-up options
allow for historical set-up or a computer-determined randomness for
each division's arrival so that the
gamer gets an endless number of different Battles of Gettysburg with

none of them shackled to
history's timetable.]
Prior to presenting the
1987 Computer
Gaming World Game of
the Year Award, a belated presentation was
made. "The winner of the
1986 Computer
Gaming World Game of
the Year Award is
Origin Systems for Ultima IV Lord British, designer." [Ed:
As Scorpia once noted, "Ultima IV
stands alone as an oasis in a desert."
Ultima IV is a groundbreaking CRPG
game which emphasizes character
development without sacrificing plot
and action. Of course, some may
scoff that we were so late in presenting this award, but remember—they
were a year late in releasing it!]
Finally, the moment for the 1987
CGW Game of the Year Award arrived. For the first time in the history
of Golden Empire Publications we
were so impressed with a design in
development that we asked to be included in the beta-test phase of the
product. When we first saw this
product demonstrated at the 1987
Winter Consumer Electronics Show
we realized then that this program
was going to come as close to being
the perfect simulation of its subject
matter that we had ever seen. With
our involvement in the beta-test
phase it came even closer to the
ideal. Therefore we are proud to
present the 1987 Computer Game of
the Year award to: Electronic Arts for
Earl Weaver Baseball—Eddie
Dombrower and Teri Mason, designers (strategy by Earl Weaver)." [Ed:
EWB is undoubtedly the most exciting sports simulation to be released
in years. It has it all and could easily
have been considered for either the
strategy or action categories in its
own right. With the capacity to
design your own stadium, choose
team colors (Amiga version), trade
players, and use instant replays, you
can't lose.]
With such worthy winners, it's no
wonder that California shivered on
the day we left for the convention.
Shore up your houses before next
year!

RID #42 (Use card
opposite pg. 8)
On this page, a number of games
and articles are listed for evaluation, as well as some general interest questions. When evaluating a
game, consider such matters as
PRESENTATION (graphics, sound,
packaging and documentation);
GAME DESIGN (design, playability,
and level of interest); and LIFE
(does the game wear well?).
For each game which you have
played or each article which you
have read, place a 1 (terrible)
through 9 (outstanding) next to the
appropriate number.

SSI mounted a successful "Rebel Charge at Chickamauga" in order to take
the top four positions on the strategy side of our readers' Top 50. SSG's
"Russia" is managing to maintain its position in the center of the Top 10
rated games and "Chessmaster 2000" seems to be losing some of its earlier
strength. Part of the reason for such dramatic movement on the strategy side
is due to the reclassification of "Gunship," CGW's "Action Game of the
Year, 1987. As a game which requires both action skills and tactical decisionmaking, this game would be in the Top 10 on either side. So we moved "Gun-

ship" to the Action/Adventure side to be consistent with the award category.
"Strike yer Union Jack, ye landlubbin"Ulti-mates!' Aargh, we've got ya' in
our sights!" At least, that's what some of readers are saying as Microprose's
"Pirates" begins its assault on the Action/Adventure list with ranging shots
within one-tenth of a point from the venerable "Ultima IV." "Starflight" was
nudged slightly out of its number three orbital position and some of "Might
and Magic"'s magic was dissipated as these titles slipped to positions four
and five respectively.

