February 1984

Vol. 4 No. 1

FEATURES
THEY CALL IT MURDER

12
Dave & Diana Stone

Murder On The Zinderneuf

CARRIER FORCE

14
Floyd Mathews

Overview & Play Tips

TITAN EMPIRE

15
James McPherson

Review

TWO FROM SIMULATIONS CANADA

16
Jay Selover

Grey Seas, Grey Skies & Fall Gelb

RINGSIDE SEAT

20
Dave Long

Review and Rating System

GOLF: TWO SIMULATIONS

24
Roy Wagner & Russell Sipe

NATO COMMANDER
Review

GEOPOLITIQUE 1990
Review

WHIPPING YOUR M.U.L.E. INTO SHAPE

KNIGHTS OF THE DESERT
Strategy and Tactics

26
Mark Bausman
31
Bob Proctor
34
Carl M. Evans
40
Mark Bausman

Departments
Inside the Industry
Hobby and Industry News
Taking a Peek
Atari Arena
Scorpion's Tale (Zork I)
Learning Game
Commodore Key
Tele-Gaming
Silicon Cerebrum
Reader Input Device

Game Ratings
Index (Volume 3)

5
7
8
22
28
32
35
36
38
48
49
50

Game Playing Aids from Computer Gaming World
COSMIC BALANCE SHIPYARD DISK
Contains over 20 ships that competed in the CGW COSMIC BALANCE SHIP
DESIGN CONTEST. Included are Avenger, the tournament winner; Blaze,
Mongoose, and MKVP6, the judge's ships. These ships are ideal for the gamer
who cannot find enough competition or wants to study the ship designs of
other garners around the country. SSI's The Cosmic Balance is required to use
the shipyard disk. PLEASE SPECIFY APPLE OR ATARI VERSION WHEN
ORDERING. $15.00

ROBOTWAR TOURNAMENT DISK
CGW's Robotwar Diskette contains the source code for the entrants to the
Second Annual CGW Robotwar Tournament (with the exception of NordenB)
including the winner, DRAGON. Also included is the winner of the First Annual
Tournament, NORDEN+. Twelve robots in all. Muse Software's ROBOTWAR
required to use tournament disk. $12.00.

CGW BASEBALL DISK
Contains the four teams of the All Star League reported on in 3.3 (AL West All
Stars, Al East, NL West, and NL East); the six teams of the 1982 Winter League
(see 3.3), the eight teams of the Greatest Baseball Team of All Time
Tournament, and a reprint of the results of The GBTOAT tournament from
issue 2.3. SSI's Computer Baseball Apple version required to use data disk.
Apple version only. $12.00.
Send check or money order to: Computer Gaming World, Disk Order Dept.,
P.O. Box 4566, Anaheim, CA 92803-4566. California residents please add 696
sales tax. Allow 3-4 weeks for delivery.

INSIDE THE INDUSTRY
by Dana Lombardy

Here are the results of the readers
survey in the October, 1983 issue of
CGW.

In that survey, we asked readers what
other types of games they played before
they began playing computer games, and
what other types of games they still play
now that they're computer garners.

Part I asked which one statement
below best described the individual
reader's gaming experience. (Numbers
to the right of each statement represent
the percentage of readers that answered
"yes" to that statement.)

A. I didn't play any other games
regularly (at least 3 to 4 times
a month) before I got into
computer games, and I still
don't play anything except
computer games.

B. I didn't play any other types
of games regularly before I
got into computer games, but
now I play other types of
games regularly (as well as
computer games).

C. I played other types of games
regularly, and still play these
other games regularly, as
well as play computer
games.

D. I used to play other types of
games regularly, but now I
play only computer games
regularly.

18.6%

3.5%

46.9%

31.0%

Part II asked those readers who
answered "yes" to statements B. or C.
above to check one or more of the following types of games they now play
regularly (other than computer games).

B.
C.
Role-Playing Games
(such as Dungeons &
Dragons® )
75% 50.1%
Wargames
(such as Squad Leader) 50% 56.6%
Miniatures Wargames
(using scale models/
soldiers
0% 20.8%
Abstract Strategy Games
such as chess, go, etc.) 50% 56.6%
Coin-operated Arcade
Games
(such as Pac Man)
50% 43.4%
(Totals add up to more than 100%
because a reader could check more than
one type of game.)
Thirty-one percent of garners who used to play other types of games now play
computer games almost exclusively. This
was offset just slightly by the few who
had never played other types of games
but got into them as a result of playing
computer games (3.5% of the readers
who responded).
This net loss (27.5%) confirms what
non-computer game companies have
suspected: computer games have
"stolen" their customers-or at least a
good number of them.
While it may be comforting to noncomputer game companies that 46.9% of
the readers who responded to the survey
still play other types of games (as well
as computer games), even these gamers
may be buying fewer wargames, roleplaying games, etc., than they used to.
Of those computer garners who started
playing other types of games, most
became involved with role-playing
games such as Dungeons & Dragons ® ,
Traveller® , etc. Wargames, abstract
strategy games, and coin-op arcade
games all tied for second place with an
equal number of these readers. No
reader became involved with miniatures
wargames as a result of playing computer games.

Of those computer garners who still
play other types of games regularly, their
order of preference is: wargames
(56.6%), abstract strategy games (56.6%),
role-playing games (50.1%), and coin-op
arcade games (43.4%). Only 20.8% of
computer gamers still playing noncomputer games are involved with
miniatures wargames.

Part III asked those readers who
answered "yes" to statements C. or D.
above to check one or more of the following types of games they used to play
regularly before they got involved with
computer games.
C.

D.

49.1% 31.4%
Role-Playing Games
60.4% 65.7%
Wargames
Miniatures Wargames 24.5% 17.1%
Abstract Strategy Games 54.7% 22.9%
Coin-op Arcade Games 50.9% 37.1%

This last part reveals the most interesting information about what types
of games "lost" customers to computer
gaming.
Of those computer garners who still
play other types of games regularly, one
category — role-playing games — actually showed a slight gain in involvement
(49.1% before computer games, 50.1%
after).

There was a slight drop in involvement
in wargaming after they started playing
computer games: 60.4% played
wargames before they started playing
computer games, and 56.6% of these
same garners are still involved with
board wargames (a 3.8% drop). 24.5%
played miniatures wargames before getting into computer games, and 20.8% of
these garners stayed with it after they
became computer garners (a 3.7% drop).
(The data seems to suggest that
miniatures wargamers who are now

computer gamers are not a separate and
distinct group of wargamers. Instead, the
figures imply that a percentage of board
wargamers are also miniatures
wargamers. In this case, all miniatures
wargamers also play board wargames).
The numbers of readers involved with
abstract strategy games actually increased slightly after becoming computer gamers (54.7% before getting into
computer games, 56.6% after).
The biggest drop came among coin-op
arcade garners. Before they got into computer games, 50.9% of the readers played
coin-op games. Now only 43.4% of the
readers continue to play these games (a
7.5% drop).
However, all these figures are so small
that it's reasonable to assume that about
the same number of garners are still playing other types of games as played them
before their involvement with computer
games.
Of those readers who used to play
other games but now only play computer
games, 65.7% used to play wargames,
17.1% used to play miniatures
wargames, 37.1% used to play coin-op
games but no longer do so, 31.4% used
to play role-playing games, and 22.9% of
these readers used to play abstract

strategy games.
What does this mean in hard numbers?
If we consider only the circulation of
CGW (25,000 readers), over 5,000 former
wargamers no longer play these games
— they now play computer games exclusively. An additional 360 wargamers
no longer are active with these games
even though they still play other types of
games (as well as computer games).
The other categories of games did not
lose as many customers to computer
games. (There is substantial overlap
among the types of games that garners
used to or still play).
If the readers survey of CGW is an accurate reflection of the average computer gaming hobbyist, these percentages translate into much bigger losses.
It's been guesstimated that there are
about 50,000 computer wargamers in the
U.S. If the percentages from the CGW
survey are applied to this figure, over
16,000 of these computer garners used to
play wargames but no longer do so.
It may be reasonable to assume that the
majority of these 16,000 wargamers were
"hard-core" hobbyists who bought some
of the wargames published by smaller
game companies. Such companies print

only 1,000 to 2,000 copies of a new
wargame title. Even a "large" wargame
publisher might print just 5,000 copies
of a new title.
Computer games may not have
"killed" these smaller wargame companies, but they've certainly halted
recent growth.
What does this mean to the readers of
CGW?
Since the small non-computer game
companies can't "fight" the computer
game companies for your attention and
dollars, some of them are "joining" the
computer game market instead.
Game Designers' Workshop (makers of
Traveller ® ), Yaquinto Publications,
Simulations Canada, and others are
entering the computer game market with
their own designs in 1984. Some of these
games will be computer versions of their
successful board and role-playing games,
and some will be brand-new titles.
These companies are noted for having
very good game designs, and should
bring some fresh and interesting games
into the computer game hobby in 1984.
If you've been concerned that there are
too many computer games that look and
play alike, 1984 may be the year you'll
see some really different games for your
personal computer.

We are using Industry News this issue to report
on our impressions of the Winter Consumer Electronics Show recently held in Las Vegas. But first,
a retraction. In our last issue (p.11) we reported that
Avalon Hill Game Co., was negotiating the sale of
Computer Diplomacy to a larger company. We were
wrong. Eric Dott, president of Avalon Hill informs
us that they never negotiated the sale of the game
to anyone. What they have done is set-up a
marketing agreement with Radio Shack who will
distribute the TRS-80 version of CD. The IBM-PC
version is being distributed through their traditional
marketing network. We saw the IBM-PC version of
the game at CES and were impressed with the
graphics. The IBM version has already been shipped to stores. The TRS-80 version should be in
Radio Shack stores in the near future. Other titles
nearing release from AH are Dreadnaught, WWII
Atlantic naval game for the Apple; Gulf Strike, computer version of the detailed board game from Victory Games for the Atari; Under Southern Skies, a
Graf Spee game for the Apple; Panzer-Jagd for the
Atari and C-64; and a computer version of their boxing game Title Bout for the Atari.

Two new computers from Commodore were
unveiled at CES. The Commodore 264 and 364V
with be 64K machines that feature "on-board" ROM
software. At the Commodore press conference it
was unclear if these programs, which would include
at least word processing and a spread sheet, will be
in ROM inside the machine or in ROM cartridge.
When asked about the fate of the C-64 Commodore
said "we have never dropped any computer that we
have manufactured and we will not drop the C-84. "

Apple had a token booth (they have never gone
in for the CES show very much anyway). Their
Mouse-Paint with mouse hardware looks like it will
be an impressive addition to graphics software field.
Lisa style software has trickled down to the Apple II.
Elsewhere in this issue we have a review of
Avalon Hill's Tournament Golf. We indicate that
we hope they will come out with other course disks
for the game. They told us that they now have a golf
course data disk with Pebble Beach and Augusta
available which retails for $22.

Atari's huge booth seemed to shout "no retreating
for Atari this year." But the Coleco booth was
perhaps more impressive The name Coleco appeared in reduced print under ADAM. The Adam
computer looks like a winner to us and there was
an impressive roster of computer games from top
computer game companies being demonstrated on
the machine.
In other news, Yaquinto Publications of Dallas,
TX and Poulos Publications of Northlake, IL have
formed a joint venture marketing company to
publish computer games, most notably, computer
versions of Yaquinto board games such as
Ultimatum, Timeship, Tarot-The Teacher, Armor,
Ironclads, and Market Madness . They are also
looking for designer-programmers. If interested contact Phillip Poulos at 312 - 345 - 4255.
Strategic Simulations has entered the fantasy
adventure game field with QUESTRON for the
Apple computer. The Atari version will be released
in Spring ($49.95).

Broderbund Software
17 Paul Dr.
San Rafael, CA 94903
DROL: Amusing arcade game with outstanding graphics. Players must rescue a redheaded girl and her propeller-beanied
brother and their pets. The imagery is cheerful, funny and rich in detail and color. Apple, C-64, and Atari. $34.95.
LODE RUNNER: Atari version of their excellent action game. See review in CGW 3.5.
CBS Software
Greenwich, CT 06836
CHARLES GOREN: LEARNING BRIDGE
MADE EASY: A tutorial bridge program
developed for the computer by
internationally-known bridge expert
Charles Goren. The program teaches bidding, covering such topics as hand evaluation, opening bids, responses and rebids,
and provides 100 especially selected hands
for practice in play. Available for IBM-PC
and Apple computers. $79.95.
Cyber Enterprises
P.O. Box 2066
Cerritos, CA 90701
CYBERCHESS: A chess instructional program. You provide the chessboard and it
provides the moves for four games (two
amateur games; rated to 1650 and two professional; rating 1600 to 22009. You choose
each move for one side from six choices. The
program will score your selection(s) and provide you with a commentary on each of the
possible moves. Only one move is correct.
The games are actual games and commentary is provided by chess masters. Seventy
additional disks with four games each are
available. C-64, Apple, TRS-80. $29.95.

Datamost
8943 Fullbright Ave.
Chatsworth, CA 91311 - 2750
ARDY: Arcade game very similar to Sierra
On-Line's OIL WELL game. Ardy each ants,
larvae, etc., while avoiding attacks upon his
tongue. Apple, Atari, C-64, $29.95.
CAVERN CREATURES: This is a case of
"The box artwork has little to do with the
game". The "creatures" in this game are an
assortment of symbols (geometric forms,
spaceships, and animals, etc., but not the
green meany on the box cover). You blast the
symbols as you descend a vertical cavern.
The underground city looks nice, the game
is so-so. Apple. $29.95.
COHEN'S TOWERS: An arcade game in
which you must travel up and down
elevators collecting and delivering packages.
Joystick required. Atari and C - 64. $29.95.
COSMIC TUNNELS: Ho-hum arcade game
game in which you travel through the
cosmic tunnels to find energy bars which
help your planet survive which is good
because you are their only hope which isn't
very unique among computer games but
then this game is typical of the genre period
Atari $34.95.
MONSTER SMASH: Remake of a Apple
game that was distributed by The Software
Farm. We did not find it very interesting.
Atari. $29.95.

MR. ROBOT: Best of this particular group
of Datamost releases. A Donkey-Kong style

game with 22 screens. Includes "Robot Factory" which lets design up to 26 different
screens. Atari, Apple, C - 64, $34.95.

NIGHTRAIDERS: Zaxxon type game, but
not nearly as well done as the original. Atari,
$29.95.

SUPER BUNNY: Bugs Bunny becomes
Superman in this arcade game that plays like
Frogger. When Super Bunny strikes a foe
you are treated to a comic book style POW!
or BAM! (remember the Batman TV series?
Oh, you weren't born then? Sorry). Speaking of comic books, "The Origin of Super
Bunny" makes up a good portion of the
rulebook. Apple, $29.95.

TAIL OF BETA LYRAE: Scramble type
game in which you drive the aliens from the
asteroids in the tail of the double star Beta
Lyrae. Worth checking out if you like Scramble type arcade games. Atari, $34.95.

Datasoft
9421 Winnetka Ave.
Chatsworth, CA 91311
POOYAN: Based on the coin-op arcade
game. You control the piglets as they attempt
to ward off the evil wolves. Atari, CoCo, Apple, C - 64.

THE SANDS OF EGYPT: An adventure
game in which you play the role of Lord
Charles Buckingham III, a famous explorer.
Nice animation. You must overcome puzzling hieroglyphics, stubborn camels, and
mystical mummies. Apple.

Infocom Inc.
55 Wheeler St.
Cambridge, MA 02138

INFIDEL: Infocom begins its "Tales of
Adventure" series with Infidel. The packaging is typically Infocom (i.e. outstanding).
Left to die in the Egyptian desert with only
a map, a cube of ancient markings and an
incomplete hieroglyphics dictionary, Infidel
challenges you to find the entrance to the
last great pyramid and to unravel its
mysteries. Most versions retail for $49.95,
some cost more. Infidel runs on most
computers.

Krell Software
1320 Stony Brook Rd.
Stony Brook, NY 11790

ADVENTURES IN FLESH: No this is not
one of those porno programs, it is an educational game that explores the human
anatomy and physiology. Using the format
of an adventure game the player is
miniaturized and travels through the body
Fantastic Voyage style. One form of play involves exploring the various systems of the
body attempting to discover disorders and
disruptions in the body's normal healthy
function. $49.95. Apple.

THE BLACK DEATH: Educational game
that teaches basic principles of
epidemiology and public health decision
making. Players see a large grid representing healthy people (displayed in low-res
graphics or in numbers). This visual map
serves as the focal point of the player(s) attempts to control the spread of disease.
Although the slowness of the game (in Basic
we surmise) and the cumbersome cursor
movement routine makes for the game appear to be outdated by current standards,
don't let that fool you. The game does a good
job at what it is aiming to do, teach individuals, or groups about disease control.
Teachers and parents of teens should
check–out this and other Krell games. Apple. $49.95.

PLATO'S CAVE: Some of the comments
about Black Death are applicable here. The
game does a good job of introducing
students to the relationship between
evidence and inference. Apple. $49.95.

MicroProse Software
10616 Beaver Dam Rd.
Hunt Valley, MD 21030
SOLOFLIGHT: Exciting, realistic 3–D flying
simulation for the Atari and C-64. A more
accurate than the old Sublogic Flight
Simulator (we have not seen the new one
yet). SF simulates realistic takeoffs, landings,

and cross-country navigation under both
visual and instrument flight rules among 21
different airports grouped in Kansas,
Washington State, and the mountains of Colorado. Simulation options include touch and
go landings, visual or instrument flying, full
cockpit instrumentation, dual VOR navigation radios, instrument landing system,
multiple air navigation maps, and emergency procedure practices. $34.95 and well
worth it.

Muse Software
347 N. Charles St.
Baltimore, MD 21201

ANTONYM ANTICS: A colorful well
designed word game for ages 6 - 13. The program teaches children the meaning of antonyms by illustrating each selection in cartoon form. Apple. $39.95.

THE FUNCTION GAME: TFG will graph
mathematical equations for the high school
or college student. It will help identify a
variety of mathematical problems through
the use of its graphs and diagrams. Using
Algebra and Calculus, TFG makes learning
much more interesting than just getting it
from a textbook. Apple. $39.95.

INTELLECTUAL DECATHLON: ID provides 10 different contest intended to stretch

your mind. If includes contest designed to
test your ability to memorize, make complex
and split second judgements, and identify
abstract objects, musical notes and word
associations. One event that we especially
liked was the horse race event which required studying a variety of factors to determine the best betting scheme. You bet points
that you have earned up to that point (very
clever, that). Apple. $39.95.

Penguin Software
P.O.Box 311
Geneva, IL 60134
BOUNCING KAMUNGAS: Humorous arcade game in which you raise melons while
avoiding having them smashed by the bouncing kamungas. Other hazards are lighting,
sensitive snakes and Peronies (read "living
bumps in the road". Now all we need is a
game with roaming potholes.) Cute game.
Apple. $19.95.
THE COVETED MIRROR: A graphics
adventure with a lot of animation as well as
imbedded arcade game sequences. You must
find the missing piece of the wizard's broken
mirror before the evil voar the Vermin does.
Good value at $19.95. Apple.

PIE-MAN: Atari version of an Apple
original. You are working in an automated
bakery. you take the pies as the come out of
the conveyor, put shipped cream and a

cherry on them then take the finished pie to
the pie bin (IBM probably stole the bakery
idea from PIE-MAN when they did their
commercial with Charlie Chaplin; uh, just
kidding IBM). Sacks of flour, greasy floors,
and tipsy wedding cake bakers make your
job more difficult. Apple and now Atari.
$19.95.

Sierra On-Line Inc.
Sierra On-Line Building
Coarsegold, CA 93614

AQUATRON: A Defender style game that
combines air and sea fighting. Above the
water you fight a variety of air and space
craft. Dive below the water's surface to fight
submarines. Apple.
Synapse Software
5221 Central Ave.
Richmond, CA 94804

ENCOUNTER!: Combine the play style of
Battlezone with the outstanding 3 - D
graphics of Way-Out and you have Encounter. Enjoyable. Atari.

RAINBOW WALKER: Tired of trying to
find the rainbow, then walk on a rainbow.
Someone has stolen the colors of the rainbow and Synapse has provided you with
magic shoes that will allow you to restore the
colors. Atari.

Sir-Tech Software
6 Main St.
Ogdensburg, NY 13669
CRYPT OF MEDEA: A Horror/Adventure
game (package says "ages 15 and up"). The
game features full sentence parsing, hi-res
graphics and text animation. With a Mockingboard speech board the game will talk to
you. Musical tunes have been interspersed
at key points in the game. Apple. $34.95.

THEY CALL IT MURDER,
BABY!
by David & Diana Stone

BASIC INFORMATION
Name:
Type:
System:
Format:
# Players:
Authors:

Price:
Publisher:

Murder on the
Zinderneuf
Who done it
Atari
Disk
One
Robert Leyland,
Paul Reiche III, and
Jon Freeman
$40
Electronic Arts
San Mateo, CA

At 5000 feet and 12 hours out of New
York one of the sixteen passengers of the
Zinderneuf Luxury Zeppelin is missing.
On board a dirigible that can only mean
one thing. Murder!.
Your objective in Murder on the
Zinderneuf (MURDER), one of the
premiere games from Electronic Arts, is
to expose the murderer through the
character of a "famous" detective. Your
methods of operation include interrogating suspects, "shadowing" them,
and searching for clues. Unlike Spade,
Marlowe, Hammer and other famous
detectives of the Zinderneuf era, you
don't carry a "rod". This is a discovery,
intuition, logic game, not a shoot-em up.

tion describes the personalities of the
characters, their kinship, the color of
their hair, and whether or not they
smoke or wear glasses. These basic
characteristics do not change from game
to game. The murderer and the victim
are always two of the sixteen. Each game
presents a different plot, a different victim and murderer, and a different
challenge for you, the detective.

You might be wondering if you can
`beat' the game by learning the plots. We
doubt it. There are a set number of "confessions" (the exact number we haven't
determined), however, we have played
the game over 20 times and recall seeing the same confession only twice.

To begin MURDER, you select one of
the eight detective to play. Their names
suggest that each is based on a famous
fictional sleuth. There's Harry Hacksaw,
Chief Inspector Emile Klutzeau, Miss
Agatha Marbles, Humbolt Hause, Lieutenant Cincinnato, Charity Flaire, Achille
Merlot, and Jethro Knight (also known
as "the Angel"). Each has his own personality and his own unique crimesolving style. That personality and style
affects how you may interrogate suspects and how quickly you find relevant
clues.

Principle restrictions include confining your movements to the passenger
deck and accomplishing your mission
before the Zinderneuf lands in 12 hours
(about 36 minutes of real time).

After you have selected your detective,
he appears in the dining room of the
Zinderneuf and you are told who is missing (read: murdered). Your case officially
begins and the clock begins its twelve
hour count down.

The same sixteen characters are in
each scenario. Their basic personalities
do not change from game to game, but
their temperaments do. The documenta-

The Zinderneuf is colorful — very colorful. Your Atari must have a GTIA chip
to play the game. The main screen
display, where you do all your sleuthing,

is a cut-away, birds-eye view of part of
the passenger deck with a four-line text
window at the top. Your detective appears as a unique full-figured character
that you move about with the joystick.
The sixteen passengers appear as
person-shaped figures. Each has its own
special shape, color, and style of walking. After a few games, you will
recognize each instantly as they scurry
about.

As you move your detective, the screen
smoothly scrolls vertically revealing
more of the passenger deck. The very
front of the ship is the dining area, the
rear is the lounge, and in between are the
individual passenger cabins. As you approach the back of ship, the drone of the
engine increases slightly in volume. Nice
touch.
You move from cabin to cabin interrogating passengers about other
passengers. Where the passengers go
may be revealing, especially if
passengers with no previously known
relationship are seen entering one
another's cabin. For example, you would
not find it unusual to see Felicity Sucrose
enter Margaret Vandergilt's room, Felicity is Margaret's daughter. However,
finding young Felicity in dark, handsome Aldo Sandini's room may suggest
intrigue, and more.

On a few occasions while playing
MURDER, we witnessed passengers
disappearing when the detective entered
the room, and when he stepped out they
re-appeared. This minor program bug
did not seem to affect the play of the
game but it was annoying.
Actual interrogation is begun by
touching your detective character to the
character you wish to interrogate. The

text window offers you the choices:
QUESTION, IGNORE, or ACCUSE
THE SUSPECT. Under joystick control
you make your selection. Don't be too
quick on the button here. A slight movement of the joystick may cause you to accidentally ACCUSE when you only
meant to QUESTION.
Then, using the joystick you select
HOW you wish to interrogate. Each
detective has his own personal approaches to select from. Hard-boiled
detective Hacksaw Harry, for example,
can be VIOLENT, COOL, FRIENDLY,
PUSHY, or STUPID, while the insightful
spinster Agatha Marbles can be STERN,
SYMPATHETIC, CHATTY, POLITE,
HELPLESS.
Selecting the right approach is important. It can make the difference between
being told to "get lost" and getting good
answers to two or three questions before
the suspect decides he has no more to
say for now. Getting to know the detectives, and each of the sixteen characters,
will enable you to avoid hostile replies.
The game designers encourage you to
be creative in imagining how a question
might be asked by your detective. For example, if you select POLITE as your approach you may imagine your character
saying "Excuse me, but could you tell me
what you might know about so-and-so";
or when selecting a "forceful" approach
you might imagine your detective growling "Tell me everything you know about
so-and-so, and nobody gets hurt!". It's
fun, but not required, to read the questions and responses out loud, in
character.

You next select which passenger you
want to ask about. You will almost
always want to begin by asking the
suspect what they know about the victim. A text line presents the names of
four of the sixteen passengers at a time.
Joystick movement allows you to "leaf"
through the list to make your selection.
This way, the screen doesn't get cluttered up with character's names, and
you are spared having to type in their
names (and anything else for that
matter).
Quizzing passengers reveals their relationships in the current scenario, but
they don't directly spell out "who done
it". The responses of the passengers are
the stuff from which you piece together
who is likely involved with the murder,
who is a good suspect to question next,
and whose room you should search for
clues.
Each room contains one clue only, or
none at all, with one exception.
Somewhere on board, in one of the

cabins, is the MOTIVE CLUE. This clue,
when found, points a finger hard and
straight at one of the suspects. Finding
the MOTIVE CLUE is no easy task. The
MOTIVE CLUE can be found only if you
have met certain criteria: you must have
significant information obtained from
your interrogations, and you must have
already found an ordinary clue in the
room where the MOTIVE CLUE can be
found.
Essential to every game, and to every
mystery for that matter, is the illusion of
winnability (or solvability, as the case
may be). And, in the cases of defeat the
player must perceive that failure was the
player's fault (not the game's) but can be
corrected by playing better the next time.
MURDER lives up to this criterion
admirably.
One reason for its playability is that the
authors play fairly with the clues. The
clues and the responses of the
passengers seem logical and ultimately
fit together as part of either the main plot
or sub-plot. Yes, there are red herrings,
these are to be expected (even demanded) in detective fiction.
The game designers incorporated a
number of restrictions that facilitate
game play and suggest some strategies.
One restriction is that after you have
either questioned or ignored a suspect,
you can't question (or accuse) that
suspect again until you have either found
a clue or questioned a different suspect.
Another restriction that directly affects
play and strategy is that if you accuse an
innocent suspect, or if you accuse a
suspect with insufficient evidence, that
passenger will not speak to you again until the Zeppelin lands. Sufficient
evidence means finding the MOTIVE
CLUE, or gaining significant evidence
from your interrogations.
As soon as you have the MOTIVE
CLUE or sufficient evidence, you find
the suspect and make your accusation.
If you are right, the murderer blurts out
his confession. We have guessed the
right suspect too early with the result
that he would not talk to us anymore.
This was somewhat annoying since we
were pretty sure that we had gathered
enough "significant evidence" to make
the accusation. This has made us
somewhat shy about making accusations
until we have found the motive clue and
are positive who the killer is.
If you are on a particularly tough case,
the Zinderneuf will land before you can
positively identify the murderer. When
this occurs you are given the opportunity to make a final accusation before the
murderer is revealed by the game.
The computer then rates you as a
detective. Factors that affect your rating
include: how fast you solved the crime,
the amount of evidence you obtained,
and the number of false accusations that
you made. Ratings range from Feeble

Flatfoot to Super Sleuth.
The "human engineering" of
MURDER is well above average and
should serve as a good example for
would-be programmers on how to allow
complex input under joystick control.
Speaking not as programmers, but as
game players whose sofa is six feet from
the computer, we're pleased with almost
any game that can be totally controlled
by the joystick (we resent having to get
up even to press START to re-start on
some games).
One reason that MURDER is fun to
play is that the game designers have
done their homework. Each of the sixteen characters is loosely based on
historical characters or character-types
from the 1930's. For example,
Zinderneuf's Sally Rose is similar to real
Sally Rand, the fan dancer; Buck Battle,
an Olympic star turned movie star, is a
cross between Buster Crabbe and Johnny
Weismuller.
Many games nowadays have
background information and stories
about the characters in the games; some
quite cleverly written. Zinderneuf,
however, is the one of the few games that
we have run across that provides
character background information that
is useful and actually applies to the play
of the game.
MURDER is more than just a string of
interesting characters carefully interwoven into random plots. Wellresearched historical context helps
MURDER create a fictional world exciting and authentic enough as to
become a reality of its own.
Good detective fiction follows certain
conventions. As mentioned above, clues
must be handled fairly so that a person
of above average intelligence, or one
with lots of experience, can solve the
crime before the solution is revealed.
Other plot devices of detective fiction are
firmly established and well-known to all
lovers of this kind of writing. MURDER
incorporates, either directly or indirectly, some of the standard detective fiction
conventions and conveniently ignores
others. A few traditional detective plot
elements missing from MURDER include the murder weapon, the accomplice, and the corpse. Also, suicide
is out of the question. However, none of
these "omissions" take away from the
play of the game.
In conclusion, MURDER ON THE
ZINDERNEUF is in a class by itself. It
is like no other game that we've seen on
the market: it has animated graphics but
it's definitely not an arcade game; you
assume a role but its definitely not a role
playing game; you piece together clues
but it's definitely not an adventure (like
Infocom's "Witness" and "Deadline"). It
IS a good "who done it" that, if you like
mystery fiction, you will enjoy playing
again and again.

CARRIER FORCE:
Overview & Play Tips
by Floyd Mathews

Carrier Force (CF) is an excellent
operational level game of World War II
Pacific fleet action. It recreates the four
most crucial carrier battles in history:
Coral Sea, Midway, Eastern Solomons
and Santa Cruz. Fleet operations are
simulated in more detail than Gary
Grigsby's earlier game, GUADALCANAL CAMPAIGN (GC). In GC, each
game turn represents 12 hours, and the
full game lasts 180 days. But in CF each
turn represents one hour, and each
scenario lasts only two to three days.
Also, you can control more aspects of air
operations and combat in CF than in GC.
At the start of a scenario, each ship
and plane appears in its actual historical
location. However, if you want to add
more of the "fog of war", you have the
option to randomize the initial set-up in
most scenarios.
The object is to obtain points by
destroying or damaging enemy ships,
aircraft and land bases. The Imperial
Japanese Navy (IJN) can also get extra
points by bombarding USN bases and by
landing assault forces.
There are two high resolution scrolling map displays, each about 30 hexes
square. Each map occupies about six
screens, and a hex is about 50 miles
wide. The Midway map centers on Midway, and the map for the other three
scenarios centers on Guadalcanal.
The status of your ships and planes,
and reports from your pilots, are printed
on your screen. Sighting, combat and
damage reports may be exaggerated, so
you do have to evaluate them with a
grain of salt.
All of the historical ships are included,
down to the smallest seaplane tender,
minesweeper and patrol boat. Each ship
is rated for its individual characteristics,
such as speed, gunnery, flak, armor protection, and so forth. There are also 20
types of aircraft, with each rated for its
speed, endurance, dogfighting ability

Carrier Force
NAME:
Wargame
TYPE:
Apple, Atari
SYSTEM:
#PLAYERS: 1 or 2
Gary Grigsby
AUTHOR:
PRICE:
$59.95 $39.95
PUBLISHER: Strategic Simulations
Mountain View, CA

and bombing accuracy.
This game does a superb job of portraying the tension and uncertainty of
the WWII carrier battles. You know that
there are powerful enemy forces lurking
out there somewhere, and you know they
are hunting for you. You have to find
them before they find you. A single successful air strike against your big carriers
could decide the whole battle. If a fire
breaks out, a ship may suffer additional
damage and secondary explosions if the
fire spreads. Crippled carriers and airbases will be unable to conduct air
operations.
Bad weather can add to your uncertainty. Weather conditions may
change, and low cloud cover can seriously limit search capability and air operations — especially in the Coral Sea
scenario. My only complaint with this is
that weather conditions apply generally
to the entire map, and there are no local
squalls or fronts.
There is a great deal of randomness
built into the combat and search
algorithms of this program, so that luck
can be a factor in this game. But, your
command decisions will have the major
effect in deciding the battle. You must
plan your operations several hours into
the future: How many air search missions should you commit now, and
where? Should your battleships stay back
to protect your carriers, or should you
send them forward to pound land bases

and seek surface combat? Should you
arm your bombers now with high explosive ordnance for land targets, or
with torpedoes and armor piercing
bombs for ship targets? Should you strike
now against the enemy transports you
found, or wait to hopefully sight the
enemy carriers? Should you send large
fighter escorts to protect your strike missions, or hold most fighters back to defend your carriers? Should you concentrate most of your planes into a single
large air strike, or spread them over
many smaller missions in consecutive
"wave" attacks? Should you advance to
finish off the enemy cripples, or run
away for safety?
The four scenarios are unevenly
balanced, and this is historically
accurate. The IJN has the following advantages in all four scenarios: longer
range aircraft, superior torpedoes and
surface gunnery. In the first two
scenarios, the IJN has a great numerical
advantage in ships and planes. In all
scenarios, the USN has nearby bases for
additional air power and emergency landings, and the USN task forces start
close together so they can provide
mutual support. After the decisive IJN
defeat at Midway, the USN has much
better odds in terms of carriers, quality
and experience of pilots, and flak. In all
scenarios, the USN player receives fairContinued on p. 45

TITAN EMPIRE

James A. McPherson

BASIC INFORMATION
Titan Empire
Strategic and
Tactical Space War
SYSTEM:
Apple II/IIe
One
# players:
AUTHOR: Ed Zaron
$34.95
PRICE:
PUBLISHER: Muse Software
Baltimore, MD
NAME:
TYPE:

Titan Empire (TE) is a combined
strategic and tactical game. The objective is to prevent the Titans from capturing our solar system. The game not only
includes the nine planets, but the major
moons as well. And, with only one ship
at your disposal, you have a lot of
"ground" to cover. This is due to the fact
that you must not only attack the enemy
planets and moons but you have to defend the planets currently under your
control. The Titans can attack at more
than one location with multiple ships.
The basic game has Saturn, Mercury,
and Jupiter as enemy planets (including
their major moons). After you have
played the basic game, you are able to

randomize the planets initially under
enemy control for a fresh game.
The game is played utilizing three
displays. They are:
1) Space Window — which shows approaching enemies, planets, and moons
(you do battle using this display).
2) Planetary Information — shows
amount of fuel and the number of armies
on each planet and moon. It also
designates friend or foe.
3) System Map — A map of the solar
system divided into sectors.
Always present on the bottom portion
of the display is the radar screen plus
current statistics on the game in progress. The radar screen has nine levels

of magnification which are adjusted
depending upon your needs. This screen
lets you view the surrounding vectors for
approaching enemy ships. Not only do
you have all of these displays available,
but in addition you must control fuel,
ship repair, speed, direction, weapons,
and shields.
Fuel is consumed in distance traveled
as well as shots fired. Fuel can be found
on all planets and moons but is limited.
The fuel supplies do renew themselves
over time but you cannot stay at one
planet for ever. If you use up all of the
fuel in one area, it is no longer an easy
area to defend as you must refuel
elsewhere. Further, friendly armies must
be on a planet from which you wish to
refuel, and your shields must be down
while doing so. One final comment on
fuel consumption . . . battles with the
Titans consumes a lot of fuel.
TE has a realistic orbiting solar system.
You must continue to monitor the Map
display in order to plan your strategy. It
is better to concentrate your efforts on
planets and moons which are near your
sector and only traveling to other planets
when their orbits bring them close. In
other words, don't spread yourself too
thin.
Each planet starts out with fuel and
armies, but the numbers of both will
Continued on p. 44

TWO FROM
SIMULATIONS CANADA
by Jay Selover

It's always nice to see a new company
appear on the computer gaming horizon.
Simulations Canada, a conventional
wargame company for some years now,
has recently entered the field with two
computer wargames, Grey Seas, Grey
Skies (GSGS) and Fall Gelb (FG). Stephen
Newberg, the company's founder, has
been its primary creative talent, building
it into one of the more respected of the
"third world" board wargame companies. With his expansion into computer games, Stephen has gone to outside talent for the first two releases.
GSGS was designed by W. J. Nichols, and
is a tactical simulation of modern naval
combat. FG was designed by L. Howie,
and covers the German invasion of
France and the low countries in May,
1940 which led to the Dunkirk
evacuation.

You can expect certain things of any
Simulations Canada product, including
these two games. Both are well researched and both have terse rules and no
peripheral documentation. The two
games have one other important feature
in common. They were designed as computer assisted wargames. Each game includes two mapsheets and two sets of
unit counters so that two human players
can separately and secretly set up and
move their units. The programs have no
graphics, so that even if you're playing
a computer opponent, you need the map
and counters to keep track of the positions of your forces.

Past these similarities, the games
diverge considerably. They of course
simulate very different events in scale
and scope. They are also products of two
different programmers. GSGS is entirely

in basic, while most of FG is in machine
language (surprisingly, the difference in
execution time between the two is not
that large). Let's take a look at the
strengths and weaknesses of each game.

GREY SEAS, GREY SKIES
GSGS simulates hypothetical tactical
engagements between various surface
and submarine forces in the near future.
The game can cope with up to ten units
total (up to seven on a side, but if you
have seven ships, your opponent can
have no more than three). There are
seven scenarios included plus a "build
your own" feature which allows players
to select units from a library of the
world's naval forces. The United States,
Great Britain, France, and the Soviet
Union are well represented with carriers, cruisers, destroyers, frigates, auxiliaries, merchantmen, and both conventional ("hunter/killer") submarines and
ballistic missile submarines. Of course,
the converted American battleships (now
cruise missile platforms) are also included. In addition, a variety of smaller craft
(destroyers, frigates, and subs) are included from West Germany, Italy, India,
Japan, Argentina, and China.
Each turn represents six minutes of
real time, and the player is put in the
position of the captain of each of his
ships. For each ship or sub, he can perform any, some, or all of the following.
1) Check status of sonar contacts. 2)
Check status of radar and visual contacts. 3) Check status of weapons systems
(number of each type available and for
subs, the load in each tube). 4) Check
status of fire control and order attacks
against any contact. 5) Check the helm
for position, course, and speed and make
changes to course and speed (subs also

have depth capabilities). 6) Finally,
helicopter status can be checked and
orders to helicopters can be issued.
Movement takes place on an
x,y-coordinate grid which is 180,000 yards
(about 100 miles) across and which is
marked into increments of 10,000 yards.
Courses and bearings are always given
relative to 0° being due north (straight
up the y-axis). You will need to become
comfortable with the system, but you
won't have to go back to high school
trigonometry to play (as was often the
case with TORPEDO FIRE). Your fire
control computer can be ordered to track
any contact and will, within two or three
turns, deliver the exact bearing and
range to the target. You don't really even
need this information, as any weapon to
be fired only requires the identification
of the target contact. The computer then
determines where to aim your missile,
torpedo, or gun based on the best
available data, and whoosh, off it goes.
The two most important functions that
the player controls are search/detection
and fire control (when to fire and at
what). The game handles fire control
very well, giving the player easy access
to all required information (weapon
types, capabilities, ranges, target locations and whether a target "lock" has
been obtained). Spotting the enemy,
though, is a required precondition to firing at him, and the search capabilities of
your ships will be something of a
mystery unless you're currently in the
Navy or want to go dredge the data out
of a technical book somewhere. What are
your chances of spotting an enemy ship
by active or passive sonar or radar under
average conditions? How much better is
the sonar on an "anti-submarine"
destroyer than on a "general purpose"
destroyer? How does the average sonar

or radar of a British ship compared to
that of a Russian ship? The answers to
all of these questions are locked away
somewhere in the program, but nobody
thought the captain needed to know!
While we're talking about hard to
access data, let me take one swipe at the
game (and Fall Gelb, too) — Lack of
Documentation. Simulations Canada has
always used brief, succinct rules; and
with this game, we are told how to play
the game and no more. With a board
game, you look at the combat results
table and know about what chance your
shot has of hitting. But, in GSGS, you
may never know whether a Harpoon
missile missed because you were
unlucky or because you were crazy to
take the shot. Sure, we figure that closer
is better, that locking on is better than
taking "snap shots", and that active
sonar locates more efficiently than
passive; but some quantification of the
choices is required for us to make intelligent decisions. A "player aid" card
would be of invaluable assistance here;
even a few guidelines are better than
nothing. Also on the card could be
relative sonar and radar capabilities and
a listing of the weapons carried by
various ships ( as it is, the only way to
access a ship's weapons inventory is to
use it in a scenario).

A lot of the information which I would
like to see is theoretically obtainable in
the program. This is because the game
is written in basic, and can all be cataloged and "listed" off the disk. Unfortunately, with "REM" statements, it's going to
take a lot of work to find which variables
correspond to, for instance, sonar
ratings. Another unrealized potential of
the game is "design your own" ships.
Each class of ship has a text file on the
disk which contains the variables unique
to that type of ship. If we knew the
sequencing of the file, it should be a
fairly simple matter to create your own
"pet" ship for hypothetical engagements.
Basic programming has the problem of
slow execution (GSGS is quite fast for
basic but is still slow compared to most
machine language programs), but it has
the potential of allowing the tinkerer in
all of us to tailor the game to our tastes.
It is a very difficult task, though, without
some help from the programmer.

FALL GELB
Even though Europe had been at war
for over eight months, the Allies were
totally unprepared for the German
onslaught of May 10, 1940. The Netherlands fell in four days, Belgium in 18,
and France held out (officially) for six

weeks. FG simulates the German attack
on a strategic scale with two day turns
and each unit representing a Corps. The
program allows two-player and solitaire
play (you can play either side against the
computer, but who wants to take the
Allies and lose every time?). Each turn,
you first go through an "intelligence
phase" where you can check the status
and location of each unit and also check
for the identity and location of any
enemy forces which your attacks or air
reconnaissance might have uncovered.
Then, one can issue various levels of
movements, attack, defense, withdraw,
or reorganize orders to each unit. After
your opponent or the computer has done
the same for the other side, the computer
moves units and executes combat.
With GSGS, you can get to the point
where you don't need the mapsheet and
counters to play; but with FG, that map
and those counters are indispensable.
The map uses area movement, with
geographic regions of various shapes
and sizes (like on a Risk board). You have
about 40 German units, 65 Allied units,
a map with irregular geography, and no
graphics display on the program; you
can bet that you'll spend plenty of time
consulting your separate set-up!
Continued on p. 45

1

RINGSIDE SEAT:

Review and Rating System
by Dave Long

Ringside Seat
Boxing Simulation
Apple, C-64
Disk
1 or 2
AUTHOR: Carl Saracini
PUBLISHER: Strategic Simulations
Mountain View, CA

NAME:
TYPE:
SYSTEM:
FORMAT:
#PLAYERS:

Ever wonder who was really the
greatest boxer of all time? Could "the
Rock" take Ali with his dancing,
rope-a-dope style and blast him to the
canvas? Or would Joe Louis, the
Brown Bomber, emerge as the
champ, perhaps with a crushing late
round victory over the great Jack
Dempsey? Well, now you can find
out for yourself and, what's more,
you can be the guiding force that
leads your favorite to victory!
RingSide Seat is SSI's strategic
boxing simulation which places you
in the shoes of a fighter's manager
and lets you coach your fighter from
the corner. Between each round, you
make the key decisions which can
lead your fighter to the "the thrill of
victory, or the agony of defeat,"
stated, of course in the dry nasal
tones of one of our most obnoxious
sports commentators.
As manager, you tell your fighter
at the beginning of each round which
strategy you want him to follow.
Should he fight Flat Footed, Cover
Up, Charge In, Stick and Move, Stay
Away, Go for the KO, or Protect his

Cuts? That decision is yours, but be
careful. Once you choose a strategy,
you must stick with it for the whole
three minutes of the round (unless
things get so bad that you want to
Cover Up).
THE FIGHT
The graphic display of the fight is
very well done. You are presented
with a balcony view of the ring, and
see each blow as it lands. You will
see your fighter's head snap back
when he's hit with a jab, see him
double over when smashed in the
stomach, and even watch him fall to
the canvas on knockdowns while his
opponent raises his hands in victory.
To the left and right of the ring are
displayed the status and condition of
the two fighters. As the fight progresses, fighters suffer cuts, gashes,
swollen eyes, split lips and bloody
noses. Some rounds will see a fighter
suffer excessive punishment, and
perhaps in a subsequent round your
man will fight with his arms lowered
from taking too many blows to the
body. All cuts are shown in red
border if still bleeding, or in inverse

print if the cut become extra deep or
is aggravated by repeated blows to
the same spot.
The feature which, in my opinion,
really makes the game is the blow-byblow and color commentary which is
given at the bottom of the screen.
Each action taken is noted, with an
explanation of its effectiveness. "Ali
swings wildly and misses, Ali moves
around, Ali connects with a right
cross to the head," etc. When a blow
is particularly effective, you may be
told that "Marciano is dazed by the
punch, Marciano is staggered by the
punch," or even "Marciano falls to
the canvas and the referee begins the
count."
The color commentary (and here
again one can almost hear the nasal
tones of our "favorite" ringside commentator) is really descriptive. Not
wishing to spoil your initial response
to many of his comments, I'll merely
mention that the color truly gives the
finishing touch of realism, whether
its "Ali appears to be in control" or
"Marciano can't get it all together
this round," his many astute observations often have both managers
snorting in derision or roaring with
approval as their pugilists continue
to contest the outcome of the matter
at hand.
FIGHTER DATA

As in nearly all SSI games, you are
given the opportunity to create and
battle with your own fighters, Rocky
Balboa, Apollo Creed, and the vicious
Clubber Lang were the first three
fighters that I "made up," and it was
Continued on p. 47

EPYX's latest cartridges, like Pit Stop,
are much better than the initial releases
I reviewed 10 months ago.
THE STATE OF THE ART. Of the
games reviewed in CGW 3.3, Astro
Chase has been re-released in cartridge
by Parker Brothers, and there is now a
two player version of Wayout from
Sirius, called Capture the Flag.
But the "state of the art" has moved
on. For "Best Graphics" I would now
have to name Murder on the
Zinderneuf, even though it isn't an
action game. (Blue Max would get the
nod there.)
That tank game I mentioned hasn't

ATARI ARENA
Allen Doum

That this column has existed for a year
is something of a shock to me. There are
a number of topics and games which
have piled up that I wanted to cover. But,
the topics already covered haven't been
standing still. So this time I will look both
forward and back, in an attempt to find
out just where Atari gaming is now.
SILLY THEMES. Arcade game
players are often being required to do
silly things to earn their points; such as
in the various running-jumping-climbing
games and the delightful Drelbs. But,
better graphics techniques are allowing
for more realistic action as well. Blue
Max is one example, and Pole Position
could almost be called a sports simulation. Action games will probably continue down both paths. And why not?
There are plenty of exciting game ideas
in both directions.
CARTRIDGES. As reported in CGW
3.2, more companies (and more types of
software) are going to be on cartridges.
Although Broderbund and Synapse have
not converted many games, there has
been a strong showing from Parker
Brothers, Sega and CBS in recent
months with versions of arcade games
like Q*bert, Star Trek and Gorf.
In addition to games, software such as
Word Processors and programming
languages have been put on cartridges,
both by Atari and by third-party
publishers like OSS. Also many of the
new cartridges are using bank switching
to increase the amount of memory (and
power) available in the cartridge.
In addition, I am glad to report that

shown up yet, but the flight simulators
from Microprose are getting close.
Hellcat Ace pits a single player against
fast moving enemies, but with only a
horizon line for terrain. Solo Flight
shows both color terrain and an instrument panel in a peacetime setting. (I
haven't seen Mig Alley Ace, a two
player, split screen version of Hellcat
Ace yet.) Now, if they can just get all of
that working together.
Speaking of that tank game, we will
soon be turret deep in versions of Battlezone. All it will take is some realistic terrain and some good tank specifications.
Is that too much to ask?
Survivor is still holding on in the multiplayer co-operative category, but there
is more competition (if you will) now.
CONVERSIONS
There seems to be some improvement
here, particularly in sound, but not much
otherwise. (See next subject.)
ELECTRONIC ARTS
Almost all of this new company's
releases since last reported have been
conversions of games already on the
Atari to other computers. Two, Hard
Hat Mack and Axis Assassin have come
the other way — from Apple versions —
and both look it. Hard Hat Mack is
another running-jumping-climbing
game, and Axis Assassin is a game that
looks like Tempest (see next subject), but
has unique play elements.
ARCADE PLAY-ALIKES
The Donkey Kong cycle is still in full
swing, with elements of Jungle Lord
about to be added. Hopefully the Q-berts
are finished, but weren't there a lot of
them in such a short time? The Battlezone is just ahead, but when do we
reach the Frontline? I'm waiting to see
if anyone has the gall to try Star Wars.
Oh, and by the way, do you have your
laserdisc interface yet?
(Authorized versions from Atari,
Parker Brothers, Datasoft, and Sega for
these and others are available or sure to
be forthcoming.)

There are two types of games that,
because they are well covered in the rest
of the magazine, are usually not discussed in this column: wargames and adventures. The "state of the art" in both fields
has been pushed forward this year.
In wargames Eastern Front, besides
being converted to cartridge, also got a
scenario generator and an "expansion
kit" of scenarios (both from APX, as is
Saratoga, a similar game on the
American Revolution campaign). Excalibur, Chris Crawford's latest from
APX, will be the subject of a feature
review next issue. SSI, Avalon Hill,
Broderbund, and Microprose all released
new wargames for Atari computers, as
well.
In adventures, the translations have
proceeded apace, however the hybridizing of adventure and arcade games is on
the increase. Action games like Zeppelin
and adventures like Gateway to Apshai
are causing the distinctions to be harder
to make.
In fact, distinctions between strategy
and arcade games are getting harder as
well. Real-time wargames such as Combat Leader and Legionnaire aren't fast
enough to be called action games yet, but
next years crop will include some that
will be hard to categorize.
Of course the big change for Atari
Computer owners next year are the hardware and firmware changes in the XL
series of computers. So far, the only impact has been that the new machines will
not boot all of the old software, due to
disk copy protection programs that used
"illegal" operating system addresses.
This has affected people who have
bought the new machines, although revisions in the new operating system have
reportedly reduced the problem. The
software publishers are changing the
protection programs as well, so this problem should soon fade away. Since there
are a great number of the older machines
on the market, software publishers will
probably be reluctant to use any of the
new features for some time. New controllers, such as touch tablets and light
pens, could have great utility in games,
and could still be used on the old
machines. The proliferation of modems,
including the new "direct-connect"
modems, will increase the demand for
tele-gaming on the Atari as well.
The major loss, however, is the third
and fourth controller ports. Multi-player
games, unless they can use paddles, will
have a much reduced market.
In all, it has been an interesting year,
and the year ahead shows great promise
as well. All of the new hardware,
whatever else it signifies, at least
demonstrates a willingness by Atari to
stay in the home computer marketplace.
And who knows, maybe Alan Alda can
sell computers better than Bill Cosby did.

GOLF:
Two Simulations
by Roy Wagner and Russell Sipe

As happened three years ago, Avalon
Hill and Strategic Simulations have,
within a couple weeks of each other,
released sports games on the same subject. In summer 1981 both released
statistical baseball games (AH'S MAJOR
LEAGUE BASEBALL and SSI's COMPUTER BASEBALL). According to our
readers, SSI's game proved to be the
more popular of the two. But this time
around we predict that the Avalon Hill
game will be the more popular.
Both games are very well done and
although on the surface appear to be
similar, have some basic differences. The
Avalon Hill game stresses YOU playing
the round of golf using your own skills
(which you must develop with the
paddles). At the same time you must plan
your shots and execute them according
to your ability and the demands of the
situation. The SSI game emphasizes the
latter approach. Ability is determined by
the statistics you have loaded for yourself
prior to the round. The mechanics of hitting the ball are abstracted.
Both games are reviewed here.

BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:
Tournament Golf
TYPE:
Simulation
SYSTEM:
Apple II
FORMAT: Disk
#PLAYERS: 1 TO 4
AUTHOR: KEN COATES
PRICE
$30
PUBLISHER: Avalon Hill
Baltimore, MD

BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:
TYPE:
SYSTEM:

Professional Tour Golf
Simulation/Strategy
Commodore 64 /
Apple II
FORMAT:
Double Sided Disk
#PLAYERS: 1 — 4
AUTHOR:
Henry Richbourg
PRICE:
$39.95
PUBLISHER: Strategic
Simulations Inc.
Mountain View, CA

TOURNAMENT GOLF
Russell Sipe

In CGW 3.4 Stanley Greenlaw said that
Avant-Garde's HI-RES GOLF 2 (HRG2)
was "the best golf simulation on the
market." HRG2 now has a couple of
challengers for that distinction. While
SSI'S PROFESSIONAL TOUR GOLF
(PTG) can make a strong claim for best
simulation of professional golf (using pro
golfers stats); as a golf simulation in
which you must use your own skills,
TOURNAMENT GOLF, by Avalon Hill
issues a stronger challenge to HRG2 as

the best golf simulation on the market.
What set HRG2 apart from the other
games in 3.4 as well as PTG was the arcade sequence in which you must guide
the path of the golf swing. TOURNAMENT GOLF (TG) has this same feature
and has actually improved it. In TG you
use the paddle buttons to control the
arms and wrists during the swing.
Holding down the 0 button starts the
arms into their backswing, releasing the
0 button starts the downswing. The 1
button controls the wrists in a similar
manner. If you have played Microsoft's

OLYMPIC DECATHLON you will remember the shotput event; the
mechanics are the same in TG. In OD
you used the paddles to control the
biceps and triceps, timing was the key.
In TG you must, with the same care to
timing, co-ordinate the arms and wrists
to produce the perfect swing. Break your
wrists to late and you will get a slice, too
early and you will hook the ball.
What makes TG superior to HRG2 in
mechanics is that in TG you actually
have a golfer profile which realistically
portrays the mechanics of the swing. In
TG you see the shoulder pivot, the wrists

break, etc. In HRG2 you see the path of
the swing but not in relationship to a
figure that displays shoulder and wrist
actions.
Just like HRG2 there is a version which
is designed for less experienced players.
With the "Amateur" version, the swing
is much easier to co-ordinate. In time
you will want to graduate to the "Pro"
version which requires practice to
develop a good swing.
Speaking of practice, TG has a practice driving range and putting green
where you can hone your skills. As you
might have guessed, the graphic display
in TG can actually help you to improve
your game by seeing what is happening
mechanically when a slice or hook occurs. TG has pleasing hi-res graphics.
Each hole is contained on a single
screen. The greens have contours and a
break indicator indicates the size break
for which one must compensate. Fairway features are typical: tee, fairway, #1
rough, #2 rough, trees, traps, water
hazards, and greens. A wind indicator
give the direction and strength of wind.
A hi-res scorecard is displayed between each hole and can be printed out
at the end of the round (not in hi-res).
The low score for the course is updated
to disk (if needed).
There are two shortcomings of the
game which make it less than the perfect
computer golf game. First, you cannot
hit over trees. As any golfer will tell you,
hitting over trees is something we all do
from time to time. But, fortunately, the
way the courses are laid out, this is not
a common problem. When you DO find
yourself stymied behind trees, you can
try to hook/slice the ball around the
obstacle or simply play around it.
The other shortcoming is that, unlike
HRG2, there is not a tournament security program that permits tournaments by
mail. In HRG2 a special tournament sequence can be used to play rounds which
produce a scorecard with scores and a
special code that the tournament director can use to validate the score. This
avoids such possibilities as a contestant
starting a round over if he is not doing
well. Actually, it is not accurate to call
the lack of this feature a "shortcoming".
It's presence in HRG2 is unique among
computer games.
To illustrate the realism of TOURNAMENT GOLF let me close with this true
story. In high school I was a four year
varsity letterman in golf. In my senior
year I was MVP, played in some
tourneys, etc. But the occasional fantasy
I entertained about going professional
was dampened by the fact that under
pressure I tended to tense up (which is
death to a golf swing). I realized that if
I was making a putt for $20,000 I
couldn't hack it. That coupled with the
fact that a nine handicapper was not professional material meant that I would

have to find another way to make a living. Eventually I started CGW and put
myself in a non-stress job, publisher and
editor (haha, excuse me while I reach for
another Rolaids).
In our first tight match of TG I had a
3 stroke lead after the first nine against
my assistant editor. I lost the lead early
on the back nine and trailed by a shot
when we finished the 15th. I held my
own on 16 and 17. Coming to 18 I was
still one stroke down. It was a par 5. I
was lying 6 feet from the hole after 3
shots. Kirk had some problems in the
trees and it looked like I was going to be
able to pull the match out of the proverbial hat. I had a nice straight six footer
to win the match (I had been sinking
these all day). I choked. Three footer left,
slight break to the left. I overcompensated, three putt, lost match.
Aaarrrggghhh!!! The only feature the
game lacked was the ability to throw my
clubs in the lake.
The game comes with two 18 hole
courses and is set up to use courses from
separate disks. I look forward to the
possibility of future courses for TG from
Avalon Hill.
TG is highly recommended for any
golfer with a Apple II.

PROFESSIONAL
TOUR GOLF
Roy Wagner
It's snowing outside today, but I'm still
going to play a round of golf. It will be
a foursome with myself, my regular partner and, just for fun, I'll invite Arnold
Palmer and Ben Crenshaw along. We
will all meet at Pebble Beach just as soon
as I can get my disk loaded. Time passes
..... Two hours later we are all at the
clubhouse discussing our game. On the
par 72 course, I shot an 85, my partner
an 82, Arnold a 70 and Ben a 73. I stayed
in my warm home and played a very exciting and realistic game of golf while my
neighbor shoveled snow.
Professional Tour Golf (PTG) is an accurate simulation of golf which makes
use of performance statistics to cause a
golfer to perform in the game in a manner consistent with how he does in real
life.
The game comes with the statistics for
20 professional golfers, past and present,
with plans to make additional players
available. The program gives you the
ability to enter the characteristics
(statistics) for 40 players of your own
choosing (yourself, friends, other pro
golfers, etc.). This data is stored on your
own disk and can be updated to fine tune
your players after a few rounds of play
or if their actual golf skills should
change.
The general golfing characteristics for
each player are collected using the Utility

Program. Data such as how far a player
can hit a driver or pitching wedge are
combined with data such as players
handicap to determine performance
ratings. These values are then used to
generate the detailed player characteristics that are stored to disk under
a player number (41 — 80) and player
name (up to 15 characters).
The game comes with two courses. For
the first course the designer collected
some of the toughest and most exciting
holes from different courses around the
world. Unfortunately, we are not told
their real locations. The second course
is PEBBLE BEACH, one of the best
known courses in the world. Other disks
are under development for such courses
as MERION, OAKMONT (site of the
1983 U.S. Open), and AUGUSTA NATIONAL (annual site of the Masters).
Both courses are very well presented by
high resolution bit mapped displays. In
order to fill the screen with a graphic
representation of each hole, a scaling
factor is given on the score card that is
displayed before each hole. The teeing
area, fairway markers, trees, water,
sandtraps, and putting green are all
shown in different colors, creating a
display which is very impressive.
The order of play is determined
according to the rules of golf. When it
is your turn to play, your initials will be
shown with the direct distance to the
hole. In the case of a sandtrap, an
asterisk (*) appears after the distance
(two asterisks are shown to signify a bad
lie in a sandtrap). You then select the
club you want to use. For shots out of or
through the trees, you may additionally
specify that it will be a recovery shot and
you want to keep it low. The computer
will subject the recovery shot to greater
distance and direction variation. The
HELP option will display a screen showing you the statistical average for each
club (a real help in learning your
"players" capability).
Next you enter the direction of your
shot, entering a value from 0 to 360. The
computer will display a flashing dot at
the point where you have aimed the club.
The computer helps by suggesting a
value-to-be used in parentheses which is
not always the best choice, so you can
hit any key except RETURN to enter a
new value. Entering RETURN will ask
you for a shot deviation. This option lets
you attempt to curve the ball left or right
in order to compensate for a dogleg or
to hit around trees. You have five deviation options: hook, draw, none, fade, or
slice. All deviations are relative to the
flight of the ball. There are no guarantees
that the shot will perform as you have
requested. Performance is based on
many factors, the most significant being
your capabilities. (How many of us
Continued on p. 47

NATO COMMANDER:

Review

by Mark Bausman

NATO Commander, from Microprose,
is a strategic simulation of an attack by
Warsaw Pad (WP) forces on NATO
forces in Western Europe. The human
player controls the NATO forces while
the computer controls the WP forces.
The game provides five scenarios with
four levels of difficulty for each scenario.
You may also choose to play division or
brigade size units. Units consist of armor, infantry, cavalry, militia, airborne
(WP only), helicopters, air wings, and
tactical nuclear weapons. Terrain includes clear, forest, rivers, mountains,
and roads. There is also a special terrain
feature called surface to air missile sites.
SAM Sites do not move nor do they have
combat capability but they help suppress
WP air power and their loss accumulates
victory points for the WP. The game is
won through the accumulation of victory
points. These points may be gained or
lost from combat and political activities.
The game has no turns, phases, movement allowance, or combat points. You
and the computer move simultaneously
in a real-time mode. A clock in the upper right portion of the screen displays
the time and at the end of each day a
news bulletin appears which gives the
status of the attack. All game actions occur in conjunction with the clock. Units
are simply ordered to move from one
place to another and how soon they get
to the new place is determined by their
type and the terrain they must cross. For
combat, a ground unit is ordered to
attack an adjacent enemy unit and the
combat continues until one unit is
destroyed or retreats.
A unit's combat capability is determined by the number of tanks and men in
it, its morale, and its mode. When a unit
is moving it is in tactical mode and is
unable to attack. When it first stops it is
in hastily prepared defense mode and as
it sits longer it moves to prepared
defense mode. Helicopters may attack
anywhere on the board and they continue to attack until exhausted or
ordered to stop the attack. When combat is ordered you may choose from two
levels of attack intensity or you may
choose chemical attack. Nuclear

BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:
SYSTEM:

Nato Commander
Atari 400/800/1200
48K, Joystick Optional
FORMAT:
Disk
#PLAYERS: One
AUTHOR:
Sid Meier
PRICE:
$34.95
PUBLISHER: Microprose Software
Perkton, MD
301-667-1151
weapons strikes must first be authorized and then targeted. Once targeted the
strike preparations will commence and
shortly there after the target will be hit.
Air Wings are not ordered to attack
directly but are sent on missions. Missions include air-superiority which
suppresses WP air power, ground support which increases the combat
capability of units, or reconnaissance
which reveals the location of WP units.
The WP has airborne units but not
helicopters.
Units may be ordered with joystick or
keyboard (with keyboard play being
easier). You use a cursor as the unit
painter and simply move the cursor to
the unit with which you wish to work.
There is a "freeze" key which sets as a
great equalizer. Its use allows you time
to assess the situation and enter the
desired orders. When you have entered
all the orders you want simply resume
the game with the same key. This key is
especially valuable when playing the
Attack on Germany scenario as the map
board covers several Atari screens in
width and length, and the cursor scrolling is just not fast enough to keep up
with the computer.
STRATEGY
The various scenarios offer a variety
of strategic situations. The first is a learning scenario and is mainly a controlled withdrawal of the NATO forces to
more defensible positions. This scenario
uses only the top part of the map board
and so is easy to control. In this scenario,
as with the others which I have played,

the NATO Forces starts out with three
isolated infantry divisions under attack
in the East by superior WP forces and
the rest of your forces scattered around
the map board. The isolated units are in
prepared defense mode and will take
quite few of the WP forces with them
before they surrender if you should
choose not to try to relieve them. I usually write them off. When the scenario
starts, immediately press the "F" key and
take a look at the situation. New players
should use the space bar and determine
where the strong and weak units are.
Since strength does not vary from game
to game, experienced players will know
which units are strong and which are
weak.
Most WP forces will be concentrated
in the central part of the display. This
would seem the perfect time to target a
nuclear strike. Unfortunately (or "fortunately"; depending upon your viewpoint. — Ed.) the high command (ATARI)
will not authorize a nuclear strike until
it is a last resort. Your strongest divisions
are also located in the central part, but
a little further south and are scattered.
Your overall strategy should be one of
defense. Being in a forest or behind a
river provides extra defense but the best
situation is to force WP forces to move
and attack NATO forces which have
been in position long enough to be in
prepared defense mode. The defense
should be selected so that NATO units
may support each other.
The computer will select a strategy
Continued on p. 45

By the way, from time to time a certain light-fingered gentleman (?) will
wander by, anxious to relieve you of any
goodies you may be carrying. He is the
infamous Thief, and it's best to try and
get out of the room as soon as he appears, or anything worthwhile in your
inventory will disappear. However, at
this time, it's wise not to try and kill him;
you do need him for something, but
more about that later.

ZORK I

As told by Scorpia
Well, the holidays are over, and the
long, cold nights of winter are here. But
don't let that get you down! Just settle in
close to the fireplace, mug in hand, and
we'll get started with that classic adventure, Zork I.
A white house in the woods. How
simply this epic adventure game begins!
However, as you might expect, there is
more here than meets the eye, much
more. So, wander around for a bit,
mapping carefully as you go, and see
what you can discover in the great
outdoors.
When you've finished with that, it's
time to make your way behind the house
and (grunt) into the kitchen. Upstairs is
the (dark) attic, and off to the west is the
Living Room. Useful items can be found
in all three rooms, although you won't
be needing all the items at the same time.
Now, a quick tour shows you there
aren't any other places in the house, and
you've already been around outside, so
where can you go from here? Well, examine everything in the house carefully,
and don't be afraid to look under things
or move them around. You should be
able to find your way underground soon
enough. I do suggest, though, that you
bring along the sword and lamp, because
you will certainly be needing them...and
quite soon!

Once you've made it down below, you
will find you have only two directions
in which to move; one brings you to the
Gallery, and a treasure, the other brings
you to the Troll Room, and possible
death. Now you know why you need the
sword! Only one will survive the encounter; I certainly hope it's you! But if
not, there's always the restore game option (whew!).
Once the troll has been dispatched, the
rest of the Great Underground Empire
is open to you. Some parts will be less
pleasant than others. For example, to the
west of the Troll Room is (sigh) a maze.
You might want to leave this part of the
game for later, because the mapping is
tricky, and the adventure has only just
begun (there's a lot to see out there!). But
in any case, the best thing to do here is
bring plenty of items to drop so you can
map it out. Take your time, because this
is a mean one. Remember also that there
are more than four directions!!
Your travels are just beginning. There
is a dam to visit, which will give you a
rather spectacular view, and provide an
interesting little diversion: getting the
sluice gates open. Best to check out that
Maintenance Room; too bad you can't
read EBCDIC! Ah well, just be careful,
and remember that what you do here
could have an effect somewhere else
("Bubble, bubble . . .").
Once the gates are open, you might
want to explore around the Reservoir, as
well as around the base of the dam. That
pile of plastic just might be important,
what could it be? Hmmm, there's the
Frigid River next door, perhaps there's
a connection?
However, before you go floating along
the river, there's something else to be
done first. You'll need to visit the Temple and its environs, and more than
once, too (this game is famous for having to run back and forth between locations many times!). Finding the place
shouldn't be too hard; just look aROUND
for it...and you might want to bring a
rope for this one.
After you find the Temple, and the
gold coffin in the Egyptian Room, it may
dawn on you that you can't get back out
the way you came in. And there doesn't
seem to be any other way out, except a
small hole in the floor of the Altar Room.
But that sure is a small hole; you'll never

get through it carrying that coffin! What
can you do? Well, try doing the most
likely thing you can think of doing in an
Altar Room, and see what happens. Oh
yes, you might want to look inside the
coffin when you get a chance.
What you find inside should remind
you of something you have already seen
(or, something that you should have seen
if you bothered to explore the outdoors
at the beginning of the game!). Experiment a little bit...this is a golden opportunity you shouldn't pass up! Then tuck
everything away in the trophy case.
At this point, you can either go back
to the Frigid River, or you can go back
to Hades first; it doesn't make much difference. Supposing that you opt for
Hades, you should come across some interesting items, such as a bell, a book,
and a candle, along the way (you probably saw these things when you were
here before; now is the time to pick
them up).
This may sound familiar to some of
you; indeed, these three items are standard in the use of exorcism (by the way,
I hope you have something with which
to light the candles; I *don't* recommend the torch!).
The sequence of actions is very important here; if you don't do things in the
right order, you won't be able to get rid
of the evil spirits and enter Hades. So,
think about this: First, you have to get
their attention. Once you've done that,
the rest should come naturally. Read any
Good Books lately?
Once you've banished the evil spirits
and obtained the treasure in Hades, you
should be able to find your way out and
back to the house without too much of
a problem (as long as you've been mapping along the way!). Now you might be
in the mood for a little jaunt on the river.
When you do finally make your way
down the River, be alert! For one thing,
you certainly don't want to find yourself
going over the Aragain Falls (definitely
a one-way trip!), and for another, you
don't want to miss anything important!
However, you will soon realize that,
once again, you can't return the way you
came (mean game, this Zork!).
But don't despair! You should be on
dry land, very near to the Aragain Falls.
(In fact, this should be the same area as
the Sandy Beach). If you make your way
to the Falls, you might just find a way
of getting home again.
Ok, after you get the goodies stored
away, it's time for more explorations. Investigating the area north of the Reservoir will bring you, eventually, to the
coal mine. It can be a fun place
IF
you're careful!
First, there's a pesky little bat, which
will try to pick you up and deposit you

randomly somewhere within the depths
of the mine. If you keep in mind that this
is a VAMPIRE bat, you might be able to
figure out what you need to get past him
safely (spicy stuff!).
Beyond him is the Shaft Room, which
has perplexed many an adventurer!
What could that basket possibly be used
for? Well, it's at the end of a long chain,
perhaps it's meant to be lowered. Have
you looked inside it? Empty? Might that
be a clue?
Still, there is much to see here yet, so
let's leave this mysterious basket for now
while you make your way to the coal
mine proper. This is, alas, another maze.
It's much smaller than the one in the
cellar, but still quite confusing. As with
the other one, it's best to drop various
items so you can map it out.
Eventually, you will make your way to
the Ladder Top, which leads, naturally
enough, to the Ladder Bottom, and from
there to the Timber Room. In here is a
VERY narrow passage. You'll have to
drop just about everything you're carrying to get through that crack. Too bad
you can't bring any light with you.
But there is a way to get light into this
room, of course. Just think about how far
DOWN you are, and what might be UP
above you! Once you've figured out how

to get a light source in here, you can investigate the Machine Room, and its
strange-looking machine.
Taking a peek inside it, you find some
glassy sludge. Or, something that looks
like glass. Since this is a treasure hunt,
what might look like glass, but isn't?
Right! Now you know what to put in the
machine..all you have to do is figure out
how to turn it on.
Hmmmm, that sure is a pretty small
switch. Tiny, in fact. About the size of,
no, not a nail, but something pretty
similar. It would be a dam shame if you
didn't have the right thing with you here!
Once you're finished with the Machine
Room, and have your latest treasures
stowed away (or possibly stolen!), you
might want to pay a visit to everyone's
favorite place, the Loud Roomroom. Actually, while this room gives many people a hard time, it's really quite easy to
get the bar: just consider the room's
outstanding quality, and make an order
of it.
About now, you've collected most of
the goodies in the game, but there are
still a few things left to do, most of them
connected with the maze in the cellar.
Careful mapping, as mentioned earlier,
will help you through it. When you get
to the Cyclops Room, keep in mind your
Greek mythology. You won't have to be

violent; it's simply a matter of saying the
right thing.
The thief, however, is another matter
entirely! There's no way around it, you'll
have to kill him (by this time, of course,
you're probably happy to do it!). Be
warned he won't be easy to put away, so
it's best to save the game before making
the attempt. One thing to be aware of is
that, before he's killed, he has to do
something for you. A thief has both the
tools and the expertise to open all sorts
of items. Keep that in mind!
You're just about finished now; most
likely only one treasure remains to be
found and placed in the trophy case.
What could it be? Well, when you find
out what's inside the egg, that might give
you a hint. If you still can't figure it out,
try doing something with it. Tweet,
tweet!
Finally, all the items will be in the case,
and you will receive a message; that
message will lead you to the barrow that
is the gateway to Zork II.
Whew, finished at last! Quite a set of
adventures, those Zorks! But you've seen
it through, and it's time for something
completely (well, almost!) different: next
time, we'll leave the dank and dusty
dungeons for the dark and deep reaches
of outer space in Starcross. See you then!

GEOPOLITIQUE 1990:
Review
by Bob Proctor

hours. This does not have to be at one
sitting since there is a game-save option
at the end of each turn (year). To keep
games from running over-long, each
scenario has a time limit of 8 to 12 turns.
If neither superpower has fulfilled their
objectives at the end of this period, then
the one which is closer to doing so (on
a percentage basis) is declared the winner. Those of us who occasionally feel
"we wuz robbed" will be glad to know
that it is not necessary to stop play at this
point; you can continue (indefinitely) if
you want to.

BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:
TYPE:
SYSTEM:

GEOPOLITIQUE 1990
Strategy
Apple II/ or
Apple IIe
FORMAT:
Disk
#PLAYERS: 1
AUTHOR:
Bruce Ketchledge
PRICE:
$39.95
PUBLISHER: Strategic
Simulations Inc.
Mountain View, CA

A CUBIST VIEW OF THE WORLD
David: "Joshua, let's play a game of
Global Thermonuclear War!"
Joshua: "Well, David, I'm pretty bored
with that now that I've played
out all the variations. How
about a game of Global Political
Confrontation instead?"
David: "That sounds boring."
Joshua: "Oh, but it's not! Even at MY
processing speed, I've only been
able to analyze a small number
of variations."
David: "Yeah, but I'd rather play a
wargame."
Joshua: "War, of course, is always the
last resort of diplomats and
statesmen."
Very few games, either on a table top
or computer, have presented war in a
broad context. Stop and think, how
many games can you name where warfare isn't mandatory? There's CIVILIZATION, winner of a Charlie at Origins '83,
and the older EMPIRES OF THE MIDDLE AGES from SPI. Both of these
multi-player games can be won without
resorting to military conquest, though
you may be forced to defend your
borders against less scrupulous
neighbors. Science fiction fans could say
the same thing about STELLAR CON-

QUEST and later games of galactic exploration and colonization.
Now there is such a game for computers: GEOPOLITIQUE 1990 from SSI
for the Apple II (a version for the Commodore 64 is planned but not yet
available). Rather than being set in the
past or distant future, GEOPOLITIQUE
is modern. It has seven "starting positions"; one of which portrays the world
political and military situation as it is
now (1984), while the rest show various
situations that might occur by the year
1990. In all cases, you play the United
States against the computer's USSR. No
two-player games, solitaire only.
The country's condition is measured
on three scales: Gross National Product
(GNP), Prestige, and National Security. In
each game, you must pick two of the
three as your objectives. The computer
sets goals based upon the beginning
situation. If you achieve these goals, the
game is over immediately and you win.
The Soviets have a similar set of goals,
but you're never sure how close they are
to making them. Different combinations
of goals can produce drastically different
games from the same starting position,
so there is enough variety here to keep
a dedicated player interested for a long
time.
A typical game lasts from 1 1/2 to 21/2

Golly, I said, can a game that runs in
48K really capture the interplay of a hundred governments, of thousands of
cultures? The answer is "Nope, not even
close". What it can do is portray two
superpowers and 16 minor countries in
a simple economic framework. The
superpowers vie to form Economic,
Political, and Military Treaties with the
minors. A fourth type of agreement is the
Neutrality Treaty, which cancels all
previous agreements a minor has formed and is used to undermine the enemy's
power base.
Only six of the minors have names of
countries: Canada, Brazil, Japan, China,
India and the United Kingdom. The rest
are abstractions of the attitudes and
resources of a region. So, there are
Western Europe and Eastern Europe,
Central and South America, North, West
and East Africa, and Opecia (the oil-rich
middle east). One consequence of this is
the absence of all the familiar names:
Korea and Viet Nam, Cuba and Grenada,
Sinai and Lebanon. The hot-spots of the
last 38 years are submerged in the identities of a dominant neighbor (as Korea
would be part of Japan) or lumped
together. Presumably, Egypt, Israel, and
Lebanon are all part of the region called
Near East, but can you imagine stranger
bedfellows? (Not any more than Korea
as part of Japan-Ed.) Still, you negotiate

with these regions as though they had a
single government and, in keeping with
that spirit, I'll refer to them as
"countries".
Negotiations are influenced by many
factors. Each country is rated for its willingness to negotiate and its leanings
toward one or the other superpower. The
relative level of prestige of the superpowers is a major factor in a country's
desire to form treaties with them. As the
world tension level increases, countries
tend to become more willing to take
sides. The presence of nearby military
units can help (if they're yours) or hinder
(if they're not). Finally, the manner in
which you conduct the negotiations is
important. There are five degrees of
pressure. You can start with a mild Request, escalate to a Demand, even go all
the way and threaten military action.
You shouldn't be too demanding with
allies, nor should you threaten with the
military unless you are willing and able
to conduct a limited, local war if the
threat proves insufficient. The loss of
prestige that follows a hollow threat is
crippling.
The world map is drawn in high-res,
but is as abstract as the geography. The
countries are mostly, well, squares! This
Continued on p. 46

The Learning Game
Bob Proctor
I am often asked by people who do not
(yet) have their own computer just how
educational they really are. These are
adults, mind you, and they freely grant
that educational software may be a great
boon to children in their formative years,
but they aren't so sure if there's anything
for them. They say they've given up on
touch typing and speed reading; they
don't need to bone up for the SAT. What
ARE you interested in, I ask, Science,
History, Medicine, Politics? Yeah, they
say, something like that.
My answer to them (and to any of you
with the same size feet) is "Absolutely
yes with one very important condition".
You've got to want to learn. If you're
willing to put out the effort (learning is
somewhat more strenuous than swallowing applesauce) then there are plenty of
programs that will give you the opportunity. I prefer games, naturally.
Take SSI's new GEOPOLITIQUE 1990
as an example. Let's examine the question of what one could really expect to
learn from this game, either in a group
or alone. I won't describe this rather
complex game here, read the review
elsewhere in this issue.
At the very end of the rulebook is a
suggestion for using GEOPOLITIQUE in
a classroom environment. The idea,
briefly, is to use five people as the US
government instead of one. Each player
would have certain responsibilities in the
game. One player would be the Secretary
of State and would allocate Political Action Points and make decisions regarding negotiations with other countries.
The Secretary of Defense would control
the mobilization and deployment of all
military units. The Secretary of the
Treasury would make decisions about

economic production and would
(presumably) favor economic growth
over the needs of the State and Defense
Departments. A National Security Advisor would analyze possible Soviet
moves and be responsible for the security of the country against attack, but have
no real decision power in game terms.
The fifth player would be, of course,
the President. The ultimate responsibility for all decisions rests with this player;
that is, the President can override any of
the other four. The President's responsibility is to meld the recommendations
of the Cabinet into a cohesive policy that
will benefit the country.
As you can see, the thrust of this exercise is to generate conflicts of interest
and to attempt to resolve them. The insights gained would probably not have
to do with international politics so much
as with national politics. This would be
a superb way to learn about the executive branch of the US government.
If more students were available (and
most classes are bigger than five) you
could improve on it by letting the rest of
the class represent the American people.
They could vote on important issues (like
a Presidential election every four years),
represent Congress and demand the
resignation of unpopular Cabinet
members. Since a large group cannot all
crowd around a monitor anyway, three
or four could be selected to represent
The Media. They would be the pipeline
through which news of world events is
filtered to the general population. It
would be exciting if Freedom of the
Press could be made an issue, which
would require that someone become the
Supreme Court so that all three branches
of government would have a function.
Unfortunately, there cannot be a Soviet
player to take advantage of any security
leaks so it is hard to imagine a viable
need for secrecy.
If it seems that GEOPOLITIQUE plays
only an indirect role in this hypothetical
learning exercise, you're close to right.
This is all that any simulation game does.
It models the rest of the world so that our
decisions seem to produce some sort of
result. In this case, that result may be a
higher Gross National Product or a
treaty with Brazil. In other games, the
result may be a successful battle or an
increase in market share. In ALL cases,
the learning occurs because of the
decision-making process that goes on
between your ears. Adding more people
adds the aspect of group dynamics
without taking anything away.

*******

If any reader knows of a case where
a strategy game has been used in a class
or group, I'd like to hear about it. Please
write to me in care of Computer Gaming
World.

Whipping Your M.U.L.E. Into Shape
by Carl M. Evans
If you haven't gone out and bought
M.U.L.E. yet, don't waste any time. Stop
reading this and run on out and buy your
own personal copy before they are all
sucked up. If you already have your own
copy, then you know what I am talking
about. But have you been able to beat the
computer players consistently in the
tournament mode when you are playing
the Human character? If not, then read
on and I will disclose some playing
strategies to you that will come in very
useful.
The first thing you have to realize is
that there is only one product worth producing in any quantity . . . CRYSTITE.
All of the other products in the game are
subject to the usual laws of supply and
demand. In other words, as the supply
increases, the price of the product
decreases. Crystite, on the other hand,
sells for some random price between 48
and 148 dollars per unit regardless of the
supply.
I am amused by the antics of other
human players who try to corner the
market on smithore, food, or energy. I've
seen smithorne sell for over 300 dollars
per unit and the player who drove the
price up gloated at his success until the
last couple of turns in the game when I
came from out of what appeared to be
nowhere to pass him up and beat him by
several thousand dollars. The secret is
simple. Produce only as much food and
energy as you can use and dedicate
everything else to the production of
crystite.
The logic of this seems to be clear cut,
but the implementation of this strategy
needs a little bit of thought. Let's go
through a game and highlight some of
the important milestones. First, on turn
one of the game try to get one of the river
plots. They can not be beat for producing food. You will find that the production of a river plot will keep you supplied
with as much food as you will need
through most of the game. You may want
to temporarily set up one other food plot
early in the game with the intention of
converting it to crystite at the earliest opportunity. If you do set up a second food
plot hoard all of its output and convert
the plot to crystite around turn five or
six.
The second thing is to try to buy up the
entire supply of energy at the store. If
you can do this, it will give you some
additional leeway in the first four turns
and hinder the development of your opponents. Whether you can suck up all of
the store's energy or not, you should
establish two energy plots by no later
than the end of the fourth turn. An ancilliary note to the energy policy is to

NEVER sell energy. The first reason is
that you may very well suffer three turns
later during an energy shortage and wish
you had never sold any. The second
reason is more immediate. You might get
a hundred or so dollars for a unit of
energy from an energy-starved player,
but he will get at least two to eight hundred dollars worth of production from
it depending upon where he is on the
learning curve.
The pirate will usually show up for the
first time around the fourth or fifth turn
of the game. You should, therefore
develop two energy plots and two food
plots during the first four turns. Starting
on the fifth turn, set up any new plots
for crystite production and ignore the
possible appearance of the pirate.
Note: be very wary of getting stuck
with a piece of high priced land in an
auction during the early turns of the
game or you will find yourself in a real
cashflow squeeze. There will always be
time to buy up additional land in the
second half of the game. The additional
production capability of the extra plot of
land does you little good if you later have
to let land go undeveloped due to lack
of money.
Now that you have your energy and
food supply established, you can concentrate on finding those high yield crystite
deposits. If you are playing against three
computer opponents, this is where you
beat the socks off of them. You can find
crystite in one of three ways. The first
way is to stumble across it on a plot of
land that you already own. You can try
this by simply putting a crystite M.U.L.E.
on that plot of land and hope for a
bonanza.
The second way is the traditional way
where you go out and get a sample from
a plot of land and take it to the assay office in town. This is what you will have
to do if you are playing against human
players. If you are playing against computer players, however, life is made easy
for you. If a human player locates a high
grade crystite deposit, he will assuredly
grab that plot of land and put it into
crystite production at the earliest opportunity. Not so, the computer player.
Those poor computer players will assay
one or two plots every turn without taking advantage of any assay information
they get. This makes the poor computer
a very easy opponent to beat. While he
goes off into whatever electronic dream
that androids have (electronic sheep of
course — Ed.), you walk away with the
game by grabbing all three of the high
yield crystite deposits.
Now lets talk about some very important things to keep in mind. The first of

these things is attrition. You will find
that 50 per cent of any excess food and
25 per cent of any excess energy will
be lost each turn to something called
`spoilage'. Ignore the loss of any energy
units, but try to minimize the losses in
food by keeping no more than two or
three over your needs. Your actual production on the next turn will depend
upon whether or not you have an adequate supply of energy, but a lack of
food simply reduces the amount of time
you have to make any changes to your
production plots.
You can hold up to fifty units of
smithore and crystite without penalty (if
you ignore any losses to the pirate). Any
units over fifty are simply lost at the end
of the round. This brings us to the last
two things you should do in your pursuit
of a clear win. Always sell any smithore
that you have. This tends to keep the
price down for the guy who is heavily
into smithore production and consequently keeps your cost for new
M.U.L.E.s down.
Never let yourself run short of energy!
Being short by one energy unit can cost
you as much as $1000 on a single turn.
Also note that the 'need level' that the
game shows you during the auction
phase is based upon your current production level. It does not take into
account any new plot developing you
may do on the next turn.
The next thing is something you
should start doing around turn 10, if you
haven't already done so. You should get
rid of all of your food producers and
move your energy M.U.L.E.s into the
river bed. By that time you should have
a large stockpile of energy and precious
little undeveloped plots. As soon as all
of your non-river plots are producing
crystite you have no real need for food
anymore since you don't have any plot
changes to make. By turn 12 you should
end up with at least nine crystite plots
and a single energy plot on the river bed.
The last thing is to hold onto your
crystite until you can get a price over 110
dollars per unit. You have to take the
usual precautions about the maximum
holdings of fifty rule. Also, if a pirate
hasn't turned up by turn 9 you might be
in for a large hole in your pocket on turn
10.
These strategies are always good
against the computer players, but you
will find them only adequate against experienced human opponents who are using the same tactics. When you are playing in that kind of game, try to maximize
your use of the economies of scale and
grab as many good crystite plots as you
can. Happy gaming!

THE
COMMODORE
KEY

Roy Wagner

The holiday season has come and gone
now. Some of you got a new Commodore
64 (C64) and want to buy games (or other
software) for it. But what you can buy
depends on what input peripheral (s)
(Datasette or disk drive) you have. These
determine the medium (cartridge,
cassette tape, or disk) on which what you
buy will be stored.
If you only have a C64, you can only
buy software on cartridges. These push
into the slot in back of the C64, on the
side nearest where the joystick's plug in.
Make sure your machine is always turned off when you insert or remove these
cartridges, or you may severely damage
the cartridge and/or your C64.
The number of games available on cartridge is limited at this time, but much
more is becoming available. Manufacturers prefer cartridges because they are
easiest to use (especially for children)
and offer good software protection. They
are ready to run as soon as you turn on
the machine. Cartridge programs are
written in machine language and so they
run faster than BASIC.
The maximum size of a cartridge program is 16K. You cannot write information to cartridges, so you are NOT able
to save scores or a partially played game

when using them.
Some game companies that offer
several game cartridges are: SPINNAKER (mostly children's learning
games, though more games are being
released for older children and adults),
HES (arcade like games and Turtle
graphics), and EPYX (arcade like games).
I recommend Story Machine, Facemaker,
Gridrunner, Shamus, Jumpman Junior,
and Pitstop.
If you also received a Commodore
Datasette (a special cassette recorder
designed to work reliably with the C64),
then you can buy games on cassette tape.
Surprisingly, the number of things on
tape is somewhat limited. This is due to
the l-o-n-g time that it takes to load a tape
program. And, if the cassette head is
dirty or out of alignment, there is always
the horrible message that comes at the
end of a long wait — ? LOAD ERROR —
which means "try again". The really
good games on tape are large programs
and prone to the above problems. Most
people buy a Datasette because it is a
"cheap" input/output peripheral. Aside
from small programs and small data
files, the Datasette can be frustrating to
use. Cassette tapes can, however, be used
to save game data and scores, and are
somewhat easy for children to use.
Some companies that offer good
cassette tape programs are: ACCESS
SOFTWARE (shoot-em games), AVALON
HILL (variety of simulation games),
SYNAPSE (arcade like games). I recommend Neutral Zone, Beach Head,
Telengard, Andromeda Conquest, and
Fort Apocalypse.
Finally, if you own a disk drive, you
have available to you all software that is
produced for the C64. A company that
produces software for the C64 will
always make it available on disk and may
then make it available on tape. Commodore originally forecast that 70% of
the people who bought C64, would buy
a disk drive. The actual percentage has
turned out to be 90%. Don't feel bad if
you do not yet have a disk, you will soon.
It is somewhat expensive (though
cheaper than one for any other brand of
computer), and well worth saving all
your Pennies to buy (maybe you can get
an advance on your next birthday?).
A disk drive gives game designers the
opportunity to produce very elaborate
games that load new screens, programs,
or data as needed. Using one is a fast
way to load and save information when
compared to tape. It is, though, difficult
to use disk drives with children younger
than eight, due to the care that must be
taken not to damage the disk. I always
create a backup of the original disk for
children to use. Otherwise, someone
older always has to be called in to load
"their" programs. Disks are cheap to use
and I have never heard of anyone yet
who has reported a disk which has failed

because it has worn out or been
overused.
Some companies that offer a very good
selection of quality games on disk are:
INFOCOM (excellent text adventure
games), EPYX (role playing and arcade
like games), ELECTRONIC ARTS (excellent variety of games), STRATEGIC
SIMULATIONS (conflict and sport
simulations), and SIERRA ON LINE
(arcade like games). I recommend the
Zork series, Suspended, Temple of
Apshai, Jumpman, Pinball Construction
Set, Archeon, Combat Leader, Professional Tour Golf, and Frogger.
An item that all computer garners will
need is a joystick. There are several
styles and brands available. Generally
the quality, reliability, and how long it
will continue to work is directly related
to it's price. The more you pay, the better the joystick. Always try to test it
before you buy. What one person likes,
may not be for you (especially if you are
left handed). You should be able to easily
hold the joystick in your hand and the
firebutton should be well placed for
quick firing at attacking antagonists.

ENDING COMMENTS
Keep waiting for a good Chess program. Cyber Chess is available, but is
only a tutorial of already played games.
It has, however, good educational value.
Sargon II is out, but I recommend you
wait for Sargon III. Chess 7.0 from
Odesta should be available soon (this
program is on the same level as Sargon
III). Odesta also has a chess teaching program called Chess!, based on Chess 7.0.
From EPYX, Jumpman Junior is
available on cartridge. It has only 12
screens and is slightly more limiting than
the disk version of Jumpman (senior, I
guess), which has thirty screens. If you
have a disk drive, buy the disk version.
Another game from EPYX on cartridge
is Pitstop. This is a look alike for Pole
Position. It plays more like bumper cars
because hitting other cars or running off
the track only causes your tires to wear
more quickly (indicated by them changing colors). If they wear out before you
can pull into the pits, then you explode
away. The action in the pits has excellent
graphics and sound effects as cars on the
track pass you by. In the pits you get fuel,
change tires, and signal the flagman to
let you back on the track. While you do
all this track time ticks away. This game
is at its best with more than one racer
(up to four can play).
For the next issue I hope to review
games that are originals and only
available for the C64. One of these is
Power Star, a new arcade like space
game. If you have any comments or
questions concerning games for the C64,
please contact me care of this magazine.

TELE-GAMING

your ears and cheeks. Shivering, you
take a deep breath and knock several
times.
The doors instantly swing wide and a
friendly gentleman, with a hint of
mischief in his eyes, greets you saying,
"The Mansion awaits. Kindly wipe the
snow off your shoes before entering!"
The doorkeeper then departs, leaving
you alone in a lushly decorated foyer.
You quickly observe that the oriental
rugs covering the slate floor are a bit
threadbare. However, two large paintings on the west wall are obviously early
Athenian and most valuable.

Patricia Fitzgibbons
Late one wintry evening, a winding
path leads you through the darkness to
an enormous, and somewhat mysterious,
stone mansion. For a moment you
hesitate in front of the thick double
doors. Glancing up, you notice the warm
gleam of candlelight flickering through
gaps in the heavy curtains that hang
behind every window. A chill wind nips

Hearing the sounds of light-hearted
laughter echoing down the corridor, you
move forward toward a grand staircase.
But, as you do so, you step into a strange,
encompassing beam of light and are
briefly disoriented. Then, once again,
you hear the authoritative voice of the
doorkeeper: "Energize! Portal activated!
What room are you thinking of?" Since
you are visiting the GameMaster mansion, you have dozens of rooms to
choose from. You pause for a moment,
pondering your alternatives.
The "mansion," created and operated
by Harlow Stevens, Jr., is a multi-line
gaming system located inside of an
Alpha Micro computer in Evanston, Illinois. Subscribers to the GameMaster

system may visit the mansion, via
modem, twenty-four hours a day, every
day of the year. If you own a computer
or terminal and a modem, and purchase
a GameMaster membership, you will join
the hundreds of subscribers who have
been guests of the mansion during the
past four years. Some of the "regulars"
enjoy dropping into the Parlor area for
a cozy fireside chat with up to six
friends, but most members check into
the house for the many online games.
As you roam throughout the six levels
of the mansion, you are treated to
delightful text descriptions of each room
you enter. For example, if you decide to
spend a few minutes in the Parlor (which
is located just to the left of the foyer entrance), you will be greeted by the following message:
The minute you walk in you feel
at home. Before you lies a myriad
of sofas, ottomans and captain's
chairs. The west wall is
predominated by an oversized
fireplace. A gentle fire casts glowing reflections. On the mantle rest
the many trophies and awards the
GameMaster has acquired through
the centuries, for you see, your
host is a master of more than just
one type of game. The south wall
Continued on p. 44

THE SILICON
CEREBRUM
by Bruce Webster

HEURISTIC SEARCH
PART 3: INFORMED
BREADTH-FIRST SEARCH
RECAP
For the last few issues, we've been
talking about using heuristic information to help find solutions to computer problems. Our sample problem
is finding a path between two locations on a hex grid. Specifically, we
want to trace a path from S to G on
the map shown in Figure 1 (the hexes
with an X are impassible). Last
month, we looked at breadth-first
search (BFS), a method guaranteed to
find the shortest path. Briefly put,
BFS involves keeping a list (queue) of
hexes to be looked at. We start out
with just S in the list. We then grab
the first hex in the list. If it's the goal
hex (G), we're done. Otherwise, we
expand the hex, which means that we
examine the six hexes adjacent to the
one we just grabbed. Each hex that
hasn't been previously looked at gets
put at the end of the list. We then go
back and grab the next hex on the
list, and so on, until we either find
the goal hex (as mentioned) or we run
out of hexes (which means there is no
path). Figure 2 shows the trace map
for a BFS on Figure 1, and Figure 3
shows the actual path found. (For
more details on all this, see the last
two issues.)
At the end of last month's column,
I revealed that BFS doesn't use any
heuristic information, but instead is
a blind search. In other words, it
doesn't know (nor does it need to
know) where the goal hex is; it just
looks until it runs across it. But since
we do know where the goal is,
couldn't we use that information to
direct our search? Of course we can.
This month, we're going to look at an
informed breadth-first search (IBFS)
and see what difference a little
intelligence makes.
CHOICE OF HEURISTIC
Since we're trying to find the
shortest path from S to G, the obvious

choice for our heuristic is distance.
In other words, we need a function
that will return the distance (in
hexes) from any hex on the map to
any other hex on the map. Let's suppose that we're representing our map
as a two-dimensional array. Any hex
then has the coordinates (x,y), where
x is the row (top to bottom) and y is
the column (left to right). Given two
hexes with coordinates (x1,y1) and
(x2,y2), then the following function
will return the distance between the
two hexes:
FUNCTION distance (x1,y1,x2,y2
: integer) : integer;
VAR
templ,temp2,dx,dy
: integer;
BEGIN
dx : = abs(x1 - x2) ;
dy : = abs(y1 - y2);
tempi : = dx;
IF odd (dx)
THEN dx = dx + 1;
temp2 : = dy - (dx DIV 2);
IF temp2 < 0
THEN temp2 : = 0;
distance : = tempi + temp2
END; { of FUNCTION distance }
We can now use this function to
create a smarter BFS algorithm.
INFORMED BREADTH-FIRST
SEARCH
As mentioned last month, this version of the algorithm uses a trace
map (TRACE) to trace the path back
from the goal hex to the start hex,
and a list of hexes called OPEN. For
this version, we'll need a change to
OPEN. Each hex stored on OPEN
will have a cost value (H.COST)
stored with it, equal to 1 plus the cost
value of the hex which was expanded
to produce that hex. In other words,
if we pull the hex H off OPEN and
expand it to its six adjacent hexes,
each of those hexes will have a cost
value of H.COST + 1. The cost of the
starting hex (S) is 0. The cost of any
hex is simply the length of the path
from that hex back to S. We'll
also need a cost map, CMAP, to
remember the cost to a particular hex
even after the hex has been pulled off
OPEN. CMAP is initially set to all 0's.
Our algorithm is essentially the
same as we gave last month, but
with two important differences. First,
when we null a hex off OPEN. we

don't just take the first hex. Instead,
we pick the hex in OPEN that is most
likely on the shortest path from S to
G. How do we determine that? Well,
for a given hex H, the estimated
length of the shortest path passing
through it is given by:
Men : = H.COST + distance
(H.X,H.Y,G.X,G.Y);
where the coordinates of H are
(H.X,H.Y) and the coordinates of G
are (G.X,G.Y). H.COST gives us the
actual length of the current path from
S to H, while distance returns the
shortest possible length of a path
from H to G.
The second difference comes in
expanding H to its adjacent hexes,
ADJ(n), n = 1..6. In the BFS algorithm, we wouldn't put a hex on
OPEN if it had already been there
(i.e., if TRACE[ADJ(n)] > 0). However,
with our IBFS, we have to watch for
a particular problem. It's possible to
place a hex on OPEN and then run
across it again by a shorter path. For
example, let's say that some hex, A,
was placed on OPEN with a cost of
6 and a trace value of 3 (A.COST =
6, TRACE[A] = 3, CMAP[A] = 6).
Later, another hex expands to A from
a different direction (5) with a cost of
4. Since TRACE[A] is already nonzero, we would normally throw A
away. But we've just found a shorter
path to A, so we need to put A back
onto OPEN so it can be considered
again. Since our new cost is less than
CMAP[A], we set A.COST = 4,
TRACE[A] = 5, and CMAP[A] = 4.
If A has already been pulled off
OPEN, we put it back on; otherwise,
we just change its COST value and
leave it where it is.
I hope that isn't too confusing, but
these changes are critical if we want
to be sure to find the shortest path
each time. Here, then, is the modified
algorithm:
(0) Clear TRACE and CMAP (i.e.,
set all locations to 0). Put the
starting hex on OPEN and set
its location in TRACE[start] =
7. Set the TRACE locations of
any impassable hexes to 7.
(1) If there are no more hexes on
OPEN, then no path exists, so
quit.

(2) Remove H from OPEN, where
H has the lowest estimated
path length. If two or more
hexes have the lowest value,
pick one randomly.
(3) Examine the six hexes adjacent
to H, called ADJ(n) for n = 1..6.
(4) If ADJ(n) is the goal hex, then
quit.
(5) If TRACE[ADJ(n)] = 0, then set
TRACE[ADJ(n)] = n and put
ADJ(n) on the OPEN list. Otherwise, if ADJ(n).COST is less
than CMAP[ADJ(n)], then set
TRACE[ADJ(n)] = n and either
put ADJ(n) on the OPEN list (if
it is no longer there) or just
change its COST value. Otherwise, ignore ADJ(n).
(6) When all 6 hexes have been examined, go to (1).
Figure 4 shows the trace map using
this algorithm, and Figure 5 shows
what the final path looks like. A
better gauge of the added intelligence
is in the number of hexes added of
OPEN (in step 5) and the number of
hexes pulled off OPEN and examined
(in step 2). The BFS algorithm put 70
hexes onto OPEN and expanded 55,
while the IBFS algorithm put only 49
hexes onto OPEN and expanded just
26 of those. Another indication is the
percentage of hexes placed on OPEN
that had to be expanded. The BFS
expanded 79% of the hexes placed
on OPEN, while the IBFS only expanded 53%.

YET ANOTHER ENHANCEMENT
Those of you with sharp minds
may have seen a simple change that
can improve our algorithm's "intelligence" even more. In step 2, we select
randomly among all hexes having the
same (minimal) estimated path
length. Rather than select randomly,
why not choose the hex closest to the
goal? (Of course, if there are two or
more that qualify, then we select randomly among those.) That way, we
are picking from OPEN the hex that
has the best chance of being on that
minimal path.
Let's call this algorithm MIBFS (for More Informed
Breadth First Search). Figure 6
Continued on p. 44

CGW GOLF TOURNEY RESULTS
Our congratulations go out to Phil McCloud of Schaumburg, IL who won CGW's Golf Tournament. Phil fired
blistering rounds of 66,55, and 62 to finish 29 under par
in the three round tournament.
The tournament, which was announced in CGW 3.5,
made use of Avant-Garde's Hi-res Computer Golf 2 . One
round was played on each of the three courses included
with the game. HRG2 has a tournament routine which
permits play–by–mail tournaments. This routine prevents
doctored scores by way of a coding which appears with
a score in a tournament round and can be used by the
tournament directors to determine if the round was
played according to the rules of the tournament. Such
things this coding would reveal would be attempts to alter
the score, or any attempt to start the round, quit and start
over.
We had sixteen entries. The average score per round
was five over par. Scores range from Phil's tournament
low of 55 in his record round to a 101 posted by one
player in the first round.
Finishing in second, nine strokes back was Phil's playing partner Ken Maloney (-20). Hmmm? When asked how
they did so well, Phil indicated that he, Ken, and others
have been playing the game "for money" for a year. That
could tend to sharpen your game. Placing third was Kevin
Hill of Maregno, OH. He finished with a 17 under par
192. All other entrants finished the tournament over par.

Knights of
the Desert
Wargame
TYPE:
Apple, Atari,
SYSTEM:
TRS-80
Diskette or Tape
FORMAT:
#PLAYERS: 1 or 2
Tactical Design
AUTHOR:
Group
PRICE:
$39.95
PUBLISHER: Strategic
Simulations
NAME:

Knights of the Desert (KOD)
recreates the period of the. North
African Campaign from March 1941
to January 1943. The game is played
in turns with each turn divided into
phases and each phase divided into
player actions. Every action, such as
movement or combat, requires expenditure of supply and operation
points. The game is won through accumulation of victory points or by
taking the opponents home base. If
you are not familiar with KOD, then
you should read the feature review in
our last issue.
A look at the victory points table
and the Order of Battle Chart in the
rules book will quickly point out an
overall strategy. The Axis must push
its units as far east as it can and capture the town of Tobruk as well as
any other towns it may be able to
reach. The allied strategy to counter
this, must be to hold the towns and
fight as slow a withdrawal action as

possible until reinforcements arrive.
The rules book suggests that the Axis
player should be able to capture Bardia and surround Tobruk on the first
turn.
Since the first turn is vital to a winning game, I have chosen the Tobruk
41 scenario to examine the tactics of
KOD. As the Axis player you must
get 220 points for a strategic victory.
The Allies need -130 points for the
same. The Allied tactics are fairly
simple — consolidate, fortify, and defend. The Allies should attempt to
force the Axis to use as many operation and supply points as possible in
attacking Allied units. Given the
chance, The Allies should withdraw
the armor and depot units located
near El Agheila to Benghazi using
the coast road. The Axis players tactics are not so easy to chose. In 1941
Rommel decided to use the desert
route in hopes of capturing Bardia
and Tobruk and cutting off the
retreating Allies on the coast road. In
the longer scenarios this is a tactic to
consider, as on the second turn you
will be able to attack Bardia and
Tobruk and squeeze the Allies between arriving reinforcements and
your advanced units. In the one turn
scenario, as in all scenarios, operations limitations must be taken into
consideration. Nonmechanized units
receive only 36 operation points per
turn, while clear terrain squares cost
three operation points each to cross.
This means that the nonmechanized
units can not reach Tobruk in one

turn by going across the desert. By
sending the nonmechanized units up
the coast road they may not only
reach Tobruk, but also have enough
operation points left to attack it. The
same story is true for the mechanized
units. By going up the coast road they
will have enough operation points
left to attack either Tobruk or Bardia.
(Going up the coast road will also get
you Benghazi). Of course some must
sacrifice for the greater good. There
are Allied units on the coast road and
someone must deal with them. There
is no better division suited to the task
of destroying weaker units that the
Italian Ariete Armored Division. It
starts at nearly 100 percent combat
strength and almost completely supplied. It can make short work of the
depot units between El Agheila and
Tobruk capturing their unused supply in the process. What of the 2nd
British Armor and its supply depot
outside El Agheila? In the longer
scenario I recommend you attack
and destroy these units with the
Ariete Armor supported by Italian
infantry. The attacks should be at
low intensity, as you will have
favorable odds. In the Tobruk 41
scenario you can ignore these units
and save your supply and operations
points for the attack on Tobruk and
Bardia. Capturing Benghazi, Tobruk, and Bardia along with the
destruction of the forces defending
those towns and the movement of
your forces that far East will
guarantee a strategic victory.

Starbowl Football
NAME:
TYPE:
Sports Simulation
SYSTEM:
Atari
Disk & Cassette
FORMAT:
#PLAYERS: 1 or 2
PRICE:
$31.95
AUTHORS: Dan Ugrin &
Scott Orr
PUBLISHER: Gamestar, Inc.
What do you do when the
season is over? When snow at last
lies thick on the local football field
and the last Bowl games are decided
— does that mean that you've got to
spend the rest of your winter
weekends actually cleaning the
garage or sweeping out the attic?
No...not if you're lucky enough to
own an Atari Home Computer and a
neat little program from Gamestar,
Inc. called STARBOWL FOOTBALL (SF). Limber up your throwing
arm, football fans, it's STILL football
time!
SF is a sports program which was
released in 1982 but which has only
recently received attention from the
media. The general lack of good
sports games for the Atari makes this
program particularly attractive,
because it is one of the best football
programs for the Atari currently on
the market.
Although many types of computer
games can afford to be visually
abstract, we expect a sports game to
reflect reality as closely as possible.
In this regard, SF fits the bill very
nicely. It is visually full of nice
touches such as a green, onehundred yard field that is marked off
in ten, five and one-yard intervals
with proper end zones, goal posts
and yard markers. The football
players themselves are reasonably
well-designed and are quite nicely
animated. Sounds include a couple
of rousing college fight songs, a bit of
the "Star-Spangled Banner,"
referees' whistles, crowd roar and
even the sound of the ball being
kicked.

Overall, the graphics rate an
above-average evaluation and, I
suspect, will be pleasantly satisfying
even for us hard-to-please Atarians.
Okay, so the game looks good. But
what about the game-play? First of
all, SF is easy to play. Even though it
claims to have 196 different combinations of plays to choose from, it
really only offers a choice of four
pass plays and three running plays
on Offense, and the same number of
counter-plays on Defense. While this
may not seem like a lot, it serves to
keep the game moving along at a
brisk pace. Thus, after only a few
minutes study of the easilyunderstood game instructions, you'll
be managing your team like John
Madden, himself. Nevertheless, the
game is not easily mastered. It requires a combination of strategy and
timing in order to score big. In this,
you'll be more successful against a
human opponent than against the
computer, since the computer opponent is much too formidable to be of
much use, even for practice. (For instance, in a typical game against the
computer, a friend of mine threw in
the towel after the score had reached
100 to 0. However, the game
designers claim that the computer
CAN be beaten, so maybe it's a matter of persistence).
Besides the one or two-player play
mode, you can select from two different skill levels — College or Pro. I
would suggest the College level at
first, but the Pro level offers the most
fun once you have mastered the
basics of the game.
In SF, the action takes place on a
horizontal football field of which
only about 35 yards are visible at any
one time. The television screen
automatically scrolls the length of
the field to keep up with play as the
teams move up and down the
gridiron.
As in real football, the object in SF
is to' outscore your opponent with

touchdowns, fieldgoals or safeties.
While trying to accomplish this, you
must learn to contend with the game
clock, the 30-second clock, interceptions, fumbles and penalties. The entire contest is controlled with the
joystick, including play selection.
There are six men on each team, only
one of which you control — the ball
carrier on Offense, and the Free
Safety on Defense. The computer
controls the movements of the other
men. However, you get to program
the pass patterns for each Receiver
and the blocking assignments for the
Offensive line, as well as the pass
coverage for the Cornerbacks and
the rushing assignments for the
Defensive line.
Once the ball is hiked, the quarterback has the option of running with
the ball, or passing it to a receiver —
assuming that you have previously
(in secret) designated one as eligible.
The free safety may blitz the QB or
hang back and try for an interception
or to tackle the runner. To complete
a pass, you must hit the trigger the instant the ball arrives at the receiver.
Becoming proficient at this takes
some practice, so be patient! (Even
then, if the receiver is closely
covered, the pass may fall incomplete). Running into anyone
while carrying the ball, even your
own man, can result in a tackle,
which sometimes can turn into a
fumble — an automatic turnover.
However, score a touchdown and
your man does a little victory dance
in the end zone — a fitting "
in-yourface"ts ldiv!
Anyone looking for a reasonably
accurate and visually enjoyable
simulation of the game of football is
sure to be pleased with SF. The major
deficiencies lie with the discouragingly and unrealistically tough computer play and perhaps in the
overemphasis of the pass as opposed
to the run. (Don Coryell would love
this one!) All in all, however, I would

recommend this game to anyone
with a friend who is looking for an
excuse not to have to clean the
garage next weekend.
Bob DeWitt

BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:
Gumball
TYPE:
Arcade
SYSTEM:
Apple II (48K)
FORMAT: Disk
#PLAYERS: 1
AUTHOR: Robert Cook
PRICE:
$29.95
PUBLISHER: Broderbund
Software
San Rafael, CA
Can you use transcendental curve
smoothing techniques to predict production schedules? How are your
shop floor control techniques? Are
you proficient with balanced line
loading?
Well, even if you couldn't tell a bill
of material from a breakeven analysis
chart, there's a new factory game for
you. In `Gumball', you don't have to
build the factory (some crazy man
already did that). You don't have to
climb around on it. You don't even
have to jump over pieces of it. All you
have to do is operate it. Using joystick
or keyboard, you throw levers to
direct production outputs and to
position colored bins under the output chutes of the factory to collect the
colored gumballs as they are made.
Be absolutely sure to catch each gumball in the properly colored bin.
Make just one little innocent mistake
and the Quality Control inspector
will come out and dump the entire
bin. By the by, a color TV or monitor
is a must!
Just like in every factory, there's
more to your job than that. There's
the quota, the time clock and conveyor belt speed. You control only the
belt speed. In fact, if you don't speed
things up considerably in the later

rounds, you'll never meet your quota
before 5:00 p.m.
Don't punch your time clock just
yet, there's more. Some of the gumballs are rejects. Let them go into the
reject bin or your point total is
severely penalized. The first few
times played, I ended up with 00000
points. It's a little demoralizing to
play for five minutes and end up with
zip. In fact, it feels a lot like the first
day on any new job. And, if all that
isn't enough, some deranged bunch
of dental school dropouts have put
gumball bombs into the works.
You've got to get them in the sights
of a LSCFFG (Let's Save Candy For
Fun Gun) to get rid of them.
The graphics of `Gumball' are delightful. Objects move smoothly in
front of and behind each other, as if
you just plugged a special graphics
board into your Apple. In fact, it's
worth catching a few gumballs in
the wrong bins just to watch them
tip over.
Between shifts, there's a cartoon
and a promotion. The cartoon shows
the victorious factory worker returning home after a successful day at
the factory. (Does making gumballs
really generate all that smoke?) As the
rounds progress, the home he returns
to gets fancier. It had better! The first
bears a striking resemblance to a
building which should have a crescent moon carved into its door.
Game play requires a lot more
strategy than you might suspect at
first glance. The game can be played
on a number of levels. The most basic
is to simply meet your quota and
move on. If this is your goal, you can
pretty well forget about where you
dump the reject gumballs, and not
worry too much about missing some
good ones. Just concentrate on catching most of the colored ones in the
right bins, getting your quota and
your promotion.
On another plane, however, is the
goal of maximizing points. Now you
must treat every moving gumball
with equal attention. You'll find
yourself becoming a clock watcher.
"If I work for just a few more
minutes, I could get another 1000
points", are the words of a newly
created gum-a-holic.
John Besnard

BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:
One On One
TYPE:
Sport Simulation
SYSTEM:
Apple
FORMAT:
Disk
#PLAYERS: 1 or 2
PRICE:
$40.00
PUBLISHER: Electronic Arts
San Mateo, CA
With 15 seconds to go, score tied 24 —
24, Dr. J inbounds the ball at the 3 point
line. He fakes left, drives right, and with
:05 left on the clock goes up with a 16
foot turn-around jumper . . . he scores!
26 — 24 now with :02 left to go. Larry
Bird inbounds the ball, steps backwards
across the 3 point line, and lets fly as the
last second ticks off the clock . . . It's
good!! Three points for Bird, and he wins
27 — 26!

Thus ended my first victory at the College level over the computer controlled
Dr. J in Electronic Arts' latest software
masterpiece, the incredibly realistic
"Julius Erving and Larry Bird go One on
One" (0/0). In our interview in CGW 3.6,
Trip Hawkins, President of EA said he
wanted to produce games that were
"simple (easy to understand), hot (fast
and intense), and deep (the more you
play, the more you find). One on One
shows just how successful those concepts can be.
The first and last word on 0/0 has to
be graphics. Absolutely fantastic!! After
a few minutes of playing, you feel like
you're watching TV, but controlling the
action. The players dribble with either
hand, spin and twist and twirl and leap
just like in real life. Each is given different abilities as in real life. Bird is the
better outside shot and rebounder, but
Dr. J has inside moves that'll make your
head spin, and seems to have a knack for
stealing the ball just at the right moment.
One friend of mine said he found it
easier to beat the computer using Dr. J.
I find it easier with Bird.
For those who avoid lengthy rule
books like the plague, 0/0 is your dream
come true. The joystick controls player
movement, while pressing the button
starts a jumpshot and releasing it lets the
ball fly. A quick flick of the button turns
your player around 180 degrees. On
defense, the button causes an attempt at
a steal or to block a shot, or go for a rebound. In the two (human) player game,

the defense can play with the keyboard,
or you can use one of a number of
peripherals to equip your machine to use
a pair of joysticks. And that is it. You can
now boot up and start playing. When you
do, I'd suggest starting at the Park and
Recreation level, rather than Varsity, college, or Pro. You need to learn to walk
before you try roller skates.
Your options in playing a game are
numerous. You can play to a set score
— say 21 — or with a time limit of 2, 4,
6, or 8 minute quarters. Your choice of
either winner's or loser's outs. The computer will play either Larry Bird or Dr.
J, and you can even vary the options in
mid-game. If, for example, you happen
to be losing by 15 to 20 points at the college level, (a not uncommon situation)
and decide to make things easy on
yourself, you can change levels to a Park
and Rec game and attempt the comeback
of the year. Or when you're way ahead,
up the computer to Pro level and see how
it feels to have defeat snatched from the
jaws of victory!
All games are played with a 24 second
shot clock to keep the action flowing,
and an extra touch of realism is added
by the fatigue indicators at the bottom
of the screen. The more you do, the more
you tend to gas out. Attempts at steals,
running and jumping are all good ways
to expend energy, and since the number
of timeouts are limited (fatigue drops to
0 after a timeout or at the end of the
quarter) you may find it wise to slow
things up a bit from time to time. As
fatigue increases, your effectiveness
decreases. Eventually your leaping attempts for the rebound may look more
like a drowning chicken than anything
else, so watch yourself carefully, and
conserve your energy and timeouts.
Any game benefits from those little extra touches. When you make a spectacular play, you're ready for a pat on the
back and One on One gives it to you with
an Instant Replay. The computer will
freeze the live action and replay your (or
its) brilliant play, giving you a moment
to beam with pride (or curse, as the case
may be). And when you slam a particularly good dunk, the backboard will
shatter, and you'll get chewed out. A hint
here . . . stand still while they clean up,
you'll benefit from the rest.
Lastly, foul shots take a special touch.
Watch the computer player when he
shoots, and eventually you'll catch on.
One of my only (minor) problems in
playing the game is that when things are
hectic underneath the basket, it is
sometimes hard to tell who has the ball.
Particularly on defense when you're trying to steal, I often find that I've gone up
to block a shot without realizing that I've
gained possession of the ball. This is ok,
sometimes even good strategy at the Park
level where you get the ball at the inbounds marker if you forget to clear it
(we're playing half court, remember), but

at the college level, you'll have a turnover
for failure to clear. Perhaps a possession
change sound or light indicator would
help.
The other thing that I really would
have liked is an overtime period for the
timed games. Of course, you can simply
play another two minute quarter, but the
computer doesn't know that it's overtime, and you lose a little drama.
Every game designer must hate
reviewers who add all their little suggestions now that the time for change is
past, but I'll be looking forward to edition two of this one. I hope game
designer Eric Hammond carries through
on his teasing comment of wanting to
add hook shots to the players' repertoire
at some point, and I'd like to see an option to allow PRACTICE at free throws,
or perhaps even a free throw game. The
problem in making a game as realistic as
0/0 is that you can think of a million addons that simply can't be included. Can
we — hope? dream? pray? — that additional player discs — Kareem? Wilt? —
may be forthcoming?
When nominations are made for Computer Sports Game of the Year, 0/0 will
be there. Super graphics, constant
action, the opportunity to out-think and
out-hustle your opponent all make this
one of the best computer games I've
seen. Period. Keep'em coming, Trip.
Dave Long

NAME:
Floyd of the Jungle
TYPE:
Arcade
SYSTEM:
Atari
FORMAT:
Disk/Cassette (32K)
#PLAYERS: One to four
AUTHOR: Sid Meier
PRICE:
$29.95
PUBLISHER: MicroProse Software
FLOYD OF THE JUNGLE (FJ) is a
variation of the climbing/jumping theme,
the object of which is to help the mighty
Floyd negotiate various jungle hazards
in his attempt to save the "lovely" Janice
from the perils of the jungle.
Unfortunately, our distressed heroine
cannot budge from her spot at the top of
the screen (perhaps she is mired in a tar
pit) and, starting from the bottom of the
screen, Floyd must run, jump and climb
his way to the top in order to save her.
Alas, as in most tales of the heart, all his
efforts ultimately go for naught, for even
at the moment of victory, Janice is snatched from his bosom and thrust into
another life-threatening situation (there

are five different ones in all) and poor,
foolish, gallant Floyd must conquer the
jungle all over again.
Each screen presents a static playfield
which is divided by jungle foliage and a
river into a series of levels through
which Floyd must run while avoiding
pygmies, snake pits, bands of vicious
monkeys, large, toothy tigers, alligators
(actually crocodiles, unless this is
Florida) and ponderous elephants with
very large feet. He can punch the lights
out of the pygmies with a blow from his
mighty fist, but he must jump over
everything else. Controlled by a joystick,
Floyd can run and jump left or right and
climb up and down the hanging vines
which connect the various levels. He
must be careful however, for if he
mistimes a jump, he will die a horrible,
crumpled-paper-doll death beneath the
feet of an elephant, or on the fangs of a
hungry tiger or croc.
FJ has some definite pluses but, in this
reviewer's opinion, it also exhibits
several minuses. For instance, if you're
like me, you like to see a lot of colorful
action in a game of this type. Here, the
scenario is a cute one and offers a lot of
visual potential. But, while the screen is
admittedly full of animation, it is not
very colorful. It consists mostly of images in white, black, grey, yellow and
dull green.
Floyd himself is very nicely done but
the rest of the cast leaves much to be
desired, especially the "unlovely" Janice,
who is downright ugly. (Also, a particular problem with the choice of colors becomes apparent when Floyd
attempts to cross the river, since he
becomes almost invisible while superimposed over the white-colored river).
On the plus side, FJ is one of the few
programs that allows up to four players
to compete simultaneously (four
joysticks must be used). In the multiplayer mode, each person controls a
"Floyd" of a different color. They compete to reach Janice, aiming ultimately
to achieve a previously selected number
of points in order to determine the
overall winner. Since you have an
unlimited number of Floyds at your
disposal and because there is no time
limit or any other variable to work
against, the greatest enjoyment and
challenge in this game is realized
through this type of competition. In the
multi-player mode, when your Floyd
meets an untimely end and must start
over again from the bottom of the screen,
the desperate scramble to catch up with
his rivals can make for some pretty entertaining competition.
In view of the many superbly-crafted
games of this genre on the market today,
FJ finds itself up against some pretty
outstanding company. In my opinion, he
comes up short. However, FJ is less expensive than much of its competition,
and may therefore be an acceptable
choice for some gamers.

TITAN (Cont.)
vary. The maximum number of armies
per planet as well as what your ship can
carry at any one time is 255. I found that
the safe number of armies per planet is
200. This gives you a safety margin in
case the planet is attacked while you are
somewhere else, depleting your armies
in battle which could lose you the planet.
You must transport armies to replenish
any planets or to beam them down when
attacking enemy planets.
Some general comments are as
follows:
— when traveling between planets and
attacked, slow down to warp zero to improve your shooting accuracy.
— the enemy will get one last shot after
it is destroyed, so don't drop your shields
too fast after battle.
— there are various types of enemy
ships — each of which has different
capabilities — so be advised.
— when you attack a planet or moon
it fires back. Also, if the orbits of a
friendly and enemy planet or moon get
within range of each other they will fight
it out among themselves with or without
your aid.
When I first booted TE, I expected a
game similar to Galactic Attack by SirTech. But, while the basic objective was
the same, several features had been
added to further enhance the game.
Features which I feel added to the enjoyment of the game (i.e. different types of
enemy ships, more display windows,
planets shooting back or between each
other, realistic planet orbits, etc. . .)
TE requires strategic planning but
occasionally requires you to use quick
reflexes in an arcade style confrontation
with the enemy. The various graphic
displays also lend themselves well to
smooth player interaction in this overall
playable, but sometimes frustrating
game.

SILICON (Cont.)
shows the trace map for MIBFS,
while its path is identical to the one
found by BFS (Figure 3). The MIBFS
algorithm added only 47 hexes to
OPEN and expanded only 20 of those,
giving an expansion rate of 43%.

CONCLUSION

That's it for this issue. Next column, we'll take a harder look at the
performance differences between
BFS and MIBFS and see if smarter
really is better. We may also play
around a little with different terrain
types. See you then.

TELE-GAMING (Cont.)
consists primarily of a large picture window looking onto the vast
front lawn and beyond. This is a
good place to watch the many
visitors coming and going;
perhaps you might even spot someone you know. To the north is
a set of double doors leading to the
banquet room. To the east, the
doors leading out to the foyer. Why
not walk around and visit with the
other guests? Grab a seat!
The "P.A." (public address) system
allows you to send messages to others
who are currently online. It is also used
to alert all members to the entrance or
exit of a guest. A control-G is sent to your
computer, then a one-line message such
as "Sirena walking into Parlor" appears
on your screen. In this way, you can let
your friends know that you wish to chat
or get together for a game. Multi-player
games, such as "Medieval Conquest,"
"18 Wheeler," and "Oil Baron," are easily scheduled by posting messages on the
bulletin boards that are available in the
alcove areas. Of course, electronic mail
is also widely used and each member can
sign up for his or her own mailbox
(located in the Mail Room, just to the
right of the foyer entrance).
The Lower Level (basement area) is
where subscribers spend
much of their online time. The popular
game of "Eamon," with fifteen modules
donated by author Donald Brown, is
played by visitors to the Time Room. In
the Club Room, gamers can choose from
one- or two-player versions of "Blackjack," "Rack-Up," and "All/None."
Naturally, the State Room is the site of
ongoing play-by-mail "Diplomacy" campaigns. Fans of war simulations participate in "Nuke Strike" and "Destination Midway" in the War Room. Other
gaming locales include the Board Room
(chess, checkers, and backgammon), the
Locker Room (baseball and football), the
Engine Room ("18 Wheeler," "Cargo
Master," "Makin' Tracks," and "GM Air
Freight"), and the mysterious Chamber
(which you "Enter at your own risk!").
Although the Lower Level's gaming
rooms and the Parlor are the mansion's
most popular areas, many hours of
online time may be enjoyably spent exploring other floors of the house. From
the first floor, with its Foyer, Mail Room,
Parlor, Kitchen, Pantry, Banquet Room,
Greenhouse, and Garage, you can ascend
the grand stairway to the second level
where you will find the Conservatory,
Work Room, Bedroom, and Library. The
Library houses a number of "books"
which describe all the rooms and
features of the mansion, and the
Bedroom contains an alarm clock which
announces incoming mail and alerts you

to the presence of a waiting gameroom
opponent.
Three Conference Rooms, a
Newsroom (local user group updates), a
Guest Room, the Balcony, and a Dark
Room (photographic tips) are all found
on the third floor. On the fourth level,
you can access learning programs in the
Class Room, view computer art in the
Gallery, post general messages on the
Magic Blackboard, or download programs from the Archive. The top floor
houses the Observatory (horoscopes and
biorhythm charts) and the Divination
Room (the Oracle's abode).
As if all of these offerings were not
enough, the enthusiastic GameMaster
staff mails a printed "Gazette" seasonally
to all members. This newsletter announces contests (with free system time
as prizes), gaming tips, picnics, and birthday parties. What does it cost to
subscribe to this exciting system? Basic
membership is $15 and includes a
documentation package and four hours
of connect time (which is thereafter
$3/hr.). There are several ways to obtain
a subscription: 1) send a self-addressed,
stamped envelope requesting a registration form to: GameMaster, 1723 Howard
St., Suite 219, Evanston, Illinois 60202;
2) sign up with a registered dealer in the
Chicago area; or 3) contact the hotline
at (312) 328-9009 and use your credit
card. GameMaster also operates a
separate bulletin board system (run on
an Apple computer) which provides current information. The modem number of
the BBS is (312) 475-4884. Since the mansion itself and the BBS are in the Chicago
area, many subscribers have to add on
the cost of long-distance telephone calls
to their total connect charges. However,
the mansion is certainly worth an occasional visit by out-of-town guests.
Other notable interactive, multi-player
gaming systems include: Delphi, (617)
491-3393, in Cambridge, Massachusetts;
Plato, (800) 233-3785, in San Diego,
California; and Info-Net, (800) 527-2432
(outside Texas) or (800) 442-6586 (within
Texas), in Dallas, Texas. (All numbers
given are for voice phone.)
As always, I welcome comments and
information about your tele-gaming experiences. You can contact me on CompuServe (ID 72145,42) or by writing to
me at: 195 Claremont Avenue, Suite 115,
Long Beach, California 90803.

CARRIER FORCE (Cont.)

NATO (Cont.)

SIM CANADA (Cont.)

ly accurate radar reports, which means
it will be difficult to surprise him with
readied aircraft on the decks.
The USN torpedo bombers are
generally vulnerable and ineffective, and
should be reserved for finishing off cripples. The US Army level bombers are
worthless for antiship missions. The
SBD dive bombers, however, are the best
US strike aircraft, and you should send
them out first.
A rough handicap in a two player
game would give the less experienced
player the IJN in the first two scenarios,
or the USN in the last two scenarios. In
general, the relative USN strength improves as the war progresses, and it
is probably easier to beat the computer
in the later scenarios. In the solitaire
games, the only difference between the
four difficulty levels is that the computer's search capability becomes more
effective at the higher levels.
The program's solitaire play capability is excellent. The computer tends to
follow the historical IJN strategies, yet
it is unpredictable on the details. In the
Coral Sea scenario, the computer will try
to land assault troops for the invasion of
Port Moresby. In Midway, It will continue to savagely pound Midway until it
spots the US carriers. In Eastern
Solomons, the computer tries to unload
transports at Henderson. And, in Santa
Cruz, it comes out aggressively seeking
a decisive fleet engagement.
After making contact, the computer's
carriers try to maintain a range of about
250 miles from the US carriers. It usually orbits 12 fighters over each carrier,
and keeps at least 12 aircraft readied on
the deck at all times. The computer tends
to combine most of its planes into a few
large strikes, with about one third of the
strike planes being fighter escorts. Its
high priority targets are your carriers,
and the Kate torpedo bombers can be
very deadly. The computer's battleships
generally move forward seeking surface
combat, especially at night.
Planning your search patterns is a key
factor in this game. It is important that
you find the enemy carriers before they
find you. It may help to surround your
task forces with several small fighter
patrols to hopefully shoot down the
enemy search planes before they find
your ships.
This is the first game Gary Grigsby has
designed on the Atari. Gary says he finds
it easy to translate a program designed
on the Atari to the Apple, but very difficult to do the reverse. This is good
news for both Atari and Apple owners,
because both will benefit from having
more high quality games which will run
on both machines.
[Ed. note — Floyd Mathews was a
playtester for CARRIER FORCE.]

that will allow it to apply maximum
pressure at your weakest points. It also
takes advantage of the fact that its forces
can not be seen until they are adjacent
to a NATO unit or are spotted by airwings on reconnaissance missions.
Air-wings should first be assigned to
air superiority missions. When the status
report tells you that WP air support was
light or non-existent then press the "F"
(freeze) key and reassign air-wings to
ground support or reconnaissance missions. (I favor the recon missions
because knowing where the enemy is
can save you from some nasty surprises.)
Use the helicopters as attack support
units as they are not very effective when
attacking alone. Armored cavalry supported by choppers is very effective
against WP infantry especially if they use
chemical attack while the choppers use
accelerated attack. You can win scenario
one if you can set-up a good defensive
line behind the river with a slight bulge
at the helicopter site.
Scenario three is the only offensive
scenario and it starts with a massive
NATO strike against WP air bases. This
gives NATO clear cut air superiority and
increases its combat capability. Each
scenario will end when the time limit has

The intelligence output and order input are both rather cumbersome. All information is obtained one unit or area at
a time; it would have been very helpful
to get a tabular display of, say, current
positions of all units, or positions of all
Army headquarters, or locations of all
detected enemy units. The order entry
procedure is more understandable, as
one does need to give the order, the
designated unit, the area to be attacked
or defended against, and also possible
exploitation paths. The airpower entry,
though, is particularly slow. It's a shame
that an important but peripheral aspect
of the major ground action consumes an
inordinate amount of order entry time.
The best thing about FG is that it does
accurately portray the abilities of the
various combatants and it allows
historical actions. The Germans can hit
hard towards Sedan, break through,
and race for the sea. The infantry will
be left behind, and you may get a taste
for just what a gamble this was if you
have an able Allied opponent (and
especially if you use the set-up option of
an improved Allied training doctrine).
Also, if you play the Germans, you don't
need to capture Amsterdam to force the
Netherlands to surrender. Just follow the
historical plan of sending the 18th Army
smashing through Nijmegen to Rotterdam. Holding both territories cuts off the
bulk of the Netherlands from the rest of
the Allied forces, and the country will
capitulate within one turn. Watch out,
though, for one good counterattack
against Nijmegen before they go
belly up!
FG shares the same "lack of documentation" problem that is so vexing in
GSGS. It is a little more understandable
here, since so many current computer
wargames omit any sort of combat
results table ( the computer will do it all,
so why bother the player). Of course, you
can only learn by trial and error how
many units to commit to a particular
attack in order to have a good chance of
success, or how many areas can be
traversed by marching for one turn, or
how serious are the effects of each type
of terrain in combat. I still don't know
how much contribution I'm getting in
my assaults by adding a particular level
of air power on ground support. Maybe
I'm too demanding and most gamers
don't want to be bothered with all the
data, but I get more enjoyment from a
historical simulation if I've made my
decisions based on more than just a
"well, let's try this and see what happens" level of understanding.

been reached or the victory points tally
enough to indicate a clear cut winner.

ANALYSIS
My only complaints with this game
were that the forces are too unbalanced
in favor of the WP to allow a really good
battle and that the game seems to end
before the allotted number of turns if the
victory points become too unbalanced.
Also, do not press the S (save game key)
unless you really want to save the game.
Pressing it will clear the mapboard and
you can not get the units back. I had a
good defense going in scenario four
when I accidentally pressed it while going for the A key. So far I have not played
a scenario that ran long enough to want
to save it.
When I first began playing board
games, my main complaint was that the
play was taken in turns with sometimes
multiple phases for each sequence of
events. The objective of course was
realism. When computers started offering strategy games I felt this could be the
solution to the age old problem of
realism since the computer could handle all the details. Only recently, with
such games as COMBAT LEADER and
NATO Commander, has the true power
of the computer worked to present a
realistic simulation of combat. NATO
Commander combines the map, scrolling, and unit symbols of EASTERN
FRONT with the realistic game system
of Combat Leader to obtain a superb
strategic simulation.

Final Thoughts
I really don't mean to dump on these
two games as far as documentation goes;
they are really no worse than many

current releases in this regards. Unfortunately, running with the pack is, in my
eyes, not good enough.
Both games are good simulations, and
appear to be built on well researched
data bases. They are both designed in
presentation and content for the board
gamer who now has a computer and
wants to make use of its limited intelligence and rules adjudication
abilities. That's fine with me. Now, if
they would just print up player-aid
sheets, I could be buying a lot of Simulations Canada computer games in the
future.
NOTE: Early shipments of Fall Gelb had
a bug which caused the program to crash
in a particular situation. The problem
will have been fixed by the time you read
this. It had to do with the "SH" (shift
headquarters) command, and only appeared in solitaire play. To check
whether your disk has the problem, start
a solitaire game, and give only two
orders in the first turn: an SH to any
Army headquarters unit, and a move
order to any other unit. If the program
crashes during the computer execution
of the turn, you've found it. You can
return a faulty disk to Simulations
Canada with a note of explanation and
❑
they will send a replacement.

GEOPOLITIQUE (Cont.)
is necessary if there is to be room to
show the location of fleets and armies,
small flags that indicate US/USSR sympathies, and letters to show existing
treaties. The oceans of the world are
divided into 13 Ocean Areas which are
used solely for the deployment of fleets.

The last "good" that can be produced
is New Industrial Capacity. These points
are simply added to the current capacity
so that there is more available the following year. If you can combine industrial
growth with economic treaties with
minors (to raise the raw material base),
you can boost GNP quite rapidly.
STICKS INSTEAD OF CARROTS

THE KEYNESIAN SCHOOL OF
DIPLOMACY
Any strategic game should impose
some sort of constraints on your actions.
This prevents you from doing everything
and forces you to make choices and
assign priorities. In GEOPOLITIQUE,
these constraints are economic. Each
country has a rating for three categories
of raw materials (food, metal, and
energy) and for industrial
capacity. Industrial capacity is used to produce raw
materials (up to limits set by the above
ratings) and to convert raw materials into "finished goods".
There are only five kinds of finished
goods and none of them are automobiles
or refrigerators. Instead, we have
military Maintenance Points (MMTP),
Military Mobilization Points (MMBP),
Political Action Points (PAP), New Industrial Capacity (NIC), and Mobilization Capacity (MCAP). Wow, what a lot
of fancy words; let's see what they mean.
You need one MMTP per turn for each
fleet or army that is mobilized. If you
can't produce enough MMTP's then you
are forced to demobilize the units that
can't be maintained. You also need a
MMTP to "ready" a unit for a turn. A
unit must be readied to conduct a local
war and readied units exert more influence over negotiations.
You need one MMBP to mobilize a
fleet or an army. All newly mobilized
units appear in the US (or USSR) and
must be deployed from there. Movement
is simple, each unit can move to one adjacent area turn. Armies can move
across any number of ocean areas as
long as each is occupied by a friendly
fleet. There is a limit to how many units
can be mobilized in one turn. This is the
Mobilization Capacity, or MCAP. MCAP
can be increased at considerable cost, as
a result of production.
Political Action Points represent your
capacity to support negotiations abroad.
Like MMTP, they are relatively cheap to
produce but cannot be saved. You scatter them around, no more than two to a
country in any one year. After allocating,
you get to negotiate with any country
where you have a PAP. However, each
Soviet PAP cancels one US PAP and vice
versa, so if both powers put one PAP in
Central America then nobody gets to
negotiate. Even if you choose not to talk
at first, a long-term investment of PAP's
can slowly make a hostile minor more
amenable.

What if your national prestige drops so
low that nobody wants you as a partner?
Then you concentrate on increasing
your military strength and taking over
minors by force. A successful local war
will give you automatic economic,
political and military treaties with that
country. However, the government also
becomes rather hostile so it is necessary
to keep an army there to prevent the
USSR from obtaining a neutrality treaty.
A successful campaign of military conquest will inevitably lead to war with the
other superpower. At this point, you
discover that you've been playing
GEOPOL and that another game,
GEOWAR, is available on the other side
of the disk.
GEOWAR seems similar but is subtly
different. The turns represent three
months instead of twelve and there is no
more negotiation. All minors promptly
declare their allegiance or neutrality.
Military units acquire strength ratings.
Depleted strength is rebuilt by Reinforcement Points, which become the primary
output of economic production.
Now the race is to see which can
dominate the globe. Each country has a
value relative to its worth and the first
side to amass 60 points for two consecutive turns wins. The power which
has already invested in mobilization
capacity can seize the initiative by
getting its forces into the field more
quickly. The one with the greater
economic base can also try to attrit the
other with repeated combat, being willing to suffer equal losses since it can
replace lost strength more quickly.
It's a real global war, but non-nuclear.
Those who prefer Armageddon to
maneuver will be disappointed, but a
nuclear war does not give meaning and
substance to the GEOPOL part of the
game. As Joshua found out, the only way
to win a nuclear exchange is not to play.
CONCLUSIONS
GEOPOLITIQUE 1990 is not only an
excellent game, it is an innovative one.
It would be nice if it were more detailed
(less abstract), it would be nice if you
could play either side, it would be VERY
nice if there were a two-player version.
But I'm not finding fault with what is
there; just wishfully thinking of what I'd
like to see added to an already full disk.

RINGSIDE (Cont.)
here that I began to wonder how to
make them "competitive" with the
historical figures given to you on the
game disk.
A full 'stable' of historical fighters
is presented, and each fighter is rated
extensively in so many categories
that it actually boggles the mind.
Here arose my only uncertainty over
the game. Fighters are rated in no
less than 27 different categories and
attributes, and there is really no explanation of where the statistical data
given was compiled. Consequently,
we really don't know through whose
eyes we are seeing the various
fighters. My experience showed that
Ali and Marciano were the best two
fighters overall, but that at any given
time, most of the top heavyweights
had the ability to beat one another.
A single elimination tournament of
the top eight heavies saw Ali come
out on top, while a seven round
`round robin' tournament with each
fighter meeting each of the others
saw Marciano come out in first place
with a record of six wins and only
one loss. Ali stopped him in round
7 of their match, but Ali lost to both
Liston by a KO (???) and Louis, giving
Marciano the title.
My first 'creation' was some kind
of superman; he knocked Ali out
three times in a row in the first two
rounds. So I decided to try and
develop a system for creating fighters
of more or less equal resources.
Hopefully this will allow two fighters
to have different strengths and weaknesses but still be of comparable
mien. With the thought that the
system may be of interest to you, but
with the warning that it is NOT
simple to understand, I present it
here for your consideration. Since it
is a well documented fact that
readers of Computer Gaming World
are above average in intelligence,
perception and abstract reasoning,
you should all have no trouble at all
with my rather abstract system.
The main problem is creating a
numerical system for rating a newly
created fighter is that there are six attributes which are rated with a value
of one being the best possible, while

all the others have one or a negative
number being the worst possible.
Thus we have six fields of characteristics, the first of which is Ability vs
Boxer/Slugger. Each point allocated
in this section costs triple, so if your
fighter is rated 1/1, the cost is six
points.
Field Two includes ability to Follow
Up, to Cut, to Charge In, to Stick and
Move, to Stay Away, to KO, to Protect Cuts, and to Work Free. Points
allocated to these areas count at face
value.
Field Three points are SUBTRACTED from the fighter's total.
This field includes ability to Take a
Punch, Take Punishment when Hurt,
Avoid a KO, to Work Free when
Trapped, to Absorb Punishment, and
to Not Get Cut.
Field Four attributes are Strength,
Quickness, Stamina, and
Agresivn.Quckratedfom-9(h
fastest, which costs 9 points) to + 9
(the slowest, which costs - 9 points).
Stamina (rated from 125 as maximum stamina) costs 1 point for each
10 units allocated. Thus a stamina of
100 would cost 10 points.
Field Five is composed of two attributes, percent of time that punches
land, and percent of extra sting (a
measure of how hard your fighter
hits). As in field one, points spent
here cost triple, with the maximum
allowable being 90%, which would
cost 27 points (9 x 3 = 27).
The final formula is Field One and
Five points times three, plus Fields
Two and Four, minus Field Three.
As I said, not simple. But, as the
game designer was unable or unwilling to make all his values of one format, it's the best I could do. To give
you some idea of where to go from
here, Ali is a 96, Marciano a 99.5,
and Larry Holmes an 85.3. Anyone
wishing to give us some feedback
will certainly be welcome.
CONCLUSIONS

Even dedicated non-garners will
change their tune when you show
them this one, with heads snapping
back and bodies crashing to the canvas. Tie on your gloves and come out
fighting, folks, because this game is
for real!! D

GOLF (Cont.)
choose to hit a hook or slice?). The screen
will show the ball's flight path across the
aerial view of the hole.
Out of bounds, sandtraps, water
hazards and trees are handled realistically. The game instructions go into
great detail in explaining how to handle
tree shots. Handling tree shots as an
average golfer and taking into account
display scaling can make these shots a
real challenge.
Finally, when all players are on the
green, putting can begin. Each player
continues to putt until they have holed
out. The overview screen display is now
replaced by a putting green display. This
is not a fancy display, just a side view
of the player a relative distance from the
cup. The display shows the distance to
the cup and a green rating with 1.00
representing a flat green. The success of
your putt is again based on the statistics
of your player. You may select from
three types of putts. A putt is used most
often, a lag stroke is used for long putts
where you want to reduce the change of
3-putting, and a charge stroke is used to
make an all out effort to hole the putt,
but at the risk of 3-putting.
When all players have holed out, the
scorecard is displayed. It totals all
scores, separates the front and back nine,
and shows the par, distance and scaling
factor for each hole. While the scorecard
is displayed, the game may be saved to
be continued at another time. A typical
four player game with one human player
can take about two hours to complete.
The player Manual is clearly written.
It provides many details covering game
design and methods of play to help you
perform at your best. The details of play
and statistics provided for the player's
characteristics are so complete that you
may learn things you never knew about
your own capabilities.
If you don't have any real statistics to
enter, I suggest you enter a driver
distance of 220, a wedge distance of 100,
a handicap of 12, and an average rating
for all other questions. These values provide for a very enjoyable game.
The screen display of club and putting
characteristics is very detailed, however
the game does not yet have a printer option to produce a hard copy of this data.
It would be nice if the final scorecard
could be printed. The player disk does
save each players statistics (rounds
played, average putts, high and low
scores, etc.). PTG also saves the top score
for each course with the initials of the
player setting that record.
PTG is an excellent statistical simulation of golf both in play realism and in
what can be learned for playing real golf
with all the play options available, you
will not get bored of this game very
quickly.

There were 228 RIDs turned in by press time for this
issue.
Newly rated games and updated game ratings are
listed with bold type in the table on page 49.

GAME RATING
The table on page 49 includes games evaluated by our
readers. For a game to be included in this listing it must
first have been offered for rating in our regular RID
rating system. Games offered for evaluation are those
covered in the magazine and/or those having a good
sales record during the time of evaluation. Once offered
for evaluation, the game must have been evaluated by
a sufficient number of readers to be included in the
results. Any game not evaluated by at least 10% of the
respondents was not included in the results.
Games were rated on a scale of 1 (terrible) to 9
(outstanding). Respondents were asked to consider such
things as PRESENTATION (graphics, sound, packaging, documentation); GAME DESIGN (design, playability, interesting?); LIFE (does the game wear well?)

RID –12 (Use card provided)
On this page a number of games and articles are listed
for evaluation. Please take time to evaluate these games
and articles. Use the guidelines above for game evaluation. Leave blank any game which you have not played
enough to have formed an opinion.
Please rate articles on the basis of the article itself,
not your opinion of the game being reviewed. Enter a
zero for any article that does not interest you.

R.I.D. was prepared with the help of SPEED STAT by SoftCorp International, Westerville, OH 800-543-1350

See page

48

for details on the Reader Input Device

