May 1992

Number 94
Features
14
Merger Mania
Tips for corporate raiders in Avalon Hill's Computer Acquire.

20
My Castle and Welcome to It
Charles Ardai explores Sierra's Castle of Dr. Brain.

24
Cineplay's Free D.C!
Kellyn Beck's digital detective meets Claymation.
by Charles Ardai

30
Dark, Diabolical and Dangerous
CGW sneaks a peek at Darklands from Microprose.

34
Virgin's Shuttle
Virgin launches into the simulation game.
by Stanley Trevena

38
Accolade's Mike Ditka Ultimate Football
Good news for arcade fans that "Bear"s repeating.
by Wallace Poulter

40
Mapping Koei's Uncharted Waters
Japan's dominant strategy publisher sails in a new direction.
by Dave Arneson

46
Twenty-Five Year Mission
Interplay's Star Trek: 25th Anniversary.
by Allen Greenberg

50
Baseball by the Numbers
Win Rogers finds the strike zone in Strat-O-Matic Computer Baseball.

Supplementary Section
Special Advertising Supplement
Dynamix presents "Great War Planes:" a look at the computer game series.

59
Bo Knows (Arcade) Baseball
Data East's Bo Jackson Baseball.
by Win Rogers

66
Super Tet-CIS
The shape of Spectrum HoloByte's Super Tetris.
by Michael S. Lasky

72
Between the Uprights
A sneak preview of Konami's NFL Football.
by Johnny L. Wilson

74
Underground Educational System
A teacher looks at Broderbund's SpeIunx and the Caves of Mr. Seudo

79
Elf Off the Shelf
Running and jumping with Ocean's Elf
by Leah Wesolowski

86
Look Who Dropped In
Three-Sixty's VIs for Victory: Battleset 1: Utah Beach reviewed.
by John J. Vanore

90
The Club Med Invasion
Tips and tactics for Harpoon: Battleset 3: Mediterranean Conflict.
by Tim Carter

94
Secret Tactics of the 8th Air Force
Tactics and tables for Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe.
by James Lowerre

99
SimCan's Pacific Storm
Dispatches of a command-level World War II naval wargame.
by Alan Emrich

102
WARp Speed Strategy
Strategic notes on RAW Entertainment's Worlds at War.
by Michael Peck

108
Getting Civilized
What's happening to Sid Meier's Civilization?
by Alan Emrich

Departments
Taking a Peek
8
16A (Margin of Insert)
Questions for the CGW Poll
18
Rumors
56
The CGW Poll
57
The Hall of Fame
58
PC Research/SPA Top Games
62
Scorpion's Tale (The Secret of Monkey Island 2)
Over There (European Games Report)
68
76
From the Cockpit (Flight Simulator Software from Mallard)
80
Scorpion's View (Buck Rogers: Matrix Cubed)
84
Computer Wargaming World's "Broadsides & Gripeshot"
Editorial
112

Taking a Peek

Access
Salt Lake City, UT
BARTON CREEK: Yet another in the
graphically beautiful course supplements
for Links, Links: Barton Creek features
the site of the senior PGA Liberty Mutual
Legends of Golf Tournament located in
the wide-open hill country of Texas. CGW
#89 (p.26) featured the background behind the creation of this course disk. IBM
($24.95). Circle Reader Service #1.

The Avalon Hill Game Company
Baltimore, MD
COMPUTER ACQUIRE: In this update
of the computerized boardgame classic
Acquire, players get to see a color-coded
gameboard (as though they were playing
the boardgame) and to input commands
via a mouse-driven interface. Players now
have the option of knowing or not knowing exactly how many shares the opponents have. The former is useful for
novices, the latter makes a better game.
The new opponents are significantly improved, as well. IBM ($24.95). Circle
Reader Service #2.
Corn Gods Publishing Company, Inc.
33 Catalpa Terrace
Darien, CT 86820
(203) 967-4002
ET CORN GODS GAME: Based on the
premise that God had extraterrestrials
("ETs") come to earth and put hidden
meanings into the words of the English
language, the player's challenge is to unravel over 5,000 such word puzzles. Online tutorials replace written instructions,

teaching both the use of language in the
game, as well as the game rules (which
are mind-numbingly numerous and
remarkably bizarre). Weird (to say the
least) in premise, these word puzzles are
for truly deep thinkers. IBM ($39.95).
Circle Reader Service #3.
Domark
c/o Accolade
San Jose, CA
MIG-29 FULCRUM: A loosely collated
series of missions in search of a campaign game (which is not, alas, included), this product is a fairly standard
example of European flight simulations.
Although there are some innovative instruments on the panel and there is a certain fascination with fighting against
NATO warplanes, without any
head-to-head playing features, there are limits to
the game's scope. While the real MiG-29s
are among the world's most advanced
fighters, the game is not in a corresponding position with regard to flight
simulators. IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader
Service #4.

Taking a Peek

Earthquest, Inc.
125 University
Palo Alto, CA 94301
(415) 321-5838
ECOLOGY: Edutainment on an ecological theme, this environmentally conscious program is designed in the "click
and explore" tradition, rather than
presented as a "pure" game. With many
SimEarth-like features to it, the interface
provides easy access to charts and
graphs, ecology games, the sounds of nature, animations and many other features. An EcoSimulator demonstrates a
pure "cause and effect" relationship upon
the environment. Perhaps the most entertaining, however, is the Renegade Tour.
This is a highly amusing sequence in
which players become vegetables with
the task of fixing the environment of
planet "Whatamess." It's hard to tell who
will like this package more, teachers or
students. Macintosh ($59.95). Circle
Reader Service #5.
Electronic Zoo
Baltimore, MD
ABANDONED PLACES: This new
CRPG, a British import, is something of a
cross between Dungeon Master in terms
of appearance and Might & Magic II in
terms of world scope. There is definitely
a large universe packed in the box, with
some new twists on ways to travel that
are akin to the Ultima series (horse, air,
ship, etc.). Based on the usual epic quest
of good versus evil, the game is mouseand icon-driven and features a 40-page
history book to supplement the scant 12
pages of game documentation. Amiga
(no price). Circle Reader Service #6.
Hi Tech Expressions
New York, NY
BARBIE DESIGN STUDIO: If there's a
little girl in your house, here's the
software that will remove any computer
shyness from her personality. Complete
with graphics such as Barbie's Magic
Mansion and her famous '57 Chevy, the
usual signs, posters and other print kit
features abound. However, this program
also offers a diary printout, plus various
organizers (including a homework planner!). Perhaps best of all, the "dot
matrix" look has been somewhat abated
in order for the printouts to demonstrate
more of the smoother, rounded features
of the product's namesake. IBM
($24.95). Circle Reader Service #7.
Interstel
Richardson, TX
DUSK OF THE GODS: If the names of
Midgard, Asgard and Jotunheim have

any special meaning to you, that might
pique a special interest in this CRPG
based on Norse mythology. With a
manual that is not only a fascinating
recapitulation of Norse legends, but also
features a huge glossary (which comes
in very handy during the game), this
CRPG features multiple endings, nonlinear plot lines and the ability to print
out character interaction for later reference. Between items found and sacrifices
made to the likes of Odin, Thor, Tyr and
Freya, Dusk might be considered
Valhalla'va game and well worth a Loki.
IBM ($69.95). Circle Reader Service #8.

While taking advantage of every piece of
advanced Amiga hardware that can be
thrown at it, the awkward interface,
which requires manipulation of the
mouse and the joystick, leaves something to be desired. Naturally, a flight
simulator that only concentrates on two
very specific aircraft will be rich in detail
for them and the planes are brutally
realistic, almost to the point of being
testy and rather difficult to fly. A twoplayer option using modem or serial
mode exists for this well-received piece of
Amiga software. ($49.95). Circle Reader
Service /19.

Jaeger Software
7800 White Cliff Terrace
Rockville, MD 20885
(301) 948-6862

Ocean Software
San Jose, CA

FIGHTER DUEL: CORSAIR VERSUS
ZERO: Heralded as a technological
breakthrough for achieving a frame rate
as high as 28 frames per second on a
high-resolution display mode, this is
made even more impressive when one
considers that the aircraft are both bitmapped down to the smallest image.

WILD WHEELS: With a soccer-like object of pushing a huge metal ball toward
the goal, teams of cars and drivers zoom
around the arena in this team sport of
car-to-car combat. The court can become
quite frenzied as ten cars maneuver
around, collecting weapons and repair
tokens, while trying to keep the ball in
the other player's side of the field. Each
player (two can play head-to-head via

Taking a Peek

serial or network) controls the team's
lead car, while four robot cars are
programmed to attack, block, guard the
goal, etc. It seems very exciting in a
Projectyle sort of way. IBM ($49.95).
Circle Reader Service #10.
PC Globe, Inc.
Tempe, AZ
BUSH BUCK — GLOBAL TREASURE
HUNTER: This is a repackaging of Bushbuck Charms, Viking Ships & Dodo
Eggs as reviewed in issue #88, page
102. IBM ($39.95). Circle Reader Service
#11.
Simulations Canada
Bridgewater, Nova Scotia
MAIN BATTLE TANK: MIDDLE EAST:
Another in SimCan's tactical armored
warfare games, players issue orders to
their troops via menus and await reports
which come in "over the radio" (i.e., are
read along the bottom of the screen as
text). This one focuses on modern warfare in the Middle East with 75% of the
scenarios postulating Arab-Israeli conflicts while the remainder covers Desert
Storm with the description: "The
Americans [soldiers] are volunteers, convinced in an almost imperial fashion of
their own innate superiority." Players
may also create their own scenarios. The
game features no graphics or special
sound support. IBM ($60.00). Circle
Reader Service #12.
PACIFIC STORM: THE MIDWAY CAMPAIGN: Another in the SimCan "command viewpoint" series, this one covers
a crucial ten-week period immediately following the Doolittle raid over Japan
during WWII. The Japanese needed a
"big victory" to force the Americans to
the bargaining table, while the Americans
needed any victory in the Pacific to prop
up flagging morale. Thus, both sides will
be mustering their forces, with Midway as
the focal point of the campaign.
Reviewed on page 99 of this issue. IBM
($60.00). Circle Reader Service #13.
Software Toolworks
Novato, CA
CASINO PACK 1: For the casual casino
game player with Windows, this package includes four games: Roulette (with
both European single-0 and American 00
wheels) for one or two players, Keno,
Blackjack (playing 1-6 decks) and Poker
(which is really "Video" Poker). The latter
three games are solitaire play only, and
Poker includes some arcade sound effects to go with three variations of play.
IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #14.
PAPERBOY 2: Sequel to the hit arcade

game, Paperboy 2 features new and
larger neighborhoods to terrorize (er ... in
which to deliver papers). New obstacles
and bicycle stunts are also "rolled up"
and ready for delivery in this arcade fest.
IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #15.
THE CHESSMASTER 3000: The battle
for chess game supremacy has gone in
many directions, but this product concentrates on new features. Oh, sure,
there are more graphics (2- and 3-0
views and multiple chess sets), but the
capacity for creating computer opponents with unique personalities,
analysis in plain English (as opposed to
"chess jargon") and a variety of other features make for an impressive package.
The latest Software Toolworks chess
program may well be worth sacrificing a
few pawns in order to capture it. IBM
($49.95, $59.95 for Windows version).
Circle Reader Service #16.
U.S. ATLAS 3.0 and WORLD ATLAS
3.0: Adding even more features to these
standard computer reference programs,
information is presented for ease of use
and understanding through use of the
Windows environment. Persons can now
create their own informational databases
and add them permanently to these atlases, as well as making map notations
(both with text and customizable icons).
Naturally, everything can be copied and
pasted to other documents through Windows and printed out (with a Windowscompatible printer). One might even be
able to pin Carmen Sandiego down with
these maps! IBM ($79.95). Circle Reader
Service 1117.

Titus Software Corporation
20432 Corisco Street
Chatsworth, CA 91311
(818) 709-3692
PREHISTORIK: This 2-D scrolling arcade game puts a club in the prehistoric
player's hands and has him bashing for
burgers everything in sight. Cute, with a
few puns and plenty of straightforward arcade game play, this one is definitely a
prehistoric computer game, all right. IBM
($49.95). Circle Reader Service #18.
SWAP: A simple puzzle game of tile
swapping and removal, this European import has rules printed in three languages.
Quite an interesting and challenging system for "tournament" or "campaign"
play, "Swap" uses shapes (squares, hexagons and triangles) to form colorful puzzles to drive players mad. Puzzle lovers
will want to get their P-A-W-S on S-W-A-P.
IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #19.
Way Forward Technologies
1000 MacArthur Blvd. #32
Santa Ana, CA 92707
(714) 434-9795
WAY FORWARD FUN PACK FOR
MICROSOFT WINDOWS: Seven games
of the classic ilk for Windows 3.0 or
later, including a Breakout clone, a Pac
Man clone, a Missile Command clone, a
Rescue Raiders clone, a Tetris clone, an
Asteroids clone and an Apple II-looking
game of "grab the icon before the wandering icons touch you" called Jewel
Thief. This product underscores the
adage "everything old is new again." IBM
($39.95). Circle Reader Service 1/20.

Strategy

Tips and Techniques for Avalon Hill's Computer Acquire
by Johnny L. Wilson

L

ong,

long ago in a
time continuum far, far
out, Minnesota Mining & Manufacturing Corporation (3M) published a
line of Bookshelf Games. Although the line boasted
some trivia and generic
strategy games, the most
prominent titles emphasized
business (Acquire, Executive Decision and Stocks &
Bonds). Although they were
all boardgames, they
heralded the types of games
to be programmed for the
computer games of the future. Executive Decision
was the forerunner of management games
like SSI's early Cartels & Cutthroats (by
Dan Bunten), Britannica Software's
Managing for Success and PRODIGY's
CEO. Stocks & Bonds was a multi-player
implementation of personal investing that
was concept-oriented, as opposed to the
data intensive Millionaire II and The
American Investor from Britannica
Software. Acquire was an abstract multiplayer strategy game of hotel mergers.
When The Avalon Hill Game Company
purchased the Bookshelf Games line from
3M, both Stocks & Bonds and Acquire
looked like prime candidates for computer
versions of the games. Indeed, both games
had a brief stint on computer store shelves,
but Computer Acquire outlasted its sister
games (perhaps because of the continued
success of the boardgame version).
Both the boardgame and the computer
game versions of Acquire feature the same
simple game mechanics. Players draw a
handful of tiles, play them on the game
board to create hotel chains, build the
chains up or merge them together. Each
turn, one tile is played and up to three
shares of stock can be purchased. The
goal, of course, is to parlay one's stock
holdings into the most money when all
hotel chains are liquidated at the conclusion of the game.
The original version of Computer Acquire
was on the Apple II. The Apple version of
the game was virtually all text (the
gameboard was more limited than the Spartan graphics used in the present version);
featured relatively poor computer opponents; required keyboard input and allowed all players to see all of the stock held
by the other players. The first IBM version
offered only a slight improvement of
graphics and opponents, but was basically
a straight conversion of the Apple and still

from the merger to buy into
other chains and, most importantly, allows one to
trade the stock from the less
expensive chain in a
two-for-one for the stock from the
more expensive one.

allowed players to see everyone's holdings.
The latest IBM version of the game supports, but does not require, a mouse and
solves that earlier problem. Now, one can
choose whether to display them or not. The
latest version also provides a greater variety
of tougher opponents.

Making a Continental Breakfast out of the Imperial Opposition
Here are some strategic considerations for
corporate raiders who find themselves playing against the more aggressive computer
opponents in the latest version. Initially,
alert players will realize that the human
player will not always be able to form a
hotel chain (particularly when the human is
Player 1 and plays the first tile). The computer-controlled players form hotels faster
than human players and seem to get the
benefit of the doubt when drawing tiles. So,
in order to win the game, it will be necessary to control the mergers. To maximize
the chance of controlling mergers, a player
should make a mental note of the area with
the most concentrated number of tiles available in his/her inventory. Then one should
try to gain majority interest in a hotel chain
in that area, regardless of what the other
players do.
If possible, one should gain majority interest in the lowest-priced (or smallest) hotel
chain in that area. This offers two advantages. First, it leaves one with a war
chest in case there needs to be a switch in
tactics when one assaults another chain.
Second, whenever two hotel chains have an
equal number of hotels, the lower-priced
chain is the one which is purchased. Since
one only gleans the shareholder bonus
when the chain in which one has majority interest is merged into a dominant chain, it is
best to be invested in the less upscale
chain. This gives one the bonus money

Note also that astute
gamers almost always trade
a merging chain's stock in
the two-for-one transaction,
even when the price of one
share in the higher-priced
chain is less than the total of
two shares of the lowerpriced chain. The rationale
is that a player can only
buy a total of three shares per turn. If the
two-for-one trade is accepted, however, it is
possible to get a number of shares through
the trade and purchase the standard three
shares in addition to the traded shares.
The final phase in the offensive strategy
takes place once one has acquired a
majority stake in a "safe" chain (which cannot be merged into another). At that point,
one should force all future mergers into
that particular chain to build up the value
of one's holdings prior to the game's end.

Holding a Financial Festival
with Worldwide Impact
In addition, successful gamers play defensively. They carefully place their tiles as far
away as possible from those chains in
which they have few or no holdings. This is
because building toward those chains increases the probability of the majority stockholders receiving a bonus and "raiding"
their chains by purchasing stock with the
money accrued from the merger.
Also, wise corporate raiders always buy
stock whenever it is available. Computer Acquire (and Acquire) do not favor those
who save money for a "rainy" day. One
must have stock in order to make money
and having more stock makes it more likely that one can cause a merger and create
cash flow.
Finally, ruthless corporate raiders will
remember that it is possible to declare the
end of the game after no more mergers are
possible. In close games, there is absolutely
no sense in continuing play if it enables
one's opponents to build up their holdings
or forces one to play tiles which strengthen
their holdings.
So, here's to merger mania and lodging
leverage. After all, it's the American way!

Industry News

Microsoft Golf
For some time, CGW has
been anxious to make this announcement public: Access
Software and Microsoft
have teamed up to bring us
Microsoft Golf! For years
Microsoft's only entertainment product was the
phenomenally successful
Flight Simulator series.
Then Microsoft released the
popular Microsoft Entertain-

ment packs. Now, working
closely with Access Software,
Microsoft is zeroing in on
final code for a mid-summer
launch of Microsoft Golf.
Under the arrangement between the two companies,
Microsoft will publish the Windows versions of Links
products, and Access will
publish DOS-based products,
including their upcoming 386
Pro Links. Course disks will

continue to come from Access. All current Links
course disks will run on
Microsoft Golf.
The Microsoft Entertainment packs aside, this is
Microsoft's first move to become a significant presence
in the entertainment category. We can expect to see
more entertainment products
from Microsoft in the future.
Fore!

Prodigy Network
Tour Golf
In another pairing of computer game vendors, the
Prodigy Information Service
has joined with Accolade to
bring us Prodigy Network
Tour Golf. Using Jack Nicklaus Golf & Course
Design:Signature Edition
Prodigy users will be able to
play in the monthly tournaments against opponents in
every area of the country.
The tournaments will be available as a "Custom Choice"
(additional fee required) on
the Prodigy Service. You
must have a copy of the Accolade game to play in the
tournament. Look for it this
summer.

Other News
• Dynamix has signed a
licensing agreement with fantasy author Raymond E.
Feist to produce a CRPG
based on The Riftwar Saga.
The game will be a fully
rendered 3-D environment
using a first-person perspective and some of the most advanced graphics techniques
we have yet seen in a CRPG.

• Spectrum HoloByte's
upcoming new campaign
disk for Falcon 3.0 features
the Asian Theater of War,
and there are three scenarios
to play through. The first
scenario is Japan versus
USSR (over the Kuril Islands), which will introduce
naval targets and ordnance
into the simulation. The other
scenarios involve Korea as
well as Pakistan versus India.
The next scenario disk will
be the Western European
theater of war.
• Reactor Software's new
release on the Macintosh CDROM will be Screaming
Metal and will be built from a
new engine instead of
Macromind's Director,
which they used before.
• Ubisoft will be publishing scenario disks for Battle
Isle in May.
• RAW Entertainment
has told CGW that they
released a "slide show" disk
of Space, Inc. in Europe by
"pretending" that something
downloaded to a German
company had been intercepted. It only took three
days for the "slide show" to
make its unofficial way onto
U.S. bulletin board systems.
That's one of the more creative distribution systems of
which we are aware.
• Dynamix will release the
promised expansion module
for Red Baron in July (new
aces, mission builder, new
campaign, new planes, etc.).

Review

TITLE:
The Castle of Dr. Brain
SYSTEMS:
IBM
PROTECTION: Document Look-up
PRICE:
$49.95
DESIGNER:
Corey Cole
PUBLISHER:
Sierra On-line
Coarsegold, CA

A Visit to the Mind-Bender

S

Sierra's The

Castle of Dr. Brain

by Charles Ardai

ome people simply don't enjoy puzzles. They don't like
logic puzzles, they don't like word games, they loathe riddles and they detest unraveling mathematical conundrums. One would normally recommend that such people stay
as far away as possible from a game like The Castle of Dr.
Brain, which offers puzzles, puzzles and more puzzles. Yet The
Castle of Dr. Brain is not a normal game, even though the puzzles it offers are normal puzzles. It is, in fact, one of the most
entertaining agglomerations of puzzles ever stuffed into a single
package — and it is packed in such a way as to entertain even
the most stubborn puzzle hater.
The Castle of Dr. Brain is so well put together, so copiously
animated and richly scored, so readily willing to offer help and so
easily adjusted to the player's level of mental agility, that it has a
real shot at converting puzzle haters into puzzle lovers. Like the
Creature sewn together in another famous doctor's castle, this
game is a collection of odd parts held together mostly by the
force of its designer's will; but also like that Creature, the game
turns out to be not a lumbering, misshapen monster but a noble,
well-meant enterprise whose spirit is astonishingly pure.
The Castle of Dr. Brain is delightful — irrepressibly so. From
the deliciously wacky opening scenes (the castle is constructed
atop a giant stone head and the front door rolls up like a window
shade instead of opening the ordinary way) to the tchotchkes
that litter the hallways (flowers placed in the boot of a suit of
armor are said to stand in a "foot" of water), designer Corey
Cole obviously followed his mandate to create a world with something funny around every corner. Each scene has a painted backdrop that takes full advantage of a 256-color palette and every
object in every background is "clickable," even if it is not part of
a puzzle's solution. Many scenes also have their own
soundtracks, including sly musical references to such pop-culture
icons as Pink Floyd and 2001: A Space Odyssey.
Each room in the castle contains at least one, and usually two
or three, puzzles to solve. All the puzzles in a given room or on a
single "floor" are of the same type: memory puzzles, language
puzzles, jigsaw puzzles, sequence puzzles, programming puzzles,
astronomy puzzles and so forth. One travels from floor to floor
on elevators that double as three-dimensional mazes. There isn't

much freedom to select which puzzle to solve next — Dr. Brain
shuttles the player from place to place in a fairly linear fashion —
but there is enough freedom that one never resents the game for
being too controlling.
Each type of puzzle, except for the elevator mazes, only appears once. There is one word-search grid, one magic square,
one jigsaw puzzle, one robot arm to program, one clock sequence to predict. This structure produces two good results: endless variety, which means that no one will get bored, and an
even distribution of puzzles, which means that no one will get
bogged down in a sequence of puzzles he cannot solve. Each
puzzle goes on just long enough to entertain and challenge and
then is never repeated. The game carries the player along at a
furious clip, touching down here and there and then picking her
up and carrying her on before things have a chance to get dull.
The player sets the pace of the game, but the game sets its own
rhythm, which is always bouncy and always in motion.
To move quickly or slowly, to save games often or rarely —
those are the player's choices. But to moue, period, is the
game's choice, and move it does. The Castle of Dr. Brain has
an insistent forward momentum that is infectious. It makes the
player want to see the next screen, want to be blindsided by the
next unpredictable challenge. The game is heavily interactive and
guaranteed to get any couch potato's mental gears turning. This
is true of adult players as well as children, incidentally. There is
no audience to which The Castle of Dr. Brain is unsuited. Even
subscribers to Games magazine, who will knock down the puzzles one-two-three, will enjoy them as they do so. The Castle of
Dr. Brain is like a child's busy-box for the computer age, full of
interesting buttons to push, noises to make and things to discover. It is the best kind of educational game: the kind that is
naturally mind-expanding without being preachy and learningdirected.

The Inner Workings of the Brain
The Castle of Dr. Brain is very different from most of Sierra's
other games in that it is not an animated adventure, though superficially it shares the popular Sierra adventure game interface.
The most obvious difference is that the player is not represented

Review

by an on-screen character. One also has an inventory, as in an
adventure game, but it is rarely necessary to use it. What one
uses primarily are a hand icon and an eye icon, with which one
clicks on the various objects one sees. Some clicks produce
clever remarks (for instance, the books in the clock room include Time Enough for Love and A Brief History of Time) while
others call up windows with puzzles in them. Each puzzle has its
own instructions, which can be displayed as often as a player
needs, and most of the puzzle windows have slots into which
"hint coins" can be deposited for further assistance. (One
receives hint coins for every correct solution.) A slider that the
player can call up from the control menu hidden at the top of
the screen determines what difficulty level the puzzles come at,
from Novice to Expert. "Novice" means solving a 3x3 magic
square instead of a 5x5, and only needing to find eighteen of the
twenty-five words in the word search rather than all of them. At
"Expert" level, some of the puzzles are challenging enough to
slow down even the most experienced puzzle junkie; at "Novice"
level, they are easier but not so easy as to be a total waste of
time. One still needs to find those eighteen words, after all.

Mixed in with these odd little enigmas are some more conventional fare: cryptograms, three rounds of "Hangman," the
aforementioned magic square and word search, and a game of
"Memory" in which the cards to be matched show alien creatures
and their home worlds. (This last is a lot of fun, though one
wonders why "The Moleri are firmly rooted in their environment"
gets matched with "Holliendar is known for its spectacular sunsets.") Many of these games are enlivened by bits of animation:
the hangman dummy gratefully dances away from the gallows
and the aliens buzz around the planetarium in a little flying
saucer.

The difficulty level can be changed at any time, even after a
puzzle has already been encountered. Most players will not
choose a difficulty at the beginning of the
game and leave it set for the duration.
One suspects, rather, that they will tailor
each puzzle's challenge to match their experience with that puzzle type and their
mood. This is as it should be. The player
is in control of the game; the relationship
between software and user is not adversarial, as it is in so many games, but
cooperative.

Before Dr. Brain

Young players who need a leg up even
to fare well at "Novice" level can get a
boost from Muriel Mandell's Fantastic
Book of Logic Puzzles, which comes
with the game. This book is pitched at
the youngest possible audience and
teaches the rudiments of logic in a friendly manner. It is not as well-written or
clever as the game is, but it will probably
help some players get started.
Others will be able to jump right in, ignoring even the flimsy
storyline the game provides. (For the record, the story is that the
player is being evaluated for the position of Dr. Brain's lab assistant.) From the first puzzle, a memory challenge that will remind
old-timers of the handheld electronic game "Simon," to the last,
the game shines with wit, imagination and an apparently genuine
passion for the exercise of mental power.
Some of the puzzles reward specialized knowledge — the
astronomy room, with its demand that players pick out constellations and identify planets, comes to mind. It helps to know, in advance, that Saturn is the one with the rings. Most of the puzzles,
however, require only a capable, questing intellect.
For instance, how is one to determine, on the basis of three selfreferential statements, which of three robot heads will follow
one's instructions? (Yes, it's the old liar/truth-teller puzzle dressed
up in technogarb... but it works.) How is one to fix a computer circuit, given a half-dozen pieces and a half-dozen rules for assembling them? In what order should four buttons be pressed to shut
off the clock room's infernal alarm? What is the answer to the riddle "What do you do when a robot has a heart attack?" (No, I'm
not going to tell you.)

Each sequence is a delicious morsel, so playing The Castle of
Dr. Brain is a little like wandering through a candy store, sampling a goody from each tray. To extend the metaphor, Corey
Cole is a Willy Wonka-like confectioner, blending something magical and something "good for you" into a tasty buffet of highly
nutritious brain food. Not everyone will enjoy every dish on the
menu, to be sure — but most will enjoy the majority, and that by
itself is a most unusual triumph.

The Castle of Dr. Brain is not the first time puzzles have been
collected in a computer game, of course.
In addition to Electronic Arts' recent
Are We There Yet? (reviewed in CGW
//92, p. 34), the early history of computer
games featured Epyx's memorably unplayable Ken Uston's Puzzle Panic and,
a few years ago, Cliff Johnson's The
Fool's Errand (originally published by
Miles Computing) brought many a computer user's work to a crashing halt as
he scratched his head over some of the
most devious puzzles ever devised. Both
of the latter games — one rotten, one excellent — shared a common flaw: the
designer's attitude seemed to be, "Try
me if you dare, solve me if you can." In
playing these games, one had to piece
together the rules to each puzzle as best
one could. One had to manipulate tiny
puzzle pieces and arcane ciphers. One had to figure out unfathomable secrets that were locked away behind layer upon
layer of trickery. These were the type of games that make puzzle
haters hate puzzles. There is an audience for them, but there is
also a certain sadomasochistic slant to the enjoyment of them
that renders them wholly inaccessible to many.
The Castle of Dr. Brain is the exact opposite. It has no power
trip on its mind. It is encouraging, not discouraging, to the
player. It makes a point of rewarding, rather than retarding,
achievement. Critics more ideological than the current reviewer
might draw a distinction between "masculine" and "feminine"
models of game design, saying that bite-the-bullet puzzle games
are "men's" games while The Castle of Dr. Brain offers a more
maternal, nurturing approach. There may be something to this,
but one generally prefers to see matters more simply. The Castle
of Dr. Brain offers something beautiful to look at and something
fun to do. It also offers players young and old something to think
about.
"Your mind," says the game, "is the key to every door. Set
your mind free, and no lock can hold you, no bars restrain you."
There may be no more important lesson we can learn. To the extent that this game teaches it, Corey Cole and Sierra deserve
our attention, our appreciation and our applause.

Pop corn Not Included V

TITLE • Free D.C!
SYSTEM • IBM
PROTECTION • None
PRICE • $59.95
DESIGNERS • Kellyn Beck and Doug Sharp
PUBLISHER • Cineplay Interactive
Portland, OR

by Charles Ardai

F

rom

the start, computer games have aspired to a style
and a degree of refinement best described as
"cinematic." Only with today's most sophisticated techniques are significant advances being made toward this goal.
However, in adopting a cinematic mode, today's games open
themselves up to criticism on a cinematic level. It is not
enough to achieve movie-quality software; one must also
achieve quality movie-software.
It is from this critical standpoint that we will consider the
new generation of "Interactive Movies."
The human race has 28 years left. After that, it's the robots'
turn to rule. So says Cineplay Interactive in Free D.C!, an
"epic cinematic adventure" that is also this interesting new
company's first release.
Cineplay Interactive is a collaboration between Kellyn Beck
and Doug Sharp, the designers behind some of Cinemaware's
best games (including Defender of the Crown and King of
Chicago, respectively) and Will Vinton, the creator of Claymation
(the technique that makes the California Raisins sing and dance
on TV). Cineplay states that it is dedicated to "creating adult
stories about interesting characters with real personalities" and
"removing the artificial barriers from computer games." Both of
these are laudable goals. If any company has enough accumulated talent to achieve these goals, it is Cineplay, and one expects that they will come closer to success with each successive
release.
If they don't yet succeed in Free D.C!, it is partly because of
wrinkles in the game design that need to be ironed out and partly because the medium in which they are working still imposes
strict limits on what one can do — how much digitized speech
can be crammed into a game, for instance. Mostly, however, it is

because the first "adult story" they chose to tell comes across
like something out of a particularly nutty comic book. According
to the game's storyline, in the year 2020, mankind's previously
loyal mechanical helpers will rise up and take control, killing
much of the world's human population and putting the rest into
cryogenic suspension. A few specimens will be kept alive and unfrozen, but one wouldn't necessarily want to be selected for the
honor: this lucky few will be bred, researched and housed in
giant "natural habitat" preserves, where they will be expected to
perform for the entertainment of their robot captors. In short, 28
years from now we will all be killed or put on ice or in a zoo. So
much for 30-year mortgages.
Now, for the plot twist: several centuries into their captivity, the
humans have begun to fight back. One of the seven humans
living in a preserve set up among the ruins of Washington, D.C.
has constructed a robot-disabling machine. The robots can't
come near him; they are terrified that he will destroy them and
possibly even escape to threaten their 1,000-year hegemony.
Their only hope is to thaw another human, 20-century detective
Avery Zedd, and have him sniff out the culprit.
What they do not expect is that Avery won't want to play their
game. (Why they don't anticipate this is anyone's guess.) As
soon as he gets a chance, he hooks up with the other captives
and starts plotting his own escape. Will Avery be able to free him
self and his enslaved brethren? Can he dodge the death-dealing
"Poodle" and "Red Knight" robots? Can he find all the pieces
needed to build the legendary Detectron and then use it to vanquish his enemies? Most important of all, can he do all this
before 12 hours run out and a capsule the robots have implanted
in his liver blows up? He can, in the right player's hands.
Who is the right player? Anyone armed with fifty dollars, a top-

of-the-line system (a Sound Blaster card is an
absolute must) and plenty of patience.

Freedom — Some Assembly
Required
The first order of business (after gunning
down the game's initial threat, a berserk Red
Knight) is to travel around the overgrown excapitol mall and find all the humans who live
there. Without them, Avery will not get very
far. In fact, without them there is nothing to do
in the game except shoot robots, which is
about as much fun (and as difficult) as shooting fish in a barrel.
To help Avery get around, the robots have
provided him with an intended-to-be-cute robot
helper named "Wattson." Wattson not only ferries Avery around on his back but also
provides most of the game's comic banter,
such as this typical exchange (not reproduced
verbatim):
Avery (thirsty): I need a belt.
Wattson: Improved technology has rendered elastic waist-support devices unnecessary.
Most of the game's comedy is at this level, unfortunately.
Anyone whose taste in humor does not run to lame gags like
this will do well to steer clear of Free D.C!, since they comprise a
large portion of the dialogue.
In any event, Wattson is equipped to carry Avery to any of the
13 monuments in the zoo: the White House, the Smithsonian, the
Interstate Commerce Commission Building (now there's a
popular D.C. attraction), the Lincoln Memorial, the National Archives, and so forth. There is also an underground area — previously a subway tunnel — inhabited by a grotesque, charmingly
ungrammatical creature called "Harry the Subhuman."
Part Yoda (from Star Wars) and part Gollum (from The Hobbit), Harry is easily the game's best character. In addition to leading the player to a very important Detectron part, Harry is fun to
spend time with. His backward-talking schtick wears thin after a
while, but his dialogue is a cut above everyone else's, and two
cuts above Wattson's. It helps, too, that Harry's facial expressions are animated through a very effective use of Claymation.
Claymation is also used, less effectively, to animate some slimespitting mutants who live in the Natural History Museum. All the
other characters' images are digitized from footage of live actors,
with generally good results. A minor problem is that when a character's lips move it looks more like chewing than talking; a bigger problem is that the characters' lips move in exactly the same
pattern, and for the same length of time, no matter what is being
said.
In between conversations with these characters (more on this in
a minute), the player has to maneuver Avery through each of
the buildings and all the jungle-like landscape scenes that connect them, picking up the weapons and Detectron pieces that
are sparsely scattered about. The player moves around the
screen in conventional point-and-click fashion and selects actions
by clicking on one of three buttons lined up in the middle of the
screen. The buttons are labeled "Use," "Ride," "Stun," "Map,"
"Fight," "Talk," and so forth. There are never more than three
choices in any given situation, because there are only three buttons; how the buttons are labeled depends on what situation
Avery is in.
Having no more than three possible actions at any given time
may sound excessively limiting, but it is appropriate in this game
because there are never a whole lot of things for the player to
do. There are no puzzles, for instance, and there are few of the
traditional obstacles one is accustomed to finding in adventure
games, per Cineplay's stated intent to eliminate "artificial barriers" from their interactive movies. The problem here is that

Cineplay has taken out the normal activities
one expects from an interactive movie without
putting in anything to replace them.
As a result, there are a frightening number of
screens which are completely, literally empty.
One travels across these screens
dumbfounded, unsure of what one is supposed
to do and ultimately concludes, correctly, that
one is supposed to do nothing at all.
Granted, sometimes there are random encounters on these screens, but these are always run-ins with robots that require no skill
whatsoever to resolve. (One selects "Stun"
over and over again until the robot disappears,
or else one runs away.) The various screens
have nicely drawn backgrounds, but so what?
One doesn't do anything with the backgrounds.
In fact, just about all the player actually does
anywhere in the game is talk: one has to
navigate numerous conversations with the
eight main characters in order to win their confidence, get information about Avery's predicament and get help to escape.
Whether one enjoys the game depends entirely on whether one
enjoys these conversations. Needless to say, they'd have to be
pretty wonderful to make up for all the do-nothing travel that connects them.
Unfortunately, though they have their good points, the conversations are not great. The funny ones are never as funny as the
writers must have thought they were, and the informative ones
often descend into tedium. The plot is campy sci-fi and very hard
to take seriously, yet the player is expected to sit through long,
serious arias of exposition. The characters are the sort one finds
in weak science fiction novels, not so much characters as
dialogue engines — and while the dialogue is not bad, it is long
and not good, which almost amounts to the same thing.
In addition, the dialogue scenes have some memorable technical shortcomings. These are so disappointing that they merit a
discussion all to themselves.

Freedom of Speech
When Avery finally locates a character and selects "Talk," the
menu buttons stop displaying possible actions and start displaying conversational gambits. One selects these exactly as one
selects actions: by clicking on the buttons, whose labels are context-specific. For instance, Avery might choose to "Cajole" rather
than "Goad" the petulant Edsel Binkley, and he might choose to
answer Dr. Valerion's questions in an "Ironic" rather than a "Factual" manner. Other choices include "Angry," "Pissed," "Cocky,"
"Studly," "Weird" and "Batman"; the reader is invited to imagine
the particular situations that demand these responses.
The results of the player's choices determine the course of the
dialogue that is displayed in half-text/half-graphic windows superimposed over the top portion of the screen. These windows feature close-ups of the characters' faces that are sometimes
animated, but not always, and sometimes have digitized speech
to go with them, but not always. Strangely enough, they never
seem to have both: either the characters' lips move or we get to
hear them speak.
The same style of interaction was done much better in Access'
Martian Memorandum. At least there one got to choose one's
actual dialogue (rather than merely the tone of one's responses)
and if a conversation started out digitized, it stayed digitized all
the way through. Here, conversations switch from spoken-word
audio to no audio, and from animation to still pictures, seemingly
at random and often within a single sequence. The effect is an unpleasant one, like watching a movie that periodically switches
from color to black-and-white not for artistic reasons but because
the director couldn't afford two hours' worth of color film.
Obvious parallels to the early days of film come to mind since

there was a time when movies were making
the same bumpy transition from silence to
sound that computer games are making now.
Today, an audience watching Al Jolson's The
Jazz Singer (usually considered the first
"talkie") typically expresses mystification not
so much when the silent scenes give way to
singing, but when the movie switches back to
silence once the singing is done. Why,
everyone wants to know, if they were able to
record sound, didn't they do the whole picture
that way? Part of the answer is that it was enormously costly, which is part of the answer with Free D.C!, as well
(i.e. digitized speech is terrifically costly in terms of disk space).
Even with limited means, however, it is possible to do good
work instead of bad. Unlike the designers behind Free D.C!, the
makers of The Jazz Singer chose their moments of recorded
sound with great care: the film uses sound only when someone
sings and in one key dialogue scene, and then uses it for the
duration of the scene. Imagine how much more mystified an
audience would be if, instead, the sound would cut out right in
the middle of some of Jolson's songs. This is the equivalent of
what happens in Free D.C!.
As a result of the clumsy way that the digitized audio is mixed
into the game, Free D.C! feels patchy and poorly thought out.
Cineplay does have available a three-disk speech expansion
module, for an extra twenty dollars, which more than doubles the
amount of speech in the game; this is a good investment for
players whose systems have enough memory to support it. However, twice as much speech is not all that was needed — a logical, coherent distribution of speech throughout the game was
needed as well.
The expansion module improves matters but it certainly does
not eliminate the problem. Even with the added speech, many
conversations still cut in and out with all the grace of a car radio
passing under a bridge. One can never predict whether a given
conversation will be digitized or not, so one has high expectations for all of them and is frequently disappointed.
The designers' failure in this regard is particularly disturbing in
light of the fact that conversation is the player's main activity in
the game. One almost wants to say that if Cineplay couldn't
digitize all the speech in the game it shouldn't have digitized any,
because one comes away from Free D.C! remembering how
much of the game was not digitized instead of how much was.

Artistic Freedom
It is a pity that the audio component of Free D.C! is so unsatisfying overall because the individual pieces of it are quite well
done. Though Wattson's voice is a typical, grating, robotic earkiller, the other characters' voices are all well cast and well performed — unlike, for instance, the mostly wooden line readings in
Sierra's CD-ROM version of King's Quest V or some of the tinnier voices in Martian Memorandum.
The actors and actresses whose likenesses are used for the
visuals are well chosen, too. Particularly happy surprises are
Avery Zedd himself, played by the improbably handsome Kellyn
Beck, and Dr. Valerion (Tom McGranahan), whose voice and features recall Laurence Olivier in his later years. The fact that Sir
Larry wouldn't have been caught dead in a picture like Free D.C!
is beside the point.
McGranahan brings a much appreciated touch of class to the
project. The computer graphics that are used for the robots, the
scenery and most of the character animation are strong, evoking
well the atmosphere of the ruined city. The game's backgrounds
are also good, though not at the level of the painted backgrounds employed by Sierra and Lucasfilm, for example. The
use of famous buildings for settings adds a nice touch of horror,
not unlike the use of the Statue of Liberty in Planet of the Apes.
Where the game is the weakest is where it counts most, in the

writing. Even the erratic sound would be forgivable if the writing were good — after all, one
could always turn the sound off and just read
the text off the screen. Unfortunately, the writing is not good, for all the reasons mentioned
above and quite a few more.
The wisecracks are so silly that even the normal audience for that sort of thing — young
kids — will wince at them. So, any laughs the
game may have earned turn out to have been
at its own expense.
The story is hamstrung by too many things that make no
sense, starting with its premise: if the robots feel threatened by
one of the seven humans, why don't they just kill all seven and
thaw seven new ones? After all, these robots have neither the
moral restraint expected of human beings nor the programming
of one of Isaac Asimov's robots, who are forbidden to harm
humans. This they could do from a distance, at no risk of being
disabled, by simply destroying the entire zoo. (Surely the robots
feel no sentimental attachment to the old human monuments,
especially given that they don't even remember their correct
names.) A more explicit premise would have been welcome.
To the writers' credit, however, the game does offer a good
deal of genuine interactivity. One gets to make choices that really do affect the outcome of an encounter, and there are many
such outcomes to explore. The game has three different endings
for players to sample, as well as numerous "hidden" scenes for interested players to ferret out by trying new combinations of
honesty, dishonesty and sassiness in the various conversations.
The key word here, however, is "interested" — all the variations
in the world don't matter if the player has to wade through a
preposterous plot, weary cliches and bad jokes to get to them.
Not every scene is badly written, of course, but enough are that
the likelihood of most garners sticking with Free D.C! to the end,
much less replaying it to try all the different choices, is extremely
low.
The irony in all of this is that the game claims its writing as one
of its strong features — the back of the box touts an "action-packed story by a professional screenwriter." The professional in question seems to be one Ryan Holznagel, since the other two
credited scripters are the game's designers. While Mr. Holznagel
may be a pro, the kindest thing one can say on his behalf is that
Free D.C! probably doesn't represent his best work. One hopes it
doesn't, in any event.
Cineplay would have done better to go to a writer with a solid
background in interactive fiction and, though it is too late to do
so now, they should keep this in mind for future projects. When
one imagines what a Steve Meretzky or a Brian Moriarty might
have done with this game's world, its premise and Cineplay's perfectly good game engine, one almost wants to weep for the opportunity lost.
The goal of creating new types of interactive movies is a good
one, but in doing so a game company must always keep in mind
the more immediate goal of entertaining the customer.
It is fine to push the edge of the envelope; it is not fine to bore
the hand that feeds you. Yet, Free D.C! is less than stimulating. It
is also slow (screens take forever to load even on a fast
machine), thoughtlessly designed (one is not allowed to title
one's Save Game files), and formulaic ("find the pieces to build
the magic device" is one of the oldest plots in the adventure
game book). It claims to be an epic but it takes place on a fairly
small map and features fewer than a dozen characters. It claims
to be cinematic but has no "camera angles" more dramatic than
a simple medium-range two-shot. It claims to be an adventure
but, aside from a few mild action sequences, it's all talk.
Cineplay can do better than this — and almost certainly will.
Free D.C! is ambitious, well-intentioned and promising, but it is
also a failure. This writer doubts their second release will be.

Sneak Preview

S

neak Previews are not designed
to be reviews. They are feature
articles based on "works in
progress" that CGW's editors have
deemed worthy of early coverage.
These articles are not intended to provide the "final word" on a product,
since we expect to publish appropriate
review coverage when the game is
completely finished. Sneak Previews
are designed to inform our readers
about upcoming games and generate
excitement about the "state of the art"
of computer game design in general.

order they please and the options which
are open to them will be based on what
they have already accomplished (i.e.
their Fame rating).
The designers state unequivocally that
they chose medieval Germany as the setting for this first Microprose venture into
authentic role-playing because it was a

Early Explorations
by Johnny

The ominous blue-gray-black skies of a
Tintoretto storm scene provide an illuminated border for the action menu as
the party pauses on the outskirts of a
medieval city. In other portions of the
game, brooding brown shades color the
black ink of a woodcut-style sketch in
the fashion of Albrecht Direr or Hans Holbein in order to conjure the lurking
menace of the real stories anthologized
by the Brothers Grimm in Die deutsche
Heldensage ("The German Heroic Tale")
and Deutsche Mythologie ("German
Mythology"). Character screens reveal
one's player-characters with realistic
arms and armor such as one might see
displayed in a museum. Distinctive
figures strike, thrust, parry, fire and throw
in real-time action sequences that can be
interrupted for player input at any time.
Rich red splatters of raubritter blood
adorn the results screen after certain
major battles are completed and the oppressed populace rescued from the robber knights' villainy.
Indeed, Darklands is designed for
those mature and sophisticated gamers
who are tired of fantasy cliches, ahistorical generalizations and linear plots. Further, as the title of this sneak preview
("Thus Spake the Heroic Tale") implies,
it may well be the first CRPG sufficiently
grounded in time and space to allow the
gamer to write his/her own Heldensage.

Grimm Reality
In Darklands, Arnold Hendrick and
Sandy Petersen have managed to weave
history, superstition, religion, role-playing
and the fantastic into a mesmerizing mix
that offers an impressive arena for legendbuilding. Indeed, fame (as the old
television series proclaimed) is the name
of the game and parties will strive to
raise their reputation (as measured by a
cumulative numerical score) from the dismal lowlands of the "Unknown" to the
Olympian heights associated with "Legendary Heroes." The game world is so carefully constructed that parties can wander
from city and hamlet to castle in any

violent period, a superstitious period and
a mysterious period. These are elements
which raise Darklands above the
average CRPG. The violence allows the
party to bolster their reputation at the expense of historical raubritter (robber
knights) and ahistorical dragons. The superstition allows the party to be hounded
by the "Wild Hunt" and encounter the
minions of hell. The mystery surrounding
pre-scientific thought and pre-Reformation Catholic hagiolatry (worship of
saints) permits the game to use a magic
system based on both alchemy and
religion. In short, Darklands offers plenty
of surprises, even to the most experienced gamer. It allows the designers
to gently educate the gamer (with regard
to this little-known era) without having to
pontificate (with regard to particular historical perspectives). It allows garners to
experience the fantastic without having
to suspend disbelief with regard to reality.

tinter Wer? ("Under
Whom?")
Underlying any role-playing game, of
course, is the character generation
process. Darklands' character generation system shows a considerable
amount of forethought. It allows one to
choose name and sex (even though the
female adventurers of the era could, because of the male dominance of the
period, generally be categorized as
women who travelled disguised as men),
family background (one of six different
social levels from peasant to noble,
where the background determines one's
attributes and minor skills, as well as the
experience points with which one will purchase additional attributes and skill improvements) and occupation (one's job
prior to adventuring on the quest which,
in turn, determines the skills in which the
character will be most proficient).

Sneak Preview

L. Wilson

After one chooses the character's background, the program generates the number of childhood experience points (EPs)
available to the character. With these
points, the player can change the basic
personal attributes: endurance, strength,
agility, perception, intelligence, charisma
and divine favor. The latter is, perhaps,
the most interesting addition to the standard attributes, since it forms a type of
heavenly bank account from which the
character can withdraw points to increase the chance of having his/her
prayers answered.
Next, the player chooses the occupation for the character, and this generates
the EPs appropriate to a five-year span
of laboring at said occupation. With
these points, the player can add to the
percentage chance of success in:
weapons skills for edged, impact, flail,
polearm, thrown, bow and missile
(crossbows and guns) weapons; bodies
of knowledge, including religious training,

virtue, common speech, Latin, reading
and writing, healing, artifice (primitive
mechanical engineering) and survival
skills (stealth, streetwise, riding and woodwise). If one is not happy with the way
the character is developing, one can
choose another occupation (at the cost
of another five years of labor) and

proceed to adjust the skills accordingly.
Of course, some garners are always
tempted to use the strategy of continuing
to enlist in various occupations until they
create incredible characters, but the program has a built-in aging process (somewhat like the saving rolls required of
aging characters in the original Traveller
people and paper rules) if one allows
his/her adventurers to age too much.

Durer Cel
Then, once all the characters have been
created and equipped, it is time to adventure. The adventuring party is formed
and the quest begins. Much of the narrative comes to the player via a series of
screens that look, as described in the introductory paragraph of this preview, like
woodcuts which have been doctored with
light colors analogous to Andrew Wyeth
paintings (when the action is taking
place in the daytime or the mood is
bright); somber browns (when it is get-

ting toward evening or the mood somberly reflects places and persons of power
or nearing threats); a Tintoretto palette
(when it is actually night or the party is
actually encountering a threat) and a
bright orange wash (when sunrise is
near).
When the adventurers are confronted
with options (and this game features more options than any
other in this writer's memory),
these "illuminated" screens
present a menu of activities. For
example, if the party is confronted by wolves growling in the
brush, they can choose to: use
the woodwise skill of one the
members to scare the wolves
away; stand and fight the wolves
or, in the best Monty Python tradition, run away. If, on the other
hand, one of the members of the
party has divine favor with a
patron saint of woodlore, a new
option allows the party to appeal
to a saint for assistance. One
might elect to choose this option
as opposed to overt activity.
Naturally, encounters with
people (NPCs) have longer lists
of options, because encounters
with people tend to be more complex than those with animals or
monsters. The party can attempt
to bribe some, talk their way glibly out of certain situations, use an
alchemical potion to distract the
potential opposition and sneak
away, run away, pay the occasional fine, fight or surrender.
Whatever the decision, it takes
the party to the next level of interaction.
If one wants to fight (or is forced to
fight as a result of failing at one of the
other options with a bad charisma role or
something), the screen shifts to a colorful
tactical screen wherein combat takes
place in real time. Unlike some CRPGs in
which combat takes place in real time,
however, this one allows the player to interrupt the action and give commands to
individual characters at any time. So, it is
possible to have some characters
prepare an alchemical potion to throw at
the oncoming enemies, another firing missile weapons and one or two standing in
the first rank, ready to assault the enemy
hand-to-hand. In this way, attacks can be
optimized, unlike CRPGs in which realtime combat benefits the computer-controlled opponents, but not the player characters (i.e. the computer can "think"
faster than the player and doesn't have
to cope with an interface).

Sneak Preview

Wouldn't It Be Magic?
The alchemical system is interesting in
its own right. Characters must continually
be on the look-out for alchemical components and must take an occasional
risk in order to assemble potions for later
use. Each character has his (or her) own
alchemical book with the potions that he
can concoct and the normal formula for
mixing said potion. If the character does
not have the necessary components, it is
possible to change the formula and substitute, as well as to speed up or slow
down production (at a heightened or lessened risk). One is given a percentage
chance of success and, if the player
wishes to assign the character to the
task, tries to accomplish the deed. If successful, the potion is added to the character's inventory.
With the religious equivalent to magic,
hagiolatry, each character goes to
various monasteries in the course of
his/her travels and learns about saints.
As they incur the favor of the saints, they
will be able to invoke the saint's name in
tricky situations. One can flash the character's saint inventory on the screen and

receive a rundown on the powers/influence of a given saint, as well as the
likelihood of that given saint answering
the party's prayers. It is fascinating just
to learn about these saints and read the
brief descriptions. Some are familiar,
such as the legend of St. Polycarp, the
saint who was sentenced to death by fire,
but was immune enough to flame that he
was killed with a spear. Hence, praying
to Polycarp may grant immunity to flame
for the party for a brief period of time.
Some of the saints are vital in solving the
various supernatural conundrums to be
faced in the game, while others offer fascinating tidbits.

Darklands, Darklands U ber
Alles
Where Darklands really shines is in the
way it handles the story/quests. There is
a major quest that leads to a major encounter. This is not merely a "Kill the evil
Foozle" quest, however. It is a story that
unfolds in the course of exploration, observation and discovery. In the meantime, the party can build its reputation by
taking on mercenary contracts, rescuing
townships from dragons, getting involved

in political strife, recovering relics and
serving powerful leaders. The story is integrated into the actual history of the era,
but is not tied so strictly to history that it
cannot allow one's imagination to soar.
This overriding cycle of events is, of
course, that which gives the game its
name, Darklands. The goal of the party,
of course, is to bring the dawning of a
new day upon the land by their heroic
deeds.
With the entire map of medieval Germany at the player's disposal, it should
be easy to find wrongs to be righted, innocents to be rescued and villains to foil,
no matter what portion of the game the
player is exploring. The point is, players
will write their own stories in Darklands.
It won't matter to many players whether
they find the game's "Foozle" or not.
What Hendrick and Petersen have done
is create a world and a system within
which computer garners can adventure,
rather than providing one quest to be
solved. For the first time, this writer really
believes that people will continue to play
this game after it is won. The world is
that palpable and that satisfying.

Review

ike those alive at the time of the assassination of John F.
Kennedy, most people over the age of sixteen can tell you
exactly what they were doing on January 28, 1986 when
they first heard news of the Challenger disaster. The space shut
tle has in many ways touched the lives of most people. As only
the latest step in our continuing march toward the heavens, the
space shuttle represents a major engineering feat, a re-usable
spacecraft designed to ferry cargo into orbit and return to earth,
landing like an airplane. This vehicle will also provide the means
by which a future space station can be built.

Shuttle off from L
Vandenberg
Virgin's

Shuttle

by Stanley Trevena

Now, for those of us who long to tear loose of our ties to this
earth, even if only in a simulated fashion, there is Shuttle from
Virgin Games. Shuttle is a technical feat in its own right. When
a prospective buyer lifts the box from the shelf, he or she is
greeted with side-by-side graphics, real and simulated, to compare the game to the actual vehicle in action. These are the
same pictures that have graced our television screens for the
past decade, and they indicate the attention to detail that is
pronounced throughout this product.
Shuttle is a total systems simulation. Every operation, button,
gauge, action, environment and detail on the shuttle is present.
The entire feel of a shuttle mission from roll-out to landing (at
Kennedy Space Center or Vandenberg Air Force Base) is here in
painstakingly detailed programming. It is quite amazing that the
programmers were able to pull off a simulation of this scope and
complexity for the potential hardware limits that they allowed for.
The program will run on any machine that is at least 12MHz or
greater in speed equipped with at least a CGA monitor, 503K of
memory, 1.4MB of hard disk space and a keyboard. A mouse is
highly recommended, if not required, in this reviewer's opinion,
and will be assumed throughout this review.

Mission Control

TITLE:
Shuttle
SYSTEM:
IBM
PRICE:
$59.99
PROTECTION: None
DEVELOPER:
Vektor Graphix
DESIGNERS:
Ian Martin, Andy Craven, James Fisher,
Dominic Robinson and Graeme Baird
PUBLISHER:
Virgin Games
Irvine, CA

Shuttle is well designed, and some components should become industry standards in future simulations of any kind. There
is no grand tutorial included in the Shuttle manual. There is a
two-page quick-start guide that gives the player only the most
basic information needed to get the program up and running.
What is included is a most ingenious form of tutorial in the help
levels function. While setting up a mission, the player can select
from five levels of built-in help. At the highest level of help, FULLON AUTO, the program will take the player directly to the button
or switch that needs attention at Mission Control's request and
wait for the player to effect the change required before progressing to the next input location. All orders are received via a teleprinter located on board the shuttle directly linked to Mission Con
trol. This printer will be the only direction to the player in FULL
MANUAL control. At this limited help level, the player will have
to know the location and function of all controls and have some
experience with the simulator under his or her belt to succeed.
The controls interface will satisfy almost any player. If a Windows-type interface is one's forte, Shuttle will cater to this with a
pop-up user interface with pull-down, multi-level menus when
both mouse buttons are clicked. If keyboard control sequences
are more to the player's liking, there are logical mnemonic sequences that will trigger the desired result.
Mission start and time features are also flexible in Shuttle. Any
mission can be started from VAB roll-out, launch pad, in orbit, or
landing. This will allow a player to skip to the desired phase of a
mission without drudging through familiar territory. Two other
tools are provided to give the player greater control over the
simulation environment: time skip and time advance. Time skip
will allow the player to go directly to a T+ or T- time index. Time

Review

advance will allow the player to set a
time to advance to at the press of a key.
Fortunately, the simulation stops when
player input is needed during the time advance. All required functions are automatically performed for the player in a time
skip sequence.
There are some aspects of the game interface, however, that are downright annoying. For instance, on different
machines, the amount of time one needs
to press a key may vary greatly for it to
register with the program. On this
reviewer's fast 33MHz '386, a keypress of
a second or more was often required in
order to switch views. Another poorly executed interface element is the attempt at being Windows-like,
but not quite. When changing the save log name, a dialog box is
displayed. Clicking on the text input box for file name will not
highlight the existing name and erase it if the player starts
typing. If the player wishes to type a new name, he will have to
manually erase the existing one completely with long keypresses.

Shuttle Bug ("Work Arounds")
There are twelve historical missions provided in the current
release of Shuttle. Naturally, the game was designed to be
played sequentially, with the player starting with the first test
flight and moving forward in complexity. The player cannot
progress to the next mission until the prior mission is successfully completed. However, due to some bugs at the time of this
review (detailed later), Virgin has included a command line
switch to give instant access to all missions. When starting Shuttle, adding /ALL will activate this feature. Those who have other
problems can access Virgin's BBS for bug fixes and lively dialog
concerning Shuttle at (714) 562-5030.
The most important bug is with the Ku-band antenna deployment and storage. At any time before T+53 the player should
time skip to T+54 to have the computer deploy the Ku-band antenna. The same is true after closing the bay doors in preparation for landing: time skip ahead by one minute after declaring
landing comms in order to have the computer stow the Ku-band
antenna properly.

Manual Control (Documentation)
If there is any one thing that stands out in this simulation as
lacking, it is the manual. The manual seems to have no logical
flow or order to it. Some aspects of the game that clearly need

detailed information are either sparse or
non-existent, while other systems and procedures that are not utilized in the simulation have paragraphs devoted to them.
This is equally true for instrumentation
and controls in the cockpit. While it is
true that all buttons and gauges are
present in the simulation, in some cases
they may be redundant systems (with
only one primary system functional) or
have no function at all. This will prove
confusing for most green pilots of the
shuttle and can be very frustrating when
flying in modes above FULL-ON AUTO.
Also included in the box is a mission
guide that gives sometimes-brief overviews of the 12 missions and a listing of keyboard commands.
The other item included in the box is a full-size poster of all the
panels in the shuttle. While it may look impressive on the wall
when friends come over, it is of little use while playing unless the
player has a very large desk or extremely good eyes to view it
from a distance if hanging on a wall. This reviewer would have
much preferred a small book with the separate panels illustrated
in a usable size and format. [Ed: In the CGW offices, we spread
the poster out on the floor while "flying" the shuttle.]

Pilot Program (Game Play)
One of the first skills a new pilot will need to acquire is the
capacity for maneuvering the shuttle and manned maneuvering
unit in three dimensions. By disabling the digital auto-pilot, the
player can control the roll, pitch, yaw and transitional movement
of the vehicle. When starting in orbit, the shuttle is always rotating on at least one axis. Manual maneuvering is required on orbital re-entry. It can become quite difficult to get an object under
control when it is rotating on several axes. This will be especially
helpful when trying to get the MMU back into the shuttle payload
bay or maneuvering the shuttle away from the Hubble telescope.
While in orbit, the player is sometimes told to "enjoy the view."
However, views from orbit and surface detail are lacking in this
simulation. This reviewer could live with no noticeable scenery
on final approach for a landing, but the views of the earth from
space are unimpressive. A random green patch on a sea of blue
does not make for a breathtaking view. A little more detail in the
form of storm systems, continental outlines, areas of ice, and
other landmarks viewable from orbit would have provided much
more enjoyment and have, as a result, kept this reviewer's finger
off the time advance key.

Space Taste (Conclusion)
The debate between realism and gameplay
rages on in almost every corner of the
gaming industry. It is a lively topic often discussed on most of the major on-line services. In most cases, realism is sacrificed in
the name of gameplay. With Shuttle, both
sides win. With the range of options available
to the player, Shuttle can be as easy or complex as the player wishes to make it. Players
with an interest in space and hard-core
simulation fans alike will blast off into orbit
with this new simulation from Virgin. Shuttle has launched a new space race in the
simulation game derby and is sure to be
emulated in future simulation releases.

Review

O

easiest level, Beginner, allows even the most reluctant joystick
jockey to be successful. This is because it stops the action whenever the passing mode is initiated and allows the user to cycle
through the available receivers. Once the pass is thrown, all activity resumes and a yellow reception circle indicates where the
pass will land. The receiver will move to this circle automatically.
In the Intermediate mode, the action is also frozen, but the
gamer is forced to control the receivers once the pass has been
thrown.
Opening Kickoff
The Advanced mode is, in this reviewer's opinion, the most enMike Ditka Ultimate Football (Ditka) from Accolade is the
joyable of the four modes. Quarterback decisions have to be
latest entry in the
made in real time,
crowded field of
while the receivers
graphic football
act as they do in the
TITLE:
Mike Ditka Ultimate Football
games. According to
Beginner mode.
SYSTEM:
IBM
producer Sam NelNow, the ability of a
1-2
B PLAYERS:
PRICE:
$54.95 (IBM),
son, "Mike Ditka Ulquarterback
to look
PROTECTION: Code-Wheel Look-Up
timate Football is
at more than one
DESIGNER:
Gene Smith
PUBLISHER:
Accolade
targeted to people
receiver is fully underSan lose, CA
who love football
stood. Facing a
and want an actioncorner or safety blitz,
packed game rich in
the gamer simply will
realism, playability,
not have sufficient
graphics, options
time to look at multiand statistics — in
ple receivers. So
that order." The
passing to the first
championship
open receiver is an
caliber of Ditka is
absolute must.
testament to the
The Pro mode gives
designer's specific
the real-time action
goals and the skill
of the Advanced difwith which these
ficulty level with the
were implemented.
type of receiver control found in the InterFirst and Ten
mediate level. This
Ditka gives the
mode is strictly for
player a number of
serious joystick jocks.
options. These inInterestingly
Accolade's Mike Ditka Ultimate Football enough,
clude single game,
unlike most
full season and
football
games,
in
by
Wallace
Poulter
playoff only. All 28
which running is inprofessional teams
finitely easier than passing, this reviewer found the opposite true
are available to the player. However, since neither the NFL nor
in Ditka. While it is possible to operate a run-oriented offense,
the Players' Association has been licensed for the product, only
the
run-and-shoot offense of Detroit, Houston, Atlanta and Bufcity names and fictitious player names are used. In a stat-based
falo affords more excitement and opportunity to move the ball.
game, of course, this would be a decisive drawback. Since this
The TE post option from the run-and-shoot with a dump into the
game's primary focus is on playability, however, this causes no
flat is particularly difficult to defend against.
problems.
ne minute and thirty-four seconds to go in this championship game. Detroit trails New York 35-30. The ball
is on New York's eight-yard line. Second and seven;
Detroit is in shotgun formation. The snap is back to quarterback Todd Drew. New York has a corner blitz called. Drew, in
desperation, dumps the ball into the right flat to running
back Bill Strange. There's no one near him — touchdown
Detroit!

The single-game option allows one to practice plays and
strategies before taking on a full season or playoff schedule. Keyboard, joystick and mouse are supported. This reviewer found
the joystick the easiest option, even with the button instructions
reversed on the instruction card. Options include playing or
coaching, fatigue, injuries, penalties, fumbles and one of four
passing levels.
A seventeen-week schedule is available under the season option. User ease is provided with the automatic play ability.
Second and Seven

The interface is very smooth and intuitive. It allows players to
choose from the various offensive schemes available (run and
shoot, shotgun, pro set, single wing and others). Also, the four different levels of passing provide almost four different games. The

Great Hit

Defense plays an important role in football and the defense in
is no exception. Six basic defenses, 3-4, 4-3, nickel, etc.,
are provided. Within these are four variations: blitz, medium pass
defense, long pass defense and man-to-man coverage. After
much experimentation, this reviewer recommends a basic 6-2-3
defense with medium coverage as the best combination. This allows garners to take control of the strong safety and either clog
up the middle in anticipation of the run or double-team a wide
receiver. The computer opponent has an occasional fondness for
the reverse. A 6-2-3 will normally stop this tactic cold. A bootleg,
however, is a completely different matter.
Defense takes a while to learn. This is one of the more realistic
aspects of the product. If one plays behind the receiver, one will
give up far too many completions. However, an aggressive
Ditka

Review

defense that fronts the receiver will guarantee plenty of opportunities to break up passes. Getting the defender within the yellow reception circle offers the possibility of an interception. Of
course there is a disadvantage. Garners who are too aggressive
may find that the occasional completion that takes place over
the defending back's head can open up considerable real estate
(and plenty of touchdowns) for the offense.

Third and Two
The Construction Set allows a complete fantasy league to be
set up. Anything from a serious league to a very silly league can
be formed. There's something appealing about a blitzing lineback
er called Scrooge. Player attributes and team colors can also be
modified. This reviewer has noted a number of team files that
have already begun appearing on GEnie and other on-line services.
Within the Construction Set, the Playbook continues the Accolade tradition of allowing an expansion of the basic product.
Many an armchair quarterback has expressed the confident
belief that he could design a winning offense. Ditka provides this
opportunity. Either an existing play can be modified or a play
can be designed from scratch. This reviewer found success with
such diverse plays as a "radical" student body right, and the
"mega" Hail Mary.

Fummmmmbbbbbble
Interestingly enough, it is Ditka's biggest strength that also
shows its weakness. Offense puts fans in the seats, but defense

wins championships. After this reviewer had a very enjoyable
time crafting offensive plays using the Playbook, it was the lack
of a Defensive Playbook which was most striking.

Fourth and Goal
Playoff mode allows a team to forgo the 17-game season and
begin play at the start of the league playoffs. This style of play is
particularly useful for those, like this reviewer, who want the immediate challenge of winning it all. The reward for winning the
championship is, as one would expect, a nicely portrayed trophy
enhancing the screen.

Trick Play (To Cheat or Not To Cheat)
All great game plans need gadget plays. Football lore is filled
with the "Statue of liberty" and others. Not to be outdone, Ditka
includes a trick punt play. Once a player receives a punt from
the opposition, it is actually possible to activate the passing
mode and heave the ball back up the field (forward lateral?).
Strangely enough, the computer will award the receiving team
with a first-and-ten at the kicking team's original line of scrimmage! It is amusing and very useful for those who are willing to
go to any lengths to win.

Touchdown
Mike Ditka Ultimate Football is a "Smash Mouth" entrant into
the field. Its blend of quality graphics, playability and fun combines to form a superior product. Ultimately (pun intended), like
all quality products, it leaves this reviewer wanting more.

Review

I Must Go down to the Sea, Again
TITLE:
Uncharted Waters
SYSTEM:
IBM, Macintosh, Amiga
PRICE:
$59.95
PROTECTION: None
PUBLISHER:
Koei Corporation
Burlingame, CA

Koei's Uncharted Waters
by Dave Arneson

lthough

the title of this article may be anachronistic, it effectively communicates that near-universal lure of the sea
to men of vision, adventure and romance prior to the age
of aviation. The sea was the passage to exotic lands, strange
sights and fabulous riches. It is no wonder that so many grand
tales begin with a young boy stowing away at sea. In Koei's Uncharted Waters, the Japanese publisher of strategy games attempts to resurrect that era of romance and adventure.

A

As a game of seafaring adventure, the game begins fairly well.
The sailing mechanics are intriguing with variations for an individual ship's rigging, wind, current, etc. So, it is realistic enough
to allow player captains to go out and find the great trade wind
"highways" and major currents. This is excellent, but there is a
problem in that there are no annual or global weather patterns.
Thus, a significant amount of historical and realistic challenge is
missing. There is no hurricane season in the Caribbean and it is
a simple matter to sail through the Northeast Passage in the
dead of winter.

Uncharted History: What Year Is It?
The game's documentation says it starts in 1500 and goes to
1520. Nevertheless, the colonies and ports that one finds do not
correspond with this. Indeed, the layout matches no particular
time in history, with the possible exception of a generic date in
the mid-1500s. Yet, even that is pretty loose. One wonders, for example, why Oslo is a major European port, while Stockholm
isn't? Why are there huge islands in the oceans that match no
known ones? (Although one of the islands did have a treasure
buried on it, most of them had nothing of value but water.)
The geography of the game is even worse. Majorica can be
found on the east coast of Sicily where, in reality, Syracuse
should be found (instead of just off the southeast coast of
Spain). This would be very understandable if the Ports moved randomly from game to game, but they do not. It simply reflects
geography bad enough to be presented by Leonard Pinth Garnell
on the old Saturday Night Live sketch.

Captain's Log (Any Port of Call)
Perhaps the greatest failing of Uncharted Waters is its repetitive nature. One quickly establishes a pattern upon entering any
port that will hardly ever need to be varied: I. Enter Port; 2. Restock Supplies; 3. Check Market and Sell Goods (if the prices
are right); 4. Check Guild and Sell or Buy Artifacts (as needed);
5. Check Inn (See how much is needed to buy up the place!); 6.
Check Pub (Find New Mates, Buy Drinks, Gossip, Buy More
Drinks, Gossip Some More, Recruit Men [if needed]); 7. Buy
Goods (if the prices are right) and 8. Save Game and Sail. Those
who are looking for variety and surprises should weigh anchor
and sail for a different game.

Trade Winds
Fortunately, Uncharted Waters executes the trading
mechanism quite well. A good initial voyage for player captains
to chart is to take a cargo of sugar and assorted goods to Oslo.
It is a good run that allows one to stop at London to get wool
and Antwerp to get porcelain. Then one sails back to Lisbon and

proceeds to repeat the trip as
needed. Another good trade
windfall is the Majorica (buy grain,
sell wool), Pisa (sell grain, buy
artwork), Naples (sell artwork, buy
wool) run. A variation of the latter
is to buy porcelain in Venice to sell
in Majorica or buy artwork in Istanbul to sell in Naples. There is also
a minor market in Trezibolini (east
side of the Black Sea) and
Alexandria (due south of Istanbul).
The bonanzas of trade are either the coral from Santo Domingo
or the gold of Panama. One cannot get into and out of Panama
successfully, however, until reaching high level with lucky dragon
figureheads on all of one's ships. Without these figureheads,
one's merchant flotillas will be caught in the Sargasso Sea upon
every attempted egress from Panama. With the figureheads, the
Sargasso Sea will never cause a problem.
For those who have reached this lofty level of merchantdom,
the best trade goods to take to the New World are weapons. The
weapons/coral trade is very lucrative and should allow player
merchants to refit their ships with lucky figureheads after a single
voyage.
The only thing better is when the player is tapped for a mission from the King of Portugal with coral as the goal. Then it is
advisable to sail in galleons and carracks, because one will want
to haul plenty back! Sharp player merchants will buy used ships
for the first trips and not worry about commanding those big
crews quite yet!
Once a player has returned to the Old World with plenty of
gold, his/her finances will be assured. Then it is possible to
return to Europe and buy cities. Investing 120,000 gold in each
port (60,000 in the market and 60,000 in the shipyards) should
enable one to own majority interest in these port cities. So, after
each gold run, it should be feasible to buy at least three ports.
The King will be at his most approbative with regard to the
player upon such purchases.

Plying One's Trade
As in any free-market system, selling more of the same goods
into a market reduces its value. Conversely, purchasing a significant amount of the same item causes the price to rise. Oddly
enough, however, all prices go up some, no matter what item is
being purchased. Also, trade varies in a given port with its value
based on foreign investment, so there are external factors to the
market, as well as internal ones. Frankly, the trading mechanics
almost could have been a great game in themselves. Instead,
this portion of the game serves as only a nice complement to a
game which needs more action and atmosphere.

Ugh, Captain, My Captain
One major detraction from the game's playability is the fact
that the non-player characters are very much one-dimensional.
There seems to be no need for more than five captains since

Review

none of them will ever die. As long as
the player makes sure that their loyalty
has been purchased during the "distribute" phase, one will never have to
pay any attention to them. One does
have to make sure that the captains
have good sailing skills, but this happens
virtually automatically, since one is constantly sailing all over Europe in order to
sell and trade one's goods. Compared to
other Koei games, in which the nonplayer characters were running around
creating all sorts of mischief, the Uncharted Waters NPCs are a poor imitation.

it is possible to court the Princess' favor
and set sail on a short trading voyage or
two. The reason for the voyages is that
one will not (usually) get another mission
right away. One or two stops later, one
can expect to be summoned again. At
that point, one should drop everything
and return to the King. The player will
find that pirates, and others, are taking
quite an interest in his/her activities. So,
expect attacks from that point on.
Players will find themselves on military
missions rather than trading voyages, so
it will be advisable to bring gold and men
rather than sugar!

Mission in Portugal

Oddities

One important NPC that bright player captains will not ignore is
the King of Portugal. To gain new titles from the King of Portugal, one must willingly undertake missions and complete them.
Expeditious completion of the missions offers additional profits
and one can even reach the point from which it is possible to
court the Princess. So, how does one find out about these missions? Remember the section about the "Captain's Log?" One
has to visit the local pubs. There, the player will have to buy
drinks and gossip. (Oh, game, where is thy sting?) One should
try both options at least twice if sufficient gold is available. Many
times, there will be no mission, but some valuable information
about markets will be gained. The market information is generally accurate, but it may not be useful. After all, if one is in
Majorica, one already knows that grain is a good deal there.
Nevertheless, when someone wants to talk with the player captain, it is advisable to talk right then! One should not "pass go"
or make more than one stop en route. If one does not drop everything and check matters out immediately, it is all too likely that
one will end up sailing to distant ports only to discover that someone located in a port from which the player has just sailed wants
to talk with him/her!
Another problem with the mission is that the man who wants
one to undertake said quest is often the trader at the market
square. He tends to offer one the mission before one has a
chance to unload one's cargo. Then it is not possible to return
there and sell goods until after the mission is completed. Otherwise, the player loses the mission!
Some missions can be awkward as well, such as when the King
of Portugal asks one to deliver messages to the King of Spain or
the Sultan. If one has been going after their ships, they are likely
to make one wait an extraordinarily long time before it is possible to deliver that note. To avoid this potential problem, one
should not attack the ships of either country (unless they attack
first) until after the notes have been handed over.
The final sequence of missions are the ones in which the King
of Portugal is seeking treasures. Once the King explains what he
wants, a wise player will go to the pub. There, the player merchant must question and drink until getting a hint as to who one
needs to see and where he is located. The person is always far
away! An unfortunate aspect of this sequence is that it is impossible to complete missions before one hears about them. This is
especially frustrating with the treasures. Even if one happens to
search the beach in the right place, one will not find the treasure
until going through the drink-and-gossip routine and finding the
person with the map. It just seems like the game should give a
person a chance to find the treasure before finding the map.
Once the player garners the goodies, it is wise to return to Lisbon immediately and give the treasure to the King. At that point,

For some strange reason, buying Genoa will gain the player
great animosity from both Spain and Turkey. This seems very
odd, since buying Valencia does not upset the Spanish, nor are
the Turks upset if one purchases any of their ports. One would
think, at least, that Mecca might open one's fleet up to Turkish attack! Yet only Genoa upsets them. So, since there are plenty of
other ports, why tick them off?
One is also forced into a lot of unnecessary gymnastics in
order to handle one's wealth. This is because one can never
have more than 60,000 in gold in one's possession at one time.
Even when one is selling a cargo, the game will not allow the
player to sell more than 60K of merchandise at a time. This is
especially awkward with gold going for up to 1K a unit and ships
carrying 200-300 such units each. The best way to carry more
gold is to buy a good number of artifacts (limit: one of each type
in possession at one time) and then sell them (unfortunately, at
half what was paid for them) when cash is needed and there
happens to be a Guild present (Guilds are not all that common).
So one must either buy and sell in small quantities or invest the
money in 60K bunches into a port's market or shipbuilding industry. This is bad news because, after the first couple of years,
one literally has too much money. Investing is the only way to
get rid of it once that brand new fleet has been purchased. Why
this limit applies, this reviewer cannot begin to guess.
Another arbitrary limit may be found when one is recruiting
sailors. One is only permitted to spend 1K per recruiting session,
but can have an unlimited number of such sessions at the pub
during one day. When one needs 300 men and can only recruit
them 30-50 at a time, it gets unnecessarily tedious.

Don't Know Much About History
Uncharted Waters simply could have been so much more than
that. Just using some of the old NPC tricks from Koei's other
games would have meant an occasional and entertaining doublecross. As it is, one's captains are disgustingly loyal and faithful
once they have been bought off. Trade is interesting in the early
stages, but once one becomes rich and has bought the minimum
number of ports, what more is there to do? There is none of the
excitement of watching a market crash or hearing of some new
exotic item on which one could conceivably corner the market.
What of exploration? Well, since the world never changes, the excitement of discovery is only available for a little while. Why
didn't Koei emulate the "New World" standard of Dan Bunten's
Seven Cities of Gold where a rich, varied world was newly
minted for every new game session? So, in the final analysis, Uncharted Waters is mildly interesting as it stands. When compared to what it could have been, it is more than mildly disappointing. Someone may yet design the "ultimate" game of 16th
century exploration, but it isn't here yet.

!

Review

J

ames Doohan (Montgomery Scott) has
remarked that he and DeForest Kelly
(Leonard McCoy) agreed to trade lines
during the filming of Star Trek II: The Wrath of
Khan. As Spock lay dying, it was originally
Scotty who was to have warned James Kirk not
to open the protective engineering doors. It
would then have fallen to Dr. McCoy to utter his
trademark show-stopper "He's dead... [Jim]."
Rather than risk shattering the drama of the moment with that familiar and often-lampooned expression, each officer was simply made to give
advice which reflected the other's area of expertise.
During its original run on network television,
1966 to 1969, Star Trek established many such
cliches and plot devices which punctuated and
often characterized its 79 episodes. In the decade which followed,
these cliches became so popular and so instantly recognizable
that one can easily forgive the producers of six major Star Trek
films, and five seasons of an amazingly successful new Star Trek
series, for being cautious when they have referred their audience
back to events that took place in the original series.
Interplay, however, has boldly chosen to return where no man
had previously gone before for Star Trek: 25th Anniversary
(ST: 25A). This eagerly-awaited program embraces the original
series with all its characteristics in a way which attempts to endear it to those who have loved the show for 25 years.
The question raised in Computer Gaming World's preview of
ST: 25A concerned the series' followers, many of whom have ex
pressed outrage at the way various authors, artists and filmmakers have depicted the further voyages of their favorite starship. The answer to exactly how the purists are going to react to
this product will depend on which part of the game is being
played, as well as the individual purist involved and how openminded he or she is willing to be. There should be no question,
however, that this is the most outstanding Star Trek yet
produced for the computer, as well as a good, solid piece of
entertainment from Interplay.
ST: 2.5A is a combination adventure game and space combat
simulation, in which the player controls the actions of Captain
James T. Kirk during the original five-year outing. The program
is divided into seven missions, an arrangement intended to
evoke the episodic format of the television show. (One of these
is presented in two parts, so that one might argue there are actually eight missions.) Each episode opens on the classic
Enterprise bridge. At the expected point, Kirk receives a communication from Starfleet that contains his orders. In most cases,
the starship will arrive at its destination to find one or more
enemies with an attitude problem. A space battle generally follows, though it is possible for Kirk to avoid hostilities through
diplomacy in at least one location.

The space battles are a challenging arcade exercise, but represent that part of the program which is least faithful to Star Trek
drama. After raising shields and arming weapons, the player uses
phasers and photon torpedoes in what amounts to a dogfight in
zero gravity. By using a set of cross-hairs(!) and carefully leading
the target, Kirk needs to score a dozen or more solid hits on the
enemy ship. Torpedoes cause more damage than phasers, but
are more difficult to aim and require more time to reset after
firing. With further infidelity to the starship concept, neither the

Interplay's Star Trek:
by Allen
TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
PRICE:
PROTECTION:
PUBLISHER:

Star Trek: 25th Anniversary
IBM
$59.95
Document look-up
Interplay
Santa Ana, CA

Enterprise nor its enemies are equipped with aft or lateral
weaponry and the player is unable to view the action from any
point of view other than directly forward. Only a "ship position
monitor" — a radar screen in front of the captain's chair gives
the player any idea what is happening in areas not displayed by
the main view screen. The player has the option of expanding
that view screen to the full size of the computer monitor. This
makes targeting the enemy much easier, but does not allow the
player any greater range of vision nor provide access to the
radar screen.
Also on the bridge are top and side views of the Enterprise's exterior, which change color according to which system or section
of the ship has taken damage. The player may briefly interrupt a
battle long enough to instruct Mr. Scott to concentrate his repairs
on a particular system which has been damaged. Normally, Scotty gives shields the highest priority. The player may also switch
the display to monitor damage taken by the enemy vessel instead. Enemies include another Federation starship during some
mock combat maneuvers, a slippery group of pirates called the
Elasi, the familiar Klingon battle cruiser and a Romulan Bird of
Prey complete with cloaking device. The Romulan allows ample
time after it decloaks before it fires, but some alien-eyed players
also claim to have seen that ship even with its cloak in place.
Players may wish to consult with the Enterprise's science officer
during the battle, who always has something to say, although not
necessarily of value.
Possibly due to the budget restrictions of a weekly television
show, battles on Star Trek have always been pictured mainly as
tactical affairs in which the ship's computers were able to lock
on their specified targets before firing. For the Constitution-class
Enterprise to suddenly become as maneuverable as one of the
small fighters in Wing Commander seems extremely unnatural
and will likely arch more than a few pseudo-Vulcan eyebrows. On
the other hand, the battles are well-designed and very much a
satisfying challenge. The three-dimensional view of the enemy
ships as they pass the Enterprise at different angles is particularly impressive.
The Enterprise must survive its battle with the enemy in order
for Kirk to continue his mission. The final condition of the enemy
ship apparently does not affect the mission which follows, nor
does it alter the rating which the player receives at its completion.

That's Harry Mudd to You (Plot)
Following the message from Starfleet, Kirk may access the
Enterprise's computer to seek further information about his mission. Joined by Spock, McCoy and a red-shirted security officer,
Kirk beams to another ship, space station or alien planet. Once

Review

ces. For the game's final battle,
Kirk will need the most adept
crew a high score can buy.

Captain to the Bridge
(Interface Design)

25th Anniversary
Greenberg

there, the game becomes more of a standard graphic adventure.
By manipulating objects, exploring alien devices and interviewing
other characters, the player must find the source of various
problems and, in the tradition of Star Trek, put things to right.
"Demonworld" requires Kirk to stalk some nightmares while
"Hijacked Tug" is a hostage rescue mission. "Love's Labor Jeopardized" is an attempt to control a plague aboard a space station
and "Another Fine Mess" features the return of Harry Mudd. "The
Feathered Serpent" is a two-part episode in which the crew confronts another alien-turned-deity, this one in Klingon space. In
"That Old Devil Moon," the group must find and disarm yet one
more doomsday device. Much has been said about the security
officers ("red shirts," "cannon fodder," "sacrificial lambs") who, in
the series, trotted happily to their doom. Once one of them dies
in ST: 25A, the player may be sure that something has gone
wrong. The game does not quite take the "crew that's expendable" approach used by the television series.
In addition to help from the security officer, Kirk may also call
on Spock or McCoy. Spock, logically, is at his best when a computer needs attention. McCoy, of course, is a doctor... "I'm just a
doctor, damn it!" However, all three will give advice when Kirk
consults them. Often, this leads to some non-interactive conversation between the senior officers that includes some of the entertaining banter which was a favorite part of the television show.
Unfortunately, the remainder of the Enterprise crew has even
less to do in ST 25A than their flesh-and-blood counterparts had
on television.
The puzzles presented become more difficult as the game
progresses and few of them are particularly easy. The stories
themselves are also interesting and require the player to be
familiar with the most commonly known Trek trivia. There are
also several references to Star Trek II: The Wrath of Khan, including a guest appearance by Dr. Carol Marcus, behind whom
looms an unfinished, early-model Genesis Device.
Once a mission is completed, the party returns to the
Enterprise to receive a rating for their mission performance from
Starfleet. The player would be well-advised to replay any mission
for which he or she has not scored at least 90%, as this score will
affect the crew's performance in upcoming space combat sequen-

The interface for these voyages
of the starship Enterprise is, at
times, confusing. For the most
part, however, it works reasonably well. The player first selects an
action such as "use," "look at" or
"walk to," then moves the pointer
to an object, location or person.
Players should remember that
they may use one object on
another, even if both objects are in their inventory. There is very
little typing required and Kirk's statements to other characters
are selected from a menu. The mouse is most strongly recommended for this game, although players using either the mouse
or joystick will still need to keep one hand on the keyboard
during the space battles. Players may use only a keyboard
throughout the game, but will put themselves at a disadvantage,
particularly during the space battles, by doing so.
The sounds and graphics for ST: 25A are unforgettable. The
caricatures of the bridge crew are instantly recognizable and constantly in motion. Kirk glances nervously around when not otherwise busy, while Spock calmly alternates his attention between
his surroundings and his tricorder. The various locations are
wonderfully imaginative and the Enterprise bridge is amazingly
detailed and colorful. Only those tiny, important objects which
are hidden on such complex screens will cause the player some
frustration with the graphics, which support either VGA or EGA
modes.
Players who lack a sound card will be missing out on an outstanding music score which features excerpts from the television
show. The material is enjoyable to hear and its use is timed perfectly. Similarly, the sound effects aboard the Enterprise cannot
but awaken feelings of nostalgia. The program supports most
major sound cards.
ST 25A's manual could have used more attention. Most experienced garners will have little trouble making up for the lack
of instructions; however, the subject matter of this program will
probably attract many who have never before played an adventure game and it would be a loss if they were to walk away discouraged because of this problem. The manual also contains the
game's only copy protection.
ST 25A requires the use of a hard drive, on which it will require eight megabytes of space. A minimum of 10 MHz of speed
is also required. Installation to the drive is a major procedure, the
speed of which very much depends on the type of processor
being used. Owners of 286 machines may have to wait as long
as four hours for the process, while a fast 386 computer will take
about 45 minutes. The real crime here is that the user must sit
by the computer and switch disks throughout that period.

Star Fleet Evaluation
For this Trek-fanatic-turned-reviewer, Star Trek: 25th Anniversary's major shortcoming is that it is over too soon. As of this
writing, the game's developers have no plans for producing further episodes. However, that has yet to stop a Star Trek fan. Pencils out, everyone. It worked 23 years ago.... Save Star Trek —
Write Interplay!

Review

Baseball by the Numbers
Strat-O-Matic Compute Baseball
by Win Rogers

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:

Strat-O-Matic Computer Baseball Version 3.0
IBM
1-2 plus league play
Game: $35.00; Roster disks: $20.00/season
Disks and cards: $32.25/season
PROTECTION: Hidden files on disk
PUBLISHER:
Strat-O-Matic Game Co.
Glen Head, NY 11545
(516) 671-6566

oard games do not usually translate well to the computer.
The more faithful the computer game is to its board-game
roots, the less imaginative it is likely to be in taking advantage of the computer's capabilities. There are computer
games today that do a much better job of creating the excitement received from playing Risk or Monopoly around the
kitchen table than the computer adaptations of those games
(which are probably in the clearance bin of the local software
store).
Strat-O-Matic Computer Baseball Version 3.0 is based on the
world's most popular baseball board game, first released in 1961.
The board game is a comprehensive simulation of the statistical
probabilities underlying the game of baseball. It is less an imitation of real-life baseball than a paper-and-pencil precursor of
today's computer baseball simulations. Each year the company
releases a new set of player cards that translates the previous
year's major league performances into tables to be read when
three dice are thrown to determine the outcome of each
batter-versus-pitcher confrontation. Over the years, subtleties have been
added, so the more time players are willing to invest, the more
precisely the game will reflect lefty-righty differentials, fielding
and baserunning skills and even the effects of playing in different
ballparks.

Version 3.0

("the heart and soul of the StratO-Matic baseball game") and
claims that holding them in one's
hand keeps one more engaged in
the game than one is with other
computer games, but they have
finally given the computer full access to the results tables. It is
equivalent to the day the data
processing people finally threw
away their beloved IBM punch
cards.
This review is geared toward
those unfamiliar with the board
game or with earlier versions of
the computer game. From here
on Strat-O-Matic refers to the
new version of the computer
game. Most readers will simply
want to know how well the new
game plays as a baseball simulation.

The review copy came with player cards and disks for the 1991
and the 1927 seasons. It has an elaborate copy protection
scheme that loads hidden files onto the hard disk that must be
"recalled" (deinstalled) before the game can be moved to a different computer. The game can be played without a hard disk. It
requires 640K of memory, and requires a CGA or EGA card if
one wants to view the optional graphics. The company still sells
its earlier computer version in Apple and Commodore formats. It
plans to continue to issue player disks for those computers but
not to upgrade the game for those machines. While the game
has previously been available only through mail order, the company plans to start distribution through retail outlets.

The company tabulates data from old box scores to prepare historic card sets and knows more about the performance of Pie
Traynor against left-handed and right-handed pitchers in 1927
than anyone else — more than our grandfathers did.

Strat-O-Matic couldn't be more different from a glossy commer
cial product like Bo Jackson Baseball. Many will find the differences refreshing, others annoying. This is the rare computer
game whose box does not have a false bottom to make the
buyer think he is getting more product than he actually is. It has
some audio and video "enhancements," but they are harmless
and removable (see sidebar). They have apparently not spent
any money on market research or graphic design for their packaging, but instead have put their money into the licensing fee to
the Major League Players' Association for current player statistics. "User friendly" is not in Strat-O-Matic's vocabulary. Their
first loyalty is to their board game, and while they give numerous
choices and options, they have not thought out the needs of a
gamer with no knowledge of the board game.

All statistics-based computer baseball games owe a major debt
to Strat-O-Matic Baseball and its chief rival APBA. Previously,
the company was reluctant to take the natural step of adapting
its board game to the computer. Part of the mystique of Strat-OMatic Baseball has always been its difficulty. Running a "Strat"
league requires several people to spend a lot of time playing
games and keeping records. The company seems to have felt
that the computer threatens the integrity of the board game by
making things too easy. The first computer versions of
Strat-O-Matic, dating from 1986 (Apple) and 1987 (IBM), used the computer strictly as a record-keeping tool. One still had to purchase
the card sets and enter appropriate numbers into the computer.

The documentation is dense and wordy, contained in a lengthy
manual and numerous separate sheets — charts, rosters, order
forms, newsletters and so forth. It provides player cards not only
for a basic 27-man roster for each team, but also for dozens of
marginal players. This reviewer had hundreds of cards spread
out over the living room floor before realizing that the cards had
come with two sets of National League East teams and no
American League West teams. Nowhere in the lengthy documentation is there a phone number for the Strat-O-Matic company;
the number shown in the information box was obtained from
Directory Assistance. The company staff was helpful and prompt
in solving the problem and answering questions.

Strat-O-Matic Computer Baseball Version 3.0, new this year,
is the first stand-alone computer version playable without the
player cards. The manual waxes poetic about the player cards

The game offers a bewildering range of configuration and rules
options. The key decision, found on one of the setup menus, is
whether to play "without cards," with "automatic dice" or

Review

"manual dice." The choice reflects the degree to which one
wants to depart from the original board game. Actually, all three
modes can be played with or without cards, because the computer always has direct access to the player data. In "manual
dice" mode, the player rolls real dice and enter the results into
the computer, which then calculates the outcome. "Automatic
dice" mode shows the roll of the dice on-screen. The "without
cards" mode hides the result of the dice roll for a more
transparent simulation of a baseball game. However, there are
still screen messages that remind players of the workings of the
charts and numbers behind the scenes.
The game is played on a no-nonsense screen with the players'
names printed out where they would be on the field along with a
shorthand indication of their fielding capabilities. The line score is
at the top, and there is more information available about batter
and pitcher across the top and in an information window. By toggling through various alternative charts that can be viewed in the
information window, it is possible to obtain an exact readout of
the possibilities for success of bunting, sacrificing and other
strategic choices at any time in the game. The game ignores
balls and strikes and operates in a one-pitch-per-batter mode except in special cases like stolen bases. One hits the return key, a
symbol of the ball heads off in the appropriate direction and a
window opens to announce the result of the play. Two players
can each manage a team, or the computer can manage one or
both teams. At any point the computer can take over and play
the rest of the game or only as far as a specified inning.
Full results — a box score and play-by-play summary — are

available whether the game is an exhibition or a league game.
There is no need for eye-hand coordination and no time pressure. Even with a computer-managed team in the field the
human player must hit the return key to start each play. The
game encourages one to make the most of the strategic possibilities inherent in baseball. One can bring in a relief pitcher at
any time without needing to warm him up in advance. Line-ups
can be checked, fielders repositioned or substitutions made at
any time.
Stolen bases are another good example of the cerebral atmosphere of "Strat." It is a two-step process. One rolls the dice (or
has the computer do it) to find out how good a lead the runner
got. Then, only if the runner got a good lead does one roll again
to see if he made it.
There is also an awesome array of utilities for keeping records,
managing rosters and replaying simulated seasons. A couple of
examples must suffice to show the attention to detail evident in
the game. Along with other statistics in a replayed season, the
game keeps track of the relationship between the player's usage
and his usage in the real season that is the basis for his records.
A game player who wants an impeccably accurate recreation of
the season will rest a player or remove him from the roster when
he has appeared in as many games in the simulation as he did
in real life. When the computer is replaying a season, the game
can be directed to save box scores and play-by-play summaries
for all games, no games or specific games in which certain key
events take place (i.e. a no-hitter, shutout, player hitting for the
cycle or more than a specified number of RBIs, etc.).
With all the attention to detail, there are still tasks that should
have been assigned to the computer and were not. It is possible
to use a designated hitter, but the computer manager is not able
to choose a lineup if a designated hitter is used with a National
League team or not used with an American League team. So it
remains the gamer's task to choose the lineup manually. Also, interestingly enough, the company went to great effort to provide
accurate player cards for 1927, but did not provide the season
schedule, either on the disk or in hard copy. In addition, there is
no utility for generating a season schedule automatically. To
replay the 1927 season, assuming one could scare up a copy of
the season schedule, a gamer would have to program it (or an
approximation) into the computer series by series.
As an overall simulation of the game of baseball, Strat-O-Matic
is outclassed by the competition. Other games may offer an arcade mode, animation and far better graphics, of course, but
some even give Strat-O-Matic Baseball a good battle on the
statistical side, its home turf. The original Earl Weaver Baseball,
Tony LaRussa's Ultimate Baseball, and MicroLeague
Baseball: The Manager's Challenge offer somewhat comparable statistical models, reporting capabilities, computer
managers and utilities for managing a league and replaying a
season. The makers of Strat-O-Matic Baseball are too much in
love with their original board game to build a product that competes with these more comprehensive programs. This product
has unique value as a computer rendition of the classic board
game that made these competing products possible. It still sets
an awesome standard. None of the games mentioned above
goes to the trouble of tabulating real lefty-righty breakdowns for
all players in years before they were routinely collected and published. Any baseball enthusiast with a strong interest in statistics
should take a look at this absorbing program, if only to understand other computer simulations better. In fact, those who have
no interest in graphics and simply want a satisfying statistical
simulation may find Strat-O-Matic Computer Baseball (Version
3.0) to be the best baseball program of all.

-

-

Bestseller List

Review

Data East's Bo Jackson Baseball
by Win Rogers

faster one-pitch-per-batter mode. There is no way to "manage
only" and have the computer handle batter-pitcher matchups.
Further, the annoying play-by-play announcer cannot be
turned off, even by turning down the volume on your sound
board, as the voice comes through the regular PC speaker.

Here's the Pitch (Game Play)

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:

Bo Jackson Baseball
IBM (reviewed)
Amiga (forthcoming)
# PLAYERS:
1-2 plus league play
$49.95
PRICE:
COPY PROTECT: Document Look-Up
DESIGNERS:
Nigel Spencer,
James Maxwell, Larry Garner
PUBLISHER:
Data East
San Jose, CA

D

espite the hype and glitter associated with Bo Jackson's
name, this is a good-looking and fast-paced arcade
baseball game. Like Bo's baseball career, it rates high in
enthusiasm and raw talent, but may never reach its full potential
when it comes to the subtleties of baseball strategy. The game
never quite lives up to the promise of its opening shot, a nostalgic view of Crosley Field with the lights coming on. Still, Bo Jackson Baseball will give plenty of satisfaction to those whose main
interest in computer baseball is in lively action that will provide a
challenging contest of eye-hand coordination. Very challenging.
So challenging, in fact, that this middle-aged reviewer never
learned to hit computer-opponent pitching, and had to admiringly
watch his teen-age son do so. Fortunately, the pitches of real-life
opponents are not so tough to hit as the computer opponent.

The arcade interface is impressive and effective. As batter, the
player has a good look at the ball coming in. It is important to
lay off obvious balls, and position in the batter's box is as important as the timing of the swing. To bunt, one holds down both
joystick buttons and moves the joystick to one side or the other
to direct the bunt toward first or third. As pitcher, the player
watches a ball oscillating back and forth behind the plate, and
pitch placement depends on where the ball is when the player
presses the fire button. As the pitcher tires, the ball oscillates
more rapidly, making it more difficult to get the ball over the
plate. Speed is determined by the joystick's vertical orientation,
and one curves the pitch by moving the joystick right or left after
the pitch leaves the pitcher's hand. With a little practice one can
develop a wicked late-breaking curve. The underlying statistics of
batter and pitcher also affect the outcome of each at-bat.
I he action goes forward on the gamer's choice of one of three
imaginary playing fields. The players and playing fields are well
rendered and attractive. It is always a challenge to convey the action of a baseball game on the small screen, as television directors know. Here, the focus is on the batter-pitcher confrontation,
and if there is a runner at second you can see him behind the
pitcher. If there is a runner on first or third a small window opens
in one of the upper corners of the screen. After the ball is hit, the
camera pans to follow the ball, and a small diagram shows
where the baserunners are. The game is more forgiving of fielding errors than of batting or pitching weaknesses. Opposing
baserunners did not take as many extra bases on this reviewer's
shaky fielding skills as real players would.

Printing support is weak. There is no way to print from within
the program, although rosters and season stats can be saved to
text files that can later be printed or loaded into word processing
or spreadsheet programs. Box scores are never available.

The game supports "exhibition" and league games with the
twenty-six teams provided. No stats are kept in exhibition mode
and there must be one or two human players — there is no way
to watch computer-versus-computer matchups. League games
offer more variety. One can play any or all games in a predetermined full season and have the computer play the other games
automatically and save their stats. It is possible to watch computer-versus-computer matchups in league mode, but it is not
very entertaining. The game moves very slowly, one pitch at a
time, and there is no way to interrupt the action to check rosters
and second-guess strategy. There is no way to view a box score
in either exhibition or league play. At any point in a season, it is
possible to access a range of individual and team statistics.

Despite the claim on the box that this is "the most complete
computer-baseball game ever developed," it is strongest as a
straightforward arcade game and does not offer as many choices
as do its best competitors. Its arcade action is challenging, and,
since there is no "batting practice" or "pitching practice" module,
one must learn the ropes in actual games. Since one's team
changes sides every half inning, it is necessary to learn both batting and pitching skills at the same time. Unlike some games,
there is no choice between easier or more difficult levels of arcade play and no choice as to whether to be responsible for fielding and base-running as well as batting and pitching. The player
must go with a pitch-by-pitch simulation, and cannot choose the

The league replay capabilities are less useful than they would
be if real player statistics were provided. Data East did not pay
licensing fees to the Major League Baseball Players' Association
and, therefore, cannot use current player statistics. The statistics
they do provide are for a set of teams from Boston, New York,
Kansas City and so forth, on some different planet (see sidebar).
The utilities provided for playing simulated seasons, therefore,
lose their raison d'etre. While one can program in current player
stats or create customized rosters of imaginary players, who's
going to bother? Tony LaRussa's Ultimate Baseball, by contrast, lets you do that and more — play immediately with rosters
of real (retired) major leaguers, buy a current player disk and

Starting Line-up
The game supports joystick or keyboard, but not a mouse. A
VGA monitor, 640K and a processing speed of at least 10 MHz
are required. It can be run from floppies but a hard disk is recom
mended. It supports a range of optional sound boards.

Review

enter player stats with utilities that make it easy to generate
ratings from the raw statistics. Bo Jackson Baseball is much
less "complete."
The only active player whose real stats they could use, of
course, was Bo Jackson. His actual 1990 Kansas City statistics
(shown under the Chicago American League team) have been
beefed up, and in this game Bo is the .300 hitter he has never
been in the big leagues. Bo's computer imitation exceeds all his
real 1990 statistics in all but two categories. The real Bo struck
out 128 times, the simulated Bo only 20 times. The real Bo committed 12 errors, the simulated Bo (SimBo?) only three. The computer stadium provides a nice field of dreams for Bo.

Box Score
This game would have broader appeal if the designers had
provided more options for the player who is actually playing the
game, instead of all the faked statistics. A game that demands
VGA and brags about its completeness should not give such a
stripped-down, basic-model, take-it-or-leave-it feel. The IBM edition does not make particularly good use of the computer's
capabilities, but seems like a practice round for its video game incarnation. Still, as a fast-paced arcade game, Bo Jackson
Baseball provides some enjoyable, well-engineered features.

Hedging Their Bets
Statistics-based baseball games and arcade baseball games both have
enthusiastic fans who will gravitate either toward Strat-O-Matic (see p.
50) or Bo Jackson Baseball. Each game is successful at what it does
best, will give hours of satisfaction to its proper fans and will intensely
annoy those from the other camp. Each game has overreached in order
to seek a wider audience and looks somewhat silly as it ventures too far
from its real strength.

Cheerleaders at a Chess Match
Despite its messianic fervor about the purity of its statistical simulation,
Strat-O-Matic hedges its bets with some audio and video enhancements.
There is simple music, a siren sound and the imitation of an exploding
scoreboard after a home run, as well as cartoon graphic stills that flash
on the screen depicting "key plays."
The cartoons are crude monochrome sketches, comic relief from the intensity of the statistical recreation. They strike the same jarring note that
cheerleaders would at a chess match. The audio and video effects are
within the reach of a graduate of an elementary programming class and,
as a result, the amateurish effects end up drawing attention to themselves and detracting from the integrity of the game. Fortunately, in keeping
with the designers' philosophy of giving lots of choices to the gamer, any
or all of them can be turned off.

Faking the Numbers
Not content with being a sleek, speedy arcade game, Bo Jackson
Baseball bills itself on the box as "the most complete computer-baseball
game ever developed." There are more statistics screens than action
screens pictured on the box and the statistical portion of the game is, as
a result, seriously overstated. Data East saved money by not paying
licensing fees to Major League Baseball or the Players' Association and,
therefore, cannot use real team nicknames or logos or active players'
statistics. Instead of thinking through a reasonable alternative, as did Earl
Weaver Baseball and Tony LaRussa's Ultimate Baseball — neither of
which paid a licensing fee on its basic game — Bo Jackson Baseball
fakes it.
It offers twenty-six rosters divided into cities corresponding to the major
league divisions, and stocks them with pseudonym-ed players. One cannot get the feel of really playing Atlanta against Minnesota because the
teams have lost their individual character and been taken over by nonames. They didn't generate their no-name players from scratch, but
enough changes have been made to the rosters that one cannot simply
rename the players and end up with 1990 rosters. They gave St. Louis a
30-home-run center fielder, for example, who probably would have kept
them out of last place if he had played for the real Cardinals. Statistics
buffs may find that tracking down these changes is the most enjoyable
part of Bo Jackson Baseball.

Game Hints

Scorpion 's Tale
Lucasfilm's The Secret
of Monkey Island 2
the best part of the year is
over; now all we have to look forover;
ward to is a lot of warm weather
(sniff). Of course, winter will be back
eventually, but it's a long haul between
now and then. However, for those of you
who actually like bright sun, blue skies
and surf lapping at your toes, I hear the
Caribbean is great this time of year....
Ah, the Caribbean. Palm trees. Soft
breezes. Romantic nights under the stars.
Pirates. Most especially, pirates. Yes
friends, he's back! Our favorite buccaneer wannabe, Guywood Threepbrush
— or is that Guybrush Threepwood — has
returned for yet another thrilling installment in his "I wannabe a pirate" saga.
This time, with a slight difference. There
are two ways to play The Secret of
Monkey Island 2: "normal" mode and
"light" mode. Light mode is about equivalent in difficulty to the first game. Normal
mode is somewhat harder, and should
give your brain cells a fair workout. That
being the case, we'll just be looking at
what goes on in normal mode, since the
puzzles in both are similar, only more involved in the harder version.
Our boy starts off on lovely Scabb Island, which is currently under the thumb
of Largo LeGrand. Largo used to be the
right-hand man of the infamous LeChuck
while LeChuck was still alive. Now he
spends his days shaking down the
washed-up pirates and other inhabitants
on Scabb Island. Guy will have to get rid
of Largo before he can leave for bigger
and better things.
Besides, our hero just got his own
shakedown, and all his cash has been
snarfed by Largo. Nothing like a little
revenge to provide extra incentive. After
a quick tour of the island to find out
what's where and who's who, it's time to
get to work.
Work, in this case, means collecting the
necessary stuff so the lady at the lnterna-

tional House of Mojo can make a voodoo
doll of Largo. Hey, no problem, right?
How hard can it be, when Guy even has
his little voodoo shopping list so he won't
forget what to get.

needing money to pay him, Guy also
needs to give him something to replace
Dredd's lucky sailing necklace. No problem, if Guy doesn't mind being heartless
and light-fingered.

Well, let's take a look. Hmm... something from the dead... yeah, easy one, if
he can dig it. Something from the body?
That one's no sp ... err, sweat. Ummm,
something from the head. Now this one
might be a little harder; Largo's not
about to sit still for a haircut. Anything
else? Just some clothes, and that's it.

Finally! Now we're into the most involved section, the Four Map Pieces.
Yep, Guy has to come up with a map
showing the way to fabled Dinky Island,
where there's supposed to be some
fabulous treasure (Scorp checks the
game box to make sure this is Monkey
Island ll and not Ultima VI; yep, it's
Monkey Island all right). (Grin.)

Okay, time for another tour. All tours
provide accommodations at four-star
inns, but this one is maybe a half-star,
and the only room belongs to Largo.
Pity. Gee, I wonder how Guy could get in
there. A little diversion, that's what we
need. Alligators make good diversions,
when you're sharp enough.
Say, this voodoo shopping isn't so bad
after all; Guy is practically done. Now he
just needs the clothes (funny how there
weren't any to take in that room). However, Mad Marty, the local loony
laundryman, belongs to the "no tickee,
no washee" school, besides which, Largo
has no clothes there anyway. Yet.
That should give our boy some ideas. If
Guy could find a way of mussing Largo
up (without getting himself mussed),
he'd be halfway to his goal. That bucket
hanging near the three pirates (who look
very familiar, heh) might come in handy.
Of course, something needs to be in the
bucket, and the bucket needs to be in
the right place. But hey, that much at
least Guy can figure out for himself. He's
probably swamped with bright thoughts
about this.
With Largo disposed of (at least for
now), our boy can leave the island. As
soon as he has some cash, that is. Even
a pirate has to do (or pretend to do)
some honest work now and then. Rats!
And there's Captain Dredd. Aside from

Guy's gonna be doing a lot of breezing
around the three islands (Scabb, Booty
and Phatt) here. There's plenty of
back-and-forth to get everything done, so we'll
just hit the high spots and let Guy worry
about the rest.
For instance, the antique shop on Booty
Island. Lots of neat things to buy here,
and the guy (note the small "g") who
runs it even has a map piece. How convenient. Of course, he wants something
in exchange for it. Oh well, maybe later.
Say, that mirror might come in handy.
Too bad the parrot (no, that's not for
sale) likes his image so much. Luckily,
this parrot has a bird brain to go with his
bird ego. The answer to this one is in the
bag, sorta.
Oh no! ... look over there: Stan's Previously Owned Coffins! It's him again!
Gaaah. And let's not ask how he got
hold of those "previously owned" coffins.
Guy will really have to hit the nail on the
head this time (did you know Woody
makes house calls when customers can't
come to him? That's a hint, son). Ah,
revenge is sweet. Hang out for a while
and enjoy.
And the spitting contest. What would a
pirate adventure be without that? Probably a lot less vulgar (heh). You've already
figured out that Guy has to win it, right?
Right! So, he needs to (a) work up a real-

Game Hints

Iy good phlegm, (b) keep an eye on the
wind and (c) (ahem) cheat a little (all in
a good cause, naturally ... mail's in!).

Phatt Island has a contest, too. A drinking contest, in fact. Has our boy found a
way past the waterfall yet? No? Well,
don't go bananas, find a monkey wrench
and get on with it. A word of advice: the
pirate's rum would knock out a bull
elephant. If Guy has any smarts at all, he
won't touch the stuff. Of course, he still
has to win the contest. One guess as to
how (yep, cheat!).

The governor ... gosh, almost forgot
about her. Yes, it's the same lovely lady
Guy met and romanced last time out.
Only things aren't so romantic anymore
(hmm, Guy has almost as much trouble
with his women as Leisure Suit Larry!).
Anyway, our hero will have to get his
hands on an invitation to her big bash
before any reunions take place.
Actually, it's not so much the gov as
the map piece that Guy wants. Not that
he'll get far after he swipes it, but go
ahead and do it anyway. Hmmm, so
much for the big reunion. This just isn't
Guy's lucky day, not when you think
about what he'll have to do to get that
map piece. The cliff part is no problem
(wanna bet? or is that, winna bet?). As
for the treehouse, well, just how did Guy
get caught in the first place, eh?
Phatt Island isn't quite so congenial.
You can tell right off by the "Wanted"
poster with Guy's face plastered on it. Uh
oh. Seems LeChuck's posted a bounty,
and Governor Phatt (to call him obese

Been in any good crypts lately? Bet
you're wondering how Guy can open the
right one. I'll let you in on a little secret:
he has to read a book — just don't quote
me on that. Make a visit to IHOP ... err,
IHOM, too.
would be understatement) wants the
cash. In no time at all, our hero is in jail.
Getting out is easy, with a little help
from the anorexic dude in the next cell.
Now Guy can go visit the library. Very
helpful, that library, once he has a library
card (don't leave Phatt without it). And
don't overlook the lighthouse model.
But, there's still that wanted poster.
Guy's picture is just, well, a trifle too obvious. Gee, if there were just some way
to change that, somehow.

Hey, look! Guy has all four pieces of
the map. Unfortunately, our boy is no cartographer. Good thing he knows someone who is. Now, if Wally could just see
again (this is called shedding a little light
on the subject). While Wally works on
the map, go ahead and do that little errand for him. After all, he's doing a favor
for Guy. And when Guy gets back ... eek!
Wally's gone! Uh oh, he's been kidnapped by LeChuck! Now what? No prob-

Game Hints

lem; stroll around the island, and something will turn up.
Before you can say "crates ahoy!" Guy
is in LeChuck's secret fortress. Before
you can say "oops!" Guy is captured —
and strung up with Wally in the path of
one of the zaniest Rube Goldberg death
contraptions ever. It's a good thing villains always prefer elaborate death
mechanisms to a simple bullet in the
head or knife across the throat; otherwise, how would the good guys survive?
So now what? Well, I dunno about you,
but I bet Guy isn't happy about this.
Look at all the trouble LeChuck has
caused — and it ain't over yet. Guy is
probably mad enough to spit right about
now. And if that leaves you in the dark,
just lighten up for a trip that's a real blast.
Finally, Dinky Island ... and look who's
here: our old buddy Herman Toothrot.
Sorry to say, Herman's just making a
cameo appearance; you can ignore the
old coot and not miss anything. Ho hum.
This island's a weird place, especially
the jungle. Kinda reminds you of a certain underground maze in a certain pre-

vious game (heh). Yep, Guy needs a little
help here. Luckily, he doesn't have to
deal with cannibals this time, just a parrot. Polly wanna cracker. Polly wants
three crackers (hmm, almost as bad as a
certain monkey in a certain previous
game!). By the way, Guy can't get the
hanging bag, but there's a way around
this bottleneck, if he isn't afraid of being
a little destructive.
Before you can say "buried treasure,"
our hero is digging at the "spot marked
X" and finds himself hanging by a thread
(rope, actually). Which doesn't last long,
and there he is, in the dark again. Just
move the cursor around the screen, very
carefully and slowly (this one gave me
trouble; I missed the necessary item
more than once).

small complex, grabbing anything that
isn't nailed down (be sure to check
every box in storage; they aren't all the
same), to make his own LeChuck
voodoo doll (and don't overlook the grog
machine). Try to avoid the Big L as
much as possible; he can't kill Guy, but
he can slow him down.
The big moment arrives. It's voodoo
doll versus voodoo doll! Will Guywood tri
umph? Will he be rid of LeChuck once
and for all? Will there be a third Monkey
Island? Hey, don't ask me. You play the
game and find out! (grin).

Ah, light. Aiyeee! LeChuck is there and
he's holding a Guybrush Threepwood
voodoo doll! Dum-de-dum-dum. (Gulp.)
Is this it for our hero? Not quite (whew).
LeChuck's doll is nasty, but it isn't final.
Painful, yes, but all it does is kick Guy
into another room at random.

Well, I see by the old invisible clock on
the wall it's that time again. Remember,
if you need help with an adventure
game, you can reach me in the following
ways: On Delphi: Visit the GameSIG
(under the Groups and Clubs menu). On
GEnie: Stop by the Games RoundTable
(type: Scorpia to reach the Games RT).
By (IS Mail (enclose a self-addressed,
stamped envelope if you live in the
United States): Scorpia, P.O. Box 338,
Gracie Station, New York, NY 10028.

So it's hide and seek time. Guy has to
fight fire with fire, running around the

Copyright 1992 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

Until next time, happy adventuring!

Review

A

don't they start a Super Tetris
Anonymous group while they're at it? This
fourth sequel to the original Tetris — considered justifiably as the most popular computer
game ever published — is that addictive. True, Tetris
is quite habit-forming — there's no denying that.
Nevertheless, Super Tetris is super addictive,
dangerously so. This review almost didn't get written.
There was always just one more round of Super
Tetris to play before starting to write. Hours and
hours and many game rounds later, only the call of
the absolute final deadline compelled this gamer to
reluctantly quit, at least for a while.

y

Call for Super Tetris
by Michael S. Lasky

Let Me Count the Ways
So, how could Spectrum HoloByte possibly improve on the original Tetris with a fourth follow-up?
They accomplished this in a trio of ways. First, they
enhanced the playing field. Now, instead of a gamer
having to consider the square pieces falling from
screen top, there is the addition of "debris" rising
from the bottom.
Second, the game can be customized to each
player's own configuration, be it keyboard, mouse,
joystick or a combination of each. Third, with Super
Tetris (as in Wordtris), competition amounts to
more than just the player against the computer.
There are competitive, cooperative and head-to-head
player modes. All of these are two-player modes and
allow a pair to play with or against each other on the
same screen. (Head-to-head requires two computers
with two registered copies of Super Tetris and either
a null-modem serial cable or a Novell local area network.)
Finally, the designers have added lots of bells and
whistles to make what was a simple game now ever
more complex and fun. The playing field is 10
squares wide (16 wide in two-player games). As
before, when a player forms a solid line of ten
squares across, the line disappears. The difference is
that now the cubes fall only 14 lines from the top of the pit,
which, however, is 28 squares deep. The other 14 lines are the
"rubble" below the middle "water line." The gamer's object is to
get rid of that rubble. Sounds simple, right? Under Tetris' original
rules, it would be. In Super Tetris, the player is limited at the
start to 50 pieces. Because the pieces are made up of four
squares in seven unique formations, the task is vexing, occasionally infuriating and always a challenge. Sometimes everything seems to come together like an easy jigsaw. On the other
hand, there is always that rogue piece that botches everything
up, or a gamer's aim isn't always what it could be, and what was
the perfect piece lands the wrong way.

To the Height and Breadth and Depth the
Rubble Doth Reach
At the start of the game, the space above the waterline is
empty and the rubble below is exposed. Each time a line of rubble is completed, it rises one level toward the surface, slowly
revealing a graphic design which is usually related to the painted
background scene. The gamer's task is to clear all the rubble
away and proceed to the next of ten succeeding levels of gradually increasing difficulty. To help one along, a graphic thermometer is present alongside the main playing field. This small

replica of the entire pit lets the gamer see the design formed as
lines of rubble are removed.
Further help (sometimes, a hindrance) to the player are the
bombs earned with each line removed. A pair of bombs falls
from the top when a line is completed. The bombs can be used
to knock out the squares that are getting in the gamer's way. If
multiple lines are completed and removed, the number of bomb
clusters doubles (two lines gets four bombs; three lines, 8
bombs; 4 or more lines, 12 bombs). If the bombs happen to hit
special treasure pieces buried in the rubble, a gamer's work becomes instant pleasure. There are random pieces with numbers
from 5 to 15 on them. They earn one that many more pieces to
play with than the original 50. A bubble square, when hit, rises to
the top, filling all empty spaces with pieces until it reaches the
water line. An anti-bubble piece moves upward, destroying all rubble and treasures in its way. Two bomb squares earn a player
either additional bombs in the shape of the next piece or a three
by three square explosion. The lightning square, when hit,
removes the entire rubble line it is in.
Most of the time, the treasures and bombs work for the gamer.
On occasion, they can make a mess of things. The player can
manipulate the bombs like falling pieces, so good spatial relation
skills are important, as is agility with the cursor keys or pointing
device. While the mouse is best used for the beginning setup win-

Review

Spectrum HoloByte's Super Sequel
TITLE:
SYSTEM:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:

Super Tetris
IBM
1-2
$49.95
Gilman Louie, Alexey Pajitnov, Vladimir
Pokhilko, Joel Powers and Les Watts
PROTECTION: Document Look-Up
PUBLISHER:
Spectrum HoloByte
Alameda, CA

dow, the keyboard arrow keys offer the most control
during actual play.

The Ends of Being and Ideal Grace
Graphics are excellent and outright magnificent in the
Windows 3.0 version. While the program does work
with CGA and Hercules graphics, those modes are not
recommended. Both work in monochrome, offering
fuzzy resolution. A four-color CGA version is available
and costs another $9.95 through a mail-in offer. The
background screens feature scenes from the Moscow
Circus. In addition, sound cards are supported and offer
intriguing Russian circus music. Those without sound
cards hear only sound effects from their computer
speakers.
One problem with Super Tetris is that it is a memory
hog. The Windows 3.0 version requires 2 MB of RAM;
the regular IBM version requires 640k. This invariably requires that the game be booted on a "vanilla" system
(one with no memory-resident programs). Of course,
the Windows version does not have the same problem,
since Windows has a memory manager to reconfigure
to the game's needs.
Super Tetris gives sequels (game sequels at least) a
good name. The movie Rocky lost steam in five outings; Jason got to kill and re-kill six times. Tetris has
made it to number five and is aptly named, because
this Tetris is Super indeed.

Foreign Correspondence

ings. Each screen includes spot animation and each character can move in,
under and behind objects. Inhabitants
have, as in Ultima VI, a "life" of their
own within their daily routine. Release is
set for April for IBM (£39.99), Amiga and
ST (both 534.99).

Over There
UBGs Rule OK!
by Paul Rigby

A text/graphic adventure by Gremlin,
Suspicious Cargo is set in the near future against a background of space
travel and mega-corporations. As a lethal
virus spreads worldwide, several medically based corporations developed antidotes and, instead of racing to be the
first to mass-produce it, acted together to
protect and exploit their monopoly of the
vaccine.
Thus, the corporations became rich and
powerful and world governments eventually became puppets of the corporations. However, disagreement leads to infighting amongst the corporations and,
eventually, all-out war. As part of its war
effort, Universal Products, based on the
Saturnian moon of Titan, are developing
a mutant warrior via genetic engineering.
To continue work, they must transfer the
current work to Earth. This is illegal and
dangerous, as other corporations would
kill to get hold of the information the
genetic work would present.
The only problem for UP is to find some
one daft enough, someone with a lot to
lose or both to ferry the goods to Earth.
One plays Jonah Hayes, who is exactly
the sort of guy UP turns out to be looking for. Smuggler and con-man, Jonah is
behind on payments with his spaceship
and is, well, desperate.

D

aemonsgate I: Dorovan's Key, a

new CRPG from the UK's Imagitec and published by Gremlin, has been described as an Ultimabeater by some observers. There is no
doubt that there are many promising
aspects to this game. Taking an Ultima
viewpoint, the game takes the premise of
a party searching the land and cities, as
well as interviewing people, with the aim
of defeating one of those UBG (Ultimate
Bad Guy) chappies, in this case a longdead deity. Besides the NPCs in each
town there are 128 characters or groups
of characters that act more intelligently
than townspeople and serve as pivotal
elements within the plotline. There is also
a complex encumbrance system, a large
number of objects that can be manipulated and several animated sequences
that fill the details of the plot.

The magic system is divided into five
"schools:" Hedge Wizardry, Elementalism, Daemonology, Spiritualism and
Magick. Each school is the domain of different cultures. Also, each school requires different spell ingredients and
rituals to perform that spell.
In combat, the player is tactical commander. He or she issues orders and allows the party members to interpret
those orders (individual character personality has an effect, here). Opponents
vary in their skill and aggressiveness.
Within the continent of Nestor, there are
seven different cities (in addition to special locations such as castles, etc.), each
with a map of over 10,000 screens in
size. Each of these maps is divided into
basement/sewers, ground floors, first
floors, second and third floors of build-

In a strange way, Suspicious Cargo
(SC) is very similar to Dynamix's Rise
of the Dragon or a classic Sierra game.
Sure, SC is a text/graphic adventure
game and the others are pure graphic.
However, both interrupt the gameplay
with puzzle/arcade sequences. For the adventure purist, though, one can easily
bypass these sequences with a simple
mouse click on a menu choice.
The interface heavily disguises the text
input. Generally, the screen looks very
whizz-bang with three monitors that display digitized character portraits when
they occupy the same location as the
player. To the left are a bank of icons
that allow alternative play via keyboard,
mouse or both. On the upper portion of
the screen are more buttons. A beeping
sound signifies when they offer anything.
One takes the player to an arcade sequence, another loads a graphic for a particular location and so on.
If a game called Mortville Manor rings

Foreign Correspondence

a bell, prepare for nostalgia hour, because French outfit Lankhor's Maupiti
Island is very similar. Basically a whodunit-type mystery game (a kidnapping,
in fact), this French game appears on
two disks with the usual French manual
we've all grown to love and hate. Apparently the game has been compressed
onto only two disks to "reduce manipulations!" The essence of the game is to
move from location to location interviewing the game's characters and searching,
when no-one is about, the location itself.

played under two options: arcade or
coach. The latter features managerial/
coach selections such as tactical coaching decisions, and the former allows the
player, joystick in hand, to control each
player on a particular team. Features include a two-tier practice mode for team
or player. Other options include: toggling
fouls on/off, altering the speed of play
and differing quarter lengths. A Tip Off
league can be constructed, including 16
teams. Out now on Amiga, Tip Off will
compete on other formats at a later date.

When the player faces a character, one
will be given a specialized set of menus.
Questions cover a set of circumstances.
For example, "What were you doing on
blah, blah" or "What's your opinion of soand-so." The usual of detective-type thing

Completing the trilogy of 3D action/adventures is Mercenary III, from British
developer Novagen. For those who are
unfamiliar with the Mercenary series, this
game is a sort of political/military intrigue/trading/role-play/shoot-'em-up-type
game (ahem). Playing a soldier of fortune with a mission to save civilization
from the grasp of a despot, one also sets
out to make a fortune. The player tours
the solar system (19 worlds in all) in all
of its polygon splendor, looking for clues
and objects plus chatting to characters
on different planets. There are six ways
to solve Mercenary III — five of them are

Over time, one can commit statements
to memory (and/or make a few notes)
so that, if any character contradicts
him/herself, the player-detective can
argue with the person. Available now on
Amiga; other formats will follow.
Anco's latest in its Off series is Tip Off,
an overhead-view basketball game for
one, two or four players. Tip Off can be

hinted at in the documentation. Out now
for Amiga and PC.
Incidentally, anyone who would like to
contact me can do so on CompuServe
(75300,1503) or by mail to 20 Malvern
Road, Liverpool, England, L6 6BW.
Please include three international reply
coupons if a reply is desired.
Note: The above games, and any of
the other games mentioned in "Over
There" in past issues, can be obtained
from:
Computer Adventure World, 318 Kensington, Liverpool, England, L7 OEY;
telephone: 01144-51-263-6306.
Premier Mail Order, Trybridge Ltd., 8
Buckwins Sq., Burnt Mills, Basildon,
Essex, England, SS13 1BJ; telephone:
01144-268-590-766, fax: 01 144-268-590076.
Software City, Unit 4, BDC, 21 Temple
Street, Wolverhampton, WV2 4AN;
telephone: 01144 902 25304, 24-hour
credit card hotline: 01144 902 25304.
All the above telephone numbers assume one can dial direct. In case of difficulty . contact the international operator.

Sneak Preview

Quarterback Sneak Preview
Konami's NFL Football
by Wyatt Lee

A

nyone who listens to "sports talk"

shows on the radio is familiar with
the oft-verbalized complaint that
more attention is currently being paid to
the business of professional sports than
to the sports themselves. In a very real
sense, the same can be true of the licensing of computer sports games. A publisher might license the use of a particular
star's name, statistics and likeness, but
not be able to use the uniform or logo
most often connected with his team.
Again, a publisher might opt to license
the names and/or logos of the teams in
a league, but not to pay the players' association for the rights to use individual
names and statistics. Publishing a
licensed game can be very expensive.
The expense of licensing rights from at
least two different entities (a league and
its players' association) is a primary
reason for many publishers opting to
release games with real franchises and
All-Time Great team files or real
franchises with phony player names and
statistics. NFL Football from Konami,
not to be confused with NFL Pro Football from Micro-Sports (not to be confused with MicroLeague Sports), allows
gamers to coach "actual" franchises with
authentic colored uniforms and logos,
but uses "fictitious" players. Instead of extrapolating abilities from raw statistics,
these fictitious players are crafted using
ten different attributes on a scale between 01-100. The attributes are: intelligence, speed, agility, endurance, tack-

ling, blocking, catching, throwing, kicking
and (proneness to) injuries. In addition,
the height, weight, age and experience
for each player tends to weigh in. Naturally, a gamer could feasibly edit his or her
favorite teams to reflect the actual
rosters, but it is far more difficult to subjectively weigh these attributes and assign values to them than to type in statistics from sources which are readily available.
In sports games, one generally associates these fictitious rosters with those
products which are heavily actionoriented: TV Sports: Football, Mike
Ditka Ultimate Football, NHL Hockey
(on the Sega) and Hardball II . Nevertheless, NFL Football seems to go against
the grain in that while it is extremely satisfying as a strategy game, it does not succeed quite as well as an action game. It
is a hybrid game that could have been
well received by statistics buffs if it had
actual football players represented or welcomed by action players if it required
more exacting input. To put it simply,
NFL Football has the right engine to be
a very satisfying statistics-based strategy
game. In actuality, it is more like a Sega
Genesis sports game that takes advantage of the personal computer's
strengths.

Scouting Report
The strengths of NFL Football include:
its accessible interface (although the kicking is not intuitive), the delightful graphic

and aural chrome, the capacity for customizing players, the ability to create
one's own playbook and a design that
enables one to coordinate league play,
as well as accumulate and analyze statistics. The only quibble this writer can find
with the pre-production version
previewed here is that the game's
strengths are somewhat undermined by
the abstracted players. Nonetheless, NFL
Football should find a fanatical contingent of boosters within the world of computer gamedom.
The interface is driven by the number
pad. Gamers function as coaches by calling plays from up to three on-screen
pages of eight plays each. The clock is
ticking away during this segment to keep
things moving and one who thinks too
long before acting will certainly run the
risk of being called for delay of game.
Once the play is called, the gamer is
given visual cues as to which players
he/she can control. A target appears to
show where the ball is expected to land;
a square surrounds an on-screen player
that can be controlled by the gamer; a
circle tips off the location of the ball carrier (for purposes of defense) and a triangle identifies the primary receiver (for
a passing play).
At the line of scrimmage, gamers can
use the keyboard to call audibles, select
players to control, put offensive players
in motion or, of course, snap the ball.
The only potentially confusing part of the
interface is the kicking game. NFL Foot-

Sneak Preview

ball uses a double power bar for the kicking game. One must hit the Enter key
when the power bar shows the amount of
strength to be put into the kick and hold
down on the key until it reaches the center of the bar representing left/right aim.
This writer feels there is very serious
doubt he will ever be a placekicker in
NFL Football.
After the ball is in play, the interface alternates between the use of the + key
and the Enter key in order to do everything from calling fair catches and performing flying tackles, pitch-outs, laterals,
passes, diving, jumping, etc. In short, the
action controls for NFL Football look
like the game could easily be ported to
one of the 16-bit cartridge systems
(probably the SNES) in a very short time.

A Whistle on the Play
The chrome for NFL Football is especially delightful. The graphics are excellent (although the players are not quite
as large as those in Mike Ditka Ultimate
Football, they are larger than those in
NFL Pro Football) and feature fastmoving players, as well as fluttering
penalty flags. When a penalty is called, a

Conversions
Received
Castles (Interplay) Amiga
Elvira II: The Jaws of Cerberus
(Accolade) Amiga
Gateway to the Savage Frontier
(SSI) Amiga
Harpoon Battleset 4: Indian
Ocean/Persian Gulf
(Three-Sixty Pacific) IBM
Leisure Suite Larry 1: In the
Land of the Lounge Lizards
(Sierra) Amiga
Obitus (Psygnosis) IBM
Panzer Battles (SSG) Amiga
PGA Tour Golf Tournament
Course Disk
(Electronic Arts) Amiga
SimAnt (Maxis) Amiga
Space Quest IV: Roger Wilco and
the Time Rippers (Sierra) Amiga

it took statistics seriously. It allows one
to accumulate and print out league, team
and individual statistics, as well as to
compare the performance given by a
player during a given game with the
player's cumulative statistics to that
point. One would not have expected a
game that did not depend upon authentic rosters to afford such in-depth statistics keeping. In addition, NFL Football offers 19 different team statistics respectively for each team involved in a given
game.
window (about one-quarter screen size)
pops up and a referee gives the appropriate signal, plus gives the call in
digitized speech (it even sounds good on
the IBM's internal speaker). It also offers
options for turning the play-by-play text
descriptions on or off. Further, it allows
one to print out and compare the statistics generated through league play as the
gamer plays through the season on what
the game calls the "Road to the Super
Bowl."

Post-Game Show
One of the most surprising aspects of
the game for this writer was the fact that

NFL Football is a slick product.
Though it might have been tempting for
Distinctive Software, Inc. to rush this
product after their acquisition by
Electronic Arts, it is a product which
reflects care and craftsmanship. If data
disks with actual player statistics/files
ever become available, this will get plenty of playing time at the Wyatt Lee
Dome (-icile). Even without the actual
rosters, however, it may be the ideal
game for those who want some strategy,
some action and enough fast, colorful
animation to keep the most faithful football addict supplied with adrenalin until
the actual NFL season returns.

Review

The Great Underground Educator
by Robert Howell

W

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:

Spelunx and the Caves of Mr. Seudo
Macintosh Plus, SE, SE/30, II Series,

hile the words "wow," "neat" and
Classic, and LC with 2 MB of RAM,
Hypercard 2.1 and System 6.0.7 or higher
"awesome" are not generally applied
PROTECTION: None
when reviewing, they are words which
PRICE:
$49.95
DESIGNER:
Cyan
were universally applied when the player was a
PUBLISHER:
Broderbund
member of the 8-12 age group and exposed to
Novato, CA
Spelunx for the first time. Just what provokes this
response varies from player to player. It may be
the graphics on the opening screen, one of the
numerous science experiments that can be performed
or perhaps one of the available drawing/animation
programs. Whatever the cause, soon after the opening
screen gives way to game screens, the player becomes
involved in all sorts of topics — from science to music
to simple programming.
Spelunx is by Cyan, the developer of Cosmic Osmo
and The Manhole, and is marketed under the Broderbund label as a part of their Kids Club software line. It
is a learning experience program that defies categorization. Its discovery approach to learning is not novel, but it is well-written and
entertaining. The program's basic premise is to explore a series
of caves that was built by Professor Spelunx and filled with inventions by his best friend, Mr. Seudo. Upon entering the gates to
Spelunx, the player finds an elevator that leads downward to the
caves. As the elevator descends, the player gets a fleeting
glimpse of a flickering lantern, which serves notice that color
may play an important part in the explorations. Then the
elevator doors open, a small inset map appears and the adventure begins.
There are three rooms, or areas of exploration, connected by
tunnels. Each area is named for a character in literature: the
Nemo room from Jules Verne's Twenty Thousand Leagues
Under The Sea, Arwen for the elf woman in The Lord of the
Rings and Tumnus for the little faun in the first book of The
Chronicles of Narnia. Each contains an assortment of games,
experiments and other activities that may not be readily apparent.

Cosmic Nemo
The Nemo room contains an observatory from which planets
and moons in the solar system can be observed and even manipulated. Another aspect of this room is a small computer that allows the player to change the telescope view using grid coordinates. For the enlightened explorer, a secret level of this room
gives access to other activities. A painting gives information on
size comparison with objects in the solar system and is accompanied by a book with information on the planets. Other books include a history of Spelunx and a diary (which can be "locked"),
in case the player wishes to record his adventures. Here, the
player can also try his hand at making coffee or performing
gas/light experiments. There is a drawing program, complete
with memory, which records each brush stroke (even mistakes).
The drawings are stored on "RAM" cartridges in much the same
manner as one records on a tape recorder. There is even a painting with interactive parts and a lively little character for use in
stories made up by the player. Finally, if the player diligently explores every nook and cranny, the reward includes some breath-

taking graphics (breathtaking in their sudden appearance after
so much black and white), as well as another science experiment
— one involving gravity and the speed of sound.

Animating Arwen
The Arwen room begins with a teapot that leads to a forest and
a stump, and that is where the player remains unless he or she is
able to find the right buttons to push. Fortunately, they are not
that hard to locate and there will soon be three lights beckoning
in the distance. One light leads to the Pigtoad tree, which contains a Polka Machine. This little machine has two components:
a cartoon character who can be programmed to dance using
simple pictures, and a music maker with various sound effects
and an accordion-like rendition of three major and four minor
chords. Each component can work independently, but can also
be synchronized for a rudimentary audio/visual presentation.
Another light brings the player to a Tree Gene-orator. Here the
player can design his own plant using several choices within the
framework of four different variables. The process does take a
long time and, depending upon what is selected, is best left and
returned to later in the session. The third light in the Arwen room
leads the player to an animator that allows the player to choose
from different pictures and then stamp them onto a picture area.
The animate button allows the pictures to be stamped and
erased, giving the illusion of motion. The pictures are then saved
on a "RAM" cartridge and can be played back or edited.

"Tumnus, Go Clean Up Your Room!"
The Tumnus room opens into what appears to be a child's
playroom. On the left is a terrarium, in the center, a set of building blocks, and on the right, a doll standing on what appears to
be a mountain. None of these are quite what they appear to be.
A closer inspection of the terrarium reveals a temperature control, a small cave and some marble-shaped objects that, when
dropped into the terrarium, turn out to be food. By manipulating
the temperature controls and using the food pellets, the player
can make some interesting observations on the feeding habits of
lizards. The building blocks aren't really building blocks in the

Review

traditional sense. They contain words with diacritical markings
that can actually be heard through the speaker if placed in the
right positions. The doll on the mountain turns out to be a tiny
Swiss yodeler who drops a piece of bread. It is the player's job to
catch the bread in a toaster which appears when the mouse is
moved and bounce the toast back up to the yodeler. It is a
rather simple game and one of the few in Spelunx which seems
to have no apparent concept behind it.
Another feature of this room is a combination doll house and
storage area with still more activities. On the top shelf, the
player finds a curious looking bird, a toaster and an orange. With
just a few clicks of the mouse, the player suddenly finds a small
viewer that reveals much more than the naked eye can see. The
second shelf contains two puppet heads that one small observer
immediately connected to the Sesame Street characters Bert
and Ernie. While that connection was not as readily apparent to
this reviewer, their function did prove to be one of the few
aspects of Spelunx that could not be fully explored. According
to the accompanying guide, these puppet heads can be made to
talk, using a built-in microphone or another sound input such as
MacRecorder to perform puppet shows.
On the bottom floor of the doll house was a sandbox that
should appeal to every child who ever tried to torment an ant as
it went about its normal routine. The sandbox contains two ants,
two ant holes, rocks, food pellets and a slightly mysterious
corner with what appears to be two eyes peering outward.
Another activity found in the Tumnus room is a lightning maker.
This device allows the player to perform sound/light/distance ex-

periments which easily lend themselves to comparisons of the
relative speeds of light and sound.
This is a rather simplistic view of the caves and is only the
beginning of the real adventure. Hidden in one of these rooms is
a clue which will enable the player to enter an area where new
rooms can be constructed and the entire layout of Spelunx altered to the preferences of the player.
Spelunx is entertaining and has educational value. It is not,
however, without drawbacks. Chief among these are hardware requirements. While it will run on a system with 2 megabytes of
memory, it needs 4 megabytes for best results. It requires at
least 8 MB of space on a hard drive for installation, though eventually this can be reduced to 4.5 MB. It also requires HyperCard
2.1 and System 6.0.7 or higher. Fortunately, HyperCard 2.1
comes with the program and older versions are easily upgraded.
Spelunx is compatible with System 7.0, but with some restrictions on using MultiFinder. Another drawback is an annoying
message which may appear if the player returns to a previously
visited room during the course of a session. Some graphics and
activities will not work again unless the game is restarted. Finally, this program loses much of its appeal without color. While
most screens are in black and white, the activities and experiments are very much enhanced by having a color system.
While the program is listed for ages 5 and up, it is probably better suited to age groups for which reading is no barrier. It should
provide hours of entertainment in a variety of ways for both
children and adults. That is the real strength of this program — it
has a little something for almost everyone.

Computer Flight

"Ducking" for Coverage: New Flight
Simulator Software from Mallard
by Timothy Trimble

t's been almost three years since the
last release of Microsoft Flight
Simulator. During this time, there
have been many advances in the design
of simulation software — three-dimensional solid polygon graphics, sound
board support, 256 colors and CD ROM
(Compact Disk). Microsoft is undoubtedly slaving away at implementing their
own magical technology into the next version of the premier flight simulator on
the market. In the meantime, however,
the folks at Mallard Software (with
some help from The Bruce Artwick Organization, Ltd. and RMM Consulting)
have come up with some interesting
products to satisfy the needs of armchair
pilots until that long-awaited day when
Microsoft unveils the multimedia version
of their flagship entertainment product.

I

Sound, Graphics, Aircraft
Update
The Sound, Graphics & Aircraft
Upgrade (SGA) is being marketed as an
upgrade for Microsoft Flight Simulator,
since it improves the basic flight simulation product by adding support for better
graphics, sound, voice, and additional
aircraft. SGA is a great relief for any
armchair pilot who has grown weary of
listening to the internal IBM speaker
while flying Microsoft Flight Simulator.
With the addition of digital sound
samples and synthesized sound, the
sense of realism has been greatly enhanced. Some of the new sounds include
the engine noise (prop and jet), gear
up/down, flaps up/down, a great crash
sound sequence, and of course, the
sound of the wind rushing over the
plane. There is also an altitude alarm for
those armchair pilots who tend to forget
when to put down the gear. The cards
supported by SGA are the ATI Sound

F/X, Ad Lib, Covox, Sound Blaster
and Sound Blaster Pro. The Sound
Blaster cards will even allow more advanced users to replace the default
sound effects with their own digital recordings via the use of the Sound Blaster
Voice Editor.
The SGA graphics drivers will allow the
use of an enhanced instrument panel
and the infamous 747 "Glass Cockpit" instrument panel. The enhanced instrument panel provides extra functionality
that is not available with the standard instrument panel, such as a fuel pump,
pitot tube switch, a timer (for helping to
calculate "true" ground speed) and an altitude alert that can be set for various altitudes. The instrumentation is arranged
in a more realistic manner, which will require a little getting used to. ("Let's see,
where did that magnetic compass go?")
The 747 Glass Cockpit instrument panel
uses computer display terminals to relay
flight information to the pilot via an Engine Indicating and Crew Alerting System
(EICAS). This system will supply engine,
navigation, radio and checklist information. Both of these cockpits can be used
with any type of aircraft. ("Hum! A Glass
Cockpit in a Cessna 182!")
Speech is also supported with SGA via
the Sound Blaster and Sound Blaster Pro
cards. The ATIS (Automatic Terminal Information Service), ATC (Air Traffic Control), demonstration messages and flight
instruction messages that are normally
displayed by scrolling across the screen
are replaced by synthesized speech. The
synthesized speech is computergenerated and can sometimes be difficult
to understand, especially for a novice
armchair pilot unfamiliar with flight controller messages. The settings of the
Sound Blaster cards can be adjusted to
the pilot's liking. Although digitized

speech (pre-recorded speech) would
sound better, it does require a large
amount of memory and would take away
from the performance of the flight simulation itself. Still, this is a great improvement over having to read the messages
and it adds to the overall realism of
Microsoft Flight Simulator.
Since Microsoft Flight Simulator is a
very memory-intensive application, some
adjustments must be made to configure
both the basic program and the SGA for
the most efficiency, especially if the
Microsoft Aircraft and Scenery Designer is already installed. The best PC configuration would be the use of DOS 5.0
and then trimming the CONFIG.SYS and
AUTOEXEC.BAT to allow as much conventional memory as possible. Limiting
the use of the map window and the
second 3-D window will also yield better
results. (By the time of the printing of
this article, Mallard Software will have
a newer version of the software available
that addresses some of these memory issues.) Although the SGA software is a
great addition to Microsoft Flight
Simulator, the documentation is a bit on
the thin side and could use more detail
and pictures to describe the instrumentation of the enhanced cockpits.

Flight Planner
The Flight Planner is intended for the
armchair pilot who always seems to have
a tough time finding out where to go and
how to get there (which may be just
about everyone). The Flight Planner is a
course planning and plotting package
that will compute the flight course and associated information and then print it out.
This allows armchair pilots to have a
"custom" flight map to follow. The concept itself is simple — put in the origin airport followed by the destination airport,

Computer Flight

and Flight Planner will calculate the entire flight plan.
It will also factor in wind effects and the
time required for climbs and descents.
The flight plan can be generated either
automatically or manually. The manual
approach will allow the armchair pilot to
select specific VORs (Very high Omnidirectional Range navigation transmitter) or airport refueling points for the
flight path.
Once a flight plan has been generated,
it can be printed out. The printout can
contain the map outline (USA), navigation and communication radio frequencies, airport information, estimated time
en route, distance, inner/middle/outer
marker beacon distances and much
more. Extra space is also available for
recording actual time en route and other
information. This flight plan can also be
displayed to the screen instead of printing. Another nice feature of the Flight
Planner is the ability to generate CompuServe Fly-In format reports for printing
or uploading to the FSFORUM (Flight
Simulation Forum).
The Flight Planner comes with all of

the airports and navigational aids that
come with Flight Simulator. Due to the
extensive of new scenery, navigation
points, and airports that can be added
via ASD, the Flight Planner will also
allow the editing of the database that contains all of the required information.
There are a lot of additional features of
Flight Planner that help to make the
task of planning a flight a lot easier. A
wind correction computer will calculate
the proper heading to fly for maintaining
a planned course. The landing rollout
utility will compute the amount of runway that will be needed for landing.
Temperature effects on the planned
takeoff can be calculated to make sure
that there is enough runway to get off
the ground. The turn performance calculator will give the armchair pilot a
good idea of what angle of bank can be
handled at certain speeds without worrying about stalling the aircraft. An Aircraft
Specifications Library is included for storing and editing information on aircraft
specifications.
Two versions of Flight Planner come
in the same package — one for DOS and

one for Microsoft Windows. The version
for Windows has more features and
provides support for pasting flight plan
graphics into a word processor or drawing program for making modifications.
The documentation for Flight Planner is
very complete and comes with good illustrations for showing the reader what to
expect. The only thing not included is a
knee-mounted clip board for clipping
down the printed flight plans and maps
(grin).

Summary
Overall, the Mallard SGA and Flight
Planner provide more realism and are
great additions to the library of any
armchair pilot who likes Microsoft Flight
Simulator.
So until next time, this is Timothy
Trimble, From the Cockpit, somewhere
in a major cloud bank over Southern
California. ("Where did I put that map?")
Mallard Software, Inc. can be contacted
at:
Mallard Software
550 Edmonds #201
Lewisville, TX 75067

Review

advice. A force-field
can be purchased
to forestall an untimely death. The
player may also purchase a hero and a
wolf to accompany
the Elf on his/her
quest. One other
item worth mentioning is the "flying machine."
This contraption allows the
player to fly from point to
point and saves a lot of time
lost when fighting off hordes of
little dopplegangers.

by Leah Wesolowski
TITLE:
Elf
SYSTEM:
Amiga
PRICE:
$49.95
PROTECTION: Documentation Look-Up
PUBLISHER:
Ocean
San Mateo, CA

T

he developers at Ocean

have a real bloodbath on
their hands with their
new game, Elf. The player, as
Cornelius, embarks upon a
lone crusade to rescue the proverbial damsel in distress, Elisa.
Fighting through levels of forest, jungle, icelands and castles that
are filled with many different types of creatures is no laughing
matter. In fact, on the scale of death and destruction, this game
gets a ten for blasts per minute and a big zero for depth and
plot. The simplest analogue for this non-addicting game is that of
an ordinary Nintendo game, leaving much to be desired.
The player controls a little elf capable of shooting fireballs from
his clenched fist (when the average elf inherited this ability is unknown to this reviewer). Targets range from little beetles to stinging wasps, guardians to psychotic mages, ice monsters to the
Evil Necrilous. The player must kill or be killed. At least the
game requires the player to take care, lest he or she accidentally
shoot the good creatures, such as the little bunnies hopping
through the trees or the fluttering butterfly who seems to ride the
tailstream of the menacing wasp. While the task of killing off the
dangerous creatures is generally not difficult, it is made nearly impossible at times by the sheer number of foes to be found in the
game.
After a kill is made, a trinket may be left behind by the dearly
departed. Things such as little green gems are of key importance
to successful completion of the game. Creatures sometimes drop
hearts, which offer the player a health boost (often a lifesaver in
a particularly fierce battle). Other trinkets are saved until the
player reaches the end of a level. At that time, they are counted
up and added to one's score as bonus points. The player is
awarded a new life when 100,000 points are obtained.

Scavenger Hunt
Scattered throughout the forest are items (such as bird feed)
and herbs that the player must gather in order to complete the
game's mission of love. Items like the bird feed can be given to a
character in order to obtain some other item (in this case a
feather) or to open the way to the next level. Some of the items
seem useless at first, but their usefulness becomes apparent at
later stages.
Picking up an item is accomplished by walking over it. Giving
items to an active character is done while in the "interaction"
menu. The interaction portion of the game is controlled via the
joystick and blends well with the game design.
The herbs that are found on the eight levels of this game are
saved until such time as the player finds his way to the local
shop. There, herbs and "pets" are traded for abilities, health and

A word about copy protection
is appropriate here. The game
utilizes the list of different
herbs required for a particular
ability or special purchase to
implement its form of copy
protection. At the start of the
game, the player is prompted
to eliminate from the screen all
those herbs not required to purchase a given item from the
shop. That done, the player then may proceed to the game. Unlike many copy protection schemes, this one is easy to use and
should not be a deterrent in deciding to purchase this game.

Elven Interface
In Elf, just about everything is accomplished with the joystick,
except the commands to pause, quit, use the force-field and save
the game. The player must complete level one to be able to save
the game. The game save ability is also a saving grace for Elf.
The start game screen allows the player to choose music or effects. If music is chosen, the player will be delighted with a score
second only to the tunes in Elvira. However, the ending sequence, which occurs when the player is destroyed, is, in this
reviewer's opinion, in poor taste. The ending sequence is the silhouette of the Elf having his head severed by a guillotine as mad
laughter rings in the players ears. If effects are chosen, the end
sequence is done away with and sound effects replace the music.

Hints to Save the Maiden Fair
The best advice this reviewer could give to the player of Elf is
to pick up everything. It may look like a rock, but chances are it
is an uncooked chicken and the player will need it. The flying
contraption is a good goal for the player to save up for. When interacting with the various active characters in Elf, try everything
on the list. Most of all, though, the best advice this reviewer can
give is to keep firing.

Off With Your Elven Head!
In all, this reviewer didn't care much for Ocean's Elf. Perhaps
its true market would be found in the Nintendo section at KMart. This game's shoot-'em-up style, the less than challenging
puzzles and its joystick-only interface (so typical of European
Amiga programming) do not take advantage of the Amiga's
capabilities. While the musical score is nice, it does not make up
for Elfs lack of finesse. Perhaps a trip to the guillotine is fitting
for this Elf.

OPINION

Scorpion 's View
Strategic Simulations Inc.'s
Buck Rogers: Matrix Cubed
as told by Scorpia

Scorpia is an experienced and
respected adventure game expert.
CGW is pleased to be able to provide
this forum for her distinctive and
often controversial perspective.

S

econd in the Buck Rogers series,
Matrix Cubed revolves around
what is basically the scientific
equivalent of the philosopher's stone: the
transmutation of elements. This time out,
however, it's not so much a matter of
stopping the bad guys from developing a
super weapon as it is keeping them from
getting their hands on the info in the first
place. NEO, you see, already has the
plans. For once, the good guys are a half
step ahead of the evil-doers.
In order to stay ahead, and actually create the Matrix, NEO needs the help of a
couple of scientists, and that's where
your team comes in: tracking down these
people and persuading them to work for
NEO. As you might expect, this will be
the usual hard task, with plenty of opposition along the way, as well as a few side
trips here and there.
You have the standard team of six,
either newly created or transferred from
Countdown to Doomsday. I strongly
recommend bringing over the party from
the previous game if at all possible. They
will cross with all equipment intact and
you'll be needing every piece of it. Heavy
firepower is the name of the game here.
If you're developing a team from
scratch, you won't start with much in the
way of arms and armor, but you can
make up the difference by looting the
bodies of defeated opponents. Be sure

that everyone in the party carries at least
two different types of hand weapons; not
all weapons work against all types of opponents. Microwave guns, for instance,
are virtually useless against anyone (or
thing) with armor, but they do quite well
against unarmored critters.
Heavy ordnance — rocket launchers,
plasma throwers and explosive grenades
— are the best weapons in the game, and
you will be using them a lot (or you will
if you want to get through the combats
quickly and with minimal damage).
Everyone should carry a grenade launcher and explosive grenades. Also stock up
on chaff grenades; they will keep your
enemies from using the same weapons
against you.
In terms of skills, you absolutely need
Pilot Fixed Wing. Without that, you can't
finish the game. If no one has that skill,
start building it up right away. If someone already has it, pump it up at every
opportunity.
Near the end of the game, a ship must
be flown through the upper atmosphere
of Jupiter. A member of your party is required to be the pilot. Strategic Simulations, Inc. tells me that an NPC will do
the job if none of your own people can
but, after numerous retries, I came to the
conclusion that this just was not the
case. Each time, I was forced to choose
a member of my own team to pilot the
craft, without exception. So, be certain
you have at least one person with Pilot
Fixed Wing.
Other important skills include Climbing,
Hiding in Shadows, Fast Talk and
Acrobatics. Life Suspension Tech is

needed in one instance. Demolitions will
come in handy in a couple of places.
Pick Lock and Bypass Security are very
helpful. Library Research and Programming, ditto. Ship Repair skills will be useful on the living ship. Those are the main
ones you should concentrate on building
up over the course of the game.
The action begins on Mercury, where
the team is assigned to keep an eye on
the coronation of the new Sun King and
prevent any assassination attempts. It is
here (before the big event) that they will
first learn about the Matrix device from
Dr. Romney before he is hauled away by
PURGE. PURGE — Prevention of Unwanted Research and Genetic Engineering — is a new villain. As you might
guess from the name, they are against
any genetic research of any kind, and
having the Matrix device would go a long
way to help them "clean up the solar system for humans." So PURGE agents,
along with the usual RAM crews and occasional Mercurian troops, will be popping up now and again throughout the
game to make your life difficult.
As before, your team will be doing a lot
of travelling, visiting, among other
places, Earth, Luna, Mars, Mercury,
Venus and the asteroid belt, finishing up
at Jupiter for the grand finale. Having
someone who can pilot a space ship is
therefore a necessity.
Not so necessary is space combat. This
has not changed at all since the last
game and is still governed by the same
static, boring routines as ever. Fortunately, you can avoid all off-world encounters
and never miss them. The only reason to

OPINION
engage in this fighting is to fill up your
NEO bank account, which is used to pur
chase fuel, ammo and repairs at various
bases. However, all these services are
available for free at the NEO base, and
with careful piloting, you won't need to
buy anything anywhere else.
Speaking of fighting, Matrix Cubed is
much more combat-intensive than the
previous game. It seemed to me that
there were more random encounters, for
one thing, and more fixed encounters for
another. Perhaps we just walked into too
many wrong rooms or took too many
wrong turns, but my team certainly used
up a lot of ammunition in this one.
When we had ammunition, that is.
There are three (count 'em, three) points
in the game when your party will have to
fight essentially naked, without weapons
or armor of any kind. The first of these
situations occurs on Venus. This one isn't
too bad; all you have there are a couple
of encounters with Ursadders, and it's
over pretty quickly.
Mars, however, is another kettle of
aliens entirely. Here you will be running
around without your goodies for some
time, after being captured by RAM. Buck

has also been captured, but he, at least,
retains his trusty .45. A good thing, too,
since without him you probably wouldn't
be able to make it through this portion of
the game.
Aside from having to take on (among
other things) a combat robot
barehanded, there is a major encounter
with a small army of (unarmed) guards
and Gennie dogs. While the guards have
no weapons, the Gennies make up for
that with multiple attacks and the ability
to poison. Add in the lack of armor on
your side (meaning the enemy almost always hits), and you have a very nasty
fight indeed.
My team got through it by knocking the
difficulty level to the bottom and hoping
for the best. Three of the party were
Desert Runner fighters, with maximum
strength. They, at least, could do some
damage when they hit. The other three
were capable of nothing better than
1d2+1 barehanded, and were best kept
well away from the fight (especially since
their own hit points weren't so great).
Buck can't be controlled by you, so you
just have to cross your fingers that he'll
go for the right targets before it's too late.

Once past this combat, you have a
choice of exploring to the south or west.
I recommend going south, as one of the
rooms along that way holds your
weapons and armor. You will, of course,
have to fight to get to them, but that encounter isn't quite so bad as the one with
the dogs. After your team is re-equipped,
your human opponents will be similarly
armed, but by then, it really doesn't matter too much, as you'll have what you
need to handle them.
The final barehanded run occurs in the
Amalthean Genetics Foundation. It's not
as bad as Mars, but it's definitely worse
than Venus. For all of these situations, I
recommend keeping the difficulty level to
the minimum, and saving the game frequently so you don't lose your progress
in case something unpleasant happens.
As if all that wasn't enough, there is the
fighting that occurs on the Stormrider
platform orbiting Jupiter, which constitutes the end game. Here, you are subjected to multiple waves of attackers,
who arrive via the living ship (and how
they obtained control is never explained).
The pattern is always the same: you're
called to a landing area to repel attack-

OPINION
ers. When combat ends, you go through
the Stormrider ship to "mop up" the
troops who slipped in while the main
force was being battered. Then, before
you know it, yet another attack comes at
you.
This goes on for a while, until finally the
big moment arrives when you have to
pilot the ship through the atmosphere.
That's very quick: either your chosen
character makes the roll, in which case
all is well; or the roll is flubbed, in which
case everyone dies, and you'll have to restore to your last save position.
Naturally, there is a final battle after the
flight, or actually two, back to back,
where your team takes on Sid Refuge
(the main PURGE opponent) and his
robot friends. The nastier robots are in
the second battle, so be sure to save
some of the heavy firepower for that one.
Remember, you won't have the chance
to save the game, or re-equip rocket
launchers and the like, between combat
sequences.
So, after many trials and tribulations,
you come to the end. Buck, Wilma and a
NEO force arrive in the living ship (and
how they got control of it isn't explained,

either). Buck leads everyone in giving
you three cheers (big wow), says, "Let's
go home" ...and there you are, looking at
the DOS prompt.
That's right, folks. After taking a lot of
heat for doing that in Eye of the Beholder, SSI went ahead and did it again
in Matrix Cubed. Why is it so hard for
game designers to understand that
players want more for their efforts than a
few lines of text and a drop out of the
program? That was a slap in the face in
EOTB, and no less of one here. If space
was a consideration, they could have left
out the entire side trip of destroying a
doomsday laser to make room for a
decent ending. In Countdown to
Doomsday, destroying the doomsday
laser was the entire thrust of the game.
Here, it's no more than a trivial activity.
You go in to a small RAM installation,
find the laser, blow it up and that's that.
It's mainly a waste of time, since it has little or nothing to do with the plot of
Matrix.
There are, in fact, several instances of
these "doesn't mean a thing" situations.
The Sun King, for example. It has no effect on the game whether or not you

save his life. If you do, you get some
extra experience points; if you don't, you
get nothing extra. Otherwise, there isn't
much to it. The same is true for the
living ship (that vessel which changes
hands with alarming frequency). You can
bring about an alliance between the
Stormriders (whose ship it is) and the
pirates (who took it over, more or less),
but aside from providing experience, it
doesn't really affect anything in the game
play.
Overall, Matrix Cubed is a disappointment. Aside from the horrible ending, the
pieces just don't fit together as well as
they should. The individual scenarios that
make up the whole are uneven: some
are good, some are bad and the rest
seem to be there almost as afterthoughts. This one simply doesn't have
the smooth flow, the energetic "pulp
serial" feel to it, that characterized the
first game and made it such fun to play.
If a third in the series is planned, we'll
hope they go back to the design of
Countdown to Doomsday and manage
to avoid the problems of Matrix Cubed.

COMPUTER WARGAMING WORLD
May 1992

"I Came, I Played, I Conquered"

CGW # 94

A.I. MIA?
by Alan Emrich
with a flat screen, sort of like the old
football arcade game. Surrounding the
table are player stations that have mice
and keyboard input devices. Displayed
on the table-screen is a full-size VGA
map, with each player's units displayed
as if they were counters on a board.
Each player would take his turn like a
regular wargame, using the mouse to
select and move his units." — Mark Accetta, Jersey City, NJ

L

ast issue, I put forth an appeal for
greater gaming connectivity, specifically requesting that readers make a call
to someone who had placed an Opponents
Wanted ad or, better still, placing such an
ad. Because of the lag time inherent in
magazine publishing, letters are only now
trickling in regarding that plea, so we'll all
discover together in next issue's Opponents
Wanted section how well the rally went.

Old Business: Games Sans
Brains

84
Editorial: A.I. MIA?

86
Review: Utah Beach

90
Review: Harpoon Battleset 3: The Med
Conflict

94
Strategy: Secret Weapons of the
Luftwaffe

99
Review: Pacific Storm

102
Replay: Worlds at War

106
Review: The Perfect General Scenario
Disk — World War II Battle Set

108
Industry News: Civilization 2nd Edition
Computer Wargaming World is published twelve times a year as a free supplement in Computer Gaming World.

Unique to this editorial is a screen shot. It
is of the computerized version of the
boardgame EastFront by Columbia
Games on the Amiga (it is presently being
converted to IBM for Windows and should
be available in the early fourth quarter). A
complete game, with modem and
play-by-email features, all it lacks by current computer wargaming standards is an artificial
opponent (though it will also lack the hefty
price tag of most computer wargames). We
asked for your thoughts about relying solely on human intelligence for computer wargames. Here were some of the many, many
thoughtful comments we received:
"I am learning that BBSs are the most likely place to meet other wargamers. What the
world needs is true human-versus-human
games that let you exchange save game
files in an ongoing game. This could be
[by] BBS or disk by mail, but it makes a
real difference to have a real person instead
of Al." — Mike Raymond (on CompuServe)
"The inability to find opponents drove me
away from board games. The best alternative is to have games which offer multiplayer play as an option through modems,
but which include Al." — Leonardo Zevallos,
Huntington Beach, CA
"I am surprised that very few board
games have had a direct translation to the
computer.... I think one reason really is because of the daunting Al routines that must
be incorporated for solitaire play. Truly, Al
is the most complex programming of a
computer game. It is a module by itself that
must be created, for the most part, after the
game has been completed. If a publisher
were comfortable with creating a game
without Al, the development time would be
significantly reduced.
'In our dreams, we envision a large table

"I would definitely be interested in purchasing wargames based on or duplicated from many board game titles
without the Al." — John M. Slogick
"If I always had an opponent, I would
probably play boardgames. Computer wargames without Al is unthinkable." — C. B.
Blackard, Little Rock, AR
"Unless a game has a modem option,
regardless of its complexity, that sim/game
soon disappears from my hard drive. Who
wants to continually pound the hapless Al
once a $60 game has been mastered?
Modem games offer a freshness that comes
with playing human opponents. [They have
a] much longer lifespan and, at $20 a pop,
I'd buy them all! I refuse to purchase
games now unless they have the modem
option." — Dave Bednarek, Milwaukee, WI
"Then there are those people in my situation — grognards in small towns that don't
have human opponents and cannot afford
excessive telephone bills. Sure, Al in some
games is 'anything but intelligent,' but they
are all I have. Games without Al? No.
Games that give you a choice of human opponents or Al? I'm all for it." — Ray Stickler, Paris, IL
"Modem ability is a must, whether BBS or
real-time format." — Bill Whiteford, Denver,
CO

Vox Populi, Vox Dei
Not surprisingly, wargamers universally
want better Al in their computer wargames.
While solitaire-only wargamers are still a
large percentage of the group, those seeking to reach out and find human adversaries to challenge appear to be the largest
(and growing) segment of the wargaming
population. Like the first respondent, I've
found many new wargaming friends
through the networks and BBSs. It seems
like wargamers have the kind of disposable
income to buy computers and modems
and subscribe to a network. Gregarious by
nature, we've carved out wargaming niches
on every major network in the US.
In the meantime, the number of "computerized" board wargamers will only increase, as will those with modems, seeking
other electronically connected wargamers
to match wits with. One day, connectivity
will be a standard alongside solitaire play
versus Al. In the meantime, computer wargamers will continue to reach out and
crush someone.

Review

V for Victory:
Battleset 1: Utah Beach
SYSTEM:
Macintosh
PRICE:
$59.95
PROTECTION: None
Ed Rains
DESIGNER:
Three-Sixty Pacific
PUBLISHER:
Campbell, CA

TITLE:

Three-Sixty's V for Victory: Utah Beach
by John J. Vanore

Turns are divided into three phases per
player turn, replicating the sequential flow
common to most wargames (and in stark
contrast to titles such as Patton Strikes
Back, which uses a continuous game
clock).
Each turn begins with the Planning
Phase, at which time the player maps out
his forces' actions for the current turn.
Functions covered here include movement
and attacks by ground units, artillery support, air strikes and naval bombardment.
This is also the time to adjust supply level
allocations, if needed.

omputer wargaming can generally be viewed as an outgrowth of manual, or board wargaming, which relies on
unit counters and a hexagon-grid mapboard. Over the
years, software designers have tried a variety of approaches to
recreate the "feel" of boardgames, while incorporating all the advantages inherent to a computer-based game. After a decade of
efforts that have met with varying degrees of success, ThreeSixty Pacific appears to have come closest to a perfect synthesis of the board and computer formats. They achieved this
feat with V for Victory: Battleset 1: Utah Beach (hereinafter
Utah Beach). Perhaps most amazingly, they did it first for the
Macintosh platform, making full use of the Mac's graphic user interface (pull-down menus, etc.). Conversions to other platforms
are in the works; an IBM-compatible version is next and ThreeSixty may follow up with other formats as well. This reviewer, a
Macaholic, can only hope this initial release for the Macintosh is
a harbinger of the future.

C

Utah Beach (as described in the "Sneak Preview" in CGW
#88) starts up after the D-Day landings and deals with battles
and engagements involving U.S. and German forces in the
western portion of the invasion site. A total of six scenarios are
presented; one short introductory scenario to help players
familiarize themselves with system mechanics, four longer (and
increasingly complex) battle scenarios and the full campaign
which ties it all together.
"D-Day" is a generic military term that designates the date of
an amphibious assault, with the first wave scheduled to hit the
beach at H-Hour. For military historians and veteran gamers, however, there is only one D-Day — June 6th, 1944, which marked
the Allied invasion of Normandy along five beaches (supplemented by airborne drops behind those beaches). Three
beaches, Gold, Juno and Sword, saw landings by Commonwealth forces. Omaha and Utah Beaches were the sites of
American assaults and Utah Beach, the westernmost of the five,
is the locale of this game. Interestingly enough, however, none of
the scenarios included deals with the invasion itself. The earliest
start date for a scenario (the full campaign scenario, at that) is
June 7, the day after the landings.
Utah Beach is remarkably similar to a classic board wargame.
Movement is hexagon-based and units are rated for factors such
as attack, defense, movement and range (for artillery), as well as
the less tangible attributes of fatigue, morale and disruption.

Movement, courtesy of the Mac user interface, is a simple matter of "click-and-drag."
Artillery fire support allocation is handled
similarly, with the addition of holding down
the Command key to distinguish shooting
from moving. Likewise, with the air or
naval sidebar opened up, simply clicking on the desired target
hex is all that is necessary. If this becomes too big a burden, as
may happen in the larger and more complex scenarios, the computer "staff" is available to carry out these fire support allocation
functions, all from a pull-down menu. Attacks are planned just
like movement, except that the "movement" is made into an adjacent, enemy-occcupied hex. From a Command Bar at the bottom of the screen, the player has the option of selecting a
regular "Assault" (the default option), a light "Probe" or an "Allout Assault." (See the Strategy sidebar for an explanation of this
option.)
When "The Plan" is considered satisfactory, shifting to the Execution Phase will implement the plans of the previous phase,
and give the player a chance to watch his strategy unfold.
Ground forces, subject to their movement allowances, will follow
the paths traced out during Planning. Attacks also occur here —
these are carried out only by units which began the Execution
Phase adjacent to their intended target.
A particularly noteworthy aspect of Utah Beach is the quality
of the computer Artificial Intelligence (Al) routines used to control the computer opponents. As either the American or German,
the computer presents a tough, competent foe. The Al routines
appear to be heavily based on sound military doctrine, intertwined with a thorough knowledge of victory point objectives.
The computer is tenacious on defense, and very smart on offense. It shows a clear preference for conducting a limited number of massive, coordinated attacks each turn, with full consideration given to exploitation of terrain advantages.
A final note is necessary. As can be expected with the Mac,
sound and graphics are superb. Sound effects, which can be toggled on or off, are impressive and add to the atmosphere created
by the game system as a whole. The price to be paid for this
sophistication is that Utah Beach eats up nearly 2 MB on the
hard drive.
Every gamer knows that there are "nice-to-have" games, which
are curiosities at best, and "must-haves." Utah Beach is clearly
in the latter category, a wargame designed by wargamers for wargamers. While taking full advantage of the computer format, it
preserves the tactile feel of classic board wargaming in a
thoroughly historical venue, leaving this reviewer completely satisfied with a game well fought every time around.

Review

Hitting The Beach (Strategy Notes) Katz)
At the risk of sounding overly simplistic, this reviewer can only
state the obvious. The optimal way to play Utah Beach effectively
(i.e. to win) is to fight the battles and engagements according to
sound, tried-and-true battle doctrine. What follows, then, are some
general common-sense concepts to keep in mind during play. These
comments are generally applicable to both U.S. and German commanders.
Rather than view the battlefield from an extreme micro- (tactical) or
macro- (strategic) perspective, a player must have a firm handle on
his own force's strengths, weaknesses and capabilities. He must also
know what other assets are available to support his efforts. Using
only the on-map forces, without taking advantage of air strikes and
naval bombardment support, can be catastrophic.
Force status is critical! This cannot be repeated too often. Fatigued
units and units low on supply will not fight well. That is a given. In
fact, game documentation specifies a 3.3 percent decrease in combat strengths for each step of fatigue. (This from a rulebook that
omits most major algorithms used in combat resolution.) Fatigue
and disruption effects are serious, so take heed! Take advantage of
night turns to rest the forward-most units. Rotate front-line units into
the rear, while throwing newly-arrived forces into the fray. Actions
taken along the way to attenuate fatigue levels, particularly removing
units from enemy zones of control and completely resting them
during night turns, will pay dividends throughout the game in terms
of higher unit effectiveness, fewer casualties suffered, and a more impressive victory level. The key here is to walk a fine line. The player
must avoid driving his forces to a highly fatigued state, yet must
drive hard and fast enough to achieve his objectives in a timely manner. Easier said than done!

Utah Beach, while clearly showing its boardgame roots, takes advantage of the computer format and goes beyond the conventions
familiar to old grognards. Take, for instance, the victory conditions
and the absence of a "sudden death" victory. The program calculates victory point totals at the end of each turn and, in addition to
the usual "body count" method, victory points are awarded for possession of certain terrain features, notably cities and towns. Points
are awarded in Utah Beach on a cumulative, turn-by-turn basis,
precluding a player from making a last-minute dash to snatch up victory point objectives and winning on a technicality. This reviewer
has, on numerous occasions, eliminated all German units from the
map, but nonetheless lost the game. This resulted from taking too
much time in reaching assigned objectives, thus allowing the computer opponent to reap the victory points for territorial control turn
after turn. Frustrating...
Although the underlying premise of victory point calculation may
be valid, its representation is, in this reviewer's perspective, the one
weak spot in Utah Beach. The dynamics of the victory conditions
may inspire (and for this reviewer have inspired!) some less than orthodox tactics which, while useful in winning the game, may achieve
their ends in ahistorical and unsound ways. For example, after identifying and locating all cities which yield victory points, a crafty U.S.
player may detach a small group of battalion-sized units on a "citysnatching exercise," meant only to garner victory points. While this
writer does not endorse such an approach, it does cut down on the
nasty incidences of seeing a swastika-emblazoned flag waving at the
end of a scenario to indicate a German victory.
The key to success can be summed up in two words: "combined
arms." In the drive to achieve victory over the computer opponent
without resorting to questionable "tactics," the player must optimize
each attack and shatter the defenders. A balanced attacking force is
the key. A mix of infantry and armor is the foundation of a good >

Review

attack. Artillery support will help, either as bombardment, in direct
support of an attack or, in the interdiction mode, cutting off retreat
paths or the movement of reinforcements along major arteries. If assaulting a town or fortified area, one should not forget that each
division has an organic combat engineer battalion. While ostensibly
weak on offense, their special abilities in breaching obstacles provide
an odds-shift modifier that can make a crucial difference in an important assault.
When designating attacks or committing units to defense, one
must also remember to click on a unit's icon at the bottom of the
screen to call up the command bar and give the player the option of
specifying different levels of intensity for the operation. When playing
in a limited intelligence environment, for instance, the player may
want to execute a number of light "Probe" attacks (intelligence-gathering missions which minimize contact and the potential for friendly
casualties). When the intention is to seize territory or destroy enemy
forces, an "Assault" or "All-out Assault" is in order. An All-out Assault is based on increased determination of units involved in the
combat, rather than an increase in firepower or other tangible factors. The benefits from a successful All-out Assault can be enormous, but this maneuver is a two-edged sword. A failure will result in
a greatly-increased number of casualties to the attacking forces.
A few words are in order regarding stacking. The basic limit is
three battalions per hex. However, due to unit frontages on the offensive, only two battalions can effectively assault from a hex. Spread
out attacks from a number of hexes, serving to both cut off potential
retreat routes and overwhelm defenses by attacking from front, flank
and (possibly) the rear of a defensive position.
Turning to defense, common sense is reflected in the game
mechanics. There are three basic elements to be considered on
defense: terrain, prepared defensive positions and unit mode. Han-

dling terrain is obvious: hunker the units down in the most forbidding
landscape around. The Cotentin Peninsula is home to the bocage,
the notorious hedgerows comprised of sunken fields surrounded by
three-to-six foot high earthen walls. This is probably the best terrain
to defend from, and there is certainly no shortage of it in Utah
Beach. Bocage, or indeed any other terrain feature, can be enhanced
by prepared positions.
Fortifications, whose development requires the presence of engineer battalions, represent an extensive defensive network that includes trenches, minefields and the like. Merely "digging in," on the
other hand, provides forces with the benefits of foxholes, prepared
weapons positions and pre-planned fields of fire.
The essence of defense is having a plan in mind, one which will, if
not defeat the attacker entirely, then deny him his objectives long
enough to also deny victory. That defensive scheme must include assigning defensive modes to the troops in the trenches. The player
needs to determine how intensely to defend a particular position and
communicate that to the units in question. "Retreat if attacked" is a
viable option where slowing down the attacker is a desired objective
(and minimizes casualties for the defender). "Defend if attacked" is
the default mode, similar to the "Assault" option on offense. Maximum level of effort is defined by the "Hold at all Costs" option. Much
like the All-out Assault, this is a bloody choice which mandates a
higher level of casualties than allowing retreat. Of course, under a
particularly devastating assault, the defenders may not hold even
here, further magnifying the losses on defense.
The foregoing analysis merely scratches the surface of a complex
game, and is based on a scant few weeks of high-intensity testing.
However, the game mechanics are generally based on sound military
doctrine, and smart play will, as a rule, lead to success.

Review

The Cub Med Invasion
The Mediterranean Conflict: Harpoon Battleset #3
by Tim Carter
new to the Harpoon system, they take on a
more significant role in the more confined
spaces of the Mediterranean than they do in
the wide-open spaces of the Atlantic. When
these units can be spared from ASW and
search missions, they provide even the smallest task force with a long-range missile
capability. Against smaller vessels, helicopters can be deadly, so long as they remain
out of anti-aircraft range.

Tim Carter serves on the faculty of the Institute of International Relations at the University of British Columbia in Vancouver.

O

Finally, even those scenarios that rely on
the now out-of-date notion of a war between
the Soviet Union and NATO are given a distinctive flavor, due to the extensive use of
small craft and the navies of smaller NATO
allies such as France, Italy, Greece and
Turkey.
TITLE:
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
PUBLISHER:

ne of the great strengths of the Harpoon
system is its inherent ability to expand,
constantly providing the grognard with
new situations and new problems to solve. Harpoon Battleset
#3: The Mediterranean Conflict (MedCon), not only provides
players with new platforms and a new map, it also presents a
number of markedly different types of conflicts. The game, as a
whole, provides a different experience from either the GIUK or
North Atlantic Battlesets.

Harpoon Battleset #3:
The Mediterranean Conflict
Amiga, IBM
$29.95
Three-Sixty Pacific
Campbell, CA

The third Harpoon battleset includes not only U.S., Soviet and
Western European forces, but also the navies and air forces of Israel, Egypt, Syria and Libya. In fact, more than half of the
scenarios included in the battleset involve situations which do not
take place in the context of a superpower conflict. This is a welcome development, given that such "minor" conflicts seem
much more likely to occur in real life.

New Faces, New Forces
While Three-Sixty Pacific has provided players with a number
of hypothetical Third World War scenarios, the real heart of MedCon lies within those scenarios that deal with conflicts among
the smaller powers within the region. Several Arab-Israeli
scenarios are included, as well a war between Greece and Turkey
and one between Egypt and Libya. Regardless of the countries involved, the battles in MedCon have a different feel from those
that take place in either the GIUK gap or the North Atlantic. In
part this is due to the confined spaces of the Mediterranean itself.
As well, the mix of platforms available in most instances
provides players with new situations and new problems.
Two important elements in the third battleset are fast attack
craft (missile boats) and attack helicopters. While missile boats
saw some action in the smaller scenarios of the GIUK battleset,
the treatment of these platforms is much more complete in MedCon. Fast attack craft comprise almost the entire surface navy of
many smaller states. Further, every scenario included has these
craft on at least one side, and victory often depends upon the
coordination of missile boats with other air and sea elements
(see strategy and tactics below).
Although helicopters capable of surface strike missions are not

Combined Ops in Confined Spaces
(Strategy)

Since so many of the platforms available are
not top-of-the-line equipment, players will have to
be much more cautious in their use of some equipment. Providing a surface group with anti-air and ASW coverage now requires
considerably more coordination, as air units will primarily be
based on land, rather than at sea. On the plus side, the area
being dealt with is generally a lot smaller, making the coordination of forces much easier.
As usual, combined operations are the name of the game. However, given that the task forces available are unlikely to be as
well-rounded in terms of capabilities as was the case in the Atlantic, combining forces takes more care and more planning. (This
will be more familiar to those players who have spent a substantial amount of time playing the Soviets.)
A typical operation might involve a central task force with
limited air capabilities complemented by land-based air and missile boats. While air units should provide ASW and CAP for the
main task force, missile boats can operate at a distance from the
main task force to provide a screen against surface attack. If possible, diesel submarines should operate in conjunction with both
the central task force and the screening groups, as their speed
makes interception under other circumstances a matter of pure
luck. A particularly useful ploy is to entice enemy forces to
chase a missile boat squadron onto a waiting submarine.

Just the FACs (Tactics)
Missile boats are the weapon of choice for many smaller states,
as they are cheap and pack an effective anti-ship punch. However, the almost total lack of defense means that fundamentally
different tactics are needed if fast attack craft are to avoid getting
into mutually suicidal exchanges with similar classes of enemy
boats.
Missile boats are most effective when they have aircraft to spot
for them, as this may allow them to attack undetected and escape without suffering a retaliatory attack. The helicopters on
board the Israeli Saar 4.5s are worth their weight in gold for
precisely this reason. These helicopters should be protected at all
costs and should only make attacks themselves if there is no risk.

Review

Often missile craft will either not have the luxury of air support,
or both sides will be able to perform searches, nullifying any advantage. When this is the case, all that a player can do is try to
keep his ships alive until they can launch their missiles, then flee
at top speed.
One tactic which seems to improve group survivability is to
deploy one's missile boats in a line-ahead formation, heading
directly toward the most likely threat. While the front ship will almost always be sunk by an enemy attack, many incoming missiles will continue to strike the wreck long after the ship has been
destroyed. This seems to be particularly useful in the case of
bearing-only attacks.
This sacrificial ship can provide time for the rest of the group to
launch their missiles or, if they are out of range, to flee until the
enemy has lost contact and then attempt another attack (possibly from another direction). Continuing an attack in the face of superior enemy firepower is a recipe for disaster, as most units will
not survive long enough to close the necessary distance to attack.
An alternate ploy is to detach a single ship, which can sail
slightly ahead of the main force, occasionally turning on its radar
in search of the enemy. Again, this ship is unlikely to live very
long. However, it may well allow the rest of a group to launch its
own attack undetected, the key to success with missile craft.

Matching Technology in the Air (Doctrine)
Third World countries are usually able to deploy some modern
platforms. However, they often have to make do with older units
in some key areas, in spite of the fact that these units are lacking. This is particularly the case with respect to air forces. Many

strike aircraft, particularly among the Arab nations, are not
equipped with modern sensors, making them less suited for
night or bad weather operations. However, players should take
the advice given on the Harpoon database with a grain of salt
when it comes to the use of older or obsolete platforms. Even
though many older fighters do not have the ability to detect
enemy aircraft themselves, they can still be effective at night, if
they are guided to their targets by other radars.
The key weakness of older aircraft such as the MiG-21 and the
A-4 Skyhawk is their lack of long-range missiles. Due to this
weakness, these aircraft should not be used against advanced interceptors, such as the F-15. Still, this reviewer found them to be
effective both at night and during the day against opponents
which were not equipped with medium- or long-range air-to-air
missiles. Older aircraft should not be used against surface targets
except under good conditions, as the lack of advanced ordnance
and targeting systems usually leads to high losses and little target damage.
Players should be willing to use aircraft and loadouts in roles
that they were not originally intended to fill. In the GIUK battleset,
this reviewer sank whole Soviet fleets using waves of ASW
aircraft armed with Harpoon missiles. In Med Con, players will be
faced with a serious lack of modern hardware, especially longrange stand-off missiles. Most anti-radar missiles make a fairly effective substitute for anti-ship stand-off missiles, particularly when
used in large numbers.
Harpoon: Battleset Three: The Mediterranean Conflict is an
entertaining and thought-provoking addition to the Harpoon system. The combination of imaginative scenarios with new (and/or
outdated) platforms and situations give the battleset a distinctive
style of play that sets it apart from the Atlantic battlesets.

Strategy

Singin' the 8th Air Force Blues
Strategy and Tactics for Lucasfilm's
Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe
by Jim Lowerre

The Way It
Should Be (Allied Strategy)
Step One: Destroy
the enemy air force.
The first target in any
air campaign is the
enemy air force. Attack the most capable
Gruppen first: Me-229,
Me-262, Me-163, FW190, Me 109, in that
order. Concentrate on
nothing but occupied
Luftwaffe airfields until
only two or three Gruppen remain (unlike the
Iraqis, the Luftwaffe
has no place to run).
Every turn thereafter,
attack all occupied airfields with at least one
Bomber Group.

C

ombat flying in WWII remains a fascination of many a mature PC pilot.
By that time, aircraft had a trusty
mechanical reliability. No more were skilled
and daring souls lost to pure coincidence or
malicious fate. Generally, they killed
themselves.
In aerial combat of the era, pilot
skill, rather than weather, winds or faulty wires, determined who would be
toasted and who would be toast.
Fighters fought while bombers
bombed and everyone had a grand
old time on the ground. Lucasfilm's
Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe lets
period aficionados sail through the
skies of the Third Reich in both directions. Not only can they test their
flying/fighting skills, but they can also
test their analytical abilities. Players
may direct either side in the first true
operational air campaign conducted
by man against man.
The U.S. 8th Air Force initiated and
pursued this campaign with a little
help from their friends (the British),
but not much. It is from the perspective of the Mighty 8th that the following discussion of tactics and operations comes. May the reader enjoy,
and soar.

Step Two: Destroy
the enemy economy.
With the Luftwaffe
down and out (pun intended), attacking the
German economy becomes both feasible and profitable. First off,
destroy the enemy's research and development centers. This will prevent a disadvantageous technology mismatch later.
Don't panic, there's plenty of time.

Now, go after the industries affected by
the victory conditions. Attack the highest
pay-off/largest percentage of industry targets first. Don't trust the available campaign intelligence. The summary and map
aren't reliable. Both have out-dated or incomplete information. The only good
source of information is Ultra and, as in history, it should be used sparingly to prevent
discovery.
Note that keeping track of one's own
results is a must (see Chart A, Example Target Attack Results). Don't attack old targets
unless the initial attack yielded poor results
or several turns have passed. Expect targets to regenerate themselves (one building
every turn or two) and recognize that flak
fully regenerates each turn. Don't forget to
check and attack all occupied Luftwaffe airfields each turn. Otherwise, the Luftwaffe
will regenerate and the player will suddenly
be intercepted again. Once the enemy is
down, keep him down.

The Personal Touch (The
Mission)
Step One: Destroy the enemy air force.
Fly the P-47 in the close escort role (maximum firepower, ammunition and accuracy).
Attack the closest occupied airfield
(fuel/time-over-target considerations). Put
three bombers in one flight group and four
escorts in two more (if more than four escorts are used, there will be an endless
stream of interceptors, which makes it very
difficult to attack the target). Use high-point
NPC pilots (they reduce losses and improve
target effects). Start the bombers at 20,000
feet and the escorts at 22,000. Go out to
take on the first group of interceptors, then

Strategy

stay close to the bombers until they're no
longer threatened. Don't
dump the drop tank(s)
when escorting (he's
after the bombers; the
player will be just fine as
long as he doesn't get in
front of him).
After there are no more
enemy interceptors,
release the wingman
back to base and dive
down to the target. After
the bombers attack,
finish off the enemy airfield. Attack the flak
towers first, one at a
time, from outside the airfield perimeter, out of
range of all but the target
tower. After destroying all
buildings on the primary
target, take out as many
buildings as possible at
other target locations.
Repeat until the missions

are no longer intercepted (Luftwaffe
withdraws out of escort range or is reduced
to three or fewer Gruppen). Expect heavy
bomber losses in the first two or three missions (like losing all of them before they
reach the target).
Step Two: Destroy the enemy economy.
When enemy Gruppen are no longer a
threat, switch to V-weapon and economic
targets (see Chart B, Target Description).
Use seven P-47s in the dive bomb and
strafe role. Put the maximum number of
aircraft (six) in the flight group (pilots not
in the player's flight don't do as well as
those with him, even when high-point NPC
pilots are assigned). Start at 100 feet when
attacking flak-defended targets. Once all
buildings on the one's target are destroyed,
release the wingmen back to base (they
don't add anything in subsequent attacks
and may run out of fuel) and go on to
destroy more buildings. Each turn, attack a
fresh target.

V-weapon targets are undefended and
thus the most vulnerable. V-2 sites are
recognizable from altitude and distance as
yellow patches on the countryside, V-1 sites

Strategy

results tracking chart to calculate requirements for follow-up strikes.

"Hey, You in the Back"
(Reserves)
Deploy reserve fighter groups to separate
forward airfields. Groups on separate airfields give maximum flexibility in creating
flight groups. Forward airfields give maximum escort/fighter bomber range.

Leading Little Boys (Pilot
Management)
Before starting a campaign, personal expertise and experienced pilots are needed.
Use the MS-DOS MkDir command to create a pilot save subdirectory and call it
PILOTSAV. Use the Historical Missions and
Tours of Duty to build one high-point NPC
fighter pilot and one high-point bomber
crew. Fly the easier (lowest numbered) historical missions repeatedly. Save the NPC
pilot/crew to the PILOTSAV subdirectory
every two or three missions. If a pilot or
crew is lost, copy the file out of the subdirectory back into the SWOTL directory.

as black patches. Drop bombs on the
tough buildings, strafe the others (see Chart
C, Strafing). Pick a primary target in the
vicinity of several others (this ensures running out of ammunition before fuel).
When attacking economic targets, personally attack the flak positions while the
flight attacks the target. From altitude and
distance flak batteries show as bright green
patches in cities and dark green patches in
the country. Stay beneath 200 feet and the
flak can't shoot. Then, once the flak is
destroyed, it is possible to finish off the
buildings the flight missed.
When planning a mission against an
economic target, use high magnification
and range circles to identify threat flak batteries (flak batteries have a range of three
miles, so the actual target area extends
beyond the map symbol). Begin the mission where the highest threat flak batteries
can be attacked first (those with the
greatest target area coverage).
Attack guns from the side. Ignore the
building (fire control center?) behind the
guns. Each gun counts as a separate building for the player's personal score. When
the flak stops shooting in the target area,
one can turn to finish remaining buildings.
High-point NPC fighter pilots in one's
flight group (see Chart D, Pilot Rank Points)
will continue to attack the primary target
until it is destroyed or they exhaust ammunition or fuel. High-point NPC fighter pilots in
other flight groups and average- to lowpoint NPC fighter pilots in the player's flight
group will make a single bombing pass and
a single strafing pass, then return to base.
Using high-point NPCs allows one to orbit
the primary target while one's flight takes it

apart, saving one's own ordnance for subsequent targets.
Don't assign rockets to other aircraft
(NPC pilots do better with bombs). Use
wing bombs and drop tanks for distant targets. Pick the closest target to allow carrying bombs rather than fuel. Pick the target
with the fewest flak guns defending it. Each
turn, make an attack on a fresh target.
Avoid flak and towers on the way home.

Other Touches (Secondary
Missions)
Results of secondary attacks depend on
the number of buildings destroyed at the
primary and subsequent targets. For maximum points, make the primary attack on
nearby undefended V-weapon sites. Ensure
that all buildings at the primary target are
destroyed, then destroy as many other buildings as possible, within fuel/ordnance limits.
Assign secondary attacks to the tough targets. A single bombing group or ground-attack group will completely destroy a secondary target if the primary target is completely destroyed and four or five more buildings
are destroyed on subsequent target(s). Allocate two attacking groups on the most important secondary targets to ensure destruction (i.e. Peenemunde research site,
Schweinfurt ball-bearing plant). Use the

As an alternative to the Historical Missions
and Tours of Duty, build the pilot/crew's
score using the custom mission builder.
Don't add defending fighters, but concentrate on hitting buildings. Initially pick targets near England. Drop bombs individually. Attempt to destroy one building with
each bomb/bomb release. For the fighter
pilot, fly the P-47 with bombs. Strafe after
bombing until out of ammunition (hmmm,
sounds like a prescription). Attack different
types of targets to become familiar with the
layout of each. Don't forget to get back
over England before ending the mission.
Continue to fly individual missions until a
full colonel fighter pilot and bomber crew
are developed. Then, use the MS-DOS copy
command to clone the two colonels into
other NPCs. Make as many as desired.
Save them all to the PILOTSAV subdirectory. As pilots are lost, resurrect them out
of the subdirectory.

End Game (Conclusions)
Hit the Luftwaffe with everything on the
first turn. One group, bomber or attack can
and should be assigned to each and every
occupied Luftwaffe airfield. Then all one has
to do is fly fast and shoot straight. If the
first mission is successful, the rest of the
campaign will be a breeze — one might
even win in five or six turns. This writer has
dropped the Luftwaffe from 18 Gruppen to
one on the opening turn of a strategic
bombing campaign.

Review

Simulations Canada's Pacific Storm: The Midway Campaign
by Alan Emrich
TITLE:
Pacific Storm: The Midway Campaign
IBM
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
$60.00
PROTECTION: None
DESIGNER:
R. C. Crandall
PUBLISHER:
Simulations Canada
Bridgewater, Nova Scotia, Canada

n 1942, our struggle with the
Japanese was a military one. Six
months after their sneak attack on
Pearl Harbor, Japan had rolled up such
an impressive string of military victories
that they were ahead of even their own
optimistic timetable of victory. Still,
many Japanese leaders knew that their
economy could not match their Western
foes, and that the Allies had to be
brought to their knees before they could
be brought to the bargaining table,
where a negotiated peace could take
place.

I

For the Allies, the Doolittle raid in
April, 1942, was done strictly to bolster
flagging American morale. While having little real effect on the war, it
did wake up the Japanese and encourage them to try another bold
move in an attempt to deal a fatal blow to the remnants of the
American Pacific Fleet. Pearl Harbor had to be neutralized and the
Americans crushed. The stepping stone was a small island in the
Pacific which had seen great importance during the previous 75
years as a coaling station for steamships. It was located halfway between Hawaii and Japan and was aptly named, therefore, Midway.

Pulling Up Anchor
For zero to two players (playing at the same machine), Simulations Canada's Pacific Storm: The Midway Campaign is a
strategic-level wargame covering the crucial eighteen-week period
beginning on May 15, 1942, using nine two-week turns. While the
Japanese have the initiative, the Americans need a "win" for public
consumption, so both sides are on the prowl and in need of a victory. Players assume the role of either Admiral Yamamoto or Admiral
Nimitz and have massive naval and air forces at their disposal. Some
ground forces are also at the ready, but theirs is a support role in
this clash of navies.
Players must make decisions at the highest levels and weigh costs
versus benefits carefully. This is particularly important for the
Japanese player, because making a large commitment requires drawing from the strategic oil reserve (at a great penalty in victory
points). Interestingly, once the player sets the wheels in motion and
orders out the fleet, little is left for the player to influence. Instead,
one watches events unfold, while only interfering by issuing the
highest level of orders (engage, retreat, etc.).
Each turn, one consults the game's main menu and checks the intelligence reports. Here, several sub-menus offer lists of current data
on friendly forces, plus estimates of enemy forces and intentions.
The latter information is crucial to gameplay, since knowing enemy
intentions means knowing when to have the fleet sortie and where.
American estimates, thanks to their breaking of the Japanese codes,
are usually accurate to the letter, while the Japanese player will have
to rely on reports that are less accurate.

New Orders Have Come In
After checking the intelligence reports, one must pull up
the strategic menu and create the plan of action for that
turn. This consists of answering five questions: Should the
operation be direct or subtle? (e.g., should the Americans
slam into a Japanese base just to stir the pot?) Will the
combat doctrine be to go for enemy carriers first, or battleships? The next three questions concern levels of force
commitment. The player can set the tempo of operations
(i.e., its breadth and the number of different locations that
might be covered during the turn), the force commitment
level (committing reserves has a negative effect on victory
points) and the risk level (once engaged, how desperately
should they fight?).

These decisions made, one's staff works up the detailed
orders and the game turn can be consummated. However,
for those who like to meddle with individual ships and missions, players can select the operational menu and take a
more "hands-on" approach to management. It is here that
specific reserves can be added to specific task forces,
specific units can be transferred or transported to various
locations. The execution of these operations is fairly
simple, although this reviewer discovered the process of
transporting troops and planes more through trial and
error than by his careful study of the nine-page rules manual.

Midway or Bust
Although the game has only one scenario (a head-on collision in
the Pacific), some variants are provided. Play can be conducted with
either open or, more realistically, limited intelligence. Both sides have
a strategic pool of forces (reserves) which can be committed (at a
cost in victory points) to operations. Since major points are awarded
for intimidating the other player into aborting a mission and for capturing bases, there are clear benefits to taking more risks in the
game. However, the risks are only worth it if one wins, so committing
the troops to battle can be just a tad nerve-wracking.
Combat is resolved by reading "radio messages" along the bottom
of the screen. It is here that the status of the battles will be told, blow
by blow. Since there are no graphics in this (or any other) Simulations Canada computer wargame (save the map card used for reference when plotting operational moves), reading about the action is
all a player can do. Furthermore, sound support is limited to IBM
beeps and boops, which punctuate the damage of major ships (such
as carriers).
While it has always seemed that $60 is a lot to pay for a computer
wargame with no graphics or sound support, it is nonetheless impressive to find a wargame that, at its highest level of play, can be
finished in under 15 minutes. If one wants to muck about with the individual forces here and there (and what wargamer could resist?), a
normal game lasts for about an hour. The "Storm" series from SimCan is one of their best, and this one will pique any player's interest
in their upcoming strategic Pacific war game due out later this year.
Since Simulations Canada games are scarce on the store shelves,
here is the address:
Simulations Canada
P.O. Box 452
Bridgewater, Nova Scotia
Canada B4V 2X6
Be sure to write and at least get their catalog and newsletter.

-

Replay

Carriers in Space
A Strategic Analysis of the Opening
Rounds in a Worlds At War Campaign
by Michael Peck

he
T

interstellar conflict between the
Blue and Red forces began with
fevered mobilization. Both sides constructed their fast-escalating fleets with
the realization that the game could be
decided by their initial decisions. This article is the story of that conflict, as experienced in a standard 50-turn campaign of RAW Entertainment's Worlds
at War (WAW), with the human player
commanding the Blue forces and a computer player commanding the Red forces. The hidden movement provisions for
task forces and neutral planets were used.

Production Parameters
Fleets must be tailored specifically to a
player's overall strategy. If the plan is to
attack aggressively, the initial task forces
should, of course, carry heavy offensive
armament. In this conflict, Blue took the
opposite tack. The Blue Admiralty
planned to gobble up neutral planets as
quickly as high school students chew up
green MaMs. The operational goal was
to avoid combat and, like gas, expand to
fill the vacuum.
Though such a plan indicates a more
passive strategy than that to which most
gamers are accustomed, the truth is that
most victory points in WAW come from
planetary conquest rather than space
combat. Therefore, the Blue Admiralty
used its initial 500 production points to
build three troop convoys, with Staying
Power and Defense Power of 50 points
respectively, as well as five scouts and
45 Marine Landing Craft. The SPs are

needed to give the task force speed, the
high defense strength will make it a
tough nut to crack and the scouts will
spot what lies ahead. In this all-or-nothing
gambit, the troop convoys carry no offensive armament because the admiralty is
gambling that combat will be unlikely in
the early stages of the game. More importantly, fleets can always be returned to
port at a later date to be fitted with bombers and missiles. Similarly, the planet
which contained the Blue base received
just 50 points, all of which are used as
SPs in order to generate replacement
points at an accelerated pace. If trouble
were to appear, replacement points could
quickly be converted into DPs that would
serve to shore up the base's defenses.

Matters of Maneuver
Using the hidden planet option meant
that planets would not appear until the
auto-scouts reported the sightings on
Turn 2. So, Blue's command structure
sent its three TFs in a shotgun formation,
moving generally toward the southwest
and away from the Blue headquarters located in the northeast corner of the map.
This procedure was ordered to enhance
the chance of getting a jump on new discoveries.
Note that WAWs most distinctive feature is its highly unusual map and movement system. This means that the variable cost to move between boxes each
turn — or the severing of links between
boxes — makes movement almost as random as the dice rolls in Monopoly.

Players are well advised to use the shift
+ arrow keys to scroll ahead and see
what the boxes look like. Too often, the
route which looks like an easy path will
halt in a dead end a few boxes down the
line.
Although the auto-scouts are fairly efficient, the Blue Admiralty also launched
two independent scouts toward the Red
map edge in order to hedge its all-out
gamble with extra intelligence. The mission objective for these scouts was to locate the Red home base and, as a result,
shadow any fleets that might leave said
base.

Invasion Information
By the second turn, the auto-scouts discovered several planets. One crucial variable in WAW is the distribution of
planets, which varies each game. Nothing is more frustrating than watching all
the neutral planets appear in an
opponent's territory. Fortunately, in the
campaign being reported upon, the distribution was balanced, with several
planets located in both Red and Blue territory.
The Blue Admiralty immediately dispatched two TFs toward a prime 25-point
world nearby, while the third force
headed toward a more distant 30-point
world. Admittedly, there were smaller
(and more easily attainable) planets
closer to Blue TFs, but the command
staff determined that the additional victory points would make it more

Replay

worthwhile to go for the high-value
worlds. Almost as important would be
the potential production points they
could add to the Blue Empire. The 15 or
20 points produced by a high-value
planet may not seem like much, but
once those numbers are multiplied by
two or three planets over 50 turns, it
makes a decided difference. For example, a small TF could feasibly be built
on one planet, then could stop at other
bases to be fitted with additional equipment.
Still, the hardest part of WAW is taking
neutral worlds in the first place, because
planetary assaults are exercises in frustration. The root of the trouble is the invasion formula contained in the rules
book. It essentially gives the optimum attack only a 50 percent chance of success. For example, attacking a 25-point
planet with 25 Marines has a 50 percent
chance of success; quadrupling the assault force to 100 Marines only raises the
odds to 80 percent. A shortage of
Marines, combined with the difficulty of
transporting them to distant planets,
makes overkill tough to accomplish on
all but the weakest of worlds.

boxes and had neared the map edge. On
the way, they had also run into a Red
bomber formation heading toward Blue
territory. It is a good idea to check the
strategic map every turn, since the computer announces any enemy TFs which
have been detected, but neglects to update player admirals on any missile or
bomber attacks.
Though WAW is a variant on the carrier
battles of the Pacific War (why else
would there be night flying rules in a
space game?!), players who expect to
stop enemy bombers with a screen of interceptors are going to be disappointed.
There are no fighters in the game and
TFs cannot outrun high-speed bombers.
Once bombers are spotted, it is too late.
Also, although the rules manual suggests that TFs split up in order to
hamper detection, that also leaves them
vulnerable to piecemeal destruction if
they are detected by enemy scouts.

The Blue Admiralty opted to land 25
points of Marines on a 25-point world,
hoping for the most efficacious results.
With the negative result, it proved most
fortuitous that it had ordered the second
TF along as insurance. The second assault proved successful and the brass
from the Blue forces managed to breathe
a sigh of relief.
Unfortunately, just as the initial victory
was secured, the planetary population
rebelled against the new military rulers.
The bewildering frequency of rebellions is
positively nightmarish in WAW, because
rebellion usually occurs several turns
after the planet has been conquered,
when a player's forces are busily
engaged in some other sector. There is
nothing a player can do about it, other
than always keeping a few Marines in
reserve to reoccupy discontented worlds.
In the campaign currently under discussion, the dejected Blue TFs were forced
to return home in order to embark more
troops. Meanwhile, Red had already
taken two worlds (actually three, but one
rebelled), giving it an edge in the victory
point race — a point constantly rubbed in
by the VP graph which appears every
turn.

Bomb Basics
By Turn 5, Blue's two independent
scouts had surmounted the labyrinth of

Defense in WAW is based solely on the
combined DP of any task forces and
bases in the box. Therefore, Blue moved
its two nearest TFs together so that the
41 Red bombers would confront a total
DP of 100 when they hit. This proved to
be a wise decision, since it decimated the
bombers at little cost to the defender.

What Goes Around Comes
Around
By turn 10, the plans of the Blue Admiralty had started to unravel. Although
it had managed to capture the 30-point
world, the Red forces occupied three
planets in the same interval. In a move
of desperation, Blue decided to divert
some of its ships to attack Red forces,
while the remainder continued the planethunting initiated at the beginning of the
conflict. To accomplish this, Blue was to
refit two task forces with additional
Marines, while the third was given bom-

bers. The combat system favors one
large strike over several smaller and
often uncoordinated attacks, so it usually
pays to concentrate all bombers in one
task force.
Blue opted not to use any guns, trusting that their plans would not call for
their ships to enter close combat range
with Red TFs. Missiles were also rejected
because, although they are very fast,
they only allow one shot. At least, any
bombers that might survive could be reused in a later sortie.
The two "amphibious" groups that were
dispatched headed for the 25-point
planet, while the attack TF headed
toward Red territory, relying on the
scouts to provide accurate information
on enemy movements. Note that, although the speed of the bombers is impressive, it is easy to launch them prematurely. Bombers must be recovered by
the beginning of the fourth turn, giving
them three turns to travel to and from
their targets. With the high probability
that the safe path going in will become a
dead end going out, carriers need to go a
little closer. This, of course, is a riskier
proposition for the carriers themselves,
but what is a carrier without bombers?
Blue's carrier TF did manage to close
the range on an enemy TF, which had
been shadowed continuously by an independent scout. Then it was Red's turn to
feel the wrath of carrier-based air power,
as 70 bombers pounded a 40-DP task
force and managed to decimate it while
only garnering moderate losses themselves. This was immediately followed by a
retaliatory bomber and missile strike
which inflicted light damage. (Presumably, Red's scouts were also doing surveillance.)
At this point, Red was still ahead, but
the Blue forces were closing the gap,
boosted by the capture of a second
planet. Then, with two high-value worlds
under its control, Blue felt confident
enough to order the bulk of its forces to
engage in offensive missions in Red territory, while a single amphibious group
would continue to mop up the remaining
neutrals.
Whether Blue was to be successful or
not would depend on the prowess displayed in the offensive missions against
the Red forces. The important factor is
that these opening gambits allowed Blue
to reach a winnable position. It is to be
hoped that CGW readers have better battlefield luck and find themselves in a winnable position even sooner than the Blue
Empire did in this game.

Strategy

The Perfect General: WWII Scenario Disk
Richard Savage
QP's first
scenario disk for
The Perfect
General is a real bargain in terms of price,
fixes to the original and
playability. This reviewer
walked into the local
software store and
bought a copy for a
mere $24.95, quite a bargain compared to what
is usually paid for
software these days.
Upon arriving home and
installing the scenario
disk, it proceeded to update the latest version
onto the Perfect
General's .EXE file,
fixing a few bugs that
had affected the modem play. Excellent!
This reviewer had already contacted QQP
via phone about these bugs, and had
received two disks in the mail, at no cost,
with all bugs fixed. If all software companies adhered to this policy, a lot of the
griping on the Bulletin Boards would cease.

they did in real life, and
every yard is likely to be
measured in smoking
tanks and eliminated infantry companies. This
reviewer's suggestion to
those who play this
scenario via modem is
to play the long game
(15 turns instead of 10)
in order to give the attacker any chance at victory and to limit the
defender to 200 or 250
points, even in the long
game, to get nearly historical results.

Q

The Battle Set Scenario Disk comes with
all the maps in a bound booklet, minus the
Pegasus Bridge "Beginner's Game." This is
an improvement over the original, in which
the maps were loose, with different maps
on both sides. Also included is a booklet
describing the battles, game length, how
many purchase points the attacker and
defender receive, special restrictions as to
what units each side may buy, terrain and
weather effects, reinforcement points to be
received by each side and documentation
on victory points.
Finally, we come to the scenarios... all 15
of them. Unlike the original game, which
only had generic scenarios with a couple of
WWII scenarios tacked on, this scenario
disk is devoted to battles that a lot of us
have come to know, study, and boardgame
(if the reader is a grognard like this
reviewer is). The folks at QQP must have
received some feedback on their original
game — mainly that players were having
the most fun playing "Alamein" and "Patton Kicks Butt." This reviewer played the latter scenario ten times via modem with his
trusty opponent, and each game revealed
new strategies and different approaches.
Clearly, more WWII scenarios were in order.
This reviewer can't help but compare The
Perfect General to those old Avalon Hill
boardgame favorites: Panzer Blitz and Panzer Leader, with the nod going to Panzer
Leader because of the "opportunity fire" involved in The Perfect General. Basically,
the new WWII Scenario Disk can be divided
into three different categories: 1) Pacific Battles (Guadalcanal, Okinawa, Saipan, Iwo
Jima, and Oahu [What if?]); 2) Desert Battles (Kasserine Pass, Gafsa, and Gazala-Bir

Hacheim) and 3) European
Battles (Pegasus Bridge, Sicily, Anzio, Utah Beach,
Omaha Beach, Arnhem and Kharkov).
Finally, issue will have to be taken with
Alan's statement in his pre-release preview
that this game "little lends itself to modem
play." Modem play is the whole reason for
this game: the wargamer's dream of being
able to play a wargame when weather conditions or "wargaming widows" make face-toface play impossible. Alan mentioned in his
preview that too much time seems to be
spent "waiting for the other fellow to make
his move." Well, time is relative. If one has
laid an ambush, setting bazooka teams in a
forest next to a road and waiting for the
loyal opposition to roar up in a recon
vehicle loaded with valuable engineers, one
can hardly tear one's eyes from the screen.
Another thrill is turning on the "Show Artillery Plots" option and watching one's opponent roll his self-propelled artillery right
into the impact areas of those (previously
plotted) heavy artillery units! There is simply nothing else like this on the market for
those of us who like tactical war games.

How to Become the "Perfect
General" in World War II
Obviously, reviewing every battle, along
with revealing subtle strategies and hints,
could fill the entire issue. Instead, this brief
article will be the first in a series of onepage analyses of Perfect General scenarios.
This issue features the "Okinawa"
scenario. This one is for players who have
complained about the lack of a competent
computer opponent. When playing the attacker, the player is channeled by the terrain into three corridors, across heavily
guarded rivers and through very slow terrain. The defender has a wealth of artillery
and mines available, along with some nasty
heavy tanks and SPAs. After playing this a
few times, one might be able to beat the
computer, but it will be close. Against a
human opponent, forget it. Casualties
among the attacker tend to soar just as

Attacker: The best
strategy for the attacker
is to bring along some engineers to remove
the mines that will inevitably be found
strewn liberally across one's path and to
rebuild the bridges which will have been immediately destroyed by any competent
defender. The name of the game for the attacking player is to advance, at all costs.
The attacker may even have to use some
alleged Russian tactics and march a couple
of infantry units across a mine, sacrificing
them for the ability to free up that section
of the road for the advance.
The attacking player should try to get victory point cities in artillery range and sight
as soon as possible in order to let the big
guns do their work. The only relief for the attacker is that every time he kills a unit, he
knows there will be no replacement for it.
Defender: Thoughtful placement of
mines is a must. Defenders should not be
afraid to buy six or eight of them. They will
be worth their weight in gold in delaying the
attacking player. One should also buy an
engineer unit and place it in the rear area,
on some bridge that the attacker will have
to cross later in the game. Then, after the
engineer blows the bridge, he can lay mines
on the opposite bank. When the attacker
gets too near, the engineers can be moved
into a city, where they will do a better than
average job against attacking armor.
Also, heavy and light artillery should be
carefully positioned. It is good to count
those hexes so maximum casualties can be
inflicted as the attacker advances. Deploying infantry units in the woods and on top
of hills to spot for the artillery is also important. Finally, defenders should buy a couple
of heavy tanks and a couple of SPAs, just
to ruin the attacker's day. Nothing is more
disheartening for an attacking player than
to finally drive a light tank adjacent to a victory city, only to find a heavy tank about to
commence opportunity fire on the light
tank itself. One cannot resist the chance to
crush the attacker psychologically, as well
as physically.

Industry News

by Alan Emrich
ngineers, mathematicians, programmers, handymen... there are certain
kinds of people who just love to
tinker with things. Sid Meier is just such a
designer. Each morning during the development of Sid Meier's Civilization, he would
enter the Microprose building and hand a
new version of the game to Bruce Shelly.
After Bruce, the playtesters glommed onto
the new code. By the end of the day, they
would have suggestions and comments,
and the next day Sid would produce yet
another updated version of the game in
response to these suggestions.

many small processing units working in concert with a system for message passing can
often surpass the effectiveness of one very
large processing unit. In practical Civilization terms, this means that a player with
several small cities has an advantage over
one with a few large cities.

E

Still, a handful of in-house playtesters can
only do so much in the development time
allotted. When a game is released, the
game-buying public becomes, de facto, a
vast army of tens of thousands of
playtesters. Each individual consumer
might have suggestions or comments, and
some might even devise a perfect plan or
counter to a computer program's artificial
intelligence not previously thought of by the
smaller, in-house playtest group.
So it was when "a room full of computer
scientists, mathematicians and cognitive
psychologists" got together and dissected
Civilization as a puzzle to be solved, rather
than a game to be played (of course, they
add, "...these are the same people who
think graph theory is fun.") Their findings
have been posted over many lively strings
of information on CompuServe and have piqued the interests of designer Sid Meier.
They have found two optimal plans for running roughshod over the Al in Civilization,
to which Sid Meier has responded with yet
another new version of the game (taking
the opportunity to fine-tune even more little
things along the way).

"They Create Desolation and
Call it 'Peace."
— Tacitus' Agricola
Behold, Gus Smedstad [CompuServe address: 71777,2716], the first of a cast of
characters who would influence CGWs new
#1 rated game, Sid Meier's Civilization,
and his theory that the way to win at the
Emperor level is to continually expand at
the expense of the computer's civilizations.
The logic is that, since the computer
players get such a large advantage in
making discoveries, playing a peaceful technology race game is "a sure recipe for disaster." While suggesting staying with
Despotism for as long as possible because
of its military advantages, Gus' approach
was still somewhat "civilized" inasmuch as
he advocated building city improvements
and wonders of the world, but he still
pushed for sails early so that every computer player could be interfered with as
rapidly as possible.
Enter Greg Bezoff [CompuServe address

For example, in the pure form, if there
were no limit to the number of cities which
could be on the map (there is, by the way),
one could create a 30 x 30 square of size
one cities. These would produce 1800 light
bulbs per turn through scientists alone (if
the player creates that elite citizen right
away in each of those cities). This is in addition to any light bulbs generated by the
player through trade!
72711,2616], who took this moderate Mongol maxim to its logical extreme, becoming
the "total Mongol strategy," which works, in
detail, thusly:
Players limit their city sizes to two or (if garrisoned) three so that no civic improvements need be built to keep the citizens
content and thus cause the need for a tax
base to maintain them. ("Temples and
suchlike don't help me to rape, pillage and
loot.") Build only barracks (since they have
no maintenance cost) and set the tax and
luxury rates to 0% so that every trade unit
goes into light bulbs. Concentrate research
on The Wheel, Mathematics and Navigation
(id est, Chariots, Catapults and Sail units).
Chariots are the best military units until
armor shows up, so deploy them by the
swarm.
Next, grow little cities like weeds, raising
them to size three (where their growth can
be frozen by working coal mines, oil sites,
etc. that do not generate any surplus food
or by creating a specialist — particularly the
very useful scientist) and have them continually contribute their shield production
for the aforementioned military units (made
veterans by the no-maintenance-cost barracks improvements built). Thus, with the
total Mongol war effort, players who never
leave Despotism can usually conquer the
world by the time Christ would have been
born.

Reductio ad Absurdum
(Reduction to Absurdity)
While the total Mongol strategy was being
debated, a new theory of economic optimization was presented by Peter Delaney
[CompuServe address: 73750,3667] and
his fellow students at Carnegie Mellon
University, Joe Beck and Jeff Duprey. Their
collaborative effort, with Joe at the helm,
produced a revolutionary game concept
called the parallelia theory.
Derived from concepts in parallel programming and parallel distributed processing
(for which the university's Dr. McClelland is
a prime mover), the theory states that

Since every city has a "free square" with
which it works another square (or can be
converted into an elite citizen), a size one
city "works" two squares (the city square
plus one other). Now, consider that a size
ten city works eleven squares (a size fifteen
works sixteen squares, etc.), and one can
see the efficiency of having many size one
cities working two squares each. In other
words, size one cities are 100% efficient,
with production efficiency decreasing as
city size grows.
Another sub-plan of this is the "virus" approach of building as many cities as possible. This will ensure that, once the ceiling
in the game is hit, computer players will not
be able to build any more cities. Again, this
is taking the matter ad absurdum (to absurdity), but is an effective mathematical
counter to the game's programmed limitations. However, size one cities are vulnerable to enemy conquest. Thus, there
was a need for defense, particularly from
early barbarian raids. Naturally, parallelia
and the total Mongol strategy seemed
made for each other, and a perfect match
for optimal play was born.

Novus Ordo Seclorum (A New
Order of the Ages [is Created])
This, the motto on the great seal of the
United States, might also serve well as Sid
Meier's motto for game development (particularly in the case of Sid Meier's Civilization). In response to these mathematical
stratagems, Sid is putting the finishing
touches on a 3.0 version of Sid Meier's
Civilization. Making the best use of such
resourceful playtesters as Mr. Bezoff, Mr.
Smedstad and the boys of CMU, prototypes
have been posted for public use in the
Microprose library on CompuServe, with
constant feedback, therefore, coming in to
Sid via e-mail. Perhaps with the new motto
of "Sic Semper Tyrannis," the following
changes are being made to the initial
release version of Civilization as taken
from the extended READ.ME file included
with this latest version:

Industry News

23. Cities must have a population base of
five or more to support taxman or scientist
specialists.

When this occurs, be sure to hit the happy
button in order to fully understand why.

Additional Playing Tips and
Techniques

24. Under a Despotic government, citizen
unhappiness will increase with the number
of cities controlled. This may lead to "very
unhappy" citizens (recognizable by their red
shirts) who must first be converted to normal unhappy citizens before they can become content. This effect occurs to a lesser
degree under other government types as
well.

Knocking out the usual plethora of defending units in a computer player's cities en
route to conquest can be a time-consuming
and expensive gamble. After all, winning
battle after battle against a pile of (usually)
fortified urban defenders can cost several attacking units in the process. The solution:
The "20-square siege technique."

25. A maximum of three units per city
may be used to impose martial law (id est,
convert unhappy citizens to content ones).
26. Cities may be renamed at any time.
Click on the new rename box or press the
"r" key on the city status screen.
27. Transport units no longer contribute
to city unhappiness under The Republic/
Democracy.
28. The maintenance cost of Barracks has
been changed to 1/2/3 coins at the Prince
and King difficulty levels, and 2/3/4 coins
at the Emperor level.
Additionally, a few bugs are being
remedied. These include the compatibility
problem with certain EGA graphic cards,
the "never-ending game" bug, screen update re-writes and other small annoyances.

Mutatis Mutandis (Things
Having Been Changed That
Had to be Changed)
The practical upshot of these changes to
the average player of Sid Meier's Civilization will be minor. While changing city
names adds a classy touch and taking
away the "sad face" that transports
produce makes sense, most of the other
changes are quite specifically designed to
counter the aforementioned perfect plans
for besting the game's programming.
The increased cost for barracks, however,
is significant, particularly since computer
players do not bear this added burden
(chalk up another advantage for the computer players at higher difficulty levels).
Veteran units, therefore, will become more
precious and the costs of squandering them
must be weighed more carefully by human
players. The burden of a "military tradition,"
as simulated by barracks, to support one's
own "Mongol strategy" might prove
economically prohibitive over the long run
to Princes, Kings and (especially)
Emperors. While a total Mongol strategy
remains viable, its success has
been reduced from a virtual
certainty to merely probable,
depending on the circumstances in play (which is as it
should be).
The number of cities that
can be managed with increasing citizen unhappiness now
has set limits and specific consequences. No longer can
players build virus-like hordes

of tiny cities which contentedly worked for
the common good. Below is a table indicating the number of cities which a given type
of government can support at a specified
difficulty level and still continue to use the
game's current happiness formula.
When a player's empire grows beyond the
size indicated by the number below, each
additional city causes a fraction of the empire to be plagued by an additional unhappy person. For example, a despotic government at the Emperor level will function normally up to six cities (for the mathematicians, then, X = 6 in this example).
When the seventh one is added, 1/6 (or
1/X) of the empire's cities will have a
citizen take on a worse attitude (go from
content to unhappy or, when no content
citizens are left, from unhappy to the
red-shirted "very unhappy" status). The second
city added above this ceiling will cause 2/X
(or 1/3, in this example) of the cities in the
empire to feel the strain. Thus, by the 12th
city (2X the safe limit of six), every city will
have an additional citizen made unhappy.
Beginning with the 13th city (2X + 1), 1/6
(1 /X) of the empire's cities will get a
second citizen made unhappy gratis, and
so on for every addition to, and multiple of,
the base happiness number given in the
table.
All of this can be checked by simply opening up a city's display, clicking on the
happy button and looking at the first line
of the citizen roster. If this line of citizens
does not show the first few (2 at Emperor
level, 3 at King, 4 at Prince, 5 at Warlord
and 6 at Chieftain) citizens as content, then
they've been hit by this new "imperial discontent" formula. Of course, another way
to find out is when carefully balanced populations suddenly riot, indicating that something has increased unhappiness there.

Since every government type (save Despotism) requires shields for military units'
maintenance, the problem becomes how to
reduce the shields a city produces and thus
eliminate defending units without firing a
shot by "starving them out" through a lack
of support. Since every square in a city's
radius which is occupied by an enemy unit
cannot produce for that city, one must simply place a unit on every land square within
the besieged city's radius that can produce
any shields. This might require up to twenty
units to cover every possible square (it seldom does, particularly against coastal
cities), but diplomats and caravan units
work as well as soldiers for this purpose.
Thus, the city will be reduced to a number
of units which only the shields generated in
the city square itself can produce, Q.E.D.
Another frustrating element is maneuvering through territory developed by another
player while at peace with them. This cannot be done without breaking the peace,
which is made impossible for those whose
governments include a Senate (specifically,
The Republic and Democracy). However,
there is a way through this rural roadblock.
Enemy improved squares can be entered
by diplomats and caravan units without
hindrance, even while under the conditions
of a peace treaty with another player. Simply place one of these unit types in an improved enemy square, and then other friendly military units may stack there without
violating the peace terms.

Deus ex Machina
(A God out of a Machine)
The world continues to evolve. This is
also the case in the many imagined worlds
enjoyed by players of Sid Meier's Civilization. Here was presented to the reader
some perfect plans for defeating the limitations of the game's programming and an
announcement of a new version of the
game that corrects not only these, but
other minor problems in the
game as well. The 2.0 version
of Sid Meier's Civilization
can be obtained by calling the
Microprose BBS at (410) 7851841 (2400, 8/N/1), or in the
appropriate libraries on either
CompuServe or GEnie. Alternately, persons can contact
Microprose Customer Service
directly and request this latest
version of the game.

Editorial

S

tate of the Industry:
Genesis times three. In the
first Genesis, God created
the heavens and the earth out of
nothingness. Cosmically
awesome. In much more recent
times, Paramount gave us the
Genesis Device of Star Trek II:
The Wrath of Khan. Do you
remember? After the Genesis
device is triggered, a huge blast consumes and recreates all matter within its
reach. Following the inevitable hair-raising escape from the shock wave, we
stand on the bridge of the Enterprise
and look back on the fantastic new creation. The underlying theme the filmmaker wanted us to experience was the
shear awesomeness of creation. It
worked.

Interactive
Entertainment

Today, in computing, we are watching
Genesis number three. A new thing is
being formed right in front of our eyes.
Not a creation out of nothingness, as in
the biblical account of Creation, nor anything on the scale of what man wrought
in Star Trek II, but, to those who have
eyes to see, an awesome thing is in the
making.
Here is information and interaction on a
new, exponentially accelerated level, a
level unbelievable 15 years ago. Before
running my word processor to type this
letter, I ran a program called Street Atlas
USA from DeLorme Mapping. This incredible $99 CD-ROM gives detailed
street-level maps of the entire USA. From
an overview map, I zoomed first to
Southern California and got a map showing its main cities and freeway system.
From there I zoomed in on Orange County. A detailed map of the county was displayed on my computer, and I zoomed in
to Anaheim Hills. From the Anaheim
Hills display I zoomed in on my neighborhood. Then I zoomed in to my block.
There. Right there on the screen I could
point to where my house was located.
Pretty damn awesome.
Next I zoomed out to the USA map and
checked out the location of my
grandparents' old home along a rural
road in the South. I zoomed in. There it
was. Close your mouth, Russ, the flies
will get in.
For the past couple of years, this embryonic consumer-level information and interaction matrix was called "multimedia."
The physical vehicle for consumer-level
multimedia is that extraordinary little
device, the CD. Thus we read about CDROM, MPC (Multimedia PC with CD-ROM
drive), CD-I and CDTV. Unlike the Bible's
Genesis and Paramount's Genesis, this
new genesis is taking a bit longer to take
shape. But taking shape it is.
Most CD-based multimedia products fall

by Russell Sipe
into one or more of three categories:
databases, education or entertainment.
That is the exact order in which I would
place the current manifestation of multimedia products.
The most impressive works in CDbased multimedia today are the
databases. For a hundred dollars I now
have at my fingertips a street map of the
entire United States. Another CD
(Magazine Rack from Information Systems, $90) gives me the complete text
of 100,000 current articles from "300 of
today's most important magazines" (including Computer Gaining World). A
third CD, the 1991 Time Magazine Compact Almanac gives me 10,000 Time
Magazine articles selected from the 68year history of the publication (including
the full text of the magazine from 1989
through April 1, 1991). Hundreds of
photos, full-color charts and maps are
reproduced as are dozens of full motion
and sound video clips from history (including CNN Gulf War videos).
Some have predicted that, due to the
Freedom of Information Act and our
rapidly growing capability in providing
gigabits of data at the consumer level, in
less than a decade a consumer will have
home access to all public computerstored data available in the USA.
CD-based educational products currently make best use of the sound and video
aspects of multimedia. Programs such as
Mammals: a Multimedia Encyclopedia
(National Geographic Society); Multimedia Beethoven: The Ninth Symphony (Voyager Software and Microsoft) and the CD-ROM version of Where
in the World is Carmen Sandiego
(Broderbund) are showing the way.
Unfortunately, for garners, the weakest
category in CD-based multimedia
products is computer games. The
category is not weak due to a lack of titles; between CD-ROM, CD-I and CDTV,
there are plenty of games. The problem
is that in many cases the first generation
of games being released leaves a lot to
be desired. The majority of titles released
on CD-I, CDTV and, to a lesser degree,
CD-ROM are not up to par. Those games
that do have the level of game-play CGW
readers are accustomed to tend to be
floppy-based games that have been
ported to CD-ROM. Most of these are
straight ports that add no new multi-

media capability (e.g. Wing Commander). In a few cases, the CD
version has been enhanced. For
example, the CD version of LucasTM film Games' Loom
has received
a complete new sound and
speech treatment that really enhances the game.

Now, there is nothing inherently
wrong with a straight port. Indeed, one
reason many of the ports retain their
value on CD is that a CD-based multimedia platform was in the minds of the
developers when the products were
created. There is the key: The best game
designers have been developing for CDbased multimedia for the past three or
four years even without the platform.
That's why we have games that require a
half-dozen or more disks to install. That's
why we have a thriving sound card business on the PC platform. That's why the
interfaces are being streamlined.
Thus, even though interactive entertainment is making a slow start on CD-based
multimedia, the seeds of great growth
are there, and those seeds come not
from Philips or Commodore or Hollywood, they come from the computer
game design community. So stand on
the bridge of your personal Enterprise
and watch: a new world is being formed
before your eyes. And you are part of it!
State of the Magazine: What do we
call this new form of gaming? CD-ROM
gaming? Multimedia gaming? The first is
too limiting; the second too vague. The industry is slowly but surely gravitating to
the term interactive as if "interaction"
was something new under the sun. The
annual CD-ROM and Multimedia Conference is changing its name to Intermedia. For the first time, the Software
Publishers Association will present a
panel called "Interactive Entertainment."
While the concept of interactive entertainment is nothing new to CGW readers
(after all, can you think of a better definition of "game" than "interactive entertainment?"), we felt the term was descriptive
enough of the coming CD-based multimedia environment that we proceeded to
file a trademark in 1991 for the use of
the title "Interactive Entertainment" in
connection with magazines and books.
We feel it is time to use that title. Beginning with this issue, Computer Gaming
World will carry a new secondary title:
the magazine of Interactive
Entertainment™ . In one sense, this new title
reflects our roots as the oldest magazine
on computer games (i.e. interactive entertainment). In another sense it speaks of
our commitment to keep you, our
readers, informed on the exciting new
world of CD-based multimedia entertainment, or interactive entertainment.

