"Covering Interactive & Multimedia Entertainment COMPUTER GAMING WORLD WINGS OF GLORY The #1 Computer Game Magazine June 1994 / Number 119 GAMES RATED Feature Reviews Alone In The Dark II Carriers At War II Fleet Defender Ravenloft Seawolf Announcing The CGW PREMIER Awards $3.95 USA $4.95 Canadian T 06 CD-ROM Upgrade Kits Looking Under The Hood At Bolt-On Multimedia 0171486\"0714 "


" G INCORPORATED Oisciples of Steel The disappearance of your father has left Lanthor without a leader. Factional infighting in the resulting power vacuum has left the realm in chaos! In your heart, you've always known that you were the chosen one now it's time to act! You've got to save your once-rich land by re-establishing the supremacy of the guilds. Choose your disciples and your strategies, build vast armies to conquer or defend, heed the counsel of the lords or assassinate them everything is under your control! Disciples of Steel is the ultimate role playing game, with stunning graphics and hundreds of challenging quests. Heart pounding sound effects and original soundtrack make Disciples incredibly realistic. It'll amaze you with its fine attention to detail, powerful weapons, and huge array of magic spells! pool probed 0060 DOORS Locan MAHE SHEENA vocou STEEL STEEL SHEENA 96 STRENGTH INTELLIGENCE HUI SOOM ACCURACY INTUITION YOUR FARTYIS FROGRESS IS INTERRUPTED EYA GROUP OF FOSSIELE FOES. VOU HAVE ENCOURITEREO A LIZAROHAN, SEVERAL GIANTRATS FRT SPLS I MAS SPL O ILL SPLS CHARM LUCK ATT POS FOCO MATER KALM FIGHT SHEEHA MAG POOL MONEY FOCO OPTIONS HATER OPTIONS ALTER DISCIPLE OUT OF COPPER our or Hone your skills and build your strengths danger lurks around every turn! Fight or flight! Choose wisely, as things are rarely what they seem! OXO Time for talk is pasi! Only the wigility cal the cunning will survive! Game by Megasoft Entertainment. Published by FormGen Inc. (800) 263-2390 Circle Reader Service #65 "


"THE REBELS THINK THE FORCE IS WITH THEM. EXPLODE THE MYTH. Rip through the Rebel front in six unique Imperial starfighters. 1994 LucasArts Entertainment Company. All Rights Reserved. Used Under Authorization. X-Wing game  1992 LucasArts Entertainment Company. TIE Fighter and X-Wing are trademarks of Lucasfilm Ltd. Star Wars is a registered trademark of Lucasfila lid. The LucasArts loga is a registered trademark of LucasArts Entertainment Company. LucasArts is a trademark of LucasArts Entertainment Company. IBM is a registered trademark of letersational Business Machines. TIE Fighter came New heart-stopping. interconnected battles will envelop you. Enhanced ultra-realistic 3D graphics and gameplay. Now you can experience Star Wars from a new point-of-view. From the creators of X-Wing\" comes TIE Fighter\", the sequel that lets you fly for the Empire. The dark side of the 'Force beckons...dare you'respond? GI LUCAS Arts COMING SOON FOR IBM PC AND COMPATIBLES. AT YOUR FAVORITE SOFTWARE RETAILER, OR CALL, 1-800-STARWARS. "


"THERE GOES THE E E E "


"NEIGHBORHOOD, D oom. Earth is destroyed by a D catastrophic event, and you're responsible for rebuilding civilization on another planet. Lucky you. Where you go and if you survive is up to a brata you there's a galaxy of a possibilities. the robominers and monorail systems you'll use on the planet surface, Outpost's photorealism and 3-D rendered animation are unprecedented. Based on NASA research in planetary science, robotics, terraforming, and interstellar spacecraft design, Outpost places you in control of the most comprehensive strategy simulation ever developed for the PC. No kidding. From the colonization starship to Develop agriculture, mining and manufacturing to survive, and then invest in research and recreation facilities to make life more comfortable for your colonists hopefully they'll be around long enough to enjoy it. Because, in the end, the decisions you make will determine the destiny of mankind. OUTPOST BUILD MANKIND'S FUTURE IN SPACE SIERRA See your local retailer or call 1-800-757-7707 Circle Reader Service #111 "


"DELTA It's not a Game. YOUR MISSION: You control the most agile racer known to man as you fly down the 256 color, 3-D, polygonalshaded landscape at speeds where thought and action are one and mistakes are paid for in blood! If you and your Trace Vehicle survive, use your bonus points to modify its armor, firepower or speed to suit your style, then jack back into the Net for another Run! In Delta V, a new type of Virtual Reality has been brought to the PC! "


"EREE: Delayasi ALPHA: BE TORTORPEDO LASERS in Ganga: 502 ALPHA2756 UESTHOOVT TORPEDO Normal view Horimal View 4240 258 ERCE: Q:30:09 ALPHA=126 DESTROY: DE LASERS PROTON TORPEDO Normal View L6 12-09-2147 17H34.48 \"So chummer, you want to know about runnin? \"The Net's the most dangerous cyber-dream you'll ever have, 'cept it's not a dream. You gotta be ruinless and quick, huggin' the lattice like an Olthan lungworm on a Borian air-grazer. Once you jack in, it's just you and your Trace. \"Like I always said, Netrunnin' is like a drug, the speed gets you higher than a \"ject of Cephilene Blue, but a mistake'll leave you deader than a jacked out straightliner. \"That chum, is as permanent as it gets ...\" 1998 224 END -GROTHAN JHIR, ex-Netrunner. ..It's a State of Mind BECHESDA SOFTWORKS Currently Available on IBM PC VGA, minimum 386/33 processor (486/33+ really cooks!), minimum memory 590K Ram, 2MB EMS memory and high density disk drive required. Supports: Roland, SoundBlaster and Gravis Ultrasound, Copyright 1994 Bethesda Softworks. All rights reserved. Bethesda Softworks and Delta V are trademarks of Media Technology Limited. All rights reserved. Circle Reader Service #47 Circle Reader Service #47 "


"FEATURES COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 18 Cover Story: Wings of Glory Star In Origin's Cinematic WWI Flight Sim by Paul C. Schuytema Son of 688 Attack Sub Electronic Arts' Seawolf Goes Full Speed Ahead by Robert L. Hayes MicroProse Catapults Fleet Defender Mark Estaphanian Acquires His Target Wrangle Like A Real Tomcat Survival Tips for Fleet Defender by Tom \"KC\" Basham Hardware Highlight: CD-ROM Upgrade Kits The Best Disc Drives For The Buck by Mike Weksler Wings of Glory pg. 18 EIURI Wholly Sphincter! Wing Commander Meets Internal Medicine in Microcosm by Jeff James Terrors Twice Told Polygon Pirates Await The Unwary in Alone In The Dark 2 by Allen Greenberg The 1994 Premier Awards CGW Salutes The Best In Gaming Fleet Defender pg. 28 Soccer Special A Look At The Challengers For The Computer World Cup Possessed By Ravenloft Petra Schlunk Exorcises SSI'S RPG 92 The Text Adventure Lives! Charles Ardai Goes Back To The Future of Gaming 96 Alone In The Dark 2 pg. 46 A Russian 6-Pak To Go Paul Hymen Visits Interplay's One-Stop Gaming Mart 100 Game... Or Interactive Movie? Media Vision's Quantum Gate Swings Both Ways by Charles Ardai 108 Jurassic Park Bytes Neil Harris Puts On His Dino Dentures 116 SimBill, SimHillary Maxis' SimHealth Wrestles With National Health Care by Keith Schlesinger Quantum Gate pg. 100 "


"FEAR. EXHILARATION. COURAGE. MADNESS. BRAVERY. EVIL. All in one little box. LORDS MIDNIGHT DOMARK COMING IN JULY *94. For order information call 800-695-GAME today. Circle Reader Service #132 "


"120 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD Do-It-Yourself Flight Sims, Part 3 Flight Sim Blueprint For Domark's Flight Sim Toolkit COMPUTER WARGAMING WORLD 140 The Trials Of Trincomalee Carriers At War Il Visits More Exotic Battlefields by Terry Lee Coleman 142 Vodnik's Vikings Kingdoms Of Germany and Vikings // Lead Realism's Invasion by M. Evan Brooks 146 How Deep Is Deadly Games' U-Boat? Alan Emrich Dives For Some Answers 150 Publisher Russell Sipe Associate Publisher Jonathan Lane Editor-in-Chief Johnny Wilson Editor Chris Lombardi On-Line Editor Alan Emrich Managing Editor Ken Brown Technical Editor Mike Weksler Assistant Editors Chuck Miller Terry Coleman Art Director Susan Zurawik Graphic Artist Jack Rodrigues Production Assistant Christine Kloss M.I.S. Manager Gene Allen Advertising Manager Lee J. Uniacke Advertising Sales Coordinator Kathy Garcia Account Representative Marci Yamaguchi Contributing Editor (Adventure Games) Scorpia Contributing Editor (Wargames) Evan Brooks Racial Tension The Conqueror's Guide To The Races Of VGA Planets by Ted Foster 158 Winning The Great War How To Keep Those Caissons Rolling by Josh Bruce 164 Market Garden On-Line MPG-Net Takes The War To Cyberspace by Richard Savage 550 Fiin Piay Vispisy Lontroi Sunday, Jays and 25 minutes remaining PRINSESSA 1 koppaio AEL JO LEER Suur OSFD Pone Golunt Intip On Dard Lost 3 In GOTS Tappi Trol2 Carriers At War II pg. 140 Contents are copyrighted by Ziff-Davis Publishing Co.. 1994. Subscription Rate: The subscription rate is $27.94 for a one year subscription (12 issues). Canada and all other countries add $11.00 for postage. Airmail subscriptions are $78.00) per year. Canadian GST registration number is R123669673. Payment must be in U.S. dollars made by check or money order drawn upon a U.S. bank. Visa, MasterCard, AMEX accepted. Subscription Services: For subscription service questions, address changes or ordering information, call toll free (800) 827-4450 within the U.S. and Canada. All other countries call (303) 447-9330 or fax to (303) 443-5080 (international subscribers only) or write to Computer Gaming World: P.O. Box 57167, Boulder, CO 80322-7167. Back Issues: For back issues (subject to availability). $6,00 per issue ($8.00 outside the U.S.), send check money order or credit card information to Back Issues Dept., Ziff-Davis Publishing Co., P.O. Box 53131, Boulder, CO 80322-3131. Psalms 9:1-2 CompuServe (76703,622) America On-Line: CGW Prodigy: EXPT40B GEnie: CGW Internet: 76703.622@compuserve.com Telephone: (714) 283-3000 Fax: (714) 283-3444 For advertising information only, call: Lee J. Uniacke (714) 283-3000 x41 Printed in the U.S.A. DEPARTMENTS 12 Editorial 161 Marketplace (Computer Game Ratings) 162 Advertiser's Index By 14 READ.ME Product (CGW Spews The News) 163 Advertiser's Index By 68 Scorpia's View (Arena) Company 90 Scorpia's Mail 168 Taking A Peek 112 Shareware Showcase 173 Hall of Fame 132 Letters To The Editor 174 Top 100 Games 136 CWW Editorial 176 What's Hot? (Awards And Coming 177 Patch File Attractions) 178 The Rumor Bag 138 Opponents Wanted (Equinus Bettorus) "


"FALCON NORTHWEST ANNOUNCES A NEW POWER FOR A NEW AGE OF GAMING: THE MACH VpTHE WORLD'S FIRST PENTIUM POWERED GAMING PC! MACH V Now there are 3 models of the ultimate gaming machine! Fill your need for speed! FAST... 40 VGA FRAMES PER SECOND! The MACH V Basic: for performance on a budget Intel 486 DX/2-50 MHz processor, 4 Megs of RAM, 255 Meg hard disk $1,995 Standard Features: 100% Compatible with All IBM PC Software Falcon VESA Local Bus Motherboard, 256K Cache, AMI BIOS VESA Local Bus Graphics Board with 1 Meg16.8 Million Colors! Falcon VESA Local Bus Hard Drive Controller Card -4 megs/sec! RAM expandable to 32 megabytes TEAC 1.2 & 1.44 Floppy Drives MPC Level 2 Compliant 250ms Double-Speed CD-ROM Drive SoundBlaster PRO'M with Multimedia Encyclopedia on CD-ROM Shielded Multimedia Speakers with Bass Boost CH Products FlightStick PROTM 4 Button Joystick CH Products Automatic Speed Sensitive Dual Gameport Mini-Tower Case with 250 Watt Power Supply Two Cooling Fans with Temperature Sensing 14\" Non-Interlaced SVGA Monitor, .28dp, Edge-to-Edge Display 101 Key Keyboard with Dustcover MS-DOS 6.2 & MS-Windows 3.17M. NEW 3 Button Serial Mouse UL, CSA. TUV.VDE & FCC Class B Approvals One Year Parts & Labor Warranty One Year On-Site Service Policy Not Included with MACH V Basic model FASTER... 45 VGA FRAMES PER SECOND! The MACH V: The original with some new twists Intel 486 DX/2-66 Processor, 8 Megs of RAM-NEWI, 255 Meg hard disk $2,495 UNREAL... 50 VGA FRAMES PER SECOND! The MACH Vp Pentium: the fastest game machine on the planet! Intel Pentium processor, 512K of static RAM cache expandable to 2 Megs. 8 Megs of RAM, 425 Megabyte hard disk w/256K cache $3,495 But don't take our word for it... \"if you want to go all out for games, the Falcon is * Compared to the MACH V, XXXXXXX the best bet for your money.\" 2000's (DX2/66) system ran like @#%&!\" -Computer Gaming World Gary McMillan, Fairbanks, AK \"They [Falcon's techs) are always available and will spend time to work with their customers. The system is just perfect for our needs and makes running simulations a real pleasure.\" -P.C.Combat Simulations Magazine \"My Falcon MACH V lets me run all my gamos with the detail settings on high and I am still ablo to scream through the frames.\" -Keith Stadler, Wilmington, NC \"Every game I've bought, every program I've bought, has worked perfectly on the MACH V!\" -Perry DiMarco, Howard Beach, NY \"It screams!\" -Paul Gentry, Portland, OR THE FALCON MACH V: THE ULTIMATE GAMING MACHINE THE MACH VIS PERFECT WHETHER YOUR MACHINE IS A DEDICATED GAMER, OR YOU ALSO USE IT AS A BUSINESS, SCHOOL, OR HOME COMPUTER. YOU CAN CUSTOM FIT THE MACH V FOR YOUR MISSION WITH THESE UPGRADE PACKS: BUSINESS PRODUCTIVITY PACK WINDOWS FOR WORKGROUPS 3.11 CITIZEN GSX-220 24 PIN PRINTER 250 MEGABYTE TAPE BACKUP $375 STUDENT PRODUCTIVITY PACK: CITIZEN GSX-220 24 PIN PAINTER MICROSOFT BOOKSHELF CD-ROM W/DICTIONARY, THESAURUS & MORE $275 EXTREME SOUND PACK SOUNDBLASTER 16 ASP SONY SATELLITE/SUBWOOFER SPEAKERS (YOU GOTTA HEAR THESE!) S275 ENHANCED VISION PACK: MAG MX15 15' 1280X1024 DIGITAL MONITOR, SUPER HI-REFRESH 1 MEG VIDEO MEMORY UPGRADE $325 FALCON NORTHWEST COMPUTER SYSTEMS 263 South Bayshore Dr. Coos Bay, OR 97420 Ph: (503) 269-0775 Fax:(503) 267-2575 To Order Call: 1-800-258-6778 VISA & MasterCard Accepted Financing Available On Approved Credit. Circle Reader Service #141 "


"EDITORIAL Game Ratings: NOT SUITABLE FOR MATURE AUDIENCES by Johnny L. Wilson s usual, the government is acting upon nies, calls for every game to be viewed by an shipment review rating system will process A their misconceptions of the world of independent panel prior to release. This insoftware products in a non-discriminatory gaming and, as usual, it is going to cost dependent panel would consist of parents, manner, such as first-come-first-served.\" you, the gamer. The solutions to the video child psychologists, and educators. They expect this kind of even-handed treatgame ratings dilemma advocated by U.S. How does that hurt you? This panel is not ment from the vi ment from the video game industry where the Senators Lieberman (Dem., CT) and Kohl going to understand that you are a largely machine manufacturers dictate how many (Dem., WI) will cost computer gamers in adult audience. They are not going to pergames a software publisher can have on the terms of time, money and content. At pressceive that there is a marketplace of mature shelf, but make allowances for some publishtime, Senator Joseph Lieberman's office sent gamers. Everything they evaluate will be exers to have more than others? us a copy of a letter which his office had sentamined under the rubric, \"Is it good for chilMost importantly, the creation of an indeto Ken Wasch, the Executive Director of the dren:\" As a result, many of the games covered pendent panel to review all games necessitates Software Publishers Association. The letter in CGW will be rated as unsuitable for chilthe creation of an unwieldy bureaucracy that indicated that Senator Lieberman and his dren and many retailers will refuse to handle will cost a lot of money to administer. Senaassociate, Senator Herb Kohl, have no conthese games because they perceive themselves these games because they perceive themselves tors Lieberman and Kohl tors Lieberman and Kohl do not understand ception of the differences between audience, as family-oriented stores and cannot sell unthe difference between video games and compublication/manufacturing process, and suitable merchandise. puter games, so they do not realize that game size between video games and computer Further, the requirement for \"prior review\" whereas video game play is extended because games. The senators and their colleagues seem to believe that all interactive entertainyou have to play levels over and over again in does not hurt video game companies. They have a lag time in which review can take place order to master them, computer game play is ment is for kids and that whatever is good for while the cartridges are being manufactured. often extended because the game worlds are the video game companies is good for all This is a lengthy process that usually takes larger and the e larger and the environments/system more platforms. place out of the country, requires some shipcomplex. So, while you could view a video Lieberman stated specifically, «...your letter ping delays, and costs more than disk duplitape showing a gamer going all the way appears to imply that there is a distinction cation. It can be months from \"code release\" through a video game in a few hours, it would between interactive entertainment software to distriburion on a cartridge pame, whereas take almost a week to go through even the developed for PC or other open systems and it may be a matter of a week or two on a most optimal path of a large computer game. software developed for use on dedicated platicated platdisk-based product. So, timing is not a sensidick Who is going to pay the hard-earned cash for forms. We question the basis for such a distive issue on cartridge games, but it is quire the bureaucracy that spends this amount of tinction.» Further, Lieberman's committee mittee significant on the disk-based side. time? You! insists on a ratings system that requires \"prior For example, assume that a video game review\" (where a panel views every game in What can you do? We have already sent a full prior to its release) for all products. Both company submits a game for review and a letter to Senators Lieberman and Kohl delineof these misguided approaches to the ratings competitor submits one a week later. Let's ating the problems inherent in their solution. assume that for no particular reason (a breakNow, it's up to the readers of Computer Gamissue are dangerous for you as a gamer. down in logistics, personal preference of the ing World to let these gentlemen know that First of all, Lieberman and Kohl have enpanel, etc.?), the second company's game is there are adult gamers that want their side of dorsed a ratings plan that has been developed reviewed first. Chances are that it still won't the issue to be heard. Write them now or by video game manufacturers and video game hit the market before the first company's expect to pay the price la expect to pay the price later in limited subject publishers without significant input by pergame, as both products are in a lengthy dumatter, late game releases, and higher prices. sonal computer-based publishers. The loneplication process. With disk-based software. It can happen here. exception to this rule is Electronic Arts, however, that logistical anomaly could mean Write Sen. Joseph Lieberman at 316 Hart which publishes personal computer titles but that the first product would not hit the Senate Office Building, Washington, DC nets more than two-thirds of its proceeds shelves until after the second product had 20510-0703; and Sen. Herb Kohl at 330 from video game sales. The plan, advocated taken advantage. Lieberman's letter merely Hart Senate Office Building, Washington, by this group of video game-oriented compatells Wasch, \"We would hope that any preDC 20510-4903. CGW Page 12 (Commuter ( ina Worl. "


"WULFPACK Since its release, Wolfpack has set a new standard for submarine simulations. Winner of Tilt Magazine's Tilt D'Or award for best simulation, it has consistently topped the best seller charts, earning raves from the reviewing community: \"Wolfpack can only be classified as a genre buster, one of those rare games that sets a new standard for other releases in the same field to live or die by.\" Video Games & Computer Entertainment \"The graphics for Wolfpack are stunning.\" Wargamer Wolfpack is now available with 58 new missions (70 total) on IBM floppy disk, IBM CD-ROM (includes over 5 minutes of breathtaking animation sequences) and Amiga floppy disk. Coming soon on Macintosh floppy disk and CD-ROM. You command either a WW2 submarine wolf pack or the surface fleet. Historically accurate, your weapons and instruments are precisely keyed to the war year that you choose to play A full construction set is included to allow you to re-create actual battles. Pick up a copy at your local software store and find out what underwater warfare is all about. Wolfpack is published by Novalogic, the creaters of Comanche REITE N AOPAD SERT IN DIT Wolf Pack, Comanche, Novalogic, and tho Novalogic Logo are trademarks of Novalogic, Inc. All other names are INSON trademarks of their respective holders ren KIDS LOGIC Actual screen images Circle Reader Service #97 "


"READ.ME Gamers Get Break In Compton's Patent Review THE LATEST NEWS FROM THE GAMING WORLD Ad Astra Origin Goes To The Stars For Wing Commander III aladin, Maniac, Angel, Spirit-characters familiar to fans of Origin's D Wing Commander series—will shed their animated shells to be portrayed by live, Hollywood talent. Names like Mark Hamill, Tim Curry, John Rhys-Davies, and Ginger Lynn Allen will fill the credits of what will surely be one of the hottest games of '94. Mark \"Star Wars\" Hamill and Tim manding tones to the character of Colonel \"Rocky Horror Picture Show» Curry are Eisen. returning to the PC screen for the second In spite of all the acting talent, the time, having both recently done voice acttrue star of the show may be the ing for Sierra's Gabriel Knight. Curry will game's technology. Wing Commander play Melek, a Kilrathi warrior, while III will sport a stunning Super VGA Hamill will star as the player-character (aka graphics mode and Silicon Graphics ren\"Blue Hair») role. John Rhys-Davis, who's dered backdrops into which the actors will had a variety of supporting film roles be seemlessly inserted. In a recent demon(Raiders of the Lost Ark) and is currently a PATENT DENIED U.S.P.1. The U.S. Patent and Trademark Office has rejected all 41 claims I for the Compton's NewMedia multimedia patent announced during last year's Comdex. The patent had made broad claims with regard to the use of certain \"search and retrieval\" functions which Compton's believed were proprietary. Under the broad claims, any publisher of a multimedia product would have to pay royalty fees to Compton's. CGW and other industry observers were concerned about the potential impact in two areas: 1) the tendency for publishers to pass along the pricing (royalties + paperwork fees + the inevitable buffer) increases to gamers and 2) that the precedent of approving this broad patent would encourage other companies to claim broad parents on technology which has been developed simultaneously in other companies (causing more emphasis to be placed on legal filings and litigation than in design and development). In addition to the good news for gamers, the decision of the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office to overturn the broad patent claims may stem the tide of questionable software parents already granted. For example, Patent #5,175,857 granted a patent on a Quicksort implemented by using a linked list of pointers to the objects to be sorted. This is a task regularly assigned in introductory computer science classes. Patent #5,121,492 was granted to a developer who had figured out how to simulate the access times associated with a CD-ROM by slowing down a hard disk. Hardly revolutionary technology! Compton's does not expect to be hurt by the decision. Thomas McGrew, Vice-President for Market Development and Product Planning, told CGW that the company was not depending on any patent-related revenue stream as part of their current business plan. TV \"Untouchable,\" may don an Irish brogue for the role of Paladin. Malcom \"A Clockwork Orange\" McDowell will portray Admiral Tolwyn, and Ginger Lynn Allen, an actress of some renown in the \"adult film industry, will play a Chief Technical Officer and possible love interest. Jason Bernard (Herman's Head) will lend his comstration, CGW was able to play a scenario in SVGA mode and fly a ship through the beautifully bit-mapped belly of a Kilrathi capital ship. The SVGA mode will require the highest of high-end 486 machines, but there is a VGA mode available to accommodate high-end 386s. Wing Commander III is scheduled to release before Christmas of this year. Page 14 Computer Gaming World "


"It's An SX2! The British Are Buying 1.1!12!! Nets $462 Million ! Intel's Newest Addition To Its OverDrive Family In a recent meeting with CGWand Intel, Along with the announcement of the Intel discussed their long term strategy SX2 OverDrive, Intel announced a price to market an OverDrive upgrade chip reduction for the first member of the for each CPU it manufactures. The OverDrive family, the 66MHz IntelDX2 OverDrive processor is a replacement processor for your existing CPU allowing you to easily and economically upgrade your system for faster perforSoftware Toolworks mance. The latest OverDrive processor is the new SX2 OverDrive upgrade chip. This chip will oftware Toolworks, publisher of the allow 486-25SX owners to turn award-winning Chessmaster series, has their machines into the equivabeen purchased by Britain's Pearson lent of a 486-50DX2, although PLC for $462 million ($14.75 per share). without the standard DX's Pearson is not only the publishing compamath co-processing ability. The ny that owns the Financial Times, but is suggested retail price is $249. the owner of popular publisher Penguin The OverDrive package is Books and scientific/textbook publisher designed to allow the average Addison-Wesley. Pearson is also the parent computer user to install the PETER company of Thames Television and has a chips themselves in a few minsignificant stake in British Sky utes. All OverDrive packages Broadcasting will come with many value Software Toolworks has been on the added features such as a preOverDrive. This chip, which now rerails for acquisition side of such deals in the past, attached heat sink, a utilities disk, chip $499. allows owners of 33MHz DX systems having purchased Datasoft (sometimes remover, concise documentation, and techto upgrade to a performance equivalent to a known by its Intellicreations label) and nical support. Installing the chip is a matter 66MHz DX2 system. Other additions to Mindscape in the past. The former purof either directly replacing the existing CPU the OverDrive family are anticipared, chase was primarily to add additional flopor dropping the OverDrive into a special including a chip based on Intel's recently py-based titles after Software Toolworks OverDrive socket and having it coexist with announced IntelDX4 line. bought a disk duplication company. The your CPU. Mindscape purchase added cartridge design and marketing capacity to the mix. Currently, Software Toolworks gleans 48% of its revenue from PCand CD-ROMbased products and 42% from cartridgebased products. It is unclear whether the purchase was for the purpose of getting Software Toolworks' game divisions or not. The optimistic sign for gamers may be that n undisclosed source at the Pearson immediately appointed an experiMicrosoft Corporation has come enced Sega Europe CEO, Nick Alexander, I forward to tell CGW that there are as head of the Pearson New Entertainment 14 previously unseen levels of the arcade Europe group. However, Pearson may very game Tempest buried within Microsoft well plan to focus on Software Toolworks Arcade. To access the secret levels, hold as a vehicle for porting traditional content down the \"T» and «D» keys while double(book and television properties) over to clicking on the main Tempest icon. When CD-ROM titles, much like the very sucthe game loads, the level selection menu cessful Grolier Encyclopedia product and will allow you to choose from these secret the Ziff-Davis How Do Multimedia levels. Computers Work? title. It will be interesting to see which direction Toolworks takes its Tempest: Bill Gates' second favorite pastime; the first, shredding Outland next-generation products. CGW cartoon strips. Microsoft Security Leak! Secret Levels of Tempest Revealed Tempest Game Options Help VED Tu June 1994 Page 15 "


"On THE SEVENTH DAY, THE LORD SAID: | \"I'M POPED. YOV BULD THE THEME PARK.** CHOOSE FROM OVER 30 RIDES. SHOPS AND ATTRACTIONS, INCLUDING 5 RIDES YOU DESIGN YOURSELF. COMPETE AGAINST 40 PARKS IN 6 CATEGORIES INCLUDING RICHEST OWNER AND CUSTOMER SATISFACTION EXPERIENCE THE JOYS OF MANAGEMENT. INCLUDING HOSTILE TAKEOVERS AND REAL-TIME ARBITRATION. "


"THINK YOU CAN DESIGN AND BUILD THE GREATEST AMUSEMENT PARK IN THE WORID? YOU SELECT THE SITE, YOU LAYOUT THE RIDES. IN FACT, YOU CONTROL EVERY ASPECT OF RUNNING A HIGHLY PROFITABLE AMUSEMENT PARK, FROM HIRING EMPLOYEES, TO DEVELOPING NEW RIDES, TO MAINTAINING AN ADEQUATE SUPPLY OF SOFT DRINKS, ANY MISTAKES AND THE BUSTLING HORDES OF FUNSEEKERS WILL LET YOU KNOW! OH, AND THAT MERRY-GO-ROUND IN FLAMES IS A CLUE TOO AVAILABLE FOR IBM FLOPPY AND CD ROM. MACINTOSHE FLOPPY AND CD ROM, AND 3DO\". VISIT YOUR LOCAL RETAILER OR CALL 800.245.4525. ELECTRONIC ARTS IM kutohtered trademark of International Business Machines Marintah hartplatered trademark of Apple Computer Inc. 300 is a tradernork of The 300 Company, Bellloop ond the Balllrog logo ore registered trademarks and Theme Park is a trademark of Bollfrog Production, lid, Circle Reader Service #138 "


"SNEAK PREVIEW Smoking Camels Are Bad For your Health So Watch Your Sopwith's Six In Origin's Wings of Glory A poor aviator lay dying at the end of a bright summer's day his comrades had gathered about him lo carry his fragments away... ...and then to his wondering comrades these brave parting words he did say: \"take the manifold out of my larynx and the cylinders out of my brain take the piston rods out of my kidneys and assemble the engine again. by Paul C. Schuytema -W.W.I aviators song canvas and wood airplane, no parathe observers who hung chute, castor oil smearing your gogabove the battlefields in gles, clouds of yellow mustard gas tethered balloons wore below, and they expect you to be a hero? them regularly, but the Yes, World War One was a strange time for pilots were not issued this new breed of winged warriors called 'chures for fear that they \"aviators.\" Airplanes were a new technology would simply leap out of (not even five years had passed since Orville the airplanes at the first and Wilbur's \"powered kite\" milestone), sign of trouble. and the pilots who flew them were on one Wings of Glory, the forthcoming \"cinehand gallant knights of the air and, on the matic-simulator\" from Origin Systems, will other, expendable tools of war who were far bring the unique world of W.W.I aviation less valuable than the fragile planes which to life, but with a nod more in the direction they flew. Parachutes were available, and of an Errol Flynn movie than a dry and super-real simulation. Make no mistake, though, Wings of Glory will model the flight of the rickety and tricky-to-fly airplanes to the utmost detail, surpassing all other W.W.1-era sims in the reality department. Wings of Glory is based on a modified Strike Commander flight-simulation engine. Page 18 Computer Gaming World "


"Talk around Origin was that, while the latWhile watching the art team est release of Strike Commander cleared up put together the images, I couldmany of the realism problems, the simula n't help but notice their dedication did not make the best use of the flight tion to historical accuracy. engine. The ability to beautifully render the Working with blueprints of the details of the various planes and ground taractual planes, period phogets was lost in the kilometers of distance tographs, and color photos of between opponents who faced off with restored aircraft, they sought to radar and guided missiles. Warren Spector, create as authentic a look as posthe producer of Wings of Glory, had been sible. cinated with W.W.I aviation for years. The beautiful birds you can and had put many hours behind the stick of take aloft include a Sopwith Pup, Dynamix's Red Baron (which he believes to an early, single-gun plane with The player can pan around the cockpit, be an excellent game and an astonishing poor performance; the twin-gunned accomplishment\"). When he saw what the Sopwith Camel; the Spad XIII 235hp nearly a full 360 degrees while still in full Strike Commander engine could do, he felt bomber boasting twice the power of the control of the plane. This \"rubber necking\" that marrying the power of that technology Camel: the anemic SESA which had the is very useful when tracking an opponent with the seat-of-your-pants quality of a sole virtue of a wing-mounted gun for balwho flies past, allowing the player to immeW.W.I dogfight would be a marriage made diately break and fall into purin heaven. suit. The flight control is smooth, and even at the novice levels the Warren brought Bill Baldwin on board planes are modeled with cnough from the Strike Commander crew, assemrealism to startle PC pilots who bled a design team and hit the ground runare familiar with the other ning, sculpting a game with the realism and W.W.I-era sims out there. Wings detail made possible by the Strike of Glory does not mask the fact Commander engine with a story reminiscent of the 1930s-era W.W.I dogfighting film. that these planes were slow, ungainly contraptions, as did  View ODJEDES 0 Knights of the Sky, and players Masters Of The Canvas Albathos TUJITS DISTAN might be a little taken aback by the The first thing that struck me about  UP awkward flight dynamics. Wings of Glory was the gorgeous derailing of the airplanes. By texB993/14 Stories Of Glory ture-mapping highly detailed The game features three main arenas of graphics onto the plane's polygoplay: the cinematic game, the mission gennal shapes, the simulation preerator and the mission recorder. The missents the players with aircraft sion recorder is a Dynamix-like VCR that which feature canvas stretched allows you to play filmmaker and edit your across wooden wing spars, the mission tapes, as well as enter the sim at any vibrantly colored patchwork of point during a tape. The mission generator German camouflage, unique will allow you to set up any aerial combat fuselage paintings, wooden cowlmission you might imagine (including ings, and enemy pilots with unlikely Sopwith Camel versus Sopwith scarves flapping in the wind. Camel and other «Allies only\" dogfights), When flying, switching to the loon busting; and the classic Fokker Dr. I— perform a bombing or ground attack run, external view and rotating around your the Red Baron's tri-wing fighter. or take on the \"gauntlet,\" which is basically plane will present you with a visual treat never before seen in a flight simulator. The Once in the cockpit, the player can an arcadish, never-ending stream of enemies to test your aerial mettle. graphics are just that good. flight relatively casy or as realistic as possiThe heart of Wings of Glory, though, is ble. At the most realistic setting, the cinematic game. Cast in the role of an Wings of Glory takes into account American flier, the player begins the game the uncomfortable yaw found in on January 25, 1917, to the angry rebukes the carly radial-engined planes. of a commander who doesn't like that two Due to the way the cylinders of his star pilots had decided to «tie one on\" fired in sequence, the engine crethe night before. As a result, the ated a nasty gyroscopic effect, player/character is relegated to «B» pulling the plane in the direction squadron, the flight wing for the fresh of the propeller's spin, and the cadets. These young pilots came to the pilot would have to apply nearly front with only a few hours flying time constant back pressure on the under their belts, and were shouldered with stick while in flight. life-expecrancy only a little longer than ir June 1994 Page 19 "


"The plot and diadisappears into the horizon in both direclogue, crafted chiefly by tions, and really illustrates the awkward Origin writer Lisa stalemate of the war. Dotting the trenches Smith, throws the player are aerodromes and small villages, and flyinto a pulp adventure ing overhead truly gives the impression that film, complete with a there is a war going on \"down there.\" beautiful French farm Perhaps one of my greatest disappointments girl, a 100-year-old farm in other war-era sims to date has been the house, a cast of quirky fact that there is really no indication of a and very convincing war going on below my plane. The terrain characters, and of in Wings of Glory, especially the trench-linc, course, an arch-nemesis, solves this problem admirably. the German ace Ulrich After spending an afternoon with the Gertman. Through the design team at Origin, I was struck by their would take to fly over the western front. absolute dedication to this project, and fly better and more capable planes as they their efforts to make Wings of Glory the The game follows the player through 40 are introduced the game starts out throwmost beautiful and accurate sim out there. varied missions, up through November, ing you into the rather anemic, single1918. Instead of choosing to work with a Warren Spector's enthusiasm was contagunned Sopwith Pup). Along the way, the gious, and he seemed to beam when he told branching-tree mission format, Wings of player develops attachments to characters, me, almost matter-of-factly, that Wings of Glory presents the player with a linear learns from his mentor, and confronts a Glory would be the most realistic game in sequence of missions. Spector observed, the world.\" through his work on the original Wing Commander If it can live up to that high promise, game, that while the designthen it will truly be an accomplishment, but ers created an entire tree of even if it just comes close, Wings of Glory missions that would branch still holds all the potential to be an excellent one way or the other based game, and one certainly worth looking forward to. CGW on player performance, it did not accurately model the way players actually played Wings On The Screens the game. Most players Since Wings of Glory strives to exude would play a mission over The quality of champagne the aura of «pulp cinema,\" we thought it and over again until they got around here leaves quite a bit might be useful to refer interested readit right, so they would only ers to the classic films. These films will follow the \"victory\" path of to be desired give you a feel for the spirit of the game 18 missions, never seeing German spy. Eventually, the player moves and will put you in the mood to don the other missions. By laying out the from the comparatively luxurious aero your silk scarf and silly leather hat and sequence in a linear fashion, every player in drome to an American outpost of green climb into the air on \"wings of glory.\" Wings of Glory will experience all of the canvas tents to finish out his tour of duty. missions. This layout also seemed to fit well Wings (1927) with the fact that while the air war was sigDrawing The Line Clara Bow, Charles Rogers and Gary Cooper nificant in W.W.I, it did not alter the (first film to win the Best Picture Oscar) course of the war to any real degree, and so I was not able to perform any ground Dawn Patrol (1930) no matter what a single pilot was able to strike or bombing raids on the version 1 achieve in the air, the Allied forces would tested, but I did get a chance to look over Richard Barthelmess and Douglas Fairbanks Jr. still have won the war in 1918. the ground objects and vehicles which Hell's Angels (1930) Whitney Ayres, one of the four full-time Jean Harlow and Ben Lyon project artists, was working on. The level (produced by Howard Hughes) of detail is astounding, Ace of Aces (1933) from the glow of coals Richard Dix in the back of a steam locomotive to the flowDawn Patrol (1938) ers in the window boxes Errol Flynn, David Niven and Basil Rathbone of French farmhouses. (the favorite of the Wings of Glory design team) The most prevalent landscape feature in the Lafayette Escadrille (1958) sim is the ever-present Tab Hunter and Clint Eastwood front line, a bombed The Blue Max (1966) out, cratered snake of George Peppard and James Mason muddy trenches which Page 20 Computer Gaming World "


"SO MANY TARGETS, SO LITTLE TIME! Ultra-detailed, smooth scrolling VGA graphics RAPTOR  CALL OF THE DOWS Explosive cinematics and sound tracks Supports all major sound cards and game controllers . 27 enormous levels, each with at least one boss ship This ain't no dinosaur game! There are times when the best weapons just aren't enough. To answer the Mega Corp call, you'll need nerves of steel, an itchy trigger finger, and the strength to stand till the end. Your equipment: The Raptor, a super-tech bird of prey with enough state-of-the-art firepower to crush any foolhardy opposition. As if twin machine guns that can rip holes through 6-inch steel plate weren't enough, the Raptor can be upgraded with 14 hard-core weapons that go beyond intense, straight to overkill! Your mission: Kill for cash, and leave nothing standing in your wake! If your looking for a game with unbelievable graphics, fierce combat, and a pulse-pounding sound track, Raptor: Call of the Shadows is all that and more! Grab your gear. Head for the flight deck. Raptor awaits! CALL 1.800.GAME.123 IT'S TOLL FREE (We're here all the timel) For the cost of shipping and handling, only $5.00, you'll receive the first mission. Or download the first mission and pay no shipping and handling. Call the Software Creations BBS and check out the FREE Apogee file section. The BBS phone lines are: (508) 365-2359 (508) 368.7036 (508) 368.4137 2400 BAUD 9600-14.4K 14.4-16.8K Further episodes are sold separately and can be purchased by calling Apogee's toll-free number. APOGEE SOFTWARE THE HEIGHT OF GAMING EXCITEMENT Raptor: Call of the Shadows requires an IBM or 100% compatible 386 or bolter computer with 2 MEG RAM (4 MEG recommended), a VGA graphics card and 12 MEG free space on a hard disk drive. Joystick and mouso are optional. Supports all major sound cards. CYGNUS APOGEES SOFTWARE P.O. BOX 4 9 6 3 8 9 "


"REVIEW Leagues Of Its Own EA's Seawolf: Sinking Simulation Or The Best Sub Game Afloat? by Robert L. Hayes, Jr. any wargamers have lamented the breakup of the Soviet Union, at V least from the standpoint of modern-era wargames. What fun is it to beat up on the hapless Iraqis or other third-rate armies? Though there is no one currently in the queue to take over the role of Evil Empire, there's no cause for wargamer alarm, as game designers have realized that all they have to do is postulate a hard-line coup in the former USSR to set all aright. Seawolf, the newest submarine simulator from Electronic Arts, is set in just such a near-future world in which the Soviet Union has been resurrected by hard-line militarists, with predictable results. Global tension mounts and the newly-reborn USSR faces off with her old antagonist, the good old U.S. of A. The Seawolf, the USN's newest toy, finds herself square in the middle of the raging naval conflict that follows. BARCE73 mese STEIO0:04:16 COURSE! 244 DEG COURSE 15 11.8 KTS SFEED DEPTH DEG SONAR hull of Seawolf's claim to being a realistic vessels. Other views are possible, and the simulation. periscope view is particularly well-done. An On booting Seawolf up, you are presented underwater view can be useful for detecting with a remarkably well-rendered animation enemy subs and here we've been wasting all of a ship on the horizon. A rain of missiles this money on sonar systems, when all we launch from this vessel and disappear into the have to do is look out the window). Most clouds. Suddenly, a boiling spray appears in unique is the camera view, wherein the foreground, and a missile (obviously from wolf can drop off a remote camera, which a submarine) leaps high on a parabolic arc then pans in a 360-degree arc, providing a constant view from wherever the camera was dropped. KYNDA CLRSS CG BEARING 28 DEG It is possible to play SeaSPEED wolfs 33 missions in a camSOFT DEPTH WAYPOINT SET CAPTAIN paign mode, or any given mission can be played singly. During the campaign, you TOW OUTI FREVIOUS must successfully complete TOW IN CLOSE each mission to proceed to the CUT TOWDENTIFY next. Most of the missions are PING WATERFI straightforward sub hunts or surface ship shooting galleries, most with the Seawolf sig. nificantly outnumbered. The mission are all drawn from into the sky, reappearing a few seconds later and making tinfoil out of the enemy ship. plausible conflict scenarios (although the deThis is all accompanied by dramatic stereo signers apparently could not conceive of a sound and is quite an impressive beginning. naval situation in which the US was on the losing side), however, one of the missions is Once within the game, it is pleasant to note silly and highly unrealistic. In mission 29, the that the graphics are nearly as good as the Seawolf is ordered to sink a Japanese convoy cinematic introduction. Digitized video shots invading Sakhalin Island (one of the islands of your crew members appear in response to over which Japan and the former USSR have orders, and the battle screen a long-standing disagreement). graphics (usually an overhead Seawolf This occurs right after the Seawolf naval plot display) are crisp and easily read. A status box takes PRICE: $69.95 up a disproportionate amount REQUIREMENTS:386-25MHz, 3MB RAM 1486DX, of space on the top-down VGA graphics, 14MB hard drive screens; though it can be space; supports most major moved about the four corners PROTECTION: DESIGNERS: Paul Grace, John Ratcliff of the map at will, it can be very PUBLISHER: Electronic Arts San Mateo, CA distracting and all too often (415)571-7173 covers up approaching enemy Speculative Specs You take on the role of a submarine commander who leads the prototype Seawolf on reconnaissance, attack, and patrol missions all over the world in the course of the US-Soviet conflict. And what a prototype she is! Capable of speeds approaching 60 knots and carrying a massive armament load, the Seawolf is a remarkable submarine. It is so remarkable, in fact, that it is unbelievable. Nothing remotely like this ship is on the Navy's drawing boards, nor could it be. Sixty-knot submarines simply do not exist, and despite this impressive speed in the water, the Seawolf is remarkably quiet, cluding Russian sonar with ease while picking up the quictest sounds with her beyond-stateof-the-art sonar and towed array. While it is fun to command such a powerful craft, this incredible power is the first torpedo into the SYSTEM IBM 7MB RAM recommended), sound cards None SEAWOLF Page 22 Computer Gamino World "


"MARPOOTRADIO BANGET4.8 MLS TIME OO20140 missile, no data on how deep a sub can be and still fire a SELECT MISSILE missile-in short, TOMAHALUK no data. The manSEA LANCE CANCEL ual is so deficient that it even fails to WERPons SHATIDXT MSG LOADMISSILE SATEL PBV MSG tell you what your FLOOD DOSE MK VOICE ORDERS weapons are. AdCD/FLD CAMERA FIRST PREVIOUS EMPTY DIRECT ALLIGATOR 3 CLASS LST LAST mittedly, most peoCLOSE BERSING: 347 DEG FIRE PREVIOUS ple buying the COURSE 244 DEG SOURCE 1277 DEG SPEED 11.8 KTS SPEED 100 KTS game probably DEPTH OFT DEFTH 25 FT know the differXA DIRECT MISSILE HIT SI8 FORT VIEW SETTINGENIINISITOKIU PRIMERISTA ence between a is ordered to support an invasion of another Harpoon and a SeaLance, but what's a stasis will probably be upset to find that EA has of the disputed territories! Aside from the he torpedo? As it turns out, it's just a Captor already begun advertising a \"hint book\" for unlikelihood of resurgent Japanese militaamincin which case, why not call it a Captor Seawolf, which is, more likely than not, the rism-particularly when the world is teetermine? The manual therefore basically consists real manual for the game. ing on the brink of nuclear conflict, as it of a list of the game's options, with sketchy Your sonar operator will identify targets for would be in the war Seawolf describes the information on each of them. Many gamers you, given sufficient time. This is well and thought of the USN turning its guns on an ally simply over a policy disagreement does not ring true. In any case, having picked out a mission or started the campaign, you are placed aboard the Seawolf itself. Function keys on the keyboard allow you to call up navigation, sonar, weapons, communications, or the \"conn\"Like a hypothetical U.S. nuclear response to a Soviet first strike, Electronic Arts has responded swiftly and effectively to answer certain criticisms about the Seawolfmanual. In the game term for the game preferences panel. this table you will find the weapons data that was omitted, purged, or stolen from the Each of these command systems is comprised documentation. of a menu of options and a digitized video clip The weapons are broken down by Power, Speed, Detection and Range. Power refers to of the responsible crew member. For examthe maximum number of damage points a particular weapon can inflict. Thus, if the ple, under Sonar are found the commands for Seawolf gets nailed by three Type 66 Torps, it's toast. Speed refers to the maximum speed deploying the towed array, sending an active of the particular weapon in knots. Detection refers to the ability of the particular weapon sonar ping, and consulting the waterfall dis to find targets (the higher the number, the better the weapon). Range, listed for friendly play. This system is clumsy and slow, particu weapons only, refers to the approximate maximum range of the particular weapon. larly in the heat of battle, but most of the important commands do have hotkeys, and POWER SPEED DETECTION RANGE after a few missions of practice the interface ENEMY: does not get in the way so much. You have SS-N-14 Missile reasonably good control over most systems, the only flaw being the difficulty in getting SS-N-15 Missile 80 information about the Seawolf's current Type 45 Torpedo 16 status. It is altogether impossible to get a Type 53 Torpedo LR 15 damage report, for instance, and difficult to Type 53 Torpedo HS 80 make out the ship's remaining weapons. Type 66 Torpedo HS 100 F.Y.E.O. Secret Weapons Data For Seawolf 75 60 60 80 maaaa . .. : 22 Hull Breach! In addition to the Seawolfs specs, there are other serious reality problems with the game. The Seawolf's weapon load consists of two Harpoons, two Tomahawks, and two SeaLance missiles, along with a huge (50+) arsenal of torpedoes. Aside from the illogic of an attack sub having so few missiles (and missiles are far more effective in Seawolf than their underwater cousins), no meaningful weapons data of any kind is given in the manual. No weapon ranges, no weapon speeds, no details on how long control cables for torpedoes are, no data on weapon effectiveness, no data on how deep a sub can be and still be hit by a FRIENDLY: Harpoon 255 Tomahawk 255 (Use against surface vessels only) Sea Lance Missile 100 55 20 (Can be used against subs, but best used against surface vessels) MK-48 Torpedo LR 40 40 22 10-12 miles (Best used against slower subs and all surface vessels) MK-48 Torpedo HS 80 55 3-6 miles (Best used against the Akula and Alfa Class subs at less than 1 mile) MK-48 Wakehoming 80 40 20 10-14 miles (Most effective against surface vessels by homing in on their wake) MK-48 Stasis 80 50 18 3-6 miles (Drop to the bottom of the ocean to wait for an unsuspecting vessel to pass over) 18 Ime 1004 Page 23 "


"Fama HEADING10140 TIME:00:04:04 BEARING:2830 297 150FT good, but he is capable of identifying any number of targets at once. This makes manual identification using the waterfall display rather pointless. In the time it takes you to identify one target by comparing its signature to those given in the manual, your sonar of ficer will have identified everyone else within sonar range. It's easier and safer to simply stay in the top-down map and wait for the computer to do the work, rather than moving to the waterfall display for identification purposes. On the whole, the artificial intelligence is poor. Convoys will continue steaming on course even while your torpedoes rip them to bits. Enemy carriers, presumably bristling with ASW helicopters, launch one or two at a time, if they even launch at all. Enemy submarines don't try to get into the Seawolf's baffles, and they rarely even move between thermal layers. The game's hydrodynamic and thermodynamic models are highly realistic, but the AI is so poor at finding your submarine that much of the effort that went into creating these models is wasted. There are a few gameplay problems, as well. Lockups are not infrequent, particularly when large amounts of digitized video are being played. The Seawolf itself so outclasses its opposition that only hordes of Russian des of Russian subs or surface vessels pose a threat. As a result, there is very little feel of one lone wolf cautiously (and dramatically) stalking its prey. Target selection is idiosyncratic, as it often takes multiple attempts to pick a target out of a pack of enemy ships. Finally, the out of a pack of enemy chi Seawolf cannot communicate with friendly vessels in the area. unable to find a willing soul in time for review, I expect that head-to-head play will be very popular. The graphics are lovely, and the sounds are very well done. The digitized video clips are in a low resolution, but still add loads of atmosphere to the game. There are a wide variety of enemy ship types, of all nationalities, and most of the scenarios are quite enjoyable. Who hasn't wanted to blow up Cuban picket ships and wreak havoc through defenseless convoys? So, despite the problems with the manual, the realism, and some of the gameplay, the game is still a whole heck of a lot of fun. This is definitely a game for someone who wants to enjoy a few hours of blowing up Russian Sp ships, and not for the next Admiral Nimitz. Unfortunately, Electronic Arts gives the impression that Seawolf is el rine simulation, and that's just not the case. Serious naval warfare fans are not likely to be entertained by the liberties Seawolf takes with their suspension of disbelief. As a simulation, Seawolf is a dud; as a game, it's a solid effort and a worthwhile addition to any naval gamer's shelf. Those wishing for the next Red Storm Rising will be disappointed, but as long as you're expecting an enjoyable beer-andpretzels submarine shoot-em-up, Seawolfwill hit your target. Cow On The Other Hand... Seawolf does have many strong points. Modem and network play are supported, to the loud cheers of many gamers. Although I was Although I was What Do PC Jet Jockeys Want? NEW PRODUCT The Mark II WCS (Programmable Throttle; Also Allows you to Program your Joystick) Hair-Raising Sorties Death Defying Maneuvers Heroics Victory Realism HOTAS And... FCS (Joystick) Turustmas | Controls RCS (Rudder Pedals) 10150 SW Nimbus Ave. Portland, OR 97223-4337 PHONE (5031689-3200 FAX (503)620-8094 Circle Reader Service #161 Page 24 Computer Gamine World "


"Epic Pinball is shareware from Epic MegaGames. «EPIC PINBALL RINGS UP A HIGH SCORE\" COMPUTER GAMING WORLD \"UP THERE WITH THE BEST OF THE COMMERCIAL RELEASES\", RATED 91% PC FORMAT \"PERFECTED TO THE PEAK OF PLAYABILITY.. EPIC PINBALL IS VITAL TO HAVE.. BUY, BUY, BUY!\", RATED 5/5 PC POWER SHAREWARE TRY IT TODAY! What Do We Mean by the Term \"Shareware\"? Play Epic Pinball, Our Latest PC Masterpiece It means you can try it before you buy it and it means you won't pay an arm and a leg for a quality PC game. The shareware version contains the Android table. The \"registered\" versions are the Epic Pinball Packs shown here which contain four pinball tables each Where Can You Find the Shareware Version to Try? Epic MegaGames redefines the art of PC Pinball with Epic Pinball by James Schmalz. It offers realistically fluid ball movement, a high-quality sound track and ultra-smooth scrolling graphics. It's all here: ramps, sink holes, kickbacks, drop targets, multiple-ball play, jackpots, skill shots and scoring rules just like real pinball tables. Epic Pinball packs offer a variety of pinball styles from the nostalgic Excalibur to the futuristic Enigma with targets and other surprises emerging from an oozing plasma field. Epic Pinball is shareware which PC Zone says is \"easily as good as commercial offerings\". See the sidebar to find out how to try it today. If you have a modem try one of these two great places (or your local BBS); On CompuServe, GO EPIC. You can download a specially priced Game of the Month and visit our forum where you'll find more Epic shareware games, hints, tips and support. To try CompuServe for free, call (800) 524-3388, ask for representative #536. EXEC-PC is the world's largest BBS with over 280 lines. On your very first call you can download Epic shareware games hassle-free. Just call (414) 789-4360 (V.32bis) or (414) 789-4210 (2,400 baud). Call today! If you don't have access to a modem but you have a VISA or MasterCard you can order the shareware version through our tollfree line for only $5. Android Excalibur Pot of Gold Crash and Burn EPIC PINBALL PACK You can buy Epic Pinball pack 1 or 2 for S29.00 PLUS $4 SHIPPING AND HANDLING Jungle Pinball Deep Sea Deep Sea M Magic agic Enigma Enigma EPIC PINBALL PACK Or get both Epic Pinball packs for only $45.00 Where Can You Get the Registered Versions? Call 1-800-972-7434. Have your credit card ready. Or, you can also purchase our games on CompuServe for download directly to your computer. GO EPIC for details. PLUS SA SHIPPING AND HANDLING TO ORDER CALL EPIC MEGAGAMES 1-800-972-7434 EPIC PINBALL REQUIRES A 386 OR BETTER 640 KB OF RAM AND VGA VISA, MasterCard and Checks accepted. MD residents please add 5% sales tax. Each order includes a bonus shareware game. In the U.K. or Europe please call Epic MegaGames UK at 0767 260903. Epic MegaGames 20 Courthouse Square, Rockville MD, 20850 Phone (301) 983-9771 Fax (301) 299-3841. CompuServe: 70007,1631 SUPPORTS MAJOR SOUND CARDS INCLUDING GRAVIS ULTRASOUND "


"Fall Under The Spell Challenging to Uolk down path to eest MOTO SKOOL ay \"SATE "


"Of This Year's Most ntasy Adventure! From far, far away and long long ago comes a story to savor: a tale of courage, romance, Sorcery, evil deeds and malevolent curses; a tale to lift the heart and strike at the senses. | Your kingdom has suffered hard at the hands of the Sorcerer Sanwe. But it is 20 || years since he and his dread castle were | sealed within a magical force by the Court wizard of your father; the then king. Now, the dragon representing the evil maye is stirring and the sphere that holds him is cracking open. The Sorcerer has reawakened! Your quest is clear: Fight your way to the castle and defeat Sance! ORAGONSPHERE MITE O PROSE A Division of spectrum Ho 1o Byte  Inc  1994 MicroProse, ALL RIGHTS RESERVED Available on CD-ROM for IBM PC/Compatibles 1-800-879-PLAY "


"REVIEW Top Cat! Fleet Defender From MicroProse Photo courtesy of Grumman Corp. by Mark \"Endo\" Estephanian Panterrarisan PORTIVO Hits Towary squadron Horarsw. n oft n the vapor trail of Spectrum resurrect your pilot in the middle HoloByte's F18 Hornet, Microof a campaign. Wingmen can also Prose casts its hat into the carrieradvance in rank, making them based operations ring with Fleet Defender. more capable companions and inVF-24 JAMU Rogers This long awaited flight simulator models the creasing their tendency to take the Dorpus erado Cardon twin-engine, swept wing, strategic intercepinitiative and seek out targets. Holan tor known as the «Tomcat\" with a solid flight Most missions will take place and radar model, and excellent campaign feaover water, though you will escort tures. bombers into defended ground arOn start up, the choice you face is a simple cas where AAA and SAM sights Trim Andor one: enter the quick turn-and-burn arena of will complicate your life. The camthe Scramble mode, or take the Campaign paign objectives are broken down DIFFCULTY BEGIN route with its three theaters of operation into rather simplistic terms such as multiple scenarios, and mission generator. \"you must shoot down a total of four TU-22 Tu tercept Officer) working the scopes. The front cockpit sports a sharp representation of In Scramble mode you can set up allied and for success,\" and you are given no control of a center display called the vertical display enemy flights in a snap. You can select your waypoints or mission planning. Gamers used indicator (VDI), a mini HUD-type repeater targets—from TU-22 bombers to a flight of to setting waypoints and time on targets will which can be toggled to display the TeleviMiG-29s—along with many other variables probably be disappointed. sion Camera System, and a 20x zoom camera with a few quick clicks of the mouse. No that can track and display targets in all control of enemy way points is available, but I Was There! weather. The \"look down» view reveals a you can specify a position in which to start The best way to illustrate Fleet Defenders navigation instrument called the HSD (horithe scenario: either offensive (on the bandit's radar modes and flight model is to put you in zontal situational display). Engine and fuel six), defensive (he's on yours) or neutral (head the seat. So, let's fly a campaign mission with status indicators also appear in this view. to head BVR). the El Dorado canyon scenario (historically The Campaign mode features a mission As I dump raw fuel into my burners, I shift based on the US Libyan air strike in 1986). views to the Air Boss perspective and watch generator with three theaters of operation: Our mission is to escort a flight of 1111 North Cape, Mediterranean, and a training bombers in route to the Benghazi airfield. as my F-14 rockers down the deck. I clean her up and adjust my theater, Oceana. Several scenarios are availAfter selecting the Jolly able in each, including the Oceana training Roger VF-84 squadron, I max Fleet Defender missions tailored to hone the skills necessary out the difficulty settings, and PRICE: $59.99 for flight and fight. The mission generator arm up with a fleet defense SYSTEM: REQUIREMENTS: 386-33MHz or better (486 will send two squadrons of allied aircraft to bravo load out. Once in the recommended), 4MB RAM, VGA engage the enemy, with your objective being front cockpit, I marvel at the graphics, 14MB hard drive space, mouse; supports Adlib, Roland, to survive and bat .500 in your missions. very detailed front displays. Pro Audio Spectrum, and Sound Blaster sound cards In most campaign missions, your job is to Left and right views are very PROTECTION: DESIGNERS: clean and display a throttle, Scott Spanburg, Mike McDonald, protect your carrier and escort various strike Scott Elson, Ned Way, packages to their targets. A pilot will advance gear lever, and a bank of warnChristopher Clark, George Wargo. in rank as he racks up campaign points, buting indicators. Snapping a Detmar Peterke MICROPROSE PUBLISHER: MicroProse if he dies or allows his carrier to get nuked, quick glance back, I can see Hunt Valley, MD (410) 771-1151 the campaign is over. Thankfully, you may my backseat RIO (Radar InIBM FLET None SIMULATION Prae 28 Computer Gamine World "


"$34900 Suggested Retail Price 20P GUN You've got the sound. You've got the CD-ROM. Now get the picture with ReelMagic Lite! ReelMagic MPEG vidum ReclMuglas You've got the 16-bit sound card and CD-ROM drive-now all you need is ReelMagic Lite to join the MPEG revolution! ReelMagic Lite is the world's first MPEG video playback card. It will change the way you look at multimedia forever, at a price you can afford today. MATO The MPEG process delivers 200:1 monster data compression for full-screen, full-motion TV-quality video, along with CD-quality audio playback30 fps MPEG (-Quality Adlib. DOS video playback MPEG cudio gome compatible ReelMagic Lite ReelMagic ReelMagic Moltimedio Plays popular Sound Blaster-compatible games. all from your standard CD-ROM drive. That's what gives your interactive MPEG entertainment \"walk-in» realism and puts your GETPICTURE favorite movies on CD-ROM* The MPEG experience sets the new industry standard in visual excitement-send Top Gun rocketing across your entire screen or watch the first lunar landing on Compton's interactive encyclopedia! And many more next-generation ReelMagic MPEG interactive entertainment and movie titles are on the way. As an added bonus, when you get ReelMagic Lite you'll also receive the MPEG version of a thrill-packed, live-action adventure game FREE! Call 1-800-845-8086 ext. 407 for your nearest ReelMagic dealer—and blaze into the future now DESIGNS with MPEG! Dual Speed CD Drive Stereo Speckers NATURE HUNTINA VAN ZORR ZOR Pro SIN SECET: CUBE Comptons Encyclopedia These are just a few of the many exciting Red Magie titles available now. 'Call Sigma Designs to inquire about CD-ROM drives compatible with movies on CD. MPEG, the Motion Picture Experts Group, is the industry standard for data compression and decompression. 1994 Sigma Designs, Inc. The Sigma Designs logo is a registered trademark, and ReelMagic is a trademark of Sigma Designs, Inc. All other brand and product names are property of their respective owners. Specifications subject to change without notice. Circle Reader Service #128 "


"THISH 200 200 flight path to line up the HSD caret with my next waypoint. It's now time to activate the AWG-9 radar and fire control system. Steady up at angels 10, the EC-3 Hawkeye vectors me to an intercept position for incoming contacts. I swing port heading 160 for a 20-degree offset and with a quick keystroke tell my wing man to \"go tactical.\" I now have his attention and he will hopefully seek out targets on his own. Engaging auto-pilot to maintain heading and altitude, I jump into the rear RIO seat where my forward view shows the DDD (Detailed Data Display) indicator and a rectangular box with a radar beam sweeping back and forth. The look down view is a radar scope called the TID (target indicator display). This scope looks like a baseball diamond with your aircraft at home plate and is slaved to several radar modes that are selected on the DDD display, On the DDD I can see three blips off to the left side of the screen and several blips to the right. The blips are appearing and disappearing, so I tweak the beam elevation to get a solid return. I can actually shape the scan pattern emanating from the nose of my airinformation and I will have to lock up the target in Pulse Doppler Single Target Track (PDRSTT) to get a track. This will set off the bandit's Son 103TALE warning system, and he'll know I'm ALT 10000 tracking his aircraft. The TWS-M and TWS-A track modes are best suited for the AIM-54 Phoenix missile system. The radar is passive and shows multiple targers on the TID without having to lock the targets. The «A» variant automatically assigns a Phoenix to each contact prioritized by proximity, and the «M» manual mode allows the pilot to decide the sequence. Have your eyes craft. The beam elevation can be tilted up or glazed over yet? It does take a while to get down, and I can adjust the vertical and horiyour head around the radar system-it took zontal scanning volume by changing the ele me at least three reads through the documenvation bar and azimuth switches in the left tation-but dedication will certainly be reRIO view; this will flatten or elongate the area clongate the area warded. of radar coverage. I have several search and Having dialed in the radar on the DDD, I track modes at my disposal, and I select the highlight or \"hook» each blip on the TID bi TWS-M (Track While Scan-Manual). with the HT button. This will bring up inThis mode is slaved to the TID and will formation on the scope. I identify all the display target icons along with range, altitude targets, and I now can see that the F-111 will and heading information. I can use the Pulse be intercepted by a flight of four. I use the DT Doppler Search (PDSRCH) or Range While key to designate cach enemy target and a Scan (RWS) search modes to scan for targets Phoenix is assigned to each. At 60 miles, I am at greater ranges, but I will receive no range well within the range of the AIM-54 missile. "


"I clear my wingie to attack the target I have selected; as soon as he fires I can switch targets and effectively direct his firepower. I pop back into the front seat at 50 miles and closing...Fox 3!!! I hose off four AIM-54 missiles while my wingman also ripple fires. Our flight closes within 20 miles and I get a report that three F-5's are splashed. I watch the TID as the targer icons spin 360 with decreasing altitude HEADING 354 ALTITUDE 215 AIRSPECO 130 and vanish... YES!! A single bandit has avoided my million dollar missile, and I thing and help me out, but it's obvious I'm have lost contact with the small agile fighter out of altitude, energy and ideas. I switch to I jump back into the RIO seat to try to get a padlock view which will swivel around him locked. Shifting to the close-in radar tracking the enemy, but I get disoriented and, mode, I lock the twisting F-5 below my flight just before the bandit gets a firing solution on me, my wingman nails him with a Sideand get a launch warning. My TEWS system lights up with a missile warning so I activate winder. The bandit is engulfed in a huge black and orange fireball strewing out pieces my jammer, break hard 90 degrees, and spit of twisted aircraft, careening down to the a load of chaff packets. I can see the missile's iles deck. Whoaaaa...one case of whiskey to my wingie for saving my butt. at the speed of heat, so I can pull across the missile's line of sight and jink. I spoof the missile and keep closing within visual range High Visibility of the F-5. BAD IDEA! Graphically, Fleet Defender pushes the enThe fighter our turns me and immediatelyvelope of desktop computers. The texturesaddles me up for dinner. I instruct my wingie mapped polygon images are highly derailed, to go defensive, meaning he will drop everyand things like panel markings, insignias and weapon stores are all rendered in detail. The cloud patterns and water effects are a pure joy to watch. Early morning and nighttime are also simulated extremely well, so the overall look of the sim is very rich. At low levels, the water has a rippling effect which gives the illusion of cresting waves. There is, however, a performance penalty for all this grandeur-especially when venturing into enemy cities. The frame rate slows considerably as the high detail of buildings and landscapes sucks up CPU power. Fortunately, you can turn off the derail to speed things up. Fleet Defender incorporates various exterior views, some of which can be manipulated on both axes. These views pan slowly, and other flights can appear jerky. However, views like the LSO and Air Boss are worth the price of a price of admission, and Fleet Defender strikes a very good balance berween game play and pure graphic orgasm. It also supports a full complement of sound devices, and emulates engine spooling sounds and explosions with good fidelity. Digitized speech is available if you have the free memory. Bring 'Er Down Carrier landings are performed by contacting the Air Boss. If the deck is clear he will give you clearance to land. If not, he will If it were any more real, you'd be drinking Tang. New Microsoft Space Simulator is so authentic, the Johnson Space Center at NASA has asked for it. Select your spacecraft from our fleet and blast off. Once in space, command your ship in our free-flight mode. Explore the fiery red canyons of Mars, or the explosion of a supernova, all based on actual satellite data. It's just one of the realistic simulations we have waiting for you to take control. To get off the ground, shuttle over to your reseller and pick it up. Microsoft Galt e Qudce Home 1994 Microsoft Corp. All rights reserved. Microsoft is a registered trademark of Microsoft Corp. Flight Simulator is a trademark of Bruce A. Artwick. "


"STRATEGY Fire, But Never Forget Photo courtesy of Grumman Corp. Basic ACM School For Fleet Defender by Tom \"KC\" Basham vector you to a marshaling area where you await a landing sequence. The carrier is equipped with an optical ball, and the LSO (landing signal officer) will give you verbal cues for your approach. The actual landings and launches are fairly easy, even at the maximum realism sercings, and anyone who has flown Flight of the Intruder, Jet Fighter, or F18 Hornet will find landing pretty routine. Stormy conditions will make things much tougher as you struggle to get lined up, but weather conditions don't affect the pitch of the deck or create any nasty turbulence for you to deal with. You can practice landings by using the «chear\" key for a quick setup in the landing pattern, enabling you to practice landings from different points in the approach. The flight model has an accurate envelope and takes altitude into consideration, modifying indicated air speed by air density. While o you bring your F-14 back to the carrier after firing a full spread of 6 not a close-in dog-fighter, the F-14 can turn Phoenix? Or, do you and your RIO moderately well, and the radius will tighten (Radar Intercept Operator) spend enough with increased G's. The rudders induce no time adrift in a life raft that the rest of the roll during deflection, and stalls are preceded crew suspects you're practicing rowing-perby a tame buffering from which it is easy to haps to defect to neutral Sweden? If you said recover. The model simulates high angle of the latter, or if you fall somewhere between attack accurately with the velocity vector ac the two, we've got some tips for you. curately displayed; but while you can yank the nose up all day long, the sink rate is negligible, making it difficult to descend in a nose up attitude. The graphics make up for any shortcomings of the flight model by creating a very convincing sense of momentum, especially at low levels. Fleet Defender has something for either the casual or the hard-core gamer. It's not a closein dog fighter like Falcon 3, but is really a tactical flight simulator where you will spend most of your time in the back seat searching for targets. The product is of high quality and To start with, don't try to knife-fight with exhibits some very new and innovative fea the F-14. While it's hardly the worst maneutures like extensive wingman controls, adding | vering aircraft in the sky, it's a far cry from a new level of strategy and game play. Enemy the F-16 many are used to flying. In an F-16, Al is very good, and you can expect to be kept 4g is only as far away as the afterburner very busy in a gaggle of bandits that maneuver détente on the throttle. In Falcon 3.0, a quick in both the horizontal and vertical. I found burst of zone-5 afterburner quickly makes Og no major bugs, but I did encounter some available to you. The F-14 lacks such acceleration luxuries. Even with full afterburner in a problems with getting the wingman comdive, Fleet Defender's F-14 is slow to reclaim mands to function consistently. Fleet Delost energy. Despite having a jet engine, F-14 fender does lack a modem option, which is a dogfight tactics have more in common with natural for this product, and I'm sure many W.W.Il prop-engined fighters than an F-16. head-to-head players will be disappointed. The F-14 certainly outmaneuvers older airStill, even as a solo flight, Fleet Defender is an craft, such as the F-4 Phantom. It has the outstanding simulator that will serve to reesability for high AOA maneuvers, and pertablish MicroProse as a major player in the formed them nearly 20 years before the MiGflight sim wars. CGW 29's vaunted Pugachev's Cobra, but it simply wasn't designed to be a dogfighter. The F-14 was created to shoot down hordes of enemy bombers at long range, before they could threaten the host aircraft carrier with cruise missiles. When flown properly, limited-energy fighters can best more modern opponents, but it takes a lot of skill and just a bit of luck. The best advice is to use the F-14 as it was intended-killing the bad guys at maximum range. No bandit should be allowed to close and initiate a dogfight. If a dogfight does commence, call your wingman for assistance immediately. This gives the bandit something else to worry about. Keep your nose low and the throttle set high to maximize available energy. Spend your g-forces wisely as needed. Don't pull 6g if a 2g turn will suffice. With any luck, the bandit will engage your wingman and present a quick, easy rear-quarter kill shot to you. Far Wars Long-range killing means using the AIM54 and (to a lesser degree) the AIM-7 Sparrow missiles. In casual conversations, the AIM-54 Is discuss is discussed as having a 100nm range, being totally fire-and-forger, scoring extremely well in non-combat missile tests, but considered to have limited maneuverability and therefore limited capabilities against fighter-sized targets. Discussions with F-14 crew members tar will dispel most of these myths, however. First, the AIM-54 missile has an absolute maximum range around 100nm, but keep in mind that like all other air-to-air missiles, the Page 32 Computer Gaming World "


"VOCABULARY ENHANCEMENT POLITICAL CORRECTNESS CLATHURIN ALIYOLIVE MISSED SPIRITUAL AWARENESS JI BUTT-KICKING EXCITEMENT Grand Prize Winner: The Apple Japan CD-ROM Award Chosen over IRON HELIX, HELL CAB, and MYST. \"Downright outrageous.\" V2 Inside MacGames MacHome Journal DOMOV Welcome to the future. U America's on close-out sale. Everything's going to hell on afterburners. The Skins and the Neos have stolen the last gene samples of Earth's wildlife. If you ever want to hear a bird go tweet again, you'll have to do something fast. Fire up your hovercraft and blast through an incredibly realistic, grungy 3-D New Yorkof-the-future in a non-stop firefight. Your hand-picked Co-pilot is screaming with attitude. Your custom-chosen soundtrack is turning your brain to plasma. The Weapons Lady has 24 different forms of destruction for your selection...if you can handle it. All you've got to do is stay alive long enough to save the world...and make a few bucks while you're at it. FROM THE AWARD-WINNING CREATORS OF LUNICUS\" Inquiries please call 415-813-8040 AWARD-WINNING CD-ROM MACINTOSH ADVENTURE NOW AVAILABLE FOR WINDOWS YBRID Paramount Interactive "


"25 26 rocket motor burns less than 1 minute. After that, the missile glides the rest of the way to the target. As it glides, it loses speed and maneuverability. At the maximum edge of its 19744 S600 RVEI is wasted. When the ration of wingmen. No longer do you alone, dar is set to PSTT (pulse armed with a single aircraft and eight missiles, single target track engage the entire third world. Now, you have which, incidentally, is support aircraft, friendly fighters, and your not implemented in own personal wingman. These three can save Fleet Defender), the misyour life...if you use them correctly. sile flies active the entire Support aircraft could be B-52 bombers, way, so the F-14 can A-6 Intruders or an E-2C Hawkeye. While all break contact at any of these rely mainly on you for protection, the time. Hawkeye is particularly vulnerable. PatrolFleet Defender has ling high above the waves, these AWAC airsimplified this procecraft use their powerful radar to report the dure somewhat. Basipositions of enemy air and naval forces to you cally, no matter what and other fighters. When you are within radar mode you launch 100nm of the Hawkeye, it will datalink inforwith the AIM-54 mation directly to your RIO's displays. Using seems to be SARH until either you break the this information, you can fire Phoenix mislock, or the missile reaches a pre-defined \"acsiles at long range without even activating tivation point\" derived from the target inforyour own radar. Using the SHIFT+P commation available at launch time. Therefore, mand, the Hawkeye's radar operator will rethe longer you maintain radar lock on the port all known contacts around you. target, the less time the missile will actually Like all carrier assets, there are only a limbe active. At 10nm from the target, the misited number of Hawkeyes available to you sile will go active. If you break the lock (usually 3 or 4). If these WIR aircraft are lost, so are your long range eyes. Use the Hawkeyes mercilessly to destroy your enemy and always be ready to come to their aid. The loss of a single patrolling E-2C could la reforma allow an entire squad9872 ron of MiG-29s to ambush you from your flanks. Other F-14s are near you, generally flying barrier patrols called sooner, the missile will immediately go active. BARCAPs to prevent Although the enemy should get a lock warn any enemy aircraft from approaching the caring on his RWR when you lock him up, he rier. They also provide a reception escort for shouldn't get a missile indication until the returning aircraft, so they'll shake bandits off missile goes active. So, the longer the missile your tail if needed. Additionally, an extra pair remains SARH, the closer it will get to the of F-14s are on standby on the carrier. These targer before going active, and the less time ready-5 aircraft are armed for flight, and can the target will have to react. Experiments in be underway five minutes or less after receivFleet Defenderseem to show ing the launch order. a much higher hit rate when the launching aircraft maintains a lock on the target and keeps the missile SARH for as long as possileft. Against a lumbering C-130, the AIM-54 Phoenix may well destroy the target at maximum range. A nimble MiG-29, however, will simply dance away from the missile. The AIM-54 is typically effective against fightersized targets at ranges less than 30nm. In Fleet Defender, I usually hold fire until bombersized targets are less than 75nm away and fighter-sized targets are less than 50nm away. Secondly, the AIM-54 is generally referred to as «active radar homing» as opposed to the «semi-active radar homing» (SARH) AIM-7 Sparrow. SARH missiles require the launching platform to maintain a radar lock on the targer for the full duration of the missile's flight. An active radar homing missile is usually called «fire and forget,» meaning once the pilot launches the missile he can forget about it completely, confident that it will find and kill its target. The AIM-54 is usually called a \"fire and forget\" missile, but that is a somewhat misleading phrase, as the AIM-54's guidance mode varies. Depending upon the mode the AWG-9 radar is in at launch time, the missile may actually fly in semi-active mode part way to the target, then go active in the terminal moments of the hunt. Alternatively, the missile may be semi-active all the way to the target, requiring the pilot to maintain radar lock, or it may even fly the entire flight in active mode. In the real AWG-9 radar, when using the TWS (track while scan) mode ar far away targets, the missile launches in SARH, then goes active after a set amount of time. During the SARH portion of the flight, the F-14 must maintain radar lock on the bandit. When the AWG-9 is set to PDSTT (PulseDoppler Single Target Track) the missile remains semi-active throughout the entire flight. If the radar lock is broken, the missile 9872 ble. We Are Not Alone In many ways, Fleet Defender bears little resemblance to previous MicroProse products, most notably in the addiHEADING ALTITUDE 13046 AIASPEED 410 Proo 34 Camuter Camine World "


"QQP's Strategies of the Month These other F-14s have their own jobs to do, but they'll come to your rescue, and they expect you to help them out as well. As stated, the F-14 is an interceptor first, a dogfighter second. If you find the enemy getting in too close for comfort, and especially if you're low on weapons, don't hesitate to use SHIFT + <F1> to call for help. Unless you are way off course or extremely deep in enemy territory, another pair of F-14s will be vectored toward you immediately. If possible, call for help slightly before you egress so they can cover your escape. If you receive the \"no assistance available\" reply, that's a not-so-subtle hint that you're a long way from where you're supposed to be, or that all other F-14s are in trouble of their own. In either case, you should hightail it back to the carrier pronto. Cover Me There are many ways to acquire victory in Grandest Fleet, A) Develop just your basic fleet and keep pumping them out. A six to eight battleship force can be devastating even against super-ships. B) Grow your economy toeventually construct superships. These ships are both powerful and interesting to use. If you can get your base economy to the point of building super-ships in your ports, you'll be tough to beat. C) Get your cities up in size. This will do several things to take you to victory. As the cities' size gets beyond certain levels of growth they will increase in victory point value. This can be significant. Larger cities also create more tech and resource points per turn, and when those cities are very large it is pretty tough to bomb them down in size. Carrier planes and bombers will take many more casualties when attacking large cities. D) Go into a full city-economy development. This includes; Universities, Hospitals, Downtowns, City Size, Convoys, Forts... Etc. This gives you many extra victory points per turn, unbeatable defensive position, and overall strength. Many games can be won with this approach. E) A combination of the above. The options are limitless. With all this, G.F. plays as a very in-depth game. There is still the maneuvering and building your fleets. ENJOY!! A puzzle game that will entertain anyone. Try all three ways of playing; Basic-Adventure-Master. These have nothing to do with the difficulty level. The last friendly aircraft left is the wingman, your best friend in the sky. He'll stick by you like gluc, follow your orders, and protect you at all costs. Your wingman isn't disposable; lose a wingman and you'll most likely lose your own jer. Lose enough jets and you'll lose the war. Your wingman expects you to tell him what to do every step of the way. He won't engage until you give him permission, and he won't stray from your wing without orders. He's your most powerful asset (other than your own aircraft), but he's looking to you for guidance. To begin with, he won't engage a target, even if you radar lock it and press <F2>, until you tell him to enter combat mode. Press either <Fl> to order him to go tactical\" or <F3> to tell him to fly \"combat spread.» Either of these commands will make him wake up and prepare for battle. When you radar lock a target and press <F2>, he'll immediately attack that target. I prefer to let my wingman operate on a longer leash. I usually proceed to the main waypoint and perform the primary mission objective while using the <F6>, \"Sanitize\" command to order my wingman to search for targets at my six or my flanks. I order him to \"check sanitize\" both sides and the rear before issuing the <F1> \"go tactical\" command. I wait and see what (if any) contacts he reports, then press <Fl>, then again order him to sanitize the direction of the highest threat. After receiving the command, he'll cheerfully go off on his own and kill bad guys. Once that task is done, I continually order him to sanitize either side and the rear until I've accomplished the main mission. Next month, Tom will discuss the intricacies of the Fleet Defender radar systems. C6W Perfect General Tactical support aircraft is \"The answer\" to those pesky enemy artillery pieces hidden in woods or behind hills. But be careful if your opponent has placed machine gunners close to this artillery your planes could get shot down. Much more on Perfect General II next month. Truly the ultimate word puzzle game for the computer. We truly believe this. The four quests are quite different from each other, even though they may not seem to be at first glance. Give each one a good try. Of all our testers, each have a favorite. Q.Q.P. 495 Highway 202, Flemington, N.J. 08822 (908)788-2799 Circle Reader Service #105 June 1994 Page 35 "


"HARDWARE SURVEY CDs On A ROMpage them for under $200. Why not a triple-speed drive? I've found that, for the most part, they are significantly faster for software installations, but they yield only a marginal improvement in game performance over that of a double speed CD drive. Also, talk among game publishers suggests that both the double speed and the triple speed drives are interim products before faster CD-ROMs become available sometime in 1995. Since the triple speed drive only gives marginally superior performance at a not-so-marginally larger price, the double speed is probably the best interim buy. Illustration by Brian Clarke 8 Upgrade Kits To Turn Your Mundane Machine Into A Multimedia Monster What Is A Multimedia Kit? Basically, a multimedia upgrade kit contains a CD-ROM drive, a 16-bit sound card, some means of connecting this equipment to your computer (the three wires of power, sound and data), and usually a boatload of bundled software. When considering the sound card in an upgrade kit, there are a few things to keep in mind. Look for Sound Blaster compatibility—that is, genuine FM support (not software emulation!) via a Yamaha OPL2 or OPL3 chip for music and 8-bit mono (stereo for Sound Blaster Pro) hardware DAC compatibility for voices and sound effects. Crearive Lab's cards, and anything from MediaVision or Aztech will fit the bill. Also, if the card provides wavetable synthesis, make sure that the card supports General MIDI in addition to native mode support. Of the sound cards available, I've found the Orchid Game Wave32 (or the Sound Wave 32) and the Logitech Soundman Wave to work with games with the least amount of hassle. In addition to a sound card and a CDROM drive, you'll usually get a few CD games, some speakers, and perhaps a low-end joystick. Most of these packaged speakers are worthless. Using these speakers on a multimedia computer is like paying $3000 for a great stereo system, only to pump the music through cheap, swap meet speakers. The speakers that accompany most kits seem to come from Labtech and require a DC converter adapter. Unfortunately, the adapter is by Mike Weksler T he history of entertainment software unlike the laundry detergent aisle of a superreads a bit like a Chinese calendar. market, the CD-ROM upgrade kit section is Back in the mid-'80s, when gamers usually crammed with huge, alarmingly vispent more time swapping floppy disks than brant boxes that shout their content's fabuskewering bad guys in their favorite role-playlously new and improved ingredients. In this ing games, there was a Year of the Hard Drive. survey we'll try to get beyond the hype and When MS-DOS gamers grew disenchanted look at the active ingredients in these packwith their 16-color EGA palette compared to ages and help you determine what kit is best superior graphics on the Amiga and Atari ST, for you. there was a Year of the VGA Card. Likewise, there were Years of the Amiga and a couple Do You Even Need A Kit? Years of the Apple II. If you already have a sound card with a built In addition to being a year of endless buzzin CD-ROM interface (like the Sound Bl. words, 1994 is The Year of the CD-ROM. Pro), you may want to skip the upgrade kits Nearly every game publisher will put their completely and simply plug in a CD-ROM ly plug in CD-ROM games on CDs this year, and many have drive. With that, you're done, finito! Once committed to going to CD-ROM as their you have those two components working, primary delivery medium by the beginning of you're ready to handle just about any CD the 1995. If you want to keep up with the gaming software industry can throw at you. Jones', it looks like your next hardware invest i c If you get a stand-alone CD-ROM, I'd ment will be a CD-ROM drive. recommend a double speed (300 KB per The CD-ROM aisle in your local computer second minimum transfer throughput) with superstore can be a bewildering place. Not less than 350ms access time. You can find So, you must either use batteries, buy a 6V adapter, or listen to the speakers unamplified. I'd recommend either buying better speakers (Acoustic Research sells adequate models for $60-80) or plugging your computer sound system into your home stereo. Into Each Life, A Little DOS Must Fall O nce you get your CD-ROM drive and Page 36 Computer Gaming World "


"sound card installed, you'll have to wrestle with conventional memory. You must somehow tuck 50K of new CD-ROM and sound card drivers into upper memory just to get your games to run! To go into detail on this subject is way beyond the scope of this article (check out my new technical tips column in the July issue!). If you're a tech-weenie like myself, it's just another memory juggling trick that shouldn't take you long to master, but the majority of gamers should consider dropping the QEMM or 386Max memory managers into their shopping carts. When shopping for your kit, be sure to ask your retailer if they will install a multimedia upgrade kit for free as a purchasing incentive. Aztech Labs, Inc. Double Speed Pro 16 Sound Sound a30 The Sound Galaxy Pro 16L, the foundation of this kit, is treated like Sound Blaster Pro (8 bir stereo digital audio) by the majority of games, and has the added benefit of an inexpensive wavetable upgrade using the Aztech Wave Power daughter card (with 8-bit Ensonic ROMs). While you don't have to be Werner Von Braun to install this kit, a bit of technical knowledge regarding interrupts and memory 1/0 addresses doesn't hurt. I found that I still had to manually install the CD ROM drivers and do a little tinkering after the installation (which goes into Windows and installs lots of multimedia junk onto your rig). This kit is great for someone who just wants to play games, but compared to some of the other kits in its class, is priced a bit high for what you get. The speakers are a notch above most others, but there's much less software bundled into this kit. The wavetable upgrade feature, while not Wave Blaster compatible, is adequate, and an Azrech spokesperson said that it should now support General MIDI via the on-board MPU-401 hardware. Aztech provides hardware to many of the manufacturers mentioned here, so those of you who like to drink straight from the well should check out this kit. Double Speed Pro 16. Price: $499. CDROM: LMSI CM206 (Laser Magnetic Storage Civilization, Railroad Tycoon, F-117A, Rebel Int.), double speed, min access time 325ms, Assault, Sim City 2000, Return to Zork. Creacaddyless. Interface: 16 pin Philips Sound tive Labs (408) 428-6600. Card: Sound Galaxy Pro 16L. Games: Jones in the Fast Lane, Battle Chess Enhanced CD, Creative Labs Space Quest IV. Aztech Labs, Inc. (510) 623Digital Edge 3x 8989. This kit is essentially the Sound Blaster 16 Creative Labs SCSI-2 card with the Advanced Signal ProcGame Blaster CD 16 essing chip) and the NEC CDR-510 triple speed (450KB per second throughput) CDAfter going all the rounds with multimedia ROM drive. Once hooked up, this combinakit installations, I have come to the conclution proves to be a true multimedia dynamic sion that you just can't go wrong with one of duo. Games run without a hitch, and software installation from the triple speed to the Creative Labs' multimedia upgrade kits. hard drive was blazingly fast. Since it is rather Creative Labs offers several different kits in addition to the Game Blaster CD 16, includexpensive, you might find it hard to justify ing the Discovery CD 16 ($449) and the Eduthe extra cost of the triple speed drive unless tainment CD 16 ($599). Each package you're pulling huge graphic files from the contains a different collection of bundled CD, given the marginal improvement in software, but the hardware is identical, except game performance. If money is no object, that the Game Blaster CD 16 offers more however, this is the kit for you. games and a SunCom FX2000 joystick. So, if you already have a large game library and a good joystick, I would recommend that you get the least expensive double speed kit—the Discovery CD 16. The Matsushita CR-563-B drive has proven to be adequate for almost all the CD-ROM games I've played, the only hitch I've found being that, on occasion, the CD drawer must be opened and closed in order to get the CD to mount. The kits all have variants of the Sound Blaster 16 (either Basic with the sole Panasonic Creative Labs Digital Edge 3X interface, or the Multi-CD variant, with adapP Digital Edge 3X. Price: $999. CD-ROM: tors for Panasonic, Sony, and Mitsumi CD NEC CDR-510 triple speed, min access time ROM drives) which is wavetable upgradable 195ms, caddy required. Interface: Adaptec with the Wave Blaster, one of the better SCSI-2 50 pin. Sound Card: Sound Blaster-16 wavetable synthesizers on the market. When SCSI-2 with Advanced Signal Processing. the SB16 was first introduced, it had some Games: Rebel Assault, Indianapolis 500, Lemnoise problems, 8-bit Sound Blaster compatimings. Creative Labs (408) 428-6600. bility problems, and driver bugs, but these seem to be less of an issue with more recent versions of the cards. Super Deluxe Creative Labs' installation routine is one of the best I've seen, the exception being that it While the games bundled with the Super won't let the user selectively install certain Deluxe may not be the cream of the crop, the Deluxe may not programs. It will configure your system easily sound card is some heavy duty multimedia but then proceed to dump several megabytes iron. capable of running as either a Sound of multimedia programs (MIDI sequencers, Blaster. a Sound Blaster Pro, or a PAS 16. The MIDI file players, authoring software, voice initial release of the Pro Audio Spectrum 16 recognition utilities, etc.) onto your hard had some serious problems, but these probdrive whether you want it to or not. As a lems seem to have been eliminated in the footnote, I found the customer support to be latest versions, as all of the Media Vision cards excellent, especially considering that I called I've recently resred have performed without a on a Sunday afternoon. hitch. The NEC CDR-210 double speed CDGame Blaster CD 16. Price: $549. CDROM is a solid performer, on par with the ROM: Matsushita CR-563-B double speed, Creative Labs Omni CD (Matsushita CRCr min access time 320ms, caddyless. Interface: 563-B). Panasonic 40 pin. Sound Card: Sound Blaster Media Vision has the easiest multimedia 16 Basic. Games: Lemmings, Silent Service II, kits to install, period. The \"quickstart\" option W DOUBLE SPEED PRO 16 Aztech Labs Double Speed Pro 16 June 1994 Page 37 "


"CAS MULTIMEDIA KIT allows you to select which superfluous progeared for the gamer. This spartan kit comes KUNSTVAROS grams (from a gamer's perspective) you don't in an unassuming box that may be mistaken DIE want to dump onto the hard drive, and it rests UNESCO for just a sound card. The kit contains exactly the IROS, I/O addresses, and DMAs with a what you need to get up and running with a pleasant female voice. The best part about the double speed Orchid CDS-3110, a caddyless installation is that it only requires one floppy drive with, get this, a play button on the front! disk. The installation will configure the sys(First the Apollo 11 landing, now a play tem for you (allowing more experienced users button on a CD-ROM drive.) The drive does a manual override), and prompts you to place have a slightly slower access time than some an installation CD in the drive and reboot the of the other double speed drives mentioned. machine. After a few prompts, you can walk Also included is an Orchid SoundWave 32 away. All of the other kits require you to feed Media Vision Pro Deluxe and enough software to send you on your floppy disks into the machine. In addition way. Two things however, must be assumed. (and someoncat Media Vision should receive have 3D sound capabilities, the Premium uses First, that the user has a modicum of technical a multimedia medal for this), the package Sound Retrieval System (SRS), the Sound Blasincludes a truly useful installation video. It ter uses Osound. The Premium is the first ter uses sou begins with an overview of the Phillips screwsound card to embrace the emerging VESA driver (really!) and steps you through the audio standard. entire process. The hardware installation If you find this kit on the shelves cheaper techniques are real-world techniques (i.e., than the one from Creative Labs, it should be they show you how to connect the audio and a good value, but I would personally wait data cables to your drive before you screw it until the new Media Vision sound hardware into the bay), and the tape is divided to is battle tested. I've also found the NEC-510 differentiate between the novice and adtriple speed drive to run a bit on the warm vanced user. With the concise documentaside when playing audio CDs. tion and the best installation routine in the Orchid Sound Wave CD industry, you should be up and running in no Pro Deluxe. Price: $799. CD-ROM: time. NEC CDR-510 triple speed, min access time less time expertise—especially the ability to read be195ms, caddy required. Interface: SCSI 50 pin. The package also includes a really beefy tween the lines of inadequate documentaSound Card: Premium 3-D SCSI-2. Games: audio cable with Fisher Price-like connectors tion-and second, that the user has his or her Critical Path Forever Growing Garden, and an extra \"Y\" power connector. The only own speakers or sound system. Buster's First Thunder Storm, Who Wants Ardrawbacks to the package are the poor speakthur, Always Arthur, Iron Helix, Mad Dog This particular installation was rife with the ers. McCree, Return to Zork, and Richard Scarry's kind of complications that would have a novFor one hundred dollars less, you can get Busytown. Media Vision (510) 770-8600. ice user returning the kit for either additional the Family Deluxe kit which has essentially assistance or another kit. Most kits attempt the same hardware, but with fewer games. Orchid to idiot-proof their installation by at least numbering the installation disks. With this Super Deluxe. Price: $499. CD-ROM: SoundWave CD kit, we have «Sound Wave/CD Multimedia NEC CDR-210 double speed, min access time Multimedia Kit Kit install disk,\" \"SoundWave 32 In320ms, caddyless. Interface: SCSI 50 pin. stall/Driver Disk,\" and the \"SoundWave 32 Sound Card: Pro Audio Spectrum. Games: Of the multimedia upgrade kits in this Sound Impressions Install\"—three separate Critical Path, Forever Growing Garden, roundup, Orchid's offering seems to be most disks labeled «install»! Additionally, while the Buster's First Thunder Storm, Who Wants Arthur, Always Arthur, Iron Helix, Mad Dog Multimedia Upgrade Kit McCree, Return to Zork, and Richard Scarry's Busytown. Media Vision (510) 770-8600. Double Speed Company Internal CD-ROM Double Speed Pro 16 Aztech Labs, Inc. LMSI CM206 Media Vision Game Blaster CD 16 Creative Labs Matsushita CR-563-B Pro Deluxe Discovery CD 16 Creative Labs Matsushita CR-563-B Edutainment CD 16 Creative Labs Matsushita CR-563-B Family Deluxe Media Vision NEC CDR-210 While the Media Vision multimedia upSuper Deluxe Media Vision NEC CDR-210 grade kirs may have goofy names, they have SoundWave CD Orchid Orchid CDS-3110 good value in the form of superior installation Reel Magic Reel Magic Sony CDU-33A-01 routines, toll free customer support, and low Multimedia FX Prestige Reveal Matsushita CR-563-B prices. This triple speed kit is priced at $200 Multimedia FX Ultra Reveal Matsushita CR-563-B Multimedia FX Elite Reveal less than Creative Labs' triple speed kit, for Matsushita CR-563-B essentially the same CD-ROM and similar Triple Speed hardware. Digital Edge 3X Creative Labs NEC CDR-510* The Premium 3-D SCSI-2 sound card is Pro Deluxe Media Vision NEC CDR-510 designed to be competitive with the Sound *caddy required Blaster 16 SCSI-2 with Advanced Signal Proc** VESA audio compatible essing. Both are wavetable upgradable, both SER Page 38 Computer Gaming World "


"installation for the SoundWave 32 does not require you to play with hardware jumpers, the installation routine has some unintuitive steps. This is also the only kit which will not automatically install the MS-DOS CDROM extension driver, and it's easy to pass up the installation screen that informs you of this. For the money (ca. $499), you get decent Sound Blaster-compatible 8-bir digital audio and General MIDI support, as well as MT-32 compatibility. The Sound Wave 32 card has new ROMs and sounds very good, but it's not in the league of a Wave Blaster. Once installed, this kit worked as advertised. As the only kit in this survey offering waverable right out of the box, it is well worth looking into. It's a solid product from Orchid, but I would highly recommend that the novice user seek help with the installation. On a more positive note, the one game that is included, Lucas Arts' Day of the Tentacle CD, packs more value into the kit than the entire software packages of some of its competitors. SoundWave CD Multimedia Kit. Price: $499. Interface: 34 pin Sony interface. CDROM: Orchid CDS-3110 double speed, min access time 350ms, caddyless. Sound Card: Sound Wave 32. Games: Day of the Tentacle, Gus Goes to Cybertown. Orchid (510) 6830300. plug-and-play, and just might require a user with a black belt in DOS. The Reel Magic board installation had a pretty screen that Reel Magic scanned all interrupts, I/O address, and DMA slots, showing unused resources in green. You can also toggle the Real Magic board on and off in the setup screen, toggle on and off the CD-drive, MPEG player, and sound emulation. I configured for everything and when it was all done and rebooted, no Reel Magic CD-ROM drive was recognized! It turned our that the installation crapped out and higher resolution full-motion, full-screen didn't install the CD-drivers. I can work video is the Reel Magic MPEG decoder. The around such things, but I'm an experienced card connects to your video card and plays full hardware guy. The novice would be nonscreen MPEG video. It can work with an existing sound card, or it can use its own plused. It's a shame that the installation is so hardware for Sound Blaster compatible muclumsy, because the upgrade kit is packaged sic. with the care that a mother would use in The Reel Magic card might be the future of sending her child to camp for the first time. full motion video, except that video card There's everything you would need including manufacturers are currently working hard to an extra «Y» connector in case you run out of get an open MPEG playback standard on power connectors, and a 6-volt adapter for video cards. In other words, you wouldn't the speaker. need an additional product to get full motion So, the Reel Magic package is an interesting video. In the meantime, there are a few titles one, but if the video card manufacturers dethat support the Reel Magic with its MPEG velop their open MPEG standard, the card decompression (Return to Zork, Police Quest may not have much of a future. For the $849 IV, and Dragon's Lair) and they look great. In price, you could get a kit that would give you addition, you can play Philips CD-I DVI more utility and a better CD-ROM drive, movies using the media player that comes and leaving you enough cash to save up for an standard in Windows. open MPEG standard video card if and when If you already have a sound card and CD, they come around. you can get the Reel Magic board as a stand alone for $449, or if you already have a sound Reel Magic. Price: $849. Interface: Sony card, you could get the Reel Magic Light 40 pin. CD-ROM: Sony CDU-33A-01 (cheaper, no sound hardware) for $349. If CDROM double speed, min access time 320ms, you have nothing, you can get this kit, but caddyless. Sound Card: Reel Magic MPEG/SB. there are mighty slim pickings in the software Games: Dragon's Lair, Coupon for free Return arena for MPEG compatible games. to Zork and Star Trek CD-I full length motion As for the installation, this one is not exactly picture on CD! Reel Magic (510) 770-0100. Reel Magic Reel Magic Imagine the wonderful next generation games with real-time, full-motion, full-screen video such that actors in uniform conduct briefings instead of depending on animated sequences. Right now, the only solution for CD-ROM Access Time 320ms 320ms 320ms 320ms 320ms 320ms 350ms 320ms 320ms 320ms 320ms Installation Video no no no no Sound Card Sound Galaxy Pro 16L Sound Blaster 16 Basic Sound Blaster 16 Basic Sound Blaster 16 Basic Pro Audio Spectrum 16 Pro Audio Spectrum 16 SoundWave 32 Reel Magic MPEG Aztech 16 bit OEM Aztech 16 bit OEM Aztech 16 bit OEM Sound Card CD Interface Philips 16 pin Panasonic 40 pin Panasonic 40 pin Panasonic 40 pin SCSI 50 pin SCSI 50 pin Sony 34 pin Sony 40 pin Panasonic 40 pin Panasonic 40 pin Panasonic 40 pin Wavetable Synthesis upgradable upgradable upgradable upgradable no no Experience Required for Installation intermediate novice novice novice novice novice expert guru intermediate intermediate intermediate yes Price $499 $549 $449 $599 $399 $499 $499 $849 $449 $549 $649 yes yes no no upgradable upgradable upgradable no yes yes yes 195ms 195ms Sound Blaster 16 SCSI-2 ASP Adaptec SCSI-2 50 pinyes Premium 3-D** SCSI-2 50 pin yes no yes novice novice $999 $799 June 1994 Page 39 "


"Reveal Computer Products Multimedia FX, MFX06 Elite \"Value Added!\" should be stamped all over this package. Reveal stuffed this kit with 8watt powered speakers, an Aztech 16-bit sound card, the Matsushita CR-563-B CDROM drive, and a boatload of software. Installation is very similar to the Aztech multimedia upgrade kit, but if you have to go to DOS to tweak things, there is little reference to CD drivers in the documentation. The documentation is quite voluminous, but is more focused on the included applications and less on the hardware and installation routine. There is an installation video, but it only covers the hardware installation (the easy part) and not the software configuration (the bear!). To their credit, Reveal does have a 24-hour 365-day technical support hotline. With the huge amount of both games and Vith the huge amount of both games and family oriented software bundled with this kit, marvelous speakers, and a good double speed CD, you might not be able to pass it up if you find it at a decent price. Most of your money will be going to the bundled software, so you may decide to purchase one of the more inexpensive kits Reveal offers, such as Reveal Multimedia FX, MEX06 Elite the MFX02 Prestige ($449) or the MFX04 Ultra at ($549). Multimedia FX, MEX06 Elite. Price: $649. Interface: Panasonic 40 pin. CDROM: Matsushita CR-563-B double speed, RO min access time 320ms, caddyless. Sound Card: Aztech 16-bit. Games: The Chessmaster 3000, King's Quest VI, Stellar 7, Space Shuttle, Where in the World is Carmen Sandiego, Indiana Jones and the Fate of Atlantis, Dune, The Lord of the Rings, Jurassic Park. Reveal Computer Products (800) 326-2222 ery CD 16 from Creative Labs. The Family Deluxe, in spite of its lack of a waverable upgradability, has the best installation procedure and offers good gaming hardware at a low price, without a lot of useless software. The Discovery CD 16 can be upgraded to waverable synthesis with a Wave Blaster, and is priced to sell at $449. It really becomes a ross up berween the two sound cards. With the Media Vision, you get Pro Audio Spectrum 16, Sound Blaster Pro, and Sound Blaster compatibility, and with Creative Labs, you get Sound Blaster 16, Sound Blaster Proand Sound Blaster compatibility. These cards are pretty close in performance and when combined in a kit, either one would suit the would be multimedia gamer. If you can find one on sale cheaper than the other, it makes the decision that much easier. If they were the same price and you were a hardware novice, the Media Vision install video and toll free customer support would be quite an inducement. If these things aren't important to you, or you see a Wave Blaster in your multimedia future, than the Creative Labs kit would be a good choice. Any of the other kits in the roundup would be a welcome addition to a computer for general multimedia use, but when dealing with games, it's usually best to go with companies who have a strong track record. CGW Is There A Winner? If I had to pick one kit off the shelf, it would be a toss up between the double speed Family Deluxe kit from Media Vision and the DiscovLive-Action Players Entertain And Teach All At Once! Learn Poker From The Best In The West. Poker Sit down at the Cowboy Casino. And play high-stakes poker against five wise-cracking card sharps. Your opponents are tough. A mean Cowboy. Cunning Riverboat Gambler. Sneaky Bandito. Sarcastic Dude. A crazy Prospector and his mule. They insult you. Show no mercy. Make you laugh at your mistakes. But Ace the bartender's your edge. He teaches you the odds. When to open, raise, check, fold or bluff. Plus winning strategies for Five Card Draw..Five and Seven-Card Stud...and Texas Hold'Em. Hundreds of action scenes, . PC great graphics and sound make Multimedia PC this game a sure bet. Call 1-800-357-5238 now for names and of IntelliPlay dealers, and get Cowboy Casino in your choice of Multimedia 3DO PC or 300. And start playing to win. Total Interactive Instruction IntelliPlay Published by timedia Sports, Ic, Ino Piedmont Center, Suite 300, Afonta, GA 30305 Phone (404) 262-0000. Fax (404) 261-2282. Iteploy is a registered trademak of life media Sports, Inc. The Multimedia PC logo is a certification mark of the Multimede PC Morketing Council, le 300 and the 300 logo creodemarks of the 300 Company Computer Gaming World Page 40 Circle Reader Service #79 "


"DEDAY GENERAL R UVID L. MONTGOMERY General St Bernard L. Montgomery. \"Menly. Ind the 2101 rwy Group and we c anded cd THE BEGINNING OF THE END As Supreme Allied or Axis Commander, the fate of Europe hangs on your decision. The challenge to the Allies: Establish a beachhead and smash through to Berlin. To the Axis: Break them and preserve the Reich. and had the reputation of being a formal fighting commander. Is a Mekong ludent and practitioner, Montgomery a trusted salers, and lew Redwy d ers could welche Ir le w e. A 12th, 1942. al core commander of the Lighth Ivy in Eppl. Mone y made the store processor kere DOT 90F SRED) . WARNING: Historically Accurate Personalities This is a wargame with a difference! Movie, ay Parapes Halread O ly V. Gd 93.400 D M Status BITED Fortify 1 CUCUE CHEREFLEGE MOORMO DO 60 Play real-time animated battles within turn-based strategic campaigns from June 1944 through the end of the war D-Day: The Beginning of the End\" is the latest in Impressions' Micro-Miniatures series. It even surpasses \"The Blue & The Gray\" in strategic complexity, and packs in the historical detail you demand. E Destroy Structure x City Omer rupted Trinforcement Linden Turn-Based Campaign Level * *  Historically accurate army organization  Leadership capabilities & Personalities  Enhanced A.I.  Naval/Air Bombardments  Accurate Field Weapons  Supply & Reinforcements  Detailed rural and urban terrain Micro-Miniatures Battle on Detailed Terrain RTTLE OF: Corn -MEN FIT FOR DUTY Perve 1.159 Resource Paint Hele 8.400 Increase plein e freeDit Infantry AN st GERNIN TOTALS -MEN FIT FOR DUTY Diva Netve Toal 153 TTA, ABD TO2004 infantry CUN) dut) Ivary CORES THE FLIES WIN GRAD Reinforce and Build your Divisions Battle Results: Win or lose? 01994 Impressions Software Inc IBM PC VGA Screenshots Impressions SIOIIS Committed to Excellence in Strategy Entertainment Impressions Software, Inc. 222 Third Street, Suite 0234, Cambridge MA 02142 "


"REVIEW Microcosm Gaming In A Shoot-Em-Up Vein by Jeff James T ans of classic science fiction are probraces down Korsby's Cephalic Vein. As you with a kill-or-be-killed choice. Giving players K ably familiar with Isaac Asimov's story move through Korsby's body, you will be the option to swerve inside veins might have 1 Fantastic Voyage, in either its novel or confronted by a variety of objects racing tomade things a bit more interesting. movie form. In the story, a submarine full of ward your sub. These consist primarily of a In an effort to provide some sort of diversity scientists is miniaturized and injected into the hostile menagerie of geometrical objects, to this very basic shooter, Psygnosis places blood stream of a dying politician to remove ranging from spiked spheres to spider-like three different vehicles at your disposal. The a life-threatening brain tumor. With the reobjects. Most are unarmed and simply try to primary craft is the Spook series submersible, lease of Microcosm, Psygnosis updates Asismash your sub to bits by colliding with it. a slow craft used in the Cephalic Vein and mov's inner space adventure with brilliant Destroying these objects requires your mov Femur bone sections. The Hunter-Killer sub ray-traced graphics and aniis smaller, faster, and more nimble, and is mation, teamed with a moused in the Vena Cava, Carotid Artery and tion picture-quality soundBrain segments. Finally, a pressurized diving track. In a product which suit is used to finish the second half of the could easily be dubbed Son final stage of the game, in which you must of Fantastic Voyage, Microexplore the furrows and folds of the brain in cosm attempts to take CDorder to locate Gray M. ROM-equipped gamers on a Both the Spook and the Hunter-Killer offer shoot-em'-up adventure three forms of arcade sequences, two of which through the fascinating inare identical for both craft. When piloting the ner vistas of the human Spook, you have no control over speed or body. ing the targeting cursor over them and pressdirection—just the targeting crosshair. When Your goal in Microcosm is to locate and the requisite fire button/key much like flying the Hunter-Killer, the view shifts to a destroy a microscopic brain-control probe, utos microscopic version of the action found in the rear, external view of the craft and provides a dubbed \"Gray M\", that has been injected into Operation Wolf arcade game. I couldn't help limited amount of control over its movethe bloodstream of Tiron Korsby, president but wonder how Korsby remained breathing ment. The similar sequences consist of a comof Cybertech Corporation. To reach Gray M, you must successfully complete five separate with so many foreign objects clogging his bat in which the sub comes to a complete game stages. The first stage is the Cephalic stop, and you assume control of a stationary veins and arteries, crowding out the paltry laser cannon, firing at objects which charge Vein, located in Korsby's right arm. The secsupply of red blood cells which occasionally appear. Even though they are few, ond stage is the Femur bone, followed by the into view. Finally, cach vessel has to confront and defeat an Superior Vena Cava (which carries deoxygenthe red blood cells present a probMicrocosm ated blood to the heart), and the Carotid lem of their own, often appearing Artery (which supplies blood to the brain). suddenly in small groups, forcing PRICE: $59.95 SYSTEMS: you to make the difficult decision The final stage is where the player confronts Sega-CD, 3DO, Amiga CD32 Gray M itself: inside the Brain. of whether to shoot them (diminREQUIREMENTS: IBM: 386 or better, 4MB RAM, ishing Korsby's health in the proc12MB hard drive space, VGA graphics, CD-ROM drive ess) or plow into them, battering PROTECTION: We All Live (And Fight) DESIGNERS: Tim Ansel, Adrian Panton, In A Yellow Submarine the submersible's meager allotment of shields. Since the Spook Psygnosis Ltd. Cambridge, MA You begin the game at the helm of a minisubmersible isn't allowed to ma(617) 497-7794 ature submarine, looking outward as the sub neuver inside veins, you're faced IBM CD-ROM (reviewed), None MICROCOSM Clive Gratton PUBLISHER: Page 42 Computer Gaming World "


"Medieval England A time of castles and conquest. The throne is empty. The serfs are restless. a Rebellion is in the air. a The Lords of the Realm invite you to join their ranks. Build your castles. Cultivate your lands. Marshal your resources. Take the risk. Go for the Crown. We uscar Sords of the Realm Harithe Coming soon from Impressions pronuniy fontan a Nam Circle Reader Service #77 "


"PODGAVE ago when Psygnosis used the doesn't help much during installation, either. technology to create the Nearly half of the 32-page instruction bookPlanetside demo displayed let is spent on setting the stage for the game, on the CDTV. Using fractal with an appalling paucity of useful playing technology, FET can transinformation. As is, the player is injected into fer large amounts of graphic the blood stream of Korsby without having data very quickly, even on the slightest idea of what to shoot at. The last single-spin CD-ROM few pages are dedicated to describing the solar drives. Running on a 386 system in which the game is placed. It serves with a single-spin drive, Miwell as interesting reading, but is entirely crocosm performs with only useless as an aid to gameplay. Important game a small number of pauses; information such as the fact that bumping end-of-level guardian in order to pass to the on a 486 with a double-spin into vessel walls and trigger-happy shooting next level. drive and extra RAM, pauses to load data can kill Korsby and end the game is during gameplay are almost nonexistent. strangely missing from the documentation. A stic voyage Accompanying the excellent animation is one or two-page section describing the obThough the gameplay is simplistic, even an equally excellent suite of music. Rick jects a player will encounter in Korsby's blood brainless, it still has problems. I often found Wakeman (from the rock group YES) is credstream would have also been welcome. control of the targeting cursor to be someited with the composition of the original Psygnosis is aware of Microcosm's flaws and what cumbersome. Instead of trying to race game soundtrack, which fits nicely with the is promising a patch disk that will fix most of the cursor around the screen in an attempt to game's cinematic animation elements. The the control and audio problems; it should be target faster moving enemies, placing the cursound effects used in the game aren't up to available by the time you read this. Players can sor in the middle of the screen and firing the same high quality, though. Explosions also contact Psygnosis at their Internet adcontinuously seemed to yield the best results. sound tinny and weak, and the laser cannon dress: PSYGTECH@PSYGNOSIS.COM. The crosshair also has an annoying tendency sounds as if it is powered by AA batteries. Finally, less dexterous users may want to simto disappear when there are no encply cheat their way through all mies on screen, making the player the levels in Microcosm by using spend an extra second or two to Wayne Sike's handy locate the cursor when a new wave PLAYLEVL utility, which alof hostiles appears. lows the five game levels to be The preferred control method is played in any order. the mouse; the keyboard and joysPLAYLEVL (also called tick seemed far too slow to be useful. MCPLAY) can be found in the Although the manual states that the Gamer's forum on CompuServe joystick and mouse can be used inunder the keyword 'Microterchangeably throughout the cosm'. Other on-line services course of play, I discovered that SCOas opees may carry the utility as well. when I did so, the game occasionally QUERLOAD HEALTH On purely aesthetic terms, SHIELD refused to accept input from any control source. Strangely, there is no Microcosm breaks exciting new mo ground in CD entertainment. method for joystick or mouse calibration, mouse calibration. Fortunately, however, Microcosm does supfortunately, however, Microcosm do The abundance of ray-traced animation and although a configuration utility for keyboard port a wide variety of sound cards, thanks in polished cut scenes gives the game a decidedly control is included. part to the game's MCOSM.CFG utility. cinematic aura, with the professionally Another annoyance with the game conUsing a text editor and a brief section in the crafted soundtrack adding to the big screen cerns the lack of a save-game function. Microuser's manual, players can edit feel. Psygnosis' FET technology is also a big MCOSM.CFG to get Microcosm to run most cosm lacks such a mechanism, although the step for gaming, and I hope we see it again in game does offer a limited number of opporsound cards. This feature is better in theory the future. Unfortunately, cool technology tunities to continue after one has botched a than in practice, as less-technically astute and a \"cinematic feel\" do not a game make; particular level. gamers may have undue difficulty in getting and, indeed, it seems that in their effort to their sound cards to work at all. Practical make an audio-visual marvel, Psygnosis forplaying experience revealed that the default Bon Voyage Microcosm installation works got to make a game. Cow Psygnosis reportedly used Silicon Graphics well with Sound Blaster cards workstations to generate the graphics in Miand compatibles: gamers with crocosm, and it definitely shows. The game less popular sound cards may be glitters with polished graphics and animain for a frustrating installation tion. Lengthy animated segues and cut scenes process. Gravis UltraSound usare interspersed throughout the game. The ers take note: the game does of program uses a proprietary animation techfer enhanced audio for nique that Psygnosis dubs Fractal Engine Ultrasound cards with extra Technology, or FET. Astute Amiga owners memory (up to 1MB) installed. may have noticed FET in action over a year The game's documentation Page 44 Computer Gaming World "


"COMPANIONS OF TM XANTH CD-ROM FEATURING VOICES FOR OVER 30 CHARACTERS! Xanth speaks to you! FREE BOOK ENCLOSED! \"Demons Don't Dream\" by Piers Anthony Open the door to a fantasy world... USA Today says-A playful fantasy filled with fun. UNPM HINYX COMPANIONS OF where beauty masks the danger lurking at every turn An enchanted land with fantastic creatures and all the magic, puns and humor that have made Xanth a worldwide favorite WLEGEND Loonaturelles ENTERTAINMENT COMPANY 1-800-245-7744 Actual VGA graphics shown. Distributed by Accolade, Inc. Circle Reader Service #145 "


"REVIEW The Polygons of Penzance T-Motion's 3-D Actors Star In Pirated Sequel to Alone In The Dark by Allen L. Greenberg y first thought on experiencing the share a deadly secret which keeps them from Both Alone in the Dark games are distinincreased violence of Alone in the the grave. Their leader, One Eyed Jack, has guished by several graphic features. As already Dark 2 was that the program's proestablished an alliance with a voodoo-wieldmentioned, there are the polygons that are fuse polygons had surely been infected by ing witch whose plans for the kidnapped girl, effectively used to create animated characters some mysterious software virus. I had reGrace, are not at all appetizing. which are as awkward and blocky in appearcently cured my desktop 486 of just such an ance as they are elegant in execuinfestation. Seemingly, it had been designed tion. While the characters in the to implant revolutionary and anarchistic sequel may have been refined ideas into an otherwise conservative wordsomewhat beyond those of the processing document. Having finally cleared original, they retain the same marimyself of all charges regarding the overthrow onette-like movements. While of the current political system, could it be thar they may seem on the verge of I now faced the virus in a new form? I was collapsing into a pile of mangled well aware that normally peaceful polygons geometry, each character manages had been used to create the willful characters to go about his or her task with in the original Alone in the Dark. Had these purpose and dignity. Obediently, same polygons, due to my carelessness, now and with great deliberation, they undergone a hideous mutation into some walk or run at your command, denew, nastier breed? I soon discovered to my Players who were impressed with the origispite the fact that a wall or some horror, that no mere viruses were these! No, nal Alone In The Dark, yet found the program other object may have long ago made forward these insidious polygons had been deliberoccupied only a few brief evenings of their progress impossible. There is definitely a ately bred to become the deadliest of villains, lives, will find Alone 2 to be in a killer league charm to these creatures that you just don't and the fiends now populated Alone in the of its own, and not a game for those who are see in more conventional adventure games. Dark 2, the latest three-dimensional aceasily frustrated. The program serves up a The two games are also distinguished by rion/adventure game from Infogrames. sinister mix of puzzle solving and one-on-one their use of multiple perspectives or \"camera Once again, Edward Carnby is the hero of combat, the latter of which proves to be the angles\" at each location. Thus, the point of a macabre tale set in the early part of this game's greatest challenge. More than once, view in one room may jump from behind the century. A young girl has been kidnapped, Carnby will find himself captured and Carnby's partner has disappeared during and seemingly without hope. At Alone In The Dark 2 an attempt to locate her. The trail leads to a these points, the story shifts to classically haunted mansion located on a little Grace who, under your conrocky cliff in California, overlooking the Patrol, must find a way to free her PILONEM DNAK 2 PRICE: $59.95 SYSTEM: cific Ocean. Hell's Kitchen, as this estate is would-be rescuer. Amazing REQUIREMENTS: 386-25Mhz, 2MB RAM, 14MB called, is surrounded by a dangerous garden Grace, teddy-bear in tow, has her hard drive space, VGA graphics; supports AdLib, Sound Blaster, maze, underground passages, hidden traps, share of puzzles to solve. She is and Sound Source sound cards PROTECTION: and enough well-armed guards to protect the Code cards never called upon to fight, but DEVELOPERS: Infogrames house from a small army. The villains responmust strategically avoid the piPUBLISHER: Santa Monica, CA sible for the crime are a crew of pirates, mostrates lest she find herself impris(800) 443-3386 definitely not of common stock, and who oned alongside Carnby. IBM 1-Motion Page 46 Computer Gaming World "


"Advanced Dungeons Dragons CONTI GAMS Raven Dita Strahd's Possession Tomask and defeat Strahd, one of the Umost nefarious of all gothic horror characters, or you'll never escape the terror of the AD&D RAVENLOFT game world! Presented in High Resolution 320 x 400 256-color VGA, STRAHD's POSSESSION delivers twice the quality of VGA without the cost of a Super-VGA card! So you experience gothic horror role-playing at its best in this visually stunning game. Bask in the glow of an exceptionally large 3-D gaming window. Explore bonechilling dungeons. Challenge 30 authentic RAVENLOFT game world creatures. Cast over 60 mage and priest spells. Let automapping keep track of your travels with maps that print complete with any notes you made on them along the way. All this plus a haunting musical score and digitized sound effects will keep you on edge for hours and hours! Just be careful, things get pretty eerie when the sun sets! Available for IBM & Compatibles on 3.5\" disks and Enhanced CD-ROM. comunales IBM HI-RES 256-color VGA Displays WIELU CELINE TO ORDER: Visit your local retailer or call: 1-800-245-4525 with Visa/MC (U.S. & Canada only). UHEURS DEL Ved A DODES THERE WILCRCCOMATOON CONTATTACCUWE WE CAN NOTAZALE. WE DISCOVELO GIRLS PULLINC ODYWIE WC COMPAUNCLERON DIAMANTOVANOW ME H LATLAND OF DEVILA DEVIANONS TAAHDA HY DO YOU OCNTURE TITO THE DARK COKOST W DPE Technology developed by DreamForge Intertainment, ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS AD&D, RAVENLOFT. the TSR logo and all TSR characters, character names, and the distinctive likenesses thereof, are trademarks owned by and used under license from TSR. Inc. 1994 TSR. Inc. 1994 Strategic Simulations, Inc. All rights reserved. "


"hero, to above his head, and finally to a distant perspective from across the room. Often, an important object may be glimpsed from only one of these angles, and then quickly disappear when the view changes. When this happens, it is necessary to stroll around a bit until the perspective changes back to the one in which the object may once again be seen and approached. Unfortunately, many of the hand-to-hand battles which occur are not always seen from the most advantageous position, and it is often necessary to \"poke and hope\" at unseen combatants. Other difficulties occur in the garden maze outside the house. The maze is fairly simple, but a sudden change in perspective can scramble one's mental map and make navigation somewhat frustrating. Carnby will not survive more option, but that seems to be the one form of than one or two head-on encouncombat in which the pirates are better trained ters with the pirates, so skillful use than the hero. Oddly enough, it seems that of combat strategy is the key to Carnby is at his most deadly when fighting success. Pistols, Thompson submawithout a weapon. He may throw a left or chine guns and ammunition are right punch, or put his foot directly in the face liberally scattered throughout of the enemy. Most potently, if Carnby Hell's Kitchen, and Carnby does moves as close to his enemy as possible, as best by finding a protected corner though he were about to dance cheek-tofrom which he can briefly emerge cheek, he is able to pound the villain merciand fire at his enemies before ducklessly into the ground with his forehead. ing back to safety. These are superMore than once, solving Alone 2's puzzles natural enemies, and most of them will help Carnby avoid being caught in a require more than one or two bullets before battle in which he is attacked by multiple Thev dramatically fade away. As the game they dramatically fade away. As the game villains. Every objecr found in the game is progresses, Carnby's ammunition becomes useful, and there is no limit to the number of less plentiful and his guns may be lost altoitems which may be carried around. Being in gether. Fighting with a sword becomes an the right place at the right time is vital to success in the game. Unless the hero is properly positioned, doors will not open and certain objects may not be manipulated or used. At one point, it becomes necessary to push a cannon into position in order to destroy a room across a hallway. This simple action may take hours of trial and error before Carnby is in the proper position to respond to the command. In addition to weaponry, Hell's a 4848111179 . * re's 1711 982-pedoplatum 2 W100 adet * tasse * 7275 14717011 147274414 ! R7UQU ENCODE QUIFPIC Da "


"character's inventory list is also here, along with options which are specific to each item in that list. All action comes to a halt in this mode. This way, Carnby is able to switch weapons, reload one of his firearms, or even take a hit-point-restoring swig from his flask without being pummeled by a bad guy as he does so. The musical score which accompanies Alone 2, with the exception of some brief inspiring excerpts from Wagner's opera The Flying Dutchman, is somewhat silly, and most Kitchen also contains a wealth of information which not only relates the history of the place's current evil inhabitants, but also reveals how various items lying about the house can be used to defeat them. Most important is the special weapon which is needed to destroy One Eyed Jack. A commonly used voodoo icon must also be uncovered so that it may put to rest his vampiric female companion. Also scattered around the mansion are flasks of the pirates' favorite drink which, under most circumstances, will restore the battle-weary Carnby's diminishing supply of hit points. The controls for Alone 2 are similar to those used in the first game. There is no need for any input device other than the keyboard, and this works quite well. The two vertical direction keys move either Carnby or Grace forward or backward, while the remaining directional keys spin the character clockwise or counter-clockwise. Tapping either of the vertical keys a second time will cause Carnby to break into a swift trot, while Grace, the little darling, prefers to \"skip to my lou.» The program also includes the same innovative game-save system in which a screen snapshot is saved alongside the player's description of the situation. The «enter» key brings up a list of options including \"fight\" and \"push.\" The one of the undead pirates fades out of existence. Carnby's footsteps echo realistically as he walks through the giant mansion, yet one cannot help but wonder how the diminutive, bare-footed Grace makes a similar noise as she walks about. More ludicrous is that each time Carnby bangs his deadly forehead into an enemy, he lets out a grunt that more resembles an expression of indigestion than it does a battle cry. Fora game which demands as much physical effort to defeat as does Alone 2, the ending is somewhat of a lerdown. It comes after several white-knuckled battles, including one against an acrobat on a narrow, wooden beam high above the ground. These final battles are so intense that it would be foolish not to save the game to disk after each victory. Unfortunately, the only rewards are a brief explosion and little Grace waving «bye-bye.\" Despite its weak ending, as well as some other irritating moments, Alone 2 is a good, solid challenge. Much more so than its predecessor, it will test players reflexes as well as their minds. Make no mistake: the polygons are back, and they are hungry. CGW Ah! Got you'll players will probably elect to do without it. However, the game's sound effects are a mixed bag. The sound of swords and other weapons in battle are very impressive, and there is a supernatural thunderclap cach time doesn't simulate is ear popping. If it were any more real, your chair would be in a 30° bank. Our new Microsoft Flight Simulator has four planes, each with its own instrument panel created digitally from actual photographs. There are storm clouds and sunsets to fly into. Crashes are scarily real. And you can fly to airports anywhere in the world. It's just one of the realistic simulations we have waiting for you to take control. Everything is at your reseller. So, take off. COMPASS 1141 STRO8E5 200M 2. LIGHTS AUTOP. Microsoft Home COM 120.50 NAU 110.SO 1994 Microsoft Corp. All rights reserved. Microsoft is a registered trademark of Microsoft Corp. Flight Simulator is a trademark of Bruce A. Artwick. "


"PLOT  NAVY'S FIRST DEFENSE. FLEET DEFENDER The F-14 Tomcat Simulation! WU Terchtes Thermalt Ehes Utete nem forti The Haus Actual screens may vary. It's all up to you! The skies are swarming with bandits. Only you stand between the threat and your carrier battle group. Lock on your radar and launch the Navy's advanced weapons to destroy the most sophisticated enemy targets ever developed for a MicroProse simulation. Roll, turn, climb, and dive to out-maneuver enemy aircraft using an artificial intelligence developed right out of Soviet and Third World military doctrine. A computer-controlled wingman responds to your every command. And, you'll interact with strike packages that include F/A-18 Hornets, A-6 Intruders, A-7 Corsairs and E-2C Hawkeye AWACS. Featuring the latest in 3-D terrain technology derived from digitized information taken from LANDSAT geological surveys, you'll pilot your F-14 through actual locations. Fleet Defender from MicroProse. We brought you the F-15 Strike Eagle, now try the F-14 Tomcat featuring the most authentically modeled F-14 systems available anywhere outside of the Navy. MICROPROSE ! To get our free catalog, call 1-800-879-PLAY Mon-Fri.. 8:30 am 5:00 pm EST i or fill out the coupon and mail it to: MicroProse Software, Inc.. 180 Lakefront Drive . Dept. 10. Hunt Valley, MD 21030-2245 Name: ENTERTAINMENT. SOFTWARE Address: City:  1993 MicroProse Software, Inc. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. For IBM-PC/Compatibles. Circle Reader Service #91 State: Zip: — -------------AAZ "


"ANNOUNCING THE NEW PREMIER AWARDS CAMP WORLD PREMIER WINNER irst Place, Numero Uno, Top of the Line, Apex, Gold Medalist-Premier! All of these terms R point to the pinnacle of authority, the peak performance or the preeminent product in its 1 field. This has always been true of the CGW Game of the Year Awards, a selection of the best computer games of the commercial year from both a critical and popular perspective. This year, we have shortened the eligibility cycle to move toward a calendar year awards process; added multimedia awards (any multimedia product released before press time was eligible for these awards); and finally, named our awards — The Computer Gaming World Premier Awards. So, even though we've given Game of the Year Awards in the past, this year's presentation of the CGW Premier Awards is something special. So, break out the champagne, pass out the confetti, put on your tux or formal, and launch the fireworks, it's time for the premiere unveiling of The Computer Gaming World Premier Awards. "


"WINE GAME OF THE YEAR AME OF THE YEAR Multi-Player BattleTech Doom those of us who love on-line games find that the fictional universes they depict are pleasant escapes from the mundane normalcy of our everyday lives. On-line games become colorful refuges, mindlife preserves, and cyburban retreats where our alter egos, those game characters whose back stories we keep stored within our minds, live more exciting, successful and sometimes, fulfilling lives than we do during the average day in the classroom, courtroom, factory, field, hospital, laboratory, legislature or office. Most people who play on-line multi-player games spend as much time talking about what they've done in the game universe as they do playing the games themselves. The finalists for this year's awards are no exception. They are worthy of plenty of talk. MPG-Net introduced a masterful translation of Empire Builder, the boardgame of railroad building in the U.S. and Canada from Mayfair Games. The Imagination Network brought out a new version of Shadow of Yserbius: Fates of Twinion, their extremely successful on-line fantasy role-playing game, as well as SOCC e heard about it everywhere we went, \"DOOM!\" We were asked about it whenever gamers congregated, «DOOM?\" We tossed off accolades about its smooth scrolling, its detailed texture mapping, its network capability, the aural impact of its visceral violence and its deranged graphic look-DOOM. We printed stories about companies where employees faced a DOOM of career-crisis proportions if they were caught booting the game. We thumbed through countless cards from readers stating that \"DOOM rules!\" \"DOOM uber alles!\" and \"DOOM is awesome.\" The #1 rated game in our Top 100 was DOOM. We had DOOM fests in our offices on the network and played what was virtually DOOM VR with a flying mouse and head-tracking unit. On-line services and BBSs became filled with The Doomed Team (I to r): Sandy Petersen, DOOM editors Jay Wilbur, John Carmack, Adrian Carmack, and new levels. John Romero, Dave Taylor, Kevin Cloud, It seemed that American McGee, Shawn Green whenever and wherever computer games entered the picture during the latter part of 1993, DOOM was the first syllable on our lips. So, with its technological excellence and near-universal approbation from the gaming public, what better game to name as the first Computer Gaming World PREMIER Game of the Year, our equivalent to the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences «Best Picture» award, than DOOM? If you liked the monsters in DOOM, you can credit the back story by Sandy «Call of Cthulhu» Petersen and the artistic excellence of Adrian Carmack and Kevin Cloud, along with model builder Gregor Punchatz. The techno-wizardry that enabled you to play so many hours of smooth-scrolling, monster-blasting fun was 22 brought to you by John Carmack, John Romero and Dave Taylor. DOOM is a first-person perspective action game with smooth scrolling as players face 3-D modeled, texture-mapped monsters. It is technologically important because it offers advances over id's Wolfenstein 3D engine, which was licensed and modified for other commercial games, and is much imitated in the world of computer games today. Congratulations to the PREMIER Game of the Year. 3-D Golf, a multi-player version of Wilson Pro Staff Golf Tim Wissemann's VGA Planets deserves special recognition for being the first BBS game to be nominated for this award. Award winners have always represented simultaneous multi-player gaming rather than PBEM, simply because it's harder to accomplish, but the editors felt that the impact of VGA Planets made it worthy of an Honorable Mention in this category. The PREMIER On-Line Game of the Year is Multi-Player BattleTech, the GEnie game designed by Kesmai Corporation. The game lets the gamer control his/her destiny as a MechWarrior in the pre-Clans BattleTech universe. Gamers enlist in the military or mercenary units of their choice, and the universe is dynamic in that individual battles impact upon the on-line universe. Battles are fought from mechs, giant robotic vehicles of destruction, in a simulation that looks like Activision's classic MechWarrior, but performs significantly better with real human 'mech pilots on your flanks. There are plenty of fans of the novels and boardgame who make this less of a game, and more of an alternative lifestyle. LA HEALTH Page 52 Computer Gaming World "


"INTURE GAME OF THE YEAR ON GAME OF THE YEAR ADVENTURA ACTION GAN Prince of Persia II ith DOOM capturing overall honors, the contest for PREMIER Action Game of the Year was reduced to a four-way slugfest between four significant games. Origin's Privateer brought capitalism and piracy into the universe of Wing Commander. The game advanced the graphic Jordan Mechner look of the series somewhat and introduced a free-wheeling open-endedness for the players who chose not to follow the story line. Origin's Shadowcaster (Brian and Steve Raffel with Victor Penman) added art, role-playing elements and story to a modified Wolfenstein-3D engine. LucasArts' Rebel Assault (Vincent Lee) established a new record for CD-ROM game sales as well as a new model for action games based on film properties. Not only did the game feature digitized footage from one of the most successful film series of all time, but it offered game sequences with a 3D feel, enabling the player to slew through canned animation sequences. Day of the Tentacle & Gabriel Knight T he very word «adventure» conjures images of explorI ing strange and dangerous environments, venturing into uncharted realms, foiling the diabolical plans of archetypal enemies, solving mysteries and having unusual experiences. The entire graphic adventure genre is filled with detailed plots and fascinating sertings and characters. Sometimes, Tim Schaefer the adventure milicu is handled in Jane Jensen a very serious fashion. Sometimes, the adventure is set within some rather zany parameters. This year, we celebrate both types of adventure game. Broderbund's Myst (Rand and Robyn Miller) is a puzzle-driven experience with detailed 3-D rendered sets where the exposition is unveiled via QuickTime movies, The gamer faces diabolical puzzles and an overarching dilemma with regard to trust. Activision's Return to Zork (Doug Barnett, Eddie Dombrauer and Michele Em) tries to put the Infocom back into the game genre with its emphasis on puzzles, while simultaneously using Hollywood talent and sophisticated techniques to up the Dave Grossman ante of production values. Star Trek: Judgment Rites is Interplay's second foray into building graphic adventures on the classic television show. This time, the episodes are richer, and the \"Enterprise as space fighter\" flight model is optional Yet, the editorial staff found itself torn between two very different, but highly rated graphic adventures: Sierra's Gabriel Knight: Sins of the Fathers (Janc 2 SGVPOK LT LT 44 2 00 at PLCH La Qol talk O DEL Jensen) and LucasArts' Day of the bo Tentacle (Tim Schaefer & Dave Day of the Tentacle Grossman). Both rated highly with our readers and both offered new approaches in terms of art direction for computer games. We felt that the former was the best dramatic presentation in this genre, and that the latter was the best comedic presentation in the graphic adventure genre. We also didn't want to duplicate the tendency in motion picture awards to assume that the drama is automatically superior to the comedy (an assumption that seems true in every critical community except France). So, the co-winners of the PREMIER Adventure Game of the Gabriel Knight Year award are Gabriel Knight: Sins of the Fathers and Day of the Tentacle. Day of the Tentacle's fluid animation sequences underscore a strong script and solid game play. Gabriel Knight introduced elements from graphic novels (diverse splash screens, dark color palettes, illuminating facial perspectives, etc.), nightmarish dream sequences and a dark human story that reads and plays extremely well. In general, it would be reasonable to say that story won out over technological innovation in this genre. The winner of the PREMIER Action Game of the Year is Prince of Persia 2: The Shadow & The Flame from Broderbund. It isn't surprising that Jordan Mechner (Karateka and Prince of Persia) would offer a smoothly animated horizontal scrolling thriller with cinematic scope, vivid action and daunting puzzles. He's done it before. The original Prince of Persia was a masterpiece of animation, blending the action from feature film footage with animated sprites to create very realistic characters. What is surprising is that the sprites (moving characters) and backgrounds for Prince of Persia 2 can be as detailed as they are without reducing the fast, fluid action quality to the game. The sequel certainly surpasses its predecessor and well deserves the crown of PREMIER Action Game of the Year. June 1994 Page 53 "


"ATION GAME OF THE YEAR PLAYING GAME OF THE YEAR SIMULATION ROLE-PLAYIN. Betrayal At Krondor ole-playing is a subset of the adventure game genre. Where adventure games focus on the puzzles and stories, CRPGs tend to emphasize character growth or skillbuilding. This year, every title among the finalists brought a terrific new look to role-playing. New World Computing's Darkside of Xeen features the most impressive linking of two CRPGs in computer game history. Jon Van Caneghem's dark counterpoint to his carlier Clouds of Xeen title is a major John Cutter step in the advancement of virtual world building, since you can bounce back and forth between two linked game environments. Westwood's William Alan Crum and Philip W. Gorrow designed Lands of Lore. Lands of Lore features impressive special effects that some said couldn't be done in the MS-DOS world and a delightful story that blends together many of the classic fantasy archetypes of shape-shifting. MicroProse ventured into the world of CRPGs for, perhaps, the last time with Bloodnet. Developed by their former Pennsylvania development group, Bloodnet is a gothic romance gone cyberpunk. The script by John Antinori and Laura Kampo, which mixes vampirism and hacking, is one of the most interesting to hit this genre, and the surrealistic aspects to the art style are definitely fascinating. Dark Sun, from Strategic Simulations, Inc., is the long-awaited \"new engine\" for games produced under the TSR Advanced Dungeons & Dragons license. It is also one of the last TSR-licensed products to be published by SSI. Russ Brown and the rest of his team managed to capture the uniqueness of the magic system and \"scorched earth\" look of Troy Denning's Prism Pentad series of novels. So, in a year of stiff competition, the winner of the PREMIER Role-Playing Game of the Year award is Betrayal at Krondor. Published by Dynamix and designed by industry veteran John Cutrer, with significant assistance from fantasy author Raymond E. Feist, Betrayal at Krondor is the quintessential example of how a computer game should be built from a fantasy novel. It is favored by our readers because of its play value and non-linear story, and it is favored by our editorial staff because it seems to be the product that took the most creative risks. It features a bold use of the company's proprietary 3-Space (3-D) technology, lavish use of digitized images, a fascinating magical system that is built upon the magic in the novels, and the skillful blending of new story elements with the history and characters from the much loved novels. IndyCar Racing amon Slye is a perpetual contender in this category. Though he has won in the past, Aces Over Europe features a look and feel that is too close to previous efforts for the IndyCar pit crew (I to r): S. Dalton, great sim designer to garD. Kaemmer, O. Khudari, ner this year's award. K. Butters, and R. Garcia. However, Dynamix continues to accelerate the performance of products in Damon's Great War Planes series, and its position as a finalist in this category underscores the quality of this series. Spectrum HoloByte's Tornado (Kevin Bezant, Nick Mascall, Tony Hosier, Robin Heydon and Matthew Smith) offers the most versatile and realistic mission planning approach that flight sim fans have ever been able to use. It is positively brilliant in its operational model. Domark took a different path with Flight Sim Toolkit. Jonathan Newth and David Payne have created a «Power to the People\" product extraordinaire. We have never seen such an ambitious project in our combined years of covering computer games. This construction kit allows you to actually build a commercial-looking flight simulator to your specifications. Though the product may require too much TOYOTA Mobil TOYOTA work for it to achieve the popular appeal of some of the other finalists, it is a welcome and innovative 78 Se addition to the simuBSC 1981 lation genre. Paul Grace, Sonny Hays, and Andre Gagnon decided to simulate something completely different. Instead of using the firstperson viewpoint out of a vehicle's cockpit, windshield, or viewslit, they elected to produce a simulation of infantry combat in the jungles of Vietnam. Electronic Arts' SEAL Team is the first simulation to treat infantry combat with the same detail as would a game of armored or aerial combat, and it is one of the most sensitively handled treatments of the Vietnam Conflict that we've seen. The PREMIER Simulation of the Year goes to Papyrus Software for IndyCar Racing. David Kaemmer's texture-mapped exteriors race through the twists and turns of an IndyCar season atop lightning fast polygon models. Kaemmer is attentive to detail in modeling how everything from wind, tire wear, gear ratio, wing angle, tire quality, engine fatigue and physical damage affects the performance of a high performance car. IndyCar Racing also features modem-to-modem play and lots of high performance chrome in terms of replay action and camera angles. It is the motor sports aficionado's dream come true. Page 54 Computer Gaming World "


"The Ultimate Roadtrip To Superfluous Knowledge. HOLLYWOOD CADILLAC RANCH WORLDS LARGEST PEANUT BUTTER & JELLY SANDWICH Why do Sex balt Mann 2 33 FULL CATANY O de Waw Topp e The thesis in lomuch eagle g resoyamids LIN TRIVIA PHD ROAD SCHOLAR Pack your brain—you'll need it. Here's a roadtrip that'll bombard you with hundreds of arcane, wacky trivia questions about America's \"unadvertised\" attractions. In fact, as you trek down the interstate you'll have bits of trivia hit you like bugs on a windshield. SPLAT! And once you've ventured through all 48 states? Well, Mother Maybelle and Coach MAHDN Clamphead will be waiting to present you with trophies and prizes. But remember, it's not horsepower that'll get you there...it's brain power. So hitch a ride with Media Vision's CD-ROM title Road Scholar.\" Visit your local software dealer or call us at: MEDIA VISION 1-800-845-5870. Now, that's multimedia! IM Media Vision, the Media Vision logo and Road Scholar are trademarks of Media Vision Technology, Inc. All other trademarks and registered trademarks are those of their respective companies. @ 1994 Ken Bell Productions. @ 1994 Media Vision, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Circle Reader Service #165 "


"ULTIMEDIA AWARDS To celebrate the launching of multimedia as an integral part of the computer gaming world, we selected four categories in which we would present PREMIER awards: Best Voice-over Acting-Male, Best Voice-over Acting-Female, Best Musical Score and Best On-Screen Performance. Selections were made on the basis of performance expertise, artistic value added to the game, and appropriateness to the medium. Acting for computer games is very different from any other type of acting. Actors in a multimedia production have to run through scenes for numerous possibilities, often without having an ensemble of other actors with which he/she can work. Also, note that though this year's winning performances were published in games which we considered excellent, future awards may yet arise from games with limited play value but sterling performances. Unlike the PREMIER awards for the games themselves, eligibility for the multimedia awards was open to every game published by press time. Multimedia games are still a new enough approach that we needed a wider eligibility span in order to see a significant number of performances. ON-SCREEN PERFORMANCE BEST ON-SCRD ith a unanimous vote, the editorial staff chose Michael Gregory as the first winner of the award for the PREMIER On-Screen Performance in a Multimedia Game. Gregory plays the evil chancellor in The Horde (from Crystal Dynamics). A film veteran with parts in RoboCop and Total Recall under his belt, Gregory had the advantage of performing in film vignettes with a live cast as opposed to providing a solo performance in front of a Chromakey or Ultramatte screen like many computer game performers. Nevertheless, we found ourselves particularly impressed with the way Gregory communicates via body language and facial expressions, even in scenes where he has no speaking part. He literally steals the show from male lead Kirk Cameron, and gives gamers an incentive to keep playing until they Michael Gregory can force this campy bad guy into eating his words. Michael Gregory well-deserves his position as winner of the first-ever acting award in this new medium. PEST MUSICAL SCORE The capacity for CD-quality audio and the evolution of sound cards in terms of quality and performance, make this an optimal time for introducing a PREMIER Musical Score for a Multimedia Game. Though we listened to plenty of musical performances that we enjoyed, most of the editors preferred Burke Treischmann's original music for The Horde. Not only do we like the funky, whimsical riffs within the score, but we appreciate the way that every type of terrain or genus of hordling has its own musical theme. The music adds to the game by shaping the mood and intensity of each level in the game, and it is safe to say that every track on the CD has something musically unique about it. Just listening to the various tracks is like listening to an album by an avante garde jazz performer. Burke Treischmann FEMALE VOICE-OVER ACTING BEST TEMA T here were plenty of fine performances by women in multimedia games, but the narrator in Gabriel Knight captured our fancy. Virginia Capers offers just the right balance between ethnic accentuation, playful whimsy and mood-setting suspense. We initially expected to give this award to a performer who was portraying a specific character, but we were totally overwhelmed by Capers' performance as the narrator. Her performance alone makes it worthwhile to purchase the CD version of Gabriel Knight: Sins of the Fathers, so she is the inaugural recipient of the PREMIER Award for Best Voice-over Acting (Female) in a Multimedia Game. Virginia Capers MALE VOICE-OVER ACTING The winner of the first-ever PREMIER Award for Best Voice-over Acting (Male) in a Multimedia Game is I Patrick Stewart. From the initial stentorian tones heard in Lands of Lore, the role-playing magnum opus from Westwood Studios, we never had a doubt that the Shakespearean actor and television star was perfectly cast as the royal monarch. His vocal range gives a sense of urgency and reality to the game as the story unfolds. BEST MALE VO Patrick Stewart Page 56 Computer Gaming World "


"RTS GAME OF THE YEAR TGY GAME OF THE YEAR SPORTS GAN STRATEGY G Master Of Orion LittrBox HARETTA TERRAN LITT The Front Page Sports Football Pro The finalists in the Sports Game caregory offer superior performance in a number of categories. Cactus League Pro Basketball (Cactus Development) by Ralph Rhoades offers indepth strategy and an exciting challenge in player management. Largely a text game in a year of 3-D blockbusters, we nevertheless honor this game for its accurate replays, detailed stat disks, and exciting game play. Patrick Cook APBA Baseball For Windows from Miller Associates is similar. Though the most recent version has added a new graphic look with more appeal for the average gamer, it is still the statistical model and replay accuracy of this new game, like its venerable ancestor, that commands everyone's attention. Yet another sport is represented in NHLPA Hockey. Electronic Arts took the most successful hockey game in the cartridge world (so successful that it was reviewed favorably in CGW, a rare event for cartridge games) and expanded its horizons to offer league play, a larger view of the rink and more user-customizable features. NHLPA Hockey is an adrenaline pumper with new refinements for hockey addicts. All of the finalists mentioned so far are worthy products, but the championship bout was fought between the two groundbreaking football products: MicroProse's Coaches Club Football and Dynamix' Front Page Sports Football Pro. Both offer intriguing new 3-D perspectives and both appear to be the results of exhaustive research. The designers of Coaches Club Football, Ed Fletcher (who worked on the original Wayne Gretzky Hockey) and Doug Whatley (an industry veteran releasing his first design), had the advantage of working from an actual NFL coach's playbook and took great patience to design even the newest NFL rule changes into the product. The winner of the PREMIER Sports Game of the Year is Front Page Sports Football Pro from Dynamix. Since its inception, Front Page Sports Football has been the leading football game among our readership, and the addition of real players and statistics in the latest edition makes it even better. Graphically, Front Page Sports Football Pro is still the clear leader, and the customized coaching profile allows you to create realistic leagues with AI coaches that have the tendencies you specify. Plus, NFL fans like the fact that Front Page Sports Pro offers all of the \"off the field\" fun of personnel management through trades, drafts, and replacing injured players. Front Page Sports Football Pro is, to date, designer Pat Cook's masterpiece and his Front Page Sports Baseball is sure to be a contender in this category next year. YAN omething old and something new entered the strategy genre during this year's period of eligibility. Software Toolworks unveiled another incarnation of their classic Chessmaster series. The scion of CGW's Hall of Fame member, Chessmaster 4000, proves that Software Toolworks still has the capacity and will to improve their best-selling chess engine. This year's model is more competitive than ever with not only the Stephen Barcia expected stronger chess engine, but refined artificial opponents who do an excellent job of emulating classic grandmasters via an exhaustive 17-variable model. Electronic Arts Kasparov's Gambit is, on the other hand, a chess game for the \"rest of us.\" The emphasis of the game is on tutorial, commentary and classic game libraries, Both games are beautifully crafted, and the nod would have to depend upon whether you were looking for a great opponent (Chessmaster 4000) or a great teacher (Kasparov's Gambit). Will Wright and Fred Haslam are also no strangers to a list of finalists in the strategy genre. SimCity 2000 is their latest entry in the world of Game Design Fizet a Facts Planets Tech Text Turn system simulations. This advanced city simulator adds many of the features and considerations that were previously lacking in the original SimCity. It offers more types of energy, transportation and funding to meet the needs of discriminating mayors ex machina everywhere. Strategy classics were not the only products in the offering for this year, however. Two other games put new subject matter in the strategic orbit. First, Several Dudes Holistic Gaming teamed up with QQP to present Merchant Prince, a strategy game that captures the greed and treachery of medieval Italy even more than the classic Machiavelli boardgame from The Avalon Hill Game Company. Merchant Prince allows you to build up wealth and power via three different tracks: ecclesiastical, economic, and political. Everyone has to use some of all the tracks, but it is up to you which approach will be your primary vehicle to incontrovertible influence and preeminent prestige. (Hint: The church is easiest.) Second, the inimitable Jeff Tunnell turned his fascinating The Incredible Machine engine into a strategic tribute to cartoon violence and invention, Sid & Al's Toons. If you've ever wanted to try your hand at designing the latest Wile E. Coyote-style June 1994 Page 57 "


"VARGAME OF THE VCAR Clash of Steel contraption, Sid & Al's Toons gives you all the computerized Acme parts you'll need to succeed. It's a difficult game to describe because it moves beyond the boundaries of the genre into a new generation of software toys. The PREMIER Strategy Game of the Year is Steve Barcia's Master of Orion (MicroProse). Steve's company, SimTex Software has created a game that is worthy of being called \"Civilization in Space\" because Sid Meier's Civilization is the game with which, because of its strategic depth and addictive quality, it is most often compared. Like the winner of two years ago, Master of Orion offers multiple tracks for victory and even advances beyond its distant cousin because it adds a complex diplomatic web of intricate intrigue and builds upon a technological model that is not merely cosmetic, but forces tactics to evolve. This game epitomizes and expands the \"Conquer the Galaxy\" motif in strategy gaming. AL AWARD FOR INNOVATION SPECIAL AMA Aide De Camp This year, the editors of CGW wish to present a Special PREMIER Award for Innovation to Scott Hamilton of HPS Simulations for Aide De Camp. Billed as the wargamer's friend, this unique product allows even the clumsiest gamer the opportunity to convert his/her favorite boardgames into computer moderated (Play-ByElectronic-Mail-capable) versions of those games. The maps can be as beautiful or functional as you want, and the Scott S. Hamilton whole process is easy-to-accomplish. The product comes complete with generic terrain sers and the tools to build your own. It has a capacity for redefining the properties of each terrain tile in order to accomodate the movement restriccions and combat effects of said terrain. It provides for easy road and river design by letting you point and click from centertpoint of each hex and connect the dots. It has simple tools to let you convert game counters into onscreen reproductions, even if you don't have artistic talent. We've never seen anything this versatile for meeting the varied and often obscure interests of wargamers. We think it's the most user-friendly design kit this side of scanning maps and counters directly into your system. equels and new versions fill out the roster of finalists for PREMIER Wargame of the Year, but the award goes to an original design. The final release of the V for Victory series is Gold Juno Sword. Released by Three-Sixty Pacific and designed by Eric Young and Keith Zabalaoui, the game refines the system with better artillery and supply rules, as well as a cleaner interface. Although basically a sequel, the improvements to the system brings it to the realms of wargame finalist. High Command is the Three-Sixty Pacific release of an ambitious, sometimes overly economic model of the European theater of WWII. A refinement of the previously released game, this strategic tour de force by Gregg Carter and Joey Nonnast offers morc hard data than the previous incarnation and a more comprehensive economic model. This is the wargame of choice for those who want a detailed, realistic simulation. The heir to a previous CGW Wargame of the Year, Warlords II (Strategic Studies Group) takes the award-winning game system and enhances it with more and randomly generated maps, hidden terrain, and more diversity in unit types. The AI presses SSG's approach to a new high in versatility and competitiveness. Designers Steve Fawkner, Gregor Whiley, Roger Keating and lan Trout have managed to add an expanded diplomatic wrinkle to the basic strategy of the game, as well. In Walls Of Rome, Ali Atabek, Scott Baker, Paul Kellner, and James Thomas bring the Siege game system to its full maturity. Unfortunately, this occurred as the demise of Mindcraft as a publisher was imminent. In this sequel to Siege, the AI is less predictable than in the previous releases, the historical research is extremely solid (including many obscure battles that you can't find anywhere else and historical uniforms/banners which are something of a miniaturists' dream), and a multi-player modem capacity that takes the game up another norch in our opinion. German designer Martin Scholz created the PREMIER Wargame of the Year for Strategic Simulations, Inc. Clash of Steel takes a classic, markerable wargaming subject-strategic warfare in WWII's European Theater—and gives it a boost in terms of playability, interface, and historical chrome/personality. Although the Al is respectable, Clash of Steel is particularly excellent as a multi-player \"hot seat\" game (played at the same compurer). It offers the right amount of historical depth, but never frightens the gamer with unnecessary details. Everything is accessible, useful and enjoyable in this well-conceived design. CGW Page 58 Computer Gaming World "


"ANART NATHAT ZORK TREBELL UZA ASSAULT STLAITHFUITER 20 AEROPOS MOPOSE CITY 2000 GROLIER IRON HELIX STENS DU CYCLOTE THE PLANET'S HOTTEST HARDWARE MEETS THE PLANET'S COOLEST SOFTWARE. INTRODUCING GAME BLASTER CD 16. All the leaders of the gaming universe have joined most outrageous games in the cosmos Rebel forces. And now they're coming to get you. No Assault and Sim City 2000-and for the next six other game experience can prepare you for what's months, no other kits have them. But that's not waiting inside the new Game Blaster CD'16 mulall. Game Blaster also includes Return to Zork, timedia upgrade kit. You get a Sound Blaster Iron Helix, F-117A Stealth Fighter, Silent Ser16-bit sound card and speakers that make all vice II, Civilization, Railroad Tycoon, and Grolier's your games sound terrifyingly real. A doubleMultimedia Encyclopedia. Of course, all your speed CD-ROM, so all your games run games will sound better because they're made to be faster. An FX-2000 played on Sound Blaster. The question is, can joystick, so you can you handle it? Want more info or the name of a BLASTERCD 16 hone your reflexes. Creative Labs dealer? PROGRE CREATIVE Not to mention the Call 1-800-998-5227. CREATIVE LABS, INC. *Suggested Retail Price $549,95 1994 Creative Technology t..d Game Plaster CD Sound Blaster, and the Sound Blaster and Creative logos are trademarks of Great Technology Ltd. All other trademarks ate the property of the respective owners. US inquiries Creative Labs 1-800-998-5227 or 08-428.600 fotomational inquitte Creative Technology Ltd. Singapore, TEL 65-7780233 FAX 65-773-0353. Circle Reader Service #131 "


"OPERATION CRUSADER. The Total Combat Experience TM WORLD at WAR NWAR Crote BeldeD erne Truk Gud Sollun LIBYA Zoom Middle level zoom map of North Africa. 900 Selle Donna Tactical tuup featuring combat mits near Tobruk BEOORDEN Real-time battle reports from the front. fee Belle Hot on the heels of the industry's first \"Game of the Year\" for a computer wargame, the team that brought you the award-winning V for Victory series has joined forces with The Avalon Hill Game Company for yet another blockbuster! Atomic Games and Avalon Hill are proud and excited to present OPERATION CRUSADER, the first in the new World at War series covering great campaigns of WWII. Set in the expansive reaches of the Libyan and Egyptian deserts, OPERATION CRUSADER sweeps you into the role of German Field Marshal Erwin Rommel or British General Sir Claude Auchinleck as they commit their nations' finest infantry and tanks in an all-out struggle for the Mediterranean port city of Tobruk. A series of six historical scenarios will show you first hand what open field tactics and desert combat are REALLY like. Experience for yourself the cursed Hellfire Pass and in the end see if you, too, can earn the title, \"The Desert Fox\". Available at Leading Resellers, including: Babbages Comp USA Computer City Electronics Boutique  Egghead Radio Shack Software Etc.  Walden's Software. Time Reference Calendar gives weather forecasts and reinforcement alerts. The Avalon Hill Game Company DIVISION OF MONARCH AVALON, INC. 4517 Harford Road, Baltimore, MD 21214 If Operation Crusader cannot be found locally, call TOLL FREE 1-800-999-3222 Ask for Operator CGW5 Circle Reader Service #44 Available on: IBM PC compatibles. Required: Processor 386 or better. Min. 4MB memory, HD.3.5' Floppy, Hard Drivc, SVGA-VESA graphic card & monitor, support Adlib, Roland & SoundBlaster cirds. AND Available on: Macintosh Color Systems. 4 MB RAM. HD req'd. "


"kingmaker. The Quest TM for the Crown Actual screens may vary. Step back in history to the time of the War of the Roses. In England, racked by civil war, the crown hangs by a thread and the throne is there for the taking. Take command of your own faction and begin the quest for the crown, Will you fall to face the executioners blade? Or can you outwit your opponents and win, for your Royal Heir, the throne of all England? Based on the best selling strategy board game, Kingmaker brings the intrigue and anarchy of the 15th Century warring England to life. No matter how many times you play, highly-sophisticated artificial intelligence guarantees a challenge for novice and master strategist alike. Available at Leading Resellers, including: Babbages. Comp USA Computer City Electronics Boutique  Egghead Radio Shack Software Etc. Walden's Software. Coming Soon ... 3rd Reich PC, and Operation: Crusader-Part 1 of the World at War Series! the Opposition finds voice through Richard of York, both Rival claimant finds voice Shakespeare's great drama Henry VI recounts the War of the Roses throughout Kingmaker \"Come, let us four to dinner. I dare say this quarrel will drink blood another day.\" 2007 O rench ng Reseller omputer Clio Shack BANNED in the UK! 04 LLC TUM Can you place your candidate upon the throne? Or will you end, as so many did, bent beneath the headman's axe... # The Avalon Hill Game Company Available on: IBM PC compatibles. Required: Processor 286 or better. Min. 640K memory. High Density Hard Drive.VGA graphic support Adlib, Roland, SoundBlaster Sound support for digitized speech. Also available: Commodore Amiga. 1 MB reqd. HD recommended. DIVISION OF MONARCH AVALON, INC. 4517 Harford Road, Baltimore, MD 21214 If Kingmaker cannot be found locally, please call TOLL FREE 1-800-999-3222 Circle Reader Service #38 GAMES OF STRATEGY "


"REVIEW \"Football» Frenzy 9 A World Cup Soccer Roundup by Paul Rigby and Derek Dela Fuente Allsport USA, Photo by Stephen Dumm T s far as we Brits are concerned, there this premier sporting event. Of course, as the ples. The choices are tough, because there is only one «Football.\" It's played host country, the USA has an automatic place must be 30 or so different football games w ith a round ball and not that funny in the tournament, rather than having to floating around on different formats at the shaped excuse for a bladder that those gruntqualify. present time. Anyhow, here's the kickoff... ing, padded refrigerators throw at each other. For those enlightened Americans who are The word \"Soccer\" is an abomination that switched on to the football scene and are SENSIBLE SOCCER should be expelled from all dictionaries and getting into the mood of the World Cup, (Sensible Software) wiped clean from all memoAvailable on: Amiga, IBM, ries of the world's population. SNES, Gameboy Football is all about flair, intricate passing, vision, specSensible Software, one of the leading UK tacular goals and crunching software houses, has released its own version tackles. of football on every format over the last two Unfortunately, the idea of years. The most recent releases have been on seeing England win the Nintendo's SNES and Gameboy. In the deWorld Cup, which is about to bate over the best football action/tactical take place in several US cities game, there is no doubt that Sensible is in this June, has been reduced to everyone's top three, no matter what format. a bit of a personal dream. All the versions look the same with the usual Abysmal tactical play and top-down view presented. After a few bits of poor player selection from the management setting formations and tuning team manager (now ex-man12 HOAN the player's skills, you can jump jump right ager) have eliminated Enginto the game. The Gameboy version is one land from participation at the he Preci Precision and timing are crucial in the fast-paced action of Goal. of the best games on this particular system. World Cup, the holy grail of Will we see a Jaguar or 3DO offering? The football. From Germany and Brazil to far-off heres a personal off here's a personal selection of our top six footchances are very high. The game is fast and Australia and exotic Cameroon, the best ball games from the UK, Europe and Japan. responsive, with plenty of tricks, a huge playteams from all over the globe will compete in We have tried to cover all types from the the ing area, and precise controls. In short, it's a managerial game to the action/tactical examcla 4:20 Page 62 Computer Gaming World "


"GOAL (Virgin) direction for a quick crossAvailable on: Amiga, IBM over into the penalty area. A player's pace and stamina deThe first thing you notice in this top-down cide how quickly he is able to view, tactical game is the wealth of menu turn within a confined space, options to be chosen before actual play befake out the defender, and gins. I personally appreciated the Practice burst to the net in true Bobby option, because it gave me a chance to work Charlton style. on my dribbling, passing, shooting and corners at my own pace before I moved into the Defenders have four ways game's more serious level of competition. In to stop potential goal-bound addition, all the usual options are available. ilable attacks: a slide tackle coming The field conditions can be set for normal, in from the side; a block muddy, wet or Wembley, the latter emulattackle by getting between an U.S.A. 0:1 Brazil ing England's national stadium. Match duraattacker and the ball; inter Your vector-based opponents play a surprisingly good tion can be set between one and 20 minutes cepting a pass; or simply by team-oriented game in World Cup Soccer. for each half. Goalkeepers have levels of hard, fouling. Fouls may result in either a free kick, or no foul called, depending player veers to the side to contact the ball, a medium or easy, predominantly changing the on the referee. A nice touch is the variety of speed of the goalie's actions. full view of the goal is seen from the player's referees from which to choose. perspective, as opposed to seeing an inaniReplays are fairly standard, although a nice mate goal ar an incorrect symmetrical posichange here is the ability to replay each goal When a free kick is awarded near the goal, tion. In addition to having the proper look automatically and to be able to save a replay a dotted line appears, allowing you to set the and feel as the angle of the goal moves, it gives straight to disk. Choice of scale allows a zoom direction, length, and height of the kick. Deyou the opportunity to shoot (and possibly in/out function to operate either automatfenders will form a wall that can be adjusted score) from a very acute angle. ically or by pressing the space bar in order to from one to seven players. Also, corners and throw-ins have a more realistic feel than in change perspective. The viewpoint for the Control of the players is standard with game is basically from a bird's-eye perspecmost games, because they use the dorred fluidly scrolling banana kicks and good attention to inertia and heading. The computer boundary lines properly. tive. So, zoom-in gives a bigger and more intelligence in the game ensures that the playdetailed view of individual players, while WORLD CUP SOCCER '94 ers work as a team. For instance, if one of your zooming out allows you to see more players (Sierra) Available on: Amiga players is sent off the field in Sensible, there is and a greater deal of the playing field. a hole left on either defense or offense. With Once the options have been altered, you This game is being programmed in the UK, World Cup 94, the game system fills this hole h which is somewhat unusual for Sierra. More may select your team. A single match gives the with another player who, in effect, takes on a significantly, it is a foorball game which will be released double role. Even the throw-ins are innovative and simple. When a throw-in is taken, only on the Amiga for the European market. Release on the three nearest players on your team will run other formats depends upon around close to the player with the ball and are highlighted. When a player is spotted and the success of the Amiga vertargeted the ball will be thrown to him. This sion. is far more intuitive than any similar feature The programmer is Steven seen in other games. Dunn, who works alone at his home, just a mere six miles Like any good football game, however, it is from MicroProse UK. His only as good as the user. All the teams are previous work included the seeded, based on the designer's research of coding for Starglider 2 and team and individual player skills. The great Hammerfist. The new football teams you would expect are included, and all game has taken him nearly a of the teams can be adjusted in terms of skill. LELO +0 year to complete. Possession of the football requires plenty of Wembley offers a tough challenge for any of the potential The game initially looks like skill, but it is well worth the effort. After a 144 visiting teams in Virgin's Goal. Sensible Soccer and plays in a sa game's completion, statistics are posted peroprions to choose from any of the 144 predemanner similar to that slick taining to time of possession, shots on goal. etc., making this a worthwhile purchase for fined teams (the Virgin employees team is title. Many subtle differences, however, enthe stat fan. good for a laugh) or create your own. After sure that World Cup Soccer '94 is in the Previewing their individual statistics for stamina, mier League of football games. PREMIER MANAGER 2 aggression, etc., players are selected from a The familiar overhead view of the game is (Gremlin) squad of 28. The speed of play ranges from used, but this time, it is vector based. SurprisNovice to the ultra-fast Ace. Available on: Amiga, IBM ingly, the players don't look too weird, and Control of players follows the tried-andthe pitch and scrolling ensures that most of Last November Gremlin's Premier Manager true method, with built-in inertia allowing the playing angles can be viewed. You can shot straight up to the top of the UK charts. the player to build up speed when running even see the goal rotate and retain its form as It has stayed there ever since and is now with the ball. This means it is hard to change player movement occurs in its vicinity. As a acclaimed as one of the better management 1111111111112 SEAWEN June 1994 Page 63 "


"Holy SPhip DUELDAD AUTO ARMOUR SCORE EOOS ROO Hang on. Tight. You're about to enter the dark and foreboding world of Microcosm. Super-realistic, computer generated graphics inject you into the body of Cybertech's president, Tiron Korsby. Your mission: to find and eliminate a deadly and elusive brain manipulation droid. Experience a whole new realm of adventure gaming as CD ROM-based interactive cinema effects transport you inside the heart-stopping action. SCOA00046 AUTO DUELDADE SPEED "


"MICROCOSM ct:r? SEGA CD MICROCOSM Available for Sega CD, PC CD ROM, and 3DO at your local retailer. Over 500 megabytes of brilliant SGI graphics and an original sound track by Rick Wakeman, formerly of YES, crank up the intensity to levels you've never before encountered. Step into the latest high-tech micro-submersibles and pilot your way to the edge of your imagination. But don't forget to pack an extra pair of shorts. 675 Massachusetts Avenue Psygnosis Cambridge, MA 02139 (617) 497-7794 Circle Reader Service #155 "


"games on computer (if a little predictable in and anticipation very natural the AI stakes). The facet that appeals to most during play. In no other game players is that it is highly intuitive, but also can you achieve such a high requires a reasonable level of skill. From the degree of pinpoint accuracy moment the game is loaded up, the player when passing. The clever debecomes engrossed in the world of football sign allows for players to be management. assigned both offense and deNow, Gremlin retains all of the original fensive stances at midfield. ideas, with added features to make the sequel, Thus, the transition of the Premier Manager 2, the best in its class. A team from offense to defense Conference League has been added to help is accurately simulated. Playdevelop your player skills before you move on ers may also be positioned for full defense or all-out offense to the Premier League. A two-player option is also included, plus detailed march reports by assigning them to specific of all the games being played. If a continental Human goalies are often distracted by the lush areas of the field. flavor is more to your liking, see if your fields of FIFA International Soccer. The impressive controls almanagerial skills are up to the French or low short passes or Pele-style win a particular game. Ball control is often Spanish Leagues. power kicks from 40 yards out. Your only more important than defensive or shooting limitation is in how quickly you can master In addition to the different leagues, the new capabilities, particularly when setting the controls. When putting in the frantic version offers 16 unique playing formations pace early in a game. Later on, mixing the action, the designers didn't neglect the simuand cight selectable playing styles, including endurance and speed of youth with the expeindividual morale and fitness levels. The ricnce of veteran players will generally prolation aspects. Illegal or dirty plays will cause graphic look of the playing fields has been vide a successful strategy. The best part of your team to be a few players short. Also, unlike many games, these referees see everyimproved, and you may even set ticket prices Premier Manager 2 is that you can apply a and the level of crowd control. Weather convariety of different types of management thing (perhaps these chaps remembered their ditions are variable enough to sometimes restyles to produce a successful football team. glasses!). sult in postponements. The new challenges All in all, a classic football game. Final Wrap Up require you to balance up to 64 sponsors while simultaneously struggling with player FIFA INTERNATIONAL So, that describes the top division of footcontract negotiations. From the eight train SOCCER (Electronic Arts) ball contenders which are currently available ing camps to the limit of four foreign players Available on: Sega Genesis on the digital pitch. We don't expect every in European competition, you will have no (SNES forthcoming) gamer to choose the same game as his or her lack of managerial decisions to make. favorite, but we think we've handicapped With the official license of FIFA (the world them well enough for everyone to start their Although other management games may football governing body) combined with the own World's Cup. Cow have a glossier look, Premier Manager 2 is the expertise of the world's leading software comtops as far as gameplay is concerned. Changpany, you have a right to expect something ing tactics subtly affects the outcome of a good...but this is stunning. FIFA Internagame. Fitness is a key component, especially tional Soccer is a remarkably complete simuduring long matches that feature extra time lation of the sport. The numerous options or, for successful clubs, who have to deal with include league play (with exhibitions, play-off a congested fixture list. Player statistics are and tournaments), computer or human-conimportant, but knowing when and whom to trolled goalkeepers, adjustable fouls, and a substitute is the critical decision in who will variety of time settings. The new four-way, multi-player ALTRINCHAN 0-3 BATH CITY adapter is supported, and up to eight players can compete together or even team up against the computer. PREZENTARE Play begins with the crowd roaring, a good example of how the sound support enSTAFFORD RANGERS @JO HALIFAX TORN hances play. The controller FUPERO PASSE PETIT pad allows you to finely execute ball control, player moves, and kicks with consummate ease. The perspective of the game is just above and slightly to the side of the PAUSE MEDIUM SUB pitch. This adds the feeling of Sudden weather changes can make scoring speed to the game, and the difficult in Premier Manager 2. superb overview makes passes THE WORLD BASSES BALL FIRST HALF HEATHER: LIGHT HINDS ALTRINCHAM BATH CITY 1139 SHOTS AT GOAL.......O PASSES ATTEMPTED..3 TACKLES HOME STAFFORD RANGERS TACKLES ALTOMTOM Page 66 Computer Gaming World "


"WHEN YOU'RE REALLY SERIOUS ABOUT PLAYING GAMES Subscribe to America's #1 computer game magazine... and score up to 47% savings! Get ready for some serious action with Computer Gaming World the spectacular monthly magazine that helps you pump-up your computer gaming expertise. Brought to you by the publishers of PC Magazine, PC/Computing, MacUser and Windows Sources, every monthly issue of Computer Gaming World  Reveals special «winning secrets\" for your favorite games  Provides «first looks\" and in-depth reviews of new computer games  Explores the latest in multimedia, CD-ROM and interactive game environments  Helps you make the leap into cyberspace with on-line gaming  Explains how to turbocharge your system for faster action...and much more! Whether you're into fantasy, action, sports or strategy. Whether you use DOS, Windows or a Mac...it's time to start racking up the points with Computer Gaming World. Subscribe now and save! One year/12 issues $27.94 — You save 41% C Two years/24 issues $49.97 You save 47% Savings based on annual cover price of $17.40. Please mention this 4-digit key code to operator when placing your order: 4294 CALL NOW TOLL FREE Special Sports Games Section COMPUTER GAMING WORLD The Premier Computer Game Magazine 100 GAMES RATED S CONFIG FILES TO SOLVE 1.GAMERS' MEMORY PROBLEMS takes G EMPIRE DELUXE COSTO WIN AT SPACEYARDAHE Wamer-New-Media XXX 13666 XXX 666 1-800-827-4450 "


"empion's Return To Arena ScarplayMagic And Character Classes In Bethesda's Role-Playing Epic ast month we stepped into Bethesda's Arena and looked at this cpic game's main features, but due to space and time constraints I only mentioned the finer details in passing. In particular, I was only able to give the character classes and the derailed magic system a cursory glance, so this article will fill in the gaps and get into the meat of these meaty features. Got You Under My Spell As noted last time, the magic system is very flexible in thar spells can be purchased readymade, and unique spells can be created from scratch through the Spellmaker at any Mages Guild. My experience was that with most spells, especially offensive spells, it's better to \"roll your own\" than to buy \"off the rack.\" The typical offensive spell comes with a certain base damage, modified by the level of the caster. For instance, Shock does a base damage of 1-35 points, plus 1-5 points per level. This makes it rather weak in killing power. Nice against goblins and orcs, perhaps, but not really all that great against, say, an iron golem. I found it better to reverse that, starting with low base damage and large increments per level. Cold Death, one of my favorites, did a base 5-15 damage, plus 25-40 per level. An expensive spell, in points, for low-level mages to cast, but well worth it in killing power The same holds true for protective and utility spells. Shalidor's Mirror, an off-therack spell, gives a 40% chance, plus 2% per level, of reflecting an incoming spell back at the enemy caster. Compare that to Improved Reflection, which starts with a base 1% chance, increasing by 14% per level. Of course, you can go too far with custom spells. Depending on class, the most points a magic-user can ever have for spellcasting ranges from 100-300 points. The cost to cast a spell declines as character level rises, but ifa spell starts out requiring a lot of points, you may have to wait a very long time before it Other professions can simulate these effects can be used. with potions or items. For example, a fighter Spells can be created with multiple effects, might have a buckler with levitation spells on it, such as a combination of paralysis or a dagger with Passwall, or some and continuous damage (nasty), invisibility potions, or a but these, as you might expect, longsword with lightning spells cost more to buy and more to in it. These are all helpful, but cast in spell points. I found it don't really compare to having simpler and more efficient to the ability to do all that on a concentrate on sheer firepower. regular basis. Blowing a critter out of its tracks Further, the level of spell on an with a shot or two is always prefitem is fixed, while spell potency erable to fancy stuff. The best for mages increases with their enemy is a dcad enemy, and the levels. So that longsword of sooner it's dead, the better. lightning will always do the With that in mind, there is no same damage, however adquestion that the best mage class for firepower vanced your fighter, whereas a mage's lightis the Battle Mage. Offensive spells in Spellning spell becomes ever more deadly as the maker are cheaper for Battle Mages and also mage advances. cost less to cast in spell points. I Mages of all types therefore have a tremenhad two main spellcasting chardous advantage in Arena and are the best acters: Kali the Dark Elf Nightchoice of character to play. Of course, it is blade (a thief/mage), and Orvaal possible, although difficult, to get through the Breton Battle Mage. with a non-spellcasting character. For that, a Kali had to pay 1740 gold for Knight is probably the best way to go. Cold Death; Orvaal only 936, Knights have good hit points, can wear any and that for a slightly more poarmor, and use any weapon. They also repair tent version (25-45 increment weapons automatically, so by carrying a couinstead of 25-40). At level 18, ple and switching around now and then, Kali needed 48 magic points to weapons never wear out or break. cast it; Orvaal, only 26. A wellThe Icast advantaged class is the thief. Exequipped Battlemage is probcept for the spellcasting Nightblades, thieves ably the most deadly character in the game. do not have an easy time at all. Let's face it, a Actually, any properly-run mage is deadly thief's forte is stealing, not solo dungconeerand will have an easier time of it than the ing. There is no scope at all for thiefly activinon-spellcasting classes. They can sneak ties (aside from lockpicking) in the dungeons. around invisible to all but the Thieves can't try to slip past a most potent monsters. They monster, or sneak up and backhave protection against physical stab it. Once in a dungeon, and magical attacks. They can thieves are no more than thirdfloat over lava and dissolve walls rate fighters, with mediocre arin their way. They can cast mor and hitpoints. death from near or far. And they I ran Shadow, a Dark Elf Assasdon't really need a lot of spells sin, through several dungeons. to accomplish all that. Neither He didn't do too badly, until he Kali nor Orvaal had more than came up against the Wraiths with about 15 or so spells in their their devastating fireball spells spellbooks. (those spells are potent!). Two Page 68 Computer Gaming World "


"new! \"Spear of Destiny Mission Disks! Mission 2: Return to Danger Alission 3: Ultimate Challenge FLOOR SCORE LES 16 225800 9 HEALTH ANNO 90% 97 FOO SCORE UUES 5 300600 9 3 HEALTH ARHOLT 627 61 FLOOR 17 SCORE LIVES 220800 9 REALTI AR 100% 999 The Action Continues... New Challenges! in two brand new missions for Each mission features 21 exciting the fantastic virtual reality game new levels, with new enemy Spear of Destiny! Now you can guards, new treasures and a enjoy more of the heart-pound whole new fortress to penetrate. ing, adrenaline-pumping excite New puzzles require thought as ment you loved in the original well as quick reflexes. Fantastic game! These terrific new mis new art and unbelievable digital sions feature all new floors, sound make these the most excitguards, bosses, graphics and ing games ever! Get the latest sounds! Spear of Destiny missions today! LIVES FLOOR SCORE 10 304400 9 HEALTH ANYO 17788 FormGen Inc. 7641 East Gray Road, Scottsdale, AZ 85260 (800) 263-2390 (905) 857-4141 Circle Reader Service #143 "


"shots and he was cinders. Trying to get him across the room to the monster (so it couldn't cast spells) while guzzling healing potions by the case, was a frustrating experience. Wraiths weren't the worst of my problems. Still ahead were fire daemons, vampires, and liches, all of whom have powerful spell attacks, can see invisible adventurers (so can Wraiths), and hir very hard in melee, too. I couldn't see Shadow getting past all that without truckloads of healing potions, a lot of luck, and many restores. So I abandoned him and went on to Kali the Nightblade, who of course had a much easier time of it, being a spellcaster. So while thieves may be fun to run in town where they can burglarize, pick pockers, and steal from shops, they aren't terrific, or even good, when it comes to following up the main line of the game, which is getting those staff pieces out of the dungeons. One thing to watch out for is creating new characters after running an old one for a while. After Shadow had gotten the second staff piece, I decided to look at some other character types. I went back to \"create new character» from inside the game don't have to spend much on equipment. and made up a Monk. Their money goes into building a nice collecShe came, brand-new, with two tion of spells. Once that's taken care of, mages staff pieces already in her invenonly need gold for a good supply of Restore tory and the sewer map already Power potions and a few other types as filled in; the same thing hapbackup (always have a couple of backup popened with two more characters I tions for emergencies). created. It was only after exiting Thieves can't wear the fancy armor, but the game completely and re-runthey can use some of the fancy weapons. ning it that I got new characters That, and a raft of potions is what they spend with proper inventory and blank money on. Thieves will generally end up with sewer maps. Always start fresh the most cash and not much to buy with it. when making up new characters. Gold can go pretty far in this game, too, because all prices, except for Spellmaker and It's A Rich Man's World identifying items, can be bargained down Money is of interest to all classes, although from list. Mundane stuff is amazingly cheap in somewhat different ways. Warriors need it to begin with, and any character can be comto buy the fancy plate armor that pletely outfitted for very little not only protects, but enhances right after exiting the dungeon. physical stats, as well as to purThis is a nice change of pace chase fancy weapons with spells from all those other games that on them. These things are, of want your life savings just for a course, expensive. Between suit of leather armor. those and a good supply of poThe better items, weapons and tions for healing, curing disease, armor with enchantments on erc., fighters are always in need them, naturally cost more. Still, of cash. good bargaining can get them Mages have it (again) easier. for you at more reasonable Since weapons and armor are reprices. There are even special fesstricted for them, spellcasters tival days when items are halfP.O. BOX 6295 SPECTRUM HOURS: The UNIVERSAL Game Cheater! Th Guest Cheat death with... 5586878 .. MACHINE 9998899989394958998RR8 R999&N THE HOURS: P.O. BOX 6295 SALINAS, CA 6AM-11PM PST 93912-6295 7-DAYS 1-800-983-4321 Canon CALL FOR CALL FOR ELECTRONICS CURRENT PRICES CURRENT PRICES BMCD Shadowrasta 48 Spaceward Hol-WNO DOS 36 None in the Dark 2 48 Sherlock Holmesla 35 Anchon UiTa She Commander 10 Year Colector replay 49 Sherlock Holmes II 50 era Eldar Sorols Subna 2050 11h Hou 56 Sm C 4g Bades of Nepoleon Syndicate: American Psvot ADSD Ordim:Genies Curse42 15 BON Scan Dse 16 TaxForce Admiral Pack ADSD Dark Sun Sa Trek 2sh Aniv. Betaala Kander To Fomer AD&D Dungeon Harck Stie commander W T Oos 56 Bake Sune Episode 1 Uma Vit Pacan ADD Eye of the Beholder I 47 Srdcase PusS & Am. Par 5 Boodnet Uma Vit Pagan Snach PM Theme Park V ADED Eye of the Beholder Tn 51 Victory God ino Sao ADS Raveniot Ufima Crizzion Master Players Ed. Val d Davies Aegis: Guardian of Flot Ultima VI Complete Dark Legions Valod None in the Dark 48 Uima Vit: Pagan Spooch Act 52 Dela V When Two Words War Armored Fis Unima Underword I&T Derat Wrg Commander Academy Under akiing Moon Nic Baron CD a 35 X-Wing Doom Episode 1 Bersaha Se Sky 38 Wing Commander 1 Deluxe Dragons pere X-Wing: mera Pers.it Boodnet Wing Commander 2 Dolo Dunell XWri 2 B Wing Comanche wEperdid Mice 59 Wing Commander / Uhm V 29 Dungeon Master Conspiracy Work Eine Pus 300 System Deemonsgate 0 a 35 3 Wah of the Gods WN Eyed the Beadalol Escape from Mons Kanar Dark Legons BM.EWEL CASE F-14 Fleet Dorterde Horde Dracza Uhiershad 47 7h Guest Front Page FBPO John Hedon Footbal Dragon Lore. Chap 1 Chaos Contrum Fronter: Ele 2 Lemmings Dagarsphere 40 Dracula Unleeshed Gonal Conquest Lost Fles of Sherlock Holmes 50 Dune 40 Dune Harpoon 1 Vad Dog Motor Getriel Kright 15 Gabrid Knight Out otis World Gretard Banks 12 Gusho 2000 We of the Dead Road Pach Hell Cabo V1.1 ron Hella Legends of Valou Sacoscasar ha King's Quest 6 Master of Orion Sax Ware ton Hot Lagando Kyanda Microsot Acade-WN Journeyman Poject 18 Rod Assant Outdfis World Super Wing Commander Labyrinho Tmé 43 8 bao Pulat General wooh Toa Epe lands d' Lore Sece. Weapons ou de Scan Dsis ATARI Lord d the Rings Poojaus Marts: Expoental Fghter 20 Sar Wars Chess Powerllonger Microcosm 7 Ches of Gold commem.ed) A-Tran Cos Set Burde 44 SSN-21 Scene Pacte Sake wSpeech pack 51 ADSD: Dungeon Hack 42 Shaconcaster Privater 50 ADSD. Rarenih 52 WE ALSO SOLL Sledow ol Ysorbius Rebol Assaur Alien Breed 19 Siege & Dogs of Wa Bunde) LUCI SEGA SIES Rem DZork 47 None in the Dark 38 Space Huk PRICES SUBJECT TO CHANGE, CONTACT PUBLISHERS FOR DEFECTS 20% RESTOCKING FEE ON RETURNED & REFUSED ITEMS WE SELL ALL PAYMENT: CHECKS (ORDERS SHIPPED WHEN CHECK CLEARS) COMPUTER & MONEY ORDERS (TREATED AS CASH) VIDEO CA residents add 7.25% sales tax/HANDLING $2 PER ORDER ENTERTAINMENT SHIPPING: FREE GROUND SHIPPING WITH $100 PURCHASE, UNDER $100 PRODUCTS 3-DAY UPS ADD $5 PER ORDER, 2ND DAY AIR ADD $7 OTHER SHIPPING TERMS ARRANGED. COD ADD 56 Circle Reader Service #115 Computer Gaming World Trome  SIGGE soice Quest 4 The Infinity Machine works with virtually ANY game. Our easy to use interface allows you to edit or freeze almost any game feature such as lives, gold, or energy in real time. Our slow-motion mode lets you breeze through the tough spots like no tomorrow! What are you waiting for? Start living today! My WW FROM $34.95 u.s. REM 1359 FRANK DRIVE  MONROE, MICHIGAN 48161 Software TO ORDER, CALL 800-457-1161 Circle Reader Service #119 Page 70 "


"LUNICUS They Stole Your Planet. They're Trashing Your Country.  They're Going To Kill Your Family There's Only One Thing A Civilized Person Can Do.. ME MACWORLD COO/ WASTE 'EM \"FASTEST GAME ON CD-ROM.\" -NEW MEDIA MAGAZINE -MACHOME JOURNAL \"THE KING OF CD-ROM ADVENTURE GAMES.\" tttt1/2 -MACUSER MAGAZINE AVAILABLE FOR MACINTOSH AND WINDOWS ON CD-ROM Vou're one of the last free Earthlings left: your team on Moonbase Lunicus will have to save the world. Grab your cybersuit. Strap on the ol' plasma cannon. Jump in your shuttle and scream into the fire-fight of your dreams. This lightspeed arcade movie brings you the best of both universes: butt-kicking action with CD-ROM intensity, and all of it with killer attitude! Hyper-real environments. Skull-crushing music-tracks. Kick droid-butt against tough odds that keep rising to match your skill. There's no waiting for anything, not even if you need to breathe. It's a dirty job but somebody's got to do it. CYDLOUH Paramount Interactive Circle Reader Service #121 "


"takes place on the bottom level or save the game and continue exploring the of the Imperial dungeons, you world of Tamriel. vs. Tharn. I found him a rather. Whichever, you will probably want to save difficult opponent and opted your character for the sequel. For that, you for the casy (relatively speaking) have to back up all the related save files to method of defeating him. I've floppy. There are ten save positions, and the been told that it's possible to related files end in \".00\" to \".09\". So if your defeat him in battle, but going final save is in the first position on the save by my own experience, that screen, you'd copy off all files ending in\".00\". could be a long-term project. If it's in the fifth position. vou want all fil Afterwards comes a brief story ending in \".04\", and so on, up to \".09\" for sequence, then your character is the tenth save. Keep those disks in a safe place; whisked out of the dungeon and deposited whisked out of the dungeon and dep I expect that the next game will show quite a back in the Imperial City. At this point, you few improvements over the initial entry in the can save the game and go on to other things, cerise GAN Abracadata, the publisher of Design Your Own RailroadTM introduces ... TRAIN | ENGINEER Ground-breaking Cab-view Simulation! Dulex Pick Up Day ILIRII ULUI price to start with, and can be bargained down from there. The mages guild has festival days, too, when everything (except Spellmaker and identification) is halfprice; these are good days to stock up on potions. Raid! As reported in the previous article, Arena's big problem (aside from not having much of a plot) is that the game is buggy. Four patches alFour parches al ready, and a fifth is in the works as I write this Obviously, the game was released far, far too soon, with less than adequate playtesting. Nothing I ran into was fatal (that is, prevented winning the game), but others have had problems because the dungeon levels reset when you leave them, although not always completely. One unlucky player was making his way through Labyrinthian, the second staff piece dungeon, and came to a dead halt. This place has two doors that require special keys to open. He found the first key, unlocked the door, then headed for town to cash in his goodies. On his return, he discovered that the first door was locked again, only this time, there was no key to open it...and the only way past that door is with the key. Restoring to a previous save, before the first door was unlocked, was the only option. That's a lot of time and progress lost. So it is best, especially in dungeons that have magically-locked doors requiring keys, to stay in there until the dungeon is completed. Otherwise, you may find yourself at a dead end, with much to do over. This problem is being addressed in the fifth patch, but until it becomes available, better safe than sorry. Bethesda, I will add, has taken steps to ensure that all patches are downward compatible. This means that if you have used an earlier patch already, the newer one will not require you to start over; none of your progress will be lost by upgrading with a later patch. Further, if you are playing the original release, adding any patch will not force you to start over. Given the size of the game, that is an important consideration, and kudos to Bethesda for making this effort. (Although Bethesda has gone to great lengths to ensure that Arena patches are backward compatible, one CGW editor did have his save games corrupted by the 4th patch. This was apparently a rare case. To ensure that you do not have problems, Bethesda suggests that you make sure you are not in the middle of a guest when you apply a patch. -Ed.) I didn't mention the endgame last time (don't ask embarrassing questions why). It Speed: Stop -Design Layouts — Add Scenery Run Trains from the-Engineers' ViewpointD ut on your engineer's cap (grasp your computer mouse tightly) and get ready to drive down the tracks!  Simulates operation of a powerful locomotive from the cab view. The program you've all been asking for. Yes...it can use Design Your Own Railroad track layouts! Includes dozens of elaborate railroad layouts! . Includes animation sequences and REAL train sounds. View your layouts' colorful scenery from the engineer's viewpoint. Retail .........$49.95 Available for Windows/DOS & Macintosh User-controlled: weather conditions, pickup/delivery Yo schedules, response to train collisions, and cargo. To Order, Call... Abracadata: 1-800-451-4871 Abracadata the source of plan-making software SINCE 1985 P.O.Box 2440 Eugene, OR 97402 (503) 342-3030 ning nas Circle Reader Service #159 Page 72 Computer Gaming World "


"CRETIVE CREATIVE LABS, INC. Multimedia Specialists Game Blaster CD 16 New from Creative Labs! The Game Blaster CD 16 multimedia upgrade kit features a Sound Blaster 16. a double speed CD-ROM drive, speakers and joystick, and an incredible software bundle including Rebel Assault, Return to Zork, Iron Helix, SIM City 2000. Creative CD Blaster and more! 1-800-233-0010 Tech Support: (608) 233-8832 P.O. Box 55164 Madison, WI 53705-8964 CREATIVE NEC Visa & Master Card welcomed! Hours: M-F 9am 6pm Sat. 9am -1pm CST NEW! $379 CHINON CDS535 Double Speed CDROM drive O PLEXTOR MultiSpin 3Xi DM3028 Double Speed Plus CDROM drive CREATIVE LABS. INC. Digital Edge 3X New from Creative Labs! Along with a triple speed CD-ROM drive, the new Digital Edge 3X features the Sound Blaster 16 SCSI-2. Groliers Multimedia Encyclopedia, Voice Assist, Text Assist. Digital Morph. Rebel Assault, Indy 500, The Simulation, and much more! Power users. this is your CD-ROM drive! Lightning fast internal triple speed drive with 195ms access time, 450KB/sec transfer rate, and a continuousflow 256KB cache. Exceeds MPC level 2 specifications, and is PhotoCD Multisession, and QuickTime compliant. Switchable SCSI-1/SCSI-2 interface. .. .. . With an access time of 250ms, and a double speed data transfer rate of 300KB/sec and a 256KB buffer, the CDS-535 is one of the fastest drives around! PC Magazine Editor's Choice! This high performance SCSI2 CD-ROM drive is intended for demanding multimedia applications such as animation, graphics, 3-D modelling and full motion video. It features a 240ms access time, a 64KB buffer and a 335KB/sec transfer rate. Triple Speed! CALL! $448 $299 $257 MULTIMEDIA HARDWARE 49  290 VIDEO CAPTURE/OUTPUT MM UPGRADE KITS Reveal MMD041 Int. kit 439 NEC Multispin 3xi internal 448 SOUND CARDS Sound Blaster 16 Basic Reveal MMD061 Int. kit 549 NEC Multispin 3Xe external 543 Sound Blaster Pro Dix Game Blaster CD 16 379 Reveal DC230 Hm Ofc. 239 NEC Multispin 3Xp portable 418 418 Audio Magician Plus Sound Blaster Dix Discovery CD 16 . Reveal DC240 Educ. Pk 239 NEC Multispin AX Pro (NEW) 919 Aztech Sound Galaxy BXII 55 ASP Option Edutainment CD 16 425 Reveal DC250 Ent. Pk 239 Plextor DM3028 internal 252 Aztech Sound Galaxy Basic 16 115 Wave Blaster Option Digital Edge 3X (NEW!) Call Plextor DM3028 int, w/kit 310 Aztech Sound Galaxy Pro 16 139 Maui Wavetable Upgd Creative Omni CD int. 195 CD-ROM DRIVES Plextor DM5028 external 379 Gravis Ultrasound 126 MV Pro 16 CD III 789 Aztech CDA268-01A int. 159 Plextor DM5018 ext. w/kit 429 Pro Audio Studio 16XL MV Memphis 545 Chinon CDS 535 internal 299 Reveal DC002 Int. Pro Audio Studio 16 149 50/50 PC TV+ 315 MV Reno (NEW!) Chinon CDS 535 int. w/kit 332 Toshiba 3401B internal 339 Pro Audio Spectrum 16 119 ADS Game Zapper 104 MV Family Deluxe kit 335 Chinon CDX 535 external 425 Toshiba 3401E external Pro Audio Spect 16 basic 95 Creative Labs TV Coder 105 MV Premium Deluxe kit 499 Chinon CDX 535 ext. w/kit 465 Sony CDU-33A 167 Pro Audio Power Pak 59 Video Blaster SE 239 MV Super Deluxe kit 399 Creative Omni CD int. 195 Sony CDU-33A interface 48 Sound Blaster 16 (MultiCD) 139 Video Spigot for Windows 236 MV Pro Deluxe kit 695 Creative Omni CD ext. 327 Sony CDU 33A w/interface 189 Sound Blaster 16 MultiCD/ASP 169 Pro Movie Studio ReelMagic Upgd. kit 619 Microsols Backnach dhisod 380 Sony CD 012 MicroSols. Backpack dbl spd 389 Sony CDU-561-01 int. 259 Sound Blaster 16 SCSI2 169 Sigma Designs ReelMagic 364 Reveal MMD021 Int. kit 359 Mitsumi FXOOID 185 Sony CDU-7811-10 ext. 489 Sound Blaster 16 SCSI2/ASP Call for speakers, SCSI controllers, more! 169 279 199 CD-ROM TITLES We only sell CD-ROM! 7th Guest 43 Day of the Tentacle/M.M.II 37 Jet Pack 43 Planit Earth 34 T2 Chesswars 7th Guest 2:11th Hour 59 Desert Storm MPC 33 Jones in the Fast Lane 36 Planit Paradise 34 TFX Adventures 27 Dinosaur Adventure CD 40 Journeyman Proj. The 42 Police Ost 4:Open Seas 41 Team Yankee 2 Advs of Willie Beamish 37 Dinosaur Discovery MPC 25 Just Grandma & Me 32 Protostar, War of the Front 41 Terror of the Deep Aegis: Guardian of Fleet 48 Dinosaurs 41 Jutland 46 Putt Pult Goes to the Moon 41 Tetris Gold Air Warrior 32 Dracula Unleashed 45 King's Quest VI Pult Pult Joins Parade 42 Tony LaRussa BB 2 Aladdin and His Lamp 30 Dragon's Lair 33 King's Quest VI Upgd 22 Putt Putts Fun Pack MPC 32 Total Baseball 1993 Edition Alone in the Dark 44 Dragonsphere 49 King's Ransom 33 Quantum Gate 44 U.S.Atas 4.0 Amanda Stories 33 Dune 47 Labyrinth of Time 45 Quicken CDROM 64 Ultima Under. 1 & 2 Animals MPC for Windows 54 Dungeon Hack 36 Lands of Lore 39 Ravenloft 49 Ultima VIII W/Speech Pack Arthur's Teacher Trouble 36 EcoQuest Search Cetus 36 Last Dinosaur Egg. The 32 Rebel Assault 42 Under a Killing Moon Atlas of US Presidents MP 29 Empire Dix Scenario Dsk 19 Laura Bow 2 36 Return of the Phantom 37 Video Cube BI7 Flying Fort, w/SS2 32 Eric the Unready 32 Lawnmower Man 37 Return to Zork 42 Video Cube:Sports Backroad Racers 24 Espn Baseball Tonite 43 Legend of Kyrandia 33 Ringworld, Revenege of the 35 Video Game Solution CD Battle Chess Enhanced 42 Espn Sun. Nite Football NFL 43 Lesuire Suit Larry 6 43 Rodney CD-ROM 25 Wacky Funsters Bloodnet 41 European Racers 39 Lightning CD 53 Rorniagain 16 Where in World Dix Blue Force: Next of Kin 37 Eye of Beholder Trilogy 49 Loom 38 Routerial v10 14 Where in the USA Carmen SD Buzz Aldrin Rce Space 55 Eye of the Beholder 3 46 Lord of the Rings 42 Sam & Max Hit the Road 33 Who Shot Johnny Rock C.I.T.Y. 2000 31 F117&F15 Senario Disk 44 Lost Treasures Infocom II 35 Scrabble Deluxe 21 Who Killed Sam Rupert CD-ROMIX! Freex 14 F15 Strike Eagle 3 44 Lost Treasures of Infocom 31 Secret Weapons of Luftwaffe 44 WinCD Professional 1.1 CD-ROMIX! Hardcase 14 FA 18 Hornet 54 Lost in Time 37 Secret of Monkey Island II 38 Wing Commander II Complete CD-ROMIX! Prime 14 Family Doctor MPC WIN 43 MPC Wizard 12 Seven Days in August MPC 33 Wing Commander Il/Ult UW Campaign 32 Fantasy Empires 35 Mad Dog Mcree 28 Sh. Holmes Con Det 3 49 Wing Commander/Sec. Mission Capital Hill MPC 26 Gabriel Knight 43 Man Enough 43 Shadowcaster 43 Wing Commander/Ultima VI Castles II 46 Game Pak 45 Mantis Exp Fighter 42 SimCity Enhanced 44 Wolf Pack Challenge CD Pack 28 Game Pak ! 56 Mario Early Years Collectio 27 Sneak Peak 65 Word Tales Chaos Continuum, The 40 Gateway 2 32 Mavis Teaches Typing 45 Space Adventure 51 World Atlas 4.0 Chessmaniac, The 33 Geekwad Gms of the Glxy 25 Mayo Clinic Family Health B 37 Space Quest 4 35 World Circuit Gran Prix Chessmaster 3000 MPC 44 Great Naval Battles pk vol 46 Mayo Clinic: The Total Hear 35 Space Shuttle MPC 26 World of Xeen Cinemania Movie Guide '94 49 Gunship 2000 w/Scenario 35 Mega Race 32 Spellcasting Party Pack 32 Wrath of the Demon Commanche w/Mis. 1&2 57 Guy Spy 26 Microcosm 48 Spirit of Excalibur Compton's Int. Encyc Upgrd 84 Harrier Assault SVGA 42 Microsoft Golf for Windows 39 Sporting News Pro Football OT TITLE Conan The Commerian 23 Hell Cab v1.1 46 Mosaic Magic 31 Sports Illus Almanac MPC 38 Daron's Lair Cong Robin Hood WIN 39 High Command 48 Myst MPC 47 Star Trek 25th Enhanced 48 Dragonsphere Conspiracy 41 Horde, The 49 Newsweek Interactive #1 27 Star Trek 25th Anniv 53 Sabrel Knight Critical Path 44 Humans. The 23 Newsweek Interactive #2 27 Star Wars Chess MPC 39 Microcosm Curse of Enchantia 21 Inca 37 Oceans Below MPC 27 Stellar 7 39 Myst MPC CyberRace 36 Inca 2 36 Oh No More Lemmings Dual Pa 35 Street Atlas 2.0 USA WIN 89 Ravenloft Daemonsgate 36 Indy Jones Fate Atlantis 37 PC Globe Maps & Facts 32 Strike Commander/Tactical O 47 Shadowcaster Dark Seed 37 Interplay's 10 Yr Anth 45 Patrician 36 Stronghold Darksun 47 Iron Helix 54 Planit Adrenaline 34 System Shock 53 Ultima Vill w/speech No surcharge on credit cards. CODs accepted with $6 charge. Software shipping $5/order, hardware shipping is 5%. Personal and company checks allow 14 days. Returns must have an RMA #. Call for info. Software sales final unless defective. Returns subject to 15% restocking fee. Pricing and availability subject to change. Circle Reader Service #94 2. 35 TFX "


"REVIEW Exorcising The Madness Of Strahd's Possession Sink Your Teeth Into SSI's Ravenloft by Petra Schlunk LEVEL 1 (MAX) LFVEL 2 (2./RN) (O MAX) | | | | L A CANAZE68 SENRE TI 1-10 FLAME ARROW 1101 SLOW LIGIT JUCLD LCUCL 4 in MAX) LCUCL M MOXI LCULO LA MINE the suspension of disbelief, the sense of recovery of the lost Holy Symbol and an exit forms. You may move by clicking on the being there, of feeling one's heart from this world. In your way are large and movement arrows at the bottom of the pounding before opening yet another deadly dungeons, vicious monsters, and the screen, by holding the left mouse button door the creation of a game atmosphere evil Count Strand. But, we are getting ahead down and positioning the cursor in the conducive to such things is both one of the of ourselves; we need some adventurers first! screen, by using the numeric keypad, or by most difficult elements of game design to achieve and one of the most necessary comjust moving the mouse around after activarFortune Deals Its Hand ing the \"free mouse movement\" option. You ponents of a good role-playing game. StrateBearing in mind that your purpose is to find can also choose to move with the default gic Simulations' Ravenlofi (developed by some adventurers, you cauriously enter a forsmooth scrolling interface or with the step DreamForge) manages to blend the elements tuneteller's hut (noticing how similar the furmovement\" feature. Step movement is not of a first-person 3-D environment, with nishings are to the gypsy's wagon in Ultima sound and story into a work replete with just recommended because the mode's angular, IV). Cards are dealt and from these 90 degree movements make navigating duncards you choose your character's ESTO gender, race, character class, aligngeons and facing monsters during combat ment and portrait. Character atalmost impossible. MARIE MISSILE IMPRAUEN IFTIFY I WMVISIBILITY tributes are rolled up randomly Having figured out how to move, your but you can modify the attributes party runs wildly after the assassin and corners up to the maximum values for the him! Well, he is not about to hand over his character's race. stolen goods, is he now? That means combat! While up to four characters can Combat is real time and virtually identical eventually be enlisted for the party, to that in many of SSI's previous role-playing you only begin with two. Natu1. VLILCI YCKVIRU 1-11.10. DULU MURSILE: games (such as the Eye of the Beholder series rally, this means that you are exand Dungeon Hack). Fortunately, a new feapected to meet many characters in your travels and that some are ture has been added to this game in which likely to offer to join you. Consider everyone may attack simultaneously by clicking on the attacking monster, assuming they such an insidiously credible atmosphere. all such offers, even when your are close enough to engage in hand-to-hand From the introduction where we discover party is full. Dismissed party members can that Lord Dehlt of Elturel has been attacked always be found again, eager to return to combat. I found that the most effective way by a foul assassin who has stolen the Holy adventuring, and their belongings automatto deal with hordes of monsters was by clickSymbol of Helm, to the closing scenes, Raically transferred to their willing ing madly on the screen while using the nuvenloft invites us to become part of the story. replacements! Ravenloft: Strahd's Possession After Lord Dehli's Holy Symbol is stolen, PRICE: $65 CD-ROM; 580 Floppy you are sent to recover it from the assassin. Before You Can Walk SYSTEM: Upon recovering this amulet, your party is REQUIREMENTS: CD-ROM: 386 or better (486-33 Obavenior recommended), 4 MB RAM, surrounded by mist and transported to a for The newly created pair of adVGA graphics, 13 MB HD space, est in a new world. The amuler is gone and double-speed CD-ROM mouse venturers will find themselves in Floppy: 386 or belter, the party is trapped in this new place (Did hot pursuit of Lord Dehlt's 4 MB RAM, 21 MB HD space, VGA graphics, mouse you really believe that recovering the amulet would be assassin. Ah, but for this PROTECTION: None would be that easy?). From these woods, your pursuit you must learn how to DESIGNERS: Chris Straka, Thomas Holmes PUBLISHER: Strategic Simulations, Inc. party must find the village of Barovia and move, and movement in the Sunnyvale, CA (408) 737-6800 uncover clues which will lead to both the world of Ravenlofi has many I-10 WAAN EYE Nach IBM Page 74 Computer Gaming World "


"AVAILABLE! NOW RETAS THE ULTIMATE GAME OF STRATEGIC CONQUEST. ORBITING TADOP UNIT In a real-time universe, every move could be your last. REMOTE VIELE STABLISH OABIT You are the commander-in-chief on a quest to conquer and colonize a galaxy of alien worlds. But first you must overcome hostile climate conditions, ward off cunning enemies, weigh critical information, calculate the risks, and make tactical decisions ... all at the speed of . light. Because in this mind-bending, real-time universe, there's a fine line between galactic success and dismal failure. 01 000000ODIO heme 20-93118 HURMA 0000000000 To order Star ReachTM, call 1-800-969-GAME, or see your local retailer. 11 .: COLONIZATION Interplay Productions, Inc. 17922 Fitch Avenue Irvine CA 92714 (714) 553-6678 Actual IBM screen shots \"PATROL HAEA. 0 1993 Interplay Productions, Inc. and Techronics. All rights reserved. Star Reich is a trademark of Interplay Productions, Inc, Circle Reader Service #124 "


"SCLCCT CLASS\" \"\"SCLCCT CACC PIGIITCR Tillcr PALAVIN MAUL KANGLK CLLKIC FJETZ003FURY CLLFAC LCUCU LAWFUL GOOD HIBAN FEASIE STR 10700 10200 WIS CHA HAZAS TOTAL WP meric keypad to turn and face the monsters how to turn and walk through doorways, and corded by an elegant automapping system. that slipped behind my party. this allows you to stand back and fire either the maps (which can be saved and printed) Note that most encounters are predetermissiles or spells at them without risking indicate doors, items, nearby monsters, mined and, once cleared out, a dungeon stays damage. In addition, most monsters will igNPCs, teleporters, illusionary walls (only afthat way. However, nocturnal excursions to nore your party if you ve cast an Invisibility ter they have been discovered) and trapdoors. any location outside of the dungeons will spell. Eventually, I found that the easiest way Unfortunately, the maps do not show butresult in numerous random encounters. to get through most of the dungeons was by tons (frequent features of the dungeons that traveling under an Invisibility spell and recan be difficult to find) or stairwells. The Everyone knows that magic is particularly peatedly firing a magic Dagger of Throwing ability to write on the maps can help you helpful in CRIG combat, but in Ravenlofts (found early in the game) at all monsters in make up for this oversight, since all maps are case, it can work against your party. Choosing 8 my path. accessible at any time, and you can easily spells to cast during combat occurs in real Finally, there is one especially irritating remind yourself of places that remain partime! That makes casting spells a poor option problem with combat: monsters have an octially unexplored. in most circumstances because your fighters casional tendency to materialize or MALESTROM tend to be sitting ducks while your cleric or move on top of your party! You mage is frantically trying to find the right will not be able to see the monster spell! Unfortunately, this is not the only probor hit it unless you move away. lem with the magic system, because the spellTurning around will not help. casting menu obscures your characters Characters have been known to die portraits and, more importantly, the inforignominiously while spinning mation on how many hit points they have left frantically looking for an attacker and how much damage they are taking. This who is, presumably, standing on can lead to unexpected and unnecessary fatheir head! talities. After combat your party can rest Many monsters are hard to hit, deadly and, to heal and to memorize or pray for worse, undead! Most of the undead monsters spells. Resting occurs without incan drain levels, and there are no restoration terruption everywhere but out | FRIE 1989 spells or items in this game. So, saving fredoors. The only requirement for a On your journeys you will encounter many quently is essential (a \"quick save» feature is peaceful night's sleep is that no monsters are people. Conversations are easy to begin; simhelpful here). Since frequent saving and rewithin your range of sight. This is especially ply position the cursor of your mouse over loading can be inconvenient, it is fortunate useful in dungeons where you can quickly slip characters and left click. This starts an anithat monsters often act as if they suffer from around a corner or down a stairwell and catch mated sequence in which the character speaks some sort of curse upon their movement AI. a nap before returning, refreshed and reAs a result, they have trouble figuring out to you and text appears on the screen. charged with spells, to combat. Through conversation, you will learn more about Barovia, the surrounding lands, and Cartography Made Easy your quest, as well as acquire new party members. At times unintentionally amusing and Having mastered the essentials of at other times appropriately evocative, concombat, you can begin exploring versations in Ravenloftare always entertaining the interesting places in the world and one of the best features in the game. of Ravenloft. Forests, caves, catacombs, an eerie cemetery and foreOn Possessions boding buildings, such as the (Yours, Not Strahd's) 04 immense and fearsome Castle Ravenloft, all await your vigilant exAs you travel, you will find many useful ploration. Fortunately, your items. Although characters have a limited lengthy peregrinations through carrying capacity based on their strength an such regions and edifices are reoverly encumbered person will be less effecCLERIC 35001 RA TO NEXT LEVEL AC 2 A Page 76 Computer Gaming World "


"Mutants. Biohazards. Cyberspace. SHODAN. There's no time to rest when your foe doesn't sleep ... SYSTEM SHOCK n System Shock, biological engineering and automation merge in a raging storm completely out of human control. As the game begins, you awaken from a healing coma on the space station Citadel, only to find yourself in the twisted aftermath of a terrible mutiny. Somehow, you've escaped the fate of your companions, who have been mutated beyond recognition to serve SHODAN, the ruthless computer that now controls all station operations. With your neural interface, you can \"jack» into cyberspace, SHODAN's realm, to steal clues to the mystery and stop a plot to enslave Tarti. Actual screens may vary.  Marvel at the first person, 3-D, smooth-scrolling viewpoint as you jump, lean around corners, look up and down, climb ledges, crawl through shafts, and even fly with rocket boots. Experience the most sophisticated physics system in a computer game, complete with variable gravity, recoil effects, explosions, and moveable, destructible objects.  Listen to explosive sound in ORIGIN's new dynamically layered music system, and view realistic illumination effects pools of light, shadows, flickering lights and flashes. FOR A GREAT GAME EXPERIENCE, USE AN INTEL486T DX2 OR PENTIUMTM PROCESSOR-BASED SYSTEM. FOR LITERATURE ON INTEL PROCESSORS, CALL 1-800-756-8766 LEDRICH Copyright 1994 ORIGIN Systems, Inc. System Shock is a trademark of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Origin and We create worlds are registered trademarks of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Electronic Arts is a registered trademark of Electronic Arts, Intel, Intel486 and Pentium are trademarks of Intel Corporation. le create workshs. Available at a software retailer near you, or call 1-800-245-4525 for MC/Visa/Discover orders. An Electronic Arts Company P.O. BOX 161750 AUSTIN, TX 78716 Circle Reader Service #99 "


"EWW. tive in combat), this does not really present a problem. Strong characters can carry an enormous number of weapons and armor without approaching the limit of their carrying capacity. You can place items directly in characters' hands from the adventuring screen, allowing both a rapid determination of whether a particular weapon can be used by a character and the quick perusal of documents. Unfortunately, inventory management can become painful because you can only equip armor and rings from the inventory screen and store, use or drop objects by going back and forth between the adventure and inventory screens. Puzzle solving does not play a prominent role in Ravenlofi. Most puzzles are of the make-sure-you-have-explored-everything variery. That means walking along walls to find secret passages or buttons, exploring all rooms in dungeons and buildings to find important items, reading everything and talking with everyone. By doing this, almost all puzzles will solve themselves. All that will remain is following up on the leads you get from NPCs and from books or manuscripts. There are a few optional subquests in Ravenloft. Completing one or more of these subquests is highly recommended since expesaved games were lost, corrupted, or caused problems with my hard drive. So, be prepared for a few extra headaches when playing this version of Ravenloft and be sure to save frequently using different saved game slots. Encore! Aside from a few technical problems and a somewhat cumbersome interface, Ravenloft is a solid, thoughtfully designed and enjoyable game. While the music varied in effectiveness, the graphics and sound effects (many of which will be rience points are difficult to acquire (at best, recognizable to those who have played you may get a pure mage or thief up to level other SSI games) added greatly to the feeling 12). Fortunately, the outcome of the final of suspense and discovery. The animation battle against Strand depends less on the levsequences are entertaining and the narration els of your party members than it does on is superb. Best of all, Ravenlofi has the one their having completed the appropriate steps thing that makes me want to replay a rolein getting to that point. playing game: because the game is basically fun and not too long (about 40 to 50 hours Reversal Of Fortune on a first pass), once you know how everyThe biggest problems with Ravenloft have thing works and what you will find, you can nothing to do with the game design. Movethink about what the \"best\" starting party will ment speed varies widely, occasionally slowbe to make the most efficient use of the items ing to an aggravating crawl. Also, the CD and NPCs found in the game! In my opinion, version of the game frequently locks up. This this \"what if I started with...\" quality makes occurred most often when exiting the game Ravenloft a valuable contribution to the world and while using the automap. A few times, of computer role playing, cow PREMIUM TEMPLATES FALCON, MIG OR HORNET COMMANDER UTILITIES\" *Finally! Total control of your Falcon 3.0, MiG-29 or Hornet squadrons and campaigns!! ONLY ca 19.95 OR PER SET! + nn 3.0 squadrons + NH + For one low price you get all six: FALCON COMMANDER OR + FALCCALC/MIGCALC/IIORNETCALC: Superb.campaign intelligence gathering MIG COMMANDER UTILITIES tools. Viewable/Printable theater map with detailed info on every site,ground forces & all flight paths! Printable Fuel consumption Waypoint timing, Strategic Tactical reports + F3 TEMPLATE and \"Kneeboard sheet\". Even tells you the conditions for victory or defeat!! ONLY $24.95!! F3/MIG/HORNET REQUISITION: Take full command of Falcon 3.0 squadrons! I Customize squadron names and pilot's roster, including names, callsigns, skill ratings and status. IMPORTANTI FCU is compatible with Falcon 3.0: Operation Fighting Tiger Replenish supplies including F-16's! Sort/print roster by rank or skill, Sierra Hotel list and more! P MCU is compatible with Falcon 3.0 AND MIG-29: D.A.F.\" FALCON MAPPER: The famous Red Flag, Instant Action and HUD customizing HCU is compatible with Falcon 3.0 AND Hornet: N.S.F. . eu utility! Change default theaters for Reci Flag and instant Action. Declutter HUD. Set vel. Auto-generates Red Flag missions in any theater. New graphical Premium TemplatesTM standardized, color-coded layout map shows entire Red Flag theater, flight paths, enemy positions and more! destroys \"Keyboard Confusion\"!! SHOW13: Viewer for screen-shots taken with Falcon's secret screen capture program! View shots individually or in 'slide show. New conversion feature saves screenshots to popular DER B EEN Template .GIF or PCX formats. Includes easy instructions for Falcon's hidden capture commands! KCCMENU: Fantastic menu-shell that brings it all together! Use ready to go menus Keyboard Commander Templates reduce confusion or customize to your preference. Add new menu items or create sub-menus to add other and increase one's gaming pleasure. -CGW sims, games, TSRs or bat files. Completely unloads from memory while running selection!! INOCENTE BOTTI Falcon 3.0/3.01/MIG-29 Aces of the Pacific KCC'S COMBAT MISSIONS: All new gut-wrenching, action-packed Red Flag Strike Commander Secret Weapons Luftwalle missions. Includes all type missions in different theaters. See if you've got what it takes to Privateer MS Flight Simulator 4.0 & 5.0 Tornado A.T.P. fly these volunteers only thrillers! Strike Eagle III Jotlighter 1 & 11 X-Wing B-17 Flying Fortress To Order Call Computer Express: DIICOVER VISA Gunship 20001&1 CY Air Combat F117A Stealth CHECK SIX 1-800-228-7449, Ext. 522 8:30 6:30 EST Mon-Sat  All other inquiries to: Keyboard Commander Corp. 4839 SW 148 Ave., 402, Davie, FL 33330 800-262-6066 * High-Quality, 3-D Graphics * Color-coded Layout * Laminated Stock * Fake M o derne Templemus of the Commop lakini tude mostramte MG Avery of Home: No Streicher an awesom e * Fits all AT101 Keyboards Standardized Format * Affixes to Keyboard * 1-$12.95, Any 2$21.50 Any 3$30.00, Any 4 or more $9.25 each!! + z aces of the Pacisticniwalte Circle Reader Service #80 Page 78 Computer Gaming World "


"The Invasion has begun Technology licensed from ID Software, creators of WOLFENSTEIN\" 3D 100 SBD CORRIDOR Alien Invasion At a software dealer near you or call (305) 591-5900  (800) 468-7226  BBS (305) 471-8962 (2400-14.4 Baud Rates) Wolfenstein is a trademark of id Software. All Rights Reserved. Corridor 7: Alien Invasion and Copstone are trademarks of IntraCorp Inc. All other trademarks acknowledged. Circle Reader Service #51 Capstone "


"CHIPS&BITS har sous Fare Call 800-699-4263 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'l 802-767-3033 Source 10058 PO Box 234 Dept 10058 Rochester, VT 05767 IBM HARDWARE IBM HARDWARE IIIIIIIIILU Thrustmaster Game Crd $27 Thrustmstr Rudder Sys $99 Thrustmaster WCS 2 S94 Thrustmt UProm WCS2 $19 Video Blaster $349 Virtual Pilot 361 Voice Blaster S48 Voiceblaster Bundle UNDER A KILLING MOON' Transports you to the virtual world of the feisty detective Tex Murphy, New feature allows you to save and splice scenes together Digitized voices & sound effects and an amazing level of detail & freedom of movement make this game visually & aurally stunning. CD S55 UNDER IBM ADVENTURE 'THRUSTMASTER'S FORMULA T1' is the most realistic control for all of today's driving simulators. Features fully functional steering wheel, brake and gas pedals and turbo boost gauge used in supporting games. $129 510LT ITUN 59 \"DISCIPLES OF STEEL' The Ultimate in classical lantasy role-playing. Help save a richly detailed land from self-destruction. Unite the people of this ancient land and together you can defeat the evil horde that is gathering... growing... waiting... Features animated and detailed VGA graphics. $35 \"POLICE QUEST 4: OPEN SEASON' You're a detective for LAPD. A tough job under any condition, but especially now you must solve a string of random murders. Features digitized background and video captured actors. CD 542 Acoustic Rsearch P 22 $66 Acoustic Rsearch P 42 $159 Acoustic Rsearch P5709319 Acoustic Rsearch P622$239 AdLib Sound Card $34 Advancd Gravis UltrsndS129 Altec ACS 100 Speakrs $69 Altec ACS 150 Subwfer $109 Altec ACS 200 Speakrs $209 Altec ACS 3 Spkr Sys $169 Altec ACS 300 wSubwf $299 Altec ACS 50 Speakers $79 CH Weapons System S44 Cyberman $69 Fighter Stick $79 Flight Control Stand $18 Flight Stick $36 Flight Stick Pro Game Card 3 Automatic $28 Gravis Analog Joystick $29 Gravis Anolog Pro Jystk $34 Gravis PC Game Pad $19 Jet Stick $29 Labtec CS-1000 Spkrs $75 Labtec CS-1200 Spkers 584 Labtec CS-1400 Spkers $89 Labtec CS-150 Spkers $17 Labtec CS-550 Spkers $24 Labtec CS-700 Spkers $32 Labtec CS-800 Spkers $30 Labtec CS-900 Spkers $63 Mach 3 Joystick $27 Maxx Cobra Flightstick $59 Maxx Control Yoke S54 Maxx Ruddr Pedals FLT S38 Media Cncpt Solstr Clon $39 NEC3XE MSp Ext CD $599 NEC 3X1 MSpn Int CD $499 Notebook Gameport S42 PC Symphny Adlib Cmp $37 Pilot Control Stand S19 Pro Audio Spectrum 16 S139 Pro Audio Spect 16 Bas$109 Pro Audio Spect Plus $89 Pro Audio Studio 16 $169 Reel Magic CD Upgrd $599 Reel Magic Vid Upgrd $385 Rudder Pedals Driving $39 Sony MDR E414 Hdphns S9 Sony SRS7 Speakers $9 Sony SRS9 Speakers $14 Sound Blaster 16 ASP $214 Sound Blastr 16 Basic S129 Sound Blaster 16 MCD S179 Sound Blaster Dix $79 SBlastr Discovry CD 165315 SBlastr Omni CD Dry $239 SBlastr Powerd Spkers $25 Sound Blaster Pro Dlxe $89 SBlastr Vid Spigot WIN $229 SBlaster Voice Assist $42 Sound Galaxy BX2 $59 Sound Galaxy NX2 $79 Sound Galaxy NXPRO $109 SGIxy NXPRO16 MMD S449 SGalaxy NXPRO 16 S139 SGalxy NXPRO MM Kit $349 Sound Machine $94 Sound Machine Pro 16 $139 Sound Man Wave $195 Sound Star Snd Enhner $9 SoundMan 16 9 99 Thrustmstr Driving Sys $129 Thrustmastr FCS Pro 999 Thrustmt FCSPro UProm$19 Thrustmaster Flight Sys $59 IBM ADVENTURE IBM ADVENTURE IBM ADVENTURE IBM ADVENTURE 007 James Bnd Stih Aft $12 7th Guest CD $48 7th Guest 2:11th Hr CD $54 Advent Will Beam VGA S24 Advent Will Beamish CD $24 Alien Legacy S42 Alone in the Dark $33 Alone in the Dark CD $48 Alone in the Dark 2 S34 Alone in the Dark 2 CD 548 Alone in the Dark 3 CD 548 Altered Destiny $29 Amazon Animation Classics S39 Awful Thngs frm Outrspc S36 B.A.T. Beneath a Steel Sky CD 539 Beverly Hillbillies S19 Bioforge $48 Bioforge CD $52 Blake Stone $42 Blake Stone Episode 1 $9 Bloodnet $39 Bloodnet CD $43 Blue Force: Next of Kin S42 Blue Force: Next Kin CD S39 Blues Brothers $25 Buccaneers CD S48 Castle Wolfenstein CD 542 Castle Wolfstn-Spr Dest S29 Chaos Continuum CD 544 City 2000 CD Companions of Xanth $32 Compans of Xanth CD $36 Conan CD $26 Conqust Robin Hd VGA $24 Conquests of Camelot S15 Conspiracy CD Corridor 7 S36 Covert Action S6 Crime Does Not Pay S12 Critical Path WIN CD S48 Cruise for a Corpse $19 Curse of Enchantia CD 523 Daemonsgate $32 Daemonsgate CD $32 Dark Half $9 Dark Seed Dark Seed CD $39 Darkseed 2 $42 Day of the Tentacle $35 Day of the Tentacle CD $42 Death Gate CD $35 Deja Vu 1&2 WIN $34 Don't Go Alone Doodle-Mation Windows $29 Doom $45 Doom CD $48 Doom Episode 1 $12 Dracula $34 Dracula CD $35 Dracula Unleashed CD $47 Dragon Knight 3 $46 Dragon Knight 3 CD $46 $24 S41 $36 $32 $9 Dragon's Lair 2 Tm Wrp $34 Dragonsphere CD $48 Dreamweb $36 Dune CD $49 Earth Invasion WIN Earthrise $9 El Grito DJagur CD WIN $46 EIN $24 Epic $32 Eric the Unready S21 Eric The Unready CD $36 Escape Dead Zone CD $48 Evolution $39 Evolution CD $39 F15 Strike Eagle $7 Fascination CD $39 Flashback $32 Fourplay WIN $19 Fred Phrks Front Phrm $24 Fred P. Front Pharmct 2544 Fred P. Frtr Phrmct 2 CD 544 Free DC $9 Freelancer 2120 S42 Freelancer 2120 CD $42 G-Nome $42 G-force $19 Gabriel Knight $39 Gabriel Knight CD $45 Gamma Force $6 Gateway $13 Gateway 2:Homeworld $32 Gateway 2 CD Gateway Collct 182 CD S36 Gobliiins CD $19 Gobliiins 2 CD $19 Goblins 3 CD $19 Guy Spy CD $29 Hand of Fate $29 Harvester CD $52 Heart of China EGA $34 Heart of China VGA $19 Heaven and Earth $32 Heimdall $17 Hell Cab CD $52 Hired Guns Hook Horde $42 Horde CD $49 In Extremus $42 Inca or CD $19 Inca 2 or CD $19 Indy Jones 4 Ft Atlantis $36 Indy Jones Ft Atintis CD $42 Inherit the Earth $45 Innocent Until Caught $34 Inspector Gadget $34 Iron Helix CD S56 Isle of the Dead Jack the Ripper $39 Jagged Alliance $48 Journeyman Project CD 548 Journeyman Prict 2 CD $52 Jurassic Park $39 KGB $17 King's Quest 5 VGA $32 King's Quest 5 WIN CD $41 King's Quest 6 CD $39 King's Quest 6 Upgd CD $24 King's Quest 6 VGA $45 King's Ransom $36 King's Ransom CD $38 Kronolog : Nazi Paradox $36 L.A. Law S9 Labyrinth of Time CD $48 Lands of Lore 2 $42 Lands of Lore 2 CD $46 Laura Bow 2 or CD S24 Leather Goddesses S24 Leather Goddesses 2 $39 Legend of Kyrandia $32 Legend of Kyrandia CD $32 Leisure Suit Larry 1 EGAS16 Leisure Suit Larry 1 VGAS19 Leisure Suit Larry 5 VGAS24 Leisure Suit Larry 6 S42 Leisure Suit Larry 6 CD $39 Leisure Suit Larry 7 CD $44 Loom $19 Loom CD $39 Lost Eden Lost Eden CD $48 Lost Files Sherick Hims $26 Lost Treasures of Intocm$39 Lost in Time $19 Lost in Time CD $19 Magic Death CD S26 Magic Pockets $18 Man Enough CD $42 Manhole $27 Maniac Mansion $18 Mario is Missing CD $44 Martian Memorandum S24 Microcosm CD $49 Mixd Up Faery Tale EGA $14 Mixd Up Faery Tale VGA $29 Mixd-Up Mother Goose $29 Morph Man CD $29 Myst CD $48 No Mth &I Must Screm S44 No Mth&I Must Scrm CD 544 Noctropolis $48 Noctropolis CD $52 Nomad $39 Out of this World $36 Out of this World 2 CD $45 Peppe's Adv in Tm VGA $29 Phantasmagoria CD $59 Police Quest 1 VGA Police Quest 3 VGA S24 Police Qust 4 DOS/WIN $39 Police Quest 4 CD $39 Police Quest 5 CD $48 Power Hits: Kids Prince of Persia $25 Prince of Persia 2 $42 Quantum Gate WIN CD $45 Quest for Glory 1 $18 Qust for Glry 1 VGA CD $39 Quest for Glory 3 $24 Quest for Glory 4 $39 Quest for Glory 4 CD $39 Quest for Glory 5 CD $44 Return To Zork CD $48 Return of Phantom $34 Return of Phantom CD $38 Return to Zork $42 Riftwart Riftwar Legacy VGA $39 Ringworld S35 Ringworld CD S38 Robinson's Requiem S42 Robinson's Requiem CD 542 Robocop 3 $32 SDI $6 Sam & Max Hit Road $34 $36 S36 S6 S29 "


"Visa/MC Accepted. Checks Held 4 Weeks. Money Orders same as cash. COD 58. Defec lives replaced will same product Most items shipped same day. Shipping times may vary. Price availability may change. All sales final OVERNIGHT SHIPPING in US $4 per order. Mail to Canada, PR. HI, AK, APO, FPO S4 per order 4-8 day Worldwide shipping $6 per Item. Handling $2 per shipment. we replaced win carne product was dama chaped same day. Shipping inces may FREE G AM E O FFER *See Last Page For Details IBM ARCADE IBM BUNDLES *THE GRANDEST FLEET' Experience the grueling campaigns, the agony of defeal & the exhilaration of victory! Allocate natural resources to build missile sites, radar stations, shipbuilding facilities and superships. It is up to you to destroy your nemesis. Modem play and random maps. S36 Vaxine S12 Who Shot John Rock CDS36 Wild Streets S24 Wild Wheels S12 Winball WIN S28 Wrath of the Demon $12 Xiphos $9 Zool $34 INTEON HD (IOS IBM BUNDLES 'SYSTEM SHOCK' You receive a neural implant that allows you to enter cyberspace. Upon awakening, you discover that a super-intelligent computer has seized control of the station and is planning to release a deadly virus. $48 SUVENICE www. me a \"HAND OF FATE is the second title in the Fables and Fiends series. Follow an offbeat young mystic Zanthia, who must voyage to the center of the world to undo a hideous curse. Contains hours of fun for all Legend of Kryandia fans. Features unforgettable characters. $34 Perfect General Greatest Battles of 20th C WW2 Battles Power Hits: Battletech $32 Battletech 1. Battletech 2. Mech Warrior Power Hits: Movies $17 Rocketeer, Hare Raising Havoc, Die Hard, Ghostbusters Power Hits: Sci Fi $19 Prophecy. Tongue of Fatman, Circuit's Edge, Mines of Titan, Death Track Power Hits: Sports $19 Face Off, Pro Tennis Tour, MotoCross, Powerdrift Secret Weap Luftwff CD $39 DO 335 Pleil P-80 Shooting Star P-38 Lighting HE 162 Volksjager Space Quest Bndle 1-4 $42 Spellcasting Bundle $34 Spellcasting 101,201, 301 Spellcasting Bundle CD $32 Task Fre 1942 WRSR CD $35 The Victory Pack $34 Turning Point $29 Gettysburg, Spanish Armada, Waterloo Ultima Bundle 1-6 CD $59 Ultima Trilogy Ultima 1-3 Ultima Trilogy 2 $48 Ulrima 4-6 Wing Commander 1 Dix S48 Wing Commander Secret Missions 1 & 2 Wing Commndr 1 Dlx CD$29 Wizardry Trilogy Wizardry 1-3 Wizardry Trilogy 2 Wizardry 4-6 Dongfen augyker 'THE MERCHANT PRINCE' Explore the world! Can you seek & explore the old world and find new worlds with their own prospering ports of call? Find advantageous trade routes. Historical & random maps. Up to 4 players. Modem play. $39 $39 IBM ADVENTURE IBM ADVENTURE IBM ARCADE IBM ARCADE S32 $9 $33 Air Combat Classics $39 Their Finest Hour Battle Hawks Secret Weap of Luftwaff Allied Forces M1 Tank Platoon, Gunship Award Bundle $44 Kings Quest 5, Red Baron, Rise of the Dragon Combat Classics $19 F15 Strike Eagle 688 Attack Sub Team Yankee Dynamix Bundle 1 $24 A-10 Tank Killer 1.5 Heart of China Stellar 7 Eye of Beholder Collctn $52 Eye of Beholdr Trilgy CD $51 Falcon 3 wThrstmst FCS $99 Gateway Collectn 1 & 2 $36 Land Sea Air 2 $19 Command HQ Red Storm Rising F15 Strike Eagle Lost Treasurs Infocom 539 Infidel, Lurking Horror, Deadline, Witness, Suspect, Ballyhoo, Hitch Hiker's Guide/Galaxy. Suspended, StarCross, MoonMist, PlanetFall. StationFall, Enchanter, Sorcerer, SpellBreaker, Zork 1-3, Beyond Zork, Zork Zero Lost Treasurs Infocm CD$39 Lost Treasurs Infocom 2 $29 Border Zone, Plundered Hearts, Bureaucracy. Cutthroats, A Mind For Voyaging, Hollywood Hi Jinx, Seastalker, Sherlock Holmes: Riddle of Crown Jewels, Wishbringer, Nord and Bert. Trinity Lost Treasrs Infcm 2 CD $29 Lucas Classic Advent $36 Indiana Jones, Secret Monkey Island 1. Maniac Mansion Magnetic Scrolls Bundle $16 Fish, Corruption, Guild of Thieves Marvel Trilogy $12 Max Pac $16 Star Control, Hoverforce, Test Drive 3 Maximum Overkill wDisk S45 Megafortress Mega-Pak $38 Megafortress Megafortress Mis Disk 1 Megafortress 3-D Editor Perfect General Trilogy $36 $39 $9 IBM HINT BOOKS S6 $6 $9 $24 $3 512 $19 $32 $42 Sam & Max Hit Road CD $42 The Dig $40 Screen Antics WIN $19 The Prophecy $19 Secret Monkey Isl VGA $25 The Trial $44 Secret Monkey Isl CD $39 Thief of Dreams $42 Secret Monkey Island 2 $21Time Quest $12 Secret of 7th Labyrinth $42 Touche Shadow Caster $34 Treasure Huntrs, Inc CD $48 Shadow of Comet CD $48 Tuneland CD $36 Simon the Sorcerer $32 Ultimate Domain $39 Space Quest 1 VGA $16 Ultimate Domain CD $44 Space Quest 4 VGA $28 Under a Killing Moon CD $55 Space Quest 4 CD Uninvited $6 Space Quest 5 VGA $36 Voyeur CD $48 Spawn $44 Walker $32 Spellcasting 101 Warriors of Legend $18 Spirit of Excalibur CD $22 Where Space Crmn Dix $44 Star Base Where in Time Carmen $32 Star Reach $36 Where in USA Crmn Dix $45 Star Trek 25 Anniversry $32 Where in USA Carmen $29 Star Trek 25 Annivrs CD $54 Where in World Carmen $29 Star Trek: Judgmnt Rites $33 Where in Wrld Crmn Dlx $44 Star Trk: Str Fleet Acad $36 Where in World Dix CD $54 Star Trk: Str Fit Acad CD $52 Who Killd Sam Ruprt CD $21 Starship $29 Wing Comm Uitm 6 CD $24 Stellar 7 $21 Wing Commdr U UW CD $55 Stellar 7 CD $24 Wrath of the Gods CD $39 Superheros of Hoboken S38 Yserbius $26 Suprhroes of Hobokn CDS38 Zombie Dino CD $48 System Shock $48 Zorro $39 System Shock CD $52 Teenage Mut Ninja Turtl S12 Terminator 2029 $29 IBM ARCADE Terminator 2029 Op Scr $19 Terminator Rampage $42 500 CC Race Bike S29 Terminator Rampage CD 545 Alien Breed $19 Terror of the Deep or CD $36 Aliens Ate My Babysitter $27 Amazing Spiderman S12 Mortal Kombat $36 Aracnaphobia wSnd Src S12 Ms Pacman $6 Artura S4 Never Mind Back to the Future 3 Ninja Gaiden 2 $12 Crazy Cars $25 Ninja Rabbits Creepers S34 Obliterator Dr Doom's Revenge Pac Man Dragon's Lair $34 Paper Boy 2 $19 Dragon's Lair CD $39 Pick'n Pile Dragon's Lair 3 $34 Pinball Fantasies $35 EMotion Power Drome Eight Ball Deluxe $38 Predator 2 Fast Action Paq Prehistorik $29 Finale Punisher Fire & Forget S24 Raiden Galactic Conqueror S31 Rebel Assault CD $44 Geekwd Gms of Galxay $19 Rise of the Robots $45 Geekwd Gms Galxy CD $21 Rotox $9 Gobliiins 3 $19 S.C. Out $12 Gobliiins VGA $16 Savage $6 Gold of the Aztecs $12 Silverball $29 Guy Spy $24 Space Ace $32 Highway Patrol 2 $29 Space Ace 2 Incredible Machine 2 $28 Street Ball $9 Incredible Machn 2 WIN $29 Street Fighter 2 S34 Incredible Toons $29 Super Cauldron $25 Innocent $38 T2:Arcade Game $29 Internatnl Ninja Rabbits $12 Take-A-Brk Pinball WIN $19 Jurassic Park CD $44 Taking of Beverly Hills $6 Kye Deluxe WIN S33 Teenage MNT Man Miss S12 Mad Dog Mcree CD S35 Teenage Mut Ninja Turtl $12 Mad Dog Macree 2 CD $39 Tetris Gold CD $32 Metal & Lace The Tinies Metal & Lace Upgrade $5 Titan $29 Microsoft Arcade WIN $29 Titus Fox $25 Mirage Thunder $39 Tristan Pinball $19 Circle Reader Service #54 $34 A-Train $16 Advent Willie Beamish $10 Alone in the Dark Altered Destiny Bard's Tale 1 Bard's Tale 2 Bard's Tale 3 Bargon Attack Blue Force: Next of Kin $10 Castle Wolfenstein 3D $10 Castle of Dr Brain $10 Champions of Krynn $10 Civilization S16 Codename Iceman S10 Colonel's Bequest $10 Comptr Adv Game Scrts S16 Conquests Robin Hood $10 Conquests of Camelot $10 Curse of Azure Bonds $10 Dark Queen of Krynn $10 Darklands $14 Death Knights of Krynn $10 Doom $10 Dracula Unleashd strat $16 Dragons of Flame Dungeon Master $10 Dynamix Grt War Planes $16 $8 "


"CHIPS&BITS non Fax 1088 Call 800-699-4263 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'l 802-767-3033 Source 10058 PO Box 234 Dept 10058 Rochester, VT 05767 IBM HINT BOOKS IBM HINT BOOKS FLIGHT SIN TU 'FLIGHT SIM TOOLKIT gives you the power to design every aspect of your sim world down to the finest detail from cockpit instrumentation and aircraft aerodynamics to trees, trucks, mountains and skyscrapers. Features hundreds of clip-art planes and terrain and sophisticated 3D editors. $58 DMARK of te CRESTERN PLAN ORTITNA ANTILERIES $10 $10 INDYCAR RACING $10 INDYCAR RACING' Experience the thrill of racing the world's fastest race cars against the world's best drivers. No other simulation gives you IndyCar driving this real. Coax your car through an outside pass, drop through the cork. screw at Laguna Seca or slide through the groove at 220 mph. $37   Ne sot PAPYRUS The laten EcoQuest Srch for Cetus$10 Elvira 2 Jaws Cerberus $10 Elvira Mistress Dark $10 Eye of the Beholder $10 Eye of the Beholder 2 $12 Eye of the Beholder 3 $12 Fascination $10 Fred Pharkas Fron Pharm $8 GEN Secrets of Game $10 Gabriel Knight $10 Gateway Savge Frontier $10 Global Conquest Bk wdk S21 Gobliiins $10 Gold Rush $6 Gunship 2000 $16 Hand of Fate Harpoon $16 Harpoon 2 Strategy Gde $16 Heart of China Hillsfar $8 Immortal $10 Indi Jones Fate Atlantis $10 Indy Jones Grix Adv $10 Inherit the Earth $16 Island Of Dr Brain Jetfighter 2.0 $16 King's Quest 1 $10 King's Quest 2 $10 King's Quest 3 $10 King's Quest 4 $10 King's Quest 5 $10 King's Quest 6 $10 Laura Bow 2 HintBook $10 Leisure Suit Larry 1 $10 Leisure Suit Larry 2 $10 Leisure Suit Larry 3 $10 Leisure Suit Larry 5 $9 Leisure Suit Larry 6 $10 Lemmings w/disk $18 Loom $10 Lord of the Rings V1 $10 Lost Files Sherick Hims $10 LucasArts Adventure Bk $16 LcsArts Air Combat Sirt $16 Magic Candle 2 $10 Magic Candle 3 $10 Manhunter New York $10 Manhuntr San Francsco $10 Martian Dreams S13 Master of Orion Off Strat $16 Matrix Cubed Might & Magic 1 & 2 $10 Might & Magic 3 $16 Might & Magic 4 $16 Might & Magic 5 S 16 Might & Magic Cmpndm $16 Off Bk Leisr St Larry 2nd $14 Off Bk of Ultima 2nd Ed $16 Off Gd R. Wilco's Adv $14 Off Gd Kngs Qus! 3rd ed$16 Off book of Police Quest $12 Pacific Strike Playtestrs $12 Patriot $16 Pepper's Adventure Time $8 Planet's Edge $16 Police Quest 1 $10 Police Quest 2 $10 Police Quest 3 $10 Pool of Radiance $10 Pools of Darkness $12 Populous 182 Offi Strat $16 Power Monger Strategy $16 Powermonger $10 Privateer Playtestr's Gd $16 Protostar $8 Quest For Clues 2 $21 Quest For Clues 3 $21 Quest for Clues 4 $21 Quest for Clues 5 $16 Quest for Clues 6 $16 Quest for Glory 3 $10 Quest for Glory 4 $10 Quest for Glory Strategy $19 Questbusters: Bk Clues $18 Railroad Tycoon $12 Realms of Arkania $14 Return to Zork $9 Return to Zork Adv Gde S16 \"BIOFORGE' After breaking free of your security cell, you Rex Nebular Cs Gn Ben $14 enter the ruins of an ancient civilization. There is a hostile Rise of the Dragon $10 alien on the prowl & an emergency situation to get under Rise of Dragn SEGA CD $9 control. 3-D synthetic actors & rendered backgrounds, $48 Sam and Max $10 Sea Wolf Strategy Gde $16 Secret Monkey Island $10 Secret Monkey Island 2 $10 METAL & LACE Secret Silver Blades S10 The gorgeous Robo Sentinel Worlds 1 S10 Babes are expectShadow Caster S18 ing you and you'll Shadow Sorcerer S10 get a welcome you Simcity 2000 Strat Gde $16 won't soon forget. Simcity/Simearth Book $20 Strapped in Robo Simearth $16 armor & loaded with Simfarm Strategy Guide $16 special weapons, Simlife Official Strategy $16 the talking Robo Simon the Sorcerer Hint $10 Babes will have you Sonic Strategy Guide $16 THE BATTLE OF THE ROBO BABES gripping your joySpace Quest 1 HintBk $10 stick & wiggling the Space Quest 2 $10 gimbal all night Space Quest 3 $10 long! Contains vioSpace Quest 4 $10 lent fighting scenes Spellcasting 101: Off Bk S14 & sexy graphics. $29 Spellcasting 201 BK $10 Star Trek 25th Aniv $9 Star Trek Judgmnt Rites $10 IBM EDUCATIONAL IBM EDUCATIONAL Starflight 1 $10 Starflight 2 $10 Strike Commd Off Book S14 Children's Writg&Publish S42 Qurky Quays's Sci VGA S29 Stunt Island $16 Clock Works $19 Reader Rabbit 2 WIN $29 Summoning $16 Dinopark Tycoon $34 Rodney's Funscreen $32 Tales Magic:Prophc Shd $12 Dinosaurs CD $48 Scooter's Magic Castle $32 Time Quest $10 Don Quixote CD $24 Sctr's Magic Castle CD $34 Treasures Savag Frontr $10 Dyno-Quest $29 Secret Isind Dr. Quandry $29 Tunnels & Trolls $16 EcoQust Srch Cetus CD S29 Slater & Charlie CD $42 TurbGrafx 16 Secrts V2 $10 EcoQuest VGA $32 Slater&Charlie Go Camp $29 Ultima 4 $10 Fatty Bear's Bday Surpr $32 Snoopy's Fun Pack $9 Ultima 5 $10 Fatty Brs Bday Srpr CD $38 Softwr Toolwrks Refr CD $79 Ultima 6 $10 Fatty Bear's Funpck CD $34 Stckybear Parts of Spch $32 Ultima 7 $12 Fatty Br's Wild Gms CD $44 Stickybear Reading $24 Ultima 7 & Uworld Book S16 Island Of Dr. Brain VGA S29 Stickybear Spellgrabber $29 Ultima 7.5 Balncg Scals $16 Island of Dr Quandry S26 SS: Gizmos & Gadgets $26 Ultima Avatar Advt Book $16 Jack and Beanstalk CD $34 Wacky Funster $9 Ultima U Stygian Abyss S12 Jungle Book WIN CD S19 U Uwrld Wrld of Lab Bk $12 Last Chance to See CD $38 V Victory IBM ROLE PLAYING Mario Teaches Typing $16 $26 Wizardry 6 Cosmc Forg $12 Mario Teaches Typg CD $48 Wizardry 7 $16 M. Beacon Teachs Typg $29 All Character Editors $16 X-Wing Official Strat Gd $16 M. Bcn Teach Typg WIN $34 ADD Collectors Edition 3 $19 Yeager Air Combat Hdbk $16 M ega Math Access Super Bundle $34 Yserbius $12 MS Gallery: London CD $45 Al-Qadim:Genie's Curse $45 MS Dinosaurs CD $42 Al-Qadim CD $49 Mmedia: Vivaldi WIN CD $24 Amberstar $19 IBM EDUCATIONAL Orbts: Voyage Solar Sys $29 Arborea Journy Inr Snct $34 Oregon Trail WIN $34 Arena: Elder Scrolls $44 Aesop's Mmd Fables CD S30 Oregon Trail WIND CD $39 Bard's Tale Construction $29 Ancient Empire S25 Print Shop Deluxe $49 Black Crypt $32 Annabi's Ancnt EgyptCD S52 Print Shop Dix Bus Grph S29 Blackmoore CD $46 A uto Insight $36 Putt Putt Goes to Moon $42 Bloodstone $27 Aulo Map $39 Putt Putt Gs to Moon CD944 Captain Blood S9 AutoWorks $49 Putt Putt Joins Parade $32 Celtic Legends S32 Body Insight $36 Putt Putt Ins Parade CD $48 Challenge of 5 Realms $39 Boom Box $12 Putt Putts Funpack $19 Champions $37 Castle of Dr Brain VGA $19 Putt Putt's Funpack CD $34 Champions of Krynn $12 IBM ROLE PLAYING IBM ROLE PLAYING $10 $12 $9 Cobra Mission $34 Corporation $9 Curse of Azure Bonds $15 Cyber Empire $16 Cyber Space $39 Cyber Space CD $38 Dark Sun $47 Dark Sun Grey Isl Ex Pk $34 Dark Sun CD $49 Darklands $29 Darklands Mstr Ed wbk S51 Daughter of Serpents $19 Death Knights of Krynn $21 Demon Hunter $42 Disciples of Steel $35 Dragon Strike Dragon Tales CD $38 Dragons of Flame Dungeon Hack $38 Dungeon Hack CD $34 Dungeon Master $29 Dungeon Master 2 $36 Dusk of the Gods S12 Elvira 2 Jaws Cerberus $19 Eternam $19 Eye of the Beholder 1 S14 Eye of the Beholder 2 $19 Eye of the Beholder 3 $42 Eye of Beholder 3 CD $48 Fire King $24 Flames of Freedm MWII $24 Forgotten Castle $49 Forgotten Castle CD $55 Four Crystals of Trazere $16 Gateway Savage Frontr $32 Gods $16 Hero's of Mt & Magc CD $45 Heroes of Might & Magic S45 Hunters of Ralk CD $54 Interactive Movie 1 $52 Intrplay's 10 Yr Anth CD $48 Joan of Arc $12 Jorune $45 Jorune CD Lands of Lore Lands of Lore CD S41 Legacy: Realm of Terror S39 Legend S22 Lord of the Rings CD $45 Lord of the Rings V1 $32 Lord of the Rings V2 $37 Lord of the Rings V 1&2 $35 Lords of Midnight $48 Lords of Midnight CD $55 Loremaster $29 Lure of the Temptress $16 Magic Candle 2 $9 Magic Candle 3 $9 Masters of Magic $46 Masters of Magic CD $48 Matrix Cubed Mega Traveller.Zhodani S6 MegaTraveller 2 S12 Megatraveller $18 Might & Magic 3 Might & Magic 4 Might & Magic 5 Mines of Titan Pirates Gold Planet's Edge Pool of Radiance $15 Pools of Darkness S9 $38 "


"Visa/MC Accepted. Checks Held 4 Weeks. Money Orders same as cash. COD 58. Defectives replaced with same product. Most items shipped same day. Shipping times may vary. Price/availability may change. All sales final OVERNIGHT SHIPPING in US $4 per order Mail to Canada, PR, HEAK APO, FPO 54 per order 4-8 day Worldwide shipping SG per item. Handling $2 per shipment para poner care product at arranged same day showing times may FREE GAME OFFER \"See Last Page For Detalls IBM SIMULATIONS IBM SIMULATIONS VIRTUAL VIXENS US VIRTUAL VIXENS' BY PIXIS Save your friend from Crystal, who has imprisoned him in a VR Pleasure World, for his failure to please her. You must satisfy three women before you can reach Crystal and solve the mystery of her strange, erotic existence. A VR science fiction adventure with 3D animation. CD S52 TGB $26 \"WARLORDS 2 brings the fun and excitement of the first Warlords with 640 x 480 graphics, a hidden map option, and totally new Al system. Features random mapping for infinite replayability, troop transports for amphibious warfare, & a diplomacy option that provides the framework for backstabbing. S38 9 MM2 $42 $39 IBM ROLE PLAYING IBM ROLE PLAYING Frontier Elite 2 S38 Grand Canyon Scenery $18 Great Nav Bat Ships All $19 Great Naval Battles CD $55 Great Nav Batt Scn Bld $24 Great Naval Battles 2 $45 Great Naval Battis 2 CD $42 Gunship 2000 Scen Dsk $24 Gunship 2000 VGA $34 H.A.W.C. $32 Harrier Assault $32 'ORIGAMO' Advance through the maze by successfully Harrier Assault SVGA $47 completing each puzzle. Place blocks and shapes on the Harrier Assit SVGA CD $44 puzzle as a conveyor belt moves along or your blocks Heatwave $6 will stack up and time will run out. $39 Heroes of the 357th $18 Hyperspeed $16 Indy Car Racing $37 Inferno $39 \"WARLORDS 2 Inferno CD $39 SCEN EDITOR Iron Angel S39 Contains routines Iron Angel CD S39 which automatically Japan Scenery Disk $12 smooth the transi Jet Fighter 2.0 $39 tions between ter Jet Pack CD $44 rain types. Offers Jetfighter 3 $44 complete control of Jump Jet $39 scenario creation Jump Jet Aces Pack $46 and 24 new sce Jutland CD $44 narios. Create new Killing Cloud $6 maps, edit existing Lawn Mower Man CD maps, set city rev Life and Death $19 enues and descrip Life and Death 2 $24 cenario Ruilder tions, build roads. Lightspeed $9 and place ruins and Lunar Command S24 temples. $29 M1 Tank Platoon 2 $44 M1 Tank Platoon Classic $19 M4: Sherman Tank Sim $34 Mantis Exp Speech Pak $19 IBM SIMULATIONS IBM SIMULATIONS Mantis Experim Ftr VGA $28 Maximum Ovrkill Bdl CD $59 Aces of the Deep S42 European Racers CD $29 Maximum Overkill MD 2 S32 Aces of the Pacific S44 Evolver $38 Mech Wars S48 Across the Rhine S48 Eye of the Storm Fit Sim $29 Mech Wars CD S48 Across Rhine Exp Set 1 S26 F117A Stih Fighter VGA $29 Mechwarrior 2 S46 Across Rhine Exp Set 2 $26 F15 Strike Eagle 2 $15 Mechwarrior 2 Add-on S19 Air Combat Pacific 1942 S48 F15 Strike Eagle 111 $34 MechWarrior 2 CD S46 Air Duel $33 F15 Sirk Eagle 3 Acs Pk $52 MegaFortress Air War Ovr Eurpe: 1943 $48 F15 Strike Eagle 3 CD $48 Megarace $36 Air Warrior SVGA $34 F19 Stealth Fighter $18 Metal Tech: Battledrome $29 AirportFacilities Dir $12 F40 Pursuit Simulator $29 MiG 29 (Stand Alone) S44 Armored Fist $44 FA 18 Hornet $54 MiG 29 Gold CD S52 Armour Geddon $32 FA 18 Hornet CD $54 MiGN29 Fulcrum $32 Army Air Corps: 1942 $48 Falcon 3.0 $46 MS Flight Sim 4 Japan $19 Art of the Kill $24 Falcon 3 Sct Fightg Tgr $24 MS Flight Sim 5.0 546 Assignment Miami $19 Falcon 3 Sc2 MiG 29 $32 MS Flight Sim 5 LsVegs $29 B17 Flying Fort Classic S19 Falcon 3 Sc3 FA18 Hrnt $32 MS Flight Sim 5 Nw Yrk S29 B17 Fly Fort WSS2 CD $37 Falcon 4.0 $59 MS Flight Sim 5 Paris $29 Backroad Racers CD S29 Falcon AT MS Flight Sim 5 SnFran $29 Battle Command Falcon Gold CD $49MS Flight Sim 5 Portind $32 Battle of Britain $34 Fast attack CD MS Flight Sim 5 DC $29 Battlecruiser 3000 $45 Fire & Forget 2 $29 MS Flight Sim Fit Shop $32 Blue Max Aces Great War $9 Fleet Deindr F14 Tomcat S48 MS Space Simulator 1.0 $44 Cardinal of the Kremlin $6 Flight $52 Mule 2 $44 Chopper Pack CD $40 Flight Adventures 825 $39 New Facilities Locator $9 Chopper Strike $48 Flight Planner Flipbt p $24 Nomad CD $39 Chopper Strike CD $52 Flight Sim Flight Shop $29 Operation Airstorm CD $42 Coaster $32 Flight Sim Toolkit S58 Pacific Strike Combat Classics 2 $29 Flight Sim Toolkit CD S54 Pacific Strike Spch Pak $17 Conqueror Multi Tank $6 Flight Sim Tkt Exp Dk 1 $28 Power Boat Simulator $39 Crash Course Flight Sim Tkt Exp Dk 2 $28 Power Politics WIN $12 Cyber Race $29 Flight Sim Tkt Exp Dk 3 $28 Praxim S32 Cyber Race CD Flight Sim Tkt Exp Dk 4 $28 Privateer $48 Das Boot Submarine $12 Flight of the Intruder $16 Privateer CD $56 Delta V $42 Fly the Grand Canyon $32 Privateer Spec Opert 1 $22 Design Your Own Railrd $29 Flying Circus Privateer Spec Opert 2 $22 Elite Plus $19 Formula 1 $24 Privateer Speech Pack $17 Circle Pandor Senice #54 Rally $29 Reach for the Skies $19 Real Weather Pilot $29 Red Baron VGA $29 Red Storm Rising ODCP $14 Road & Trck Grand Prix $24 Sailing Simulator 3 $42 Sailng Sim 3 East Coast $32 Sailng Sim 3 West CoastS32 Scenery Collection Set A $9 Scenery Collection Set B $9 Scenery Collin California $9 Scenery Collt Grt Britain $9 Scenery Enhancmnt Ed $21 Sea Wolf $44 Sea Wolf CD $52 Seal Team $36 Secret Weap Ex He 162 $21 Secret of Dinosaurs CD $44 Semper Fi $44 Sert City: Life is Feudal $42 Shuttle Shuttle CD Silent Service 2 Sim Town Sim Town CD Skywarrior Space Clipper Space Racers CD Spectre VR CD Spectre Virtual Reality $38 Speed Racer $26 Star Fleet Acadamy CD $45 Starlord Storm Troop $54 Storm Troop CD $54 Strike Commander $34 Strike Commander CD $55 Strike Commdr Sp Op 1 $22 Strike Commor Spch Pk $19 Stunt Island Sub War 2050 $35 Syndict Sci Amer Revit $22 TFX CD $45 TFX: Tactical Ft Exprm $39 Tank $16 Task Force Admirls Pck $45 Team Yankee $12 Team Yankee 2 $19 Team Yankee 2 CD $29 Test Drive 2 $30 Test Drive 2:Collection $19 Test Drive 2:Euro Chall $6 Test Drive 2:Muscl Cars $12 Test Drive 3 $29 Test Drive 3: Passion $19 Test Drive 3:Road & Car $9 The Big One CD Theme Park Theme Park CD Thunderhawk Tie Fighter $48 Tie Fighter Missn Disk 1 $24 Tie Fighter Missn Disk 2 S24 Top Gun Danger Zone S24 Tornado Tornado CD S42 Tower S42 Tracon WIN U-Boat 2 $36 Ultrbots Sanction Earth $36 Vette $15 Voice Commander Bdle $18 WC 2 Operation 2 $22 WC 2 Speech Mod $13 WC Secret Mission $20 $37 $48 $12 Protostar $39 Ravenloft $48 Ravenloft CD $52 Realms of Arkania $36 Red Crystal $29 Riftwar Legacy CD $25 Rome: Pathway to Powr $29 Secret Silver Blades $15 Sentinel Worlds 1 S9 Shadow Caster CD $45 Shadow Sorcerer $9 Sherlock Holmes 1 CD $36 Sherlock Holmes 2 CD $36 Sherlock Holmes 3 CD $51 Sleeping Gods Lie $12 Spacewrecked $19 SpellJammr:Pirates Rlm $16 Spellcraft:Aspct of Valor $19 Star Saga 2 $19 Star Trail $46 Star Trek Dp Space 9 $52 Star Trek Dp Spac 9 CD $52 Star Trek Next Gen CD $56 Stonekeep Stonekeep CD $48 Stronghold $36 Summoning $16 Sword of China $42 Syndicate $39 Syndicate CD $42 Tales Magic: Prophc Shd $16 Terran Envoy $ 9 Treasures Savag Frontr $12 Ultima 4 Quest of Avatar S35 Ultima 5 Wrriors of Dest S38 Ultima 6 False Prophet S19 Ultima 7 Black Gate $47 Ultima 7 Forge of Virtue $16 Ultima 7 Series CD $42 Ultima 7.5 P2 Silvr Seed $20 Ultima 7.5 Serpent Isle $48 Ultima 8 Pagan Ultima 8 CD $47 Ultima 8 Speech Pack $17 Ultima Uworld 1 & 2 CD $59 Ultima Uwrld 2 Labyrinth $48 Ultm Uwrld Stygn Abyss $21 Uncharted Waters $42 Unlimited Adventures $37 Veil of Darkness $37 War of the Lance $9 Waxworks $19 Wing Comm 2 UUW CD $34 Wizardry 4 Wizardry 6 Cosmo Forg $22 Wizardry 7 Crusaders $29 World of Xeen CD $19 $42 542 $48 $40 IBM SIMULATIONS $46 S48 $28 $9 ATP 2.0 $29 ATP Flight Simultr 1.0 $19 A.T.A.C $30 A10 Avenger $46 A320 Airbus S29 AH-64 B Longbow $54 AH-64 Helicopter $46 Aces Over Europe $39 Aces Europe Mis Disk 1 $27 Aces Europe Mis Disk 2 $27 Aces Pacific Mis Disk $19 $39 $39 "


"CHIPS&BITS Call 800-699-4263 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'l 802-767-3033 Source 10058 PO Box 234 Dept 10058 Rochester, VT 05767 4 02-09-388: For Source 1088 IBM SIMULATIONS IBM SPORTS WHOSHOT JOHNNY \"WHO SHOT JOHNNY ROCK' It's the roflicking 30's and someone killed the popular singer Johnny Rock. You will need to navigate the back streets, gaming halls, funeral parlors and dirty sections of the city to get clues held by a number of shady characters and solve this murder mystery. CD $36 SILFULLBUSTIBLE de BOSS GUT FETERUS FOTO EIDINLESSIANO ao CEPH M ONTE WC Secrt Miss 182 Bol $20 WC Secret Missn 2 HD $20 Wild Blue Yonder CD $49 Wing Armada $54 Wing Commander $21 Wing Commander 2 $26 Wing Commander 2 Bdl $29 Wing Commdr 2 Dix CD $29 Wing Commander 3 $52 Wing Commander 3 CD $54 Wing Commandr Acady $25 Wings of Glory $49 Wolf Pack CD $42 World Circuit $29 World Circuit CD $34 World Circuit 2 $42 World Circuit 2 CD $44 X-Wing $42 X-Wing Mission Disk 1 $19 X-Wing Mission Disk 2 $19 Zephyr $45 \"LINKS PRO CASTLE PINES' In the beautiful land of Colorado is the Castle Pines Golf Club designed by Jack Nicklaus. The course offers 7,495 yards of golfing challenge, longest PGA Tour course, and beautiful graphics. $19 IBM SPORTS 'TIE FIGHTER Sequel to the ac claimed X-Wing, players fly under the direction of the Dark Lord himself, Darth Vader. Defy the Rebel Alliance in training, combat misslons & tours of duty that strengthen the Emperor's hold on the galaxy. Six Imperial starfighters to fly under the strategies of the Empire. $48 00033001 0000000 ML 1960s World Series $17 ML 1970s World Series $17 ML 1980s World Series $17 ML BB 4 USAT Fan Man $25 ML BB 4 USAT Gen Man $19 ML Baseball All Stars $12 ML Baseball Pro Tms ea $20 ML Football 2 ML Personal Pro Golf $28 Madden Playr Stats 1989 $8 Magic Johnson Fast Brk $6 MicroL BB Seattle 13 $12 MicroL 82-88 BB Ssn ea $17 MicroL 89 FB Season $17 MicroL BB 4 USA Today $28 Microsoft Golf WIN $48 Microsoft Golf CD $48 NFL Chall Col Alumn Tms $9 NFL Chall Pre Season 90 $9 NFL Chall 91 Pre Season $9 NFL Chall All Star Team $9 NFL Chall Dream Teams $9 NFL Chall Premium Ed $59 NFL Coaches Club $34 NFL Cches Club Ex Dk $19 NFL Cches Club FB 2 $44 NFL Cches Club FB CD $34 NFL Proleague Football $12 NFL Video Football $19 NFL Video Football $29 NHL Hockey $43 Nascar Challenge $29 PGA Tour Golf Ltd Ed $32 PGA Tour Golf WIN $38 Pga Tour Crs 1 WIN $17 Playmaker Football $12 Pro Tennis Tour 2 $19 ProFtball Analyst 92 Edt $9 Proleague Football '94 $29 QuarterPole $26 RBI 2 $9 Road to the Final Four 2 $41 Sporting Triangle $3 Strat-O-Matic Cmptr BB $29 Summer Challenge $34 The Games Wintr Chall $29 Tie Break Tennis $9 Time Out Sports Bsball $25 Time Out Sports Bsktball$39 Tom Landry Football $29 Tom Landry Football Dix $29 Tony LRss Classic Stad $12 Tony LaRussa Baseball $9 Tony LaRussa NL Stad $15 Tony LaRussa BB 1990 $12 Tony LaRussa BB 1991 $12 Tony LRussa BB 2 CD $46 Tony LaRss BB 2 1993 $16 Tony LRss BB 2 92 Tm $14 Tony LRussa BB2 En Mn$14 Tony LRussa BB 2 $35 Tony LRss BB 2 Stad $18 Unnecessary Roughnss $34 Wayne Gretzky Hocky 3 $42 Weaver Baseball 2.0 $17 Weaver Commssnr Dk 2 $16 Weaver Tm/Plyr Stats 89 $3 Wilson Pro Staff Golf $23 \"COFFEE BREAK CD COLLECTION' Quality gameplay and great graphics have made the Coffee Break Series wildly popular with computer gamers all over. Includes arcade, gambling, and strategy games. CD S29 IBM STRATEGY IBM STRATEGY IBM STRATEGY IBM STRATEGY $39 APBA Baseball $24 APBA Baseball Innovatr $34 APBA Bsball Statmstr 2 $29 APBA Bowling APBA Hockey $34 APBA Micro Manager $32 American Collg Fball '94 $42 American Gladiators $21 Barkley: Shut Up & Jam $42 Baseball WIN Bball Chall 87-89 Tms ea $9 Blood Bowl $39 Brett Hull Hockey $42 CD-ROM Baseball CD $24 David Robinsn NBA Actn $44 Dirk's Baseball Encyc S19 Face Off $9 Fast Break $6 Front Page Football Pro S45 Front Page Sports Bsball$42 Greens $34 Hardball 3 $34 Hardball 3 Collection $39 Hardball 3 Players Disk $16 Hardball 3 Stadium Disk $16 Hardball 4 $34 Hole In One Mini Golf $6 Hole In 1 Mini Gif Crs Dk $3 Hole in 1 Mini Golf Dix $12 Internationl Sports Chall $9 Jack Nicklaus Clip Art $3 Jack Nicklaus Crs Dk 1 $6 Jack Nicklaus Crs Disk 2 $6 Jack Nicklaus Crs Disk 3 $6 Jack Nicklaus Crs Disk 5 $6 Jack Nicklaus Signatr EdS27 Jack Nicklaus SE Crs 1 S6 Jack Nicklaus SE Crs 2 $16 Joe Montana Football 2 $42 Links Crses 2 Firestone $17 Links Pro 386 Golf $32 Links Pro 486 CD $42 Links Pro C1 Mauna Kea$19 Links Pro C2 Pinehurst $16 Links Pro C3 Banff Sprg $19 Links Pro C4 Belfry $19 Links Pro C5 Innsbrook $19 Links Pro C6 Firestone $20 Links Pro C7 Pebbl Bch $24 Links Pro C8 Cast Pines $19 ML 1950s World Series $17 $38 $34 $42 $19 Advanced Civilization $35 Aide de Camp Air Force Commander $9 Airbucks 1.2 $24 Ambush at Sorinor $42 Ancient Art of War Sky $26 Archon Ultra $34 Arctic Baron $29 Arctic Baron CD $29 Armada $22 Armada 2525 Ashes of Empire $29 Battle Group Commder $45 Battle Isle Battle Isle Scenario Disk $22 Battle of Chickamagua $38 Battle of Chickmgua CD $42 Battles in Time $36 Battles of Destiny $34 Battles of Napoleon $24 Beyond Squad Leader $38 Big Business $9 Black Beard $36 Breach 2 $12 Breach 3 $36 Buzz Aldrn Race Space $38 Buzz Aldrn Rac Spac CD$54 Caesar $34 Campaign 2 $36 Capitalist Pig WIN $19 Carrier Command $9 Carriers at War $24 Carriers at War 2 $39 Carriers at Wr Const Kit $16 Castles $18 Castles 2 $36 Castles 2 CD $49 Castles Northrn Campgn $9 Celtic Tales: Balor of Evil$42 Chessmst 4000 Trb WIN $36 Civilization $44 Civilization WIN $48 Clash of Steel $39 Cohort 2 $18 Colonization $45 Colonization CD $45 Command HQ $19 Command HQ Classic $18 Command and Conquer $42 Conquer for Windows $19 Conquered Kingdoms $32 Conquered Kingdoms 1 $24 Conquered Kingdoms 2 $36 Conquest $36 Conquest of Japan $36 Crime City $12 Crisis in the Kremlin $32 Cybergo $39 D-Day: Opert Ovrlord CDS26 D-Day: Beginning of End $39 Darklegions $42 Darklegions CD $39 Dead Zone CD $52 Detroit $39 Discovry Stp Columbus $34 Dominion: One Kngs Life$41 Dominus $39 Dragon Force $12 Dragon Lord Dune $12 Dune 2 $34 El Fish $34 Electric Jigsaw $12 Empire Builder $36 Empire Deluxe $34 Empire Deluxe WIN $35 Empire Dix Mastr Ed CD $45 Empire Deluxe Scen 1 $21 Fantasy Empires $39 Fantasy Empires CD $45 Fantasy Fieldom CD $48 Fields of Glory Fifth Fleet $42 Fighting for Rome $12 Fort Apache $19 Gemfire $37 Genghis Khan 2 $34 Gettysburg $29 Gettysburg: Inter Battle $32 Gettysbrg: Inter Batt CD $42 Global Domination $34 Gobliiins 2 Princs Buffn $16 Gold of the Americas $24 Grandest Fleet $36 Great Nav Batt Admirl Pk$49 Hannibal $32 Harpoon 2 $48 Harpoon 2 Battle Set 1 $26 Harpoon Challengr Pak $24 Heirs to the Throne $32 HUMANS $24 Humans CD $28 Humans: Insult to Injury $14 Kingdoms of France $34 Kingdoms of Germany $36 Kingmaker Koshan Conspiracy $36 Koshan Conspiracy CD $48 L'Empereur $37 Laser Squad $12 Lemmings ODCP $19 Lemmings 2: Tribes $29 Lemmings Datadisk $19 Lemmings wDatdsk CD $45 Liberty or Death $37 Lords of the Realm Lost Admiral $19 Lost Admiral 2 $39 Lost Vikings $24 Maelstrom $32 Master of Orion $39 Mechamander Mechamander CD $42 Medieval Lords $12 Mega Lo Mania Merchant Colony $17 Merchant Prince $39 Millenium $6 Napoleonics New World Order $38 Nobunaga's Ambition $37 Nobunaga's Ambition 2 $37 Nuclear War $16 Objection $19 Objection Enhanced $19 Operation Combat $12 Operation Crusader Operation Europe Outpost $39 Outpost CD $39 Paladin 2 Patrician $34 Patrician CD $36 Pax Imperia $42 $34 $39 S42 IBM STRATEGY $9 $34 $34 18th Air Squadron $36 A Train $34 A Train Constructn Set $9 A Train W Constrctn Set $32 "


"Visa/MC Accepted Chocks Held 4 Weeks Money Orders same as cash, COD $8. Defect tives replaced with same product. Most items shipped same day. Shipping times may vary Price availability may change. All sales final OVERNIGHT SHIPPING in US SA per order. Mail 10 Canada, PR, HI, AK, APO, FPO 54 per order 4-8 day Worldwide shipping S6 per item. Handling $2 per shipment. FREE GAME OFFER See Last Page For Details Prince Dorian IBM TRADITIONAL IBM TRADITIONAL Video Poker by Masque 59 Virtual Reality Studio 2 $64 Welltris $15 Wheel of Fortune S6 Wheel of Fortune 2 S6 Wheel of Fortune 3 Word Tris $27 Wrath of the Demon CD $29 Zig-Zag $34 $9 Rives Im CVT ecomanli Thischday 23sta Snokemon 21 SA To hall the action presa SPACE \"LORDS OF MIDNIGHT' Luxor, ruler of Midnight, was taken prisoner by Boroth the Woltheart, Rescue the ruler and twelve prisoners held in the Citadel. Has 3D landscape, almanac of characters, and point & click interface to move around. S48 IBM WAR GAMES CHRONY \"LEISURE SUIT LARRY 6' As a contestant on a dating game show, you have won a 2 week vacation at a posh resort Sur rounded by luxury & girls, you mingle, schmooze & work your way up to a grand encounter in the penthouse suite! CD $39 *7th GUEST: 11th HOUR' Sequel to 7th Guest except the stakes are higher, the puzzles more clever and the return visit even more unsettling. Solve puzzles and investigate clues that take you through Stauf's haunted house with movie-like plot twists, special effects and music soundtrack. CD$54 THE UNDERWATER COMBAT SIMULATION 'SUBWAR 2050 The oceans have become a vital source of food, energy, and minerals. Corporations have turned the exploration of the sea into the world's most lucrative industry. Explore thousands of miles of 3D underwater seascapes, pilot four types of submarines, and breathtaking simulated combat. $35 $39 IBM STRATEGY IBM STRATEGY IBM STRATEGY Grandmaster Chess $12 H. Barbara Animt Wkshp $39 Hard Day's Night CD $25 Hearts $12 Hong Kong MJ Pro S32 Hoyle's Book Games V3 $29 Hoyle's Bk Games Cisc $29 It's a Wonderful Life CD $39 Jeopardy Jeopardy 2 $9 Jeopardy 25 Aniversary $14 Joseki Genius $39 King's Table $23 Lawn Mower Man SS CD$36 Lexicross $24 Lucky's Casino Advent $38 Monopoly Deluxe $27 Monopoly Deluxe WIN $29 Oligopoly $9 Omar Sharif Bridge WIN $32 Omar Sharif on Bridge $32 Omr Shrf Bridge Dix CD $46 On Target $9 Origamo $39 Oshkosh '92 CD $39 Pictionary $12 Pinball Dreams $29 Pool Shark $18 Positronic Bridge $30 Puzzle Gallery 1 $9 Risk $28 Risk WIN $26 Rodeo Games $9 Russian Six Pack $26 Russian Six Pack WIN $19 Sargon 5 $13 Scrabble Deluxe $26 Scrabble Deluxe WIN $19 Scrabble Deluxe CD $25 Shanghaii 2 $29 Solitaire Royale $19 Solitaire WIN $26 Solitaire's Journey WIN 338 Solitaires Journey $34 Solitaires Journey 2 $36 Sorry $12 Space Vegetables 59 Spot Stan Wongs Video Pokr $19 Star Wars Chess $38 Star Wars Chess CD $44 Street Atlas USA Win CD$89 Super Jeopardy $19 Super Tetris $29 Swap $29 Tactical Wizard $39 Take-A-Brk Crswrd WIN $19 Terminator 2 Chess Wars$37 Terminator Chess $34 Tesserae WIN $16 Tetris S15 Tetris Classic S26 Tetris Classic WIN $26 Think Cross Trump Cast 2 Casn Bay $6 Trump Cast 2 DD1 $4 Trump Castle 2 DD2 $4 Trump Castle 3 $29 Trump Castle 3 CD $29 Trump Castle Collct CD S14 Turn-n-Burn Vegas Entrent Pak WIN S21 Vegas Games Pak WIN $21 Videogame Solution CD S29 Video Cube CD S 45 Video Poker Villa Crespo S9 IBM TRADITIONAL $39 S12 S36 Action North Atlantic S26 Action Stations Scen 1 S3 Action off River Platte S26 Aegis: Guardn Fleet CD 553 Air Raid Pearl Harbour S22 American Civil War V1 S24 American Civil War V2 S24 American Civil War V3 S24 Banzai Battle Stations S20 Battle Tank Barbarossa S36 Battle Tank Kursk $36 Battle of Austerlitz S26 Battle of Leyte Gulf S24 Battle of the Atlantic S36 Battles of Napoleon $24 Battleship Bismark S26 Blitzkrieg Ardennes $19 Blue and the Grey $36 Borodino Napoln Invads $29 Bravo Romeo Delta S24 Campaign $32 Campaign CD $35 Campaign Mission 1 $18 Carrier Strike Carrier Strike Exp Pak $19 Charge of Light Brigade $12 Civil War No Grter Glory $21 Conflict: Korea $12 Conflict: Middle East S12 Decision at Gettysburg $18 Dreadnoughts $29 Dreadnoughts Bismark $29 Dreadnoughts Deluxe $59 Dreadnoughts Ironclads $29 Drums of Glory $44 Fall Gelb $36 Fifth Eskadra $36 Fleet Med $27 Gary Grigsby Pacfc War $36 Gary Grgsby War Russa $45 German Raider Allantis $26 Gettysburg: Turning Pnt $36 Golan Front S36 Grand Fleet Grey Seas, Grey Skies $36 Halls of Montezuma $24 Harpoon $12 Harpoon Battle Set 3 58 Harpoon Battle Set 4 58 Harpoon Chalingr Pak $19 Harpoon Designer Srs 1 $17 Harpoon Designer Srs 2 $25 High Command $45 Kampfgruppe Kriegsmarine Kursk Campaign 36 Line in the Sand S12 Long Lance S39 MacArthur's War S9 Main Battle Tank C Grm $36 Main Batti Tank MidEast $36 Main Battl Tank N Germ $36 S28 Perfect General $34 Perfect General 2 $44 Perfct General Sc2 20th $23 Perfct Genrl Sc Dk WW2 $21 Populous 2 $32 Powermonger $19 Protostar CD $36 Purest Wargame S36 Rags to Riches S36 Railroad Tycoon 2 $39 Railroad Tycoon Classic $19 Rampart $17 Reach for the Stars $24 Realms $16 Red Ghost $39 Red Zone $32 Renegade Legion Intrcpt $12 Robo Sport WIN $34 Romance 3 Kingdoms 2 $39 Romance 3 Kingdoms 3 $39 Rules of Engagement S9 Rules of Engagement 2 $34 Ruls of Engag 2 Cpgn dk519 Second Conflict WIN $34 Seven Cities Gold 2 919 Sid Meir's Civil War Siege $12 Siege With Exp Disk $19 Sim Ant Sim Ant WIN S34 Sim Ant CD S48 Sim City $27 Sim City WIN Sim City CD $48 Sim City Classic $26 Sim City Classic WIN $26 Sim City 2000 $39 Sim City 2000 WIN S42 Sim City 2000 CD S45 Simcity 2000 Gr Disstrs $18 Sim Earth $29 Sim Earth WIN $29 Sim Earth CD $48 Sim Farm $29 Sim Life $29 Sim Life WIN $29 Smokin Gun WIN Space Hulk $19 Space Hulk CD $42 Space Miner $36 Space Raiders CD $42 Spaceward Ho! $36 Spaceward Ho! WIN $36 Star Control 2 $34 Star Legions $9 Strike Squad $39 Stronghold CD $36 Sub Version $36 Tac Ops $42 Tank $36 Task Force 1942 S36 Tegel's Mercenaries S9 Tegel's Mercenaries 2 S44 Termntr 2 Chesswars CDS27 The Complete UMS $44 Theatre of War $16 Ticonderoga $46 Tigers on the Prowl $42 Unnatural Selection $29 Utopia $29 Victory or Defeat WIN Victory or $42 Viking Conquest $36 Vikings 2 $36 CD-Romix 1 Hardcase $16 Vikngs Fields of Congst $19 CD-Romix 2 Prime $16 Visions of Aftermath $12 CD-Romix 3 Free X CD $16 Walls of Rome Casino Game Pak WIN $32 War in the Gulf $12 Casino Mastr Gold WIN $43 Warlords Checkmate WIN Warlords 2 $38 Chess Net WIN $9 Warlords 2 Scenario Ed $29 Chess X Colossus $9 When Two Worlds War $34 ChessManiac 5 Bill & 1 $39 Worlds at War $19 Chessmniac 5 Bill&1 CD $34 Worlds of War CD $48 Chessmaster 2000 $24 Chessmaster 3000 $29 Chessmaster 3000 CD $46 IBM TRADITIONAL Chessmaster 3000 WIN $35 Classic 5 $32 3D Pinball $12 Classic 5 WIN $30 3 in 1 Players's Pack $9 Classic Casino WIN $16 Acquire S9 Classic Solitaire WIN $16 Americans in Space CD $41 Coffee Break Collt CD $29 Armada Villa Crespo $9 Combination Lock S9 Backgmn By George WIN S9 Demon Blue S9 Baseball Card Collector $12 Den Millr: Nws to Me CD $25 Baseball Facts S9 Dr Floyds Desktop Toys $14 Battle Chess 4000 VGA S24 Dr Thorp's Blackjack $32 Battl Chess 4000 SVGA S36 Dr Thorp's mini Blackjack $9 Battle Chess CD $45 Dr Wong's Jks/Vid Pokr 5 $9 Battle Chess EGAVGA $18 Dr Wong's Jk/Pokr WIN $12 Battle Chess WIN S18 Faces Tetris 3 S15 Beat the House $29 Gambit, Kasparov's $39 Blackjack $9 Game-Maker Ver 2.0 $49 Bridge 2: wOmar Sharif $28 Go Master Dlx V 5 WIN 579 Bridge 2: wOmr Shri CD $52 Go Master Jr Ver 5 WIN S19 Bridge 7 $24 Go Master Tool Kit S39 Bridge Baron WIN $34 Go Master Tool Kit WIN 579 Bridge Olympiad $36 Go Master Ver 4 WIN S39 Bridgemaster WIN S 29 Gofrs Winkl Adv CD Win $12 Ciula Denda Sanica 54 $36 $12 $59 S29 $36 $9 $34 "


"CHIPS&BITS people as Fan Source sa Call 800-699-4263 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'l 802-767-3033 Source 10058 PO Box 234 Dept 10058 Rochester, VT 05767 IBM WAR GAMES NEURODANCER JOULDEY INTO TIL DEURONET $26 \"NEURO DANCER BY PIXIS Navigate through the NeuroNet by hacking into the forbidden worlds of dark mysteries, danger, and sensuality. Use computer and VidFone to obtain enough credits to interect with the erotic NeuroDancers who traverse the computer networks in search of willing viewers. CD $49 E ONDWEDDU For Vitrhe Malta Storm $36 Man of War $36 Mare Nostrum Marianas Turkey Shoot $12 Midway $12 Moscow Campaign $36 Northern Fleet $36 Operation Overlord $36 Pacfc Strm Midwy Cpgn $36 Paclc Strm Solmn Cpgn $36 Panzer Battles $19 Patriot $12 Patton Strikes Back $14 Prelude to Jutland $26 Red Sky Morning $36 Return to Falklands $28 Rising Sun $26 Road Sumtr to Appmttx $45 Rommel Batll for N Afrca $24 Rommel at El Alamein $36 Rommel at Gazala $36 Second Front $21 Seventh Fleet $36 Squad Leader $48 Stalingrad Campaign $36 Storm Across Europe $12 The Great War $39 Third Reich $34 To The Rhine $36 Typhoon of Steel $12 UMS 2 $19 UMS 2 Planet Editor $12 Under Fire $12 V Victory Market Garden $15 V Victory: Gld, Jun, Swd $34 V Victory: Utah Beach $15 V Victory: Velikye Luki $15 V-Victory: Markt Garden $12 V-Victory: Utah Beach $12 V-Victory: Velukye Luki $12 Victory at Sea $41 War in the Falklands $26 Warpoint $36 Warship Changd History $26 Waterloo $19 White Death $19 WW2 Batt of Sth Pacific $32 \"V FOR VICTORY MARKET GARDEN' takes you to Southern Holland on Sept. 17th, 1944. Features a full scrolling map of the Eindhoven-Arnhem area, over 500 military units, 9 types of combat, detailed weather effects, assume either Allied or German command, extensive campaign analysis, & historical variants. $19 IBM ADULT \"KINGMAKER Step back in history Best of the Best V 2 CD $29 to the time of the Betrayal CD $32 The test for the Crown War of the Roses. Beyond Explicit CD $34 In England, racked Bodacious Beauties CD $36 by civil war, the Bodycello CD $12 crown hangs by a Busting Out CD $36 thread and the Busty Babes CD $32 throne is there for CD Brothel CD $36 the taking. FeaCafe Flesh CD $32 tures high quality California Daydrmer CD $29 digital graphics, inCamp Double D CD tuitive icon-based Cat and Mouse CD $42 user interface, infiCenterfold Squares $21 nite replayability Centrilds & Covrgirls CD $32 and adjustable difCollege Girls CD $34 ficulty levels. $39 Come Play With Me CD $36 Condo Cuties CD S34 Creme de la Creme CD $29 Debby Does Dallas CD $38 'STAR WARS: Deceptions CD $29 REBEL ASSAULT Deep Throat CD $36 Take control of a Devil in Miss Jones CD $34 Star Wars vehicle in Digital Dancing CD $36 challenging piloting Digital Dreams 2 CD $22 & combat sceDigital Seduction CD $34 narios. Hone flight Dirty Adult Cartoons CD $34 & combat skills to Doors of Passion CD $29 defend Tatooine Double Play Vol 1 CD $36 against Imperial atDouble Play Vol 2 CD $36 tack, challenge the Dream Girl CD $32 menacing walkers Dream Machine CD $39 of planet of Hoth Dungn of Dominance CD $36 and combat the Ecstacy CD $29 Empire in intense Endangered CD $29 deep space ErotiCafe CD $48 battles. CD $44 Erotica CD $34 European Erotica CD $34 Exotic Girls 3 in 1 CD $19 Expose CD IBM ADULT IBM ADULT $24 Extreme Delight CD $28 Femme Fatale $26 Local Girls V. 2 CD $22 Sizzle CD $29 Femme Fatale Dt Disk 1 $18 Lovely Ladies II CD Southern Beauties CD $34 Femme Fatale Dt Disk 2 $18 Madame's Familly CD $38 Strip Poker 3 $19 Femme Fatale Dt Disk 3 $18 Mark of Zara CD $38 Strip Poker 3 DD 1-6 ea S16 Femme Fatale Dt Disk 4 $18 Massive Mellons CD $29 Strip Poker Professional $34 Femme Fatale Dt Disk 5 $18 Mean Street USA CD $29 Strip Poker Pro DD1-8ea $16 Femme Fatale Dt Disk 6 $18 My First Time CD $29 Supr Modis Go Wild CD $34 Femme Fatale WIN $29 Mystique of Orient CD $29 Super Smutware CD $19 Flame CD $25 Neurodancer CD $49 Superstars of Porn CD $24 Frat Girls of Doubl D CD $32 New Wave Hookrs 1 CD $32 Surfer Girls CD $29 G.L.F.s keep on Givg CD $25 New Wave Hookrs 2 CD $32 Sweet Dreams CD $29 Giffy Gold CD $28 Night Trips CD $48 Toy's Not Boys CD $29 Girlfriend Suzie $39 Nightwatch Inteactiv CD $36 Tracy I Love You CD $32 Girlfriend Teri $45 Nova Collection V. 1 CD $26 Treasure Chest CD $24 Girls Steven J Hicks CD $29 Nova Collection V. 2 CD $29 Tropical Girls CD $26 Girls of Mardi Gras CD $32 Othr Side of Chelsea CD $29 Urotsukidoji CD $36 Girls of Risque CD $32 Overexposed CD $39 Virtual Vixens CD $52 Girls of Vivid V. 1 CD $34 Pandor....AAAH'S CD $27 Volcano CD $34 Girls of Vivid V. 2 CD $34 Paradise Club CD $36 Weekend at Ernies CD $26 Girls, Girls, Girls CD $29 Penthouse Intractiv CD $69 Wickd Q-Time Movie CD $42 Glamour Girls 1943 CD $36Penthouse Jigsaw PG $21 Wicked Whispers CD $29 Heavenly Bodies 2 CD $45 Penthouse Jigsaw XXX $12 Winner Takes All CD $34 Hidden Obsessions CD $32 Phone Sex CD Audio $15 Womn Who Lov Men CD S26 High Volume Nudes CD $26 Physical Therapy CD $19 Women of Venus CD $22 Hooter Heavens CD $36 Playboy Electrnc Datebk $34 X-Rated Bloopers CD $27 House of Dreams CD $24 Porkware V.2 CD $29 Hs of Sleepg Beauts CD $29 Princess of Persia CD $29 Insatiable CD $32 Racquelle Released CD $34 IBM BUDGET Intract Adult Spl WIN CD $12 Rimfire Pacific Video CD $32 Intract Semore Butts CD $39 Scissors N' Stones CD $44 007 James Bnd Stlh Aff $12 Interactive Lovers CD $38 Secrets CD $34 3 D Pinball $12 Jigsaw Pinups $19 Sex CD 3 in 1 Players's Pack $9 Kama Sutra CD $34 Sex Olympics $19 Action Stations Scen 1 $3 L.A. Strippers CD $32 Sexiest Women on CD $24 Acquire $9 Legends of Porn 2 CD $29 Air Force Commander S9 Loads of Fun CD $32 Sinfully Yours CD $29 AirportFacilities Dir S 12 IBM BUDGET IBM BUDGET $9 $12 IBM ADULT $6 $9 Amazing Spiderman $12 Amazon $9 Aracnaphobia wSnd Src $12 Armada Villa Crespo $9 Artura $4 B.A.T. $6 Back to the Future 3 S12 Backgmn By George WIN S9 Banzai Baseball Card Collector $12 Baseball Facts Battle Command Bball Chall 87-89 Tms ea 59 Big Business Blackjack $9 Blue Max Aces Great War $9 Bodycello CD $12 Boom Box $12 Breach 2 $12 Captain Blood $9 Cardinal of the Kremlin $6 Carrier Command Castles Northrn Campgn S9 Champions of Krynn $12 Charge of Light Brigade $12 Chess Net WIN Chess X Colossus $9 Combination Lock Conflict: Korea $12 Conflict: Middle East $12 Conqueror Multi Tank $6 Corporation Covert Action Crash Course $9 Crime City Crime Does Not Pay $12 101 Sex Positions CD $36 101 Sex Positions 2 CD $34 3D Darling CD 3D Dream Girls CD $36 94-95 CDX Calender CD $29 Adult Movie Almanac CD $52 Adult Palate CD $22 Adult Palate 2 CD $29 Adult Reference CD $24 Advent of Brad Stalin CD$39 After Dark Trilogy CD S34 All Beauties CD $24 Amateur Models CD $19 Amateur Video WIN CD $22 American Girls CD $29 Amorous Asian Girls CD $32 Animated Fantasies CD $34 Animatd Fantasies 2 CD $34 Asian Palate CD Baby's Got Butt CD Bare Assets CD $32 Best of Inferno CD $39 Best of Vivid CD $36 Best of Barlw Affairs CD $39 Best of the Best V 1 CD $19 Dark Half Das Boot Submarine $12 Demon Blue Don't Go Alone Dr Doom's Revenge Dr Thorp's mini Blackjack S9 Dr Wong's Jks/Vid Pokr 5 9 Dr Wong's Jk/Pokr WIN $12 Dragon Force Dragon Lord 59 Dragon Strike Dragons of Flame Dune Dusk of the Gods EMotion Earthrise Electric Jigsaw F15 Strike Eagle Face Off Fast Break Fighting for Rome Finale Free DC $9 Gamma Force $6 Gofrs Winkl Adv CD Win $12 Gold of the Aztecs S12 Grandmaster Chess S12 Harpoon $12 Harpoon Battle Set 3 S8 Harpoon Battle Set 4 S8 Hearts $12 Heatwave $6 Hole In One Mini Golf $6 Hole In 1 Mini GII Crs Dk $3 Hole in 1 Mini Golf Dix $12 Intract Adult Spl WIN CD $12 68% 9 $9 $34 $6 "


"Visa/MC Accepted. Checks Hold 4 Weeks. Money Orders same as cash. COD $8. Defes tives replaced with same product Most items shipped same day. Shipping times may vary. Price/availability may change. All sales linal. OVERNIGHT SHIPPING in US 54 per order. Mail to Canada, PRI HLAK APO, FPO SA por order, 4-8 day Worldwide shipping S6 per item: Handling $2 per shipment. FREE GAME OFFER *See Last Page For Details Build an enprto punto pulory MACINTOSH NEO GEO MASIER $129 DRI \"MASTER OF ORION' Build an empire that will stretch across the entire galaxy. Start with a single planet. Develop resources and design ships for your alien population to colonize nearby. Now start building a fleet of ships ranging from shuttles to dreadnoughts. Now conquer the universe. $39 BENEATH A STEEL SKY' Jack into the world's first computer-based animated comic book adventure and enter a future where Earth as we know it is on the verge of Ecological Sunset. Features cutting edge virtual theatre environment, over 100 different locations, and futuristic sound effects. CD $39 Go Master Deluxe S49 Harpoon Scenario Editor S14 Jack Nicklaus CrDk 1-3ea S6 Jack Nicklaus Crs Dk 5 $6 Lexi Cross Omar Sharif Bridge Dix $19 Out of this World $19 Robo Sport Shadowgate $19 Sherlock Holmes CnDt 2 $19 Sim Ant $19 Spirit of Excalibur S14 Test Drive 2: CA Chaling $6 Test Drive 2: Super Cars $6 WordTris S19 Robo Army $99 Samurai Shodown $199 Sengoku Sengoku 2 $199 Soccer Brawl $129 Super Sideks Soccer 2 $199 Super Spy $99 Survivor $199 Top Hunter $199 View Point $199 World Heroes 2 $199 $24 JAGUAR MICROPROSE 3DO S46 FOR VILTOAY 556 \"V FOR VICTORY UTAH BEACH thrusts you into the role of military strategist during the Normandy invasion. As an American commander you must overcome strong German resistance. Features realistic weather effects, 8 types of combat and choose from 6 different scenarios. $19 \"V FOR VICTORY VELIKIYE LUKI takes you to the Russian Front during WW 2. As the German commander, you must rescue your encircled forces that are hold up in Velikiye Luki. Features 9 types of combat, choice of German or Russian command, and choose from 7 scenarios. $19 Jaguar System $249 Jaguar CD System $299 Jaguar Controller $24 Alien Vs Predator S58 Barkley Basketball Battle Zone 2000 Brett Hull Hockey Brutal Sports Football Bubsy Checkered Flag 2 Club Drive Dungeon Depths S54 European Soccer Chall $56 Hosenose & Booger $54 Jack Nicklaus Golf $46 Jaguar Formla 1 Racing $54 Kasumi Ninja Raiden Star Raiders 2000 Tempest 2000 Tiny Toon Adventures $52 Ultimate Brain Games S56 OMIC S52 3DO System $599 3D0 Gun S36 11th Hour S56 Aces over Europe S49 Alone in the Dark S49 Battle Chess $46 Conquered Kingdoms $49 Demolition Man $56 Doom $49 Dragon Tales $49 Dragons Lair 2: Time Wrp$52 Escape Monster Manor $49 Horde $49 Jurassic Park $49 Lost Files Sherick Holms $49 Mad Dog McCree 2 $49 Madden Football Microcosm $49 Night Trap $52 Orion Off Road $49 Out of this World $49 Red Baron $49 Road Rash $56 Sewer Shark $49 Shadow Caster S49 Space Ace $49 Star Control 2 $49 Star Trek Next Genertn $49 Star Wars Chess $49 Total Eclipse $52 Troddlers $49 Who Shot Johnny Rock $49 Wing Commander $49 WorldBuilders, Inc $49 $49 IBM BUDGET IBM BUDGET IBM BUDGET IBM BUDGET TURBO GRAFX Sorry $9 $6 $12 Turn-n-Burn $9 Typhoon of Steel S12 UMS 2 Planet Editor $12 Under Fire Uninvited $6 V-Victory: Utah Beach $12 V-Victory: Velukye Luki $12 Vaxine S12 Video Poker by Masque 89 Video Poker Villa Crespo $9 Visions of Aftermath $12 Wacky Funster War in the Gulf $12 War of the Lance Warlords $12 Weaver Tm/Plyr Stats 89 $3 Wheel of Fortune 2 $6 Wheel of Fortune 3 $9 Wild Wheels $12 Wrath of the Demon Xiphos $9 $9 Internatnal Ninja Rabbits $12 Internationl Sports Chall $9 Jack Nicklaus Clip Art S3 Jack Nicklaus Crs Dk 1 $6 Jack Nicklaus Crs Disk 2 $6 Jack Nicklaus Crs Disk 3 $6 Jack Nicklaus Crs Disk 5 S6 Jack Nicklaus SE Crs 1 $6 Japan Scenery Disk $12 Jeopardy $9 Jeopardy 2 $9 Joan of Arc $12 Killing Cloud $6 L.A. Law $9 Laser Squad $12 Lightspeed $9 Line in the Sand $12 MacArthur's War $9 Madden Playr Stats 1989 $8 Magic Candle 2 Magic Candle 3 Magic Johnson Fast Brk $6 Marianas Turkey Shoot $12 Matrix Cubed Medieval Lords $12 MegaFortress Mega Traveller:Zhodani S6 Mega Traveller 2 S12 Midway Millenium $6 Mines of Titan $9 ML Baseball All Stars $12 ML BB Seattle 13 $12 ML Football 2 $12 Ms PacMan $6 New Facilities Locator $9 NEO GEO Never Mind $9 NFL Chall Col Alumn Tms $9 NFL Chall Pre Season 90 S9 NFL Chall 91 Pre Season $9 NFL Chall All Star Team $9 NFL Chall Dream Teams $9 NFL Proleague Football $12 Ninja Gaiden 2 $12 Ninja Rabbits Obliterator Oligopoly $9 On Target $9 Operation Combat Pac Man $9 Patriot $12 Penthouse Jigsaw XXX $12 Pick'n Pile $6 Pictionary $12 Playmaker Football $12 Power Drome $6 Power Hils: Kids $9 Power Politics WIN $12 Predator 2 S9 ProFtball Analyst 92 Edt S9 Punisher S12 Puzzle Gallery 1 S9 RBI 2 $9 Renegade Legion Intrept $12 Rodeo Games $9 Rotox $9 Rules of Engagement $9 Savage $6 S.C. Out $12 Scenery Collection Set A $9 Scenery Collection Set B $9 Scenery Collin California $9 Turbo Duo $289 Air Zonk CD $44 Beyond Shadowgate CD $45 Black Hole Assault CD $47 Bonk's Big Adventre CD $44 Buster Brothers CD $34 Camp California Yo Bro $29 Dragon Slayer CD $42 Dynastic Hero CD S 44 Fantasy Star Soldier CD $44 Forgotten Worlds CD $34 Gao CD $45 Godzilla CD $46 Jackie C. Actn Kung Fu $32 Loom CD Madden Football CD $44 Mystic Formula CD $45 Raiden $39 RoboTech Love Song CDS47 Shadow Beast CD Simearth CD $42 Street Fighter 2 Terraforming CD Wizardry 1 & 2 CD $34 Scenery Collt Grt Britain $9 SDI $6 Sentinel Worlds 1 $9 Shadow Sorcerer $9 Siege $12 Sleeping Gods Lie $12 Snoopy's Fun Pack $9 $12 Space Vegetables $9 Sporting Triangle $3 Spot $6 Star Legions $9 Storm Across Europe $12 Street Ball $9 Taking of Beverly Hills $6 Team Yankee $12 Teenage Mut Ninja Turtl $12 Teenage MNT Man Miss $12 Tegel's Mercenaries $9 Terran Envoy Tarran Envoy S9 Test Drive 2:Euro Chall S6 Test Drive 2:Muscl Cars $12 Test Drive 3:Road & Car $9 The Tinies $12 Think Cross S12 Thunderhawk $6 Tie Break Tennis Time Quest $12 Tony LRss Classic Stad $12 Tony LaRussa Baseball $9 Tony LaRussa BB 1990 $12 Tony LaRussa BB 1991 $12 Treasures Savag Frontr $12 Trump Cast 2 Casn Bay $6 Trump Cast 2 DD1 $4 Trump Castle 2 DD2 $4 $9 $9 $36 AMIGA 633 $9 $3 Neo Geo Gold $569 Neo Geo Control Pad $46 3 Count Bout $189 Andros Dunos $199 Art of Fighting 2 $199 Baseball Stars Pro 2 $149 Blues Journey $129 Burning Fight $149 Crossed Swords $129 Cyber Lip $129 Fatal Fury 2 $199 Football Frenzy $129 Ghost Pilots $129 King of the Monstrs 2 $169 Last Resort $149 Magician Lord $99 Mutation Nation $149 Nam 1975 $99 Ninja Combat $99 Breach 1 Scenario Disk $3 Fast Break Heatwave Jack Nicklaus Course 1 S6 Test Drive2:Muscle Cars $3 LYNX $3 S12 $89 $44 $38 MACINTOSH Lynx System Alien Vs Predator Battle Zone 2000 Castle Wolfenstein 3D Checkered Flag Dracula Eye of the Beholder $39 S36 Bridge 7 Dragon's Lair 2 519 S19 $44 $44 "


"CHIPS&BITS nie oor ons Fan Source 105 Call 800-699-4263 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'l 802-767-3033 Source 10058 PO Box 234 Dept 10058 Rochester, VT 05767 GEN HARDWARE GEN ADVENTURE LOADS RES $47 A $52 . Federated Worlds Nd. 4 Way Play Adaptor S29 6 Button Arcade Stick $39 6 Button Control Pad $19 F-16 Wireless Contrl Pad$42 Genesis Activator $79 Genesis CD Sys 2 CD $229 Genesis CDX System $399 Genesis System 2 core $99 Genesis Systm Sonic 2 S119 Genesis Team Player $26 Mars 32X System $149 Mega Mouse $32 Power Plug $34 Remote Arcade Pad S19 Remote Arcade System $36 SG Program Pad 2 $32 Sega Steering Wheel $39 BREACH 3' As Squad Leader of an elite corps of marines waging war against the UDP you must direct your men in missions from rescueand-support to seek-and-destroy. Combines the best of turn-based and real-time gaming. Features free-structured campaigns & individual marine personalities. S36 'ULTIMA VIII: PAGAN' You are imprisoned on a distant world where the forces of the Guardian hold absolute command. Without allies or even a familiar frame of reference. you must learn to defeat the ruling Elemental Titans on their own terms in your quest to bring the battle to the Guardian. $48 GEN ADVENTURE QUARTER POLE AN 'QUARTERPOLE creates a look never seen in sports simulation software before. An interactive first-person interface means no more boring menu screens to slow down your adventure. Up to 10 players can choose from a variety of opening scenarios to create their fortune. $26 Mickeys Magical Quest $54 Night Striker CD $49 Out of this World or CD $49 Pink Panther Pirates of Dark Water $54 Pitfall Popeye Prince of Persia CD Puggsy CD Radical Rex Rainbow Islands Rebel Assault CD Return to Zork CD Rise of the Dragon CD Roar of the Beast $39 RoboCop 3 $44 Rocky & Bullwinkle $46 Shadow of Beast 2 CD $49 Sherlock Holmes 2 CD $43 Shinobi 3 $42 Socks the Cat $46 Sonic the Hedgehog 3 $54 Space Ace CD $49 Space Pirates CD $49 Spiderman & Venom $54 Star Trek Next Gen CD $64 Star Trek: Deep Space 9 $54 Steven Seagal $54 Stone Protectors Strider $56 Strider 2 $39 Switch CD $49 Sylvester & Tweety $54 T2:Arcade Game $39 TMNT:Hyperstone Heist $46 Terminator CD $49 Time Killers $56 Time Trax $49 TinHead $49 Tom & Jerry $49 Valis 3 $56 Vikings $39 Who Shot John Rock CD$49 X MEN $44 Young Indy Jones Chron $43 Zero Kamikaze Squirrel $52 Zombies Ate Neighbors $44 \"LINKS 386 PRO offers SUPER VGA graphics and advanced features designed for your 386 or 486. New features include computer opponent, save game option that allows your friends to play against you in an existing game. Play at Harbour Town or use the course disks for extra fun. $32 $46 $48 LINKS (386 ANGROLEAGUE $45 GEN KICK & PUNCH GEN SHOOTERS GEN SIMULATIONS Addams Family $44 Advent Will Beamish CD $42 Aladdin $49 Alien Trilogy CD $49 Alien Vs Predator $49 Asterix & Great Rescue $49 Batman Returns CD $42 Beavis & Butt-Head $49 Blades of Vengeance $42 Bubba & Stix Bubble & Squeak Bubsy 2 $52 Castlevania Bloodlines $44 Chakan Forevr Man CD $49 Chester Cheetah 2 Chuck Rock 2 CD $44 Cliffhanger CD $49 Cool SPOT Demolition Man CD $54 Dolphin CD $39 Dracula $46 Dracula CD $49 Dracula Unleashed CD $43 Dragons Lair 1 or 2 CD $49 Dune:Battle for Arrakis $49 Fido Dido $46 Fire Team Rogue $59 Flashback $52 Flintstones $39 Global Gladiators S32 Golden Axe 3 S49 Goofy S49 High Seas Havoc S46 Home Alone 2 S43 Home Improvement S49 Hook CD $42 Hurricanes $49 Impossible Mission $54 GENESIS SPORTS Virtua Racing $79 Wing Commander 2 $56 World Champ Rally CD $44 World Champ Soccer 2 $46 World Cup USA CD $46 World Series Baseball S49 GENESIS SPORTS GENESIS STRATEGY $59 GEN ROLE PLAYING $52 $46 Clayfighter $52 Soldier of Fortune $52 Double Dragon 3 $39 Subterrania $49 Dragon $56 T2:Arcade Game CD $49 Eternal Champions $56 Third World War CD S42 Fatal Fury 2 $56 Total Carnage CD $49 Juggernauts:New Breed $56 View Point $54 King of the Monsters 2 $54 Kung Fu:Legend Contins $56 Mortal Kombat CD $46 GEN SIMULATIONS Mortal Kombat 2 $69 Ninja Warriors CD $49 688 Attack Sub $56 Power Instinct AH-3 Firehawk CD $44 Rise of the Robots CD $46 Al Unser Jr Racing $46 Samurai Showdown $58 Battle Corps CD $44 Streets of Rage 3 $59 Choplifter 3 $49 Super Street Fighter 2 $69F 117 Night Storm $52 TMNT Tournamnt Fightro 556 Formula 1 or GP CD $49 World Heroes 2 $56 Harrier Assault CD $49 Indy Heat Jungle Strike GEN SHOOTERS MIG 29 $44 Mario Andretti Racing $52 Crime Patrol CD $49 Megarace CD $44 Drug Wars CD $49 Monster Truck Wars S49 Exo Squad Nigel Mansell WCR S49 Gauntlet 4 $42 Pacific Theater Ops S57 Lethal Enforcers w/gun $66 Powr Modir:Euro Rcr CD $42 Lethal Enforcr w/gun CD $64 Powr Modir:Spac Rcr CD$42 Lode Runner CD $46 Road Rash 2 $42 Mad Dog McCree 2 CD $49 SeaQuest DSV $56 Mega Turrican Skitchin' $42 Microcosm CD $49 Speed Racer $56 Nuclear Rush Virt Reality$49 Super Battletank 2 CD $44 Predator 2 S29 Super Bike Challenge $49 Robo Aleste CD S41 Tomcat Alley CD $49 Skeleton Krew S46 Top Gear 2 $46 Battle Fantasy CD S42 Battletech $52 Black Crypt S59 Dark Wizard CD S43 Dominus $49 Dungeon Master CD $44 Eye of the Beholder CD $54 Genghis Khan 2 $59 Heimdall CD $44 Lunar 2 CD $52 Might & Magic 3 $59 Phantasy Star 4 $69 Pirates! Gold S48 Powermonger CD S43 Star Quest $49 Treasures of Isis CD $49 Unchartd Watrs Nw Horz S59 Vampire Killer $44 S49 Barkley Basketball $52 Brett Hull Hockey $54 Brutal Football S49 Championship Pool $46 College Football 94 Double Dribble S52 ESPN Baseball or Fball $54 ESPN Bsball or FB CD $49 FIFA Internatnal Soccer $52 Hardball 4 $54 Jamm It S56 Links Pro Golf CD $56 MLBPA Baseball $52 MLBPA Grand Slam BB $54 Marco's Magic Soccer $46 Mutant League Hockey $44 NBA Basketball or CD S49 NBA Showdown $52 NFL Greatest Teams CD $49 PGA Tour 3:Europe $49 Pebble Beach Golf Pele Soccer 2 $49 RBI 94 $52 Tecmo Baseball $54 Tecmo Hockey $54 Unnecessary Roughnss $56 Vitale Basketball WCW Super Brawl $49 Winter Olympics $54 Aero Biz Supersonic Animals CD S44 Caesars Palace $49 Cascade $49 Chessmaster $42 Columns 3 Dune CD $49 Family Feud $49 HUMANS 2 S49 Jeopardy 2 $49 Jeopardy CD $49 Jim Powers Lost Dimen $49 Liberty or Death $59 Monopoly $44 Nobunaga's Ambition $49 Operation Europe $62 Risk CD $52 Romance 3 Kingdoms 3 $58 Shanghai 2 $44 Sonic Spinball $43 Star Wars Chess CD S49 Super Battleship Virtual Pinball $43 Warrior of Rome 3 CD $52 Warsong $29 Wheel of Fortune $46 Wheel of Fortune CD $52 Wheel of Fortune 2 $49 Where in Time Carmen $29 Indiana Jones CD $39 Indy Jones Ft Atlants CD$44 Interplanetary Lizards $49 Itchy & Scratchy $43 James Pond 3 $39 Joe & Mac $46 Jungle Book $56 Jurassic Park CD $49 Justice League $56 Lawnmower Man or CD $52 Leisure Suit Larry 1 CD $54 Lion King $54 Mad Dog McCree CD $49 Mansn Hidden Souls CD $49 McDonald Land $46 Metal Fang CD $49 $54 $44 $52 S43 GEN KICK & PUNCH $52 $52 Akira Beast Wrestlers Brutal $46 $49 "


"Visa/MC Accepted Checks Held 4 Weeks. Money Orders same as cash COD SB. Defectives replaced with same product. Most items shipped same day. Shipping times may vary. Price availability may change. All sales final. OVERNIGHT SHIPPING in US $4 per order. Mail to Canada, PR HI. AK. APO, FPO $4 per order a day Worldwide shipping S6 per item. Handling $2 per stipment ang parang . FREE GAME OFFER See Last Page For Details SNES ROLE PLAYING SNES SPORTS CORRIDOR 1995-1941 CEUM 'ACES OF THE DEEP' Between September 1939 and May 1945, Ger. many launched over 1.000 U-boats into combat against the Allies. Dive deep to avoid at. tacks and measure your success in tonage as you take command in the most realistic and advanced WWII German U-boat simulation created. $42 \"CORRIDOR 7' The year 2012. A team of U.S. scientists returns from Mars with a small, metallic object the first hard proof that life exists beyond our planet. Features full screen action, alien and advanced milltary weapons, and morphing aliens. Offers proximity mapping. transparent walls, and 4 difficulty levels. $36 ACES of the DEEP WOLFENSTEIN 30 THE PIT TE MARE ACTUALLY DIFERENCED FEAR ON WATERINS A CAPTER LANE S52 and Might Magic I Isles Terra \"MIGHT & MAGIC 3' Lead a party of hand-picked adventurers to a rendezvous with the legendary wizard Corak. Bizarre and intriguing creatures will challenge you along the way. Features elaborate world simulation, stunning music, automatic \"help\" function, and hours of swashbuckling adventure. $19 GABRIEL KNIGHT: SINS OF THE FATHER Gabriel Knight is a horror writer and rookie private investigator. Your skill, logic and courage will help him solve a series of ritual voodoo murders. Includes 'Gabriel Knight graphic novel and features 3-D highresolution graphics CD $45 ASUPERNATURAL POVHOOTLI $56 GABRIEL KNIGHT SINS OF THE FATHERS. Journey Home $49 Kick Oll 3 $49 King Arthur/Knghts Justc$59 Kirby's Tee Shot $52 Lord of the Rings $54 Legends of the Ring $46 Lufia 2 $56 MLBPA Grand Slam BB $62 Might & Magic 3 $59 Madden Football 94 $52 Obitus $58 Mega Man Soccer $56 Paladin's Quest $52 NBA Jam Session $62 Runes of Virtue $59 NBA Showdown $56 Secret of Mana $59 NHL Stanley Cup $42 Shadow Run $56 Pele Soccer $54 Spellcaster:Aspcts Valor $49 Power Pro Baseball $52 Super Dragone Crom $54 Pro Sport Hockey S54 Ultima 6 $59 RappBall S49 Ultima 7:Black Gate $64 Riddick Bowe Boxing $52 Uncharted Waters 10r2 $59 Side Pocket $47 Wanderers from Ys 3 $29 Slam Masters $56 Warrior of Rome 3 $52 Soccer Shootout S56 Super Bases Loaded 2 $59 Super Goal! 2 $54 SNES SHOOTERS Super Volleyball Tecmo Baseball $56 Contra 3 $46 Tecmo Super NBA Bball $54 Cybernator $46 WWFSW2: Royal Rumbl $59 Exo Squad $54 Waialae Cntry Club Golf $49 Fire Power 2000 $39 Winter Extreme $54 Fire Striker $52 Winter Olympics S54 Galactic Defenders $54 World Cup USA $54 Lethal Enforcers w/gun $64 Parodius $54 Soldier of Fortune SNES STRATEGY Super Metroid $56 Super R-Type 3 $54 Aero Biz Supersonic $59 Super Sonic Blastmn 2 $54 Jeopardy 2 $52 Total Carnage $49 Jeopardy Sports Edition $52 View Point $54 Jim Powers Lost Dimen $49 Vortex $52 Liberty or Death $59 Loopz $46 Mario is Missing SNES SIMULATIONS Metal Marines $59 Nobunaga's Ambition $49 8 Hours $52 Operation Europe $62 Aero Fighters $52Pac Attack $39 Al Unser Jr Racing $52 Pinball Dreams Choplifter 3 $44 Populous $36 F-1 Pole Position $52 Railroad Tycoon $54 Freeway Fly Boys $49 Risk $52 Mario Andretti Racing $52 Romance 3 Kingdoms 3 $59 Monster Truck Wars $58 Shanghail 2 Nigel Mansell WCR $49 Sim Ant $42 River Raid $46 SimCity Spectre VR $52 SimEarth Speed Racer $56 Super Battleship $44 Super Battle Tank 2 $49 Super Bomberman 2 $56 Super F1 2 $58 Super Conflict $49 Super Off Road:Baja Super Solitaire Top Gear 2 $49 Utopia $49 Transformers 2 $56 Vegas Stakes Turn & Burn:No Fly Zon $52 Wheel of Fortune 2 $49 WarpSpeed $44 Wild Trax $56 Wing Commander $53 FREE GAME OFFER SWISS SIERRA $46 SNES HARDWARE SNES ADVENTURE SNES ADVENTURE SNES KICK & PUNCH $56 $49 Championship Joystick $56 Lethal Enforcers Gun S18 Power Plug $34 Pro Action Replay $79 Program Pad $32 Super Advantage $39 Super Link (5 Playr Lnk) $29 Super Multitap $32 Super Scope $54 Wireless Control Pad $42 S.O.S. $49 Skuljagger $39 Sky Blazer $52 Space Ace $52 Spiderman & Venom $59 Star Trek Next Generto $59 Star Trek:Deep Space 9 $56 Steven Seagal $54 Super Adventre Island 2 $52 Super Empire Strks Bck $55 Super Godzilla $54 $44 $46 $56 Clayfighter $56 Doomsday Warrior $46 Dragon Fatal Fury 2 $59 Final Fight 2 $49 King of Dragons $59 King of the Monsters 2 $54 Kung Fu:Legend Contns $56 Mortal Kombat 2 $69 Ninja Warriors $56 Peace Keepers $54 Power Instinct $54 Rise of the Robots $56 Samurai Showdown $59 Sengoku $49 $49 Shadow of the Ninja 2 $54 Streetfighter 2 Turbo Ed $59 Super Street Fighter 2 $69 TMNT:Tournment Fightrs $56 Undercover Cops S56 WCW Super Brawl $49 World Heroes 2 $58 SNES ADVENTURE S43 $49 $46 Death of Superman $59 Demolition Man $56 Dracula $16 Dragons Lair $36 Eek the Cat $52 Fire Team Rogue $59 Flashback $54 Flintstones Movie $54 Generation 2 $54 Ghetto Blaster $49 Home Improvement $52 Hurricanes Incredible Hulk $54 Inspector Gadget $19 James Bond Jr $32 Jetsons Joe & Mac 1 or 2 ea $49 Jungle Book $56 Jurassic Park $56 King Arthurs World Knights of Round Table $56 Lawnmower Man $42 Legend $49 Legnd of Mystel Ninja 2 $56 Lion King $54 Mario & Wario $54 Mega Man X $56 Metal Combat $48 Nosferatu $54 Pirates of Dark Water $52 Pocky & Rocky 2 $52 Popeye $49 Radical Rex $49 Ren & Stimpy Show 2 $52 Robocop Vs Terminator $56 Rocko's Modern Life $49 Super Return of the Jedi $59 T2:Arcade Game T2:Judgement Day $42 Tales of Spike McFang $56 Tazmania $48 The Shadow $52 Time Killers $56 Time Trax $49 Twin Bee:Rnbw Bell Adv $52 Untouchables $52 Virtual Bart $57 Wizard of Oz $36 Wolf Child $46 X-Kaliber $46 Young Merlin $56 Zero Kamikaze Squirrel $54 Zool $49 ActRaiser 2 $48 Addams Family Values $54 Aero the Acrobat 2 $52 Aladdin S54 Alien vs Predator $44 Aliens 3 $49 Americn Tail:Feival West $49 Arcus Odyssey $54 Batman:Reveng of Jokr $49 Battle Toads $35 Beauty & the Beast Beavis & Butt-Head $49 Bebe's Kids $46 Bonk's Adventure $54 Bubsy 2 Bugs Bnny:Rabbit Rmpg $56 Castle Wollenstein 3D $54 Chestr Cheetah 1or2 ea $49 Chuck Rock 2 $49 Claymates $49 Cliffhanger $52 Daffy Duck/Marvn Martn $46 SNES SPORTS SNES ROLE PLAYING Spend $60 on any in stock software and choose a free IBM game from the list below. Offer subject to change or cancellation without notice. Valid from May 1st through Jun 31st or while supplies last. an Merlin $59 $59 $59 Master $69 SNES KICK & PUNCH Brain Lord Breath of Fire Dungeon Master Eye of the Beholder 2 Final Fantasy 3 First Queen Gaia Fantasy Genghis Khan 2 Golden Empire Inindo $64 $54 $56 $56 $59 $56 Barkley Basketball $56 Baseball Stars 2 $54 Bill Walsh Colig Football $49 Brett Hull Hockey $49 Brutal Football $49 Diamond Challenge $52 ESPN Baseball or Fball $54 FIFA Internatnal Soccer $52 Hardball 3 $56 Jamm It $56 Ken Grilley Baseball $52 Art of Fighting $59 Battle Blaze $39 Battle Toads/Doubl Dragns49 Artura, Sound Star, Airborne Ranger, Gunship. SDI, Wheel of Fortune 1 or 2 5.25, Obliterator, 3 in 1 Players Pack, Video Poker Villa Crespo, Punisher 5.25 "


"MAIL UUUUUUUUUU 29 Get A Clue! Scorpion's wivururs wir Return to Zork QFG IV: Shadows of Darkness a Simon the Sorcerer Forge of Virtue Lands of Lore Companions of Xanth Serpent Isle Sam & Max Hit The Road ennnnnnn o here we are in the back room again, asking about how to get back across the river Scotia at the end. Pieces won't work here. You floundering in a sea of mail sacks. And after visiting the temple at Bel Nair. They need the Whole Truth and nothing but to we were making such good progress have trouble because the game does not indidefeat the old hag. Just put it all together and getting the place cleaned out, too. Now that cate in any way (except a vague remark about stop her when she starts morphing. Do it summer is about to pounce, Fred is thinking receiving a special gift) that their map has soon; if she makes it to the third form, you're more about the annual Grues Convention in become a magical map. Once you've been to gonna be toast. August instead of keeping his mind on the the temple, you can get to any known (preCompanions of Xanth: Most of this game business at hand. Ah well, maybe we can do viously-visited) location simply by clicking is pretty simple, but there's a spot or two some autumn cleaning instead. on it. This makes travel quite easy, once you where people run into a little trouble. One of Before we get to the mail, though, I have a know about it. By the way, some players have these is the door ajar. It can't be opened, it little something to say about Daemonsgate. I had problems with the map becoming corcan't be closed, and in general, it seems there's have not played this game and don't plan to rupted. Not everything appears on it, or it nothing you can do with it (or to it). The do so, but a letter came in from a CGWreader can't be scrolled, or some other odd thing answer lies in the old pun/riddle, \"When is a in early March detailing his frustrations with happens. In those cases there is nothing you door not a door? When it's a iar tech support for the game. can do except restore to a point where the Serpent Isle: The fight with the three Banes The box contained no warranty card and map was still good and play on from there. of Chaos is tricky, and not entirely fair. Playno information at all about tech support. QFG IV: Shadows of Darkness: Some aders win the battle, then hurry off to do the When he hit a serious bug in the game, he venturers are having difficulty with locating ceremony to restore the Chaos Serpent, only had to get the phone number from an ad. grue goo (nothing to do with Fred, by the to find that nothing much happens. That's Amazingly, someone did answer the phone, way). It's easy to find, although perhaps not because the Banes aren't in those little soul and he did get a return call the same day; easy to reach. The pool where you exit the prisms—yet. They are inside something else unfortunately, very unfortunately, he was out cave is full of grue goo. Also, other gamers are and have to be transferred over to their happy at the time. having a hard time with satisfying the skull homes. Now that you know this, it shouldn't That was the last contact he had with outside Baba Yaga's hut. Think about that for take much time to figure out where they Imagitec Design. He kept calling them for a moment. It's a skull; there aren't too many actually are when the fight ends. about a month and a half with no answer on things around that it would find useful, and the other end, until finally he got a message there's only one person around who has what Sam & Max Hit The Road: So here are the Freelance Police having fun with the binocuit wants. that the number had been \"temporarily dislars at the restaurant by the ball of twine. connected.\" Simon The Sorcerer: No one enjoys visitThey'd probably be having even more fun if Persistent to the end, he managed, after ing the Swampling (can't blame em, heh), bur they could see better and knew what they great trouble and expense, to track down everyone wants to move that crate to see were looking for. Well, before they know Dreamweavers, the England-based company what's underneath. Too bad the little critter what to look for, they have to talk to Shavthat made the game. They told him they won't let you get near it. The only thing to Ool (you know, the guy hiding out in the knew about the bug (more than one, it turned do is get rid of him. Violence, however, is not Mystery Vortex). Then they need to improve out), and that they were planning to upload the solution (besides, the poor thing is just visual acuity to see it. Waka Waka Waka (rats, patches to the Internet. Since the patches lonely, not evil). Indigestion, on the other what a terrible hint!). weren't ready at that time, I don't know if hand, has possibilities. Choke. they actually made it onto the net, nor at what Forge of Virtue: A lot of people are still That's about it for this look into the mailFTP sites they might be available on, and I playing this one, and like others before them, bag. In the meantime, if you need help with don't have an Internet address for the comhave had problems with the Test of Truth. an adventure game, you can reach me in the pany. However, I do have the regular address Amulets, amulets everywhere, nor a one to following ways: and phone number. If you need to get in take. That's because all those obvious trinkers On Delphi: Stop by the GameSIG (under touch with the company, you can do so at: are just fakes designed to lure you away from the Groups & Clubs menu). Dreamweavers, Suite 202, 15 Wellington looking for the one true amulet, which is by On GEnie: Visit the Games Round Table Rd., Dewsbury, West Yorkshire, England, no means obvious (hey, you didn't think they (type: Scorpia to reach the Games RT). WF131HF. Phone: 011-44-924-461-115. were gonna make this easy, did you?). So Many thanks to James Kight of North Carodon't let yourself be hoodwinked; look to the By US Mail (enclose a self-addressed, lina, who provided this information and walls instead. stamped envelope if you live in the US): paid for it in more ways than one!). Lands of Lore: While it wasn't so long ago Scorpia, PO Box 338, Gracie Station, New And now on to the mail! that I gave a hint about this one, it's still Still York, NY 10028. Return To Zork: A lot of people have been giving players headaches. Namely, taking out Until next time, happy adventuring! CGW Page 90 Computer Gaming World "


"pinball VATTISider PIESAI VAULT STONES & BONES GRAPHICS MODES SPEED DEVIL THIRD GENERATION PINBALL Fast, full-screen table scrolling Totally authentic ball movement Great sound effects and music High resolution color graphics o 4 unique new tables with features that will keep you playing for hours: NEW! Variable table angles Variable table scroll rate Full table tilt 2 graphics modes to let you use each table in two different sizes RealMotionTM Pinball Fantasies is the first game to use exclusive RealMotion technology to bring to you the most accurate, realistic, dynamic arcade excitement possible on a computer. \"Now Available From A Store Near You, Or Call Us At 716-872-1200 For Ordering Information\" . Ramps and Tunnels Ball Traps Flashing Bumpers Jackpots and Bonuses Rollovers Drop Targets PARTYLAND ACTUAL SCREEN SHOTS \"Com:letely redefines intell simulciions and the rest of the imatke Will Le sarandeling te meet the standere PC Entertciumleri BILLION DOLLAR GAME SHOW \"Many pinball games have speared none are so purely enjoydule as the one from 21st Century Electronic Games CENTURY 21st Century Entertainment, Inc. P.O. BOX 415 WEBSTER, NY 14580 Circle Reader Service #35 "


"REVIEW The Text Generation More Games For The Textually Insatiable by Charles Ardai Take some garlic and go home to your ( mother. Tell her there is very serious doubt you'll ever be a vampire slayer! few months back, CGW published the rule of thumb in publishing is that for an article I wrote called \"Sons of every dozen people who bother to write in Infocom,\" about a couple of game response to an article, there are 120 who designers who stubbornly persist in writing don't. And if 120 people buy a game, wh text adventures. The clear signs on all sides you're practically talking grassroots support. are that text adventures are the last thing a A ll of which I offer as prelude to and hip, bleeding-edge, ear-to-the-infohighway explanation for, this article, a sequel of sorts gamer wants to play. No one, the convento the earlier piece and (who knows?) tional wisdom goes, still cares about text maybe the start of something big. You see, adventures. two of the dozen letters I received came I was delighted that these young rebels with games attached. The first was from D. were bucking conventional wisdom. Since I A. Leary, author of Unnkulia Zero, one of the games I covered in \"Sons of Infocom\"; cut my gaming eyeteeth on text adventures, D. A. enclosed a copy of his latest title, The I very much want new ones to play. What I Horror of Rylvania. The second was from didn't put in the article was my feeling that Dennis Cunningham, who sent his magI was not alone in desiring new text advennum opus, T-Zero. tures, mainly because I wasn't sure. And, by gum, both games were good. Now I'm sure. Since the article appeared, I've gotten a dozen letters from Hexed By Text people who wanted to second the sentiment. To appreciate just how unusual this Nestled in the foothills of Eastern is, you have to know that the largest numEurope, not far, one assumes, from that ber of letters I had previously received in other-ylvania, lies the sleepy nation of response to an article was two. (If you're a Rylvania. You and your girlfriend Carolyn game reviewer and you're not Scorpia, the are touring the countryside when dusk falls, mail doesn't exactly pour in.) This is why the woods close around you, and a pack of the response to \"Sons of Infocom\" was so wolves leaps out of the underbrush. When surprising—and so gratifying. the wolves retreat, Carolyn lies bleeding, near death, on the ground. You run into Granted, from a marketing standpoint, a the the nearest town for a doctor. When you dozen people who like text games is hardly and the doctor return. Carolyn's body has better than one, since selling a dozen copies vanished. You're all alone, a stranger in an of a game won't exactly make a dent in a unholy land, with a girlfriend who is bot designer's payments on his Rolls Royce. But missing and dying...and your troubles have only begun. To say any more about The Horror of Rylvania's story is to say too much, since the game hits you early on with a number of surprises. To know about these in advance would diminish your ultimate enjoyment, although knowing nothing about them means you can't begin to appreciate the game's delicious perverseness. Consider: some 70-odd moves into the game you'll have the rug pulled our from under you when an attack turns you In ancient times, the release of a new text into a... adventure was cause for much celebration. No, I can't bring myself to spoil it. Let's just say that afterwards you won't be eating a lor of garlic bread with your fettuccine in red sauce. (And as for that red sauce...) The subplots mount as you leave the town for the perilous Castle Gloomfen, trying desperately to mix a potion to return you to your normal state. Meanwhile, you're getting visions of Carolyn being tortured by a maniac, visits from a headless apparition, the cold shoulder from a crone who wants some booze before she'll tell you your fortune, and hunger pangs because it's been hours since you ate your last priest. Not necessarily in that order. Leary is at the top of his form here, integrating marvelous multiple-stage puzzles (including, be warned, some of his famous lying-computer puzzles and dead ends) into the most fully-developed storyline I've seen in a text game in years. Rylvania is not just a grab bag of puzzles; it's a ripping good yarn full of good scares, good jokes, good adventure game writing, and a plot that actually holds everything together. Experienced adventurers will find themselves racing through the game, since the puzzles tend not to be all that difficult. (Leary himself rates the game's difficulty at 5 on a scale of 1 to 10.) However, there are a few ringers in there. I was stumped twice, Page 92 Computer Gaming World "


"\"THUMBS UP!\" Johnny L. Wilson Computer Gaming World  Carey Deluono's Hollywood Mogul HOLLYWOOD MOVIE STUDIO Past the studio gate with your name on it lies your personal dream factory. Go for it: Buy original scripts and blockbuster bestsellers or steal ideas for yourself. Set vastly padded production budgets. Choose enough special effects to hide the lack of plot. Play God with producers and directors. Make and break superstars' carcers, or enslave stars of tomorrow. Shoot on Sound Stage 10, in London, or on the slopes of the Himalayas. Have marketing and distribution grovel at your feet. Attend your world premieres. Grab it all: Sit back and watch the grosses roll in. Snag that Beverly Hills mansion, Malibu beach house, 40,000 acres in Montana or your own Greek island. Collect the most overpriced art on earth. Find you can't live without that 4th studio jet. Keep the biggest names in Hollywood waiting outside your studio gate. Or Gamble it all! Sell your shirt just to stay alive. If you've got what it takes to make it in Hollywood... Carey DeVuono's Hollywood Mogul is gonna take everything you've got. To purchase, visit your local software retailer, or call 1-800-350-5550. DeVuono De Vuono Available for IBM And Compatibles. MS-DOS and Microsoft Windows versions available. 600k required, mouse suggested, 3 meg hard disk space required. Carey DeVuono's Hollywood Mogul is a trademark of DeVuono DeVuono Games, all rights reserved. Other brands and product names are trademarks of their respective holders. Ti GAMES 4 "


"writing le's not counting times when I knew what to like The Horror of Rylvania: T-Zero has a ot only was he pig headed, but do, but couldn't get the computer to under hard-to-fathom storyline liat makes I bod. stand my instructions. For the most part almost as little sense at the end as at the the purs operates well, but cliere are some beginning; it takes place in a strical maddening exceptions to the rule, such as Wonderlund with 1:Iny locations and when you find an ink bottle the comput difficult, brain-taxing puzzles; and it Won't let yoll open except when yoll smell seems to exist not to draw the player it. That's not a puzzle, just a quirk of the fiction, but as a showplace for the verbal virtuosity of the author. In Other weaknesses include occasional some regards, T-Zero reminds 11ac less crrors of language («shinny for «shimmy, of a text adventure than of those : sound described redundantly as «far-disinfuriatingly difficult cryptic tant thunder) and some inconsistent yord puzzles from the descriptions, such as a room wlhere \"the London Times, which suddenly only sound is the quier ticking of the infuriatingly easy once the clock, but contains a buzzing f whi Constructor leads you it is said «you can't scit anywhere solution. you sure can hear it. To is subtitled «an adventure for Lary also sometimes denies gamers the : being and if you don't see the opportunity to exercise their cleverness in nmeaning in that phrase at first And so it goes. Not since Infocoms coming up with alternate solutions to his his ne s not for you. You see, puzzles. In one instance, he wants the play the time being in the game, or t o It has a single game contained so much cr to use a staff found at the end of a maze least one of the time beings, a custodianwordplay. Cunningham, true to both parts to balance while wire-walking across cum-librarian who has just been given his of his name (since he is clearly both cun(yes, check your inventory, |ning and something of a han. aces a Dun gorge. The player cannot acquire a signpo or 1 spoke from a wrought-iron fnce, both c) by the mysterious Count Zers), ti ints nearly every linc. The density of the of which arc described as tall and pole-like. wealtly individual on the grounds of whose text is almost Joycean-if there ever were to It would be fine for these alternate solutions estate the adventure begins. The grounds be a computer game based on 7thegas not to work; the sign post could are jam-cked with timepieces of every Wake, Cunningham would be the man to while being uprooted, perhaps, and the description, from sundials t) cgg timers, Write it. spokc could turn out to be too he a11d 110:11y of the puzzles are time-related. That said, who is actually going to play Needless to say, this is one of those games T-Zee and love it? It will have to be somewhere you have to pay attention to where one with more patience than I have. On top How would you like you are at any given time. of clic to-clever wordplay, which is hard your sake, sir? othing is simple in T-Ze. When you cnough to navigatc, Cunningham has made find a trophy Case in Rydia, you open it mapping his world a nigliare by using by smashing the glass top. When you find a multiple paths, ostensibly heading in differtrophy case in T-Zero, you open it by tim ent directions, to realh the same location. ing the ringing of chilmes to coincide, initi What should be up is dow11; what should ating sufficient sympathetic motion on the be northwest is cast. Did Cu1111ingha 111 part of a pendulum to malke it swing and deliberately set out to confuse players, or smash the glass from inside. Want to take did it just happen? Hard to say, but I do he contents of the case? Good luck. Reach know that I had to redraw the whole map or the pendulu and your hand swings four times. and toirclh, not quite snagging it feel If there is anyone out life who wants a the stopWatch and, sure enough mammoth brain-twister-if you like, in the So, the game is not perfect, but it is the that you are being watched makes words of that proto-Cunningham, W. S. Learys games that I have played, Gilbert, «quips and quibbles heard in lhigh praise indeed, and one of the most Later, you find a suspension bridgc. Try -you might want to give TZero a enjoyable T can remember. Because of its to cross it and you get stuck, halfway across try. If you're lecy...stick to Leary, subject matter and irrevcrn tonc, yudaiain suspended uniination. How to proced? may not be for all tastes, but players with Snapping your suspenders, To Order Te Hor Ofyia, write: hearty constitutions will have, as it were, a You encounter 1 door wlhose janabis P.0. Box 851 What's behind the door? A jam Columbia, MD 2014 You find a field fullofsts In A Bottle ConpuServe: 76440,2671 terns circling overhead. Are you sup GEnie: ADVENTIONS T-Zero will also not be to everyone's to leave no stone unturned of th) cern 1et: lib@ai.aiu. taste, even though it's an essentially bloodless und abstract epitor possibly, to To order T-Zero, write: ind a rag man who is «all mixed Dennis Cunninghan cxactly this reason. In almost every way it is hts an angram of a rag man? the opposite of a hcarty, full-of-fun game gram» is an anagram of a rag man. Portland, OR 57210-3531 flock SUSDE Curta Vol "


"IKH AKRIGHT Tor centuries, war has raged among the demons and fairies, devastating this mystical land. Twin brothers, born to mortals, are separated at birth, chosen for the ultimate battle that will decide the fate of heaven and earth. They later meet, never knowing their true relation — or their own dark destiny. Fated to duel your twin to the death, you must fight to stay alive and rescue lovely, innocent maidens from the clutches of menacing foes. And perhaps, become the ruler of all. WADAU Enter a World of Demons and Damsels. If You Dare. So the challenge is on! An incomparable role playing fantasy game for your PC, with stunning, hand sculpted graphics throughout, numerous scripts and a thrilling plot. But be warned — with its voluptuous women and intense action, Dragon Knight III is for mature audiences only. And not for the faint hearted. Available now at your nearest dealer or call 1-800-258-MEGA. Or write Megatech, P.O. Box 11333, Torrance, CA 90510. Visa, Mastercard, checks accepted. Systen requirements: 286-20 or faster machine (386_ecommended) with 640K RAM, hard disk, mouse recommended. Operating Sys: MS DOS 3.3 or above, Windows .1. Graphics compatible with VGA. Sound support: Sound Blaster, Sound Blaster Pro, Thunder Board, Pro Audio Spectrum, Adlib Gold und Speed Master This game is not for the faint-hearted. Contains violence For a free demo, call our 24hr. BBS at 310-539-7739. (SNT), and some material inappropriate for minors under 18. Circle Reader Service #86 All companies and product names mentioned are trademarks or registered trademarks of the respective owners. MEGA TECH "


"REVIEW A Six-Pack of Russkies Interplay Imports Russian 6 Pak by Paul Hymen XAS The Cold War may be over, but there's onrushing liquid waste. Here you attempt to been sighted and is just as frustrating. «Fast still one Russian bomb that needs construct a «ring road» or complete circuit by Ring» is easier but not very interesting as you 1 defusing—it's Russian 6 Pak, the latrotating pieces of roadway. It's a real bear of attempt to form boxes by clicking on buttons est release from Interplay. a game, especially with the timer ticking that appear randomly. You can increase the As a Tetris fanatic, I eagerly awaited this away. difficulty by boosting the game's speed, but package that sounded like a comrade piece to A third game, which offered promise but what's the point? Crete\" features a maze that the Tris series (Tetris, Wordtris, etc.) of fell apart in the clutch, is the intriguingly must be traversed in the least number of games. So when it arrived, I grabbed a nice named \"Master Of Bombs.\" This pseudomoves-hardly an original concept. hot glass of tea and settled in for a double Tetris puzzler is fun for a few tries but then There isn't anything particularly Russian troika of Slavic puzzles. about any of these games, not even My excitement was quickly purged by the the so-called \"authentic Russian manual's introduction, a disclaimer written SCORE music\" whose disco beat is more by, of all people, the inventor of Tetris, Alexey 10609 likely to show up in Russian elevaPajitnoy. SPEED tors. (The button that turns the \"Due to a lack of sophisticated hardware music off is a godsend). availability,\" he says, «Russian programmers Although Russian 6 Pak is availIST OF are typically a few years behind their Ameriable in both Windows and DOS can counterparts regarding sound and graphversions, it lends itself best to the ics. Because of this, we don't intend to Windows environment as it closely emphasize them as much as strategy aspects resembles the popular Microsoft and game concepts... We would rather create 1-1-03-i-*** Windows Entertainment Packages, these small logic-type games than to create and, like the WEPs, some of these violent shoot-'em-ups.\" puzzles will grab you, most won't. But, ironically, the problem with Russian 6 becomes repetitive. Falling bombs must be mbs must be No, it's not fair to expect every piece of Pakisn't the sound or graphics--it's the game hooked together so that dropping detonators Russian software to measure up to the wildly concepts. The collection features six games can be used to explode them. It's an interestsuccessful Tetris, but when a program is prothat are described as «marvelously minding idea, but in the harder levels, the bombs mored as if it is the successor to Tetris (as bending and enormously entertaining.\" In are so huge that they fill the screen in an witnessed by Pajitnoy's testimonial), you just truth, they aren't. instant and the game quickly comes to a halt. expect more. While I still find myself going back to Russian 6 Pak to fling a little fruit, can The most interesting of the half dozen is That's the good news. The other three I recommend the entire package? A resound\"Flying Pictures,\" an oddball exercise in games-\"Crete,\" \"Fast Ring,\" and \"Shading NYET! CGW which a little girl climbs up and down a ladder ows\"-are rather silly and not alongside piles of fruit. You can make each well thought out. Contrary to PaRussian 6-Pak fruit vanish by having the girl toss an identical jitnoy's disclaimer, \"Shadows\" IS fruit at it. The trick is to make sure that the a shoot-'em-up that requires no correct fruits are exposed so they can be hit. strategy whatsoever, and it seems RUSSIAN $49.95 (Windows), $39.95 (DOS) SYSTEM: It isn't as easy as it looks, and one quickly strangely out of place in this colREQUIREMENTS: 286-12MHz or better, 3MB hard becomes addicted to fruit flinging. lection. To score, all you need is drive space, VGA graphics: While the pace of «Flying Pictures\" can best the ability to aim at, shoot, and Pro Audio Spectrum sound cards PROTECTION: detonate floating asteroids using be described as leisurely, \"Line Man\" is franNone Interplay Productions, Inc. tic. This is a hyperactive version of the nearcross hairs that refuse to respond (714) 553-6655 classic LucasArts game Pipe Dream in which to any efforts to direct them. It's pieces of pipe must be laid to accommodate like using a rifle that has never PRICE: IBM supports Sound Blaster and PUBLISHER: Irvine, CA Page 96 Computer Gaming World "


"HARD DRIVE TAKES ON A WHOLE NEW MEANING. INDYCAR Get a grip-and hang on tight. IndyCar Racing is real-world, 3-D racing! Check out the reviews: \"Phenomenal\"Computer Gaming World. \"Scary\"On Track. \"Fast, furious, brilliant»PC Gamer. \"Nirvana for car racing fans\"Game Bytes. ALUMAA ALUMAS Indlanopol sa PAPYRUS TV I NEW TOYOTA PC NEWS 3 NEW wie . INOY CAR COD52.03 138 0468 5 2011 6 KAD TIL The feel. It's almost too real. Scream down the straight. Crest a hill and your stomach's in your throat. Corner too fast and it's panic. Brake? Gas? Flick the wheel? If you have to think, you're toast. Don't worry, you'll learn. But this is a win you earn. The look. You're there. Cars, tread marks, terrain, billboards even paint schemes and decals on real IndyCars accurate in obsessive 3-D detail. The experience. Tinker with chassis and engine set-up. Fiddle with turbo boost, wing angles and tires. Factor in tire wear and fuel load. All play a part all can help you go faster. Add on 7 new tracks. With our IndyCar Circuits: Expansion Pack, you can race at seven new tracks from Phoenix to Mid-Ohio, Detroit to Queensland, Australia the challenge always stays fresh! Each track has been painstakingly constructed to match the true dimensions of the actual speedway. ET PATRIOPOORTEPORT SAVE And now, Indy, too! Our engineers have mastered the feel and thrill of \"The Brickyardso you can, too, with our new Indianapolis Motor Speedway: Expansion Pack. Plus, with this addon package, you get a Customizing Paint Kit to update colors and decals, or just do your car your way. OFFICIALLY LICENSED =I NDYCAR RACING Visit local retail stores, or call: 1-800-874-4607 PAPYRUS\" Now. New Expansion Packs: IndyCar Circuits, plus Distributed GOLDEN COMPUTE exclusively worldwide TRIAD AWARD by Virgin Interactive CHOISE SEARD Entertainment, Inc. 1993 INTERACTIVE 18061 Fitch Avenue entertainment Irvine, CA 92714 Indianapolis 500, Indy and The Brickyard are registered trademarks of the Indianapolis Motor Speedway Corporation. IndyCar Mand the helmet logo are trademarks of The Indianapolis Motor Speedway Corporation, under exclusive license to Championship Auto Racing Teams, Inc. Papyrus is a trademark of Papyrus Design Group, Inc. Virgin is a trademark of Virgin Enterprises Inc. IBM PC screens shown. Actual screens may vary Circle Reader Service #153 The Indianapolis Motor Speedway! "


"PREPARE FOR BATTLE Join the Interplanetary Battle on a world addicted  Circuit and pilot a Zephyr hover to combat. Square a tank in the gladiatorial games off against the of a far flung future. Fly computer, your silent and deaclly through friends, or both with the murky depths of an complete modern and aquatic mine field, or network support. It takes rocket through lightning reflexes, a steady I city streets trigger finger, and nerves of steel to pilot a Zephyr to victory. Available at your local software retailer or order direct from New World Computing at 1-800-325-8898 (818-889-5650 outside the US), or by mail: P., Box 4302 Hollywood CA 90078-4302. "


"ZEPHYR 3-D RENDERED GFAPHICS I MODEM AND NETWORK SUPPORT DOZENS OF ALIEN LANDSCAPES EASY TO USE KEYBOARD, MOUSE, OR JOYSTICK INTERFACE POUNDING ROCK-N-ROLL SOUND TRACK WEALTH AND FAME T THE VICTOR, THE REST JUST GET VAPORIZED P.O. Box 4302, Hollywood, CA 90078  1994 New World Computing, Inc. Zephyr is a trademark of New World Computing. New World Computing and its distinctive logo are registered trademarks of New World Computing All rights reserved. IBM screens shown. Actual screens may vary Circle Pandor Sanrico #151 pasowanie n a NEW WORLD COMPUTING, INC Hali "


"REVIEW Is This Another Bug Hunt, Sir? LAPAK MAIL At The Movies With Media Vision's Quantum Gate by Charles Ardai M ame Then writing about Quantum Gate, almost to the exclusion of the interactive better. It adds nothing to the Atari 5200 an ambitious interactive movie element. version of Battlezone, and offers only minor burdened with an apocalyptic Read the marketing materials that come graphic improvements on the even older plot, a cartload of avant garde visuals, bad with the game and you'd never know it. Atari VCS clunker Robo Tank. poetry, good acting, an identity crisis, and not Media Vision says things like «How you inFrankly, these scenes are marginal at best one but two subtitles («No One Dreams teract makes the difference between life and and an embarrassment at worst. To leap from Here\" and \"The Saga Begins\"), one feels the death» and «How you interact decides the the stunning visuals of the movie sequences urge to crib from the works of Charles Dick fate of the two worlds.\" The only problem is into the crude and clumsy battle-sequences is ens: It is the best of games, it is the worst of that this isn't true. Quantum Gate is a movie. to leap from a champagne bubble bath into a games. The viewer gets to wander around the sets on trough full of mud. How is it the best? For one thing, it is one which it was filmed at several points during As a game, therefore, Quantum Gate deof the first interactive movies to take full lulls in the action, as well as to make a handful serves a scathing review. I would be most advantage of the technology on the market, happy to give it one, offering more than two hours of full-motion were it not so damn video and requiring the hottest of hot-rod good as a movie. systems to view it. For another, it eschews the Though as a game de\"let's get a big-name star to go slumming\" signer, writer-director method of casting, the results of which can be Greg Roach has a lot hit-or-miss, in favor of hiring unknown acto learn, he has protors who are simply outstanding. Its script is duced something rebeautifully crafted, evoking the sort of paramarkable in Quantum noid dread normally associated with science Gate. a science-fiction movie better than any fiction writers like Philip K. Dick and Fredric since Blade Runner, Brown. Its animation, which could compete and some of the most with the clips collected in showcase antholomind-bending scigies of computer graphics such as Computer ence-fiction, period, Dreams or The Mind's Eye, is combined exKemp Purushment that I've come across tremely well with its video clips, which have Keep Peeling in years. none of the graininess of the clips in, say, So, you have to go ICOM's Sherlock Holmes games. Composer into Quantum Gate Paul Hiaumer's score, though rather too New of dialogue choices during encounters with expecting to be disappointed with the gameAge for my taste, is effective, raising the hackother characters, thereby determining which play, which is unfortunate. However, if you les on the back of your neck when it is supof several dozen supplemental scenes get P are prepared to give yourself posed to. All in all, Quantum Gate scores high played. But through it all, the up entirely to the storytelmarks in every category that defines a multiplor chugs forward without the Quantum Gate media product. player doing much to prompt it, and the direction in which it So how is it the worst of games? By hardly PRICE: $79.95 chugs cannot be affected by the QUANTUM GATE SYSTEM: IBM CD-ROM being a game at all. Oh, there are other bones REQUIREMENTS: 486SX-20MHz or better, 8MBRAM to pick—a few plot holes, some scenes that player at all. 5VGA graphics, 10MB hard drive P space, CD-ROM 150KB/sec transfer run on too long, some visuals that are too Apparently to make up for rate, 8-bit Windows-compatible sound card, Windows 3.1 dark to be made out, an insufferable instructhe lack of real interaction, the PROTECTION: game also contains a repeated Greg Roach tion manual—but any gamer's main comPUBLISHER: Media Vision Multimedia Publishing plaint will be that Quantum Gate is yet action sequence—a first-perFremont, CA (510) 770-8600 another interactive movie that stresses the son tank battle simulationmovie element, not only at the expense, but the less said about which the Kitchen Poliol None DESIGNER: Page 100 Computer Gaming World "


"ling, you are in for an incredible experience. A Tale of Two Planets The Earth is dying, choked by pollution and ecological misdeeds, and only you, medical student Drew Griffin, can save it. Yes, folks, it's yet another environmental The End Is Nigh plot-or so it appears at first. You're subjected to the usual eco-prop film clips of poisonous smoke and ominous acid rain clouds, accompanied by the usual text, describing in numbing detail how humankind has ruined its home and is scheduled to make itself extinct within five years. There is the sad, Yanniesque plink-plink-plunk music calculated to posed to be undertaking. Then there is the wring tears of self-mortification from the matter of the bugs. Drew and his fellow most dry-eyed player. There is the invocation grunts are told that the planet has a deadly of the United Nations as a catch-all political atmosphere and is inhabited by hostile insecpanacea. There is the self-consciously multitoid aliens, meaning that they periodically have to go our on raids to slaughter the indigenous population lest the Green Meanies overrun the human base. There is only one probPRIFFIN.BARBAR lem: the hazardous atmosphere means that no one can go out without a protective suit, and the suits offer a virtual-reality REC display in place of a faceplate. You see that you're shooting big, ugly bugs out of a three-year-old's nightmare, but you only TTERM see that because it's what the VR chooses to show racial cast, with its perfect, politically correct you. And as one of Drew's comrades discovdistribution of minority and white, as well as ers, if you try to remove male and female, actors. your helmet to see what's And yet, all is not well in this politically really out there, it's rigged correct paradise, for more reasons than just to self-destruct. the dying Earth. Something rorten is behind The writing is shockall the noble-sounding propaganda, as Drew ingly adult and shockdiscovers when he signs on to the Quantum ingly good, on par with Gate Project, a group that is sending volunsuch classics of anti-war teers through a space-time rift to newly dislydis SF as Joe Haldeman's The covered Planet AJ3905, the only place that Forever War and James contains sufficient quantities of Iridium OxTiptree, Jr.'s Yanqui Dooide to halt the Earth's spiral into disaster. dle. That Roach has assembled a cast that is Something is fishy about AJ3905. The equal to the task of bringplace is run as a military operation, and some ing the story to life is snooping around reveals only a single mcnothing short of remarkchanic on the planet-clearly not enough for able. It is always easiest to the large-scale mining operation they are supmake this sort of material campy and ridiculous—but the face is that he has, and the realism of the performances combines with the quality of the writing to create a future-shock film on par with Aliens. Jamie Callahan turns in an incredible, running-on-razorwire performance as Private Michaels, the space marine who tries to convince Drew that they are being lied to by the government: \"I don't know where we are, or who we're killing, or why, but they are not telling us the truth.\" James Black plays the sinister base commander, Colonel Saunders, as though he were auditioning for the role of Blofeld in the next James Bond picture. He is corruption incarnate, full of Machiavellian charm and threat: \"Private Michaels may be unbalanced...the man may be a schizophrenic and I believe he's a subversive... We want you to keep an eye on him.» Ruth Aguilar's hardass Sergeant Cranshaw outdoes Sigourney Weaver's Ripley for sheer testosterone withour becoming a caricature along the way. Annalee Jefferies turns in a strong performance as the scientist who invented the Quantum Gate and who now has the blood of an alien race on her conscience. The story's intrigues unfold over the course of three days, following Drew from the moment he arrives until the moment the evidence against the government becomes overpowering. Even then, though, you don't know what to believe. Michaels may very well be crazy, or simply more sane than everyone else. Is Earth really in any danger? If so, from whom? Who are you really working for and what are their motives? The story races along at an incredible pace, horrific revelations pil12512057 June 1994 Page 101 "


"CLEARLY, SOMETHNG HAS STARTLED MR. Cow, AND T Ain't A PAIR OF COLD HANDS. You GOT A VLLAGE. FARMS. HUTS. KnighTS. PEOPLE TO BOSS AROUND. AND A COW. LIFE iS GOOD. BUT THEN YOU GET THESE VISITORS. THEY'RE FAT, THEY DROOL, BURP, AND SMELL LKE AI OUTHOUSE. THEY COME IN HORDES, EATING YOUR 3D TEXTURE MAPPED HUTS, TREES, WOMEN, CHILDREN, AND WORST OF ALL, YOUR COW. YOU TRY TO TRASH THE IN WITH YOUR SWORD. BUT IT AIN'T EASY. AND THEIR GUTS GET ALL OVER YOU. LFE STARTS TO SUCK. You'VE MET \"THE HORDE\". MY FRIEND. AN ORGNAL GAME WITH CD-QUALITY LIVE ACTION VIDEO, DIGITIZED MUSIC AND DISGUSTING EATING SOUNDS. AND A CAST OF ACTORS WHO CAM ACTUALLY ACT; LIKE KIRK CAMERON AMD MICHAEL GREGORY. YOU BUILD WALLS, MOATS, AND DEATH PITS. AND YOU HIRE AM ARCHER TO HELP FEND THE OFF. AGAIN THE 3 DO HORDE ATTACKS. YOU SAVE THE COW, BUT THEY EAT YOUR HUT. YOUR "


"SOMPUTER Best On-Screen Performance and Best Musical Score THE HORDE PREMIER WINNER 1994 Crystal Dynamics Inc. All rights reserved. IHMIC game screens shown. Crystal Dynamics and The Horde are trademarks of Crystal Dynamics 3D), the 3X logos and Interactive Multiplayer are trademarks of The 3DO Company IBM is a registered trademark of International Business Machines Corp. CORT CROP, AND THAT GIRL NEXT DOOR YOU HAD YOUR EYE on. NOW LIFE REALLY SUCKS. AND IT AIN'T ABOUT IBM PC PC-CD & 3DO TO GET ANY EASIER. THE EVIL HORDLINGS GROW BIGGER, FASTER, EVEI SMARTER. (AND YOU HAVEN'T EVEN MET THE EVL CHANCELLOR YET.) DEAR READER, WE PRAY YOU'RE THE SORT WHO LEARIS QUICKLY. 'CAUSE THIS STUFF'S CRYSTAL DYNAMICS HAPPENING on 32 BITS. Enjoy, MY FRIEND. AND GOOD LUCK. Circle Reader Service #58 "


"ing up one after another until the final shot of the game, which answers some questions but raises still others. Yes, it's a cliffhanger, and a very effective one. Quantum Gate II is already in the works. Great Expectations So where is the game in all this? Well, in between the frequent movie sequences there are long stretches of \"free exploration time during which you can click on directional arrows to make Drew explore the three floors of the base. When you encounter something you can look at, an eye icon allows you to do so. There is also a mouth icon for initiating conversations with characters Drew meets, and a brain icon for accessing Drew's memories, which unreel in the corner of the screen like home movies. Then there are the dialogue menus for when you have to decide whether or not to admit to Saunders that you broke into the MedLab with Michaels, and the occasional VR bug-hunts as described above. Aside from this, there is very little in the way of interaction. Even scenes that look like they ought to be interactive are not. For instance, the computer controls Drew's skivntrols Drew's skiv ver during a rescue mission, and when Drew is asked to choose from a grim menu ar the end of the game, the computer chooses for the next game in the series will repair this breach of faith by focusing more on game elements. I hope this means more than that they plan to have three, rather than just one, execrable action sequences. We'll sec. In the meantime, Yes sir? there's Quantum Gate, a movie for We're not trends which the greatest Thoven't know him long praise I can offer is probably to say that I would gladly pay $7.50 to see it in a him. Worse still, when the player is given a him theater. I realize choice, it is often a Hobson's choice: No that this is a strange thing to say, since the matter what dialogue path you choose with game costs $80.00 (which neither this nor Sergeant Cranshaw in the second scene, any other game is worth, but that's a subject you'll end up doing K.P. dury in the third. for another article), but I mean it in only the Granted, the K.P. scene is necessary for the best ways. Quantum Gate is a quantum leap plot, but for the game to claim interactivity forward in computer, though not interactive, while really offering none is a species of deceit movie-making, but m while really offering none is a species of deceit movie-making; but more than that, it is a hell only slightly less heinous than that perpeof a good movie, period, with a story that trated on the volunteers in the story. sticks with you long after the final credits roll. The folks at Media Vision assure me that CGW Introducing... THE UNIVERSAL COCKPITTM STRAP IN..AND TAKE OFF!!LS The UNIVERSAL COCKPIT Allows you to Take Command of Your System Three Ways (stick, yoke or steering). Now You can have Complete Control whether on the Track or in the Air. FEATURES:  Tough Aluminum Construction  Free-Standing System. No Clumsy Desk Mounting FLIGHT SIMS AUTO RACING SIMS Clamps or Suction Cups! Stick/Rudder/Throttle Steering Brake/Throttle (not shown , yoke configuration) Push Button Shifting  3-in-1 Modular System, Easily Converted Coming Soon: The UNIVERSAL JOYSTICKTM\"Complete\" Control of Auto Racing and Flight Sims in an Economical Desktop Package. ASK FOR DETAILS! SIMULATION SYSTEMS 1-800-647-7623 SIMULATION SYSTEMS 791 E. Brokaw Rd. San Jose, CA 95112 -800-647-7623  Fax (408)441-0650 Page 104 Circle Reader Service #113 Computer Gaming World "


"| bisco THE E  DISCOVER THE BIG PICTURE GAMER IE PLAY COMPUTER GAMES ON YOUR FREE BONUS GAME WITH PURCHASE SEE PACKAGE FOR DETAILS YOU Just Plug It In AND THE ULTIMATE COMPUTER GAMING EXPERIENCE IS YOURS! GET READY FOR YOUR MOST AMAZING GAMING ADVENTURE EVER WITH TV GAMER PLUSTM. PLAY COMPUTER GAMES LIKE THEY WERE MEANT TO BE SEEN: BIGGER AND BETTER ON YOUR TV! EXPERI: ENCE COOLER COLORS, BIGGER BOSSES, MEGA MAPS AND SUPER-SIZE SWORDFIGHTS. GUEN Oris TV Gamer Plus Features 5 YEAR WARRANTY WINDOWS SUPPORT (IBM VERSION) IBM & MAC VERSIONS AVAILABLE EXTRA-LONG RCA CABLE TO TV ALL CABLES INCLUDED SIIG, Inc. 6078 Stewart Ave., Fremont, CA 94538 510/657-8688 Inc.  1994 by SIIG, Inc. TV Gamer Plus is a trademark of SIIG, Inc. TV Gamer PlusTM Is Available At The Following Locations VELECTRONICS WHOLE EARTH Brands MartU.S.A. COMPUTER UN WORLD rican MICO GENTER Circle Reader Service #112 "


"DIG ZAG BEST NEW GAME AT WINTER CES 1994 ELECTRONIC GAMING WORD GAME OF ALL TIME Quantum dality Produations, Inc. \"A word game that you can't put down\"... \"Non-stop entertainment for the whole family\".. \"A unique word game with adventures as well\". Shhh... It's a secret. . . We cannot disclose the hidden word, it's up to you to solve it. In addition to the myriad of word puzzles, Zig Zag offers another exciting twist to the game, a word game adventure. The solution is near, each puzzle brings you closer to completing the grand adventure. Right letter and location, you got a Zig ... Right letter... you got a Zag. A few letters to go... Can you deduce the word before the puzzle ends? Prepare your deductive powers as you embark on the ultimate word puzzle adventure game!  Intuitive Interface Enormous built in Dictionary Player History On-line Hints  4, 5, 6, & 7 Letter Words & Numbers \"Zig Zag\" computer game is for IBM PC. It can be obtained through your favorite retailer or call: 1-908-788-2799 or by writing to: QQP-495 Highway 202 Flemington, NJ 08822 Copyright 1994 Q.Q.P. All rights reserved. IBM is a trademark of International Business Machines Circle Reader Service #104 "


"BRIDGE OLYMPIAD THE WORLDS FINEST COMPUTER BRIDGE GAME NUO3.2011 Solo 1 le OOPQuantum Quality Productions, Inc. The finest computer bridge game ever created! Take part in the world renowned \"Bridge Olympiad\" tournament right in the comforts of your own home. Bridge masters are calling this bridge game the most challenging ever! The computer will test bridge masters' abilities while being the mentor for novice players. Practice slams, defensive play, and how to play no trump hands. Choose the type of partner you want to play with. Each partner has different bridge techniques and styles. A great way to practice before an upcoming tournament\" \"I have never seen such a clever computer partner and opponent\"  Masterful Computer Opponents Complete Player History Largest Number of Bidding Conventions On the Market The Bridge Game For A Lifetime Tournament Play A Myriad of Computer Players, Each With A Different Playing Style and Personality Circle Reader Service #103 \"Bridge Olympiad\" computer game is for IBM PC. It can be obtained through your favorite retailer or call: 1-908-788-2799 or by writing to: QQP-495 Highway 202 Flemington, NJ 08822 Copyright 1994 Q.Q.P. All rights reserved. IBM is a trademark of International Business Machines. "


"REVIEW No Wonder The Dinos Are Extinct Jurassic Park: A Meteoric Smash Or Mediocre Game? by Neil Harris tart with a best-selling novel, turn it that the dinosaurs aren't parinto a thrill-a-minute movie with some ticularly scary. In the book of the greatest special effects ever pur on and the movie, running into the silver screen, then turn it into a computer any of the dinosaurs was not game. Sounds like a formula for success, a pleasant experience. In right? particular, the spitters and If you've been playing computer games the raptors were almost cerlong enough, you've seen quite a few where a rain to leave anyone dead, or hot movie turned into a computer game. at least mangled. But in the Often, the problem with this process is that game the dinosaurs are wusthe software publishing company has to sies. Even if a dinosaur hits spend so much on the license that there's not the player, there's very little much left for the actual game. Somewhere in damage and ample opportuUDARSSIE PARK California there's a landfill full of old Atari nity to get healed. E.T. games, for instance. Other times, like Based on that, you would think that the little. If you switch the names of two files, with the Terminator games from Bethesda game is too easy. Far from it. The game is IP2D.EXE and IP3D.EXE, the next time you Softworks, the adaptation takes advantage of quite difficult to win. On the other hand, it's play you won't have to bother with the overthe power of the computer and results in a not particularly challenging. This game can't head action game you'll be in the 3D mode decent game. decide whether it's an action right from the beginning. The dinosaurs are game or a puzzle game. Each still not very dangerous and you'll wade level requires the player to acthrough dozens of them, taking only enough complish specific goals, which damage to go through a box of Band-Aids. usually involve running around and gathering up the Read The Book, See the Movie, required pieces. It takes a long Skip the Computer Game time, and any mistake is faIt's amazing that Amblin Entertainment tal-not to the player, but to (Stephen Spielberg's company) allowed this the ability to get through the game to get out the door. They wouldn't have level. released the movie in this shape, it would have gone back to the editing room. The best news It Gets Better When is that it got into stores a year after the movie, You Cheat so most of the excitement (and hopefully the The first 15 levels of the sales) has come and gone. If you're interested Jurassic Park from Ocean is somewhere in game are from an overhead anin the ultimate dinosaur experience, read between. The production values are stronger gled perspective, similar to the Ultima roleCrichton's book, or rent the movie when it than in most movie adaptation games, par playing games. After that, the comes out on video. You'll ticularly in the later segments where a firstgame switches to a first-person 3D do much better. CGW Jurassic Park person perspective (similar to Wolfenstein perspective. At this point it gets a 3D) puts you right into the action. On the little more interesting, as you run other hand, the game design makes for a around the Jurassic Park maze frustrating experience. It's as if all the budget shooting waves of 3-D dinos. Of for a movie went into special effects with course, it's nearly impossible to SYSTEM: JURASSIC PARK REQUIREMENTS: 386-33MHz or better, nothing left over for a good script. put all the pieces together to get 2MB RAM, VGA graphics 9MB hard drive space to this point, since the puzzles PUBLISHER: Ocean of America Carnivorous Reptile have to be solved exactly right to San Jose, CA or Dinowussie? (408) 954-0201 make progress. SA ocech The biggest issue I'll take with the game is The easy answer is to cheat a PRICE: $49.95 IBM P Page 108 Computer Gaming World "


"is time for another run, Chummeret HADOWRUN GENESIS TM Rated by V.R.C. MA-13 Parental Diagration Advies Mature Audiences SEGA nter the ultimate psychocyberpunk fantasy! You witnessed your brother fall to enemy fire. ow you travel the streets of the Seattle Sprawl to find your brother's killers and bring them to justice. SEGA Sena\" Senesis\" puts you in the heart of Cyberspace an the heads-up run of Your life! SEGA FASA Boul. o 2101 Rated by V.LC. Ir Jack into the Virtual World of the Matrix and get ready for intense cybercombat! MA-13 Fight Back! Real-time combats lets you actively control characters as the actions heats up. Search the Sprawl! Uncover valuable clues while you re constantly building your character's quickness, strength and charisma! Parental Discretion Adid Mature And ON You've got the Skill. Sou've gat the but...and Sena\" tenesis\" has all the Magic and technology you need! Circle Reader Service #130 as registered trademarka FASA Carporation and 1999 FASA Corporation Sooo and G San Sebel a rdeware o SEGA Shaving and has more The Video Game Tragona "


"NO COPS NO LAWS NO WIMPS MEIGIA RACE The Software Toolworks -CD ROM \"MEGARACE goes beyond conventional driving and shooting games...like a roller coaster from hell!» Electronic Games "


"ARE YOU A GIRLIE-MAN MEGARACE Software toolworks Civo Uotown In ACTION Uptown Choose your vehicle wisely. Along with your speed and cunning, it may be the only thing that keeps you alive when you battle evil enemies like The Eviscerator and Rabies. MEGARACER? Welcome to a future where anything absolutely anything goes. MEGARACE is the auto combat game that combines mind-blowing driving with no rules, no holds barred combat and the most depraved road gangs ever assembled. MEGARACE goes light years beyond today's generation of games with visually stunning cyberscapes, surreal track layouts and the kicker of them all you're actually a gameshow contestant on WWBT (Virtual World Broadcast Television) with your host Lance Boyle. Host Lance Boyle You get real \"television look\" graphics with smooth action made possible by advanced compression techniques and real time data transfers from CD-ROM. Thrill to more than 25 minutes of digitized video that will forever change the way you look at video entertainment. With MEGARACE, it's your speed, your aggression and your cunning that will get you through. Winning is the only thing that counts. It's either that or die. Strap in and get ready for a rollercoaster ride from hell. Spectacular fully rendered animation, amazing 3-D graphics and pulse pounding sound effects make MEGARACE a rowdy, super-charged, one-of-a-kind virtual driving experience. LAPS: 3 SCORE: 65401 WIN OR DIE! MERA Over 25 minutes of full-motion digitized video commentary by MEGARACE host Lance Boyle, 15 full rendered tracks, hot rock music track and the virtual ride of your life (or death). Available on 3DO\", IBMCD-ROM, and Sega\" CD For the store nearest you or to buy, call 1-800-234-3088 TM MEGARAC Cowright ow The Saliwane Teluk In. C'estigi21923. Centrale Entertainment. All rights re l a ted matteritatea Bin Mat C MIX), the laterative Modiplayer are romaker The 3 m m and trademark of Enterprises. La "


"OF THE BEST REST Shareware Showcase by Chuck Miller This month, three new games have captured my attention and driven my fel1 low editors to the brink of stomping on my surge protector. Each of these games outshine their shareware brethren by several kilowatts, blinding me late into the night and still leaving me thirsty for more. They are Raptor, an exceptional action title from Apogee Software, Heartlight, a logic puzzler from Epic MegaGames, both for the PC, and TaskMaker for the Mac, an Ultima-style RPG from Storm Impact. Game play, as mentioned, is intense. You You can use the keyboard, joystick or mouse, but I prefer the mouse. Once play starts, don't worry about what you hit. Just shoot everyhoot everything, stationary or moving. There are no penalties for hitting \"innocent bystanders» because there aren't any. However, be sure to monitor your shield status-while weapons are unlimited, shields are not. When shields begin to buckle, a visual and audible warning S@GGO7100 Software, P.O. Box 496389, Garland TX 75049-6389, (800) GAME-123. Turn On Your Heartlight Switching now from synaptic to sagacious, Epic MegaGame's Heartlight is a delightful logic-based game offering a good mix of arcade action and conundrums. Reminiscent of the many Rockford and Boulder Dash clones, Heartlight will devour a number of your evenings with challenging perhaps a trifle frustrating—yer enjoyable brain benders. Twenty ingenious levels tempt you through a variety of mazes in the process of collecting all the hearts on a given screen. The trick is to avoiding being crushed by huge steel balls, to avoid blown to bits by grenades, or stopped dead in your tracks. Planning and forethought are key playing clements. Though graphics, sound effects, and music are just average by most standards, it makes very little difference in Heartlight. Game play is so addictive that the game's slight visual and soundtrack weaknesses aren't noticeable. Carrying a «Surgeon General's» warning that it's dangerous to your producrivity, Heartlight does have its share of time gobbling and head pounding puzzles. One in particular took over 20 tries before I realized that I was approaching the whole thing from the wrong perspective. Thankfully, you don't have to finish a level to advance to the next one. If you are stumped too long on one level, you are free to move on to the next and return to solve those you were unable to complete at a later time. While the shareware version of Heartlight offers 20 levels of amazing play, registering nets you an additional 40 levels of brain-twisting action. This is one diversion that will keep you coming back for more. To register Heartlight, send $19 (plus $4 shipping and handling) to: Epic MegaGames, 10406 Holbrook Drive, Potomac MD 20854, (800) 972-7434. Raptor Rapture When I get a knot in my neck and spasms in my gnarled mouse hand, I know a game is intense. I've been suffering this delectable syndrome since I began playing Apogee's Raptor. Though the goal is the same as that of a hundred top-down shooters—to blast everything in sight, avoid being hit, and collect all the bonuses-Raptor's voracious gameplay eats other shooters for lunch. I have Violence pays handsomely in Raptor, not been as hooked on an action title since so you can buy more weopors. Sidewinder first appeared on the Amiga in 1988. The graphics are exceptional for a sounds. All you can do ar this point is cease shareware title, with audio to match. firing and try to dodge incoming fire. Your You start Raptor by generating a character shields will slowly recharge as long as you with a name, callsign and photo ID. Next, aren't blazing away on your weapons. Keep you select a difficulty level: Training Mode, your eyes peeled for storage sheds; vaporizing Rookie, Veteran or Elite. Increased difficulty these often releases energy pods that will remeans more alien ships per wave bristling store your shields. with greater firepower and damage resistance. Raptor is made up of three episodes, the After signing in, you arrive at the hangar shareware version comprising episode one. with three options: Fly Mission, enter the To obtain the other two, plus new animaSupply Room or Save Pilot. Before going on tions, harder bosses, and a slew of extra deadly a mission, you might want to drop by the weapons, send in your registration. Raptor is Supply Room in case you have an interest in the best shareware title to arrive since DOOM arming yourself to the teeth. Just like an arms strode onto the screen and is definitely a bazaar, it takes money to buy bombs and contender for this year's shareware awards. missiles, but you'll find that violence is reRegistration is $34.95 plus $5.00 S&H, alwarded handsomely. You'll also be able to though Apogee will give CGW readers a pick up bonuses in the desolate wake of ex$5.00 discount if they mention this column ploding ships, so money shouldn't be hard to when they order. You'll need a 386 or better come by if you know how to fight. Once system with VGA graphics and a sound card armed, it's time to begin the mission. to fly this bird. To register, contact: Apogee Max Mac Impact Mac role-players should look no further than to Storm Impact's TaskMaker 2.0 for Ultima-style adventuring (of the Ultima III V variety). Though not state-of-the-art in gaming technology, Task Maker is nonetheless a very solid, professional production. Those who enjoyed the \"middle\" Ultimas will find TaskMaker a nostalgic, yet refreshing experience. As with all such titles, TaskMaker is a story of a land in distress and a hero destined to free Page 112 Computer Gaming World "


"NEWS & WEATHER . Commerce Business Daily Execugrid Headline News Newsgrid Headline News Newspaper Library Newstand  People in the News  U.S. Government Center Weather Reports SPORTS ARENA. Fantasy and Simulation Sports Forum  Fishing Forum Great Outdoors Forum NVN's Baseball Pool VN's Basketball Pool NVN's Football Pool NVN's Hockey Pool NVN's Colle P al PCDN Bas 0 ASA SE D OM pm Sports Headline News  BUSINESS &ACA al et les Libra A S D Tunies LEGOL. Census Library Commerce Business Daily Computer Library Corporate Affiliates Corporate Directories D & B Company Profiles D&B U.S. Business Locator  Employee Benefits. E-Span Job Arc Ecug dead ho Nos Financial Markets Franchise Handbook Help Wanted-USA. Insider Trading Monitor Investor en Pam anet Close Mergers & Acquisitions Filings Patent Library. People in the News Small Business & Entrepreneurs  Tax/Accounting Forum  Tax Library Technology & Quality Managemehomnar Now Traduction duong Thin Register T amark LTD Y TRABu nas redit Dofiles a REFERENCE CE N A DSC SD mput Dira y Cnore pire w esmasero el s. General Medicine  Medical Library. A paper Library. Newstand. NVN Bookshelf  Patent Library  Phone File Reference Library. U.S. over ment Center OMUNICATIONS SL Forum ectro aile Fax. A Letter Internet Ma TV Member bfil ACC CON 10 : Aan rettes DS-HIF F ON Aquaria? America Forum Astrology & Houstic Sciences Astronomy rorunr . Automotive Forum Aviation Forum Chat Ciub Forum BBS Forum . Computer Games Forum Compra Ophies Falim Computer Network gorum . Computer Programming Comedy Forum Diabetes/Hypoglycemia Forum sabiem caufa . Fa 11 & Home Forum  Fantasy Sports Forum Fishing Forum . Food & Wine Forum . GameRoom 1. Jalucing Forum GEMS Senior Forum Genealogy Forum . General Exchange Forum General Games Forum  Gifts Education Forum Great Outdoors Forum  Ham Shack Forum Hobby Forum  IBM PC & Compatibles Forum  Internet Forum  In FO K Once Forum Macintosh Forum  Maintenance & Home Repairs  Mental Health Forum Mo.es Norundum Fra m c I Grum. Native American Forum  Needlecraft Forum Numismatic Collectors Forum  Nursing Network  NVN Help Forum NVN Member Profiles  Offline Reader Forum  PC Life Column Pets & Animals Forum Alat P OV Pha pogut a rum  Poet's Forum  Politics Forum Quilting Forum  Real Estate Forum Lang Mell. Zale, Un g choni mwa cience Forum  Science Fiction Forum  Small Business & Entrepreneurs . Soap Opera Forum Society For Creative Anachronisms  Sports Forum  Star Trek Gaming Forum Substance Abuse Forum Sysop's Picks. Tandy Fo m l con Technology & Quality Management. Teen Forum Television Forum  The First Precinct Travel For TIQE he Unexplained  UNIX Forum  Windows Forum Write Stuff Forum  TRAVEL SERVICES. Around America Forum EAASY Sabre. Mileage & Routing. Official Airline Guide Travel Forum  ENTERTAINMENT AND DES or pe b Joyce Ji belagu yaw of Cinema  Movies Forum  People in the News  Soap Opera Forum Simone So I a Sion Corn U TIL SERVICES. Academic American Encyclopedia  American History Computer Library. Dissertation Abstracts Education Forum Education Library Historical Forum  ned i lumtion Fort Bool nene World History WOR DOTC MFS Adventure casino Galaxy Captain Calgav II  amesom u red Years' Wro km Kid raka : T quel foi mo G I E SHOPPING vantage Catalog Handbook Comp-u-Store E-Span Jobsearch Help Wanted-USAPC Catalog FOR ADULTS ONLY. About Allohrvices e CulAdult Entertainment Might Rendezvous..MEMBER INFORMATION & ASSISTANCE Account Manage en Ch u Pavel Serv es mi mo l red roller ces Member Guidelines NVN Help Forum  Offline keauer Foruht. Omne Bilmig Payment Policy Prone Access Directory Pricing Information Sysops Picks Online Terms and Conditions. Ungrade Your Subscription Online Customer Service Support. Private Forums . Variable lowpriced subscription plans. Over 1.000 dial-in access points. NVN Classroom. Toll-free Customer Support NVN Help Forum If this isn't enough, how about the lowest online rates going? NVN Subscribe today by calling 1-800-336-9096. (In Houston, call 877-4444) Or register online using any comm software set at N-8-1 and full duplex. Dial 1-800-336-9092. When connected enter CG94LS and press <return> A SERVICE OF U.S. Videotel A few select service carry additional charges. National Videotex is a service mark of National Videotex Network Corp. All others are for identification purposes only and helong to their respective companies or organizations. Circle Reader Service #95 "


"it from some curse. Boasting \"over 100 milB&W mode, and 1750K free lion pixels of dungeons and villages,\" this title memory for color mode; a hard has obviously been kissed by a marketing disk is recommended. mouth, but it does offer an extensive playing To order TaskMaker 2.0, contact experience. Storm Impact, 2148 Rugen Road, All commands and spells are available from Suite B, Glenview IL 60025, (708) the menu and keyboard, resembling those 729-2666. Registration is $24.95 used since the dawn of computer RPGs. The for new owners, $14.95 if upgradspells are limited compared to many current ing from a previous version. A 45role-playing titles, but are more than suffiday complete money back cient to the tasks at hand. The action window guarantee is provided. fills the right two-thirds of the screen, with That wraps it up for this month. the inventory list and character stats occupyEach of these titles is a real gem and ing the left third. When equipping weapons Match your wits with balls of steel to see how many hearts will be easy to unearth now that or armor, the action window is replaced with you can capture in Heartlight. CGW is on-line on ZiffNet. a character screen visually depicting the body ZiffNer can be accessed through parts and items equipped. patched. In the process of your adventure, 'both CompuServe and on PRODIGY. On A unique aspect of Task Maker is the manyou must gather as much treasure as possible, CompuServe, go to Computer Gaming ner in which death is handled. Here, death is making periodic deposits at local \"automatic World's own forum (GO GAMEWORLD), only a temporary setback. When a player dies, tellers.\" In all, TaskMaker is an enjoyable, if Library 8, Shareware Sizzle. On PRODIGY, he immediately goes to Hell where he must slightly dated RPG. Still, titles like this often n JUMP ZiffNet and Search by Title for the escape the Devil and make it to the approprispan the gulf of technology and provide a games listed here, or Search by Category to ate exit. The items the player was wearing truly enjoyable experience. browse the entire Games Library. In addition, when he died will remain with him. Those he TaskMaker is System 7 compatible, offers the above titles are available through numerhad in his pouch will be found at the place of full color, includes a built-in interactive tutoous shareware and public domain disk librarhis death when he is resurrected in Outer rial, built-in virus protection, and internal ies, as well as on many national on-the-fly decompression. Macs from the telecommunication services and private Game play is typical of most RPGs. Mazes, Mac Plus to the newest systems are supBBSs. As always, please remember to register dungeons and villages must be explored; vilported. Minimum requirements include Syseach program and support your shareware lains and creatures must be battled and distem 6.02 or better, 600K free memory for authors. CGW Terra. 1200 Flight Yoke 2000 FREE ACES OF THE PACIFIC SOFTWARE 2222 Features: DSP Dual 16 Multimedia Kit \"Functions like 2 separate joysticks \"True 16 bits, DSP Based Sound Card (Wavetable Upgradable) Full horizontal-vertical control Dual-Speed CD-ROM Drive (Sony CDU-33A) Includes sturdy desktop clamp and suction cups \"Shielded Speakers (5 Watts/AC Powered) *Microphone Direct Way Top 30 CD-Titles Joystick Titles DW Price 4 CD Titles: ChessMaster 30XX) 7th Gues.. .. .... . Mavis Beacon Teacher Typing Animal San Diego Zoo..... US Atlas Authur's Teacher Trouble.............. Barron's Profiles of American Colleges............. CD-Rom Drive World Atlas Business and Economic Atlas... CD Deluxe Bundle 4 Titles in 1 CD... Free CD Title with selected CD ROM Drive Purchase CD D02 (Mario's Missing, World Atlas)....... AU CD Drives are Dual Speed unless otherwise noted CHAOS............ Mitsumi FXXID. SI76 Compton's MPC Encyclopedia V.1.0..................... Panasonic CR 562/563......... S179 Compton's Family Choice......... NEC Triple Speed 195ms SCSIL.. . ..5399 Comptons's Interactive Encye. V.2.01........ Sony CDU-33A.......... 5163 Dracula Unleashed..... Teac internal DI-CD-SOS SCSIL ..S289 FIS Strike Fagle III. Plextor (Texel) 3028 int 240ms SCSI IL......... $273 Family Doctor 3rd Edition...... Toshiba 44101B Int. 250ms SCSIL S229 Gabriella's Knight... Toshiba 3401B 200ms SCSI IL.. S3209 Grolier's Encyclopedia Ver.... Sound Cards Guideboks to Mathemies..... Interactive Storytime III. Cardinal DSP 16........ 5129 Just Giranda and Me........... SoundBlaster 16 MCD.. $149 King Quest VI... Advance Gravis Ultrasound.... 5139 Kodak Photo CD..... . ...... Turtle Beach Monterey Macmillan Dictionary for Children..... Orchid Sound Wave 32.... $209 MadGiveaways: Freebies! Prometheus ARIA 16 SE... $179 Mavis Teaches Typing Mayo Clinie-Health book. Children Pack $469 Fun Pack Microsoft Dinosaurs Multimedia $89 Kuture Toyot Microsoft Bookshell Arthur's Tracher Trouble 7th Guest Macmillan Dictionary for Children MicroSlot Encarta.. Drorata Ukrashed . CD Das Maria's Missing, World Mortal Kombat......... Space Quest IV .... Rebel Assault...... Just Grandma & Me Reference Library Business Pack Education Pack Return To Zork Compton's later. Ency, 94 Girliers T opwdia Ver. 6 SAT (Scholastic Aptitude Test). Busines and cook Atlas Mayo Clinie liralth book Secret of Monkey Island... Kotak Photo CD The Animals (94 Ver.! Secret of Monkey Island ......... Mony Magazine (New) Masis leacue Teaches Typis Reference Library Space Quest IV. Chessmaster 1000 Speaker's Encyclopedia.... $79 US) Ata $89 W Atlas Star Wars Chess...... eru no DIRECT4Y30004 1.30-day money la gare Not t he kriteria LA with manufacturer any No merchandise in whoRMA... Price and allability are subject to change with me Fast Irickell, Ontario, Ca. 91761 Sharing and handling chupar extra and Benutuplable Fax. 0.460-2589 Purchaslo Isol. 97-10-2595 ET DO M-F8:30am-5:30pm PST Circle Reader Service #61 edasemaa.ee 30-DAY LOWEST PRICE GUARANTEE THE ULTIMATE ROLE-PLAYING AID Introducing The Ultimate Character Editor. This exciting new product features full mouse and keyboard support, online context sensitive help and a complete windowing system (does not require MS Windows to run). This editor allows you to edit the 42 games listed below in boldface type. The price for this editor is $59.95. That's under $1.50 per editor. Upgrades will be available for new games as they are released for only $9.95 per game. CHARACTER EDITORS $19.95 each Might and Magic (1,2,3,4,5), Pool of Radiance, Hard Nova, Bard's Tale (1, 2 or 3), Wasteland, Dragon Wars, Space Rogue, Wizardry (Edits 1-3). Wizardry 4, Wizardry 5, Bane of Cosmic Forge, Crusaders of the Dark Savant, Treasures of the Savage Frontier, Sentinel Worlds I, Knights of Legend Secret of the Silver Blades, Curse of the Azure Bonds, Champions of Krynn, Space 1889, Drakkhen, Keys to Maramon, MegaTraveller (1 or 2), Keef the Thiet, Escape from Hell, Ultima Underworld (1 or 2), Twilight 2000, Gateway to the Savage Frontier, Planet's Edge, Dark Queen of Krynn, Prophecy of the Shadow, Dark Sun, Martian Dreams, Realms of Arkania, Challenge of the 5 Realms, Bloodstone, Betrayal at Krondor, Lands of Lore, Dungeon Hack, Disciples of Steel. HINT BOOKS $9.95 each except where noted Might and Magic 1, Knights of Legend, Curse of the Azure Bonds, Champions of Krynn, Legacy of Ancients, Dark Heart of Uukrul, Wizardry (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, Bane or Crusaders ($12.95)), Eye of the Beholder 2, Might and Magic 3 ($12.95). IBM listed. Apple and C64 versions also available, Mastercard Please add $4.00 for shipping and handling. VISA Open from 9 AM 9 PM every day for your convenience. GOSSELIN COMPUTER CONSULTANTS P.O. Box 1083  Brighton, MI 48116  (313) 229-2453 1-800-882-8108 Page 114 Circle Reader Service #69 Computer Gaming World "


"PICK-UP THE PHONE AND PICK TWO GAMES FREE! ACES EUROPE OVIC Crawl Inside the Mind of & Serial Killer 8 fun-filled adventure where : OPEN SEASON 1-800-795-5979 POLICE QUEST siribojica bri GABRIEL KNIGHT SINS OF THE FATHERS SERRA E Choose Any Two Sierra Games FREE When You Switch to Sprint!* the most, including international directory assistance, customer service, even instant credit for wrong numbers. And we do it 24 hours a day! Sprint long-distance service just became more valuable up to $159.90** more! Now, when you switch your home long-distance service to Sprint, you can select any Sierra game, free! After enjoying six months of highquality long-distance, you may qualify for a second free Sierra game.*** Only Sprint can offer you a nationwide 100% digital, fiber optic network that provides the long-distance quality and reliability you need. Experience for yourself Sprint's \"fiber-optic\" clarity that makes both your long-distance calls and PC data transmissions crystal clear and virtually error free. Unsurpassed call and data clarity is just one of the many benefits you will enjoy as a Sprint customer. competitive long-distance carrier The Most will also provide an automatic 20 percent discount off all calls to Sprint's millions of dial 1 customers, anytime and anywhere. When the person you talk to the most in a given month is a Sprint Customer, Sprint will combine both discounts for an effective overall savings of 36 percent on calls to that number.**** No Risk Guarantee Your satisfaction is guaranteed: we'll pick up the cost of switching your long distance to Sprint, and will even pay to switch you back if you are not completely satisfied. (Some restrictions apply.), So why not sign up for Sprint and receive the clarity, savings and service you want while getting two Sierra games you enjoy? Sprint Save on Long Distance When You're away from home too! Sprint's FONCARDSM lets you continue to take advantage of long-distance calling and savings even when you're away from home. The FONCARD is free, with cards available for every member of your family. SIERRA The Most A Unique Calling Plan Sprint offers an unprecedented longdistance calling plan called The Most available now for all customers. The Most will save Sprint Customers 20 percent off already low rates on calls each month to whomever you talk to The Service You Deserve At Sprint, we make no compromises when it comes to dependable, personal service we do it all, operator services, Offer valid only in the U.S. and for new Sprint customers. Not valid for F ONCARD-only orders. One offer per household. Certain restrictions apply. Retail value of Sierra Games. Offer valid on any current Sierra product with a retail value of $79.95 or below To qualify for a second game, the customer must bill $20 per month in 3 of the first 6 months THE MOST discounts apply to in-state/intraLATA calls only where authorized Circle Reader Service #164 "


"REVIEW OE.C. Publications, Inc., 1959,1987. Illustration by Kelly Freas. Used with permission from MAD Magazine conform roughly to libertarian, conservative, liberal, and socialist ideologies. After choosing values, the player moves on to the Policy Window to select funding, cost control, and a list of benefits; set the amount and type of taxes paid by individuals and businesses; place spending caps and set guidelines of varying strength; determine to what extent preventive, acure, and long-term care are covered; and whether or not to pur service rationing into effect. The \"WHAT?\" and \"WHY?\" buttons become helpful at this point; they activare help screens that give brief but effective explanations of what all the technical terms really mean. If only the screens and text were larger and could be advanced by a simple click of a mouse button! All this planning costs political points, or \"chips.» The player usually begins with around 55 political action chips, although this varies slightly depending upon the type of values adopted. With policies like cost controls on doctors' fees requiring 15-20 chips, you cannot do everything under the sun. Still, only the most ambitious plan will exhaust the pile. Thereafter, the chips seem HUBERT THUMB to have little impact on events, even the outcome of elections. No matter how many times a player alters values within a previously selected policy topic, no additional chips are used. This seems unrealistic, since frequent changes in direction ought to use up political capital. Although this would make the challenge that much tougher, it is something Maxis should seriously consider if it does a second edition. With the initial policy in place, events now begin to unfold at a monthly pace for up to o you've already become prince of Simdecision making. Besides, as the manual says, 12 years. A year can take up to 20 minutes, even without interruptions for new technoloCity, recreated SimEarth in your own «You might as well enjoy yourself while image, hoed your row down on Simyou're learning.\" Four pre-recorded \"tours\" gies and pleas from unhappy constituents accompanied by staff recommendations. Farm, and become king of the SimAnt hill? make it easy to learn game basics, which Those wishing to move faster can set game Are there no challenges left in the Maxis means players barely have to glance at the tidy world? How about...national health care! little 32-page manual in the first place. speed for the end of the year, which curs SimHealth is Maxis' look at the current deplaying time in half and provides a built-in The Politics Of The Sick Bed action lag that is more realistic than the bate swirling around a topic with something game's usual month-by-month micro-manfor everyone: moral choices, social responsiSimHealth begins when the player automatbility, individual freedom, and, of course, the agement. SimHealth can still be paused at any ically wins the 1992 election, regardless of time to allow the player to figure out a new almighty pocketbook. what policy is adopted on health care. This This strategy. It can also be stopped in order to er Produced in cooperation with the Markle may sound unrealistic, but when Foundation. SimHealth is expressly intended change policy, check conditions in was the last time you heard a canSimhealth each sector of the health industry as a thinking aid rather than a competitive didate provide concrete details? game. With the wit and wisdom for which The first thing the President must PRICE: $59.95 Maxis justly has become famous, the user's do is plot Personal Values on four SIM HEALTH SYSTEM: REQUIREMENTS: 386SX or better, 4MB RAM, manual sets forth the rationale behind the separate «policy diamonds» deal11 MB hard drive space, game. Since it is difficult to understand coming with Coverage, Cost, Choice SVGA graphics; supports Adlib, Roland, Pro Audio, and Sound plex systems\" and \"get the big picture of Services and Technology. This Blaster sound boards PROTECTION: None through the news media, the game keeps involves choosing a spot at or beDESIGNERS: Greg Wolfson, John Hiles track of all the boring details related to the tween the four points for each PUBLISHER: Orinda, CA choices made by the player as U.S. President issue labeled Liberty, Efficiency, (800) 824-2643 and provides instant feedback for additional Community and Equality. These The High Price Of Medi-Carelessness Maxis' Prescription For SimHealth by Keith Schlesinger IBM, Mac Maxis Page 116 Computer Gaming World "


"You've Trashed Their Homes, Left Their Police Force in Ruin and Laughed While a 300 Ton Monster Trampled Their Streets and Residential Zones... Now, Those Quiet Little Citizens of SimCity Have a Few Words For You. Circle Reader Service #123 "


"1. COURANCE Tone cukan hure no health care others feel insecure about their present Teplotek ROVER hre but raty Malth care le universal Pitt of werden. Restructura halth newrance Co provide the best quality care A profitable nith C SVETOR werkes the best w op . ulicy (hospital, family doctors, specialists, insurcially on smaller 14 and 15-inch ch m var para ance, technology), or examine the wider screens, players will soon gain a world of the government budget, business big sense of what to look for. and small, the citizenry at large, and patients. Catastrophic Illness? Two More Years! SimHealth is a trailblazer in the The player must achieve re-election every simulations genre, but as a game it two years, beginning in Nov. 1993, or face has problems. Of course, the fact sudden political death. Biennial contests rethat it wasn't designed primarily as flect the presidential and off-year congresan entertainment product mitisional elections, both of which seriously affect gates against these criticisms, but governmental action. Winning is not too diffor those of us who try to make a Community E U ficult for the first few years as long as the game out of everything, here are original policy can garner 60% of the vote at the problems. For one, the victory the start a common occurrence regardless conditions are not well developed; of the player's ideological bent. The troubles you have to win elections to keep the free market keeps everything pretty much really begin in 1999 or 2001 when accumugoing, unless the elections option is turned in line. There might be a debt crisis, but all lated cost overruns, service delays, and high off—something which makes very little sense you have to do is push the \"fantasy\" button taxes catch up with the system and produce a in such a heavily political situation! If you and draconian measures automatically kick in sudden tide of voter unrest that no amount survive the whole 12 years to 2008, you rewhole 12 years to 2008, you reto bring general spending under control. of fiddling with benefits, cost caps, and tax ceive a final score which is nothing more than There is one catch the entire private insurcuts can stop. Indeed, the problems ance industry goes bankrupt in the first three generating such unpopularity are TE months of the game! That means no one has usually the result of earlier adjustany protection even from catastrophic disease ments to maintain standing in the and injury. One wonders what people are polls and win earlier elections. It is doing about this. Why aren't the unlucky rare for new players to survive past 43% in the minority rioring and burning the election of 2001 or 2003, and it remains a challenge even for vetdown the Main Streer window? erans of half a dozen contests. The problems of victory determination are Disaster has a way of creeping up, not insurmountable. The game could be but players quickly learn to pause played competitively with friends; the prothe game and check out the graphs gram's graphs could be used to set goals for a representing a wide array of data. particular match, with the player coming Everything from hospital beds to closest to the targets declared the winner. In educational outlays are tracked on case of close calls, the lack of displayed numsimple displays using colored lines bers will prove a bone of contention. Another that can be toggled on and off for the behavior point total listed in the Personal way to adjust the game is to tinker with the easier viewing. No numbers are available, but Values window; other factors are not officially 152 assumptions used in the computer this is not a serious problem because what considered for victory purposes. In one conmodel, which could be useful for handicapmatters in SimPolitics is whether things are test, I barely survived the final reelection but ping. The trouble is that all this will take long moving up, down or sideways (status quo). managed to earn a high behavior point total hours of thought and preparation to set up a When things start to happen, the buildings because I lived up to my values. Unfortu2-4 hour game. Games can be saved and and neighborhoods on the Main Street screen nately, I sacrificed nearly all of the big and assumption changes can be recorded for later start to grow, shrink, or fall apart. While the small business firms in the country to achieve replay, which helps spread the pain over sevchanges can sometimes be hard to spot, espethe win! What kind of a victory is that? eral shorter sessions. The AI has at least one blind spot While the fun may be somewhat limited, EUROTEI Do te hure that makes it easy to win. All you the program a bit difficult to use, and some have to do is adopt an extreme definite biases present (a funeral march plays libertarian ideology, eliminate all whenever the Canadian single payer\" socialfederal health care (including ized medicine plan pops up on the screen!), Medicare!), and cut other governSimHealth still offers much at a good price, ment services by $100-300 billion and in a good cause. For those who think that per year. The polls never sink be\"the play's the thing\" and who are not too low 57% favorable, and the behavfussy about winning and losing, this game will ior point total is almost a perfect prove especially attractive. It is also recom400. You can set the game to \"Run mended for those who want to \"get under the to the End\" and breeze to victoryhood\" of a game and tinker with its black-box -14000 Dollars while hardly touching the mouse assumptions-something most of us would DOVE COSTO PREPARECE or keyboard. Institutions wax and like to do with our real-time, real world poCEEEE wane, but the \"invisible hand\" of litical model. Cow 12 an Lepurence Berita Systems EMPLOYER MON TRADITIONAL CHIPS BUDGET LO CARI EMPLOYER FUNDED RIVERM, COVERAGE EnOct wiveral health care policy Insurance in chicharployers pay RE last part of their Poloven's Dr . Uroloved and alderlu people are covered by Medicare medical PROJECTED FISCAL INTACT POLITICAL CAPITAL 3 20 Chips GRUSS Page 118 Computer Gaming World "


"SYSTEM OPTIONS DISASTERS WINDOWS PEEK City Graphs Jun 2799 SEALAND2 EL SEALAND2 ENIE Fmds: 21,285 ICICE ALEO GLAS BIPOI Residential: 5100 w «Welcome to SimCity CD-ROM!» VIDEO TAPE LIBRARY: INC Sure, Sure. It's all fun and games when you can play lord-god-king to a bunch of pixelhigh people and text boxes. Now lets see how man that Mayoral muster The SimAction News keeps you posted on daily disasters and other headline news. holds up when you're faced with the real thing... Real disasters. Real Chaos. Real people. Introducing SimCity Enhanced CD-ROM from Interplay Productions. It's SimCity with a whole new attitude as the award-winning classic goes Hollywood with professional actors, location shooting, full Full motion video brings your city officials to life --Police Chief Fire Chief and more! motion video and reallife footage of those natural disasters you find so irresistible (come on, admit it...we won't tell). Unleash a killer quake. Meltdown a few nuclear power Mess up and you'll watch as natural plants. Heck, wreak citydisaster and crime destroy your creation. wide havoc while you're at it... just don't expect your SimCitizens to sit around and take it because in this SimCity, your citizens are anything but quiet. You'll make headlines on the nightly news, come face-toface with vein-popping city officials and truly experience the lives you rule with each click of your mouse. SimCity Enhanced CD-ROM. The all new original city simulator. SIM CITY Available for IBM PC & compatibles. CD-ROM and Hard Drive required. 888083 ENHANCED CINEMATIC ROM MULTIMEDIA DOS Software 1994 Interplay Productions, Inc. 1989, 1991, 1992, 1993 Sim-Business and Will Wright. All rights reserved worldwide. SimCity is a registered trademark of Sim-Business dba Maxis. All other TM's are properties of Interplay Productions, Inc. 17922 Fitch Avenue Irvine CA 92714. (714) 553-6678 Circle Reader Service #123 "


"GAME DESIGN Unleashing the Power  lenol Sau ault 35 Terrain Tool BRE Radius 5 squares Add height Tn the April issue of CGW, we began this series with an introduction to two of the five editors in Flight Sim Toolkit: the Shape and Color editors. Readers were exposed to several previously undisclosed methods used to create realistic aircraft, as well as some tips on the best use of color in a simulator. Last month, we looked in depth at the Model, Cockpit and Sound editors. Various examples of how to utilize the functions of the Model editor to create realistic flight characteristics for your aircraft were provided. The Cockpit ediror examples defined useful cockpit instrumentation and how to place them appropriately on a panel. Sounds were casily imported into the sim using the basic Sound Recorder that comes with every copy of Windows. In this final installment we will explore Toolkii's most powerful tool, the World editor. The World cditor will bring to life the work completed in the past two articles. Here you are able to lay down terrain, determine where objects are placed, and determine what characteristics those objects will have. Enemy flight paths for aircraft and firing rates for ground forces are also selected here. You may even choose the routes of enemy supply lines, adding to the challenge of the sim. The scenario we are working with is a simple one. A U2 spy plane has been stolen by the Soviets and is being flown out of the country somewhere over the Aleutian Islands. You pilot a single Hornet, which is launched to intcrccpt the U2. Soviet aircraft and surface vessels try to down the Horner, protecting the U2 and the secrets it holds, something the U.S. cannot afford to let happen. The Last in a Three-Part Series by Matt Miller of Domark Islands In The Screen creating the island chain. Go to the Terrain One of the unique features of sims created menu item and select Tool Action. Change with Toolkit is that you can create a virtually the height to 50 meters and the radius to five squares. Make sure that the selector is on unlimited playing area. Thus, we begin in the \"Add Height.\" Using the Raise Point tool you World editor by deciding how large a playing will create small mountains 50 meters high arca we want to use. I would suggest for our Coldwar sim that we make it three riles high and live squares wide with sloping sides down to the water level. Each time you click on a by six tiles wide, which can be ser in the particular spot you will raise that FST World DAFSTICOLDWAR arca another 50 meters. Click sevFile Edit Grid World Terrain Object Path Help eral places on the screen and create a mountain range covering most of the water. Height 50 M Operation With a newly created mountain range, you may want to randomize O Set Helight OK Cancel the terrain a bit. This can casily be done by adding Fractal Iterations into the terrain. Fractalizing terrain lays down random \"fault lines.\" Select Fractalize Terrain and highlight the entire terrain tile. Do this two or three times to get a good land mass to work with. 10000 x 600 V e ressarea 1 Our next step is to make islands Create the island you've always wanted out of our expanse of terrain. Select with the Terrain Tool Action. the \"Lower Point\" tool and World menu item in the Project Manager Smooth out the edges of the various islands box. This is also where we will select the ne by clicking on the range's perimeter. You will by clicking on the range's nerimeter. You will colors for the sim (COLDWAR.FCD). notice that this makes very convincing valleys With the tiles of your world laid out accordand rivers, and if we take it a step further, ingly, you will now want to starr creating the creates islands in an island chain. Repeat this Aleutian Island chain to be used as a backdrop process for every terrain tile in the Project for Coldwar. Move the highlight tile (the Manager. Once completed, you will have a square box in the Project Manager) over a tile very good looking chain of islands within that you want to edit, then click on the World which we will create the remaining sim charEditor tool in the Project Manager. Make acteristics. sure you are in terrain mode of the editor by Since we need an airport for jer takeoffs and ensuring that the \"Terrain\" button is delandings, we are going to need to level out pressed. some terrain to build it. Select a terrain tile We will begin with a large expanse of sea. near the left of the screen, and choose one of This \"blue water area\" is where we will be the larger islands. Move the mouse over the 7.99 Page 120 Computer Gaming World "


"TU...... ........ . Elle Edit Grid World Terrain object Path Help BE island terrain and read the status bar on the Click in the middle of one of the E FST World DSTCOLDWART O bottom of the window. Try to get an idea of leveled squares. This puts down the how high the terrain is in general. Go to default object \"BOX.FSD\". Since Terrain on the menu bar and select Tool it would typically be a major chalAction again, but this time select the Tool lenge landing on a box the size of a Height to be the height that you determined postage stamp, we want to change was the average for the area. Now use the the shape that is displayed. You can Raise Area tool to level the land for your do this either by selecting Edit Obairstrip. You want to raise about a 4X5 square ject, or by double-clicking on the area for your airport. object itself to bring up the Object Properties screen. Here we can Airport '94 change what type of object it is, The first object we want to place on the what it looks like, and how it acts. terrain will be the U.S. Naval Air Station in For the runway, we want to change x02 the Aleutian Islands. We will start by putting the Shape to RUNWAY.FSD and ko sa KST100 V.40000 Radeow it down two Runways on the area of land we leave the type at Cultural. Runways leveled in the previous step. This is the most don't need to be anything else Raised terrain begins to take shape. important consideration regarding laying (though enemy runways might be down objects in Toolkit: never, ever, cross the Hangars, as they might be set to generate craft will be automatically rearmed for re-engrid lines with an object. Crossing the lines will aircraft). On the right side of the properties gagement! \"cut\" the object in pieces, and not all of those box, there are three check boxes: Player, RunPlace two runways side by side and then two pieces will be displayed in the flight sim. way and Target. Selecting \"Player» marks that in the square above the one you just laid out. Many of our users suffer from disappearYou now have a large runway that is FST World DESTCOLDWAR ing runways because they are crossing the easily accessible for landings. If you wish, Elle Edit Grid World Terrain Object Path Help grid lines when creating the object. HI you can also place some cultural objects Now, get the World Editor into Object around the airport. Hangars, other airMode (ist button, 2nd column). This craft, etc., can all be laid down very will allow you to lay down objects and easily. You don't even need to change place them in appropriate positions, as any of the object's properties, except perwell as give them properties. Zoom in on haps the shape. the island you leveled by clicking on the Placing a beacon at your airport acts as Zoom In button and selecting the area a navigation aid to help you find your you want to Zoom In on. Click and drag way back for re-arming. Place the Tower the highlight box over the area. If you object and change it from Cultural ro want to get a better view of the area, NDB (Non-Directional Beacon). You Maximize the World Editor screen by want to give this NDB some more declicking in the Maximize/Minimize butfined properties, so click on the Proper[b   orn n 1 ton at the top right hand corner of the ties button at the bottom of the screen. box. This will make everything a bit larger Fractalising the area adds randomness Change the NDB frequency to 110. We and features to the mass. and easier to work with. To zoom in on will also be putting an NDB along the object as a player, and it will be the point of one specific square, just double click on the flight path of the U2 that you are trying to view for the simulation. While it is possible square after selecting the Zoom In tool. destroy, so you will be able to use that as a to mark any object as \"player,\" you won't be When you have sufficiently zoomed in, senavigation point to help you find the aircraft able to move if your object lacks the properlect the \"Place Object\" tool in the editor. after you do some dogfighting with Soviet ties of an aircraft, either civil or military. Blackjacks (it's easy to lose your sense of Selecting \"Targer\" will allow Airdirection performing a Split-S!). Ele Edit Grid World Terrain object Path Help to-Ground missiles the ability to You can lay down more runways if you'd home in on the object. In the like (you may want one going East-West as HUD, a square will appear over the well); just remember to mark every runway target, denoting a lock-on the Tarobject as \"Runway\" in the Object Properties get. \"Runway\" is a property that section. You can change the angle that any allows a player to safely land and object is shown at using the Angle property taxi on an object. Runway objects in the Properties section. for the time being must be flat two-dimensional objects. In DoA Path Well Taken mark's FST World War II add-on orld War II add-on Webster's New World dictionary defines disk, however, runway objects may \"path\" as: 1. A way worn by footsteps; 2. A be anything, allowing aircraft carwalk for use of people on foot; 3. A line of rier landing. Runways also have a movement. While the first two make sense if hidden ability: Should you come to you are hiking or playing a computer role Use the Lower Point tool to smooth out a complete stop on the runway and playing game, we are most interested in how the edges of your island chain. shut down your engine, your airToolkit handles the third definition. FST World DESTICOLDWAR H BESHI X60 Y 45 CM 16:00OUKALOO N akinan June 1994 Page 121 "


"FST World DAFSTICOLOWARA Ierrain object Lath Help J.: A .D. Elle Edit Grid World Class Shape Object Properties Hanger Player nimitz.fsd Runway Target Namen Height 0 above ground) Paths PATIL291 s Flight Model Paths must be associated with a Hangar (for two purposes. The first and most FL aircraft) or a Depot (for ground units). After common path is Combat Air Padefining a path, you must link it to one of the trols on which enemy fighters are above object types using the Link Path tool. scnt. Enemy aircraft on this path A path does not need to begin at the object. will follow it until the player comes A box on one side of the world can be generwithin 50 kilometers of their posiAngle 0 10-360) tion, at which point they will break ating an aircraft somewhere on the other side. from the path and engage the Strength 9996 ) If the box is destroyed, it will sever the link Hangse Properties player in air-to-air combat. and aircraft will stop being generated. The Arcraft We must also deal with re-supply Shape blackjak.is most common use for this is a Hangar-object of paths, which are most often used Model myst.md generating aircraft that begin on a runway. with ground units, re-supplying Initial supply Paths in Toolkit can be laid down for one of Transport SAMs, and AA guns that O Cancel Fighter FST World DFSTICOLOWAR to have run out of ammuEle Edit Geld World Terrain object Path Help nition. One trick avail16:002780 All Selecohle Hangerne able to you is to re-supply a Hangar or Designating paths (flight lines) for bogeys to follow. Depot that re-supplies the Bridge Depot. The Bridge/Depot then something else. Let's take a look at sends out another truck. This way, should the Angle 90110-360) a few examples: player destroy the bridge, the supply line will Example 1: The Bridge be severed. (Shape) OK Cancel Properties We can simulate an enemy supExample 2: The Enemy Carrier ply line by creating a Bridge as a Here we will have a path for an aircraft that Depot that begins with zero obre-supplies an aircraft carrier hangar with enjects. We then create another decmy aircraft. We are simulating an enemy pot that re-supplies the bridge with fighter landing, refueling/rearming and takL.BOXCAMSCOVA CALETOXTATE objects (trucks, tanks, whatever). ing off again. Mark the first path as Supply, Place the runway and airport objects Thus, we have one path that ends the second as Fighrer, so that the enemy plane on your flattened area. with the supplying of one truck by will not break off to attack you as it comes in Object Properties Cultural Player Class Shape runway.fsd | Runway Target Name nil Height 0 Strength 0 Dead Mabove ground) (p) ACCESS Brings You the Vir UNDER,A Kilion Alling This category-creating Interactive Movie from ACCESS Software goes light years beyond any other product labeled \"interactive.\" Under a Killing Moon takes you to the streets of post World War III San Francisco and casts you into the role of Tex Murphy, Private Investigator, who first appeared in Mean Streets, then Martian Memorandum. Under a Killing Moon is a Virtual World full of people and places so richly detailed, you'll Format: 3 CD-ROMs faalla vankamatay thava "


"& SAHIB Shnpe Anglo lo 0-360) x9: az UZINY Seed Chan to land. For Coldwar, we will be using this to on the path, then the vehicle will FST World DFSTICOLDWAR Edit Grid World use that data for every point afterTerrain Object Path simulate long range reinforcements. Help Object Properties Example 3: The Civil Airport wards, until it reaches a point AAGUN Player where something is different. Airzsu_23.fsd Runway Aircraft will take off from an airport, fly craft paths with very sharp turns Target around for a while, then land at the same Name will be executed to the best of that airport, re-supplying the airport with one aircraft's ability. Height O lim above ground) more aircraft. This aircraft will then take off Strength 999 (p) In a civil simulation you will Dead (Shape) and fly the same path in a continuous loop. want several aircraft flying about OK | Cancel Properties When you lay down a path, it is not neceson paths, giving you a little scenery A Gun Properties sary to edit each point on the path to instruct in the sky to look at beyond that Burst Rate rounds/sec Burst Time being viewed on the ground. In 20 the speed of the vehicle or the height of the seconds Reload Time 10 seconds aircraft during flight. If you do the first point Coldwar, we are going to set up one Tale simple path, from one OK FST World DAFSTICOLDWAR Cancel Elle Edit Grid World Terrain object Path Malp map edge to the other, Object Properties for the U2 to follow. To You can adjust the number and intensity Class run the path along the of the enemy's AA guns. Shape rapler.tsd Runway entire length of the map, save it as INVISIBL.FSD, giving you the you are going to have to exit from Angle ability to create an object made literally out Height O om above ground) the World editor, move the highof \"thin air.\" The invisible object can be Strength 999 0p) light box over, then reenter the edianywhere, as long as the U2's path is linked Dead (Shape) OK Cancet Properties tor and drag the end point of the to it. path to the edge of the tile. Repeat SAM Properties Range 2 this process until the U2's flight Bandits, SAMs, and Triple A Km Detect Floor 100M path runs the length of the map. Now we come to the fun part of Toolkits Missile kp 5 The U2 itself has not yet been World Editor, as we determine the enemy OK Cancel entered into the sim, so we must forces we will use and how ferocious their create a hangar that generates one firepower will be. For the enemy fleet, we will Make SAMs as deadly as you want, U2. One possible trick is to create probably want two aircraft carriers and several but don't whine when they wax you. an object that has no polygons and picket ships to thwart the Hornet's progress. SAM Player Target Name 10 0-3601 x9! l iyan V S antahlar III ananlal is ual World Interactive Movie! Q: What do film stars Brian Keith Margot Kidder, & Russell Means have in common? What Reviewers Are Saying: \"Lots of games push the envelope-Under a Killing Moon blows it to smithereens!\" -William Trotter, PC Entertainment «A ground breaking CD adventure!\" -Joyce Worley, Electronic Games \"Under a Killing Moon combines the best elements of movies and computer games... It literally pulls you into the screen.\" -Denny Atkin, Entertainment Editor, Compute Magazine A. They all star in ACCESS Software's new CD thriller Under a Killing Moon! ACCESS Coming Spring 1994! to a Software Dealer Near You! SOFTWARE INCORPORATED Call 1-800-800-4880 for details "


"FST World DFSTICOLDWARI Terrain object Path Help n a rians at Elle Edit Guld World Class Object Properties Military Player a18.fsd Runway Name N Angle 100 -360) r Arcraft ar Shapes Model Tornet.md Number KP 12000 OK r Ordnance Cannon Rocket Nr.Ar Air Ground Iron Bomb 30 500 Place one of the carriers near the middle of els you denote in the Hangar Propthe map, and place the other near the western erties section determine what the edge. Give each of these vessels 1500 kill aircraft are armed with in the points, so that only missiles will be capable of game. A jet engine-equipped airShape taking them out. Place several picker ships craft will have guns and missiles, Target around the carriers, worth between 500 and while a prop aircraft can have only Height o r above ground) 1200 kill points cach, to serve as the carrier's cannons. Military Pathoperties protective shield. After the set-up of the AA and Cockpit hometigd Gear Down Of the two ways to get the picket ships to aircraft comes the dreaded enemy ugh Speed fire at the Hornet, the simplest is to mark the of the fighter pilot. Surface-to-Air ships as AA Guns in the Properties section, Missiles (SAMs) track down your and also set their rate of fire and reload time. aircraft based on the heat emissions The main advantage is that you can set down of your jet. The only recourse a Cancel several ships of this type quickly. The drawpilot has is to drop Chaff decoys x61 om. Hv backs are that you cannot have more than one when he hears the MAW (Missile Custer Bomb 0 ladobolt 0 AA Gun firing per ship, plus the AA gun itself Approach Warning). Place some Always keep a stock of missiles, bullets, and bombs on hand can't be destroyed withour sinking the ship. SAMs on ships and a few on the in case company decides to drop by. islands to add increasing levels of A better way to handle ships firing back at ways. Place an object, then go to Object difficulty to the sim. Don't put down too Properties. Change the shape to \"A-18\" (the you is to place AA Gun shapes on the ship many SAMs though, as they can turn your itself. Place the guns on the high points of the Horner shape included in Toolkit, ship, so it doesn't blow itself up when you fly found in the Library sub-direcby. You will now have several AA guns firing tory). Now mark this as Player, and change the object's class to Miliat you as you pass over the ship, and you have the ability to pick off individual AA guns tary, then select the Properties butwhen strafing the boats—a cool effect, espeton on the panel. This brings up cially if you give them low Kill Power bethe Player Arming screen and tween 2 and 10. properties section. The work we've done over the past two issues Enemy air forces will use the comes to fruition here, so let's inBLACKJCK.FSD shape from the Library. pur the variables! Much like the carrier supply line in the paths Change the cockpit to HORsection above, these aircraft should land and NET.FGD and change the flight take off again. Mark the carriers as «Hangars» model to HORNET.FMD. If you with an initial supply value of zero (or maybe want a gear-down shape, it is no one or two, depending on how vicious you trouble to go into the Shape Editor are). Then you want to place an INVISIBL and add a set of landing gear to the Scrambling in your very own Hornet from a base hangar on the West map edge that generates you created is a singular thrill. Hornet; then, using the \"Save As.» a Supply Blackjack. Create a path from the aircraft into Swiss cheese if you aren't careful! West map edge to the carrier, and then create function, save the new shape as a path for the CAP (Combat Air Patrol). The AA Guns can be placed with abandon, since A-18GD.FSD (for Gear Down). The Horner their hit ratio is pretty low, but SAMs are CAPs will most likely intersect the U2's flight does not have Swing Wings, so we can leave path, which will give you an additional chaldeadly and accurate. By marking the SAMs the High Speed shape blank. deadly and accurate. By marking the SAMS Now we have to arm the Hornet with amlenge when engaging the U2. The flight modas targets, they can be more easily destroyed by your Air-to Ground missiles, munition. What we decide on here will dewhich simulates radar-seeking mistermine the level of challenge built into the siles such as HARMs. You may simulation, giving you the ability to build want to make the scenario tougher sims to match your own level of play. For a by having only SAMs marked as good balance of playability and realism, I targets, simulating the loading of suggest the following: only High-speed Anti-Radiation Cannon: 2000 rounds at 1 KP each missiles. Or you can mark other Air to Air: 6 missiles at 30 KP each targets (like the ships), giving you Air to Surface: 4 missiles at 500 KP each lots of targets to choose from. Iron Bombs: 6 bombs at 10 KP each. SAMs should have between 10 and You are now ready for play! 25 kill points. Learning to FLY.EXE The Player The FLY executable is the command you The final component involved in run from DOS (or Windows, if you have over building your sim is placing down 16MB of memory) that starts the flight sim Your flight plan today calls for severe turbulence, the likely event of sudden cabin decompression, and you the Player object. Go back to the component of Toolkit. There are numerous may get a view out the side windows of your wing on fire. airport you originally set up, and \"switches\" for the Fly executable that change Have a nice flight! zoom in close to one of the runthe way the game is viewed and played. The Page 124 Computer Gaming World "


"FLIGHT SIM TOOLKIT «Let There Be Flight\" Contest most common switches are «-S», \"-A», or \"-V». These three switches set the screen size to 640x480 pixels instead of the default 320x200. The S stands for S3 based Windows Accelerator cards, the A stands for ATI Mach 8 or Mach 32 based Windows Accelerators, and the V stands for VESA compliant video cards (version 1.2 or later). Some S3 cards need the VESA driver installed before the S3 chip can work to full effectiveness; so if you are convinced you have an S3 card, but the computer won't take the -S switch, try loading the VESA driver beforehand. Remember that you can only run the sim in the same resolution as the cockpit you have designed for the player. In the TOPGUN and PILOT simulations included with Toolkit, Domark used a batch file instead of the normal FLY command to start the game. This allowed us to maneuver around the issue of display choices on various machines. The Batch file rewrites the WORLD.FST file into a new WORLD.FST file that has the variables loaded for it automatically. Experienced DOS users may want to try this as well, as it allows many users to enjoy sims created with Toolkit as long as they have DOS-based PCs. As such, Toolkit is used to create sims but not to fly those sims, because the Windows-based engine that Toolkit uses doesn't run the sim portion of the game at acceptably fast speeds. FLY.EXE requires very little conventional memory (330K), so virtually any computer has the capacity to enjoy Toolkit sims. Another switch you may be interested in is \"-P\" for Oprional Player. Used in the following manner: \"FLY -S -PFALCON» where Falcon is the name of the object you want to use as the player. Set this up in the World cditor by creating a playable object (in shape, Object Class, flight model, armament, etc.). Then, in the Name secrion of the Object Properties, enter a name thar can be entered immediately after the -P (as in -PFALCON). Domark and Computer Gaming World team up to bring you \"LET THERE BE FLIGHT\". Use Domark's revolutionary Flight Sim Toolkit to let your imagination run wild and create the ultimate flight sim scenario. Enter it for a chance to win a trip on a real bird to the world's greatest air show in Farnborough, England. ENTRIES DUE BY AUGUST 10. Grand Prize: A five day, four night trip to the famous London Air Show in Farnborough, England, September 1994. Meet the crew who is responsible for Flight Sim Toolkit, visit the headquarters of Domark and speak with the game designers. First Runners Up: Five winners will receive a ThrustMaster controller of their choice. Select from the Flight Control System, Weapons Control System Mkil, or the Rudder Control System. Second Runners Up: The next 25 winners will receive a one year subscription to Computer Gaming World. WCS DISTMASTER Third Runners Up: The next 50 winners will receive a quality Flight Sim Toolkit t-shirt. Impress your friends with this limited edition gem. FCS PFCS Send entries on 3.5\" disk by August 10, 1994 to: Domark Software Inc. 1900 South Norfork St., Ste. 110 San Mateo, CA 94403 Attention: Let There Be Flight RCS Inc. Mission Complete I hope you've found this three-part series on unleashing the power of Flight Sim Toolkit informative and helpful in mastering the creative process. Be on the look out for the highflying World War II add-on disk featuring the Battle of Midway and D-Day scenarios. FST WWII will be released to stores near you in May and will be followed soon thereafter by FST Helicopters. For the time being, however, test your newly honed sim building skills by participaring in Domark/CGW's sim building contest: A World of Flight featured on this page and win lots of exciting prizes. CGW CONTEST RULES  Registered owners of Flight Sim Toolkit only. If Master, Computer Gaming World, their agents, subyou haven't registered already, now is the time! sidiaries, distributors and resellers are not eligible.  Entries must use four of the five editors in Flight  All entries become property of Domark Software, Sim Toolkit.  Entries will not be accepted after 11:59 PM PDT,  Participation is limited to the U.S. and Canada August 10, 1994. only.  Winners will be selected by the sole discretion of Domark is not responsible for lost, misdirected, or Domark Software, Inc. damaged entries.  To be fair to all entrants, entries will NOT be  Offer is not valid for equivalent cash value of prizes. judged on the following criteria: Title screen, sound  Entries must be on 3.5\" virus-free disk. You may effects, and cockpit background picture. use more than one disk, or compress the files (as a  Winners will be determined on or before August self-extracting archive) if you wish. 20th, 1994, and notified by telephone and/or regis. The disk label must have: The title of the sim, the tered mail. author's name, and the author's daytime phone num Persons employed by Domark Software, Thrust ber and disk number if applicable. June 1994 Page 125 "


"AEGIS CD SUPRAFAXMODEM 14.4LC EXTERNAL COMPUTER Express Since 1985 Guardian of the Fleet naval simulation, Pushes you to the limit of real time strategic and tactical combat simulation. Puls the latest in military technology and the ultimate high toch warship at your fingertips, Fogtures historically occurato bottle sequences Bosed on newly declassified military information and historical accounts of actual battles. Challenges you to use the arts of deception, intelligence and warfare in this hightoch, high thrill military simulation Time Warner: DOS-CD External 14,400bps data and 14,400bps send/receive fax/modem. V.42bis data compression for up to 57,600bps throughput. SilentAnswer supports receive fox and voice calls on one phone line. Caller ID, when supported by the phone company, displays information about incoming calls. LED display lights track modem activity Package includes WinFax Lite, FaxTalk, COMt and CompuServe Information Manager software. 5-year warranty! Supra Corp.: WIN/DOS, MAC S 159 800-228-7449 TOLL FREE ORDER LINE $53 AUDIO MAGICIAN 16CD FREE BENEATH A STEEL SKY In the nor too distant future. you have two choices: live in the giant city states controlled by 23 six vast corpo rations or reside in a wasteland known as The Gop. As Gap dweller Robert Foster, your peaceful existence is decimated by the arrival of security forces intent on taking you to the city. The route to solving this sci-fi mystery and freeing this city of oppression is littered with logical problems to salve, security clearances to forge and military forces to evade MYST Journey to on island world surrealistically Hinged with mystery. As you explore this world, you'll loom that MYST was created by a man who perfected an amazing art of writing books that transport readers into fantastic worlds. Only your wits and imagination will serve to stay the course and unlock the oncient betrayal of ages past. Experience a first person point of view with no distracting controls or windows. Delight in an original soundtrack and sound effects that enhance the sense of realism. Unlike other adventure games, there's no inventory and players don'r die True 16 bit card with 16 bit stereo sound Integrated 16-bit A/D D/A Converters. Built-in Joystick Port with 2 Jaystick capabilities. Four operator, 20 voice FM music (Yamaha Synthesizer OP13). Internal CD ROM Audio Interface. Microphone jack and amplifier Sound Blaster and Adlib Compatible Compatible CD-ROM Drives: Panasonic CR523B/CR.562B, Sony CDU 31A/CDU-33A, -Aitsumi CRMCUO05S/CRCFXOôio, Weares COD. 110. Includes 3.5\" disk for Wolfenstein 3D F-14 FLEET DEFENDER Pilot the Navy's first line of defense, the F-14 Tomcat Experience all the excitement of a catapult lounch, realistic air to air combot and the challenge of PROSE londing on a pitching deck Features the latest in 3-D terroin technology derived from digitized information taken from LANDSAT geclogical surveys. You'll pilot your F.14 through actual locations. In air to air combat, you'll interact with F/A-18 Hornets, A 6 Intruders, A.7 Corsairs, and E-2C Hawkeye AWACS Realistic enemy Al patterned after Soviet and Third World military doctrine Microprose DOS Virgin: IBM $39 Broderbund: IMM CD, MAC CD $49 Calypsor BM $98 $45 Dune Catus....... 3 25 44 JOYSTICKS/GAMECARDS BM ROM Budget Guide USA 1993.......... Bugs Bunny...... Buzz Aldrin's Space........... CNN Time Capsula 1993. Campaign Capitol Hill Castles Il........................... Challenge CD Pack............. Cinemania Movie Guide 94 Coffee Break CD Collection Comanche w/Mission 182 Command Starship Companions of Xanth Conspiracy............ Coral Reef rol Path Enchantia IBM CD-ROM Eco Quest Search for Catus..... Encaite Encyelopedia 94 Evolution... F-15 Strike Eagle III Family Doctor... . Family Doctor MPC Five on 5.. Flight ATP w/East & West.... Flight Simulator Toolkit... Flying Circus... Freelancer 2120 FreePhone... Fun CD Pack... G.ORG Gabriel KGatewr 889999999 IBM D-ROM ..60 105 D&D D&D Daemon Dare to F FREE LOTTERY TICKET WITU ORDERS OVER $75 Request Your SPEAKERS Den Dinosa Dinosaurs DirectPhone Discovery CT FREE was Flight Stand.... Flight Stick... Flight Stick Pro... Flightstick PRO..... G-Force Flight Yoke... GamoCard lll Automatic GameCard III MCA Automatic Gomeport 2000 Up to BOMHE Genovation Parallel Game Port... Gravis Anclog Pro Joystick..... Gravis Eliminator Cord Gravis Mac Gamepad Gravis MouseStick II MAC................ Gravis PC Gamepad... Thrustmaster ACM Game Card Thrustmaster Flight Control ............. Thrustmaster Formula TI... Thrustmaster Pro Flight................... 105 Thrustmaster Rudder Pedals Thunderstick Virtual Pilot Y Cable for 2 Joysticks.................. AR Partner 570 Speaker System....... Alte ACS100 Speckers Alee ACS200 Speakers Koss HD I Speckers..... Koss HD 4 Speakers.... 39 Koss HD6 MPC Speakers........... Labtec CS-1000 Speakers.... Labtec C5 180 Shielded Speaker... Labtec CS-550 Speakers............... Labtec CS 800 Speakers..... .. Labtec CS-900 Speakers.... Labtec 55700 Speakers... 10 Yr Anthology .................. 11th Hour 20th Century Video Alm. MPEG 20th Century Video Almanc... 3 Balloons. 7th Guest AD&D Eye Beholder Trilogy... AD&D: Dark Sun Shattered lands.......... AD&D Dungeon Hack.. AD&D. Genie's Curse ..... Adventures of Willy Beamish................ Aegis: Guardian of the Fleet Air Warrior.. AirWorks.... Alone in the Dark..... Animals MPC..... Art Gallery Windows...... Arthur's Teacher Trouble Artic Baron. B17 & Silent Service Il... Battle Chess... Battledrome.... Beethoven Microsoft Beneath a Steel Sky Berlitz Japan Alive ..... Berlitz Think & Talk French Betrayal at Krondor....... Better Homes Healthy Cooking Bibles & Religion Shareware.... BioForge Interactive Movie Bioforge Interactive Movie... Blood Net... Blue Force.... Bookshelf Windows 94. INCA 2 Indiana Fate of Atlantis....... Iron Holix...... J.FK Astossination Japan Business Travel... Journeyman Project ............ Jump Raven... Just Grandma & Me.. Jutland... .. King James Elect. Bible. King's Quest VI King's Quest VI Upgrade... King's Ransom......... Labyrinth of Time... Lands of Lore............. .... Laura Bow II... lownmower Mon......... Legend of Kryandia.... Leisure Suit Larry VI...... Links: Pinghurst Country SVGA loom Lord of the Rings.... Lord of the Rings MPEG Lost in Time MPC Luncus ... Lyric language French MPC Lyric language Spanish MPC MPC Wizard Diagnostie Mad Dog McCree........... Mon Enough... Mon Enough. MPEG Monice Sports...... Mantis Experimental...... Mayo Clinic Family Health 1.2...... Mayo Clinic Totol Heart...... MechWarrior II.............. Mechamander... Mego Race... Microcom. Microsoft Baseball WIN Microsoft Golf Windows MPC Might & Magic World of Xeen. Monopoly Deluxe ................. Multimedia Dinosaurs.......... Multimedia Mozart... Multimedia Stravinsky Musical Instruments .... Myst......... Naval Pack Newsweek Interactive #1 Newswook Interactive #2 Nomad..... Oceans Below Omar Sharif on Bridge ... Outpost...... Oxford English Reference.... Penthouse Interactive.... PhoneDisc USA: Business... Photo CD Access DOS..... Photo CD Access WIN.. PhotoEdge Color WIN Pill Book Police Quest IV.... . Police Quest IV. MPEG... Porky Pig. Publisher 2.0....... Quantom Gote............. ROMIX Comics Freex #1... ROMIX Comies Hardcase 1 ROMIX Comics Prime CALL Deog Eco Quest Encarta Evoluti 36 Two Dollar Instant Lottery Ticket For Domestic Customers Only While Supplies Last MP ..40 King: ..55 ...CALL 25 19 28 40 CD-ROM Flight ATP w/Eos Flight Simulator Flying Circus..... Freelancer 2120............... FreePhone.... ..... Critical Path.. Curse of Enchantia. CyberRace Cyberplasm Formula........ D&D Fontosy Empires.. D&D: Stronghold Demonsgate Dare to Fly Dark legion.. .... Dark Seed Day of the Tentacle.. Deathstar Arcade Battles.. Dennis Miller News to Me Dinosour Adventure 3-D Dinosaurs! Encyclopedia .... DireciPhone.. Discovery CD Pack Dracula Unleashed....... Dragon's loir Dragon's Lair for Reelmagic DragonSphere.............. IBM CD-ROM IBM CD-ROM King's Qu. King's Quest King's Ransom.... Labyrinth of Time..... Lands of lore Fun CD Pock.... G.ORG Gabriel Knight... Gateway 11, Global Explorer Goblilins ... Goblins ll... Goblin Great Naval Battles Il... Great Navol Bottles Pock............ Greens Golf CD..... . Gunship 2000 w/Scenario...... HAM Radio Shoreware Hand of Fate............... ..... Harvester CD. Hell Cob Home Medical Advisor Pro.. Horde Horde MPEG Humans INCA IBM OROM IBM 60 "


"AIR COMBAT PACIFIC 1942 UNDER A KILLING MOON CD GRAVIS ANALOG PRO JOYSTICK PC Analog Joystick MICROSOFT GOLF Experience the true lo lile challenges of the gume of gall, while enjoying the stunning beauty of the oceanside Torrey Pines Golf Course Compatible with Access UNKS Championship Course Disks Practice at the driving range of putting and chipping greens Analyze your last shot or hole in one with the instant replay features. Tee of with up to eight goliing partners. Take a mulligan, gimmie, or rehit with one click Photo realistie scenery and stunning graphics bring this challenging course to life on your desktop Microsoft WIN LOSGAZINE Interactive movie takes you to the streets of post World War III San Francisco into a Virtual World full of people and places so richly detailed you'll feel like you're actually there Hollywood stars add credibility and the necessary talent Create a personalized Tex Murphy movie which can be replayed at any time. Rich, Original musie, high quality digitized voices and sound effects make this interactive movie as exciting as it is visually stunning Take on the challenges that WWII fighter pilots faced, Performing high-speed dives upon heavily defended carriers and chosing down Wildcats, Corsairs, and Zeros Challenge the enemy o! the bottles of Coral Sea, Midway, Eastern Solomon's, Santa Cruz, and the Philippine Sca. Command U.S. or Japanese forces, or experience the thrill of head to head dogfights with a friend via modem connection Pilot any of en historically accurate planes, each with its authentic cockpit and flight characteristics GRAVIS Designed specifically for flight simulation and action arcade games, the Gravis Analog Pro includes a built-in throhilo control, five fire buttons, including a trigger, eight adjustable tonsion selling, a \"throttle off\" feature that helps to avoid conflicts with multiplo joystick contigo rations, six foet of cord, and a foam padded handle. Microprose: DOS $49 $42 Acease DOS-CD $56 Advanced Gravid IBM $36 EMPIRE SOCCER U-BOAT U-BOAT If you've always dreamed of sponding months at sea in the claustro phobic confines of WWII submarino this is for you. Bring along a good book to while away the off watch hours. Also bring the nerve to withstand incessant barrages of depth charges railing your teeth at 200 meters. Being the intelligence not to venture a surface shot on a capital ship in broad daylight. Bring the skill to navigate treacherous waters. MICROLEAGUE TIMEOUT SPORTS Four fun, fost baseball gomos hosted by two zony characters Bernie and his dog, Jack, are here to brighten your life with their rrepressible antics. They're on 24-hour duty to prevent your screen from burn-in and your mind from burnout Random hourly, or pre Set attention grobbers foaturing Bernie and lock pop up on screen to remind you to take a break with any of the four fast and fun filled baseball game included: Boring Practice. Fungo Fielding. Sign Colling 101, or Umpire arguing Micronega: WIN BATTLEDROME High tension and high stakes till the Battledrome arena as fully articulated Herculans wield their might effortlessly across the cyberscapo Batilodrome puts it all on the line us mighty Horcs fight one on one for power, pride und money, Battledrome is a vitual reality combat arona where strategy and tactics count Os much as firepower. Choose your Herc, ils weapons, the arena conditions, the feel of battle, and the amount to wager. Modem ready All the excitement and fast paced action of the World Cup competition. Toke total control of all the teams vying for the Worlds most coveted sports honor Each of the 24 national teams has been neticulously studied and tendered sa that they mirror the strengths and playing styles of the actual squads. On the field, perform all the moves that these elite athletes the best soccer players in the world $34 Deadly Games: MAC $24 Empire Software DOS $29 Sierra: DOS, IBM CD $28 CAU CD DRIVE & UPGRADE KITS 3028 AT16 Int. 240ms....... .... ....437 3028 MVPAS16 Bundle Int. 240ms........600 5028 AT16 Ext 240ms. 5028 MVPAS 16 Ext. 240ms CDU33A/LCD Completo Kit.... .483 CDU33A/LCD Starter Kit.......... DigitalEdge CD Mult Kit Discovury Int. Dbl. 16-bit Kit 328 Fusion Double CD Internal kit...... Memphis Multimedia Upgrade Kit ....590 MultiSpin 3XE Ext. 195ms.... Mols Spin 3XI Int. 195ms .... MultiSpin 3XP Portable 195ms..... OmniCD Upgrade Kit....... ................313 OmniCD Upgrado Kit EXTERNAL....... Pro 16 ll Multimedia Kit... 503 Pro 16 III Triple Speed Kit 797 Realmacic CD ROM KI.. 725 Reno CD ROM Portable Player ............ Sensory Starter Upgrade Kit Sensory System I Int. Mm Kit. 800-228-7449 332 FAX:508-443-5645 EXT. VOICE:508-443-6125 332 FAX:508-443-5645 31 Union Ave., Sudbury, MA 01776 * . -* *8C FAX:0011-508-443-5845 Xit.CompuServeID:70007, 15340 3 13 vabt . B ut 3 DESE&6 162XL FREE UPS GROUND SHIPPING 10,000 IN STOCK ITEMS IBM CD-ROM 529 MAN Pro Audio Studio 16LC........ Quest for Glory Quicken 4.0........ ... Raiden.. Ravenlah Rebel Assault......... Redshift.... . Return of the Phantom...... Return to Zork Return to Zork. MPEG... Rich & Famous Cookbook SSN-21: Sea Wolf SVGA Harrier.... Som & Max Hit the Road Sautus.... Scrabble Deluxe .......... Secret Weapons Luftwafio. Secret of Monkey Island SelectPhone Shadow Caster.............. Shadow of the Comet..... Shott Attention Span Theatre Shuttle.. SimAnt Enhanced SimCity Enhanced..... SimEarth... Sitting on the Farm Soh Kill.WIN Soundtrack MPEG Space Aco MPEG... Space Quest IV..... Space Shuttle MPC .... Spear of Destiny Super CD-Pak Spectro VR Spellcasting Party Pak Spirit of Excalibur Sporting News MPEG, Sporting News Pro Football Star Trek 25th Enhanced Star Trek: DSN The Hunt Star Trek: TNG Tech Manual Star Trek: The Next Generation Street Atlas 2.0 USA....... Strike Commander/Tactical... Super Air Warrior... Superhero: League of Hoboken Terror of the Deep......... Tetris Gold Compilation... The Patrician ........ Three Stooges. Timo Almonac of 20th Century Tony LaRusso Baseball ll...... Too Many Typefonis! Shareware Total Distortion Trump Castle II U.S. Atlas 4.0... UFO Close Guide USA Today: The 90's Vol. 1 Ultimal. VI..... ... Ultima Underworld I & II...... Ultima VII: Complete Series..... Under a Killing Moon............ Vegas Games Deluxe..... Videa Cube Space......... Video Cubo Space MPEG.. Video Cube Sports.... Viper: Assault on the Outfit Whero in World Deluxe Wild Blue Yonder ...... Wing II/Ultima UnderWorld Wolf Pack Works 3.0... World Atlas 4.0..... MACINTOSH MACINTOSH CD-ROM Air Warrior Alone in the Dark American Civil War III... Astrochase AutoMap. Axis the Gamecheater.... Body Work: 3.0 Caesar Caesars Palace.. Carriers Al War......... Castles. Il Chuck Yeager Air Combat Citadel of the Dead... Civilization Coral Reef Cyber Roce. Dark Seed Detral Empire Deluxe........ Evolution... F.117 A Stealth Fighter... Flight Cammander... Flight Sim: Japan Scenery..... Flight Simulator 4.0..... .. Flying Nightmares.... Freelancer 2120 .............. Gabriel Knight Harpoon I. Indiana Jones Fate of Atlantis Jeopardy Sports Edition... Jeopardy with Alex Trebeck King's Quest VI... Legend of Kyrandia Leisure Suit Larry VI..... M4 Sherman lank Mae Attack Mac Full O'Humans........ Mario Teaches Typing.... Mario is Missing Micro Kitchen Companion 94 More Incrediblo Machines Oxyd Magnum PGA Tour Golf ......... Pathway into Darkness..... Police Quest IV Populous. Powermonger... Print Shop Deluxe............ Railroad Tycoon... Royal Flush... SimAnt... SimCity 2000 SimCity 2000: Great Disasters SimCity Classic... Simlile... Solitaire Antics Star Trek 25th Anniversary..... Sint Trek DSN. The Hunt Star Wars Screen Saver Strip Poker Pro #1 Data Disk.. Strip Poker Pro #6 Data Disk Strip Poker Professional Sword of Sodan............. Terror of the Deep Thrustmaster Flight Cont. MKI Thrustmaster Rudder Pedals Thrustmaster Weupon Markll. Thunderstick ADB Train Engineer .................... Triston MAC IC/MACII...... V for Victory Pak. Valkyrie... Vegas Games Entertainment Pack... Victory at Sea... Virtus VR........... Wheel of Fortune w/Vanna White... World at War: Op. Crusader Flying Nightmares.. Freelancer 2120 Hell Cab Indiana Jones Fate of Atlantis... fron Holix Journey Man Project Jump Raven. lownmower Man... Legend of Kryandia Lunicus Madness of Roland Mania Sports Micro Kitchen Companion 94 Myst... Oceans Below Planetary Taxi Rebel Assault Redshift Return to Zork Short Attention Theatre .... Sitting on the Form Solt kill Spectre VR.................... Star Trek DSN. The Hunt Star Trek: TNG Tech Manual.... Street Atlas USA.. Viper: Assault on the Outfit Virtual Tarot Wild Blue Yonder... Wroth of the Gods 29 48 IBM CD-ROM MACINTOSH 11th Hour 3 Balloons 7th Guest A Hard Days Night: Beatles... Art Gallery Bookshelf '94... CNN Time Capsule 1993 Chessmaster 3000 Cinemania Movie Guide 1994 Cyberplasm Formula Dare to Fly.......... .. Dark Seed Dennis Miller News to Me Dracula Unleashed Evolution... Circle Reader Service #56 MACINTOSH CD-ROM SEGA SNES/3DO 20th Cent. Video AlmanacAirbome Ranger SNES 52 Aladdin SEGA....... Animals 3DO Art of Fighting SNES Baule Chess 3DO Blades of Vengeance SEGA CALL Bubsy in Claws SEGA. Bubsy in Claws SNES CPU Bach 3DO.. Cliffhanger SEGA.............................. Combot Cars SEGA.... CALI Dennis Millor News to Mo. 3DO..... Dragon's Lait 3D0 Dungeon Master SNES.....................60 Escape from Monster Manor 3DO...... Eternal Champions SEGA F 15 Strike Eagle II SEGA............ . "


"REELMAGIC LITE Reel M Pont COMPUTER Express IMPEG EMAS No more jerky video. Thanks to the MPEG standard, you'll enjoy full motion, full screen playback on your PC. ReelMagic Lite brings a dazzling array of entertainment and interactive learning software to your desktop. Use ReelMagic Lite for a variety of applications, including entertainment Video CD, Interactivo learning, Karaoke CD, business presentation and Maining software. Thirty frames per second video playback gives you TRUE full motion Fullscreen video for a real movie-like experience THE GRANDEST FLEET Develop culturel resources and manage the growth of your population. Allocate natural resources to build missile sites, redor stations shipbuilding focilities and superships. It's up to you to destroy your nemesis, or end up in Davy Jones' Locker Modem Play. City Economics Cultural and Industrial aspects. A wide selection of ship types. Rondom mopsunlimited variation A truly challenging Al Battles include: Falkland compaign, Banle of Northcape, The BismarkTirpitz Connection, Surigao Straight, Yomamolo's Trop, etc. Since 1985 800-228-744957 TOLL FREE ORDER LINE Sigma Design IBM $299 QOP: DOS $34 HACKER CHRONICLES CD Over 12 years in the making! Contains stories of how they did it, actual break ins, arrests and prosecutions Most articles were written by the actual people who committed these acts. Access articles CORON and software with an easy to use menu system Areas of information include Phone Phreaking. Computer Hackers, Satellite Communications, and \"Underground\" General Information. Many subjects all very technical in nature and explained in detail, such as ATM's, credit cards, voice mail, etc. MORPHMAN CD You are the super hero Morphman and I's your ob to rescue the kidnapped Professor, destroy scien tific experiments, and blow up a research fortress. The world is depending on you and your Morph technology to accomplish this task before the experiments reach civilization. Your only weapons are your wit and the molecular sampler on your sleeve that allows you to alter your own molecular structure and that of objects cround you. Features realistic 3D animation with Microsoft Video for Windows. Realistic 3D explosions, disintegrations, glowing and other special effects seen only in movies. D-DAY A full-fledged campaign game where each player commands either the Allied invasion force or the Axis defenso force in a bid to either take Berlin or repel the invasion The game brings the challenge and fun of computerized miniatures to WW2 for the first time Unit types, initial placement of units, and available reinforcements will all be historically accurate A variety of shorter scenarios, enables those people not wanting to play a mammath campaign to gain enjoyment and value from the product DISCIPLES OF STEEL The disap pearance of your father hos left Lontor without a leader. Foctional «lahing in the resulting power vacuum hos left the realm in chaos! Save your ancerich DISCIPICS lond by te establishing Steel the supremacy Choose your disciples and strategies, build vost armies to conquer or defend, heed the counsel of the lords, or assassinate them everything is under your controll Control and develop up to 8 disciples. large array of powerful weapons. Huge selection of magic spells FormGon DOS S&S Publishing: IBM CD $24 Dynamk Dimensions: DOSCD S 28 Impressions: DOS $39 $34 .......48 IBM PRODUCTIVITY Gils Galore Shareware CD........ Holy Bible King James Version Home Survival Toolkit.... Key CAD Completo Libris Brittannia Shareware CD Lotus 123 Rel 4 Upg WIN Lotus 123 Release 2 WIN MSDOS Upgrade 62 Norton Desktop 3.0 WIN.... Norton Utilities 7.0 Paradox 45 WIN Personal Golf Analyzer.. Photo CD Alaska Photo CD Animals Photo CD Auto Racing.... Photo C Photo Phot IBM RECREATION AD&D: Dark Sun Shattered lands.... AD&D Dungeon Hack AD&D: Eye of Beholder Trilogy...... AD&D: Ganie's Curse ................... APBA Baseball WIN..... Aces Over Korea Aces of Pacifie 1946 WWII Miss Aces of the Deep Aces of the Pacific ......... Aces over Europe.... Aces over Europe: Mission #1... Acos over Europe: Mission #2 Across the Rhine.... IBM RECREATION 46 .40 CALL Beamish Final Fight 2 SNES............... Hardball I SNES Horde 3DO & John Madden NFL '94 3DO. 2 John Madden NFL '94 SEGA John Madden NFL 04 SNES 2 Jungle Strike SEGA..... Jurassic Pork SEGA 3 Lawnmower Man SNES Lemmings 3DO..... ... MLBPA Baseball SNES Mod Dog McCree 3DO Metal Marines SNES. Micro Machines SEGA..... Mortal Combot SNES....... Mortal Kombat SEGA Mutant League Football SEGA. Mutant League Hockey SEGA...... NBA Showdown 94 SEGA ........... NHL 94 SEGA......... NHL'94 SNES............ . Normy's Beach SEGA Oceans Below 3DO Out of this World 3DO. Pelell........... Pelet Soccer SNES Pirates! Gold SEGA.... RoboCop vs. Terminator... Shining Force SEGA Sonic the Hedgehog 3 SEGA Space Shuttle 3DO Stor Control ll. 300 Street Fighter II SEGA Street Fighter I SNES Super NBA Basketboll SEGA Super Off Road Baja SNES Super Wing Commander 3DO...... TMNT Tournament Fighters SNES Virtual Pinball SEGA..... WWF Royal Rumble SNES... Walsh College Football SNES ...... X Men SEGA Request Your Free America Online Membership (includes 10 Hours Online) With Any Purchase 58 inline 2228333333 28 Breach 3... Brott Hull Hockey Brutal Sports Football Caosar........................ Campaign il..... Carrier Strike....... . Castle Conquest. Costles II: Siege & Conquest... Collie Toles: Bolor Evil Eye... CALL Challenge of the 5 Realms. Chessmaster 4 WIN.... .36 Civilization II Civilization WIN Classics Casino.WIN Classics Fun Pack WIN. Cooster Cobra Mission........ ....... Comanche & Mission Disk #1 Comanche: Mission Disk II Conquered Kingdoms..... Crosswords Deluxe WIN.... Cyber Roce..... .... CyberSpace... . D Day: Operation Overlord D&D Fantasy Empires.... D&D Stronghold Day of the Tentacle: Maniac Delta V Detroit Dimension........ . . Doom Episode Drogon Knight Ill........... DreamWeb. Dune il Earth Invasion Arcade WIN... Elder Scrolls Voll Arena Empire Deluxe WIN... Eternom Evasive Action.......... Even More Incredible Machines Evolution........ .. F.15 Strike Eagle Il Classic F-15 Strike Eagle III............ F. 19 Stealth Fighter Classic...... Falcon 3.0 Faleon 4.0............ CALL Falcon: FA-18 Hornet.... ..... Falcon: Mig 29/Deadly Adversary Fast Action Pag: 1st WIN Fields of Glory..... .. FlashBack Flat Top... Flight Adventure 825.... Flight light Flight Sim: Las Vegas........... Flight Sim: New York Scenery.... Flight Sim: Oregon.. Flight Sim: Paris Scenery..... Flight Sim: San Francisco... Flight Sim: Washington DC Flight Simulator 5.0....... Flight Simulator Flight Shop... Flight Simulator Guide Flight Simulator Toolkit Flying Circus..... . CALL Formula One Grand Prix 2 Four Play 20 Freddy Phorkos....... Freelancer 2120 Front Page Sports: Football Pro.......... CALL 28 IBM ADULT Girlfriend Lisa (PG-13)... Girlfriend Teri... Metal & Lace Upgrade Disk NR18 Penthouse Interactive CD Playboy Elect DateBook Strip Poker Pro # 1 Data Disk Strip Poker Pro #2 Data Disk Strip Poker Pro #3 Data Disk Strip Poker Pro #4 Data Disk Strip Poker Pro #5 Dato Disk Strip Poker Pro #6 Data Disk.. Strip Poker Professional ....... IBM ADSL AD&D Congo AD&D: Eye of Beholder Trilogy...... Photo CD Animals..... Photo CD Auto Racing Photo CD Fireworks... Photo CD Japan........... Photo CD Sailboats Photo CD Underwater, Photo CD WWII Aircraft... Planit Paradise WIN... Print Shop Deluxe Print Shop Deluxe CD Ensemblo.... Print Shop Deluxe WIN........ Procomm Plus WIN..... Publisher 2.0 WIN........ Publisher Special Occasions WIN QEMM 386 7. Scenes Impressionists Collect........ Scenes Outer Space Collection..... Scenes Sierra Club Collection..... Star Wars Scren Sover Windows 3.11... ... Windows 3.11 Upgrade Word 6.0 WIN Word for Word 6.0 WIN. Word Perfect 6.0 DOS.... Word Perfect 6.0 WIN . . IBM PRODUCTIVITY IBM RECREATION Bicycle Bridge WIN Across the Rhine. Advanced Civilization.... Adventure Pack ........... Air Combat Classics Air Strike Pacific 1942... Air Warrior...... Alone in the Dark II Arborea 2....... .. Archon Ullra... Arctic Baron... Armored Fist... Art of the Kill............. Ashes of Empire...... Axis the Gamecheater..... B-17 Flying Fortress... Balor of The Evil Eye ...... Barkley Basketball... .. Battle Chess 4000 SVGA Batle Cruiser 3000AD Battle of Britain 2. WIN Battles of Destiny Betrayal at Kronder IBM RECREATION IBM PRODUCTIVITY After Dark... After Dark 2.0 WIN....... ... Auto Mop 3.0 WIN. AutoMap Ski Resorts WIN Auto Mop Upgrade 3.0 WIN.... Betty Crocker Cookbook WIN Bubay TM: Sereen Saver .WIN Charles Barkley Screen Saver Click & Drog WIN... Corel Draw 4.0 WIN.... Delte Companion WIN Delta WIN Disney Collection Screen Saver ... Forever Growing Garden CD 239226339 Blood Net... Body Blows.......... "


"LINKS 386 PRO Championship golf al your fingertips. Featuring Harbour Town Golf Links with Super VGA 256 color graphics for breathtaking views. Over SS 386 345 different combinations of viewing windows Features a club selection.saved shot, and a profile view\". Male or female golfers with 10 different shirt colors to choose from. Statistics recorded for each player and game with optional print out. Supports SoundBlaster and compatible sounds cards. You've got nothing to lose, and so much golfing to gain! COMMAND ADVENTURE STARSHIP Buy a sleek starship to explore regions unknown and extract untold riches from distant galaxies. Avold pirates and blood thirsty alien beings who wander the universe, randomly attacking ships like yours Never the seme game twice. Completely regenerate the universe at will. Custom configure more that 50 ships to your require ments, with more than 80 weapons, shields, and engine systems MICROCOSM A cinematic adventure of exploration and deadly hide and seek It's a fight for control of the free will of Tiron Korsby During a routine operation, en implanted, miniaturized brain manipu lotion droid is threatening to take control over Korsby's mind. A countering operation must be performed, and thus your mission begins. Features over 500MB of graphics and sound for a rich, varied and lito liko innerbody experience. Multiple frome rates of up to 30 frames/second for smooth gameplay and non stop action Puygnosle IBM CD COMPANIONS OF XANTH Now, millions of Xanth fons can escope the confines of the printed page and experience the first Xanth computer game. In Companions of Xanth, you explore Piers Anthony's magical world of mythic wonders and become a player in a game where the stakes are the existence of magic itself. Interact with Elves, Ogres, Demons, Golems, Centaurs, a serpentine Nago princess, and even the deadly Gap Dragon Includes free paperback edition of \"Demons Don't Dream MICROCOS Access Software: IBM $39 Martt Softwarot DOS, IBM CD $39 $45 Accoladet DOS, IBM CD $33 MORTAL KOMBAT/GRAVIS GAMEPAD BUNDLE ESIM CITY 2000 DAEMONSGATE Join in the exploits of Captain Gustavus and his loyal compatriols. travelling the lands of Hostor in search of a strange Sage who may hold the knowledge that could save Gustavus homeland from a despoiling horde of save Doumons. Features over 150 hours of playing time, thousands of screens to journey, huge 70,000 word conversation system, realistically modelled game world. Detailed background manuel CARRIERS AT WAR I CARRIERS AT WAR II ITRATEGIE STUDIER GROUP Fleet carrier CARRIERS operation in AT WAR Southeast Asia 1936-1946. This sequel to the hugely Successful CARRIERS AT WAR uses o much improved version of the original mechanics Sponso decade that changed the world. Offers more tension, more excitement, tougher opponents ond more dramatic Carrier bottles. The uncertainty of war is vividly recreated Eight scenorios included, some hypothetical, others controversial. Explore all aspects of tactical and strategic combot between Japan and the United States and Great Britain SIMCITY 2000: GREAT DISASTERS REQUIRES SIMCITY 2000 Enhonce your city building operience with new cities and urban challenges that load right into SimCity 2000. Wrestle with 10 different cities on the brink of destruction and tackle everything from an alien invasion in Atlanta to a misplaced microwave beam in the Silicon Valley. Ten challenging scenarios with explosions, fires, volcances and other good stuff From Sub Zero Raiden and the rest of the Kombat Warriors to the grueling endurance and intense mirror matches, the arcade hit now explodes onto the PCI Defeat Garo and the shape changing wizard, Shang Tsung, to become the Supreme Mortal Kombat Warrior. Now play even better with the Gravis PC GamePod, the ideal solution for arcade games. The Gravis PC GamePod is fully compatible with all IBM and compatible game cards and programs that support joysticks Four color coded buttons. Supports left and right handed button configurations. Hi-Tech: DOS $45 Imagitela DOS, IBM CD $28 55G: DOS $39 Maxis: DOS, MAC $14 800-228-7449 5XT IBM RECREATION IBM RECREATION 30 ...28 Way 169 402 Frontier Elite II. Game Maker 2.0..... Gary Grigsby's War in Russia.......... Gateway lI...... Genghis Khan II... Gettysburg WIN.. Giga Gomes Shoreware CD.... Global Dominations Global Response...... CAL Goblins i Grand Slam Bridge II WIN.. Great Naval Bamles Pack... Great War 39 HAW.C.............. Hond of Fate Kyrandial... Hannibal ....... HardBall Ill Diamond Collect.......... HardBall IV Harpoon II. Head Coach Football WIN... Heavy Hockey...... CALL Heirs to the Throne...... ..33 High Command....... 42 Hollywood Mogul WIN... .CALL Harda Human's Like You've Never Seen........... 26 Human's: Insell to Injury... Ineredible Toons 28 Indy Car Racing .... Inherit the Earth: Orb Quest........ CALL Isle of the Dead Jack Nicklaus Contest Tout Jack Nicklaus Signature Golf.... Jogged Alliance.... CALL Jeopardy Deluxe...... Jeopardy Sports Edition...... Jeopardy with Alex Trebeck WIN Jet Pack Jurassic Park King's Quest VI.................... Kingdom of Germany........ Kingmaker....... Kye Deluxe Legacy Realm of Terror ....... Legend of Kyrandia...... Leisure Suit Larry VI Lemmings Il Links: Banff Springs SVGA Links Belfrey Course SVGA Links: Castle Pines Course Links: Mauna Kea Course SVGA Lord Of The Rings/Two Towers.. Lord of the Realm .................. Lords of Midnight Lost in Time Lucos Arts Classic Collection.... M4 Sherman Tank Magician's Castle Master of Orion MechWarrior II...... MechWarrior 11 Add On Mechamander Merchant Prince............. Metal & loce... Metamorph............... Microleggue Baseball/Football.... Microsoli Arcade WIN............ Microsoh Space Simulator... Mig 29 Stand Alone Version............. Might & Magic Clouds of Xeen 23 More Incredible Machines........ Nano Tonk......................... EXT. VOICE:508-443-6125 Origamo Opost 332 FAX:508-443-5645 PGA Tour Golfil Pacific Strike Perfect General Trilogy 31 Union Ave., Sudbury, MA 01776 Phantasmagoria... Police Ques *O* -*-* ! * FAX:0011-508-443-5645, Prince of Persia II 40 Privateer ......... Xist, CompuServeID: 70007, 15340 R & abTV Privaloer Operations 2...... , Privateer Righteous Fire Addon Pro League Baseball......... CALL QEMM 386 Game Pack 3.... CALL FREE UPS GROUND SHIPPING Quarter Pole Quest for Glory IV Raiden..... 10,000 IN STOCK ITEMS Railroad Tycoon Deluxe Rally The Final Round Ravenloft................. Real Weather Pilot Tony LoRusso Baseball II..... Audio Magician Plus Red Crystal Tornado... 138 AudioMan... Red Ghost............ Tower. Digital Sound Pro 16 112 Remind Me Train Engineer WIN....... Digital Sound Pro 16 Plus Return to Zork............ UFO: Enemy Unknown Game Blastor CD 16... Romance Three Kingdoms Ill USCF Chess... Gravis UlmoSound 124 Royal Flush...... Ultima Underworld Il. labyrinth Gravis Ultrasound MAX CALL Russian Six Pack Gravis Ultrasound Midi Adapter... Ultima VIII Pogon 35 SSN-21: Sea Wolf Ultima Vill: Pagan Speech Pok SVGA Harrier..... Jazz Soundcard SCSI Ultimate Domain............ Som & Max Hit the Road Port Alle Sound Plus........... ...... Secl Team Vegos Gomes WIN ........ Pro Audio 16 Basic.............. Pro Audio Studio 16 ... Sert City Video Poker for Windows Shadow Coster Pro Audio Studio 16XL.... Shadow of the Comet 2 Vikings: Fields of Conquest Pro AudioSpectrum 16/US Atlas Virtus VR WIN... SimAnt WIN RoelMagic Lite Warlords .. SimCity 2000 . Replmagic Multimedia Playback Warpoint SimCity 2000 WIN..... Roland RAP 10... 459 Warriors of Legend SimCity Classic............ Sound Blaster 16 Basie 107 Wheel of Fortune Deluxe... SimFarm......... Sound Blaster 16 MCD...... When Two Worlds War ........... Sound Blaster 16 MCD ASP Simlife WIN Wing Commander Academy Sound Blaster 16 SCSI 2 185 Smokin' Guns Wing Commander Ill... Sound Blaster 16 SCS2 ASP 224 Solitaire's Journey WIN Wings of Glory 1917.1018 Space Hulk... Sound Blaster AWE32 Wizardry Trilogy Space Quest V Sound Blaster DigitalEdge 3x IV/V/V) .... Wolfpack... Sound Blaster Spear Of Destiny Mission 2 World at War: Op. Crusader... Sound Blaster Value Edition Spear of Destiny Mission 3 X-Wing SoundMan 16 Tle Fighter 109 Spectre VR SoundMan Wave XWing: B-Wing Tour of Duty... Speed Racer Challenge Racer X 199 Spellcasting Party Pak... Spiral Arm CALL 800 228-7449 Orders Only, 508 443-6125. all other business. Sales Dept. Hours Monday Friday 8AM till 8PM Squad Leader..... .... . CALL Saturday & Sunday 10AM 5PM. All other Business Monday Friday 9AM till SPM. Most orders ship within 24 Star Reach Star Trek: 25th Anniversary............. hours. Temporary shortages are normally filled within 10 days. Books, Memory chips, and some electronic components Star Trek: DSN . The Hunt are not returnable. We ship only to verified billing addresses International orders welcome. Airborne Express Shipping Star Trek: J.R, Movie & Sound....... charges $7 per order up to 6 lbs, $1 per ib. above 6 lb. UPS ground handling charge-$5 per order. Actual freight Star Trek: Judgment Rites....... charges apply for computers, hard disks, Bernoullis, tape back-ups, printers, Multimedia kits, monitors, etc. Alaska, Hawaii, Star Trek: Starfleet Academy CALL Outside continental US, APO/FPO call for information Prices subject to curge without notion Some produd not Star Trek: The Next Generation....... available outside the US. Please call for more information. Not responsible for errors or omissions Mastercard, Visa, Star Wars Chess Stonekeep.... Discover, American Express, prepaid orders, purchase orders, wire transfer, cash, and cashiers check accepted. Strike Commander Tactical #1.... Personal and Company checks allow 14 days to clear. No surcharge for credit card orders. Your credit card is not Strike Squad 38 charged until the nechan is shipped We check for stolen credit cards. All returns for credit, rear, or exchange Subwar 2050 must have a return Authorization number. Rietumed orders or ordered wrong items are subject to a 15% restocking Superhero League of Hoboken......... toe. We ship latest versions of software available. Over nine years of service. Thousands of satisfied customers System Shock CALL Send your Fax today! Al quotes answered immediately. Product covered by manufacturers Warranty Detective TFX Tactical Fighter . Theatre of Death ...... coms replaced immediately. Alitum numbers represent 3.5 floppy, except where noted Educational government, .. Tie Fighter Space Combat and corporate purchase orders welcome. Circle Reader Service #56 IBM RECREATION SOUND CARDS ..28 .29 167 196 IBM RECREATION IBM RECREATION DUCOVER "


"SCIENCE ADVENTURE II ISAAC ASIMOV COMPUTER Express SCIENCE CONTPUUR JA ADVENTURELLI ODELL DOWN UNDER Unlock the mysteries of the exotic undersea world of DEN Australia's Great Barrier Reef. Features facts about any of the 81 life forms from on animal's predator and prey to its special abilities and social behavior. Create your own fish, giv. ing it the perfect balance of speed, endurance, agility and size to increase its changes for a long, healthy life in the Great Barrier Reef Encourages users to exercise thinking skills and deductive reasoning, while improving reading comprehension illustrates a living ecosystem ond its daily struggle to say in balance MECC: WIN MAC BUTU Since 1985 No one brings science to life like Isaac Asimov Do tiny spiders live on your face? Can u cock rooch survive without its head? Is the liquid in a coconut like your blood? Play this wittesting game to learn dozens of word science facts. Click on a word or picture to call up related topics. Spina human skull. Explore the inside of a heart Knowledge Adventures IBM CD 800-228-7449 685 TOLL FREE ORDER LINE $34 $49 LANWORDS KID CAD FOR WINDOWS For ages 7 and up. This 3-D design stu: dio lets you create houses Kid CAD with electronic building blocks that click into place. You can paint and decorate everything in sight, includ ing the kitchen sink! Then fill your CUS tomized creation with a huge assortment of people and pets, furniture and ferns or even a dinosour. Take a look around! 3D virtual envi ronment lets you change your perspective. View your house from the back yard or peek through the front door. Davidson: WIN GUS GOES TO CYBERTOWN CD An interactive multimedia CD Rom for the whole family with learning activities for those under eight years old. Join Gus, the hippest most lovable dog ever created for an exciting learn ing experience in Cybertown Search for the plusive cyber buds, three of the most original and intriguing friends your kids will ever love. It's a magical town with lots to explorel Experience the Pet Shop, the Toy Store, and the Time Travel Park Features complete interactivity, captivating graphics and animation, rich digitized soundtrack, full motion video, digi tol photos and spoken directions COMPUTER CARNIVAL The computer literacy pro gram for chil dren that entertains as it engages them in learning keyboard and mouse skills. creation of computer graphics, com puter vocabu lary, computer care and even beginning programming skills. Presents excit ing games and activitins in the context of an irresistible storyline that brings kids back to play ogoin and again. FEATURES: 4 new arcade games. 2 fun interactive carnival booths, 6 sensational shows under the big top. Hall of fame displays child's name and winning tickets, Fast paced, challenging, entertainment value that's fun for all ages. Seven word game vario tions, or create your own version. Offers 20 dil ferent computer opponents with increasingly sophisticated vocabulary and skill, containing 160,000 words Online help, best plays, and gram finders, and word finders are also includ ed. If you've got network support, you can receive and send messages to your opponents via a chat windows screen. Sabor Software: WIN $23 $29 $34 Modem Media Venture DOS,MACCP $24 ATI: DOS TEST PREPARATION MACINTOSH TITLES Playroom 20... Puti Putt Goes to the Moon Roader Rabbit .... Reader Rabbit Ready for Lolor... SAT I Studyware.... ... Spell It Plus StickyBoor Reading Room... .. Super Solvers: Oui Numbered........ Super Solvers: Spellbound ............. Treasure Math Storm.. . Treehouse... Vocabulearn French I......... Vocabulearn Italian ... Vocabulearn Spanish Where in America's hare in Space Del Time is CC MAONTOSH D-ROM New Kid on the Block......... Peanuts. Yearn to learn... Richard Scarry Best Neigh... Richard Scarry Busiost Neigh...... Vitsio Visits Outer Space......... Vitsie Visits the Ocean... World Alive............ Zoo: Behind the Scenes ......... Easy Working Typing...... Easy Working Typing WIN.. Mario Teoches Typing... Movi Beocon Typing 30 Beacon Typing CD .. g Tutor V Plus 19 Tutor V Plus Dinosaur Art oricu Ad orice SCIENCE & HISTORY Work IBM REFERENCE FREE LOTTERY TICKET WITII ORDERS OVER $75 Request Your WOWS FREE ACT W/Cliff Notes..... Biology Studyware Calculus Studywaro... Chemistry Studyware...... .. GMAT w/Cliff Notes..... GRE w/Cliff Notes.... ISAT w/Cliff Notes Physics Studyware ... ...... SAT I NEW Personal Trainer WIN.. SAT I Studyware........ Score RX for ACT at Homo....... Score RX for GRE ct Home. Score RX for LSAT at Home Score RX for SAT at Home..... Your Personal Trainer/SAT2 CD..... American Heritage Dietionary ..... ...34 Americans in Space CD......... .. ....47 Animals: San Diego Zoo CD.......... Body Works 3.0 BodyWorks 3.0 CD... .. .. CNN Newsroom Global View CD... Compton's Encyclopedia CD. Creep Crawlies CD...... Cute 'n' Cuddlies....... Dictionaries & Languages CD Dictionary of Living World CD Dinosaur Adventure CD Dinosaurs! MPC Encyclopedia CD... Discovery CD Pack............ Encarta MPC Encyclopedia CD Greatest Book Collection CD....... InfoNation Rating USA to Z...... J.FK Assassination CD. Key Dictionary Plus... MS Dinosaurs Multimedia CD... Orbits. Voyege the Solar System Webster's Dictionary..................... Addition & Subtraction... Advanced Spelling Tricks Algebra... Algebra Blaster Plus... Alphabet Blocks Basic Spelling......... Beginning Reading Body Works 3.0........ Calculus Studyware.. Dinosaur Adventure Early Math ............ Fatty Bear's Birthday Surprise Fatty Bears Fun Pack Kid McGre Kid's Art Center......... Kid's Studio....... Kid's Typing Kid's Zoo... . KidDesk... Mac USA 2.0. Mario Teaches Typing Moth Blaster Plus Math Rabbit 2.0........ Millie's Math House.... Mind Castle Multimedia Workshop My First World Atlas... My Own Stories.... Odell Down Under...... .... Oregon Trail.. . Phonics.... Two Dollar Instant Lottery Ticket For Domestic Customers Only While Supplies Last Ecology Treks... Great Computer Adventure Jurassic Dinosaurs CD..... Jurassic Dinosaurs WIN Kid's Zoo CD.......... Kid's Zoo DOS/WIN. Oceans Bolow CD.. Odell Down Under WIN.... Oregon Trail Deluxe Oregon Trail Deluxe CD.... Pepper's Adventures in Time Planetary Taxi CD.... Prehistoria CD... Quarky & Quaysoo's Science Science Adventure 2.0 Science Adventure Il CD Space Adventure ............... Spoce Adventure CD............. Space Adventure Il CD.. Time lapse CD... Time Riders American History Time Treks... Undersea Adventure WIN. Webster's Dictionary WIN Where in America's Past Carmen .. Where in Space Carmen Deluxe..... Where in Time Carmen.... Where in the World is Carmen?...... Wild Science Arcade w/T-SHIRT Zoo: Behind the Scenes CD... Zookeeper Zugs Race Through Space.... 2nd Math. Alge Bloster 3... Alge Blaster Plus Algebra Algebro By Example Bull's Eye Math. Calculus WIN. Championship Blackjack.... Chemistry Works DOS/WIN Cruncher WIN.. Dinosoft Addition & Subtract Dinosoft Math Flashcards..... Dinosolt Multiply & Divide... Early Moth C Early Math WIN Geometry Concepts. Kid Cad WIN. Learn About Fractions....... Line & Shape Eater CD. Moth Bloster Spot WIN Math Blaster Spot/Kid Works il Moth Blastor WIN...... Math Robbit Enhanced Math Rabbit WIN..... Mathology .......... Mega Moth Mental Moth Games 20 Millie's Math House Operation Neptune. StickyBear Math Tutor Super Solvors. Midnight Rescue.... Super Solvers, Out Numbered.... Treasure Math Storm!......... Treasure MathStorm! WIN... Treasure Mountain... What's My Angle Young Moth ........... Delor tures i Jung WIN Ploin MACINTOSH TTILES MACINTOSHTMES TYPING MATH Zoo: Easy Easy Mario les Typing Mavis Beacon Typing 3.0..... Vocabulearn French Vocabulearn Italian L. Vocabulearn Spanish ......... Where in America's Post... Where in Space Deluxe.... Where in Time is Carmen.... Where in the World. Deluxe ..... Whero in the World is Carmen ... Word Attack 3 Word Allock 3 Zookeeper....................... Advanced Spelling Tricks......... Alphabet Blacks.................. Animal Tales.. Basic Spelling Beginning Reading... .... Cuckoo Zoo... Eagle Eye Mysteries London......... Early Math ........... Kid's Zoo... Lifemap: Animals... Lifemap: Animals w/Backbones 25 Multimedia Workshop.. ...46 Prehistori Quarky & Qura, 50's Science ....... Easy Working Typing...... Easy Working lyping WIN Mario Teaches Typing Mavis Beacon Typing 3.0... Mavis Beacon Typing CD Typing Tutor V Plus Typing Tutor V Plus WIN 3-D Dinosaur Adventure.... America Adventure...... America Adventure CD.. Body illustrated..... Bug Adventuro.... Bug Adventure CD.. Company of Whales CD ComputerWorks Concentrate. Dandy Dinosaurs CD. DinoPark Tycoon Discover Space... Discoverers CD EZ Cosmos 4.0......... Earth Treks Eco Quest Search for Catus CD. MACINTOSH CD-ROM SCIENCE & HISTORY "


"TALKING PHONICS PLUS GAME ZAPPER Ages 4 to 8. Build award winning reading, spelling. and vocabulary skills and teach children to love to read! A playful, rewarding and invigorating explo ration into essential language skills Teaches beginning middle and ending consonant sounds, as well as long and short vowels. Voice enhanced sen and say technique with special rewards offer encouragement every step of the way. Five multiple level activities keep learning fun and challenging Motivates with lively, imaginative grophics, games, and sounds Converts the VGA Output from your PC to a video signal so you can play all your favorite PC games an any TV set. Display online services kko Prodigy, America Online, and CompuServe. Includes $150 worth of FREE games: Prince of Persio, Jetfighter 11 and Spectre Challenger Support 640 X 480 VGA resolution in 256 col ors, Outputs NTSC video in RCA composite and S VHS. Includes SVHS and VGA Y cable, all salt ware drivers, and A/C power supply. Supports TV Auto Blanking, Toggling between VGA monitor and TV display 20TH CENTURY MURDER A powerful educational tool, teaching law enforce ment, criminal justice, psychol ogy, and histo ry, Five thou sond plus pages of the most sensation olmnurders of this century Follow each shocking cose the crimes, investigations trials, and pun ishments of Cowboy Casino you're laugh COWBOY CASINO Five wisecrack ing card shorks teoch you high slokes poker in a real Old West saloon Get hit with a Stream of smart aleck remarks every time you make a mistake. And while you're laugh ing, you'll learn: Five card Draw Five-card Stud Sevencard Stud, Texas Hold'em and more. Learn the odds of filling a range of Wining hands, when to open, raise or fold, and when and how to blut Easy to use controls let you cover all aspects of each game one step at a time, os often as you want IntelliPlay: IBM CD CD-ROM murderous criminals like Ted Bundy and Jeffrey Dahmer Dynamic multimedia presentation offers a chilling glimpse into the dangerous world of murders and the twisted motivations behind their unconscionable acts PowerCD: IBM CD, Mac CD $27 $79 \"$20 ADS: IBM Compatibles Stone & Associatos: DOS $33 FINE ARTIST  : AT HOME STAR TREK LEARNING AT HOME 7 Brin Bau Award winning VOLUMETII Berenstain Boars series LEARNING contains a houseful of familiar sights and sounds teaching important life and academic lossons. Vol. 2 continues in the downstairs rooms of the Bears' trou house Spelling and basie reading Seasons and the calendar Household safety tips. Numbor, sound, object and color recognition, Recycling tips. Fun games and puzzles Fine Artist inspires and allows kids to be creative, while provid ing tools for learning att techniques such as per spective Also introduces kids to a rich cry of cultural sym bols and pat torns that great ly enhance their visual vocabulary. An incredible palette of colors, a huge selection of brush shapes and sizes, and a ton of background patterns and colors that put you in the picture. Special lessons on basic art techniques such as perspective and drawing on grid 100% compatibility with Creative Water, So expanding your creative capability is easy STAR TREK COLLECTIBLES GUIDE CD Designed for all types of GREENBERGS Star Trek cok SGUIDE TO lectors. Browse from over 400 color and black & white COLLECTIBLES. photos of col lectibles from the original Star Trek TV Series, six Star Trek movies and the current Star Trek: The x. Generation TV Series Detailed list ings for over 3000 col lectibles, including the issue and current market prices. Need to learn about a Tricorder made by Mego? Just click and browsel BLACKJACK FOR WINDOWS Sharpen your skills before you hit the casinos Complete strategies for: Bosic single deck play, basic multiple deck play advanced sin gle dock play and advanced multiple deck play Choose the strategy you wish to master, set the house rules and game parameters. Split hand with hand values, card count, adds calculations and strategy rec ommendation windows displayed. Split hand with no popup window aids. Computer simulo tion will rapidly play expert strategy and per form a statistical analysis on the results. Your play results are recorded statistically for your review Gametoka WINMECC: DOS, MAC Compton's New Media: IBM CD $26 $42 Microsoft: WIN, MAC MCS: IBM CD $32 $33 CREATIVITY EXT. VOICE:508-443-6125 605 FAX:508-443-5645 31 Union Ave., Sudbury, MA 01776 * ** NO -y-*# * FAX:0011-508-443-5645 xit.CompuServeID:70007,15340 B aht TV 11. TEOREE*62*Lt FREE UPS GROUND SHIPPING 10,000 IN STOCK ITEMS My Computer Diary. My Computer Diary WIN..... My Own Stories PC Crayon Peter Pan: Story Painting Adv. Peter Pan Story Painting CD ................ Print Artis! WIN Print Shop Deluxe 12 WIN. Print Shop Deluxo Comic WIN... Print Shop Deluxe Companion Print Shop Deluxe Sampler WIN Show & toll for Kids.... Sound Source Story Book Weaver ........... Wild Learning Safari Advanced Spelling Tricks CD Advanced Spelling Tricks WIN Alphabet Blocks WIN..... Basic Spelling... Basic Spelling CD........... Mario's Fun with letters.... Mickey's ABC's Entonced Spell I 3. Spell It Plus... Super Solvers: Spellbound... Super Solvers: Spellbound CD Word Attack 3 Word Munchers...... . Word Tales CD................ Yobi's Spelling Tricks WIN... READING SPELLING Aesop's Fables CD..... ............... Aladdin and His lamp CD...... Always Arthur CD... Amanda Stories CD Arthur's Teacher Trouble CD Bailey's Book House Beauty and the Beast CD Beginning Reading WIN .. BookMaster for Speed Reading Cinderella CD ........... Dinosoft Phonics ....... . .. Dragon Tales CD Follow the Reader Gus Goes to Cybertown CD... Heather Hils Homerun CD.... Jr High Grade Builder 3 Pack Just Grandma & Me CD... long Hard Day at the Ranch CD.. Mind Castle ........ Moving Gives A Stomach Ache CD Mud Pubble CD. Now Kid on the Block CD... Once Upon A Time il Paper Bag Princess CD. Peter and the Wolf CD Phonics Plus... Reader Rabbit Reader Rabbit II WIN........... Reader Rabbit III..... . . Reader Rabbit Ready for letter Reading Adventures in Oz Reading and Mo Talking .. .......... Ready, Set, Read WIN.................. Richard Scarry Best Neigh. CD Richard Scarry Busiest Neigh... Rusty & Rosy Volume 1 WIN Rusty & Rosy Volume 2 WIN Scary Pooms for Rotten Kids CD... School House, 30 Programs...... Slooping Beauty Storybook CD. Sound It Our Land II CD Speed ..... .. ...... . Speed Reader WIN...... Sticky Bear Reading Tutor ...... Super Solvors: Ancient Empires Tale of Benjamin Bunny CD. Jule nf Peter Rabbi c ... Talking Classic Tale CD Talking Jungle Safari CD Talking Phonics Plus......... Tell Tale Heart CD ....... Thomas' Snowsuit CD... Tortoise & The Hare CD. Treasure Cove..... Ugly Duckling CD..... Who Wants Arthur? CD Zugs Dinosaur World, EARLY LEARNING Kid's Stutt Learning At Home Vol. Two CD Legend of Oz CD Mario Early Yeats Collection CD...... Mario Preschool Fun Mario's Fun with Numbers Mcgee Series Bundle.......... Memory lane... Mickey Mouse Mousepad. Mickey's 123's Enhanced Mickey's ABC's Enhanced Mickey's Jigsaw Puzzles ....... Mixed Un Fairy Tales... Mixed Up Mother Goose CD.... My letters, Numbers and Words Number Munchers........ Peanuts: Yogin to Learn WIN.... Playroom 2.0........... Power Hits Kids... Pult Puit Goes to the Moon.... Pult Putt Goes to the Moon CD. Pult Pull Fun Pack Puti Putt Fun Pack CD... .. Putt. Pult joins the Parode.......... Race the Clock CD.. Scooter's Magic Castle..... Sloter 8 Charlie Go Camping Snoopy's Game Club.... LANGUAGE Across the USA............. Discovering America Eagle Eye Mysteries London CD Expert Mups. Lost Tribe My First World Atlas....... Mystery at Museums w/T-SHIRT... PC Globe Maps & Facts PC Globe Maps & Facts CD PC USA 3.0..... Picture Atlas of the World CD... Scavenger Hunt: Africa CD.. Where in USA Carmen Where in World Deluxe... Where in World Deluxe CD Where in the USA Deluxe......... World Atlas 4.0 WIN.. Stickbear Preschool CD......... Stickybear Preschool.. Stickybear Preschool CD TreeHouse... .. Vitsie Visits Outer Space CD Word Munchers Berlitz Think & Talk French CD... Berlitz Think & Talk Italian CD Barlitz Think/Talk Spanish CD... Language Assistant. French 5.0.... Language Assistant: French WIN Language Assistant: German 5.0 Language Assistant: German WIN..... longuage Assistant. Italian 5.0.. . Language Assistant: Italian WIN Language Assistant: Spanish 5.0 language Assistant: Spanish WIN Learn to Speak Spanish CD Lyric language French CD... Lyric language Spanish CD Vocabulearn French I... Vocabulearn French I WIN Vocabulearn Italian .............. Vocabulcorn Japanese Vocabulearn Japanese I WIN Vocabulearn Spanish .................. Vocabulearn Spanish I WIN................ GEOGRAPHY 31 40 .25 ..16 25 . A World of Discovery.... Alphabet Blocks CD............. Animal Tales CD... Backyard. Berenstain Bears Fun LunchPak.......... Berenstain Bears Junior Jigsaw... Berenstain Bears Learn At Home Buster's First Thunderstorm CD......... Cuckoo Zoo.. Dr. T's Sing Along WIN...... Fully Bours B-Day Surprise CD... Fally Bears Birthday Surprise Fatty Bears Fun Pack CD....... Fisher Price Classics .............. Fisher Price Picture Dictionary Kid Desk Kid Keys Kid McGee. Kid Pix Companion WIN.. Kid Pex WIN Animation Studio WIN Betty Crocker Boys & Girls.. Creation Stories CD Creative Writer WIN Hanna Barbera's Animation Shop Kid Cuts Kid Doodle WIN Kid Fun CD... Kid Pix Kid Works II...... Lenny's Music Toon CD. logo Writer EARLY LEARNING 800 228.7449. Orders Only, 508 443-6125. all other business. Sales Dept. Hours Monday Friday BAM till SPM, Saturday & Sunday 10AM till SPM. All other Business Monday Friday 9AM 5PM. Mast orders ship within 24 hours Temporary shortages are normally filled within 10 days. Books, Memory chips, and some eleo tronic components are not returnable We ship only to ventied billing addresses International orders welcome Airborne Express Shipping charges $7 per order up to 6 lbs, $1 per ib. above 6 lbs. UPS ground handling charge $5 por order. Actual freight charges apply for computers, hard disks, Bernoullis, tapo back-ups, printers Multimedia kits, monitors, etc. Alaska, Hawali, outsido continental U.S. APO/FPO call for information VIS Prices subject to change without notice. Some product not available outside the U.S. Please call for more information Not responsible for errors or omissions, Mastercard, Visa, Discover, American Express.pro paid orders, purchase orders, wire transfer, cash, and cashiers check accepted. Personal and Company chocks allow 14 days to clear. No surcharge for credit card orders. Your credit card is not charged until the merchandise is shipped. We check for stolen credit cards. All returns for credit, repair, or exchange must have a return authorization number. Roturned orders or ordered wrong items are subject to a 15% restocking fee. We ship Intest versions of software available. Over nine years of service. Thousands of satisfied customers. Send your Fax today! All quotes answered immediately. Product covered by manu facturers warranty. Detective items replaced immediately. All tom numbers represent 3.5 floppy, except Where noted. Educational, government, and corporate purchase orders welcome. CREATIVITY "


"Letters from Paradise 1 ESPANA Sili-wood I tend to agree with most of the views expressed in CGW regarding the computer game industry. However, I can't believe you Ho of computer games is a GOOD thing. A best actor award? Give me a break! The best actor in any computer game should always be THE PLAYER! If the player is forced to take on a supporting role, upstaged by some Hollywood star, it's not a good game. If you really must give someone an award for best actor, give it to me. I've starred in hundreds of computer games! John Enright Boca Raton, FL It is the responsibility of the press to act as informed observers. In the case of the so-called \"Hollywoodization,\" we observed in our July, 1993 editorial that this phenomenon would have at least five effects. First, the \"High Concept\" mentality of Hollywood could lead to an undesired reduction to the lowest common denominator in game design. Second, the Hollywood mentality would place an emphasis on pyrotechnics or special effects. Third, Hollywood connections would lead to a new era of cross-promotion and licensing deals. Fourth, the big studio involvement would create a more difficult environment for small developers to enter. Fifth, the content standards of cames would be liberalized extensively. We hardly think that such observations should lead to the perception that we think this \"Hollywoodization is strictly a good thing. However, we think that the introduction of solid acting talent into the world of of computer games IS a good thing, and we decided to celebrate it with our multimedia acting awards. Darklands: The Last Generation Your January, 1994 (#114) edition conrained an interesting and favorable commentary from one of your readers about the game Darklands. This comment intrigued me so much that it occurred to me to track down the game's development as mentioned in CGW. This is what I found: . The first announcement that I could find was in CGW #80, March 1991, in the form of an advertisment which showed a hooded figure with a white dove. 2. The first time the official» ad appeared (a man wielding a sword) was in February, 1992. It bore the promise that \"...this March, the Middle Ages return,» a promise it couldn't keep. 3. In May of 1992 came the excellent Sneak Preview by Johnny L. Wilson. 4. CGW's Stock Watch in September 1992 noted that Darklands was one of four products by MicroProse that failed to meet its deadline. 5. CGW for December 1992 contained Scorpia's opinion, slashing the game into pieces, and Johnny L. Wilson's counterpoint, defending it. The edition contained also the first of Sam Baker's two-part strategy series of articles on the game. 6. Still in the December issue, the PC ReStill in the December issue, the PC Research Hits List, Playing Lately, responses and quotes were very good on Darklands. 7. In January of 1993, Darklands was number 97 of the Top 100 Games and in the Big Five\" of both the PC Research Hits List and Playing Lately. Plaving Lately Unfortunately, I could not obtain the CGW issues from February to May of 1993. Surprisingly, in the June 1993 edition, only the Rumor Bag made a passing reference to Darklands. All the other writings and articles, the Top 100 Games ratings, etc., seem to have forgotten it completely. This impression is dispelled by the opinion from one of your readers in your issue #114. as mentioned at the beginning of this lerrer. So, unless I got the wrong picture due to the editions I missed, I believe that Darklands is a game that does not get people addicted so that they can't do or think anything else, but play the game continuously for the next few months, but what it does have is a quality that will make it a joy to go back to from time to time. Perhaps, like Star Trek (whose ratings were shady on the series' original release), the game Darklands will amass a huge following that will spawn Darklands: The Next Generution, set in 16th Century Germany. What do you think? Mark Alexander Bandung, Indonesia The original plan from MicroProse called for three products. The first was set in Germany because designer Arnold Hendrick considered it the most violent and superstitious of medieval cultures. He also wanted to do similar games based on medieval Britain and Italy. With both King Arthur and Machiavelli's Cesare Borgia to build upon, we actually thought the latter two products had more marketing potential than the original. Unfortunately, the game didn't sell well enough to meet the expectations and the game \"engine\" isn't exactly an engine. It would require so much new code (as well as new research) in order to produce a sequel that such a product would be almost as expensive to publish as the original, if not more so. In short, we don't ever anticipate a sequel. All Patched Up For those of you who missed it in the April issue, here's a reprint of what will undoubtedly go down in the annals of computer Page 132 Computer Gaming World "


"gaming as the greatest and most significant Jay Beards Movement. Great Stuff! I am 41 years old and patch notice of all time: Lincolnville, ME started with pinball machines, moved The Patch File (p. 185) P.S. Do you only review advertisers' stuff? through Pong to Tank, Galactica and so on. ** Metal and Lace (The Battle of the Robo Your board is covered in this issue's article on In magazines, I went from (video game magaBabes) V1.42A Update: Fixes a few minor bugs upgrade kits. As for your question, the answer is zines) to CGW. You guys have a great publiand adds an Easy and Hard mode. 1/20/94. an unequivocal \"No!\" We do not only review cation that has saved me much time and I'll leave it at that. products by advertisers. However, there are very money. Thanks! Jim Corbin few publishers that do not advertise with us, so Joseph Shaffer Lowell, MA it sometimes appears that this is the case. We not Vernal, UT only review products which are not advertised, So will we. but we have run cover stories about non-adverClassical Grasp More Power tised products and have given awards to non-adnon-adI have been I have been reading your excellent magazine Great job on the audio sound card feature. vertised products. Just don't tell our advertising ng for for over two years now, and have enjoyed it It's really confusing out there, even on the department, okay? immensely, even when you deal with stuff networks. I would love a similar article on Game, Set, Match which I could care less about. The diversity video card upgrades. Again, thanks for all the \"Toward A Gamers' Liberation Moveof your publication is one of its merits, showpleasurable reading and invaluable informament\" expressed precisely what we game being how your vision is not narrowed onto one tion. holders have known for years. The term, specific type of game or game platform, bur Russell L. Reed \"game,\" like the term, \"computer,\" is hoperather look Brandon, FL lessly inadequate as a descriptor of what these evolving computer entertainment. I feel I We hope you find this issue's article on multiproducts really, virtually, are. We gamesters must commend you on your top-notch work. media upgrade kits to be just as useful. The video are swimming in a whole new plasm of the As I told a friend of mine who scoffed at your card article sounds interesting and we'll give it senses and the mind. That's justification subhead, \"The #1 Computer Game Magasome consideration. enough zine,\" that title has definitely been earned The End Is Near Michael McClintock over more than ten years of superior comYou haven't reviewed my new \"Reveal» South Pasadena, CA puter industry coverage. double-speed CD-ROM and great PRO FXWe'll have whatever he's having. Actually, we That said, I would like to get to the real 16 sound board. All floppy disk products are already did. point of my letter, that of a quotation I doomed. I will never buy another one. CD Just a quick comment or two. First, on the recently read from the writings of Titus LuROM is here! editorial concerning the Gamers' Liberation cretius Carus (ca. 99-55 B.C.). I believe it applies excellently to the world of computer wargaming and gaming in general. By Rich Tennant What joy it is, when out at sea the stormwinds OBXHTENNANT are lashing the waters, to gaze from the shore at the heavy stress some other man is enduring! Not that anyone's afflictions are in themselves a source of delight; but to realize from what troubles you yourself are free is joy indeed. What joy, again, to watch opposing hosts marshalled on the field of battle when you have yourself no part in their peril! But this is the greatest joy of all: to stand aloof in a quiet citadel, stoutly fortified by the teaching of the wise, and to gaze down from that elevation on others wandering aimlessly in a vain search for the way of life, pitting their wits Games one against another, disputing for precedence, struggling night and day with unstinted effort to scale the pinnacles of wealth and power. (Nels M. Bailkey, Readings in Ancient History Thought and Experience from Gilgamesh to St. Augustine, p. 393.) Thanks again for striving to build the best computer gaming magazine possible. F. Ross Englefield Editor Emeritus, Brock University Press \"It happened around the time he discovered network DOOM\" St. Catharines, Ontario, CANADA CGW The 5th Wave 0000 S June 1994 Page 133 "


"SSN 21 SeaWolf and 688 Attack Submare trademarks of Electronic Arts, 1993. Electronic Arts. Ever wonder what it's like to have your life llash before your ears? You'll find out when you play SSN 21 SeaWol,'the sequel to 688 Attack Sub? And the most realistid PO TAFELONA FC submarine simulation this side of Annapolis. As you skipper the world's newesi, inost heavily arieid, less ar attac suho than 100 different sound effects assault your settges: vin our revolulionary 16-bit. full digital stereo sound. NOBODY KNOWS WHAT HET GIVE YOU A PRETTY GOO high-pitched whine of Lorpedbes us they kme Narren iu on their targets. The menucing drone at a lestrovex passing overhead "


"AVAILABLE ON CD-ROM And damage reports from the mouths of crew men praying they ll live to enjoy another liberty call. Of course, it pays to DETESTAMASLELALICHEANTASI keep your eyes open, too, SSN-21 SeaWoll features. Coolor motion video, 3.D underwater mapping, and vivid digitized images of more than 50 feal-world ships and airciali, 4. Now, take a final breath of fresh air and dive into a world where good hearing is your greatest asset. L LOOKS LIKE. BUT WE'LL D IDEA HOW IT SOUNDS. Sre, it'll test your nerves. But what were you expecting the Love Boat?  ARTS "


"COMPUTER WARGAMING WORLD Art by Rodger MacGowan;  1994 RBM Graphics Congratulations, Clash of Steel Celebrating the Return of Fun in Computer Wargaming by Alan Emrich ing a command perspective). This year's winhaps the elusive Civil War game we're all ner, Clash of Steel, is, in fact, just the opposite. waiting for may yet arrive. It is a game-abour-history. Notice that Clash With all of the work being done on the of Steel puts the game first, and, because it is Road from Sumter engine, Adanac will start simple, clean, fast, playable, and, more implaytesting on their next project, The Road «I Came, portantly, replayable—it is fun. A sit down, from Marengo to Waterloo, in the coming push-the-pieces-around-and-have-fun kind months. Offering both strategic level camI Played, of wargame has been a long time coming. paigning and operational level battles, this I Conquered\" Sure, there have been others (The Perfect GenNapoleonic \"grand design\" is also likely to eral comes immediately to mind), but Clash feature some important new features covering of Steel has really delivered the computer diplomacy and multi-human player e-mail Te don't want to outflank our gala equivalent of the classic board wargame, The play. Premier award coverage (starting Russian Campaign. The game will outlast the Many recent arrivals to the wargaming on page 51 of this issue), but it does trends, no matter where the state-of-the-art hobb seem fair to talk to wargamers about the hobby may have missed the glory days of in \"historical simulations\" may go from here. SSI's award-winning Civil War battle games. wargame winner in particular. We could talk Congratulations, again, to cveryone who Conorarularin Fortunately for the newbies, these classic about Master of Orion, as well, but we've worked on Clash of Steel waxed pretty eloquently on that in the past. games, along with several other SSI warInstead, ler's consider the wargaming winner, games of yore, may be reissued for the IBM SSI's Clash of Steel Intelligence From The Front format. Their limited press run is supposed to feature photocopied rules packaged in Although Clash has its share of flaws, it won One pastime that has become popular with zip-lock bags, but they will sell for only $15. our award based upon its most important journalists in this hobby is «Sid Meier watchFor more information and a complete listing underlying virtue: the fun factor. Now, \"fun\" ing.\" While his recent CPU Bach awaits a of what titles might be available, contact SSI is an adjective you don't see much of in better sound standard before a PC conversion directly Computer Gaming World, as it is broad, vague is underway, Sid is back to considering the and used all too freely when describing any fate of his Civil War game. The status? He's There are plenty of interesting war and kind of game. But the word still has value, got two \"cool\" games in one: a strategic game strategy games peering through the Windows and it's sad to see a once-great word all but of point-to-point movement along the Eastformat. Two popular Macintosh games, dropped from the wargaming vernacular. ern Theater and a grand tactical battle game Deadly Games' M4 and Changeling Softwhere divisions dance over a freshly generated ware's Pax Imperia (a grand strategic, galactic What's In An Adjective? \"battle board.» The dilemma? After you forconquest game that is very rich in its play elements) are both due for their Windows Wargames are usually described in terms of mulate a great strategy on one level, its all too debuts before the end of the summer. their scale, complexity, and historical validity. easy to forget where you were strategically, Often, we will focus our attention on warafter spending the time necessary to fight a Also on the horizon is Victory or Defeat, a game elements like \"perceived realism,\" how grand tactical battle. This destabilizing tranWindows Wargame that would make Dani many ways we can outsmart the Al in battle, sition \"wasn't fun and is the focal point of Bunten proud. It adapts many elements comand the generally deplorable state of wargame Sid's next design decision. Chances are that mon to games such as Command HQ and rules (which, believe me, predates the advent one element or the other will have some of its Global Conquest and blends them in a new of computer wargames by decades). Seldom emphasis removed. Only time (and Sid way, creating an abstract conquer-the-world will you get a comment from a reviewer like Meier) will tell. game for those who love to tinker and who \"this game's a stitch, we yukked it up all the Civil War fans will be happy to hear that enjoy modem play. way through it.\" considerable progress has been made on a Finally, SDJ Games will re-release its grand Granted, the serious side of history is imrevamped 2.0 version of The Road from strategic WWII game, Big Three, for Winportant and is one of the primary attractions Sumter to Appomattox from Adanac Games. dows users. The new version of this \"Clash of of the hobby. However, not all wargames are I've been monitoring closely an active group Steel for beginners\" will offer Al for solitaire history-in-a-game-format (i.e., serious studof playtesters on the GEnie network and see opponents, random events and modem play. ies presented as detailed simulations present things really starting to come rogether. PerCGW Page 136 Computer Gaming World "


"TANK HEAVEN. Prepare for armored conflict, past and presentany way you want it! WARGAME CONSTRUCTION SET II: TANKS This incredible offering from SSI serves up limitless small-scale tactical armored confrontations using all of the various tanks and tools of mechanized warfare from 1918 to 1991. In short, welcome to tank heaven! Our powerful random scenario generator allows you to create a custom map, choose one of three climates, pick opposing forces, and assign objectives for each combatant. Scenarios are created according to your specifications, and no two scenarios will ever be exactly alike. Not enough control for you? Then give the custom scenario editor a try. It places all the resources of the game under your control — which means the only limit to what you can create is your own imagination! Of course, if you're not in the mood to create scenarios right away, there's still plenty of intense armored action — over twenty ready-to-play historical scenarios wait to test your armored mettle! SRL Available for IBM & COMPATIBLES. TO ORDER: Visit your retailer or call SSI Direct Sales at (408)-737-6800 (in USA & Canada) with VISA/MC. SERVER www. com 10 MEREU 21312 A: IBM 256-color VGA Displays MATEMALLEL 1160 DHE DIE MAILLO T Ratin TENIRE TOMER  Strategic Simulations, Inc. All rights reserved. "


"Opponents Wanted Those wishing to place their own (free) ads need only send us a postcard (or use the Notes section of the RID card), letter, FAX (714-283-3444] or E-Mail (Prodigy [EXPT40B), CompuServe (76703,622], The Sierra Network at [Box 1048], GEnic or America On-Line at (CGW]). Generally, we run ads once, so send another each time if you want to keep your name listed! The ads themselves should serve as reasonable examples as to how to write your own. However,  Include a brief description of the types of opponents and games you are interested in playing Games being played other than direct by modem om be listed (trading save game disks or even face-to-face).  At least one (possibly more) telephone number(s) must be included. Do not forget the area code and mention whether they are Home, Work or Modem numbers. . Include your city and state so that people who call you will both: a) have a clue as to what time zone you are in and b) recognize it when they see it on their phone bill. The Networks The following are voice contact numbers for many of the various on-line network services that connect gamers. Call them for more information on these networks. America On-Line: (800) 827-6364 CompuServe Information Service: (800) 848-8990 GEnie: (800) 638-9636 The ImagiNation Network: (800) IMAGIN-1 Multi-Player Games Network: (800) GET-GAME National Videotex (NVtel): (800) 336-9096 Novalink Network: (800) 274-2814 Prodigy: (800) 822-6922 556 USA Today Sports Network: (800) 826-9688 Bulletin Board Systems The Assault BBS is looking for game players! Play Trade Wars 2002, an exciting space adventure game. Challenge other fighters in The Pit. Go head-to-head in Chess. Play golf or bowling and challenge other players for the best casino score (yes, we have an on-line casino!). New games are always being added. Call (703) 490-8304 at 2400 Baud. Shaun McDonald SYSOP. We need you now! Opponents wanted for Legend of the Red Dragon and Usurper. Alternately, tackle over 30 other on-line challenges, including role-playing, strategy, trivia and casino games. Call Dimension Z in Queens, NY at (718) 381-1643 where we support 14,400 baud. We have over 400mb of files available to download and access to World Message Exchange conferences. Free access, 24-hours a day, 7 days a week. Check out The Informer BBS at (415) 468-6713/14/15. We have all of the latest flight sim updates and hacks, plus flight simulation conferences. Find new drivers, diagnostics and more. For more information, contact John Custer, 264 Oriente Street, Daly City, CA 94014-1531. The Impress BBS at (918) 437-3754 has the latest Apogee, id, Software Creation and Epic MegaGames. We support 2400 to 14400 Baud modems. FX/Term is strongly recommended and can be downloaded when you first log on. Hey, Southern California, check out the Techno Surfing BBS! We have six phone lines available. There are tournaments scheduled for War in Russia, CHQ, Conquered Var in Russian CHO C ur Kingdoms, War in the Pacific Air Warrior, Falcon F-16, MiG-29 and others, plus a games hint information section, game forums and multi-player BBS games. Check out our large shareware and .GIF library and our fantastic new online viewer section. We support 1200 to 38400 Baud and offer a free trial period. Call (818) 769-0691. Modem Gamers Forum BBS: Home of the Game Matcher Door for finding head-to-head gamers like you. A message arca devoted to every modem capable game known to mankind. Find opponents for games like 688 Attack Sul, Senwolf, F-29. Knights of the Sky, The Perfect General, Command HQ, Populous, Powermonger, Tom Landry Football MechWarrior II, etc. Tournaments, hints, tips, and strategy articles available, along with patch files and updates for your modem gaming software. Two version of 7W2002 on-line (one exploiting the software bugs, one cleaned up game)! Mention CGW for long distance validation. Seeking Amiga, Mac and Atari users to form an even larger opponents base. Running Renegade BBS 7-17 software. Sysop: King Crumb Babylon, NY (516) 893-4120, 14.4k, 8-N-1, 24 hours. If you are looking for the best military PC ight simulators coverage, then you must check out SimNet based in the San Francisco Bay area. This new network is expanding nationwide currently with 20 BBS systems around the country and still growing. SimNet is originating from the Trade Center BBS (SimNet Headquarters). Call (415) 340-0197. There are four nodes, 2400 to 28800 baud, 24 hours per day. Full access on your first call, no fees. SysOp: Gabe \"Joker\" Turk. Modem opponents wanted section online. Over 1.2 gigs of files, including instant support from Thrust Master, Inc. The Dakota Central Telenet BBS in Carrington, ND (58421) is a BBS with many challenging on-line games and over 30,000 files available to download free of charge. On-line games include the massive Land of Devastation post-nuclear war RPG with an available EGA graphic user interface, plus you can battle other traders and aliens in Trade Wars 2002 (tournaments start frequently). Explore with your character in the combat-happy RPG Wizard's Arena, and make big booms with others like Nuke War and Naval Battle. Trivia and card games are also on-line. Huge games file area. Free access, with a small fee for total access. 3 nodes; 300-14,400 Baud, 8-N-1. Call (701) 674-8115, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Call Little Caesar's Nightclub at (416) 238-8238. All wargamers should check out message base #13 for discussions on computer wargaming. Find an opponent or leave a review. All computer platforms welcome. The Elfspire Tomc is a fantasy Role-Playing Game Master's resource bulletin board. Wc featurc role-playing cchoes, on-line games, fantasy clip art and much more. 1200-9600 Baud. (415) 595-2387. Will you hack and slash your way through a real-time, multi-user dungeon (MUD) or attempt to conquer an entire galaxy? It's your choice when you call The Batboard BBS in Columbia, MO. Enjoy the true AD&D action of Legends and the professional e-mail game VGA Planets (with an off-line VGA interface) or tackle over 30 other on-line challenges, including ANSI Pro Football, Chat Roulette, BandWarz, role-playing, strategy, trivia and casino games. Prizes awarded for highest monthly scores, with full access on your first call and it's free)!Two CD-ROMs on-line, with the latest in quality shareware games! FidoNet echoes (including GAMING), multiline chat, the adult role-playing game Wild Side visit today for the best in multiline diversions! We're always open 24 hours at (314) 446-0475 with 14400 bps supported. The Delphic Oracle is an all-gaming BBS. Play RPGs (ADOD, GURPS), play-bye-mail games (Diplomacy, ASL), Empires at War (a Napoleonic on-line game) and other games on-line. Find modem game players. Gamemasters and players wanted. Simi Valley, California (805) 582-9004 [2400 8-N-1] Free access. The Gaming Connection BBS in Everett, WA specializes in connecting modem-tomodem players. Give it a call at (206) 742-4044, twenty-four hours a day. Join a Gaming Ladder and make new friends to challenge. Empire Deluxe and Harpoon scenarios, plus access to everything (including over 5,000 files) available on your first call! The Ho-Down BBS wants you to \"test your metal\" in multi-player games of Spaceward, Ho! Are you tired of beating 19 smart computer players in a small galaxy? Want a real challenge! Try competing against the most deadly, devious, dastardly, dangerous, diabolical, double-crossing dealers of death and destruction this side of Deneb. In other words, against players just like you! Call with modem set at 8-N-1, up to 14400 bps, (206) 577-8868. The Imperium BBS is looking for modem gamers like you! Tournaments are run for Knights of the Sky, Command HQ, The Perfect General and Global Congrest (just to name a few!). We have on-line games, message base and 3 gigs of files, too. Call one of our three nodes in Middleton, NJ at cither: 1200/2400 (908) 706-0342; 9600 v.32 (908) 706-0305; HST Dual Standard 38.4 (908) 706-0321. The Mac Commonwealth BBS in metro New Orleans, LA is sponsored by the National Home & School Mac User Group, a nonprofit organization promoting leisure and learning on the Mac. Our multi-line system features over 1 gigabyte of downloadable files, with emphasis on games and educational material. On-line magazines, Usenet newsgroups, OneNet conferences and Internet e-mail. Support file sections for over 60 commercial games! First Class graphic user interface. All lines support 1200 v.32bis 14,400 access. For information on BBS and group activities, send inquiries to NHSMUG, PO, Box 640641, Kenner, LA 70064. BBS line 1: (504) 837-7984. Call the Missile Silo BBS. Contestants wanted for Command HQ, F-29 Retaliator and many others. Tournaments to be held soon. Files, message base and (soon to come) on-line games, Running on Telegard 2.5 7 days a week, 24 hours a day. Located in Skokie, IL outside of Chicago. Call (708) 581-1735. Mention this ad in CGW for n o-hassle access validation. Gamers By Area Code I'm looking for local opponents for The Perfect General via modem. Please call Rich at home, (203) 651-1134 if you're anywhere near the Hartford, CT area. Secking modem or face-to-face opponents for Empire Deluxe. I can play at 14.4k baud evenings and weckends. Call Chuck Beilman at W-(203) 265-3440 extension 12 in Wallingford, CT. Looking for anyone interested in modem play for Indyour Racing World Circuit or MiG-29(others possible). I am in the Miami, FL arca. Call Eddic at H-(305) 274-2858. I'm looking for a few good men and women to play Doom head-to-head via serial or modem in the Melbourne, FL area. If you think that you're good and you've got what it takes to take me on, call Mike at H-(407) 676-5361. Just Doom me! I'll be waiting. Portland, OR wargaming nut seeks other like-minded nuts to play The Perfect General, Empire Deluxe, Command HQ, Seawolfor just about any other play-by-modem game available. Hoping to set up a seven-player PBEM or FTF game of Third Reich within the next two months. Any interested players contact Jeffrey at H-(503) 659-4019 or by email via the Inter Net at: jeffrey@teleport.com Looking for a local opponent for head-to-head or modem gaming on an Amiga or IBM clone. Your game or mine. Call H-(516) 758-7823. Ask for Nick. I'm in Patchoque, NY. Flagstaff area Doom players sought for serial connection or up to 9600 baud play. I also need someone to back me up in Pandemonium. Contact Jon on the InterNet at: biggles@alpine.for.nau.edu or at H-(602) 773-0390 or W-(602) 523-1482. Seeking modem or PBEM opponents for V for Victory, Clash of Steel. Bartles of the South Pacific, Empire Deluxe or Second Front. I'm a mature gamer, but not an expert. I can't afford much long distance, so modem opponents should be local. I'm a member of CompuServe and America OnLine (for PBEM). Call John Loy in the Newark, OH area at H-(614) 587-0991. Jean Gallagher or Noel Garrucha are looking for partners for Battle Chess, Global Conquest or justice Jackpot in the San Diego area. Write to us asap at: Box 689-184715OW340, Soledad, CA 93960-0689 or call H-(619) 278-6024. CGW Page 138 Computer Gaming World "


"There are those who are Titans and those who are not FIGHTER SS ACES of the DEEP  June's Top Titles: $49 1942 Pacific Air War $36 Kingmaker 41 Aces of the Deep 39 Master of Orion 49 Across the Rhine (June) 46 Mechwarrior 2 44 AD&D Genie's Curse 37 Merchant Prince 49 AD&D Ravenloft 49 Myst CD 40 Arena: The Elder Scrolls 40 Outpost CD 42 Armored Fist (June) 51 Pacific Strike 46 Battlecruiser 3000 35 Perfect General 2 (Junc) 49 Bioforge (June) 42 Sim City 2000 36 Breach 3 42 SSN-21 Scawoll 40 Carriers at War 2 36 Star Reach 36 Dark Legions 49 Star Trek: Next Generation 40 DeltaV 48 Strike Commander CD 51 F14 Fleet Defender 49 System Shock (June) 36 Genghis Khan 2 46 Tic Fighter 35 Grandest Fleet 50 Ultima 8: Pagan 44 Great Naval Battles V.2 43 Victory at Sca 44 Harpoon 2 49 Wings of Glory (une) Manttarien DERAL. We ship FedEx $7/order. PROP All returns require RMA. Unless noted, all games are IBM-compatible 3.5\" format. Call for complete product listing and availability. We accept preorders. Visit our online store on GEnie. Keyword Titan-Games. GAMES 1-800-247-5447  1994 TITAN GAMES LE VISA ONE WEST SEMINARY ST., BRANDON, VT 05733 9AM-9PM EASTERN TIME, MONDAY-SATURDAY Circle Reader Service #117 "


"REVIEW CAMPAIGN WISHES AND CARRIER DREAMS SSG Sticks To Their Warplan In Carriers At War II by Terry Lee Coleman Page Damage Cargo Speed UPE Carrier leayy Cruiser CO Nor Lapton E Chrater Lunsill Destroy no Parrot OD Edelli Hall DD STHUSUNAN GIUL MILI San Sorrd = 20 knots Ranki Okno OG TO GET Hun lage pm CV saretpop awn breaks over the South Pacific, battle, this supposedly leads to each scenario graphic look could now be significantly imthe sun's early morning majesty disbeing played as an all-or-nothing affair. proved would be if the clouds could look less pelling the last of yesterday's storm While this viewpoint has some validity, it like refugees from a hexagon mapboard. clouds. I give orders to launch our search lacks a basic understanding of the design Of course, if graphic improvements were planes to the East. The old Walrus «flying philosophy underlying the game. the only advantages to CAW II, boats\" look tired, as if they, too, must stretch 55 mio Play Olsdiay Control Tash Crow Status there would be little reason to purand yawn before going out on their deadly Friday, days 11 hours and 45 minutes Tendining BUU 21 1936 chase the game. Keating and Trout mission. I decline to place 500-pound bombs have managed to pull off a bit of a Y TG 16.2 on the ancient war-horses, in the hope that net Mov Sur Sta coup, however, in that they have they can find our enemies and return unseen. improved what was already one of Their armament of three Vickers «K» guns the best Als in all of gaming. The will do them little good should they be disWarplan idea is to basically shuffle covered by patrolling Zeros. \"cards» of possible task force deHours later, I receive reports of what apployments and objectives, while Fuel for 24 pears to be a large carrier force off the tip of staying within the realm of historiCeylon. Could it be that my enemy is so luok Group Status cal plausibilities. Thus, when playunpredicrable that he avoids not only me, but ing the Leyte Gulf scenario, the our land-based air as well? A Japanese fleet computer controlled Japanese fleet loose in the Indian Ocean would not only may not always come conveniently wreak havoc with our merchant ships, it sailing into the carefully laid Allied could even break our towards Africa. I cannot trap. Roger Keating and Ian Trout have been hesitate. My limited resources do not allow designing computer wargames for about a While the basic idea of Warplan is the same me to split my forces. Trusting that the landbased air can engage the other Japanese ships as in CAW, the Al has been enhanced both decade now, and have a good understanding in the area, I pursue the main enemy force at of where to focus in successful game design. strategically and tactic a task force, it is very efficient in sending out Unlike Gary Grigby's Pacific War, CAW Ilis flank speed. God save the Queen! And hopefully, save my brave lads as well... not grand strategic in scope. To introduce a strike forces to sink your hapless ships. What campaion scenario into what is essentially an I find most impressive, though, is that the AI operational game risks distorting the solid does a much better job of hiding than in the More Than Just A New Paint Job storical underpinnings of the CAW design. first CAW. Also, the defense of the AI is much When Carriers At War was first released on CAW II is no more suitable for a broad view more sound, especially in the amount of 8-bit machines, it had the distinction of being of WWII in the Pacific than a simulation of planes it places on CAP. The US carriers are one of the first computer wargames to apAnticram would be if it were expanded to very tough to sink when commanded by the AI. This is a tribute not only to the improved proach the complexity of board wargame cover the entire American Civil War. simulations while still remaining playable and CAW II builds on the strengths AI, but is also a good simulation of the hisfun. The revamping of CAWfor the IBM 386 of its predecessor by first offering Carriers At War machine was a milestone in computer waran even more detailed graphic game history. CAW II continues the tradition look. The animation is not the of fine wargames from SSG, with many imsame as would be encountered in CARRIERS PRICE: $59.95 AT WAR SYSTEM: provements, both obvious and subtle. a flight simulator, but they still REQUIREMENTS: 386SX or better, 2MB extended RAM, 7MB hard drive space. Detractors of the CAW system look askance give a needed suspension of disbeVGA graphics, mouse: at the detailed graphics and interface, one lief. The ship drawings are much supports most major sound cards DESIGNERS: Roger Keating, lan Trout critic even calling CAW a \"wargame for the more varied and detailed than in PUBLISHER: Strategic Studies Group (U.S.) MTV ser.\" CAW has been criticized for its CAW, with better shading and less Pensacola, FL 1904) 469-8880 lack of a campaign game, in that, since there pixelation, particularly on the is no need to save resources for an upcoming planes. The only way that the STRATEGIC ATENIEI OROUP IBM Page 140 Computer Gaming World "


"Task Group Actions WWWON 2! 1936 Corposition 20 Hotels      || Lund Band hard Sun 1 Hour Mabels Llac UWEZU NUTZI 1936 torical effectiveness of US damage control. given their due. Even in the rich The Al now seems to plan more effectively history of board wargaming, the Frida, 3 d. 11 hours and 5 minutos paraining from a strategic standpoint. This is important Pacific has seemed largely a USFrom S C in terms of game design, because traditionally versus-Japanese affair. Gamers fathe Achilles' heel of AI has been an inability miliar with the British only from to carry out an overall plan. I will leave it to their struggles in the Atlantic will those more philosophically inclined to discuss find them in a less than dominant the semantics of whether the AI really plans, role in this theater of war. Here, or simply follows deviously random instrucyou may suffer through the loss of tions. For the gamer, the important thing is the Prince of Wales, or lead Her Spolted by that the Al simulates a reasonably good opMajesty's naval forces to victory off ponent in ways that most wargames only only the coast of India. From a gamedream about. play standpoint, the British forces in general are not quite up to Stealth Fighters WWII-Style US/Japanese standards. Still, the Sound 3 of 3 Land In a WWII carrier simulation, surprise is possibility of having Spitfires in the like Okinawa, but with 10 times the ferocity. Pacific is well worth suffering through the everything. The ability to find and sink the lesser models. The Dutch are also included, The designers should be commended for excnemy before he finds you is the heart of success in CAW ploring such a potentially controversial route, but lack the firepower and the charm of the II. Searches are simple to Poling such a potenti ofers the British navy. For the player who prefers the implement, but the game requires that you while still staying on solid historical ground. w allocate resources properly and that you unJapanese, this gives two more opponents with The biggest departure from the norm, howderstand the limitations of your forces. In widely different ship types and objectives ever, comes in the Plan Orange scenario. This CAW II. the data offered is not merely than the traditional American opponent. It is postulates that tensions between Japan and bunch of numbers. The different ship and safe to say that winning with the British versus the Allies caused war to break our years earlier. plane types have a variety of characteristics for a human opponent playing the Japanese, As a result, carrier forces are much less effecyou to use or misuse. Unlike many gives more than the usual bragging rights. tive. Biplanes are the standard, and CAP is weak, with the ranges of aircraft cut back games, it is easy to believe that you SSC fue ray DISON severely from the CAW II norm. Radar is only are flying a Hurricane, since it has different strengths and weaknesses dimly understood, so the cat-and-mouse style than, say, a Hellcar. Nor does the of carrier warfare gives way to the battleships, which are for a last brief moment the domidata seem to have been fudged to nant force of the naval battlefield. For those fit the scenarios, as the performCAW players who never seem to get enough ance (or lack of same) of your forces flow effortlessly from the soundsurface combat, they will have plenty of ness of the design. chances to slug toc-to-toe in this battle. And what a tremendous amount CAW II is not merely an excellent game, it of data is available! Of the 184 is a shining example of why SSG is a leader in pages found in the game manual, the computer wargaming genre. The amount 75 are devoted to ship and aircraft of care shows clearly in the professionalism of statistics. If you ever wondered why the final product, which is remarkably free of the British Commonwealth subbugs and crashes, almost unheard of these marine class Grampus failed to sink While the British are featured in half of the days. The ability to upgrade both the graphics many ships, you will soon realize from the and Al of several scenarios in the original game's scenarios, they are not the only new information provided that it was aptly CAW to CAW II standards shows the comdelicacy for CAWII players. For those who named. Ironically, one of the nicest things mitment to support that the design team has things simply must play the U.S., Leyte Gulf has about CAW II is that gamers may enjoy the for its products. (Although when upgrading, enough action for hours and hours of carnage. game without ever looking at the database, you will lose your save games. This is fairly For the player who loves a challenge, Leyte due to the user-friendly interface. common throughout the industry, and a offers a chance to avoid the destruction of small price to pay considering the quality of most of the Japanese navy. Okinawa would Don't Worry, It's Just A Tutorial the enhancements.) be nothing special, were it not for the incluBy sticking to their guns both figuratively Despite the elegance of the interface, the sion of kamikazes. Especially as played by the and literally, Keating and Trout have prodesign team takes no chances with player computer, these weapons are every bit as duced a game which will satisfy both newconfusion. Whereas the tutorial in CAW, deadly and demoralizing as they were historicomers and veterans of the CAW system. I Pearl Harbor, was quite simple and effective cally. would even venture that this is one of the few in teaching the system, it was an obvious bust Where Keating and Trout stretch their games that goes beyond even the best as a game. Here, the exotic Trincomalee procreativity, though, is in the two \"what-if\" boardgames on the subject, so appropriate vides the setting for a greater challenge, and scenarios included. Operation Olympic is a and challenging is the system. Certainly it's it can be enjoyed long after the basics of CAW very sober look at what might have happened less difficult to get one person to play CAW II are second nature. if the U.S. had decided to forego dropping II, than to try and round up half a dozen for For the CAW veteran, the real delight of The Bomb. In preparing the Japanese maina decent game of Flattop. Trincomalee, anyTrincomalee is that the British are finally land for invasion, this scenario plays much one? CGW ish Commonwealth SUDEL LO June 1994 Page 141 "


"REVIEW Saxon Violence Saxon Medieval Warfare In Kingdoms of Germany and Vikings II by M. Evan Brooks cdicval warfare does not provide Knowing also that it is as important to hold in a typical game may require seizing from 50 the grand scope of warfare seen in territory as to conquer it, he has already to 125 territories, Kingdoms games tend to be Llater epochs. Horses weighed spruced up his original design, re-releasing it somewhat lengthy. Given the sequential nadown by armor-clad knights would have had as Vikings II. Here we take a look at Vodnikture of game turns, face-to-face play (via hota tough time performing elegant flanking style Vikings in both Kingdoms Of Germany seating) will be rather tedious, although it can maneuvers, and siege warfare was, most of the and Vikings II. be done. time, about as glamorous as a slug race down the banks of the Rhine. Medieval battles Hand-Drawn Hamlets Players are initially spread across the map, tended to be smash 'em, bash 'em each in a single territory. All participants begin In Hun-Worn Helmets affairs with a single territory and strive to amass as where endurance counted for more than tacThe graphics are colorful and more than much territory as possible. Economics merge tics. Wars were still, in the anachronistic wissufficient for a semi-abstract strategic/operawith conquest in that armies need an ecodom of Napoleon, won on an army's tional simulation. The strategic map offers an nomic base, and larger armies require more stomach, but less emphasis was spent on oroblique perspective of the territories (a total assets to provide food, arms and manpower. of 199), while the more usual operational map offers a bird's-eye Natural Insurrection view of the territories which may be readily scrolled. Interestingly Initially, most of the provinces are in a enough, Realism's advertising em\"state of nature.\" Owned by the peasants, phasizes the hand-drawn graphics. they are ripe for conquest and may be seized The territories have no relation to relatively quickly and painlessly (although an history, and one will look in vain occasional peasant province will cause more for such areas as Thurn and Taxis, losses than expected). However, eventually, Bavaria, Hannover, etc. Yes, the lebensraum does become exhausted, and the graphics are adequate, but I fail to players then begin to assault one another until see why hand-drawn graphics are a one player emerges triumphant, having vancoup in computer gaming. To be quished all of his opponents. Kingdoms of Germany fair, the close-up shots of castles are Armies may be composed of up to seven much more detailed and pleasing different unit types. Swordsmen seem to be chestrating elaborate maneuvers than on to the eye than the strategic map, pretty much expendable. Archers and crosseventually arriving in one fiefdom or another. but to be honest, I Vikings, Kingdom of England was Brian much preferred the Kingdoms Of Germany and Vikings II Vodnik's first attempt to capture the bludgartwork in Kingmaker. con-style strategy of medieval warfare. ReVodnik's games $59.95 leased in September of 1992, the design had share similar mechan Kingdoms SISTEME a modest amount of success. Now, with the ikings ics. Mouse REQUIREMENTS: VC4 graphcs, 2MB H input REQUIREMENTS: VGA graphics, 2MB hard drive space, release of Kingdoms Of Germany (KOG), serves all major funcmouse; supports Sound Blaster sound Vodnik invades the continent. Assuming herions of gameplay. Up cards is victorious in this market, he hopes to conto six human and/or DESIGNER: Brian Vodnik quer the whole of medieval Europe through computer players may PUBLISHER: Realism Entertainment Bensenville, IL another release: Kingdoms Of France/Kingermany) contest the fields of (708) 595-7487 doms of Russia (a two-for-one conquest). Europe. Since victory .04X= Brian Vodotes PRICE: IBM PLAYERS: 1 6 Page 142 Computer Gaming World "


"Serici TM Life is Feudal Sandal World, only the smarte solo In this Feudal A re you up for a real-time challenge? Command a feudal empire and attempt to dominate all other serfdoms! Your strategic planning and tactical prowess will determine your fate. Thousands of fully animated serfs are at your beck and call. Create your own personalized settlement by carefully managing activities such as mining, fishing, farming, and construction. Brave knights will be called upon to defend your settlement and conquer your enemies. So, plan wisely. Place new roads and buildings effectively. Use natural resources and maintain food supplies which will sustain your settlement. Your ultimate goal is conquest! Feudal fabulousness for the not-so feeble minded! Ke IBM & Compatibles yg 3.5\" Disks SESEL To omre: Visit you retailer at all 1-800-245-4525 with VISA/MC (U.S. & Canada only) Sef City. Like o Feudalis atrademark of Strategik Simolations, loc. 16M bs a registered trademark of ternational Business Machines et  Strategic Simulations, Inc. All rights reserved. "


"Flevoland Terrain : Rolling Hills Harvest : Surplus +1 Populace: 628/12 Stocks : 0 food Growth : 17/4 Garrison 13 Hen Died New : Unlimited Land LOREM Notes ---Harvesting at MAXIMUM. You have 3 arries with 33 Hen hers bowmen provide missile fire, with the latter similar. Differences in geography, however, enthen England is a rapier. That is, invasions by possessing more accuracy, but a lower rate of gender a marked difference in tactics. The tersea tend ro open up your territories and refire. Pikemen are useful for defensive situritories in Germany are relatively land-locked. quire a much larger reaction force and defense ations, while foor knights form an elite infan\"Thus, while the north is susceptible to sea invain depth. u are the mounted knights sion, the vast bulk of the map offers one landActually, territorial goals will often be de(cavalry) and champions, which comprise locked mass after another. Therefore, a human termined economically. Stone and iron, uscelite cavalry a la Sir Lancelot or El Cid. As may player would be well-advised to choose a beginful for building castles, catapults and elite be surmised, knights and champions do better ning territory away from the sea. Seek to expand forces, are only found in hills and mountains. in open terrain than forest or mountains. into territories which are at the \"world's edge.\" Wood, necessary for castles, catapults, ships Field armies may be raised assuming one Such conquests offer a secure linchpin upon and arming troops, is limited to forested terhas the economic surplus to afford such which to expand your conquests. rain. The \"middle game will thus be driven \"luxuries.\" Each new army costs 30 gold, one by the need for raw materials in iron unit and 11 men. Upon raising its standTaxes: 18 order to fund the war machine. ard, the army has ten swordsmen and a chamOwned by Lord Ranger. Stronghold: Home Castle (100%) Catapults are essential for sucpion. Before sending it into the fray, you Current : Enough cessful siege operations. The Kingwould be well-advised to train your force and : 3/0 doms engine now allows you to add more troops. HOMELAND build siege engines either instantaOf course, you are not alone in seeking neously or delayed, the latter being hegemony. Therefore, you will be forced to more realistic. There is a built-in adopt a defensive posture in certain areas. SE offset with catapults. ManufacturHere, castles are the near-ultimate deterrent. ing them near the front allows Castles can become horrendously costly, as rapid access to their intended tarthey grow from a tower outpost to a keep, a get, but simultaneously, it allows small castle, and finally a large castle. You may Kingdoms of Germany the enemy to offer a rapid riposte often maintain a less than optimal balance and destroy the results of one's lasimply because of economic costs—but such bors. The computer AI is a rather is the life of a liege lord. Naturally, the English territories are surunforgiving opponent. rounded by water, which offers both opporEach turn consists of 15 days, but marching runiry and lack thereof. Seaborne forces may into enemy territory is more time-consuming How Doth Yon Viking Sail! suming be considered the airborne of the medieval than merely traversing friendly terrain. army. Striking far into the enemy rear, they Both Kingdoms Of Germany and Vikings II Forced marching accelerates one's pace, but can rapidly cut a fatal breach in his defenses; are challenging games. Although easy to at a countervailing cost in fatigue. The field obviously, the converse is also true. So, until Icarn, both are difficult to win consistently. armies cannot be used as Achtung-Panzers you feel comfortable in dealing with such With the randomness of start positions, cach Vorwarts, but should be used with a goal in sudden invasions, it is better to seek a secure playing will offer different lessons and more mind. Exploiting success must be weighed homeland surrounded by defensible terrain, enjoyment. with the costs of leaving the army ripe for away from water boundaries. wavfi And yet, the abstractness of the game is counterattack. somewhat bothersome. While I loved RISK! Finally, you must pay attention and Lords Of Conquest, these games could be to economics. Manpower for played in a few hours. The Kingdoms series troops will only be available if sufrequires play times in excess of 10 to 15 hours. ficient food is available. This reWhile Sid Meier's Civilization required such quires arable fields, and additional playing times, the race for technological and assets must be spent for clearing material superiority offered an incentive to away land. Similarly, resource explay that made the time commitment worthploration (ore mining) will generCampaign Army 2 Men: 11 Days: 4 while (much to the consternation of \"gaming ally prove a profitable AVSTA Strn: AVERAGE Influ: GOOD widows\" everywhere). enterprise-assuming that you Mrle : HORMAL have the leisure and security to enTerr: Mountains With future expansions of France and RusCONTINUE joy its fruits. Such exploration has sia, one may well ask whether the system an economic cost and may not be justifies such titles. Vikings II offers the most successful until the fourth search. Vikings II geographically challenging scenario and the However, once ore is found, the others are simply variations on a similar territory offers it in abundance. theme. In effect, the Kingdoms series is WarThus, KOG offers a better scenario in which While the particular ore might run out, a new lords sans both fantasy and scenario editor. new users can learn to master the system. At search will reveal a different ore among gold, Overall, I found the series to be entertainthe same time, battles tend to be downright silver and iron. ing, but ultimately unsatisfying. The ecoin Hobbesian—nasty, brutish and short. After ter nomics and battles are grounded in Where In The Game beating up on the peasants (a common memedievalism, but are so ahistorical as to nedieval preoccupation), the land forces will Is Barbarian Sandiego? gate any valid historical lessons. If abstract grind one another into a series of thrust and challenges be your game, enjoy! If you are The game design and interface approach for counter-thrust. Subtlety is not an earmark of interested in medievalism, try Hundred Years both Kings Of Germany and Vikings II are the German territories. If Germany is a saber, War on GEnie instead. Cow UTEK HAP Page 144 Computer Gaming World "


"My son and I love this game!!! Great work!! Robert Straus, Burbank Robert Strauss, Burbank  Oxyde magnum! for PC, Mac, A500 A2000, ST, TT or Falcon Computers. Sequel of the award winning Oxyd, now at a store near you! PE... Moc: 1MB RAM, color or monochrome! PC: 386 or above, 2.5MB RAM, EGA or VGA, Soundbla. or Adl. optional. VWWX SGUERRESTREPRISE RECISELEP My daughter (11 years old) and I have become \"Oxyd\" addicts. We cannot wait to begin exploring the many other levels. Thanks for creating such an excellent prodUC. R. S., Germantown lenjoy this game a great deal and so do my children and their friends. It is just what I have been looking for !! Jerome Wescott, Minneapolis My whole family enjoyed your game a great deal. Michael C Moore, Columbia This is, without question, the most impressive game / have ever seen. I am amazed at the audio, visual and action. George L. Tanty, Arlington Heights Outstanding program!!!! John Bernauer, Los Gatos Wow! That's all I can say about Oxyd. What an incredible game! Hurry! I can't wait to play!! Oxyd has to be the most artistically superb piece of programming that I have seen. From my position of having completed about one third of the single-player levels, the landscapes have been continuously varied with a marvelous attention to graphic and audible detail that makes each new one a continuing delight. I especially appreciate how the marble interacts in seemingly realistic but different ways when rolling over or bouncing against different \"natural\" (or unnatural) substances like stone, wood, swamp, freefall etc. At this point, I'm already worrying that I'll run out of levels (assuming/ keep solving the puzzles). Jeffrey R. Harrow Oxyd Credits: Best Brain Game MacWorld Game Hall of Fame 1993 Game of the Year Computer & Pedagogik 06/93 Score this game a solid 10 Current Notes 06/93 \"A\" rating Wow! Exquisite. A must for your games library. AmnigaWorld 06/93 Game of the Month. MacWelt 02/93 Top of the Charts Brain Teaser Category, PC Games German edition This game is highly addictive. Stuart Ritchie, Canada One of the nicest games I have seen in a long time. Thanks for creating such a challenging piece of software. Steve Brannan, Canada Even our 3yr old enjoys the game. I'm completely hooked! Patricia B. Smith, NH 100 new landscapes New objects and game elements to explore. The game is a blast! Excellent graphics, extremely well done. Interesting challenges in each landscape also. / look forward to the next 90 landscapes. David Mangini, CT I just had to write to tell you how much fun I've had playing Oxyd. The attention to detail the sounds, the textures of the surfaces really adds to the fun of the game. It invites the imagination for a ride. Thanks also for making all of the landscapes challenging but not impossible. At first I thought that landscape 76 was unfairly difficult, but when I found the way through it, I really admired the ingenuity. Tom Phoenix, Portland Oxyd magnuml is an entirely new ond riveting challenge for Oxyd experts and beginners alike. The game is really slick, well designed. Those first 10 levels alone were worth paying for! It is rare to find such a visually appealing, addictive and playable game. Kathryn Wilson, Australia Call 617-497-1130 for the Oxyd magnum! retailer nearest you One of the most elegant games I've played. Thanks a lot for a great game. Jeffrey Jondahl, San Diego Get a free appetizer for PC, Mac, Amiga or ST: Send S 4.00 for shipping & handling for 10 challenging landscapes of Oxyd to Dongleware, 35 Howard Street, Cambridge, MA 02139. Send S 4.00 for a 5 level teaser of Oxyd magnum! (PC or Mac only) I'm really impressed with your game, Oxyd. Congratulations on a unique and fun product, and best luck to you all. John M. Dodd, Thousand Oaks OK so we got hooked! Circle Reader Service #63 "


"REVIEW Dunkin' Donitz Making a Splash with Deadly Games' U-boat FA by Alan \"Alarm!\" Emrich proven methods for dive tanks add a convincing \"you are there\" countering the feel to the game. If the phrase \"playing it by U-boat car\" could be taken more literally, I don't threat. know how. There is not a lot of color in this game, and deliberately so. In the designer's words, \"Having spent many months sailing the Moving waters of the North Atlantic, let me assure ships in you there are very few days when the sea is protective not a leaden gray, the sky a milk-white utting groups of haze.\" So things seem through the periscope history in convoys, and and binoculars that you spend much of the 1 the movies has committing game peering through. always been a hit-or-miss more of the proposition. For every winner Allied air resources Most of the remainder of your time is spent monitoring trans-oceanic progress on for anti-submarine like The Last Emperor or Shindler's List, there are a dirty dozen turkeys like The a black & white map, giving an appropriate warfare are far off in Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire or classic movie feel to the whole game. While the future. Much of it is possible to maneuver around inside the Attila The Hun (with John Wayne in the what you will initially encounter will be ship to its various sections, doing so is title role!). One movie that left a particular individual ships at sea (in the words of subpointless. There is nothing to control in ly powerful impression on me was Das Boot. mariners, there are only two kinds of most of these areas, unlike in say, Silent The film follows a German U-boat and its Service. The action takes place pricrew as the ride of battle turns against the marily on the bridge or the Axis during World War II. So well-crafted Kommandoturm (i.e., the conning is this movie that nervous claustrophobics tower), for those seeking a breath of will almost certainly have nightmares after fresh air. The other stations are seeing it. mostly wallpaper. Das Boot begins with a message stating Consequently, it's a good thing that, of the 40,000 German men who put U-boat has such an engrossing overall to sea in U-boats during World War II, look and sound to it. Though the 30,000 never came back—a sobering statistime compresses while making those tic. Afrer visiting a captured U-boat ar long, boring trips (slowly, as the best Chicago's Museum of Science and Industry speed this ship can make is a crummy last summer, I found myself moved while 16 knots), players will appreciate the examining its cramped quarters. What a tedium their historical counterparts squalid existence these sailors must have suffered. Fortunately, the odd radio lead for weeks upon weeks at a time. Uships-submarines and targets\"), but the message or random sighting puncruate the boat duty consisted of almost endless hours monotony before it becomes too grinding, of pure boredom punctuated by minutes of supply of easy prey won't last long. Commanding your U-boat is as easy as adding an element of anxiety while closing sheer terror. Deadly Game's U-boat manwith a ship spotted on the horizon. For any clicking the mouse, reading the very realisages to really capture that feeling very well. who tend to let their attention drift, there are tic looking and functional gauges, ample sound cues to bring them Submarine School 101: and listening to the even more Reflexes Not Required realistic and essential sounds. In back to the game, and time instantU-boat fact, the game is designed to cenYou assume the role of an Unterseehoor ter around its audio, from which $59.95 (U-boat) Captain commanding a Type VII you will receive the majority of U-BO SYSTEM: Macintosh C, 770 ton Atlantic U-boat, commissioned your feedback. The digitized crew REQUIREMENTS: ed, 4MB RAM, 640x480 in May of 1940. These are the \"happy members reporting in, the opencolor or gray-scale monitor times for you and the rest of the ing and closing of hatches, the PROTECTION: None DESIGNERS: Rene Vidmer with Ubootwaffe (U-boat fleet). Although you cacophony of diesel engines runRobert Madison PUBLISHER: Deadly Games and the 43 others in your crew are inexperining at flank speed and, particuGreat Neck, NY enced, the Allies have not yet adopted Tarly, the sounds of flooding the (516) 482-4000 egal PRICE: LCHII or better recommend Page 146 Computer Gaming World "


"TIGERS N THE PROWL ON THE HPS Simulations the WARGAMER'S Computers Comipany, and designer Scott Hamilton, bring you the ULTIMATE WWII tactical combat simulation. overing the ENTIRE Eastern Front from 1939-45, Tigers On The Prowl includes a detailed database of hundreds Uof fighting vehicles, weapons, and force structures for the Axis, Allied and Soviet forces. Likewise, combat is resolved by precise calculations of armor thickness and round penetration at the instant of impact. It also features morale, hidden movement, communications, airstrikes, night fighting, forest fires, and much more. Designed for all levels of wargamers, Tigers On The Prowl includes 5 scenarios, a, VISA/MC: CALL flexible scenario builder, and three levels of complexity. Orders are given to platoons or sec(408) 554-8381 tions, with a maximum of a supported combat brigade on each side. Can be played Dealer Inquiries solitaire against the computer, or by Welcome two players either face to face or by mail/e-mail. Tigers On The Prowl can use maps and symRequires VGA, bols created with Aide De 570KB free RAM Camp. Tigers On The and 2 MB hard disk BA space. Mouse optional. Prowl is as real as HPS Simulations For IBM and compatibles. you can get withP.O. Box 3245 out being there. Santa Clara, CA 95055-3245 Copyright 1993 by Scott Hamilton/HPS Simulations. All rights reserved. IBM is a registered trademark of International Business Machines, Inc. RE "


"ly telescopes down when closing for an find yourself in some deep saltwater (if encounter. you're lucky) very quickly. Other dangerous opponents include patrol boats, Closing In For The Kill cruisers, battleships and aircraft carriers. The skill that you must develop is More likely encounters are with the four different types of merchant ships, which shadowing enemy vessels, waiting for night, and setting them up for the kill. is good, because they don't shoot back. Here you must learn by feel the range Diving and conducting those slow, batof your torpedoes. Eventually, you will tery-draining maneuvers can be quite nerve-wracking. Great sound effects figure out how to set up good attack angles, and in emergencies, how to get amplify the experience, rattling through headphones provided with the game, as out of trouble. A great help is the Uyou wrestle with your inability to shoot boot Fahrer Handbuch, sporting a \"Groner, 1938\" publishing date. back from below the 20' mark. Although this brief manual consists Players won't have to fight the primarily of patrol maps and ship silhouthe torpedo shot. Switching to the rudigame's smooth-as-glass interface, though. ettes, it does include some tactical advice mentary attack computer that the Germans In fact, because of the low skill level employed in 1939, you must input the and a wonderful glossary. Evens so, much required to fully embrace U-boat, some will ship's size and its height at the waterline of the game must be learned through trial see it simply as a nice, light simulator. into the viewfinder. You only need to hit a and error. Although the systems are simple, a realistic couple of buttons for the necessary calculafeel has not been completely sacrificed on Generally, U-boats should approach a tion, after which you simply select which the altar of playability. I thoroughly target while sighting it via periscope or tubes to flood (four bow and one astern), binoculars. The trick is to observe targets enjoyed this fine, easy going simulation. Of and give the order to fire. course, I had to watch Das Boot again, but when they can't see you, which can be that's just U-boat getting me back into accomplished since U-boats have very small Alarm! \"submarine mode.» For a game that you silhouettes. Should you close successfully to My problem was knowing when to fold within firing range (whatever that might can pick up and start playing with nary a look at the documentation, this submarine be) without being spotted or \"pinged\" by 'em.\" I quickly learned, for instance, it was simulation can still maintain a respectable enemy ASDIC (sonar), your target will be not a very bright idea to stalk a destroyer. lined up and waiting for you to calculate Once they know you're out there, you will depth. CGW Where Have You Seen This Before? SPECTACULAR TOP SHAREWARE GAMES ONLY $1.50 PER DISK  Doom  Multi-Dimensional  Another Planet and  Tetris 3D  Duke Nukem 2 Theif Me with No Beer  Flight Simulators  Eternam  Gateworld  Roadwars 2000 Kiloblaster  Simulations of Risk,  Halloween Harry Major Stryker Scrabble, Monopoly,  Executioners  Lemmings Mystery Manor Uno  Stratsys Kung Fu Louie  Spear of Destiny  Hockey  Hugo's Whodonit  Jill of the Jungle Megatron  Wofenstein 3D  Baseball  Redhook's Revenge  Blake Stone  Galactix PLUS Many,  3D Chess  Monster Bash Bio Menace Many More FREE CATALOG INCLUDING WINDOWS, BUSINESS, UTILITIES, EDUCATION, GRAPHICS Now you Can Have Your Own GIRLFRIEND.. ... a sensuous woman living in your computer! GIRLFRIEND is the first VIRTUAL WOMAN. You can watch her, talk to her, ask her questions and relate to her. Over 100 actual VGA photographs allow you to see your girlfriend as you ask her to wear different outfits, and guide her into different activities. As a true artificial intelligence program GIRLFRIEND starts with a 3000 word vocabulary and actually grows the more you use it. She will remember your name, your birthday, and your likes and dislikes. GIRLFRIEND requires 7-10 MB of free space. We offer the ADULT VERSION containing 2 different girls, LISA and SUZY al o special price of only $69. (reg. price S120.) Swimsuits and SOUNDS ... the swimsuit disk that TALKS! There are many disks full of swimsuit models. But none of them allow you to HEAR the models while you view the photographs. We have odded the exciting dimension of TRUE SOUND technology to allow you to hear the models talk about themselves through your standard speaker or sound cord. You will receive over 1.2 MB of sound and full screen, VGA graphics. You will also receive a FREE disks containing all the utilities you need to view, print, monipulote, catalog, edit, and convert your pictures to Windows wallpaper. A great deal at only $19. Also available: The Science Fiction Disk See incredible space shots and alien encounters while hearing other worldly descriptions and music. Only $19-or pair with Swimsuits and Sounds for $35. On CD-ROM: 3D DARLINGS ... the first CD-ROM containing 3 Dimensional Images. This revolutionary new CDROM offers hundreds of 3-Dimensional images of top glamour models of our timo. Each model poses in bikini and lingerie attire in various background settings. Included is a user-friendly menu program that lets you choose a specific model, read all about her statistics and alternate between 2-D and 3D images. A special Zoom & Pan feature is included that lets you select any portion of the image for an extreme close-up. Includes models real names statistics and contoc information.Reg. price $79. Special intro price: $49. Our FREE CATALOG includes ADULT games, movies and pictures on both DISKS and CD-ROM ADD SA S/H 3.5 Or FOREIGN ORDERS ADD $2/DISKIN PA ADD TAX O MUST STATE AGE OVER 21 YEARS. VISA/MC Orders Only: 800-243-1515 Ext. 600UA / 24 HRS / 7 DAYS FAX (215) 997.2571. Or CK/MO to SeXXy Software, P.O. Box 220., Dept. 600UA, Hatfield, PA 19440 Circle Reader Service #160 Page 148 Yes! On the flier that came with your ThrustMaster controls Interface Dynamics now has an affordable system of brackets that provide a complete Cockpit Environment. Call, write, or fax for a free brochure. Interface Dynamics Corporation 294 Forest Road * Wolfeboro, NH 03894 Phone: 603-569-4638 Fax: 603-569-8038 "


"so shall you reap. HARVESTER TM coming this summer for PC CD-ROM 1-800-238-42 ryy  Merit Software.  Future Visionary, Inc. Harvester is a registered trademark of Future Visionary, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Circle Reader Service #28 "


"STRATEGY Now The Shoe's On The Other Pseudopod A Strategy Guide for Tim Wisseman's VGA Planets, Part 2 by Ted Foster illustration by John Clarke Starbriv Starrini 2 StarBlur 3 SuperStarlirio 1 Nova Drives Haulova Drive 6 Quantan Drive 7 per Tn our last installment, we took a broad view of Tim Wisseman's multi-player strategic slugfest, VGA Planets. This month, we'll get into specifics with each of the various star-faring races that you can play. Whether you prefer the cold blooded Lizards, the mechanistic Cyborgs, or even the Evil Empire, every race has unique strengths and weaknesses, and each requires a very different style of play. It is this diversity that keeps VGA Planets interesting and challenging over many games. The Solar Federation: The Federation's Nocturne-class destroyers, Nebula-class cruisers, and Missouri-class battleships can be used as pseudo-freighters, giving you lots of transporting capabilities with well-armed ships. The early use of these classes of vessels will give you an edge when you reach the Phony War (see last month's article for an explanation of the \"Phony War» phase). The Nova-class Dreadnought is one of the best battleships in the game with 10 beams and 10 torpedo tubes. However, be aware of its limitations, since even if fully armed with tech-10 weapons, a single Nova will be destroyed by a large fighter-carrier. The Nova will cause some damage, but it will lose nonetheless, so send these ships out in packs whenever possible. Use your excellent medium-sized ships to give an opponent grief during the Phony War. Since all of your ships carry torpedoes, use them frequently to lay mines to keep other ships out-especially those the Fearless Wing cruiser, with its ample that are cloaked. cargo space, and the Deth Specula-class frig. The Lizards: This race has a good ate with its tremendous firepower. array of medium sized vessels, with similar to the Lizards, the two carriers that my favorite being the Lizard-class the Bird Men can build are generally not cruiser. Be careful when using the worth the cost. The Dark Wing-class battleSerpent, Reptile, and Vendetta-class ships, as ship, on the other hand, is a fine capital ship, they are easy to capture when their shields are the only Dreadnought in the game that can knocked down. knocked down. cloak. Imagine an enemy commander who The Madonzilla carrier can end up being looks at his own worlds and never really too large to be used as a light carrier and too knows if a cloaked Dark Wing is there waiting small to compete with the other large carriers to strike. The only drawback of this deadly in the game. Fighters are very expensive for ship is its relatively small fuel load, which this race as well, so use this ship limits its range. with caution. The T-Rex battleTECH LEVELS 1 to 7 STARSHIP ENGINE CONSTRUCTION ship, however, is one of the best battlewagons for its size available. Few enemy battleships can ger it to Fuel used 150% damage before succumbing liglityear themselves. traveled The improved ground combat of the Lizard race is very valuable as it allows them to take worlds without OF THESE ENGINES 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 necessarily having to fight for Quantan Drive? Lapfactor them. Because the attack ratio is usually set to 20:1 or better, this DURANIUM: t's means that a mere 501 lizard clans MOLYBDENUM: 15 ki's (50,100 colonists) can conquer an ESCOLH Hole enemy world of 1,000,000 colotund one of the antities nists. Since most starbase worlds are about that size, Lizard troops are excepWhen the fighting starts, use your ships to tional for taking worlds with starbases intact, choke off enemy supplies and to lie in wait inheriting whatever tech levels and defenses until the perfect time to take a ship or colony. already established by your foe. Use your battleships in wolf packs to invisibly The Empire of the Birds: Nearly all of the penetrate enemy lines and deliver heavy strikes to starbases. Be wary if the cloaking fail Feathered One's ships have large crew complements, making them very hard to capture. rate is set to a high percentage (20% or Additionally, almost all of them can cloak, higher) as you run the risk of detection when creating some difficult defensive problems for crossing large distances. your opponents. Two of the best vessels are The Fascists: Urterly evil, these beings seem Tech Level: ? [ Planet 1 1 Tits Engine) COST: 120 Heredits \"TBITONIUM 3 kts 350 Kts 236 It's Page 150 Computer Gaming World "


"IT'S FAST IT'S FURIOUS! IT'S EMPIRE SOCCER! The soccer game that captures all the excitement and fast paced action of the World Cup Competition. * Three gameplay-formats: Training, Exhibition & World Cup, * Managerial control to effect substitutions and formation changes, * Full ball control diving headers, overhead kicks, sliding tackle, baek heel etc * Free kicks, corners, throw-ins and penalties, .Tit Speed Burst 2npiren movice Pirgo Novice * 32 national teams each with different tactics and skill levels. * Special advanbeth player moves, * Up to players in World Cup ournament, * Five skill settings ease you from beginner To World Champion. * Set up your own World Cup leagues, Available for IBM-PC-and-Compatibles  Empire Software. SO F WARE ENTERTAINMENT INTERNATIONAL (USA) Inc, 4 Professional Drive, Suite 123. Gaithersburg, MD 20879. Voice: (301) 216 9706 FAX: (301) 216 0117 "


"EL LEI EIL. SER SON SWLLT S TOU LEELE CSEROTOD Speed: E.T.A. Star Start 3 Sagaralace North Hawth Dr Qatar Dre? to exist only to cause pain and suffering to are so fast that they can actually tow a carrier ploy your Emeralds to unload large mineneighboring empires. The aptly named Dza or battleship faster than normal ships can fields in both your space and your enemies. Painmaker and Little Pest scout are ideal pursue, making them deadly foes indeed. Then tow the enemy's vessels home when the cloaking D7 Coldpain and The Cyborgs: The only race to have both an they are trapped and drained of fuel. Use this Deth Specula frigates can make mincemeat of excellent bartleship and carrier. Cyborgs are technique to simply take away any fleet trying other medium warships. A masterpiece is the the strongest race in the game offensively. to invade and to make it your own. Ill Wind battlecruiser, which manages to The main limitation for the Cyborgs is their Your Onyx-class frigates are best used to cram 10 beams and two torpedoes onto a tech inability to build automatic fighters as other make ordinary planers into the broiling lava level 5 hull, making it one of the most potent races can. The Fire Cloud-class cruiser is one balls that you like best, so use them often. It cruisers in the game. The Victorius-class batof the better medium ships, and the tleship is an average Dreadnought which B222-class destroyer has seven SHIP 10 should be used with caution, especially if SMALL. DEEP SPACE FREIGHTER beam weapons, incredible for its Primary Ship Mission 1011 10 fighting alone. small size. Other ship types such as 1 EXPLORATI021  L CLIP Especially in a mineral-poor game, the B41 Explorer, Quietus cruiser, 3 ny MINIS PLUNDER! It's a quick and easy way to turn and Iron Slave base ship, are too Fuel: B RAUTPOTKUT natives (or colonists if you can afford it!) into small to be very useful, so hold off Engine: [HRANOS DIVE 6 COLONIZE supplies and cash. Be careful it is all too easy building them in favor of the larger Weapons: NOUNSMELOR Tubos: motorpedo INTERCEPT to over-plunder a world into ineffectiveness. ships and freighters. Number of Torpedocs: BUT. GROUND ATTACK Damage: NEMC: Use your fine raiders to greatly upset your The Cyborgs' two capital ships enemy's backfield, preventing him from reColonists: mana are both brimming with mass and Location: COSTE Supplies: WS Waypoint Ten LIGE stocking the warships at the front lines. If you firepower. The Annihilation-class Tritanium: ONIS Distance: R oyal Maars Duranium: MOS keep the war in his interior, victory shall be battleship is equal in armament to Molybdenum: DUPOTELES yours. Kup'Lah! Friendly Cade: E the Federation's Nova-class with Fuel neoded: KTOR Primary Enemy: Ship Weight: RTLOSE The Privateer Bands: The Privateers don't 20% more mass, making it vulnerMission: Exco me M Max Weiglit: win the game by defeating you with their able only to the larger fighter-carriers. Even more powerful, the becomes another tool to deter aggressionTECH LEVELS 1 to 7 STARSHIP ENGINE CONSTRUCTION Biocide-class carrier is only a tech who wants to capture worlds that are the 9 hull, so build it frequently and worst to colonize? often! The Evil Empire: Our other ultimate villain Fuclused per Use your assimilation ability to has been blessed with an array of fair cruiserlightyear quickly establish large populations size ships and an awesome knock-out punch. traucied and get starbases built. Dedicate The PL21-class probes are hyperspace-capaseveral bases to doing nothing but ble to cover a lot of ground in a hurry, though OF THESE PROHLS building fighters, something they they have little cargo space. The Super Star 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Warpfactor can do with no tech level increases. carriers and cruisers are weak in combat but Use the fighters to support the make excellent fighter supply ships. COST: 120 Mercredits TRITONIUM: 25 Biocide carriers, then keep those The Star Frigate is your only ship with MOLYBDENUM: 15 ki's supply lines open. After that it's torpedoes, so it should be used wisely as a time to assimilate, assimilate, asmine-layer. The Super Star destroyer and on all these trgu similate.... Moscow-class escort are too small to be much fleet. Instead, they defeat you with your own The Crystal Confederation: Aluse in combat, but can be an effective deterfleet. Of the many ship types they can build, though suffering from a deplorable lack of rent when fighting the Privateer or other the Meteor blockade-runner is the top pergood small vessels, this race can still be a group with many small ships. The Empire's former. I recommend you build them in formidable opponent. The Ruby-class light crowning achievement is the Death Star lookgroups of five or more, so that they make cruiser and Sky Garnet-class destroyers have alike, the Gorbie-class carrier. It is unquesmore efficient pickpockets. Your larger cruisgood punch, but like all of their smaller shipstionably the strongest individual ship in the ers and carriers are generally too small for are far too easily captured. The Emerald-class game. extended combat, so build them only as a last battlecruiser fares better with its eight guns Build as many starbases resort. and an incredible 510 unit cargo hold, makadvantage of your \"free\" fighters which are Have BR4 and BR5 ships cloak ncar enemy ing it your premier medium ship and incidenmade there. Keep good supply lines of fightlines and wait for a freighter to come within tally, one of the best mine-layers in the game. ers and fuel to your Gorbies using the Super 162 light years. They can hit it, wipe the crew, The two capital ships are similar to the Star carriers. Use your Dark Sense ability to capture the freighter, and be gone before helpLizards in size. The Crystal Thunder carrier Lizards' in size. The Crystal Thunder carrier gain optimum intelliger gain optimum intelligence on your oppocan arrive. Beware of the Privateer's Achilles' is the weakest large carrier in the game, renent, and then loose your \"Ping-pong balls heel-large minefields and situations wherequiring judicious use for good results. The from Hell\" into his most viral systems. charshan 0% The Diamond-class battleship is a good ship in The Robots: These mechanical types rely Meteors are ideally suited for obtaining a fleet terms of power and defensive strength, but almost solely on fighter-carriers for their fleet. for you. Sent our cloaked in wolf-packs, they should still be used in groups to maximize its What an irony, then, that their only torpedocan rob a large ship of fuel. Within 1-2 turns worth. capable ship, the Cat's Paw-class destroyer, is the ship will be helpless and ready for towing Your entire economy should be set up to one of the best small ships in the game. to the nearest Privateer starbase. These ships produce as many web mines as possible. EmHeavily gunned and impossible to capture, it Anton Deo 7 Tecli Leur: 1 Planet 1 DURANIUM 3 Page 152 Computer Gaming World "


"SA Aut 114554$ E4251 1456 The Darkest Knight is Still Ahead GABRIEL KVGHT See your favorite retailer or call: 1-800-757-7707 SIERRA Circle Reader Service #110 "


"augments these abilities with a large cargo capacity. Of the Robots many base ships, the Iron Slave-, Pawn-, and Cybernaut-class ships are too small to be worthwhile. However, the Instrumentality, Automa, and Golem classes are exceptional ships, each capable of launching large waves of fighters which will devastate even a battleship. The larger Golem carrier needs only fear packs of enemy capital ships. Use your excellent Cat's Paw ships to colonize and patrol your perimeter. They make great mine-layers as well, so use them to take full advantage of the Robots minc-laying bonus. Try some of your base ships as \"fighter factories\" to produce the many small craft you will need to make your carriers effective. QTankers may be employed in similar fashion. The Rebels: The Rebels suffer from a lack of good medium ship designs. The Taurus and Deep Space scouts make excellent armed merchantmen, but are prone to capture by warships. The Falcon-class cscort is one of the few ships capable of hyperspace travel, and should be used to settle distant regions quickly. The Cygnus-class destroyer has good guns but cannot absorb much damage Of the medium-sized ships, the Tranquilcarrier, the Scorpius makes a good fighter lity-class cruiser is the best, but has much less manufacturing ship, and is also useful as a armament than similarly-sized cruisers of minesweeper during invasions. The real carother races. The Sage, Guardian, and Iron rier is the Virgo-class battlestar, which actuLady-class frigates have good armament, but nt, but ally matches up well with opposing carriers. ally marches in once their shields are down, those hulls beTen guns give it excellent punch, and its only long to the enemy. failings are its lower mass and two fewer The Sagittarius and Gemini transports fighter tubes than some of the other heavy make wonderful fighter factories. Simply carriers. park them over a world and keep them supplied with minerals and supplies, and they Build fighters on your ships, particularly will cheaply keep your fighter wings stocked. the light carriers and Gemini freighters, to The Rush-class ship is a great carrier in this manufacture them in large quantities for your game. Though equipped with only five beam battlestars and starbases. Make the most of weapons, it more than makes up for this fault your ability to sweep mines at long range. The with its large mass and 10 fighter bays. Colonial fighter-carriers are the only vessels Use armored transports like your Deep in VGA Planets able to sweep mines faster Space scout to expand and to defend your than they can travel at warp 9. If a light carrier early borders. Try to quickly build up to the is available, send it along during invasions to Rush ships to make up for your lack of good sweep mines, while keeping the battlestars secondary ships. Use Tranquillity ships as ready for combat. mine-layers and Gemini freighters as traveling fighter supply bases to support your carThat wraps up this strategy guide. One sign ing fighter supply bases to su riers. of quality in a game is how much versatility The Lost Colonies Of Man: The Colonies . it gives you to develop your own tactics and \"gives you to develop your own tactics and share many designs with the Rebels, includstrategy tricks, and VGA Planets gives you ing a deficiency in good medium ships. The ample room to add upon what I've suggested Little Joe escort has good punch with its six here. Now it's time for all you would-be guns, but suffers from low mass and is unable Emperors to find a new game at a local bulto take punishment. Moving up to the light letin board near you and start building! CGW Hook 16.95 H Came from the very Y NEW! Artificial ntelligence game! SAOBRA SIDELINE SOFTWARE D ORDERS 1-80 YOUR PC IMPORT & CLOSEOUT CONNECTION NEW PC TITLES TYPE Battle Isle 2 CD ROM War Simulation Break Line Breakout for the 90's Brutal Sports Football Arcade Simulation Canon Fodder Arcade Chaos Engine Action Arcade Evasive Action Flight Simulator Genesia Strategy Game In Extremis Arcade Adventure King Maker Strategy Lamborghini Challenge Driving Simulator Lil Devil Arcade Adventure Maniac Sports Sports Simulator Micro Machines Racing Arcade Rise of the Robots Fighting Game Star Lord (Microprose) Strategy UFO (Microprose) Strategy Winter Olympic '94 Sports Simulation PC MAGAZINES Get the best news on the best PCtitles from the US & Europe! These high gloss, full color magazines also feature demo.packed PLAYABLE cover DISKS with each issue! Titles include: PC Format, PC Review, PG Zone, PC Plus, PC Power, PC Action, and PC Games! Your choice! Only $10 each! SHIPPING (UPS Ground) For up to 3 pieces, by payment: Mastercard & Visa 55.00.CO.D. (Cath Only) $10.00 Nent day & second day ait available! Call for prices on special shipping. Shipping times not guaranteed. Price & Availability subject to change! No refunds or exchanges. Delective products changed with name item Products warrantied through Sideline FAX ORDERS CALL (305) 491-6134 Need Into Call (305) 491-9519 DEALER INQUIRIES INVITED! 840 NW 57th Court L auderdale, FL 21.309 DON'T MISS THESE DISCOUNT PC DEALS! Four Crystals of Trazar 21.95 Civilization 21.95 4-0 Sports Boxing 18.95 Callossus Bridge 4 9.95 A-Train 26.95 Colorado 9.95 Acbon Stations 18.95 Command HO 18.95 Ancient Art of War in Shies 24.95 Conan the Cimerron 18.95 Artic Barons 21.95 Creepers (Psypnosis) 18.95 ATAC (Microprose) 24.95 Dave Ledbeiter Golf (Green) 26.95 8.17 Bomber Microprose) 24.95 Deluxe Strip Poker 2 18.95 Backgammon 9.95 Bard's Tale 3 18.95 El Fish 21.95 BAT 9.95 Elvira 2 18.95 BAT2 21.95 Epic 21.95 Battlechess 18.95 F16 Falcon 9.95 Battle Isle 18.95 Fire Team 2200 16.95 Binds of Prey 21.95 First Samurai 18.95 Bloodwych 14.95 Floor 13 18.95 Carmen USA Deluxe 21.95 Global Conquest (Micropose) 21.95 Carrier Command 14.95 Greg Norman Golf 18.95 Carriers ar War 21.95 Harpoon & Battle Set 2 18.95 Castles 16.95 Heart of China 18.95 Cantunon Defender of Rome 18.95 Hero Quest 18.95 G2GOCO Girlfriend Teri offers welcome relief from doom, gloom, wolves, monsters, and mortal combat Jack Nicholas Greatest 18 16.95 Joe and Mac Caveman Ninja 18.95 Killing Cloud 9.95 King of Chicago 9.95 King's Ouest 6 21.95 Legend of Kyrandia 21.95 Lemmings 2 28.95 Links 386 (Access) 29.95 Lure of the Temptress 18.95 Mantis 24.95 Mavis Beacon Typing Tutor 18.95 Mike Ditka Football 18.95 Mig 29 Fulcrum 16.95 Nigel Mansell's Grand Prix 21.95 Obitus (Psypnosis) 18.95 Pacilic Islands 21.95 Populous & Data Disk 24.95 Power Manger 19.95 Pushover 18.95 RBI Baseball 2 9.95 Realms 18.95 Rar Nebula 24.95 Road & Track GP Unlimited 9.95 RoboCop 3 18.95 Rocket Ranger 9.95 Sarpon 5 18.95 Secret of Monkey Island 2 21.95 Shadontands 18.95 Sim Ant 21.95 Sim City Terrain Editor 9.95 Sim Lite 18.95 Sleepwalker 18.95 Sleeping Gods Lie 9.95 Space Crusade 18.95 Spacewrecked 9.95 Spell Casting 101 9.95 Spons of War (RAW) 18.95 Spor 9.95 Star Lepians 21.95 Strike Fleet 19.95 Super Off Road Racing 9.95 Super Space Invaders 18.95 Super Tetris 19.95 Team Yankee 21.95 The Immortal 19.95 The Lost Admiral 14.95 T.V. Sports Baseball 21.95 TV Sports Boxing 21.95 Trump Casino 2 18.95 Twilight 2000 16.95 Ultima 6 21.95 Ultima Underworld 2 21.95 Verre 9.95 W.W.F. 2 Wrestling 24.95 Waxworks 24.95 White Death (Raw) 18.95 Winter Super Sports 92 9.95 Wizkid 18.95 Wolfpack 9.95 World Class Leaderboard 9.95 Wrath of the Demon 16.95 Zoal 21.95 Girlfriend: The adventure with 10\" commands Actually, the number is too high to count! You see, Girlfriend uses artificial intelligence, so you can ask her any question and she will answer on your PC screen or audibly. Dream up things for her to do, and then watch in VGA color! Players tell us they never get bored because Girlfriend learns new words and ideas from every conversation. Every time is! different, and there is no endgame! Watch for Girlfriend at your favorite store or order direct: Girlfriend Lisa PG-13 $59.95 Girlfriend Teri PG-13 $69.95. Add $4 S&H. Sound Blaster compatible voice add-on: $29.95. Specify disk format. Caution: mature subject matter! For FREE info on our software, including adult kits, circle the reader service number below! Dealer inquiries invited. AIVR Corp. (800) 324-AIVR 709 Lingco #106, Dept CG406 Richardson, TX 75081 USA Tel (214) 235.4999, Fax (214)235-4992 Pa L41 Circle Reader Service #42 Circle Reader Service #107 Page 154 Computer Gaming World "


"Brian Vodnik's Kingdoms Kingdoms Germany DF ILIULUI ONNEX Germany e a t u r e s Ratings from 520+ New England users group members  1-6 Players, 196 Territories  7 Troop types and catapults  5 Difficulty levels with handicapping  Control of up to 20 armies and 5 flotillas per kingdom, 5 Castle types Toggle each kingdom between human, computer, and off  Resource management of food, wood, stone, iron End of turn checking for movable armles Artificial intelligence (AI) that makes extremely tough computer opponents at the higher difficulty levels Inter 95% 95% Graple 999 Son Rating Overall Artificial Intelligence: 97% Hold interest: 955 Full sound and music support for SoundBlaster and others  Quick siege. QuickmoveTM and Double Quickmove\" which greatly speeds up the computer's turn Quick and easy food shortage/crop increase notification for faster turns  Dispatch/Gather troops to or from castle garrisons to adjacent territories Immediate/Delayed catapult construction option  Beautifully HAND-DRAWN graphics Simple point and click interface to an intricate and detailed game Brian Vodnik's Vikings Trupe COUTER L UUTEE LOG 95% ang Overall IN COUTER ICTOR CATALTM The BEST Medieval Strategy Game Series made. Period. Beslisen Tentertainment Vikings IT and Kindgoms of Germany are available for IBM. Realism Entertainment, Inc. 6N599 Pine Street Bensenville, IL 60106 (708) 595-7487 VIKINGS ITM and Kingdoms of GermanyTM are trademarks of Realism Entertainment, Inc.  1994 Realism Entertainment, Inc. All Rights Reserved Worldwide. The video game perfectionists... detalls detalls, detalla, Circle Reader Service #106 "


"FREE SHIPPING! MISSlov ON ALL U.S. ORDERS OVER $50. VIA UPS GROUND WITH COUPON. CONTROL (800) 999-7995 The First Wonderof the CyberWorld. VIRTUAL VEGAS AMERICAN DATA BANKERS PRESENTS: SOFTWARE VAULT PLATINUM Sunwar PLATINUM Platinum Collection is the sixth and latest CD ROM treasure. Includes: Games, Windows Based Apps, Windows NT The Instant Based Apps, Multimedia, Graphics, Sounds, Desktop Publish-ing, Word Librar Processing, Pictures and GIFs, Fonts and on DR Clip Art, Virus Protection, Educational, Business, and much more. $ 84 Also Available: | Windows Collection, Games Collection Gold Collection 884, each or 3 for $88. FDE COMING SOON ON CD-ROM JOURNEY INTO THE REURONET PIXIS INTERACTIVE FEATURING THE \"TFUI\" INTERFACE NEURODANCER NEURODANCER Roam the NeuroNET by hacking into the forbidden worlds of dark mysteries, danger. Use your computer and VidFone to obtain enough credits to View the exotic Neurodancers who roam the computer networks in search of will ing viewers. Featuring 3D animation interactive game-play and live motion Video Requires: 486, SVGA, 4 MB of Hard Disk BMB RAM E NEW MACHINE PRESENTS! DREAM MACHINE   TNE Wbre la drea nell dream? The most innovative CD ever! Navigate through a 3D world where your ultimare fantasies come alive. The Dream Machine's beautiful hostess will lead you on an interactive journey through your imagination. The only CD that adapts to your choices. As seen on Donahue, Joan Rivers and CNN. CD ROM $69. 196 ywu wel decide ORUTSUKIDOJI POF GIANT PYRAMIDA MEDIEVAL SAGTKEST ROMAN COLISEUMS? HO HUM. WAIT UNTIL YOU SEE A PLAYGROUND FOR BROWNUPS THAT'S FREE FROM THE LAWS OF TIME, PHYSICS, OR THE MOB. VIRTUAL VEGAS\" IS THE PLACE. YOU'RE THE V.I.P. HERE'S YOUR TICKET. Is there any hope for humanity? Will the Legend of the Overfiend become reality? From the animation geniuses who created Space Cruiser Yamato, this is the astounding and controversial theatrical masterpiece which singlehandedly launched a whole new genre of Japanese animation. Definetely not for children. CD ROM $49. LIRORSUKIDOJD VEND OF THE OVEIS CD ROM $49. An AngeVOUD MOVISOR DISCOVER 800-9007005 "


"CD ROM CENTRAL G M o 45 GAMES World Circuit Grand Prix World of Xeen Wrath of the Gods ADULT PHOTO CD 40 44 35 50 37 Fatty Bear's Fun Pack Fingers for Windows 30 Flight Light Plus Flight Sim Toolkit 57 Gabriel Knight 50 Global Explorer 89 Great Naval Battles 2 45 Great Naval Battles Groliers Encyclopedia 6 79 Hell Cab Inca 2 Interplay's Classic Collect 47 Intro to Wordperfect 5.2 37 Iron Helix 62 Just Grandma and Me King's Quest 6 Upgrade Labyrinth of Time Lands of Lore 43 Lawnmower Man Learn Fly Fishing Lord of the Rings Lost in Time Man Enough (0) Mayo Clinio Rom Mayo Clinic Total Heart Mechamander MM2 Day of the Tentacle Myst Pacific Strike Peter Pan Painting Adven 30 7th Guest 2 The 11th Hour 69 7th Guest AD&D AI Qadim Curse AD&D Dungeon Hack AD&D Fantasy Emplres AD&D Ravenloft Aegis Guardian of the Fleet 53 Alone in the Dark Armored Fist Arthur's Teacher Trouble Astrology Source Backroad Racer Battlechess Enhanced 29 Bible Library 39 Blood Net Comanche Complete Ultima VII Bundle 45 Critical Path Daemonsgate Dark Legions Dark Sun Shattered Lands 54 DarkSeed Dracula Unleashed Dragon's Lair Eye of Beholder 1,2,3 F15 Strike Eagle 3 Fatty Bear Birthdy Surprise 45 Privateer 60 Putt Putt Goes to the Moon 47 Putt Putt Joins Parade 39 Putt Putt's Fun Pack 39 Rebel Assault Return to Zork Scooter's Magic Castle 30 Scrabble Deluxe Shadowcaster Sim City Small Blue Planet 49 Space Hulk Star Trek 25th 60 Street Atlas USA B8 Strike Commander 58 Syndicate 45 TFX 45 The Horde 52 The Journeyman Project The Tortoise & The Hare 40 Theme Park Tony LaRussa 2 Ultima Underworld 1&2 Ultima VIII Pagan Under a Kiling Moon Who Shot Johnny Rock? Wing Commander Ultima 6 39 Wing Commander 2 Dlx Wing Commander Dix Wolfpack 29 3D Darlings 3D DreamGirls Adult Palate Vol. 2 Amateur Models American Girls Aslan Palate B. Babos 2 Digital Dreams Double Play 1 Girls in Vivid 1 or 2 Girls of J. Stephen Hicks II Girls of Risque High Volume Nudes Hot Peppers More Northern Delights Northern Delights Sizzle Screen Saver Southern Beautles Sweet Dreams Stills Venus Model Search 93/94 Women on Wheels INTERACTIVE Adult Movie Almanac Adult Sampler Adventure Seymore Butts 69 Adventures Seymore Butts 2 69 Buttman's Euro Vacation Cat and Mouse Condo Cutles Digital Dancing Doors of Passion Dream Girl Dream Machine Hot Wire LA. Strippers Maddam's Family Massive Melons NeuroDancer Night Watch Nightwatch 2 Paradise Club Scissors N Stones Virtual Vixens Winner Take All Virgins MOVIES Amorous Asian Girls Baby's Got B*tt 29 889889 8988 Best of Inferno Best of Vivid Betrayal Bikini Beach Blonde Justice Busting Out Cafe Flesh College Girls Deception Erotica Girls of Mardi Gras Hidden Obsessions QT House of Dreams House of Sleeping Beauties Insatiable Kama Sutra Legends of Pern 11 Mystique of Orient New Wave Hookers lor | Night Trips Pinch of Pepper Princess of Persia Racquel Released RainWomen Secrets Super Models Go Wild The Barlow Affair Traci I Love You Wicked Wicked Whispers 99B9%E 3 58 Adult Sampler $14. 22 21 43 47 45 RC 47 Spring Sale! A.T.A.C. CD ROM AutoMap Windows 29 Bible Library BattleChess 4000 24 learn Fly Fishing Buzz Aldrin Race Mystique of Orient 29 Dragon's Lair 3 29 Wing Commander & F-18 Hornet 24 Ultima 6 Bundle 29 F-15 Strike Eagle3 34 Mouse Mat Leather Goddess Lemmings 2 29 The Suncom Cleaning Rex Nebular & Vaccuum Kit $19 San Fransisco Scenry 29 32 35 40 40 34 Get the facts via FaxBack... Call 201.676.7454 from your fax machine. Receive information on new releases, Adult CD rom, specials, and more. 24 HOURS A DAY 7 DAYS A WEEK 4n gazda 40 38 43 50 IBM DISK GAMES Flight Sim Toolkit Wind 59 Privateer Speech Pack JOYSTICKS Formula One 27 Putl Putt Goes to Moon 35 Aces of the Deep 43 Front Page Football Pro 47 Putt Putt Joins Parade 33 ACM Game Card Aces Over Europe Gabriel Knight 43 Putt Putt's Fun Pack Flight Control Pro Across the Rhine Goblins 3 27 Quarterpole Flight Control System AD&D Al Qadim Genie's Great Naval Battles 2 47 Rally 40 Flight Stick Curse 45 Hannibal 32 Real Weather Pilot 27 Flight Stick Pro AD&D Ravenloft Harpoon 2 Return to Zork Formula T1 Air Warrior Harpoon 2 #2 WESTPAC 30 Romance of 3 Kingdoms 11142 G Force Yoke All-American Football 40 Harpoon 2 Scenario Edit 30 Sailing Simulator III VGA 49 Gamecard III Automatic Alone in the Dark 2 High Command 47 Scenery Enhancement Ed 27 Parallel Game Port Arborea II Inca 2 22 Scrabble Deluxe Windows 29 i Armored Fist Incredible Toons 25 Serf City Life is Feudal 40 Rudder Pedals Betrayal at Krondor IndyCar Racing Shadowcaster Sabre Analog Joystick BioForge 48 Isle of the Dead 37 Siege Walls of Rome Virtual Pilot Carriers at War 2 43 Kasparov's Gambit 39 Sim City 2000 43 Weapons Control Mark 2 95 Champions 37 King Maker 37 SimCity 2000 MD 1 Cobra Mission King's Ransom 37 Simon the Sorcerer Kingdoms of Germany Comanche Bundle 37 SSN-21 Seawolf SOUNDGARDS 45 Comanche Mission Disk 235 Lands of Lore 37 Star Reach Ad Lib Gold 1000 Cyber GO Links 385 Castle Pines 22 Star Trek Judge Rights 37 Digital Edge CD ROM Kit Daemonsgate 34 Links 386 Pro 42 Star Trek Next Gen. FX 16 Dark Legions 45 Master of Orion 45 Stonekeep Pro Audio Spectrum 16 Dark Sun Shatter Lands 52 Meadowlark Bridge 52 Strip Poker Professional 34 Real Magic Board Delta V 43 Mech Warrior 2 Disk 1 22 Strip Poker Data 1-8 each20 Sound Blaster 16 ASP ! Detroit 37 MechWarrior 2 47 Stronghold Sound Blaster 16 SCSI Disciples of Steel 40 Metal and Lace 34 Sub Wars 2050 Sound Blaster Pro Deluxe 99 Dragon Knight 3 Metal and Lace Upgrade 5 Syndicate Sound Galaxy NX Pro 16 Dragon Knight 3 Upgrade 5 Microsoft Flight Sim 5.0 49 Syndicate America Revolt 25 Sound Machine Sound Kit Dragon's Lair 35.25 29 MM 2 Day of Tentacle 40 System Shock UltraSound Elder Scrolls The Arena 43 New York Scenery Disk 34 T2 Arcade Game Voice Blaster Empire Deluxe Windows 37 NHL Hockey '94 43 Terminator Rampage Wave Blaster Eve of Beholder 1.2.3 52 Operation Crusader 47 The Dig F-18 Hornet 35 Pacific Strike 50 The Merchant Prince 40 AGGESSORIES Pacific Strike Speech Pack22 Theme Park Falcon 3.0 Falcon 3.0 Mig 29 Pacific Theatre of Third Reich Art of the Kill Fatty Bear Birth Surprise 35 Operations 42 Tie Fighter Bachelor Pad Fatty Bear's Fun Pack 24 Paris Scenery Disk 34 Tower CD Rom Caddie Flashback Powerboating Sim III 49 Ultima VIII Pagan CS 150 Speakers Fleet Defender F-14 PowerPoker Windows 40 Ultima VIII Speech Pack 22 Gameblaster Flight Light 92 Privateer 52 Unlimited Adventures 37 Mitsumi Double Speed Flight Light Plus 32 Privateer Righteous Fire 25 Unnecessary Roughness 37 Mouse Mat Single V Victory 4: Gold Juno Notebook Gameport Victory at Sea Supra V32 Fax Modem 169 Methods of Payment Victory Pak We accept Visa, MC, Discover Card & Money Warlords 2 Mitsumi Double Speed Internal Washington Scenery orders. Personal checks allow 14 days to WC 2 & Speech Pak CD Rom Drive. clear. School, State & City purchase orders Wings of Glory accepted. High Performence Operation, ww il Battles Pacific Shipping X-Wing 250 ms access time X-Wing Imperial Pursuit UPS Ground ($5 minimum)/UPS Blue ($7 On Sale! $199. X-Wing MD 2 B Wing minimum); APO & FPO ($7 minimum); Overseas minimum $30 shipping (please fax orders) Send money orders or checks to: MISSION CONTROL 356 Glenwood Avenue Dept. CGW0694 East Orange, NJ 07017 Simply send in coupon with your order! Overseas & Military Orders given special attention! Offer expires 05/30/94 50 CITACA COMMUNIQUE 37 37 43 HMS 50 Our New Mission Control Communique is here! Order our color catalogue filled with New items, GD Rom, Adult CD Rom, Discount Coupons, Complete Listings and more! FREE with your order, otherwise send $2.00. (Outside of US and Canada send $5.00) 219 43 42 FREE SHIPPING On All US Orders over $50 via UPS Ground CONTROL Circle Reader Service #93 INTERNATIONAL 20.6772-14 FAY 20-677-9484 "


"STRATEGY Home Before the Leaves Fall Winning at SSl's The Great War lery or mobile anti-aircraft, if available. Never charge forward to attack the computer's forces, but let them come to you instead. If You Build A Line, They Will Come Appropriately for a WWI simulation, the defense enjoys a big edge. The computer AI will throw every unit it has at you, so be ready for the waves of frontal assaults. Employ your sappers to entrench your units, and use the benefits of defensive terrain to improve your chances for survival. Don't attack enemy units with infantry unless it's a clear cut victory, and be cautious even then. During this period, continue producing artillery and antiaircraft, with an occasional infantry unit should the need arise. Friendly buildings are crucial to repair any damaged units. Whenever a unit is reduced to two or three steps, ir should be immediately withdrawn from the line to be repaired and replaced with one from the reserve. Many scenarios have your forces outnumbered by four-to-one, and every unit completely eliminated hurts your chances of winning. Artillery can do devastating damage to the enemy during this stage, with no danger of loss to itself. Mass the artillery fire against a few units until they are destroyed, and then repeat the technique with other units. While you could theoretically destroy all of the opposing units in this manner, you are better off thinning out the enemy forces for a counterattack. Pick a target building in a weakened area and throw every unit you have at it. Most enemy units you encounter should be encircled with everything available and attacked immediately. When confronting bunkers, bring up medium or heavy artillery units by truck and place them just outside the range of the bunkers. While it might take a few turns to destroy the bunkers, this effective strategy involves no casualties. Production should be shifted to light artillery, infantry and trucks to give mobility to your forces. by Josh Bruce tories or depots is a good decision early on. Be sure to choose good, defensible terrain such as woods, mountains or rivers between the enemy and your headquarters and factories. Once you've decided where to defend, create a continuous line of troops in this area, placing artillery and anti-aircraft behind the line, with a small cavalry detachment in reserve. Optimally, this line will be created a short distance in front of a building to facilitate repairs. Production should focus on artilV Torld War I lasted four years, caused 16,000,000 casualties, saw VV the collapse of three empires, and planted the seeds for Stalinist Communism and Hitler's Nazism. Now, you can join in on the fun. SSI's The Great War recreates World War I in generic fashion. Every scenario that you successfully complete moves the calendar ahead two months, and makes new technology, such as tanks and airplanes, available for your use. Although each scenario is different, there are certain approaches applicable to every situation. What follows are a series of tips I've picked up \"living in the trenches.\" These hints should improve your chances for success during your movement from Private to commanding General. The true secret to vicrory in The Great War is an understanding of three key elements: strategy, tactics and unit experience levels. The Strategic elements consist of positioning, defending and counter-attacking. During the positioning phase, the two sides will be separated to a degree. Since it will take some time before combat begins in earnest, use this time wisely. Sending forces to capture neutral facA simple and effective maneuver to use during this stage is to load a truck with a light artillery unit and several clire infantry units (such as Kampfgruppe Hutier), then send it running at an enemy factory. Concurrently, save build points for several turns, so that you have 150-250 accumulated by the time the truck reaches the factory. Upon reaching the destination, immediately overwhelm any defenders and send one infantry unit into the factory. In the following phase, start mass-producing infantry. Soon, Your brand-new Charron Armored Car comes complete with adjustable windshield, single headlight, and pivoting machine gun, all at no extra charge. Page 158 Computer Gaming World "


"In 1944, This Was The Only Heavy Metal Touring Europe. American M4 Shermans. Tigers of the Third Reich. These were the tanks that rocked Europe from D-Day to the fall of Berlin in World War II. The same armored juggernauts that you'll command in the explosive new game Across the Rhine from MicroProse. Jump into history's most famous tanks and experience the fierce combat and tough decisions that gripped World War II tank commanders. Take command of U.S. or German forces. Control single tanks or entire Companies. And blast your way through enemy units across the war-torn landscape of Europe. Across the Rhine from MicroProse. And you thought heavy metal started in the 70's. Circle Reader Service #150 MICROPROSE 1993 MicroProse ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. "


"instead of one truck on the enemy's flank, you overlook any opportunity to use land artillery enemy train-mounted gun will require that will have a number of combat units with or even Charrons (if the situation warrants) you send several waves of infantry units. You which to tip the balance of power on that against enemy naval units. Ships cannot be should expect to take losses just closing the front in your favor. Don't try this trick if the built or repaired, making any damage to them range. Once your forces are adjacent to these enemy still has an air force, and remember to permanent. behemoths, attack with everything available steer clear of any artillery. While proper tacAfter the enemy fleet has been swept from and pull the remainder of your forces back tics in combat are still important, adhering to the seas, use your ships as mobile artillery out of their range. The best way to deal with this strategy should greatly increase your platforms against the enemy land forces. any enemy artillery is by using your air force, chances of victory, regardless of how difficult Gunboats and torpedo boats can move into provided vou have air units to spare. Unlike the scenario. coastal hexes making them very effective as ground units, aircraft have the speed to get extra artillery, and battleships are devastating behind the enemy's lines and wreak havoc Dreadnoughts And Aeroplanes in this role. Despite the critical nature of with his artillery. Though there is a rich arsenal of weapons naval actions, airplanes attacking ships are available to the player, four types deserve almost worthless. Rather than pursue this special mention on their usage and tactics: suicidal strategy, use your ships in concert To The Green Fields Beyond aircraft, ships, artillery and armor. Aircraft are with artillery. Armor units have a good attack strength, an very powerful weapons due to their maneuverability. Aircraft are also immune from the Those Caissons Keep Rolling Along excellent defense strength, and the ability to attacks of infantry, artillery, tanks, cavalry, Artillery units come in five varieties: light, roll through trenches, but are extremely slow. and sappers, so special care should be taken anti-tank, medium, heavy, and trainOffensively, they are a natural to spearhead to eliminate any enemy aircraft immediately. mounted guns, each with its own strengths the attack, with other units following in their Begin by using all of your fighter airplanes to and weaknesses. Light artillery and anti-tank wake for mop-up purposes. Defending attack a single enemy air unit and destroy it, guns are probably the best units in the game against armor requires that you use artillery continuing in this fashion until you have as they are cheap to produce, have a ranged and air power, as they expose and air power, as they expose the Achilles' complete control of the sky. Keep your attack, a good attack strength, and can defend heel of any armor unit-its lack of speed. ers in a safe rear area until the enemy's against close assaults. The weakness of these Light artillery and anti-tank units have the air force has been destroyed. Once you have units is that their range is so short that they ability to move and fire. They can retreat control of the skies, use your bombers to are easy targets for heavier artillery. from armor while keeping up a devastating attack artillery positions and tanks, fire, and the tank's low movement allowance as these dangerous units cannot deprevents it from escaping. Even so, the defend against bombing runs. fense value of armor is so high thar the most Use the mancuverability of your concentrated firepower often causes less damair units to continually gain attack age than expected. bonuses in combat and to retreat to a friendly building for repairs Experience is in many ways the most imwhen damaged. Air units are both portant element of the game. Level six units fragile and expensive. A brand new will beat the pants off of level one units every Handley Page bomber costs 115 day of the week. So, how do you get your build points, but a mere 15 to reunits to become level six? For artillery, it is pair. With production costs of simply keeping the guns firing at any available most aircraft bordering on the protarget, but for other units the process is not hibitive, once destroyed, they are so simple. In most one-hex range attacks, usually gone for good. A squadron commander wishes he hadn't bragged your units will lose at least one step, but they 6° about getting one more medal. or good. Naval units enjoy similar immuwill also gain at least one level of experience. nity from the attacks of most land Heavy artillery units can dominate the batBy the time a unit is reduced to two steps, it ts, with the notable exceptions of Chartlefield with their power and exceptional will also have approximately four levels of rons and artillery, and also have a devastating range, but have a number of deficiencies. experience. The key is withdrawing the unit ranged attack. At the start of any naval sceLacking mobility, they cannot move and fire to be repaired. Not only is the unit returned nario, deploy your naval units in three lines. in the same turn, and are defenseless against to full strength cheaply, it will also retain any Torpedo boats, gunboats and submarines close assault. The best way to dispose of these accrued experience. Repairing units is thereform the outer shell, acting as skirmishers. units is to get a ground unit next to them and fore not just cost effective, but mandatory. Next in line are destroyers, with any battleattack with impunity. The train-mounted Now the time has come to grab your favorships bringing up the rear. By using this guns enjoy the greatest range of any land unit, ite shovel and head off into the trenches to try three-tier approach, combined with the facombined with the greatest land attack value these tips and tactics out for yourself. Remiliar tactic of waiting for the enemy, you in the game. They share many of the probmember to concentrate your fire, keep casuutilize each of the units at its most effective lems of heavy artillery and are further realties low, attack the enemy air force every range. Any force which attempts to atrack you stricted to rail lines for movement. chance you get, and you will soon be develwill have to face the concentrated fire of your Train-mounted guns are particularly effective oping strategies of your own. By following entire fleet. When firing at naval units, rewhen used defensively, but movement rethese guidelines, your men will perform as member to mass the fire against a single ship, strictions render them practically worthless seasoned poilu, and maybe you'll last long and make submarines a prime target. Don't for an offensive operation. Taking out an enough to see the end of the war. Cow Page 160 Computer Gaming World "


"The Marketplace Call your Account Representative, Marci Yamaguchi, at (714) 283-3000 x37 for information on how you can advertise your game, product or service in the economical MARKETPLACE section. MIDNIGHT GAMES FINEST IN INTERACTIVE ENTERTAINMENT SINCE 1984 Games Too Expensive? Consider Pre-owned Software  Save big $$$ over new  Original disks and manuals IBM AMIGA C64 Hard-to-find classics plus all the latest releases Call or write for free catalog (specify computer) Bare Bones Software 940 4th Ave #222 Huntington WV 25701 1-800-638-1123 Customer Service: 304-529-0461 BBS for complete list: 304-529-7050 Reader Service #45 The NEW CAPE COD CONNECTION ELECTRONIC SHOPPING MALL Our BBS is back 24 HOUR Electronic On-Line Shopping is available. Download our complete new & used Software, Tabletop & Sports Apparel Catalogs, updated daily with new products. OnLine Ordering 24 Hours. One of the largest used software listing available today. Have us sell your used software on consignment. Robert Berry, Proprietor 21 PLEASANT VIEW AVENUE FALMOUTH, MA 02540 BBS 508-548-2908. HELP 508-457-0738 24 HOUR FAX 508-457-4558 Reader Service #50 LEGENDS A RICHLY DETAILED AND REALISTIC COMPUTER MODERATED PLAY-BY-MAIL GAME SIMULATION COMBINING THE FINEST ELEMENTS OF FANTASY ROLE-PLAYING AND EMPIRE BUILDING! RULES BOOKS $15.00 CAMPAIGN MODULE $15.00 (INCLUDES SET-UP AND MAP) Introducing the Cybership FREE Software! FREE Hardware! MIDNIGHT GAMES PO BOX 280 DEPT G MEDFORD OR 97501-0019 BBS# 503-857-8537 PHONE# 503-772-7872 FAX# 503-772-0636 COMPUSERVE# 71241,455 Encapsulated Computing Enviroment. An affordable virtual reality system for your home computer. Enhances the realism of games & simulators. Why do your computing at a desk when you can relax inside the comfortable cockpit of your own Cybership? Inexpensive. Easy to build. Fun to use. For detailed plans & instructions that include provisions for a built-in stereo system, and controllers send $26.95 to: Become a Beta Tester! It's easy! Companies can't afford to pay employees to play games all day in search of programming errors. They need you to test their newest games and hardware. You can keep what you tcst Free! For a complete information package on becoming a Beta Tester send $9.95 + $3.95 S/H to: CCB Enterprises PO Box 336 Saint Marys, GA 31558 Cybership Systems P.O. Box 166 Cottage Grove, MN 55016 (612) 768-0326 Reader Service #59 GIVE OUR MULTI-LINE BBS A CALL AND CHECK OUT THE LATEST IN WINDOWS AND OS/2 SHAREWARE, OR VISIT OUR GAMING SECTIONI Reader Service #92 Reader Service #52 K UFIKIRIKLIK PAPER MAYHEM \"The Informative PBM Magazine\" Do you know what PBM (Play-By-Mail) gaming is? If you don't, we can help you explore the world of PBM gaming. Paper Mayhem has been leading the way for over 10 years by informing people about PBM gaming. Articles, reviews, biographies, PBM game & company ratings and more fill each issue. Paper Mayhem has been improving with the ever expanding, hobby of PBM gaming since 1983. Each bimonthly issue brings you the latest on PBM news. So why delay and miss out on all the fun? PAPER MAYHEM Dept CG, 1518 Adams St. Ottawa, IL 61350-4770 US Subscriptions: Single issue $5.00 1 year $24.00 2 year $42.00 FOREIGN SUBSCRIPTIONS: Please inquire for rates. Reader Service #101 INTEGES \"Powerful programs of growth and adventure\" MAGIC MIRROR I... a toolbox for your mind. E. Kinnie, PhD. Clinical Psychologist, $39.95. MAGIC MIRROR II ... experiences for your mind, $39.95. THREE GATES ... skryeing, awareness shifting, I Ching and runes, $39.95. MERLIN ... an apprenticeship, $29.95. PHOENIX FIRE... high-tech Ouija Board, $39.95. MAGIC MOUNTAIN ... weird adventure, male and female versions, not for children, $39.95. Blue Valley, 29 Shepard St., Walton, NY 13856 KKRUVIKTE MasterCard/Visa 1-800-545-6172 (after 5 p.m.) , Reader Service #48 Inne 1904 "


"ADVERTISER GAME & PRODUCT INDEX Free Product Company Page 10.1 Product Company Page 150 Across The Rhine 103 Bridge Olympiad 145 115 79 44 60 161 35 Companions of Xanth Computer & Video Products Corridor 7 Cowboy Casino D-Day: The Beginning of the End Delta Disciples of Steel Doom Dragon Knight III Dragonsphere Electronic Shopping Mall BBS Empire Soccer Epic Pinball F 14 Fleet Defender Falcon & MIG Commander Utilities Falcon MACH V Flight Simulator 88 137 91 128 80 55 141 153 110 39 Gabriel Knight Game Zapper 131 MicroProse 159 68 Mail Order Software Gamer's Gold 167 Quantum Quality 107 160 Mail Order Software S Software 154 Products 114 MegaRace Software 110, 111 Legend Entertainment 45 Toolworks Spectrum Electronics 70 155 Microcosm Psygnosis 64, 65 95 NVN National Videotex 113 Capstone Software Network Intellimedia Sports Operation Crusader Avalon Hill Impressions 41 111 Outpost Sierra On-Line 4,5 63 Oxyd Magnum Dongleware 145 Bethesda 6,7 PBM Magazine Paper Mayhem FormGen Cover 2 Pinball Fantasies 21st Century ID Software Cover 3 Entertainment Megatech 95 45 Pre-owned Software Bare Bones Swe. MicroProse 26, 27 QQP Strategy Hints Quantum Quality Cape Cod Connection 161 Products 43 Raptor Apogee Software Empire Software 151 Ravenloft Strategic Epic Mega Games Simulations, Inc. MicroProse Reel Magic Lite Sigma Designs, Inc. Keyboard Commander 78 165 Road Scholar Media Vision Corp 135 Seawolf Electronic Arts 134, 135 Falcon Northwest Serf City Strategic 143 Microsoft 48, 49 Simulations, Inc. Corporation 123 SimCity CD Interplay 117, 119 Sierra On-Line Space Simulator Microsoft 30, 31 Advanced Digital 169 Corporation Systems 143 Spear of Destiny FormGen Creative Labs Mission Disk Corporation Sega Of America 109164 Sprint Sierra Direct 115 Aldea Labs 124 Star Reach Interplay Blue Valley 161 Star Wars Chess Software Toolworks Merit Software 149 System Shock Origin Systems 77 DeVuono DeVuono 93 Tanks Strategic Games Simulations, Inc. Papyrus Publishing 58 The Horde Crystal 102-103 Dynamics, Inc. Paramount Interactive 33 119 The Infinity Machine REM Software Realism Entertainment 155 138 Theme Park Electronic Arts 16, 17 Avalon Hill 61 61 TIE Fighter Lucas Arts Midnight Games 161 Explodes the Myth Tigers on the Prowl Domark Software HPS Simulations 147 159 Impressions Abracadata Ltd. Train Engineer Paramount Interactive 71 161 TrustMaster Controls ThrustMaster 24 114 Direct Way 3000 117 Titan Games Try a Titan 139 148 112 Interface Dynamics SIIG TV Gamer Plus 105 CCB Enterprise 161 36 Under A Killing Moon Access Software 122, 123 Chips & Bits 80-89 113 Universal Cockpit and Simulation Systems 104 Universal Joy Stick Computer 126-131 100 Wing Armada Origin Systems Express Cover 4 161 Cybership 97 WolfPack CD 13 Nova Logic Inc. Gosselin Computer 114 151 Zephyr New World 98, 99 Consultants Computing Mission Control 156, 157 104 Zig Zag Quantum Quality 106 Products Multimedia Specialists 73 Please see advertisement for contact information. Reasonable Solutions 165 Sideline Software 154 59 30 Genie 154 Game Blaster CD16 Genesis Shadow Run Girlfriend Growth and Adventure Sw. Harvester Hollywood Mogul 75 171 99 60 137 70 62 153 Indy Car Racing and Expansion Packs 102 Jump Raven 106 Kingdoms of Germany 38 Kingmaker 92 Legends 132 Lords of Midnight 77 Lords of the Realm 121 Lunicus 61 Mail Order Peripherals 166 Mail Order Product 52 Mail Order Products 54 Mail Order Products Mail Order Products 72 08 Mail Order Products Mail Order Products 94 157 107 Mail Order Products Mail Order Products Mail Order Products Mail Order Products Page 162 Computer Gaming World "


"ADVERTISER COMPANY 86 PHONE INDEX Free Page Free Info. Page 95 86 88 91 149 159 Abraca 122, 50 % 26, 27 30, 31 % .. 48, 49 % 161 3 161 156, 157 73 4 95 113 5 161 151 98,99 6 161 97 7 161 Cover 4 80 89 126 131 102-103 161 102 121 8 * 155 64,65 8 intor Company Phone Number 35 21st Century (716) 872-1200 Entertainment Abracadata Ltd. (800) 451-4871 36 Access Software (800) 800-4880 39 Advanced Digital Systems (800) 888-5244 Aldea Labs (214) 235-4999 Apogee Software (800) gam-e123 Avalon Hill (800) 999-3222 44 Avalon Hill (800) 999-3222 Bare Bones Software (800) 638-1123 Bethesda (800) 677-0700 Blue Valley (800) 545-6172 Cape Cod Connection (508) 457-0738 Capstone Software (800) 468-7226 52 CCB Enterprise (508) 548-2908 54 Chips & Bits (800) 699-4263 56 Computer Express (800) 228-7449 131 Creative Labs (800) 998-5227 Crystal Dynamics, Inc (415) 473-3434 Cybership Systems (612) 768-0326 DeVuono DeVuono (800) 350-5550 Games 61 Direct Way 3000 (800) 882-8108 132 Domark Software (800) 695-play Dongleware (617) 497-1130 135 Electronic Arts (800) 245-4525 138 Electronic Arts (800) 245-4525 137 Empire Software (800) 216-9706 Epic Mega Games (800) 972-7434 141 Falcon Northwest (800) 258-6778 65 FormGen Corporation (800) 263-2390 143 FormGen Corporation (800) 263 2390 Gamer's Gold (800) 337-8578 Gosselin Computer (313) 229-2453 Consultants 62 HPS Simulations (408) 554-8381 71 ID Software (800) 661-7383 Impressions (617) 225-0848 Impressions (617) 225-0848 79 Intellimedia Sports (800) 886-4956 166 Interface Dynamics (603) 569-4638 124 Interplay (714) 553-6678 123 Interplay (714) 553-6678 80 Keyboard (800) 228-7449 Commander Corp 145 Legend Entertainment (800) 245-7744 Lucas Arts Entertainment (800) sta-rwars 165 Media Vision (800) 845-5870 Company Phone Number Megatech (310) 539-7739 Merit Software (800) 238-4277 MicroProse (800) 879-play MicroProse (800) 879-play MicroProse (800) 879-play Microsoft Corporation (800) 426-9400 Microsoft Corporation (800) 426-9400 Midnight Games (503) 772-7872 Mission Control (800) 999-7995 Multimedia Specialists (800) 233-0010 National Videotex Network (800) 336-9096 New World Computing (800) 325-8898 Nova Logic Inc. (818) 774-0812 Origin Systems (800) 756-8766 Origin Systems (800) 756-8766 Paper Mayhem Papyrus Publishing (617) 868-3103 Paramount Interactive (415) 813-8040 Paramount Interactive (415) 813-8040 Psygnosis (617) 497-7794 Quantum Quality Products (908) 788-2799 Quantum Quality Products (908) 788-2799 Quantum Quality Products (908) 788-2799 Realism Entertainment (708) 595-7487 Reasonable Solutions (800) 876-3475 REM Software (313) 457-1161 S Software (800) 243-1515 Sega Of America (800) 872-7342 Sideline Software (800) 888-9273 Sierra Direct (800) 795-5979 Sierra On-Line (800) 757-7707 Sierra On-Line (800) 757-7707 Sigma Designs, Inc. (800) 845-8086 SIIG (510) 657-8688 Simulation Systems (800) 647-7623 Software Toolworks (800) 234-3088 Software Toolworks (800) 234-3088 Spectrum Electronics (800) 983-4321 Strategic Simulations, Inc. (800) 245-4525 Strategic Simulations, Inc. (800) 245-4525 Strategic Simulations, Inc. (800) 245-4525 ThrustMaster (503) 639-3200 Titan Games (800) 247-5447 106 107 63 155 145 134, 135 103 106 157 119 154 165 16,17 151 154 109 NEM 107 164 110 154 115 68 111 Sierra 153 4,5 29 105 Cover 2 69 167 114 147 Cover 3 41 43 39 148 75 117, 119 128 112 113 116 114 115 * 77 110, 111 161 117 w * Please see advertisement for contact information. June 1994 Page 163 "


"ON-LINE REVIEW Market-Garden, Modem-Style deployment secret from his counterpart. As units were moved into enemy territory, every space entered had to be announced, with the opponent checking for his own forces in the given space—sort of like Battleship for adult wargamers. Although tense and exciting, the game was clumsy, placing a lot of emphasis on each player's honesty and knowledge of the rules. Of course, a computer makes a perfect \"rules lawyer\" and umpire in this situation. The folks at the Multi-Player Games Network recognized this, and so married the GDW board game with a computer judge to create an on-line game that could be played by two gamers from any part of the country. Players cannot cheat, even unwittingly, and the program also keeps track of every unit and its supply state. Thus, players are freed from many of the mundane details of board games and have the luxury of a live human opponent rather than a predictable Al. The computer handles the details of masking enemy troop movements, calculating combat resolution, and analyzing the availability of reinforcements, leaving the players time to develop a winning strategy. Paradrops Into Darkness Before any movement, the Allied player drops airborne units. Several different hexes may be targeted at the same time, but units which drop in rough terrain, cities or villages generally lose a combat step. Should a unit paradrop on a hidden German unit, combat immediately results, and one of the units will inevitably be destroyed, displaced or forced to retreat. The German player may only see which drop points are occupied by the Allies, not how many units are in each hex. Next the Allied player picks which 30th Corps units will spearhead his drive across the bridges. Tanks seem an obvious choice, but engineers will be needed to help repair any bridges blown by the Germans. Triggered by Allied units moving alongside, the destruction of bridges isn't automatic, but it seems that all the wrong bridges are blown at the wrong times, at least for the Allied player. Mechanized infantry is desirable, both for its high combat factors and quickness, and the Allied player can't neglect infantry, as the foot-sloggers are needed to dig the Germans out of all the places tanks can't quite reach. Hide-And-Seek With Armor After the Allied player sets up his forces, he then decides which travel mode to use, either road or off-road. This is a stinky decision, since he is unable to see enemy units. The only clue he'll have to the enemy's whereabouts is a light-blue tint that appears any time an enemy unit moves through a hex. Pretty soon the whole map seems to be light blue, leaving one to puzzle out where the enemy is. Should one move n September 17, 1944, Allied forces dropped three divisions into a hex containing an enemy unit, a lightning bolt appears and his of paratroops into a narrow corridor stretching 60 miles in unit immediately halts its movement. He must then decide whether Nazi-occupied Holland. The purpose of the attack, code to reinforce, retreat, or try and surround the enemy. named Operation Market-Garden, was to seize a series of bridges so Road movement is quicker, but has combat liabilities, as units that the British 30th Corps could advance across the line, link up with the engage in combat in the road movement phase face doubled firepower paratroopers, and drive a wedge into Nazi Germany. The Germansfre from the enemy. Units on roads are further restricted by an inability met the Allies with scavenged units formed from the remnants of their of their to stack unless they started the turn together. Off-road movement is forces defeated in France and two SS Panzer divisions that were refitting nearby at the time, unknown to the Allies. Operation Market-Garden Good wargame simulations of Market-Garden have been rare. Most attempts have suffered from complex rules, poor computer intelliPRICE: $2-4 per hour. depending on time and location gence, and unwieldy game systems. The best boardgame version so REQUIREMENTS: 386 or better, 4 MB RAM, 2 MB hard drive space, far has been Game Design Workshop's Operation Market-Garden, an DESIGNERS: Nina Lussow, Tim Thibault (IBM), Brian Adleberg (MAC) award-winning game released in the mid-eighties that attempted to PUBLISHER: Key West, FL 1-800-438-4263 put the \"fog of war» into board games. Each player had his own board, 1-800-GET-GAME) identical to that of his opponent, where he kept his own force MPG-NET Paradrops Wargamers Into Cyberspace by Richard Savage SYSTEM: IBM, Mac VGA graphics Mouse (supports Sound Blaster) MPG-Net Page 164 Computer Gaming World "


"VGA Games Bible Games (4 disks)(7120) Test your knowledge of the Bible.(HD)(CGA) Blake Stone 2.0 (4 disks)(8280) $1.99 Per Disk BLAKE STONE ALING OF GOLD VGA Games Epic Pinball (3 disks)(8290)VGA Games Ultimate Chall. Golf (3 disks) (8360)Windows Games Best Win Games 1 (4 disks)(4860) Chomp The hottest selling program in our last catalog! (1 meg RAM)(386+%DOS 6.0+) HD)(VGA) Duke Nukem II (4 disks)(8350)Plan & execute each shot carefully. Precision & depth of features will amaze you. (HD)(VGA) Wolfenstein 3-D/Utils (3 disks)(2230)Escape from a Nazi prison (HD) (VGA) VGA Flight Simulators (2 disks)(2490) ENERAL Duke blasts his way to freedom with enough firepower to wake the neighbors. (1 meg RAM)(386+%DOS 6.0+) HD (VGA) VGA Tetris Clones 1 (4 disks)(2880) CHOME 20+ games for Windows in each volume. Best Win Games 2 (4 disks)(4490) Best Win Games 3 (4 disks)(4460) Best Win Games 4 (4 disks)(9190) Best Win Games 5 (4 disks) (9710) Kids Games for Win (4 disks (4330) CBF 64268 Score 4260 Most lifelike pinball we've ever seen! (HD)(VGA) To Order Call: 800-876-3475 Halloween Harry (4 disks (8330) Fly dangerous combat missions!(HD) (VGA) Pickle Wars (3 disks)(8440)15 fabulous hi-res variations.(HD)(VGA) VGA Tetris Clones 2 (4 disks)(8510) The latest & greatest variations (HD)(VGA) EGA Mouse Solitaire (4 disks)(1930) 1892. B22a Help Harry penetrate Space Station Liberty & rescue the victims on each level.(HD)(VGA) Skunny Adventures (4 disks)(8230)Save the planet with a salad shooter.(HD (VGA) Sim Space (7 disks)(8190)-Spaceship flight & combat simulator (HD)(VGA) VGA PacMan Clones (2 disks)(8070)14+ great games for kids! Solitaire Games/Win 1 (4 disks) (9080) tel BNR store. Met HD CDAMAN 02. . :: .22 19 EGA solitaire mouse games.CD MEGA) Requirements: (HD) Hard Disk. (VGA) VGA graphics, (386+) 386 processor or above, (M) Mouse 4 variations of the classic game.(HD) (VGA) VGA Card (4 disks)(8420)Enjoy five great card games.(HD)(VGA) A squirrel with an attitude! (HD)(VGA) 99 14 solitaire variations for you to play. Solitaire Games/Win 2 (4 disks) (9870) 11 more solitaire variations for you to play. Jigsaw for Win (4 disks) (9840)Great jigsaw puzzle simulation.(HD) VGA) Word Games for Win (4 disks)(4970)15 challenging word games.(HD)(VGA) Quatra Comd./Win (4 disks) (9720)A hot new game for Windows! (HD VGA Prices are per disk and not per program or title. Shareware programs require separate payment to the authors if found useful. PER DISK* 12 disks or more 49 PER DISK* 1-11 disks 1 PER DISK* Save 30%+ OFF the Reg. Price of $3 /$309 in our catalog of Software for IBM PC's & Compatibles FREE CATALOG Name Disk Size: 05/\" 03\" (add 50c per disk if you require 3\") No. disks Shipping & Handling $ 4.00 Federal Express Next Day Air (add $7) $ Federal Express 2nd Day Air (add $5) $ Business Company (if applicable) Reasonable Solutions U.S. Only L COD (add $5) oon Address City/State/Zip Canada (add $2) Foreign outside U.S. & Canada (add $4) $ TOTAL ORDER $ Phone All checks must be payable in US funds. We cannot accept Eurocheques Method of payment: Visa/MasterCard Discover Check/M.0. enclosed COD (US Only) Card No. Exp. Date Signature I I FER 2008 SES I Order your free RS Software catalog today! By fax 24 hours a day 503-773-7803 or call toll free 800-876-3475 (6am to 5pm PST). JReasonable Sol 1221 Disk Drive Medford, Oregon 97501-6639 To order call toll free: 800-876-3475, or 503-776-5777,or FAX 503-773-7803 CGW 4/94 Circle Reader Service #157 "


"HEYour opponent is doing their road impulsa SE 22 DES CORSO Non 101 Keto often used in attempts to blow a hole through the enemy's lines, allowing armored vehicles to go roaring down the roads. If the off-road combat phase fails, however, usually a traffic jam develops. THAP LEGEND This plays out well historically, causing the Allied player to curse his stupidity in not choosing the right mode, or to berate himself for not being careful enough in the stacking of his units. Both sides have to plan ahead, making for a good, tense, and often realistic game. Terrain and modes affect the combat in Market-Garden to a great degree. During a road impulse, all defending units have their firepower doubled. In an off-road impulse, defenders need to have the benefit of good terrain, such as hilltops, bridges or ferries. The units are displayed with regular NATO symbols for mechanized infantry, paratroopers, and engineers, but the tanks get silhouettes and add a bit of pizzazz to combat. All units have their fire strength, defense strength, and movement factors listed, just as any familiar counter from a standard board wargame would. Combat is initiated after each movement phase, presented as an enlarged version of the hexes and B The Allies are bringing in reinforcements units involved. Incidentally, combat is the only occasion in which one can see enemy units. Once terrain effects are calculated, the defender them. Unsupplied units are outlined in red as a reminder, and they fires first, and he can cut down the attacker's firepower significantly are not revealed to one's opponent. This is very significant when the before he has a chance to reply. Targeting enemy units forces one to firefights start, since unsupplied units are halved in firepower. decide whether to take out the unit in the open field or pounce on Engineers were vital at Market-Garden, and they are a primary focus the hilltop defender, hoping that there aren't more defenders just out of the game. Bridging engineers, while crucial, are used up once they of sight. Effective fire will either reduce enemy units or send them repair a bridge. Airfield engineers may fix any one of the three airfields into digital oblivion in a ball of flame! in the Arnhem area. Once an airfield is repaired, units of the British 52nd division can arrive, and their powerful battalions are a welcome The Long And Winding Supply Road sight to the beleaguered Allied paratroopers. Regular engineers can Supply is key to success, which is appropriate for a mobile WWII cross rivers and canals, and are helpful in encircling enemy-held campaign. There are two types of supply, bridges. The Allied player should take regular and airborne. The Germans have great care in guarding his bridge engia large degree of latitude, since they may neers, as there never seem to be enough use three board edges as sources of supof them, and with the double-blind sysA ply. The Allied 30th Corps traces supply tem, a couple of panzer battalions attackvia the main road back to Allied lines. ing a lone engineering unit can be a Airborne units must trace to their supply disaster later in the game. depots, which are only dropped if the Victory is determined at the end of the weather is right. Many times crucial airAe tenth turn. While this doesn't seem like borne reinforcements will be delayed, so many turns, the double-movement systhat needed supplies are dropped in aan tem gives the Allies plenty of time to stead, as the Allied player has a limited attempt a breakthrough. The Allied number of drops each turn. Units out of player achieves a strategic victory if an supply at the beginning of their turn Allied AFV unit exits off the North edge remain that way for the rest of the day, of the map, provided his forces can trace even if a supply route is later opened to a line of supply through regular ground routes. An Allied Operational victory, MAP LEGEND while easier to arrain, still requires that a line of shaded hexes can be traced from an allied unit north of the Lower Rhine/Ijssel Rivers to a regular Allied ground supply source. For a tactical victory, the Allied player need only break the line of the Lower Rhine/Ijssel River. The German player wins a tactical victory if the Allied player doesn't fulfill any of the above conditions, plus he wins an operational victory if there are no Allied unirs north of the Maas River. Can you say \"Good-bye, Ist Parachute division?» During my more than 60 hours of play with both sides, I can Bridge sincerely say this is a great on-line wargame. With the variable Hash weather, landing zones, and German setup, no two games of MarketGarden have ever been alike. Any true wargamer that has a modem owes it to himself to play this game at least once. A warning is in order, though. The game is very addictive. After playing a single game, you'll be thinking about how you could have taken that bridge, if only one esclat emit to ardino NO or two small things had gone differently. Cow VASA Non-road Highway O ELET I RI C ELEMENTE Oooo3 SBOL LOGIC Woods u of Fenty us 23 Page 166 Computer Gaming World "


"19 HAVE OVE 2,00011 Call or more! USED IBM GAMES COMPLETE & VIRUS FREE WITH THE ORIGINAL BOX DOCUMENTATION AND DISKS DOUBLE DRAGON 2 DRAGON FORCE DRAGON LORD DRAGON WARS DRAGONS OF FLAME DRAKKHEN DUNE DUNE 2 DUSK OF THE GODS EARTHAISE EL FISH ELVIRA 1 ELVIRA 2 EPIC ERIC THE UNREADY ESCAPE FROM HELL ETERNAM EYE OF BEHOLDER 2 EYE OF BEHOLDER 3 EYE OF BEHOLDER 3-CD GUNSHIP 2000 VGA HALLS OF MONTEZUMA HAND OF FATE HARD NOVA HARDBALL 3 HARPOON HARPOON DESIGNER SER HARPOON EDITOR HARRIER ASSAULT HEART OF CHINA VGA HEAVEN & EARTH HEAVY METAL HEIMDALL HEROES OF THE 357TH HEROES OF THE LANCE HIGH COMMAND HILLSFAR HOOK HOVERFORCE HOYLE'S BK GAMES VOL 1 HOYLE'S BK GAMES VOL 2 HOYLE'S BK GAMES VOL 3 HUMANS HUNT RED OCTOBER HYPERSPEED IMMORTAL INCA INCREDIBLE MACHINE VGA INDIANAPOLIS 500 INDY JONES FATE ATLA INDY JONES: LAST CAUS ISHIDO MAGIC JOHNSON MVP MANHOLE MANHUNTER SF MANTIS EXP FIGHTER-VGA MANTIS EXP SPEECH PA MARTIAN DREAMS MARTIAN MEMORANDUM MATRIX CUBED MAXIMUM OVERKILL MAXIMUM OVERKILL MISS MEAN STREETS MECHWARRIOR MEDIEVAL LORDS MEGAFORTRESS MEGAFORTRESS MISS DK MEGATRAVELLER 1 ZHOD MEGATRAVELLER 2 MERCHANT COLONY METAL & LACE MICHAEL JORDAN FLT SIM MIDWINTER MIG 29 FULCRUM MIGHT & MAGIC 1 MIGHT & MAGIC 2 MIGHT & MAGIC 3 MIGHT & MAGIC 4 MIGHT & MAGIC 5 MIKE DITKA FOOTBALL MILLENIUM MINES OF TITAN MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE ML BASEBALL 4 USAT PSYCHIC WAR QUEST FOR GLORY 1-EGA QUEST FOR GLORY 1-VGA QUEST FOR GLORY 2-EGA QUEST FOR GLORY3-VGA RAILROAD TYCOON PAMPAAT REALMS REALMS OF ARKANIA RED CRYSTAL RED LIGHTNING RED STORM RISING RETURN OF PHANTOM RETURN TO ZORK REVOLUTION 76 REX NEBULAR COS GEN RIDERS OF ROMAN RISE OF DRAGON-VGA ROAD & TRACK GRAN PR ROAD TO FINAL FOUR ROBOSPORT WIN EDUKEILER ROMANCE 3 KINGDOMS ROMANCE 3 KINGOOMS 2 ROME, PATHWAY TO POW RULES OF ENGAGEMENT RULES OF ENGAGMNT 2 SAVAGE EMPIRE SCRABBLE SEAL TEAM SEARCH FOR THE KING SECOND FRONT 29 2 GAMER'S GOLD WE PAY CASH FOR USED GAMES We want your current used games 1-800-377-8578 WE'RE BUYING! WE NEED GAMES, IBM GAMES Got Something To Sell? Follow these Easy Steps 1. Prepare a list of the games you are selling Coll, fex, or mail your list to GAMER'S QOLD. call for authorization before shipping or FAX list for current quotes 10 605-334-8766 In Canada, call 605-339-2060 2. GAMIR'S GOLD will quote the current buying prices & issue an authorization number for your shipment. Gomes will not be accepted without an authorization no. Price quotes are good for 14 days. WE SELL USED GAMES 3. Pack games in box. Write authorization no. clearly on outside of box. Mail to OAMER'S GOLD. Save your authorization no. We can't answer questions about your shipment without your number! STAR FLEET 2 STAR LEGIONS STAR TREK 25TH ANNIV STAR TREK JUDGEMENT STAR WARS CHESS STARFLIGHT 1 STARFLIGHT 2 STELLAR 7 STORMOVIK STREET FIGHTER 2 STREET ROD 2 STRIKE ACES STRIKE COMMANDER STRIKE COMMANDER SP STRONGHOLD STUNT DRIVER STUNT ISLAND STUNTS SUMMONING SWORD OF ARAGON SYNDICATE TANGLED TALES TANK TASK FORCE 1942 TEAM YANKEE TEENAGE MNT ARCADE TEENAGE INT HANH MIS TEGEL'S MERCENARIES TERMINATOR TERMINATOR 2029 TEST DRIVE2 TEST DRIVE 3 TEST DRIVE 3:ROADSCAR THE PROPHECY THEATRE OF WAR THEIR FINEST HOUR THEXDER 1 THUNDER HAWK THUNDERSTRIKE TIMES OF LORE TOM LANDRY FOOTBALL TONY LARUSSA 38 TONY LARUSSAULT BB TOP GUN DANGER ZONE TORNADO TRACON TRACON 2 TREASURES SAVAGE FR TRILOGY TRISTAN PINBALL TUNNELS & TROLLS TWILIGHT 2000 VGA TYPHOON OF STEEL ULTIMA 4 QUEST AVAT ULTIMA 5 WARRIORS DE ULTIMA 6 FALSE PROPH ULTIMA 7 BLACK GATE ULTIMA 7 FORGE OF VIRT ULTIMA 7.5 SERPENT ISLE ULTIMA 7.5 SILVER SE ULTIMA TRILOGY 1 ULTIMA TRILOGY 2 ULTIMA UNDERWORLD 1 ULTIMA UNDERWORLD 2 ULTRABOTS SANCTIONE UMS 2 UNCHARTED WATERS UNDER FIRE UNLIMITED ADVENTURES UNNECESSARY ROUGHNESS UTOPIA V VICTORY: UTAH BEACH VEIL OF DARKNESS VENGEANCE OF EXCALIBR VIKING CHILD VISIONS OF AFTERMATH WAR IN MIDDLE EARTH WAR IN THE GULF WARLORDS WARLORDS 2 WAXWORKS WC 2 SPEC OPERATION 1 WC 2 SPEC OPERATION 2 WC 2 SPEECH PACK WC SECRET MISSION 1 WC SECRET MISSION 2 WGULTIMA 6 CO WEAVER BASEBALL 2 WEAVER COMMISIONERS WEAVER MLBPA PLAST WESTERN FRONT WHEN TWO WORLDS WR WHERE IN WORLD CSD WHERE IN WRLD CSD-CD WING COMM ACADEMY WING COMMANDER 1 WING COMMANDER 2 WIZARDAY 5 WIZARDRY 6-COSMIC FOR WIZARDRY 7-CRUSADERS WIZARDY 4 WOLFENSTEIN 3D WOLFPACK WONDERLAND WORLD CIRCUIT WORLDS AT WAR X-WING X-WING 8 WING X-WING IMPERIAL PURS YEAGER'S AFT YEAGER'S AIR COMBAT le availibility 40 BOXING 688 ATTACK SUB 7TH GUEST.CO A-TRAIN ALAC A10 TANK KILLER 1.5 ABC BOXING ABC MONDAY NIGHT FB ACES OF THE PACIFIC ACTION SPORTS SOCCER ACTION STATIONS ADV OF WILLY BEAMISH AIR BUCKS AIR BUCKS VER 12 AIR FORCE COMMANDER ALL AMERICAN COLLG FB ALONE IN THE DARK ALTERED DESTINY AMAZON AMBUSH ANCIENT ART WAR. SEA ANCIENT ART WARSKY APBA FOOTBALL ARE WE THERE YET? ARMADA 2525 ARMOUR ALLEY BAT 317 FLYING FORTRESS BAG BLOOD BALANCE OF POWER 1990 BALANCE OF THE PLANE BARD'S TALE 1 BARD S TALE 2 BARD'S TALE 3 BARD S TALE CONST SET BATTLE CHESS BATTLE CHESS.CO BATTLE ISLE BATTLEHAWKS 1942 BATTLES OF DESTINY BATTLETECH 1 BATTLETECH 2 BETRAYAL AT KRONDOR BIG BUSINESS BLITZKRIEG ARDENNES BLOODSTONE BLOODWYCH BLUE ANGELS BLUE FORCE NEXT OF KIN BO JACKSON BASEBALL BRAIN BLASTER BREACH 2 BREACH 2 SCEN DISK BUCK ROGERS 1 BUZZ ALDRIN RACE INT CAESAR CAESARS PALACE CAMPAIGN CAR & DRIVER CARRIER COMMAND CARRIER STRIKE CARRIERS AT WAR CASTLE OR BRAIN VGA CASTLES CASTLES 2 CASTLES-NRTHRN CMPN CENTERION DFNDR ROME CHALLENGE OF 5 REALM CHAMBER SCI MUT PRST CHAMPIONS OF KRYNN CHESSMASTER 3000 WIN CIVILIZATION CLASH OF STEEL CLUE MASTER DETECTIV COASTER CODE NAME ICEMAN COLONEL'S BEQUEST COMMAND MO CONAN CONFLICT KOREA CONFLICT: MIDDLE EAST CONQUERED KINGDOMS CONQUESTS OF CAMELOT CONQUESTS OF JAPAN CONQUESTS OF LONGBO CONTINUIM CORPORATION COUNTDOWN COVERT ACTION CRACK DOWN CRIBBAGE GINKING CAIME WAVE CRISIS IN THE KREMLIN CRUISE FOR A CORPSE CURSE OF AZURE BONDS CYBER EMPIRE CYBER RACE CYBERGENIC RANGER CAGGER OF AMMON RA DARK CENTURY DARK QUEEN OF KRYNN DARK SUN DARKLANDS DARKLANDS MASTERED DARKSEED DARKSPYRE DAUGHTER OF SERPENTS DAVID WOLF SECRET AG DAY OF THE VIPER DEATH KNIGHT OF KRYN DEJA VU 2 LOST IN LV DICK TRACY DISCIPLES OF STEEL DONT GO ALONE UN NONOOD ao o f All games are tested & IBM disks virus checked games are in original box with original documentation Call for current title availibility AMER'S WE ACCEPT ONLY D VISA, MasterCard/Discover S Money Orders/Cashiers Check GAME Most items shipped same day. $5 UPS/59 2nd Day Air call for information on Canadian shipments GAMER'S GOLD 1008 W. 41st Street Sioux Falls South Dakoto 57105 4. If you would like to use your money or credit to purchase games, include a \"wish list of titles you are interested in. 5. Your check will usually be mailed within 10-14 working days of receiving your games. Some 'wish list game credits may take slightly longer to fill. Games will be checked for viruses & completeness. Gomes must be complete with all disks, printed materials, & in original box. Incompleto games will be returned at your expense. Circle No. 68 on Reader Service Card 10 EYE OF THE BEHOLDER F-117A STEALTH FIGHTER F15 STRIKE EAGLE 2 F15 STRIKE EAGLE 3 F19 STEALTH FIGHTER FALCON 30 FALCON 3.0 FIGHT TIGER FALCON AT FANTASY EMPIRE FIGHTING FOR ROME FINAL CONFLICT FIRETEAM 2200 FLAMES OF FREEDOM FLASHBACK FLIGHT OF INTRUDER FLIGHT SIMULATOR 4 0 FLIGHT SIMULATOR 50 FLOOR 13 FOUNTAIN OF DREAMS FOUR CRYSTALS TRAZER FREDDY PHARKAS FATA FREE DC FRONT PAGE FB PRO FRONT PAGE FOOTBALL FULL METAL PLANET FUTURE WARS GABRIEL KNIGHT GARY GRIGSBY PACIFIC GATEWAY GATEWAY 2 HOMEWALD GATEWAY SAVAGE FATA GENGHIS KHAN GHOSTS & GOBLINS GLOBAL CONQUEST GLOBAL EFFECT GOBLINS.VGA GOBLIHINS 2 -VGA GODFATHER GOLD OF AZTECS GOLD OF THE AMERICAS GOLD RUSH GRAIL QUEST GRANDSLAM BRIDGE GREAT NAVAL BATTLES GREAT NG AMERICA ATL GREAT NG SUPER SHIPS GREENS GUNBOAT GUNSHIP 2000 SCENDSK GUNSHIP ISLAND OF OR BRAIN VGA JACK NICKLAUS SE CRS JACK NICKLAUS SIGNATU JACK NICKLAUS UNL GOLF JAMES BOND STEALTH JCK NICKLAUS GATST 18 JET FIGHTER 2 MISSION JET FIGHTER 2.0 JOE MONTANA FOOTBALL JONES IN THE FAST LANE JUMP JET KEYS TO MARAMON KGB KILLING CLOUD KING'S QUEST 4. EGA KING'S QUEST 5. VGA KING'S QUEST 6 VGA KNIGHTS OF THE SKY KOSHAN CONSPIRACY L'EMPEREUR LAKERS VS CELTICS LAND SEA AIR TAILOGY LANDS OF LORE LASER SOUAD LEATHER GODDESSES 2 LEGACY REALM OF TERR LEGEND OF FAERGMAIL LEGEND OF KYRANDIA LEGENDS OF VALOR LEISURE SUIT LARRY 5 LEMMINGS LEMMINGS 2 LEXICROSS [ ATTACK CHOPPER LIGHTSPEED LINE IN THE SAND LINKS 386 PRO LINKS GOLF LORD OF THE RINGS 2 LOST ADMIRAL ENHANCED LOST FILES SHERLOCK LOST IN LA LOST IN TIME LUNAR COMMAND MADDEN FOOTBALL 1 MADDEN FOOTBALL 2 MAELSTROM MAGIC CANDLE 1 MAGIC CANDLE 2 MAGIC CANDLE 3 ML BASEBALL GMOWNER ML BASEBALL MANAGERS ML FOOTBALL 2 ML FOOTBALL DELUXE MONKEY ISLAND 2 MONKEY ISLAND VGA MOONBASE MURDER NASCAR CHALLENGE NFL 94 FOOTBALL NFL COACH'S CLUB NFL FOOTBALL NFL PRO LEAGUE FB 91 NFL PRO LEAGUE FB 92 NFL PRO LEAGUE FB 93 NFL VIDEO FOOTBALL NIGHTBREED NO GREATER GLORY NOVA 9 VGA OBITUS OIL'S WELL OPERATION COMBAT OUT OF THIS WORLD OVERLORD PALADIN 2 PAPERBOY 2 PATRIOT PERFECT GENERAL PIRATES PLANET'S EDGE PLAYMAKER FOOTBALL POLICE QUEST 1 VGA POLICE QUEST 3.VGA POLICE OUEST 4 POOL OF RADIANCE POOLS OF DARKNESS POPULOUS POPULOUS 2 POWER HITS MOVIES POWER HITS SCIFI POWER HITS SPORTS POWERHITS BATTLETEC POWERMONGER PRINCE OF PERSIA PRINCE OF PERSIA 2 PRIVATEER PRO LEAGUE BASEBALL PROPHECY 1 PROPHECY OF SHADOW PROTOSTAR SECRET OF SILVER BLADE SECRET WEAPONS EXPAN SECRET WEAPONS LUFTW SENTINEL WORLDS SHADOW CASTER SHADOW OF YSERBIUS SHADOW PRESIDENT SHADOW SOACERER SHADOWGATE WIN SHADOWLANDS SHERLOCK HOLMES -CD SHUTTLE SIEGE SIEGE EXP DOGS OF WAR SIERRA ADV BUNDLE SIERRA FAMILY FUN PK SILENT SERVICE 2 SILPHEED SIM ANT SIM CITY SIM CITY GRAPHICS SET 1 SIM CITY GRAPHICS SET 2 SIM CITY TERRAIN EDIT SIM EARTH SIM LIFE SKATE OR DIE SOLITAIRE'S JOURNEY SORCERIAN SPACE 1889 SPACE HULK SPACE QUEST 1 VGA SPACE QUEST 2 EGA SPACE QUEST 3 SPACE QUEST 4. VGA SPACE OUEST 5 VGA SPACE QUEST BUNDLE SPACE ROGUE SPACEWARD HO! SPACEWRECKED SPEAR OF DESTINY SPECIAL FORCES SPECTRE SPELLCASTING 101 SPELLCASTING 201 SPELLCASTING 30: SPELLCRAFT ASPECT SPELLJAMMER PIRATES SPIRIT OF EXCALIBUR STAR CONTROL STAR CONTROL 2 Prices & availability subject to change Call Tall Free for current ttles and those not listed-wele pot lots more! Al Used Games are complete & vnus free with original bax, documentation & disks. Sys. tem compatibility is not guaranteed. Al sales are final-defective games replaced with same title. Free shipping (Regular Ground) in the continental USA on orders over $150. ANNN wBuy& SELL "


"Taking  Yeur N PAY 29850 Savel Expert Software P.O. Box 144506 Coral Gables, FL 33114-4506 (305) 448-2074 EXPERT BINGO: Now you can shout «Bingo» in the privacy of your own home with this Windows program, an accurate recreation of the \"gambling\" game for the slower set. You can play several varieties of Bingo for $10 a card (in virtual money, of course), though the program doesn't allow you to input your own home variants. While your home Bingo hall may lack the Sisters of The Sacred Heart, the digitized female voice that calls out the numbers does a passable imitation. IBM Windows ($14.95). Circle Reader Service # 3. Replay A quick look at titles now appearing on a store shelf near you Links Castle Pines Golf Froggman Software PO Box 144506 Miami, FL 33114-9776 (305) 567-1363 Who Shot Johnny Rock? Access Software, Inc. 4910 West Amelia Earhart Dr. Salt Lake City, UT 84116 (800) 800-4880 LINKS CASTLE PINES GOLF: More than a year since it shattered the existing conventions of computer golf, Links 386 still seems ahead of the times technologically, Early courses in the series were somewhat easy to play, once you got a handle on the game system. Castle Pines, though, is a very difficult course even for the seasoned linkster. The computer version is quite faithful to the Jack Nicklaus-designed course layout, and features the longest hole—some 644 yards-to be found on the PGA tour. Bunkers, menacing trees, water traps and other pitfalls rendered in photo-realistic detail await the computer golf enthusiast. IBM ($24.95). Circle Reader Service # 1. WWww COD UINGOTU INIGO ULINGO BINGO wa mooom lammatomoa mums mmmm Nem Em9wmm Duo PINBALL 2000: Froggman's digital steel ball package is actually a budget version of 21st Century's Pinball Dreams, offering two of the four pinball tables included in Pinball Dreams at half the price. Rocket, a descendant of 70s-era pinball machines, is the more challenging of the two included, with a straightforward design that emphasizes bumpers and targets. Graveyard is more modern in its design with its two looping ramps. Both tables are seen through smooth-scrolling views, and offer the obligatory TILT function. In all, Pinball 2000 is an average title at a better than average price. IBM ($14.95). Circle Reader Service # 4. OZ-BHH Expert Bingo American Laser Games 4801 Lincoln Rd. NE Albuquerque, NM 87109 (800) 863-4263 POP 17 Koei Corporation 1350 Bayshore Highway, # 540 Burlingame, CA 94010 (415) 348-0500 Pinball 2000 WHO SHOT JOHNNY ROCK?: They call her Red. She was Johnny Rock's girlfriend, his fiancée. That's how we met. It seems that Johnny got in with some bad company, four creeps to be exact. He had the goods on one of them, so they decided to ventilate his carcass. End one singing career. Now it's my job to solve the crime, get past the goons protecting these four \"upstanding\" citizens, and find out Who Shot Johnny Rock?. American Laser Games follows up Mad Dog McCree with another point-n-shoot game, only this time you are cast in the role of a prohibition-era gumshoe trying to solve a crime and stay alive. Sharp wits will help, but a quick draw with a mouse will serve you best. The storyline and acting are decent for this sort of game, but the gameplay is simplistic to the extreme. IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #2. OK GENGHIS KHAN II—CLAN OF THE GRAY WOLF: This game is more than just Genghis Khan with a face-lift; it sports a much stronger Al, with some of your enemies hostile, some intellectual. Instead of the four leaders of the first version, you may now select from 15, all with role-playing-like attributes. Advisors are quite eclectic: you may debate with Thomas Aquinas, drink tea with Marco Polo, or share mutton with Robin Hood. Novice Khans may vent their conquering spleen on Mongolia in the basic scenario, but the true challenge for the veteran wargamer is the World Conquest scenarios, wherein you try to unite all of Eurasia under your benevolent rule. Retaining the combative core of its previous edition, this version now offers 16 different unit types. Samurai are as tough as IZNA-zony J Dirt Genghis Khan 11—Clan Of The Gray Wolf Page 168 Computer Gaming World "


"BRING YOUR FAVORITE GAMES TO LIFE ON THE BIG SCREEN! TM GAME ZAPPER ZAPS COMPUTER GAMES FROM PCS TO BIG-SCREEN TVS! LIMITED TIME OFFER! These sensational computer games are FREE-a $150 value-inside every GAME ZAPPER package! Prince of Persia Jet Fighter IT Spectre Challenger\" GAME ZAPPER turns your living room into a virtual reality gameroom by boosting your favorite PC games from your VGA monitor onto your big-screen TV. GAME ZAPPER converts your PC's VGA output to a video signal and supports 640x480 VGA resolution. So plug in GAME ZAPPER — your favorite games will be larger than life! ERGIERU DEAR KOMMTI1311 by Brderbund by Velocity by Velocity Recomntended for DOS applications only Circle Reader Service #39 ADS ADVANCED DIGITAL SYSTEMS 20204 State Rd. Cerritos, CA 90701 (310)865-1432 (3101809-6144 (Fax) (800)888-5244 Available at:  Best Buy.CompUSA. Computability Computer City  Computer Express Egghead Software Fry's Electronics Insight J.D.R. Micro Center Tiger Software USA Flex "


"fie pred Datian birenters in der NRWIEDER SO ZE ZERS they were historically, Knights charge courageously, and elephants trample everything. Still, the star here is the Mongol cavalry, possibly the greatest mobile strike force in history, which gives Medieval fans and Panzer freaks alike plenty to enjoy. IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service # 5. aren't enough games for their OS of choice. Well, the creator of that OS, Microsoft, is trying to do something about that with their relatively new Microsoft Home line. The larest releases from that line include three new Microsoft Golf courses that are sure to put some fire under golfers irons. Banff Springs puts the Canadian Rockies in your picture window. For those preferring a course nearer sea level, Pinehurst offers the masterpiece of Donald Ross, without the usual 60-day waiting period for reservations. Of all the courses, Mauna Kea is the most exotic. Its Hawaiian beauty hides a difficult course, quite unlike the others, and is a good choice with which to impress the neighbors. The interface is elegant, and the game's pro tips and different camera angles add to the enjoyment. IBM ($24.95). Circle Reader Service # 8. SimCity 2000 Scenarios Volume 1 -Great Disasters gecerted 200 SC STEEL SHEENA . OPET SPLS 1 MAG SPL VILL SPLS SFL POS S 1 ATT FOS KETIOLE Maxis Software 2 Theatre Square, Suite 230 Orinda, CA 94563-3346 (800) 33-MAXIS SIMCITY 2000 SCENARIOS VOL. 1GREAT DISASTERS: Although Maxis prefers to call it a \"software toy,\" SimCity 2000 nonetheless offers quite a challenge for any gamer. The detailed graphic worlds in this package open up 10 new urban vistas for your entertainment, each with its own unique disaster. Some, like volcano eruprions in Portland, are natural; more man-made calamities include riots, pollution, and a nuclear meltdown (for those who missed The China Syndrome on cable). There is even a trendy earthquake and fire in California. While some may tire of being, in effect, humanity's janitor, most gamers will jump at the chance to deal with UFO invasions and eruptions of the volcanic kind. IBM, Mac (24.95). Circle Reader Service # 6. SHEENA MAG   27 Rodes Origin Systems, Inc. 12940 Research Blvd. Austin, TX 78750 (512) 335-5200 Disciples of Steel P Swing Control SM In th OO ON Custom CAD pod Swing ULTIMA VIII PAGAN: In a notable departure from previous Ultimas, Ultima VIII Pagan leaps forward in technology but drops, in favor, some traditional baggage that Ultima fans have grown fond of lugging around. Though the imagery is gorgeous and the perspective improved, the Avatar's interaction with the world more resembles Prince of Persia than anything the previous Ultimas have offered. Also lost in the transformation are all previous companions, and the ability to travel to different towns and sail the seas. While the graphics and digital audio have increased in quality, the world itself has grown smaller. Those who find their greatest pleasure in visuals and action sequences will be pleasantly surprised, as may be those new to the lands of Britannia, but traditional RPGers and longtime Avatars may find more vices than virtues in Lord British's latest effort. IBM ($79.95, Speech Pack $24.95). Circle Reader Service # 9. Megasoft Entertainment 137 West Bay Area Webster, TX 77598 (713) 554-7137 DISCIPLES OF STEEL: Perhaps this game might be more appropriately titled Disciples of Stainless Steel, because it appears to be a role-playing game with the kitchen sink thrown in. Long time role-players will recognize elements from all of the major games of the past decade. The combat system will instantly bring SSI's Gold Box engine to mind. The main interface is somewhat akin to Crusaders of the Dark Savant, while the documentation has a certain Wizardry I element of discovery to it. The usual table of party members has been widened somewhat to include a party of eight, with a variety of skills and classes to choose from. Beyond the typical party concerns, the game also has a broader strategic element, as you can raise armies to conquer and control castles. IBM ($59.95). Circle Reader Service # 7. Microsoft Golf Course Disks Ultima VIII Pagan PS000 Sanctuary Woods 1875 South Grant St. San Mateo, CA 94402 (415) 578-6340 DENNIS MILLER—THAT'S NEWS TO ME: It's ironic that a comedian known for puncturing the puffed up egos of the rich and famous would come in an oversized package largely filled with air. Dennis Miller stars in an \"interactive\" comedic monologue (a direct spin-off of Miller's stint as Saturday Night Live's newscaster) where you play the producer, selecting which of the many Dennis Miller jokes you wish to hear. The wittiWORLD NEWS Bush in Somalia Japanese Princess kard Mock Cate Microsoft Corporation One Microsoft Way Redmond, WA 98052-6399 (206) 882-8080 MICROSOFT GOLF COURSE DISKS: Windows users often complain that there 110111 FOTODE Dennis Miller-That's News To Me Page 170 Computer Gaming World "


"The Most Thrilling Animated Chess Game In The Galaxy! Wun DODAN 8 Now available in this galaxy for IBM PC and compatibles and MPC CD-ROM THE SOFTWARE TOOLWORKS TAR WARS. CHEST Combine Star Wars characters with one of the oldest strategy games in the world and you get the Software Toolworks' Star Wars Chess the most thrilling animated chess game in the galaxy! It's your turn to pit yourself against the dark side... and may the Force be with you! Up to 72 animated 3-D capture sequences! Relive battles The Force is with you! between the Rebel Alliance and the evil Empire through astounding original artwork and a powerful chess program. It's like making your own Star Wars movie on a chessboard! Through dazzling animation, Leia, Luke, C-3PO, Darth Vader and other characters you love come to life in brilliant 3-D sequences. Up to 72 unique capture moves and authentic Star Wars music and sound effects make this a chess program like no other in the universe. THE SOFTWARE TOOKWORKS For the store nearest you or to buy, call 1-800-234-3088 THE SOFTWARE TOOLWORKS STAR WARS CHESS are copyright 1903c s Entertainment Company. All Rights Reserved. Used Under Authorization. STAR WARS is a registered trademark of Lucasfilm Lud. Underlying computer code 1993 The Software Toolworks, Inc. All Rights Reserved. The Software Toolworks is a registered trademark of The Software Toolworks, Inc. IBM a registered trademark of International Husiness Machines Corporation Circle Reader Service #116 "


"cisms encompass Sports, World News, Politics and Show Biz (with the inevitable Clinton and Buffalo Bills jokes) and are organized by month, category and specific news story. The more than 200 bits showcase Miller's sardonic style, although this material, being based on headline news from 1993, may not tickle quite as much now as it would have a year ago. IBM CD-ROM and Mac CDROM ($29.95). Circle Reader Service # 10. Sierra On-Line, Inc. P.O. Box 485 Coarsegold, CA 93614 (800) 757-7707 SIS more GOBLINS QUEST 3: In keeping with the charm, wit, and animated antics characteristic of the first two games in the series, Goblins Quest 3 is designed to thoroughly amuse and puzzle all who ser foor into this zany world. The unlikely hero in this offshoot of the Goblins tale is Blount, a journalist by trade and an adventurer by heart. With a strong desire to frequent faraway lands, this headstrong writer and hard-headed goblin sets off for Foliandre Mountain in search of a famous artifact thought to bestow special pleasures upon the individual who rerurns it to his people—the Jewel of the World. In the course of his quest, Blount changes from weakling to strapping hero as he alters size, sprouts wings, and transforms into a werewolf. Puzzle lovers are guaranteed an enjoyably bizarre experience. IBM CD-ROM ($29.95). Circle Reader Service # 11. Villa Crespo Software, Inc. 1725 McGovern St. Highland Park, IL 60035 (708) 433-0500 ARCADE ACTION KIT: Villa Crespo has gathered five action games previously sold separately in their Coffee Break series into one budget-ware box. International Ninja Rabbits is a cartoonish spoof/imitation of the Goblins Quest 3 Street Fighter games. Canyon Capers and Demon Blue are your typical scrolling-runningjumping-dying-a-lot games. More of the classic arcade style can be found in Turn n' Burn, an Asteroids wannabe. Space Vegetables' silly plotline has you harvesting colorful and improbable extra-terrestrial fauna to fill the starving bellies back on earth, and sports a more professional look than the rest of this budget-ware collection. All of these games run in the lower-end of the quality spectrum, but action lovers may not be able to resist the Gettysburg Multimedia Battle Simulation value. IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service # 13. ELEMENTS LOGIC: Another in the seemingly endless maze of maze games, this one requires you to maneuver a spherical \"element\" through several mazes on a number of levels. You are confronted by locked doors and insidious traps that can swallow your brave element before it even has the chance to run out of energy, but the mazes 000037 are filled with colored keys, extra energy and life pills, and point spaces galore. Should you Arcade Action Kit find yourself in a no-win situation in any maze you can always hit the Suicide key to start over. Whatever would the Senate Subcommittee on Video Game Violence say? IBM ($29.95). Circle Reader Service # 14. ELE GAMES MAGAZINE PRESENTS WORD PUZZLES: The monthly magazine for puzzle players comes to the computer in SCOREZOBOARD? ?an interactive, user-friendly form. For traditionalists, there are the classic crossword puzzles, but the more adventurous will find the Elements Logic Double Crosses a worthy challenge. Closet code-breakers will find no embarrassment in IFE WO the time pressure of Cryptograms, while the COLUMOLLA LAN LULU more casually puzzle-minded can while away U OMBLE their time with amusing Quote Boxes. All the ICHTHTHAVILLE, N EAA. puzzles are graphically enhanced, with lots of POOL colorful screens adding splash to the tranquil BITTOHTO pool of the puzzler's mind. With over 200 puzzles included, it's comforting to know that you can't wear out your electronic eraser. IBM ($29.95). Circle Reader Service # 15. Swfte International, Ltd. Stone Mill Office Park 722 Yorklyn Road Hockessin, DE 19707-8701 (302) 234-1740 01 EDDA KEYS.. MOLLE STEVE SE Rom 2001 DROWIN GETTYSBURG MULTIMEDIA BATTLE SIMULATION: A fine example of the merging of Hollywood and computer gaming can be seen here, where Swfte's previously released wargame is mated with Ted Turner's Gettysburg film, producing a rather unique product. Gameplay is much the same as the original release, although the icons are more stylized than in the floppy version. Arcade elements, such as aiming cannon fire, persist in this \"simulation.\" The battle scenes were the best part of the Turner film, and they are certainly one of the high points of the game. Similarly, the voice-overs by noted Civil War historian Shelby Foote help bring the campaign descriptions to life. Much more accessible for the novice or casual gamer than in its original form. IBM CD-ROM ($69.95). Circle Reader Service # 12. GORINELLE DARTMOUR HARVARD PENIN PRINCETON DEC Games Magazine Presents Word Puzzles CGW Page 172 Computer Gaming World "


"* COMPUTER GAMING WORLD HALL OF FAME Welcome to the Cooperstown of Computer Games, Here, raised upon pedestals, you'll find the games that broke the records, established the benchmarks, and held gamers in delighted trances for hours untold. Wing Commander Origin Systems, Inc., 1991 Amiga, IBM, Sega The 3-D Space Cantat daar The Bard's Tale (Electronic Arts, 1985) Battle Chess (Interplay Productions, Inc., 1988) Chessmaster (The Software Toolworks, 1986) Civilization (MicroProse, Inc., 1991) Dungeon Master (FTL Software, 1987) Earl Weaver Baseball (Electronic Arts, 1986) Empire (Interstel, 1978) F-19 Stealth Fighter (MicroProse, Inc., 1988) Gettysburg: The Turning Point (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1986) Gunship (MicroProse, Inc., 1989) Harpoon (Three-Sixty Pacific, 1989) Kampfgruppe (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1985) King's Quest V (Sierra On-Line, Inc., 1990) M-1 Tank Platoon (Micro Prose, Inc., 1989) Mech Brigade (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1985) Might & Magic (New World Computing, 1986) M.U.L.E. (Electronic Arts, 1983) Pirates (Micro Prose, Inc., 1987) Railroad Tycoon (MicroProse, Inc., 1990) Red Baron (Dynamix, 1990) SimCity (Maxis, 1987) Starflight (Electronic Arts, 1986) The Secret of Monkey Island (LucasArts Entertainment Company, 1990) Their Finest Hour (LucasArts Entertainment Company, 1989) Ultima III (Origin Systems, Inc., 1983) Ultima IV (Origin Systems, Inc., 1985) Ultima VI (Origin Systems, Inc., 1990) War in Russia (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1984) Wasteland (Interplay Productions, Inc., 1986) Wing Commander (Origin Systems, Inc., 1991) Wizardry (Sir-Tech Software, 1981) Zork (Infocom, 1981) Wing ComWING mander was and coNMANDER is, in many ways, the ultimate action game. Chris Roberts' design combined the smooth performance of a polygon-filled flight simulator with convincing bit-mapped overlays that were artistically superior to the ordinary flight simulation. The shoot'em-up\" world was satisfyingly realistic in that it allowed gamers to shoot at everything-even their mother ship! The truly unique aspects were its cincmatics. It wrapped the intense action around a well paced cinematic story, complete with a soundtrack that sped up and slowed down according to the pace of the action. When Wing Commander debuted on our Top 100 it broke the record for the highest rated game and held its top spot for many months. Wizardry Sir-Tech Software, 1981 Many Formats Nico MIND Wizardry was Theron almost an instant classic. It offered a first-person perspective dungeon crawl using line and fill technology, as well as role-playing characteristics, spells, and skills with which «people and paper\" role-players could identify. Forcing players to save games at inns\" reinforced the suspended disbelief that you were actually exploring a dungeon in a real world where your character had real needs. The Wizardry series is, of course, one of the Big Three role-playing epics in computer gaming, along with the Ultima and Might & Magic series. June 1994 Page 173 "


"Reader Poll #117 rouw Top Adventure Games GAME COMPANY Day of the Tentacle LucasArts Monkey Island 2: Le Chuck's LucasArts Indiana Jones: Fate of Atlantis LucasArts Gabriel Knight Sierra Quest for Glory III Sierra Sherlock Holmes CDI Viacom Star Control II Accolade The Seventh Guest Virgin Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes Electronic Arts 10 King's Quest VI: Heir Today... Sierra SCORE 9.94 9.91 9.79 9.65 9.56 9.55 9.33 9.32 9.20 9.17 Top 100 Games COMPUTER GAMING WORLD The #1 Computer Gome Magazine Type AC SP Score 10.49 10.33 ST ST 10.26 OOO OO 10.24 10.22 Undet med RP ST WG Top Role Playing Games Chie Seun 10.11 10.09 10.00 AC ST 9.97 AD SP IN GAME COMPANY SCORE Ultima Underworld Origin 10.22 Arena: The Elder Scrolls Bethesda 9.80 Betrayal at Krondor Dynamix 9.64 Lands of Lore Virgin 9.54 Ultima Underworld II Origin 9.42 Might & Magic til New World Computing 9.41 Might & Magic: Darkside of Xeen New World Computing 9.37 Ultima VII Origin Eye of the Beholder II SSI 9.34 10 Might & Magic: Clouds of Xeen New World Computing 9.34 ON AD ST RP AD WG 9.35 WG SI WG AD RP WG SP SI NOUAWNTop Simulation Games GAME COMPANY X-Wing LucasArts Falcon 3.0 Spectrum HoloByte World Circuit MicroProse Aces of the Pacific Dynamix Indy Car Racing Virgin/Papyrus Comanche: Maximum Overkill NovaLogic Aces over Europe Dynamix 8 Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe LucasArts 9 Stunt Island Disney 10 Gunship 2000 MicroProse SCORE 9.71 9.59 9.44 9.38 9.33 9.27 9.20 9.19 9.00 8.95 Game Company #1 Doom Id Software 2 Links 386 Pro Access 3 Master of Orion MicroProse 4 Merchant Prince QQP 5 Ultima Underworld Origin 6 Sim City 2000 Maxis 97 Warlords II SSG 8 Wing Commander 11 Origin 9 Solitaire's Journey QQP 10 Day of the Tentacle LucasArts 11 Front Page Sports Football Pro Dynamix Monkey Island 2: Le Chuck's Revenge LucasArts 13 Dune 11 Virgin 14 Arena: The Elder Scrolls Bethesda 15 Indiana Jones: Fate of Atlantis LucasArts 16 The Perfect General QQP 17 V for Victory: Velikiye Luki Three-Sixty Pacific 18 X-Wing LucasArts 19 Carriers at War Construction Kit SSG 20 Gabriel Knight Sierra 21 Betrayal at Krondor Dynamix 22 V for Victory: Utah Beach Three-Sixty Pacific 23 NHLPA Hockey Electronic Arts 24 Falcon 3.0 Spectrum HoloByte 25 V for Victory: Market Garden Three-Sixty Pacific 26 Quest for Glory III Sierra 27 Sherlock Holmes CDI Viacom Wolfenstein 3-D Id Software 29 Lands of Lore Virgin 30 Conquered Kingdoms QQP 31 War in Russia SSI 32 World Circuit MicroProse 33 Ultima Underworld II Origin 34 Might & Magic III New World Computing 35 Privateer Origin Aces of the Pacific Dynamix 37 Might & Magic: Darkside of Xeen New World Computing Hardball III Accolade 39 Ultima VII Origin 40 Pacific War SSI Might & Magic: Clouds of Xeen New World Computing Eye of the Beholder II SSI 43 Star Control II Accolade Indy Car Racing Virgin/Papyrus 45 The Seventh Guest Virgin Chessmaster 3000 Software Toolworks 47 Kasparov's Gambit Electronic Arts 48 Comanche: Maximum Overkill NovaLogic Jack Nicklaus Signature Golf Accolade 50 V for Victory: Gold Juno Sword Three-Sixty Pacific WG AD,RP AD AC RP WG,ST WG SI RP RP AC SI 399943*********3*********32*33334338348 9.94 9.91 9.91 9.87 9.80 9.79 9.75 9.73 9.71 9.68 9.65 9.64 9.63 9.62 9.59 9.58 9.56 9.55 9.55 9.54 9.53 9.49 9.44 9.42 9.41 9.39 9.38 9.37 9.37 9.35 9.34 9.34 9.34 36 RP Top Strategy Games GAME COMPANY Master of Orion MicroProse Merchant Prince QQP Sim City 2000 Maxis Solitaire's Journey QQP Dune II Virgin Chessmaster 3000 Software Toolworks Kasparav's Gambit Electronic Arts 8 Syndicate Electronic Arts 9 Hong Kong Mahjong Pro Electronic Arts 10 The Lost Admiral QQP I-ORION SP RP WG RP RP AD, AC MICROPROSTI YOU AWN 9.33 SCORE 10.26 10.24 10.11 9.97 9.87 9.32 9.28 9.21 9.13 9.05 AD ST ST 9.33 9.32 9.32 9.28 9.27 9.27 9.24 SI SP WG "


"AC,ST STAC wowords Top Wargames s 2955 AD GAME Warlords II The Perfect General V for Victory: Velikiye Luki Carriers at War Construction Kit V for Victory: Utah Beach V for Victory: Market Garden Conquered Kingdoms War in Russia Pacific War V for Victory: Gold Juno Sword SCORE 10.09 9.75 9.73 9.68 9.63 4 5 6 COMPANY SSG QOP Three-Sixty Pacific SSG Three-Sixty Pacific Three-Sixty Pacific QQP SSI SSI Three-Sixty Pacific Psygnosis Electronic Arts Dynamix Electronic Arts LucasArts Sierra Spectrum HoloByte Electronic Arts Sierra SSI Sir-Tech Sierra Origin Accolade Sir-Tech Sierra QQP Legend New World Computing Sierra 9.58 RP RP AD RP AD 9.53 9.49 9.34 9.24 8 9 10 RP AD,RP ST AD SSI WG AD WG AD SI WG,ST AD Top Action Games GAME Doom Wing Commander II Wolfenstein 3-D Privateer Lemmings Tetris Classic Oh, No! More Lemmings Prince of Persia 2 9 Out of this World 10 Rebel Assault Sierra Disney QQP Sierra COMPANY Id Software Origin Id Software Origin Psygnosis Spectrum HoloByte Psygnosis Broderbund Interplay LucasArts SCORE 10.49 10.00 9.55 9.39 9.21 9.14 8.92 8.60 8.57 8.51 51 Lemmings Syndicate 53 Aces over Europe Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes 55 Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe 56 King's Quest VI: Heir Today... 57 Tetris Classic 58 Hong Kong Mahjong Pro 59 The Castle of Dr. Brain 60 Eye of the Beholder Wizardry VII: Crusaders of Savant 62 The Dagger of Amon Ra 63 Ultima VII: Part Two Serpent Isle 64 Les Manly in: Lost in L.A. 65 Bane of the Cosmic Forge Quest for Glory I (VGA) The Lost Admiral 68 Eric the Unready Empire Deluxe Conquests of the Longbow 71 Clash of Steel 72 Police Quest 3 73 Stunt Island Battles of Destiny 75 Space Quest IV Western Front 77 Carriers At War 78 The Adventures of Willy Beamish Freddy Pharkas Frontier Pharmacist 80 Alone in the Dark Gunship 2000 82 The Incredible Machine F-117A Oh, No! More Lemmings 85 The Island of Dr. Brain 86 Chuck Yeager's Air Combat 87 Sam & Max Hit The Road 88 Indianapolis 500 89 Spellcasting 301: Spring Break 90 Rex Nebular 91 Gateway to the Savage Frontier 92 Tony La Russa Baseball Il Populous II Hoyle Book of Games, Vol. 3 High Command 96 Heart of China 97 Veil of Darkness Dracula Unleashed 99 Gateway 100 Starflight 11 9.21 9.21 9.20 9.20 9.19 9.17 9.14 9.13 9.11 9.10 9.10 9.09 9.08 9.06 9.05 9.05 9.05 9.04 9.04 9.04 9.03 9.01 9.00 9.00 8.98 8.98 8.97 8.96 8.96 8.95 8.95 8.92 8.92 8.92 8.91 8.87 8.86 8.83 8.81 8.80 8.79 8.78 8.78 8.78 8.78 8.75 8.74 8.74 8.72 8.71 WG SSI NO WG AD AD ST SSG Dynamix Sierra 1-Motion MicroProse Dynamix MicroProse Psygnosis Sierra Electronic Arts LucasArts Electronic Arts Legend MicroProse SSI SSI Electronic Arts Sierra Three-Sixty Pacific Dynamix Pastndu 2 Top Sports Games von AWNGAME Links 386 Pro Front Page Sports Football Pro NHLPA Hockey Hardball III Jack Nicklaus Signature Golf Tony La Russa Baseball II NFL Pro League Football The Games: Winter Challenge 4-D Boxing Wayne Gretzky Hockey III COMPANY Access Dynamix Electronic Arts Accolade Accolade SSI Micro Sports Accolade Electronic Arts Bethesda SCORE 10.33 9.91 9.62 9.37 9.27 8.78 8.54 8.50 8.37 8.30 SP ST ST 7 8 9 10 SSI WG AD RP AD AD RP Viacom Legend Electronic Arts Poll is based on reader survey cards in each issue of CGW and published two issues subsequent. Data on more than 100 games is archived and top ten lists may contain games which scored below the Top 100 cutoff. Games on unnumbered lines have scores equal to the line above. = Top game of type. Magenta=New Game AD=Adventure, RP=Role Playing, SI=Simulation, ST=Strategy. WG=Wargame, AC=Action, SP=Sports The Computer Gaming World Poll A monthly survey of the readers of Computer Gaming World Magazine. "


"Alihat suot What You've Been Playing Lately cierrain como PC Research Hits List Of Top-Selling Software February, 1994 PC Games (MS-DOS/Windows) Rank Title and Source 1. Sim City 2000 (Maxis) Microsoft Flight Simulator (Microsoft Corp.) Star Wars Rebel Assault (LucasArts Entertainment) The 7th Guest (Virgin Interactive Entertainment) Wolfenstein 3D/Spear of Destiny (Formgen) X-Wing (LucasArts Entertainment) Leisure Suit Larry VI (Sierra On-Line, Inc.) Aces Over Europe (Sierra On-Line, Inc.) X-Wing, B-Wing (LucasArts Entertainment) Police Quest IV (Sierra On-Line). Links 386 Pro SVGA (Access Software, Inc.) Mortal Kombat (Hi Tech) Microsoft Arcade (Sierra On-Line, Inc.) 14. Links: Pebble Beach (Access Software, Inc.) Sub War 2050 (MicroProse) Sim City (Maxis Software) Star Trek: Judgment Rites (Interplay) Indy Car Racing (Virgin Interactive Entertainment) Gabriel Knight (Sierra On-Line, Inc.) Lawumower Man (EduQuest) Amiga Games Rank Title and Source 1. AD&D Gateway to Savage Frontier (Strategic Simulations, Inc.) Space Quest IV (Sierra On-Line, Inc.) Powermonger (Electronic Arts) Heart of China (Sierra On-Line, Inc.) Castles (Interplay) Macintosh Games Rank Title and Source SimCity 2000 (Maxis Software) Myst (Broderbund Software, Inc.) Sim City (Maxis Software) Leisure Suit Larry VI (Sierra On Line, Inc.) 5. Hovle's Classic Card Game (Strategic Simulations, Inc.) CD-ROM Products Rank Title and Source Star Wars Rebel Assault (LucasArts Entertainment) The 7th Guest (Virgin Interactive Entertainment) Microsoft Encarta (Microsoft Corporation) Gabriel Knight (Sierra On-Line, Inc.) Myst (Broderbund Software, Inc.) Lawnmower Man (EduQuest) Lands of Lore (Virgin Interactive Entertainment) Comanche: Maximum Overkill (Electronic Arts) King's Quest VI (Sierra On-Line, Inc.) 10. Star Trek 25th Anniversary (Interplay) This list is based on units sold by ten retail chais, representing over 1300 stores. For more information, please contact PC Data at 1703) 435-1025. Every month our mailbox bulges with hundreds of Reader Inpur Cards from our most loyal and outspoken readers. Over the years we've found these cards to be an invaluable source of feedback. Within 10 days of releasing our latest issue we can expect to see cards pouring in with suggestions, encouragements, tirades and many good laughs, in addition to the data for our Top 100 poll. Through your efforts, we know exactly where we stand with our readers (you don't mince words!), and we are treated to well-articulated opinions on anything and everything related to gaming. This column is a forum for these responses and for the results of our \"Playing Lately?\" query on the Reader Input Card Thanks for taking the time to fill them out... keep 'em coming! Playing Lately? Results For CGW #117, April 1994 Doom id Software) Master of Orion (MicroProse) SimCity 2000 (Maxis Software) Elder Scrolls: Arena (Bethesda) Privateer (Origin Systems) X-Wing (LucasArts Entertainment) Warlords II (Strategic Studies Group) Aces Over Europe (Dynamix) Fleet Defender (MicroProse) Falcon/Hornet (Spectrum HoloByte) The Players Speak \"Where is the Paramutual race game where one to eight players can squeeze the person on the favorite, beware the longshot, and lose it all due to random factors-while networking like Doom? -Rick Schwartz, Winnetka, IL \"Like A Emrich & P Schlunk, I bought Red Crystal specifically to play the game over (null) modem. I was never able to get the #@!' thing to run. I think that the Orbital Mind Control Lasers have taken over QQP.\" -Ex-Illuminatus, San Diego, CA \"Fleet Defender: Finally, a flight sim that does most of the things that Falcon 3 promised a few years ago and in a virtually bug-free format. A round of applause for MPS.\" -F. McKenna, Bowling Green OH socie USA \"The Pebble Beach course for Links 386 Pro has made it impossible for me to concentrate on anything related to making a living. -Bruce MacLeod, San Francisco, CA UN \"Just when you get tired of shelling out good money for dubious sequels' (unchanged except for Gold or Deluxe in the title), along comes MOO to make it all seem like money well spent.\" -K. Thonrees, Lawrence, KS \"We want modem and/or multi-player MOO & Civilization! Is anybody home at MicroProse?\" Colin Blackburn, Allentown, PA My wife said it's either her or Master Of Orion. Let the Klackons rule.\" -soon-to-be-single, Brockton, MA SONGA \"Let's see should I use my computer to prepare my tax forms or to play Doom? id Software is dooming me to be delinquent this year.\" Bill Chapman, Salem, OR \"A dog detective? A psychotic rabbit with a propensity for violence?? What kind of game is this?? The only thing I'm totally sure of: Same Max Hit The Road is totally addictive.\" -Eric Novak, Tuscarora, PA Page 176 Computer Gaming World "


"matches The Patch File **Rally V1.1 Upgrade: Fixes joystick calibration and other problems. 3/24/94 Real Weather Pilot Patch: Contains aircraft ID parch and fixes install problems with bios. 371794 Real Weather Pilot Patch: Allows players to use letters only, as suggested by the FAA.371794 **Red Baron Patch: Configuration fix for IBM only. 3/29/94 **Seawolf Patch: Allows 16-bit Sound Blaster sound effects and music. 3/30/94 SimCity2000 V1.1 Update (Mac): Latest version, it fixes the budget problem, among others. 3/1/94 **Terminator Rampage Patch: Allows Pentium users to play the game. 3/8/94 TFX Patch: Fixes the unexpected interrupt error message due to hardware conflicts, in addition to unexplained crashes. 1/24/94 TFX Patch UK V2.0 Upgrade: Makes UK version equal to USA V 2.0, including several new features in addition to bug fixes, but only works if you downloaded first parch as well. 2/24/94 **Unnecessary Roughness Revision: Changes graphics, avoids lock-ups, and allows use of Sound Blaster. Team stats are actually used, hand-offs work correctly, and players do not vanish when tackling, CD-ROM versions will now load without error. 3/8/94 **Victory At Sea V1.01 Upgrade: Corrects numerous problems with the initial release. 3/14/94 War in Russia V1.1 Update: Adjusts the game mechanics and fixes minor bugs. 2/08/94 World of Xeen CD-ROM Patch: Fixes the problems with switching CDs and with the boat ride into Rivercity. 1/03/94 **WW2 Battles Of The South Pacific: The latest upgrade for QQP's naval wargame. 3/11/94 Vomputer game programs have grown so massive and the number of possible configurations has become so huge that incompatibilities and glitches are frustratingly common. Patches for \"buggy\" programs have become a necessary evil until we reach the golden age of stan dardized platforms and bug-free programs (\"Close your eyes, Dorothy...\"). These patches can usually be downloaded from most major networks (CompuServe, GEnie or ZiffNet), but can also be obtained from individual software publisher's own BBSs or direct from the publisher with proof of purchase. We continue to urge publishers to keep us updated on the latest versions/patches to their games. Air Warrior V1.13 Update: New execute files, fixes several problems. 3/1/94 **Arena V1.04 Update: Fixes several map, music, scrolling and magic problems. Provides new hot keys and allows you to sell magic items and delere spells. Particularly helpful for 386 machine users. 3/1/94 Comanche: Maximum Overkill Update: Includes several hardware fixes, including a fix for the Pentium and the Diamond Stealth Pro video card. 1/27794 CyberRace CD-ROM V1.2 Update: Lowers the base memory requirements, fixes the save game problems, and remedies joystick problems (especially with Phoenix BIOS). 1/20/94 **Diamond Dreams Upgrade: Fixes all known bugs, and features greatly improved Al for computer manager strategies. 3/29/94 **Falcon 1.02 Mac Upgrade: Fixes sound problems on Mac AVs. 3/20/94 Front Page Sports Football Pro: Fixes player draft error and includes 26 AI enhancements. 2/11/94 Gabriel Knight CD-ROM Update: Fixes all known problems. 1/21/94 Gobliins CD-ROM Patch: Fixes sound card and CD-ROM driver problems. 3/1/94 Hornet Patch: Fixes many bugs and adds new features to Spectrum HoloByte's combat sim. 2/07/94 **IndyCar Racing V1.02: Fixes several sound problems, as well as more minor corrections. 3/16/94 **IndyCar Racing Patch: Allows use of the Gravis Ultrasound Card. 3/20/94 *Jutland V1.1 Upgrade: Allows non-penetrating shells, adds more graphics, runs smoother, and most significantly, includes time compression. 3/30/94. **Lands Of Lore CD-ROM V1.22 Upgrade: Fixes lockup problems on fast machines, allows retrieval of Dawn's key and allows use of Waveblaster/Soundblaster 16 combo. 3/7/94 Legend of Kyrandia V1.3 Update: Fixes lockups and corrects phrasing lised by the characters. 2/04/94 Links 386 Pro Version 1.21: Corrects many major and minor bugs. 1/28/94 Lost In Time CD-ROM Update: Fixes problems with several CD drives and certain Sound Blaster-compatible audio cards. 2/09/94 Master of Orion V1.3 Upgrade: This patch features tougher opponents, adjusted play-balance, and legions of minor combat tweaks. 1/06/94 **Merchant Prince Update: Newest version of QQP's strategy game. 3/11/94 Metal and Lace V1.42A Update: Fixes a few minor bugs and adds an Easy and Difficult mode. 1/20/94 Mortal Kombat PC Update: Improves sound card support, fixes crash bugs, and requires less conventional memory. 1/21/94 Nomad Patch: Gets rid of inventory bug for trade. 3/1/94 **Police Quest 4 Patch: Fixes all known problems and speeds up restoration of saved games. Disk version only. 4/5/94 Quest For Glory 4 Patch: Corrects various memory allocation errors and lockups that some player have been encountering, in addition to a few puzzle bugs. 1/21/94 Quest For Glory 4 Patch: Allows players to receive note from Katrina. 2/17/94 (** indicates new files) The PRODIGY Weekly Top Ten Computer Gaming World is Prodigy's on-line games expert. Look for us in their Game Center, a forum where users read articles posted online by CGW and exchange messages on the bulletin boards (we can be reached there at EXPT40B). The Prodigy Game Poll is run by Prodigy based on a list of games provided by CGW and is updated weekly. Note that it is not a cumulative rating over time (like the CGW Top 100 Poll). Instead, the Prodigy Game Poll is a weekly \"Snapshot of game popularity with gamers rating their favorites on a 1 10 scale. The highest total point earners make their Top 10. We provide this data to our readers as another barometer of \"what's hot\" in computer gaming. ENE BEG TOP TEN AANKED GAMES Week of March 24 to March 31 RANK SCORE TITLE RANK SCORE TITLE 13126 Caslle Wolfenstein 30 2 219 Civilization 2 2848 Doom 7 2132 Seventh Guest 3 2783 Simlily 2008 8 1663 bing Comeander ? 4 2583 Kings Rues VI 91623 Links 386 Pro 5 2548 X-Wing 18 1568 fronPo Football * *== =====EESEEEEE COMING SOON! EDITORIAL CARTOONS from some of the nation's top cartoonists! Look June 1994 Page 177 "


"THE RUMOR BAG THIS HORSE IS A NORSE by Willie Francis Longden T pulled into someone's front yard and chill Downs and shelled out a couple of bucks cles/robots become more and more sophistipaid the requisite $15 to park on somefor a tout sheet that turned out to be an cated as game play improves. It's due from Ione's once proud bluegrass. I was headed unsolicited manuscript talking about id SoftNew World Computing around the first of for historic Churchill Downs on Derby Day ware's Quake. So, I read about the impressive next year, just like Empire Deluxe 2. The and I had a hot tip on Tank Girl. If this filly new game engine that is supposed to offer a sequel is supposed to have an easier network was in the classic race, I would bet on her like true 3-D world and the fascinating idea of and modem interface. the feminists used to bet on Ruffian back in you becoming a Thor-like god with a mighty Suddenly, a young lovely appeared in front the early '70s. hammer. of me with a mint julep in each hand. She I headed for the main entrance and collided Then, before I could get an actual racing handed one to me and drawled, \"Looking for head-on with a group of tract-wielding Bapform and place a bet, I had an embarrassing Tank Girl?\"I told her I was just going to place tists. When they asked someone in front of experience. I noticed a woman standing atop a ber on her and she giggled with her most me if he knew the Lord, he said he did. When a fountain and the crowd was yelling somecoquettish southern accent. \"Why Willie,\" they asked what he was doing at the racetrack, thing about wanting to see some bits. Figurshe whispered, \"she's not a horse. She's an he mumbled something about preaching to ing she was a fellow computer game journalist underground comic character being turned Republicans and sinners. So, they left him being encouraged to share her latest scoop, I into a Macintosh CD-ROM game. I just alone and came after me. I told them I was moved closer to the fountain. I thought she thought we'd spend Derby Day together and part of a Neo-Norse cult that believed only might talk about Jeff Johannigman's current you could tell me who was publishing it.\" Thor could save us from Ragnarok. project. The producer of Master of Orion is Unfortunately, I didn't know who was pubTheir witnessing training hadn't prepared working on a game called Little Wars with lishing it. I mentioned that Electronic Arts is them to deal with mischievous mythologians, classic SPI boardgame designer Redmond Sisupposed to be working on a Nancy Drew so they didn't know what to think as I started monsen. He describes it as a wargame with a game to appeal to young girls, but that was a the interesting features in 45-degree view where l'opulous and SimCity far cry from the Tank Girl concept. We New World Computing's upcoming Hamgang up on The Perfect General. downed our mint juleps and as we drank mer of the Gods as though it was my personal That wasn't what she was doing, however. another, I told her that Simutronics is suptheology. The product is being developed by The nicest thing I can say is thar she was posed to be reaming up with Time Warner Several Dudes Holistic Gaming, the Georgia splattering those of us close enough to her to do a multi-network murder-mystery game crew that designed Battles of Destiny and Merwith water from the fountain. On a humid using the Gemstone engine. I told her that chant Prince for QQP. I explained that this May Day in Kentucky, the little impromptu they might even be using some well-known strategy game was sort of like Sid Meier's shower made me think I had stepped into a mystery series licenses and, on the third julep, Civilization, except that, instead of working scenario from Maxis' SimRain Forest. On the suggested that there is no word yet concernyour way up a technology tree, you work your other hand, I had misheard \"bits.\" ing which on-line networks will be participarway up the deity chain until you become l quickly redirected my steps toward the \"S Odin's right hand god. I didn't bother telling ng betting window and my mind toward comUnfortunately, my memory is rather hazy them that the game is due in the late third puter games. MOO's creator, Steve Barcia, concerning the winner of this year's Kentucky quarter. has been very busy working on Mech War. It's Derby. That third julep had my head spinI made my way through the pedestrian supposed to have a Dune 2-style interface that ning and I'm still not sure if it was Tank Girl underpass that leads to the infield at Churis more up close and personal. Also, the vehior Hammer of the Gods. CGW Computer Gaming World (ISSN 0744-6667) is published monthly by Ziff-Davis Publishing Co., One Park Avenue, New York, NY 10016. Subscription rate is $27.94 for a one year subscription (12 issues). Canada and all other countries add $11.00 for postage. Postmaster: Send address changes to Computer Gaming World, PO Box 57167, Boulder, CO 80322-7167. Canadian GST registration number is R123669673. Second-class postage paid at New York, NY 10016 and additional mailing offices. Permit #672-910. Printed in the U.S.A. Page 178 Computer Gaming World "


"FROM THE CREATORS OF THE AWARD-WINNING WOLFENSTEIN 3-D \"The graphics are superb, with lighting effects and art that could only come from dark and demented minds.\" Computer Gaming World em \"You want action? You want gunplay? You want gore? ...DOOM has it all.\" PC Entertainment \"...if you have saliva, prepare to drool now.\"\"...an absolute musthave for PC action fans.\" Electronic Games WANT TO BE A HERO? GO TO HIA DOOM is a lightning-fast virtual reality adventure where you're the toughest space trooper ever to suck vacuum Scientists stationed on a far-off moonbase have opened a gateway to Hell, releasing a monster-infested holocaust upon the universe. You're the last marine remaining on the base after the invasion. Your mission is to survive!  Four-player combat over network  Two-player action over modem  Incredibly detailed 3-D world Blood-curdling stereo sound effects  Hair raising demonic denizens of Hell  Awesome foe-fraggin' weapons Call 1-800-IDGAMES Order the entire DOOM trilogy for $40.00 or get episode one, Knee-Deep in the Dead for the cost of shipping and handling. Or download episode one from Software Creations BBS. (508) 368-4137 @ 2400-14.4K baud Canadian customers call 1-800-661-7383. INC SOFTWARE Requires a 386DX PC compatible or better; hard disk drive; VGA graphics; 4 Megabytes of memory. A 486 is recommended. Multiplayer options require a network which uses the IPX protocol, a modem, or serial link. Digitized sound effects require a 100% Sound Blaster compatible card, Gravis Ultra Sound or Pro Audio Spectrum-16. DOOM is a trademark of id Software, . Other trademarks are the property of their respective companies. Circle Reader Service #71 "


"WING conMANDER Actual screens may vary. he life of a seasoned starfighter pilot isn't all glory and adventure. After years of following orders and losing ships and friends, you are finally the sole commander of the fleet, responsible for heading up a final strike against your enemy's homeland either the Empire of Kilrah or the Confederation. This war requires real strategy, not just hotshot piloting. You determine where to fight, how to fight, and what ships you need to get the job done. In Wing Armada, you have the freedom to build your own universe, your own missions and your own campaign. A Stand-Alone Game Made in U.S.A. Key Features: > Pit yourself against a friend, computer, or with a friend against the computer via modem or network. >> Choose to fly intense dogfight scenarios, search-and-destroy battles or extended campaigns. > Never play the same game twice as you explore, fortify and mine hundreds of planets in an infinite number of randomly generated universes. > Live out your life as a top-notch Terran or Kilrathi pilot and choose to fly up to 10 different ships.  Customize taunts and controls with Armada's built-in audio file integrator and keyboard configuration utility. > View RealSpace\" texture-mapped, 3-D polygonal ships at up to 25 frames per second! Carefully plot tactical moves to stop your enemy cold but beware, the tides of war may swiftly turn your next move into your last! ORIGIN We create worlds An Electronics Arts Company P.O. BOX 161750 AUSTIN, TX 78716 1994, ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Armada is a trademark of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Origin, We create worlds and Wing Commander are registered trademarks of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Electronic Arts au registered trademark of Electronic Arts. Circle Reader Service #100 "

