February 1991

Features
Shanghaied Again

Number 79

Interplay Castles into Simulations
10

Activision's Shangai II Reviewed / Alan Emrich

O.C.S. for Command HQ

SSI's Renegade Legion: Interceptor

Designer's Notes for Would-Be Officers / Dan Bunten

18

Tactical Space Combat a la FASA / Dave Arneson

Jousting over Germany

BattleTech: The Crescent Hawks' Revenge

Microprose's Knights of the Sky / Russell Sipe

20

Review & Hints for the Infocom Game / J.D. Lambright

Electronic Zoo's Legend of Faerghail

Two Views of Tunnels & Trolls

Adventure in the Great White Norse / Peter Olafson

26

New World's Tunnels & Trolls: Crusaders of Khazan

Bonus Cartridge Section

Wizardry: Forging Ahead

NEC's TV Sports: Football / Matt Taylor

30

Sir-Tech's Bane of the Cosmic Forge / Marc Clupper

Spectrum HoloByte's Stunt Driver

Finding a Challenge On-Line

Doing the "Evel Knievel" Thing / Paul Nielsen

35

Suggestions for On-Line Games

Sam Spade Goes Cyberpunk

40
43

Part One of a Command HQ Replay / Alan Emrich

Assessing Gemstone III
A Skeptic Looks at the On-Line Games / J. L. Wilson

59
68
72
76
80

Departments

Blade Hunter: Rise of the Dragon / Wyatt Lee

No Nukes is Good Nukes

55

New Game Takes SimCastle Approach

53

Taking A Peek
The Rumor Bag
Game Ratings (100 Games Rated)
Hall of Fame
Over There (European Games Report)
Scorpion's Tale (Quest for Glory II)
Letters from Paradise
Reader Input Device
Editorial

6
16
48
49
50
64
83
90
96

Taking a Peek

Accolade
San Jose, CA
ELVIRA, MISTRESS OF THE DARK:
Engage evil creatures in grisly hand-tohand combat in this horror movie of an

adventure, complete with spurting blood
and disembodied heads. Elvira's entry
into adventure gaming features spooky
VGA-level graphics of dank, gloomy
castle dungeons, as well as digitized
animation of the bosomy, wisecracking
Elvira herself. IBM, Amiga ($59.95).
Circle Reader Service #1.
Broderbund
San Rafael, CA
GALLEONS OF GLORY: Step into
Magellan's boots and play out the trials
and glory of his famous expedition in this
creation from the folks who gave you Carmen Sandiego. Discipline, rum rations,
repairs, gunnery practice, course changes and more can be delegated to the
crew via the simple mouse interface and
each decision impacts the potential success of the expedition. Quick to learn,
easy to play, yet hard to master, this
game is entertaining as well as being
hearteningly true to the history on which
it is based. IBM ($44.95). Circle Reader
Service #2.

Cinemaware
Westlake Village, CA
3 IN THREE: This spirited, satirical adventure of a number 3 that has been
ejected from its spread sheet by a power
surge and is lost in the alien world of letters is filled with brain-tingling puzzles
and a maze of logical dilemmas. With a
level of challenge not for the faint of
heart, this game, from puzzle master Cliff
Johnson (Fool's Errand), takes the
tedious corporate computer mindset,
spins it in circles and uses clever humor
to shake it loose into a sharp-edged puzzle game. Macintosh ($49.95). Circle
Reader Service #3.
DRAGON LORD: Players hatch and
raise a dragon, the basic weapon in this
game. Then they groom it and prepare it
for combat. Magic potions and spells are
used to help defeat enemies along the
way in the search for the missing pieces
of the Talisman crucial to winning this intermediate skill level strategic fantasy
game. Amiga ($49.95). Circle Service #4.

Taking a Peek

Data East USA, Inc.
San Jose, CA
FULL METAL PLANET: The third offering in the "Draconian" series, this game
is a test of strategy and diplomacy using
the idea of industrial warfare in space.
Players battle each other and/or the computer to obtain world-saving ore from the
full metal planet. Designed for players of
all skill levels, the game may be played
by one to four strategy garners. IBM
($49.95). Circle Reader Service #5.
DigiTek Software
Tampa, FL
DINO WARS: Reminiscent of Electronic
Arts' Archon or Avalon Hill's Beast
Wars, this arcade-style game features
dinosaurs who meet as pieces on a
chessboard, then battle it out one-on-one.
The graphics in the action sequences are
fairly impressive, but the play mechanics
are frustrating and difficult in the action
phase and inconsistent with the chess
model in the strategy phase. Amiga
($39.95). Circle Reader Service #6.
Disney Computer Software, Inc.
Burbank, CA
MICKEY'S COLORS & SHAPES: This
software package for the preschool set
(ages 2 to 5) offers attractive VGA
graphics and high-quality sound (with
Disney's Sound Source, which retails
separately for $34.95). Unfortunately, Disney coasts primarily on the appeal of the
famous mouse in this limited, overly
repetitive game that amounts to little
more than kiddie fluff in a marketplace
that offers far more sophisticated fare for
younger users. IBM, Amiga ($49.95).
Circle Reader Service #7.
GameTek
North Miami Beach, FL
HARLEM GLOBETROTTERS: Ever
wanted to be a Harlem Globetrotter? Although there are better head-to-head computer basketball games, this game offers
all of your favorite Globetrotter antics:
bounce shots, kick shots, somersaults,
piggybacks — they are all here. Circle
Reader Service #8.
Interplay Productions
Santa Ana, CA
JAMES BOND — THE STEALTH AFFAIR: Essentially a sequel to Future
Wars and using that graphic style and
player interface, James Bond (a U.S.
license only) sends the British supersleuth into his element in an attempt to
find the missing Stealth Bomber (which,
we hope, the Russians don't find, on

radar or otherwise). IBM, Amiga
($54.95). Circle Reader Service #9.
Lucasfilm Games
San Rafael, CA
NIGHT SHIFT: Factory worker Fred or
Fiona Fixit manufactures — what else —
Lucasfilm toys (in either a display of industrial narcissism that rivals even Disney or a wonderful display of selfdeprecating humor) in a factory with everincreasing quotas where everything goes
wrong, the boss yells and a lawyer even
brings suit! This colorful fast-paced action
game features more strategy than a
Mario Bros. game, but may be too difficult to achieve the following garnered
by the Nintendo mega-hit (or is that 4
Megahit?). IBM ($39.95). Circle Reader
Service #10.
Origin Systems, Inc.
Austin, TX
THE SAVAGE EMPIRE: Welcome to the
world of Ultima. Here in the land that
time forgot (dinosaurs, natives, all the
usual stuff), the player must seek out the

evil Dr. Johann (Warren) Spector and foil
his foul plans. A huge adventure in
grandest Origin/Ultima style full of fine
graphics, sound and all the other "features" which their games are becoming
known for. IBM ($69.95) Circle Reader
Service # 11.
Paragon Software
Hunt Valley, MD
SPACE 1889: Using a slightly improved
MegaTraveller I engine, this Game
Designer's Workshop game has made a
smoother translation into a computer
medium. Plenty of interesting character
development features highlight the huge
storyline included in the box. The Victorian era never had it so good on an
IBM. Circle Reader Service 1112.
Psygnosis Ltd.
United Kingdom
AWESOME: In addition to the usual
Psygnosis arcade "sound and graphics
signifying action," this one is a bit different. Not only does it contain all the
(Continued on page 93)

Review

f there is a secret formula for success in creating an "ultimate"
computer game for any given genre, Activision may have
latched onto it. One can almost peer into the minds of the
creative team which spawned Shanghai II. With the success in
30 different formats of their 1986 classic, Shanghai (with total
sales of over 500,000
units), how could so
successful a game ever
be trumped?

I

span. Shanghai II, like Wing Commander, has excellent "over
the shoulder" draw to it.)

'And sound. Don't forget about sound support. Some nice
music, some 'take away' tile sounds, you know...?" (It's got
those, too. Unfortunately, we've heard complaints from others of,
and ourselves experienced, a buzzing
sound when playing on
AdLib and Sound
Blaster cards. Since
sounds were one of the
last things added to the
game before its release,
the rush work becomes
apparent. Roland
owners will be a trifle
by Alan Emrich
miffed to find out that
only the music part of
the sound support is
available to them, while
the tile removal sound effects
can only be heard through their
PC internal speaker. Still, if one
can get past these glitches and
programming limitations, there is
some lovely music and clever
tile removal sound effects. Admittedly, the music quickly becomes repetitive and might best
be left set to play only at the
end of the game, but a simple
click of the mouse remedies all.
Tile sound effects include angelic harps, dragon's roars, kitties meowing, bamboo clacking,
winds blowing and more.)

A Good Deal, Better

This reviewer believes
he has discovered the
secret formula used by
the creative team which
created Shanghai II.
There is no doubt that
it all started with a meeting of the creative
minds at Activision.
Relax now and imagine
them sitting around the
conference table, brainstorming....

"Well, let's include some new
tile sets. Like the ones on all
the BBS networks." (They did.
Beautiful VGA graphics present
tile sets which are both artful
and amusing. Different sets include playing cards; fantasy with
all of the men, monsters and
armor; sports; "wooden block" letters and numbers just right for
youngsters; flags of the world;
animals; and the stylistic Hanfuda design. Each of these different sets of tiles has its own
unique qualities which do not always directly translate to the
suits of crak, barn, and coin
(plus winds, season, flowers and
dragons) of the original Mah
Jongg tile set. Fortunately, fully
illustrated on-line tile set information is there to explain these
nuances with but the click of the
mouse, so as to assist players in
determining matches. Unfortunately, there is no easy way
for players to "create their own"
tile sets, but that didn't stop all
of the players of the original
Shanghai, now, did it?)

Activision's Shanghai II

"Right, but I'm tired of the
same old tile layout. Let's do
some new ones. The Chinese
calendar would give us a spiffy theme. You know, the
twelve animals, one for each
year." (So now there are thirteen
layouts. In addition to the
original Shanghai "dragon"
layout, there is one layout for
each animal on the Chinese
calendar. Interestingly, this includes another, different, dragon
layout. Some of these are easier,
and some are harder than the
original layout, and all of them
will take a bit of getting used to
for veterans of the original Shanghai layout. Still, the core of Shanghai Ii's success can be directly attributed to these multiple ,
layouts, as they inject new diversity into the game,
extending its replay value to unimaginable limits.)

"Wait, we can do better than
just make more tile sets. Let's
animate them, too!" (They did.
Shanghai II: Dragon's Eye
TITLE:
Remove a pair of cats and the claw marks slash
SYSTEM:
IBM
PRICE:
$49.95
across the tile. Remove the One of Coins and it
PUBLISHER:
Activision
drops down a swirling well. The seasons change,
DISTRIBUTOR: Mediagenic
Menlo Park CA
the winds blow, fans open and close, fish splash
about, the crowd cheers at football, and the
"Okay, there are twelve new layouts, but
dragons come to life. While not every tile is animated, enough
everybody likes playing with blocks. How about a 'design
are present to add true spice to the play of Shanghai II. The
kit' to make your own piles-o'-tiles?"
animations are mercifully short, dispersed enough to avoid be"Perfect." (Gee, everyone liked building with blocks as a kid,
coming a nuisance and compelling enough to make onlookers
didn't they? Now with Shanghai II, players will find themselves
stare on into the monitor well beyond their normal attention
playing with them all over again on their computer. This reviewer

Review

designed two new layouts in about an hour, one a castle with a
courtyard, the other in the shape of his initials, A. E. Of course,
the real fun is not only in creating layouts using the 144 blank
computer "tiles," but also in tearing them apart through actual
game play. Diversity piled upon diversity, enjoyment in designing
layouts and enjoyment in tearing them apart. Shanghai II
touches that responsive chord where complex minds can
embrace simple "toys" like building blocks/tiles and lend wonderful credence to the expression, "men will be boys.")
"But we've got another entire game design to add. We've
been calling it 'Dragon's Eye' and..."
"Is it like Shanghai?"
"Well, yes and no. One player tries to build a pile of tiles in
the shape of a small dragon while the other tries to 'slay' it
by removing matching tiles. Here, let me show you. I've got
this Mah Jongg set right here...." (This new game was then
developed and is what really puts the "II" in Shanghai II. After
several playings, this reviewer still isn't sure he's got all of the
subtleties to this interesting variation on Shanghai, but it is certainly easy enough to learn. The hard part, however, is to master
Dragon's Eye. That will take even those who enjoy such "mind"
games as Mastermind or Host a Mystery some time to figure
out. Admittedly, it has been more fun than frustrating, trying to
learn all of the ins and outs of Dragon's Eye, and it seems a bit
easier for beginners to commence as the Dragon Master, rather
then the Dragon Slayer.)
"Oh, great! Can't you see it now? A super-tournament game

where players try to beat all the puzzles in the least amount
of time. We can even add a 'Hall of Fame...' to give them
something to shoot for." (Sure enough, they did that, too. Tournament games are now "campaign games" consisting of defeating each of the twelve new puzzles. In addition to these, between
every three games comes an interlude playing Dragon's Eye.
Thus, there are sixteen games to complete to finish the tournament. To assist players who cannot finish a puzzle, the "Find a
Match" and "Shuffle Remaining Tiles" help keys can be used, albeit with a time penalty (a very large one, in the case of reshuffling tiles). Like running a marathon, most players will be more
rewarded by actually finishing a tournament, rather than setting
their goal on winning it by setting the lowest time in the Hall of
Fame. Still, the immediate goal of finishing even a single puzzle
reminds one of a Chinese dinner. Both end with a fortune cookie,
and it's not long before you're hungry for more.)
"You know, all this sounds great, and I think we can do it.
But the reference card is gonna be a nightmare." (That's the
truth! At six "pages" long, it's more like a complete rules summary than a quick reference card, and to make it worse, it's all
in small text devoid of useful illustrations. By contrast, the on-line
support is superior to the reference card in most respects. The
very length of this game aid almost entirely eliminates its usefulness, but players are fortunate in that Shanghai II isn't that complicated a game to begin with, so "muddling through" the first attempts at its many new features can be easily accomplished with
little reference to the documentation required).
"Sounds like we've got our work cut out for us delivering
the goods on this project. I wonder what marketing's angle
will be?" (A ball bag? Yep! Along with the 3.5" and 5.25" disks,
Activision has included a little bag. Inside the bag are a couple of
good-size marbles, one black and one white. Once players stop
rolling them around in their hands like Captain Queeg from The
Caine Mutiny, they usually read the little card included in the
bag mentioning that these are "the eyes of the dragon." What will
those marketing types think of next?)
"Who cares? Hey, guys, ever have an idea so good you
couldn't wait to play it...?" (Ideas like that happen to garners all
the time. This time, the garners are fortunate that the work is
done and now they can relax enjoy playing Shanghai II either
solitaire or with a friend. Even with some flaws in execution, the
concepts in scope and grandeur that sired Shanghai II are those
worthy of the highest praise. Well done, Activision. Well done.)

Industry News

The Rumor Bag
M

by Frank Minnelli
(continued from CGW #78)

y bus twisted through the traffic grid
of Manhattan in such a way that I perceived the street layout as rather
byzantine in design. I was lost by the third
turn. Of course, I remembered from looking at
a map how regular the street grid really was,
so I couldn't help but reflect how "reality' is in
the eye of the beholder. Speaking of which,
there are supposed to be almost a dozen little
surprises in SSI's upcoming Eye of Beholder.
That's because the company is running a
promotion called the "Beholder Bonus." There
may be up to one bonus feature (sometimes
called an "easter egg") per level. We passed
by the flagship NBC studios and I couldn't
help but play out a game show scenario in my
head. "And now, Jay, tell us what the first 50
MS-DOS players and first 50 Amiga players
who find the right number of bonus features
will win."
"Well, Frank," the familiar voice would
sound, "From Strategic Simulations, Inc.,
leading publisher of computer wargames since
1980, and TSR, publishers of the Advanced
Dungeons and Dragons role-playing games,
comes Beholder Bonus Bags filled with a
variety of prizes valued at over $100, suggested retail price." Apparently, players will
receive an on-screen message stating, "Beholder Bonus — x points," whenever they discover a bonus feature.
The bus continued to pass by landmarks I
had only seen in movies. Radio City Music
Hall wore enough scars to reflect its age and
its marquee didn't seem near as bright and
glamorous as its on-screen persona. I guess
even cultural landmarks need to have a
facelift once in a while. In our industry,
facelifts occur every so often. In fact, one of
my sources waited until Alan Zimm, designer
of Action Stations and active naval X.O., was

chasing drug smugglers off
the coast of South America
before letting me know that
he was working with some
programmers on producing
a graphic version of Action
Stations. Facelift, indeed!
Times Square and the
famous Newsday building
loomed before me. I briefly
imagined that some of my
latest rumors could be
posted on the electronic
message board that continues to post headlines 24
hours a day. Just imagine: AUSTRALIAN PUBLISHER "STRATEGEM" TO RELEASE ORIENTAL FANTASY ADVENTURE! "SHINTO JOURNEY" DELVES INTO SPIRIT WORLD. I think
everyone would pick up the latest edition of
Newsday just to find out that this adventure,
which requires the player to wander through
the ancestral spirit world associated with Shintoism, will be released in July of 1991 in the
U.S.
Then, again, what if they saw a reference to
Death Knights of Krynn on the message
board? COMPUTER GAME SEQUEL ANNOUNCED FOR MARCH RELEASE ... "CHAMPIONS OF KRYNN" SAGA CONTINUES! Not
bad, huh? Massive gold letters for the latest
gold box game. Seems appropriate.
My daydreaming (even though it was actually night) was interrupted by our arrival at my
hotel. The doorman was dressed like an overgrown leprechaun and the lobby looked like
something H. G. Wells would have visualized
with its glass and brass elevators punctuated
with neon. I mentioned the H. G. Wells idea to
two suits (who looked more IBM corporate
than GQ) who entered an elevator at the same
time as I. "Wouldn' know, mate," said one of
them in a cheery Aussie accent, "Oi'm more
the H. Rider 'aggard type, m'self."
I stifled my desire to do my Paul Hogan imitation and listened with great interest as he told
me about Strategic Studies Group's Warlords, an eight-player fantasy-strategy game
headed our way from down under. He said
that realistic battle sequences, personal exploration and diplomatic maneuvering all form
part of the game. It sounds both ambitious
and fascinating.
We parted on the lobby floor (I guess they
have to put the lobby on a higher floor in the
Big Apple so that your baggage doesn't get
stolen while you're waiting to check in.) and I
managed to get checked in and ride the
elevator up to a floor that seemingly gave me
an eye-to-eye view with the Empire State Building. The red message light on my phone was
flashing as I arrived and I quickly checked
with the desk. One of the designers attending
the conference had left me a message to meet
him at Grand Central Station. He said it had

something to do with Martin
Campion and I would want to
know. You're darn tootin' (pardon the pun) I'd want to know.
Martin is the one who designed
Rails West for SSI almost a
decade ago. Since my publisher
is both a railfan and currently
working on The Complete
Strategy Guide to Sid Meier's
Railroad Tycoon for Compute! Books, I figured he'd
want to know what an old rail
buff was up to and I might even
get a promotion for finding this
tidbit. I pulled on my overcoat
and my head bag and charged
out of my hotel room, hotfooting it past the bright lights and
street vendors of Broadway to
the subway station.
I wanted to catch the shuttle
to Grand Central, but on the way, some street
prophet saw enough lily-white complexion
peeking out from under the bag that he
pointed his long ebony finger at me and
proclaimed me to be the "Anti-Christ." He said
the Jesus was black and only minorities could
be redeemed. Now, I don't have any problem
with a dark-complected Jesus. After all, he
was Hebrew, not Irish. Still, I wasn't real wild
about being consigned to hell and damnation
simply because I was passing by on a cool
New York City night. He challenged his listeners to find their true heritage and I couldn't
help but chuckle as I climbed down the subway stairs.
I knew something about their heritage. After
all, I once volunteered for a teaching assignment in a Nigerian graduate school and I can,
at least, say "Good Morning" in Yoruba. Besides, I was looking forward to playing
Strategem's Lost In Africa, an adventure set
in the "Dark Continent" era. It looks like a
sophisticated role-playing approach to the subject matter found in the boardgame, Source of
the Nile. Fortunately, the computer game is
expected to emphasize people and cultures
over the exploration of "long rivers." That's
good, because there are some fabulous cultures in Africa.
I entered the main room in Grand Central
Station and immediately craned my neck into
a gawking tourist position in order to see the
painting of the constellations being restored
on the ceiling. My source laughed at my
awkward stance and maneuvered me into a little deli for some coffee and cheesecake. The
latter was the pastry kind, although the attractive female designer I had gone to meet could
have provided plenty of the other type, had
she wished. "So," I blurted out, "what kind of
railroad game has Martin developed?"
She looked at me with that "What bus did
you just get off?" look and laughed. "It's not a
railroad game, Frank. It's a medieval strategy
game. Just like Rails West was economic
strategy, Medieval Lords is going to combine
economics and military strategy." I scribbled
my notes down as fast as possible, while
visions of that promotion receded into the
realm of lost dreams.

Review

Beyond the
and Into the
by Dave
The Good Guys/Bad Guys references is sort
of an in-joke. Some players of Interceptor, comTitle:
Renegade Legion: Interceptor
Systems:
IBM
puter and paper versions, enjoy playing the
Price:
$59.95
Terran Overlord Government, and get very upDeveloper:
Todd Mitchell Porter
Publisher:
Strategic Simulations, Inc.
pity when referred to as the Bad Guys since,
Sunnyvale, CA
obviously, the Renegades are "spineless,
traitorous scum." The bad guys don't wear
ecret — Penalty for Unauthorized Use is Death (see TOGblack, the good guys don't wear anything but black. It is left
R-7426). Enemy agents have captured our newest train
up to the player to decide who is on the side of right, and
ing device. In their hands it will spell the demise of
who is on the side of wrong. This author knows which side
numerous of TOG's finest pilots. You must intercept the
he flies for, though...
renegade squadron before they can escape with the data and
compromise TOG's entire pilot-training program. It is
After playing Interceptor for approximately 30 hours, this
suspected that this vital data will be reproduced and disreviewer is not even close to being bored yet. Even with no pretributed to all of TOG's enemies via primitive personal comvious experience with the FASA boardgame, it was easy to start
puters. If you fail to stop the rebels from escaping with this
the game, learn to play it, and get plenty of enjoyment out of it
data, do not come back. End of transmission.
in short order.
SSI's newest release in the realm of science fiction, Interceptor, is based on FASA's board game of the same name, from
the world of that company's Renegade Legion games and
books.
Interceptor is a very detailed space fighter combat game, yet it
is not a flight simulator, nor is it intended to be one. One can
use the same fighters that are in FASA's boardgame or create
custom designs. Players may also "roll up" original pilots, create
new squadrons (at six pilots per squadron), and even run a campaign game.
There are two sides in this conflict: the TOG (Terran Overlord
Government), which represents stability and organization in the
Galaxy (albeit a corrupt and ossified one); and some "independent" sorts who consider the government to be the bad guys
— the Renegade Legion and the Commonwealth. "Legalistic"
sorts consider them to be bandits, scoundrels, and rebels.
The computer game plays very much like FASA'S Interceptor
board game and has excellent EGA graphics. A player doesn't
need to be familiar with the FASA boardgame to really get
going, either.
Interceptor is a space fighter wargame with some elements of
role-playing based on a pilot's varying abilities. As for graphics,
one must remember that he is fighting in deep space, not Blackmoor Castle. The fighter icons are extremely detailed and colorful. Sometimes, however, when the fighters occupy the same sector, the icons can become confused. (It is surprising how soon
one is able to identify the jumble anyway.) There are also character graphics for your squadron members, up to four different pictures for each of the five races, one for each sex, and different
ones for each branch of service as well.
Players can challenge the computer Al or fight it out player-versus-player. In the latter instance, one player assumes the role of
the Renegade Legion (the good guys?) squadron, while the other
player plays the TOG (bad guys?) squadron. It is also possible to
split either of the squadrons between two players while playing
against the computer.

Each copy of Interceptor comes with two dozen card-stock
fighter craft information cards (printed on both sides), one for
each fighter in the game. The cards contain a lot of good informa
tion, such as tactical hints regarding each craft. The copy protection is also an integral part of these cards. The pictures of the interceptors on the cards have an artist's drawing and a reproduction of the appropriate computer graphic (uncolored).
Interceptor is a space fighter wargame inasmuch as the player
controls a squadron of up to six fighters with movement by
hexes, rather than point-to-point. Players can turn off the hexes
and use "hexdots" or turn both of these options off and have a
very nice starfield appear as a background in their place. Players
begin by picking sides, Renegades or TOGs, then build
squadrons and go on one of thirteen missions. The actual mission to be undertaken is determined at random by the computer.
When a mission is called, a briefing sheet appears on-screen
(complete with letterhead and so on). On this sheet is the information needed for the mission. There are campaign elements
which include character advancement. The characters pilot the
squadrons of fighters. Interceptor is more like a "battle
simulator" than a role-playing game. Individual pilots are rated on
measures of "Gunnery" and "Piloting." Interceptor features more
than 14 types of missions, from dogfights to space station attacks. As the campaign progresses, the pilots improve and prestige points can be used to requisition better fighters.
Prestige points are gained by shooting down enemy craft, completing missions, and just for being on the winning side. A pilot
will usually get 700-800 points on a mission in which he destroys
an enemy interceptor. One pain is that credit for the kill goes to
the last pilot who fired on an interceptor before it blows up. Although all fire is simultaneous, anyone hitting the "dead" interceptor after the killing blow gets no credit, and there are no shared
kills. Pilots will also receive decorations (neat pictures) and written commendations at the completion of each mission. This too
will result in the pilot receiving prestige points.
Mission Summary Sample: Mission #8. The TOGSQD is
hereby ordered to provide fighter cover for covert transport operations around Caesar's Folly. You will bypass enemy fighters, draw-

Dark Night
Starry Sky
Arneson
ing them away
from the
transports that will
follow several
minutes behind.
Engage opposing
fighters until you
are ordered to
break off the attack.
The war has
created a thriving
black market on
Caesar's Folly,
giving us
numerous opportunities to place
TOG intelligence
agents among the
smugglers who
operate there.
Protect the TOG's
investment.
Remain engaged with the enemy until ordered to leave. Your
squadron will be rewarded for every ship that crosses the area of
interdiction.
Warning: No prestige will be gained if you leave the area
before the transports have made it out of this sector.
You must exit from the side of the map opposite the side you
came in on. Your ships must wait for orders (which will appear
on the screen) before heading for the enemy's side of the map. If
your enemies flee, they will run off the edge they set up on. Each
surviving pilot will get 50 points for very enemy ship that disengages or is destroyed.
Taking out a Space Station, and defending the same, seem to
be the toughest missions. The game appears to be biased in
favor of the Renegades, especially in the form of the Fluttering
Petal. In four sample engagements, the Petal had four kills to its
credit and the Renegades still won all four rounds handily, even
when there were similar numbers on both sides.
Designing the perfect fighter is a guess-as-guess-can proposition. The documentation goes into no detail about how to move
around this screen, but it can be figured out with a bit of work.
This reviewer recommends starting with the engines (as many as
a hull will carry) and shields (again, all it can get, but opinions differ). Before designing ships, do a Save Game on the squadron.
Next, take the new fighter on a mission and see how it works. In
this way, a mistake can reloaded, and the squadron tried again.
The game cannot be saved while in combat, and there is no practical limit to the number of saved squadrons.
This reviewer likes ships designed with turrets. Why? Because
one can never count on being the first to move. With turrets, a
player can always get in a few shots at an enemy on his tail.

Make sure that any bow guns are deadly at short ranges. When moving up on an enemy tail, stick the muzzles of the lasers into their afterburners and let go. Since
there are usually some enemy ships that will move after, turrets
can cover any exposed areas and add to the foes' worries.
This reviewer recommends L5/1s, EPC 9s, and NPC 9s. Throw
in a big Laser 7.5/6 or MDC 10 for medium-range work. Avoid
long-range guns or any of the missiles. Be aware of the maxima.
If a craft is built too low, one could end up with a real pig. If well
armed and armored this can be useful. For flexibility, keep them
at least at a 5, 6 or 7. Play with it and have fun.
The figures for a neat little TOG medium fighter, the Dominant,
can be found in the table below. While it shows definite KessRith
influence with its heavy reliance on lasers, the Dominant is actually a Terran design. The original design called for two EPC 9s
and very heavy shields. When it became apparent that the power
drain was too much for the engines, the new configuration was
adopted rather than upgrading the fighter from medium to heavy.
The Dominant lacks the speed of most medium fighters but
makes up for it with weaponry which rivals most heavy fighters.
The armor is weak but the above-average shields for this class
ship helps make up for that. The Dominant was designed to fall
close to the Spiculum's price.
The heavy lasers of the Dominant can cut deep holes in an
opponent's armor while the EPC can enter these holes and undercut armor from deep within. The reliance on energy weapons
rather than a missile-based offense has been questioned by
many TOG strategists, but the designer feels that the energy
weapons will extend the Dominant's loiter time in combat.
Designing ships was really an enjoyable experience. Now if only
players could edit the icons and the pilot pictures ... but, hey, it's
the fighters that count in this game!
(Continued on page 92)

Review

Infocom's Battletech: The
Crescent Hawks' Revenge
Unleashes Its "Lethal Heritage"
by J. D. Lambright

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

Battletech: The Crescent Hawks' Revenge
IBM
$49.95
Barry Green & Tony Van
Infocom
Menlo Park. CA

(created for the boardgame and
novels), the closest popular analogy
to BattleTech: The Crescent Hawks'
Revenge would probably be the recent film
RobotJox. Although the movie was a dismal
disappointment, it did show true 'mech battles as they might appear in a one-on-one
situation and does give one an appreciation
for the monstrous machines of destruction
(heretofore seen primarily in Japanimation
like Fang of the Sun Dougram) which are
piloted by a warrior elite.
As noted in CGWs sneak preview of the
game (#76, p. 36), Infocom's BattleTech:
The Crescent Hawks' Revenge (Revenge)
places the player in the role of Jason
Youngblood. Jason is the son of a war hero
who is pitted against House Kurita, an
enemy combine who has captured his father,
the best Phoenix Hawk pilot alive (as
detailed in Battletech: The Crescent Hawks'
Inception). The player, along with three
friends specifically recruited for the job, attempts to get information from Morgan Kell,
legendary leader of the Kell Hounds. Piloting
a BattleMech ('mech), those gigantic robotic
fighting machines from the 31st century, and
in command of a "lance" of other 'mechs
(four to a lance), his primary objective is to
rescue his father.

What's in a 'Mech?
Since CGWs initial look at the game as a

Review

work in progress, Revenge has reached its designed scope of
more than 25 different scenarios (as opposed to the six which
were mentioned in the sneak preview) and the design team has
added more 'mechs than one could shake a Harpoon-6 SRM
launcher at. Also, the function key controls which the authors of
the preview cautioned players about have been made more effective now, so players do not have to chase a 'mech around with
the cursor in order to gain control of it. With the addition of more
weapons systems and better armor and armament as the player
improves, it becomes a difficult choice in how to best recruit for
one's lance. Players must study each 'mech carefully, trying to
get low heat factors while maintaining high
armor and armaments. One should be particularly careful not to choose a lance which
consists purely of long-range fighters, for example, because there will inevitably be those
times when one must stand toe-to-toe and
slug it out at close quarters.

though, as one may encounter an enemy and have the battle
resolved before being able to react it.
Though Revenge is not so much an exploration game, it might
be to the player's advantage to send a 'mech north along the
road after leaving the mountains (before turning south to go to
the city). A reward awaits the player who finds the time to collect
it!
Once inside the city, send the APCs south to Y56 along with
Jason's 'mech, leaving the others to battle the city's defenses.
Even if the trip north is made, one should have no trouble with
the city defenses until reaching the prison.
Concentrate fire on Y56 to knock down the
prison walls, then load the prisoners in the
APCs and "get the heck outta' there!"
After leaving the city, the player will be challenged directly by Chiun, the fiercest opposition warrior, but it is inadvisable to confront
him, even if sufficient time is available. In fighting Chiun at this point in the game, the wear
and tear on friendly 'mechs tends to cause
the player to have to try the scenario over
again. Since there is no save feature until
after completing the scenario, this premature
encounter with Chiun is best avoided. Instead,
one should sprint through the mountains (the
forest road will be strafed) and wait at the
west exit until five minutes before the dropship is scheduled to arrive. At that point, get
a move on and head out to the ship where
the player will be rewarded with a new discovery.

The jump jets were not operative in the version previewed by CGW, but they function
beautifully in the actual game. Jump jets are
of some importance when maneuvering
through heavy forests and over low hills.
These jets fire (almost looking like the entire
'mech is on fire!) and the player can fly over
almost any obstacles. The tradeoff is that this
adds tremendously to one's heat factor.

War is What You 'Mech It
As the first six scenarios were previously
described in the sneak preview, this article
will focus on the subsequent ones. Revenge
is broken up into five sets of scenarios. The
different worlds provided therein provide the
basis for these scenario sets and each progressive set increases in complexity. The player
starts off commanding a single lance and
ends up commanding three lances (a total of
twelve 'mechs) by game's end.

'Mech Boot Camp (A Really
Big Shoe)
The player will then be promoted and sent
to the Arc-Royal training world, there to hone
his skills for later battles. Since there was no
training offered at the beginning of the game,
this is the player's chance to learn some tactics, tactics that are vital to learn if one
wishes to finish the game.

The second series of missions, designated
Operation: Liberty, takes place on Dieron. In
attempting to rescue the prisoners being held
there, one of which might be Jason's father,
the player is given the choice of two heavily
armed or three lighter armed lances. As well,
the player determines whether the lance will
take the route through the mountains, the
slowest route, or the forest road (faster, but
more heavily defended). This reviewer successfully tried both ways and found the play
balance to be excellent in each.
Hint: One should set all 'mechs, except for
the APCs, at flank speed. Since the APCs are
faster, they would outrun the other 'mechs and cannot hope to
survive by themselves because of their lighter armor. Remember,
if the APCs are destroyed, the scenario is over.

'Mech Donalds? Some Fast Food for
Thought
Playing the game at speed one is to the player's advantage
since he can make moves and change those moves many times
each minute. The only time players are likely to want to use the
fastest speed is when travelling long distances. Watch out,

There are six scenarios to this series, three
offensive and three defensive. One gets to
choose from a smorgasbord of 'mechs with
the latest in armor and weapons (begging the
question "Where can I get my hands on these
beauties?"). Study the objective of each practice mission and learn what it takes to win.
Each scenario starts with a full complement
of command, fire and recon lances, each at
full armor with no damage (this is training,
after all). Use all the tactics learned in previous encounters and be sure to experiment
with new ones.
Find out how to use strafing to full advantage as it is more effective than the rolling barrage or firing shell coordinates. If the
uplink is jammed, use the intelligence command to find out
where the various lances are, then shell them to death! Be careful with the strafing command here, though, as it can also
destroy one's own command. Remember, strafing is vertical and
horizontal from the selected square, so make sure to avoid the
line of fire. Check the jumpship often and change coordinates
whenever the enemy is either destroyed or moves. Try to lead

Review

the lance being attacked, and attack along roads (as they are
often used by enemy 'mechs).

Tin Clans
After a while, the player is given command of the Crescent
Hawks against a new enemy, the Clans. They are formidable opponents and threaten the very existence of the Inner Sphere
(other than that, not much is known about them). The Houses of
Steiner and Kurita have joined forces to defeat this new menace,
so the player boards a dropship and sets off for Luthien to combat the Clans. Along the way, just when the dropship is charging
its drive, a distress call comes in from the planet below.
Kaesong, it seems, is under attack from the Clans. Those who
have read Michael Stackpole's novels for FASA should instantly
recognize elements of Lethal Heritage, a novel in the recent
series.
Now the player must choose between obeying Morgan Kell's
direct orders to proceed to Luthien or helping the beleaguered
planet below (not to mention the chance to engage these new
enemies). Assuming you decide to rescue the planet, you must
choose the method of descent, either dropship or by jump jet. If
by jump jet, it will not be possible to take all of the 'mechs;
hence you can easily find yourself vastly outnumbered and outgunned.
Proper tactics include continuing use of strafing and concentrated fire. After the battle, a distress call from the nearby city
will come in. They also are under attack. Naturally, at this mo-

ment, a call comes in from the ship that it is ready for immediate
departure. What to do? Attacking the Clans at the city (hint)
might lead to a reward, though Morgan will almost certainly chew
the player out. Use the dropship uplink to strafe the city and the
Clan 'mechs. Take the reward and then proceed to the final objective, Luthien.

Mixed Nuts (and Bolts)
On Luthien awaits the biggest surprise (sorry, no hints about
this one). In this, the longest scenario in the game, the player
must protect a convoy (twenty minutes minimum). Playing at
speed one (the fastest suggested playing speed for this
scenario), it can take over an hour to complete.
Pull the recon lance back to the base and strafe the Elementals
"with extreme prejudice." One-on-one fighting with these smaller
Clan 'mechs will prove to be a big mistake (all 'mechs will be
needed at 100% if they are to complete this series and win the
game). Puma tanks appear later and must be destroyed before
they reach one's command area, but be warned that they are
tough opposition!
Once loaded, have the two lances head for the southwest quadrants and find some place to hide before the convoy exits from
the map to the west. One must hide out for approximately eight
minutes until reinforcements arrive (from the southwest) or
engage the Puma 'mechs (another bad idea) until help arrives.
When the help arrives, be certain to protect the newly arrived
'mech, since the pilot is the only one who can control the drop-

Review

ship for pickup. Next, proceed to the proper coordinates for pickup, receive reinforcements, and, if possible, prevent the Clan
'mech from exiting the map to the northwest. If the newly arrived
'mech is killed, there will be severe penalties. If the new 'mech
on the block lives, the player will rewarded with extra personnel
and 'mechs.

Pass The Can Opener
The final scenario finds the player in command of both
Kellhound and Kurita lances against the Clan forces. Choose the
Kurita commander's son's lance and destroy all Clan 'mechs to
prevent them from reaching their dropship. Try to capture the
Clan Commander; if he escapes (or is killed) the scenario will
have to be replayed. The player will be rewarded (as will all who
played, dead or alive) and continue on to the next game in the
series (if there is to be one).
Many things that were a problem in the beta version (played for
the sneak preview) have been corrected. The 'mechs still tend to
change from "Fire-at-Will" to "Fire Defensively" and, when a target is destroyed, a new target is not selected, even if it is directly
next to the victorious 'mech. These are minor in comparison to
the effect that this game has on players. When combined with
VGA, MCGA, EGA and Tandy graphics, plus the support of almost every sound card available, there isn't too much to complain about. The full effect of explosions and rocket fire from the
speakers in this reviewer's office brought his family running in to
watch the fun.
As the sneak preview noted, BattleTech: The Crescent Hawks'

Revenge is more effective as a computerized version of the
boardgame than as the adventure game many will expect when
they see the Infocom label. This reviewer believes that being
able to have satisfying battles without having to get out the tape
measure and stacks of charts (required of the boardgame version of BattleTech) makes Revenge a very enjoyable playing experience. Therefore, he can wholeheartedly recommend the
game. Indeed, Infocom has published the game every BattleTech devotee has been waiting for. Would anyone like to buy a
set of BattleTech miniatures?

Simple Tactics for
Quick-Triggered Pilots
Players should use their specific weapons to maximum advantage (for example, don't use 'mechs at their ineffective
ranges). It is also wise to concentrate the lance's fire at one
enemy 'mech at a time and use "Fire-at-Will." This will push
your 'mechs to their limit and can be the deciding factor in a
battle. Use cover to maximum advantage, attack from behind, outflank the opponent, separate to attain better defensive odds and attack en masse. Finally, be certain to destroy
an enemy 'mech completely (to avoid being caught by
surprise the same way a disabled 'mech destroyed his opponent in RobotJox) and never underestimate your opponent.

Two Views

Digging Tunnels & Trolls
New World Recruits Crusaders of Khazan
by G. Marc Clupper

A

n innovative gaming system in its own right, Tunnels and

Trolls: Crusaders of Khazan differs enough from other
New World releases to more than offset the similarities between its documentation and packaging and those of, for instance, Might and Magic. The basic combat system for the
game is derived from Ken St. Andre's classic Tunnels & Trolls
pen-and-paper game, and the plot was developed by Liz
Danforth's expansion of some of the original "solitaire dungeons." Since Ken's design was intended to simplify the
mechanics of role-playing (he believed the Dungeons and
Dragons system was too much work to be fun) and the "solitaire
dungeons" were designed for roughly an evening of enjoyment,
one would expect the design of Tunnels & Trolls: Crusaders of
Khazan to emphasize short manageable quests and offer less
complicated mechanics, rather than the lengthy quests and convoluted mechanics of many traditional CRPGS. While these expectations are met to a degree, those accustomed to the solitude of
computer role-playing will need to exercise patience during their
initial experiences in T&T.
As the player's group of 1-4 adventurers sets out to explore the
various parts of the game's continent, the true virtues of T&T (its
rich text, story-line, and many sub-quests) come to light. The
basis of the story is focused around the Dark Legions, monsters
led by the Death Empress Lerotra'hh, and her minions, as they
threaten the peace established by the wizard Khazan years
before. So the major goal is finding the "good" wizard rather than
the "bad" wizard.

The Light and
Dark Side of
the Source
T&T's handling of
the game's many languages (19 in all!)
may be its most unique quality. As characters learn each
new language, previously illegible writings and the unintelligible grumbling of
TITLE:
Tunnels & Trolls: Crusaders of Khazan
creatures begin to
SYSTEM:
IBM (640K/Mouse recommended)
make sense and, in
$49.95
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
Elizabeth Danforth
turn, contribute valuPUBLISHER:
New World Computing
able information toward
Van Nuys, CA
the quests. Additionally,
timekeeping is directly
proportional to the manner of travel versus the scale of the map.
Most CRPGs do not bother to give the player any perspective of
scale. These and many other details (such as a unique calendar
and week, complete with holidays) offer intriguing innovations
over standard CRPG fare.

Characters, generated in the customary RPG fashion, may be
one of three trades — warrior, rogue, or wizard — and four races.
A limited choice of portraits is available to portray each player
character. Movement about the game's world is strikingly simple
and quick via mouse. Indeed, the party's icon may wander so
rapidly through the towns and beyond that the player may find
his characters taking damage from plants, animals, and natural
disasters before even realizing it.

Unfortunately, many of the legitimate role-playing details advanced in the game seem to overwhelm the game play in the
present version of the game. The design, as executed, leaves one
singing, on occasion, an exasperated version of the rock song "I
Think I'm Turning Japanese." New World went "offshore" in
order to get the game programmed swiftly and efficiently. The
game, as it stands, can be addictive and can open up new roleplaying experiences, but it could have been so much more. Perhaps the Japanese program team retained more of the aspects
of earlier CRPGs than the American designers intended.

Trolling For Adventure

Tips and Considerations

T&T operates like a game master mediating a one-player version of D&D. The game's interactive nature is appealing, but its
linearity and light attitude toward "complicated" adventuring and
clever puzzles is a definite minus. Though the text is rich in
detail, its quests may be completed quickly — perhaps, sometimes, too quickly. Players who wander from the intended track
often find themselves herded back on course by a variety of antagonistic beasts and assorted phenomena.

1) As characters travel from town to town, they will encounter
various NPCs willing to join the party. There are enough that
enterprising individuals will be able to take NPCs for what they
are worth (i.e. "loot 'em and lose 'em"). [Ed: "Enterprising," as
an adjective, has often been a euphemism for "amoral" or
even "immoral". But, hey, it's only a game, right?] Just continue to gather the gold and recover any items worthy of resale.
It is not a get-rich-quick scheme, but it will give new adventurers
an edge in such hostile climates.

T&T uses an unconventional interface/window display which requires more interpretation than the documentation provides. Although the three-dimensional "bird's-eye" view usually displayed
during the adventure may seem somewhat reminiscent of the Ultima screens, it quickly becomes apparent while the player
selects icons that the interface system is unique if not a bit
tedious.

2) Many encounters may be avoided by running away as fast
as one's legs can go. Which sometimes reveals the booty without
causing the characters to get the "boot".
3) Before entering the Tomb of Khazan, the party should have
the following items: the Crystal Skull, Heart of Fire, Demon's
Eye, Horn of Ulhong, Khazan's Staff, and the Bag of Winds. CGW

Two Views

Scorpion's View
Scorpia Searches for Treasure in

Tunnels & Trolls: Crusaders of Khazan

The game, along with
the many book-sized
solo adventures, became popular in Japan
and, as a result, the
Japanese requested a
computer version. Liz
Danforth, who had prior
CRPG design experience
(Wasteland, for instance), and had
worked with Ken on
revisions of the original
T&T system, did the initial design for the computer game.
The material was then
sent overseas. The
Japanese translated the
text, and did all of the
programming. After its
release in Japan, the
game made its way
back to New World Computing, where it was retranslated into English,
and released in the US.
During all this, there
was no communication
at all between the designers and the programmers.

S

corpia is an experienced and
respected adventure game expert.
CGW is pleased to be able to provide this forum for her distinctive and,
often, controversial perspective.
After last issue's dismantling of Fountain
of Dreams, I had hoped this issue would
bring good news. Unfortunately, the crystal
remains dark. The long-awaited Tunnels &
Trolls: Crusaders of Khazan does not provide the bright spot expected on the CRPG
scene.
To understand how a game with so much
promise could possibly go wrong, a short
history is in order. TET came out originally
as a pencil-and-paper system, designed by
Ken St. Andre as a protest against the evergrowing complexity of Dungeons and
Dragons™ (and later, Advanced Dungeons and Dragons™).

The result is a mixture
of bugs (see "Double
Blind"), incorrect clues
(see "Blind Rendition"), occasionally bizarre
text, design errors, much frustration, and a
few good ideas buried in the mire. Tunnels
and Trolls is thus an almost perfect example of what happens when designers and
programmers do not work together.
Plot is standard for the genre: get rid of
the bad guys and bring back the good
guys. In this case, the bad guys are
Lerotra'hh (known informally as La Roach
Trap) the Empress of Death, and her
buddy, the evil wizard Khara Kang. The
good guy is the wizard Khazan, who has disappeared and must be found and revived to
put a final end to the nefarious schemes of
the other two (sort of reminds you a little of
Ultima V).
You begin by creating a party of one to
four characters. Professions are the familiar
fighter/mage/thief (here called Rogue), and
races are Human, Elf, Dwarf, and Hobb

(similar to a halfling). Anyone with experience in CRPG's can pretty well figure
out which races are best suited for which
professions, although such choices are not
mandatory; it is possible to have, for instance, a Dwarf wizard as well as Dwarf
fighter.
Stats for each character are rolled randomly. Take your time here and watch how the
numbers go. The non-human races will
come up with some fairly high scores in certain areas. For example, Durin, my Dwarf
fighter, began the game with a strength of
36, whereas the human fighter started with
only a 17.
While stats will increase during game
play, it is vital to start out with the best you
can manage. Particularly important are
strength, constitution, dexterity, and speed.
Never take a character with a speed in
single digits; he or she will be very slow in
combat.
It is possible to start with only one character, and pick up the rest by recruiting
NPC's at taverns and guilds. Also, you
could recruit to replace party members who
die during the game. However, I was not impressed with the stats of these NPC's; they
were not as good, overall, as the attributes
of the characters I created. My advice is to
go with your own people, and reboot if
anyone dies.
Money is also randomly determined, and
varies widely. Too widely, in fact: it could
be as little as 40 for one character and over
100 for another. Since armor and weaponry
are not cheap (at least not for the beginning group), you want as much gold as possible for equipping the party.

Gull of My Dreams
(Game Play)
Once you're done rolling up the characters, the group appears in the town of Gull.
This is a good place to save the game,
right before you do anything else. T&T has
day and night (along with days in the week,
weeks in the month, and months in the
year), and all shops close at sunset. If you
spend too much time wandering around,
you could find everything closed for the evening and have to wait another day to buy
anything.
Therefore, it's best to save the game, explore, check out prices, etc., then restore
the game and go buy what you need.
Fighters should purchase the best armor
they can, plus a hand weapon and shield.
The Rogue and Mage can do nicely with
slings (ammunition for slings is endless and
always available). Remember to keep the
manual handy when purchasing weapons
and armor. All of them have minimum requirements for strength and dexterity, and
mages are fairly restricted in what they can
use; for a long time, the mage will have no
better armor than leather (they were supposed to be able to wear lamellar, but that
was not programmed in).

Two Views

Random encounters in Gull are few; most
take place in a little corner just before you
enter the "bad" part of town (where the
only tavern is located), and throughout the
sewers beneath. Otherwise, the combats are
pre-set in specific locations.
However, I cannot emphasize enough the
need to save often during play. There are
just too many deathtraps and gotchas scattered around the game (in Gull and elsewhere) which can lead to frustrating experiences. For instance, near the northern
edge of the town of Valdemarton is a door.
It looks like it would lead out to the wilderness; in actual fact, it opens onto a very
nasty two-level dungeon. The door is oneway, so you must go on once you're inside.
The team also gets shot in the back with
poisoned arrows from concealed archers as
they move down the first corridor.
What's bad about this is that there is absolutely no indication whatsoever that the
door leads to a dungeon. No signs, no warnings, nothing — and given its position, it's
all too easy to make the mistake of thinking that the door is simply an exit to the
countryside. An unprepared party will be in
for a very unpleasant time (on the other
hand, this dungeon has a couple of very
nice goodies, so it's worthwhile entering
when you're ready for it).

affecting her. Unless you use it during the
Unraeth, the five days that separate the old
year from the new (a sort of in-between
time), the javelin does not work. Fortunately, however, the same death wand that
works on Kang will work on Lerotra'hh.
Just be certain that you do Kang first, as
any hand weapon that hits Lerotra'hh will
shatter.
One more thing needs to be mentioned.
During a mini-quest in the game, you must
go north and climb to the top of an ice
temple. There you pick up several clues, including one that says you must have a
female dwarf in the party to finish the
game. That isn't true, and in this case, a
good thing. Imagine if you had come so far
in the game, only to find you had to drop
someone and go look for a female dwarf, of
all things. This is one of the few instances
in the game where the change in design
was positive instead of negative. Now if
they'd only gotten around to fixing up the
clue itself, everything would have been fine.

Unfortunately, having taken the notes,
you must then separate the wheat from the
chaff. Some things were not programmed
in as originally designed and the clues relating to these situations were never changed.
The biggest gaffe among them is the one
about "teaching a rogue to teach a rogue."
Originally, the Rogue was supposed to
learn the "Teacher" spell under special circumstances that would remove Khara
Kang's protection against attacks. Apparently, this entire routine was too difficult to program, so it never went into the game (use a
death wand on Kang instead; it works nicely). All the clues relating to it, however,
remained as they were.
This is especially poor since defeating
Kang is a major goal and you could waste
much time trying to find a way to teach
your Rogue a spell he can never learn. At
the very least, these clues should have
been removed or revised to reflect the actual situation.
In a similar vein, there is the matter of
defeating Lerotra'hh. You acquire a weapon
which is supposed to be the only means of

The main problem with combat (aside
from its boring sameness) has to do with invisibility. First, once the spell is cast, you
no longer see your characters on the
screen. You only know where they are on a
character's turn, when a box surrounds his
or her position. So far, that's interesting.
However, monsters capable of spells or missile fire have no such handicaps. While they
cannot see the characters for purposes of
hand-to-hand combat, they are able to hit
with spells or missiles with pinpoint accuracy. So, you are treated to the spectacle
of watching some monsters walk blindly
past the party while other critters (of the
same type) merrily blast you away.
In terms of design, the game is very fragmented. There are few guides as to where
to go or what to do. Much time is spent trekking around in the out of doors and hoping
you haven't missed something important.
Auto-mapping is some help here; at least
you can use it to see where you haven't
been yet.
Stepping on every spot is necessary, as
the game is "trigger"-dependent. Events happen only when you enter a certain square.
Aside from the towns, there are no visible
clues on the screen that anything special is
there, so you really have to march all over
the place.

Blind Rendition
(Misdirection)
There is no one to really talk to in the
game (i.e. no conversations in the style of
an Ultima or Magic Candle). You do run
across people who impart valuable bits of
important, if obscure, information, but this
is along the lines of "they tell you, and you
take notes." You can expect to take a fair
amount of notes.

attack twice (regardless of profession).
That, however, does not apply to spells; a
mage or rogue can still cast only one spell
per round.

Double Blind (Peculiarities)
Aside from bogus hints, the game has
several "seams" which the canny (or unscrupulous) player can use to obtain advantages. There is a way to acquire virtually unlimited wealth in the sewers. In "The
Digs" (Lerotra'hh's special hangout), characters can go up in level by doing nothing
more than trying to climb up a shaft
(tedious but effective). There is at least one
mini-quest in the game (regarding the Red
Orcs) that can be short-circuited so that
your party receives the reward without actually having completed the mission.
Combat has its own peculiarities. When
fighting starts, the screen changes to a
close-up of the area, similar to the old Ultimas (pre-VI). Your party is ranged along
the bottom of the screen in a single line.
Monsters are across the top, in one or more
lines, depending on how many of them
there are. Each character and monster has
a separate icon.
Who moves when is determined mostly
by speed; faster combatants move sooner,
and also further, than slower ones. Characters get one attack per round until they
reach seventh level, at which time they can

Not everything in the outdoors is related
to the main story. Occasionally, you will
come across ways to increase the character
stats or learn a language. Knowing some
languages is important and is one of the
few bright spots in the game. At the very
least, the party members should learn Orcish, Primus, and Foulspeak. Picking up the
others can also come in handy.
Actually, it isn't surprising that the game
has so uncoordinated a feel to it. Much of
the design was taken from individual TGT
scenario books and woven into one complete adventure. Ergo, the plotline and
events are not as tightly constructed as
they could have been and the bugs make it
much worse.
Considering all the problems, you have to
wonder what was going on at New World
with this game. How could the playtesters
have missed so many flaws? Were they
sleepwalking through this one? If they
didn't miss them, why weren't fixes made
before the game went out the door? It looks
as though New World needs better testers,
or else they decided to go for the quick
bucks instead of taking the extra time to
put out a quality product.
Either way, it's a shame. Tunnels and
Trolls could have been a good game. As it
stands, the only people likely to enjoy it are
hardcore T&T fans. I can't, alas, recommend this to anyone else.
Copyright 1990 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

Review

O

ne hundred
and twenty
years past,
an unholy alliance
formed between
the Lord of this
castle and a
mighty sorcerer.
Their purpose was
to control the
stylus of fate, the
Cosmic Forge
which can create
and destroy with
written words. As
their fates were
sealed by their
own evil, so now,
the fates of these
six adventures
have also been
closed...

hardships found in
the mountains,
forests, swamps,
temples and tombs,
the player fleshes
out both story and
character in a welcome departure
from more standard
CRPG fare.
Bane's true virtues
rest not only within
the scope of the
theme, but also in
the game's
mechanics. Bane of
the Cosmic Forge
may be the closest
to providing a true
fantasy role-playing
"feel" of any similar
program. Characters emerge from a
culture with eleven
races, and players
choose professions
for the characters
out of fourteen
basic professions,
but the most interesting aspect of
character generation is selection of
various skills.
Emerging from
three different influences, skills are
introduced via the following three
areas of study: Weaponry, Physical,
and Academia. Within these areas
are multiple skills in which characters may strive to become masters.
To show something of the detail involved here, the warrior classes
must prepare and study the various
advantages to primary and secondary attacks, thrusts, and melee attacks. In short, Bane reflects a
tremendous amount of research
with regard to exotic skills and
weaponry.

Wizard ry Forges into
the 21st Century

Sir-Tech's Bane of the Cosmic Forge

It has been nearly
a decade since the
release of the awardwinning Wizardry
gaming system.
Now, Sir-Tech's
goal is to bring
Wizardry into the
1990's with an allnew gaming system. More than a
continuation of
either story lines or
mechanics, Bane of
the Cosmic Forge
possesses a "heart" of its own, in
which the designer hopes to base
an entirely new world of Wizardry
products. Bane is approximately
four times larger than previous
Wizardry products and is designed
to accommodate several possible endings in order to avoid the "bane" of
many computer game designers,
linearity.

Building Character
First, characters must be
"generated" using an intriguing and
logical program which allows for the
individuality of the player to come
into action. The program also offers
a large database of character
portraits which may be drawn from
at any point in the game. Once this
is accomplished, the characters will
endure the initial "baptism of fire" in
the ancient castle of the Lord and
his Queen. The player will "imprint"
the personalities of each character
by means of the player's behavior
throughout the course of the game.
So, amidst the glories and

By Marc Clupper

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

WIZARDRY: Bane of the
Cosmic Forge
IBM (640K), Amiga,
and Macintosh
$59.95
David W. Bradley
Sir-Tech Software, Inc.
Ogdensburg, New York

In addition, the computer comes
closer to becoming a referee which
allows players to choose from
numerous options, rather than the
traditionally directive "play by my
rules" type system. This greater
freedom, in turn, allows a player
greater access to the fantasy world
and introduces less hassle from the
program. The die rolls are generally
well-balanced against each character's attributes and traits, and an interesting method of "rolling" the dice
allows players more interactive liber-

Review

ty when picking locks or participating in combat. The gamer is
even required to do some brain work when determining the nature of various traps and devices. Bane is definitely a game to
challenge both the logical and imaginative facets of the mind.
In addition, the interface is designed to be almost transparent.
The easy-to-learn key strokes and/or mouse interface allows
players quick access to all available screens. Also whenever a
parser is needed in order to communicate to the non-player characters in the fantasy world, a more natural "English" parser allows players to communicate more naturally than the
VERB-NOUN-PREPOSITION-OBJECT of many adventure games. At no
point should players feel as if the computer is restricting their actions. Instead, gamers may find themselves hard-pressed to
make use of all of their available freedom.

Face The Music
In Wizardry: Bane of the Cosmic Forge, David Bradley has
opted away from several conventions of recent CRPGs. With
regard to both music and map development, he has taken a different path. Rather than the "traditional" 20x20 square grid system used for so many maps, players may find it refreshing to
see that no such symmetrical pattern exists in Bane. Instead,
Bradley has designed asymmetrical and three-dimensional
layouts more consistent with true FRP.
Further, instead of what Bradley perceives as the "annoying"
music that many products present, Bradley opted to use digitized
sounds (rather than sound card music) to reflect the explosions
and sound of steel striking steel in the combat scenes, as well as

sounds of footsteps, slamming doors, and moving water within
the dungeon explorations. This reviewer was particularly impressed with the deep bellow of the Horn of Souls as it cried
above the crashing waves. Of course, one has to wonder how
much better it would have been with sound board support.
The animations are impressive, too. Those who own the program will continually look forward to seeing what new creatures
might jump out of the cracks and from behind the mountains.
Seeing a saber-wielding phantom appearing from behind a wall
could send many an adventurer diving for cover. Each of the
three-dimensional creatures depicted has been painstakingly
rendered and animated. Even flying creatures cast their shadows
against the ground in an eerie dance of death.
Purists will complain that a sixteen-color palette is not comparable to the 256-color palettes available in many games, but
the dithered approach to Bane's colorful graphics is not unpleasant to the eyes and may be the equal of some true VGA
games.

Forging Ahead
Sir-Tech has made it apparent that Bane is not simply a onetime event. Rather, it is the beginning of a whole new series of
Wizardry games based on the new gaming system. Players will
find that the craftsmanship and quality of Wizardry: Bane of the
Cosmic Forge make it a triumphant celebration of the Wizardry
heritage and provides a legacy almost predestined to repeat the
glory of its predecessor.

Tips and Strategies
(1) Players will find that the ability to change professions
will allow them to build characters with strengths and skills
which will surpass those of any single profession. For example, by grooming a master mage and then transferring
over to the arts of Alchemy, the character will retain the full
knowledge of their previous craft and have new access to the
powerful abilities of another profession with minimal delay. It
is advisable that no more than one character at a time do
this, as their ability to use their former skills are retarded until
they once again reach new levels of power. However, the flip
side of this is that characters progress at a faster rate as they
are "deeper" into experience-rich environments.
(2) The player should have little fear of dropping important
items since the design philosophy behind Bane has made it
impossible for the user to mistakenly discard an item that
has importance at a later time. Hint: Although the immediate
consequence of such an item may be unknown at the time, a
little experimentation will usually provide for an answer. If all
else fails, try "merging" items in your inventory to see if something new may arise.
(3) The game relies on a lot of common-sense problems.
So, if an answer does not reveal itself immediately, try taking
a break and thinking about what the characters of a party
possess in terms of skills and items. A great deal of logical
foresight has been programmed into the game system.
(4) Although mapping is not essential to the successful completion of the game, it may well save time in the long run, as
well as offering insight to the possible locales of yet undiscovered realms.

I

Survey

Making New Connections
Some BBS and Network Games
or those who
have never
played a
multi-player game
using their
modems, here are
some ideas which
may be of use.
This article is not a
complete "paiktography" of on-line
games. Rather, it is
a "sampler" for the
benefit of those
who have not yet
discovered the
variety of on-line gaming. Those who
wish to subscribe to the fee-based networks should call the following numbers
for more information: Compuserve (1800-848-8990), Consumer Sports Network (1-800-727-4636), GEnie (Voice: 1800-638-9636 Modem: 1-800-638-8369,
then type "HHH", at U// type
"XTX99598,GEnie"), PCLink (1-703-4488700) or PRODIGY (1-914-993-8000).
The $ symbol means that there are extra
charges beyond standard on-line rates.
Achilles' Leisure: CGW subscriber Walt
Kunz runs a local BBS which is primarily
dedicated to computer gaming. Readers
in the 914 area code or those who can afford to spend a bit in long distance charges are invited to check out the system
at (914) 691-9248. There are no costs
beyond those standard to Ma Bell's customers and the BBS regularly has
play-by-mail Reach for the Stars, Empire and
Omega using file uploads.
Air Warrior: GEnie's multi-player air
combat game was reviewed in CGW /167,
but the game now has several new features. An on-board "camera" feature allows on-line combat to be saved to disk
for future viewing; gunnery mechanics
now require pilots to "lead" the target
with their shots; the "drones" in the training arena function much more like real
planes; and a new regional map is now
available. ($)
APBA General Manager: The Computer Sports Network offers fantasy
baseball leagues with a twist. Players not
only draft teams and handle trades online, but they download lineups and play
games off-line with APBA Major League

puserve subscribers should
type "Go Fans" to
reach the sports
area.

Players Baseball and
upload the results to be included in the league standings. CSN offers a special
deal on purchasing APBA
products in order to participate in their leagues. ($)
Bulls and Bears: On PCLink,
Promenade and America Online, players
can participate in a competition where
each player tries to build the fastest-growing stock portfolio. Each player gets an
account full of "play money" and
proceeds to buy and sell stock on-line as
though he/she had a brokerage account
with one of the on-line brokerage firms.
CEO: PRODIGY offers an economic
strategy game which puts players into
the role of corporate executives. Bearing
much similarity to Reality
Technologies' Venture Magazine Business Simulator (i.e. read memos and
reports, assimilate data and make
decisions), CEO offers fifteen days of
competition in one of six glamor industries (automobile, beer, computers,
chocolate, soft drinks and toys). Each
day's decisions reflect a year in "game
time" and the computer will "cover" for
players who cannot sign on every day.
Dragon's Gate: GEnie's new multiplayer fantasy game uses a text interface
a la Gemstone III (see p. 53), but game
mechanics for magick and combat are
different and the "races" differ radically
from those in most fantasy games. ($).
Fantasy Sports: No matter the season,
Compuserve offers "rotisserie" style
leagues at no extra fee. Baseball, football
and hockey are most popular. Corn-

Feudal Intrigue:
Diplomacy
players who are interested in customizing games to
the size and style
they like best
should consider
GEnie's games of
diplomatic intrigue. Played by
electronic mail,
players can select
the number of participants in each
game and rules
from nearly any
"Dippy" variant ever played. ($)
Fleet Maneuvers: This space combat
game is actually a play-by-mail game,
but players can also
play-by-electronic-mail using the company's local BBS. The
game is extremely playable in either format and there is a per turn charge. Call 1303-761-4048 to reach the BBS.
Quantum Space: PCLink, Promenade
and America Online offer their own
play-by-electronic-mail game of space conquest. Those who've always wanted to
try a play-by-mail game but didn't want
to wait for the U.S. Mail for the results
will want to consider this competition.
Sniper!: A two-person game of World
War II infantry combat, players compete
on a grid-based landscape where colored
ASCII characters represent terrain features. On-line scenarios allow players to
learn the mechanics of the game by playing against the computer, but the name
of the game is facing off against a
human opponent and debriefing the 2030 minute competition, later. The meeting area and scores list serve to provide
a "community building" function. ($)
Tournament Golf Using Accolade's
Mean 18, the Computer Sports Network
allows players to download courses, play
them off-line and upload their saved
games in order to compete in multiplayer tournaments. ($)

New Column

face). At least one (possibly more)
telephone numbers should be included.
Do not forget the area code and mention whether they are Home, Work or
Modem-line number. For example: H
(213) 555-2879; W (818) 555-1940; or M
(213) 555-1715. Finally, include your city
and State, so that people calling will
both: a) have a clue as to what time
zone you are in and won't end up waking
you at 3 o'clock in the morning and b)
recognize it when they see it on their
phone bill.

Opponents Wanted
T

his is a new feature being offered

by Computer Gaming World
magazine. Here, players can challenge the "human intelligence" that
lurks behind another's brains, instead
of just whipping the computer's artificial intelligence all the time. Care to
post a bulletin on this bulletin board?
Go ahead, reach out and crush someone!

How to Write an Opponents
Wanted Ad
It's really very simple. Just send us a
postcard (or use the NOTES section of
your Reader Input Device card), and include a brief description of the types of
opponents and games you are interested
in playing. Games being played other
than "by direct modem" can be listed
(trading save game disks, meeting someone on a BBS service or even face-to-

We reserve the right to edit all Opponents Wanted ads to our standards of
taste. Below is a sample of an actual ad.

Actual Ad
Veteran wargamer seeks opponents by
modem for Command HQ. Will play any
scenario, any side. Southern California
(714, 213 and 818) area code opponents
preferred, but am willing to assume
some long distance charges during low
rate hours (be merciful). Contact Alan
Emrich at home: (213) 420-7800 to arrange for a playing time. Lakewood,
California.

Review

Dark Future
Apocalyptic Cyberpunk in Dynamix's

Blade Hunter: Rise of the Dragon

D

arker and more visually
threatening than
TITLE:
Blade Hunter: Rise of the Dragon
Interplay's NeuromanSYSTEM:
IBM (w/ 640K)
Hard
Disk/Mouse Recommended
cer or even Infocom's Circuit's
PRICE:
$59.95
Edge, Blade Hunter: Rise of
DESIGNER:
Jeff Tunnell
the Dragon captures the
PUBLISHER:
Dynamix
(Division of Sierra)
shadowy underworld of cyberCoarsegold, CA
punk better than any other computer game to date and artistically captures a dark future reminiscent of the film, Blade Runner. If
one understands cyberpunk as the equivalent of novelist William
Gibson's aphorism, "The streets have their own uses for technology,"
one will certainly understand the premise behind Rise of the Dragon
(Dragon).
For Rise of the Dragon, Jeff Tunnell envisioned a menacing
metropolis where genetic research had gone awry. In his conception,
street gangs would manufacture deadly genetic mutating skin
patches in seedy warehouse laboratories, much like gangs manufacture PCP in makeshift laboratories in today's world. To heighten the
fear, Tunnell introduced an oriental apocalypse. In this case, a legendary force called Bahumat, described as an evil warlord from circa
3000 B.C. who was believed to metamorphose into a dragon in order
to destroy his enemies and was expected to return in a time of
chaos and decay, much like the Roman Emperor Domitian was
believed to be Nero reincarnate. This villain looms in the background
and wields the frightening force of the Tongs. The latter, oriental
street gangs, are not named in the game, but the shadowy menace
associated with Tong violence is effective in conveying the insidious
threat to society. The story does have light points, however, since
Bahumat was alleged to have been defeated by a mighty knife-wielding hero named Gin-Su. One person in the game believes that Blade
Hunter is the reincarnation of Gin-Su.
In order to convey this ominous setting, Tunnell recruited a production unit that almost rivals a small Hollywood production. Don
Latarski scored the program and his musical references run the
gamut from overtones of Bach's "Toccata and Fugue in D Minor"
through oriental riffs punctuated by flute and forward into bass guitar
runs that conjure men of action from Peter Gunn through James
Bond. Robert Caracol, a "comic" illustrator, etched the original artist's
conceptions of the characters and settings in pen and ink. Then,
Brian Hahn and Mike Brenneman brought the images to the computer screen with just the right color palette to make players believe
they have entered the deteriorating world of that dark future. The entire product is a work of art from start to finish.
Finally, to give the game an even more cinematic look, as well as
to keep the tension taut by reminding the player that the clock is running, "cut scenes" are interspersed and display what is happening in
other areas of the city. These "cut scenes" are non-interactive and
simply unfold with some animation and plenty of dialogue in order to
advance the plot.
Don't Point That Thing at Me!
Like the rest of the Sierra family, Dynamix is divorcing itself from
the parser in attempting to bring graphic adventures to life. With
"point & click" technology, one doesn't have to guess the right verb
or, ideally, figure out which objects are active from on-screen clues
rather than having to clicking on everything.
In Dragon, exits are revealed by the cursor metamorphosing,
naturally enough, into an exit sign and active objects are often
tipped off by flashing lights or the cursor transforming into a magnifying glass. Mouse users can quickly examine just about any object by

clicking on the right mouse button and receiving, in turn, a description of the object. The descriptions, often rather amusing, reference
both useful items and "window dressing."
Conversation is handled according to a classic non-parser convention. The game displays a conversation balloon whenever the cursor
touches a character within the game that has something to say.
Then, players simply click on the characters and the conversation
begins. Menus of potential questions and replies pop up in response
to the conversation and/or answers provided by various characters.
Then, after the player clicks on the best response/question for
Hunter to use, the conversation branches accordingly. Jerry Luttrell
and David Selle did an excellent job of augmenting the conversations
with realistic dialogue.
The game also features two methods of handling equipment/items.
There is a main inventory which allows the player to check on
Hunter's status, examine items, place them on Hunter's person, or
drop them outside the window to be picked up and used by Hunter.
In addition, a quick inventory allows the player to access an item in
inventory and immediately operate the item on the playing environment without having to interact with the image of Hunter.

Review

The "point and click" interface also works well for handling
Dynamix's standard VCR interface in which the toggles for options
(joystick, mouse, sound effects, and music), as well as controls for
difficulty level (for arcade sequences), text speed, and detail level
may be found. The VCR interface is so named because the control
panel emulates the sliders and buttons to be found on a modern
electronic entertainment device.

What Do I Do Next?
The game is full of locations to explore. Once Hunter makes it to
the transit station (the long-awaited Metro Rail?), the transit map
indi-cates which locations are currently active. Initially, this is limited to
Blade's apartment building, his girlfriend's building, city hall and the
pleasure dome. As Hunter uncovers the right clues, a new location
pops up and Hunter has someplace new to explore. Often, such exploration will net a new location and so on. The transit map was a
wonderful way of handling game geography (just like the overhead
maps in Lucasfilm's recent The Secret of Monkey Island helped
one keep a grasp on where the game was going and where one was
within the context of the game) and "gating" the protagonist through
the plot at the right pace.
Once the player has entered a location, it is wise to be alert to
every "exit sign" on the screen. Each time the cursor transforms into
one, there is a new location to be explored. Most locations seem to
have something helpful (whether information, item or encounter).
This reviewer thought that every location was rich with detail (including the exterior of the CGW building) and offered a marvelous texture of graphic art.

Not Just Another Arcade Game
Blade Hunter: Rise of the Dragon has a marvelous story line, magnificent sound and musical score, near-transparent interface and plenty to discover. Yet, it also has arcade sequences. This reviewer, like

many other adventure gamers, absolutely disdains arcade sequences. Why should one painstakingly puzzle out the various conundrums associated with a game, only to be foiled by a lack of
reflexes? Why do so many game designers have to put those sequences in?
Fortunately, Dynamix heard the lament of adventure gamers who
loathe arcade sequences. Even though they are present in the game,
they are present in a non-obtrusive manner. Should the gamer fail to
"pass the test" over the course of several tries, the story advances
anyway. Sure, there will be those purists who protest that this means
the arcade sequence is meaningless, therefore it shouldn't have been
there in the first place, but its presence simply adds value to those
who want an action sequence in order to feel like a film or television
detective. Investigation and interrogation are simply not going to be
enough for some of the folks who will be attracted to Dragon, so
Dynamix tried to meet their need without ruining the. game for the
"rest of us." This certainly seems to be a worthy design decision and
this reviewer applauds it.

Order Your "Gin-Su" Now
Blade Hunter: Rise of the Dragon signals several advances. First,
the technology which enabled Dynamix to move from "comic" to a
magnificently textured graphic adventure proves that, in the future,
"filling up" a CD may not be as expensive as had been previously
supposed. Secondly, it proves that adapting a graphic adventure to
"point and click" technology does not mean it cannot be both wellwritten and offer stimulating discoveries for the adventure gamer.
Finally, the careful blending of music, art and adventure
demonstrates that there can be multimedia products in the future
that can offer good gameplay and good entertainment. Blade
Hunter: Rise of the Dragon is not only an outstanding product in its
own right, but points the way for the future of graphic adventures.

Replay

No Nukes Is Good Nukes
Part One of a Command HQ Replay
by Alan Emrich
Caracas "Red" player: Alan Emrich
Belgrade "Blue" player: Dennis Lytton
ommand HQ by Microprose offers a diversity of scenarios from
WWI to WWV. This article is a
recounting of an actual game using
the "2023 Scenario," otherwise known
as WWIV. The game begins with each
player controlling five cities, four
bases, six oil wells and $600 billion dollars. From that point, allies must be
secured through "foreign aid," units
must be purchased and deployed, intelligence scans conducted, and a grand
strategy for victory determined and implemented. To truly get the "feel" for a
game of Command HQ, this replay is
written as a "historical" narrative.

C

[Note about photographs: All of the
screen shots for this article are black
and white, so it is difficult to distinguish the opposing forces of red and
blue. Here is the secret: all red forces
face to the left (or west) and all blue
forces face to the right (or east).]

The Histories
Here, the initial superpowers are
described.
The world had changed over the past
30 years. Between the 1990's and the
fateful year of WWIV, 2023, trade became the key to world power. The rising
economic superpowers of Eastern
Europe, with their capital in Budapest,
and Latin America, with their capital in
Caracas, were in a state of change. For
the Latins, it was their moment in the
sun. For the Sla y s, it was their hour of
destiny.
After the collapse of the Soviet Union in
the 1990s and the successful American
Separatists Campaign led by extremist
movements from both the left and right
(which, as we all know, led to the secession of the Eastern U.S. seaboard and
precipitated their union with an emerging
Latin American brotherhood, thanks to
the rising influence of Cuba, Mexico and
Puerto Rico), the stage was set for the
dawn of "the new world." Promising a
"new order based on new ideas," the
leaders in Caracas initiated a global politiCircle Reader Service 1124

cal campaign to secure maximum
strategic advantage for their thinly disguised bid at world domination.
In Budapest, following the recent collapse of the EEC, leaders were quick to
perceive the imminent threat from across
the Atlantic, but they were a people
divided. The pan-Slavic leadership knew
that the earlier Western Europe was
united and made whole and productive
again, the more likely were the prospects
for peace.

The Cold War
Here, the five minute game period
before the allowable commencement of
hostilities is described in terms of purchasing allies through Foreign Aid.
Like a chess game on a global board,
the first moves were made by the pawns.
The Latins struck fast, securing Canada
and isolating the rest of what was once
the United States. The rest of the
Western Hemisphere was brought in line,
while moves across the oceans were
being considered.
The Sla ys plowed their diplomatic and
economic efforts into rebuilding a greater
EEC, uniting Central and Western
Europe with their eastern kin. It was a
slow process and the delay was an opportunity not wasted on Caracas.

Back in South America, it was decided
upon a strategy of building a wall and letting the enemy tire by bashing their
heads upon it. Russia was selected as the
right ally to be the "anvil" to receive the
enemy blows (after all, how many armies
had Russia defeated since the Mongols?).
The way to the enemy's capital at
Belgrade would be too tough through
Western Europe, it was reckoned, so the
"hammer" would fall from the south. To
this end, Japan was seen as the
hammer's forge, where strength could be
built up, and a campaign through China,
Egypt, then up into the Balkans would
be the overall plan of attack (although it
has been wisely said that "no plan survives the first contact with the enemy).
Liddel Hart would call it an "indirect approach" on a global scale.
The beleaguered blue boys of Belgrade
felt bereaved by the bitter bulletins. China
was secured as a buffer against Japan
and Russia, now painted in "South
American Red" on the geo-political map.
Isolated and poorly supplied, how long
could China be expected to last?
Within a short while, the "Red Devils" of
Latin America had secured India, a dagger poised at the heart of vital "blue" oilfields located in the Middle East; then
South Africa threw in with the red
menace. Belgrade blue, however, became the color of allegiance in Australia,
perhaps the balancing lever blue needed
in the Pacific.

Para Bellum (Prepare for
War)
Here, the five minute game period
before the allowable commencement of
hostilities is described in terms of purchasing military units and deploying
them for the upcoming war.
All the while, the troops were mobilizi n g...
The blue legions deployed for defense
in the Pacific, while elsewhere placing
two huge offensive forces (consisting
mainly of tanks and airplanes). The

Replay

greater of these two juggernaughts was
deployed in the Middle East, where the
quick securing of the vital oilfields would
be deemed of paramount importance.
The second force was to be ready to
mount an invasion of Russia. Hopefully,
this "defensive aggression" against Russia would prove more successful than the
evil campaigns of Hitler, Napoleon and
Charles XII of Sweden.
The red soldiers were deployed strictly
for defense in Russia, while in the Pacific,
a quick campaign to secure China was
readied (intelligence scans showed that
blue had left the area devoid of any
serious forces). Back in Caracas, a
decision was made to secure the former
United States, still a neutral white on the
map and engaged in a bloody "war of
unification" with their Eastern (red)
brethren. The Americans would be surrounded like their native sons once
circled the homesteaders, as the red forces deployed in an iron ring around their
neutral borders. If only the blue forces
could be kept out of the western hemisphere, then a solid economic base and
a two-ocean threat would be enjoyed by
the red forces of Caracas.

The Balance of Power
Here, the "hot" war's at-start forces
are compared.
The ledger of forces when the war commenced look fairly even on paper, but
the advantage seemed to be with red if
only by the defensive nature of the terrain red held. South America had an
economy based upon 23 cities, while
Yugoslavia had but 18 in a world comprised of 50 total major economic areas.
Both sides had the four bases and six oil
wells with which they started, but the
cash reserves were quite skewed with the
red budget down to a mere 9 billion and
nearing that stage where their balance
would be written in the same color ink as
their flag flew, while blue had much
greater flexibility by holding onto an aristocratic 64 billion at start.
(This, then, is the reason red declared
war; broke, deployed and ready, they
hoped that blue still needed more time
to make final purchases and lastsecond troop redeployments. Thinking
that they just might catch blue unprepared, red flashed into a quick and
callous declaration of war. This is a
sound, albeit amoral, strategy for cold
war and truce time play: be the first to
hit the war button in hopes the opponent is woefully unprepared somewhere).

loose (unless broken by the rare twominute "cease fire"). This, then, is the
war.

The balance of initial forces stacked up
as shown in the photo at the top of this
page. Note that five of the red submarines were formed as a "cordon" in
the North Atlantic to prevent any
European intervention in the affairs of
the western hemisphere, (mien referred to
as red's "Cordon Bleu."
In analyzing the compositions of the
world's military forces, blue was ready for
a decisive, blitzkrieg-style war with all of
their expensive tanks and airplanes,
while red was preparing for the long haul
with lots of defensive infantry and a
larger economy from which to build up
strength over time.

Turns 1-7, Opening Moves
After the five minutes of "cold war"
are up, either player may declare a
"hot" war and start the shooting at any
time. From this point on, economies
slow, troops commence to fire upon
each other, troop deployments take
longer, cities go "off line" after a unit is
produced, air strikes commence and,
generally, all hell (er... war) breaks

The first moves in any great war are
often the most studied. World War IV
would be no exception. While Caracas
was the most prepared and "declared"
war, it was Belgrade blue first out of the
gate with a perfectly executed, combined
arms assault on the Ukrainian city of
Kharkov in Russia, complete with
paratroops, tanks and air support. The
lone red army there could resist for only
five turns (the situation in Russia looked
very promising, indeed, from the blue
end of the table). In the Middle East, blue
was still in the throes of preparation
when hostilities broke out, but Belgrade
immediately launched satellites to establish a network of "baby blues" in the
skies above.
The legions of South America (the "Red
Bandana Republic?") began painting the
globe red by getting their Russian allies
to start securing bases
and converting
their oil supplies to wartime production
(i.e., "purchased" allies' oil wells and
bases always remain neutral and must
be "captured" by the purchasing player
in order to enjoy their benefits). Then,
Houston fell, as if struck by red lightning,
as Caracas invaded the neutral United
States. In the next instant, the Americas
threw in with their comrades in Western
Europe. With so many red soldiers
deployed on the borders and closing in
like the crushing death grip of a mailed
fist, the question was whether blue could
mobilize enough American forces in time.

Turns 8-22, Act I, Scene II
The formerly neutral Americans quickly
raised an infantry army in Detroit and
tank army in Denver. The infantry was
quickly ordered, like the revolutionary
army of 1775, to a fateful and disastrous
campaign in Canada. The Canadians mobilized a second infantry army, and the
American militia was soon overpowered.
(An important lesson: Tanks are superior on offense and infantry on
defense. The fate of these two
American units underscores both of
these points).
The American armor proved an interesting "loose cannon." Initially marching for
the Texas oilfields (blue forces already
feeling the effects of an oil shortage draining their strategic reserve), strong Latin
forces had them turning tail for the
central Canadian oil fields in short order.
The blue in Russia quickly moved from
Kharkov to Smolensk, but an interesting

Replay

lack of attack coordination caused the
sand in blue's hourglass to accelerate
toward an overripened (all right, rotten)
conclusion. Three blue armor units from
Kiev literally sat inert, calmly watching
six turns of battle while blue forces from
Kharkov attacked unsupported from the
south. Red was buying time and blue
was paying for it by not managing the offensive more carefully.
This is an example of how global distractions over several fronts can
prevent a player from concentrating
enough mental focus on vital sectors
during crucial periods of heightened
military activity. When a player can
get in there with the mouse and
"micromanage" all the details of a battle (particularly the air strikes), the tactics employed in that battle will, more
often than not, prove both successful
and less costly to that player. It's all a
trade-off in Command HQ, however, because the price of a successfully
micromanaged battle in one theater of
the world might be the fate of the war
in another.
While the Blue Boys of Belgrade were
pushing their Russian border eastward,
their Middle Eastern contingent finally
quit facing Mecca long enough to sluggishly get started on the conquest of
Saudi Arabia. Blue forces were also dispatched from Iraq to seize the oilfields to
the north in the formerly Russian
Republic of Georgia. Finally, a naval diversion was launched by blue against red forces which had seized the bases on the
Philippines. With no ground troop support, however, blue could not follow up
on its naval superiority. (Important lesson: Troops take ground. Without
troops, successes at sea cannot be consolidated by conquests on the ground.
Follow up naval victories with land attacks of either raid or invasion
strength whenever possible).
The Latin Legions of red were concentrating on their "stage one" objectives
of securing all neutral bases and oil wells
in Russia as quickly as possible; spreading their incarnadine gospel over the
United States; and attempting Fabian tactics (costly attrition to attackers) in Russia. Unfortunately for red, by turn 22 the
balance of forces in Russia was heavily
in favor of blue, particularly in tanks and
airplanes. Red decided that Russia's fate
was sealed and, just as the Czarist armies did in 1918, the troops began to
pull back to the perimeters of central
Siberia and Archangel. There, it was
hoped that the threat of "an army in
being" on blue's borders would tie down

marauders launched a "sneak raid" from
Iceland over to the blue base at Norway.
This would place a red army in a superior position to threaten central Europe
from the north, hopefully tying down
even more blue tanks and planes on useless garrison duty.

those expensive blue tanks and airplanes
and force them to waste away on fruitless garrison duty. The alternative for red
risked loosing this blue thunderbolt unexpectedly upon a red outpost somewhere
else in the world. Hence, it was deemed
unacceptable. Consequently, the blue
storm had to be both distracted and contained within Russia for as long as possible.

Turns 23-60, The End of
the Beginning
By turn 30, the Caracas Cowboys had
finished overrunning what was once the
United States of America, securing the
western hemisphere. Safe behind their
North Atlantic submarine screen (remember the "Cordon Bleu?"), red was preparing to build up in North America and
strike out across the oceans.
Red was on the defensive in other areas
of the world, though. Seven blue tank armies were rolling virtually unopposed
across Russia, preparing to secure its
northern flank of Archangel. As a
strategem, the red player loves to
threaten exposed flanks. So, the crimson

By turn 41, the Norwegian gambit had
paid off for red (who secured the undefended base there), but the blue
economy was expanding at red's expense as a direct result of the blue conquests of Leningrad, Gorki and all of Russia west of the Ural mountains, save for
Archangel (where the next blue blow
would fall). Soon thereafter, Belgrade's
forces won a telling naval battle that
threatened to turn the Pacific into their
blue heaven, but the land war was
decided by yet another red sneak raid,
this time launched from Seoul into undefended Beijing. (Another lesson:
Players must consider the value and
consequences of sneak raids, compared to the cost of keeping garrisons
to prevent their unopposed success).
Out of the "blue," a striking force of two
tank armies probed their way towards
the two entrenched red infantry armies
holed up in Archangel (the rest of red's
forces in Russia were rebuilding in central
Siberia around Novosibersk). The blue offensive westward attempting to secure
central Siberia was quickly called off so
that reinforcements could be sent to
guarantee victory to the north at Archangel. Caracas knew that losing Archangel
would begin to unhinge things in Russia,
taking the pressure off of too many
threatened blue cities and freeing up too
many blue tanks and airplanes. Drastic
measures were coldly calculated in
Caracas...
Elsewhere in the world, Belgrade's blue
boys tried their first unsupported "sneak
raid." These are raids where a lone
transport with no naval escort sails off to
an obscure, backwater destination in
hopes of seizing an ungarrisoned objective and "starting a fire" in the enemy's
strategic flank or rear. The raiding unit is
very much at risk during the trip and will
usually fail in the raid if the objective
should, in fact, be garrisoned. The costs,
however, are usually cheap and the
enemy is normally not in a position to ignore successful sneak raids.
The blue raid against the oil fields of
Borneo, however, met with failure, as the
objective was garrisoned by an
entrenched infantry unit surrounded by
hostile jungle terrain which attrits all who
reside there. While Belgrade experienced
a "Code Blue" (the rush to resuscitation)

Replay

in Borneo, Caracas mobilized three tank
armies, one infantry army, and three
naval units with orders to form up
around Hawaii. Thus, the flames of
military preparation began to forge red's
famous "Hawaiian Hammer."
What could have been the turning point
in the war, however, was about to take
place around the frozen port of Archangel in north-west Russia. Four blue tank
armies concentrated to the south of that
strategic base. Concentrated a bit too
closely, in fact. In a world of nuclear
weapons where world leaders keep their
fingers on the button while they stare
each other down, red's bloodshot eyes
blinked first.

Atomic and Political Fallout
The bomb fell on turn 60, wiping out all
four blue tank armies (an $80 billion investment on blue's part). A huge, nearly
impassable nuclear wasteland was
created which, ironically, served to greatly protect Archangel from the threat imposed by the blue forces remaining to
the south. With about half of blue's boys
now glowing in the dark, the teeth of

their Russian offensive had been pulled.
Suddenly, defensive options were being
given due consideration in Belgrade as
their supreme command sang the blues.
The political fallout, however, was
severe. All five cities of Japan, plus
Seoul, the newly conquered city of Beijing and red's dear old ally Canada packed up and went neutral in protest. Fortunately for red, most of the armies in
these countries stayed loyal, so they

were (reasonably) quickly reconquered.
Even the first naval unit to arrive in
Hawaii defected from red to blue, as did
two of red's five submarines in the "Cordon Bleu" and one of the two armies in
Bombay. In the North Atlantic, the three
remaining subs hunted down the two
chickens (er... defectors), while in India
there was nothing short of a civil war between the bloody red and blackened blue
armies present there (fortunately for red,
their army remained entrenched, while
blue's new troops were discovered unentrenched—a decisive advantage for the
Venezualan vigilantes).
The consequences of the political fallout changed the balance of economic
power such that blue's economy, for the
first time, exceeded red's. Caracas either
had to quickly get things under control
or stop planning for the "long haul." The
chaos of needing to re-secure rear areas
slowed red down for several turns, which
afforded blue considerable advantage
and possibly an easy route to victory.
(Tune in again, next issue, for "Opportunities Lost," "The Tide Turns," "Closing
The Ring" and "Strategy Hints.")

Computer Gaming World's
See Reader Input Device on page 90

The Categories
Strategy (ST): Games that
emphasize strategic planning
and problem-solving.
Simulation (SI): Games based
on first-person perspectives of
real-world environments.
Adventure (AD): Games that
allow you to take an alter ego
through a storyline or series of
events.
Role-Playing Adventure (RP):
Adventure games that are
based on character
development (usually
involving attributes).
Wargames (WG):
Simulations of historical or
futuristic warfare from a
command perspective.
Action/Arcade (AC):
Computer games that
emphasize hand-eye
coordination and reflexes.
Games are often listed in more
than one category. In this
case, the first listed category is
considered primary. In order
to be recognized as the "Top
Game" in a given category, a
game must be listed as being
primarily of that specific type.

Top 100 Games

THE HALL OF FAME
The Games in
CGW's Hall of
Fame Have Been
Highly Rated by
our Readers
over Time.
They are Worthy
of Play by All.

Foreign Correspondence

droids then move around together, forming the classic RPG party.
To escape, the player must maneuver
the droids through ten bases holding the
fortress prison in orbit, destroy the power
source in each base and find the
spacecraft needed to transport the robots
to the next base. Once each base has
been shut down, the player must then fly
the droids to the central fortress and rescue "himself".

Over There
Dungeon Re-Master
by Paul Rigby

Y

et

another Dungeon Master lookalike has appeared, this time from
Mindscape and the fertile brain of
veteran programmer Tony Crowther.
Called Captive, the player, although innocent of the crime for which he is accused, finds himself imprisoned in a cell,
under suspended animation, for two
hundred years. Then...

"I think it has been two days since I
woke up. All I remember is hearing a
low hum of machinery and then realizing I could feel myself against the cold
metal slab. It took me about three
hours to pull some of the tubes and
stuff out of me and think about getting
up. That was a mistake."
The only way to escape is, surprisingly
enough, via the briefcase found handily
nearby. Within is a computer, used to
control four robots — who happened to
respond to the SOS call. Each droid is
divided into component parts, enabling a
variety of configurations (different types
of arms, legs, heads, etc). The four

The opposition in Captive is varied and
imaginative. Dinosaur sea monsters,
dragons and mechanical tanks must be
fought using the iconic interface. The
view window lets you look through the
eyes of one of the robots. Above the
main view screen are five mini-screens
displaying extra information such as seen
through remote cameras. Available now
for the Amiga, with other 16-bit versions
to follow.
The West Marches are ruled by a duopoly. The King and Bishop each has a
court filled by courtiers presented by the
knights of the land — the player being
one of these knights. Courtiers hold great
influence as all matters of state are put
to a vote in the respective courts. A
knight who can accumulate the most
courtiers in each court will gain a
majority. With this majority comes a
chance to seize power and depose both
Bishop and King so as to replace them
with a suitable puppet ruler. If both
courts are so ruled, then that knight is
declared the winner. This, then, is the
task of the player.
In Microprose's Betrayal, four knights
battle it out: managing estates, collecting
taxes, creating armies, declaring war on
a regular basis, spying and other noble
acts.
Villages supply taxes, wheat for food,
pottery to sell, and militia (for defence
and offence). A self-sufficient village is
the player's aim; otherwise one must
finance it out of one's own pocket. The
player will also have to watch out for the
fluctuating popularity level which, if it
falls below a specified level, will result in
rebellion. Strangely, in this game of intrigue, assassinations, treason,
economics, etc., combat, which can be
toggled on or off, is a simple arcade beat'em-up, viewed from side-on. To appear
on the Rainbird label, Betrayal should
be available on the Amiga, PC and ST as
you read this.
In The Mission, the player takes the
part of a character constantly goaded
into undertaking crazy challenges from
(Continued on page 92)

Game Hints

Scorpion's Mail
Hints For Adventure Games
As Told By Scorpia

w

ell, it's a good thing Fred and I
made some extra room back
here. The number of requests far
the secret of the Ultima VI cheat menu
exceeded even my expectations. I have
begun to wonder if I should have said
anything about knowing it. It seems to
have caused a veritable flood into my
mailbox (not to mention the back room
here, which has suddenly become very
crowded).

No matter, I can handle it (I hope!).
Meanwhile, let me put in a reminder here
to be careful with those SASE's. One
reply came back to my box (over two
weeks after I sent it!) because the correspondent had used, not a postage
stamp, but a Nature Conservancy stamp,
on the envelope (oops). And there are
still those who forget to enclose a SASE
in the first place. You really need to have
one if you live in the United States, folks
(that is, if you live in the U.S. and want a
reply!). With all that said, we can move
on to this month's questions.
Ultima V: People continue to have
some difficulties with Dungeon Shame. In
particular, they can't find the way out of
the first room, and they know there has
to be more than that. Quite right, there's
definitely much more. To reach that
"much more," you need to be pushy.
Axes and arrows aren't going to work in
this instance; you'll have to get your own
hands dirty. Also, regarding Dungeon
Doom: this place is tricky. There's more
than one way to various levels, and you
can spend a lot of time going in circles.
What you really want to find is a room
with (among other critters) some
sandtraps. When you've reached that,
you're on the right path.
Wasteland: Folks are still having
problems with obtaining the four special
keys needed for the end game at Base
Cochise. One can be gotten from the
Cyborg Commandos in Las Vegas. The
other three can be found in Citadel. You

will have to go through Citadel very carefully to get all of them.

as the paragraphs on the scrolls, beginning with the Sun tile.

Quest for Glory (formerly Hero's
Quest): Some readers have been having
a hard time looking for the secret
entrance to the Brigand's fortress.
They've been doing all sorts of things in
the tavern, thinking that the way is under
the trap door. Nope. Wrong. The trap
door has nothing to do with it (as any
Thief could tell you, hehe). The entrance
is in the outdoors, cleverly concealed
amongst some rocks. Just be careful
you don't get bounced around. Also, for
those who have been asking why Sierra
suddenly changed the name of this
series from Hero's Quest to Quest For
Glory, it's simple: Hero's Quest (as a
game title) had already been snapped up
by Milton Bradley. To avoid all sorts of
problems, Sierra thus made a little
change in the title of their product.

Ultima VI: As I mentioned in my
original article on this game several issues ago, it is perfectly all right to take
anything you want from Lord British's
castle. That includes chests, locked or
not, as well as the potions sitting on the
table (although I never bothered with potions myself), and items in boxes and barrels. This time around, you don't have to
be afraid to snarf anything.

Wing Commander: I haven't played
this one; it's not really my type of game.
However, there is one tip about it that I'd
like to pass along. Going by the many
messages online about WC (of nearly
universal acclaim, too), it appears that
best results are obtained by using an
item called the Kraft Thunders tick.
Those who switched from whatever they
were using before to this particular joystick found the game much more playable.
Fool's Errand: Of the several really difficult puzzles in the game, one that
seems to be driving folks up the wall, is
catching the elusive question mark that
always bounces away when you get
close to it. The secret to success here is
obtained in the solution to another puzzle. Remember the points of the compass. Also, when putting together the
Sun map, check the tiles against the
paragraphs on the scrolls. Most (though
not all) tiles will have something on them
that relates to a paragraph, and the tiles
should be assembled in the same order

Indiana Jones & The Quest for the
Holy Grail: Most people are aware
there's a key in Henry Jones' house they
have to find. Only they can't find it. Well,
the place is such a mess already, a little
more won't hurt, right? So you may want
to try knocking things around a bit; you
never know what you might find.
Neuromancer: Money. Everyone
seems to want money. Not surprising,
really, since you need plenty of bucks to
equip yourself with the very latest in
cyber-decks. There are several ways to
obtain cash here (admittedly, not very
legally). One is to have a chat with a certain Panther Modern, who can be quite
helpful in this regard (he can be helpful
in other ways, too).
That's about all for this trek into the
mailroom. In the meantime, if you need
help with an adventure game (please, no
questions about war, strategy, or arcadetype games!), you can reach me in the
following ways:
On Delphi: Stop by the GameSIG
(under the Groups and Clubs menu). On
GEnie: visit the Games RoundTable
(type: Scorpia to reach the Games RT).
By US Mail (enclose a self-addressed
stamped envelope if you live in the
United States): Scorpia, PO Box 338,
Gracie Station, New York, NY 10028.
Until next time, happy adventuring!
Copyright 1990 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

Opinion

On-line Gaming Viewed by a Skeptic
Gemstone III,

for Example

by Johnny L. Wilson

O

n-line gaming is simultaneously a
hope for better gaming in the future, a significant option for
gaming in the present and, sometimes, a
throwback to the gaming of the past. In
many ways, the strength of the medium
are also its weaknesses. The strengths
are, of course, sociability and interaction
with human players without a requirement of geographical proximity. The
weaknesses are based on the fact that a
network is required to facilitate that
sociability and interaction. This provides
for two basic problems. First, within the
fee structure of the network, the meter is
always running. One doesn't feel the
leisure to explore multiple options when
it is costing $.10 a minute and up.
Second, the display capability of the terminals is limited by the capacity of the
modems and telecommunications
software. There are plenty of gamers
who are willing to participate in on-line
games, but are frustrated by the lack of
graphic support that current technology
allows. Though there are exceptions to
this lack of graphic support (Air Warrior
on GEnie and Club Carib on QuantumLink) and rumors of similar products for
all genres in the future, lack of graphics
is still a major limitation of the medium.

Gem in the Rough
Gemstone III by Simutronics, Inc. is
a good example of some of the best
aspects in current on-line games. However, the game also allows us to illustrate
some of the worst aspects of on-line

games. The best is reflected in its ability
to bring "real" people and their "player"
personas together and the selection of a
very fine role-playing system to handle
character generation and the mechanics
of combat. The worst is reflected in the
archaic text parser structure, awareness
of the meter running and fear of the
esoteric.
The well-cut facets of Gemstone 111 include the character generation system,
extremely well-written prose and
capacity, as in Compuserve's Islands of
Kesmai, to encounter authentically
human player characters. The character
generation system is licensed from Iron
Crown Enterprises and is a direct conversion of the RoleMaster™ pen and
paper game system. It provides for ten
different attributes, numbered up to 100
points each. Attributes rarely seen in
such games include: Eloquence, Reasoning, Intuition and Empathy. The more
typical attributes are present, as well.
Each character also has a maximum
potential for each attribute that can be
earned in the course of adventuring and
a statistical bonus or liability based on
the current statistic for the attribute. For
example, a character with an Agility of
100 would get a bonus of 35 when that
attribute is used, but the same character
might have an intuition of 22 and hence,
take a -6 disparity when that attribute is
used.
In addition, one selects race (from a
Middle Earth style list), appearance

(eyes, hair and complexion) and profession, as well as selecting skills, spells and
ranks (skill and spell levels) from a wide
menu of options. This is a marvelous
way to build a character.
Unfortunately, one wonders why
players, especially experienced
Gemstone Ill players, would ever go to
this much trouble. The opportunity to
use such skills seems rather unlikely in
the playing of the game. For example, if
a player goes to a great effort to create a
bard with a high eloquence attribute, it
does not seem to help him get a gig singing or telling stories in a tavern. It apparently does not even help him when encountering another character, because he
still has to communicate through the text
parser. The parser will be considered
later.
The prose descriptions in Gemstone III
are well-scribed, to say the least. The
short paragraphs certainly outshine most
text games and flesh out the town of
Kelfour's Landing (the game's starting
point) and environs with vivid images.
Finally, the one facet of most on-line
games which keeps bringing people
back is the capacity of playing with and
against human allies or opponents.
Gemstone III builds community within
Simutronics fantasy demesne by offering an on-line newsletter to help players
keep up with the latest happenings, a
high score list to keep things competitive
and on-line messages which indicate
(Continued on page 95)

Sneak Preview

Castling Without
Getting Rooked
Interplay's Castles

C

astles may best be described as a
hybrid between SimCity and a
strategy game concerned with the
chivalry, diplomacy, economics and
military science of the feudal era. In fact,
if the two simulations were published by
the same company, one would be
tempted to call it "SimCastle." For example, in the same way that SimCity
lets players design a city from
scratch and nurture it into a
metropolis, Castles uses a
simple layout routine to allow
players to design the floorplans
from scratch and an on-screen
editor to adapt the designs as
they come into being.
Also, the interface for Castles
is very similar to the SimCity approach. Like SimCity, where one
selects an icon, moves it to the
map via the cursor and clicks on
the spot where the actual road,
building, utility, park etc. is to be
planted or built, the "design
editor" function of Castles allows
the player to create with its point
and click interface. Players select
from two types of towers, one

type of wall or one type of door and
place them on the map. Then, players
decide whether to defend these castle features with arrow slits, cauldrons or, in the
case of a door/gate, a portcullis. Moats
are determined by the program, independently of the player.
The play mechanics themselves are

somewhat different, however. In SimCity,
one keeps making the same kinds of
decisions over and over. Then, after the
program runs through several evaluation
functions for each zone on the map, the
reports are updated and the players
make the same kinds of "standing"
decisions based on new information. In
Castles, the players make the same
kinds of "standing" decisions by
calling up decision windows for
allocating or hiring labour, purchasing or storing food, deploying military, and raising or lowering taxes. However, Castles also
features over 200 possible random problems that can arise at
unspecified times during the
game. These problems must be
solved by the player taking on
the role of a liege lord and selecting an intelligent option. So,
Castles functions as both a
"software toy," where one uses
strategy to build the castle of
one's dreams, and as a partial
role-playing game in terms of interacting with the artificial personalities of various factions.

Sneak Preview

Lord's Labour Lost
In addition to designing the castle plan,
players will have to manage their resources wisely in four areas of administration:
labour, taxes, military and food. Taxes
and food are rather straightforward. With
regard to taxes, players determine which
of three attitudes they will take toward
their citizens: generous, normal and tyrannical. Naturally, each of the three states
of taxation create their own potential
problems. With regard to food, players
must determine simply whether they will
purchase and store food in preparation
for a siege or not. Of course, funds spent
on food will mean less resources to
spend on the castle itself.
Military actions feature administrative
details like transferring troops from one
castle or lord to another. However,
players will also deploy their
men to participate in simple battle sequences depicting the
defense of one's castle (actually
using those arrow slits and
cauldrons) and, assuming the
design does not have to be
changed, brief sorties against
siege towers, ladders, catapults
and sapper's tents. The
decisions made in terms of
military administration will have
tremendous impact on this
phase of the game.
The area where players will
probably spend the most time,
however, is in the field of labour.
There, players will seek to recruit
new labourers and will allocate
them into seven different skill
areas: masons, carpenters,
smiths, diggers, carters, quarrymen, and general labourers. Obviously,
one must reach an optimal proportion between each of the skill areas or many of
the labourers will end up hurrying up in
order to simply wait.

The One Who Would Be
King
It is possible that Castles would be an
excellent program, even if it was only a
simulation of the difficulties encountered
in building a medieval castle. However, it
is also a role-playing game of sorts.
Many times in the course of a game, the
player will be confronted by a messenger
that brings a problem. The player will be
offered multiple choices in dealing with
the problem and his/her selection will
determine how the various factions
(feudal lords, church leaders, wizards

and/or serfs) respond to his/her leadership.
For example, one message states that
the Duke of Warfield has been drawn
into battle by a cunning enemy who ambushed him and killed 800 men. The
player's choices might include: a) sending 1,000 men to replenish the duke's
army; b) replacing the duke with a new
leader to avoid a similar debacle in the future; or c) sending both a new leader and
1,000 fresh troops. The final solution
may be the best military solution, but
demoting the duke is certain to set off
new troubles among the nobility.
On another occasion, the player might
be confronted by a noble who states that
a drunken cleric murdered his brother by
placing a knife in his back. As the liege
lord of the area, you must decide
whether to: a) allow the church to try the

the best way to handle each individual
problem, the situation is bound to be different, depending on what order the random problems arrive in.

Brows Bound With Victorious Wreaths
Setting Castles more distinctly apart
from SimCity is the fact that it offers a
campaign game. In the campaign game,
the player is required to subjugate eight
different geographical areas. Subjugation
is determined by the liege lord's (player
character's) ability to build and maintain
a castle in each given area. The plan for
the campaign game is built on a Welsh
analog.
Naturally, decisions made in one
geographical area follow the player from
one area to another and the diplomatic
juggling of one faction in relation to
another, as well as one military
power toward another, is more
delicate than in the scenarios
where players simply build their
castles.

Tapestries

case; b) try the case yourself; or c) assure the noble that you will look into the
case, but simply forget it and let matters
take their course. Naturally, the first
choice will get the nobility up in arms,
the second will make the church hostile
toward the player and the third will get
everyone angry at the player.
The prospect of numerous such dilemmas being thrown at the player during
the course of the game and each problem potentially impacting the labour
pool, income and military strength
makes for a challenging game. Indeed,
as angry as players often get with the
public opinion polls in SimCity, we can
certainly anticipate some visceral reactions to these "limited win" situations.
Also, the handling of dilemmas in this
way means that the game should never
really get stale. Even when one learns

In addition to excellent
decisions with regard to interface
and game play, Castles intends
to follow a high standard in atmosphere, as well. Interplay
has committed to a musical
score by the "Fat Man," George
Sanger, the composer who
rendered Tchaikovsky perfectly
for Lucasfilm's Loom and
penned such great cinematic
scores for Origin's Wing Commander and Savage Empire.
Hence, the rich atmospheric texture of medieval music should
surround the impressive 256-color VGA
graphics which depict the castles and environs themselves.

Long Live The King
Looking at a game as early as CGW
has looked at Castles means that one
cannot render a final verdict or certain
recommendation on a game. We are impressed with what the program already
does and we are in agreement with the
strategic/role-playing elements which are
yet to be fully implemented. We hear
what designer Scott Bennie means when
he says that, "It's no longer enough for a
product to be a good simulation or even
a good-looking simulation, it has to have
that element of game play that makes
players get it off the shelf over and over
again."

Designer's Notes

[This is Dan's tenth published game since 1978. Among
his better-known titles are:
Computer Quarterback,
M.U.L.E., Seven Cities of
Gold and Modem Wars].

Design Overview

A Bunker's-Eye View
of Command HQ

Command HQ is a conquer-the-world game, although not a wargame. It has more in common with the boardgame Risk! than with
the wargames often highlighted here in
Computer Gaming World. (Actually its
closest ancestor from board games would
be Axis and Allies, the Milton Bradley
WWII game with lots of toy soldiers, ships
and planes inside). The working title of
CHQ was War Room. Thus, CHQ simulates the command options at the highest
level where deploying armies, fleets and air
wings is the detailed level. Player interactions in CHQ primarily focus on buying and
transferring units, with movement and combat taking place automatically.
Appropriate to such a simulation, there is
limited intelligence concerning the enemy.
Only enemy units within a "scanning range"
of your units are "seen." (Depending on the
war being simulated, planes and satellites
may add to your reconnaissance ability.)
Also, as in the real world, CHQ has no
"turns." The game runs instead on
"modified real-time." When there is little action, time passes quickly and, when the battles heat up, the speed conveniently slows.
In addition, players can adjust the overall
speed of the game to suit their style—from
strategically slow to almost arcade-like fast.
CHQ offers a modem/serial option for the 2player game. Thus, even when playing
against another human the "limited intelligence" and "real-time action" features are
still maintained.
In the design of CHQ, I tried to make the
interaction of the world and units intuitive.
For instance, tanks are better on the attack,

Table 2: Other Terrain Effects
Terrain
Move
Ocean
20
Dock
20
Lake
20
Capital
20
Base
20
City
20
Resource 20
Plain
20
Forest
30
Mountain 40
Desert
20
Jungle
60
Polar
50
Wasteland 50

Attrit.
0
20*
3
20*
20*
20*
0
0
0
0
3
3
5
31

Dig In Repair
n/a
n/a
yes
L/S
n/a
n/a
yes
L
yes
L
yes
L
yes
L
yes
n/a
yes
n/a
yes
n/a
yes
n/a
yes
n/a
no
n/a
n/a
no

by Dan Bun
infantry are better on defense, jungles slow
movement more than forest or mountains
do, mountains and cities are easier to
defend, and deserts and polar regions
cause higher attrition. These kinds of "obvious" interactions make CHQ playable
without the need to know the specific numbers the game uses in its programming.
Thus, for this reason, and in keeping with
the normal way Microprose writes game
manuals, we left out the raw values that create the "model." However, since Computer
Gaming World readers have an appetite
for such figures and the sophistication to
handle them, here are some numeric details
on the CHQ model.

Getting There From Here
The CHQ world map/game "board" is
based on a Mercator projection map with a
resolution of 320 squares by 136 squares
covering the latitudes from approximately
75 degrees north to 55 degrees south. The
world "wraps" around horizontally. Terrain
affects the game by modifying movement
and combat, and by causing attrition.
It is important to visualize that units techni-

cally take up only one square, while their
icons occupy a three- by three-square grid
(the same size as cities and bases). Some
actual values used for each of these factors
are shown in tables 1 and 2.
During combat, units lose movement
steps for the amount of damage they suffer
and inflict (representing time engaged in
combat). For infantry units, this loss is
equal to their total damage suffered/inflicted, and for armor the loss is half the

Table 1: Movement Steps
Available per Round by
Unit Type
Infantry
12
Armor
24
Transport 36

Submarine 40
Cruiser
40
Carrier
40

Notes: Units automatically "save" leftover steps as they are moving (see
the terrain costs on Table 2, below).
Land units move only once per
round, while sea units may move as
many times as their accumulated
steps will allow when they are outside
the range of enemy units (usually
twice per round).

damage impact. This effect can reduce the
steps to a deficit of up to -25 (when these
steps are negative, that is when the unit becomes "pinned").
When not moving, a land unit's accumulation of steps is reset to zero while a ship's
value returns to its basic
steps-available-per-round (thus ships are quick to make an initial move while land units wait to build up
movement steps).
The way to get units "unpinned" is with
the "new orders bonus" built into the game.
This means that if an already moving unit
is given a command to move and its step
accumulator is less than 150% of its perround rating, that accumulator is increased

Move = The number of movement "steps" used by a unit to leave each type
of terrain.
Attrit. = Attrition causes a unit to suffer damage in certain terrains. "Resistance" attrition (marked with an *) is similar to an attack by an enemy unit
(i.e., it can destroy the moving unit). In neutral sites, the factor is 20 points of
damage. For enemy-held sites the factor is only 2 points of damage. "Basic"
attrition (i.e., "environmental" attrition) happens regardless of ownership, but
unlike resistance attrition cannot lower a unit's strength below 20 strength
points.
Dig In = Those lines marked with a "yes" mean that infantry units can dig in
(entrench) in that terrain type if they are not moving or engaged in combat.
Repair = Ships can repair where an "S" appears, and land where an "L" is indicated. The facility must be friendly and the repairing units cannot be moving
or engaged in combat for repairs to occur. All units repair at the rate of 10
strength points every other round up to their maximum of 100 strength
points.

Designer's Notes

Table 3: Units and Their Ranges
Firing Range
Scan
Land Trans. Ships Range
Land Units 2
1
5
2
Transports 2
2
1
3
Submarines n/a 2
2
4*
3
5*
Cruisers
3
3
4
Carriers
4
4
6*
15** 15**
15** 15***
Airplanes
Recon Sat. n/a n/a
n/a
20

Notes: * = Submarine scan range is reduced to 3 if the target is not moving.
A sub can only be spotted at a range of 1 when it is either stationary or if
the scanning unit is moving (regardless of spotting unit's normal range).
** = Airplanes don't automatically fire. Instead, they wait to receive missions.
*** = Airplane range also depends on the scenario chosen: 15 for 1986 and
2023, and 10 for 1942 and ????.
A visual aid for ranges: 1 square range must be envisioned as "deep overlapping," 2 squares as "slightly overlapping," 3 squares as "touching," and 6
squares as "a full unit away."

by a 50% bonus (the old "keep kicking
them in the butt" approach to leadership).

side who owns London, Paris and Berlin
wins.

Global Warfare As Scissors,
Rock, Paper

1942 (WWII): Infantry, armor, subs,
cruisers, carriers and planes are available
during this era. Income is generated by
cities but no oil is used. The side who owns
Washington, London, Berlin, Moscow and
Tokyo (i.e., all the capitals) wins.

There are 6 basic unit types that occupy
space and interact in the world. Although
CHQ is a very high-level strategic simulation, these unit types have very distinct features. There are two kinds of land units: infantry and tanks. Tanks move twice as fast
as infantry, cost twice as much and are better at conducting a land offensive. Infantry
"digs in" when not moving or engaged in
combat and, once entrenched, is less vulnerable to land and sea attacks. Also, infantry is the unit type of choice to "hit the
beaches" in an invasion (see table 4).

1986 (WWIII): This selection postulates a
war between NATO and the Warsaw Pact. It
includes all the units of 1942 unit types
plus recon satellites, killer satellites (for killing recon satellites), nukes, foreign aid
(with which to "buy" allies) and intel scans
(to "spy" on the enemy during the "Cold
War" or cease-fire periods). Custom layouts
of forces can also be created for this war
and saved to disk (which adds considerably
to the value of intel scans). The game
starts in "Cold War" mode with a timer that
indicates how long the players must make
chess-like purchase and maneuvering
decisions before hostilities may begin.
Cease-fires may also be declared if both
sides agree, leading to another couple of
minutes of cold war. To win, one side must
own Washington, London, Moscow and
Tokyo (note that all these capitals are
protected by ABM systems so they can't be
nuked). For this scenario (and the following
ones), oil fields supply the energy needed
for cities to create income and for units to
move.

are moved to random cities and the alliances are scrambled (at least as viewed from
the world of today — but who knows about
the world of tomorrow?). Each player starts
with 600 billion dollars, very few cities and
resources, no units and 5 minutes of intense cold war maneuvering before fighting
can begin.
???? (WWV): Battling it out under these
parameters postulates an "after the
holocaust" war of growing empires led by
the player's "city-states." All cities, bases
and oil fields are in random locations
across the globe and the opposing capital
is hidden. The units included are the same
as in 1942 but, unlike that scenario, oil is
needed to generate city income and move
units. To win, one must find and capture
the opposing capital. Many people have
compared this scenario to the situation
presented in the Interstel game Empire.

When land units are moved to sea they instantly and automatically become
"transports" and move like ships. Ship
types include these transports, submarines,
The Right Tools For The Job
cruisers and carriers. Transports can be easiUnits must "see" the enemy unit before
ly killed by any other ship but are the only
they can fire at it. Thus, units have a scanships that can mount amphibious attacks
ning range and a firing range (see table 3).
against land units, cities and bases. Subs
In general, a unit scans for enemy units
are hard to spot and do major damage at
each round and spots all units within its
close range. Cruisers have a moderate
scanning range (except for submarines,
range. Cruisers can also bombard shore
which have special rules as noted below).
units, are good against carriers in
head-to-head combat and are better than carriers
If there is an enemy unit within firing
against subs. Carriers are twice as expenrange, the unit then selects the nearest tarsive as subs and cruisers, have a wider
get, turns towards it and shoots. (Facings
range than cruisers (although they do a litare limited to north, south, east or west with
2023 (WWIV): This scenario has the
tle less damage) and they can carry an
diagonal unit contact going either east or
same features as "1986" except the capitals
airplane unit. These airplane
west, as appropriate). After
units have a very large range,
firing, units spend a round
can do major damage to
preparing to fire again (i.e.,
Table
4:
Damage
Points
Inflicted
by
Attacker
other units, can bomb cities
units fire every other round).
on
Defender
or oilfields, can transfer or
(Important note: a "round" is
airdrop infantry, and can also
defined as the time it takes
Defender I
Dug-In
dogfight other planes.
for every unit in the game to
Attacker V
Inf Arm Inf Trans Sub Cruis Carrier
have a chance to move,
Infantry
20
17
15
25
35
35
35
The World At War
scan, etc.)
Armor
26 20
20 25
35 35
35
There are 5 scenarios in
Stationary units that aren't
Infantry Transport 18
16
14
10
5
5
5
CHQ, covering real as well as
engaged in combat are ready
Armor Transport 9
5
8
7
10
5
5
imaginary World Wars. Some
to fire when a target apSubmarine
0
0
0
100
25
34
34
brief annotations follow.
proaches them. Moving units
Cruiser
12
10
6
50
34
25
34
have a 50% chance of being
1918 (WWI): This scenario
Carrier
10
8
5
50
25
20
25
ready to fire the first shot,
has only cruisers, subs and inAirplanes
50% 50% 50% 34
34
25
25
thereafter firing normally
fantry. There are only a few
every other round. If there are
Note that airplanes do a percentage of damage to a land unit's remaincities compared to the other
multiple targets at an equal
ing strength, and a fixed amount of damage to units (including land
scenarios, but they generate
distance, the computer picks
income for buying units. The
units/transports) which are at sea.
randomly between them if it is

Designer's Notes

Airplane Fast Facts

Example of Combat "By the Numbers:"

Scan and Mission/Transfer Range by Scenario
1942, ???? 10/70
1986, 2023 15/100

An entrenched infantry unit is defending a city from an attacking infantry unit (which happens to be located in an adjacent
mountain), and a tank attacking as a transport (although hitting
the defending unit in the flank, the transport, being a sea unit
with a blue background, receives no flanking bonus). Here's
how the losses would be calculated for each unit during a round
in which it fires:

"Downtime" Schedule
After a mission
8 turns
After defense (within 9 spaces)
+4 turns
After aborted mission due to "no fuel" 2 turns
Other Facts
Attrition rate to airdropped infantry =
20%
Attrition rate to bombed land unit =
50%
Damage points inflicted on cruisers and carriers =
25
Damage points inflicted on transports and subs =
34
Damage to city when bombed = 250 million + 5 turns delay
Damage to oil when bombed = 1000 units (5 turns production)
the unit's first shot, and then stays engaged
with that chosen enemy unit until it is either
destroyed or another enemy unit gets
closer. In CHQ, shots cause damage which
reduce the unit's strength from its potential
full-strength value of 100 strength points.
When the strength is reduced to zero or
less, the unit is destroyed. The amount of
damage done by a particular attack
depends on the attacking and defending
unit types (see table 4), the defender's terrain (see table 5) and whatever additional
combat rules might apply in a given situation.
Another combat rule is called "bombardment" and applies when cruisers or carriers
are attacking land units from greater than
one space distant. Losses from bombardment will cease, however, if the targeted
land unit's strength is below 30. (If the ship
closes in adjacent to the land unit it may
reduce it to below 30 strength points, but
the ship will be vulnerable to deadly return
fire by the defender's shore batteries at that
close a range; see table 4).

Submarine Surprises
Submarines have a number of special
rules. First of all, they can't be spotted by
satellites or airplanes. If a sub is not
moving or the scanning ship is, the sub
can only be spotted from an adjacent
square. If the scanning ship is stationary,
then it can spot moving subs up to 3
squares away. Once a sub is spotted it will
remain "seen" at the normal range of the
scanning ships (e.g., 6 for carriers and 5 for
cruisers). Subs can spot moving ships at a
range of 4 and stationary ships at a range
of 3. Thus, stationary subs are almost invisible until they attack. However, once they
attack they are immediately spotted.
Airplanes are another unit type with special rules. Like other units, they automatically scan when "available" and their range
of 15 rivals satellites (whose range is 20).
Unlike other units, however, they don't automatically attack. You have to designate a
mission for them. The range for strike mis-

The attacking infantry unit's damage to the defender =
15 points (table 4) x 2/3 (table 5) or 10 points of damage
The attacking tank's damage to the defender =
7 points (table 4) x 2/3 (table 5) or 4 points of damage.
The defending unit's damage to the attacking infantry unit =
20 points (table 4) x 3/4 (table 5) or 15 points
Net results: The defending infantry unit takes 14 (10 + 4)
points of damage, the attacking infantry unit takes 15 points of
damage, and the attacking tank is unscathed. (Important lesson: don't invade from the sea with tanks).

sions, infantry
paratroop drops, infantry transfers and
bombing runs is
15. For plane transfers to friendly cities or carriers the range is
100. (For scenarios other than 1986 &
2023, these two ranges are reduced to 10
and 70, respectively).

Death From Above
Infantry units which air drop automatically
lose 20% of their current strength. Air drops
may not be made onto cities or water. Air
attacks on enemy land units take 50% of
the land unit's remaining strength (planes
can kill land units but it takes at least 6 attacks, so the point of diminishing returns
quickly becomes apparent). Against
cruisers and carriers, planes reduce the
defender by a fixed 25 points of damage,

Table 5: Reduction of
Damage Modifier for
Defender's Terrain Type
Terrain
City*
City*
Mountain
Mountain

Defender Reduction
Infantry
1/3
Tanks
1/5
1/4
Infantry
Tanks
1/6

Notes: * = Includes cities, bases
and capitals.
Flanking applies when there is combat between units on land. Land units
hit from the side get 1.5 times the normal damage done to them while
those shot from behind get double
the normal amount. Another condition of this rule is that only units
which are currently engaged with an
enemy unit can be flanked. Thus, in
a battle between two individual
enemy units, neither side can get a
flanking bonus.

and against subs and transports that number is increased to 34 points.
Bombing cities reduces the enemy money
by 250 million and adds 5 rounds to the
time before that site can be used to
produce a new unit. Bombing oil fields
takes 1000 units of oil. (In other words,
bombing either target will cause it to lose
five rounds worth of value). After a mission,
an attacking plane is unavailable for 8
rounds. Any planes that were used for
defense (this happens automatically if the
attack was within 9 spaces of a defending
airplane) will be unavailable for 4 (additional) rounds. During its unavailable time, a
plane cannot scan for enemy units (thus
"seen" units may disappear). Note that
airplane ranges are calculated as a radius
in a circle from the square they are located
on, not as a large square "box." The radius
lines shown on the map are correct.

Fighter Chances
Planes do not always complete their attack missions (transfers with or without infantry never fail). Success depends on the
nearness of enemy planes to the target and
whether the nearest enemy plane is available or not. From 10% to 75% of missions
fail (depending on the distance from the
enemy plane and its availability). If the target is on top of or next to an enemy
plane a dogfight ensues. If the enemy
plane is unavailable there is a 25% chance
of completing the mission, 40% chance the
mission fails, 10% the friendly plane is shot
down and 25% the enemy plane is shot
down. If the enemy plane is available, there
is a 50% chance the attacking mission will
fail, 25% the attacker will be shot down and
25% the defender will be shot down. All of
this can be seen on table 6, below.
If target is 2 or more spaces from a
defending enemy plane the probability of
failure ranges from 10% to 50% for land tar-

Designer's Notes

gets (and from 20% to 60% for ship targets), depending on the distance from
defending planes. At a distance of 9
spaces or greater from a defending
airplane, no defending airplane is
engaged but the mission still has a minimal chance of failure (10% for land,
20% for sea).

around the globe before crashing. They
expend no fuel to remain in place.

Table 6: DOGFIGHT TABLE
Enemy Plane Is:
Mission Completed
Mission Completed/
Enemy Air Destroyed
Mission Fails
Mission Fails/
Friendly Air Destroyed

Available Unavailable
00%

25%

25%
50%

25%
40%

Foreign aid is the way to gain voluntary allies (unlike conquest). If a
country is neutral, giving as much aid
as there are cities in that country will
sway them to your side. In some cases,
a country may look neutral but is tending towards one side or the other.
Mexico in 1986 is tending towards
NATO, so the Warsaw player must invest twice to seduce such a country.
Conquering a city in a country makes
that country tend away from the invader. If a large neutral country like the
U.S.A. in 2023 is attacked by one side, the
other side should only need spend a single
aid to make the country an ally. However,
armies can block aid. Land units within 4
spaces of a city during cold war or 10
spaces during active war block enemy
foreign aid and its adverse effects.

Once these "non-dogfight" missions
25%
10%
are determined failures, 66% of the
failures result in a "failed mission"
(Defending plane is 0-1 space away from target)
where the mission is aborted without
loss or damage, and the other 34%
results in a plane being shot down. If a
some serious consequences in the game.
defender is engaged (i.e., the battle is within
Besides leaving a nasty wasteland in which
9 spaces of a defending airplane), half the
no unit can survive (although oceans are
time it will be the one lost. If there is no
unaffected), alliances shift and even oncedefender, then the mission plane is always
friendly units can turn hostile. Eventually, if
lost.
enough nukes are used, a nuclear winter
will ensue and the game will be aborted.
Example one: an airstrike is launched
The probability of nuclear winter starts at
against an enemy ship at sea which has no
50% for the 10th nuke and increases to
air cover. There is an 80% chance for suc100% at the 20th. There is no such thing as
cess, a 14% chance for an aborted mission,
Bugs And Piracy
"safely nuking," with the consequences in
and a 6% chance the attacking plane will
lost allies and units switching sides going
be destroyed.
As far as I know there are no major bugs
up significantly as each of the following
in the released version of the game. There
Example two: an airstrike is launched
cases is true:
has been some confusion about video
against that same enemy ship, only this
modes supported by the product. CHQ retime there is air cover for it at fairly close
• this is the first nuke used in the war,
quires an EGA, VGA or Tandy to work. How(3 spaces) range (not close enough to dog• a city was destroyed
ever, there is a pre-release version of the
fight). Now the probabilities are a 40%
• the destroyed city was at one time the
game that has been pirated, and that verchance for success, a 40% chance for an
player's ally
sion has some serious flaws. I suppose that
aborted mission, a 10% chance to destroy
• no enemy units were killed.
ranting about how piracy deprives me and
the defending airplane, and a 10% chance
my partner of a return on our 3 man-years
to destroy the attacking airplane.
The actual probability is difficult to calcuof work will only convince those mature
late because the program is very iterative at
Example three: The same attack, only
enough and ethical enough to have already
this level but, suffice it to say, don't drop
this time the defending air unit is at exdecided not to pirate software. (Contrary to
the first nuke of the game on a friendly city
treme (8 spaces) air cover range. Now the
popular opinion we are not getting rich off
unless you want to fight without friends!
probabilities are a 70% chance for success,
our royalties.) However, the player may not
Only your home country and units sta20% chance for an aborted mission, a 5%
know that pirating software hurts him, too.
tioned there are free from the "political fallchance to destroy the defending airplane,
The industry responds to sales figures and
out."
and a 5% chance to destroy the attacking
if a particular program gets widely pirated
airplane.
Recon satellites offer a good way to spot
with the consequence of poor sales, the publisher will assume it was not a good type of
enemy forces. They have a scanning range
Note that in each of the last two exof 20, which is the best in the game. They
product to make more of. Thus, less or, at
amples, when the attacking plane is
can also be moved, but use up their fuel
least, no more of that type of game will
destroyed, the mission fails, and when the
and might fall from orbit if overly
show up on the market in the future. I have
defending plane is destroyed, the mission
personally witnessed a case of this with my
maneuvered. They move 8 "world" (as opsucceeds.
posed to "satellite map") spaces towards
game M.U.L.E. back in 1984 (the heyday
their destination per round. Killer satellites
of Atari and the C-64). M.U.L.E. sold about
Oil's Well That Ends Well
30,000 copies (not good sales) but was
move twice as fast and, when they hit their
As mentioned previously, a successful
destination, they destroy all satellites within
very widely distributed by pirates. The
airstrike against an enemy oil resource will
8 "world" spaces. Satellites are launched
result was that publishers believe there is
cost him 1000 units of oil. The question is,
with 255 units of fuel, which are consumed
no market for 4-player strategy games. If
how far does a unit of oil go? Table 7,
you get a pirated game, try it out and see if
at the rate of 2 per "world" square moved.
below, should answer some of these quesyou like it. If you do then vote with your walThus, they can make slightly over one trip
tions. Know that each oil
let. (In the case of CHQ, if
resource produces 200 units
you get a pirated copy and
of oil per round, and that
like it, buy one to avoid the
Table 7: OIL CONSUMPTION RATES
one's reserve can hold a
bugs!) I'd love to hear from
Capitals
200 per round
Airplanes
20 per round
maximum of 10,000 units.
you about what you liked or
Each City 50 per round
All Moving Units
5 to initiate movement
didn't like in CHQ, suggesOf Nukes, SatelEach Base None
Moving Land Units 1 per movement step
tions for further products or
Each Unit 2 per round*
even challenges to play a
lites and Foreign
modem game. (I appreciate
Aid
* = This cost is spent for maintenance "just to exist."
all mail even though I'm
These are special purawful about answering it).
Some of the information on this table contradicts what the documentation
chase options available in
Contact me at: Dan Bunten,
might imply, but be aware that these are the actual numbers that the prothe 1986 and 2023
Ozark
1845 Softscape, P.O. Box
gram uses!
Little Rock, AR 72203
scenarios only. Nukes have

Game Hints

W

ell, here we are, starting off a new
year of gaming. Fred and I hope
that Santa brought you all the
games you wanted (and none of the ones
you didn't want!) for Christmas. There certainly were a lot of releases this season; getting through them all was a pretty heroic
task...and speaking of heroic...

some system used by QFG I has been
scrapped. Combat is now much like it was
when you trained with the swordmaster: full
screen and full character.
This allows a lot more freedom of action
and options, especially if you're a fighter
type. You can also set the arcade difficulty
to Easy, Normal, or Hard, and, of course,
you always have the option of running
away if things start to look bad.

So, ya wanna be even more of a hero,
eh? You just didn't have enough back in
good old Spielburg, huh? Fighting nasty critters, rescuing maidens in distress, putting
brigands out of business, suffering through
bad jokes...all that simply whet your appetite for more, is that it?
Fine! More is what you'll get. This time,
you get to save two cities, fight even nastier
critters, put a really mean bad guy out of
business, and suffer through worse jokes
than ever. Still wanna be a hero? Okay, but
don't say I didn't warn
you!
Quest For Glory II:
Trial by Fire, Corey
and Lori Cole's sequel
to Quest For Glory
(formerly Hero's
Quest: So You
Wanna' Be A Hero)
picks up just after the
previous game left off:
with you, Abdullah,
and your Katta friends floating off
via Magic Carpet Airlines to the
land of Shapeir. You're in Shapeir
now, and that's where the game actually begins.

All right, so here you are in Shapeir (that
is the name of both the land and a city; in
this article, Shapeir will refer to the city unless noted otherwise). The Kattas have already set up their Inn (fast workers!) and
you can stay there without charge, for as
long as you like. Good people, the Kattas.
The first thing you need to do is get your
money changed. The gold you brought
from Spielburg isn't accepted by anyone but
the moneychanger,
who will give you
dinars for it. Then, buy
a map and compass
from Alichila. There is
a hardcopy map that
comes with the game,
but it's a little confusScorpia Recounts a New "Quest for Glory"
ing trying to figure out
where you are by using
that map. The one
from Ali is much more helpful.

Scorpion's Tale

Sierra's Quest for Glory II: Trial by Fire

It's a magical map that shows all
of the city, including places you
have visited at least once. So, to
get from, say, the Gates Plaza to
the Fighter's Hall, you just click on
the Hall and poof, there you are. Of
course, you do have to find these
places on your own the first time
around.

If you played the former Hero's
Quest and eventual Quest For
Glory, you can bring your saved
character into this one. However,
be advised that the early version of
QFG II reads all transferred characters as fighters, regardless of their
profession in the first game. So
check carefully after you import
him to the second game. If he
shows up as a fighter, but is supposed to be a mage or thief, call
Sierra immediately for assistance.

Now, you can take the time out
to explore, talk to people (ask
everyone about everything you
can), sign in at the fighter's hall,
and maybe, buy a souvenir or two.
If you're a thief, locating the
Thieves Guild will naturally be high
on your list of things to do. Mages
will, of course, be looking for the
Mage Guild (Hint: have all the
spells you possibly can before looking for this place).

If you didn't play Quest For
Glory (or didn't save your character), you can create a brand-new
character. As noted above, you can
have a fighter, thief, or mage. You
can also create hybrid characters,
such as fighter/mage or
mage/thief, but it's more fun to
play through as a pure character
class.
The main reason for that is the
game functions somewhat differently, depending on what profession
you choose. Some things will show
up only for a particular type of
character and some puzzles will appear only for a particular type of
character. There are several puzzles, however, that all will face, but which will be
solved differently, according to profession.

QFG II uses pretty much the same interface as the previous game, but there is one
big difference: combat. The rather cumber-

The pace of the first few days or
so will be rather leisurely. Don't
look for too much to be happening. This is where you build up
your skills for the tough times
ahead, so make good use of this
free period. Visit the Fighter's Guild
Hall and train up, even if you
aren't a fighter. The workouts will
give you increases in fighting
ability, as well as raise your stats.
Having some extra strength or
agility never hurt anyone and it
might save your life someday.
Money is a consideration, too. There are
some things you need to buy, and you

Game Hints

could find yourself running a little short.
Check out the notices at the Fighter's Hall
for cash-generating assignments (mostly for
mages and fighters, since thieves have their
own little ways of making money). Beating
up on brigands in the desert can also put a
few dinars in your pocket.

day 17. It's the only way to cross the desert
safely. That's plenty of time for you to save
Shapeir from the elementals and get a few
other things accomplished, too. Just remember, everything has to be done before the
morning of Day 17. After that, you're on
your way and there's no going back.

Sooner or later, you'll start hearing about
elementals. Naturally, this is because the
town is about to be invaded by them and
it's going to be your job to stop 'em. Of
course, it helps to know how, so the wise
hero will ask around in the right places to
pick up this valuable information.

Does that sound ominous? Just wait until
you get to Raseir and you'll learn about
ominous. It's not like Shapeir. There are no
merchants in the Plazas, no shops open,
and no one on the streets except guards.
The whole town looks pretty slummy. In
fact, half the town has been blocked off
(no, you can't get past any of the barricades). Oh, and your magic map doesn't
work here, so you have to get around the
hard way.

All four elementals must be captured, not
killed. So, aside from finding out everything
you can about their natures (and weaknesses), you also need a suitable container
for each one. Three of these you can buy
outright, but the fourth one is another matter. How you obtain it will depend on your
character class, but don't take too long; the
air elemental shows up soon after the fire
elemental (the first) is captured.
One neat feature is public adulation.
Every time you succeed with an elemental,
the word gets around pretty quickly, especially among the Katta merchants. Make a
tour of the plazas and enjoy the praises of
the merchants. See, there are some rewards
for being a hero!

Time will hang a little heavy on your
hands, unless maybe you're a thief. There
isn't much to do or see in the city, especially on the day you arrive. Signor Ferrari at
the Blue Parrot provides (shabby) accommodations, but these are available only at
night. Since there's a curfew, it's wise to be
indoors after sunset.

The only problem with your Saurus is that
it isn't quite so brave as the manual says.
Expect your faithful mount to take off at
the first sign of trouble. However, if you
can't find him afterwards, not to worry. He'll
show up back at the corral sooner or later.
By now, you're probably wondering just
what the game is all about. Well, if you've
been talking to people (and reading the
manual!), that's pretty obvious. Things are
not good in Raseir, the sister-city of
Shapeir. First, the Emir has vanished and
no one knows what happened to him.
Second, Raseir itself has deteriorated since
then, as witnessed by the refugees and
rumors which have been pouring into
Shapeir for a year now. The Sultan's army
was turned back by a magical sandstorm.
Even the top mages of Shapeir have been
unable to penetrate the darkness that lies
over the city.
So, you're just gonna have to make a trip
to Raseir to set things right. It's not a trip
you can make alone, though. In fact, you'll
have to wait for the caravan to arrive on

Then it's through the caves we (or at least
you) go. Cross the stream (step lively!) and
then move up to the next level...providing
you do something about the wind (no, the
air elemental is no help here). Try holing
up, that might help.
There isn't much you can do about the
lava room except not to dally and to watch
where you walk. Move fast enough and
you'll come through it in relatively good
shape.
All you need now is the name of power to
open the door. You should know what it is
(if you don't, you weren't paying enough attention to the prophecy, for shame, for
shame!).
Okay, your little mission is just about
over. In fact, it is over, as your "good
buddy" pops in, grabs the idol, and leaves
you behind to die a slow death. Hey, isn't
that what friends are for?
Never fear, there is a way out. Just walk
around a bit. After a little chat with the
Djinn, it's time for the big showdown.
Before you know it, you're back in Raseir,
just outside the palace (a good place to
save, just in case).

In between these little rescue jobs, you
can wander around in the desert. It's mostly
a boring expanse of sand, sand, and more
sand, but there are a few interesting things
to be found in the arid wastes. Just watch
your step and be certain you have plenty of
water.
Transportation is helpful, too. There are
no horses in the land of Shapeir. Instead,
everyone rides the Saurus (something
along the lines of a reptilian kangaroo). Is
buying a Saurus a good idea? You bet your
life (hohoho) it is!

door open. Your "friend" is pretty impatient,
so don't keep him waiting. It's simply a matter of throwing a little light on the subject,
after all.

How you get in will, again, depend on
your profession. Mages and thieves can
take the detour; fighters go right down the
middle, so to speak. Whichever, it won't be
long before you're at the climax. Do not
waste time here; once all the candles are lit,
the demon Iblis will be released and you
don't want that to happen (after all, it ends
the game, and not pleasantly!).
The next day, you can watch Ugarte (an
information peddler and sometimes water
smuggler) get arrested by the guards.
There really isn't much you can do about
this except look on. Sorry about that, but
even a hero of your stature can't help
everyone.
However, you'll soon have the opportunity
to help someone else, and my advice is to
take it. Otherwise, you might have some
problems later. Speaking of problems,
events start to move quickly on the third
day, when you're arrested and tossed into
the dungeon.
Naturally you (and your Katta friend
Sharaf) will escape (if you don't waste too
much time). How depends on your character class again; the methods are pretty obvious.
Unfortunately, as you make your way
through the alleys, you run into someone
else who doesn't exactly have your best interests at heart (presuming he even has
one, a matter that is in grave doubt). On
the other hand, at least it gets you into that
fabled Forbidden City you've been hearing
about.
Now, the first thing is to get that crypt

Whew! That was cutting it close, but
heroes are supposed to live on the edge
anyway, right? Now, you can sit back and
enjoy the grand finale. And what a finale it
is! It is very elaborate, and certainly one of
the better game endings anywhere.
In terms of difficulty, this one is about on
a par with the previous game, maybe slightly harder in some respects. In terms of
humor, well, just grit your teeth, friends, because the bad jokes and puns are
everywhere, and they are bad! Don't say I
didn't warn you. And on that note, A River
Dirty, Gertie, until next issue!
In the meantime, if you need help with an
adventure game or a bad pun, you can
reach me in the following ways:
On Delphi, visit the GameSIG (under the
Groups and Clubs menu). On GEnie, stop
by the Games RoundTable (type: Scorpia
to reach the Games RT). By US Mail (you
must enclose a self-addressed, stamped envelope if you live in the United States): Scorpia, PO Box 338, Gracie Station, New York,
NY 10028.
Until next time, happy adventuring
Copyright 1991 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

Review

Jousting over Germany
Microprose's Knights of the Sky
by Russell Sipe

ll

right, all you jet jockeys. If vertical acceleration is your thing, if being in the midst of the
fray from the 'get go' turns you on, if you feel
the need, the need for speed...you'd better look elsewhere.

A

On the other hand, if you really want to experience
what WWI combat felt like, you're going to want to
take Knights of the Sky (KOTS) up for a spin (and
a spin is just what you may find yourself in if you
face the Red Baron himself before you are ready).
For several years now, we at CGW have wanted to
see a good WWI air combat game. We were pleased
when four games were announced last year (Wings, Blue Max,
Knights of the Sky, and Red Baron). We were disappointed
when three of the four games were delayed. Now, as of this writing, all but Red Baron have been released and we are told it will
be out by the time this issue hits the printing press.
Wings (see our review in CGW 1177) is just what you would expect from Cinemaware, a graphically rich cinematic style game
which puts more emphasis on arcade gaming than on serious history. Our review said "while some serious pilots will dismiss this
program as merely an overly streamlined flight simulator, Wings
is really a whopping good arcade experience."
Blue Max was reviewed in CGW #78. Our review stated "Blue
Max strives to give one a feel for WWI dogfighting; accuracy is
sacrificed to gameplay. The aircraft are simply overpowered for
their historical period...however, the game was designed for the
general market; garners who are more into 'game' than
'simulation' should find Blue Max enjoyable."
Red Baron was sneak previewed in CGW #75 (October 1990).
At the time, Dynamix was touting a pre-Christmas release. By
the time you read this, we will know if they hit their target. In our
sneak preview we said, "Dynamix has three goals in mind with
Red Baron: get the flight dynamics right; make sure the dogfighting is realistic; and get the historical color right (i.e., get the
famous aces to perform as they did in real life)." Our sneak
preview was based upon a version that had most of the flight
dynamics 'up and running' realistically, and the dogfighting in
place. However, the strategic (almost roleplaying) aspect of the
game was still in pieces (designwise). From what we have seen,
however, we think they could well accomplish their three goals.
So now let's take a look at Red Baron, er, we mean Knights of
the Sky. You'll have to pardon the error; you see, Microprose
had planned to call their WWI air game "Red Baron" (indeed, in
the early days, that is what it was called in-house). The title "Red
Baron" was dear to Microprose CEO Bill Stealey and
co-founder/lead designer Sid Meier's heart since an arcade game of
that name played a role in the founding of Microprose (a famous

story recounted numerous times in
Microprose literature). However,
Dynamix beat them to it, having
acquired the trademark before
Microprose could. It is a rare event
when someone beats out Bill
Stealey.

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

Knights of the Sky
113M (640K required)
1-2 (with modem)
$59.95
Jeffery Briggs
Microprose Software
Hunt Valley, MD

One is the Deadliest Number
One of the first things you will notice when playing KOTS is
that, seemingly, one hit will bring down your plane. Now that
doesn't seem very realistic, does it? But wait a minute. Let's look
at that. From the first day KOTS hit the shelves, a debate has
raged (well, maybe that's too strong, how about 'a lively debate
has occurred') concerning this one-hit feature.
Both sides can call upon history. Stories exist that describe
long, drawn-out duels with multiple hits, as do stories that point
out time and time again that a single well-placed burst would
take a plane down. Arguments on this question have gotten
down to the mathematics involved. "If a plane fires X rounds,
and X rounds hit, what are the chances that the hit will be a critical hit, etc. etc. etc.". We think these arguments miss the point.
Most WWI aviators stalked an opponent; they did not come in
with guns a-blazin'(if they did, they tended to be short-lived). It
was a fearful thing to have hot lead ripping through canvas and
wood. There was no real protection of the body or the critical
parts of the plane. Beyond the outright fear of being shot to
death was the very real fear of a punctured fuel tank (self-sealing
tanks were improvements for another World War) and the ensuing possibility of a lonely, fiery death. Death was a constant copilot for the WWI aviator.
So, how do you capture this reality in a computer game? It's
hard to make death real when you can take multiple hits and
monitor them on a hit-o-meter, as many games allow you to do.
"OK, I can take 3 more hits before I have to disengage." That
doesn't seem realistic to us. What does seem realistic is the ten-

Review

sharks found in jet combat games. Altitude is king in WWI air
combat, where gaining it is hard and losing it is all too easy.
In the campaign game, you begin as a corporal and work
your way up through the ranks. As time progresses (the campaign game begins in May 1916), better planes become available. Of course, the Germans are developing better aircraft as
well. When you reach the rank of Captain, you have the option of moving the location of your base.
In between flights, you learn of the activities of other
"knights of the sky", both friendly and hostile. Your goal is to
be the "ace of aces" (the flier with the most confirmed kills).
As part of reaching that goal or staying on top once the goal
is attained, you will probably want to challenge other highscoring enemy aces to personal combat (conversely, they
can challenge you as well).
Like F-19 and F-1511, KOTS graphics are polygon-filled and
nicely rendered. What we particularly like is the F2 tactical
view that "puts you at a point in space that allows you to see
both your fighter and the closest enemy" (you can toggle the
F2 key to see other aircraft as well). It gives you an immediate orientation to the enemy's location in a dogfight. You will
play most of the game, especially in a combat situation,
switching between the standard forward view and the F2 tactical view. Also, while many simulation garners do not care for
the unrealistic-looking chunky scenery you get by using
polygon-filled technology, the Microprose system allows for
numerous external views of the airplane being calculated
simultaneously. This means that you can get an esthetically
superior vantage point of the craft's behavior from almost
any angle at almost any time. That's a trade-off you can live
with!

sion and sweaty palms we get when we play KOTS. Just knowing that one well-placed burst/shot will bring us down makes us
hop like Mexican jumping beans on a hot plate whenever we
hear guns blazing behind us — even more so when we are playing against a human opponent (using the modem play feature).
Your heart will beat faster.
Of course, WWI aficionados who cut their teeth on dogfights
with miniatures rules and boardgames are bound to be disappointed with the fact that you can't limp home with that wing
sliced up like an avant garde sculpture or tail "Streamlined by
Spandau." There's a lot to be said for knowing that you came
close to "buying it," but managing to cheat the "reaper" for
another dogfight, anyway. So, the "guaranteed critical hit with
every hit" syndrome works both for and against this otherwise
masterfully crafted game.
With all that having been said, here is the explanation of the
one-hit phenomenon from KOTS designer, Jeff Briggs: "Actually
you can sustain multiple hits, but only the critical hit that takes
you out is apparent. Hits that only go through canvas and wood
are not telegraphed to the player". When CGW suggested that it
would have been good to telegraph those non-critical hits via a
sound clue, Jeff agreed and indicated that if they had it to do
over again, or as he put it in the proverbial programmer's lament, if they had "had more time," they would have put in just
such a sound clue.

The Look And Feel of WWI
The planes "feel" realistic. The flight dynamics and the sounds
of the sputtering engines are constant reminders that these early
aircraft were mere minnows when compared with the killer

Further, when an aircraft is shot down, the game goes into
a replay mode that is an excellent example of effective display design. After watching the replay from the "forward view"
(above and behind your aircraft), you can select from three other
views to view the same action (reverse view, predator view, and
the exciting trailer view). Well done, guys!

Being There is All the Fun
The missions themselves are structured very much like
Microprose's other flight games. You receive your orders, take off
from your aerodrome, fly the selected course (or not), perform
the mission required (or not), and return to base (or not). Missions include patrols, recon escorts, bombing, strafing, and balloon bursting. Figuratively speaking, be prepared for "hours of
boredom followed by seconds of sheer terror". Lest someone
take that last sentence literally, let's make it clear that the game
does a good job of simulating the fact that WWI pilots did not
take off, jump immediately into combat, and then land (or
crash). There is the sometimes tedious task of flying to the mission location. The potential tedium, however, is usually relieved
by the presence of hostile aircraft in the area through which your
flight plan passes. You can engage or "stay on course" and hope
they are too busy with their mission which, in turn, you hope is
not "intercept enemy aircraft". The tedium all but disappears
when you fly in accelerated time. Time passes rapidly and your
destination looms up more rapidly. Don't try to do much
maneuvering in accelerated time, though, or you'll be all over the
sky. Instead, use accelerated time when flying straight and level
towards your target and be on a constant lookout for the enemy
by toggling the F2 key.
The game includes 20 different WWI aircraft and dozens of
enemy pilots to fly against, the most awesome, of course, being

Review

the Red Baron himself. But what sets KOTS apart from the other
WWI air combat games mentioned above is that you can play
against pilots much more crafty that the computer-controlled Red
Baron (although he is no slouch). With its head-to-head feature
you and a friend (or enemy for that matter) can fire your
machine guns and duel it out in the skies. Playing one another in
the offices of CGW (via null modem connection) has been a real
hoot. The office next door wonders what all the yelling is about.
Great feature! However, while the campaign game has variety,
head-to-head combat is always the same: you start headed
towards one another a couple of miles apart and already having
attained sufficient altitude. We have a rule in the office that we
will fly past one another before engaging, since those head-on
chicken runs are usually over much too quickly.

Oops!
• In spite of the tension you face in combat mentioned above,
you don't really face death that often in KOTS. At low difficulty
levels it is rare to die in a crash. If you crash on your side of the
front you are found and returned to your base. If you crash in
Hunland, most of the time you either sneak across the front at
night and make your way home, are captured but escape, or you
are captured then released by your magnanimous foes out a
sense of chivalry (since they have heard of your glorious reputation). Puke!
At higher difficulty levels you are more likely to die in a crash,
but even then, you will survive a nose-dive crash approximately
half the time. Designer Jeff Briggs indicated that your angle of descent and speed affect your chance of surviving a crash and was
surprised at CGWs survival rate on the nose-dive crashes. By the
way, the type of critical hit you sustain determines how much
control your aircraft has after being hit.
Even when you die, you can elect to be resurrected. Death,
where is thy sting? Our recommendation is to bite the bullet (pun
intended) and resolve to let dead pilots stay dead. Of course, the
whole question is moot when playing head-to-head with your ego
and reputation on the line.
• When playing "Dogfight Encounter" you face a lone ace of
your choice. These aces tend to hug the earth, forcing you to
fight close to the deck. Even at difficulty level five, the enemy
aces will sometimes crash while maneuvering. The only way you
will know this is to see it happen or to toggle F2 and notice that
the enemy plane has disappeared. There should be a victory
screen when the enemy is defeated (or at least a replay when he
crashes such as the one you get if you actually shoot him down).
• The F2 tactical view is great for combat, but it should have
been disabled when the enemy is hidden in the clouds. You can
locate the enemy in the clouds by hitting the F2 key which
centers on the enemy (even if you can't see him). Fighting in the
clouds would have been so much more realistic had this simple
(we assume) fix been done.

Conclusions
Jeff Briggs has done a good job of making WWI air combat live
and breathe for us. The modem play feature is particularly appreciated. This game is a must for WWI fans and flight simulation fans.

Comparing the Games
As of this writing we have not received final code on
Dynamic's Red Baron. As soon as we do, we will compare
the WWI titles in CGW (hopefully in our March issue).

Review

Ring Around Valhalla
Electronic Zoo's Legend of Faerghail
By Peter Olafson
TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
REVIEWED:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

Legend of Faerghail
Amiga, Atari ST and IBM
Amiga
$49.95
Olaf Barthel, Veith Schorgenhummer and Mathias Kastner
Electronic Zoo
Baltimore, MD

curious mix, this Legend of
Faerghail (LOF). A threedisk, three-dimensional roleplaying game released by Germany's
ReLINE Software and imported by
Electronic Zoo, LOF is essentially a
Bard's Tale cousin with a horde of
bells and whistles.
Immediate impression: It's a beaut!
LOF is a feast for both eyes and
ears, vast enough to lose oneself in
for a month and saturated with features to improve the quality of play.
It is as though the designers had sat
down to create a game that had the
options other CRPGs lacked. And
yet, while handsome and featurepacked, a longer acquaintance found
LOF rough-edged in places and illthought-out or incomplete in others.
The game begins in Thyn
another town-by-menu, a la Champions of Krynn — and never was a community better named. There are
few clues to your mission at the start: simply that the normally peaceful
elves are acting odd. Specifically, they're at war with Thyn County, and
the player has been charged with gathering a party and journeying to
neighboring Cyldane County to ask for support. The count of Thyn gives
the band an amulet (which they'll need soon enough) and those instructions, and that's it, son.
Along the way, they explore a heavily-forested countryside and pass
through eight dungeons (for want of a better term) ranging from a dwarven mine to a lizard temple to a derelict castle to an elvish palace, each
with its own distinctive look and feel.
It's in dungeon deep that the game really makes its mark. The lustrous,
deep-hued graphics, while static or barely animated, are downright Dungeon Master-ish in detail. Role-players who loved Bard's Tale II: The Des
tiny Knight for its size, but despaired of the repetitive skulls-on-the-walls
motif, will be tickled pink. Moreover, each dungeon is mammoth, with
more than four levels and 1,200 rooms each. (The level I'm mapping is
roughly 30-by-30.) Supplementing the good looks is a healthy supply of
digitized sounds — slushy footsteps and moaning wind out of doors, echo
ing footsteps, slamming doors and dripping water in dungeons. This
place feels like a real place.
Get out the graph paper. Automapping of a sort has been included, but
it's a privilege, not a right. It requires a particular object or spell to accomplish it and you'll have to wear down your pencil a bit first. (There's
a map of Thyn in the fat and useful manual, but the woods are dark and
deep, running into trees is painful and there are a number of interesting
unmapped locations out there.)
Combat, of course, is inevitable in this sort of game. Fortunately, it is a
bit more sophisticated than usual in LOF. Weapons and armor accrue
damage during the fighting, but, if a blacksmith is in the party (a good
move), they can be repaired in the field. Characters can shift between
four rows, depending on their defensive or aggressive posture. (Unfor-

tunately, lateral movement to protect weak or exposed
party members is not permitted.)
Also, while characters accumulate the usual experience points, the points garnered actually reflect
damage inflicted on the enemy and success in
spellcasting for a change. A character doesn't have to
strike the death blow to gain experience.
Finally, the game does an excellent job tracking combat with a series of small charts that show experience
points, gold rations gained and damage taken. A lot of
useful information is pressed into a small space.
The characters have the usual CRPG stats and, in
the fashion of Interplay's Dragon Wars, a set of
skills. Most of these are commonplace, but an especially nice addition is "Concentration." This attribute
governs success in both spellcasting and learning to
cast new spells. (There are no fewer than six spellcasting character classes, each with mutually exclusive
sets of spells purchased in town.)
Concentration is also handy for linguists. Seven languages may be learned, in addition to the Common
Tongue, so concentration will prove invaluable in
managing the party's peaceful withdrawal from encounters or trading
items. Talking beats fighting any day in my book.
However, this option doesn't appear to have been fully exploited. In a
game so thin on hard information — the party is not even clearly steered
toward a starter dungeon — this would have been a good way to insert tidbits of news and gossip, as well as serving to flesh out the count's account. Whatever one's characters learn in LOF, they learn with blood.
However, LOF smooths the way with a number of time-saving features.
For instance, when the characters go shopping and choose an item they
cannot afford with cash on hand, they will be asked if they would like to
have the balance deducted from their bank accounts. When they stay at
an inn, it is possible to choose a simple night's rest or purchase the
equivalent of an "American plan" that includes rations. If they go into
combat against animals, they are hunting, so the post-combat reward is
likely to be rations. After all, buffalo do not carry short swords. If the characters wish to deposit or withdraw all available funds from the bank, a
tap on the return key does the trick. It is the thoughtful consideration of
these features, mints on a hotel pillow, that set the basic tenor of this
game.
Unfortunately, there is a dark side to LOF as well. Portions are as slow
as a dying troll retreating through a swamp in full plate armor. For example, entering a town requires an almost 30-second load, even with the
game on hard disk. One can speed things up a bit by disabling certain
features, but this is just about long enough to wonder if there's something more productive you could be doing with your time.
Then there is the issue of play balance. As is not uncommon in games
of this type, a beginning party will have a difficult time getting under way
without some poor soul getting killed off. Characters can be restored to
life at the town temples, but at a hefty price of 300 gold pieces per level.
So it is especially nice that the game supports characters imported
from EA's The Bard's Tale series and SSI's Phantasie and Phantasie
III. Peteroo, my 32nd-level fighter from Bard's Tale II, came over as a

Review

level one punk in LOF (but with 427 hit points!). (Regrettably, the upscale weapons, armor and special items do not make the transfer.)
For players who aren't fortunate enough to have data disks from these
early games lying about, LOF's answer to early death is Siegurd, a giant
warrior who intercepts the party outside town, just happens to be going
the same direction and nags the party ceaselessly until they allow him to
join them.
Ah, Siegurd. Siegurd is at once a blessing and part of the problem.
Once admitted to the party, he slices and dices monsters with appalling
efficiency and restores a limited number of lives to characters who die.
He may well be the only thing that keeps one's tea party alive at this
stage of the game.
Yet, counting on a god-like nonplayer character to ensure party survival
is neither an ideal game design nor likely to lend itself to player satisfaction. It is not entertaining to watch this stranger
get all the credit (not to mention most of the experience points). Taking the monsters down a
notch would have accomplished much the same
thing.
If one does not accept Siegurd into the party,
he'll go away and mope a bit, but he'll be back
(again and again). Unfortunately, such appearances can interfere with the graphics in surrounding
squares so that trees disappear and mapping becomes a pain.
In addition, beating up on Siegurd is not an option. This reviewer's party settled, rather resentfully, for making him carry all the booty. (Hint: Accept him, use him until your characters are up to
level 2 or 3, then take him into town and dismiss
him.)
In addition, combat is rarely forced upon the
party. Occasionally they'll run into monsters who
take "greet" to mean "fight." But after one combat
round, LOF will allow them to withdraw from the
fray without prejudice and with credit for damage
done. (The monsters will pursue them to the border of the monsters' particular domain, slowing
the party's progress. However, the "lure" command will drop loot to throw even pursuing
monsters off one's trail.)
Moreover, LOF is downright sloppy in places.
The translation from the original German is occasionally ungrammatical and awkward. One important command — to equip your party with
weapons and armor — is simply wrong. It is "D"
rather than "E."
At the technical end, LOF is fancy, but is lacking
in fine points. It installs itself painlessly on a hard
disk and adds the necessary disk assignments to
the startup-sequence file. (What it fails to do is assign the save disk to hard disk. The players must
do that on their own.) It uses expanded RAM for
an animated display of one-on-one combat which
displays much bellowing and clashing of arms, but
this is purely window-dressing and the character
appearance relies solely on class and not on
species. The display adds nothing to strategy.
However, these sequences may be one of the
rare occasions in which a digitized curse can be
heard in a computer game. It is muttered when a
character misses his mark and this writer could
not believe his ears until noticing that the sound
file on Disk 2 was named for the offending word.
This usage would not be a problem if the situation
really called for it, but it simply does not call for it
here (and this is not the only point at which tastelessness surfaces). Wasn't someone listening?
Didn't someone play this game before it was
released?
The game even multi-tasks, a rare virtue in a program of LOFs size. However, LOF is not bug-free.

In the initial Amiga version of the game, there is no way to get by the riddling elf who guards the entrance to the pyramid. He will not even accept
a correct answer. (A fix should be available from Electronic Zoo by the
time this issue reaches the shelves.)
Also, on several occasions a "structure table full" notice appeared when
the party was entering a town. The program anticipated the guru meditation by having me save the game, but when restored, the party was in an
inescapable position. (An EZ rep suggested the problem might come
from extra memory.) In addition, at least one dungeon doorway changed
its location when seen from a different direction.
It would be hard not to be enchanted with the visuals and promise of
this vast fantasy world and they go a long way toward making LOF a fulltime job. It may be running on four or five cylinders, but it takes one
downtown. And once there, it might be too much enjoyment to even
notice.

Cartridge Game Coverage

TV Sports Football

for the TurboGrafx-16

by Matt Taylor
EC presents You Make the
Call....
"It's third and long for the
Thunderbolts with time running out.
Jim Haly drops back to pass, but can't
find anyone open. He scrambles, but
gets no further than the line of scrimmage when a Shark knocks the ball
loose with a bone-jarring hit. The
pigskin sails ten yards downfield where
Larry Lightning of the Thunderbolts
recovers it and runs into the end zone.
Is it a touchdown?"

N

whether by straight computer simulation, which generates instantaneous
results, or by regular, human interactive gameplay. Thankfully, the programmers included a password, a sentence
of seemingly garbled letters, which can
be input at a later date to continue the
season in the same position as before.
This reviewer was slightly annoyed to
find that there is no provision for TurboGrafx-CD and TurboBooster Plus
owners to use their peripherals to save
the game.

The above is a typical scenario in
Cinemaware's TV Sports Football, a
proven computer hit which was recently translated to the TurboGrafx 16 system. Not only does the game boast
some excellent graphics and superb
digitized voices, it also blends the two
most important ingredients for a successful sports simulation on a dedicated machine: action and a realistic
feel.

The biggest strength of TVSF is that
no matter what football situation is
chosen, any combination of players up
to a maximum of four per team can
participate. Furthermore, the computer
automatically takes control of individual players if no commands are
input with the corresponding TurboPads. Competitors can rejoin the fray
any time by simply pushing a direction
key.

Pregame Warmup
(Football Options Aplenty)
After the football player crashes
through the TV set on the title screen
(perhaps looking for his agent, who
couldn't get him Canseco-dollars...
whoops, wrong sport!), a menu appears
containing an exhibition game, league
play (full season), an offensive practice,
and the coach's clipboard. The clipboard
accommodates scouting reports of each
of the eight fictitious teams, and rates
players in several different categories,
demonstrating each club's strengths and
weaknesses. There is only one "string;" injuries never occur, and modification and
creation of athletes is not permitted.

Three Yards And A Cloud
Of Dust
(Offensive Strategies)

After the automatic kickoff and subsequent return, the offense has four
general formations to choose from: ProSet, Formation, Shotgun and Kick. If one
of the first three are selected, four
specific plays are displayed, showing the
receivers' routes in the traditional
chalkboard manner. If Kick is chosen,
the player is then given an option to
punt away, fake a punt, or try a field
goal if within the opponent's 50-yard line.
The punt (which can be blocked) is a
simple aim and fire situation similar to passing,
TITLE:
IV Sports Football
SYSTEM:
TurboGrafx-16
while the field goal kicker's task is much more
# PLAYERS:
1-5 (TurboTap &
complicated. One must adjust two moving lines,
The practice session presents an opportunity
additional TurboPads needed for multiple players)
PRICE:
$61.99
one representing distance and the other directo try out the offensive repertoire (which is the
DESIGNER:
Cinemaware
tion, in order to hear the satisfying "It's good!"
same for every team) without a defense harassPUBLISHER:
NEC Technologies, Inc.
Wood Dale, IL
While this is by far the most creative kicking
ing the player. An exhibition game is a standoperation in a video football game, there is, unalone match, perfect for a game among friends
fortunately, no way to fake or block a field goal.
or a chance for one or more players to see how their skills stack
up against a computer-managed opponent.
One player on each team controls the a quarterback (and is
Finally, the league option is a single season in which every
team plays intra-divisional rivals twice and out-of-division opponents once. At the end of ten weeks of play, the top two
teams from each division have a final showdown for a spot in the
championship. An outcome must be determined for each game,

responsible for play calling), while the other players can change
back and forth between receivers and running backs. Once a
play is called, the view switches back to the vertically scrolling
gridiron. The quarterback screams a play-calling code in a convincing voice, and has a chance to send someone in motion

Cartridge Game Coverage

before the ball is snapped. As the QB, you can then order the
computer to automatically pass, pitch to a running back, or take
control yourself. If the player is directing the quarterback, he can
hand off to a back at anytime, hurl one up for grabs, or scramble
for daylight. If one takes too long without crossing the line of
scrimmage, he'll get called for offensive holding.
The passing mechanism is one of those "easy to learn but difficult to master" systems. After pressing down the button to set
the QB into a throwing stance, the player must point the QB's
arm in the direction of the receiver, while continuing to hold
down the button until an "X" marks where he desires the ball to
land. After some practice, players will find it challenging, albeit
not impossible, to judge exactly how much of a lead to give
receivers. Don't overdo it, because "intentional grounding" is
called if there are no receivers within fifteen yards of the ball's
final resting place! One major imperfection which this reviewer
noticed is that when a defender is applying tight coverage, the
ball is always knocked down (i.e., it can't be caught off the deflec
tion). When in the clear, a player's chance of a reception or interception is based on his "hands" rating.
n additional oversight discovered is that one is not allowed to
throw the ball out of the end zone.
If the player chooses to pitch the ball to an RB, just follow the
holes the blockers are opening and run for it. The obvious flaw in
the running game is that one can't just bull his way forward; if
one tries pushing through his line he might as well be running
into a brick wall. There's no chance for a one-yard "plunge over
the top" play. Another problem is that the QB has no control
over who takes the pitch. A final concern, although this is more
of a general observation about offense, is that a player can't dive
forward for those extra few yards, while defenders have the
privilege of making flying tackles.

Hold That Line (Defensive Dispositions)
On the other side of the ball, there are four settings available to
the "big D;" the 6-1, 5-2, 3-4 and "Special." The four specific
defenses within the first three formations are run outside, run inside,
pass, and blitz. The Special options are punt block, punt return,
long bomb defense, and goal line stand (only offered when
defending inside your ten yard line).
Before the snap of the ball, all members of the defending team
can switch back and forth before deciding which player to control for the duration of the play. If they spot something suspicious in the offense's formation, they have the option of changing individual player assignments to either a blitz or man-to-man
coverage (i.e., defensive "audibles"). While flipping from player to
player, they can reposition them—but the referee is constantly
watching for offsides and encroachment.
Upon hearing "hike," that time-honored invitation to pound
some 250-pound slab of meat-on-the-hoof into the Astroturf,
players may wish to restrain themselves and consider the situation before welcoming the opposing quarterback to the TVFL.
Keeping in mind that the human-controlled players are always superior to the computer-commanded athletes, one's approach
should depend mainly on which defense was called. If it was a 34 pass, it is a good idea for the human-controlled players to
either guard against the run or rush the QB if holes open in the
line. If it was a 6-1 run inside, then watch goal-bound speedsters
the computer might stack on the sidelines.
A general bug in the defense which can get really frustrating is
that if a pass prevent is called, for example, and the opponent
hands off, for some unknown reason the player's computer-

directed teammates continue their coverage for several seconds
before finally reacting to the ball. Laterals, flea-flickers and the
like are not allowed in this game, so why shouldn't your
electronic buddies be privy to this information and immediately
crunch the runner like the more sensible human players?
Another point of contention is that the muscleheaded linemen
are programmed to block each other and won't stray from their
task, even to pick up a loose ball!

Toss Of The Coin (Final Observations)
TVSF is unique among video football games in the way it
manages to incorporate fast-paced action, an excellent multiplayer environment, and even (gasp) an extent of realism. True
simulation enthusiasts will undoubtedly be disappointed with an
incomplete range of strategy and options, referring to the limited
play selection and lack of tactics such as onsides kickoffs and
reverse handoffs, and the glaring elimination of recorded statistics. Another missing element is the weather factor; the field is
the same mud-free carpet every day. Finally, many will find the
computer defeated too easily after gaining some experience with
the game. However, football fans in general looking for an intense action contest with well-animated, detailed graphics (but
why do they have to wear the same red and blue jerseys every
time?), realistic voices (though some more crowd noise would
have been appreciated), and a broad enough range of formations to keep things lively should take this ball in stride. Despite
the scattered flags on the play, as a multi-player game the call
on TV Sports Football with this official is: "The kick is up... It's
long enough... It's good!"

Review

f it were not for the loops, drawbridges, corkscrew jumps and
little old lady in the VW swerving all over the track, Stunt
Driver would be almost like driving NASCAR. As it is, though,
enrolling in Big Al's Institute of Stunt Course Driving is more akin
to a demolition derby than a pleasant Sunday drive at NASCAR.

I

Armed with a joystick (or maybe a mouse, but please don't try
the keyboard) and a 1966 Shelby Mustang 350, the player is subjected to a thorough bashing by the other cars. Joining the
pesky VW is a Porsche 911, a Camaro IROC Z and a helicopter in
the air. Watching the action from a series of TV cameras, Stunt
Driver takes on the feel of a remote-control "Hot Wheels" with
sadistic kids determined to wreck as many cars as possible.

The Game
Overall, Stunt Driver plays well. It offers such excellent play
balance for the beginner, in fact, that the initial difficulty factor
may need to be fudged by the experienced simulation fan. By
simply changing a few options and allowing the competitors to
drive with their artificial personalities intact, however, one can experience a satisfying challenge from the outset. When one first experiences the colorful background and animation graphics, it is
fairly easy to compare Stunt Driver with a plethora of driving
games available on the computer. Once one adds eight different
camera views (constantly at the player's disposal), a VCR feature
that replays the last few seconds of any race (similar to EA's Indianapolis 500: The Simulation)
and fast-moving action (due to the
polygon-fill technology) into the
mix, the game takes on the attributes of a simulation. Finally,
when one begins to encounter the
artificial personalities and grasp the
basic tactics necessary to defeat
them, the game achieves a well-rounded and challenging dimension, as well. For example, players will
want to learn how to hit the other cars at just the
right angle to inflict more damage than one's own
vehicle would receive from the collision. By slowing
down one's opponents significantly and only being
slightly affected oneself, a distinctive edge is taken
by the human player. Stock car racers have done
this for years, but now players can really duplicate
the tactic on their computer screens.

Tracks of Hazards
Spectrum HoloByte's Stunt Driver
by Paul Nielsen

Revvin' Up
(Hardware Considerations)
Spectrum HoloByte recommends a 386/33-Mhz computer if
one wishes to have the most complete detail level — 256-color
VGA, digitized sound, distant detail, etc. However, the game
plays well even in EGA 16-color mode, as this reviewer found out
on a 386/33-Mhz, 386 SX/20-Mhz and a 286/12-Mhz. Adjusting
the realism levels to match the machine resulted in a smooth, although less visually attractive, game. PS/1 buyers, for example,
need to be aware that Stunt Driver is simply not the same on
the PS/1 that it is on even a 386SX. Today's sophisticated
games require more horsepower than word processing at the office.
As for the game's sound effects, the digitized roar of the engine
rattled the case on the reviewer's Compaq 286e, even without a
sound board. However, the squeal of the tires (an important part
of the Stunt Driver experience) is difficult to hear with the internal PC speaker and requires addition of a sound board in order
to experience the full aural experience. Adding an AdLib or

Review

Sound Blaster card improves the enjoyment of the game immensely. Then all of the sounds from the engine, tires and horn
can add to the realism.

A Course Is a Course, Of Course
(Map Editor)
In addition, the five pre-set tracks offer different obstacles and,
of course, strategies. Players can put the "pedal to the metal" on
the simple oval of the training track, but need to be considerably
more cautious on the hairpin turns of the "Sidewinder." In addition, some courses have oil slicks to either bypass or slow down
for.
The "Sidewinder" also has a great little "Easter egg" (i.e. neat
discovery for the players to encounter). If the little old lady in the
VW gets too annoying, one can get therapy by loading the
"Sidewinder" course. Then, when the player sees the German engineers standing in the middle of the track (just like in the VW
commercial), it's time to mow 'em down! One even gets to hear
the thump and yell as sweet (?) revenge is exacted for the VW's
interference. It is not exactly the same blood-curdling scream as
playing Life and Death without using anesthesia on the patients,
but it's close.
If one gets tired of the fivee preset tracks, the Map Editor lets the
player set things up just right. From the placement of the TV
cameras to get customized viewpoints of the action (using the
F8 key) to the location of loops, jumps and oil slicks which affect the optimal speed competitors can manage on each track,
the map editor gives the player control. If desired, the player can

lay out custom tracks and configurations using a simple grid
sheet combined with "point and click" track/obstacle icons.
In fact, the game is so flexible with regard to customization that
the program includes a configuration editor which allows the
player to delineate damage levels, crash thresholds (when they
are fatal, major or minor), bridge speed, repair rates, friction, and
characteristics for both the player's car and opponents' cars/personalities. Indeed, the amateur physicist who is curious about the
performance of a maximum-acceleration muscle car in 0.1
gravity can find out.

Duelin' Daredevils (Modem Support)
In the Spectrum HoloByte tradition, Stunt Driver supports
head-to-head racing. Using a direct serial connection or a
modem, the action is smooth and the driving is fierce. The "
Head-to-Head" option is menu-driven and easy-to-use, especially if one
allows the manual to walk him through the procedure step-bystep. Once both players have hit "PLAY" on the main menu and
watched the Christmas tree lights to begin the race, the action is
on until the requisite number of laps are completed or one of the
player's cars cannot continue.

Finish Line
Stunt Driver is a good match for those who enjoy Atari's
Hard Driving coin-op game. The actual arcade action is very
similar and Atari's only advantage is the feel of the wheel. Stunt
Driver more than makes up for this difference by offering more
control and variety.

Letters

"Trip"-Toe Through The
Kudos
I'm sorry to have missed your [recent
open house] celebration. I want you to
know that it gave me pause when I
heard about it. It's quite an amazing milestone.
I'll never forget that when I had the idea
for Electronic Arts, one of the first
people I talked to about it was Russ,
back in mid-1982. I learned a lot that
day. It was very encouraging for me.
Ever since then, CGW has been the one
publication that really means something
to me professionally. I continue to read it
immediately when it arrives, from cover
to cover, knowing that it has both important news and legitimate criticism of the
best work in our industry.
Knowing how fragile our industry has
been, it is a marvel that CGW is ten
years young. To think that Reagan was
not even president when you started, and
the 49ers hadn't even been to a Super
Bowl!
I'm excited about joining you for the
next ten years.
Trip Hawkins
Chief Executive Officer
Electronic Arts
Does this mean you'll keep reading
us as long as the 49ers keep winning?
That ought to be good for another
decade. Thanks for the kind words.

Ole Man Reader
I have now read the December issue of
CGW and must compliment/congratulate
you that this issue is the best I have
seen. I want to wish your staff a merry
Christmas and a good new year. Keep
up with your good work. It warms an old
man's heart. Greetings from Norway.
Ole Kittilsen (45 Years Old)
Rjukan, NORWAY
You mean we get a few more years
before the editorial staff is officially considered a bunch of "old men?" To be
honest, we have lots of mature readers
on our subscription list. We guess
that's what happens when you don't
trivialize your subject matter or your
writing style.

Famous "AMOS"
After reading Paul Rigby's column
(CGW #76), I was pleased to see him
mention AMOS the Creator. I thought I
would tell your readers that you can buy
AMOS from British Magazine
Distributors' Canadian office. Write:
British Magazine Distributors
598 Durham Crescent
Unit 14 Woodstock
Ontario N4S 5X3 CANADA.
You can also Call: 1-519-421-1285.
In England, there's Sandra Sharkey
who runs the STOS Public Domain
Library. She's also going to be doing the
same for the newly released AMOS. The
AMOS library is sure to build up in the
same way. You can write to Sandra at:
78 Merton Road
Highfield
Wigan WN3 6AT ENGLAND.
AMOS handles all the usual constructs
and commands you'd expect from a
modern BASIC, as well as everything
you've ever wanted to be able to do from
BASIC — powerful sprite manipulation,
sampled sounds, fast blitter objects and
copper tricks that were only possible

from low-level hardware programming.
With over 500 commands to work with,
you'll never stop finding new ways of applying its impressive range of commands
and features.
I wanted to thank Paul for writing a
great column and CGW for the many improvements they've implemented this
past year.
Nick Peters
Wichita, KS
Whew! And we thought Paul was impressed by AMOS! Maybe Commodore
ought to put AMOS on a ROM chip.

Ryan's Mope
I love your magazine (is it just me or is
your magazine getting bigger?). "It's so
wonderful I wash my body with it." (See
CGW #52). I have but one complaint.
The paperboard page (where this card
may be found) is not laid out properly.
Since most people do not need to subscribe every time they get a magazine
and they don't use the inquiry service
every time, yet they would take the
trouble to fill out one of these fine little

Letters

cards to let you know what they feel, I
suggest putting it on the bottom where it
is accessed easily. And no, I am not a
glandular, mouth-breathing male adolescent who suffers from terminal acne and
has dangerous anti-social tendencies,
who wears coke-bottle-bottom glasses,
who finds things wrong with magazines
to write about and fill up time.
Ryan Denke
Casper, WY
Next time, please send a picture with
your complaint, just so we can check.
As it is, we realize that you have a
point. Just to prove we've got a mind
of our own, however, we've put the
R.I.D. card on the top. We can't let you
readers push us around. After all,
we're not just a bunch of pseudoerudite effete snobs!

Blame Is The Name of the
Game Machine
Once again, CGW has tread into the
bland lands of the dedicated game
machines and it has me worried. I understand and agree that any discussion of
the computer entertainment industry

must include relevant news of its competition, as covered in "Fusion, Transfusion
or Confusion" (December, #77) and
"Technological Trends for Future Computer Games" (January, #78). I can even
accept the fact that The Rumor Bag Guy
is reporting on new GameBoy and Sega
products more than in previous issues.

dedicated game technology. Your
magazine can't do their industry justice
and it's not like CGW to make halfhearted efforts.
Patrick Buechner
Washington, DC

Is this a policy change? Has CGW succumbed to magazine rack peer pressure?
CGW has been to these lands before and
wisely chose to depart quickly. Where
are you going now?

Well, as Al Smith once said, "Let's
look at the record." In December of
1989, CGW had 106 pages with 65
pages of advertising. That leaves 41
pages of computer game coverage. In
December of 1990, CGW had 130
pages with 63 pages of advertising.
Subtract the advertising and the dedicated game machine coverage (less
than five pages) and one is left with 62
pages of computer game coverage.
That is a 21-page increase in diskbased coverage. Given that kind of increase, we don't feel that we are in
any way slighting the market we love
dearly in order to do coverage of some
selected cartridge games. There are,
after all, some cartridge games out
there worthy of our attention.

Sorry if I seem a bit harsh. I love CGW
and just think that your staff's time and
energy shouldn't be wasted on reviewing

As for where CGW is going, we are
going the same direction we have always gone. We are striving to provide

Your review of TurboGrafx 16's Ys I &
11 and Nintendo's Final Fantasy (#77),
however, has pushed my patience too
far. The less-than-deceptive bar reading
"Special Bonus Section: Cartridge Game
Coverage" introducing the section would
have been more appropriately labeled,
"Warning: Cartridge Game Coverage."
More distressing was January's TurboExpress review under what appears to
be a new "Cartridge Game Coverage"
column.

Letters

the information that strategy, simulation, adventure and role-playing
gamers, in particular, need to enjoy
the full scope of entertainment
software. When we dabbled in the
world of dedicated game machines in
the past, these types of games were
not well-represented on the game
machines. The great majority of Nintendo and Sega Master System games
seemed to be horizontal-scrolling, running-jumping-shooting games with minimal strategy considerations. Now,
more sophisticated games are already
appearing on the game machines and
more sophisticated game machines are
on the horizon. If we do not provide information on these sophisticated
games to the gaming public, who will?
Magazines which specialize in
running-jumping-shooting games? Maybe.
Finally, the game machine situation
is not as clear-cut as it was a couple of
years ago. With CD-ROM drives and 16bit processors, the software for these
machines is getting much closer to the
types of games we cover. If we do not
cover the current crop of game

machines, how will we cover CD-I (essentially, a dedicated game/entertainment machine), CDTV, and the age of
multimedia. Entertainment software in
the future will draw from all these influences and, although our staff is
busy, it would be irresponsible to ignore products which our readers might
like and propagate ignorance while
the heretofore disparate portions of the
entertainment software industry are
continuing to merge.
We must emphasize that the
cartridge game coverage is bonus
coverage and does not take away from
computer game coverage.

Heavy-Duty Complaint
After the last couple (huge) issues, I
have some things we ought to discuss.
Specifically, money. The damage is clearly your fault and I should be reimbursed.
Here's the breakdown:
$275.00 Landscaper charge to repair the
forklift tracks on my lawn
$100.00 Retrieval and repair of mailbox
post (driven four feet into the ground)

$175.00 Emergency room charges for
my eight-year-old son, who tried to get
the mail
$200.00 Lost work days from reading all
the great articles and ads
$750.00 Grand total.
Of course, I can't ever throw those issues away — the charges for the extra
weight would kill me!
It's great to see your publication get so
big. You are really a force in the industry.
Keep up the great coverage!
Eric Kirchner
Florence, KY
Our legal department has requested
that we refrain from responding to the
financial aspects of this case and they
are in the process of determining probable culpability and the advisability of
placing a warning label on larger issues. Meanwhile, we hope the page
rate continues to increase over last
year's issues and you don't have to
subscribe to a user group newsletter in
order to get your "expenses" down.

Reader Input Device

Conversions
Received
A-1( Tank Killer (Dynamix) Amiga
Chamber of the Sci-Mutant Priestess
;a East) IBM
Conquest of Camelot (Sierra) ST
Deluxe Paint (EA) ST
Drakkhen (Data East) IBM
Full Count (Lance Haffner) IBM
It Came From The Desert (Cinemaware) IBM
The Manhole (Activision) IBM
MicroLeague Football (MicroLeague) C64
Star Control (Accolade) Amiga
Thunder Strike (Live Studios) IBM
TV Sports Basketball (Cinemaware) IBM

Review

Beyond the Dark Night...
(Continued from page 19)
Unfortunately, one cannot devise scenarios in Interceptor. By
choosing 'Live' players for both sides, one can select the types of
craft to be flown against each other but cannot pick missions,
etc. Players just have to fly whatever mission that the computer
deals. Icon overprints make it very hard to tell who or how many
fighters are in a sector. This is especially bad when there is also
a space station in play, since it covers seven squares. Larger
craft tend to completely overprint smaller ones and when the
same types are on top of each other, going the same direction,
there is no way to tell how many are there! Each ship moves in
turn, with all fire taking place at the end of the turn. (Thus, by no
stretch of the imagination is this a flight simulator). The order in
which the ships move is determined by several factors added to
a random number. This mean that one can rarely count on
moving last — the best time to move. A look at the strategic
map will tell who has moved already, since it is difficult to keep
track of such things and who will be moving next. Do "utilities"
during a friendly ship's movement phase, then access the
strategic map and use the "previous key" to step through the
turn. Once an enemy ship loses its thrusters it can never change
speed or direction and usually moves early in the turn (i.e. he is
dead meat). Since points are gained for killing ships, do not let
them simply sail away into the star fields. The other tactic is to
form a daisy chain of ships following each other, to get on the
tail of the enemy who is on one's wingman's tail who is on the
tail of ... well, daisy chains happen, but not too often.

Over There
(Continued from page 50)
Blenkinsop and his cronies. Fair enough;
one's past exploits are impressive,
presenting them with Guinevere's
shoelace, for example, which totally
ruined Sowerby-Jones. However, the
search for Quetzlcoatl's toothpick? Is
there such a thing? Well, it's up to the
player to find it — and quick.
Such is the batty background to Jim
MacBrayne's third adventure game. The
first two were created and placed in the
public domain. Now Jim has decided to
go commercial. A text-only adventure,
The Mission bears a striking
resemblance to the old Infocom style.
Jim readily acknowledges the Infocom
influence as his source of motivation.
The layout to The Mission is very
clean, with the room location shown at
the top of the screen. Text is plentiful,
well-written and humorous in places.
Utilities are numerous; you can RAMSAVE/LOAD, script a hard copy to the
printer, change the screen colors, define
the function keys and so on. The parser
appears to be of a high quality. For
those readers pining after an Infocom
game as they used to do it "in the old
days," you could give Jim a call. For the
Amiga with 1 Meg of RAM, costing

Frontal attacks are actually a viable tactic when defending a
space station. Why? Because the enemy is attacking the station
with their noses pointed towards it, taking damage on their bow
armor from the station, and thus are more vulnerable than is
usually the case. Otherwise try and concentrate on a few opponents and wear them down quickly. The Al is good but will
usually not disengage when its ship isn't damaged. As to the AI:
There are no difficulty levels in the game. It still works because
there is such a wide variety of ships and weapons that there are
just too many options for a human to figure out safe moves.
Since all squadrons are made up of three or more different types
of ships, the variety of weapons can be mind-numbing — and
that makes this game a first-class tactical challenge. The
scenarios are balanced by the opposing side receiving additional
ships beyond the six normally found in a squadron. In one attack
on a space station this reviewer could swear that there were fourteen rebel ships engaged before the attack was over! These are
heavy odds when the player has only six of the Empire's finest
to stop them. Although fourteen scenarios seems limiting, the
ships are always varied and occasionally one side will catch the
other at a disadvantage. Therefore the games will be different.
Overall, Interceptor is quite a good game, very challenging and
never the same game twice. This reviewer found no "sure-fire"
strategies and no "perfect" design for ships. It is easy to imagine
large numbers of people beating the keys well into the night, however, to prove that they have the "perfect" interceptor and the tactics that will always win. Warning: do not let this game fall into
the hands of avid strategy players. It will be harmful to their
sleep cycle.

£7.50, contact: Jim MacBrayne, 27 Paid
myre Cres., Newton Mearns, Glasgow,
G77 5AQ, United Kingdom.
Set in the 1920s, Delphine's Cruise for
a Corpse (CFAC) takes place on board a
three-master yacht belonging to Greek
shipping magnate Niklos Karaboudjan.
The player takes on the role of Inspector
Raoul Dussentier, who's been invited by
Niklos to join him on a dream cruise in
the Mediterranean aboard his luxurious
yacht.
The cruise has hardly begun when
Raoul is summoned in his professional
capacity to investigate a scandalous
crime — the murder of the host, Niklos
Karaboudjan. Raoul would examine the
body, but it has disappeared! Who is the
murderer? Will he/she strike again?
Where is the host's body?
Using a similar system found in Operation Stealth, CFAC adds the option to
question characters. Available in the first
quarter of 1991 for Amiga, PC and ST.
Released by Impressions, Blitzkrieg,
May 1940 is a hex-based wargame covering the invasion of France during WWII.
The player has the option of controlling
both sides. The game is played on a
turn-by-turn basis using tactical and strategic
maps. The obvious objective is to either
conquer or defend France, depending on

the side one takes. Orders are issued to
army commanders, then individual commanders "interpret" the orders. The
player can influence their commander's
strategy or he can leave it up to the
commander's discretion.
Army commanders will tell you of their
intentions using a series of messages.
Your own General Headquarters (GHQ)
will advise you in the same manner. A
number of reports are available at the
end of each turn (strengths, army effectiveness, etc.). Available now for Amiga
and ST. Please check for prices.
Note: The above games, and any of
the other games mentioned in "Over
There" in past issues, can be obtained
from:
Computer Adventure World, 318 Kensington, Liverpool, England, L7 OEY.
Telephone: 01144-51-263-6306
SDC, 60 Boston Road, London,
England, W7 3TR. Telephone: 01144-1567-7621
Premier Mail Order, Trybridge Ltd., 8
Buckwins Square, Burnt Mills, Basildon,
Essex, England, SS13 1BJ. Telephone:
01144-268-590-766
All of these telephone numbers assume
you can dial direct. If you have trouble,
contact the international operator.

Taking a Peek
(Continued from page 8)
shoot-'em-up one could ask for, but there
is also a trading element where players
cross the galaxy for purposes of exploration and exploitation. Circle Service #13.
NITRO: What? A Psygnosis game with
no shooting? This is a overhead-view
automobile racing game. Thirty races,
day and night driving with auto repairs
and enhancements. Circle Service 1114.
RMM Consulting
977 N. Rustic Circle
Dallas, TX 75218
RMM FP: A FLIGHT PLANNER FOR
FLIGHT SIMULATORS: For the ultimate
in flight simulator realism, this product allows computer pilots to design flight
plans for simulated expeditions. In addition to maps and an index for several
standard scenery databases, the product
includes sample flight plans, tips on
using flight simulators, an editor for
changing scenery databases and utilities
to calculate wind correction and descent
rate. Primarily useful in conjunction with
Microsoft's Flight Simulator, but relevant
to other flight simulators with modifications. IBM (with 640K and hard disk).
Circle Reader Service /115.
Stratagem Games
Australia
TERRAN ENVOY: This game is a great
mindbender, akin to MasterMind in
space with a lovely diplomatic twist. Plenty of trading, negotiation and (most importantly of all) figuring out who to trust
out there in the big, bad galaxy. Fortunately, even with no sound support, the
graphics and the player's handy
spaceship computer are there to help assimilate the information required to succeed in rescuing humankind. IBM
($49.95) Circle Reader Service /116.
UBISoft
Greenbrae, CA

Virgin Mastertronic, Inc.
Irvine, CA

NIGHT HUNTER: Vampires are vulnerable in this imported action game
where players join the ranks of the undead and explore the dark demesnes of
damnation. The mechanics are as unforgiving as the treatment of monsters in
old "B" movie plot lines, but players can
change into bats and werewolves and
bite the necks of their victims while attempting to avoid stake-wielding hunters
and policemen armed with silver bullets.
Amiga, Atari ST, IBM ($34.95). Circle
Reader Service 1117.

DELUXE SCRABBLE: Will this game
spell success for the many countless enthusiasts of the classic board game? Perhaps, but not if one is a "purist," since
the computer comes up with foreign,
proper and esoteric words which might
lead to bloodshed if used between
human players. Still, the on-line dictionary, anagram and crossword features will
be quite useful for those wishing to play
solitaire and sharpen up their Scrabble
skills. IBM (59.95). Circle Service 1118.
SPIRIT OF EXCALIBUR: Rich with atmosphere and lush graphics, this interactive game is set in Arthurian England.

The player enlists the aid of knights,
monks, wizards and local peasants in a
journey replete with battling dragons and
rescuing distressed damsels. Combat
simulation seems tame by comparison to
some of the bloodier offerings available.
Is this a good thing? You decide. IBM
($49.99). Circle Reader Service 1119.
SUPER OFF ROAD: Action garners
who invest more quarters than a night's
take of a Vegas slot machine in the coinop version will be thrilled to know how
faithful to the original this conversion is.
Up to three players can gather round the
keyboard or use joystick/keyboard combinations and generally tear up the track.
IBM ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #20.

Humor

by Dennis Owens

F

ar

be it from this lowly watchdog of
the industry ever to hustle shamelessly any piece of work by any of
his higher-ups in an attempt to gain
more prestige, a higher payrate, more of
the topnotch cool computer games to
review, or an office larger than the one
under the basement, behind the janitor's
closet, in one of those underground,
sunken, lost archaeological digs which is
so damp and dingy, it must have been
built before the age of Frobozz. But, it
just so happens that, after taking a break
from poring religiously over the latest
R.I.D. ratings (not to suggest that
reviewers would ever stoop to comparing
who gets to review more of the really
neat games (who? Us?)) — but, it just so
happens that after happening to have
taken a break from happening to have
been reviewing the latest ratings and happening to have noticed that Scorpia gets
to write about more of the top 20 — no,
make that top 30 — no, 40 — well,
anyway, that more of the games Scorpia
has been fortuitous enough to have
played and reviewed for the aforementioned higher-ups have placed, well,
higher up than those slaved through and
copiously described by said lowly
watchdog, that he figured (he being
Lowly Watchdog), it might not hurt to butter up the ol' assigner of reviews himself,
the widely praised, honorary so-and-so
etc. etc. by Lord British himself, our own
loved and extremely well-revered Johnny

Wilson. [Ed: Well, we tell our writers to
be objective.]

space port. (What? Oh. Well, could have
sworn that part was in there.)

So, The SimCity Planning Commission Handbook, for those unfortunate
enough not to know, is chock-full of
hints, suggestions, discussions, illustrations, wit, tenacity, well-placed uses of underlining, wisdom, verbosity, little dots to
offset important points and machinespecific information. [Ed: Delete reference to verbosity during typesetting.]
A stroke of genius, long overdue [Ed:
Hey, it was only a month late!], The
SimCity Planning Commission Handbook is filled with the pathos of the
human condition, the crime map of Joffeberg, and sad and depressing commentaries about paleontologists' concerns
about development in the Temecula area.

Plus, niftiest of all — oh, did your lowly
watchdog say "of all?" What he meant
was "another of the really nifty features"
(because we all know that the niftiest of
all is the writing itself (the writing, of
course, of our own dear and beloved Dr.
Johnny L.)). Anyway, what's really nifty
is the inclusion in the back of the book
of a card which can be sent to Maxis to
get lots of the cities mentioned and illustrated in the book (Squaresville,
Finigan City (your lowly watchdog's personal favorite because he simply loves
bridges), and Gilligan City, to name but a
few).

Your lowly watchdog laughed. He cried!
He jumped up and howled at the moon.
He bayed. He snuffled around in the dirt.
The SimCity Planning Commission
Handbook is obviously prize-winning
material. Nobel Prize. Pulitzer Prize. Someone make that wonderful writer a knight!
Oops! Too late.
Actually, the book is pretty good. It discusses the game inside and out — including options and the reasons behind them
for dealing with the various disaster
scenarios, in-depth and useful discussions about how to reduce pollution, and
even how to raise the funds to build a

Your lowly watchdog's only problem
with the book is that he has learned to
embezzle so well (Bond issues! Bond issues!) that he wishes there would have
been more discussion of the various pastimes available to ex-mayors whiling
away their time in Sing Sing.
Dennis Owens is a social worker in
Texas who has written for CGW over
the course of several years. He attracted our attention with a series of
humorous letters to the editor and will
continue to write an irregular humor
column (in addition to the increased
amount of blue chip reviews which the
editor will now surely assign him) for
CGW.

Opinion

On-Line Gaming
(Continued from page 53)
whenever any human player has entered
or exited the game. With so much emphasis on community building within the
Gemstone III area on GEnie, it is no
wonder that Brian Moriarty, designer of
Lucasfilm's Loom, describes the game
as a microcosm of society.

Even Valuable Gems Have
Flaws
Alas, as brilliantly conceived and
wonderfully executed as much of
Gemstone III is, the text parser provides
the most visible flaw. Much like an earlier
text game, one can read a vivid description of a room complete to description of
a tavern keeper. Yet, when one tries to
speak to the tavern keeper, the ubiquitous mantra of the parser is chanted, "I
don't understand what you just typed."
To be sure, it isn't quite as obnoxious as
"I don't know what a tavern keeper is,"
but it reflects the traditional bane of the
parser nonetheless.
Further, as well-written as the prose

descriptions are, one must play "Guess
The Parser" in order to find anything active in the locations (either that or most
of the shops in Kelfour's Landing don't
have any active items and that seems
strange for an introductory location).
This means players end up spending lots
of time trying to guess what's important
in the game and guessing the active
items is not playing the game.
Meanwhile the meter continues to tick.
Finally, on-line games need to find
some better way to indoctrinate players
into the game. Most games have
documentation which can be
downloaded, but once again, the meter is
running. If only there was some kind of
free, introductory tutorial (i.e. with no
meter running) that allowed the player to
create a character and play through a
few encounters before being dumped out
into the interactive environment. That
would take some of the fear out of
novice players with regard to: a) not
knowing command structures; b) not understanding conventions within the
gaming group; and c) not knowing what
to do.

Assessment
This writer wanted to delve into
Gemstone III with both feet. All the
"word of mouth" he had received about
the game was positive and the character
generation sequence had him itching for
exciting quests and dynamic deeds. Instead, the development of the character
seemed wasted, the gaming environment
appeared surprisingly empty and it was
an ego risk to try to get acquainted with
the other player characters in the game.
This writer knows that on-line games will
be an important contributor to the creation of a global village of understanding,
culture and play in the future. Yet, the
present incarnation of on-line games
doesn't quite work for him.
Gemstone III may be accessed by
typing "m930" from any prompt on
GEnie. It has some flaws, but it also
sparkles. Also, the game, like all good online games, is continually being updated
and improved, so these notes must be
considered tentative and never final.
Gamers will have to decide for themselves whether the sparkling facets or flaws
are dominant.

Reach Out and
Crush Someone

he State of the Industry: About
three years ago, CGW had a special
opportunity to attend the Artists'
Symposium sponsored by Electronic
Arts. One of the most fascinating conferences at the symposium dealt with
modem games and their potential for the
future. Dan Bunten shared his experiences in attempting to get Modem Wars to
market and work with EA in developing
a "front-end" for modem support.
The issue, as Bunten saw it, was that
computers were in the "wrong room of
the house" for multi-player games using
a single computer to be effective.
Originally, multi-player games simply required players to take turns in front of
the keyboard and monitor (some, like
Koei's Nobunaga's Ambition II and
Data East's Full Metal Planet still require this effort) or the ability to save the
game to disk and pass the current position on to the next player (as in both the
American Civil War series of wargames
from SSI and SSG or Interstel's Empire. Then, Bunten tried to remove the
logjam in front of the monitor by using a
deck of cards which impacted on the
strategy of the game (Robot Rascals).
Andrew Greenberg used a similar technique in the Star Saga series when he supplemented the time in front of the
monitor with off-line "textlets" (paragraphs which described in brilliantly conceived prose the kinds of atmosphere
and plot development computer gamers
were used to seeing on the screen).
Unfortunately, neither of the last two
strategies seemed to catch on. Bunten
theorized that the modem was the ideal

medium for involving more than one
player in a computer game. Hence,
Modem Wars was born. Alongside
Modem Wars, EA demonstrated its commitment to modem gaming with the
modem-to-modem options in 688 Attack
Sub, F-16 Combat Pilot and Populous.
Spectrum HoloByte has also made a
commitment to modem-to-modem
games with Falcon A.T, Tank!, Flight of
the Intruder and Stunt Driver, as well as
the planned Electronic Battlefield Series.
Whether the trend toward "modemable"
games will continue or not is unclear. It
has been very difficult for software publishers to monitor whether the "modem"
option has actually added to sales or not.
CGW urges those readers which use the
modem options to specify that they like
the option on their registration cards
whenever they purchase a "modemable"
product.
State of the Magazine: This issue,
CGW highlights multi-player games by offering: reviews of Microprose's Knights
of the Sky) and Spectrum HoloByte's
Stunt Driver (which offer modem play);
design notes and a replay for Command
HQ; a review of NEC's TV Sports: Football (the Turbo-Grafx 16 version which
uses a peripheral to allow up to five
players); a new "Opponents Wanted"
column (expected to run irregularly); and
some notes on selected bulletin board
(BBS) and network games. Computer
gaming no longer means solitary confinement. Now, more than ever, computer
garners can hook up to Ma Bell and say,
"It's clobberin' time!"

