"Special Computer Game Design Section COMPUTER GAMING WORLD The Premier Computer Game Magazine July 1993 / Number 108 Pages of X-Wing Tips Sneak Preview: Id's Doom Michael Jordan Takes Flight Winning at Caesar The Making of 7th Guest An Inside Look Lemmings 2 Marches On! $3.95 USA $4.95 Canadian 07 Legend's Companions of Xanth 2907412158 "


"Suear of Destiny kollenstein 3D Graphic Adventure Dir. 1111 Il t ill LII I II II III MHED AZWA FLOOR 8 SCOREUUES 4400 3 HEALTH ANNO 367 23 FLOOR 5 SCORE LIVES 2900 3 HEALTH ARRO 17% 831 FLOOR 9 SCORE. LIUES 2800 3 HEALTH AMOS 80% 939 Virtual Reality! Spear of Destiny brings virtual reality to the PC, hurling you into an intense battle between good and evil in which only you can save the world! A breathtaking musical soundtrack sets the mood, while amazing first person\" visual perspective and spectacular digital stereo sound effects give an experience like no other game you've ever played! Features! spectacular VGA virtual reality system breathtaking musical soundtrack for Adlib, Sound Blaster digitized stereo sound effects for Sound Blaster, Sound Source over 20 complete floors to cover 4 levels of play difficulty special extra challenges for advanced game players * saves multiple games in process What the Reviewers Say! the player is there' like no game I've ever played...\" e the sound and the visual action, is frighteningly realistic...\" \"I can't remember a game making such effective use of perspective and sound and thereby evoking such intense physiological responses from its players.\" Game by id Software. Published by FormGen Corporation, Box 279, North Andover, MA, USA, 01845-0279 (800)263-2390 (416)857-4141 Fax: (416)857-4531 Circle Reader Service #56 "


"ENTER A WHOLE NEW REALM REALMS ARKANIA S OF AR CALMS KANI Enter a whole new realm of fantasy roleplaying... Enter a rich and detailed gaming system... One that offers all you expect, and more, from a finely woven, carefully crafted epic adventure. One that allows you to choose your level of involvement in the \"behind the scenes\" detail. ideal for both novice and experienced players. One that places you in the midst of an DIN explosive era of strife and LF turbulence. One providing a truc quest to challenge your imagination, a rich adventure to involve your mind, and careful balancing and smooth game play to make sure your time is spent playing. Enter a world of mythical creatures, magic and old legends... Enter a world filled with peril, conflict and uncertainty... ENTER ARKANIA... Cut loose in a world of blazing adventure. Hundreds of hours of game play, exploring a vast continent richly studded with towns, dungeons and endless adventuring opportunities! Your heroic characters must track down every lead and every contact if they are to succeed in their search for the renowned Grimring, the Blade of Destiny. You'll face many hazardous journeys by road and ship as you explore the fantastic realms and cities of Arkania. Of course, you will encounter numerous foes determined to prevent you from succeeding in your quest. TALPOS E Fantasy Role-Playing Simulation ik AVAILABLE CLUE BOOK FIL: H=CH Felstown and PRODUCT FEATURES  Fully Animated Isometric 3D Combat  Phased-time Game System  Town & Dungeon Automapping  2 Difficulty Levels for Novice & Experienced Players  True Point & Click Interface  Easy to Use Multiple Choice Dialogues  Impressive Musical Score & Sound Effects  Full 3D «First Person\" View of Towns & Dungeons A LAND OF CONFLICT REALMS A LAND OF ADVENTURE REAMS Thes UGLELE GAME FEATURES . More than 70 Towns, Villages, Dungeons and Ruins  12 Character Archetypes . 7 Positive & 7 Negative Character Attributes  Over 50 Skills, adjustable at the player's option  12 Magical Realms with over 80 spells  Auto-Combat Option  Parties of up to 6 Characters may be Split and Regrouped HacTHOTEULINO NOONG OF UIC HOC WALL MESED ano A LAND OF CONVERSATION A LAND OF RICHES AVAILABLE FOR: IBM PC & 100% COMPATIBLES (VGA, 640K, 80286 OR BETTER, MS-DOS 3.X, 5.0 OR 6.0) SOUND SUPPORT FOR: AD-LIB, AD-LIB GOLD, SOUND BLASTER, SOUND BLASTER PRO, ROLAND LAPC-1/MT-32, PRO AUDIO SPECTRUM, THUNDERBOARD, PC & TANDY INTERNAL SPEAKER AMIGA (1MB REQUIRED) AVAILABLE AT A SOFTWARE RETAILER NEAR YOU, OR CALL: 800) 447-1230 Circle Reader Service #91 SIR-TECH P.O. BOX 245, OGDENSBURG, NY 13669 FAX# (315) 393-1525 "


"FEATURES COMPUTER GAMING WORLD  Riding Nightmares and Shaking Palm Trees Pun and games in Legend's Companions of Xanth by Johnny L. Wilson To Air is Jordan To fly is Michael Jordan in Flight by Wallace Poulter Feel The Force, Reader X-Wing marks the spot when Rusel DeMaria unveils tips from his exciting new book SPECIAL COMPUTER GAME DESIGN SECTION Computer Game Developers Conference CGW's editorial staff invades the design community VERIFY (Crea teenu()) Day of the Tentacle Speaks Chris Lombardi gives voice to the details behind LucasArts' upcoming talkie Ccolor enu: :-Colorken () Detach Companions of Xanth pg. 10 Developers Think Like a Pendulum Do What computer game designers say to each other: Abstracts from The Journal of Computer Game Design ASSERT ( mm Onu NULL); // defaul CMenu:: -CMe nu will destroy FUTOGEL What Happened to the Other Six Guests? Verin Lewis shares the secrets behind The 7th Guest Hot Cars and Hot Graphics CGW's Gordon Goble interviews Papyrus Dave Kaemmer voia CColorMenu: AppendColo IMenuItem(U INT DID COLORREF color) KOI New Indy 500? Pg. 62 The \"Write Stuff Using Maxis' games as \"authoring tools\" by science fiction author Martin Cirulis VERIFY (Appe ndMenu (MF E NABLED I MF OWNERDRA W. DID, (LPCSTR) Col or));  Book Review: Flights of Fantasy Mike Weksler reviews a book on programming a flight sim Back in Time Presto Studios' The Journeyman Project by Tony Reveaux a Luv Dose Lemmings 2 Psygnosis helps gamers discover new Tribes by Saul Serrafina Doom Pg. 104 Conquering the Maelstrom Merit Software's space strategy game by Douglas Winship on Tracking Down a Winner Ken Hill tries MPGN's on-line Empire Builder en Executive Decision D.C. True's Shadow President by political columnist Chuck Moss Jump Jet pg. 146 "


"TM Tools The Creepers are on the move. It's the annual trek to the Butterfly Bowls. But, with over 70 levels of factories, caverns, and forests to cross and with the worst sense of direction in the entire animal kingdom, getting them all there is going to take some doing! 1 Energy 2000 161 1 Tools FLUITECTES Energy 3600 Creepers Features:  Over 70 puzzle levels.  256 colors (PC).  Crazy Creeper animations  Difficulty rating from easy to brutal.  Full soundcard support with 16 funky soundtracks. The Creeper-cam with multiple playfield views. ERE entre a The mean green creeping machine Look for Creepers crawling in your favorite software store, or call: (800) 438-7794 Psygnosis 29 Saint Mary's Court, Brookline, MA 02146 (617) 731-3558 Circle Reader Service #81 "


"104 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD Sneak Preview: Doom What's hot about Id Software's new game? by Chris Lombardi 106 The Newest Games in Europe Robin Matthews visits the European Computer Trade Show 112 The Future of Computer Entertainment CGW's editorial staff gleans clues from InterMedia '93 118 Neither Fish Nor Foul Gordon Goble examines the lure of Maxis' El Fish s 120 'Mech My Day Electronic Arts' Ultrabots by Allen Greenberg COMPUTER WARGAMING WORLD Publisher Russell Sipe Editor Johnny Wilson On-Line Editor Alan Emrich Managing Editor Ken Brown Assistant Editor Chris Lombardi Art Director Susan Zurawik Graphic Artist Jack Rodrigues Marketing Manager Diane Miller M.I.S. Manager Gene Allen Assistant M.I.S. Manager Mike Weksler Ad Manager Jim Messing Circulation Kathy Garcia Contributing Editor (Adventure Games) Scorpia Contributing Editor (Wargames) Evan Brooks Ad Director Jay Eisenberg 126 Start the Revolution with Koei Tim Carter evaluates Liberty or Death 130 Win Win in Rome, Just as the Romans Do Strategy for Impressions' Caesar by Alan Emrich 134 From Sumter to Appomattox Terry Lee Coleman fires the first shot in publicizing this American Civil War game from Canada 138 The Perfect 20th Century General Richard Savage reviews the new data disk from QQP 140 What's in a Boardgame? HPS Simulations' Aide de Camp creates PBEM kits by Alan Emrich 143 If It's Tuesday, This Must Be Russia A replay of V for Victory: Velikiye Luki by Michael Peck 146 Jump Jet from MicroProse European correspondent Paul Rigby takes an early look 155 Which Games are the Games of the Year? Nominations for Computer Gaming World's \"Games of the Year\" Computer Gaming World (ISSN 0744-6667) is published monthly by Golden Empire Publications, Inc. 130 Chaparral Ct. Suite 260. Anaheim Hills, CA 92808. Second-class Postage paid at Erlanger, KY 41011 and additional mailing offices. Permit #672-910. Contents are copyrighted by Golden Empire Publications, 1993. Postmaster: Send address changes to Computer Gaming World, P.O. Box 601, MI. Morris, IL 61054-8052 The subscription rate for twelve issues (one year) is $28.00. Canadian and foreign surface subscriptions add SI100. Foreign air subscriptions are $78,00 per year. All payments must be in U.S. dollars, made by check drawn upon a U.S. bank, Visa, MasterCard, or money order. Psalms 9:1-2 CompuServe (76703,622) America On-Line: CGW Prodigy: EXPT4OB GEnie: CGW Subscription Dept. 1 (800) 827-4450 Telephone: (714) 283-3000 Fax: (714) 283-3444 Foreign Subscribers: (815) 734-1113 For advertising information only, call: JE Publishers Representative Company 3415 S. Sepulveda Blvd., Suite 520 Los Angeles, CA 90034 (310) 572-7272 For newsstand circulation, call: Kemco Publishers Services (603) 924-0224 Printed in the U.S.A. DEPARTMENTS 28 Rumor Bag (Spanishus Fleaus) 80 Scorpion's Tale (Of Woe and Anguish) 98 Scorpion's View (Serpent Isle) 108 Letters from Paradise 110 The Fifth Wave (Rich Tennant Cartoon) 116 Shareware (Family Games) 124 Computer Wargaming World Editorial 150 Taking A Peek 155 Advertiser Index 157 CGW Hall of Fame 158 The Top 100 Games 160 What's Hot 161 Patches 162 Editorial (Hollywood) "


"I hi nk you w Were Ever Th @ SOMETHING ELSE? T SOMEONE ELSE ? romo @ P SOMEWHERE ELSE? on't 't Worr I H RRY... Circle Reader Service #49 P "


"IT'S ALL IN  Sources indicate that a rival syndicate has developed a dangerous new computer program, and our research boys want it. Your mission: @ build Company Agents using cybernetic implants and hi-tech weaponry. Utilizing action, strategy or a lethal mix of the @ TEAM SELECTIA count on two, you can infiltrate fifty remarkably detailed futuristic cities, each 'alive' in real-time. @ To confiscate a copy of Syndicate, visit your local software retailer, or call toll free 800 245 4 5 25. Available for the IBM PC and compatibles. Eliminate the Hooligans Take control of the city. But expect maximum resistance. "


"YOUR HEAD. VE SYNDICATE BULLEROC o Bullfrog Productions Ltd. 1993 ELECTRONIC ARTS Circle Reader Service #50 "


"73 goodle prave TIME PROD NO. SCENE TAKE Sneak Previews are not designed to be reviews. Tey are feature articles baseul on \"works in progress\" that CGW's editors have deemed worthy of early coverage. These articles are not intended to provide the final word on a product, since we expect to publish appropriate review coverage when the game is finished. DIRECTOR PRODUCED BY Nada Chance Xanth Fans Would Miss This One yans of Piers Anthony's Xanth books and Abbott and Costello's \"Who's on First?\" routine will immediately be relieved to know I this conversation isn't in Legend Entertainment's upcoming Companions of Xanth. I use it as the opener, however, to show those who are not familiar with Xanth what a punful place it can be to go adventuring within. In addition, it introduces the unusual looking femme on our cover and tips off the fact that the player is going to have to get to know her in order to succeed in this adventure. Companions of Xanth is based upon Demons Don't Dream, the latest Xanth novel from Piers Anthony. In the book, still only available in hardbound at press time, there is an argument between two demons: Earth and Xanth. Those who have followed the series know that these are the dualistic demigods who hold the futures of Mundania (Earth) and the magical land of Xanth in their hands. The thesis for both the novel and the game is that Earth and Xanth have made a bet, a gambit rather like that of Yahweh and Satan in the prologue to Job or like Nickles and Zeuss in Archibald MacLeish's J.B. They have decided to make a wager upon the performance of human beings in a test of wits and prowess. Indeed, the interesting conceit of the game is that the player's character is Dug Mundane and that the game which Dug plays in the book is the same one, Companions of Xanth, which the player has just purchased. Of course, the premise of the game is that one demon has bet on the player's character and that the other demon has bet on a computer-controlled character named Kim. The set-up for all this has some humorous overtones and describing the denoument would reduce the enjoyment of discovery within the game experience. So, suffice it to say that gamers will assume the role of Dug and adventure within the familiar environs of Xanth. They will encounter notorious puns and familiar characters; they will enter the infamous Gap (no, not panting for breath) and encounter Stanley Steamer, the Gap Dragon; they will solve the entrance puzzles to ger into Magician Humphrey's castle; and they will stare into hypnogourds and end up in the notorious void. Pega Lego Legend Entertainment's Companions of Xanth by Johnny L. Wilson The Legend Evolves Of course, the first thing Legend veterans are going to say is, \"It doesn't look like a Legend game.\" Indeed, the designer has gone far beyond the graphic text adventure approach of the Spellcasting series and Timequest adventure. It has even gone beyond the interstices of full-screen puzzles, cur scenes and animation in Gateway and Eric the Grundy Golem: So, you understand that each character has a personal name, a creaturelrace name: Jenny Elf, Che Centaur, Demoness Metria, and so on. Dug Mundane: Okay, but who's the gorgeous blonde on the cover? Grundy: She's Nada Naga. Dug: I can see she's not a Naga. Otherwise she would have a long serpentine tail. But who is she? Grundy: Nada Naga. Dug: I know she's not a Naga ... Grundy: Then what do you need to know? Dug: Her name. Grundy: Nada Naga. Dug: I didn't ask her race. I asked her name. Grundy: Nada Naga. Dug: I know she's not a Naga ... Grundy: Right! Dug: What do you mean, right? Grundy: She's Nada Naga. She is a Naga and her name is Nada. Her talent is the ability to change from human to Naga form. Dug: So she is a Naga, but she's Nada Naga. Grundy: That's the first intelligent thing you've said since you started playing this game. Take Put Look at Open Close Give Talk to buttercup You've got a small yellow buttercup that contains a MAP UNDO Page 10 Computer Gaming World "


"eyneu MAP UNDO Unready. Indeed, the new interface Take some time to draw more than static looks like a graphic adventure in the Put pictures surrounded by text. Almost true sense of the word. Look at Open every environment within the game In fact, looking at the screen may Close has an animation running somewhere give people the erroncous feeling that Give in the picture. In Mundania, it is alTalk to this is a LucasArts graphic adventure ways raining (animated rain) in order in the SCUMM tradition. The art style to encourage the gamer to learn the isn't quite the same and the cominterface and get out of the wet, demand/inventory lines are not in the envelope pressing environment and into colorsame places on the screen, but that ful Xanth. Some of the animated You close the envelope. feeling of deja vu is initially present. features will be as simple as rain fallHowever, that doesn't begin to tell the ing, water rippling and bees buzzing, full story. but they reflect Legend's desire to The truth is that this is a «smart make their screens appear less static to interface.\" It is point-and-click like gamers who are intimidated by their many of those found in graphic adventureland, but the underlying traditional graphic text adventures. parser is solid enough that it doesn't care about the order in which Another interesting graphic touch is that the icons in the player's gamers click. One can click on a verb and then an object, or one can inventory line change to reflect their current status. Remember that choose an object and then a verb. If one clicks on an object that has puns abound in Xanth, so one can pick a buttercup, remove the butter special verbs associated with it, a submenu of additional commands and use the cup for something else. The butter will appear in the appears on-screen. Each objecr usually has a default verb with it. If inventory as a par of butter, but will melt if the player doesn't do the player simply clicks again, that order is implemented. If the player something with it. We thought this was a nice touch. wishes to do something else, the default can be overridden. When the player clicks on objects and verbs that provide for From Scene To Shining Scene multiple interpretations, the \"smart parser\" (that's what we call it. The game also features another new approach for Legend. Since the Legend feels like that implies too much of a traditional text game) wager indicates that the player's character is competing against the allows the gamer to pick between poscomputer's character, the game uses Take sibilities. If a possibility is grammari. Put several settings as opportunities for cally possible, but not a possible action Look at cinematic cut scenes. These rOin the game context, said command Open toscoped images have been touched up Close will appear as a \"gray\" command line Give by the animators so that they don't to allow the gamer to know that it is Talk to look as rough as most rotoscoped aninot the solution. Though Companions mations, and they tell not only the of Xanth is essentially a graphic advenstory of Kim's (the competitor's) proture (i.e. contains pictures with hot 2 011 gress, but they unveil a secondary plot spots and objects, and limits the basic postic through «film,\" as well. In order to command list to 10 verbs), it contains You take the envelope from the desk. keep the Kim cut scenes from becomover 100 different verbs that can be ing too repetitious, players also get to used at various times during the game. sce some of the metastory (remember Further, a lot of design time has been the wager?) that Dug doesn't know spent in trying to anticipate the weird about. These cut scenes show how the things that gamers might try to do. So, responses and occasional demons are reacting to the situation, animated sequences have been placed within the game to supply such much like the comments from the popcorn salesman and balloon contingencies. Another philosophical underpinning for the new inseller who represented God and Satan in the Broadway play, J.B. terface is that there will be no «Hunt the Pixel\" puzzles. As the player Xanth is a fascinating place and the graphics/music of the game do sweeps the cursor over the graphics, anything \"hot\" lights up, but their best to present some of its diversity. Though it is a reasonably nothing smaller than a post-it note done to scale will ever be imporsized game, the design philosophy is to have no environment larger tant. than 15 rooms and no puzzle which Take The folks at Legend have been conPut requires the player to backtrack uncerned that most of their previous Look at reasonably. The desire is for players to games tended to look like pretty picClose Open experience the fun and whimsy which tures surrounded by a sea of text. The Give is Xanth without getting frustrated. new interface makes most descriptions Talk to Michael Lindner, designer of the fit into two lines. If the description Push game, was producer of Spellcasting needs to say more, boxes expand over Pull 201 and Frederick Pobl's Gateway (as the inventory and companion boxes at well as co-designer of Gateway). His Open the door the bottom of the screen in order to biggest challenge, in addition to reallow for more text. You're in a dimly lit cavern. Nada Naga stands beside you, maining true to the universe deFurther, the new dialogue system scribed in more than a dozen Xanth substitutes a portrait window over the books, is to interweave his \"Ron Gilgraphic presentations. The non-player bert\" philosophy of player-friendly MAP UNDO character will say something and a vadesign with the reality that Xanth, for riety of responses will be allowed for the player's character. It is point all its frivolity, is still a dangerous place. In balancing the humor and and click like the rest of the interface, but the conversations are the danger, lies his challenge. dynamic and change, depending on what Dug has said in previous Gamers who like puns will definitely want to play Companions of conversation(s) or what he has done. Xanth. Those who are offended by word play, need not apply. As for The new interface shows that the design team is willing to spend me, visiting Xanth is always worth the effort. Cow MAP UNDO getting her bearings. July 1993 Page 11 "


"UBIN Air Ball \"Oh, he flies through the air with the greatest of ease, That daring young man in his high top Nikes.\" asketball, funny enough, is the primary reason that soccer has never become popular in the U.S. In the rest of the world, soccer (or football as it is known worldwide) is the working class sport of the masses. Anyone who walks into any run-down public housing track in the U.K. is likely to see groups of kids playing soccer with almost anything: a real soccer ball, a soft drink can, a tennis ball or even a rock. Meanwhile, in the U.S., basketball is the king of the inner-city environment and it is here that some of the best ball is played in 3-on-3 tournaments. The fact that Jordan is allowed contractually to play in such 3-on-3 tournaments was a surprise. Jordan in Flight (Jordan) arrives in a large, gaudy, two and one-halfinch deep box. Of this, some one and three-fourths inches of the box amounts to air. This, of course, might be appropriate for Air Jordan, but in these ecologically sensitive times one has to wonder why so many trees were sacrificed to the god of packaging Further, one must question the wisdom of a sports simulation where a 486/33 is the recommended platform. Flight simulation fans may have high-end machines of necessity, but we doubt many sport game fans do (especially in a market where some of the best sports products remain text-based). On the reverse side, of course, one could praise EA for pushing the envelope. The Tip First impressions are incredible. The 3D-based graphic engine is so far ahead of everyone else, it is amazing. The manual claims that flight simulation algorithms are applied to let the player view the game from any distance or angle. However it is done, it is breathtakingly impressive. Immediately upon jumping into a 3-on-3 exhibition game, the full array of Jordan's impressive shot-making ability is available. From the quick first step around the defender to a leaping wraparound dunk, Jordan is a continuous flow of superb 3D animation. Mouse control is easy to use, and the number of actions available is kept to a minimum, which helps the case of play and keeps the simulation accessible to all levels of players. The video replay and video edit option allow the user to not only replay the previous play, but to create and manipulate one's very own highlight film. The interface for these options continues to improve and Jordan in Flight provides such functionality in a very logical and friendly fashion. The replay and highlight part of the product should be a significant part in any purchase decision. If the user enjoys putting together highlight films of their greatest achievements, this is a major plus. Michael Jordan in Flight from Electronic Arts by Wallace Poulter Setting a Screen The manual is particularly impressive, although not for its look, which is almost excluTITLE: SYSTEM: GRAPHICS: PRICE: PROTECTION: DESIGNERS: PUBLISHER: Michael Jordan in Flight IBM (483/33, 4 MB RAM recommended, 3.5 MB HD space) VGA (with 1 MB video RAM recommended) $69.95 None Mike Suarez, Greg Zumwolt, Michael Jordan Electronic Arts San Mateo, CA (800) 245.4525 Page 12 Computer Gaming World "


"Anything You Want... You Got It!... "


"DRU SECH (COP Edit-Speed Frane COP sively red, white and black. JO000 offensive rebounding strength would afford him second Maybe this was some atWilmington 02:10M arietta and third chances. tempt to convey the colors SPDRM 324 SPORTE There are four specific plays included with the game. of the Chicago Bulls. These are the low post cutter, high post cutter, back door What is impressive is that screen and give 'n go. Again, if the game was more four of the first pages deal challenging, these would be useful. As it stands, there is with such matters as little need for them. \"Video Mode Support,\" \"Sound Card Support,\" Foul Trouble \"Performance Issues,\" What is it about basketball simulations? From the \"Potential Graphic Anomalies,\" and \"Trouoriginal «Larry Bird and Dr. J do very little\" through bleshooting.\" Someone \"Michael Jordan and Larry Bird do even less,\" there has took a lot of time testing seemed an inability to transfer a good game to the PC the compatibility of Jordan in Flight and they should be Fin Location Height Pan Edit Speed Frame-11 market. To quote from the (LOAD (SAVE applauded for their effort. In addition, Mitchell Anthony manual, «It has taken a (STAPU PLAVI KO has done some entertaining work with some flip-book long time and a great deal BECIMEXIT SLEM ve K animation in the manual. This is a nice little touch that of ingenuity on the part of underscores the craftsmanship that went into the proda dedicated team of technicians (all Michael Jordan uct. fans).» And therein lies In the Paint part of the problem. Michael Jordan in Flight could Game play revolves around a 3-on-3 tournament held have used the critical eye of among teams based in some of the hotbeds of street a non Jordan fan. In fact, basketball. Manhattan, NY, Oakland, CA, Lowell, MA the whole product has a are all represented, along with Jordan's own Wilmington breathless hero worship asclub. For some reason, though, there is no team from the pect about it, which gets to streets of Chicago, where be tedious. The box copy announces \"Revolutionary some of the nation's best FIIN. Location Height LOAD SAVE video-sim (TM) technology captures all the air artistry of street basketball is played. STOP (PLAV) 101 240 Michael Jordan with unprecedented realism.\" That's an Multiple options keep the BECINT EXXY SLEVA 1> extremely accurate description, but you will note that game interesting for a there is no mention of a «game\" in that description. while. Six different scoring or time methods are availAgain quoting from the manual, \"We chose to set able from being the first to Jordan in a 3-on-3, half court game because it's the best score eleven baskers to usformat in which to showcase his talent.\" It would have been more refreshing to see \"With a recommended set up ing 12 minutes per quarof a 486/33, if we had gone to 5-on-5, the game would ter. In the latter, there is have been horrendously slow.\" some strategy involved, as tiring teammates will have Hitting the Three to be substituted to keep the team fresh. After especially good or poor shots, a pop-up video of There are three levels of difficulty, Street Ball, Michael Jordan is played. Such Speed Camera College and Pro. Unfortunately the Pro level is far lines as \"What a brick\" and 10. 32 too easy, and the reason can probably be traced to SPORTS SAULEHT SPORIN \"Maybe you should take up the fact that the product is based on Michael Jordan. golf\" accompany one's less imJordan is just too good overall and, as a result, you pressive efforts. I did get a don't need the other players to develop a successful chuckle from the Jordan voice strategy. There are two different strategies that will over, that appears occasionally win almost every time. The first is for Jordan to during the game, when he exclusively take 3-point shots. Jordan is so good that spoke of it being time for the he hits almost 50% of the time. A quick look at the North Carolina defense. Dean mathematics will show you that the opposing team Smith, the North Carolina Tar must shoot over 80% of their 2 point shots to beat Heels head coach and Jordan's the Jordan-led Wilmington ream. A second option college coach, is generally credis for Jordan to keep the ball ited as being the only person and run around, shielding the who could hold Jordan under 20 points a game. ball, until an angle to the basLT DE SPORTS ket is established. Then, head SAU EXIT) SPORT At the Buzzer for the basket for a satisfying Michael Jordan in Flight is the most visually realistic slam. sports software on the market. The Video-Sim (TM) I also found that the best technology is indeed revolutionary, and Mike Suarez team was created by selecting and Greg Zumwalt should be congratulated for bringthe best rebounders. In this ing us closer to a more realistic depiction of the sport. way, I could compensate if I Michael Jordan in Flight, however is only half the missed a shot taken by Jordan process. Now, they need to apply the technology to a on the outside. This way, the game. CGW Camera Speed 3 Page 14 Computer Gaming World "


"Check out the New Air Bucks! Due to overwhelming response to Air Bucks, Impressions are delighted to announce an upgraded version of the game, to give you, the player, the features you want! AIN BUCKS Routes Planes Cango Finances Bank toeks Better Graphics Bot Date TARR1548 256 color VGA graphics are used throughout the game LAL Bucks Routes Planes Cango kinandes Bank CAT FA Animated Zoom Mode ir Buca +290 + Hathias ten 330272284 Dato TUUNIT 47 Watch your planes fly around the world; city selection & all other commands can be made from here TICKETS TC-DEC XUS Lower S ROUTE OK SPREDICTED INCOME ROUTE DISTAN I ean. Gang Better Interface TOTAL: 22 service scheduled Price Cheer koute. RED Check Plane Income INCORE on 1 AD 17 Nex Plane DEICHSUR42 More user-friendly menu selection, better mouse & faster typing Tren Date Description 52041 513632 21460 009 0096 0857 4/5 Fuel Purchase 4/5 New Plane 4/6 Fuel Purchase 450 More Reports 309 470 Fuel Purchase 4270 17270 0103 4/18 Fuel Purchase 104 4221 Ticket Fares 104/23 Fuel Purchase 107 4/2 TICKet Fores 100 4226 Fuel Purchase 0109 4227 New Plane 19900 179200 520048 35627 1091 244787 200000 144707 Detailed data on plane demand & costs is easily accessible Among the many other enhancements made to the game are: Upgraded economic model & computer player Al, sound effects, personalisation of airlines, check register, better mouse & typing handling, city sizes now from 1 to 100 & vary thru time, print to paper options & lots more! ARBORUM,12 available free to all registered users of Air Bucks 1.0/1.01 Impressions Committed to customer satisfaction in strategy entertainment! Circle Reader Service #64 "


".:THE VERY BEST IN STRATEGIC STARSHIP COMBAT Impressions are delighted to announce an Omnitrend production Rules of Engagement 2! The original became an instant success one of the top 6 games of 1991\" (Newsweek), \"involving, well-planned, entertaining, highest levels of intelligence and excitement\" (Computer Game Review). Now, the sequel surpasses even the original's excellence! Rules of Engagement 2 is a real-time, strategic space combat game. The player commands a fleet of starships engaging enemy ships in campaigns composed of multiple combat missions. The attention to realism and detail (Omnitrend's hallmark) and the sheer size of the game are phenomenal, and are made accessible by the unique easy to use control system. Rules of Engagement 2 is the latest Interlocking Game System moduleand can link with Breach 2 or Breach 3 (coming this fall).  Exciting animated sequences featuring 3D rendered spaceships relate the storyline at strategic points within campaigns. Players can create their own tree-structured campaigns with the world's first campaign-builder and can even include their own PC Animate Plus animation files!   LIARS TIR EastNLAGINSENERE wa 1901 PM FECUS FILEY 01 00 LOTELS TACOEF CEL ORIENTES I LEINFORCE 120 Lys Star HAVHARI COLD SED . Rules of Engagement 2 features an a still from an animated squence outstanding interface. Game screens consist of four QuadPanels, color coded to distinguish different control systems. The central control bar coordinates all activity between panels. Users can select which of the 28 QuadPanels appear on the main screen and can even save several configurations for use in different situations. L FOL DPH TIMEX ONT 002400 sample configuration of QuadPanels FYF Rules of Engagement 2 offers a significant advance in artificial intelligence within computer gaming. Each starship captain has a substantial dossier complete with many personality traits which affect how he, she or it reacts to orders and situations which arise. Caravelse SITE ENGETUT BEC. SCO LOVE SERVICE RECOUNT THAHEESTERESE COUR ko, A. STRIELLE D INAMIT IIDAVEY OR i IEEE  METATA ! LLAMINE CEVICTION NISMESTY OMICIS LEAST SPACE CLATTESIAN a starship captain's dossier SNITY DESTROYIA INS VURY CASAN aless Rules of Engagement 2 offers immense replay value, allowing the player to design and construct both friendly and hostile spacecraft and their captains, specify the physical and mental capabilities of the enemy forces -and design solar systems in which the battles will take place! DEFLESSIO 100STMR NRW 101015 BedmiNSTOETS MAS 19FELPARK outfitting a ship in dry dock Committed to Excellence in Strategy Entertainment Impressions Software. Inc. 7 Melrose Drive, Farmington, CT 06032 Circle Reader Service #65 "


"RULES OF ENGAGEMENT : EN OMNITREND OMNITRENO Impressions INTERLOCKING GAME SYSTEM\" Circle Reader Service #65 "


"ctrategy au TIPS AND TACTICS FOR LUCASARTS' X-WING by Rusel DeMaria These tips and tactics have been excerpted from the forthcoming book, X-wing: The Official Strategy Guide by Rusel DeMaria and Prima Publishing. Along with the following general tactics, the book will include complete descriptions of every mission, strung together with wellwritten fiction that supports and enhances the fiction of the game. The book will be available in June for $19.95. STANDARD OPERATIONAL DIRECTIVES: STARFIGHTER COMBAT Situational Awareness and Energy Management A Rebel Starfighter Pilot needs more than dogfighting skills to defeat the Empire. Situational Awareness and Energy Management are the two keys to developing effective starfighter tactics. Situational Awareness is knowing where you are, where your enemy is, and what you need to do to accomplish your mission goals. Energy Management is configuring your ship's power system to achieve the maximum efficiency. Proper use of these skills will depend on your ability to constantly analyze and reassess your situation in a rapidly changing environment. Situational Awareness and the Combat Multiview Display (CMD) The CMD is the most important part of your targeting system. The very first thing you should do at the start of any mission is query the CMD (in ID mode) for the nearest enemy fighter [R]. Note that, though armed, Shuttles and Transports aren't considered \"starfighters» and will not be selected by the targeting system in this manner. If there are enemy ships nearby, you will have to decide quickly whether to engage or proceed. You should consider yourself already under attack if there is an enemy less than 2 klicks distant! Using the targeting system and the CMD, quickly cycle through all of the craft displayed on your sensors, noting their type and distance [T or Y). Pay particular attention to those ships most critical to your mission. As time allows, assign them to the memory locations of the targeting computer for quick reference during the mission (Shift-F5F8]. As new ships enter the area your R2 or ship's computer will alert you with an appropriate message. Target the new arrivals in the CMD to see how they affect the overall situation. As you do this you should be building a mental map to help you determine the best way to achieve your mission. Energy Management and the ELS Display The primary consideration during any mission is what power configuration will optimize your chances for success. There are three main elements of concern. These are the Engines, Weapons and Shields. Depending on mission goals and the needs of the moment. energy levels may be optimized for maximum speed, firepower or defense. There are always trade-offs and you will have to learn the pros and cons of each. As the mission proceeds you may find it necessary to make frequent adjustments. There is no \"perfect\" configuration. Nevertheless, you should always strive to maintain fully supercharged cannons and full primary and secondary shields. Here are some tips for managing energy in battle:  Shift weapon energy to shields. When you begin a mission you will find your cannons are already at their supercharged levels. Your primary shields will be fully charged, but your secondary shields will not be charged at all. Note that the cannons recharge more rapidly than the shields. Experienced pilots have found they can bypass certain inefficiencies in shield recharge rates by setting the cannon recharge rate at maximum and then transferring that energy to the shields [ or Shift-F10]. Quickly build up your secondaries by transferring any accumulated cannon energy directly to the shields. Use shields to store energy. Shields dissipate energy more slowly than the cannons. Use shields to store energy like a battery. When you are redirecting as much energy as possible to the engines for greater speed, but still wish to maintain your shields, you can keep the shields at their normal recharge rate and redirect all the cannon energy to the engines. Then, when you need to fire your weapons, you can quickly transfer shield energy to the cannons (; or Shift-F9). Don't forget to reset the recharge rate for the cannons! Use cannons to charge shields. Another alternative which allows good speed, shield maintenance and some firepower is to redirect all shield power to the engines and set the cannon recharge rate to one above normal. Then manually transfer cannon energy to the shields every few moPage 18 Computer Gaming World "


"WHEN TV WORLDS WAR. nu MODELIJUngarnAUT Speed Lond: Fire Poweri T7 Target : S ESattutto Rodar: BUTLD COTTI Lob:7 nu STATS In ProduE TIONI Command your entire planet's military resources in abiertoerto conquer a hostile neighbouring planet. You control a state of the art workstation from which advanced software tools enable you to design hew craft, research new technologies, build new installations & craft, set up highly sophisticated missions and watch the progress of this strategic-interplanetary conflict END Design your own spacecraft for tanks, submarines, jet....! Battles take place in space & on surface of otro lapers DOPDE I DOBOD Random planet generator for great replay value Designed as ar 2 player gamel DESIGN STATS SVATIn Send out units on missioned explore the unknown enemy planet and yipe out its military capability Impressions Committed to Excellence in Strategy Entertainment Impressions Software, 7 Melrose Drive, Farmington, CT 06032 Circle Reader Service #66 "


"citrateg. ments. This increases your workload, but in a low threat environment where you're not actually using the cannons very much this works well. You can actually build up a full charge for both systems this way! Redirect energy to engines for maximum speed. For maximum possible speed you will need to redirect both cannon and shield energy to the engines. As long as you have already maximized your shield strength first, you should have a few minutes before that energy dissipates. Note that normal recharge rates merely maintain current energy levels.  Redirect energy to other systems to slow down. This is the corollary to the previous rule, but is sometimes overlooked by novice pilots. When it is necessary to reduce speed, like when you want to keep a slower-moving target within range, you may choose to redirecr energy from engines to shields or to weapons instead of cutting your throttle. This way, you achieve the speed desired, but also gain additional charging for other important systems. Just don't forget to correct your settings when more speed is required. Weapons, Targets, and Firing Configurations Weapon selection and firing configuration decisions will often determine the success or failure of a mission. There are a few general rules that apply to almost every situation. Homing Projectiles: Homing projectiles such as concussion missiles and proton torpedoes are intended to give you some \"standoff\" attack capability. Since these are \"fire-and-forget\" weapons, their rapid deployment can help you quickly even the odds in your favor. Torpedoes are designed for attacking larger and slower ships. Torpedoes, though faster than a starfighter, can't turn as well. An alert pilot can always evade one, so avoid using them against starfighters unless the enemy is flying straight and level or in a head-on attack. Also, it should be noted that Imperial doctrine prohibits \"wasting\" torpedoes on starfighters so you probably will not find yourself targeted by one. Concussion missiles, on the other hand, are designed for dogfighting. Because of their great speed they are also somewhat effective at intercepting torpedoes. When targeting large enemy ships you must be within 6 klicks to get a lock-on. Against small ships the distance must be less than 2 klicks. At extremely long range you must keep the target absolutely centered in the targeting box. You will discover that Imperial ships are able to achieve solid lock-ons while you are still \"acquiring\" your lock. This is one area in which they maintain a slight technological edge. Cannons: For most combat and almost all dogfighting you will rely on your cannons. The dual fire mode has proven to be the most effective compromise when considering power, targeting opportunities and firing speed. In the Y-wing this is especially true because the cannons are in a twin mounting that places their fire in a very small area. If the target is going to be hit at all, it will be hit by both guns and may as well receive the double shot! In the X-wing, and to a lesser degree the A-wing, dual-fire mode is preferred because the wing-tip mounting of the cannons allows a much larger area to be considered by the targeting system. Although this results in a less efficient use of cannon energy (since up to half the shots may miss), it is offset by the benefit of having more firing opportunities against a small, rapidly maneuvering target such as a TIE Fighter. In fact, because TIE Fighters are smaller than an X-wing's wingspan they can find safety between the cannons right in the center of your targeting box! General Notes On Combat Combat in space is all about positioning. You want to be in a position to hit the other guy, and you want to avoid being in a position where he can hit you. In engagements between starfighters this is a straightforward task. A starfighter's weapons all face forward, so if you can position yourself on the enemy's tail and stay there, you will defeat him.  Dogfighting to the End When dogfighting, pick a target and stay with it until you have destroyed it. (See the rule relating to Hull Damage for an exception to this rule.) . Breaking up a Formation When breaking up an attack by several enemy ships in formation, your primary task is to keep firing long enough to force a particular ship to break formation. Proceed to attack each ship in the formation until all have been forced out of their attack run. After that, destroy at will or continue with mission objectives. Using Missiles on a Flight Group When attacking a multiship flight group with missiles or torpe. does, lock and fire as quickly as possible. If a missile or torpedo is evaded at first, don't worry; it will continue to track the targer. After you have fired at each of the enemy ships, go back through the target list to the earliest one that still survives. Fire another projectile if necessary, but try to take it out with cannons if you can. Remember, there aren't any reloads in a dogfight! Use them wisely. (When employing missiles or torpedoes against stationary targets it is not necessary to get a solid lock. A few seconds of \"yellow\" is sufficient). Escort Duty When flying a defensive patrol stay within a few klicks of the vessel(s) you are protecting. When you move to intercept any attackers try not to go more than eight to ten klicks away. A second attack on the other side will catch you too far away to get back in time. Also, when protecting other ships try to draw off the fire of large enemy ships by flying within range of their guns and popping off a few shots yourself.  Suicide Attacks In a one-for-one war of attrition the Empire will win. They know this and will not hesitate to spend their starfighters in suicide attacks against ours. In a head-on attack never assume an Imperial pilot will try to avoid colliding with you. His devotion to the Emperor, his honor and bravery are all confirmed when he dies while destroying the forces of the Rebellion. Fortunately for the Alliance, the ruggedness of our starfighters enables them to withstand most collisions with enemy starfighters. This is especially true when all shields are fully charged. However, despite the fact that these collisions usually result in the destruction of the enemy fighter, this is not considered a good tactic! Note that due to the rate of closure during head-on attacks, you can start firing at 1.7 to 1.9 klicks. When making a head-on attack into Page 20 Computer Gaming World "


"e n loci Sling wit und anderen S truk Gama FREDDY From the Creator of Leisure Suit Larry Frontier Pharmacist FREDDY Frontier Pharmacist SIERRA SIERRA We're Looking For People Who Like To Draw. They call him Freddy Pharkas, Frontier Pharmacist. He was born to be a gunslinger. But when he met his match, he gave it all up for a life in pharmacology. Now his arch enemy is back. And Freddy learns life's hardest lesson, you can't hide behind a pharmacy counter. Al Lowe, the creator of Leisure Suit Larry has gleefully pillaged the plots of every old Hollywood Western and stolen er, created the legend of Freddy Pharkas, a stirring Western sage of cowboys and Indians, banditos and mysterious strangers, women of ill repute and the men who repute them. With his faithful Indian sidekick, Srini Bagdnish, Freddy's aiming for clean up Coarsegold once and for all. And woe to any cliché that stands in his way. Play the only computer game that hands you a loaded six-gun and doesn't teach you how to use it. Freddy Pharkas, Frontier Pharmacist. And see if you're as good with a gun as you are with a mouse. SIERRA See your local retailer or cail 1-800-326-6654. Circle Reader Service #105 "


"strategy heavy fire you are advised to avoid enemy fire by maneuvering in a \"corkscrew\" manner until you have closed to dogfighting range. Then, when your target flies past, turn behind him and attack. In the case of TIE Fighters or any other fighter with hull damage, you can maintain a straight and level head-on attack because the target will be destroyed with only a few shots. This is risky, however, as you will take several hits to your forward shields.  The «Wotan Weave\" Learn to do the \"Wotan Weave.\" This is a spiral or corkscrew maneuver that will enable you to avoid enemy fire while maintaining a particular heading. First target the craft you wish to head towards (or away from). With this as your reference point, start turning while simultaneously pulling back (or pushing forward) on the stick. If you are doing this correctly, the targeted craft's blip will appear about half way from the center of the appropriate sensor display. Your stick will be approximately half way towards a corner position, but will require constant small adjustments. Generally speaking, when avoiding fire from a large ship use a slow spiral. (The greater the distance the slower the spiral.) When avoiding enemy starfighters (or missiles) a tight fast spiral is best. Attacking Large Ships When attacking large ships the \"Wotan Weave\" is absolutely essential for making repeated attack runs. The standard method is this: 1) Have shields and cannons fully charged, with recharge rates at maximum. 2)\"Weave\" in and begin firing at 1.6 klicks and maintain fire as you close on the target. You may wish to reduce speed to keep from getting too close. This will also serve to maximize your fire on the target. 3) When you've taken enough hits to require breaking off, reverse direction and full throttle. 4) Transfer all available energy to the rear shields. 5) Start \"weaving\" and continue to fly away until out of range or ready to make another run. 6) Restore shields to even distribution. Balancing Shields Whenever you've taken a few hits, be sure to even out your shields. Press S three times. This is especially important when you are going to transfer energy from the cannons to the shields. The reason is that if, for example, your forward shields are down, but your rear shields remain at full, you won't be able to transfer the energy! (Our engineers are working on this.) Missile Escape Maneuver To avoid a missile you must have it targeted in the CMD. You must be moving at high speed (at least 100). Turn away from the missile, then when it is about 0.4 klicks away turn hard towards it. Assuming you are successful, keep turning toward it until it self-detonates. Because Y-wings are generally unable to do this, greater reliance must be made on their stronger shields and hull. Keep Cannons Supercharged Supercharged cannons fire farther as well as hit harder. Need we say more? Know Your Target Know your target's characteristics, especially speed and armament. When closing to \"dogfighting range, (less than 0.75 klicks), match speed with your target. This will help you stay on his tail and keep you from overshooting into a disadvantageous position.  Control Energy; Control Speed Use ELS configuration adjustments to control speed. In the X-wing and A-wing cach level adjustment to the lasers or shields will result in a 12.5% change in engine power level. For the Y-wing there is a 6.25% change. The actual adjustments are rounded up in your favor. Special Characteristics Of Imperial Star Fighters  TIE Fighter The most common Imperial starfighter, the TIE is small and highly maneuverable. Like the TIE Bomber and Interceptor, it has no shields and even less armor. Cruising speed is the same as the X-wing. Quite deadly in the hands of a skilled pilot, it is nevertheless completely outclassed by all Rebel fighters. . TIE Bomber TIE Bombers are the most heavily armed Imperial fighters. Each TIE Bomber carries lasers, concussion missiles, and proton torpedoes! In some ways, the TIE Bomber is comparable to the Y-wing. They have the same cruising speed and are the \"heavies\" of their family. Though not as challenging in a dogfight, its missiles make it the most dangerous of all the Empire's starfighters...beware!  TIE Interceptor The TIE Interceptor is a faster TIE Fighter with a stronger hull and four cannons instead of two. With a cruising speed equal to that of the A-wing, the TIE Interceptor is much more dangerous than its predecessor. In the hands of a highly skilled pilot it is very tough to beat, especially in a Y-wing. TIE Advanced The latest in TIE starfighters is the TIE Advanced. Like others in this family, it has no hyperdrive capability, but it does have shield generators. Its shields are not very powerful but they regenerate quickly. Because it is so difficult to hit there is usually cnough time between hits for the shields to recover. First encountered during the Battle of Yavin, this craft is even faster and more maneuverable than the A-wing! Even in the hands of a mediocre pilot this is an extremely formidable dogfighter. However, TIE Advanced pilots require considerably more training than pilots of other craft. Fortunately, the Empire has yet to produce significant numbers of them. Needless to say, it is even tougher to beat than the TIE Interceptor, and almost impossible for a Y-wing.  Assault Gunship The Assault Gunboat is the first Imperial design to incorporate shields and hyperdrive capability. Its cruising speed lies between that of the Y-wing and X-wing. This one also carries concussion missiles, making it quite dangerous in combat. Apparently learning from the Alliance, the Empire has begun to employ these *** * **** ** Wotan Weave Page 22 Computer Gaming World "


"etrategy 80 120 100 80 90 65 gunships, using hit and fade tactics Speed Chart similar to ours! Operating in small independent groups, they also conX-wing 100 Y-wing ducr armed reconnaissance and are A-wing often the prelude to major Imperial TIE Fighter attacks. TIE Bomber TIE Interceptor 110 Communications In Battle TIE Advanced 125 [Shift-A] (Attack Target!) is the Assault Gunboat most important wingman comTransport 55 Shuttle mand. Use it often, especially when the enemy is coming from more than one direction. It is also a good way to get concentrated firepower on a single target such as a Freighter or Corvette when you wish to destroy it as quickly as possible. [Shift-C] (Cover Me!) should be used with caution. The reason is that if your wingman is already engaged and you order him to come to your aid, he will ignore the enemy he was fighting. That enemy will now have an easier time getting your wingman! Note that you must be currently targeted by an enemy craft to get a response. [Shift-I) (Ignore Target!) should also be used with caution. It is useful for getting a wingman to break off an attack, (should you wish to finish his target off yourself), but may make your wingman a sitting duck! You may notice that despite acknowledging your order, your wingman may continue pressing the attack. [Shift-W] (Wait for Further Orders!) should be used with extreme caution. It is more effective for getting a wingman to break off an attack but will definitely make him a sitting duck! Hits To Kill Table  Hull Damage At a certain level of hull damage a ship will automatically head towards its mothership or its hyperspace exit point. Unless their complete destruction is a part of your mission objective, let ships with hull damage go. If the arrival of other enemy ships depends on their destruction, this will help delay them.  Pilot Skill Level When assigning pilots, don't worry about the default skill levels. You can only improve their skill levels. If the pilot you assign is less skilled than the one who was assigned when the mission was built, no change will occur. Of course, you may still lose the pilot in combat!  Nonplayer Starfighters Note that nonplayer craft will not fire torpedoes at enemy starfighters, or missiles at other enemy craft that are not starfighters. Highlighted Ships The highlighted red part of a ship displayed in the CMD has no meaning except in the case of the Star Destroyer.  Brushing Off Your Wingmen When doing close fly-bys of other ships, avoid rolls and hard turns if you have wingmen. They try to maintain position and will often collide with the craft being flown by. [Shift-G] (Go Ahead and Engage!) to order \"waiting\" ships to get going. [Shift-H] (Head Home!) is useful for those pilots who are so skilled that wingmen just get in the way, (and prevent you from making ALL the kills!) Be careful, though, as this is another way to make it easy for the Empire to kill one of yours. The reason is that the ship receiving this order will have to make it to its hyperspace jump point, which may be some distance away, and will be vulnerable until it gets there. Note that in the heat of battle, discipline is often difficult to maintain. Avoid putting yourself between a wingman and his target and you will avoid \"friendly fire.\" The Farlander Diaries The following is excerpted from the combat diaries of the Rebel warrior, Keyan Farlander. The two entries were written during his first tour of duty, and contain detailed descriptions of the two most dangerous of his early missions. OP 4: Protect Medical Frigate Mission Briefing The wounded from the attack on Briggia are being brought to a Medical Frigate. You must provide security while the wounded are being transferred onto the Frigate. Three Medevac Shuttles and the Corvette Korolev must all escape into hyperspace after delivering their cargo of wounded. First the Shuttles and then the Korolev will dock and unload. The Corvette Korolev and the three Medevac Shuttles must all survive. Farlander's After Action Report I hypered in and began my mission start sequence, charging up shields first. The mission began quietly, but then an Imperial Frigate, the Warspite, dropped out of hyperspace about 11 klicks away and launched a group of three TIE Bombers and two TIE Fighters, then hyperspaced away. Immediately, I targeted a Bomber, wishing I had more help, then headed toward it at full throttle. With fully charged shields I set the shield recharge rate to normal and redirected all cannon power to the engines to get my speed up to 125. I switched to torpedoes, then when I got within 3 klicks of my target I reset shield and cannon recharge rates to maximum to bring my speed down to 50. Keeping my hand steady on the controls, 1 fired my first torpedo head-on because the distance between us was still greater than 1 klick. Any closer and I would have had to turn onto CRAFT X-wing Y-wing A-wing *11 LASERS MISSILES TORPEDOES Shlds Shlds Shlds Dn/Kill Dn/KillDn/Kill 11/4 2/1 */1 16/9 3/1 1/1 11/3 2/1 */1 */2 */1 *16 */1 */1 *14 */1 */1 12/4 2/1 */1 21/6 4/1 1/1 21/5 1/1 15/10 3/2 1/1 */1 40/8 7/1 97/24 12 81/40 TIE Fighter TIE Bomber TIE Interceptor TIE Advanced Assault Gunboat Shuttle Transport Space Tug Cargo Container Bulk Freighter Corellian Corvette 4/1 2/1 5/1 12 4/2 The first number is the usual minimum number of blasts necessary to bring the shields down. Shields regenerate, however, so if there is a pause in the attack more shots will be necessary. The second number is the number of additional shots to destroy the target. For example, an Assault Gunboat's shields begin to fail after taking more than 20 hits. They may not completely fail for a few more hits, and then the hull itself can take a few more shots. Note that these figures are based on continuous fire with supercharged lasers. Also note that concussion missiles are not effective against the larger vessels. July 1993 Page 23 "


"\"There must be not a balance of power, but a community of power; not organizer rivalries, but an organized common peace.\" Woodrow Wilson ASHESH "


"In a modern world, what happens when empires fall.. Inspired by     1 Loed you on your side you will deliver brigold gond. palette of Good and > corner of goods. D elso says that comandare Houbek was in this expected back in 2 hours.comp r endron this loun 4 hours ago buenit For Ashanka Het expected back in 9 hours. INITIA the tumultuous events in Eastern Europe, Mike Singleton and his team have created Ashes of Empire, their biggest game Om 0.000000 You must choose your own diplomatic strategy when dealing with people. to date. Ashes is a complex fusion of adventure and strategy which places demands on all your powers of diplomacy and intelligence. As you enter the heartland of your one-time great Flying one of many vehicles, you attack a ground target adversary, you must find a strategy to bring order to chaos, while at the same time avoiding the initiation of a nuclear conflict with an embittered and desperate | people, mistrustful of your intentions s Each town holds the potential of new allies and resources to acquire. in this New World Order. V Free instructional videotape Keyboard function overlay Over 6,000 unique characters The harsh reality of an .empire torn apart. Full free movement in a 3-D environment of 2.8 million sq. miles and 9000 locations. Circle Reader Service-#57 GAMETEK Distributed by Gametek, Inc. Packaging 0 1993 banetek, Inc.. Gametek is a trademark of IJE, Inc. 2999 DE 191st Street, north Miami Beach, Florida 33180. Ashes of Empire is a trademark of Miranje Technologies Multi-Media Itd. licensed by mirage Technologies multi-Media Ltd. I 1993 Midnight Technologies Itd. All rights reserved. "


"atraten the Bomber's tail and then fire. the ones with the prisoner. I As quickly as I could, I locked up reselected my lasers and took and fired on the other two them out. The one remaining Bombers. I knew I couldn't afShuttle was the one I had to ford a miss because my comdisable. It was still on course for puter told me that the Warspite the Invincible. So I wouldn't had returned to normal space — lose it, I targeted it in the CMD on the side of the Medical Frig. and assigned it to a memory ate opposite me. And it was location, using the \"Wotan launching more TIES! Weave\" as I closed in because Once again I redirected canthe remaining TIEs from non power to the engines and set group Gamma were on my tail. the shield recharge rate to norSome TIE Interceptors from mal. When the TIE Fighters got group Beta seemed to want to too close, I used the \"Wotan join in as well, but I couldn't Weave» to evade them. I knew 1 take time to fight them yet. I could not stop to dogfight them, had to disable the Shuttle bebut had to destroy the second fore it got too close to the Inwave of TIE Bombers the Warvincible. spite had launched! Once again, Switching to ion cannons I slowed down when I was and checking that they were on within 3 klicks of the Bombers dual-fire, I disabled the Shuttle and fired torpedoes as soon as I as soon as I was in range, then had a solid lock. Then I finished switched back to lasers. off the other two Bombers beThe Alliance Shuttle Rescue 1 fore they could launch their own jumped in once the Shuttle was missile salvos. disabled. Now I had to protect Finally, I turned my attention both Shuttles until the mission to the TIE Fighters that had was complete and the Sullustan been dogging me the whole time. As I was engaged in dogfighting still leader had escaped into hyperspace. more TIEs, the mission complete message came up on my display. I brought Rescue 1 up in the CMD and assigned it to the next memory location. At the same time I checked the computer and If you have a lot of difficulty with this mission, try sending noticed a new TIE Interceptor group, Delta. I targeted Delta 1 and the Shuttles home at the start of the mission. This is a spoiler assigned it to a memory location then turned my attention to the TIES but it will enable the Korolev to begin docking right away. Also, nearest the Shuttle. I concentrated on T/I Beta group as my highest because there are six TIE Bombers and you only have six immediate priority, determined to eliminate them before T/l Delta torpedoes, if you miss you may find the expedient way to came in range. destroy one or two is by ramming them. Not recommended, Next, I brought up Delta l in the CMD and switched to torpedoes but it is quick and effective! — I had three left — and fired as soon as I could lock on, one for each Interceptor. They avoided engaging me, going instead toward Rescue 1. so I was able to get good shots. If I had missed with any torpedoes, OP 10: Rescue Sullustan Leader I would have had to redirect all my shield power to the engines and set the cannon recharge rate to one step above normal to get enough Mission Briefing speed to catch up with them and still be able to keep firing. The Empire has kidnapped the Sullustan leader. You must rescue As soon as these Interceptors were destroyed, the Invincible launched him from the Empire in order to secure Sullust as an ally of the more of them. I turned toward the next wave, reset the shield recharge Rebellion. You will drop out of hyperspace about three klicks behind rate to normal, and began transferring cannon power to the shields a formation of five Imperial Shuttles escorted by a half-dozen TIE until the shields were fully charged again. This time I had to engage Fighters. They are on their way to the Star Destroyer Invincible 22 the new wave of T/I Delta with lasers. Once again I redirected all klicks distant. With your Y-wing you must identify and disable the shield energy to engines in order to keep up with them. Shuttle with the Sullustan leader. You will be accompanied by a pair The good news was that once I eliminated this group, Rescue I had of X-wings. SHU Kappa 5 must be boarded and SHU Rescue I must completed its mission. I got the mission complete message once it had survive jumped to hyperspace. With the Shuttle gone, the Interceptors homed Farlander's After Action Report in on me, but I decided to stick around and shoor them up, even Well, I'm not sure why I got to fly the Y-wing while Hamo got an though the mission was over. X-wing. Maybe it had something to do with my success when I Warning: Spoiler Alert rescued the prisoners. Whatever the reason, I had the job of identifying and disabling the shuttle with the Sullustan leader in ir. As you cycle through the target list, the last Shuttle of the five is the one with the Sullustan leader. Stay back about 1.5 klicks I began my start sequence, but dropped throttle to 2/3 and switched from the Shuttles and fire off two torpedoes at each of the four to lasers. A quick survey of the CMD showed me that TIE Fighter other Shuttles. They won't turn to engage you unless you get group Alpha was about to turn and attack me and I figured to take within one klick so this will allow you to eliminate them out at least one in a head-on pass. Then I switched to torpedoes as the without having to dogfight. Of course, you're still going to have remaining T/Fs continued past me and fired one torpedo at each a tough time with the TIE Interceptors, but try to stay between Shuttle — not to destroy them, of course, but to weaken their shields. the Rescue Shuttle and the Invincible and follow the procedure Now I noticed that some Shuttles turned to fight back, clearly not given above for dealing with the second wave of T/I Delta. Cow Page 26 Computer Gaming World "


"YOU CAN OUTFLY THIS GUY... BUT CAN YOUR COMPUTER? Yesterday's high speed games have pushed your Personal Computer to it's limits. Today's games are breaking them. You need a computer with no limits. You need to fly a Falcon. The Falcon MACH series are the first personal computers designed especially with the serious gamer in mind. The MACH systems employ new VESA local bus technology with the fastest graphics ever made for gaming and business use. They can produce 45 VGA frames per second. 30 Frames per second is flicker free to the human eye. Serious hardware for serious players. System MACH 2 MACH 3 MACH 4 CPU Type 486/DX-33 486/DX-50 486/DX2-66 Motherboard VESA Local Bus VESA Local Bus DRAM Memory VESA Local Bus 4 Megabytes 130 Megabyte 8 Megabytes 16 Megabytes Hard Drive 170 Megabyte 212 Megabyte 223 MHz Landmark v.2 Speed 111 MHz 167 MHz VGA Frames / Second 26 40 45 Price $ 1,599 $ 1,999 $2,499 System Upgrade Options: Internal CD-ROM SoundBlaster Pro CH Flightstick Joystick add $249 add $199 add $ 39 All systems come standard with: Mini-tower case, 230 watt power supply, 1.2 and 1.44 floppy drives, Genoa 8500 VLB graphics card, 101 Key keyboard, 14\" .28dp SuperVGA monitors, 2S/1P/1G ports, & DOS 6 and are backed by our 1 year parts and labor warranty. Any system can be custom built to your specifications, please call for pricing. Sales: (800) 258-6778 Information: (503) 269-0775 Fax: (503) 267-2575 FALCON NORTHWEST COMPUTER SYSTEMS 263 South Bayshore Drive Coos Bay, OR 97420 Circle Reader Service #54 "


"The Rumor Bag That's a Jai Alai! by Pedro Alfonso Jimenez Xavier de la Mancha II I had really wanted to do was find and the U.S.C. graduate asked, \"Oh, did it out about The Dig Brian Moriarty's come from Sega? They're doing an X-Men upcoming graphic adventure from game.\" It took me a second to realize she was LucasArts. So, when my source asked me to talking about the most popular member of meet her in a famous Tijuana nightclub, I the comic book's band of mutants, the Woldidn't hesitate. I even took a little overnight verinc. Then, I asked her which characters bag in case we ended up on the Yucatan were going to be in the game. She told me that Peninsula (what better place for an archaeX-Ment would feature Cyclops, Gambit, ological dig?) and hitched a ride to the border Nightcrawler and Wolverine on the side of with the usual suspects. justice and Magnero as the ultimate bad guy. Our idea was to drive the rental car to the As soon as we crossed the border, we hailed border, walk through no man's land and catch one of the fabled Tijuana Taxis. Fortunately, a cab on the other side. The ride was almost one of my sources spoke fluent Spanish, as as wild as the highway surfing sequence in opposed to the broken half-Ingles, halfLucasArt's Sam & Max: Freelance Police On Espanol I used when visiting TJ. She gave the The Road (the graphics adventure where our cabbie the name of the club and he flipped a favorite detectives visit every weird amusempped \"U\" in the middle of Avenida Revolucion. ment venue in Americana from the World's \"Spun this sucker around faster than a hockey Greatest Ball of Twine to the dangerous Gaplayer who just lost the puck,\" I said. tor Golf course). In between lane changes that veen lane changes that \"Then, I guess you know about NHL made a demolition derby look tame, a little  Hockey,\" said my source. \"EA's finally going magpie whispered in my ear that '93-'94 was to put it on the IBM.\" I love it when she talks going to be the era for cyberpunk. Not only hy hockey. \"The IBM version will even have a are ReadySoft's CyberSpace and MicroProse's 'coach only' option and stat compiler to go Blood Net in the works, but Interplay has with the expanded graphics and sounds they hired the writer-director's assistant from the Gilm Jennifer 8 to produce an unnamed cybercouldn't get into the Sega version.\" punk role-playing game. Bullfrog/EA is near The taxi pulled up in front of the night club, ing completion of Sundicate a strategy game and it was blacker than a Command HQ in a dark future milicu. and Cyberdreams has square after it had been nuked. That's what I convinced Harlan Ellison to contribute to a cold my friends and the redhead asked if I graphic adventure based on the award-winknew about Command HQ II (working title). ning short story \"I Have No Mouch And I l admitted that I didn't and she said that the Must Scream.\" new version would eliminate the secrer \"doc scan\" technique that lets players cheat on the We had parked the car and walked through ???? scenario, improve aircraft carriers, make the pedestrian gate when one of my gentle it run under 2400 baud and possibly, add a companions pulled me back and screamed. scenario builder. She had seen a rat cross her path and was ready to return to the good old U.S. of A. \"Are you The club was closed, so we elected to visit sure it was a rat?\" I asked, \"It could have been the restaurant across the street. We would [former software executive's name withheld only have to wait a few minutes for our soso that industry insiders can replace it with called friends to show up and my \"sources\" those who have burned them on one or more thought they could loosen my tongue with a projects]!\" My sources\" (technical term used little mescal. Heck, I didn't figure there'd be by journalists in order to be reimbursed for any problem. I must drink about 64 ounces travel and entertainment expenses) laughed of coffee a day; what's this pansy discolored and I shifted gears, \"Maybe it was a wolverstuff gonna do to me? They poured and served ine?\" me, poured and served. No problem! I even bit the head off the worm to show them what Only the Michigan alumna was offended a man I was. Two of my sources swooned, but one said I wouldn't be able to bite the head off one of the worms from Dune Il on the Sega. Not only is the action supposed to be much faster on the console, but the figures and objects are four times larger than those on either the IBM or the new Amiga version. The good news is that the maps have more interesting and functional terrain features than those on the personal computers, but the bad news is that gamers won't be able to save their games. «Shure,\" I said (sort of), \"but didja' know the nextsh game they do won't be on Arrakis? I think they're tired of drawin' all that shand.\" \"See,\" said the redhead, \"didn't affect him at all.» They all giggled at my expense and I stood up to show that I still could. I collapsed onto the table on my back. The last thing I remember was the little magpie saying that two submarine simulations should hit this fall. Remember the good old days when everyone was doing WWI flight simulations and trying to name their games Red Baron? Now, the battle is over Seawolf. The little bird said that the games will each take a very different approach on the subject, but it was funny that they opted for the same name. Two of my sources picked me up and were ready to carry me out of the restaurant. By that time, I decided the farce had gone far enough. \"Gee, you ladies are almost as strong as Zanthia, the main character in Westwood's sequel to Kyrandia.\" Of course, they immediately dropped me onto the floor when they realized the slurred speech was gone. I figured it wouldn't take them long to realize that «mescal» bottle had been filled with watereddown Squirt and a gummy worm, either. So, down I told them the sequel would have seven same chapters, lots of nifty new technological flourishes, plenty of comic relief and a love story. I didn't quite get the whole message out before the blonde lifted up my bag enough to pour a cold Corona down my shirt. \"You think you're so smart!\" she sputtered, \"tell me where The Dig takes place?» Even though I knew it had something to do with an asteroid, I decided this wasn't the time for share and tell.\" cow Page 28 Compuer Gaming World "


"Interaction, Relaxation, Competition, Cooperation, Recreation, Conversation, Education... Imagination v2.0 Map LarryLand\" Join Leisure Suit Larry and adults from all over in the world's first Cyberspace Casino MedievaLand Team up with others to explore the dark caves within an active volcano. MAIL Post Office Receive E-mail in your own mailbox or send mail using SierraStamps.\" SierraLand Dogfight other Aces in Red Baron, splat 'em in PaintBall\" or just putt around in a game of Mini-Golf. HELP TSN The Mall Get the best prices on all kinds of stuft? ClubHouse A friendly place to play Bridge, Backgammon, Cribbage, Chess and other great games. Destination? ImagiNation! For Your FREE Invitation To ImagiNation, Including 3 Hours Of On-Line Time Call: 1-800-SIERRA-1, Or Fill Out And Return The Coupon Below. Valuable Coupon For your FREE Trial Membership Kit and 3 FREE hours of on-line time, just call: 1-800-SIERRA-1, or fill out this coupon, place it in an envelope, and send it to: The Sierra Network, Offer #320, P.O. BOX 11, Oakhurst, CA 93644 Yes, I have at least a 386 computer, a modem, and a valid major credit card. If I decide to use The Sierra Network after my 3 free trial hours are up, I will become a full member and be billed as little as $12.95 per month.. Now there's a whole new way to have fun with your personal computer. It's called Imagi Nation: The Cyber Spuce Theme Park and it's only on The Sierra Network. The Sierra Network is on-line games and more, including products for every taste and skill level. Games range from the multi-player version of the award-winning Red Baron and the critically acclaimed fantasy game The Shadow of Yserbius, to more relaxing fare like Bridge and Chess. There's even multi-player games for children like Graffiti and Boogers. More than 20 great games so far and more to come! But what really makes The Sierra Network special is the sense of community that you get when you visit ImagiNation\" Each night, thousands of friendly people gather there to play games, meet new friends, and generally have a good time together. If you'd like to try The Sierra Network, all you need is a 386 or better computer, a VGA monitor, a 2400 baud modem, and a valid major credit card. Just send in the coupon, or give us a call. We'll give you everything you need to enter the land of ImagiNation, and your first 3 hours --FREE ImagiNation on The Sierra Network. There's no place you've ever been that can compare to the fun and friendship of the world's first CyberSpace Theme Park. Name Address City/State/ZIP Day Phone Evening Phone The Sierra Network Card Number: Expiration Date Credit Card: Visa MasterCard American Express Discover *Subject to current rates, terms and conditions. See rate card in membership kit for details. Offer good through December 31, 1993 1993 The Sierra Network Offer #320 TM designates a trademark of The Sierra Network * Your credit card will not be charged unless you use more than 3 hours of on-line time. Red Baron is a registered trademark of Dynamix Offer good until December 31, 1993 Offer available only to first time members 01993 The Sierra Network Offer #320 Circle Reader Service #89 "


"RED CRYSTAL «'The Seven Secrets of Life\" QQP. Quantum Quality Productions, Inc. NOREM Seek out the seven secrets of life .... Can you forge through the evil that lurks in the depths of the eerie dungeons, the ominous castle towers and the savage countryside? Play alone or with a partner. Simply, one fine adventure and role playing endeavor.  MODEM PLAY . 1 OR 2 PLAYERS WORKING TOGETHER OR IN HEAD TO HEAD COMPETITION BREATHTAKING GRAPHICS FASCINATING ECONOMIC SYSTEM LARGE VARIETY OF MONSTER TYPES OVER 50 DUNGEON LEVELS AUTO-MAPPING FEATURE The \"Red Crystal: Seven Secrets of Life\" is for the IBM PC. It can be obtained through your favorite retailer or ordered directly by calling: 908-788-2799 1993 Q.Q.P. All rights reserved. IBM is a trademark of International Business Machines. Circle Reader Service #102 "


"SOLITAIRES POURNEY FOR WINDOWS . Oooho AC -OOP: Quantum Quality Productions, Inc. GARY TEVENS The greatest collection of solitaire games ever is now available under Windows. In addition to the 105 individual games there are tournaments, quests and cross country journeys for a lifetime of gaming entertainment. It's not just a game... it's an addicition!! NOW WINDOWS COMPATIBLE 105 SOLITAIRE GAMES (Most of the world's best) TOURNAMENT PLAY (Set tournaments or create your own 4 INTRIGUING QUESTS SEVERAL CROSS-COUNTRY TOURING COMPETITIONS COMPLETE HISTORY AND OVERALL AVERAGES FOR EACH GAME The \"Solitaire's Journey for Windows\" is for the IBM PC. It can be obtained through your favorite retailer or ordered directly by calling: 908-788-2799 1993 Q.Q.P. All rights reserved. IBM is a trademark of International Business Machines. Circle Reader Service #82 "


"Dungeons & Dragons COMPUTER GAME STRONGHOLD THE POWER TO BUILD AND COMMAND YOUR OWN KINGDOM! STRONGHOLD is the first kingdom simulator set in the DUNGEONS & DRAGONS game world. Battle computercontrolled adversaries to become Emperor by building and expanding a kingdom while dispatching all opposing forces. You'll deal with all the details of running your own domain: Construction, farmland, population, housing, taxes, troops, moralechanging seasonal conditions as well as a multitude of D&D game monsters. Stronghold's striking visual presentation includes a ground-view camera angle that zooms in and out using 3-D scaling technology. Music and digitized sound effects enhance the fantasy mood. The intuitive interface makes this unique game fast and easy to play! STRONGHOLD. Running a kingdom may not be easybut it sure is fun! IBM (386 or greater) TO ORDER: Visit your retailer or call 1-800-245-4525 (in USA & Canada) with VISA/MC. domer BUILD Fighter SEL CongraritionGromage unitior cluiny level G (126,181 Fighter Mage Cleric Thiel PERUT URST OF 2 LOYAL TO PKHTFR 2016 LEVIL, LAWFUL ENEFIFHF FORTS 509,134/720,000 HET POINTS 57/57 TORIAL WEAPOTES SADY SIMORE My lady, families are squeezed together in tiny rooms throughout this neighborhood. We need more housing VILD SCREENS SHOWN: IBM 256-COLOR VGA. TH RUBIO Fighter Mage VIEW Retetore M cer ists 1sghtning bait spell towards red dragon Fighter Mege Cleric Thier TRAVIOUS ESTADESSE DONES Thief DUNGEONS & DRAGONS D&D, and the TSR logo are trademarks owned by and used under license from TSR. Inc.  TSR. In 1993 Strategic Simulations, Inc. All rights reserved "


"VERIFY (Cre teMenu()); COMPUTER GAME DESIGN SECTION CColorMenu 3-CColorMe u  Exhibit Haus Meeting Roi Rest Rooms Detach(); ASSERT (m_h enu == NULL); // defaul CMenu::-CM nu will destroy void CColorMenu : Appendcol rMenuItem INT DID, COLORREF color) VERIFY (App ndMenu (MF NABLEDI MF OWNERDR W, nID, (LPCSTR) CO or)); //////// Computer Game Design: Who, How and Why? TT Te have covered the entertainment software industry for more than a decade. Even so, it is still amazing to discover concepts we had failed to consider. For example, we know pretty well how graphic adventures move characters V V about the screen, but we never thought about the strategies required to redraw the background for each frame. Again, we know how much attention is paid to the physics behind the vehicles/vessels in a simulation, but until recently, we never thought about the physics algorithms for a blimp camera. So, computer game design is a dynamic field that always offers surprises. This special section on computer game design has been produced to draw back the curtain a little so that readers can appreciate some of the personalities, philosophies and techniques which are taken into consideration when a design team starts work on a computer game. The opening article is the first half of our coverage of \"The 7th International Computer Game Developers Conference.\" Then, Chris Lombardi takes us \"Behind The Screens\" to view the voice talent work for Day of the Tentacle (LucasArts' new Maniac Mansion sequel). Next, the \"Abstracts from the Journal of Computer Game Design will talk about redrawing backgrounds in adventure games and other design problems. From the developers themselves, Verin Lewis tells us of the pleasures and perils of transforming videotaped images into computer game images, and Gordon Goble interviews Papyrus' Dave Kaemmer about next issue's cover feature, a hot new Indy car racing simulation from the developers of Electronic Arts' Indianapolis 500: The Simulation. After that, science fiction writer Martin Cirulis shares how he and Hugo/Nebula winner Lucius Sheperd have used SimEarth and SimLife ro create worlds for novels and short stories. Finally, Mike \"Moondawg\" Weksler reviews a book that can help readers program their own flight simulators (or, at least, appreciate what other people have to go through in order to do so), The Waite Group's Flights of Fantasy: Programming 3-D Video Games in C++. Here's hoping that our readers enjoy reading about designers, design ideas and game technology as we enjoy discovering how the games move from ideas to our computer screens. We think watching the making of the games is almost as exciting as playing them...at least from our vantage point. After all, we don't have to keep typing in those lines of code and hunting down clusive bugs. We only deal with the interesting parts, like the weird costumes game designers wear at the annual costume banquet. #define COLOR BOX IDTH #define COLOR_BOX EIGHT void CColorMenu :MeasureIt m(LPMEASUR ITEMSTRUCT 1pMIS) It all items are of fixed size Page 33 July 1993 "


"@ UJI GRIFY eMe.. ColorMenu: ColorMen Graduation Day for Computer Entertainment The 7th International Computer Game Developers Conference Detach() ; by the Computer Gaming World Staff SSERT (m hM nu == ULL); defaul Menu::-CMe i will estroy bid LolorMenu: AppendColo MenuItem (U NT NID, PLORREF blor) RIFY (Appe Menu (ME E BLEDI OWNERDRA TID, PCSTR) col :)); o some people, the financials of the days when Electronic Artists were going computer gaming business make it to be the royalty of the next entertainment too insignificant to pay attention to industry. this fledgling industry. The same people from the time many of our public commight say that game designers, programpanies formed in the early '80s with vacumers, composers, producers and artists tend to live in a \"Neverland\" of their own ous but effective promises of making making, a world of neat and cool hacks \"stars» out of computer game designers, that are very hard to explain to most the design community has tried to be its people. That may not be true for long, for own counterculture and counterpoint to reasons to be found both within and withthe slick marketing departments that out the community of game developers. package their talent. Many ruined comIn many ways, this year's Computer panies rest in the graveyard of computer Game Developers Conference seemed game history because both sides of a comlike a cross between high school gradumercial entertainment product were not ation and homecoming. properly integrated. Chris Crawford's \"I Had A Dream\" Now, Hollywood is moving in upon speech showed that he had rethought his this pool of talent with a quick and sure design philosophy and game/life goals. step. This may imply several significant Speculative fiction writer Harlan Ellison Though his opening day address was a changes in the computer game industry greets computer game developers prior to bittersweet analog to the idealistic apho (which are claborared upon in this the banquet. risms of valedictorian speeches, it was month's cditorial), but it appears that Harlan Ellison would be as helpless upon most game developers have been at this the stage as Don Rickles without insults. type of nexus point before and, hopefully. The trouble is that Harlan was out of his are prepared to graduate into a world of clement. He was talking to a group of better and possibly more lucrative) pospeople who want to change the world sibilities. from its couch potato acceptance of the With Sony's recent aquisition of status quo as much as this literary guerrilla Psygnosis, Viacom's acquisition of ICOM, and employees of Walt Disney Billing Harlan Ellison as a futurist is Software, LucasArts Games, Trimark definitely a misnomer. He is actually a Pictures and Paramount's electronic recalcitrant, a reactionary who bends publishing division attending the conferrevolutionary prose to his own ends. After ence, it made a perverse kind of good admitting that he does his writing on a Marc Blank (Zork), Steve Meretzky (Leather sense to have automobile manufacturertypewriter as outmoded as the one on Goddesses of Phobos), Mike Berlyn (Intidel, proclaimed futurist Harlan Ellison, one of which William Gibson punched out the Brian Moriarty (Trinity) and Dan Horn (former Director of the Microcomputer the \"old ones\" of science fiction whose technopoetry of Neuromancer, Ellison Engineering Group o Infocom) celebrate a name must be spoken with hushed and tried to make contact with his audience reunion in front of another \"dungeon.\" reverent tones and a screenwriter in his by admitting that his contribution to a tinged with an overarching sadness beown right, to deliver the keynote address computer game design based on the cause the designer has opted to focus for the annual awards banquet. One Hugo-winning \"I Have No Mouth And upon a narrow niche of interactive art would think, however, that a man as bril1 Must Scream\" amounted to two full lovers rather than continuing to reach as liant as we perceived Harlan Ellison to be weeks of design work. We had to chuckle. many gamers as possible. The conference would have bothered to learn something At least, Bill Gibson had graduated to a seemed like homecoming as the principal about his audience before he delivered his word processor prior to the writing of founders and most famous designers of SP Mona Lisa Overdrive, and Ellison was Infocom joined together to reminisce bragging about his contribution to a game about the Cambridge Camelot where the I Have No Message, But in an industry where it sometimes takes Great Underground Empire was formed, I Must Scream two weeks to figure out the physics of a and several clusters of designers looked chase plane view or a blimp camera. InEllison has an anger schtick. He takes like a return to the Pajaro Dunes (a resort side of two minutes, Ellison had proven where Electronic Arts used to have offhis ethnic weltschmerz (Jewish pessithat he didn't really understand technolsite meetings for planning and playing) mism) and uses it as a club on his audiogy or the challenges faced daily by his ences. Without his anger and pessimism, audience. 20 Refine OLOR BOX W OTH define OLOR BOX H IGHT bid ColorMenu: HeasureIte (LPMEASURE TEMSTRUCT MIS) / all Cems are fixed ze Page 34 Computer Gaming World "


"WORLD WAR II The war is about to begin. Soon, the German blitzkrieg will sweep across Poland and the rest of EUROPE Europe. Starting in 1939, CLASH OF STEEL spans the European Theater of World War II with one complete 1939 1945 campaign and six scenarios, including the Fall of France, Operations Barbarossa, Blau, Citadel and D-Day. SLASH TIT SELL 256 color VGA displays To order, visit your retailer or call 1-408-737-6800 x186 with VISA/MC (U.S. and Canada only). For play on IBM III  Strategic Simulations, Inc. All rights reserved. "


"BRIXX Game Design ERIFY Menu ColorMenu: ~ColorMen Detach(); SSERT (m_hM nu == ULL) 7 defaul Menu : : -CMe u will estroy oid ColorMenu: AppendColo MenuItem(U NI NID, OLORREF olor) The major thesis of the address seemed oper community itself and each nominato be that the assembled game designers tion was accompanied by comments from need to do something besides create those who nominated the games. The games. He extemporized on incidents order of honored products was deterfrom his life in the army, seeming particumined by the presenters and had no bearlarly proud of the way he manipulared an ing on the relative merits of each game. officer into assigning special duty in order Every game nominated was considered to to compile a company history he had no be equally worthy. As each game was in intention of completing and how he had troduced, the members of the developchallenged a fellow non-comm to perpe ment teams were given pins recognizing 18 trate fraud. their distinctive contributions to the We aren't quite sure what he means. If gam games and making them the equivalent of he means to take the games which the the \"honor society for the \"Class of '93.\" assembled designers are already making The first game nominated was Putt Putt and infuse them with enough human Joins The Parade from Humongous Proemotion to bridge gaps of interpersonal ductions. One nominator said, \"It reunderstanding, there are designers trying minded me of my favorite book when I to accomplish this in many different ways was a kid, but it was alive.\" Another said, (games with artificial personality, multi\"My second youngest was fighting for the player cooperation and, most imporchance to play and he's only three.\" tantly, with story). We simply don't Frankly, the designers loved the easy inunderstand why their contribution is any rerface, the cute animation, the great less significant than Mr. Ellison's contrisound effects and its vocal caricatures, but butions to society. the most important thing about the game If he objects to the violence which is so was that it gives the player a purpose. It is pervasive in both video and computer the kind of game where a child can be a games, he had best revisit the anarchicand participant, nor a tourist. glorious celebration of violence in his own Putt Putt Joins The Parade was designed work. Violence is both an easy way to by Shelley Day and Ron Gilbert. express conflict and resolution in any artThe second game honored was, as masform. It can also be powerful. That is why ter and mistress of ceremonies Tim we advocate a more careful use of violence in certain games, but do not editorialize Brengle and Nicky Robinson observed, nominated in spite of or maybe because against violence per se. of -its graphic violence. Id Software's Harlan Ellison says that the computer Wolfenstein 3D features fast, smooth, lowgame design community should quit resolution texture-mapped graphics that playing games with their lives. We think not only give motion sickness to most Ellison should stop playing games with players, but put shareware back on the his audiences. It's time to put away his map, almost singlehandedly. \"Bad Melville\" impression and use his Wolfenstein 3D was developed by John podium as a \"futurist\" to challenge his Carmack, John Romero, Adrian Caraudiences instead of settling for cheap laughs and letting them miss the message. mack and Tom Hall. Next, the assembled community recogSpotlight On nized Comanche: Maximum Overkill from Exceptional Games Novalogic. Kudos ranged from the game providing a flight simulation that is both Though Ellison provided the keynote fun and easy-to-learn to the fact that it has address on banquet night, the bulk of the the best fractal generated terrain that anyevening was devoted to honoring exceptional computer games. These games one had yet seen. were nominated from within the devel Comanche: Maximum Overkill was developed by Kyle Freeman and John GarERIFY (Appe dMenu (MF_E ABLED F OWNERDRA NID, LPCSTR) col r)); the attention of the assembled throng. Spectre was clearly recognized for its capacity to challenge gamers with realrather than artificial opponents. It was honored for its entertainment value as the presenters considered its service as a productivity destroyer. It was also cited as proof that the Macintosh really can do fast polygonfilled games. Spectre was designed by Steve Newman, Sam Schillace and Craig Fryar. Proving that there is still room for genuine innovation, the conference's next honor went to Dynamix' The Incredible Machine. Designed and developed by Jeff Tunnell Productions, the product combines something of the best aspects of Sim City and Lemmings. One programmer/artist even said that this was the game she always wanted to do and, in contrast to what rival designers usually feel about another's work, she felt they had done ir right. Another commentator observed that they've stuffed Rube Goldberg into the player's computer with this game. The presenters even claimed that the satisfying play experience could not be described, only experienced. The Incredible Machine was developed by Jeff Tunnell, Kevin Ryan, and Brian Hahn. Speaking of innovation making it difficult to describe a product, the developers didn't know whether to call Stunt Island (from Walt Disney Software) a flight simulation or a film cditing simulator. Those who nominated the product observed that Stunt Island provided a satisfying experience from placing the cameras to flying the aircraft. Most importantly, they observed that it was probably the first time someone would really want to see a saved game (i.e. film). Stunt Island was developed by Adrian Stephens, Ronald J. Fortier, Cary Hara, and Martin Day. LucasArts Indiana Jones and the Fate of Atlantis was the next honoree. Although its multiple paths proved an inefficient way to make Indy \"three games in one,\" the designers commended Hal Barwood and company because all three paths actually work. Some nominated the game because of unique sections where one builds their own interface, and others appreciated the way this game focused on story and characters over puzzles. Indiana Jones and the Fate of Atlantis was designed by Hal Barwood and Noah FalStein Observing that it is rare when the remake is better than the original, the final game to be honored was Accolade's Star Control 2. Developers stated that it is a perfect blend of action and adventure that define OLOR_BOX_W DTH define OLOR_BOX_H IGHT 20 cia. coid ColorMenu: Measurelte (LPMEASURE TEMSTRUCT PMIS) COMPUTER GAME DEVELOPER NERDS In keeping with the trend of honoring fast-scrolling three-dimensional games with awesome graphics, the community also honored Origin's Ultima Underworld. One nominating designer stated, \"My girlfriend won't play it because it's too realistic and scary,\" and another said, «I don't think you can get any closer to VR without a helmet.\" Ultima Underworld was developed by by Paul Neurath and the crew of Looking Glass Technologies. Next, Velocity's Spectre was brought to // all tems are f fixed Everyone attending the banquet has probably been called a \"nerd\" at one time or another, but this vandalized sign embraced \"nerditude.\" ize Page 36 Computer Gaming World "


"We don't know from friendly skies. the-loop, look elsewhere. If you're interested in a career, sign on to Air Warrior only on GEnie. You've beat all the flight sims? A furball doesn't raise a sweat anymore? Ten minutes of WWI combat isn't even challenging? Hmm... Maybe you are ready for Air Warrior\". That is, if you think you can handle the most realistic combat flying there is. Because Air Warrior does more than correctly model 28 different WWII aircraft, complete with spins, stalls and buffeting. It puts you up against other human beings. Online, in real time, for as long as you care to play. That's why Air Warrior attracts the aces. So if you're just looking to do a friendly loopSign up : 1. Set communication software for 81N or 71E half duplex (local echo) at 300, 1200 or 2400 baud. 2. Dial toll free: 1-800-638-8369. Immediately upon connection, enter HHH 3. At the U#=prompt, enter XTX99223, AIRCRAFT then press RETURN 4. Have a major credit card ready. In the U.S., you may use your checking account number. (There is a $2 monthly fee for all checking accounts.) For more information in the U.S. or Canada, call 1-800-638-9636. Air Warrior On DOS 9 GEnie multi-player games 28 29 SKESMAL Air Warrior is a registered trademark of Kesmai Corporation. GEnie is a registered trademark of General Electric Company. Gimphic interface required and available for selected machines. 100% Organic Opponents. Corporation Circle Reader Service #104 "


"VERIFY (Cre teMenu ( CColorMenu: -CColorMen u() Detach(); ASSERT (m_hM enu == NULL); // defaul CMenu::-CME nu will destroy void CColorMenu: AppendColo MenuItem (U INT DID COLORRET color) VERIFY (Appe ndmenu (MF_E NABLED MF_OWNERDRA W, TID (LPCSTR) Col or)); becomes more than sum of its parts. Ulgamer has the ability to make meaningful and this would leave gamers with a sense rimately, they called it an action game for decisions). Hence, Civilization ended up that they couldn't win because the compeople who read with sound that is excepwith phased turns, lots of reports and lots puter was cheating. tional enough to make gamers think of things for the player to do. Ninth, he admitted to almost adding they've upgraded their sound boards. Third, Sid Meier's Civilization almost jets, helicopters and airborne units. HowStar Control 2 was developed by Paul simulated the rise and fall of civilizations. ever, he insisted that if one provides for Reiche III and Fred Ford. If there is one thing clear in history, it is new technologies close to the end of the that there is an episodic cycle to the great game that it will frustrate the gamer by How I Almost Screwed civilizations. Sid opted not to go for the making them ask \"What's the use?\" Up Civilization rise and fall theme because it would have whenever given an opportunity to build In total contrast to the angry approach been too discouraging to the player for the such technology. The abstracting of later of Ellison was the affable talk of Sid game to regularly and arbitrarily destroy technologies was a deliberate attempt to Meier. Sid's lecture centered upon the the civilization he/she has painstakingly moderate the endgame. Meier observed ways that he could have ruined his bestbuilt up over the course of dozens of that lots of people felt the ending was selling game, Sid Meier's Civilization. Not hours. Though it would have made the arbitrary, but he explained that it was game conform to history, it would have designed intentionally to leave the gamer forced the game into the dustbins of his wanting more. tory to have imposed such a «no win» Tenth, he confessed that he almost put T. design feature. minefields and minesweepers into the Fourth, the designer with the most game. The idea was to give the gamer games in the CGWHall of Fame admitted enough tools to build a solid defensive that he almost ripped off another Hall of perimeter. Unfortunately, Sid told us that Fame game, Empire. Then, he asserted the minefields caused the AI ro do \"stupid that, in addition to the ethical question, things.\" Then, he advised designers, «If it is far better to look for new elements in you've got a feature that makes the AI game design than to simply cannibalize look stupid, take it out. It's more imporolder games. tant not to have stupid Al than to have Fifth, Meier stated that he almost made good the world too big. A big world sounded Eleventh, Meier told the assembled deSid Meier (Sid Meier's Civilization) very good at first, because it intimated signers that he almost included a multidemonstrates the amount of caffeine necessary to lecture on the morning more gameplay. Instead, Meier said that player modem option in the game. Then, after the banquet. it macle winning the game too repetitive he opted not to do so for several reasons. only did it take considerably longer than and not necessarily fun. First, he wanted the game to be turntwo weeks for Sid to creare \"Civilization,\" Sixth, he stated that he almost let the based instead of real-time so that the but it required considerable thought at computer do too much management of gamer could control the pace. Turn-based key junctures of the project. games do not work well in modem play the player's cities. Instead, Meier insisted First, Sid Meier's Civilization had a textthat designers need to give the players (because of dead time). Second,\" he plenty of things to do. If said designer book feel. Meier had actually begun to doesn't believe that the community of multi-player gamers is that large. As he believes the activities constitute too much build a game around the «heavy\" subject stated, «My feeling is, if you had friends, of human civilization prior to his work on for the player to do, he/she can also proyou wouldn't need to play computer Sid Meier's Railroad Turan but the worl vide a default that lets the computer manbogged down because it wasn't \"fun.\" age items by using the same artificial games. Later, after RRT was completed, he came intelligence routines that one must design Twelfth, he said that he almost made back to the game, focused on the enter for the computer opponent(s). \"One reathe game politically incorrect, just for taining elements of the game, and ended son I continue to program my own laughs. Finally, he admitted that, «I alup completely it quickly once it started games,\" commented the designer, \"is to most put a big animated title sequence, coming together. be aware of opportunities to find new uses digitized speech, and Super VGA graphics for modules within existing code.\" in the game. Well, actually I didn't, but I Second, Meier admitted that he origiSeventh, Sid confessed that he almost wanted to point out the trade-off.\" Sid nally wanted to write a \"detailed commade the game too civilized. After all, the concluded his lecture by asserting that puter model» to handle the sociological, name of the game was Civilization. Yet, game play was more important than any economic, ecological and political forces he insists, \"The game isn't really about s game isn't really about single feature. i calute that forged civilizations. He emphasized being civilized. The competition is what In the question and answer period, the fact that there are only two kinds of makes the game fun and the players play Meier explained that he still does all his computer games: ones where the player knows what's going on and those where their best.\" So, he admits that, «At times, own programming and continually upthe player does not. In the latter category, you have to make the player uncomfortdates playable, expanding versions of the there are games where the designer has all able for the good of the player.\" So, Civ games he is working on. This enables lots became a wargame where building civiliof mid-stream adjustments, as it subjects the fun (games that are usually not detailed enough to communicate the rezation is almost, but not quite, incidental. the work in progress to constant evalusearch to the camer) and James where the Eighth Sid Meier's Civilization almeeration. Sid admitted that doing his own computer has all the fun (featuring plenty used multi-player alliances. Sid even adprogramming allowed him to experiment of algorithms, but not process intensive mitted to writing a lot of code to handle with features and approaches because he wasn't imposing on anyone's time but his enough to allow the gamer to really get those alliances. Yet, he found that he into the action). Meier prefers games couldn't play balance the game with those own. \"To me, programming is almost a where the player has all the fun (where all alliances because the computer could exnuisance. It's a means to an end.\" the vital information is presented and the ploit alliances almost as good as the player (See Part II Next Issue) Cow TITUTION /////////// #define COLOR BOX W IDTH 20 #define COLOR_BOX_H EIGHT 20 void CColorMenu: MeasureIte (LPMEASURE ITEMSTRUCT 1PMIS) // all items are of fixed size Page 38 Computer Gaming World "


"Beyond fantasy. Beyond legends. If you've been looking for the mother of all fantasy role-playing games, we know where you can find it. Online, in GemStone IIITM. This is no kill-the-dragon-thank-you-verymuch computer game. And it goes far beyond any of the other so-called legends in the online arena. Here in GemStone III, you're joining real people, in real time for your online quests. Some of the best role players and game masters in the country all meeting together in a vast and constantly evolving world, rich with fascinating characters and demanding adventures. It's a place you can play forever. GemStone III makes every other fantasy game history. And your friends are already here. So sign onto GEnie\" today, and welcome home to GemStone III. Sign up now: 1 Set communication software for 81 N or 71E half duplex (local echo) at 300, 1200 or 2400 baud. 2. Dial toll free: 1-800-638-8369. Immediately upon connection, enter HHH 3. At the U#=prompt, enter XTX99224, FANTASY then press RETURN 4. Have a major credit card ready. In the U.S., you may use your checking account number. (There is a $2 monthly fee for all checking accounts.) For more information in the U.S. or Canada, call 1-800-638-9636. GemStone III\"N: Shadow World a On GEnie multi-player games Pet 23 Best 25 GemStone III is a trademark of Simutronics Corp. Shadow World is a registered trademark of Iron Crown Enterprises, Inc. GEnie is a registered trademark of General Electric Company. Optional graphic front-end program available for IBM PC only. 100% Organic Opponents. SIMUTRONICS Circle Reader Service #103 "


"Menu Game Design ColorMU --CColorMen Detach(); BEER Game developers offer nutritional guidance for prospective computer game designers. IS FOOD SSERT (m_hM nu se ULL); defaul Jenu::-CMe a will estroy Loquacious editor Johnny Wilson is interviewed by Molly McCrae (KPIX-TV) for special segment on violence in computer/video games. Developers gather around the \"want ads\" in the CGDC recruitment center. id ColorMenu: ppenacolo TenuItem (U IT NID ELORREF lor) Steve Peterson in a pose that seems suspiciously natural to those of us waiting for Champions. ERIFY (Appe Menu (MF_E BLED -_OWNERDRA nID PCSTR) col =)); George Alistair \"Fat Man\" Sanger leads a session in his Porter Waggoner suit. Memories of The Class of '93 MIT 7/11/TTI //////// Just like school — some classes were closed by the time we reached them. Board member Susan Lee Merrow (Broderbund Software) hams it up as she turns Kids & Computers editor Peter Scisco away from an overflowing session. Trimark's Kelly Flock and EA's Rich Hillemann reminisce about the way things were before they were executives. RE Lefine LOR_BOX_W OTH 20 lefine LOR BOX_H GHT 20 sia ColorMenu: leasureIte LPMEASURE EMSTRUCT MIS) Former computer game magazine editors Rusel DeMaria (PC Games) and Margot Tommervik (Softtalk and Softline) share the \"off the record\" stuif they never got to publish in their magazines. A Will Wright demonstrates a unique programmer hack for tying one's shoes. 1 all ems are fixed ze MIS->jemo Computer Gaming World "


"Close encounters nightly. There's only one way to find out. Sign up and meet us in Federation II available only on GEnie For the cold reaches of space, there's an awful lot of chummy people here. That's because Federation II isn't one of those shoot-the-ship computer games. This is a universe full of people. Real people, online, working with other real people in real time: busily building their fortunes, planets...nay, empires. And they'd love to throw some work your way so you can do the same. Of course, there's a lot of bargaining, buying and bulling that goes into it. We're social creatures, after all But if you're one of those special individuals who understands that creating an empire is ever so much more interesting than destroying aliens, maybe you can thrive in our space. Sign up now: 1. Set communication software for 81N or 71E half duplex (local echo) at 300, 1200 or 2400 baud. 2. Dial toll free: 1-800-638-8369. Immediately upon connection, enter HHH 3. At the U#=prompt,enter XTX99225, NIGHTLY then press RETURN 4. Have a major credit card ready. In the U.S., you may use your checking account number. (There is a $2 monthly fee for all checking accounts.) For more information in the U.S. or Canada, call 1-800-638-9636. SUU Federation II GEnie multi-player games Ferierat 100% Organic Opponents. GEnic is a registered trademark of General Electric Company. Circle Reader Service #59 "


"MARON You build it. NE NILDI POYou race it. MIELDS You pay your own speeding tickets. USE ANIMATED 3-D INSTRUCTIONS TO BUILD ONE OF FOUR MODEL RACERS: PORSCHE 911, BUGATTI EBITO, NAZCA M12 & LAMBORGHINI LP 500S  TRY TO OUTRUN THE COPS AS YOU RACE THE CLOCK TO ONE OF THE FOUR TOUGHEST TRACKS IN EUROPE OUTDUEL OTHER DRIVERS AS YOU RACE TO THE CHAMPIONSHIP INTEGRATED VIDEO CLIPS HELP YOU CHOOSE TRANSMISSION, TIRES, SPOILER SETTINGS AND FUEL AVAILABLE FOR MS DOS ON CD-ROM THE MODEL MAKES THE GAME BETTER, THE GAME MAKES THE MODEL BETTER. Circle Reader Service #86 "


"RevellE POWER MODELER EUROPEAN RACERS Revell CD {ACTUAL VIDEO FROM GAME} "


"ERIFY eMenu * Game Design ColorMenu: -ColorMen LIGHTS, CAMERA, INTERACTION Detach(); SSERT (m_hM au Es JLL); defaul lenu::-CME a will estroy Behind the Screens with LucasArts' Day of the Tentacle by the CGW staff pid ColorMenu: EppendColo MenuItem (U NT NID DLORREF Slor) ERIFY (Appe Menu (MF_E EIBLED _OWNERDRA DID CPCSTR) col -)); 1/77777777 IIIIIIII Ithough computer game producers don't yet call acting taped one at a time, though talents and ask to do lunch,\" it is true that the \"old\" the storyline often calls for Hollywood is quickly infiltrating the \"New Hollywood\" dialogue between characof computer game development. As the linear technology of the ters. In a typical situation, former and the interactive technology of the latter converge in the actors in dialogue are new technologies and techniques, it is interesting to view the together and can act off work of talented and flexible people who can work effectively of one another. In the with one foot in both technological realms. computer game situation We had such an experience at Hollywood's Studio 222, the the actors only have a script sight of the voice-acting taping of Day of the Tentacle, LucasArts' to play off of. As Barra says, next adventure game. This wacky scquel to Maniac Mansion \"getting the actors into character is very difficult...half the involves the trials of three teenagers who bop about space-time studio is spent cueing up the actor for the scene.\" to undo the plans of a mutant appendage. It will be the first game Organization is a key issue. With 4500 lines of branching in which the CD-ROM dialogue, the producer must keep the track of where the version and the disk veractors are in the game, and what sort of reading is sion will be released conrequired for the line. Barra has to keep the entire structure currently. It will also be of the game in mind while the actor reads, so she can the first adventure game correct the actors' interpretations or ask for different to offer spoken parts for inflections where needed. nearly every action and response in the game, The actors were cast from a group of known voice making it computer talent. The biggest name on the bill is Richard Sanders, gamings first full probably best known for his character Les Nessman from \"talkie.\" All of the story the TV sit-com WKRP in Cincinnati. With his experience dialogue and the majorplaying Les Nessman, Sanders is a natural for the role of ity of action responses nerdy, bow tie-bearing Bernard in Day of the Tentacle. the \"You can't do thats\" Sanders noted (with tongue in cheek) that playing Berand \"What a ridiculous nard in Day of the Tentacle was a bit of a stretch for him, Associate Producer, Tamlynn Barra, gives thing to do\" resince he usually plays more manly sorts of roles. More directions to the actors from the sound sponses—will be spoken production booth. seriously, he admitted that computer game acting was a aloud to its players. All challenge, since the actor is recording his lines out of told, there are 4500 spoken lines in the game context. The problem was overcome a monstrous design, production and actby Barra's directing efforts. She creing task. ated the context for Sanders verbally and walked him through portions of Riding the fence between Hollywood and the game so that he would know Silicon Valley is Associate Producer, Tamhow his character should react. lynn Barra. This twenty-something producer got her start in stage and video From what we've heard, all of this production, and began with LucasArts hard work and talent will produce Games in 1990. She directed the voice-actone of the best sounding computer ing and produced the \"talkie\" portions for game \"talkies» yer. With its Chuck Push Nurse Edna the CD version of Indiana Jones and the Fate CIV PO Up List SHOW MELA Jones style animation and the wit of of Atlantis and is now overseeing the mamOp .HUR DU PUSA the LucasArts adventure game team, moth Tentacle project. Clas OK to PUL Day of the Tentacle may also be one of the best playing. Who knows, Voice acting for computer games creates A scene from Tentacle in which Bernard maybe \"Let's do lunch\" isn't that far new problems that actors and directors (Richard Sanders) and an Irish maid (played by Jane away. CGW rarely have to face. For one, the actors are Jacobs pictured above) exchange barbs. define OLOR_BOX_W OTH define OLOR_BOX_H IGHT 20 20 id ColorMenu: Teasurerte LPMEASURE EMSTRUCT MIS) 7 all Eems are fixed Page 44 Computer Gaming World "


"Bad Day in Bagdad! You've been cast out of the palace as a beggar. The princess has turned against you. The palace guards want your head on a skewer. And you haven't even had breakfast yet. This is not good. It gets worse. One minute you're fleeing for your very life across roof tops. The next, you find yourself washed up on a desert island...or amidst ancient ruins, face to face with a disembodied head (and boy is it hungry!). This is really not good. You stumble upon quicksand, serpents, spikes, magic spells, a skeleton with a sick sense of humor. and then...well...things get just a mite tricky. Introducing Prince of Persia 2: The Shadow & the Flame. Some call it a dozen Arabian Nights movies rolled into one. Actually, it's your worst Arabian nightmare. So get some sleep. Once this is hund swashbuckler begins, you may never sleep again. PULSE-QUICKENING ACTION RICH MOVIE-LIKE STORY AND SOUNDTRACK  INCREDIBLY REALISTIC ANIMATION A CINEMATIC ACTION GAME BY JORDAN MECHNER SUGGESTED RETAIL PRICE: $69.95 (MS-DOS VERSION). SEE YOUR LOCAL DEALER OR CALL 1-800-521-6263 AND REFER TO CODE 262 TO ORDERAT A 25% SAVINGS. REQUIRES 10 MHZ 286 OR FASTER MACHINE. HARD DRIVE AND VGA REQUIRED. 01993 Broderbund Software, Inc. Prince of Persia is a registered trademark and The Shadow & the Flame is a trademark of Broderbund Software. All rights reserved. Circle Reader Service #37 "


"HANDS OF LOIRE THE THRONE OF CHAOS The Dark Army encroaches. King Richard falls. And Scotia beckons you, laughing... In her mad quest for power, Scotia has ravaged the kingdom. She seeks the throne, yet it eludes her. She's getting desperate. She's getting mean. Fireball Mist of Doom hining Vertex CAN YOU STOP HER? DO YOU DARE? "


"FEATURING Compass and Automapper Included Adventure through ancient keeps and living forests. Unearth hidden ruins and haunted caves. a Make Friends and Influence People Cooperate with the helpful, sidestep the treacherous and destroy the dangerous Quick and Easy Combat and Spell Casting. ia Indulge in a Land of Sensory Delights Over 20 megabytes of compressed art and special effects. Actually hear the clash of steel! Feel the blows of terrors who slip beneath your guard! LANDS OF LORE THE THRONE OF CH Westwoo AN INSPIRED FANTASY RPG EXPERIENCE FROM THE DEVELOPMENT TEAM THAT CREATED EYE OF THE BEHOLDER\" I AND II. Westwood Distributed Exclusively by Available for your IBM PC. Eye of the Beholder I and II are trademarks of TSR, Inc. GAMES The Eye of the Beholder games, TSR, Inc. and SSI are not connected or related in any way to the Lands of Lore game, Virgin Games, Inc. or Westwood Studios, Inc. Lands of Lore is a trademark of Westwood Studios, Inc.  1993 Westwood Studios, Inc. All rights reserved. Virgin is a registered trademark of Virgin Enterprises, Ltd Circle Reader Service #97 "


"ERIFY Game Design eMenu ColorMenu: -CColorMen () Detach(); Abstracts from the Journal of Computer Game Design SSERT (m hM mu == ULL); / defaul Menu::-CMe u will estroy oid ColorMenu: AppendColo MenuItem (U NT DID, OLORREF olor) ERIFY (Appe dMenu (MF E TABLED F OWNERDRA NID LPCSTR) col r)); Our game design issues regularly feature notes which we have currently attempt to attract their audiences. He contends that cribbed ... er ... researched and compiled from The Journal of they simply use terms that are a matter of degree (faster, fresher, Computer Game Design. This issue abstracts from issues 6.2, 6.3 bigger, etc.). He also observes that this hasn't changed since the and 6.4 of the journal. The summaries printed here are not meant early Arari marketing in 1980. Indeed, he suggests that most of to detract from the full articles within the journal, but as an attempt the industry is unsure abour a product unless it is a sequel to a to let readers know what is available. The Journal of Computer successful product or uses a sensational new technology. Game Design is published six times per year, and the subscription Next, he challenges the design community to move away from rate is $36 ($50 outside of North America). To subscribe, write to developing games by reading registration cards and taking surThe Journal of Computer Game Design, 5251 Sierra Road, San veys. Instead, he advocates creating products that appeal to a Jose, CA 95132. particular constituency, the use of audience engineering in order to develop audiences which are more responsive and products Audience Engineering (Chris Crawford, The which accomplish more. Global Dilemma: Guns or Butter:) How to Write Interactive Characters and Crawford's thesis in this article is that the customer does not Dialogue (Michele Em, Return to Zork) really know what he/she wants in a compurer game. Therefore, the designer reasons, the entertainment software industry ought Em comes to this industry from work at a special effects shop to be able to both attract customers to and divert them from (as an artist) and as a screenwriter. Her article underscores the computer games. difficulty of writing interactive dialogue. Since players love to play \"What if?\" she asserts that the writer must continually His initial point is that information, even entertaining inforvisualize consequences and payoffs for more than one statemation packaged in a computer game, is a different kind of ment/action within a given situation. commodity than any other. Whereas people will buy the same model car, eat the same sandwiches, and wear the same clothes over and over again, they won't buy the same game. As Crawford states, «To be in any way valuable, information must be different from what the customer already owns. You can't sell anybody a second copy of any piece of information. You've got to offer them something new and different.\" Naturally, he observes that customers do purchase sequels. Yet, he also points out that a sequel offers something familiar with new content. After outlining a traditional James Bond plot, he notes that the question remains how wild and crazy the ultimate bad guy will be and exactly how Bond will save the day. Hence, even in the context of the familiar, sequels are selling new and different information. Next, Crawford elucidates the way that software publishers MITTIT ///////// define OLOR_BOX_W DTH 20 Live action actor in Return to Zork define OLOR_BOX_H IGHT 20 Foid ColorMenu: MeasureIte (LPMEASURE TEMSTRUCT PMIS) \"For me,\" says Em, \"interactivity in dialogue, in a game setting, means multiple choices of direction, multiple possibilities for information to be delivered, and a myriad of ways to amuse the game player.\" Dialogue has the responsibility of making the characters in a game seem credible. Em suggests that players should be able to recognize a character by the way its dialogue flows, whether it is presented in text or digitized speech from an actor. Hence, writers must get inside their characters and know their motivations and backgrounds enough to make the speech flow in a natural way. For games, Em tries to get each slice of dialogue into 60 character spaces. To do so, she naturally slices out as many multisyllabic words as possible. They usually sound stilted in dialogue and two or more has the added disadvantage of turning 11 all tems are f fixed Scene from Return to Zork ize Page 48 Computer Gaming World "


"Amoroush AT SORINOR TM 175 Strategic Ambush Simulation from the Makers of Siege! DE BEBE TRO orinor's forests are dark and gloomy and full of dangers. But you took Clan Sernevan's money, and it's up to you to protect their princess on her journey. You peer over the shoulder of a wary swordsman into a clearing. As you're deciding whether it's safe to enter, you hear a branch snap on the trail behind! Orcs flood into the clearing! Boulders fly from the trees! Ambush at Sorinor!  Play a mercenary captain in a world of intrigue! Accept missions galore from the six Clan chiefs to make money-and enemies! S ge ood Command dozens of troop types hiding invisibly or charging in the Open!  Beware of traps, and set your own!  Design your own missions and create your own maps! MINDCRAFT 2291 205th Street, Suite 201, Torrance, CA 90501 Actual IBM VGA screen photos. MNEN Circle Reader Service #73 "


"C ERIFY eMenu ColorMenu: -CColorMen Detach(); SSERT (m_M nu = ULL); defaul Menu::-CMe will estroy an ordinary line into a tongue twister. Then, she reminds would-be writers that the dialogue must be kept short so that the gamers can get on with the game. For games like Return to Zork where actors are going to perform the lines, she observes that she keeps all of the character's dialogue together and lists the variations and reactions in logical order. Hence, the actor performs the dialogue all at once and the cditing and mixing can take place at a later time. This process enables her to do another task that she considers important, check the dialogue flow. She reads the sentences aloud in all possible combinations in order to see how they work. This is when one often has to cut out the lines that do not work. Em also encourages writers/designers to pen their dialogue sequences with programming requirements in mind. IF/THEN, GOTO and DEFAULT TO are ways to schematize the dialogue hierarchies in the writer's mind. Finally, she stresses the need to give each character a personal motive and a point of view. She even encourages writers to give each character a history, even if it isn't going to be expounded upon within the game. This will infuse the characters with a sense of reality that simply cannot be beaten. DOS MAGIC TUTA STATed The Journey in fhis H006 Vi! LAGC 0 Taobry. IT QRS Morning Lev: 35 LK:20 Kd:15 Uf: 93 WI 20.2 oid ColorMenu: AppendColo MenuItem (U NT NID, OLORREF olor) ERIFY (Appe dMenu (MF_E ABLED F_OWNERDRA DID LPCSTR) col r)); Software Sprites: A Tutorial and Some Tricks (David Joiner, The Faery Tale Adventure) Joiner lists several techniques for handling animation. Particularly interesting is his analysis of handling backgrounds as the animated character moves across the screen. He suggests several solutions to handling the background so that it can be re-used for the next frame of animation. Kccp a separate copy of the background. The copy of the background is copied over the visible background. This is somewhat expensive in terms of memory and is generally unworkable in the case of scrolling backgrounds. Regenerate the entire background every frame. Joiner says this is only possible if the background is created algorithmically or is tile-based. He warns that it is the slowest solution. Regenerate only the parts of the screen that were damaged. He suggests using a \"damage array\" would track what portions of the screen were overwritten by the figures. Joiner observes that this isn't too tough with tiles, since the coarseness of the array can be set to the size of the tile, but can get very complicated with multi-planar backgrounds. Save the background behind the figures and restore when done. This requires keeping an off-screen region just large enough to hold the background that the character can cover in a frame. Then, before drawing the character in a new position, the backsaved region can be restored (erasing the old character). Of course, this becomes more complex when there are lots of characters on the screen. Finally, Joiner suggests that programmers who use this technique should save, draw and restore in three separate passes to avoid drawing backgrounds that have portions of other characters. Faery Tale Adventure Walton also points out how tough it is to get product onto the shelves and keep it on the shelves. He gives a six-step strategy to accomplish this task.  Make entertainment products with broad appeal (or gear your budget to targeting a safe, proven niche). Know your audience better than the competition (to prevent returns). Find a publishing partner who has sufficient distribution and market clout to get your product on the market shelves. Developers should make sure that they ask the publishing partner the specific outlets where their products are sold and not accept \"everywhere» as an answer. Make sure that adequate resources are devoted to markering your product at your publisher, especially MDF (Marketing Development Funds). Print ads create mindshare; MDF creates shelf space. Promote your own product vigorously. Helping to create momentum is vital (on-line, print press and personal tours of retail stores) Aggressively fix any problems and listen to customer feedback. IIIIIIIT define OLOR BOX W DTH 20 define OLOR_BOX_H IGHT 20 Invasion of the Expositorions (Chris Crawford, Balance of Power) Crawford could not be timelier with one observation. He notes that the expositorions (i.e. Hollywood-types) are coming into the industry and contends that this represents a problem (see Editorial, page 162). The problem is that these so-called expositorions (novelists, directors, producers and screenwriters) do not understand interactivity and think that it is a facer of the entertainment industry that can simply be added onto what they already have. Crawford rightly observes that \"Interactivity isn't some minor twist that we apply to the primary media of sound and image. It's the very essence of the medium. Sound and image support interactivity.\" As he sees it, the expositorions believe that they will be able to create the same old expository presentations that they have always made, but make it play on a computer. Crawford states that the expositorions are ignorant of the idea of interactivity, but wisely observes that their large corporate bucks and fresh ideas will more than compensate for their ignorance. He says he is going to join the bandwagon. He likes the creative idealism of the invading expositorions because they are risk-takers. He thinks they could create a new kind of media. Cow oid ColorMenu: MeasureIte (LPMEASURE TEMSTRUCT PMIS) Diskette Entertainment Software Distribution (Gordon Walton, Harpoon) Walton provides a cautionary tale for developers who seek to establish their own distribution at retail. He starts the article by showing what the software publisher actually gets for a computer game (if they're lucky). For example, he notes that the average discount to the retailer/distributor is 60% off the suggested retail price. This allows for wide variation in \"street price.\" // all tems are f fixed ize Page 50 Computer Gaming World "


"Wolfenstein 30 Hottest Shareware Game \"...more like an interactive movie than an arcade game.\" Shareware Update \"Almost single-handedly justifying the existence of shareware... Video Games & Computer Entertainment \"The first game technologically capable of...immersing the player in a threatening environment.\" Computer Gaming World Imprisoned in a NazioFortress In an act of desperation you overpower your cell guard. Standing over his fallen body, you frantically grab for his gun. Deep in the belly of a Nazi dungeon, you must escape—or die trying 261 MS LEOCL Score UD NADIAN 96% 19 5.00 3 LEADERS Experience a 256-color, smooth scrolling virtual reality Hear professionally composed music with an AdLib, Sound Blaster, or compatible Four levels of game play make it enjoyable for the novice to the experienced player Battle with knives, pistols, and machine guns Easy to start playing, and instantly absorbing REALT TARMO 192 53 CULL SOOSE 5600 Call Toll Free 1-800-GAME123 For the cost of shipping and handling, only $4.00, you'll receive Episode One, Escape from Wolfenstein. Or download Episode One and pay no shipping and handling. Call the Software Creations BBS and check out our FREE Apogee file section. BBS Phone Lines are:  (508) 365-2359:2400 BAUD  (508) 368-7036:2400-9600  (508) 368-4137:2400-14.4K Episodes two through six are sold separately and can be purchased by calling Apogee's toll-free number, shown above, P.O. Box 476389 Garland, TX 75047 SOFTWARE Not Recommended for Younger Viewers Due to Realistic Depictions of Violence Wolfenstein 3-D requires an IBM or 100% compatible computer with 640K RAM, a VGA graphics card, and a hard disk drive. Extended memory (XMS), expanded memory (EMS). loystick, and mouse are optional. IBM is a registered trademark of International Business Machines, Inc. Sound Blaster is a registered trademark of Creative Labs, Inc. AdLib is a registered trademark of AdLib, Inc. Circle Reader Service #33 "


"Play Hard. Play Quarterdeck OG ALON SPECIAL OFFE QEMM-386 3 HOT GAMES OVER $ 320 93 SOFTWARE MORY INGS Now, buy something you really need and get some games you really want. Quarterdeck's QEMM-386\" gives you the highest performance memory management money can buy. It's the leading utility in the industry. It can help you get G et 3 free games your work done faster when you buy the special by allowing you to use OEMM-386 Game Bundle productivity-enhancing TSRs and network -while supplies last utilities you'd otherwise have to do without What are you going to do with all the time you save? Play! In the Sky Step back into history and experience the emotion of airborne combat with the men and machines of the Pacific Theater of World War II. Attack carriers, air bases and fight the finest pilots Look for this Special Package at your favorite software store! even fly for the other side. Magnificent 240-page manual is complete with photos and war maps. On the Gridiron Get into the action with this amazingly realistic simulation. Its 3-D look puts you in the middle of the action in the most complete football gaming package ever. Play quarterback arcadeRohte Aces of the Pacific FREE Front Page Sports: Football FREE 300 to 900 MPH300 the enemy can throw against you. Super-realistic simulation includes 30 accurately recreated WWII fighters and bombers; legendary enemy (and friendAces of the Pacific ly) aces to battle, and all the \"The benchmark of the 90s heart-pounding excitement of for flight simulators.\" carrier landings. Choose from -Simulation Magazine an array of missions or enlist for the entire war. You can style or be the coach and play a strategy game against an opponent or against the computer. View instant replays from a floating camera you position. Front Front Page Sports: Football Page: Football is \"... remains unchallenged as the most designed to complete football game ever... for appeal to players gridiron fans of all interest levels...\" at any level. You Electronic Games get a full 47-man roster including iniured reserve up to 28 teams and 1400 plav. ers per league, 200+ stock plays, 300+ stat categories and your choice of exhibition or a full season of play. "


"Safe. Save Big. OPTERLEI MANIFEST Overview Typ Acces falait Memory Ultima II Labyrinth FREE Retail Value = 45678 0:00 2000 m First My Expanded nappable Ramable = Page Frame High RAM Mapped ROM Excluded Uldes wer LAN R: ROM V: Split ROH 2006 Manifest memory analyzer FREE 3108 4n00 5nbe 6100 2006 Bne Snee   Extende *500 In Coupon Discounts Enclosed liii BEL    Tom ww ww organ OD STOTIS Press 13 for List Mode 11 Holy F2 Print 588 Gosaceful brain creature   Through the Labyrinth ANALYST'S CHOICE INFO WORLD PRODUCT OF THE 100 YEAR MAGAZINE BEST PC PRODUCTS EDRIORS CHOCE CATEGORY WINNER THE DOO PC WORLD Work Safe YOU are in the Epherea Vold You guess that it is currently dawn. it is currently dawn QEMM-386 is the number one memory management program Your vision distorts and you teel light headed. O in the world. Not only does it make games run better, it helps you when you get back to work-reducing the chance HAWEEK Send in your registration card and get this special free bonus! of crashing while making Ultima Underworld II incorporates the latest advancements in room for both your favorite sound, 3D graphics and animaTSRs or network utilities Ultima Underworld II: tion. You play Avatar, trapped and memory hungry programs like WordPerfect or Labyrinth of Worlds with the other leaders of Britannia by the Guardian in a MS Windows. Whether you Registration Bonus Game black rock gem. You will have to have one megabyte or eight, LOTUS find your way out against seemingly overwhelming odds. But QEMM-386 can find more memory for your programs. BYTE BYTE BYTE you must-or your entire country will die! Play Safe Suggested U.S. What You Can Expect QEMM-386 version 6 gives your OUT OF Circle Reader Service #83 Retail Price: $99.95 Maximum MEMORY games all the conventional memoVoal Qty Product Each Totals (default) ry available on your PC. AutomaQEMM-386 Game Pack $99.95 Payment method Shipping & Handling $10 (Canada & USA only) tically. No wonder QEMM-386 is specified Visa MasterCard Expires Calif. Residents add 8.25% by more game publishers than all other Card # Total memory managers put together. Name Address Readers Choice 1991 51991 AWARDS OF E EXCELLENCE POURNELLE'S T USER'S CHOICE AWARD READERS CHOICE AWARD Conventional Memory Gain DOSS DOS3004 DOS5 alone with QIMM6 Please allow 3 weeks for delivery For fastest service call (Sod) 351-3222 ext. 1D1 Ly=-=-=-=State Quarterdeck Office Systems 150 Pico Boulevard, Santa Monica, CA 90405 (310) 392-9851 Fax (310) 314-4219 Quarterdeck International Ltd., B.I.M. House, Crofton Terrace, Dun Laoghaire Co. Dublin, Ireland Tel.(353) (1) 284-1444 Fax: (353) (1) 284-4380 Quarterdeck All games are complete, fully-functional versions. However, because of shipping considerations, individual game boxes are not included  Quarterdeck Office Systems. All trademarks are property of their respective owners. "


"ERIFY rea ement eMen, som *** (jame esign ColorMenu: ColorMen Detach() From Digital Dreams TO CD Reality SSERT (m hM nu e ULL); / defaul : ~CMe u will estroy A look at the technical development behind Trilobyte's The 7th Guest by Verin G. Lewis & Michael A. Barth oid ColorMenu: Appendcolo MenuItem (U NT NID OLORREF olor) ERIFY (Appe dMenu (ME_E ABLED F_OWNERDRA nID LPCSTR) col HIZ Yomputer generated special effects in the film and video Some animation techniques overlap with those used to pro( 'worlds has been commonplace for years. It is only recently duce special effects in live-action video. The beauty of all this is that computer end-users have begun to see the application that it is often difficult to tell whether a certain result has been of these new methods on the monitor screens of their own achieved through animation or special effects. The camera recomputer systems. cords, frame by frame, second by second, a sequence of images In the movie industry, special effects are consistently used. that differ only fractionally from one another. The illusion of From Blade Runner through Close Encounters, special effects progressive movement is created by projecting the series of abound. In Hollywood these effects are taken to the highest level. frames at a rate that simulates motion. Using Computer Aided Design (CAD) programs, producers design sets in order to decide if they will build actual models or Focus On Process simply render them in a graphic environment. Fortunately for us, PCs The process started for us when we have brought graphics development were introduced to Rob Landeros down to earth and professional qualand Graeme Divine of Trilobyte. ity special effects can be produced Trilobyte is a company concentratwith surprisingly minimal equiping on original CD-ROM entertainment software. To call their work ment. original is an understatement. Their Fast History project was The 7th Guest, a breakthrough in gaming software. I shared Breakthrough rotoscope technolan interest with Rob and Graeme ogy played a major role in the adbecause I was looking into acquiring vancement of film animation, computer systems on which to deallowing the creative artist to import velop CD-ROM base multimedia images from reality into animated software. We spent an afternoon toCyber actor on green screen. sequences. Animators merged their It is easy being green. gether discussing software and hardartistically creative world with lifeware options. A few months after I like forms of motion represented on got my systems up and going, Rob film. They shot the film, ran it through a projector, the image offered us a chance to work with them. appeared on a light table, and they could manipulate each frame Was I interested? Bill Gates himself had demonstrated parts of a step at a time. One could then trace cach frame separately to the game at the 1992 Multimedia Convention in San Francisco. capture the reality of movement in its pure, cellular form. Digital He called it, \"the new standard in multimedia entertainment\". video has made the video camera the roroscope of gaming The CD-ROM game contains 36 minutes of full-motion video development. and dialogue recorded by live actors. It had taken the people at Trilobyte two years to develop a true, 3-D, 22-room mansion World Of Games (each room taking at least one month to produce) in which the game takes place. The player can move throughout the mansion In the mercoric world of high-resolution graphics games, as high-resolution graphic backgrounds scroll and rotate around full-motion digital video is a fast emerging phenomenon. CD him. Not only has Trilobyte broadened the frontier of multimeROM is the transicnt medium of choice for this technology. It dia gaming, but The 7th Guest may well be establishing the has the mass-storage and speed required to provide interactive future path that this form of entertainment will take. video sequences to the end-user. Still, how are animated segments imported into digital media? Graphics Assignment Moving characters must be cut out, extracted, and pasted once My first assignment was to develop the introductory sequence more onto rendered backgrounds in the order of their sequence to the game. Trilobyre hired a video crew to set up a green screen of events. This poses many problems to artists, technicians, and background (after a disappointing experience with their blue video producers in the multiple worlds of animated film, video screen, scc Gracmc's notes in the Computer Game Developers production, and digital imaging. Conference report) on which all their live action video sequences MUMMIT 20 define OLOR BOX W DTH define OLOR_BOX_H ICHT 20 oid ColorMenu: MeasureIte (LPMEASURE TEMSTRUCT OMIS) Wall tems are f fixed ize. Page 54 Computer Gaming World "


"ésion crea cColorMenu: **CColorMen u Detach(); ASSERT (m_hM enu NULL); 27 defaul CMenu::-CMe nu will destroy void CColorMenu:  AppendColo I'MenuItem (U INT DID COLORREE color) would be shot. The green screen gave a neutral background to Background Utility all our video sequences. This allowed us to render the green part of the image transparent. Our job was to develop the back Once we had this utility, we striped the chroma blue out and grounds for the introduction to the game and \"paste\" actors onto converted individual JPG files to GIF files. We then reassembled the different backgrounds that we developed. the individual GIF files into continuous digital video. We I called on Andy Anderson, a graphics artist, to work with me treated this digital video as an animated reality, and we were able to enhance the images using special effects we developed in on this. He had an extensive background in fine art, an interests Animator Pro. in working with computer graphics, and a strong work ethic. The job Compare the video camera's relacould be broken down into three tionship in the production of the The steps. First we had to strip, link, and 7th Guest, to that of the rotoscope. clean up the digital video images, The same way the rotoscope created and add any special effects required technical advances in animation by by the script. Next we had to deallowing the animator to incorporate velop the backgrounds on which the the form and movement of real life various introductory scenes would images into an animated reality, so the play. Finally, we had to place the video camera has allowed us to take digital video onto the backgrounds. digital images into a computerized environment. This step of video taping High 8 Hits actors and converting them into GIF Giles, which are then reassembled inWhile we were waiting for Background on which the cyber actor to Animator Pro, represents a monuTrilobyte to provide the digital will be composited. mental break in game production. video to us, we took two approaches to the development of the backgrounds. Not only did we take the approach of rendering the backgrounds with AutoDesk GIFs & FLCs Animator Pro, but since several of the scenes take place outside, we took a High 8 video-camera and taped the basis for the This digital rotoscoping process is completed when the frames backgrounds. are assembled into Animator Pro. In Animator Pro there is a feature called NumPic. Using NumPic you can take a series of We took a Computer Eyes/RT color video \"frame grabber\" numbered pictures and load them into the program, which in board and captured the various scenes. We shot a shade tree and turn can save them as a single file with a FLC (the native file a view of a valley from a hillside graveyard. These videotaped format for Animator Pro) extension. The numbered series of views would be used, in part and in whole, as the base for our pictures comes in and makes a FLC file. The images have been exterior backgrounds. This technique worked so well that we threaded together by the program. re applied it to our interiors as well. We taped a bar, a bedroom, and a doll shop, which became the background for the introThe green background is treated as if it were transparent by duction. Animator Pro. The series of GIF files are then assembled into FLC files. These FLC files can be composited onto backgrounds, GIFfy J-PEGS rendered or captured, enhanced, and played to reveal their animated form. Once we had captured and stored these background images, Sometimes when frames have been converted to GIFs, and we manipulated them with Animator Pro until we had the exact then to FLCs, they don't have the backgrounds called for in the script. same color palletes. If you look at the Each background not only had to palletes of various GIFs, even those be exact and realistic in graphic detaken from the same series, often the sign and detail, but the staging of palletes will be noticeably different. the digital video characters was Each frame can have a different palcritical. Trilobyte's production lete. If the pallets change from frame company videotaped the actors in to frame, GIF to GIF, you get flashes front of a blue screen background, of differing light as the FLC series is which would later be converted to played. To solve this problem, Animagreen (the color chosen to function tor Pro has developed the feature called as transparent in Animator Pro). One Pallete. One Pallete lets you go The the footage was captured and into your FLC file and make all the stored into individual, compressed palletes the same throughout the sefiles known as JPGs. These individVoila! Our techno-wizardry seamlessly ries. ual files where given to us on 250 melds actor and background-a marriage Mb backup tapes. made in cyber-heaven. Clean Up We then transferred them for processing to our hard drive. We chroma-striped the JPG files Once the series is One Paletted, the images can be cleaned up. . to GIF files, a file format that Animator Pro could read. During It is a matter of editing frame by frame. Perhaps there was a this process the original JPGs were resized and cropped to lighting anomaly during the shoot that caused parts of the green 640X320, the working size for the game. Also, this process screen to remain opaque. The editor must make sure any areas automatically converted the blue background on which the actor of green screen, or other anomalies, are removed. Each frame performed to green. Initially Trilobyte converted the JPGs to must be carefully cleaned before special effects can be added. GIFs for us, but when they developed an in-house utility to strip out the chroma blue and replace it with green, we took over this Animated graphics can take up huge amounts of storage, process. especially when special effects are involved. It is not unusual to VERIFY (Appe ndMenu (MF_E NABLED ME OWNERDRA W, DID (LPCSTR) col or) ); #define COLOR_BOX_W IDTH 20 #define COLOR BOX H EIGHT 20 void CColorMenu: :MeasureIte m (LPMEASURE ITEMSTRUCT 1PMIS) // all items are of fixed size July 1993 "


"CODQUEREO KINGDOMS Scenario Disk #1 OOP Quantum Quality Productions, Inc. SARY SHELLS The medieval realm of Conquered Kingdoms is about to get bigger. Devastate your opponent in these all new and exciting maps for Conquered Kingdoms ... THE MULTIAWARD WINNING STRATEGY AND TACTICS GAME. Beautiful ALL NEW scenarios UTILIZE BASIC HUMAN UNITS, THE FANTASY UNITS OR BOTH  21 LEVELS OF PLAY (STRONG AI) MODEM PLAY COMPLETE GAME SCORING HISTORY RICH IN STRATEGY AND TACTICS SEVERAL FULL CAMPAIGN CONQUESTS The \"Conquered Kingdoms Scenario Disk\" is for the IBM PC. It can be obtained through your favorite retailer or ordered directly by calling: 908-788-2799 1993 Q.Q.P. All rights reserved. IBM is a trademark of International Business Machines. Circle Reader Service #99 "


"WAR BATTLES OF THE SOUTH PACIFIC OP Quantum Quality Productions, Inc. The time: World War II The place: The South Pacific Wage war for the sole ownership of the South Pacific. Historically correct battles challenge all, to do better than the Navy did as it happened in WWII. Not only naval combat, but air and land combat. Create and transport armies to enemy ports through air, naval, and bombardments from your adversaries to take over their bases. O MANY SCORCHING BATTLES TO CHOOSE FROM PLAY JAPANESE OR U.S. FORCES MODEM PLAY EXPERT MENUS OR NOVICE MENU SEVERAL LEVELS OF DIFFICULTY STUNNING HISTORICAL ACCURACY HUNDREDS OF SHIP AND PLANE TYPES  INTUITIVE INTERFACE The \"WWII: Battles of the Pacific\" is for the IBM PC. It can be obtained through your favorite retailer or ordered directly by calling: 908-788-2799 1993 Q.Q.P. All rights reserved. IBM is a trademark of International Business Machines. Circle Reader Service #101 "


"ERIFY ERIFY Eame esam au GD) eMenu. ColorMenu: ColorMen Detach(); SSERT (m hM nu a ULL) 1 defaul Menu::-CMe u will estroy have 25 Mb or larger FLC files. Speed also becomes a paramount to incorporate into the game. Also, they wanted us to add in issue when dealing with large files. Our systems were 486s special effects for the digital video. running at 33 MHz with 1 Gb (gigabyte!) hard drives and 16 Mbs of RAM. Back On The System Again Once we had finished cleaning up and adding the necessary special effects to the digital videos of the actors, we saved the Andy handled the special effects. I focused on converting and FLC files one last time. We then loaded the FLC files containing cleaning up the JPG files, assembling the GIF files, and cleaning the appropriate backgrounds and marted the actors into the up and editing the digital video. Employing the techniques we scene. Our finished product, a completed sequence with live developed throughout the introduction, we proceeded to work actors performing in the cyberspace of our digitized and enour way through over 11,000 frames. hanced backgrounds. In one sequence we had to layer the During the months we spent working on The 7th Guest, there background scene. The character was required to flee the scene were times when we felt like anyone in the embryonic stages of into the woods. In this case we wanted the character to run any technological breakthrough: overworked and out of our behind a tree. We matred the characters to the background, and depth. It was critical to our success to be working for Rob and then we marted the tree over the character as he ran away. Graeme. They made certain that we had the hardware and software tools, and more important, the support we needed so Finishing Touches much to succeed. Trilobyte introduces their game via a book in which the turning pages came to life. Our final task was to create a special Pushing The Envelope effect for the people at Trilobyte. Gradually decreasing and increasing the Edge effect, provided by AutoDesk Animator Pro, Thomas Edison once said, \"Opportunity is missed by most over several stills of the first and last frames, had a dynamic people, because it is dressed in overalls and looks like work.\" By graphic impact. Each introductory sequence appeared to be an working for Trilobyte on The 7th Guest, Andy and I were able engraving that came to life, played out its scene, and then faded to take what we know about art and computers-graphic design, back into an engraving. video animation, and special effects — into the uncharted realms of cyberspace. In turn we were given the chance to be part of the creation of one of the most powerful computer games developed Delivering The Goods to date. Now that the work is behind us, and The 7th Guest is We saved cach of our edited and composited FLC files on the on its way to your computer, I think back on the time and effort same 250 MB backup tape that the original, compressed JPG that Andy and I put into this project, and wonder when such an files arrived on. Upon delivery of the finished scene, the introincredible opportunity will come along again. This opportunity ductory sequence, Rob Landeros offered us an opportunity to allowed us to help push the technological envelope and broaden convert, cdit, and clean up all the digital video that they intended the horizons of multimedia gaming. Cow oia ColorMenu: Appendcolo MenuItem (U NT NID, OLORREF olor) ERIFY (Appe dMenu (MFE ABLED 1 F.OWNERDRA IF IT WAS ANY CLOSER, YOU'D BE ON THE COURT. CACTUS PLEAGUE ROFESSIONAL 3 basketball FROM THE LEVELOPERS OL AFBA PROFESSIONAL BASKETBALL NOT AN ARCADE GAME IT'S THE MOST STATISTICALLY ACCURATE BASKETBALL SIMULATION EVER CREATED You can create teams with any of the real-life players you want! Or play games with the players on their real-life teams. It's up to you! Complete AutoSchedule Module, Statistics Module, Records Module and more! Perfect for fantasy leagues, but you don't need to be a basketball expert to have a ball. VERSION 3.0 NOW AVAILABLE USE YOUR VISA OR MASTERCARD CALL 1-800-336-9444 TODAY AND BE ON OUR COURT TOMORROW! CACTUS DEVELOPMENT COMPANY, INC.\" WE TAKE FUN SERIOUSLY For IBM PC/XT/AT/386/486s and compat bles. To purchase with check or money ordet, send $49.95 plus 54.00 shopping and landing to Cactus De.elopment Company, Inc., 7113 Burnet Road, Suite 214, Austin, Texas 78757. Cumylight 1993 totes Development Company, Inc. Customer Support: (512)453-2244, Fux (517.453-3757, BBS: (512)4533155. APRA Professional Parketball ko trademark of the APBA Gume Company, Inc., Limester, Pennsylvania CACTUS LEAGUE PROFESSIONAL BASKETBALL is a trademark of Coctus Development Company, Int Circle Reader Service #38 Computer Gaming World Page 58 "


"ETA, Autumn 1993. Mullard.  Copyright 1993, Mallard Software Copyright 1993, Aviation Simulations, Inc. Circle Reader Service #72 "


"COMPUTER Express The World's Ultimate Superstore CD—7th Guest 5000 FREE UPS Ground Shipping Henry Stauf is an evil toymaker whose work holds a sinister secret. When a series of children die in mysterious circumstances alter buying his toys, the local community begins to ask ques. tions and the plot thickens when Stauf himself meets an untimely demise The game begins when six guests are anonymously summoned to the late toymaker's remote hilltop mansion, now eerily vacant (For IBM) Pirates Gold! A fresh new action/ adventure in the swashbuckling spirit of the original! Spectacular new adventures with more cities to explore will keep players coming back! More opportuni ties to obtain treasures, power and prestige. Enhanced swordfighting and combat capabilities Players rewarded for outstanding triumphs. Stunning new VGA super VGA art and graphics that bring to life the untamed era of piracy in the 17th century Caribbean. (For IBM DOS) Freddy PharkasFrontier Pharmacist Live the legend of a man raised as a gunslinger, who gave it all up for his first love: pharmacology! The year is 1888: the setting, post-Gold Rush California With pestles and pistols, you defend PHARRAS your bucolic burg from one catastrophe after another arson, stari pedes, hired guns, riverboat gamblers... teminal tartulence! Point and click your way through Sagebrush, livestock, cacti, buzzards & swinging saloon doors...just like at the movin pitcher show! (For IBM DOS) Publisher: Sierra Same Day Delivery on In Stock Items $60 $42 $42 Publisher: Virgin Publisher: Microprose Day of the Tentacle Te DE Flight Control System Thrust Master's Flight Control System is the most realistic joystick on the market. Offering the look and feel of an actual jet-fighter stick. The Flight Control System also has the most control of any joystick on the market. With four but tons and a 4-way hat switch, computer pilots spend less time looking at the keyboard and more time winning air battles. The additional functions on the stick are supported by the latest flight Simulators and it works as a two button joystick in all programs. Get real, get Thrustmasterthe leader in innovative flight-sim hardware Manufacturer: Thrustmaster The Lost Treasure of Infocom Vol. 1 Afortune of interactive The Last mystery, fantasy, and science-fiction adventures. The big name games you love to play hundreds of dollars worth in one value-packed collector's edition. Explore under ground labyrinths. sorcerers' climbers, lost Frokom space stations, and El more! Hours of spineTingling Suspense...brain teasing puzzles...Sidesplitting comedy 20 titles you'll treasure in your software library (For IBM DOS and Mac) Maniac Mansion sequel, Day of the Tentacle sucks players into a wacky cartoon world to save the planets from Dr Fred Edison's mutated per fentacles. By control ling three frenzied kids in three different time periods and employing warped cartoon logic. players save mankind tentacle takeover. Orders accepted VISA on our toll free number MonSat 8:30 to 5:30 EST. Visa MasterCard, and DUCAVER Discovercard accepted. All credit card orders processed within 24 hours. Continental US shipments: UPS Ground $5. Airborne Overnight $7. Corp, Gov't, Educ, APO, FPO, International orders accepted. $42 $46 for CD ROM Publisher: Activision $42 $42 for IBM CD-ROM Publisher: LucasArts Entertainment $34 Call orders to: Fax: 508-443-5645 Voice: 508-443-6125 800-228-7449x321 65 IBM EDUCATION A. Alphabet Blocks for Windows Barton's Book Notes for Window Calculus for Windows GMAT W Cliftotes GREW.CLIFFS Notes OS 40 210 35 22 65 *KidDesk 39 35 29 109 109 IBM CD-ROM TITLES CD-Adventures of Willy Beamesh CD-Animals MPC VERSION \"CD-Arthur's Teacher Trouble CD-Arts and Entertainment CD-Barney Bear Goes to Space CD-Beauty and the Beast MPC CD-Berita Think & Talk French CD-Case of Cautious Condor CO-Chessmaster 3000 Window CD Cinemana Movie Guide WIND CD Clinton *CD-Compton's Enc Comp Up CD-Compton's Interactive Ency CD-Conan The Cimmerun CD-Curse of Enchantia CD-Eco Ouest Search for Cutus CD Elect. Travel California CO-Global Explorer CD-Golf Guide MPC (CAI) Cn.frammy Awards CD-Learn to Speak Spanish *CD-Leisure Suit Larry Window CO-Lost Treasures infocom CD-MPC Music Morant *CD-MPC W ard Diagnostic CD-Mantis Expertimental CD-Mayo Clinie Family Health CD-Murder Strange Fellow CD Musical Instruments CD-PC Karaoke CD-Photo CD Access Windows CO-Scrabble Deluxe CO-Secret Weapons Luftwaffe CD-Secret of Monkey Istand CD-Sherlock Detective Volume 1 CD-Sherlock Detective Volume 2 CD-Sherlock Detective Volume 3 CD-Sleeping Beauty Storybook CD-Software Jukebox Arcade CD-Space Quest IV CU-Sports Illustrated LCD Street Atlas USA Party Planner Personal Pediat can Personal Physician Print Shop Deluxe * Paint Shop Deluxe Comic Chata Print Shop Deluxe Windows Profit for Windows Quicken for Windows \"Quicken US. Atlas DOS Your Deck for Windows IBM RECREATION AD&D Dark Sun Stuttered Lands AD&D Eye of the Beholder II \"ADBD Eye of the Beholder III ATAC Secret War Against Drugs Aces of Pacific 1916 WWI Miss Aces of the Pacific VGA Aces over Europe Air Force Commander Air Warrior SVGA Aircraft & Scenery Designer Alone in the Dark Amazon The Guardians of Eden Ancient Art of War in Shes CD-Canton CD-Desert Storm CD From Alice to Ocean CD oferwinkle's Adventures CD-Grolier Encyclopedia CD Iron Helix *CD JourneyMan Project CD-Just Grand & Me 45 CD Lost Treasures Infocom 29 *CD-Photo CD Access Macintosh CD-Sherlock Detective Vol! CD-Sherlock Detective Volume 1 CD-Sherlock Detective Volume 2 CD-Sherlock Detective Volume 3 CD-Spaceship Warlock CD-Sports Illustrated Almanac CD-Survey Western Art CD-Victor Vector & Yondo CD Virtual Valerie Directors CD-ROM DRIVES & UPGRADE KITS Chinon CDS-435 luternal Drive dent Drive 444 U JOYSTICKS/GAMECARDS Analog Plus Joystick Fight Stick GameCard 2-Port Programmable GameCard Ill Automatic GameCard III MCA Automatic Mach II Joystick Mixx Flight Yoke il Thrustmaster ACM Game Card Thrustmaster Pro Flight Coil Thrustmaster Rudder Pedals Thrustmaster Upgrade F15 F117A Thrustmaster Upgrade Falcon Thrustmaster Weapon Control Thunderstick SPEAKERS *Koss HD 6 MPC Speakers Koss Speaker Pair HD 4 Koss Speakers Amplified HD-1 Labtec Speakers CS-150 Labtec Speakers SS-700 AMIGA RECREATION A-Train 45 25 99 15 nou Language Assistant French 50 Language Assistant Spanish 50 Logo Wide Math Rabbit Enhanced Mickey's 123's Enfanced Mickey's ABC's Enfanced Millie's Math House Mystery at the Museums Oregon Trail Deluxe VGA Pepper's Adventures in Time Playtoom w/Sound Rock & Bach Studio SAT Personal Trainer SAT C Notes Science Adventure Treehouse 239 45 USB 75 30 39 25 Here are only a few of the 3,000 products we've delivered to our satisfied customers... Computer Express 31 Union Ave. Sudbury, MA 01776 Civilization Dark Seed Dune Circle Reader Service #42 "


"This Is The Only Hardware You Need To Shop The World's Ultimate Games Superstore. JITE FREE UPS Ground Spectre Spectre Supreme is the sequel to the best selling cyberspace combat/action game. Contend with slicers, auto-qun turrets and hunter Killers. Your deadly ene mies now use radar shielding and optical cloaking. Fortunately, you now command smart misSiles, Seekers, proximity mines and spinners. Get ready for the hottest electronic adrenaline rush you'll ever experience! (For Mac) Spectre PC delivers advanced simulation technology featuring full color graphics, breathtaking scenery with fluid 3D animation Customizable battle craft design. High quality digitized sounds (For IBM DOS) Spectre Supreme $38 Publisher: Velocity X-Wing X-Wing, a space combat simulator in which players pilot X. Yand A-Wing fighters. recreates the epic space battles between the Rebel Alliance and the evil Empire made famous in \"Star Wars\". As new pilots, players take the starlighters through their paces in training, historical cumbat missions and three intense tours of duty. (For IBM DOS) Shipping Buzz Aldrin's Race for Space Buzz Aldrin's Race for Space is a computer simulation of man's greatest adventure, the race to the moon. It recreates all the excitement of every space mission using digitized footage from lift olls, space walks, lunar landings and splashdowns As Space Director, you have at your disposal the entire space inventories of both the USA and USSR, and can plan and direct every space mission: sub-orbitals, orbitals manned and unmanned, planetary and lunar flybys: lem tests: lunar passes and even emergency space rescues! (For IBM DOS) Same Day Delivery on In Stock Items Spectre PC $32 $42 Publisher: LucasArts Entertainment Publisher: Interplay 100 ED PORT-ABL&ounder No sales tax except for Mass add 5%. Personal checks will delay shipment 5 business days. Products covered by manufacturer's guarantee. Defective software replaced immediately. No CODS. Item availability and price subject to change without notice. 15% restocking fee for non-defective returns. CD-Who Killed Sam Rupert? CMC presents the most interactive murder mystery available on CDROM. In April, New Media Magazine presented Who Killed Sam Rupert? with four INVISION AWARDS: Best Adult Game. Best VIRTUAL MURDER Story/Script. Best J Production Design, and an overall Award of Excellence. Interactively investigate, interrogate, and tour the places, faces, and final hours of the dead restaurateur Sam Rupert. (For IBM) C.Y.P.H.E.R.: OPERATION WILDLIFE & OPERATION U.S. PRESIDENTS Adventure and discovery! The whole family can join in the race to outwit enemy LURK agents and crack the secret codes. Each adventure offers a unique learning experience. In OPERATION WILDLIFE, explore the fascinating world of a mammals In OPERATION U.S. PRESIDENTS test your knowledge of presidential trivia and American history. Each comes with built-in Funcyclopedia (For IBM DOS & Macintosh) PORT-ABLE Sound Plus\" IN Perk up your presentations. Make training more ellective And, put some guts into your gaming pastimes Anytime. Anywhere. Because now there's PORT-ABLE Sound Plus --the first truly portable sound peripheral to deliver 16 bit CD quality music with stereo audio capabilities. And, since you just plug into your IBM compatible PC. desktop or laptop parallel port, you don't need an engineering degree or even a screwdriver Comes with everything you need, including a high fidelity speaker and built-in microphone. (For IBM) PRESIDENTS Mac Version $36 Publisher: Tanager Sollware $30 $ 154 Publisher: Creative Multimedia Publisher: Digispeech * COMPUTER ! **5 FAX:0011-508-443-5845 * 10*--** 10W ADT V . Xlt. CompuServe ID: 70007, 15340 W Bikut 3 910 686 36 XL. SS Exores The World's Ultimate Games Superstore MACINTOSH RECREATION Adven of Wise Beamish COLOR B. Eit's finest Challenge \"Capitalist Pig Camers At War 48 21 18 28 229820 15 Citl Cication Master Player Ed. Cognito 40 32 Civilization Mint Book Culgation Master Player Ed Cominche Mission Disk! *Comanche Mission Diski Comanche Maximum Overkill Command HO Classic Conquered Kingdoms Conquest of Japan Darklands Hint Rook w/DISK Daktands VGA Darktands Master Players Ed Daughter of Serpents Dragon's Laitill Dragon's Laut Singe's Castle Uune 11 Eco Questi intores! Eight Ball Deluxe El Fish Empire Deluxe For the ready Goblins Hint Book Goblins : The Prince Button Grand Canyon Upgrade Grand Slam Bridge il Great Naval Battle America Great laval Battles N Aslantic Great Plaval Battles Scenario Great Naval Bastles SuperShips HardBall Il HardBall Big League Parks Hard Ball Player Disk HowScenery Upgrade Hoyles Book of Game Classic INCA Indiana Jones Fate of Atlantis Jack Nidaus Signature Golf Jack Nicklaus Signature Tout 1 Jack Nicklaus Signature Tour 2 Japan Scenery Upgrade Jet Fighter It Tactical Bundle Links Mauna Kea Course SVGA Lost Admiral Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes Lure of the Temptress Mane Mansion II Mantis Experimental Fighter Mantis Speech Pack Michael Jordan Flight Microsoft Flight Simulator stional Lampoons Chess Maniac Origin FX Screen Saver Patriot Perfect General Populous 11 Power Politics for Windows \"Prince of Persial Prophecy Putt Putt Fun Pack Faro Tycoon Classic Railroad Tycoon Master Hit B Red Baron VGA Baron Mission Builder Silent Service Il Classic SimAnt SimAnttor Windows SimCity Windows SimCity Graphics Set 1/Guide Searth SimEarth Windows Simile Simite for Windows Solane for Windows Solitaite's Journey SoundGraphic Flight Upgrade Space Quest V Star Controll Strike Coriander VGA Strike Comunander Speech Pack Stuntstand This Scenery Upgrade Take A Break Pantall Windows Task Force 1942 Terminator 2029 Tony Lussa Baseball T u ssal ALBRIL Stadium Veil of Darkness Hint Bock Wayne's World Wilson Pro Solf Golf Wing Commander Wing Commander !! Wing Commander Il Speech Disk Wing Commander Operation Wolfenstein1 Spear of Destiny World Circuit Grand Prix World Tour Tennis *X-Wing Mission MACINTOSH EDUCATION A-Tia Alge Blaster Plus Joshua's Reading Machine PREM \"KidDesk Mic's Math House M ed Up Fairy Tales Playroom Sesame Street ABCs & 123's Snap Dragon Story Book Weavet Where in the World Deluxe Conquest of Longbow Dragon's Lair Mac 11 Color Dragon's Lan Singes Color) Eigla Ball Deluxe Pinball Falcon MC \"Freddy Panas HeliCats Over the Pacific Indiana Jones Fate of Atlantis \"King's Quest VI Led 61 Kyland 32 SSSSSSSSSSSSS Lemings 27 Might & Magic 18 Omar Stanton Bridge Out of this World SC O Secret of Monkey Island ! Shanghai 37 18 just call 1-800-228-7449 to start saving time and money with Computer Express. Computer Express 31 Union Ave, Sudbury, MA 01776 Castle or Victory Mt Garden Mengence of Excalibur IBM SOUND CARDS "


"RIFY (rea Menu . Gdll AL UJI olorMenu: CColorMen etach(); SERT (m_hM caprus Preturns to the Winner's Circle LL); defaul enu:: CME will stroy id olorMenu: ppendColo enuItem (U TID, LORREF An Interview With David Kaemmer Of Papyrus Design Group lor) by Gordon Goble RIFY (Appe Menu (MF_E BLED OWNERDRA nID, PCSTR) col =)); TEYTEEN The 1989 release of \"Indianapolis 500: simulation, and a founder of the Papyrus the model includes hundreds of variables The Simulation\" signaled a turning Design Group. Today, despite continued that influence the car's handling, just as I point in driving simulations. There Indy sales four years into its life span and in real life. Other games seem to use the weren't a lot of \"bells and whistles, \" but for enviable customer satisfaction, Kaemmer is joystick deflection to do very high level the first time on a personal computer, one ready to take the stunning simplicity of the calculations — the car's direction and could experience a little of the true feel of an original game one step further. We managed speed are simple functions of the joystick open-wheeled race car. For thousands of to flag down the fast-moving but amiable position. In our model, when you move armchair Andrettis, Indy was as close as they Kaemmer, and brought him in for a quick the joystick, it does no more than change could get to strapping on a helmet and CGW pit stop. the steering angle of the front wheels. planting the right foot to the floor. ArcadeLikewise, the throttle and brake inputs are style it was not the view was from the ON INDY 500 THE converted to pedal deflections. Any speed cockpit, there was but a single track (the Indianapolis oval), lap times were accurate, or directional changes are then calculated SIMULATION... (many times per second) using gobs of and the on-track competition t o Newtonian mechanics. That looked like they would from EL NU makes it feel very much like a real an ABC in-car camera. car. Tuning the chassis by changMore importantly, the ing the myriad wing, tire, suspendrive was real. Each corner of sion, and gearbox settings also the Indianapolis oval had to alters the car's speed and handling be perfectly carved the just as the equivalent changes do slightest misjudgment would in real life. result in the stinging smack of CGW: How long did it take to a wall or that helpless slipput all this into a workable packslidin'away feeling of the inage? field grass. Just navigating the car once around the Indy Kaemmer: About two years for course at full acceleration was the Indy PC version plus another an accomplishment in itself. eight or nine months for the After a certain degree of Amiga version. driving proficiency bad been attained. CGW: Indy 500 brought an innovative CGW: Do you feel you underestimated physical alterations to the vebicle could be realism to driving simulations. What were the number of people interested in the made in the pit lane, and setting a car to its you able to do that the other guys weren't subtleties of driving a \"real\" race car over ultimate potential became a skill in itself in terms of programming, game design, other arcade style games on the market Indy was, and is, a subtle exercise demandetc.? at the time of Indy's release? ing maximum concentration, and extractKaemmer: The key to Indy's realism is Kaemmer: To tell you the truth, I ing addiction in return. that it contains a very complex and accudidn't give it much thought at the time! Twenty-nine year old David Kaemmer is rate physics model. I spent a great deal of was developing it. I thought it would sell the mastermind behind this celebrated time researching race car dynamics, and well because I had so much fun playing it! S TORE TH lefine LOR_BOX_W 20 lefine LOR_BOX_H CGHT 20 R3 2 id ColorMenu: TeasureIte LPMEASURE EMSTRUCT OMIS) 7 ali ems are fixed ze Page 62 Computer Gaming World "


"CHIPS & BITS inc. FREE GAME WITH YOUR $75 ORDER* PO Box 234 Rochester, VT 05767 Fax 802—767-3382 Int'l 802-767-3033 Call 800-753-4263 Shipping to US,PR,AK,HI,APO & FPO S4 per order. Air Mail to Canada $6 per order. Handling $1 per shipment. 2 Business Day Air US $6 per order; PR, HI $12 1st Item + $2 ea, ada'i; AK $19 1st Item + $2 ea, add'l. Handling $1 per shipment. Europe, S. America Air Mall $19 1st Item + S6 ea. add'l. Asla, Australia, Africa, Air Mall $25 1st Item + S6 ea. add'l. Handling $1 per shipment. IBM HARDWARE IBM CD ROM IBM ADVENTURE FLASHBACK THE QUEST FOR IDENTITY   'FLASHBACK combines an intricate plot, exciting music score, sizzling sound effects, and dynamite action, Features incredibly subtle and fluid movement with smooth animation at 24 frames a second, 200 differentgame screens dozens of puzzles pan & zoom effects, and over 75 fully animated cinematics. $33 Acoustic Research P22 $79 Acoustic Research P622 $239 AdLib Sound Card $39 Adlib Gold Sound Card $159 Advancd Gravis Ultrasound $139 Champ Joystick $19 Flight Stick Joystick $36 Game Card 3 Automatic $39 Labtec 105 Powered Speaker$24 Media Concept Sound Card $72 PC Symphony Sound Card $37 Pilot Control Stand $20 Pro Audio Spectrum 16 $179 Quickshot 123 Joystick $12 Sony SRS9 Speakers Sound Blaster 16 $219 Sound Blaster Deluxe $89 Sound Blaster MM Upgd Kit S499 Sound Blaster Pro Basic $129 Sound Blaster Pro Deluxe $129 Sound Galaxy BX2 $65 Sound Galaxy NX2 $89 Sound Galaxy NX Pro $125 Snd Galaxy NX Pro 16/scsi $169 Snd Galaxy NX Pro MM Kit $450 Sound Machine $99 Thrustmaster FCS $67 Thrustmaster FCS Pro Thrustmaster Rudder CS 999 Thrustmaster Weapons CS $72 Thrustmaster WCS Mark 2 $99 Putt Putt Joins the Parade $42 Return of the Phatom $42 Rodney's Funscreen $46 Secret Monkey Island $39 Secret Weap Luftwaffe $48 Sherlock Holmes Consul Det $44 Shuttle $24 Software Toolworks Refernc $80 Space Quest 4 $39 Space Quest 4 WIN $42 Spirit of Excaliber $32 Star Child $32 Star Trek 25Anv $46 Stellar 7 WIN $42 Talking Classic Tales $60 Talking Jungle Safari S60 Team Yankee 2 $29 Ultima Bundle $59 Ultima Underworld 1&2 $52 Velveteen Rabbit Childrens $58 Where in the World Deluxe $66 White Horse Child $32 Wing Commander 1 Deluxe $48 Wing Commander/Ultima 6 $57 Wing Commandr/Ultima UW $59 Wolf Pack $39 Wrath of the Demon $29       S42 $35 $15 $34 IBM ADVENTURE $31 IBM CD ROM $25 $42 $56 'CARRIERS AT WAR' brings to life six crucial carrier battles of WWII; Pearl Harbor. Coral Sea, Midway. Eastern Shores, Santa Cruz, and Great Marianas Turkey Shoot. Seek out and destroy enemy carriers fleets, air forces. Features hundreds of individually modeled ships and aircraft from that period. $37 $42 RST Heimdall $17 Hired Guns $32 Hook $32 Inca $42 Indy Jones 4 Fate Atlantis $36 Jack the Ripper $38 KGB King's Quest 5 King's Quest 6 King's Ransom Kronolog: Nazi Paradox L.A. Law Laffer Utilities WIN Land of Lore Laura Bow 2 Leather Goddesses Leather Goddesses 2 Legend of Kyrandia Leisure Suit Larry 1 VGA Leisure Suit Larry 5 $34 Leisure Suit Larry Bundle 1 $39 Loom $19 Lords of the Rising Sun Lost Files Sherlock Holmes $44 Lost Treasures of Infocom $42 Lost Treasures of Infocom 2 $29 Magnetic Scrolls Bundle S21 Martian Memorandum $29 Max Pac Out of this World Plan 9 from Outer Space Police Quest 1 VGA $24 Police Quest 3 $36 Prince of Persia Prince of Persia 2 $45 Return of the Phantom Return to Zork $38 Rex Nebular Cos Gen Ben $39 Rex Nebular Master Edition $52 Riftwar Legacy $39 Ringworld $36 Rise of the Dragon $34 Rome: Pathway to Power $32 Screen Antics WIN $24 Search for the King Secret Monkey Island Secret Monkey Island 2 Sex Olympics $19 Sex Vixens from Space $12 Shadowgate WIN Shogun $12 Sierra Adventure Bundle 1 $39 Space Quest 1 VGA $16 Space Quest 4 $36 Space Quest 5 Space Quest Bundle $36 Spellcasting 101 $19 Spellcasting 201 $36 Spellcasting 301 Spring Brk $34 Star Trek 25th Aniv Star Trek: Next Generation Stellar 7 $21 Terminator 2029 $42 The Prophecy $36 The Train $6 Time Quest Trolls $7 Uninvited Uninvited WIN $34 Walker $32 War in Middle Earth S12 Warriors of Legend Where in America's Past $37 Where in Europe is Carmen $29 Where in Time Carmen $32 Where in USA is Carmen $29 Where in USA is Carmen Dix $45 Where in World Carmen $32 Where World Carmen Dlx $52 Wonderland Zool RIER ATSTAR $32 $12 $34 $38 $35 $39 Advent Willie Beamish $24 Advent Willie Beamish 2 $39 All Dogs go to Heaven $17 Alone in the Dark $36 Amazon $36 Attack Pack B.A.T. $14 Bloodstone $36 Blue Force: Next of Kin $45 Cadaver $27 Castle Wolfstn-Spear Destiny $37 Chamber Sci-Mutant Prstss S25 Coaster Conquests Robin Hood VGA $36 Conspiracy Deadlock Files $34 Countdown $37 Covert Action Crime Does Not Pay $19 Crime Wave $37 Cruise for a Corpse $32 Cyber Race $42 Cybercon 3 $29 Dark Half $10 Dark Side $28 Day of the Tentacle $39 Deja Vu 182 WIN $28 Demon's Gate Dog Eat Dog Dominus $39 Don't Go Alone $6 Dragon's Sphere $42 Earthrise $9 Elf $24 Epic $32 Eric the Unready $38 Eternam $36 Flashback $33 Fred Pharkas Frontier Pharm $42 Free DC Future Wars S9 Galleons of Glory $24 Gambit $38 Gateway $29 Godfather $29 Gold Rush $15 GrailQuest $17 HUMANS $21 Havoc for Hire $42 Heart of China VGA $19 Heaven and Earth $32 12 Roads to Gettsyburg WIN $48 7th Guest A Christmas Carol $18 Advent Willie Beamish $45 Adventures of Brad Stallion $39 Aesop's Multimedia Fables $30 Barney Bear Goes to School S23 Barney Bear Goes to Space $23 Battle Chess WIN & DOS $46 Buzz Aldrin Race Space CD $59 California Travel $12 Campaign $35 Capstone Game Collection $45 Chessmaster 3000 $46 Conan $21 Conquests Robin Hood $42 Curse of Enchantia $26 Cyber Space Don Quixote $32 Dune EcoQuest Search for Cetus $42 El Grito Del Jaguar WIN $46 Eye of the Beholder 3 $48 Fascination WIN $39 Gofer's Winkel Advet WIN $35 Guy Spy $29 Impressionist Sources WIN $69 Indy Jones Fate Altantis $52 Interactive Storytime Vol 1 $30 Interactive Storytime Vol 2 S30 Interactive Storytime Vol 3 $30 Jack and the Beanstalk $34 Jones In The Fast Lane WIN $42 Jungle Book Win $34 King Quest 6 Rom S48 King's Quest 5 WIN $42 King's Ransom $38 Laura Bow 2 $42 Legend of Kyrandia $49 Library of Art: Renaissance $60 Loom $48 Lost Treasures Infocom 2 946 Lost Treasures of Infocom $46 Mantis Experimental Fighter $45 Multimedia: Vivaldi WIN 9 34 Omar Sharif Bridge $46 BUSINESSEXDATIBUS $32 $32 GALS $36 $46 $12 $6 $9 $19 'SOUND GALAXY NX PRO 16' supports the 5 most popular sound cards. Features CD ROM interface, 16 Bit stereo playback with 20 voices at up to 14.4 KHz, volume control, midi interface, game port, 4 walt amp, and software setup. S169 Visn & MC Accepted. CODS $6. Checks Held 4 Weeks. Money Orders Treated as Cash. Most Items Shipped Same Day. Shipping times not guaranteed. Check compatibility before you buy. Defectives replaced with same product. Offer, price & availability subject to change. All Sales Final. \"SEE LAST PAGE FOR DETAILS $16 $34 "


"BRIF area Men Game Iesugu au ColorMenu: ColorMen Detach(); SSERT (m_M nu == ULL); 1 defaul Menu::-CMe u will estroy oid ColorMenu: AppendColo MenuItem(U NT NID, OLORREF olor) OMPUTENISOUTS EMPUTER ERIFY (Appe dMenu (MF_E ABLED F OWNERDRA \", DID LPCSTR) col r)); REPLAY ON PAPYRUS what do you do other than game development? DESIGN GROUP... Kaemmer: We do a lot of contract proCGW: What is your official title with gramming. We've done educational softPapyrus? ware, business productivity software, Kaemmer: Co-founder and Vice Presi systems software, you name it. Our focus dent, Technology. is on projects which require technologies CGW: Would you like to mention any similar to those in game programming: KURU high speed graphics, sound, any type of other people who deserve recognition for If anything, I probably overestimated program in which a myriad of complex how much interest there would be in it. problems need to be solved. We continue Flight simulators usually do very well, and Kaemmer: On the original Indy 500, to do game development mainly because I have always thought of Indy as being Richard Garcia did a significant amount we enjoy it, but also because it's a good Flight Simulator on a racetrack. I did unof programming, Rob Hubbard at EA did way to keep our technologies current. derestimate the number of crazy lunatics a fantastic job on the Adlib and Roland sound drivers (Indy was one of the first (myself included) who would drive a 500 CGW: Were you pleased with the arrangement between yourself and Elecmile race. I put that capability in figuring games, if not the first, that used those tronic Arts pertaining to Indy 500. Did that there was no harm in making it posboards for sound effects), and my wife Althea went beyond the call of duty durEA do a satisfactory job marketing the sible, but nobody would actually do it. Of ing its development. (You try putting a game? course, then I had to try it in order to say that I had done it. In doing so, I discovone week old baby to sleep with the Kaemmer: At the time it was a very ered that driving the 500 miler was the scream of doppler-shifting Indy engines good deal. We were an unknown quantity most fun activity in the game (although blaring out of the Roland MT-32 in the to EA (and to just about everybody), so next room.) you can get a wicked case of joystick they gave us a big break. Financially for elbow»). us it's been about a break-even, but the game has helped our visibility, since a lot CGW: How much time did you spend of people in the industry know it and like on research ar \"The Brickyard\"? Is the track a completely faithful representation Indy 500 never sold as well as we and of the real thing EA thought it would, but I don't think Kaemmer: The only research I did at EA's markering can be faulted. There are the \"Brickyard\" was visiting the museum probably some things EA would do difand riding around the track in a bus. I did ferently if they had markered the game porc through a lot of books, maps, and again, but they had a though sell. There video footage in order to get the dimen On the new game, John Wheeler is my is only one track in the game, and an oval sions of the track and the location of all primary programming assistant, and is at that! It's difficult to sell the game's the grandstands correct. The track in the doing a fabulous job with the instant realistic physics when every other Tom, game is a faithful representation of the replays and the whole user interface. Dick and Harry with a driving game calls track as it was in 1988. In 1989, the real Adam Levesque is building the tracks and theirs «the most realistic driving game speedway was resurfaced (eliminating the 3D objects, and Doug McCartney is ever.\" I think game buyers become fairly bumpiness on the pit lane), then in 1990 drawing the texture maps and menu artskeptical about the inflated claims that ces were added along the work. They all deserve a lot of credit. they see all the time. So naturally just inside of the front straight. So now, the doing a great job and maintaining a good doing a great iob and maintaining a good about everyone who picks up the box original simulation is a bit dated, I'm humor, all while working with a perfecthinks «Test Drive on an oval... no afraid. tionist like myself. thanks.\" EA drummed up a lot of publicity about the game; it was featured in CGW: Are you aware of the obvious CGW: Was there a Papyrus bcfore Indy stories on ESPN and Entertainment ToIndy 500 «Game-Within-A-Game\" that DV 5002 night, and was reviewed by the major auto consists of discovering just how many cars Kaemmer: Yes, but not long before. magazines, and they all loved it. can be destroyed in a single melce? Omar Khudari and I formed Papyrus in August 1987, and I started work on Indy Kaemmer: That's gruesome. I'm ON THE in January, 1988. shocked that people would do such a NEW PRODUCT... thing. Twenty-nine was my best. How CGW:So, was Papyrus formed in order CGW: When will the new product be about trying to win a 10' lap race by to develop Indy 500 crashing out all the other cars before shipping? What is its official name, and Kaemmer: We did form Papyrus with someone else wins? On a kinder, gentler what is the projected price? the intention of developing games, alnote: Best single lap speed I heard on though Indy wasn't in our plans at that Kaemmer: We haven't yet decided on Compuserve that someone turned a point. We traveled to San Francisco and RIGHT FRONT 243.10 mph lap, which is, as far as I pitched a few game ideas to EA in '87, and know, the all-time simulation record. AnCOMPOUND SOFT we mentioned the possibility of doing an other good game for those who have masPRASSURE 35 P51 tered the simulation: What's the lowest Indy 500 game. Unbeknownst to us, Rich Hilleman at EA was simultaneously lookCHANGE TIREREIRY boost at which you can win the 500 miler DONE ing for someone to do an Indy 500 game, (or the 150, 60, or 25)? A friend of mine claims to have won the ten lap race with and so the ball started rolling. a boost setting of 1, although I'm not sure CGW: What has Papyrus done beI believe him... tween Indy 500 and this new game, and define OLOR_BOX_W DTH 20 define OLOR_BOX_H IGHT 20 oid ColorMenu: MeasureIte (LPMEASURE TEMSTRUCT OMIS) Il all tems are f fixed Eze Page 64 Computer Gaming World "


"CHIPS & BITS inc. FREE GAME WITH YOUR $75 ORDER* PO Box 234 Rochester, VT 05767 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'l 802—767-3033 Call 800-753-4263 Shipping to US,PR,AK,HI, APO & FPO S4 per order. Alr Mall to Canada $6 per order. Handling Sper shipment, 2 Business Day Air US $6 per order; PR, HI $12 1st Item + $2 ea. add. AK $19 1st Item + $2 ea, add'l. Handling 1 per shipment. Europe, S. America Air Mail $19 1st Item + S6 ea, add'l Asia, Australia, Africa, Air Mail S25 1st Item + $6 ea. add'l. Handling S1 per shipment. IBM ROLE PLAYING IBM HINT BOOKS IBM HINT BOOKS COMTANDAO $9 A Chris Roberts Game 'STRIKE COMMANDER' is a flight simulator of uncomprising quality and realism, interwoven with a gripping cinematic story. This release marks the completion of 2 years of intense software developmentusing Origin's Realspace graphics system. Fly over extremely detailed enemy territory to deliver your cargo. $48 $20 $9 Powermonger $10 Quest For Clues 2-5 Each $21 Quest for Glory Strategy Gd $19 RUNS Issue #1-19 Each $6 Railroad Tycoon $10 Rex Nebular Cos Gen Ben $14 Rise of the Dragon $10 Savage Empire $10 Search for the King Search fort $10 Secret Monkey Island 1 or 2 $10 Secret Silver Blades $10 Sentinel Worlds 1 $10 Shadow Sorcerer $10 Simearth $16 Simcity & Simearth Simlife Official Strategy $16 Space Quest 1-4 Each $10 Spellcasting 101 Official $10 Spellcasting 201 $10 Star Trek 25th Aniv $10 Starflight 1 or 2 $10 Strategy Plus Issue 12-30 Ea $5 Strike Commander Official $16 Stunt Island $16 Summoning $16 Tales Magic:Prophecy Shdw $12 Time Quest $10 Treasures Savage Frontier $10 Tunnels & Trolls $16 TurboGrafx 16 Secrets $10 Ultima 4-6 Each $10 Ultima 7 $12 Ultima 7 and Underworlds $16 Ultima 7.5 Balancing Scales $16 Ultima Avatar Adventures $16 Ultima U Stygian Abyss $12 Ultima Underworld 2 $12 V Victory $16 Wasteland $10 Wizardry Cosmic Forge $12 Wizardry 7 $16 Yeager Air Combat $16 $29 $19 SOIANS OP GUALDTIL Might & Magic 3 $29 Might & Magic 3 Char Edit $16 Might&Magic 4 Clouds Xeen $34 Might&Magic 4 Char Edit $16 Might&Magic 5D Side Xeen $42 Mines of Titan Murder $29 Obitus No Shirt Pirates Pirates Gold Planet's Edge Planet's Edge Char Ed Pools of Darkness Protostar Questron 2 Ragnarok Realms of Arkania Rings of Medusa Savage Empire Savage Empire Char Edit $16 Sea Rogue $29 Secret Silver Blades $15 Secret Silver Blades Char Ed $16 Sentinel Worlds 1 Sentinel Worlds 1 Char Edit $16 Shadow Sorcerer S9 Shadowlands Shadows of Mordor $19 Sleeping Gods Lie Sorcerian $15 Space 1889 $12 Space 1889 Char Edit $16 Space Hulk $38 Space Inc $34 Space Rogue $30 Space Rogue Char Edit $16 Spacewrecked $19 Spelcraft: Aspect of Valor SpellJammer:Pirates Rlm Sp $38 Spellcraft:Aspect of Valor $38 Spirit of Excalibur $9 Star Saga 2 Starflight 1 or 2 $17 Stonekeep $54 Summoning $38 Sword of the Samurai Tales Magic:Prophecy Show $29 Tale Magic: Proph Shad CE $16 Tangled Tales $21 Terran Envoy $12 Third Courier $6 Times of Lore $28 Treasures Savage Frontier $32 Treasure Savage Frntier CE $15 Trilogy $15 Tunnels & Trolls $12 Twilight 2000 VGA $24 Ultima 6 False Prophet Ultima 6 Char Edit $16 Ultima 7 Black Gate $48 Ultima 7 Char Ed $16 Ultima 7 Forge of Virtue $18 Ultima 7.5 Serpent Isle $48 Ultima Trilogy $39 Ultima Trilogy 2 S48 Ultima Uworld Stygian Abyss $48 Ultima UW Styg Abyss CE $15 Ultima Uworld 2 Labyrinth $48 Uncharted Waters $42 Unlimited Adventures S32 Veil of Darkness Vengeance of Excalibur $16 War of the Lance $9 Wasteland Char Edit $16 Waxworks $29 Wizardry Trilogy $32 Wizardry (1-3) Char Edit $16 Wizardry Cosmic Forge $34 Wizardry Cosmic Forge CE $16 Wizardry 7 Crusaders $39 Wizadry 7 Crusaders Chr Ed $16 'AMAZON' recaptures the fun and excitement of the 1950's drive-in movies. Travel to unexplored regions of the Amazon, fight 10 foot ants, and find emeralds stolen by Cortez. Amazing cinematic effects such as multiple camera angles, flashbacks. zooms, pans, and fades. Features full digitized voices & sound effects. $36 $10 688 Attack Sub $10 A-Train $16 Advent Willie Beamish $10 Altered Destiny $10 Bard's Tale 1-3 Each $10 Black Cauldron $10 Blue Force: Next of Kin $10 Buck Rogers Countdown S10 Castle of Dr Brain $10 Champions of Krynn $10 Civilization $16 Codename Iceman $10 Colonel's Bequest $10 Conquests Robin Hood $10 Conquests of Camelot $10 Countdown $10 Curse of the Azure Bonds $10 Dark Queen of Krynn $10 Darklands $14 Darkspyre $10 Death Knights of Krynn $10 Dragon Wars $10 Dragons of Flame $8 Drakkhen $10 Dungeon Master $10 Dynamix Great War Planes $16 EcoQuest Search For Cetus S10 Elvira 2 Jaws of Cerberus $10 Elvira Mistress Dark $10 Eye of the Beholder $10 Eye of the Beholder 2 $12 Eye of the Beholder 3 $10 Fred Pharkas Fron Pharm $8 Free DC $10 Gateway Savage Frontier S10 Global Conquest Strat w/disk $21 Gobliiins Gold Rush Gunship 2000 $16 Hard Nova $10 Harpoon $16 Heart of China $10 Hero's Quest 1-3 Each $10 Hillsfar $8 Immortal $10 Indi Jones 4 Fate Atlantis $10 Island Of Dr Brain $10 Jetfighter 2.0 S16 King's Quest 1-6 Each $10 Knights of Legend $10 Laura Bow 2 HintBook $10 Leisure Suit Larry 1-5 Each $10 Lemmings w/disk $21 Loom $10 Lord of the Rings V1 $10 Lord of the Rings V2 S6 Lost in LA $10 LucasArts Adventure Book $16 LucasArts Air Combat Stratg $16 Magic Candle 2 or 3 $10 Magic Candle 3 $10 Manhunter New York $10 Manhunter San Francisco $10 Maniac Mansion $10 Matrix Cubed $10 Might & Magic 1 S10 Might & Magic 1&2 $16 Might & Magic 2 $12 Might & Magic 3-5 Each $16 Off Book Leisure Suit Larry $12 Olf Book of Ultima 2nd Ed $15 Ol Gde Roger Wilco Space $12 Off Guide King's Quest 2nd $10 Oll Book of Police Quest $12 Patriot S16 Planet's Edge $16 Police Quest 1-3 Each $10 Pool of Radiance $10 Pools of Darkness $12 Populous 1 & 2 Office Stratgy $16 Power Monger Strategy $16 $19 IBM WARGAMES $26 S26 S12 Dreadnoughts The most EXCITING SEA BAITLES ever fought $19 DREADNOUGHTS accurately models the looks, specifications and tactics of fighting fleets during the great age of the battleship. Includes 7 scenarios such as: Coronel (1914). Falklands (1914). Jutland (1916) and Dogger Bank (1915). Features a menu interface for entering commands, external 3D view, & hidden movement. $39 Action North Atlantic Action off River Platte Air Raid Pearl Harbour $22 Ambush at Sorinor $42 American Civil War V1-3 Ea $22 Banzai Battle Stations Battle Tank Kursk Battle of Austerlitz Battle of the Atlantic Battles of Napoleon Blitzkrieg Ardennes Blood & Iron Blue and the Grey $42 Bravo Romeo Delta $29 CW No Greater Glory $21 Campaign $39 Carrier Strike $39 Carrier Strike Exp Pak $19 Carriers at War $34 Carriers at War Exp Pak Charge of the Light Brigade $34 Conflict $8 Conflict in Vietnam $9 Conflict: Middle East $14 Conflict: Korea $36 Decision at Gettysburg $19 Dreadnoughts $42 Dreadnoughts Bismark $29 Dreadnoughts Ironclads Dreadnoughts Deluxe $89 Fifth Eskadra $22 Fire Brigade $34 Fleet Med $27 Frontline $13 JUL CGW3 $37 $37 $29 Visa & MC Accepted. CODs $6. Checks Held 4 Weeks. Money Orders Treated as Cash. Most Items Shipped Same Day. Shipping times not guaranteed. Check compatibility before you buy. Defectives replaced with same product. Offer, price & availability subject to change. All Sales Final. SEE LAST PAGE FOR DETAILS Circle Reader Service #41 "


"ERIFY eMenu 510) PRESS ESCORE TO DRIVE TRACK VIEI ColorMenu: -ColorMen Detach(); SSERT (m_hM mu == ULL); / defaul Menu : :  u will Lestroy roid ColorMenu: Appendcolo MenuItem (U NT NID COLORREF color) ERIFY (Appe IdMenu (MF_E TABLED F OWNERDRA 1, DID, LPCSTR) col f)); B12118 the name, but it will be shipping in October, 1993. We currently expect the list price to be $69.95. CGW: Modem and head-to-head play is becoming all the rage. Are you planning to incorporate either of these two features into the new product? P SPEED Kaemmer: Yes, two-player modem play will be included. We also would like to allow more than two players to compctc. tings which range from an easy to drive and are exploring the feasibility of differ setup through a fast and hairy scrup. ent approaches to thar problem. We'll However, tweaking your settings can give have more information within the next you an advantage. few months. CGW: How large will the program be? CGW: How many tracks will be inKaemmer: It'll be bigger than Indy 500. cluded with the new game? What measIt runs in 386 protected mode, so it will ures are you taking to ensure the require a 386 or berter (a 486 will increase faithfulness of the new tracks? the graphics realism, by allowing texture Kaemmer: Three or four tracks will be mapping in real time). It will require 2 complete by the time the product ships, Megs of RAM, and use berween 2 and 4 with all the others on the IndyCar sched Megs of hard disk space, plus about 500K ule to be released as add-on tracks as soon for cach add-on track. as they are done. The tracks that are inCGW: How long has it taken to put this cluded cover the variety of circuits the whole thing together? When did you deIndyCars run on: a superspeedway, short cide that there would be a new product at oval, road course and/or city circuit. We all? have researched the tracks extensively, using detailed track maps to get the track Kaemmer: We've been working on the lengths, widths, corner radii, etc. correct, new game for almost 1 1/2 years, with U.S. Geological Survey data to get the another four months to go. We decided altitude changes correct, and photos and that we were going to do it about a year video to get the surrounding details and a half ago. I've been wanting to do it (grandstands, trees, etc.) in the right since Indy was finished, but it had to places. We also scrutinize in-car footage become financially feasible first. to make sure that the cambers and gradiCGW: Have you driven race cars yourents are correct everywhere yes, there self. or has anvone else at Papyrus? is banking. Kaemmer: No to both. However, I do CGW: Replays are a popular and an commute into Boston every day, and I important feature of driving simulations. believe after seven years of that you beOne complaint I had concerning Indy 500 was its inability to save more than one come eligible for a USAC license. replay...will the new product include the ability to save multiple replays for later ON THE glory, and will replays be any longer than COMPETITION... those in the original Indy? Kaemmer: Multiples, yes. Longer...we CGW: Recently, it has been Microprose' World Circuit that has captured the may have the length of instant replay imagination of digital racers. Have you depend on the free memory in the machine, although 20 seconds already seems played this game? interminable, doesn't it? Multiple car set Kacmmer: Yes, it's a nice game. In fact, ups can also be saved. when I first saw it, I was disappointed, CGW: How will customized car set-up since we were already hard at work on our differ from the original? Will this operagame, and I was hoping it would be yet tion be simpler or more technical/true-toanother lame driving game. The graphics life? in it are very good, it looks very much like you are driving a race car. But the physics Kaemmer: There are a few extra options: speedway or road course wings, rain tires, and you can change the engine's power curve and reliability by playing with the spark advance and fuel/air mixture. Brake bias will be adjustable from the cockpit. None of the complex settings adjustments will need to be made in order to have fun with the game, though. You'll be able to choose from three default setstill leave much to be desired. It doesn't feel like you are driving a race car. It doesn't give me the sense that I'm in control of a car — more like it's in control of me, and it won't let me go where it's not safe to go. With the line magnet off, it feels even less like a car. The car set-up changes don't materially change the handling either. I haven't had the patience to see if they change your lap times. CGW: Was there ever any attempt to get your new product to the marketplace before World Circuit Kaemmer: No. We could've hammered the game out quickly, but I prefer to take the time to get everything right. Our new game will be as far beyond any other driving game as Indy was when it came out. Indy has stood the test of time very well. It's still selling, and a lot of people are still playing it, even after several years. We have exceeded that level of depth in the new game, so I'm not worried that another driving game will come along and take away from our sales. CGW: Finally, what will your new CCW. Finally game have to offer that is superior to World Circuit? Kaemmer: It feels like you are driving a real race car. The physics model is actually superior to Indy's. Engine and skidding sounds are dynamic, giving you feedback about the car's handling. Car serup is much more extensive than in World Circuit, and settings changes really alter the way the car handles. Plus you get to drive on many different types of courses: high speed, full throttle superspeedways, fastpaced short ovals, sweeping road courses and challenging city circuits. The circuits also have varying cambers (banking) as well as altitude changes. You'll find that a corner at the bottom of a hill will offer substantially more grip than one at the crest of a hill. The graphics have a tremendous amount of texture-mapping — projecting bitmapped images onto 3D polygons, much like Ultima Underworld — which adds greatly to the realism and the sense of speed. The cars are polygon-rendered in real-time, nor pre-drawn. Plus they are all texture mapped, so they look like real Indy cars, complete with sponsor's decals. They also break into pieces if they smash into the barriers. The instant replays are also very extensive, with a lot of TV-like camera footage (and the scream of doppler-shifted engines). If confidence is a virtue, Kaemmer is better than most. Only time and the game-buying public will decide if the \"new Indy\" has what it takes to out-drive the competition. In the meantime, though, it certainly looks as though the gloves are off. CGW ////////// define COLOR_BOX_W DTH define COLOR_BOX_H SIGHT 20 toid ColorMenu: MeasureIte (LPMEASURE TEMSTRUCT PMIS) Tel // all tems are of fixed / ize Puge 66 Computer Gaming World "


"CHIPS & BITS inc. FREE GAME WITH YOUR $75 ORDER* PO Box 234 Rochester, VT 05767 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'l 802-767-3033 Call 800—753—4263 Shipping to US.PR.AK, HI APO & FPO $4 per order. Air Mail to Canada $6 per order. Handling S1 per shipment. 2 Business Day Air US $6 per order; PR, HI $12 1st Item + $2 ea, add'l; AK $19 1st Item + $2 ea. add. Handling s1 per shipment. Europe, S. America Air Mail $19 1st Itom + $6 oa, add'l. Asia, Australia, Africa, Air Mall $25 1st Item + $6 ea. add'l. Handling $1 per shipment. IBM ARCADE IBM EDUCATIONAL IBM ROLE PLAYING Airborne Ranger Artura 323 $32 RDAN \"MICHAEL JORDAN IN FLIGHT captures all the air artistry of Michael Jordan with unprecedented realism. Play 3-on-3 basketball, hitfrom the outside, drive the lane or execute the giveand-go with offensive play-calling. Hold the court against 32 real-life competitors. Features digitized graphics, and instant replay. $38 $34 $32 $24 $32 $37 $24 $15 $26 $21 'LINKS 386 PRO offers SUPER VGA graphics and advanced features designed for your 386 or 486. New features include computer opponent, save game option that allows your friends to play against you in an existing game, pre-recorded games from worthy opponents, and many game modes. $39 $22 Atomino Back to the Future 3 Bargon Attack VGA Batman the Movie $24 Battle Storm $32 Bill & Ted's Excellent Adv $19 Brain Blaster $28 Cogito Windows $38 Combat Classics $24 Continuum $29 Cool Croc Twins $24 Creepers Generation $28 Day of the Viper $19 Dr Doom's Revenge $9 Dragon's Lair $22 Dragon's Lair 2 Time Warp $34 Dragon's Lair 3 $34 Dragn's Lair Esc Singe Cast $34 Eight Ball Deluxe $38 Fast Track $25 Freakin Funk Fuzzballs $19 Galactic Conqueror $31 Galactic Empire $27 Ghost & Goblins $21 Gobliiins Guy Spy $27 Hyperspeed Killing Cloud $19 -affer Utilities $21 aser Squad $32 Monty Python Night Breed Nova 9 Obliterator Pac Man Pipe Dream $19 'it Fighter Power Hits: Battletech $32 Power Hits: Sci Fi $19 'unisher $20 S.C. Out $38 Savage $15 Sierra Arcade Bundle 1 $24 Silpheed $21 Sliders $27 Space Ace $32 Space Ace 2 $34 Space Wars $37 Speedball 2 S25 Star Blade Stellar 7 Street Fighting Man Street Football $15 Super PacMan Super Space Invaders $25 superman $28 Swamp Gas Windows $38 'ake-A-Break Pool WIN $29 aking of Beverly Hills $19 eenage MNT Man Miss $31 engen's Arcade Hits $12 erminator 'errorpods $24 etris Classic WIN $26 he Light Corridor he Tinies hexder 1 $15 hexder 2:Fire Hawk $15 ristan Pinball axine iking Child olfied $19 Vild Wheels S26 Vrath of the Demon $21 C-Men 2 $25 (enocide Ciphos $34 Ace Detective $30 Ace Explorer: Sequencing $36 $36 Ace Inquirer $40 Ace Reporter $36 Ace Reporter Deluxe $48 Auto Map $64 AutoWorks $49 BodyWorks $49 Boom Box $29 Castle of Dr Brain VGA $29 Cleo is a Dragon $30 Clock Works $19 Comic Book Maker $32 Cuckoo Zoo Eagle Eye Mysteries $32 EcoQuest 2 Lost Scrt Rain $34 EcoQuest Evelyn Wood Dynmic Readr Fay's Word Rally Incredible Machine $29 Island Of Dr Brain $29 Jones Fast Lane $24 Kidworks $30 Kidwriter Gold $32 Land of The Unicorn $39 Mario Teaches Typing $24 Marvin the Moose Vol 1 or 2 $30 M Beacon Teaches Typing $26 Milliken Storyteller Vol 1 or 2 $30 Mixed Up Faery Tale $29 Mixed-Up Mother Goose $29 Munchers Bundle Never Ending Story 2 Crayn $9 Orbits: Voyage Solar Systm $39 Peanuts $9 Phonics Plus $25 Picture Perfect $32 Play Room $35 Print Shop Deluxe $39 Print Shop Dix Bus Graph $24 Putt Putts Fun Pak $22 Quarky Quaysoo's Turbo Sci S29 Read 'n Roll $36 Read 'n Roll Data Disk $12 Read & Rhyme $31 Rdr Rabbit 1: Early Reading $37 Reader Rabbit 2 Rdr Rabbit's Ready Letters $37 Robot Writer Plus $30 Rodney's Funscreen $32 Scooter's Magic Castle $32 Secert Island Dr. Quandry $38 Snapdragon $29 Speedreader WIN $30 Speedreader WIN DD A Speedreader WIN DDB $12 Speedreader WIN DDC $12 Spell it Plus $31 Spell-a-Saurus Spelling $31 Spelling Wiz Stickybear Opposites $23 Stickybear Parts of Speech $32 Stickybear Reading $24 Stickybear Reading Comp $30 Stickybear Reading Tutor $31 Stickybear Shapes $29 Stickybear Spellgrabber $32 Stickybear Spelling Tutor $32 Story Sketcher Super Munchers $29 Spr Solvrs: Midnight Rescue $30 Super Solvers Spellbound $31 Super Spellicopter $21 Treasure Mountain $39 Tree House $39 Wacky Funster $18 Wkly Reader Reading Comp $31 Where in Space Carmen Dlx $50 where in USA Carmen Dix $45 Where in World Carmen Dix $52 2400 AD $12 ADD Collector's Edition 2 $45 ADD Starter Kit $29 Bard's Tale 3 $32 Bard's Tale 3 Char Editor $16 Bard's Tale Construction $27 Battletech 2 $31 Beyond Blue Event Horizion $36 Black Crypt Buck Rogers Countdown $12 Captain Blood $9 Celtic Legends $32 Challenge of 5 Realms $44 Champions $37 Champions of Krynn $19 Chmpions of Krynn Char Ed $16 Cobra Mission $49 Companion of Xanth $36 Corporation $14 Curse of the Azure Bonds Curse Azure Bonds Char Ed $16 Cyber Empire $32 Cyber Space $39 Dark Queen of Krynn $32 Dark Queen Krynn Char Ed $16 Dark Sun Dark Sun Grey Isle Exp Pak $34 Darklands $39 Darklands Master Ed w/book $51 Daughter of Serpents $32 Death Knights of Krynn $21 Death Knights Krynn Char Ed$16 Dragon Wars $12 Dragon Wars Char Edit $16 Dragons of Flame $9 Dungeon Master $34 Dusk of the Gods Dusk of the Gods $24 Elvira 2 Jaws of Cerberus $19 Elvira Mistress Dark $29 Eye of the Beholder 1 $19 Eye of Beholder Char Edit $16 Eye of the Beholder 2 $38 Eye of Beholder 2 Char Edit $16 Eye of the Beholder 3 $42 Fountain of Dreams Four Crystals of Trazere $24 Gateway Savage Frontier $32 Gryphon Masters of Havlar $38 Heaven and Earth $32 Heros Quest 1 VGA $24 Heros Quest 2:Trial Fire $21 Heros Quest 3 Immortal $17 Joan of Arc $12 Keys to Maramon $12 King's Bounty $15 Knights of Legend Char Edit $16 Legacy of the Necromancer $17 Legacy: Realm of Terror $34 Legend $31 Legend of Valor $39 Legends of Drakka $38 Lord of the Rings V1 $32 Lord of the Rings V1 Chr Ed $16 Lord of the Rings V2 $37 Lord of the Rings V2 Chr Ed $16 Loremaster $39 Lost Tribe $29 Lure of the Temptress Magic Candle 1 $12 Magic Candle 1 Char Editor $16 Magic Candle 2 $19 Magic Candle 2 Char Editor $16 Magic Candle 3 $38 Martian Dreams $37 Martian Dreams Char Editor $16 Matrix Cubed Mechwarrior $19 Mega Traveller: Zhodani $9 Mega Traveller 2 $19 Mega Traveller 3 $39 JUL CGW2 Rotox LINKS(386 ACCESS PUTER-AIDED DESIGNSTOOL GAMEMAKER CREATE TOUR ORAZON TEROARED $19 ESPLORE MAZES $22 DESIGN WORLDS 'GAME MAKER' allows you to create 256 color VGA adventure and arcade games without programming. Characters, monsters, and parts of a sceen can all be animated. Characters can gain or lose lives, score, hit points and 20 other attributes. Includes several full games, many scenes, monsters & backgrounds for you to use. $68 756 COLOR VGA ONSTERS PLAN MOVEMENT $29 $37 IMPORT GRAPHICS $29 IMATE MONSTERS $32 56 Visa & MC Accepted. CODs 56. Checks Held 4 Weeks. Money Orders Treated as Cash. Most Items Shipped Same Day. Shipping times not guaranteed. Check compatibility before you buy. Detectives replaced with same product. Offer, price & availability subject to change. All Sales Final. SEE LAST PAGE FOR DETAILS Circle Reader Service #41 "


"BRIFY None fame || esngin ColorMenu: -ColorMen BUILDING. DOO Detach(); WORLD R Oceans Biomes SSERT (m_hM nu == ULL); defaul Menu::~CMe u will estroy THEO Cities Life Events Heat Rainfall Winds SeaFlow SeaHeat Magma lla Populate Build World (HELP) oid ColorMenu: AppendColo MenuItem(U NT NID OLORREF olor) A Study in Using Maxis' Software Toys as Tools by Martin E. Cirulis ERIFY (Appe Menu (MF E ABLED 1 F OWNERDRA , NID, LPCSTR) col r)); race of ice-bound, intelligent trichordates, but seeing them develop on the screen of SimEarth made me consider the possibilities; at least enough to hustle down to the library and see what there is to know of trichordates and their unsuccessful sojourn on the real Earth. With that little technical disclaimer out of the way, let's get on with the real nuts, bolts and chips of WorldBuilding...the Sim way. MIT define OLOR_BOX_W DTH 20 define OLOR_BOX_H IGHT 20 s a Science Fiction writer, I somelogic, these two products move from the times long for the Golden Age of realm of software toys to that of writing I SF, when you could get away with tools. writing a lurid tale or two about exploring the steaming jungles of Venus or encounRecently I had need of these two proters with the desert nomads of Mars. An grams in one of my current projects, an age when the average reading audience SF cpic I am co-writing with Lucius was a trifle less questioning, an age when Sheperd, author of Life During Wartime basic science wasn't so readily at hand, an and The Golden, and winner of a bucketage when they bought what you told ful of Hugos, Nebulas and World Fantasy them. Alas, things have changed in SF to Awards. Being the junior partner and the the point where the believability of the set one with three quarters of a B.Sc., I beis almost as important as the plot. Con came responsible for crafting the backtrary to mainstream belief, good SF is not drop. After climbing out from under a simply made up: it is painstakingly built, pile of geophysics and biology texts with from face to extrapolation to fiction. a wad of notes and ideas, I decided to run World Building, the act of creating sciensome sims my way and see if my ideas tifically valid alien settings, has grown would fly...or swim...or just sort of ooze. into a cottage industry itself, with seminars and how-to pamphlets available at Now before we go any farther, a small almost every SF convention one would distinction must be made: The programcare to attend. mers at Maxis would probably be one of the first, followed by thousands of science Unfortunately, all the advice and refermajors with their hard-won knowledge, ences in the world cannot tell a writer how to point out that the Sim toys are not his ideas will interact in ways he hasn't meant to be exact models of reality. Many thought of yer. World Building is an act shortcuts have been taken with the actual of modeling, but until now it has been a eco-processes they mimic. Having said static model—a beautiful construct when this, it's important to point out the resemdone well, but lacking any sense of the blance they have to reality rather than dynamic. You could sculpt a perfect figtheir limitations. To use SimEarth and ure, but you could never be sure how it SimLife as tools, one should realize they would sneeze, jump or cry. But now, this are to World Building as the / Ching or limitation has been inadvertently adTarot cards are to telling the future: they dressed by those clever kids at Maxis with can't actually give you tomorrow's headtwo of their always interesting Sim prodlines, but they set your mind on paths that ucts, SimEarth and SimLife. With the you might have missed on your own. For investment of a little imagination and instance, I may never have thought of a SimEarth: Order out of Chaos SimEarth is the least adaptable of the two programs because it is designed with most Earth parameters—size, gravity, chemical composition and such thingshardwired in. There are still ways around this. Besides, if endless alternate Earth's were good enough for Star Trek, they are good enough for us, at least for starters. This program won't be of much use to you if you are writing about exotic world forms like Rocheworlds or ultra-dense plancroids, but if you are of the old school and a basic spherical world of comparable size to Earth is good enough for you, then SimEarth is sufficient for some interesting experiments. Of course, in both programs you should operate in experimental mode, as there's no use limiting the power you might need to alter things to your liking. Also, you will probably want to turn the auto-disasoid ColorMenu: MeasureIte (LPMEASURE TEMSTRUCT PMIS) // all tems are f fixed ize Page 68 Computer Gaming World "


"CHIPS & BITS inc. FREE GAME WITH YOUR $75 ORDER* PO Box 234 Rochester, VT 05767 Fax 802—767-3382 Int'l 802-767-3033 Call 800—753—4263 Shipping to USPR,AK, HI APO & FPO $4 per order. Air Mail to Canada $6 per order. Handling $1 per shipment. 2 Business Day Air US $6 per order; PR, HI $12 1st Item + $2 ea, add'l; AK $19 1st Item + $2 ea. add'l. Handling $1 per shipment. Europe, S. America Air Mail $19 1st item + $6 ea. add'l. Asia, Australia, Africa, Air Mail $25 1st item + $6 ea. add'l. Handling $1 per shipment. IBM WARGAMES IBM STRATEGY IBM STRATEGY $36 * THE 7TH GUEST isa terrifyingly real virtual environment lurking on a CD ROM. Henry Staufwas a maker ofamazingpuzzles. His greatest creation is the strange mansion in which you now find your self. Features video clips with live actors, bizarre games & puzzles, 22 fully rendered rooms to explore and many ghastly discoveries. $56 $35 Gary Grigsby Pacific War Gettysburg: Turning Point $36 Grey Seas, Grey Skies $19 Halls of Montezuma $24 Harpoon $25 Harpoon Battle Set 2 or 3 $19 Harpoon Battle Set 4 $24 Harpoon Scenario Editor $27 Harpoon Challenger Pak SE $49 Harpoon Designer Series $17 Harpoon Designer 2 $25 High Command $45 Kampfgruppe $59 Line in the Sand $24 Long Lance $39 MacArthur's War $14 Main Battle Tank C Germany $36 Malta Storm $36 Man of War $36 Marianas Turkey Shoot $15 Midway $19 Northern Fleet $36 Operation Overlord $29 Pacific Storm Midway Cpgn $36 Pacific Storm Solomon Cpgn $36 Panzer Battles $24 Patriot $44 Patriot Battle Set 2 $24 Patriot Scenario Editor $27 Patton Strikes Back Prelude to Jutland $26 Red Lightning $12 Return to Falklands Rising Sun $26 Rommel Battles For N Africa $24 Rommel at El Alamein $36 Rommel at Gazala $36 Rorke's Drift $34 Second Front $21 Seventh Fleet $36 Stalingrad Campaign $36 Storm Across Europe $12 Third Reich To The Rhine $36 Typhoon of Steel UMS Original UMS 2 $19 UMS 2 Planet Editor $19 Under Fire V Victory: Gold, Juno, Sword $44 V Victory: Market Garden $44 V Victory: Utah Beach V Victory: Velikiye Luki Victory at Sea War in the Falklands Western Front White Death *532283 Robo Sport WIN $34 Romance 3 Kingdoms 1 or 2 $42 Rules of Engagement $19 Rules of Engagement 2 $38 Second Conflict WIN Seven Cities Gold 2 Shadow President ShadowGate WIN Sid Meir's Civil War Siege Siege Expansion Disk Sim Ant Simcity Simcity WIN Simearth Simearth WIN Simfarm Simlife Spaceward Ho! Special Forces Spoils of War Star Control Star Control 2 Star Legions $38 Starfleet 1 $17 Starfleet 2 $38 Strategic Forces $19 Sub Version Sub Wars Sword of Aragon $28 Task Force 1942 $39 Tegels's Mercenaries 2 $44 Theatre of War $17 Traders $19 Unnatural Selection $32 Utopia $29 Vikings Fields of Conquest $37 Visions of Aftermath $24 War in the Gulf War in the Warlords 2 Warlords When Two Worlds War $42 Worlds at War $19 $36 $45 $12 $28 $37 'CONQUERED KINGDOMS' allows you to invade castles and fly over mountains as you battle for control of the world. Features nine scenarios, a random map generator, human and fantasy combat troops, 21 levels of difficulty, modem play, several full campaign conquests, and complete game scoring history. $36 Castles Northern Campaigns $19 Civilization $32 Civilization Master Edition Clash of Steel $38 Cohort 2 $18 Command HQ $19 Conquered Kingdoms $36 Conqueror for Windows $39 Conquest of Japan $36 Crisis in the Kremlin $39 Dark Seed $28 Dino Wars $28 Diplomacy $12 Discovery Stp Columbus $34 Dragon Lord $12 Dune $19 Dune 2 $44 El Fish $41 Empire Deluxe Fields of Glory $36 Fighting for Rome $12 Final Conflict $17 Fireteam 2200 $24 Fireteam 2200 Constrctn Kit $25 Fort Apache $34 Gemlire $37 Genghis Khan $37 Global Conquest $34 Global Effect $17 Goblins 2 Princes Buffoon $24 Gold of the Americas $19 Imperium $26 Inindo $37 Koshan Conspiracy $32 Kye Deluxe WIN $26 L'Empereur Lemmings $32 Lemmings 2 $32 Lemmings Datadisk $19 Liberty or Death $37 Lost Admiral $19 Lost Admiral Enhanced $44 Lost Admiral Scenario Disk $23 Lost Patrol Maelstrom $38 Medieval Lords $14 Mega Lo Mania $31 Mercenaries Tegel's $38 Merchant Colony $17 Microcosm Millenium $15 Monarch $38 MoonBase $24 New World Order $38 Nobunaga's Ambition $25 Nobunaga's Ambition 2 $37 Nuclear War Objection $34 Objection Enhanced $49 Operation Combat Overlord $21 Pacific Theater Ops $42 Paladin 2 $34 Perfect General $29 Perfect General 2 $44 Perfect General Scen Disk $21 Perfect General Scen Dk 2 $23 Populous $17 Populous 2 Powermonger S34 Powermonger World War 1 Push Over $32 QOP Bundle $49 Railroad Tycoon $34 Railroad Tycoon 2 $52 Rampart $17 Reach for the Stars $24 Realms $17 Red Zone $32 Renegade Legion Interceptr $12 Riders of Rohan $19 $38 $42 $12 S6 $12 IBM SIMULATION OOP S12 $32 $46 Shot SOUD MAGINE A COMPLETE PC SOUND MIT $9 IBM STRATEGY $12 SOUND CARD $29 'SOUND MACHINE' brings together 2 of the most popular computer add-ons in one inexpensive package. Features a genuine sound blaster chipset, digitized voice input/output full duplex MIDI interface, built in 4W amp. volume control, a pair of 3\" magnetically sheilded speakers, and a Quickshot joystick. $99 688 Attack Sub $19 ATP Flight Simulator $29 A.T.A.C $34 A10 Tank Killer 1.5 Enh 534 AH-64 Helicopter Aces of the Pacific $42 Aces Pacific Mission Disk 1 $27 Aces Over Europe $42 Aces Europe Mission Disk 1 $27 Aces Europe Mission Disk 2 $27 Air Duel $38 Air Warrior SVGA $35 Allied Forces $12 Armour Geddon Armoured Fist $38 B17 Flying Fortress $39 Battle Command $12 Birds of Prey Blue Angels $12 Campaign: Strategic Flight S $37 Car and Driver $38 Cardinal of the Kremlin Carrier Command Combat Classics Conqueror Multi Tank Crash Course Das Boot Submarine Design Your Own Railroad $29 Dynamix Bundle 1 Elite Plus $19 Eye of the Storm Fit Sim $29 F117A Stealth Fighter F15 Strike Eagle 3 $42 F15 Strike Eagle 3 Aces Pak $49 JUL CGW 4 $32 $38 SPLM A Train $34 A Train Construction Sel $23 Air Force Commander $29 Airbucks $36 Ancient Art of War Sky $34 Armada 2525 $29 Ashes of Empire $48 Balance of Power 1990 $35 Bandit Kings Ancient China $32 Battle Isle $32 Battle Isle Scenario Disk $22 Battles of Destiny $36 Big Business $12 Breach 2 $19 Breach 2 Scenario Disk $15 Buzz Aldrin Race into Space $42 Caesar $36 Carrier Command Castles $18 Castles 2 MITLE $21 $29 $9 $42 Visa & MC Accepted. CODs $6. Checks Held 4 Wecks. Money Orders Treated as Cash. Most Items Shipped Same Day. Shipping times not guaranteed. Check compatibility before you buy. Detectives replaced with same product. Offer, price & availability subject to change. All Sales Final. \"SEE LAST PAGE FOR DETAILS Circle Reader Service #41 $36 "


"BRIFY Hanne BRIFY elanu Un Sirula s elor reBOLEROOM 10. BAGONG TERESEK SolorMenu: ColorMen M Detach(); SSERT (m_hM au == JIL); defaul lenu::-CME will estroy Did ColorMenu: AppendColo enuItem(U NT NID LORREF lor) BRIFY (Appe Menu (MF_E ABLED I R_OWNERDRA nID LPCSTR) col 1)) CONEC Lersie Pola MVKOD ter modes off unless you are really interprint out a map or two that strikes your ested to see how your ideas react under fancy and take some notes on rainfall, stress. As a writer, I am mostly interested temperature, and altitude of various biin disasters of a more choreographed omes and nearby life form classes that you MCIMOS kind. think might be handy for your story. BJJCICOCC SimEarth is used to investigate the imWith some of these details recorded, you plications of the initial conditions that should have some idea of the specific you have thought up. Use the Geosphere plants and animals that will inhabit your and Atmosphere Model Control panels to world. Do some more research, whip up create the basic pattern of your alien a few funky species, and prepare for your world and try to think of everything first. next Sim project. A world of vicious storms is going to have pretty serious cloud-cover, so you should SimLife: The main thing here is to try and keep the probably crank up the Cloud Albedo and All the Myriad Ways experiment as small as possible and still Rainfall factors, while a little research will get it to do what you need, unless you tell you that you should probably also Once you have detailed a few original have a 486/zillion and memory chips to increase the planet's Axial Tilt to power and interesting life forms, you should see burn. Since SimLife isn't a Windows apthose storm patterns. how they might interact, and SimLife is plication yet, a huge (and therefore pretty ideal for this. In fact, in some ways it's slow) experiment can keep you off the You should probably try not to fool better at simulating alien environments keyboard a long time and put your writwith the biosphere settings until you have than its predecessor. Clever use of the ing way behind schedule. Of course, your some sort of clear evolutionary philosoPhysics menu can simulate conditions on computer doesn't have to sleep when you phy, as these changes are the most gratuia variety of alien worlds and the way they do... affect life. If your life forms live around you don't have any pet theories to try, just bubbling volcanoes, up the cost of walkAfter you have the lab set up, you must let things go with the factory settings and ing. Low G world or thick atmosphere? populate it, and it is here that the program assume that your world has the same base (The latter possibly indicated by your requires as much from you as you do from rules of life that Earth does, which, deSimFarth dara) Lower the cost of Alving it. Before designing anything, you must pending on which professors you talk to, High winds and storms? Better up the Soil have a few things straight in your head, may pretty much be the case in the real and know what has to be altered in the and Climate Change ratio. universe. Later on, if your initial experiment to reflect these things. design seems to be very partial to How big, roughly, is each square FO L ATL Simulatium Spral Hulus Disasters life you may want to up the Reof terrain? (reflected in movement LISBOKO WITTE production Rate or fiddle with costs) Does each icon represent a the Thermal Tolerance if you BRE single specimen or a group? (Refind yourself with a desert world. production method in animals and A world orbiting a hot, young Food Valuc in plants) Are the days star can be reflected with a high long or short? (Day Length ticks). Mutation Rate, a factor to be remembered when creating lab DO DO DO Again, imagination can compensites in SimLife as well. sate for seeming limitations in the Some of the changes you make program. If you were working on can be subtle, others extreme, an ecosystem where all life was in but try to have a rationale for all constant flight, a situation that is of them and above all else, stick seemingly not addressed very well to them. Remember, each run by the simulation, making flying you make is an experiment; if 103 easy won't cover it; you'd have to you end up with a blazing, Vefind a way to reflect the truc lack nus-like inferno, or a globe of of solidity of your world. A way undifferentiated goo where around this is to rig up a comamoebas are king, maybe you should Now, pick a lab site using either your pletely aquatic environment, making all rethink your initial ideas or perhaps reSimEarth notes or just a solid idea in your plants of the floating variety and all anisearch a little more deeply. Altering the head. Keep in mind what kind of environmals the swimming kind. True, the exsettings halfway through, like turning off ment you are going for (island, mountain, periment won't reflect all the genetic an inconvenient Greenhouse Effect, is not plains, tropical, temperate, desert) and permutations of the gaseous environwise unless you have some sort of alien don't forget to set Climate Lab controlsment, but the effect is pretty close, and as intervention plot in mind. This goes for to reflect the latitude of your lab site and long as you know they are all actually popping in biomes or life-form classes as the Axial Tilt of the world. flying, the data and any conclusions you well; just stick to what the world you've draw from it should still be valid. designed will give you. Maybe it won't be Creating the terrain is a relatively exactly what you wanted, but it might be straightforward process. If you don't have With these factors settled you can get just the inspiration you were looking for specific features in mind, just set the down to the serious work: specific designs And pay attention to the composition and Mountain/Lake Ratios in the Worldof life forms. This task can be divided into density of your model atmosphere, these Building Menu to what seems appropritwo groups of generalities, Plants and are the little details that can make a world ate and let the computer whip it up for Animals. seem like a living thing in a story instead you. If you have a specific map in mind, use SimLife's very nice map editor to build Plants are the easiest to work with beit square by square. I was able to generate cause plant life is more easily categorized, Once you've run a few simulations, some very accurate and detailed maps. and the program gives you less options in Faval Orcet eoved to total IN BrontOJAUT FUnang Divenly Gare front 1 220 II/II/IMIT Aler Wallylleshing Short petion on, low tiden define OLOR_BOX_W DTH define OLOR_BOX_H IGHT 20 20 oid ColorMenu: MeasureIte (LPMEASURE TEMSTRUOTI PMIS) // all tems are f fixed ze Page 70 Computer Gaming World "


"CHIPS & BITS inc. FREE GAME WITH YOUR $75 ORDER PO Box 234 Rochester, VT 05767 Fax 802—767-3382 Int'l 802—767—3033 Call 800—753—4263 Shipping to US PRAK, HI APO & FPO $4 per order. Alr Mall to Canada $6 por order. Handling $1 por shipment. 2 Business Day Alr US $6 per order; PR, HI $12 1st Item + $2 ea. add\"; AK 519 1st Item + $2 ea. add'l. Handling $1 per shipment. Europe, S. America Alr Mail $19 1st Item + $6 ea. add'l. Asia, Australia, Africa, Air Mall $25 1st Itam + $6 ea, add'l. Handling S1 per shipment. IBM TRADITIONAL IBM BUDGET MAC GAMES $21 $19 $34 $31 $29 $29 $15 $21 $24 $32 $29 Hoyle's Book Games V1 Hoyle's Book Games V2 Hoyle's Book Games V3 Hoyle's Book Games V4 Jeopardy 25th Aniversary Jeopardy, Super Talking Jigsaw Pinups Laffer Utilities WIN Lexicross Lotto Gold Monopoly Deluxe Omar Sharif on Bridge Penthouse Jigsaw XXX Pictionary Planet of Lust Prime Time Hits Prime Time Hits 2 'AIR DUEL' lets you experience air-to-air combat across the decades with everything from a sopwith camel to a MIG 23. Features combat in 6 historic periods, ability to match aircraft from different time periods, a selection of 12 aircraft each with its own unique flight characteristics and weapons, & modem play. $38 $38 Battle Chess $29 Dragon's Lair COLOR Hardball 2 Harpoon Battle Set 4 Ishido $34 Might & Magic 1 & 2 Monopoly Out of This World COLOR $36 PGA Tour Golf $38 Pools of Darkness Puzzle Master Railroad Tycoon Reach for the Stars Red Baron COLOR Space Ace 2 Spirit of Excalibur COLOR Starflight 2 $38 Super Tetris $32 Test Drive 2 $27 Trump Castle 2 $34 Vette $33 Where World is Carmen SD $27 Yeager's AFT $32 80 YEARS OF DOGFIGHTING         3884 $9 MICROPROSE Risk $7 S9 \"   *FREE GAME OFFER $5 GENERAL ST BNTTLES Spend the specified amount on any in stock software and choose a free game from the corresponding list below. Offer subject to change or cancellation without notice. Valid only while supplies last. $9 GREATEST CENTURY 3333333 Sargon 5 Scrabble Deluxe Shanghali 2 Sharkey's 3D Pool Shogi Master Sierra Family Fun Pak $29 Solitaire Royale $19 Solitaire WIN $32 Solitaires Journey $34 Sorry $12 Stratego $31 Strip Poker 3 Strip Poker 3 DD1-6 Each Super Jeopardy Super Tetris Swap Terminator Chess Tetris Classic Trump Castle 3 Vegas Entrtnmnt Pak WIN $20 Vegas Games Pak WIN $19 Video Poker AlaCarte $34 Video Poker Villa Crespo $12 Video Poker WIN $19 Video Poker by Masque $19 Virtual Reality Studio 2 $64 Wayne's World $26 Wheel of Fortune 3 Wheel of Fortune Gold $15 Word Tris $27 World Champion Backgmmn $24 World Champion Cribbage $24 $9 SPEND $75 'GREAT BATTLES OF THE 20TH CENTURY'brings 20 new scenarios for the Perfect General game. Includes 1967 & 1973 Suez conflicts, Kursk, The Moscow Push, Stalingrad, Malta, Long Binh Inferno, Crete, Falklands, Inchon, Operation Sea Lion, Pusan Per, Saigon, Bataan, Fulda, Dnepr Br. Guderian Forward, & more. $23 $9 Conqueror Multi Tank $4 Covert Action $12 Crash Course $6 Cybergenic Ranger $6 Dark Half $10 Das Boot Submarine $9 Delender of the Crown $12 Diplomacy $12 Don't Go Alone $6 Double Dragon 3 $8 Dr Doom's Revenge $9 Dr Thorp's mini Blackjack $10 Dragon Force $12 Dragon Lord $12 Dragon Wars $12 Dragons of Flame Earthrise $9 F15 Strike Eagle 1 Face Off $9 Fighting for Rome $12 Free DC $9 Future Wars $9 Gama Force $6 Gauntlet 2 Gremlins 2 $6 Gunship $12 Harmony Hole In One Mini Golf Hole In One Mini Golf Delux $9 Jeopardy $9 Jeopardy 2 Joan of Arc $12 John Elway Quarterback $6 L.A. Law Land Sea Air Trilogy $12 Lane Mastadon $6 Lightspeed $9 MUDS MacArthur's War Magic Johnson Fast Break MegaFortress $12 Mines Of Titan $9 Ms Pacman $6 Nuclear War Obliterator $6 Operation Combat $12 Pac Man Panzer Battles $12 Pictionary $12 Pirates $6 Planet of Lust $12 Punisher Renegade Legion Interceptor $12 SDI $7 Sentinel Worlds 1 $9 Sex Vixens from Space $12 Shadow Sorcerer $9 Space 1889 $12 Spirit of Excalibur $9 Storm Across Europe $12 Test Drive 2 Muscle Cars Tie Break Tennis $12 Time Quest $12 Trump Castle 2 Turn-n-Burn $10 Typhoon of Steel Under Fire $12 Uninvited Video Poker Villa Crespo $12 Video Poker WIN $12 Video Poker by Masque $12 Viking Child $9 War in Middle Earth $12 War of the Lance $9 Warlords $12 Weird Dreams Wheel of Fortune Wheel of Fortune 2 Wheel of Fortune 3 X-Men Xenocide 4th & Inches 5.25 Airborne Ranger 5.25 Artura Backgammon by George Big Business 5.25 Bravo Romeo Delta Gunship Obliterator Pirates SC Out The Tinies Xenocide $9 SPEND $100 $9 IBM BUDGET Second Conflict The Galactic Conflict Continues... $5 $9 SECOND CONFLICT' is a game of interstellar strategy & conquest for windows. Control all aspects of the economy, military, and civilian population. Allocate resources to produce battleships, planetary defenses, stealth ships, transports and missiles. Features multiple human & computer players, & a scenario editor. $34 Blackjack for Windows Covert Action Dark Hall Defender of the Crown Dragon Force 5.25 Grandmaster Chess Hole in 1 Mini Golf Dix Mac Arthur's War Operation Combat Panzer Battles 5.25 Patton Strikes Back Railroad Tycoon Sentinel Worlds Video Poker for Windows War of the Lance 5.25 2400 AD 3D Pinball 3 in 1 Players's Pack 4th & Inches Acquire Airborne Ranger Allied Forces $12 Amazing Spiderman Artura Backgammn By George WIN $9 Banzai $12 Baseball Facts $10 Battle Command $12 Big Business Blackjack Blackjack WINDOWS $12 Blue Angels $12 Blue Max Aces Great War Buck Rogers Countdown Captain Blood Cardinal of the Kremlin $9 Carrier Command $9 Chess Net WINDOWS $9 Chess X Colossus $9 Clue $12 Combination Lock $10 Conflict $8 $12 $9 $6 $9 SPEND $200 $9 $12 $6 Allied Forces Bridge 7.0 Cardinal of the Kremlin Command HQ Dune F15 Strike Eagle 2 Lost Admiral Red Storm Rising Warlords 5.25 JUL CGW 6 Visa & MC Accepted. CODS $6. Checks Held 4 Weeks. Money Orders Treated as Cash. Most Items Shipped Same Day. Shipping times not guaranteed. Check compatibility before you buy. Defectives replaced with same product. Offer, price & availability subject to change. All Sales Final. Circle Reader Service #41 "


"BRIFY Lamelesaan BRIFY Manus Thank You ColorMenu: ColorMen USE 9th N, 74.18 Brn 0; 30.4 eles -any HO> .761/ Detach(); CH,.024% . Ure Aims 0.202 SSERT (m_hM au == JLL); defaul Menu::--CME 1 will estroy Suan Rain: 16.0 /'y Halilula Did ColorMenu: AppendColo TenuItem(U NT NID LORREF lor) ERIFY (Appe Menu (MF_E ABLED 1 _OWNERDRA NID LPCSTR) col c)); their characteristics. Say I File Hindus Muuels Graplis quis Specal Dalasound fiddle with the Hell-Hound have a lovely, detailed sketch design a bir or even better AT ALERT: Sea Leve of a purple and orange spikeOSHDI..Corposition graph fiddle with the Squirrels and, tree that tinkles in the wind Voila! The birth of Gormaand glows at night. If it is also nian Vapor-Bunnies! deciduous, needs a lot of Die CD, .518% Even more interesting and moisture, grows in a temperhelpful is when the simulaate climate, and has dropping tion fiddles with your deseeds, I might as well use a signs all by itself using Poplar model from SimLife's XE mutation and natural seleclibrary. Here the program tion to fir your ideas into a isn't as useful in helping you coherent pattern. This can make up new things as it is in spur whole new bursts of helping you figure out where creativity in directions you your new things will grow on hadn't even considered when your alien world. I have inopaura Hu Suplents Thriving you created the original life found it very useful to do a forms. The keys to this kind simple botanical study by Heat: 2400 UPIR Nind XX320 of study are the Speciation populating a lab site with a O NURSA A TETtude: 1800 MADRAS. CUM command to help you caterandom spread of Earth plant gorize any useful adaptations species from the library and watching to teric those theories are, they can be genyou hadn't thought of, and the Variables see what takes hold. If I do this and notice eralized in a very realistic way. option from the Populare menu, to help that the Poplar plants are doing very well, The inhabitants of Alpha Centauri C you keep track of the behavior and success I should probably make a note regarding 8 may be incomprehensible glowing of your changing life forms. Sometimes a the abundance of purple and orange spike spheres, but if those spheres drift around day in the life of a Hell-Hound can be trees around my mid-latitude villages. all day evaporating little colored rocks off very revealing. Since there are more genetic charac mountain tops, then they are basically teristics and considerations for animal deHerbivores. If they travel with other Sim-ing it all up. sign in SimLife, there is both more leeway glowing spheres, then they are basically and more work in the testing of things herd animals. If they drop off hundreds of Neither SimEarth nor SimLife are truly alien. The \"What comes out on top\" little shiny specks that eventually grow meant to be shortcuts to an advanced test that I describe above for plants works into glowing spheres, then they are basidegree in Biogenetics or Geophysics, and using the animals in the Earth library as cally asexual life forms that have many nothing can replace a lot of reading and well, but the answers you get from this young. And so on. This is a very imporasking the right questions of people who procedure are much more general. If you tant WorldBuilding technique regardless have spent the time getting the approprihave a specific site in mind but are not of whether you are Sim-ing or not, but ate education. However, they can be very sure how to populate it, then a general rest with SimLife at your disposal, it is indisuseful idea generators for most writers pensable. If you are having trouble makand can serve to help new SF writers avoid ing these generalizations with your some of the more common mistakes that creations, then perhaps more research or can mar an otherwise well written story. fleshing out is in order. Those ravenous monsters on the plain Once you have these generalizations may be very exciting, but you're going to down, it's a relatively simple matter to lose some of your audience if those same plains aren't filled with monster-food. plug them into SimLife's genetic codes The kind of detail that these two proand give them electronic life in the fields of your computer's memory. Even the grams can help you provide is the stuff documentation for SimLife agrees that the that turns an interesting backdrop into a living, breathing world that readers won't De creation of a stable food web is fairly difficult, so don't be too depressed if the want to leave and will be eager to return to. first few experiments are failures. Once will show if it can support a large populayou get the hang of things, you can start Lucius Sheperd and I are very pleased tion of grazers or whether carnivores putting more consideration into your rewith the world we have created for our should be large or small. But be warned, sults. Just keep in mind what you are epic, and some of the simulations I ran this kind of experiment is time consumtesting. were an important part of that creative ing and doesn't always give accurate reprocess. The hours spent pushing these sults as the initial burst of random animals If you are simply interested in whether programs to their limits were rewarded can wreak havoc with your plant ecosysyour Gormanian Hell-Hounds can surwith a horde of new ideas and directions. tem before any kind of stable animal vive on a diet of cute furry things, don't I can only hope you agree when the book population occurs. knock yourself out on creating a bizarre and complex experiment. Put your effort is published in late '94 or early '95. The more difficult but far more rewardin creating the Hell-Hound model and Any help a writer can find to free up his ing method is to try to fit the beasties of just populate your lab site with good old or her creative resources is a good thing, your imagination into the genetic frameEarth squirrels for edibles. A few run A pencil may not create the building, but work SimLife provides. The key here is to throughs and close examination of the it certainly makes the job easier for the work with your general categories. There History charts will give you a good idea of architect. In SimEarth and SimLife, the are as many theories of what alien life may the ratio of cute furry things to Hell\"toymakers\" at Maxis have gone a step be like as there are StarFleet uniforms at Hounds that would work on your world. beyond giving us software toys. They have SF conventions, but no matter how esoIf everything just keeps dying off, then given some of us software tools. CGW ///////// ////////// define OLOR BOX W OTH Sefine OLOR_BOX_H IGHT 20 sid ColorMenu: TeasureIte (LPMEASURE TEMSTRUCT MIS) 7 all' cems are fixed Page 72 Computer Gaming World "


"CHIPS & BITS inc. FREE GAME WITH YOUR $75 ORDER* PO Box 234 Rochester, VT 05767 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'l 802-767-3033 Call 800-753-4263 Shipping to US PRAK, HI APO & FPO $4 per order. Air Mail to Canada $6 per order. Handling $1 per shipment. 2 Business Day Air US $6 per order; PR, HI $12 1st Item + $2 ea. addi; AK $19 1st item + $2 ea. add'l. Handling $1 per shipment. Europe, S. America Air Mail $19 1st item + $6 ea. add'l. Asia, Australia, Africa, Air Mail $25 1st Item S6 ea. add'l. Handling $1 per shipment. IBM SIMULATION IBM SIMULATION IBM SPORTS $60 $31 Tracon 2 $29 Ultrabots Sanction Earth $39 Voice Commander F117A $18 Voice Commander F15SE3 $18 Wing Commander $19 Wing Commander 1 Deluxe $48 Wing Commander 2 $48 WC2 Operation 1 or 2 $22 WC 2 Speech Mod $13 WC Secret Mission 1 or 2 $20 Wolfpack $15 World Circut Champnshp Ed $45 X-Wing $39 X-Wing Mission Disk 1 $24 Yeager's Air Combat $21 $45 'COMANCHE MAX MUM MAXIMUM OVERKILL MISOVERKILL SION DISK 1' pushes the envelope with 30 new action packed missions in ultra realistic new terrain from arctic NISIR DIE night to an arid desertgorge. Features 3 new campaigns, enhanced AI, & new enemies (SCUD launchers, HIND 24 gunships, & BRDM-3 gun jeeps). $28 S32 $37 NFL Challenge NFL Challenge Team Disks $22 NFL Challenge Premium Ed $59 NFL Football NFL Pro League Football 92 $24 NFL Video Football $39 PGA Tour Golf $32 PGA Tour Golf Ltd Ed Playmaker Football $26 Pro League Baseball $18 Pro Tennis Tour 2 ProFootball Analyst 92 Edt $19 Road to the Final Four Summer Challenge $34 TKO The Games Winter Challnge $34 Tom Landry Football $24 Tony La Russa Baseball 2 $36 Tony La Russa2 Stadium Dk $18 Tony La Russa 2 92 Team $12 Tony La Russa Baseb2 FM $18 Wayne Gretzky Hockey 3 $39 Wayne Gretzky League $26 Weaver 2.0 commemorative $41 Weaver Baseball 2.0 S14 Wilson Pro Staff Golf $23 World Circuit World Class Soccer $6 POTRETTA IBM SPORTS MA $12 $32 $28 $34 IBM TRADITIONAL $28 $12 In 'BATTLES OF DESTINY' you must seek out and destroy up to 3 opponents in order to conquer the world. Features modem play, air, ground and naval combat, challenging artificial intelligence, 22 different units to construct, more than 20 worlds to conquer, campaign style play, and a complete player history. $36 $36 F19 Stealth Fighter $24 F40 Pursuit Simulator $31 Falcon 3.0 $48 Falcon 3 Scen 2 Mig 29 $25 Falcon 3 Scen1 Fighting Tgr $24 Flight Planner $24 Flight Simulator 4.0 $42 Flight of the Intruder $15 Fly the Grand Canyon $45 Game Pak 1 $36 Great Naval Battles $44 Great Naval Batt Scen Build $28 Great Nav Bat America in All $21 Great Nav Bat Supr Ships Atl $19 Gunship $12 Gunship 2000 $37 Gunship 2000 Scenario Disk $24 Heroes of the 357th $15 HoverForce $31 Iron Helix $52 Jet Fighter 2.0 $39 Jet Fighter 2 Mission Disk $19 Jump Jet $39 Jump Jet Aces Pack $50 Knights of the Sky $29 LHX Attack Chopper $17 Land Sea Air Trilogy Land Sea Air 2 $29 Life and Death $19 Life and Death 2 $24 Lightspeed $9 Mantis Experimental Fighter 539 Mantis Exp Speech Pak $19 Maximum Overkill $44 Maximum Overkill Missn Dk1 $28 Maximum Overkill Missn Dk2 $28 MegaFortress $12 Megafortress Mega-Pak $38 Megafortress Miss Dk 1 or 2 $26 Orbits $37 Pacific Islands 2 $30 Power Boat Simulator $39 Power Politics WIN Privateer $52 Rapcon $29 Reach for the Skies Red Baron $36 Red Baron Missn Dk Builder $24 Red Storm Rising $12 Road & Track Grand Prix Un $37 Scenery Collection Set A $37 Scenery Collection Set B $34 Scenery Colltn California $37 Scenery Colltn Great Britain $34 Seal Team $42 Search for the Titanic $27 Secret Weap Luftwaffe Secret Weapons Exp 1-4 Ea $21 Shuttle $26 Silent Service 2 Sky Chase $25 Strike Aces Strike Commander $48 Strike Commndr Speech Pak $24 Stunt Driver Stunt Island Stunts Syndicate Tank Task Force 1942 Task Force Admirals Pack $52 Team Yankee $29 Team Yankee 2 $27 Test Drive 3 $29 Test Drive 3: Road & Car $15 Their FH Battlehwks Bundle $44 Thunderhawk $21 Thunderstrike $27 Tie Fighter $46 Top Gun Danger Zone $20 Tornado $34 $29 $31 $32 4D Boxing $17 4th & Inches $4 ABC Monday Night FB $37 ABC Wide World Boxing $32 APBA Base Team Disks $21 APBA Baseball $24 APBA Basketball $34 APBA Bowling $14 APBA College Basketball $32 APBA Football ATP Tennis $34 Action Sports Soccer $25 All American College Ftbll $36 American Gladiators S21 Basketball Challenge Bo Jackson Baseball $32 Cycles Grand Prix $28 David Robinson NBA Action $44 Days of Thunder $24 Front Page Football Greens $34 Hardball 3 $34 Hardball 3 Players Disk $17 Hardball 3 Stadium Disk $19 Hole In One Mini Golf $12 Hole In One Mini Golf Crs Dk $6 Hole In One Mini Golf Dix $12 Indianapolis 500 $17 Jack Nicklaus Unlimited Golf $27 Jack Nicklaus Clip Art $12 Jack Nicklaus CD 1-5 Each $15 Jack Nicklaus Greatest 18 $27 Jack Nicklaus Signature Ed $42 Jack Nicklaus SE Course 1 $14 Jack Nicklaus SE Clip Art $24 Joe Montana Football $31 John Elway Quarterback $6 Lance Haffner Baseball $36 Lance Haffner Boxing $36 Lance Hallner College BBall $36 Lance Haffner Football Lance Halner Hockey $36 LH Pro Basketball $36 Lance Haffner Team Disks $16 Lance Haffner Utilities $16 Links $29 Links Courses 1-7 Each $17 Links Pro 386 Golf $39 Links Pro Course 1-3 $20 Madden Football $17 Madden Football 2 $32 Mario Andretti Racing $17 Michael Jordan Flight Sim S38 ML Baseball Manager's Ch $19 ML Football 2 $39 ML Personal Pro Golf $28 ML Wrestling 1990 $28 Micro League Football Dlx $39 Microleag Baseball 4 USAT $31 Microleague Basketball $28 Microsoft Golf for Windows $39 Mike Ditka Power Football $32 CARRIERS AT WAR $34 3D Pinball $10 3 in 1 Players Pack $12 3D Pool Acquire $9 Amarillo Slim's Poker $12 Amarillo Slims 7 Card Stud $10 Armada Villa Crespo CB S 10 Backgammn By George WIN $9 Battle Chess 4000 SVGA $36 Battle Chess EGAVGA $19 Battle Chess WIN Blackjack Bridge 7 Bridgemaster Caesars Palace Casino Craps Casino Game Pak WIN Casino Master WIN $25 Casinos of the World $29 Centerfold Squares $21 Checkmate Chess Net WIN Chess X Colossus ChessManiac 5 Billions & 1 $48 Chessmaster 3000 $29 Classic 5 Clue $12 Clue Master Detective $15 Cribage Gin King Dealer's Choice Dr Floyds Desktop Toys $26 Dr Thorp's Blackjack $32 Edward O'Thorpe Black Jack $9 Electric Jigsaw $12 FS-Pro Faces Tetris 3 $15 Femme Fatale $26 Femme Fatale DD 1-3 Each $18 Game-Maker $68 Games Master WIN $19 Go Master Ver 5 $39 Go Master Junior Ver 5 $19 Go Master Dix Ver 5 $89 Grand Slam Bridge $11 Grand Slam Bridge 2 $32 Grandmaster Chess $32 Home Alone 2 $26 Hong Kong Mah Jong Pro $32 House of Cards $12 JULGGW 5 $32 $19 $19 $19 'THE CARRIERS AT WAR CONSTRUCTION KIT provides an infinitely flexible tool for creating a particular battle or an original scenario. Build ships and planes, organize squadrons, draft maps, position air bases and adjust the artificial intelligence used by the computer. 3 new scenariosincluded: Wake Island, Guadalcanal, & Tarawa. $37 $29       $21 CONSTRUCTION KIT Visa & MC Accepted. CODs $6. Checks Held 4 Weeks. Money Orders Treated as Cash. Most Items Shipped Same Day. Shipping times not guaranteed. Check compatibility before you buy. Delectives replaced with same product. Offer, price & availability subject to change. All Sales Final. \"SEE LAST PAGE FOR DETAILS Circle Reader Service #41 $52 "


"ERIFY (Crea eMenu()); THE WAITE GROUP ColorMenu: ColorMen **Game Design Flights of Fantasy: Programming a Flight Sim in C++ FLIGHTS OF FANTASY PROGRAMMING 3-D VIDEO GAMES INC Detach(); OUT SSERT (m_hM ULL); /defaul Menu::-CMe u will estroy by Mike «Moondawg\" Weksler oia ColorMenu: AppendColo MenuItem (U NT DID OLORREF olor) ERIFY (Appe dMenu (MF_E ABLED FOWNERDRA nID LPCSTR) col T)); few years back, I saw a small flight simulation program listing in a computer graphics book. It was a little C T program that \"flew\" a gunsight over a grid (superimposed over green land with a blue sky). With visions of F-16s dancing in my head, I set out to program this sim. Eighteen months, several over-my-head computer books, two C compilers, one C++ compiler, and a third party graphics library later, I completed what more or less can be described as a flying lawnmower simulation with a nice \"cockpit\" and a graphical user interface. It was educational and fun, but it was a much more arduous project than I ever expected. What I really needed was a good reference book that was written at the intermediate programming level with easy-to-understand programming examples and ready-to-use program routines. My \"Lawnmower Commander\" was a patchwork of code from different books and programming libraries, and I remember thinking that there had to be an casier way. In fact, hacking into the wee hours, I would imagine an announcer coming over my stereo: «Does this happen to you? Can't get that poly-fill function to draw your sky? Is your gunsight permanently drawn onto the ground at some indisCOM criminate location that speeds by in a mocking manner? Can't get a clean compile to save your life? What you need is a book for the intermediate programmer that specifically addresses flight simulation topics!\" Flights of Fantasy: Programming 3-D Video Games in C++ is the very book my imaginary salesman would have pitched to me. \"You'll find all the essentials to create a complete working flight simulator as good as Red Baron or Falcon 3,\"touts the press release. Of course, this is ridiculous marketing amplification. Rather, this book is a great foundation for learning the fundamentals of C++ programming, bit-mapped graphics, 3D polygon filled graphics, and flight simulation. After reading a few of the chapters in Christopher Lampton's easy-to-read style, I soon realized that I could have written my \"lawnmower\" simulation in an evening with this one book, my Borland C++ compiler, and my hacker's enthusiasm. Of course, it would take staying up all nighr, but what programmer hasn't arrived at a clean compile with a Carl's Jr. breakfast burrito at dawn. 140 IIIIIIIIII to speed up one's calculations. Additional chapters cover the necessary math and viewpoint translation calculations necessary to get a flight simulation off the ground. The book also addresses topics all the way from the use of C++ \"classes\" and \"objects\" to optimizing one's source code with Borland's Turbo Profilera tool bundled with the Borland C++ compiler which allows one to optimize code. Additionally, the PCX viewing code in the bit-mapped graphics chapter will save the novice reader from getting in too deep with a third party graphics library. Unfortunately, there are some dry spots in this hacker's oasis. For example, the chapter covering fractal landscapes only provides a function for drawing a random jagged line across the screen, with a reference pointing the reader to more in-depth books on fractal 3D terrain generation. In other words, anyone looking in this chapter to try to figure out how to program the terrain to Comanche: Maximum Overkill or Strike Commander will be sorely disappointed. Also, the sound chapter, while providing the basics of interfacing with the SoundBlaster, could have provided more examples. Fortunately, the author provides a useful chapter on basic flight dynamics and then covers the featured \"FoF' flight simulation in depth. While not boasting gouraud shading, dithered horizons, texture mapping, nor any weapons or other aircraft to fly with/against, this bi-plane simulation is the perfect specimen with which to dissect and poke around in its guts. Especially interesting was finally learning how left, right, and rear views were programmed as well as 3D poly-filled mountains and other ground objects. Clean Compile Flights of Fantasy: Programming 3-D Video Games in C++ is available from the Waite Group Press for $34.95. While not as complete as touted, this 556 page book serves as an outstanding reference to the novice and intermediate game programmer. The wealth of provided code (both in the book and on the provided disk), flight simulation program, and useful bibliography give the reader the foundation for further studies in this mist shrouded area. Topics of discussion pertaining to this book and code can be found in the Game Design section of the CompuServe Gamer's Forum (GO Gamers), courtesy of the \"Fly by Night Group.\" One can find the author, Christopher Lampton, on CompuServe at (76711,311]. Hopefully, Mr. Lampton will follow up this work with an in-depth look on such topics as real time texture-mapping, 3D fracral terrain, and dithered horizons, bringing these esoteric topics into the realm of the intermediate game hacker. Cow define OLOR_BOX_W DTH 20 define OLOR_BOX_H IGHT 20 oid ColorMenu: MeasureIte (LPMEASURE TEMSTRUCT PMIS) Enclosed, please find ... Each chapter has ample C++ examples illustrated with cuttingedge rendered graphic illustrations. The book takes the reader from a graphics primer, through the fundamentals of wire-frame and poly-fill animation, right up to polygon clipping, hidden surface removal, and the use of look-up tables and integer math // all tems are f fixed size Page 74 Computer Gaming World "


"Distributed By Bally INTRODUCING THE EXPERIENCE OF REAL PINBALL Broderbund Cichlas a Deh TM 2,695.500 W 1030.500 AMTEX, the maker of the award-winning and critically acclaimed Tristan , is proud to announce the release of Eight Ball Deluxe, the world's most popular traditional pinball game. It's the first of many pinball favorites to be released in the \"AMTEX Pinball Classics\" series. 423.000 TEA PLAY strategic shot making a must for pinball aficionados! Imagine all this explosive action, without waiting for a machine or the need for a 64 pocket full of quarters. And you can play with up to four players. So relive the exciting thrills of the arcade today with friends. Over and over again! Watch for more of the classic games you grew up with... \"you big sausage!\" DELUXE 64 PC & MAC VERSIONS AVAILABLE Eight Ball Deluxe is all the fun and excitement of the original game, captured in an awesome simulation. Amazing high resolution graphics, authentic speech, digital sound effects, plus all the mechanics of real pinball! After chalking up, you'll bank shots, rack up bonus points, then shoot for the exciting and elusive Deluxe. All with three, fast moving flippers that allow for ball trapping and For product information, send your name and address to: AMTEX Software Corporation, P.O. Box 572, Belleville, Ontario K8N 5B2 or call 1-613-967-7900 Fax: 1-613-967-7902. Suggested retail price $59.95 AMTEX Pinball All trademarks are the property of their respective companios. Copyright  1992 AMTEX Soltware Corporation.  1981 EIGHT BALL DELUXE is a trademark of Midway Manufacturing Company (makers of BALLY pinball games). Used under license. Midway Manufacturing Company is a subsidiary of WMS INDUSTRIES, INC. All rights reserved. Circle Reader Service #32 "


"DBUIn GD-ROM HEUD KEEPING SPACE TIMELINE Journey Back to the Future in Presto Studios The Journeyman Project by Tony Reveaux The introduction to the visually stunning Journeyman Project leads you through a Ismoke-filled post-atomic apocalypse where rival nations unite in a peaceful utopian sphere. The convoluted plot begins in 2318 on the skyborne city of Caldoria, where the world nervously awaits the return of the Cyrollans. These squeaky-voiced aliens have ideas of global harmony more syrupy than anything Michael Jackson had ever dreamed. Within this universe on the brink of bliss, time travel has become a workable technology, but is restricted to prevent the time stream from getting warped by irresponsible use. the interface for the game. Journeyman's interface, like Spaceship Warlock and most other graphic-rich games, reduces the area of the action on the monitor by establishing a mechanical convention. Here, it is the narrow view-glass of the snap-on electronic monocular that is an integral part of the BioSupport Suit. Considering the weighty data chunks of QuickTime movies and sound files in Journeyman, it was wise to slim the window down. Even with my speedy Hitachi drive, I just had to get used to the drag-and-lag on the action as the CD-ROM data stream chugged along with long load times and slow uptakes. When the game is loading, it is impossible to move, select or save. Waiting and sweating is all that can be done. gating those modular corridors and tunnels. The cursor arrow traces a path for each step taken. As handy as this is, there may be some times when it is necessary to jump before leaping while one surfs the space/time continuum. It is advised to save positions often, or suffer a thousand deaths. Extemporizing Through The Missions While traveling through time, a BioSupport Suit offers protection from most environThe World's First Pnlarcalistic Adventure Game for the Macintosh 100 W CO-ROM MAC VERSION The government has formed an elite guard to shield against bad times and to repair any rifts in the continuum from sabotage. The Temporal Prorecrorare (rhe gamer's cmployer) is headquartered in the Temporal Protectorate Annex, a top-secret bunker. Very few humans can be admitted to the controls of Pegasus, the last existing time machine. The gamer's objective is to follow whatever missions are assigned to mend the rifts in time. TITLE: SYSTEM: Because each loaded sequence is a QuickTime movie, it has to cue the player to the beginning in order to run. For instance, even when saving a position at the console of the Pegasus time machine, the place where destinations are chosen, when one restores to that position, he or she has returned not to the jumpseat but back into the elevator, and will have to go through the whole entry sequence again. While the movement burtons can be activated with the mouse, the program likes the keyboard's arrow commands better. The digital compass and the mapping BioChip can help the player go home again after naviPRICE: PROTECTION DESIGNER: PUBLISHER: The Journeyman Project Color Macintosh Il or greater (5 MB RAM required, 8 MB RAM preferred QuickTime 1.5, CD-ROM drive) $99.95 None Presto Studios Presto Studios P.O. Box 262535 Sau Do, CA 92126.2535 (619) 689.4895 Tempus In A CD Before talking about the specific missions, however, it is necessary to touch briefly upon Page 76 Computer Gaming World "


"Free time. Plus, you could win a trip to GenCon! this year! Plus, we'll award a one-year subscription to Computer Gaming World to nine other winners. Now's your chance to sharpen your gaming skills and meet other players absolutely FREE. If you enjoy interacting with many role-players at once, sign-on to the National Videotex Network(NVN) and try the selection of multi-player games! Use the $25 credit, to get acquainted with the games and the players at no charge! Log into MUD II: The Quest For Immortality and seek to become an immortal Wizard. Or, travel the Island of Kesmai\" in a party of adventurers and seek danger and treasure. Launch a space empire in Galaxy II and conquer the quadrant, or become a historical noble in The Hundred Years War and carry out your king's will... or yours! Simply fill out the entry form below and mail it to the address provided by July 15, 1993. Then, on July 21, 1993, at 9pm (Central time zone) on the NVN Multi-Player Games Forum, we'll hold a drawing and announce a winner. You don't need to be present to win, or even a member of NVN; we'll notify the winner by phone and mail. Don't miss a minute of action-packed play. Join now. Basic membership, including free use of over 80 basic services, is only $5.95 per month*. And, Premium services are priced at just $5 non-prime and $8 prime time...even at 9600 baud! Here's what the GenCon winner will receive:  5 days/4 nights of hotel accommodations, from August 18 August 22, 1993, in Milwaukee, WI, site of the annual GenCon Game Faire.  Round trip airfare from anywhere in the continental U.S. to Milwaukee. A four day gaming pass to GenCon. One full year subscription to Computer Gaming World. Win a trip to GenCon the ultimate gathering of gamers! Your chance to meet the best gamers face to face is at GenCon. the nation's largest role-playing game faire. It happens every August in Milwaukee, Wisconsin. Thousands of the best gamers from around the country and the world, gather for four days of non-stop gaming action and questing for titles and prizes in hundreds of events. Imagine someone paying your way. It could happen. NVN, provider of the nation's premier multi-player role-playing games, and Computer Gaming World, the nation's premier computer game magazine, will send one lucky person to GenCon Join NVN now and save $25! We'll give you $25 in usage to explore games and other NVN premium services. Set your 1200, 2400 or 9600 baud modem and dial 1-800-336-9092 At the appropriate prompt, type the code CG93RR and press <return>. For more information or to order by phone, call: 1-800-336-9096 Age: Contest Entry Form Name: Address: City/State/Zip: Day Phone: (_ Evening Phone: ( ) Do you own a computer and modem? Sponsored by: COMPUTER GAMING WORLD The Premier Computer Game Magazine MUD The Quest for Immortality RULES: 1. Persons of any age can enter. However, minors under the age of eighteen (18) years must travel with a parent or legal guardian at their own expense to collect the grand prize. Signature of parent or legal guardian may be required to collect the grand prive. 2. Employees and contractors of National Videotex Network, U.S. Videotel. Golden Empire Publications and their affiliates and subsidiaries are incligible to win prizes. 3. This contest is void where prohibited by law. 4. Contest winner will be drawn at random from all entries. Odds of wiming the top prize will depend on the total number of entries 5. Only one entry per person allowed, sorry! NATIONAL VIDEOTEX MAIL ENTRY TO: National Videotex Network: Product Mgmt: 5555 San Felipe: Suite 1200: Houston, TX 77056 *Subscription fee is $5.95 per month. Prices and service content are subject to change NVN is a mark of the National Videotex Network, Corp. MUD II is a copyright of MUSE, Lid. All others are marks of their respective companies/organizations. Circle Reader Service #106 "


"ROM Deyneinn CD-ROM KYL Extemporaneous Conclusion ship may finally be coming in for the alien watchers, and it could be up to the player to make sure the Cyrollans have a happy landing. The Norad VI mission can be the most touch-and-go, with a missile that just doesn't want to say no. It does make a difference which sequence is taken on missions, and some of the objects one acquires in one mission may be vital to survival in another. The complex environments of Journeyman are believably fantastic, and the solidly rendered and polished maKAVA chines, vehicles, devices, tools, keys, doors, mental hazards, as well as inventorying acquicontrols and robots work with convincingly sitions and monitoring energy levels. Every precise action (though some devices may need second spent questing burns up energy, so one must remember that the meter is running and an extra mouse-nudge or two). The excellent time may simply run out while the player's sound effects sharply support and underscore character hoofs through history. The first goal the dramas as one grapples with new and is to hop back 200 million years to retrieve a unpredictable catastrophes. time log disc, then return to the Annex to enter its temporal coordinates into the maCREATE chine. This is to check against any discontinuities in history. One must also be careful not to cause any glitches while traveling; upon each return the player must check that there aren't any warps in the grooves. In the Sydney Australia mission, it'll be tough darts if a player can't get his or her genes together. The Mars Colony mission requires a lot of energy to keep up with uppity robots and not bomb out. The Journeyman is a challenging, take-no-prisoners game, as tough as they come with its many logic puzzles and its no-instructions, no-returns machineries. It is all the more rewarding after puzzling past cach conundrum. For these new realms of the CD-ROM graphic adventure game, perhaps its time to draft new rules. This is different country than the text-adventure game or even the Ultimas of action gamers. There is plenty of room on the disk to include complete hints and answers for those who want them when they need them. To see glimpses of these fully rendered worlds and not be able to enter them is like paying for a cruise and getting stuck in the cargo hold. cow ASU EMMEL Entertainment Software Consultants Is Seeking Qualified candidates for a Progressive, New Entertainment Software Producer In Southern California THE ULTIMATE ROLE-PLAYING AID Introducing The Ultimate Character Editor. This exciting new product features full mouse and keyboard support, online context sensitive help and a complete windowing system (does not require MS Windows to run). This editor allows you to edit most of the games listed below (including all of the Might and Magics, all of the Ultimas, all of the SSI games, all of the Bard's Tales, and more). The price for this editor is $59.95. So, for the price of 3 editors, you will be getting approximately 30 editors. Upgrades will be available to handle new games as they are released for only $9.95. CHARACTER EDITORS $19.95 each Might and Magic (1, 2, 3 or 4), Drakkhen, Pool of Radiance, Hard Nova, Bard's Tale (1, 2 or 3). Wasteland, Dragon Wars, Space Rogue, Wizardry (Edits 1-3). Wizardry 4, Wizardry 5, Bane of Cosmic Forge, Crusaders of the Dark Savant, Treasurers of the Savage Frontier, Sentinel Worlds I, Knights of Legend, Secret of the Silver Blades, Curse of the Azure Bonds. Champions of Krynn, Space 1889, Keys to Maramon, MegaTraveller (1 or 2), Keef the Thief, Darklands, Escape from Hell, Ultima (3, 4, 5, 6 or 7). Dark Heart of Uukrul. Savage Empire. Tunnels and Trolls, Lord of the Rings (1 or 2). Countdown to Doomsday, Martian Dreams. Eye of the Beholder (1 or 2). Death Knights of Krynn, Fountain of Dreams, Magic Candle (1 or 2). Pools of Darkness. Ultima Underworld. Twilight 2000, Planet's Edge, Dark Queen of Krynn, and Prophecy of the Shadow Interested Applicants Should Apply For the Following Positions Computer Programmer (MS-DOS based) Graphic Artist Music/Audio Effects HINT BOOKS — $9.95 each Might and Magic 1, Knights of Legend, Curse of the Azure Bonds, Champions of Krynn. Legacy of Ancients. Dark Heart of Uukrul. Wizardry (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, Bane or Crusaders). Eye of the Beholder 2, Might and Magic 3 (12.95). applicants should send a resume and brief letter of interest listing applicable commercial projects to: Entertainment Software Consultants 8780 19th Street, Suite #336 Alta Loma, California 91701 IBM listed. Apple. C64 and Amiga versions also available. Please add $4.00 for shipping and handling. Open from 9AM 9PM every day for your convenience. I VISA GOSSELIN COMPUTER CONSULTANTS MasterCard PO Box 1083  Brighton, MI 48116. (313) 229-2453 ! Highly Competitive Compensation Confidentiality Assured All Applications Will Receive a Response Circle Reader Service #61 Circle Reader Service #52 Computer Gaming World Page 78 "


"SOUND GALAXY IT WAS AS IF YOU WERE IN THERE! Forget about a primitive game session where gunning down a jet fighter or running away from a fire breathing dragon creates a dumb effect. And you reacted because you see it coming. If not, it's a game over for you. CD-QUALITY SOUND EASE OF INSTALLATION Sound Galaxy NX PRO Extra change all that See and All configuration settings are via software without Do by giving you a whole new generation of sound the hassle of setting jumpers. technology that promises you superb CD-quality sound that match the best amplifiers and full stereo VALUE FOR MONEY capability. Topping it all are the bundled software such as Monologue for Windows, Voyetra Audio Station & SUPPORT MORE SOUND STANDARDS WINDATIM OLE, just to name a few, so that you can Let yourself go ga-ga over the full sound support for edit audio, animate and create stunning graphics on AdLib, Sound Blaster Pro, Covox Speech Thing and screen. And not forgetting the free speakers that allow Disney Sound Source. And you find yourself hacking you to blast yourself to glory as you see your scores away the jungle of games and entertainment chalking up. software available under both DOS and Windows environment. So step into the world of imagination with MORE CD-ROM INTERFACE Besides the built in AT-BUS CD-ROM Sound Galaxy interface support for Mitsumi and Panasonic NX PRO Extra. drives, the NX PRO Extra can also support the Sony AT-BUS CD-ROM drive simply by plugging the SG adaptor to the Mitsumi interface. It can be further upgraded to more powerful SCSI CD-ROM drives. BE SOUNE Call us : 1-800-886 8859 GALAXY Circle Reader Service #34 Smetas Correction V S GROUP U.S.A. Orice: AZTECH LABS, INC. 16707 Fremont Boulevard, Fremont, CA 94538. U.S.A. Tel: (510) 623-8988 Fax (10) 623-8989 Head Office : AZTECH SYSTEMS PTE LTD 31 Ubi Road 1, AVS Building, Singapore 1440. Tel: (65) 741-7211 Fax. (65) 741-8678/9 Tlx : RS36560 AZTECH 9 MORT. All trade namese marks are registered trademarks of sci GOMIKINY Secifications whicct to change withoutrir notice "


"SA SCORPIA FEELS THE PINCH OF UPGRADE ULCERS CAT This time around, we aren't going to be Naturally, you can't. However, just at that Nothing happened. looking at a game. No, this tale is a time, the VESA standard for VLB had gone Unfortunately, the in-store machine was a 1 cautionary one: Life On The Edge, or through. No more proprietary slots; everyone 486/50, so we couldn't test the card on it (but The Perils of High-Tech. Fred, get the rewould use the same technology for local bus we did anyway, with the same result, which freshments ready. I'm gonna need it after (at least supposedly). Therefore, any decent meant nothing). So they took the 16-bit card reliving this experience! VLB card from any manufacturer would from their machine and put it in mine. The Sharp-eyed readers noticed that the April work, thereby allowing choice. That did apsystem came right up. That was a relief, but (#105) issue had only one instead of my usual peal to me. still ... two articles. The Mail column was present, The end of the year is always a confused Phone calls are made. One to the computer but the View was rather conspicuously abperiod, and the changcover to VESA added manufacturer (the manual was a little, umm, sent. There was a reason for that. In order to to it. Everyone was retooling their motherindecipherable on some points, ahem). No, play a computer game, one needs that indisboards for the new standard. I would have to nothing needed to be done to enable the VLB; pensible item, a computer system. For much wait a little while, but it was only supposed to it was set and ready. Any VLB card should of January, I was without that essential little be about two weeks or so. In the meantime, I work after being plugged in. Hmmmm. item and this is how it happened. arranged for some friends of mine to buy the Then, a call to the card manufacturer. This As the end of '92 approached, I re-assessed 386. They were a little hesitant to take it when was more involved, and less satisfactory. Fimy current system, a 386/20 with 2 megs of the replacement wasn't on hand, but I reasnally, we get to someone who seems to know RAM and a 40 meg hard drive. There was no sured them it was okay. I could tough it out something. \"Oh, the OPTI chipset? We've doubt about it. I needed more horsepower, for a couple of weeks, and no major games been having some problem with those\" (and more memory, and more drive space. In were on the horizon anyway. Had I but but a few others, as it turned our later). \"We're few others short, a new system entirely. known ... working on a new chip right now.\" Of course, This didn't exactly thrill me. In '88, I So, the Tuesday after New Year's, I check they can't say when it will be ready, but bought my first MS-DOS machine. Only in at the store, everything seemed okay, and \"soon.\" two years later, I was buying a 386. Now, I we put the order in. Then we learned someNow what? Wait for the new chip, or send had to upgrade again. Three systems in four thing: VLB doesn't work in a 50Mhz ma the card back and get another one from someyears is no joke, especially when your livelichine. On a 486/25, or a DX2 25/50, or a one else? Presuming, of course, that someone hood depends upon staying up with the curDX2 33/66, yes. On a pure 50, nope. Standelse has a card ready. And what if that card rent games and you don't have much choice. ardization, don'tcha' just love it? Well, the 66 has some problems? This is the first of the first So, I went shopping for a system I hoped didn't cost much more than the 50, and generation VLB cards, which makes it all would last, maybe (hah!) a little longer than besides, the way technology has been rocketpretty chancy. Let's wait. the usual two years. ing along, maybe it was better to get the fastest . And Another week goes by. The chip arrives. It It seemed to me that a 486/50 with 8 MB machine. We switched the order to a 486/66. turns out to be exactly the same chip that is of RAM, 120 MB hard drive, and local bus and then I trundled home to my cave to wait already on the card, and doesn't work any video would be just the thing. I could get such out the two weeks. better. More calls to the card manufacturer. a system at the local store, for a good price. The one hitch was the local bus video (VLB). It was a little weird, looking over at the More confusion. Apparently there isn't any Up to that time, all the VLB's were proprieempty table where the 20 used to sit. It was upgrade, this is their only chip. tary. Each manufacturer had their own way even weirder, not playing any games. At least Enough is enough. Send this turkey card of doing it, and provided the necessary video I got caught up on some reading, and I still back to them. VLB can wait. I can wait until had my trusty Apple Ile so I could log on to this whole situation settles down, and I know card. the nets. For some reason, though, I was for sure that I'll get a card that works. So, now Of course, if the card was unsatisfactory in feeling a little restless. the store orders a regular 16-bit card for the any way, you were stuck: either use that card or go back to an \"ordinary 16-bit video card. The two weeks passed, and I managed to interim since we know that it will be okay. It day prived. live through it. Then, the great day arrived: This did not appeal to me. Also, several indearrives in a few days and once more, we start arri testing the system out, one card at a time. pendent card manufacturers were beginning the system was waiting in the store. Yay! to advertise VLB cards, and these had to be Naturally I hurried right over there. They Everything works. I breathe a sigh of relief. generic. How could you use a generic card in opened up the case, plugged in the video card, a proprietary slot? and turned on the system. (Continued on page 100) Page 80 Computer Gaming World "


"Wing Commander Flys Faster! Sherlock Solves Faster! Carmen Sandiego's Found Faster! orch Notes The Best of the Bureau History of the World Countnes of the Word The Complete Dickens \"The Corrplete Twain Biographies austrated American History Free CD CD Includes Lightning CD Runs All Your CD's Faster! Do you feel the need for speed? Lightning CD Lightning If you've ever played a game or searched through a reference library, you know how slow CD's can be. Is perfect for entertainment, reference, educational, and multimedia programs Program OTT 2007 PAME Spratly Kedares Video Passes WILL AL Significantly reduces annoying video pauses A CD ROM Lightning CD is the answer to your speed problems. Lightning CD is a CD cache that improves performance by moving frequently used information from your CD to RAM. The next time your computer needs information, it's available immediately. You'll notice the difference instantly. Includes six other powerful utilities for improving your computer's performance ogra Our Cu... TREAT US Also speeds up both DOS and Windows programs 93% Slower 81% Slower 62% Slower Lightning CD No CD Cache Lightning CD No CD Cache Lightning CD No CD Cache If speed is what you need, get Lightning CD to make all your CD's run Lightning fast. To order, or for the name of the dealer nearest you, call 8 0 0 9 67 5 5 5 0 Wing Commander Sherlock Holmes Carmen Sandiego Look for Lightning CD and other Lucid products at A m BEST COMPUTER ely COMPUTER CUT COMPL E GGHEAD SOFTWARE THE COMPUTER SUPERSTORE EGGHEAD SOFTWAREX Wrth American Sowan upperta LUCID 4 . D CORPORATION Lucid Corporation is located at 101 W. Rernet Bood, Seate 450, Richardson, TX 75082. Phore 2149948100 Fox 2149948103 Lightrin Lighting for Windows, Lightning for DOS, and lightning ( te frodemarks on lood is a registered trademark of ludil Corporation. Al other trademarks are acknowledged Circle Reader Service #71 "


"Devlet Lemming On The Edge Psygnosis' Lemmings 2: The Tribes by Saul Serrafina Tt's always a bit disconcerting when cold Meet George Lemming with jet packs, the Cave lems wield huge clubs reality rudely intrudes on an involved that bash through walls, and Beach lems shoot gaming session. There I sit, my entire beFor those who haven't had the pleasure of the tube on surfboards. All totaled, there are oor meeting this delightful pet, the lemming of 55 different skills, up from eight or so in the tant thing in my life being that this pixel goes the computer variety is a small (approx. 20 original! Overkill? Perhaps, but this variety there, and Life seeps through a drafty cerebral pixels), cute (green buffonts that bounce with makes for very challenging play. Just when window. As I save another band of lemmings their I hat Girl stride), incredibly stupid apone feels comfortable in Psygnosis' new Lemmings 2: The Tribes, I prox. 20 1.Q.), yet gifted with extraordinary on a level, the skills ger shuffled up and new realize that I've safely tucked away more leminnate skills. They are known to build stairs, ones must be learned. Though a bit overmings this month than dollars in my savings die ditches, bore tunnels, scale precipitous whelming at times, the new and constantly account. I've certainly done more to further cliffs, and even clills, and even explosively self-destruct explosively self-destruct chans changing skills keep the game fresh, which is the digital existence of these creatures than important in a game with over 120 levels. I've done for a real dying species. And I've remarkably perilous environment, and would These levels are divided into 12 groups of dcfinitely invested more thought into their have long gone extinct but for the efforts of 10 one group for each of the tribes. Each salvation than into my own pitiful soul. Do many tireless gamers who the lemmings are retribe offers a self-contained series of puzzles pause (or \"paws\" in lemmings parlance) to thought to worship as deities. From a lemwith their own delightful graphic look and reevaluate my existence? Do I turn off my ming command chair, empowered with a mouse, glorified gamers command the lemcompurer and write a letter to my congresdistinct lemming antics. Lemmings 2 is differmings to perform the different tasks within sional representative? Hardly. I plod on stuent from the original in that there is no predetermined number of lemmings that must pidly but happily, blind to my fate, hoping their repertoire. If the lemmings are fortunate that some kind deity will see fit to clear my be saved to complete a level; rather, there are enough to have a quick-witted gaming deity, three tiers of success. If the player borches a path of nasty impediments and deadly falls, they will be able to avoid the certain death level and saves only a few lems, he or she is just as I clear the paths of the stupid but happy that lurks everywhere in their world and arrive creatures on my screen. safely at their homes. The Origin of the Species This is the lemming gamers have known, loved, and \"nuked\" with a grin. But these creatures have changed a bit since we've last seen themin fact, they've mutated in many odd ways. In Lemmings 2, gamers will discover an island off the coast of Sequelia that has been biologically isolated for many software seasons. On this gaming Galapagos several species of creatures can be found that are genetically descendant from the original lemming. Due to the bizarre geography of the island (divided into 12 pie pieces) and the I'd like to think my weakness with regard to widely divergent ecosystems to be found these cute creatures is due to the design skills there, the Basic Lemming (joeblowus lemof DMA Design and Psygnosis rather than muricus) has speciated into 12 distinct types. any weaknesses in my character. These folks The forces of selective market pressure have have done a first rate job with this sequel to a yielded the most bizarre of adaptations. The TOTS first rate original game. We've all known the types discovered include Circus Lemmings disappointment of sequels, which tend to be (lemurica slapstikus), Sports Lemmings (bruce hasty and uninspired attempts to cash in on genericus), Beach Lemmings (grand kahooniTITLE: Lemmings 2: The Tribes SYSTEM: Amiga, IBM the spirit of a successful original, but Lemcus), Polar Lemmings (ididoroticus), Medieval GRAPHICS: VGAMCGA mings 2 really is twice the game its predecessor Lemmings (brave-sur-robinicus), Highland, PRICE: $59.99 PROTECTION: Egyptian, Shadow, Space, Outdoor, Classical None was. Lemmings 2 sports a dazzling new variety DESIGNER: DMA Design of graphics, sound, lemming antics and fiendand Cave Lemmings. PUBLISHER: Psygnosis Brookline, MA ish puzzles, along with interface tweaks that Each of these lemming types brings distinct (800) 438-7794 make playing much more lemmer-friendly. skills to the party. The Space lems zoom about DMA Page 82 Computer Gaming World "


"Sound BLASTER BLASTER Whether it's the menacing snarl of a chainsaw or the banshee scream of your F-1 Tomcat, just remember: it isn't real. Until you hear it on a Sound Blaster.\" Sound Blaster fidelity adds a whole new dimension to PC games, not to mention multimedia and other applications. And Sound Blaster is compatible with more of your software BLASTER BLASTER than any other audio card. No wonder it's the best selling sound board of all time. So when you're ready to hear what your games really sound like, get in touch with your Sound Blaster dealer today. Or call us direct at 1-800-998-5227. Or we may just have to From games to stereo multimedia to full-blown, CD quality 16-bit Advanced Signal Processing send Bruno over to persuade you. audio...we've got the Sound Blaster for you. Sound Hair CRCATIVE Copyright 1993 Creative Technology Ltd. Sound Blaster and the Sound Blaster and Creative Labs logos are trademarks of Creative Labs, Inc. All specifications subject to change without notice. International inquiries: Creative Technology Ltd., Singapore, TEL. 65-773-0233 FAX 65-773-0353. Sound BLASTER Sound CREATIVE CREATIVE LABS, INC. You never heard it so real. Circle Reader Service #45 "


"DID awarded with a bronze medal. Saving them all earns a gold, while mid-range success earns a silver. Also unlike the original, there is a grander scheme to the game. If one loses, say, 10 lemmings on the first level of a tribe, there will be 10 less on level two -one's success carries over from level to level. The object is to complete the puzzles in each tribe level with a gold medal, which might be one of the more challenging tasks in computer gaming. Each of the tribe's medals is a piece of a talisman. In the game's fiction, the talisman must be reconstructed so that the lemmings can make a grand Exodus on an Ark and escape the coming End of the World. Lemmings 2 is truly a game of biblical proportions. original game: One still chooses lemming puzzles, the sound track with original music tasks from a menu across the bottom of the for each tribe, the people-friendly interface. screen, and one still assigns the tasks by clickThe package even includes a brilliant little ing a cursor box on the individual lemming. novella that tells the story of Lemming Island One interesting addition, probably borrowed in a style that melds A.A. Milne and Douglas from Psygnosis Creepers game, is a «fan\" curAdams — it's classic Brit wit. In the final sor. With the fan, the player can blow certain analysis, puzzle lovers who don't mind being flying or air ballooning lemmings around the beat over the head with a Cute Club, and screen. The best new addition is the Fast don't mind beating their own heads over Forward command that marches the lemdifficult puzzles should find Lemmings 2 to be mings in double-time and eliminates any one of their better purchases of the year. Cow dead time in the puzzles. Level passwords have been thankfully done away with and replaced by a game saving option. On the Level The puzzles have been lovingly designed Up a Creek Without a and ooze cute out of every pore. The lemmings even die adorably, and there are new Kayaker Lemming? and vicious ways for them to be killed: gobDon't nuke another helpless creature. bled up by ravenous creatures, gunned down The first CGW hint-disk is now available. by battlemech robots, and mutilated by other offering gold medal solutions for all 120 more demented devices. The potential size of levels in Lemmings 2. Step by step walkthe levels has increased; one can now not only throughs will lead you to a complete talisscroll the screen horizontally but laterally as man and the admiration of thousands of well. As in the first game, some of these green haired furries. puzzles require superhuman fears of coordi Send check or money order for $6.00 to: nation to master. New players should be Luv Doze Lemmings! warned: though furry and friendly, this game P.O. Box 730 isn't going to curl up in your lap and purr. Yorba Linda, CA 92686-9963 Everything about Lemmings 2 squeaks of Please specify 3.5 or 5.25 inch disks. quality: the delightful animations, the clever By The Way You Do The Things You Do The interface is basically the same as in the CAPE COD CONNECTION LOOKING FOR A SPORTS TITLE? CALL FOR CURRENT PRICING AND SAME DAY SHIPPING PORTS 24 HR ORDERING (only) 1-800-729-6733 SUPPORT/INFO 1-5 EST Mon-Sat 1-508-457-0738 IBM Wing Cmdr 2..... $49 Rome............. $33 Eye Beh. II......... $39 SIMULATION Strike Cmdr....... $52 Spaceward Ho.. $39 KO VI................. $52 Aces/Pacific..... $52 Eco WW II: 1946....... $26 Star Legions...... $39 Leg. of Valour.... $39 The Lost Adm.... $39 Mag. Candle 3.... $39 Air Warrior ......... $49 IBM V For Vict 1........ $46 M&Mag. Xeen.... $46 Commanche...... $46 STRATEGY V For Vict 2........ 546 Paladin 2 ........... $39 Comm. Data..... $26 Dreadnoughts... $46 Bat. of Destiny... $39 Viking Fd Conq. $39 Protostar............ F15 III ............... 559 Caesar..............539 Western Front.... $39 Ringworld.........539 Spellcraft ........... $39 Falcon 3.0......... $52 Carrier Strike..... $46 Uit. Underw 2.... $52 OpFlying Tiger .. $26 Carriers/War...... $46 IBM ROLE Ult. VII................ $52 Fireteam 2200... $29 Castles 2............ $39 PLAYING Gr.Naval Bat's... $46 Civilization......... $46 Gr N Bat Ships .. $25 Conq. Kingd...... $39 A&D Unl Adv..... $39 Jump Jet ........... $46 Patriot................ $46 Amazon............. $46 Sec Weap Luf.... $46 High Comman... $45 Ch. 5 Realms..... $46 Plane disks ea... $20 Liberty or Doa ... $39 Crus. Drk Sav.... $46 Sim Life ............. S46 Monopoly Del.... $39 Dune 2........... $39 Task Force 42 ... $46 Pacific War....... 552 Lemmings 2...... $39 WILL SELL X-Wing.............. $46 Populous 2........ $39 YOUR INTERESTED IN SELLING YOUR USED USED SOFTWARE? Give Cape Cod Connection a call at 1/508-457-0738 for details! THE PLAYBOOK OF SPORTS-RELATED SOFTWARE If you're a computer sports fan, you want to know what software is available, how similar titles compare, and you want the latest releases at attractive prices. That's why our complete Playbook describes dozens of strategic simulations, awesome action games, and specialized utilities from little known sources. We want to be your source for hi-tech sports. The Playbook is free with all phone and mail orders. > BASEBALL BASKETBALL CAPE COD CONNECTION BOWLING ACTION SOFTWARE EDUCATION CALENDARS $ FISHING CARD COLLECTING FLIGHT GAMES FOOTBALL HANDICAPPING GOLF TRIVIAS KEY SIMULATORS HORSERACING STATISTICS MOTORSPORTS OLYMPICS CEREBEL SAILING 800 747 0908.617 576-6700 JOY SKIING 675 Mass Ave  Cambridge MA 02139 TENNIS TAKE YOUR BRAIN OUT TO THE BALLGAME We hope you enjoy our new economical format. All remains the same, however except we have discontinued the Membership Option (we will honor members until their expiration date). PLEASE NOTE THAT CCC HAS ENDED THE PRICE WAR AND RAISED IT'S PRICES. In order to run an efficient and economically sound business we must see profits. It's time to put sanity back into this industry and we hope you, our customers understand our needs and support us. Our NEW pricing scale is calculated on 35% OFF Product Retail Mail should be sent to: 21 Pleasant View Avenue, Falmouth, MA 02540. UPS Shipments within Cont. U.S. are $5 per order. Overseas rates are based on package weight. Defective software replaced with same only. There is a 15% restocking fee. Circle Reader Service #39 Circle Reader Service #40 Page 84 Computer Gaming World "


"FLASHBACK WOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO Action so life-like, HEZ you'll have to keep reminding yourself : it's only a game. And not a movie.  et de INNRINDINE IN la mer c , The W a great . MET That's because Earth has been infiltrated Flashback is the only by shape-shifting aliens action adventure game bent on world conquest! that uses movie-making To save Earth, you technology to the max. must fight through three We filmed real actors in fantastic worlds and 200 motion. Then we brought game screens! Solve everything to life on the dozens of mind-bending computer through puzzles. Get your cues rotoscoping, the digitiza from over 75 fully anition and retouching of mated cinematics live action Like film film — at at FLASHBACK a great 24 frames THE QUEST FOR IDENTITY. movie, a second! Flashback What's combines it all mean? an intriSimply the cate plot, smoothest exciting animation music ever! Run, score, jump, roll superb or stagger 1924 sound with effects, incredibly subtle and spine-tingling suspense fluid movement. Fire your and dynamite action. weapon and watch your Flashback. Now playbody recoil with remarking at a movie theater... able realism! er, game store near you! Step into this awesome IBM TO ORDER: Visit your cinematic experience as retailer or call 1-800-245-4525 with Conrad B. Hart, VISA/MC (U.S. and Canada only). a scientist who's made Delphine Software International DSCA a horrifying zi discovery:  Strategic Simulations, Inc All rights reserved. GA DIE Creation and development, 1993 Delphine Software International 1993 U.S. Gold Lid "


"e. meuneinn Ride the Winds of the Maelstrom VALUE BUDGET s. S THE DRY COST TELES TODAY HO:536 T LAGENHOL LINES 19 Merit Software's Maelstrom by Douglas Winship The obvious assumption when first stepdisaster for the free galaxy. Harmony may be said action would almost certainly set off a ping into the Maelstrom is that this is small and weak, but it is very wealthy, and it chain reaction destroying the entire planet, L another thematic reprise of such games is the player's job to exploit that wealth to end including three-fifths of the galaxy's Fitz. (No as Spaceward Ho! or Reach For the Stars, an the Syndicate threat forever. need to feel safe though, the Syndicate is explore-and-conquer game of intergalactic With its tiny population. Harmony cannot surely working on a way around this...) empire building. Not so. As the name sugstand alone against the Syndicate. The player FONTE 12-30-96 gests, this real-time game throws the player must form a coalition with the other threatinto an ofttimes bewildering array of less than ened planets, sometimes rescuing those that TOTAL FUNDS straightforward challenges. Furthermore, alhave fallen prey to the evil empire during the OPERATING COSTS | most nothing is as it seems in this universe, course of the game. Harmony must remain whether threat, opportunity, or (more comfree long enough to attract sufficient money monly) both. While the player is learning to and manpower from the other free planets to ride the winds of the storm, the animated mount a force that is able to deal a death blow sequences of enemies overrunning planet to the Syndicate headauarters-wher 23 Harmony appear all too often and not always that is. SURVEY MINE CLOSE PERSON for obvious reasons. Fortunately, once the storm is mastered, it's an exciting ride. The player runs Harmony from the ExecuUID GOUD BIN RESMIN MIN SHU EXIT Maelstrom takes place in a post-war galaxy, tron 1200 Holodesk, which provides information and communications facilities. The populated largely by independent planets. Peace is being threatened anew, however, by player can converse with Harmony's departHarmony begins the game with two working mines, but scores more are needed to a new and malevolent super-power, the Synment heads and VIPs on other planets and is dicate. A renegade former agent of that emprovided with background information files supply the money to fuel an offensive war pire (the player) has defected to lead the on them. As the game progresses, new charmachine. One must survey the planet to find defense of Harmony, a third-rate power the most concentrated ore patches; then, hire acters are discovered, and the files of known whose conquest by the Syndicate would spell persons are updated. One of the most important responsibilities of the player is reviewing efficiency is totally dependent on the quality resumes and hiring and firing the ship's offiof the foreman hired to run it. In time, mines cers, mining foremen and other middle manbecome unprofitable or even peter out altoagement types. Finally, the player must issue gether, so routine monitoring is a must. The orders to one or more of the executives and mining department will provide the fewest assign sufficient staff and budget to the prosurprises during the game, but those it does ject. The labor force is the most critical comcalcem P provide are very valuable. Mining is very labor modity in Maelstrom. It is very hard to get ! intensive and is not a renewable resource, but more, and the military can spend\" much of # it is lucrative. Ships cost a lot of money, and it in a hurry if a battle is lost. Harmony needs a lot of ships. The government of Harmony has four departments at the player's disposal: Mining, Marching On Dow Chemical Research, the Military, and the Secret Intelligence Network. Each is critical to the outWhile Harmony must buy most of its weapcome of the game, and their respective ons, defenses and computers from other neudemands for budget and human resources tral planets in the galaxy, especially early on, must be carefully balanced and adjusted it does have a small but motivated R&D throughout the game. We'll look at each in department. Top and not-so-top scientists are turn, from least to most complex. available to lead research in a variety of scienTHE LITIMATE GALACTIC STRATEGY GAME tific fields. Again, the quality of these employPuttin' On The Fitz ces dictates how likely they are to succeed in Maelstrom: The Ultimate Galactic each project they undertake. Research labs Strategy Game Firzholnium tri-gem ore (Fitz) is the heart will provide new weapon systems that can GRAPHICS: of Harmony's economy, the reason for its either be kept in-house or sold as parents to $69.95 peril, and its primary defense. The planet is the major arms manufacturers for big cash PROTECTION: Documentation look-up DESIGNER: Andy Blau essentially a gigantic lump of this hyper-volapayments. Unsold weapons cost less to buy PUBLISHER: Merit Software tile fuel and munitions ingredient. The main and are unavailable to the rest of the galaxy. Dallas, TX (214) 385-2353 reason that the Syndicate has not just bomR&D will also produce various other invenbarded Harmony into submission is because tions of various degrees of usefulness to other TITLE: SYSTEM: IBM VGA PRICE: Page 86 Computer Gaming World "


"Deview FUNDS FURTL H2997471 CURRENT HOO00000 FREE H1597477 HULL LEAP COPIL DEF. STRUCT INTD-03 SCANNER clarity. It lacks a tutorial or fast-start section and one must read all the way to page 41 before finding either what the actual victory conditions are or what the basic strategy of the game might be. In spite of the manual and interface, however, Maelstrom is well worth the effort to be expended in learning it. It seldom drags as the game progresses, and if it does, the player can crank up the clock until something happens. Maelstrom will take plenty of time and many games to win, providing much more than the average number of «Lost Evenings\" without getting old. Best of all, there just aren't many games out there that are very similar to Maelstrom at all, so those who appreciate big games should take a ride. CGW PRICINY Confessions of SIN HULL 05! SHARK dicate saboteurs on Harmony, though this last job is out of the player's control. IF SIN has a large enough chunk of the budget, Harmony is mostly sabotage-proof. COST4120000 All other missions must be determined by 106 the player and will be assigned to the first available agent. Though agents are hired like HWWDDCL executives in other departments, the carly missions do not require as high quality agents HOLD BUY SELL 1++ REPRIR as in other departments. Later, the quality of UIO GOU TIL SIN RES UITN MAIN SAU EXIT agents does become an issue, but fewer are needed. SIN agents are responsible for most departments. The utility of some inventions of the surprises in the game. will not be immediately obvious, and others With a ride from the military, SIN agents are just plain silly. Once the player has develtravel to other systems, even Syndicate homeoped a blend of ongoing research into the worlds, to discover any information prefields that interest him and found top-notch viously undiscovered there. This searching brains to run cach project, research can be needs to be repeated as the game goes on, as safely left to run itself until it eventually starts things change. These recon missions can be to repeat its inventions. come exciting should the agent discover a Syndicate base. If a VIP from somewhere, Prattle of a Major General cven Harmony, is kidnapped, then SIN needs The Military is the biggest, most labor into act fast to rescue him or her. SIN agents tensive, most executive intensive, and most also are propaganda masters who can travel to expensive department on Harmony. A strong neutral planets and stir up public sympathy navy is necessary to protect Harmony from for Harmony. If they are successful enough, pirates and the Syndicate and to protect, or the leader of the planet may elect to offer even free, allies and neutral planets from the direct aid to Harmony. SIN is cheap and easy, but the player should not get careless because bad guys. The navy also provides transportation to Harmony's secret agents, a cheap but of this. It should be used only where necesvery important service. Players will spend half L e sary, and only the best agents should be used or more of their time at the military screen. on high risk insurgency and rescue missions. Each ship must be custom-equipped from There are a number of hidden treasures a wide array of hulls. weapons defenses and a wide array of hulls, weapons, defenses, and spread across Harmony and the Galaxy. battle computers. It must then be assigned at the These items are in the same place cach time, least one executive (the captain), and unless it sit and the player should note where they are so is a courier, it should really have two others. they can be found earlier in the next game. They can If the quality of emplovee is important in Also, certain of the more complex events hapmine foremen and scientists, it is 100% criti pen in every game, but their timing is never cal in the case of naval officers, especially the same from game to game, so the player captains. A capital ship costs almost a month's must learn to recognize the signs that one mining income and its crew may consume up event or another is about to take place and to 10% of Harmony's precious available lareact appropriately. Enough random actions bor. An incompetent captain will not survive occur to keep things fresh from game to game. a battle, and more importantly, neither will his expensive ship. Stormy Matters The battle module in Maelstrom is pretty Maelstrom has an attractive user interface simple. The player has a limited ability to based almost entirely on the mouse. The only intervene in a skirmish, primarily through time the player needs to touch the keyboard target and weapon selection. Wounded ships is when entering a new savegame name, and can also be ordered to retreat or enter a defeneven then there is an on-screen keyboard for sive mode to minimize casualties, although dic-hard rodent pushers. All in all though, the the temptation to get off one more shot with interface is Maelstrom's main weak point. The a wounded vessel is often both overwhelming game is simply so big that there are times and ultimately expensive. The player may when the player needs more information than elect to let the computer run his battles for can be displayed on screen at one timc. Pophim, but this is not wise. Skill at the battle up windows might be a solution, but the screen won't be able to make up for poor play design requires one to keep a piece of paper elsewhere, but poor battle play can negate handy in order to keep track of everything, otherwise good play. The documentation suffers from the same problem. There is more information to be Secret Agent Scam presented than is convenient and the manual The Secret Intelligence Network (SIN) is ends up being more confusing than helpful. the key to Maelstrom. SIN is responsible for It is written as if it were the owner's manual all the dirty tricks that make being Overlord for the Harmony control center, down to a fun and ultimately successful. SIN is also warranty disclaimer from the head of R&D. responsible for thwarting the efforts of SynWhat this offers in atmosphere, it sacrifices in Unlike the hints in the manual, which deal with specific events or items in the game, the following advice offers some ideas on the nuts and bolts of running a successful rebellion. Mining Survey early, survey often, survey everywhere. Get as many mines into production as early as possible. Fitz prices are high, and you don't need the staff elsewhere. Research  Have at least one team working on each research area as soon as you can get top people in each field.  If you sell a weapon, it will soon be shooting back at you. Military Ships on the ground at Harmony offer NO protection from enemies. Put idle ships on a patrol mission. They can be recalled or redirected if trouble arises elsewhere. With a maximum of eight ships per mission, it may take two or more missions to the same planet at the same time in order to defeat very powerful enemies. Have several Fox class ships available for transporting SIN agents around. SIN First Rule of Maelstrom: \"Mr. Fredricks is your friend.\"  Recon every planet as soon as possible. Don't blackmail people you want as a friend. Insurge the rich planets first, and only when a top-notch agent will get the mission. Last rule of Maelstrom: \"Mr. Fredricks is your friend.\" July 1993 Page 87 "


"Devlet Transcontinental Competition Train photo by Russell Sipe MPG-Net's Empire Builder. bu Ken Hill Tante Empire Builder Loods formation Display About no yor many years there has been a niche in the board game market for games involving trains and railroads. This genre has produced some classic games over the years: Rail Baron, 1830, Railway Rivals and many others. One of the most popular rail games released in recent memory is Mayfair Games' Empire Builder (EB). Now, fans of EB can take their dreams of riding the rails to fame and fortune to the electronic network of the MPG-Net. With this excellent implementation of a classic board gaming system, the rail game fanatic can experience a game with other players around the world as easily as if they were all sitting around the same table. un Take A Load Off Empire Builder is a game played on a map of the United States and southern Canada in a modern era. The object of the game is to make money faster than your competitors. The players do this by picking up loads from es on the map and delivering these loads to other cities. Players have three demand cards (with three possible contracts per card) at all times which gives them nine possible combinations for earning the green stuff. For example, a demand card might indicate \"Cars to Los Angeles, $34 Million\" or \"Imports to Winnipeg, $20 Million.\" The farther away from the source of the demand, the higher the card will pay upon successful delivery. Players construct their rail network by connecting dots on a grid superimposed on the map. Starting from a major city like Chicago, New York or Seattle, they build track across the country which they can use to fill the needs of the demands listed on their cards. The price of track is determined by terrain; mountain milcposts and river crossings cost more than building in open country. Routes into cities are also expensive. Two preliminary rounds of track laying start the game, after which trains are placed on the map and a turn sequence of «move then build» is followed for the rest of the game. There are six major cities on the map. Other cities on the map fall into two other categories, medium or small. Access is limited to these cites in order to provide some competitive flavor to the building process. Most cities provide commodities roughly corresponding to their \"historical\" economy. Detroit provides cars, Des Moines and St. Louis, corn, and the Pacific Northwest or Maine, wood. Each turn, players move their trains around the map, picking up and delivering loads, and making money. Once a player successfully delivers a load, he or she draws another card from the demands\" pile and continues. Early in the game, most of the earnings are re-invested in track building to expand the network. Later on, players can upgrade to faster or more powerful locomotives to run on their mature lines. Disasters like floods, snow storms or strikes appear from time to time to hamper the players. Getting caught in a derailment or similar disaster can be a minor annoyance or a major tragedy depending on the situation. The first player to amass $250 million in cash and has successfully connected to five of the six major cities on the map wins the game. Net'n on the Rail Road On MPG-Net, potential players gather in a conference area and wait for other players to appear. Once they are ready to play, one player starts a game by establishing two guidelines for the game: starting cash and victory conditions. The other players join the creator in his or her game group and the game begins. Once the Windows-based front end is started by the host computer, plavers are presented with a beautiful representation of the game map in a window. Other windows soon pop up with additional information. Each player can see their current cash position, train level and loads they are carrying in a small window labeled \"You.» The player can also see the same information about the other players in the game (except for cash position). The \"Demand» window shows the player's current demand cards, while a click of the Pille Command Londo Tantalus . Empire Builder Information Display About Wha; . CL TITLE: SYSTEM: GRAPHICS: PRICE: DESIGNERS: SERVICE: Empire Builder IBM (Windows, modem required) VGA 53/54 per hour Mayfair Games/Tantalus, Inc. MPG-Net (800) GET-GAME Page 88 Computer Gaming World "


"Evil magic will not die. It waits. Underground. For the time it can return to claim its dominance. RETURN TO ZORK STARING JASON HERVEY. ROBIN LIVELYAJLANGER.JASON LIVELY EDAN GROSS. SAM JONES HONES INFOCOM ASOCKHou wa ACTIVISION JOE ASPERIN \"SENATHAN WANG ANO TERI MASON INFOCOM KEY MICHELE EM DESTA DOUG BARNETT ONETO PETER SPRAGUE ACTIVISION. SCREENPLA COMING SUMMER 1 9 9 3 To order: See your local retailer or call 1-800-477-3650 Circle Reader Service #46 "


"meuhein Tantsustuc Empire Builder mond Leads information Display About Othet. Hoyen The Turn Manila It is now your turn! 100 Other players Uno Leila Groupi Pick up your loads: $25 Million NE S8 Million SO Million $39 Million Hewan S22 Million mallu $19 Million mouse shows the demand cards of others. hearty \"All Aboard!\" while news of disaster There is also a «Control Panel» window cards is preceded by a newsboy's call of \"Extra! which has icons for all the major game funcExtra!\" Telegraph wires click, steam engines tions. chug and diesels purr, all of which adds to the The MPG-Net implementation of the gaming experience. game is true to the original down to the finest detail. The map window in which players will Rough Track spend most of their time is roughly 1/6th the If the game has any drawback in its current size of the entire map. The player can scroll form, it is the slowness of play. Despite all the the map using the scroll bars on the side of the efforts of the programmers to provide tools to OK window. One can toggle between the larger, speed play, the game can take a while. In my more detailed play window and a smaller experience, a two-player game lasts around representation of the whole map. Unfortutwo hours. Each additional player in the game nately, this map shows only the position of adds about a half to one hour to the length of This really isn't the fault of the implementhe trains and not the track networks, and so the game. While these times mirror how long tation but is more the nature of the game is only useful as a reference. the game takes to play in person (at Icast with itself. There is a natural pause in the game, The game has several features that make the only three or four players), it is really longer even when played in person, when a player game both easier and faster to play than the than it has to be. After all, I don't have to draws a new demand card after delivering a Original. Even long-time EB players some count cash, physically draw track, or handle load. Early in the game, players build track times forget where loads can be obtained. mundane bookkeeping chores in this version. almost every turn which can slow the game as This problem is easily solved by well. MPG-Net seems to have recclicking with the mouse button on Tantalus Inc. Empire Bullder ognized this in their implementathe demand card. Not only do all File Command Loads Information Display About tion and have taken steps to minithe possible pick-up points for the Loads Avallable mize the problem. commodity become immediately BILLINGS There are a number of minor marked with a box, but also the problems with the system. The surdestination for that load. Clicking Demands OD CATTLE vey function at the time of this rewith the right button will display 00 SHEEP view only allows onc section of these helpful markers on the larger track to be \"pre-built.\" Many times, scale play window while clicking a number of spurs and connections with the left will display them in the must be built in a single round and full-map window. this limitation slows play. Also, Most game functions can be acwhile the software is a Windowscessed from the control panel. based package, I would advise Train movement can be started Clear against trying to run any other apwith a click on the movement icon. plication while the Empire Builder After this, the player simply points TL $12 Million front-end is operating. A number of at the next milepost along the route problems can arise, ranging from and the train moves along. RightRightthe changing of screen colors to a clicking on the movement icon Manager. My total crash of Windows, forcing the causes the train to \"auto-move.\" player out of the game. None of the The player's locomotive will move as far as it There can be long pauses while other players game windows are re-sizable. It would be can along the current route until it reaches a finish their turns. A careful player can use this helpful if one could size the play window to a decision point or runs out of movement time to survey track and plan strategy, but larger area if one is using one of the higher points. This feature speeds up play and elimithere are times when the game can drag. The resolutions that Windows supports like nates some of the endless clicking necessary to times I quoted above assume that all the play800x600 and 1024x768. In fairness to MPGmove an engine. ers in the game are experienced EB players Net, I should point out that EB is very much who are familiar with the time-saving features Building track is as simple as clicking on the a \"work in progress» and many of the probof the interface. Games played with novices build icon and using the \"crayon» icon to lems discussed are being ironed out. As the can be excruciatingly slow. (I encourage any draw track connecting from one milepost to system matures, I'm sure that improvements beginner players to play a couple of games another. Another time-saving feature is the solitaire to get a feel for the game before will be made. \"survey\" option. This allows players to draw attempting to play against experienced playtrack on the map before their turn and build Minor problems aside, I was very impressed ers.) with the job that MPG-Net has done in conall of it quickly when the appropriate time verting one of my favorite board games to the arrives. Not only does this help with route small screen. Their implementation of the planning and cash management, but it speeds game is sure to pass the scrutiny of the fanatics the game up tremendously. who love games of this genre. It is simply the Players can also send public or private mesbest computer implementation of a board sages to other players during the game using game that I've played to date. The ability to the \"Telegraph» icon. All of the important play with other rail game fans across the counaspects of face-to-face play have been duplitry is icing on the cake. At a time when finding cared except for slipping that extra load on an opportunity to get the gang together for an your train card while no one is looking! evening of board gaming is getting more difThe Windows-based interface is a joy to use ficult, MPG-Net gives one the opportunity to and makes excellent use of sound cues to let play the game at anytime—without submitthe players know when important events octing the living room to the ravages of beer cans cur. The arrival of your turn is signaled by a and pretzel bags. Cow $4 Million VAUCAM $14 Million attar Ha! Program Tantalus in Emsie Duilder File Command Lusshorman play About Oriyer 102 30-10.30 Page 90 Computer Gaming World "


"SPOILS OF WAR RAGNAROK R.A.W. Ospoils A War PH goes Direct KARA for Recession Proof Pricing and AVAILABILITY! Yolonize and conquer Toin the final great far away lands. You J Viking quest to will have to fight long aid the Gods in their and hard to achieve final battle victory! Naval and Land Ragnarok!! 200 races, battles, R and D, tactical multiple quests with no option, colonists. predetermined AT+ / 1 Meg RAM/ storyline, 100's of EGA / VGA / Adlib/ BUY FROM RAW ENTERTAINMENT HD req'd. War / items. Management $59.95 Satisfaction Guaranteed! XT+ / 640K / VGA/ $34.95. Includes FREE Adlib / HD Required. Map Editor for Roleplaying Extended Gameplay!! $50.95 $34.95 ACTION STATIONS! FIRETEAM 2200 Guarantee: Includes FREE Construction Return your purchase Ku (PC Only) !! Available within 30 days of invoice PC and Amiga date, with reason for return (1 Meg) and with the product(s) in a resalable condition and we will refund your money RAW INCLUDING the shipping and handling charge for RAW that title! The Naval Surface Combat Tactical Simulator. WE WANT YOU TO BE L i-tech combat on distant worlds! Command 1 Covers 1922 1945. 30 scenarios, build and COMPLETELY 1 your Fireteam of up to 16 units. 30+ SATISFIED!! Combat Units, 25 Weapons Systems, Battle generate scenarios, 180+ ship classes, superb A1 Computer, 20 scenarios, modem play between PC * Refunds only on titles and historical accuracy, 160 page manual. and Amiga versions. purchased directly from XT+ / 640K /EGA / Adlib / Modem / HD required. XT+ / CGA / 640K / HD recommended. RAW and with enclosure of Wargame $49.95 $29.95 Wargame $49.95 $29.95 original invoice. Includes Free Construction Kit (PC Only)!! ACTION STATIONS 1922 1946 Also Available: Terms: Shipping and Handling $3.50 U.S. ($5 Canada) for first title, $1.50 ($2.00 Canada) (All 640K / EGA PC and 1 Meg Amiga.) for each additional title ordered at the same time. Goods sent Priority mail (Airmail Canada). Worlds At War Science Fiction, Wargame $49.95 $29.95 Credit Card Sales: (MC/VISA). Call: 1 800 323 7878 (24 hours). Telephone Orders: Action Stations Scenario / Utility Disk(s) 2795 $14.95 Colorado residents add sales tax. Checks / Money Orders: State machine I disk size I format. (Amiga 1 Meg Only) Napoleon 1. Wargame $49.95 $29.95 Also daytime and / or evening phone number. Make check ou to RAW Entertainment Inc. 64 Page 8 1/2\" x 11\" Ragnarok Strategy Guide SH95 $9.95 Mail Order order's:Texas residents add sales tax. Goods usually shipped within 3 business Bravo Romeo Delta Global Nuclear Wargame $40.95 $29.95 days. R.A.W. Entertainment Inc.957 NASA Road One. Suite 146. Houston Texas. 77058 3098 (713) 286 2 386  R.A.W.Entertainment, Inc. All Prices Relate to Advertised Titles Only "


"VKNG Di SOFTWARE, INC. Adventure/Role-Playing A REALMS OF IBM Mac 37 37 IBM Mac IBM Mac ARKANIN 19 19 ea. 49 . . Pools of Darkness Prophecy of the Shadow Quest for Glory! (VGA) Quest for Glory II Quest for Glory III Ragnarok Realms Realms of Arkania Red Crystal Return to Zork Wing Commander Secret Mission 1 & 11 Wing Commander I Deluxe Wing Commander 11 Special Operations! Special Operations 2 Speech Pack Wing Commander III X-Wing 19 19 Ultima VI Ultima VII Forge of Virtue Ultima VII Part 2 Ultima Trilogy! Ultima Trilogy 2 Ultima Underworld Ultima Underworld 2 Uncharted Waters Warriors of Legend Wizardry Trilogy Wizardry 4 Wizardry 5 Wizardry 6 (Bane) Wizardry 7 Crusaders) ..... . Hint Books .. 12 10-12 ... Present A-Train: Official Strat. Guide AD&D Clue Books Avatar Adventures Bard's Tale III Chaos Strikes Back Chuck Yeager Handbook Civilization Clouds of Xcen Dagger of Amon Ra Darklands Dungeon Master 10 10 3193 . 298enome . Realms of Arkania Sir-Tech breaks off from the Wizardry line & brings another great role playing adventure. Utilizes excellent graphics and sound. Very hot item! IBM $37 Past IBM Mac AD&D Starter Kit 31 AD&D Collector's Edition 39 . AD&D Collector's Edit 2 43 . AD&D: Unlimited Advent. 37 593 Bards Tale It Bards Tale Constr. Set Betrayal at Kronder Black Crypt Castles Northern Camp. 19 Castles Il Challenge of Five Realms Champions of Krynn Conquests of the Longbow 42 Curse of the Azure Bonds 15 Darklands Art Disk w/HB Darklands MPE Dark Queen of Krynn 3137 Darkside of Xeen 42 Dark Sun: Shattered Lands 4193 11/93 Grey Isles Camp. 4793 Daughter of Serpents 32 Death Knights of Krynn 19 Dragonlance Collec. Ed. 43 Eric the Unready 37 Eye of the Beholder 19 Eye of the Beholder 2 Eye of the Beholder 3 Four Crystals of Trazere 34 Gateway Savage Frontier Gemfire Gryphon Master of Havlar Heimdall Inca Inindo King's Quest IV King's Quest V (VGA) 42 King's Quest VI King's Ransom Legacy Legacy of Necromancer TBA Legend of Kyrandia Legends of Drakka Legends of Valor Lord of the Rings Lord of the Rings 2 Lost Vikings Lure of Temptress Magic Candle 2 Magic Candle 3 Martian Dreams Might & Magic I&II Might & Magic Ill Might & Magic IV M&M Clouds of Xeen Merchant Colony Pirates Gold 6193Pool of Radiance . 31 . 37 . . . : . 12 Lemmings: w companion disk 15 Lord of the Rings Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes Lucasfilm Air Combat Lucas Arts Adv. Game Book Harpoon Battlebook Heaven & Earth: Strat. Guide Magic Candle 2 Martian Dreams Might & Magic Official Guide Might & Magic !!! Patriot Official Strat. Guide Planet's Edge Pools of Darkness Powermonger Official Surat Populous 1 & 1 O. Strat. Book 12 Quest for Clues: Book of Orbs 11 Quest for Clues: Man of Swords 11 Quest for Clues 3 & 4 16 ca. Railroad Tycoon 12 Ragnarok Strat. Guide Rex Nebular Ringworld Run 5 Magazine 1-17 Secret of Monkey Island I & II 10 ez Sherlock Holmes Sierra Hint Books Sim Earth: Official Surat. Guide 12 Sim Life: Official Surat. Guide Star Control 2 Starflight I & II Bea Star Trek 25th Anniversary Strike Commander Guide Stunt Island Guide Summoning 15 Ultima: Official Book 12 Ultima III. 9 Ultima VII Ultima VII Part 2 Ultima VII & Underworld 11 Ultima Underworld I & II 10 ea. V for Victory #1 Battle Book 12 Veil of Darkness Wing Commander I & II Guide 12 Wizardry 6 (Bane) Wizardry 7: Hint Book WING 10 IBM Mac 42 652 Veil of Darkness This gothic nightmare is not for the faint hearted. Plunge into a maze of vampires, werewolves and zombies accompanied with chilling graphics and sound FIX. IBM $37 10 Alone in the Dark Amazon 38 Batman Returns Blue Force: Next of Kin Spring Carmen San Diego: Past Carmen San Diego: Europe 34 Carmen San Diego: Time 34 Carmen San Diego: USA 34 Carmen San Diego: World 34 Carmen San Diego: Deluxe 49 Carmen San Diego: Amer. Past 38 Castle of Dr. Brain Champions Classic Adv. Pak (LucasArts) 37 Dagger of Amon Ra 42 Deja Vu 1 &11 Eco Quest 2 Elvira 1 Elvira 2 Freddy Pharkas 3/93 Heart of China 37 Indy Jones/Last Crusade 34 Indy Jones Fate of Atlantis 39 Leisure Suit Larry Tlogy Leisure Suit Larry! Leisure Suit Larry 5 42 Lost Files Sherlock Holmes 42 Lost Treasures of Infocom 42 Lost Treasures of Infocom 37 The Manhole Maniac Mansion 2 Spring Out of this World Police Quest Police Quest 2 40 Police Quest 3 42 Rocketeer w/Sound Source Savage Empire Sea Rogue Seal Team Spellcasting 301 Strike Commander Speech Pack Uninvited (Windows) Vel of Darkness Waxworks Willy Beamish Wolfenstein/Spear Des. 9 . . 32 37 37 37 37 42 . 42 37 Hardware 1537 Savage Empire Secret of Monkey Island Secret of Monkey Island 2 Secret of the Silver Blades Shadowgate Shadowgate (Windows) Shadowlands Shadow Sorcerer Spellcraft Spoils of War The Summoning Tales of Magic Treasures Savage Frontier Ultima IV Ultima V X-Wing Pilot X-wing, A-wing, or Ywing against the Imperial Empire. Includes combat training tours of duty, promotions, decorations, replay camera. Digitized music and dialogue from the movie. Must have! IBM $42 . 42 as we . . Adlib APS 2001 Cobra Joystick CH-Flightstick CH-Virtual Pilot Flight Yoke 2000 Gravis Eliminator Gamecard 29 Gravis Joystick Gravis Pro Gravis Ultrasound Pilot Control Stand 21 Pro Audio Spectrum-16 210 Pro Audio Spectrum Plus 145 SoundBlaster ASP 16 235 SoundBlaster Pro 180 Sound Blaster Pro Basic 150 SoundBlaster Microchannel 269 Thunderboard 99 Thrust Master flight stick 69 Thrust Master Pro 114 Thrust Master Rudder Pedal 109 Thrust Master Throttle 79 Thrust Master TSR's LEGACY OF TERROR Ami Dungeon Master Scrolls Elvira I & II Empire Deluxe Strat. Guide Eye of the Beholder 2 F-15 Strike Eagle III Guide Falcon Air Combat Falcon 3 Strategic Guide Global Conquest Guide widisk 15 Great War Planes Gunship 2000 Strategy Guide 12 Jetfighter It Strat. Guide Legend of Kyranda Legends of Valor 29 Future ArmourGeddon Bad Blood Battletech Powerhits Buck Rogers Buck Rogers 2 Breach 2 Cyberspace Dune Dune Il Epic Elite Plus Flashback Free D.C. Gateway Hard Nova Jonny Crash Leather Goddesses Phobos 2 46 Legions of Krell/Star Legions 37 \"M\" Mantis Speech Pack Martian Memorandum Mechwarrior 2 Megatraveller Megatraveller 2 Nova 9 Out of this World Planet's Edge Powerhits: SciFi Privateer Protostar: War on Frontier Rex Nebular MPE Ringworld: Revenge Patri. Rise of the Dragon (VGA) Space Hulks Space Quest 1-11 Space Quest III Space Quest IV Space Quest V Spelljammer Star Control 2 StarFlight 1&11 Star Trek 25th Anniversary 36 Star Trek: Next Generation 3Q Strike Commander Speech Pack Terminator 2029 Twilight: 2000 Ultrabots BERDAS . 999999.... March Specials IBM .... A Line in the Sand Champions of Krynn Centurion Death Knights of Krynn Eye of the Beholder F-16 Combat Pilot Int. Sports Challenge Links/Bountiful Course Disk MBT. Cen. Germany . Overrun Secret of Monkey Island I Sim City Add-ons 1 & 2 Space Quest IV Starflight I & II Stratego Test Drive II: Supercars Treasures of Savage Frontier Ultima VI Wing Commander .. . .na. Legacy You've just inherited a home from your evil ancestors. Explore over 400 rooms of terror in a desperate struggle to stay alive. Excellent graphics and sound F/X IBM $34 Latest and Greatest Battles of Destiny Conquered Kingdoms Dune II F-15 III Front Page Sports: Football Mercenaries Pacific War Star Control II Ultima Underworld II V for Victory Series 16 ea. ao .. "


"For information and release dates To place orders in U.S. and Canada Fax 1-(404) 840-7925 SAME DAY SHIPPING on items in stock. Hours: Mon-Fri 10am-10pm EST (6am-7pm PST). UPS Rates: Ground: $5.00 3-day Air: $6.00 2-Day Air: 7.00 AK & HI: 12.50 COD Add: 5.00 Overseas: Avail. Mail Rates: AK & HI: 6.00 Canada: 6.00 Overseas: Avail. Prices are subject to change so please call first! PHONE: (404) 840-7906 24 HR. FAX: (404) 840-7925 2890 Lake Colony Drive, Suite 12, Norcross, GA 30071 Please have credit card ready! Open Saturdays 10-5 for your convenience. Strategy Pre-WWII IBM Mac 22 IBM Mac FGA-VICTORY Red Storm Rising Classic Shadow President Shuttle Special Forces Utopia SimLife SimLife (Windows) Solitaire (Windows) Solitaires Journey Spoils of War Stunt Island Super Tetris Super Tetris (Windows) Tristan Utopia Virtual Reality Studio 2 Wacky Funsters Weere The Prophecy Wordtris Sci-Fi IBM Mac Ambush 4/93 . Ancient Art of War Skies 37 . Blue and the Grey 5/93 Cacsar Centurion Civil War Vol. 1.2 or 3 27 Cohort 2 Conquered Kingdoms Conquest of Japan Discovery of Columbus Genghis Khan Gettysburg Gold of the Americas L'Empereur Liberty or Death Merchant Colony No Greater Glory Nobunaga's Ambition 2 Paladin ! Prelude to Jutland P.T.O. Rampart Red Baron (VGA) Mission Builder Romance of 3 Kingdoms 42 Romance of 3 Kingdoms 2 42 Siege Dops of War Warlords Enhanced Warlords II Waterloo H5bn5 Sports HNB9999 16 37 16 Empire Deluxe This is the modern version of the award-winning EMPIRE. Now with Super VGA, digitized sound FIX. network & modem capability, scenario editor, and more. A must! IBM $37 31 . . Battlefield 2000 Breach 2 Cyber Empires Fireteam 2200 Global Effect Imperium Mantis Speech Pack Mechamander 10793 Mercenaries 37 Mercenaries 2 6193 Reach for the Stars 28 Robosport (Windows) 38 Rules of Engagement Rules of Engagement 2 4893 Second Conflict (Windows) 34 Space Inc. Spaceward HO! (Windows) 37 Spaceward HO! (DOS) Spectre Star Legions Star Legions 2 Theatre of War SVGA When Two Worlds War 37 4-D Boxing All-Amer. College Ftbll 92 Andretti's Racing Challenge ATP Tennis Bill Elliot Nascar Car and Driver 28 37 V for Victory: Market Garden The most popular WWII series in gaming software adds another proud product Simulates Allied airborne invasion of Germany in 1944. SVGA graphics required. IBM/Mac $43 IBM Mac Complete PGA Tour Golf 31 Earl Weaver Baseball 31 Earl Weaver Baseball || 16 . Front Pg. Sports: Football 42 . Front Pg Sports: Baseball 3/93 Front Pg Sports: Bskrball '93 Games: Summer Challenge 35 Games: Winter Challenge Grand Prix Grand Slam Bridge 1 Hardball 3 MLBPA Player Disk Stadium Disk Hockey League Sim II Indy 500 Jack Nicklaus Sig. Ed. Golf Course Disk #2 15 John Madden Football II Jordan Flight Links Links 386 Pro Mauna Kea Crse. Disk 19 Mieroleague Baseball 4 33 NCAA College Football 92 37 NFL Challenge NFL Video Pro Football PGA Tour Golf PGA Tourn. Crse. Dsk 15 15 PGA Tour Golf (Windows) 37 PGA Tourn. Crse. Disk 15 Pool Shark Pro League Baseball Power Hits: Sports Tony LaRussa Ulu Baseball 19 Add-On Disks Tony LaRussa 2 92 Stats Disk AL/NL Stadiums Fantasy Draft Wayne Gretzky Hockey 2 36 Hockey League Sim. Wayne Gretzky Hockey 3 Wilson Pro Golf World Circuit 32 . IBM Mac V for Victory Mkt. Garden 43 43 V for Victory. Casserine Pass 2020 V for Victory Stalingrad 30 30 Victory at Sca 1993 Warlords Western Front ww It: Battles of Pacific 5793 World War II General ...... ORDS 24 Modern ...... . A.Train Construction Set Air Bucks Are We There Yet? Battles of Destiny Battle Chess Battle Chess (Windows) BattleChess 4000 (VGA) 32 BattleChess 4000 (SVGA) Buzz Aldrin's Race to Space 42 Caesar's Palace Caesar's Palace (Windows) 18 Chessmaster 3000 Chessmaster 3000 (Windows) 43 Civilization Civilization Master Edition Classe 5 Classic 5 (Windows) Club Racquetball Command HQ Classic Design Your Train mHHH Warlords Enhanced This classic wargame has been on top of CGW's Reader Poll for 2 years. Addictive medieval strategy game with 1-8 human computer players. A+ rating IBM $19 IBM Mac Design Your RR Design Your Landscape Dominant Species Dominion Eco Quest 2 El-Fish Empire Deluxe Eric The Unready Facetris III Flight Sim 4.0 Sound and Graphics Global Conquest Gobliiins Grandest Admiral Grand Slam Bridge II Heaven and Earth Hong Kong Mahjong Hong Kong Mahjong Pro Hoyles/Classic Incredible Machine Ishida Lemmings More Lemmings & Game 33 More Lemmings Lemmings 2 Lexi-Cross Life & Death II Lost Admiral Lost Admiral Enhanced Monopoly Monopoly Deluxe DOS/Win 37 Ongin Fix Screen Saver Perfect General WWII Scenario Disk 22 . Great Battles 20th Cen 25 Perfect General Enhanced 8/93 Pinball: Windows Pool Shark 18 Populous Populous 2 World Editor 3/93 Powermonger WWI Scenario Disk Power Politics Power Hits: Movies R.R. Tycoon Classic Reach for the Skies Keyboard Overlays A 10 Tank Killer ATP Aces of the Pacific B-17 Flying Fortress C. Yeager Air Combat F-15 Strike Eagle II F-117A Nighthawk Falcon 3.0/3.01 Flight Simulator 4.0 Jetfighter I and II Megafortress Secret Weapons Luftwaffe 10  39 CD-ROM CARRIERS AT WAR Aces of the Pacific WWII: 1946! RAF in the Pacific Aces Over Europe Campaign Disk! Action North Atlantis Action Stations v3.2 32 Data Disk Air Raid Pearl Harbor Air Warrior B-17 Flying Fortress Banzai Battletank Barbarossa Bismarck Campaign Carriers at War 4235 Const. Kit Carrier Strike Expansion Disk #1 21 Clash of Steel 4/932 . Flect Commander 6793 Fleet Med German Raiders Atlantis 26 Grand Fleet Great Naval Battles 42 Super Ships/Atlantic 19 Scenario Builder America/Atlantic 19 High Command High Cmd. Enhan. SVGA 5193 In Harm's Way Malua Storm Marianas Turkey Shoot 26 MBT Central Germany 39 MBT Kursk Midway New World Order Pacific Theater Op Pacific War Panzer Battles Patton Strikes Back Reach for the Skies River Plate Rommel North Africa Second Front Secret Weapons Luftwaffe DO-335 plane disk 20 HE 162 P-38 P-80 Seventh Fleet Silent Service 2 Silent Service 2 Classic Task Force 1942 Their Finest Hour/Bdhwks. 44 Third Reich V for Victory: Utah Beach 43 V for Victory Velikiye Luki 43 43 25 7th Fleet 39 AT.P. 39 A-10 Warthog 12/93 A Line in the Sand ATAC Air Force Commander Allied Forces Comanche: Max. Overkill Expansion Disk 1 Expansion Disk 2 Conflic Korea Conflict: Middle East Crisis in the Kremlin F-117A Nighthawk (VGA) F-15 II Classic F-15 III F-15 III Voice Commander F-19 Voice Commander Falcon 3.0 Operation: Fighting Tiger Falcon MC Flight Sim 4.0 Flight Planner Sound & Graphics Rescue 911 Scenery Design Global Effect Gunship 2000 Campaign Disk 1 Halls of Montezuma Harpoon v1.3 Battleser 2 or 3 Battleset 4 Harpoon Designer Series Harpoon Scenario Editor Harpoon Challenger Pak S.E. 49 Harpoon II Harrier Assault Jet Fighter 2 Add on disk JF2 wladd on disk Jump Jet Jump Jer \"Ace Pack KGB MI Tank Platoon MacArthurs War Megafortress Mission Disk 1 or 2 Megfortress Megapack Pacific Islands 11 Patriot .   . Risk . 12 Roads to Gettysburg The 7th Guest Amaring Universe Battle Chess Battle Chess Enhanced Blade Buzz Aldrin's Race Space Campaign Case of Cautious Condor Challenge of Fire Realms Chessmaster 3000 Conquest of the Longbow Creepy Castle Cyberspace Dagger of Amon Ra Dark Sun Destination-Mars Dune Eco Quest Great Naval Bardles Gunship/Midwinter Guy Spy Iron Helix Jones in the Fast Lane King's Ransom King's Quest Y The Legend of Kyrandia Loom Lost Treasures Infocom ! Lost Treasures Infocom II M-I Tank Platoon . Magnetic Scrolls Maniac Mansion 2 Mantis Manhole Enhanced Murder Makes Strange Deadfellows North American Indians Pacific Islands Pacific Islands 1 Prince of Persia The Secret of Monkey Island 47 Secret Weapons of Luftwaffe Sharif on Bridge Sherlock Holmes Cons. Det. I 43 Sherlock Holmes Cons. Dec. 1143 Shutde Spaceship Warlock Space Quest IV Saar Trek 25th Anniv. Edition Total Baseball Total Distortion Ultima I-VI Bundle Ultima Undwid Wing Co. Victor and Yondo Where World Carmen Deluxe 52 Willy Beamish Wing Commander+ Secret Missions 1 & 2 47 Wing Commander II Deluxe 47 Wing Commander/Ultima VI 57 Wolpack 3193 Carriers at War Construction Kit This kit allows modification of existing CAW scenarios or the creation of new scenarios. New scenarios includeWake Island, Guadalcanal, and Tarawa. IBM/Mac $37 BBB%BBBBBBBBB .... ... Risk (Windows) Sargon V Scrabble Deluxe (Windows) Sharif On Bridge Shanif On Bridge (Windows) Shuttle SimAnt SimCity SimCity (Windows) SimCity Supreme ! SimCity Supreme II SimCity 2000 SimEarth SimEarth (Windows) SimFarm HHB . 49..... % 37  . . "


" MS49S Goes to Washington Photo by fack Rodrigues D.C. True's Shadow President by Chuck Moss abstract fashion. Troops are committed to countries or launched on invasions as casily as setting a number, and combat results are displayed instantly. This is also where a player can conduct-gasp!-nuclear war! their two cents on proposed policies, and will even resign if you do naughty things. (The Press Secretary is an attractive blonde. My wife dubbed her square the «Packwood Button.\") Power? You want it, you got it! Presidential authority is exercised through a series of menus and buttons. The Shadow Prexy can dole out foreign aid, rearrange the Federal Budget, and raise/lower taxes at whim. The budget menu allows across the board spending cuts the likes of which Ronald Reagan would have drooled for. In addition, the player may act as statesman and propose trade relationships, try to influence other countries' policies, attempt to bring about peace, or wage covert war. Finally, there's the dreaded «War Room\" in which military affairs are handled in highly Shadow President .C. True's new strategy game, Shadow President, is an extremely detailed geopolitical simulator that balances the world on its players' shoulders. It also allows players to kick said globe around like a beachbal, but that's definitely not advised. There are five alternate reality scenarios, all starting in January 1990, ranging from genuine Earth to Super-Iraq (guess who won the Gulf War?). The game runs in continuous time, with days varying from half a minute to several seconds. equiring a fairly sophisticated computer set-up, Shadow takes up 7.5 megabytes of hard disk space, a minimum of $50K free memory, a good sound card/speaker set up, and advises using a math co-processor and 486 chip. However, I ran it on a beat-up 286 and it worked fine. VGA graphics are crisp and up to current standards. It does occasionally lock up, particularly in some of the military sub-menus, but this might be due to my pushing the capacity of an older machine. Caveat: save often. The players of Shadow President find themselves transported into the Oval Office. There is no election. One just steps into the seat of power and starts to act. This is accomplished not only through the player's computer, but through the \"Shadow Network\" as well. The latter is the instrument that allows one to control the destiny of the United States and the world. The Shadow Network, or the onscreen display, is a world map with a series of buttons set below and to the side. Using the mouse, the player points and clicks to various countries, interacting with them much as in Chris Crawford's Balance of Power. A good President is an informed President, and this is where Shadow provides bells and whistles. Players can access country-by-country data from the \"CIA World Fact Book\" that comes as part of the software, accounting for much of those 7.5 MBs. A series of \"filters,\" or push buttons, change the map to display cconomic strength, alliance orientation, military spending, strategic value, etc. In addition, the player has a stable of advisors: Secretary of State, Defense Secretary, CIA Director, etc. These advisors will put in The Simulation of Presidential World Power Join The Network, Seize The World Shadow President gives the player a varied and sophisticated array of tools to monkey with the planet. The player defines the goals and the means. Whadda ya wanna do? Nuke Ohio State? Keep things running on an even keel? Raise the world's standard of living? Balance the budget? You've got the means, the ends are vour business. But this is not Risk. Conquering geographical areas until one covers the globe like the symbol for Sherwin Williams Paint Company is not going to provide victory. A player is measured by several scorecards. Most immediately important is Leadership Effectiveness Rating (LER). A low LER means that everybody laughs at you and kicks sand in your face. Every time a player does something that doesn't work out, LER drops. Guard that LER well, or you'll find even Chad won't exchange cultural programs. A second important factor is \"Ruthlessness.» Do too many nasty things and you'll find yourself assassinated. Third, your popularity with the U.S. electorate is key. Remember: he who has a 90% approval rating in summer 1991 can be out of office in January 1993. More importantly, let popularity drop too far and the game will be abruptly terminated with an impeachment notice. Playing Chicken On The Hot Line So how does the game play? With a fairly long learning curve. There are lots of subtle by-plays among the nations, lots of hidden actions going on. Everybody knows what's coming on August 2, 1990, of course, and Saddam can be easily thwarted. But he'll be back, and there are other pitfalls out there. As President, the player makes the international climate, and the more ruthless your policies, the more chaotic and violent the world bePresiden TITLE: SYSTEM: GRAPHICS: PRICE: PROTECTION: DESIGNERS: Shadow President IBM VGA $69.95 Documentation Look-up Brad Stock, Robin Antonick, Charlie Athanas D.C. True, Ltd. 1840 Oak Avenue Evanston, IL 60201 (800) 929-1243 PUBLISHER: Page 94 Computer Gaming World "


"Brian Vodniks TM fields of conguest\" The BEST Multi-Player Medieval Strategy Game made. PERIOD. Brian Vodnik's  1-6 Players, 199 Territories \"... Quality strategy war game that is well worth looting and pillaging to get.\" Computer Gaming World, July '92  7 Troop types and catapults Vikings ( 5 Castle types, 5 Difficulty levels .an excellent strategy game that should appeal to strategists of all levels of experience.\" Amazing Computing, Nov. '92 Sields of Conquesta Toggle each kingdom between human, computer, and off ... REAL WINNERI Superior graphics and superb gameplay.\" Chicago Tribune, Sept. 25, '92  Resource management of food, wood, stone, iron  Beautifully HAND-DRAWN graphics \"... Unlike so many of the lacklustre wargames out there VikingsTM has a difference-it's actually good.\" Computer Trade Watch, June 22, '92 Huge 800 X 896 pixel map that you actually play on! core The intuitive control system is so straightforward that you can get hooked immediately... addictive and highly enjoyable.\" CU Amiga  Simple point and click interface to an intricate and detailed game SCREENSTAR OM OP  Handicapping SK Siege of Strathclyde's Home Costle! Territory on 153 TON 14 Owned by Lord Brian Stronghold: Hone Castle (100%) Current : Cnough Terrain : Mountain Morvist i Surplus + Populace: 12/21 Stocks 10 Food Greuth : 1273 Gorriron: Men Died 14/0 Hey Unlimited Lond : HOMELAND 2 Mergin IITTITUTT fficiency 78 . . . Woll Sections : 20 erroched Wall Strength 120 STOPH Castle 0 Prchers o Crosrbono STORM LACTACAT 2 ridds not in vse yet. You have 5 ornker with 33 men here. XBO All the details of a territory can be found with a single click of the mouse. Looking at the overview map, we see an even game in progress. Sieging a home castle with only two catapults ... NOT a good idea! Available NOW for Amiga and IBM. Coming soon for Color Macintosh. Realism Tentertainment VIKINGSTM, Fields of Conquest and TRUE 32-BITTM, are Trademarks of Realism Entertainment\" Realism Entertainment\" 6N522 Pine Street Bensenville, IL 60106 (708) 595-7487 Circle Reader Service #85  1993 Realism Entertainment\" All Rights Reserved Worldwide. "


"pevnew FUGEES DE CUTTUR i recte HULLE Sortim AROURI TERALLY in ROMAN CASA UDAL Are these peopl e sneered Hort For 17 Manuel 9.441 ir 10% I, Petand 1.25 kn, N. 10 Tor Sries Warla Standing Tatende e RIE 200 comes. Conversely, be an international nice guy and the world smiles with you. Mostly. As a learning tool, Shadow does a good job of providing information and showing players how complicated the world is. As a simulation, it has certain real-world problems. A simulation, particularly one that draws heavily from contemporary headlines, must parallel the real world. This reviewer found certain...well, anomalies. Most jarringly, American armed forces are paper tigers. Saddam's army kicks U.S. tail whenever armed force is applied. A typical counter to Iraqi invasion of Saudi Arabia put a million and a quarter U.S. troops against 800,000 Iraqi soldiers. The resulting clash took months, and U.S. casualty figures mounted to the 50,000 range. This sure isn't the Desert Storm I remember. In addition, committing troops causes one's popularity to free fall indefinitely. Once again, this isn't borne up by any real-world situation. Even than a pinball game in a Chicago bowling Vietnam took three years for the public to alley. Fortunately, such actions are possible, cool, with Nixon reelected in 1972. Who since rebooting a game is infinitely easier than programmed this thing? Cyrus Vance? rebooting the world. More inaccuracies: the USSR is belligerent LOILLISEKERS and uncooperative. In 1990? Actually, Gorbachev was so desperate to save his regime, he was signing anything in exchange for cash. (Remember the Grand Bargain?) In short, as in many political games, the model reflects the designers' sensibilities rather than actual realities. How does Shadow work as a game? The problem is that you can't do cool stuff. Effectively running a nation is a tedious business Control tatil CHCIA) of details. A good world leader prevents bad Poslanom things from happening and works to raise Games that stress responsible management, boring things like Third World GNP. Alas, yer stay fun, emphasize hands-on challenges: an entertaining game must let the player be like Sim City, Civilization, or Railroad Tycoon. an activist, making things happen, bad or good. The simulation aspect of Shadow PresiLarge scale, highly abstract political simuladent forces one to be more passive than active tions like Crisis in the Kremlin and Shadow if stability is the desired goal. President have many virtues but tend to be too arid for real entertainment. This one is preShadow President, despite its wealth of dedominantly for those who love to input numtail, confines a player's actions to running inning bers and tweak complex systems models. As bere through menus and inputting numbers, for me, even invading Canada is more fun finely calibrating economies and relationthan carefully massaging the numbers in this ships. It's highly ethical and educational, but boring. A player yearns to break loose and do cducational, but less entertaining game. The something wild like invade Canada to bring reluctant verdict on Shadow President: a work home the Stanley Cup. Or drop a nuke on of art that belongs in every civics classroom, Tokyo just for the hell of it. Unfortunately, but it sure won't drag me away from Dune II. such actions cause the world to \"tilt\" faster CGW PARALLEL GAME PORT. ÔTEHUUN LIL Portable computers are great except when it comes to playing simulation and action games. That's because they don't come equipped with a gameport. The Parallel Game Port\" (PGP) fixes that problem and lets you connect a joystick, yoke, weapon systems controller or pedals to any portable or desktop MS-DOS computer. And even if your computer already has a game port, the PGP's software features make it an indispensable accessory for any serious gamer. Use it to customize key joystick switches and eliminate inconsistencies between games. Even eliminate the computer speed dependencies of some game ports. PGP's Standard mode is fully compatible with all game software. And an Enhanced mode adds sensitivity and response for most simulation games. Look for the Parallel Game Port in the software section of your computer store. Or call (714) 833-3355 and say: \"Stick it to me!\" TURN YOUR NOTEBOOK COMPUTER INTO A FLYING MACHINE  Connect your joystick to any IBM-compatible computer  Program your joystick switches for specific gamos GENOVATION GENOVATION Circle Reader Service #60 Page 96 Computer Gaming World "


"Top Titles at the Lowest Prices! Since 1982 800-554-9925 Compu FAX: (414) 357-7814 CGW 7-93 TECH INFO: (414) 357-8181 HRS (CST): M-F 8am-8pm, Sat 11am-5pm P.O. Box 17882, Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53217 Call Us On Our US/Canadian Toll Free Number! Consumer Electronics IBM CREATIVE LABS. INC. SOUND CARDS CREATIVE SOUND $225 BLASTER.16 ASP  16-Bit Stereo Sampling & Playback for Voice Channel  Enhanced 4-Operator, 20-Voice Stereo FM Music Synthesizer  MIDI & CD-ROM Interfaces  Windows 3.1, SB & SB Pro Compatible Uitima Underworld II Uttatots. Uncharted Waters Uninvited for Windows Unlimited Adventures U.S. Civics. V for Victory Market Garden V for Victory. Viah Beach V tor Victory II Velikeye tuki Veil of Darkness Wayne Gretzke 3 War of the Guit Warriors of Legend Ween: The Prophecy When Two Worlds War Where..Carmen San Diego Each Where. Carmen Past Where. Carmen Space Where Carmen USA Deluxe Where...Carmen World Deluxe Wed Science Arcade Wilson Pro Staff Golf Wing Commander 11 Speech Accessory Pack Special Operations #1 or 2 Wing Commander Deluxe Wizardry. Crusaders Dark Savant World Atlas 40..... World Circuit Champ Edition .... World Science Arcade World Circult Grand Pro XWing Zodiac Signs.... 49.95 37.95 39.95 31.95 31.95 39.95 42.95 42.95 42.95 37.95 34.95 29.95 19.95 34.95 34.95 2995 29.95 44.95 4495 .44.95 34.95 24.95 49.95 15.95 20.95 49.95 39.95 44.95 39.95 ...34.95 34 95 39 95 39 95 Indy Jones 4 Fate of Atlantis.... .... 34.95 International Sports Challenge 3096 Jack Nicklaus Unlimited 34.95 Legend of Zyrang 1 Lemmings 1 or 2 28.95.3: 95 Light Ouest 31.95 29.95 Firestone, Bountiful Course Disks 17.95 Lord of the Rings 2 or 3 34.95 Lords of Time 29.95 Lost Treasures of Infocom 39.95 Madden Footbal 31.95 Mega Fortress 37.96 Mission Disk 1 or 2 Mercenaries 37.96 Megatraveller 2 34.95 M9.29 30.95 Might & Magic lll... 3495 Napoleon 29.95 Navy Seals 25.95 No Greater Glory 39.95 Oh No! More Lemmings stand alone 29.95 Oh No! More Lemm add-on....... 21.05 Out of this world...... 46.95 PGA Tour Golf 31.95 Golf Tournament Course disk 17.95 Perfect General 34.95 WWII Scenario Disk 19.95 Pinball Dreams 2095 Pinball Fantasy 24.95 Pa Fighter 21.95 Puan 9 from Space Pools of Darkness 3795 Populous 11 37.95 The Challenge scenario disk 20.95 Powermonget 31.95 Prehistorie Prophecy of the Studow... 37.95 Red Zone 29.95 Road Rash 31.95 Secret of Monkey Island I or Il.... Shadow of the Beast Il or Ill... 34.95 Shadowlands... 29.95 Sharif on Bridge .... 29.95 Shuttle 29.95 Sim Ant 34.95 29.95 PRO AUDIO AMIGA Multimedal MEDIA W VISION MPC $175 LED Pro Audio Studio 16 $225 Sim City Sim Earth... 2995 2995 MODEMS ZOOM La Russa Baseballll.. 37.95 Laser Squad 2495 Legacy. The 39.95 Legacy Realm of Terror 3495 Legends of Valout 37.95 tesut Suat Latry 5 39 95 29.95 Oh No More Lemmings (Add-on) 21 95 Lemmings Il... 34.95 Liberty of Death 3495 Links 386 PIO ....... 39.95 Mauna Kea 1995 Banff Springs 19.95 Lord of the Rings Il Two Towers 3495 Lost Fles of Sherlock Holmes 42.95 Lost Treasures of Intocom 39.95 Lost Vikings ......... 29.95 Lunar Command 3495 Lure of the Temptress 29.95 Magic Candle Ill 37 95 Mants/Speech Pack ...........39.95/19.95 Manois Missing 3495 Mega Lo Mania 29.95 Megatraveler llor lll 34 95739.95 Michael Jordan in Flight 37.95 Might & Magic III 3495 Monopoly Deluxe for Win... 34.95 Moraits Maccal Music Machine 20.95 MS Golf for Windows 42.95 Multimedia Music Vivaldi 35.95 Mystery at the Museum 34.95 Mam 1965-1975 29.95 National Lampoon's Chess Maniac.. 3995 News of the Past ....... 34.95 NFL Pro League Football 44.95 NFL Video Pro Football 44.95 No Greater Glory 39.95 Omar Shariff on Bridge Windows... 29.95/29.95 Origin FX: Screen Saver ......... 25.95 Out of this World... 3495 Pacific Theater of Operations 39 95 Paladin 2.. 34.95 Patti 42.95 Pathway to Power.. ..... 29.95 Pepper's Adventure in Time.... 29 95 Perfect General 34.95 Pirates of Gold 39.95 Populous II. 37.95 Power Politics Prince of Persial...........................39.95 PrintShop Deluxe DOS or Windows 44.95/44.95 Graphics Libraties Business...... 29.95 Graphics Libraries Sampler Privateer ........... 47.95 Proleagun Baba 34.95 Proto Star War on the Frontier ..... ..39.95 Quarky Turbo Science 29.95 Quest for Glory 3....... ......... 39.95 Rags to Riches ......... 34 95 Rampant... ....... 17.95 Realms of Arkana 34.95 Return of the Phantom 3405 Ring World 34.95 Ring World: Patriarch's Revenge/premiurn 34,95 Robocop 3-0 31.95 RoboSport for Windows 24.95 Rock and Bach Studio 34.95 Rome 29.95 Rules of Engagement 39.95 Rules of Engagement II 39.95 SCOUT 34.95 37.95 Secret Weapons Luftwatte 39.95 Expansion Disk 1.2.3 or 4 19.95 Serpent Isle (U7 part 2) 47.95 Seventh Guest Seven Cities of Gold 31.95 Shadow President 39.95 Shadowgate for Windows 31.95 Shadowlands 29.95 Shanton Bridge Enhanced... 59.95 Sid Meier's Bundle 29.95 Siege/Expansion Disk 20 95/20.95 Sim A DOS Windows 34 95/34.95 Sim City DOS/Windows 29.95/34 95 Sim Earth/Windows 29.95/29.95 Sim Farm 34.95 Sim LM 39.95 Software Jukebox: A. grade builder.... Software Jukebox The Arcade Solitaire's Journey Sound Graphics, Aircraft Space Inc. Space Quest 5 39.95 Specul Forces 29.95 Spectre Supreme 39.95 Spectre DOS premium 34.95 Spell Cratt 34.95 Spelicasting 301.... 34.95 Spebammer Pirates of Realmspace 37.95 Star Control 11 34.95 Star Legions 37.95 Star Trek Screen Savers for Win 3 2.95 Strike Commander 47.95 Stro Poker 3/data disks.............. 29.95/15.95 Summoning 3795 Sweet & Low, American Folk Songs 35.95 Syndicate 3795 TA Break Pinball 29.95 TA Break Pool 2995 Tales of Magic: Proph. Shadow.. 37.95 Task Force 1942 39.95 Task Force Admirals Pack 44.95 Tegel's Mercenaries 37.95 Terminator 2029 The Castle of Dr. Brain 19.95 The Prophecy 24.95 Theatre of War .... 17.95 Tom Landry football 29.95 Tony Latussa Baseballll 36.95 Tornado Traders 29.95 Treasures of the Savage Frontier 31.95 Tristan 29.95 4995 Forge of Vulture Data Disk..... 20.95 Solitaires Journey 34.95 Space Hulk Star Control Il... 34.95 Star Trek 25th Anniversary ....... 34.95 Strip Poker 3 Tales of Magic: Prophecy Shadow.......... 37.95 Terrain Envoy 28.95 The Challenge 20.95 The Light Corridor ..... ..29.95 Tom Landry Football Twighlight 2000 34.95 Ultima IV or V 37.95 Utopia 29.95 Viking Field of Conquest 3695 Warriors of Legends ...19.95 Where in the Carmen each 29.95 World Circuit.. . 3495 ATrain 39.95 Anony 29 95 Air Force Commander 34% Air Support. 29.95 Bard's Tale Construction..... 29.95 Birds of Prey 31.95 Black Crypt 31.95 Buzz Aldrin's Race Into Space........ 39.95 Campaign 34.95 Carmen San Diego Each .... ... .. 30.95 Carmen San Diego America 36.95 Castles 34.95 Campaign Disk .. ... 19.96 Castles ll. Civil War Conquest of Japan... .. 34.95 Creepers Crusaders of the Dark Savant.... ..39.95 Cyber Empires... 31.95 Cytron 2995 Demonsgate 34.95 Dark Seed........ 39.95 Death Knights of Krynn 31.95 Delux Music Il... 77.95 Deluxe Paint IV (while supplies last) ...... 97.95 Demoniak 3095 Desert Strike 31.95 Discovery Columbus 34 95 Dragon's Lair 3 34.95 Diane , 29.95 Elvira Il Jaws of Cerberus 39.95 Eye of the Beholder 1 or it 37.95 Eye of the Storm 29.95 F-147-18 29.95 Fables & Fiends. Legend of Kyranda 34.95 Fighter Dual Pro Final Conflict....... 34,95 Gateway to the Savage Frontier 31.95 Great Naval Battles 42.95 r 37.95 Battleset 74 25.95 Harpoon Designers Series Battleset...... 31.95 Harpoon Signature Edition 4795 Heimdall 24.95 Aces of the Pacific 39 95 WWII 1946 add on disk 1995 Aces Over Europe... AD&D Dark Sun: Shattered Lands 47.95 AD&D Unlimited Adventures 31.95 ADIBOUADIJUNIOR VOL 1 34.95 Adventures of Pinocchio 45 95 Air Bucks 34 95 Air Traffic Controller 34.95 Air Wamor 39.95 Aircraft & Adventure Factory 24 95 Airforce Flight Assignment 39.95 Aladdin and His Wonderful Lamp 35.95 Alone in the Dark 3495 Amazon 39.95 Ambush 37.95 Armored Fist 37.95 Ashes of Empire 44.95 Aspects of Valor 59.95 ATP Tennis 31.95 AT Air Command 3495 B-17 Flying Fortress 39.95 Bad Blood. 31.95 Barron's Book Notes 44.95 Batman Returns 2995 Battles of Destiny 34.95 BattleChess 4000/Super VGA 29 95/34.95 Battlefield 2000 37.95 Betrayal at Kondor 39.95 Big League ballpark diskhardball lll 17.95 Black ! 31 96 Body Illustrated 44.95 Buzz Aldrin's Race into Space... Campaign ... 34.95 Car & Driver 37.95 Carrier Strike South Pacific 39.95 Expansion Sc! 20.95 Carriers of War ....... 34,95 Carriers of War Construction Kit. 3495 Castles for ll 3495/34.95 Cà 34.95 Caesars Palace 19.95 Challenge of the Five Realms 34.95 Champions ..... 34.95 Chess Meister 5 billion and 1 Civibration ... 44,95 Classic Adventutes 34.95 Comanche. Maximum Overkill 42.95 Mission Disk /1 or 12 . 25.95/25.95 Conquered Kingdoms....... 34,95 Conquest of Japan 3495 Contraction Zack... 24.95 Creepers 29.95 Crosswords Deluxe................ 21.95 Crusaders of the Dark Savant.... 41.95 Curse of Amon Ra 3995 Curse ol Enchanta. 49.95 Cyber Emples.... 3195 Daemonsgate VGA 34.95 Daager of Armonia...... 39.95 Dark Queen of Krynn 31.95 Darklands 39.95 Darklands MPE 44 95 Dark Hall Dark Sun . 4795 Daughter of Serpentis 31.95 Deja Vul or II, Windows 3195 Dominant Species Dragon's Lair 3 3495 Dr. Floyds Desktop Toys 2495 Dune li...... .34 95 Eagle Eye Mysteries 31 95 Ecoquest II 29.95 Ecoquest. The Search for Cetus 49.95 Eight Bull Deluxe 39.95 El-Fil Electronic Aquam 3496 Empire Deluxe 34.95 Entrepreneur Business Planner 49.95 Eric the Unready.. ........ 34.95 Exodus 2495 F-15 12 Classic premium....... 1995 F-15 Strike Eagle III 34 95/49.95 Fables & Fiends. Legend of Kyrandia......3495 Falcon 3.0 44.95 Disk 1 Operation Fighting Tiger Final Contact 29.95 Financial Workshop 25.95 Flashback 3195 Flight Assignment. Ar Force 39.95 Flight Simulator 40 39.95 Pilot's Power Tools 24.95 Freddy Prakas 39.95 Front Page Football 39.95 Gambi 37.95 Gary Gristy's Pacific War 4495 Global Effect 1795 Gobblin 11 24.95 Grand Slam Bridge Il Great Naval Battles 42.95 Scenario Builder 25.95 Expansion Disks a 20.95 America in the Altantic 1995 Hard Ballil or Ill 29.95/34.95 Harpoon Signature Edition 47.95 Hanne Assull. 34.95 Het & Earth 2995 Heroes of the 357th 17.95 High Command 42.95 Hockey League Simulator 1 29.95 Humans 24.95 INCA Incredible Machine 29.95 Indy Jones 4 Fate of Atlantis Haluan 5.0... 55.05 J Nicklaus Sign Tour 2 1795 Jack and the Beanstalk 35.95 Jump Jet 39.95 Jump Jet Ace Pack 4995 Jutland 49.95 King's Quest 5 Ensanced... 30.95 King's Quest Lands of Lore... 34.95 V.32 bis Semd/Receive for Windows Internal / External V.32 bis Send/Receive 14,400 Internal / External .... $175/$205 3195 $175 / $205 Call For More Titles! Supra Corporation Supra Fax Modem V.32 bis, Internal with Fax Software, DOS/Windows ...... $179 / $179 SupraFax Modem V.32 bis, Ext. alone.............$229 with Fax Software, DOS/Win ...............$239 / $239 Software available only on 3.5\" disk or premium packs. No individual 5.25\" disks are available JOYSTICKS 800-554-9925 3495 . ...... $75 ................. Advanced Gravis: Analog Joystick....... $32 Eliminator Game Card ............ .$30 PC MouseStick...... CH Products: Virtual Pilot / Virtual Pilot Pro ..................$69 / $89 Flight Stick Hi Speed Adaptor $19 Gamecard 3-Auto / Gamecard 3-PS/2 ....... $30/$49 MACH 3 Joystick ......... $29 Maximum: MAXX Flight Yoke .............. MAXX Pedal.......... Kraft: Kraft KC3.. Kraft Trackball w/Foot Controler ................ Kraft Thunderstick. ........... Thrustmaster: Flight Control Weapons Control Mark II ... Rudder Pedals $119 Thrustmater Pro... .................. $119  One of Wisconsin's Top 10 of Software Available. Women Owned Businesses. All Products Sold  Corporate, Govemment & Carry Manufacturers' School Pos Welcome. Full Warranties & VISA Documentation.  APO, FPO HI, AK No Surcharge Puerto Rico & Canadian on Credit Cards. orders welcome: 6%. . Most Orders Shipped Min. $6. Interational within 48 Hours. Orders Shipped First Class  Software Shipping only Mail Insured: $5 per order, not per title. 15%-Min. $15. If mail cost Hardware: 5% Min. $5. exceeds calculated amount, .C.O.D orders welcome. you'll be billed additional with only a $6.00 Charge. Call for Free Catalog  We Ship Latest Version &Items Not Listed Prices fluctuate beyond our control & may change for better or worse. Defective returns must have a Refum Authorization number. Call our 1-8CX to obtain a Retum Authorization or your return will not be accepted. Shipping & handling are non-refundable. All sales are final. All returns are subject to a restocking fee. $99 ... ...... Circle Reader Service #44 "


"Scorpion's View Scorpia Finds plenty of Venom on Serpent Isle SERPEN? Scorpia is an experienced and respected adventure game expert. CGW is pleased to provide this forum for her distinctive and often controversial perspective. ltima VII: Serpent Isle is the direct remain where once a mighty civilization There is some speech, although not much. follow-up to The Black Gate. The Avaflourished. Fortunately, the lion's share of it is by Denis tar and trusty companions (lolo, Make no mistake about it: Serpent Isle is a Louber as the Great Earth Serpent, the best Shamino, and Dupre) sail off to Serpent Isle, complex game, much more so than The Black voice in the game. Not that he sounds quite hot on the track of Batlin, who escaped at the Gate. Many threads are woven into this taplike that in real life; some audio magic was end of the previous game. Exploring this mysestry, and, at times, it is easy to lose sight of performed on the recordings. No matter, it is per terious land, they soon discover it was settled the pattern as a whole. While the Avatar's Avatar's well-done and perfect for the part. hundreds of years ago by refugees from the ostensible purpose is to find Batlin, tracking Serpent Isle is certainly the cleanest-running time when Lord British was consolidating the him down takes a back seat to becoming product that Origin has brought out in a remnants of Sosaria into the new realm of entangled in the affairs of the island's inhabiwhile. The game is very stable: no bizarre Britannia. Each group had its own reasons for tants. Even when Batlin has finally been dealt graphics, no missing inventory items, virtuleaving, and cach founded a city of its own: with, there is still at least a good third of the ally no crashes. Once, and only once, the Monitor, ruled by Knights; Fawn, home of game left to complete. This is not something game froze on me. That was in Fawn, while the Beautiful People; and Moonshade, domiyou play through in a couple of afternoons. reading a scroll found on a body. After renated by arrogant Mages. booting and restarting the game, I was able to Game mechanics and interface are mostly The humans are at war with the Goblin race read the same scroll with no problems. I the same as they were in The Black Gate consider this a momentary hiccup, since that had settled there before them. Moonmouse-driven point-and-click, with keynothing even remotely similar occurred anyshade, on its own little island off the coast of board commands supported as well. It is usuwhere else in the game. the main one, is not really troubled by this; ally easier to use the mouse for most things, Monitor and Fawn bear the brunt of the although some of the keys can be faster than conflict. It is primarily the Knights and Pikepaging through the icons. For instance, commen of Monitor that defend the human esbat mode can be started simply by pressing tablishments against the incursions of the \"C\" instead of first bringing up the Avatar's Goblins. For all that, each town has its inscreen and then clicking on the dove/sword fighting, politicking, and petty squabbling. icon. Serpent Isle is not a peaceful land. Conversations also use the same method It is even less peaceful, thanks to the mysteintroduced in The Black Gate words are rious and deadly storms that roar across the printed directly on the screen, and you click with the mouse on the keyword of your islands at unpredictable intervals. The storms choice. There is no keyboard input here at all. can kill, or teleport people and objects at random. Few now dare to travel the roads or The music seems to have been brought over So, the game is clean, the storyline good, sail the seas. wholesale from the previous game; I recall many new places to visit, good sound and hearing most of the tunes in The Black Gate. graphics...what could be wrong? Plenty, Underlying all this is the mystery of the Some time having passed since then, it's hard Some of it is minor, but there are also some Ophidians, a now-vanished race that worto say if anything new was composed for this major problems with this game. shipped the great serpents of Order, Chaos, one, except for the tune that plays while in the and Balance. Only ruins decorated with serpent gate nexus. Still, it's all good music, It runs under the VooDoo Memory Mansnakes and a few books in a sinuous alphabet so an encore isn't a problem. ager, which was universally hated in The Black PRODUZI Page 98 Computer Gaming World "


"Gate. Fortunately, aside from a planned addday, with little or no extraneous animation or remove. I spent a long time in the lever in, Origin has announced Serpent Isle will be going on in which case, the party can move room over this before finally giving up on it. their last product to use VooDoo. That being quite rapidly). Speed is also better when the Once again, the Hound to the rescue. Here the case, I will skip my planned diatribe (heh) Avatar is going solo or has only a companion you track someone else, and the trail leads to and only say: ler us raise a cheer to this heartor two along the castle, where the barrier is now mysteriening news, and hope we can use our chosen It takes, on average, a minute or more to ously gone. No explanation is given for this, memory managers in future Ultima games. load in a saved game, and slightly less to save Inventory is the same nightmare it was in a position, with the files being in the 400the previous game. Items in packs and bags 500K range. This is definitely not state-ofIn the castle of the white dragon, you must proceed room by room. Most of the doors are move around, cover each other, and generally the-art, especially when The Summoning, make it difficult for you to find whatever whose save files balloon ro 700-800K by the locked, and require a key or lever to open you're looking for. On several occasions, I had end, can save such monsters much, much them. Eventually, you come to a room with then to start taking things out of the backpack just faster. Even with a SMARTDRV cache, 1 no key, none of those you have work, and to locate a particular object. This jostling found no material improvement in either disk there is no lever. This looks like a dead end, around may be «realistic,\" but it does not add access or save/restore times in Serpent Isle. but it isn't. anything to the game and can be a great Warning: Specific Hints Follow Through most of the game, you learn that time-waster. Where the game really falls on its face, face a locked door needs a specific key to be This is especially true of the spell reagents. however, is in the construction of some of the opened. Bashing, explosives, or lockpicking Even keeping them in a separate bag doesn't \"puzzles.\" In order to explain this more fully, just won't do the job in most cases. I tried help very much. Try locating a dark item, I will have to give away some solutions or these methods anyway on several doors in the such as nightshade or black pearl, when it's partial solutions. Then again, considering the castle, with no positive result. It was my misagainst a black background. It is very hard to circumstances, this may not be a bad thing. fortune to stop before reaching the one and keep track of how many you have of each only door on this level that could be opened by Up north, after you get through the mounitem. What we need here is a \"reagent bag,\" tains, one of the first things you find is a small similar to the \"rune bag\" of Underworld; a bag bashing. Are we having fun yet? There are other situations like these in the with a light bottom that keeps the reagents game, which seem designed to frustrate more neatly in place and readily countable. Failing than anything else. It is especially bad because that, it needs at least a hor key of some kind they are major points, where you are stuck to show how many of each reagent is in the with really nothing else to do (or nowhere to bag. go), until you figure out (through desperate Food is another sore point. As before, once trial and error) what has to be done to progress a party member becomes hungry, he whines to the next stage of the game. and moans about it until you stuff something Loose ends show up, too. Return to the Bull in his face. Even with a packload of food, he Inn late in the game and you find that everyis totally incapable of feeding himself. This is nonsensical. The whole food business itself is one except Wilfrid is dead and Wilfrid isn't a nonsensical and nit-picky detail we can do talking about it. Apparently, he hasn't nocave with five pedestals, five Ophidian runes ticed that his mother, brother and all the withour. Let us be done with it once and for and a barred door. By trial and error (which guests have been slaughtered. Worse, a all. Buy everyone two weeks of iron rations, and they all eat when hungry, instead of waitdoesn't take long), you can figure out how the manned guard tower is only a few steps away, ing, like a baby, to be hand-fed by the Avatar. runes should be placed on the pedestals, but and no one there seems to have anything to this doesn't open this doesn't open the door. say about it, either. The artificial intelligence of the party characters hasn't improved a lot since The Black Further north are the Gwani, a peaceful race Revisit the Gwani and you note that most Gate. They have smartened up enough so that of fur-covered humanoids. You help them of them are dead, but the survivors seem comthose equipped with missile weapons usually with their current problem (a sick child) and pletely unaware of it. The same holds true in stand back to use them instead of rushing up all they say is that perhaps someday they can Monitor, where the sole survivor is totally to the front line. However, should you have do something for you in return. They make oblivious to the carnage in the city. It is all people set to \"attack nearest,\" and the nearest no mention of the mysterious cave. They very exasperating. happens to be something on the other side of seem to know nothing at all and, of course, In sum, Serpent Isle is a good story gone a wall, those party members will try to push there is no way you can bring up the matter wrong. While the main plotline is solid, exethemselves through the wall to get to it. They in conversation. There is no one else around cution of it is inadequate. There are irrelevancompletely ignore the visible threar in front to talk to and really nowhere else to go. You cies (the whole businece of Chamina's of them. Party members also cheerfully walk could be stuck here for a long time. background is bogus), loose ends, too many over or through the most blatant traps, no poorly-designed \"puzzles,\" and an amazing It turns out that you must call in a special matter how carefully the Avatar maneuvers. They do not seem to notice these things at all. Hound to track Batlin at this point. Then, programming oversight that allows you to and only then, the Gwani suddenly rememcomplete the game without performing what Those are the minor, albeit aggravating, is supposed to be a crucial ritual. ber the cave and tell you how to get into it. matters. Now we come to the more serious Why couldn't they tell you this in the first Origin needs to re-examine ones. Disk access is the first. The game goes place or why couldn't you simply bring up the refresher course ont to the drive constantly. The party can hardly matter yourself (having visited the cave)? It is something that has gone steadily downhill take a step or any sort of action without the a very frustrating sequence. since V), as well as how open game design and drive light going on. The more animation of logical plot connections are supposed to any kind that is happening, the slower the There is the matter of Shamino's Castle work. With that, and the elimination of some game becomes. It can become excruciatingly (which does not shed a very good light on his of the more irritating minor features, the next slow in some instances, even on a 66 MHz past). You can get in and enter all the outer Ultima may well be a game worth playing. machine. The fastest movement is usually rooms, but the central keep is barred by a Serpent Isle, however, is likely to provide more obtained in the open wilderness, on a clear mysterious force field that nothing will dispel aggravation than enjoyment for most players. CGW OD July 1993 Page 99 "


"@corpiom's Tale (Continued from page 80) However, we've been doing all this with one of the store's in-house monitors; my own is Fors. my own is still in the box. Let's just be certain and try it out before I take it home. The monitor is defective. If thoughts could kill, half the world's population would have died in that moment. It is now four weeks, almost the end of January, that I've been without a game computer. Not since I got my first Apple way back in '81, have I ever gone so long without a game to play. Never, with any system, have I had such problems, or been so frustrated. ARRRGHHHHH!!!!!!!! KIIIIIILLLLLL!! Fortunately, my self-control asserted itself and I did not actually go berserk, even though I certainly felt like it! We managed to get an order in to the manufacturer in time, and they promised the replacement would be there tomorrow. It actually did come the next day, and it actually worked. I lugged it home, and hooked everything up, mainly cables and wires, since all the cards were already inside. Then, I turned the system on, and it booted with no problems. Okay, so far, so good. Next, re-load all the files backed up from the previous machine. That went well. Try out ProComm Plus with the new modem. Hmmm, not dialing. Spend most of the afternoon fiddling around with settings and thumbing through the manual, my own hand printing, never mind writing, to finally track down the one letter I needed It's that bad (well, y'know, it ain't easy holdto change in to change in the modem string to make it ing a pen in a pincer). work ... but, I make it work. The mail continues to pile up. Some of it, Let's see how the Gravis Ultrasound Soundalas, gets mixed in with old stuff already Blaster emulator does with the Ultima Underanswered, and goes out in the trash during world demo. Gee (ear to speaker), there is one of my rare \"clean-up\" fits. I don't like to some sound there, bur it's awfully low. The think about that one. GUS amplifier is, let's say, weak. I need amFinally, the Apple is up and running again, plified speakers now. Luckily, the computer and I settle down to the backlog. Slowly but store owner has a pair of slightly-used Rolands surely, it gets taken care of. At last, everything he doesn't need and sells them to me. is caught up, the computers are working, and So, it's the last weekend in January, and life returns to abnormality in the cave. finally — FINALLY! the system is toWHEW! gether, up and running properly. That's when So be warned: when the latest in high-tech I discover the Michelangelo virus in the parcomes around, let someone else mess with it tition table. Well, it could have been some first!! Don't be the first one on your block (or thing worse; this is one of the easier viruses to in your cave) to buy the new toy; it may come remove from the system. Anyway, it's gone, with more headaches than you ever imagined. my MS-DOS machine is fine, and I CAN Okay, next time, we'll return to the usual PLAY GAMES AGAIN!!! bill of fare here at the Tale. Meanwhile, if you The following week, my Apple died. need help with an adventure game, you can reach me in the following ways: It is, of course, on the Apple that I answer On Delphi: visit the GameSIG (under the all the letters I get from CGW readers. This, in some ways, was more serious than not Groups & Clubs menu). having an MS-DOS computer, since I could On GEnie: Stop by the Games Roundstill reply to questions on games I had played Table (type: Scorpia to reach the Games RT). in the past. Now the man is prung up fast. in the past. Now the mail is piling up fast. By US Mail (enc By US Mail (enclose a self-addressed, Answer by hand? My handwriting was stamped envelope if you live in the United never very legible and has gorten worse over States): Scorpia, PO Box 538, Gracie Station, the years since I've been computing. Hey, New York, NY 10028. there are times when I can't even make our Until next time, happy adventuring! Cow SOFTWARE CLOSEOUTS GAMER'S GOLD $5.00 Star Glider II WE PAY CASH FOR USED IBM GAMES ako Nintendo, Super Nintendo, and Sega Genesis We want your current used games* 1-800-377-8578 call for authorization before shipping WE SELL USED GAMES IBM, Nintendo, Super Nintendo, Sega Genesis All games are tested & IBM disks virus checked Call for current title availibility AMER'S B IBM, AMIGA, APPLE, COMMODORE 64/128, ATARI ST, MAC & MORE IBM BARGAINS UNDER $10 W/MS-DOS, BARCAINS UNDER 120 MINDSCAPC/THUNDER MOUNTAIN FAST BREAK. Accolade 59.50 Monday Night Football VGA $16.50 SUPER HUNDU TOR C-64/128 Sharkey's 3D Pool $19.50 DONT GO ALONE, Accolade $ 9.50 10.GAMES FOR $14.50 Microte saue Football $14.50 OUTRUN, Sega $ 0.50 Microleague Baseball $14.50 Includes: Demolition Mission, Army SPACE HARRIER, Sega $5.00 F-15 Strike Eagle $16.50 Moves, Bad Street Brawler, Tai-Pan, GUNSHIP, Microprose $ 9.50 Solo Flight $16.50 Fist. Tai-Cuti. Mutants, Cyrus Chess. CROSSBOW, Absolute $5.00 Tomahawk $14.50 Doc the Destroyer. & Uridium. $14.50 MIND DANCE, Mindscape Xiphos $14.50 LEISURE SUIT LARAY BUNDLE MY GRAND PIANO,Fisher-Price $9.50 MEGAFORTRESS $16.50 FROM SIERRA for IBM/MS-DOS MAGIC JOHNSON BASKETBALL 5 9.50 Carrier Command 514.50 BEGINNING ALGEBRA, Dinoson $ 9.50 Sky Chase Includes: $14.50 GEN, KNOWLEDGE BUILDER $ 9.50 David Wolf Secret Agent $14.50 Leisure Suit Larry 1, 2 & 3!! HUMAN BIOLOGY, A.E.C. $ 9.50 Blue Angels $14.50 Rocket Ranger $14.50 Only $30 SANDS OF FIRE, Three-Sixty $9.50 Air Strike U.S.A. $14.50 ARMOR ALLEY, Three-Sixty $9.50 Blue Max $14.50 Dark Heart of Uukrul $16.50 MARVEL TRILOGY SIERRA for IBM $19.50 Buck Rogers ! $20 EACH FROM MICROPROSE for IBM Buck Rogers 2 $19.50 QUEST FOR GLORY 2, FIREHAWK Heroes of Lanco $19.50 Includes: CODENAME ICEMAN, HEART OF Dragons of Flama $19.50 Amazing Spiderman, X-men CHINA, KING'S QUEST 1 -or-4. Questron 11 $16.50 & Dr. Doom's Revengo. $19.50 OIL'S WELL, COLONEL'S BEQUEST NEWSROOM PRO $19.50 Only $20 !! LEISURE SUIT LARRY 1 -or3. CERTIFICATE MAKER $16.50 RISE OF THE DRAGON, THEXDER. EGA PAINT 2005 $14.50 MIXED UP MOTHER GOOSE DAS BOOT $14.50 STAR COLLECTION for IBM SPACE QUEST 1 -or2-or-3. MANHUNTER NEW YORK $14.50 10 GAME BUNDLE $19.50 CALL FOR OTHER TITLES! X-MEN 2 PUNISHER $19.50 from Electronic Zoo DR. DOOM'S REVENGE $14.50 LAND. SEA & AIR TRILOGY AMAZING SPIDERMAN 514.50 SUPER SALE $19.50 SUPER CONTRA $14.50 Includes: Paris-Dakar, Skidoo, by Microprose. 3 GAMES $20 TWILIGHT 2000 $14.50 Includes: AIRBORNE RANGER. LIGHTSPEED 20,000 Leagues under the Sea, $14.50 COVERT ACTION $14.50 Legend of Djel, Mouldy Old PIRATESI & GUNSHIP. FOR IBM Dough. Balloon Lagoon, Mechanic IBM SPECIALS WHILE THEY LAST... Panic, Plasma Pilot, Space Scape, Hoyle's Book of Games Vol. 2 RED RARON by SATA BATTLECHESS 2. by Interplay & best selling TREASURE TRAPI! SOLITAIRE, by Sierra. $15 HARPOON CHALLENGER PK $25.00 TROIKA 3-pack Includes:28 Solitaire games with ADULT FUN FOR IBM FROM FREE SPIRIT mouse support. Tons of fun!! SEX VIXENS FROM SPACE 310150 from Paragon Software for IAM. SEX OLYMPICS (VGA only) $16.50 ......SALE.......$14.50...... For IBM on 3.5\" disks only. SOLD ONLY TO ADULTS 21 & OVER. hduda: REBEL PLANETS, IVAN & METAL us more items for a HEARTS. Alt VISA/MC ORDERS CALL TOLL-FREE Windows 3 compatible with different computers... Apple, VGA, mouse & sound card support!!! Fast paced 1-800-676-6616 Atarl, Amiga, C64123, MAC, multilevel arcade action with 100'1 af levelse Credit Card Orders Only 11 ( 525 minimum & lots more IBMMS-DOS 11 ating play, Strategy & quick reflants required COMPSUIT TO ORDER: Send check or money order including shipping charges of $5 fod | U.S.A., $8 for Canada, $16 all others. Califomians must include 7.25% sales P.O. BOX 5160 tax. To receive our catalog with 1000's of closcouts for all computer types, SAN LUIS OBISPO sond S2 incash or U.S.postage stamps.. DO NOT CALL FOR A CATALOGII CA 93403 To check for an item not listed here, call (805) 544-6616. 95.00 GAME WE ACCEPT VISA/MasterCard Most items shipped same day. S5 UPS/S7 2nd Day Air *Games must be complete with all disks & printed materials and in the original box. Incomplete games will be relurned of your expense. GAMER'S GOLD 1008 W. 41st Street Sioux Falls South Dakota Circle Reader Service #58 Page 100 57105 Circle Reader Service #43 Computer Gaming World "


"«Vroom, vroom» ...And There's SoundMan\". GUARANTEED COMPATIBLE or your money back LOGITECH SoundMan 16 delivers sound so real, 85% of the time people can't tell the difference from live sound. That's because it's packed with the absolute latest in sound board technology: up to 16-bit/44KHz record/playback, Yamaha OPL-3 stereo synthesis 20-voice chip, 100% Sound Blaster« and Ad Lib» compatibility, and more. SoundMan brings you the highest CD quality sound available, for all your games and applications, in Windows« and DOS. From Logitech, the peripherals leader. At your dealer, or call 1-800-732-3026. 10/@ Trademarks belong to their respective owners. The Senseware Company SOUND VDMA SoundMan 16. Get Real Circle Reader Service #74 "


"A New Dimension Tim Tyler a.k.a. 'Tyre\" Toronto, Canada \"Merlin, I'll cast a cure spell on you.\" Ed Avis a.k.a. \"Merlin\" Camden, NJ \"Tyre! Help! I'm wounded.\" DRAKKAR\" STAR CRUISER CETASER\" Gimiaus, H . Balar, dow o n the door and we're the rear HMM 243 too .... .il 0 x lopen door north Chat and play games with people from around the world without ever leaving your home. MPG-NET gives you something you can't find on floppy disk; on-line realtime contact with the most puzzling and challenging entity of all time. Another human mind. Play pulse-pounding, intriguing, forever challenging games with stunning graphics and vibrant sound. Games that are constantly improving so they won't get stale. Form strategies, share secrets and solve puzzles with up to 100 folks from around the world, twenty-four hours a day. In addition to our games we have Bulletin Boards so you can write public messages to other players, and Electronic Mail to send private messages. We also have Chat Rooms in which you can shoot the breeze LIVE with people from around the world. All you need is a modem, a phone line, and a computer; IBM-PC compatible, Macintosh, or Amiga. come visit a land where dragons roam free, rodents grow to unusual size, and adventurers are the endangered species. Team up with players from around the world. Together, explore mysterious lands, armed only with your enchanted weapons, psionic spells. and wits. You'll find untold riches and glory while solving intriguing puzzles, and destroying the mightiest of beasts. MPG-NET brings you the ultimate in fantasy role-playing. The year is 2300 A.D. We've discovered stardrive and colonized hundreds of new solar systems. In the process, however, we pissed off some very nasty aliens. To say they hate us is an understatement. They'll do anything to eliminate us from space. No compromises. This is all-out interstellar war. We need your help! Based on GDW's classic space combat game, MPG-NET brings you the on-line version of Star Cruiser-a 3D, multi-player campaign of splitsecond action. 1992 MPG-Net, Inc Multi-Player Games Network and MPG-Net are service marks of MPG Net, Inc The Kingdom of Drakkar is a trademark of Drakkar Corp. Computer network versions of Empire Builder, Star Cruiser, Operation Market Garden, and the Kingdom of Drakkar are designed and developed by Tantalus Inc. All other brand and product names are trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective holders "


"in Entertainment ...Your Multi-Player Games Network. Brad Elk a.k.a. \"Sauer\" Louisville, KY \"If you need some help, just page me.\" Lori Zini a.k.a. \"Diana\" Waco, Tx \"What tore you up. Merlin?\" OPERATION EMPIRE BUILDER MARKET-GARDEN LE:161 MPG-NET is accessible from over 600 cities in the United States and over 80 cities internationally. It costs less than you think: $4.00 per hour in the continental US and $3.00 per hour in the N.Y. city area. These costs are all inclusive. There are no hidden communication fees. ni mm LVVISO PEE Dial toll free 800-GET-GAME and we'll send you your account number, password, start-up kit, and 5 free hours right away. For more information call 800-245-0317. Three elite Allied paratroop divisions drop into enemy territory. Their mission, to seize the bridges leading up to the Rhine the last obstacle of Allied advancement into the heart of Germany. They almost succeed. Scattered remnants of Axis forces already defeated in France must guard the Rhine the first-line of defense for the Third Reich. They almost lose. MPG-NET brings you the on-line version of Operation Market-Garden, GDW's classic two-player war game, based on the biggest airborne operation in history. Combining two great American loves: Railroads and Money! Now you can capture the entrepreneurial spirit of America and build your own railroad empire. The wheels of progress are you and up to five other players from around the world, locked in a power struggle of epic proportions. It takes planning and ambition to build a railroad empire. And only the best will endure. Experience MPGNET's on-line version of Mayfair Games award-winning, classic board game. MPG-NET Your Multi-Payer Games Networks 800-GET-GAME 800-438-4263 Circle Reader Service #77 "


"cneak preview 2 They're Going to Hell for This One! The Bad Boys at ID Software Take Their 3-D Engine to New Depths by Chris Lombardi next generation technology jump. It's a Dantes on a circle by circle descent to Godhigh-altitude, wind-aided, Carl Lewis of a knows-where. Sneak Previews are not designed to be reviews. They are feature articles based on \"works in progress\" that CGW's leap ahead. Wolfie players who ventured solo into editors have deemed worthy of early coverage. These Gamers who choose to accept this new Hitler's den may now enlist help in Doom. articles are not intended to provide the final word on a product, since we expect to publish appropriate review mission will find themselves in the skull of Doom is (God help us) multiplayer. Those coverage when the game is finished. a space marine, the likes of which we saw fortunate enough to have access to a netdie en masse in the film Aliens. In fact, the work will be able to hunt by fours. Those of script of this game could be transformed lesser fortune, though blessed with modem T his summer marks one year since Id into Aliens with a simple Search Software dropped unsuspecting and Replace and a slight twist of gamers into a stunningly realistic setting. There you'll stand, playing Nazi stronghold in Wolfenstein 3-D. With cards with three other space station its blazing 3-D scrolling and its simple, Rent-A-Marines, popping powthough extremely intense game play, Wolfie dered donuts and jawing about the quickly became the car's caterwaul in action red light delights to be found plangames. The Texas-based team of software et-side, when the alert klaxon sounds. But it's not another genetically engineered gerbil loose on aisle 12 there's real trouble about, and that straight flush you were just dealt is shor to Hell. Strutting out into the hallway with well-armed cocksureness, you see a sight that makes you regret that your combat briefs are airtight. It's a ht. It's a and a friend, will be able to hook up and a friend, will be able to hook muscular, horny, pizza-nightmare of a remotely. The rest of us can play with ourdemon with a soul eatin' grin. Yes, he wants selves; a state of affairs to which we comyour immortal being, and, no, he's not puter gamers are well accustomed. beyond using gross surgical means to get it. As mentioned, Doom is a great improveupstarts that brought us this gaming expeIf the trigger finger is fast enough, you'llment over Wolfie. One glance at a scrolling live to shoot another, and your multi-level screen is enough to prove it. Whereas pilers this past year. They've been very quest to find the source of these soul Wolfie had nicely textured walls with bitbusy. So busy, they've probably yet to hang snatchers will have begun. Off you go, four mapped adornments, Doom has opulently all of their awards on the wall. better-armed, though less lyrically endowed textured walls with bit-mapped adornWe don't know what nasty ments. Whereas Wolfie has bare ceilings and sludge is seeping into the Texas floors, Doom has carpet, tile, ceiling panels water table, but whatever it is has and light fixtures. There are immense comgiven these boys some strange puter banks with rows of important looking visions, and what's worse, the prolights, and monitors displaying bit-mapped gramming sorcery to carry it out. planets and space station maps. There is Doom is the name of their next crefurniture: tables, chairs, counters and crates ation, and unbelievable graphics — there are even cards on the table for the technology is their game. Doom is, poker game mentioned earlier. Gamers will not too surprisingly, another 3-D also be able to put their own touch on the action game based on Id's award surrounding, as one's bullets will pockwinning game engine. But what is mark the walls, which will bear those terrisurprising is how far they've taken torial markings for the rest of the game. If this new incarnation beyond the environment of Wolfie «put you there,\" Wolfenstein. Doom is not the typical BE Page 104 Computer Gaming World "


"neak preview.4 then Doom will pick you up, hurl you in, cook a gamer's circuits. At one close the door, and turn the key. point, you can climb to an upper Ever wonder how the Nazis kept their level and look out across a vast area fortress so well lit in Wolfie? Well we hadn't of virtual space with all sorts of either, but now that we've seen Doom the graphic monkey-business going on question does come to mind. One of the down below. It's the computer more impressive features of the graphics is game equivalent of one's first the addition of light, or rather, the removal Grand Canyon vista. The Id 3-D system has changed very little in the actual mechanics of the game. Keyboard users will still have the Alt, Cnrl, and arrow keys as their best friends, and the number mind these days when discussing a game of keys will still cycle through the ridiculous stockpile of weapons that such graphic intensity is the computer one keeps on their person. The horsepower required to play it. In its current stare, enjoying the full experience of weapons still suggestively protrude Doom will probably take a muscular 386 from the bottom of the screen, and machine; however, there will be options to they still animate in visceral pulses of power, though they do wild new resize the graphic window and switch off things. There's an animated, thrustsome of the graphic detail so that lower-end gamers will be able to play at a decent clip. ing double-bayonet that reaches out Increased realism has its costs, though realof it. There are gorgeous lighting effects in into the screen, as well as a shotgun that Doom; long shadows stretching from doorone's bit-mapped arm will pull back and ism of the Doom kind may make it worthwhile. ways, overhead beams casting patterns on cock after every blast. There are other, the floor, flickering fluorescent bulbs as irrimore twisted armaments to be found and August looks to be the month in which tating as in life, and caverns so black you fired, though we'll save some surprises forgamers will be Doomed to wander shadowy can't see your pistol muzzle in front of your later. One new and welcome interface addihalls rife with Satan's spawn. Like Wolfie, face. If you thought bumping into a Nazition is an automap feature that will keepDoom will be distributed through shareware henchman in a suffocating maze was track of the sights scen and the places ver channels and direct from ld. The first unnerving, try knocking head-long into ng try knocking hexd-long into uncovered. This will be an essential part of uncovered. This will be an essential part of episode (one level) will be freeware and will Satan's soul steward in a darkened alley. a Doom session, as the non-orthogonal floor offer frugal graphics compared to the rest of Another major shift from Wolfie to plans are disorienting and labyrinthine. the game. However, in the registered verDoom is in the lay of the land. The Doom Again as in Wolfie, the primary directive sion, Id won't hold back. Who knows to room architecture now includes nonis to scavenge the floors for ammo, health what depths Id will go to bring this virtual orthogonal walls -a college boy's way of rejuvinators and treasures, while fighting experience to a bullet-casing littered end? saying that they are not restricred to right back hordes of baddies that lurk in every 19 One just can't be sure of such things with angles. In addition, there are now variable dark corner. Those who wished for a bit these Id guys. There's only one thing we ceiling heights and multiple levels within a more interactivity in the world of Wolfie can be sure of — we'll have one Hell of a time. CGW level, as one might find in an Ultima will be satisfied a bit. There are switches Underworld. In Doom there are curving and on the walls that can be flipped to interestdescending hallways, stairs to upper and ing effect. Walls will move, platforms will lower areas, recessed \"conversation pits,\" rise from the floor or descend from and elevated platforms. The effects they've the ceiling. There's even a room in created with these new tools are enough to which bits of the floor pulse up and down like pistons, making for a seasick trip across the hall. Id hopes to make some of the computer terminals interactive, though they hadn't implemented that in their latest working version. Basically, as the mechanics go, Doom is the same \"hitch up yer jockstrap\" shoot-nscrounge as Wolfie, though on a completely different planet. The question that comes to July 1993 Page 105 "


"inside the industru European Invaders? CGW's Foreign Agent Stalks Europe's Premier Computer Show by Robin Matthettes BUSINESS DESIGN CENTRE TIC MAGIX ord British, Chris Roberts, Sir Tech's several new plane types, many of which make the pipeline include yet another golf game, Robert Sirotek, Leisure Suit Larry, and their welcome debut on any PC simulation: International Golf Championship, Odyssey a Ja six foot rall Zool — were all in town the British Spitfire, Tempest, Tornado, Mossequel to Epic (hope its better) and a snazzy (old London Town that is in April '93 for the quiro, the German Me 109, looking flight sim entitled Spring European Computer Show. Every Focke Wulf 190, and the Me Inferno, an update of the year this major European computing event 262 jer. This range has now elderly, but still excellent gets more important, and although there did snatched the crown held for so F-29. not appear to be too many big releases, there long by LucasArt's Krisalis was keen to were some real surprises. S.W.O.T.L, but Lord British GAMES show all of its new sci-fi did mention that one future adventure Shadoworld, The Yanks are Comin' project is to adapt the Strike and it certainly is a neat The Electronic Arts stand was surprisingly Commander engine to a WW2 piece of programming it dominated by just one piece of software — flight sim...very interesting. was soothing to see the but what a piece of software Origin's long \"The other Dynamix title is software demonstrators awaited Strike Commander. Graphically and their first attempt at serious managing to get the space audio-wise it seems to be all that has been role playing, Betrayal at Kronmarines killed as often as promised, and with the full version coming in dor: This is a CRPG based on this reviewer did! around the 50 Mb (!) this is certainly one of the respected Riftwar novels of Sheffield-based Gremlin the biggest releases of the year. Sierra's stand Raymond E Feist, and claims Software had a very busy was back to back with that of MicroProse, to be the largest gaming world show, exhibiting the and both US giants were showing off a couple created in any similar game. Amiga and now PC verof new releases. MicroProse had their new The explorable area is stated to sions of the very popular UK-written multi-aircraft flight combat sim, be some 224,000,000 sq. ft, as arcade game, Zool. This is Dogfight, and the usual opposed to 5,290,000 sq. ft. in among the sharpest arcade game on the IBM among collection of «F-someUltima VII, and a small forest and even a six foot tall Zool wandering things\" over various platand multi-level dungeon\" in around couldn't steal attention from the forms. Legacy, their new Eye of the Beholder (all figures forthcoming Little Divil. This is a great game UK-produced horror adand quotes from Sierra's distributed PR materials). venture looks tasty and that is graphically like a Don Bluth title but should be opening its cofhas some cracking puzzles and problems. The fin any night now. Over Here animation is top notch, controls are good, it Sierra has had a busy pe 3 Headex Coktel Vision's stand caused has wit, and bags of gameplay. This could be the surprise release in the next few months. riod with lots of new PC many a queue as people games, but it was two stopped to look at the CD ver. Finally on the Gremlin stand was their new products under their Dysion of Inca, with more of driving game Nigel Mansell's Racing, based namix label that attracted those amazing graphics and upon his Formula One Grand Prix experimost attention. Aces Over some equally stunning sounds. ence, not his Indy Car stint. This is a straightEurope is the latest add-on The UK's own Ocean had a forward arcade game, and the least said about to the excellent Aces Over couple of titles on offer, init the better. Bearing in mind that the crashes The Pacific flight sim. cluding plugging the forth(even into walls Nigel!) are quite tame, this Apart from upgrading the coming A-Train Construction will not be the best value product this year game's Al, it introduces Kit from Maxis. Other titles in with its asking price. ECTS Page 106 Computer Gaming World "


"Hel Impressions is now a two-country software good and add to a game that claims to be 50% fully mouse driven; and the graphics are an outfit and is hiring software programmers at larger than EOTB II. absolute delight. There is a fair proportion of a rapid pace. Cohort 2 has just come out, but Shortly after sccing a preview of Bcholder combat in real time. Westwood states that two other products were the reason for stopIII, the new Westwood adventure title, Lands there will be more use of magic spells in LOL, ping. The Blue and the Gray, Impressions' US O'Lore was also previewed. The latter appcars and the accompanying graphic and musical Civil War game is a progressing treat, and Ed to use a straight development of the original effects look very special. Grabowski was keen to stress the importance Westwood EOTB engine, now released from Another Westwood release on show was the of getting this one right. \"We are using some some of the limitations of the AD&D worlds. CD version of Legend of Kryandia. This debut of the best people available to ensure the most This looks a fare nicer product than the SSI release for Westwood/Virgin was the surprise historical accurate miniatures wargame...this offering. Time will tell, but it seems likely thar graphic adventure of 1992 and now hits the will be the best release, and we are very excited SSI will try and get EOTB III out ASAP to at silvery disk with another 85MB of digitized by it.\" The other area of interest was the use least capitalize on that release before the obspeech and sounds. All conversations are now of voice commands with When I wo Worlds vious comparisons are made with the new spoken by an ensemble of professional actors War, and it is uncanny to see the effect of Westwood offering. and actresses, and the casting director has speech on drop down menus and commands. done a great job. The splendid nasty of MalPsygnosis from Liverpool, now working colm is particularly bitter and twisted, and he closely with Sony, seems to get better each cackles and jeers his way through this stylish year, Combat Air Patrol, Walkers, Hired Guns adaption. The plotline and puzzles are the and a CD-ROM product Microcosm. The star same as the disk-based release, but this is no of their show, though, was definitely the brilmere shovel-ware. The CD version of Legend liant Lemmings 2. of Kyrandia will be available for multimedia US Gold maintains a big presence at the PCs in the Summer of 1993. ECTS, and it seems that they are getting more Also about to be released on CD are two of This manor is well protected. and more PC orientated. The main new prodVirgin's recent biggies, their Space Simulation ucts on show were the add-on disks for Comkaca Shunleand their involved sci-fi strategy game, manche Maximum Overkill (more whoosh OSIXILARGIA Dune. Shuttle CD will contain over 45 minand bangs, but with even better scenery), utes of sampled speech that will allow all Flashback from Delphine, the ADD ConLands O'Lore communication between the Space Shuttle struction Kit (the first decent build-yourand mission control to be spoken. Add to this own?), Dark Sun from SSI, the conversion of Virgin and Westwood's Lands O'Lore The a full blown space encyclopedia with more the best selling German RPG Blades of DesThrone of Chaos would take the award for the ne than 1,000 VGA photographs and over tiny, and the eagerly awaited Eye of the Bemost surprising new game. Lands O Lore is 150.000 words of text along with several maholder III. not another graphic adventure in the Legend or enhancements to the control system, and This third (and supposedly final) episode in of Kyrandia vein, but, as mentioned, is styled you have possibly the most comprehensive more after their previous Eye of the Beholder title of its type. SHAINDORO LUNAHDAT release. Led by another terrific opening seOther forthcoming PC releases from Virgin quence, the player is introduced to a wonderinclude Caesar's Palace, a gambling compilafully revolting villainess in the form of Scoria. tion running under Windows with four verTo all appearances she seems beautiful, butsions of Poker, Blackjack, Baccarat, Roulette, this agent of the Dark Army is actually a and Craps, a football game from the programhorrible hag capable of changing her shape at mer of Kick off 1 and 2 called MEU will. Eight distinct story sections, 30 unique GOAAAAAAAAAL-A (Amiga, ST and IBM areas, from castles to dungeons, swamps, anPC), Beneath a Steel Sky (billed as the world's HUGTHER cient ruins and The White Tower. No longer first computer-based animated comicbook), Dali fettered to the AD&D system, Westwood hasArchie Maclean's Pool and two Amiga/ST tiopted to adopt a less statistically intensive tles in Cannon Fodder and Apocalypse. Eye of the Beholder III approach and go for simplicity. Character The End of the Show as SSI's best selling series is sub-titled the Assault statistics are now reduced to: Attack, Defense on Myth Drannor and is set in the Forgotten and Magery. We Knew It Realms world. The party of heroes is sent to The interface is a slick updare to the EOTB ECTS is coming of age. Many people now recover an artifact of divine power from the system. Movement and direction changes take this show very seriously as witnessed by dread undead lich Achwellan. The plot is as handled in discrete \"square at a time\" moves the various dignitaries and icons that attended old as the Dwarf mines but the gaming system via a bank of direction arrows; inventory this year. Last year the show was still awash looks a little fresher. The Westwood Studio management and object manipulation are all with the Amiga and its software. This year it team responsible for the good Eye of the Bewas hardly mentioned, let alone seen. Lots of bolder I and the better EOTB II has now talk about 3DO, but the real buzz was CD. moved onto adventure worlds anew and it The consensus seemed to be that it was bound seems that SSI has had to develop their own to happen, and soon, requiring only a couple gaming engine from scratch. The finished «must-buy» products to finally get it airproduct looks very similar to that used in both borne. the earlier titles, but possible goodies like ECTS, which now bills itself as the world's auto-mapping and a genuine free flowing only dedicated trade event for computer and 3-D environment are not within this product. video games, was held from Sunday 4th April Enhancements do include group combat, exto Tuesday 6th April 1993, at the Business ternal locations, and some areas that are unDesign Centre, Islington in London. It is derwater. One's characters don't exactly swim Legend of Kyrandia II traditionally held as both a Spring and through these scenes, but the effects are still Autumn cvent. CGW U HERIC July 1993 Page 107 "


"Letters from Paradise ESPANA Caught in the Net Thank you for taking the time to review the Kingdom of Drakkar. We were delighted to see your magazine review one of the games offered on our network. I would like, however, to update your readers on some changes that have taken place here at MPG-Net. Since CGWwent to press, we have made some price changes. The maximum cost for connecting in the continental United States is now $4 per hour through the network nodes. In addition, MPG-Net supports two local nodes of their own. Our Poughkeepsie area node (914-724-3940) is available for $2 per hour. Our New York City node (212-643-0633) is available for $3 per hour. We plan to add more local nodes in the future. If you or any of your readers have any questions or wish to find out more about our nerwork, call 800-438-4263 (GET GAME) and we'll be happy to assist you. Janet Brodhead MPG-Net Director of Customer Service Thanks for the update, Janet. We're always glad to print news about lower rates. SEALed With A Kick Warning: This letter contains strong language which may be offensive to some readers. I must obiect to the comments by Johnny L. Wilson in his \"Dancing with SEALs\" sneak preview in issue #106. How valid is his preview of a game based on the SEAL teams when he did not serve and proudly parades his anti-war attitude while ridiculing his acquaintance's son for his favorable viewpoint of special forces and claiming that Apocalypse Now and Platoon are realistic films. I served in Vietnam as a SEAL. We supported riverine operatives and helped the Navy PBRs (Patrol Boat/River) to interdict VC supplies shuttled down sampans and portaged through shallows by bearers. We intercepted VC couriers and after killing or capturing them, passed the information they were carrying to Navy Intelligence. I consider Platoon absurd, totally unrealistic and pure propaganda. The Green Berets, while being propagandistic on the other side, was much closer to reality, aside from filming the setting sun in the wrong direction, and instills a proper patriotic attitude in the boy mentioned. Most Americans have a strange reaction to the act of killing. In real life, you shoot the enemy and you kill him dead, whether or not he is armed, whether or not he is going for his gun, whether he looks dangerous or appears benign. That way, you stay alive and your men stay alive. Many of our senior officers and civilian leaders do not believe this. They would rather that we got killed than our enemies did. That attitude is stupid and it is wrong! My interrogation techniques could get a little rough; my guys could make hamburger out of two or three young, innocentlooking, unsuspecting VC. I did not worry about whether or not I was killing the VC properly (what is improper killing I wonder?) because at least my guys and I were out in the boondocks killing 'em, not sitting behind some desk or in a cozy college stroking our meat. To me, a Purple Heart is not a badge of honor. I consider them enemy marksmanship medals and I am happy not to have ever \"won\" one. In battle, I always kill my enemy before he has a chance to kill me and use whatever it takes. Never did I give Charlie an even break. I shot from ambush. I used supe rior firepower. I never engaged in hand-tohand combat unless there was absolutely no alternative. To me, the combat knife should be a tool, not a weapon. All the whiz-bang knife fighting, karate/judo/kung fu b.s. you see in the Rambo-Jambo shoot-'em-up movies are just that: bullshit. The real-life rules of war are simple and effective: stay at arm's length whenever possible and shoot the shit out of the enemy before he sees you. That is not ruthless, immoral or unfair. It kept my SEALs alive and there were fewer of the enemy. Keep your anti-American, anti-war attitudes out of your reviews and have veterans decide if a game realistically portrays combat. Harry Chicago, IL Dr. Wilson responds: I should have thought that the empathy that I, an admitted opponent of the Vietnam Conflict, gained for Vietnam veterans from my experiences of playing SEAL Team would have proven something of the healing value of the game. I also would have thought that my pointing out how easy it is to differentiate targets in the simulation, as opposed to the nightmare reality faced by you and your colleagues, would have indicated that the playing experience had brought at least a minor degree of additional understanding of the difficulties you faced. I said that my goal in playing the game was to survive. Your letter sounds like that was a realistic goal in the actual experience. That seems a point in the simulation's favor. I am sorry that you felt I was \"bragging \"about the purple hearts earned by my character. I was intending to show what an «ifly \"experience each mission had been for me. Indeed, I talked about the purple hearts and unsuccessful missions in the same breath. What I was attempting to show was how this program could increase one's sensitivity to the Vietnam experience, even to those such as myself who had seen the Vietnam vets as being on the other side\" because they weren't protesting with us. Playing the missions in the SEAL Team beta reminded me in a most powerful way that those involved in the conflict were doing their best in a thankless, impossible task. By the way, I was not the one who called Platoon realistic, it was the Vietnam vet of my acquaintance. Further, he was not disappointed with his son's desire to serve in the armed forces, but rather with his son's obsessive desire to see combat. For a different take on the same coverage, please read the following letter. Border Crossing I've been following this great magazine since 1985. There certainly have been a lot of changes in computer gaming, as well as changes in your magazine. I have always felt that your editorial staff has been responsive to your readers and always tried to present the best critical judgment on the current games. For a good job well done, I congratulate you. It is no small effort making it to issue #106. Page 108 Computer Gaming World "


"We Will Beat ANY Nationally Advertised Price*. We have more titles not listed. Call for the best prices. ................... ......... VBIT WIT SOFTWARE Hours: 9 am to 9 pm Central Standard Time Powermonger ....... Quest for Glory 3: Wages of War... Rampart.... Realms.................................................. Realms...... Red Baron ......... Rex Nebular Kingworld Rollerblade Racer.... Rome: Pathway to Power ........ .... Second Front ...... Secrets of Monkey Island 2... Shadow President............. Siege.............. Siege: Dogs of War ..... Sierra Award Winners 3Pk. Sierra Family Fun 3pk ........ SimCity SimEarth SimLife.......... SpaceQuest 4: Roger Wilco...... Space Quest 5: Next Mutation Spaceward Ho. Specter Spellcasting 301: Spring Break. Star Control 2...... Star Legions....... Star Trek: 25th Anniversary .......... Strip Poker 3 .... Strip Poker 3: Disk 1-5...... Stunt Island.... Summoning, The. Take A Break: Crosswords. ........... Task Force 1942. Tegel's Mercenaries .. Terminator 2029..... Theater of War..... Tony LaRussa's Ult. Value 5 pk. Trump Castle 3.... Ultima 5: Warriors of Destiny ... Ultima 6: False Prophet Ultima 7: Black Gate Ultima 7 Part 2: Serpent Isle.... Ultima Underworld: Stygian Abyss .......... Ultima Underworld 2: Labyrinth of World... Utopia ........... V for Victory: Utah Beach... V for Victory 2: Velkiye Luki. V for Victory 3: Winter Garden Valhalla.... Veil of Darkness. Western Front.............. Wilson Pro Staff Golf ....... Wing Commander Deluxe Wing Commander 2...... Wizardry 6: Bane of the Cosmic Forge.... Wizardry 7: Crusader's of the Dark Sovant.. Wizardry Trilogy: 1-3. World Circuit .... A Train ............ A Train Construction Set. A10 Tank Killer 1.5. Aces of the Pacific.. Aces of the Pacific: Disk 1 & 2 Alone in the Dark. Ashes of Empire... Batman Returns...... Battlechess 4000.. Battles of Destiny.... Betrayal of Krondor.. Buck Roger's: Countdown to Doomsday.. Buck Roger's 2: Matrix Cubed.. Buzz Aldrin's Race into Space........ Caesar Castles 2: Siege & Conquest........ Civilization .............. Comanche Maximum Overkill.. Conquered Kingdoms... Conquest of Japan... Conquests of Longbow. Creepers .... Dagger of Amon Ra..... Darklands ............ Daughter of Serpents..... Discovery: In the Steps of Columbus ........ Dune 2............. Eco-Quest 2: Lost Secrets of Rainforest..... .... Elvira 2: Jaws of Cerberus Empire Deluxe.. Eric the Unready. F15 Strike Eagle 3. F15 Strike Eagle 3: Limited Edition Falcon 3.0... Floor 13....... Front Page Sports Football.... Gateway.... Global Conquest. Gobliiins ......... Great Naval Battles Great Naval Battles: Disk 1-3 Hardball 3.. Hardball 3: Disk 1........ Harrier Assault .... Hong Kong Majong Pro ........ Humans, The.... Inca.... Indiana Jones 4: Fate of Atlantis Jack Nicholas Signature Golf... King's Quest 5: Absence ..... King's Quest 6: Heir Today..... Laser Squad .......... Leather Godesses of Phobos 2. Legend of Kyrandia.. Legends of Valor..... Lemmings............. Lemmings 2: Tribes Line in the Sand.... Links 386 Pro. ............... Links 386 Pro: Disk 1-3........ Lord of the Rings 2: Dark Towers.. Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes...... Lucas Arts Classic Adv. 4 pk.. Maelstrom ......... Magic Candle 3. Mega Lo Mania... Megafortress Mega Pack. MiG 29 Fulcrum ......... Might & Magic 4: Clouds of Xeen ........... Monopoly Deluxe........ New York Times Crossword Puzzles .... .... NFL Football .......... No Greater Glory Out of this world. Pacific War Patriot. Perfect General. Perfect General: DDI Police Quest 3: Kindred..... Populous 2 .......... Power Game Software Spk P.O. Box 115023-343 Carrollton, Texas 75011 ********* X Wing 800/259-2453 Joysticks & Game Cards CH Game Card III.. CH Flight Stick. CH Mach III... CH Virtual Pilot Flight Yoke.............. Quick Shot Game Kit .......... Suncom G-Force Flight Yoke... Thrust Master Joystick........ Thrust Master Weapons Control.. Thrust Master Pro Joystick ......................... Fax 214/306-9603 $ 126 Sound Cards & Speakers Gravis Ultra Sound .... Koss HD/1 Speakers.............. Koss HD/4 Speakers............ Media Vision Thunder Board W/F15..... Media Vision Pro Audio Spectrum 16 Bit Sound Blaster ..... Sound Blaster Pro 8 Bit..... Sound Blaster Pro 16 Bit... Sound Blaster Pro Basic 8 Bit .. 94 184 220 154 Most items shipped same day. UPS add $4 per order  2 Day Air add $6 per order Policies: All sales final. Check compatibility before you buy. We accept Visa/MC, money orders, personal checks (please allow 2 weeks for check to clear). Detectives replaced with same product. Price, availability & shipping times subject to change. Texas residents add 8.25% sales tax. 'Does not include closeouts, liquidations, or limited quantities. Ciel.n. . "


"ettere that covering such games does teach important Computer Wargaming Hurl lessons. The article tried to point out some of the differences between the game and reality. Those I am appalled that CGW continues to exwere lessons that were brought powerfully home pand Computer Wargaming World each to me in the course of plaving SEAL Team. We month. A full third was dedicated to CWW did not intend to glorif war and did not feel this month, though only 20% of the readerthat this was the purpose of the EA product. ship are wargamers. Being into CRIGS/AdInstead, we thought it was a personalization of ventures, I was very disappointed this month! war that may make individuals think twice Where was Scorpia? We make up 25% of the about its so-called glory. readership and had nothing of interest in this issue. Space Quest IV, again? As for the creativity lag in the industry, we recognize the validity of some of your concerns. Adam Mayo We see too much MOTS, as well. Yet, designers Greenville, SC have to be careful because the market doesn't Scorpia's presence was reduced due to her always like innovation. Think about such games severe withdrawal pains when she was without as Trust & Betrayal: The Legacy of Sibootan MS-DOS computer. She was able to stay and Powermonger. Both had extremely innoon-line with her old Apple II, but we couldn't vative elements, but were not well received by find any new games for her to review on that the camino public platform. As for the CWW space allotted, we do As for the machine requirements. We also see not choose wargame coverage over CRPG/Adventure coverage. We simply review all the products like Civilization and Conquered games in as timely a manner as we can. SomeKingdoms that do not push the edge of processtimes, CWW will be large and at other times, ing power, yet provide imique, creative gaming experiences. For CRPGers, the best solution may we will get letters from wargamers complaining about how much CRPG/Adventure coverage we beto buy a construction set like Interplays The Bard's Tale Construction Kit and SSI's Ungive. It's a two-way street and we try to be fair about it. The reason it seems CWW gets more limited Adventures in order to make their ou coverage is because of the specialized strategy quests. articles contained within. Cow By Rich Tennant I find myself in a quandary, critically, technically, and in a matter of personal taste. First, the technical: 1. I do not have the bucks to purchase a new computer, nor is my computer one that can be upgraded with a new mother board. I am rapidly finding myself left behind as more and more games require over 10 MB of hard drive space, as well of oodles of memory and speed that my 286 simply cannot muster. Most of the games that I would have played are now unplayable on my machine. Al well, such is the curse of ourdated technology. 2. As I peruse the games in issue 106, and as I browse my favorite software store, most of the games 1 see really don't interest me. Many \"walk-abouts\" that are just coming out seem to be simple rehashes of old Sierra and Infocom titles. Something as unique as Lemmings, as creative as Heaven & Earth or as captivating as the original Eye of the Beholder scrics simply seems to have gone the way of the old 10 MHz machines. This issue's emphasis on telegaming (again, prohibitive for me because of big bucks) and all the war strategy games leaves me cold. The \"Taking A Peek\" section offered nothing that hasn't been done before. I just don't think the industry is growing or developing newer and more creative games. It seems the industry is depending on technology (faster machines, better graphics, more disk space or CDROM) rather than using the old noggin to generate a neater idea of a story or make a better game. 3. And now for the criticism. The cover. I went to college during the Vietnam era. My memories of war are not glorious, nor do I think wars teach strategic lessons that can't be learned somewhere else. Having someone dressed in military uniform with automatic weapon in hand, trying to sight the enemy in what seems like a jungle setting is not my idea of fun and games. It instantly brings images of body bags, exploding mines (with flying body parts), friends killed and a black marble wall in Washington. The blood red border reinforces the death motif stronger than you realize. Your art department could not have done a better job of portraying an image so full of exactly the opposite of what CGW is about. David C. Hicks Whiteland, IN The cover photo was not just someone dressed in a military uniform. It is a historical picture and, along with the game, helps to teach some important lessons from history. We do not believe that history is learned in denial of or isolation from some of the uglier aspects of the reality. In SEAL Team, gamers are faced with choices similar to those faced by individuals in realistic situations. Without such products, based on painstaking research as opposed to conceived in the minds of the design team, our understanding of the past would be much lessened. We believe The 5th Wave CHEAT COMPUTER INDUSTRY AWARDS DINNER PODELIBE \"... AND THE WINNER OF THE VAPORWARE AWARD WILL RECEIVE THIS SIX FOOT GALP STATUETTE AND THIS CHECK IN THE AMOUNT OF ONE HUNDRED BILLION DOLLARS.\" Page 110 Computer Gaming World "


"On final approach to the United States 320 AIRBUS WO Developed in cooperation with Lufthansa and Deutsche Aerospace Airbus Trademarks \"AIRBUS\" and \"A320\" registered (applied for). Circle Reader Service #93 "


"msidethe mdustru -30 intermedia or Intermediate Technology? --3,620 New Visions and Old Questions Animate Multimedia Conference by the CGW Staff Aneta  ntermedia '93, the heir to the International 1 Conference on Multimedia and CDI ROM, featured an odd mix of skeptics and visionaries. One of the highlights of the conference was Mark Cantor, the founder of Macromind (publisher of Macromind Director, the tool used as an authoring tool for ucts), boldly stating in a general session that he didn't think CD-ROM products were very interesting. Another was NEWS Electronic Data executive, John Evans, comparing the average user of smart TV with his labrador retriever. Just as his dog gets confused whenever he has to go after more than one stick, so the average couch potato might become lost in the possibilities of interactive TV. More substantive was Tele-Communications Inc.'s John C. Malone boldly pledging that his company is interested enough in the marriage of multimedia and cable television that they would buy 14.5 million units of the first manufacturer to provide a \"magic box» for $350 or less. Along these lines, Microsoft demonstrated the Smart TV interface that they are developing. It was sobering to hear Evans talking about this industry celebrating sales of 5,000 units on a CD-ROM title in comparison with TV Guide's millions of readers, and to compare Philips' proud announcement of 100,000 unit worldwide penetration with Malone's breakthrough. It was a relief to hear substandesire to place millions of pieces of hardware tial discussion about standardization and in the homes of cable subscribers. It was alwatch one demonstration where the same most black comedy to hear entertainment compact disc (Compton's Newsweek InterAcveteran Barry Diller (formerly of both Parative) was used in a Sony MMCD, MPC, mount Pictures and Fox Television, curDOS-based machine with CD-ROM and rently the chief executive of the OVC Windows-mediated machine with CDshopping network) questioning the wisdom ROM and hear people like Sony's Dr. Toshi of anyone trying to sell an $800 box. In all T. Doi commit their companies to further fairness, Diller apologized immediately there. \" after, observing that there were at least two after obs companies in the audience trying to capture Common Sense about Multi-Media people's imagination with an $800 box. Yet, One would certainly expect a top executive he didn't believe that interactive entertainin Rupert Murdoch's global media empire to ment would become a mass media phenomeunderstand the underlying philosophy and non until a magic box with new uses and a the business of retailing media. As the keynote compelling reason to buy was available to speaker for the conference, John B. Evans consumers without effort (i.e. when it was (Director of Development for Murdoch's installed as part of the cable system for a low NEWS Electronic Data division) was the monthly fee). ideal speaker and certainly knew his audience. It was inspiring to view demonstrations of \"Did everybody sign the non-disclosure possible Smart TV interfaces and hopeful to agreement? It's the usual way these things hear honest discussions of the barriers to constarr. If you really want to get the word out, verting from an analog (the present broadyou've got to make people sign non-disclocasting media) to a digital world. It was sures. Otherwise, they don't tell anyone.\" exciting to hear proven entertainment mag. He blended fascinating insights with scinnates like Diller going one-on-one with Bill tillating analogies. For example, he observed Gates of Microsoft and John Sculley of Apple that just as the Ice Age did not occur overin order to remind them of the minimalist night, \"The Information Age has been here interface and front-end theatricality which long enough that publishers are just beginwould be necessary in order to engender a ning to notice that it's getting a bit chilly.\" Page 112 Computer Gaming World "


"Toustru His thesis was that convergence, the coming lar solution to the multiplicity problem was assembled technocrats that information alone together of traditional media and interactive introduced by Mammoth Micro Producis not enough to get people excited about media, is very threatening to media.\" tions. The company unveiled XA-Streaming, interactive possibilities. \"If you want big He described the traditional media as being providing a software solution for using the numbers,\" stated Malone, \"you've got to eman overweight, drowsing organization that same disc over a multitude of platforms. phasize the entertainment bias.\" Diller secmust «become digital, narrowcast and interAnother criticism of multi-media has been onded the notion by observing, \"You've got active.\" The major problem as he sees it is how its limited video capabilities. Hence, John to theatricalize! to get the couch potatoes to get up off their Hawkins of Philips introduced the new CD-I Questioned about the value of CD-ROM rear ends and take an active role in the interupgrade with total full-motion video. The in a world with a data highway for its infraactive side of the information age. He wonupgrade cartridge will provide additional structure, Bill Gates responded that \"CDdered if the couch potatoes are going to be memory and full-screen full motion video. It ROM is leading users and developers into smashed by the invasion of huge amounts of is fully compatible with existing CD-I syslearning how to use what is going to be availinformation or fried by the electronic gadgtems, increases the memory efficiency of exable.\" Asked how Microsoft fit into the futuretry\" or not. Yet, he hypothesized that, since isting units by 30%, allows film replay from istic vision of information, education and the amount of information which is already existing 5\" discs and allows CD-I the capacity entertainment on demand, Gates denied that available is overwhelming, the secret will be to publish high-speed video games. Note: Microsoft had plans to own television netthe introduction of customizable filters — Currently CD-I's installed base worldwide is works or cable systems. \"The great success of dumb filters — in the form of software that only 100,000 units (with roughly half of Microsoft was making ourselves dependent can fetch.\" In other words, putting the \"Me\" those in the U.S.) and the company expects and working in partnership with lots of peoin media. to double that base by this time next year. ple. We're not going to own cable stations, In Evans' vision of interactivity, connectivIn the more mainstream CD-ROM world, networks, etc. We'll keep delivering software ity will no longer be demographically related Mediavision unveiled their Captain Crunch and protocols — interface and system softaccording to who or what one is, but more video card. The nifty fact for gamers is that ware. We have more people building this \"cybergraphically\" related («How do you this card will enable them to play back video software than anybody else. We'll figure out feel?\" or \"What are you interested in, now?\"). at 30 frames per second at regular CD-ROM a way to make money. Finally, he suggested that the reason multi data rates. By the end of the year, Mediavision John Scully responded to a question conmedia is currently having trouble is because expects to have these add-in boards for under cerning the future of education by stating that engineers tend to think in linear, logical $300 street price. «The school where you go to learn facts is paths, while the creative process is tempestuPortability is another issue faced by CDgoing to come to an end.\" He believes that ous, chaotic and confusing. The goal is to ROM users. Apple Computer managed to teachers will become coaches who teach pubring the creative process to the tools, turning address this issue by introducing the Appils how to data surf (skim through tons of readers into editors. When the couch potato pleDesign Power CD. a unit which allows information) and find information without can use voice recognition to say, \"Get me users to access Macintosh CDs, EK's Pho users to access Macintosh CDs, EK's Photobeing overwhelmed. The emphasis will be on this,\" the age of interactivity will truly have CD and regular audio CDs. They also introlearning to think and research, not just repeat arrived. duced the Apple Design Power Speakers to facts. Diller concurred with Scully's belief assist users who want a complete multi-media that education will undergo a fundamental Barriers and Breakthroughs experience on the run. shift, but insisted that the social experience of Several barriers still exist to seeing the vision the school has to stay. The question is, will it of multi-media reach its full potential. FortuBradbury and Bandwidth be a total on-line experience or a partial onnately, several companies made anOne session at intermedia made it clear that line/partial off-line socializing experience? nouncements at intermedia which indicated Ray Bradbury's vision of interactive television that they were attempting to breach these directed by a viewer at home (a minor scene intermedia or barriers. Though the installed base of CDin Fahrenheit 451) may not be very far away. Intermediate Technology ROM drives is still relatively low, Robert van This panel brought together John Scully of For years, the technological community has Eijk, product manager of CD-ROM for Laser Apple, Bill Gates of Microsoft, John Malone prophesied that CD-ROM and multi-media Magnetic Storage (a wholly-owned subsidiary of Tele-Communications, Inc., and Barry are \"the next big thing\" that society always of North American Philips) announced that Diller of the Quality Value Channel together seems to be seeking. Now, the same prognosthey expect the installed base of their CDon the same panel. Diller insisted that \"interticators are saying that these technologies are ROM drives to reach 15 million units in 1996 active\" is an unfriendly word. Control, as in (up from the current estimate of 600,000 basic rools for building this ultimate infraremote control, is the issue and any interacstructure. For gamers, the message is a mixed units). They also announced two new drives tive service must allow people to point the bag. It indicates that connective games with that will both conform to the MPC standard controller and say, \"Yes.\" Anything else will broader bandwidth (better sound, video and and be compatible with Eastman Kodak's be unsatisfying. John Scully contended that response times) are closer than ever. Yet, the photo-CD format (the CM 215 and any successful interactive experience would largely unsatisfying fulfilment of the old CDCM206), both retailing for under $500. have to include lots of personal choices. \"PeoROM promises lead them to hold their exAnother problem faced by multi-media is ple will gravitate to what they are interested pectations in reserve. We'll have to wait and the multiplicity of formats. We were imin. We are creating an entirely new level of see if the potential connective games of the pressed when Dataware unveiled one authorenabling technology that will create a lot of new technology can ever live up to their poing station that supported DOS, Windows, new industries.\" tential. Thus far, we cannot say this about Macintosh, Unix, Sony's MMCD, and JaBoth Malone and Diller, coming from the CD-ROM games. Time will tell concerning pan's DOS-V and NEC-PC formats. A simitelevision industry perspective, lectured the the data highway. cow July 1993 Page 113 "


"TOP AD WINNERS ANNOUNCED Thrustmaster's Flight Control System ad garners third place honors with 214 points. Gene Monroc of Tampa, FL, and Andrew Stein of Seattle, WA, are the co-winners of this year's contest. The two came the closest to picking the actual winners and will split the $250 cash prize, as well as receive life-time subscriptions to CGW. Congratulations to all the winners! REST You people are sick. That's all we can make of it. Each January Computer Gaming World turns to you, our readers, and asks you to pick the Top Ads. Two years ago you picked SSI's Eye of the Beholder \"You Are There \"as the best full-page ad in the January 1991 issue. The next year you continued your love affair with the gruesome and grotesque by pegging SSI's Eye of the Beholder II \"Bigger... Berter...Meaner than Ever\" as the best. SSI gives us Undead times two and you eat it up. So it should be no surprise that you again have gravitated to the macabre with your selection of Bethesda's The Terminator 2029 \"Prepare For The Future\" as the top full-page ad in the 1993 CGW Top Ad contest (183 points). The terminator's evil grin and laser beam eyes stopped you in your page-turning tracks. Never let it be said that CGW readers are afraid to face death. We laugh at death, we play with death, we beat death's pants off, hah! Close behind Bethesda is Electronic Arts' two page spread for Populous II \"Back with a vengeance\"(169 points), and Nova Logic's Maximum Overkill \"Tear into a New Reality\" (161 points). The top partial page ad goes to Access Software for its Links 386 Pro \"Rivaled only by the game itself half-page spread (308 points). Taking second is Microleague Sports for its half-page spread \"For New Excitement, The Name of the Game is Microleague\" (233 points). Top Ad cor The Fursection of Bethe EYE OF THE BEHOLDER Explore AD&D Computer Fantasy Role-Playing Like Never Beforel EYES BEHOLDER II W Bigger...Better...Meaner Than Ever! NANGAN 4 CELTIROON MAMICA REI PREPARE FOR THE FUTURE.. DA SOFTWORKS STKATEGIC SIMULATIONS, INC. STRATEGIC SIMULATIONS, INC. 1970 ICCARD DRIVE, ROCKVILLE, MD 20850 Garde Reader Senior 149 1991 Top Ad Winner 1992 Top Ad Winner 4396 Rivaled only by the game itself. This all new LINKS 386 Prevention of our award-winning LINKS gold game offer many dramatic improvements that make playing LINKS J6 I'r more enjoyable and gir Freitingirw golfing possibles! Super VGA Graphics and 386 Power! The new LINKS H T C the final gamepifcally designed for the graphic a r t      . SUPER VGA-kerapa a w on py rahuling is ofLINKS Ca n Your wentheline that your computer poud! A far af listening went into LINKS 386 Pro. B NEW! The Experience Continues.. The challenge devlet Hastanele can play cash che LINKS Outip C u rately with NSP Severnally acclaim e d della Pro Shoes, Madona T eatr NK3X with a rticolevo fato ed y LINKS er, you can paste/MS la on t oden . Call us today for informatie 1-800-800-4880 LINUS www What Reviewers Are Saying about LINKS 386 Pro: Strategy Plus LINKS 36 Pro Aretha was ich pished back the envelope as defined them Simulation Right from die operanges to this p l acing here prettet ofter anot play it and we I CERERE forr adalmatin, pollution equals the performance of LINKS rawer! . if you're but primul treat yer LINKS I hr Adil you don't i nto frally postcaldant you try for an upade E l director LINKS ! A New features C opoty. rond of polfindore Than NASAP med nery shoe Senty Twojas andenys for det, as LP went there we e ERG WU,, aybay comer op www mda chouch Chers combinations of Viewing Windows. Wichterew NAS Pre you're not th e standard viewing Window With a low dickso s slade screen you a real time novit of your de calcat top view that the New Fratar Jordan S 18 Pri A D www W ACCESS fight of your NS a kind w at toisie plaan LINKS 16 Prasarana Conge och TWIRIORITE INICIARON *.tulan p Peter IGAS ort that this the dramurcally Card Reader Soket? M 1993 Page 114 Computer Gaming World "


"BERACE CYBER DREAMS\" CYBEARACE A REVOLUTIONARY 3D COMBAT AND RACING SIMULATION DESIGNED BY WORLD-FAMOUS FUTURIST SYD MEAD, WHOSE DESIGN CREDITS INCLUDE BLADE RUNNER, TRON, 2010. AND STAR TREK: THE MOTION PICTURE. TUNTUITI SIMIL Available for the IBM PC and Compatibles (August 19931. Commodore Amiga (March 1994) and Apple Macintosh (March 1994). For further information please contact: North America (818) 348-3711  Europe (070) 328-3267 (U.K.), Cyberdreams and CyberRace are trademarks of Cubeldivams, Inc. 1993 Cuberdreams, Inc. Illustration 1992 Chlagon, Inc. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. Circle Reader Service #47 "


"1 BEST REST of the Edutainment 101 by Chuck Miller The world of shareware TEVE PER Nav VIE The word «edutainment\" was coined to describe a new breed of educational software; products that effectively combined education and entertainment in a single package. While the idea in software design may seem rather new, educators have employed it in the classroom for centuries. It is, in fact, no surprise thar learning can be increased by making the process more entertaining and enjoyable for the learner. Though educational programs have traditionally been relegated to the commercial market (very little has appeared in the shareware channel), more programs are finally starting to arrive from the creative minds of shareware authors. This month we'll look at three recent titles for MS-DOS compatibles: Word Blazer, Word Rescue and Math Rescue. I'd Like a Word with You Word Blazer by Multitask Software Systems is a digital derivation of the traditional crossword puzzle. As the first release in The Family Word Puzzle Game Series, Word Blazer is a simple offering, providing the player with an enjoyable gaming experience while unobtrusively helping him or her with spelling and observation skills. Of course, the devoted word wrangler will find it especially appealing. Word Blazer contains over 150 original crossword puzzles covering a variety of subjects from words beginning with the letter D to words describing things to wear. As with the traditional game, the player is presented with a puzzle from which he or she must locate all the words in a corWord Blazer responding list. When a word is located, the player highlights each letter of the word (with the mouse pointer) and selects the Check button. If the word is correct, it will stay highlighted on the crossword grid and will appear highlighted on the word list. If incorrect, the letters revert to their original state. Successfully comt to their original state. Successfully complering a puzzle rewards the player with an animated fireworks display. Several options are at the player's disposal. Puzzles need not be finished in one sitting, as those in progress may be saved for completion at a later time. Some basic hints are available for each puzzle, as well. And, a Clock option is provided for timed play. In addition, if one would like to take a puzzle away from the computer, a copy can be sent to the printer. The only drawback is that cach puzzle must be printed individually and one copy at a time. If Word Blazer is weak in any one area, it is presentation. Sound support is limited to PC speaker bleeps. Graphics, though VGA and SVGA are supported, are simple line drawings and fills. With the visual and audible quality offered in the newer commercial products, I hope that Version 2.0 of Word Blazer is upgraded in this regard. REZAC ELNUDO DERECHT. MXOLODORVOSKONA PINOBODABODE-ORNER BOX CUNCEZ KESEKREOECORONETOMORE While more of a mental diversion than a true edutainment title, Word Blazer is still a worthy steed to add to one's stable of workhorse education programs (the first add-on volume, Arts & Entertainment Pack, should be available as you read this). However, younger players will want to keep a dictionary nearby for definition hunting with some of the more difficult words encountered during play. Word Blazer requires an MS-DOS compatible system with 640K RAM, a Microsoft compatible mouse, a hard drive with 4MB of free space and a color monitor (SVGA, VGA, EGA). Registration is $49.99 (a little high given the quality of its presentation) plus $3.50 shipping and handling. A sample diskette is also available for $5.00. To place your order or for additional information, contact: $5.00 Sample Diskette Multitask Software Systems 237 West Spruce Street East Rochester, NY 14445 (800) 836-4721 Apogee to the Rescue! The name Apogee Software is not new to readers of this column, as several of their releases have been featured in the past. Now, with edutainment in mind, we turn to two of Apogee's latest releases: Word Rescue and Math Rescue. In Word Rescue (IBMPC RT #27849), the player must assist Benny Bookworm in undoing the dastardly deeds of the mean, old Gruzzles. It seems that the Gruzzles, who can't read, have been stealing words from all the books in the land so that others can't learn to read either. The player must help Benny by matching up each word with its appropriate picture so that he can get them back into the books where they belong. Math Rescue (IBMPC 130 11 RT #30766) is similar in story. This time, however, the Gruzzles are out after numbers. Benny, who is now a butterfly, again needs the player's help. This time, one must SULEJI altuiafufuardistatud restore all the missing numbers to their rightful 5 places (the Gruzzles have CUISGESE55 been taking them from traffic signs, paychecks Math Rescue and telephones, creating quite a stir), having one's mathematic skills of addition, subtraction and mixed questions tested in the process. Those familiar with Apogee's Commander Keen will find Word Rescue and Math Rescue to have similar environments. Both feature three different episodes (the first being shareware) and are horizontal and vertical, side-scrolling games with hand-eye coordination being important to play. And, like Commander Keen, action is of a nonviolent nature. Items are collected and opponents are «slimed.\" However, ZONOAUDODOM Print POKEMON O  N Page 116 Computer Gaming World "


"Chareware bell To register Word Rescue and Math Rescue and receive all three episodes, send a check or money order for $30 each, plus $4 shipping and handling to Apogee Software, or call their order number with a VISA or MasterCard in hand. Both games require an MS-DOS compatible with EGA/VGA graphics. Apogee Software P.O. Box 476389 Garland, TX 75047 (800) 426-3123 645 H LBCS BE oa ti trang 081Hostication DERBI 13120 ROODISO131 D000500 0 90599000521030005 antes DB9 DBS es 0:00 1863 0902100 PO DOOM poco D no one or thing is visibly destroyed or mutilated (while the player's character can \"die,\" it is handled in a \"lifred-gently-up-to-heaven\" fashion). This makes both titles excellent choices for younger children. Word Rescue and Mach hell COIL Rescue are designed with SOSSOS ASSESSES youngsters in mind (though us older \"kids\" will still find them entertaining). Difficulty is adjustable to one of three levels: Easy (ages 4-7), Normal (ages 7-10) and Hard (ages 10-up), making the games great for  families with children Word Rescue spanning a large age bracket. In presentation, Word Rescue and Math Rescue are a step ahead of Word Blazer. While still EGA in mode (come on, Apogee, get with the VGA!), the graphics are more detailed and more attractive in appearance than those of the latter title. Music and sound effects, however, are excellent and add immensely to the atmosphere of the game (requiring an Ad Lib or Sound Blaster compatible sound card). In addition, both titles have the same high level of playability and addictiveness that has become a trademark of releases from Apogee. They are difficult to quit playing even for an adult! Both edutainment titles will «rescue\" the player from many dull hours, filling them with enjoyable learning. In fact, they are so much fun to play that one might actually forget he or she is learning in the process. Red Faced Phase We'd like to apologize for a little slip up in the May installment of this column. In the review of Catacomb Abyss we gave all of the design credit to Id Software. Actually, only partial credit goes to Id; they designed the 3-D engine used in the game. The creative credits go to J.A.M. Productions, a small development group headed by Jim Row and Michael Maynard. They have licensed Id's engine and plan to create a series of 3-D games for the shareware world. Their next product will be Blakestone: Aliens of Gold, coming to a BBS near you in July. Send Us Your Best If you have authored a shareware or public domain game and would like to have it considered for review in this column, please send two complete copies (preferably on 3.5\" disks) with documentation and a cover letter to: Best of the Rest Computer Gaming World 130 Chaparral Court, Suite 260 Anaheim Hills, CA 92808. Cow PILOTS Our Brackets Convert Your Office Chair votre into a Realistic Cockpit! MAHBOAR will Thrust Master Controls y Brackets Interface Dynamics PREMIUM TEMPLATES Do you enjoy \"flying the super-sophisticated PC flight simulators available today? Is \"keyboard confusion\" your worst enemy-you know, frantically hunting keys to switch views, activate defenses, launch weapons, etc., (not to mention flying the plane)just to survive the mission? KEYBOARD COMMANDER CORPS flight simulator keyboard templates can end that overload and let you concentrate on flyin' and shootin'. Our high-quality, color templates turn any AT101 Enh keyboard into a realistic control panel for your favorite sim and our standardized, color-coded layout flattens the learning curve from one sim to another Forget \"Keyboard Confusion\", just remember to... Watch NUWE Now Available!!!: Strike Eagle Ill, Gunship 2000 Maximum Overkill, X-Wing Available in fine stores! Falcon 3.0/3.01 Aces of the Pacific Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe Jetfighter I & II B-17 Flying Fortress CY Air Combat OLDININIODOOD A-10 Tank Killer 1.5 F-15 Strike Eagle II F-117A Nighthawk Megafortress A.T.P. Flight Simulator 4.0 * High-quality, 3-D graphics * Standardized format *Logical, color-coded layout * Affixes to keyboard * Fits all AT101 Enh. keyboards * Sturdy, laminated stock 1 Hurry! Get 'em at Introductory Prices!!! 1 $11.95 Please Print CheckEnclosed Money Order enclosed. Any 2 $21.50 Master delwed Any 3 $30.00 4 or more $9.25 ench IN a me Country | S & H add $3.00 or C.O.D. add $6.00...CALL Address city KCC, Inc., Dept C State/Province Zip/Postal Code 1839 SW 148 Ave., #402 Davie, FL 33330 Items (Discounts per arder only: Allow 7.4 Weeks) DEALERS WELCOME 1-800-262-6066 Interface Dynamics P.O. Box 858 Wolfeboro, NH 03894 COD Orders Call 603-569-4638 Send Check or Money Order for $59.95 One Armrest Bracket $99.95 Two Armrest Brackets $6.00 Postage and Handling Circle Reader Service #67 Circle Reader Service #68 July 1993 Page 117 "


"pevnew The Age of Aquariums A Review of EP Fish from Maxis NALE TSDIEN racques: Bonjour. While I remain safely in the Calypso, Felipe has descended into the realm of the El-Fish. Felipe, can you hear me? Felipe: Mais oui. Jacques: Tell me of your findings. D ELFISH. Felipe: It is so odd. El-Fish cannot be placed bytes of hard disk space by the bare bones into any known category. It tries to be many program, plus an additional half meg for each things, one could say camouflaging itself, yet new fish, and almost that much for a fully seems to do none well. Although at times it looks designed tank! Efficient it is not. indescribably beautiful, I seem to lose interest in Entering the program, my first impulse was Entering the program, my first impulse was and purpose so easily. Je ne sais pas, je to view a default tank with default fish, just ne sais pas... to discover the look of a completed product, Jacques: Felipe, have you bubbles in your and I was impressed — perhaps the loss of brain? You fail to make any sense! Return to the disk space was worth it after all. Running on surface immediately! a 486-33 machine with a high-resolution Felipe: I will bring a sample with me. You will video card, my screen was transformed into see... one of the most beautiful aquariums I had Our Cousteauic friend Felipe has stumbled ever seen (and this from a guy who keeps two eve upon El-Fish, a curious \"software toy\" pubin real tanks of his own). lished by Maxis, the same source of such well Pleasing scenery aside, the real stars of this respected Sims as -City, -Earth, and -Ant. aquatic show were the fish themselves. AlEl-Fish is short for \"Electronic Fish,\" as in a though no shockingly mutated strains were computer-based aquarium. Briefly, El-Fishers evident in the default tank, the varieties of fish may catch their own fish, mutate or breed that were there frolicked and moved with them with other denizens of the deep, then graceful precision and remarkable realism. produce their own aquarium-like environThough these fish didn't seem to have any ment in which to place their creations. Fully \"depth\" (when a fish swims toward the viewer detailed fish will swim in a most realistic from the rear of the tank, it doesn't get inmanner throughout the aquarium, while creasingly larger), the scrolling was smooth, clams open and close, snails crawl, and divers and each fish did exactly what fishes do in the dive, all accompanied by digitized tunes, and course of their aquatic lives. I remained transset against a scenic and colorful background fixed for several minutes, in awe of the aniof the user's making. mated graphic capabilities of personal Sound beautiful? It is. Sound interesting? In computers in the 1990s. the beginning it is, but... The next logical step was to try my hand at My views on El-Fish began to sour when I the design of an original environment. Design discovered I was to be robbed of eight megais made possible through a handsome, menuTHE E ELECTRO GTX OC 40 ARRATEK TITLE: El-Fish, The Electronic Aquarium SYSTEM: IBM (386 or better with at least 4 MB RAM) PRICE: $59.95 PROTECTION NONE DESIGNER: AnimaTek PUBLISHER: Maxis Orinda, CA (510) 254-9700 Page 118 Computer Gaming World "


"Deview Select Puish to SAVE KEEP ON CLEAR * 0 KEEP SAVE driven interface, that is SYSTEM ments would steer El-Fish away both conveniently and aesfrom its \"software toy\" intenthetically organized. Untions and towards a full-blown fortunately, it is also very game/simulation, and that was slow. The first order is to apparently nor its purpose. develop its overall look, A Maxis mentions children, starting with background desktop publishers, CAD deshading, followed by the signers, engineers and programaddition of static objects, mers as likely interested parties, such as rocks, plants and but I would think that comcoral. Animated objects puter hardware dealers would like slow-moving snails, ACTIONS be a more logical target. Runbubbling air tubes, and CONTINUE ning El-Fish continuously on an even a cat's paw that in-store monitor would look reaches into the tank on CLEAR and sound pretty impressive, occasion are then added. and might even induce some Most objects can be placed CANCEL nice neophyre buyer into a purat the front or rear of a chase. tank, and the resulting sensation of depth is quite good. placed into the aquarium. Clones of a single In this world, there are parcreation are allowed, and each variety will ticipants and there are observers. El-Fish is, Once a tank is created, it can be saved, then swim together in a school. When all fish are despite the creativity involved in the developthe actual fishies can be added and/or created. in place and are happily motoring about, the ment of cach new environment, designed for Several stock fish are ready-to-go; or, taking aquarium keeper can choose appropriate mu the observer with a lot of computer time to evolution by the hand, one can build a new sical accompaniment from a small provided kill. As an aquarium owner I can say that model to suit one's own personal tastc. selection, and then sit back and relax. watching fish glide through a tank of water is The first step in fish creation is to nab some 'That's it...and that's the problem. Accordthe ultimate relaxation technique, and El-Fish the ulti starting specimens. Any number of our scaleying to Maxis, \"El-Fish buyers will most likely comes about as close to digitally mimicking friends can be fished from a small saltwater be interested in software that fully exploits the that experience without actually having to bay or freshwater lake. The captured carp can power of their system, in order to show off bail out the odd defunct fin-waggler. Unforbe used as they are, or transformed via \"evotheir computers' graphics and sound capabili tunately, as one who requires a bit more lution\" or cross-breeding into something ties.\" While it's true that the El-Fish graphics interaction in my computer simulations and more visually interesting. Unfortunately, this are darn close to state-of-the-art, it's questionmy fish tanks, El-Fish didn't exactly float my is not a situation wherein the El-Fisher can able as to whether there's enough substance boat. CGW actually move a fin from here to there or to warrant its purchase. It would make a stretch a mouth to obscene proportions — lovely screen saver, but it uses too much comFishy, fishy, El-fish... one isn't granted the sort of genetic godhood puter power to make that possible. (Actually, found in SimLife. It is more a matter of El-Fish has an \"undocumented feature\" the manual states that it can be used as a very starting an invisible transformation process that will generate strange types of fish. The limited screen saver.\" Very limited, indeed. It and hoping the program comes up with animation engine can display many sedoes not work with Windows, does not go something pleasing to the cyc. quences of binary digits, including those away when you move a mouse or touch the in text documents, spreadsheets, etc. The When the look of a given fish is right, the keyboard, and you must exccute it manually mutant fish below was generated by feedfish must \"learn\" all of its 256 possible movefrom DOS.) Any enjoyment stemming from ing the text of this article into the animaments, involving a processing intensive anithe sloth-like tank and fish creation is fleeting tion engine. To try this feature, do the mation process. The animation of each fish and becomes plain dull after a while), and the following: on my 486-33 took upwards of fifteen min vast amount of disk space involved can be a Change the file extension of the file you ures, and is definitely not a fun thing to real problem in these space-conscious times. want to animate to .ROE. (.DOC files witness for that length of time. A nice jog The biggest failure of El-Fish is inability to often work, but avoid .COM or EXE. around the block, or a quick meal might fit maintain the player's interest. Once an aquarfiles). Copy the .ROE file to the El-Fish in nicely at this point, just don't make it a ium has been created and viewed, there just \"FISH» directory. Load El-Fish and select Filet-O-Fish. isn't much else happening. Objects in the «ROE\" and then «RESTORE FROM.\" Once back at the computer, the new fish is tank don't interact; the optional cat's paw Highlight your new .ROE file and click SYSTEM e never snatches a fish, Objects \"OK.\" bigger fish don't conWARNING: If the program doesn't like sume smaller fish, and your .ROE file, it may crash. Use with there is nothing along caution. the lines of the ecosystem maintenance\" for which I had hoped El-Fish would have ODJECT LIDRARIES made the basis for a great simulation. Discovering FIXED ANIMATED OBJECTS che compatibility of cerrain fishes with others, the likelihood of certain fish eating certain plants, disease control, The Goble Guppie and so on, but these eleUSER ODJECTS 007 *CANCEL July 1993 Page 119 "


"Inn Maximila Ultrakill Electronic Arts' Ultrabots by Allen L. Greenberg PRIMITI ETTING SUNARE HTINTHIBIT obots are clearly a culturally diverse group of creatures. Artificial metallic beings first played a part, from time to time, in Greek and Roman mythology. The term «robot\" is actually taken from a Czech word meaning \"forced labor\" and first appeared in a play by Karel Capek in 1921. While robots have enjoyed many celebrated international appearances in film and literature, it was in Japanese animation that the creatures were finally elevated to the gleaming gods and demons of mankind's future. Now, robotic design has once again been upgraded, more challenging cities then become availthis time by a race of conquerors from ourer able. Ultrabots features 13 such cities which space. According to this frightening account, must be protected. the earth was very nearly wiped out by the first attack wave of alien machines. Not wasting The player is able to leap instantly to a any further effort in attempting to say control center for each robot in order to issue \"Howdy!\" to these unpleasant newcomers, each its instructions. While it is possible to our planet's survivors quickly began to duplimanually guide the robot through each order, cate the enemy's technology. The result was most commanders will find it far more pruthe \"ultrabots.\" a trio of mega-robots dedent to activate one of the creature's many signed to match the alien machines bolt for pre-written programs. This is done by first bolt. It is also the name the action strategy selecting another robot or location and then game from Novalogic which features the selecting an instruction such as \"patrol\" or most impressive small-screen robots since \"engage in battle.\" Once instructed, the robot \"Gigantor.\" will proceed on its own until told to do othUltrabots takes place on the remains of sev crwise, leaving its commander free to attend eral blasted cities of earth. The player enters to its fellow fighters. However, a robot which each city via a central base and immediately has been damaged beyond the point of use fulness, or one which has run out of energy, takes control of the situation room.\" The will attempt to retreat on its own. robots fighting to defend earth have already been deployed throughout the battlefield and Energy for the robots is provided by a net have already been instructed to engage any of relay devices. The rclays pass on energy nearby enemies. Likewise, enemy robots have from home base, and must be within a minialso been deployed, several of which may be mum distance from each other in order to stay yerously close to home base. While each active. One nasty way to render an army of city has a different set of orders and circumultrabots useless is to take out the relay nodes stances awaiting its champion, the goal in close to its home base. Without the ner, the each remains the same destroy the enemy robots must depend on the very limited power command base. Once a city has been won, provided by internal batteries. One of the ultrabors, the net-building «scorpion,\" is able to carry and deploy additional relay devices. The scorpions may also scoop up an enemy node and put it to work in their own energy ner. There are three varieties of ultrabot, each with its own abilities and intended use. \"Humanoids» are indeed designed according to human anatomy, and are the most powerful fighters of the bunch. Equipped with some F OR FLY intimidating armor and weaponry, these creatures may also cause extensive damage by direct collision with another robot. «Scouts\" are the runts of the litter, and are best used for reconnaissance. While their armor and weaponry are weak, they are able to move far faster than other ultrabots. For spying purposes, they may alter their height and are equipped with more extensive sensor equipment. Unfortunately, a discovered scout may be destroyed before it can move itself to safety. \"Scorpions,\" as mentioned above, are responsible for building the energy net. They are agonizingly slow and not awfully well-armored. Scorpions are, however, equipped with a useful sting in the tail\" long-distance weapon. It is most unlikely that an effective battle can be mounted away from the net. Therefore, the scorpions must be allowed to venture into unfriendly territory and they should only do so under the protective cyc of their \"big brother\" humanoids. In addition to their unique weaponry, the ultrabots are also equipped with a variety of defenses. These include deployable mines and decoys, electronic counter measures, and an invisibility field. A successful campaign will most often be guided from the home base or \"situation ULTRABOTS JACK TITLE: SYSTEM: GRAPHICS: PRICE: DESIGNER: PUBLISHER: Ultrabots IBM (386/16 or faster; IMb RAM minimum) VGA $59.95 Novalogic Electronic Arts San Mateo, CA (415) 572-ARTS Page 120 Computer Gaming World "


"DPULOID CANONICK CRANENIEN EL CIDERI HEREDE CAN: CE THE MILCH FMUPFINDEN LFARE A BITVANGTX TERPELIU ERO SAY FEBRERING ENGAGE RETTENTION EU -PUES:1008117 TAIL MISSIEDEL AD LOCATION IN HIELD STTILA BET PIENS 00 C2 SAVA 21051 PRESERUE ONE 12 KA pan side to side as well as zoom in on specific ROSTERLIN targets. Its most valuable function, perhaps, PERDERE is to display a strategic map of the area. Unfortunately, this map appears in annoyingly 99ROCKER HELNICONlow resolution and fails to point out which enemy is currently attacking or even which friendly robot the player is occupying. It is on this strategic map that the player sets the DETAIL UNIT NB-430 robot's destination as well as its current target. The mouse is probably the most convenient PRO 1003 PRCHOTE COMITMEN ! method for issuing commands to the robots, JESTER although the joystick or keyboard may also be room.\" Here, commanders will find the most used. This is accomplished by placing the exiting the game. There are three levels of useful strategic map and status display. Rocursor directly over, and then clicking on, one training which the player may experience bebots which have been damaged in the field, of the control panel's many switches or butfore attempting to battle in one of the cities. beyond their limited abilities for self-repair, tons. The interior of the robots are drawn in the instruction manual is complete, almust also return to home base for more com exceptional three-dimensional detail, as are though perhaps a bit confusing in several plere therapy. Here, the player must decide the robots which appear outside the windplaces. Exactly what the game's bi-level, how much energy to divert from the net in shield screen. A variety of sound effects, some hinged package is supposed to represent reorder to attend to these fallen soldiers. Simiof which resemble an angry neighbor poundmains, perhaps, the most confusing mystery larly, the player may also divert energy to ing at the door, also enhance the action. Ulof all. create more energy relay devices, although trabots features the most impressive Ultrabots' intense graphics may confuse this is usually not necessary unless an abnorrobot-battle graphics ever seen. However, some purchasers by seeming to promise armally large number of them have been lost or they lack the depth and realism of those cade action rather than a challenging strategy destroyed in battle. Winning a scenario rein Novalogic's helicopter battle simulation, exercise. Nonetheless, the substitution of ULquires quite a bit of robot-hopping from the Comanche: Maximum Overkill. trabots' close up grittiness for the orderliness home basc, as no one ultrabot will be able to Some of the battles take place at night, of a more traditional strategy game still makes conquer the enemy on its own. during which the robot's commander will it a very novel and worthwhile experience. As Each of the three ultrabots features a unique have to rely on the video camera's thermal to whether the robots are pleased with this dashboard and control panel. A wide winddetection system and strategic map. Each ronew addition to their cultural heritage, they shield glass is featured above a smaller video bot is also equipped with a radar system. are not saying. Perhaps the ability to review screen which serves several functions. The Other features include an automatic log functheir own software will appear in their next video screen connects to a camera which cantion which saves a player's progress upon major upgrade. CGW COMPUTER SIDELINE SOFTWARE D ORDERS 1-800-888-9273 1 SPORTS GAMES IBM. APPLE . C-64 THE MOST REALISTIC STRATEGY/SIMULATION COMPUTER GAMES ON THE MARKET TODAY! FULL COUNT BASEBALL You manage all 26 most recent teams and 52 great past teams. 45 man roster  Stats compiler. Complete boxscore to screen/printer. Input your own teams, draft or trade players  Wind/Weather Option. You choose starting line-up, batting order, bunt for a hit, steal, DH option and much, much more! BASKETBALL THE PRO GAME You're the coach and you choose line-ups, shot selection, style of play and much more. Stats compiler. Full team and individual player stats kept for up to an 82 game schedule. All players rated by actual statistics and tendencies 27 current teams and over 190 great teams from the past included! Your European PC Connection NEW TITLES TYPE A 320 Airbus Flight Sim. Amberstar RPG Battle Toads Arcade Cohort 2 Strategy Sim. Daemonsgate RPG History Line 1914-1918 Strategy Sim. Ishar: Legend of the Fortress RPG Nigel Mansell's Grand Prix Racing Sim, Reach for the Skies Flight Sim. Shadow Worlds RPGStrategy Sleepwalker Arcade Strategy Space Crusade RPGStrategy Street Fighter 2 Arcade Tornado Flight Simulator Flight Sim. Transarctica Strategy Sim Vikings Strategy WWF, T2, The Simpsons ALL THREE for only World Wrestle Federation 2 Simulation Zool Arcade %5B 6 6 Bn s 6 6 7 856 6| GGZGO GCO Bard's Tale 3 18.95 BAT 14.95 Battlechess 18.95 Batlletech 2 16.95 Bloodwych 16.95 Centurion 1895 Colorado 14.95 Collussus Bridge 4 16.95 Command HO 18.95 Conan the Cimmaron 18.95 Conflict: Europe 14.95 Crisis in the Kremlin 21.95 Defender of the Crown 16.95 Deluxe Sinp Poker 16.95 Drakkhan 18.95 Elvira 2 18.95 F16 Falcon 19.95 Fire Team 2200 16.95 Five Treasure of Trazzar 21.95 Fight of the Intruder 18.95 Floor 13 18.95 Fool's Errand 16.95 Greg Norman Goll 18.95 Heart of China 18.95 Hero's Quest 18.95 Hills Street Blues 18.95 Hoverforce 14.95 Imperium 18.95 Jack Nicholas Greatest 18 16.95 Killing Cloud 16.95 King of Chicago 14.95 Mg 29 Fulcrum 18.95 Monty Python 16.95 Panza Kick Boxing 18.95 Paperboy 2 16.95 Pt Fighter 18.95 Populous /Promised Lands 24.95 Quest and Glory 19.95 RBI Baseball 2 14.95 Realms 18.95 Rocket Ranger 16 95 Sands of Fire 13.95 Sargon 5 18.95 Shadowlands 18.95 Shanghai 2 18.95 Shufflepuck Cale 14.95 Sim City 16.95 Sleeping Gods Lie 16.95 Spell Casting 101 18.95 Spot 16.95 Star Saga Two 14.95 Sinke Fleel 19.95 Stunt Car Racer 16.95 Super Oll Road 16.95 Super Space Invaders 16.95 Test Drive 2 all data disks 18.95 Three Stooges 16.95 T.V. Sports Baseball 21.95 T.V. Sports Boxing 18.95 T.V. Sports Football 14.95 Trump Casino 2 18.95 Winter Super Sports '92 16.95 ....Wolfpack 18.95 World Class Leaderboard 14.95 ORDER TODAY! Mail check or money order for $39.95 each for Apple II and C 64 or $19.95 for IBM. You may call in and order with VISA or Master Card. Please add $3.00 for shipping and handling. For more information, call or write for a free brochure. EUROMAGS Get the latest news on the best PC titles from Europe! These high gloss, full color magazines also feature a demo-packed playable cover disk with each issue! PC Format. PC Review. PC Zone, or PC Plus, each only $10 SHIPPING (UPS Ground) For up to 3 pieces, by payment: Mastercard & Visa $5.00.C.O.D. (Cash Only) $10.00 Next day & second day air available! Call for prices on special shipping Shipping times nol guaranteed. Price & Availability subject to change! No refunds or exchanges. Delective producis exchanged with same item. Products warrantied through Sideline. FAX ORDERS CALL (305) 491-6134 Need Info? Call (305) 491-9519 Dealer Inquiries Invited! 840 N.W. 57th Court, Ft. Lauderdale, FL 33309 LANCE HAFENER GAMES P.O. BOX 100594  NASHVILLE, TN 37224 615/366-8088 1-800-477-7032 COMP3 DON'T MISS THESE DISCOUNT DEALS! 4-D Sports Boxing A-Train Advanced Destroyer Sim 18.95 26.95 16.95 Armor Alley Austerlitz Backgammon PC 16.95 16.95 14.95 Circle Reader Service #70 Circle Reader Service #88 July 1993 Page 121 "


"Summer Sales Bonanza! The Original Multi-Media PC Sound Standard! Includes Groliers Encylcopedia on CD Rom! FLIGHTSTICK BLASTER lhe The SoundBlaster Pro Deluxe adds the powerful dimension of stereo sound, CD ROM interface and a multimedia mixer to all the great features of the original SoundBlaster! SoundBlaster Pro Deluxe.. .$139 SoundBlaster 16 ASP......... ......$249. ORATIVO IBM DISKS Rated #1! Readers Choice Winner 1992 The FlightStick is designed to look and feel precisely like a real Jet Joystick. Its ergo dynamic design and precision engineering help you shoot faster and score higher. Its tough construction makes it the last jetstick you'll ever buy! 4-D Boxing ............... A Train ............... A-Train Construction Set A.L.P.: Flight Commander Aces of the Pacific .47 Aces WW2 1946 Disk 1 .. Aces over Europe ............. Action Sports Soccer ...... Air Force Commander ...... Air Traffic Controller Air Warrior ..... Airbucks .......... Aircraft & Adventure Factory ...32 Powerhits: Movies ............. Powermonger Prince of Persia Print Shop Sampler/Windows.30 Print Shop Windows/Business 30 PrintShop Deluxe Windows .....47 Prophecy Prophecy of the Shadow ...40 Protostar ..... Putt Putt Joins the Parade .... Putt Putt's Fun Pack Quest for Glory III Race Drivin Rages to Riches ................. Railroad Tycoon Classic ...... Rampart ... Reach for the Stars Read N' Roll VGA Reader Rabbit 2... Reading & Me ..... Reading Adventures in Oz Red Baron VGA Red Baron Mission Builder Red Baron VGA Rescue Air 911 Riders of Rohan RingWorld .... Rise of the Dragon VGA Road & Track Robo Sport Windows .... Romance Three Kingdoms 2.43 Rome ........ ... Rules of Engagement 2 .........40 Scenery Collection Set A .......37 Scenery Collection: Set B ......37 Scenery Enhancement Editor . 27 Scenery Bundle Tropics Rocks.37 Scenery Grand Canyon ...........22 Scenery Upgrade: Tahiti .........22 Scenery Upgrade: Tokyo Japan 22 Scooter's Magic Castle ..... Scrabble Deluxe Scrabble Deluxe Windows Seal Team ......... Search for the King ....... .......27 37 .37 ...37 40 CH Products $39. Discovery: Steps of Columbus 37 Dvorak on Typing...... Eagle Eye Mysteries. EarthQuest Eco Quest 2 Eco-Saurus ........ El Fish ....... Elvira 2:Jaws of Cerberus. Empire Deluxe Eric the Unready Falcon 3.0 .................. Falcon 3.0 Fighting Tiger Family Fun Pack Femme Fatale\" Final Conflict Fisher Price Combo Pak Fisher Price: The Farm Fisher Price: Neighborhood ....22 Fisher Price:Picture Dictionary Flight 685 Flight 701 Flight of the Intruder Freddy Pharkas .....................13 Frederick Pohl's: Gateway .....37 Front Page Sports: Football ...43 FS Pro Game Maker Gary Grigsby's Pacific War Gemfire ........ Global Conquest Global Effect Gods.. Grammar Gremlins Grand Slam Bridge 2. 33 Graphic Library Party Edition 25 Graphic Library Sampler .......25 Graphics Library School Bus 25 Gunship 2000 Scenario Disk 27 Guy Spy ...................... 32 Hardball 3 ..... .. Hardball 3 Stadium Disk ........19 Hardball III Players Disk ..19 Harpoon Harpoon Challenger Pak ... Harpoon Chall SIGNATURE Harpoon Designer Series Harrier Assault ..... Hawali Scenery Disk.. Headline Harry VGA Heart of China VGA Heaven and Earth. Hockey League Simulator 2...30 Home Alone 2: Lost in N.Y. ...30 Hong Kong Mahjong Pro ........33 Hoyle's Book of Games 3 .....32 Hoyles Classic Card ........... Inca ........ Incredible Machine .......... Ishido Pack ................... Island of Dr. Brain VGA .........32 Jack Nicklaus Signature Ed ...43 Jack Nicklaus Tour Disk 2 .....20 Jack Nicklaus' Unlimited Golf .37 Jeopardy 25th Anniversary ......14 Jeopardy Tri Pack ..................19 Jimmy Connors Pro Tennis ....34 John Madden's Football ........22 Jordan In Flight .. Jump Jet ... K.G.B ..... ***.443 Might & Magic Ill...... ......40 Mike Ditka Football ..............35 MLBPA 1992 Players Disk .....17 Naval Battles:America Atlantic 22 Naval Battles:Scenario Builder 22 New Print Shop ........... New Print Shop Companion ....32 ... . ..43 50 ..52 9662-666-008  JOULNOD NOISSIN Armored Fist .............. Banff Springs BannerMania ..... Bart Simpson's Arcade Game 32 Bart Simp House Weirdnss ...32 Batman Returns ...................43 Battles of Destiny ................37 Beat the House Beauty & The Beast Print Kit ..17 Betrayal at Krondor .. Black Crypt ........... Breach 2 ............. Bridge 7.0 ....... Caesar California Scenery Collection Car & Driver Carrier Strike ......... 43 Carriers at War ........... Carriers at War:Construct Kit ..37 Castle of Dr. Brain VGA .........32 Challenge Ancient Empire .......32 Challenge of the 5 Realms ....42 Champions ................... 3 Chemistry Works 43 Chess Maniac 5 PC... Children's Writing Pub Center..42 Civilization .... Civilization Master Player's ...47 Classic 5 Classmate ........... Coaster Cobra Mission .................47 Comanche: Maximum Overkill 47 Comanche Mission Disk 1... ..28 Combat Classics .......... Command HQ Classic Conquered Kingdoms .... Conquest of Japan Creepers ......... Cuckoo Zoo Cyber Empires Daemonsgate ............ Dagger of Amon Ra Dark Lands .... Dark Queen of Kryn Dark Sun: Shattered Lands Darkseed ...... 43 Daughter of Serpents ..... Deja Vul & II:Casebook of Ace Harding..............................33 Design Your Home Interiors ..37 Design Your Home Architecture 37 Design Own Home:Landscape 37 Design Your Own Railroad ......37 Discovery Software Pack Dual.43 BOTID MAGINE Virtual Pilot puts firepower right under your thumbs, gives you advanced alleron and elevator trim controls and extra throttle control for high-powered games. Not a Clone! Genuine Soundblaster chipset means 100% SoundBlaster compatability. Includes High Performance Speakers, An Ergonomically Designed Joystick & Gameport. Software includes Voxkit Voice Utilities, Talking Parrot. FM Intelligent Organ, Jukebox for Windows 3.1 & Castle Wolfenstein. By Bondwel.. ...........$99. CH Products..$59. Aircraft/Scenery Designer .....37 Airport & Facilities Directory ...20 Algeblaster Plus Alone in the Dark Alphabet Blocks Amarillo Slim's Choice .. Amazon..... Ambush at Sorinor American Gladiators ....... Andretti's Racing Challenge ..20 Animation Studio Animation Studio/Windows ....79 NFL .. NFL Full Motion Video Ninja Gaiden 2 .... Ninja Turtles:Arcade Game ....32 Ninja Turtles:Manhattan ...... Nobunaga's Ambition II .. Number Munchers Office Design ... Operation Neptune Out of This World Secret of Monkey Island II .....40 Secret Weapons Exp. Disk 2 22 Secret Weapons Missions .......22 Secret Weapons of Luftwaffe 44 Secret Weapons:Dornier 335 12 Secret Weapons:Heinkel 162 22 Shadow of the Sorcerer Shadow President Shadowlands ........ Shanghai II: Dragon's Eye .....32 Kid Pix ... NON Call us and use your MC, Visa or Discover 800-999-7995 Weapons Control A hands on throttle with seven Independent controls Including radar mode, weapons select, waypoint select and counter mesures.............$89. Flight Control -The best joystick for Flight Simulators. Compatible with all flight simulator packages as 2 buttonjoy. stick.......... .... ..................$69. Flight Control Pro... .... $115. Rudder Pedals. .... ....$115. ACM Game Card .....................$35. NTA  : 37 Kid Pix Companion Kid Works Kid Works 2... King's Quest 6 VGA. Legends of Valor Leisure Suit Larry 5 VGA LHX Attack Chopper Liberty or Death ... Life & Death II: The Brain Links 386 Pro Lord of the Rings 2 Lost Admiral ......................37 Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes 47 Lost in L.A. ...................... .37 Lost Treasures of Infocom ....43 Lost Treasures of Infocom 2 ..32 Lunar Command Magic Candle 3 Magic Candle 11 Magic Spells Mantis: Experimental Fighter Mario is Missing ................. Mario Teaches Typing Math & Me Math Blaster Mystery Math Blaster Plus Math Rabbit .... Megafortress Mission Disk 2.27 MegaFortress Flight Old Dog ...28 Megalomania ....... Mercenaries ....... Mickey's 123 2.0.... Mickey's ABC's 2.0 ... Mickey's Word Adventures ....27 MicroLeague Ultimate Cards 27 Might Magic 4: Clouds Xeen ..43 International 201-677-1400 Fax 201-677-9484 Methods of Payment: We accept Visa, MC, Discover Card & Money orders. Personal checks allow 14 days to clear. School, State & City purchase orders accepted. Please send $2.00 for our Mission Control Communique 24 Page catalogue (free with order) Shipping: UPS Ground ($5 minimum) / UPS Blue ($7 minimum) APO & FPO ( $7 minimum) Overseas minimum $30 shipping (please fax orders) Send money orders or checks to: .43 P.T.O. Patriot Perfect General Perfect Gen Greatest Battles Perfect General Scenario Disk 25 PGA Tour Golf .... Pilot's Edge Version 2.0 Pilot's Edge Version 3.0 Pilots Edge Version 1.0 .. Pilots Power Tools Planet's Edge .... Playroom...... Police Quest 3 VGA ..... Populous 2 ............ PowerGame Bundile ........... Power Hits: Battletech ............32 $9OWNERS Sharif on Bridge ............ . Sharif on Bridge for Windows 32 Shuttle Space Flight Silent Service 2 Classic Sim Ant ..... Sim Ant Windows Sim City ........ Sim City Windows Sim Earth Sim Earth Windows Sim Farm.... Sim Life ................ Solitaire for Windows ..... Solitaire's Journey ........... Sound, Graphics Air Upgrade ..29 Spaceward Ho! ........... 37 MISSION CONTROL, 551 Valley Road Suite 211 Dept. CGW793, Upper Montclair, NJ07043 ........ e Bundle "


"Order Now 800-999-7995 Now Available in Alaska, Hawaii, Puerto Rico & Canada! International Order Line (201) 677-1400 Fax (201) 677-9484 CD ROM POWERGAME BUNDLE! Over $250. Worth of Softwarel ER GWE Comanche Max Overkill Temp..12 Computer Cleaning Kit .......... Computer Vaccuum Kit ........ F117A Template.......... F-15 Strike Eagle III Template..12 Falcon 3.0 Template..............12 Fax 96 by Freecom ................69 Flight Simulator 4.0 Template 12 Miracle Piano Teacher ........299 Strike Commander Template...12 X-Wing Template.. 5 Tests of Skill and cunning turn you computer into a powerful game machine. Includes: Railroad Tycoon, Grand Prix Racing. PGA Tour Golf, Sargon V and Chuck Yeagers Air Combat! By Activision.........$46. 59 For the Best in ADULT CD ROM. Call, write or fax Mission Control for a list of the Hottest Titles and most competitive prices. You must be 21 or over to order. 12 Special of the Month: SOUNDCARDS/CD ACCESSORIES Ad Lib Gold 1000... ..139 Discovery CD 16 bit Bundle...499 Edutainment 16 Bundle ........595 Mitsumi CD Internal Drive .....239 Mitsumi w/4 CD Titles..........299 Multi Media Starter Kit 16.....489 Pro Audio Spectrum 16.........179 Sound Blaster 16 ASP .........249 Sound Blaster Pro Deluxe .....139 Sound Machine & PC Sound .99 UltraSound Board ..... ........129 ThunderBoard 12 3.5 Head Cleaner ... 5 1/4\" Head Cleaner....... A-10 Avenger Template.... A 10 Tank Killer Template A.T.P. Template..... 12 Aces of the Pacific Template...12 B-17 Flying Fortress Template 12 Chuck Yeager Template ..........12 CONTROLLERS Analog Edge ...... 18 NORDENS 7th Guest Aladin and his Wonderful lamp 33 Almanac Time Magazine CD 1 29 Amanda Stories CD/MPC ......... ..49 American Business Phonebook 39 American Heritage Ency Dict........64 Animals MPC ........................ Arthur's Teacher Trouble....---Audubon Manuals Barney Bear Goes to Space Barney Bear goes to School Basics Electronic Cookbook ...... Battle Chess Enhanced .. . Beauty and the Beast ........... Bible Library ...... Bibles and Religion Britannica's Family Choice CD. Business Master ... C.D. Rom Pack...... co Power Box. Chess Maniac ... Chess Master 3000 Classic Book Collection Clip Art Collection Clip Art Galore.... College Handbook Colossal Cookbook Compton's Encyclopedia w/Atlas 486 Compton's Family Choice -... Compton's Multimedia Golf Guide 30 Comptons Multimedia Encyclopedia Conan the Crmerian Deathstar Arcade Battles .... Deluxe Scrabble Desert Storm Dune Eco-Quest 1 While Supplies Last! Analog Plus .. Analog Pro Joystick Analog Sabre ............ APS 2001 Cobra Joystick Aviator Yoke..... Eliminator Game Card... Flight Control Yoke Flight Stick FX 2000............ .. Gameport Automatic MCA.......48 Gameport III Automatic ...... G Force Yoke ............ Gravis Analog Joystick ..., Icontroller .................. Icontroller for Laptops ............49 Intruder Joystick for ....... Mach! Mach III Maxximum Bundle. Maxximum Pedals. Merlin.. Mouse Wheel Mouse Yoke PC Command Control PC Gamepad PC Joystick Combo QS161 PC Pack Virtual Pilot ........... 54 RE 888  My Private Collection... PC Pix Vol 1 PC Pix Vol 2 PC Pix Vol. 3. Phyical Therapy Power Pak Gold Private Pictures Vol. 1 Publish It 20 Publisher's Paradise Putt Putt Joins The Parade Putt Putt's Fun Pack Reference Library.... Secret of Monkey Island ..........29 Secret Weapons of Luftwaffe ... Shakespeare's Complete Works -29 Shareware Heaven... Shareware Studio Sharif on Bridge Sherlock Holmes 1... Sherlock Holmes 2 Sherlock Holmes 3... . Shuttle Flight Simulator Sleeping Beauty So Much Stareware Software Jukebox Soundworks Space Quest 4 Star Trek 25th Anniversary Storm 1 Storm 2 ....... Storm 3 Swinware 1993 . Talking Classic Tales Talking Schoolhouses ..............39 The GGA Tour.Earth Invitational ...47 The Jungle BookcKaa's Hunting ....33 The Jungle Book:Mowgi's Brother 33 The White Horse Child ...33 Time Table of History..... TimeTable of Arts Entertainment .65 Timetable Bus. , Politics Media ...65 Timetable of Science Innovation ..65 Too Many Typefaces.. ..19 Toolworks Reference Library 39 Twelve Roads to Gettysburg .....47 U.S. Presidents U.S. History Ultima 1 thru 6 ... Ultima Underworld/Wing Corrm 2 54 US Atlas 15 with AutoMap. ..42 US Atlas w/ Automap US History USA Wars: Civil War. Volcano Where in the World is Carmen Willie Beanish Windonare Windowmaster Windows 1993 Ultima 6 & Wing Commander Wing Commander Deluxe ........54 Wing Conunander 2 Delure ......54 Ecstasy  28 THRUSTMASTER Space Wrecked Spear of Destiny Speed Reader 11 Speedball 2 Spell It Plus Spellcasting 301 Spellcraft:Aspects of Valor ....37 SPROUT!.... Star Trek 25th Anniversary ....37 Star Trek:Screen Saver Stormovik ........ Strike Command Speech Pak .22 Strip Poker 3 ................. Strip Poker Data Disk 1 Strip Poker Data Disk 2 Strip Poker Data Disk 3 Strip Poker Data Disk 4 Strip Poker Data Disk 5 Stunt Island ................ Super Jeopardy Super Solver's Outnumbered ..32 Super Space Invaders Super Tetris Windows. Task Force 1942 Terminator 2029 Test Drive Ill ....... Teins Tetris Classic .. Tetris Classic Windows. The Lost Tribe Theatre of War ....... Tom Landry Football Tony Larussa Baseball 2 .... Tony Larussa Fantasy Draft ....16 Tony Larussa II AL/NL Stad ....19 Tony Larussa Il Fantasy Draft .16 Tony Larussa Il MLBPA Tomado ............... Tracon For Windows Tracon Il ....... Treasure MathStorm Treehouse Tristan Pinball ... Twilight 2000 VGA U.S. Atlas for Windows Ultima 7: Forge of Virtue Ultima 7: The Serpent Isle ....52 Ultima 7:The Black Gate ... Ultima Underworld II .. Ult Underworld Stygian Abyss 50 Ultrabots ................... V for Victory ........... V for Victory II:Velikiye Luki ....47 Victory III:Market Garden. Virtual Reality Studio 2.0 Wacky Funsters .............. Wax Works ........ . Wayne Gretzky Hockey 3 Weaver Baseball 2. Wheel of Fortune Tri-Pack Wheel of Fortune w/ Vanna ...27 When Two Worlds War. Where in America's Past ........37 Where in Europe Carmen .......31 Where in USA Carmen Deluxe .47 Where in USA Carmen ...........31 Where in the World Deluxe .....48 Where in the World Carmen.....31 Where in Space is Carmen......50 Where in Time Carmen ..........31 Wing Commander & Ultima 6.48 Wing Commander Deluxe Ed 50 Wing Commander II ... Wing CommandSpeech Pak ...17 Wolfenstein 3-D 5.25 Word Attack Plus Word Munchers World Circuit Grand Prix ... World Tour Tennis X-Wing .... Yeager's Air Combat Zug's Adventures Eco Island ...24 Zug's Dinosaur World ............25 Zug's Race Through Space .....25 Zug's Spelling Adventures.......24 w ACM Game Card .................. Flight Control Pro ..... Flight Control System .. Rudder Pedals ........... Weapons Control System......89 The Pllot's Edge allows you to 'program' your Thrustmaster Filght Control. A Line in the Sand .... Action Station Action Station Scenario Ad Lib Gold 1000 139 An American Tail Ancient Art of War Skies Auto Map AutoMap Windows\" AutoMap: Europe B-17 Flying Fortress Barbie's Glamorous Quest 19 BattleChess 4000 SVGA 32 BattleChess 4000 VGA 29 Bush Buck Adventure Business Card Maker Delte 32 Campaign Cashbiz Conquest of Longbow VCA 35 Crime Does Not Pay Crusaders of Dark Savant 29 Dark Half Dinosaur Designer Dragon's Lair 3 Dream House Pro Dune 2 Dvorak's Top 30 Eagle Rider Elite Plus Eye of Beholder 3 Expert Pet Care F-15 Strike Eagle III FailSafe Computer Guardian 29 Femme Fatale Flight Simulator 4 Flight Planner Ceo Jigsaw Great Naval Battles Greens: Ultimate Golf Gunship 2000 VGA Heroes of the 357th Inspector Gadget Knights of the Sky L'Empereur Leather Godess Phobos 2 Legal Letter Works Legal Letterworks Legend of Kyrandia Lemmings 2 Letter Works Lightspeed Maelstrom Martian Dreams Martian Memorandum Math Blaster Plus Windows 32 Mavis Beacon 2 Windows 32 Mavis Beacon Typing 2.0 29 Mc Cee Bundle MicroLeague Baseball 4 Mission Impossible Monopoly Deluxe Windows 32 Mouse Mat NFL Pro League Football No Greater Glory Oregon Trail Deluxe Origin FX Screen Saver Pacific Islands Paperboy 2 PC Nations Personnel Readyworks Race Into Space Rex Nebular Sailing Simulator III VGA Sales Letter Works Sea Rogue Secret Island Dr. Quandry 29 Siege Silent Service II Space Quest 5 Spoils of War Storybook Weaver Strike Commander Super Munchers Swap The Humans Tom Landry Football Time Treks Trolls Trump Castle 3 UltraSound Vaccuum Kit Veil of Darkness What's My Angle Zoo Keeper 6929 Education Master ... Electronic Traveler:California -...33 Encydopedia of Clip Art Family Doctor Family Education Collection Fatty Bear's Birthday Surprise ...39 Food Analyst Future Wars Game Master Game Pack 2 Game Pack 1 Gifs Galore Golf Guide:California/Hawaii Great Wonders of the World.....39 Crolier's Encyclopedia Cuiness Almanac ... I Photograph to Remember Interactive Story Tune Jack in the Beanstalk Jets & Props Jones in Fast Lane. KCB/CIA World Factbook Kings Quest V. Legend of Kyrandia ..... Library European & America Art.59 Lion Share Local Girls...... Loom Lost Treasures of Infocom 2 .....47 Lost Treasures of Infocom ..........47 MacMillan Dictionary Children .....40 Mammals:A Multimedia Manhole Mantis: Experimental Fighter -..47 Mayo Clinic Mixed up Mother Goose .........30 Monster Disk (2 disk set). Mother Earth Multimedia Grammy Awards ....44 Version 1. works with LucasFilm Version 2 works with MicroProse Version 3. works with Spectrum Holobyte) $12. each or all three for $33.  World & U.S. Atlas World Atlas 3.0 & US 3.0 ......40 Mitsumi CD Rom Drive Internal 350ms with Groliers, SWOL Chess 3000 and Family Doctor! Special Price $299. 39 foller espires 8/31/3) S: SAVE! $5 Simply send in coupon with your order! $5.00 off your order (over $50) SAVE! $5 Circle Reader Service 76 "


"COMPUTER WARGAMING WORLD «I Came, I Played, I Conquered» Let the Games Begin by Alan Emrich Art by Rodger MacGowan; Copyright 1993 RBM Graphics -NAGO WARGACING WORLD In this issue... Liberty or Death Review by Tim Carter ..... 126 s we head into the dog days of Sum press time, the games have begun throughout mer, most wargamers seem to find the United States (and Canada, which has a T more time for their hobby. This ususingle, brave participant). Interested gamers ally lasts until Fall when family obligations will want to note what networks these embatagain come to the forefront of personal schedtled few are using to contact us and in what ules. In the mcantime, we should all enjoy the numbers cach network is represented. This is good campaigning weather and fight our given in the table below: simulated battles while the sun shines long. With many good releases in hand and rumCompuServe: blings of Gary Grigsby's War in Russia, War Prodigy: lords II and Command HQ II, these, indeed, GEnie: are the glory days computer wargaming. (May The Sierra Network: they continue forever....) America OnLinc: Internet\": Tournament Deluxe Delphi\": We have now reached the commencement of the grand experiment known as the Com* = Through the CompuServe gateputer Gaming World / New World Comput way. ing Empire Deluxe tournament featuring Empire Deluxe. With 64 players planted Next issue there will be tales to tell of battles firmly in place, allow me to set up our starting won and lost. Even as I am preparing for the situation. summer conventions ahead (CES, Origins Answering the call to arms, Empire Deluxe and GenCon), the tournament will continue players with modems and nerwork access sent in single elimination fashion until there is but us e-mail indicating that they wanted to parone undefeated player left standing. I'll also ticipate in this great event. At stake were bring you the latest wargaming news from the several prizes, the most notable of which was Computer Game Developer's Conference. the grand prize offered by New World ComWith many top wargame designers attending, puting: a trip to California featuring tours of there is sure to be some juicy gossip. Disneyland, Universal Studios, New World What follows are the match ups, given in Computing and Computer Gaming World pairs of opponents. For their computer netmagazine. While not in the same league as work identification, use the first letter for each Publishers' Clearing House, that's not too network from the previous table (i.e., T = The shabby a prize for we computer strategy Sierra Network, C = CompuServe, ...). gamers. Good luck, good sports, and may the most The faithful have assembled on-line and, at sound tactician win. Secrets of Success in Caesar by Alan Emrich.... 130 V for Victory: Market Garden Review by John Vanore .... 134 Perfect General: Greatest Battles of the 20th Century by Richard Savage .. 138 Network An Inspection of Aide de Camp by Alan Emrich.... 140 V for Victory: Velikiye Luki Replay by Michael Peck ... 143 Name R. Rutledge A. J. Hunt T. Webb R. Olsen M. Isom D. Phillips K. Holland C. Wright R. Blake M. Kohn OOOO--City, State Seattle, WA Seattle, WA Reno, NV Seattle, WA Bremerton, WA Kelso, WA Malibu, CA Palos Verdes, CA Lakewood, CA Walnut Creek, CA A Vertical Jump Jet Review by Paul Rigby 146 Page 124 Computer Gaming World "


"Name Network Network -J. Munger W. Haberer M. Conder B. Winkeler J. Longshore P. McClellan A. Gilbert K.Wenker D. Aldrich B. Pryslak L. Brown E. Best M. Clouser B. Hart C. Rowlette M. Ellis K. Reimer C. Hartman S. Palmer S. Guilford J. Trickey R. Andrews D. Etheredge B. Hake B. Marchesani R. Wolsky T. Fatovic D. Crandell oooooooooOO E0000 EEE City, State San Diego, CA Tucson, AZ Littleton, CO St. Louis, MO Ann Arbor, MI Sterling Hts, MI Chicago, IL. Chicago Ridge, IL Minneapolis, MN Ontario, Canada ??, TX Carrollton, TX San Angelo, TX College Sta., TX Euless, TX Tupelo, MS Radcliff, KY Atlanta, GA N. Olmsted, OH Cleveland, OH Groveport, OH Waterville, OH Cockeysville, MD Silver Springs, MD Lyndhurst, NJ Cliffside Park, NJ Palisade Park, NJ ??, NJ Name J. Garvey N. Bast C. Shen B. Brennan W. Del Prior V. Wong D. Pikelny J. Lesko R. Savage H. Gale B. Walker M. Gravel B. Winslow E. Brown M. Lott W. Wyant R. Moser D. Hayden D. Hertzler B. Duval E. Skerke A. Neal K. Clark J. Bolnick D. Scheeringa M. Carroll OOOO => 000 0000-> City, State Snyder, NY Scottsville, NY Whitestone, NY College Point, NY Brooklyn, NY Bayside, NY Jackson Hts., NY Linwood, NJ Holliston, MA Westwood, MA Burlington, VT Cranston, RI Lyme, CT Burke, VA Alexandria, VA Greensboro, NC ??, FL Tampa, FL Sarasota, FL Largo, FL Downers Grove, IL Mason, OH Upland, CA Los Angeles, CA Sunrise, FL Rocky Point, NY CGW O The ULTIMATE Play-By-Mail Offer FLAGSHIP magazine, with Ark Royal Games, C2 Simulations, Capitol Consulting, Deltax Gaming, Flying Buffalo Inc, Flying Dutchman Games, Graaf Simulations, Inner Dimensions, Rolling Thunder Games Inc and Twin Engine Gaming, is proud to make what may be the most exciting offer in PBM history. For $19.99, we'll give you: (a) A 4-issue trial subscription to FLAGSHIP, PBM's leading international magazine, with 56 pages each issue packed with news, reviews, and uncensored player comments. Every issue includes a sheet of discount coupons worth many times the cost of the magazine. (b) A coupon entitling you to $20 value of rules and/or turns in any of these games: Against All Odds, Adventurer Kings, Cluster, Continental Rails, Domination, El Mythico, Feudal Lords, New Order, w Lords, Sirius Command, Space Combat, Space 101, StarGlobe, Starquest, Subterrania, Victory!, World Emperor II and Warriors & Wizards. You choose where you want to use the coupon: to help you, we will include an impartial description of each of them! The only condition is that you should not have played with that particular gamemaster before. Last but not least, if you are disappointed with the first FLAGSHIP, let us know within one month and we'll refund you the entire $19.99 by return. No handling fee, no requirement to return anything yes, you can still use the coupon. To try it, send $19.99 to FLAGSHIP, CGW special offer, PO Box 6105WSS, Gainsville GA 30504 Circle Reader Service #55 July, 1993 Page 125 "


"To ctrategy )\" Run For Your Fife! Koei's Liberty or Death by Thn Carter kasingtea W22 K3 318 D S:Bosten, Day 1 furs 4 Clinton UK 22 24 1858 3183 control and the inability of the supreme commander to radically affect the outcome of a battle conducted by his subordinates is actually historically accurate. The real problem with Liberty or Death is that strategic command and control is not much more rewarding. All of the political and strategic elements of a revolution are accounted for in the game. Popular support is important, and chronic shortages of men, equipment, supplies and money all greatly effect the nature of the war. However, the documentation does not explain either the individual elements or their cumulative effect on the campaign. Charles Allah Mortally, wounded!! He digd uith his boots iberty or Death, the latest strategy game from Koei, recreates the American War of Independence. Players assume the role of George Washington or William Howe, attempting to either foster a successful revolt or stop it in its tracks. Unfortunately, Koei has done little more than regurgitate the same model and interface used on all of their previous products. This system was impressive when it was initially released with Nobunaga's Ambition over six years ago, however, it is now hopelessly out of date. From the EGA graphics to the weak documentation, no part of this product is anywhere near current industry standards. Furthermore, there is only one scenario and players do not have the option of a modified set up. There are no historical \"what ifs\" either in the setup or the occurrence of major international events. Liberty or Death follows the same provinceto-province format as all previous Koci games. Players control individual officers, icers, each of which has a military unit attached to him. Recruiting and maintaining forces are essential elements of the game, and players must be careful to keep a balance between the size of their army and the supplies and resources available. At certain intervals the commander in chicf must report to his political masters. This involves requesting military support and deleontino Ginancial resources. The player is responsible for the conduct of the war and can be relieved if the powers that be decide that HE PUNTAHYNUTELOMAEUTICHEN STAATELIAU TUAS Biberty the situation has deteriorated below acceptable levels When battle is joined, players have the option of controlling individual units via a tactical screen. There are a variety of options and command choices to be made at the tactical level. Unfortunately, most of them do not make much difference to the outcome of the battle in question. Perhaps the designers of Liberty or Death were attempting to simulate the frustration felt by British officers when they encountered irregular tactics from the American insurgents. The lack of simple geographical information is particularly annoying. Some provinces cannot be successfully attacked without the use of boats. This is logical and the use of boats adds an interesting strategic dimension. However, it seems strange that local commanders would not know they needed boats until they had actually invaded the province (by which time it is too late). Until players learn the peculiarities of the map they will want to save often and be prepared for multiple resets. Ultimately, the real failing of the tactical clement of this game is the inability of good commanders to gain better results than weak ones. While there are many things to do on the tactical screen, the battles are grinding attritional affairs. A good general can obtain a slight advantage through the use of terrain, however numbers will still decide the outcome of most encounters. It could be argued that the lack of tactical Death ENERGISTUPITELS CAN MADURA ODRASTA TV 13:Ticonderoga, NY District Commander Allen Officers 7 Regiments TITLE: SYSTEM: GRAPHICS: PRICE: PROTECTION: # PLAYERS: PUBLISHER: Liberty or Death IBM EGA $59.95 None 0-2 Koci 1350 Bayshore Hwy #540 Burlingame, CA 94010 (415) 348-0500 Barracks 846 22 739 four Excellencs. ul are orders for ile garrison of ficanderoga? S21/3 Page 126 Computer Gaming World "


"titler POLISI 7a. Corriere For instance, while support in a particular province may be raised or lowered based upon a number of activities, there is no explanation of the overall impact of popular opinion. As well, popular opinion appears to shift for some reasons (such as a military victory) that are not elaborated upon in the manual. When this is combined with a clumsy and out-ofdate interface, the construction of strategy becomes aggravating NU T ZERTU TANTZIALA ASTUTAB 2317 ufficers / regiments On Avoiding «Death» (Strategy Tips) The British fleet is a crucial asset. As a blockading force it can strangle the rebellion while providing much needed resources to the British; as a military force its bombardment capability can turn the tide in many battles. If heavy fighting is expected, the fleet should always be used to support land actions. If the fleet has been committed to an area, try to draw the Americans into battle along the coast, where the fleet may be used against them. Support Barracks The Declaration of Independence 97a1 enbales all our hopes for a new world free from tyranny and 6417 41 oppression L$ 84 Montreal, are almost impossible to successfully attack if the British fleet is present. ata 2.Penobscot Bay, MA code-in-chier Hove man Officers / Regiments Prices Barracks Remember that support is the key to victory. Although the documentation does not say so, experience and common sense suggest that the greater one's support the more food, money and soldiers will be available. 148enningen attacks Portsmouth! 1851 $ 231 NO 89. In tactical combat terrain, forts and hills can be used to minimize casualties. Entrench units wherever possible. Remember, superior numbers will usually determine the victor. A slight advanrage can be gained by attacking a single cncmy unit with two or more friendly units at once. Whenever possible equip engineers with cannons, as they are the only units capable of inflicting damage without suffering casualties of their own. They are also the only units which can harm the British fleet. Liberty or Death feels and plays in a linear fashion. Because there are no setup options and no scenarios, players will find themselves repeating the same actions over and over again. While there are a range of strategic choices to be made, winning usually involves following the same basic steps. Once again, this was acceptable five or six years ago. In 1993 it is merely tedious. Keeping an army in existence is also important, particularly for the Americans. The British can reinforce more quickly and with greater strength, especially at the start of the war. Do not overextend your forces by trying to control too great an area at the start. CGW Take careful note of the geography of each province. Some require boats for a successful invasion, and some, like YHEM HAVE YOU EVER WONDERED WHY THOSE OTHER \"SIMULATIONS\" ARE SO UNREAL? PERHAPS, WHILE DOING MORE PICTURES, THEY FORGOT ABOUT RESEARCH, TESTING & DESIGN. WE DIDN'T \"The Informative PBM Magazine\" Do you know what PBM (Play-By-Mail) gaming is? If you don't, we can help you explore the world of PBM gaming. Paper Mayhem has been leading the way for over 10 years by informing people about PBM gaming. Articles, reviews, biographies and more fill each issue. Not to mention the ratings of PBM games and companies that our readers participate in. Paper Mayhem has been improving with the ever expanding hobby of PBM gaming since 1983. Each bimonthly issue brings you the latest on PBM news. So why delay and miss out on all the fun? Read Paper Mayhem and take advantage of PBM gaming today! SIMULATIONS CANADA.. FOR SERIOUS WARGAMING LAND COMBAT: ***New**MAIN BATTLE TANK: MIDDLE EAST. Modern Tactical Armoured Combat. \"New\"BATTLE TANK: KURSK TO BERLIN, Tactical Armour In The East. MBT: NORTH GERMANY, Modern Tactical Armoured Combat BT: BARBAROSSA TO STALINGRAD, Tactical Armour In The East. MBT: CENTRAL GERMANY, Modern Tactical Armoured Combat. ROMMEL AT EL ALAMEIN, Battles For Egypt, I July to 6 November, 1942. MOSCOW CAMPAIGN. Typhoon & White Storm, Aug 1941 to Feb 1942. TO THE RHINE, The Allied Advance In The West, 29 Aug 10 11 Dec. 1944. ROMMEL AT GAZALA, Battles For Tobruk, 26 May to 27 June 1942. STALINGRAD CAMPAIGN, The Turning Point In Russia, Jun 1942 Feb 1943. KURSK CAMPAIGN, Operation Zitadella. Summer 1943. OPERATION OVERLORD, The Invasion Of Europe, 6 June 28 August, 1942. GOLAN FRONT, The 1973 Arab/Israeli War In The North. FALL GELB, The Fall Of France, Spring 1940. Send subscriptions to: PAPER MAYHEM Dept CG 1518 Adams Street Ottawa, IL 61350-4770 US Subscriptions: Single issue $5.00 1 year $24.00 2 year $42.00 ORDERING INFORMATION, PLEASE READ CAREFULLY: All games are $60.00 each for Americans, $80.00 each for Canadians (GST included), and $65.00 each for purchasers outside North America. We will lor cheques clear before shipping (6 weeks), so, money orders are preferred. PLEASE be sure to tell us which computer you own. Purchasers from outside of Canada should send payment in U.S. funds.\" Nova Scotia residents must add an extra 10% of the total lor Provincial tax. SIMULATIONS CANADA, P.O. Box 452, Bridgewater, NS, Canada, B4V 2X6. July 1993 Circle Reader Service #90 Also available, The Journal of the PBM Gamer for $3.00 $5.00 for overseas orders FOREIGN SUBSCRIPTIONS: 1 year Canada $31.00; 1 year to Europe $51.00; 1 year to Australia $57.00. All Subscriptions to PAPER MAYHEM are to be paid in US funds and drawn from US banks. Foreign subscriptions are asked to use International Money Order in US funds. Circle Reader Service #79 Page 127 "


"WHAT IF THE WOR THEY PUT YOU INCH "


"NERE AT WAR AND GE OF EVERYTHING? . 7 High Command captures WWII in Europe on a grand scale. Spanning the war years 1939 through 1945, you are placed in complete control of all military, economic and political resources. Choose to lead the Allied or Axis war machine. Command all land, sea and air forces. Exercise your diplomatic options. Build up your military or invest in your country's infrastructure. High Command is more than a wargame. It's the ultimate hot seat. Visit your local retailer or call to order 800-653-1360 in the U.S., or 800-697-2360 in Canada. HIGH COMMAND WILL BE AVAILABLE IN JUNE FOR THE IBM PC AND 100% COMPATIBLES. HIGH COMMAND EUROPE 1939. 45 IS A TRADEMARK OF THREE SIITY PAOPIC INC. 1993 THREE-SIXTY PAOFICINC. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. IBM IS A REGISTERED TRADEMARK OF INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES Circle Reader Service #31 "


"Friends, Romans, Taxpayers Acquiring \"Talents\" for Making Money in Caesar by Alan \"Perennial Taxpayer Maximus\" Emrich kay, I admit that I'm hooked on Impressions' Caesar, but I can tell from countless messages that I'm not the only one out there. Like many who enjoy this game, however, I'm not generating the kind of revenue I need to get my \"Prosperity rating in line with my other, more successful ratings. Thanks to some inside tips from Impressions, this article can reveal some of the revenue-building angles within the game and begins with some elaborations upon pages 77 and 78 of the manual. This first section touches upon the industry formula in Caesar. There is much going on behind the scenes of commerce that successful players should be aware of. a reciprocating effect on the ncarby laborers: enforced poverty! That will be discussed a little later on in the section on property values. Besides housing within three squares, nearby heavy industry centers also directly increasc jar production at workshops. Like the housing cffcct radius on workshops, this radius is three squares. Note that workshops do not need either housing or heavy industries within three squares to produce any jars of finished goods at all, but they will certainly produce more when these two important production resources are nearby. To Market, To Market, Jiggity Jig There is one last secret to increasing workshop output. If one has a marketplace either adjacent to or within a radius of six squares along a road, the productivity bonus is in effect. Of course, having more marketplaces as outlets for an individual workshop's goods will increase the demand and, hence, the output of jars at that workshop. Keep this symP biotic relationship constantly in mind when designing the commercial areas of your city. It is important to place heavy industry, workshops, houses, markets and roads in the most efficient manner so that they generate the maximum number of jars from each workshop. A last note on markets: their six square radius is not only important for indicating that works produced by workshops are being sold, but also serves as the radius in which they positively influence the growth of houses. Sadly, markets also limit the potential growth of a residential area, but that will be discussed a little further on. Collecting Business Taxes Jarring Revelations Industry is, of course, one of a player's two main sources of income (the other being the population tax). The tax base is represented by the productivity of individual workshops. * Workshop productivity is measured by the number of jars, up to a maximum of seven, in front of each workshop. Therefore, one must strive to get the maximum output from every workshop built so that they will generate more taxes and fill the player's purse. Page 78 of the manual lists the elements that can increase or decrease each individual workshop's output of jars. Allow me to elaborate upon them with specifics so that industrious urban planners can plan industrious urban areas: The rules encourage having a nearby workforce. The truth is that only residential squares within three squares of a workshop will have a positive influence on their producrion of jars. (This has nothing to do with unemployment, by the way, which is an entirely separate formula). The workshops have When collecting taxes, workshops are taxed as a unit. If only one square of a workshop is under \"administrative influence,\" the whole of the workshop is taxed and the player will receive full revenue from it. Remember, heavy industries and markets do not pay business taxes directly — workshops do! The formula revolves around a few key variables (the city's population, roads leading away from the city, etc.) but the number of jars in front of every workshop is the major deciding factor for generating more business tax income. Hint: The preset taxation values are at about the right level for maximum growth and maximum revenue. When adjusting them, it is generally wise to do so in small increments. For example, raising your business tax rate above 5% will cause production to drop off in later years, but note that there is a lag time, both for driving down the business market as well as for recovery once rates are again reduced. Therefore, avoid raising the business tax rate until the city is making a profit. Page 130 Computer Gaming World "


"  Improving Property Values and Slumming Around The other major source of revenue is taxing the citizens. This section will present information that will help you to build and maintain high property values, the yardstick by which this income is measured. Unlike SimCity, one need not think in terms of low cost housing for the citizenry. Instead, as many affluent neighborhoods as possible are needed for both domestic tranquillity and revenue generation. Table 1 The Land Value Table Map Symbol Val Rad Lim Baths Giant Baths +1 2 + 23 +1 3 School Hospital Avoiding the \"Filthy Lucre\" Syndrome According to Suetonius, Emperor Vespasian tried to raise revenues from the populace by instituting a very unpopular tax on public restrooms. When accused that this money was filthy lucre. Vespasian was sai have held a coin under the accuser's nose and ask, «Does it smell, my son?\" To keep one's reputation from smelling and driving the people to riot, it is important that drivir you raise property values. Always remember that this is the de facto measure of the population's standard of living in Caesar. Each square on the city map begins with a property value of 0. The proximity of virtually everything one can build improves that value, except for fires, rubble and new housing starts. This information is presented in Table 1, which defines the numbers used for determining land values. In Table 1, \"Val» represents the amount added to the land value for each square of that borhoods near industries and businesses, the tile. For example, each square of a school maximum land value limit of 3 means that (which has a tile taking up 4 squares in a they will create and perpetuate slum living square shaped pattern) increases nearby propconditions to nearby houses. erty values by +1. Therefore, a square directly Finally, Table 1 shows that the value of adjacent to that school has its land value housing is modified by a variable known as raised by a full four levels (due to being within \"G.\" This stands for \"growth» and is deterthe school's influence radius, see below). mined by one's tax rate and unemployment The «Rad\" value is the radius that each (the lower the better). individual square of a tile projects its modifier on property values. For instance, a square next Driving Down Property Values to a hippodrome, which occupies 8 squares in a pattern that is 2 squares high by 4 squares Naturally, one should always put our the wide, has a +1 value over a 5 square radius. fires and clear away rubble. That will stop the hus, a square next to a hippodrome would immediate fallout to neighborhood land valreceive a +8 property value modifier. ues from neighboring calamities. Rebuilding The «Lim\" value is the maximum land those neighborhoods, however, may not be as value that a square within the radius of the easy as it was to establish them in the first item can reach. Most tiles come without limplace. The big reason is the detrimental effect its, but business, in particular, severely limit of creating new housing. Table 1 shows that the nearby property values. No matter how tent cities can drive down property values at many other factors might influence the neighan amazing rate. People who paint whole Table 2 Minimum Housing Civilities Requirements Theater Amphitheater Hippodrome +1 +1 5 Market +1 1 Rubble (on fire) Rubble (cold) -2 1 Heavy Industry Business +1 IAWNNWNNW WN AW w on WW Coco Barracks Gates +1 +1 +1 Temple (size 1-4) Temple (size 5-8) Oracle Prefecture 8 Forum (size 1 and 2) +1 Forum (size 3 and 4) +1 Forum (size 5 and 6) +1 Forum (size 7 and 8) +1 +1 Fountain (with water) Well Reservoir 1+ Housing Level #s Secret Property Descriptions Minimum Requirement 1 1,2 3,4 5, 6, 8 Positive land value Water supply T-Intersection 4-Way Intersection +2 + 11 Plaza Forum Market 1 7,9 single tent, double tent brown shack, white shack 2x1 white shack, 2x1 white house, Road access to and white skyscraper 2x1 house with pointy roof, brown skyscraper 2x1 w/small lawn on right, 2x1 with no lawn 2x1 center lawn, 2x1 with a big lawn on the right 2x2 villas and 3x3 palace or Hippodrome 10, 11 Housing (size 1 & 2) G-1 Housing (size 3-5) G Housing (size 6-9) G+1 Housing (size 10-13) G+1 Housing (size 14-15) G+2 Housing (size 16) G+2 Baths 2 1 12, 13 School and Hospital Theater, Amphitheater, 14 16 July 1993 Page 131 "


"strategy right, then drops a row for the next check. Table 3 Table 4 This can be an important consideration when Positive Housing Influence Water Supply Source Radii planning neighborhoods, as the highest land Radius of Facilities value square should be located at the top-left Source Radius corner of the block in order to better preserve Source Radius Well the values of the rest of the neighborhood Baths Reservoir when they are checked. Giant Baths Fountain (on) A final word abour improving baths and School temples: in order for a bath tile to become a Hospital The Secret Ingredient to Property great bath, one simply has to raise the land Theater Values: Civilities value beneath it. Raising a temple, however, Amphitheater requires not only an increase in land value, Hippodrome Now, the effect of all cumulative modifiers but also an increase in the population of the Marketplace presented in Table 1 is less when an area is not neighborhoods surrounding it. serviced by the basic amenities described in areas with tents (i.e., new housing) are, ac page 29 of the game manual (i.e., water, Caesar's Planning cording to this table, begging for trouble. administration, etc.). Also, while land values Commissioner Commentaries Often, it is better to add new housing one have a direct effect on the growth of housing, When counting the radii of influence of a square at a time and let each dwelling improve there are other variables that affect the home market (and, hence, tax) value. certain tile, be sure to count diagonal squares. a bit before planting a tent next door. In other words, land value is also the absoNever forget the cumulative nature of overlapping influences on land and (housing) The Real Pillars of the lute maximum that housing levels in a given property values in Caesar. Community: Property Values square can rise to. There is another, secret cap or ceiling that The land value of a square should be is placed upon housing development. These thought of as its potential property value. are the special minimum requirements for While there are no property taxes per se in housing to evolve up to a certain level of Caesar, the property value of residential houswealth. They are presented in Table 2. ing forms the basis of the taxes paid by the The requirements in Table 2 are cumulacity's citizens. Therefore, it is vitally importive. To achieve a level 16 house, all seven of tant that residential areas be constructed in these secret minimum requirements must be absolutely the highest value land areas availmet and be close enough to influence a given able. square of housing. ANW I FT 7302 The numbers such as 2x1 represent a housNow, land value is the main consideration ing tile that is 2 squares across by 1 high. The fountain in the lower-right corner for improving the level of local housing. Land Notice that type 8 houses are out of sequence. is well connected to two other fountains values, as indicated in Table 1, might have nave The reason is that types 6 & 8 (and 7 & 9) the reason and will keep running. artificial ceilings placed on certain squares houses are actually of identical quality. This when they are located near a market, rubble, gimmick allows for fairly posh housing in Water is power in Caesar. In order to receive heavy industry, business, barracks, gate or a areas where a 2x1 housing tile will simply not full benefits from a land square, it must be prefecture. Consequently, land values and fit. In order to see these different levels of within the receiving radius of a fresh water the housing built on that land near these housing, first click on the house icon, then source. For the record, those radii are prefacilities) cannot rise to their full potential. press and hold left mouse button. sented in Table 4. After that, press and hold the Note that hooking up two fountains to a Table 5 right mouse button so that both single reservoir doesn't work well at all. HowAdministrative Influence Ranges are held down simultaneously. ever, hooking up a third fountain as the midThat will present a display of dle link in a chain with a reservoir on each end Administrative Source Influence Range these different graphics (as it will and a fountain attached in between works Prefecture for baths and temples, too). very well. Forum size 1 or 2 Urban civilities have their own Forum size 3 or 4 positive effect on housing growth The Red Tape Measure Forum size 5 or 6 and improvement beyond their Not only do land squares require water, Forum size 7 or 8 contributions to the land value or they also need administrative control or they the neighborhood. Specifiwon't pay their full share of raxes. Liberals will cally, while their effects love that things simply will not prosper unless Table 6 vary (and are hard to quanthey're under the taxing influence of governGovernment Anti-Riot Protection tify for the rather tricky ment administration. How large the governhousing upgrade formula), ment office is determines the length of its arm, Security Artificial Land Radius of their range of influence is as shown in Table 5. Structure Value Increase Influence provided in Table 3. The Verdict Is In On Important note: Houses Barracks 5 squares Suppressing Riots grow, when periodically Gates 2 squares Temple (1-4) 2 squares checked by the computer, The other function of government adminiTemple (5-8) 3 squares from the top-left corner of stration, of course, is suppressing those who Oracle 5 squares the screen to the bottomare less than content with its rule. For examPrefecture 3 squares right one. Thus, each row ple, every square within a three square radius of housing grows to the of a workshop (or within two squares of heavy A  Page 132 Computer Gaming World "


"trateg SS industry) has a maximum land value imposed When the unrest factor exceeds a certain When fighting barbarians in the field, the upon it of three. Therefore, no matter how level, a rioter is born. The amount of unrest thing to note is that some tactics work better many other nearby features might raise the required to spring forth a rioter varies by the than others against each particular tribe of land value, this property value ceiling enforces quality of the housing in that particular barbarians. The secret, of course, is to find out slum living conditions on the very houses that square. Consequently, single tent housing which through trial and error. Regulars, too, improve production at workshops. That will crank out rioters with relative ease. Note, fight much better than auxiliaries. Players makes them prone to riot, so keep the strong however, that only the bottom four levels of who outnumber the barbarians by as much as arms of government, as shown in Table 6, housing will ever produce rioters. Rich levels 2-1 may still lose if their army is largely near these slums. For the record, the security will accumulate unrest, but they are too genauxiliaries. structures artificially increase the land value teel to actually riot. That is, until their housof an area (for anti-riot purposes only not ing levels decline to one of the bottom four Try increasing wages for the military at the for taxation) within their radius of influence levels, at which time they begin to act out start of the game and avoid conflict until you As many Imperial Governors have found against the stored anger of their oppression. are strong enough to win the first battle. This our, the price of plummeting popularity is will raise the troops' morale and make it easier ruinous rioting. It's bad enough when bar All Roads Lead Where? to win future battles. Brace thyself, citizen. It is almost certain that too many roads are adorning Caesar's Reading the provincial capitals out there. Straight from Unemployment Statistic the programmer comes this tip: The only places where roads are actually Unemployment happens. Now, while it is required is to connect houses to a forum and logical to assume that opening businesses businesses to their marketplaces, period. Unhelps reduce unemployment (it does, but like past experiences with SimCity, traffic only if they are prospering), other tiles effect congestion is never a problem, so one must the global unemployment number as well. think of these city streers that can be built as, Heavy industry structures will help reduce in fact, major avenues of commerce (i.e., a unemployment. So will marketplaces. Even via). Those who want to optimize their propbuilding forums will make a slight dent in barians have to be dealt with, but to have erty values may not want to run roads around unemployment. one's own citizens up in arms...! Perhaps an their civility structures (baths, schools, hospiexplanation of how a riot gets started is in Hail. citizen! May these tips serve the leader tals, theaters, amphitheaters and hippoorder. dromes). Instead, it is often more beneficial well in his ascent through Caesar. Remember, A general, city-wide check of domestic tranto property values to pack housing directly as a politician, it is your job to enjoy the fruits quillity is calculated regularly for the city. It next to them instead. of others' labor. Spend wisely, if you care. Cow is based on two things: the population tax and for those who like to build roads in the conscription levels. The higher these two cleprovinces, you will save a few dollars if you ments are, the worse things will be vis a vis pay to clear out intervening bad terrain with rioring the shovel icon before you lay down the road. After the city's general rating is calculated, Even if you can't afford the road right away, In London a specific rating is calculated for each housing this technique at least opens up a channel for square in the city. This value is equal to the armies to travel. general rating (which may be a negative number), plus any local bonus as described in Defending the Ramparts Table Six. If this value works out to less than Those who build city walls will find it usef O for any given square in the city, there may to run a road just along the inside of them. be trouble! Next to the road, build a barracks. The idea Specifically, that number is added to an is to place your barracks in such a way as to \"unrest factor\" for each individual housing get your soldiers to pop out of them and begin square. This unrest factor is the cumulative patrolling the road along the wall's interior. result of these additions over time; the worse BASED ON BRAM STOKER'S ORIGINAL NOVEL This places them well to counter any barbarthe local security level is, the more negatives ian incursions that manage to get over the For Windows. Excellent graphics, interface, sounds! that are added to this factor. walls. Count Dracula is somewhere in London. Use your wits to track down the bloodthirsty vampire and put an end to his evil menace. Assume the role of Prof. Van Helsing, the 20221 renowned metaphysician or Mina Harker, the alluring young schoolmistress. Learn the secrets of Renfield, the madman. Explore haunted mansions and much more... \"Powerful programs of growth and adventure\" MITMERL11 THE MAGIC MIRROR ... a toolbox for your mind. E. Kinnie, PhD., Clinical Psychologist. $39.95. MAGIC MIRROR II ... experiences for your mind. $39.95. MERLIN ... an apprenticeship. $29.95. I CHING... ancient Chinese wisdom and prophecy. $29.95. MasterCard/Visa THE MAGIC MOUNTAIN... a journey into another reality. 1-800-545-6172 Not for children. Male and female versions. $39.95. (after 5 p.m.) $29 cach. Mail check, cash or World Rculowned SCREEN SAVER ... math art and fractals, lively and money order to: Call or write colorful. $19.95. SDJ Enterprises, Inc. Windows 3.1 for free catalog. 1551 Fawn Valley Dr. Blue Valley, 29 Shepard St, Walton, NY 13856 St. Louis, MO 63131 386 25Mhz or faster Supports Sound Blaster (314) 966-S602 (Evenings Only) Not available in stores. Satisfaction guaranteed or your money back. July 1993 Circle Reader Service #36 Circle Reader Service #87 Page 133 DRACULA. Requires: VGA graphics Easy to Install "


"Deuneu V3 » A Bird's Eye View s from Vancouver LES CHOITANDOUS CHARLOTTE AALEIGH The Road from Sumter to Appomattox DESTRO COLUKOTA FLORENT familiar ke by roftro baileston by Terry Lee Coleman e The Arnoi inas the Carolinas Borned a 12420 The American Civil War is not just for Despite successful designs on the tactical Americans. Rather, it cuts across all level, computer games trying to cover the 1 gamer's nationalities. Never was this entire conflict from a strategic standpoint more apparent than in a tournament of the have ranged from Data East's laughable EFT classic boardgame A House Divided (from North South to the uneven and overly poU RESTI Game Designer's Workshop) at the Origins litical No Greater Glory (SSI). If the renowned under Huger national game convention five years ago, designer Ed Bever has trouble encapsulating Petersburg where six of cight quarterfinalists were from the entire ACW, what makes our Canadian Canada! My opponent from Toronto (whom friends so confident? I must confess, beat me — my only loss at A March 1 1863 kalick mouse to request orders > House Divided in three years) confided to me Focus... or Could You Adjust that in some ways, the American Civil War is the Picture, Please? almost a Canadian pastime. No surprise then, information on military units in the manual that a new company from Vancouver would Perhaps inspired by PBS's The Civil War, for the neophyte? come out with an American Civil War game. designer Frank Hunter opens the game manEven worse, the player must «arm\" the variWhat is somewhat of a surprise is the grand ual with a touch of humanity, by rememberous units before they may fight. The idea is to wargaming scope attempted by Adanac ing Richland Kirkland, the \"Angel of Marye's show the difficulties in getting supplies to the Command Systems Corporation in their first ist Heights,\" who gave opposing wounded Unfront, especially for the Confederates. While game, The Road From Sumter to Appomattox pomartox ion soldiers water as they lay dying. In that different charts are easily accessible, showing (Sumter), released for both IBM and Amiga same spirit, I will attempt to be sympathetic manpower ratios, cannon and foodstuffs computers. Three scenarios cover Manassas, to what the game accomplishes, rather than available, does the average player really need Shiloh, and Antietam, while campaigns cover what it wishes to be (which is not always to know how much cotton he has in Florida, action beginning in either 1861, 1862 or obvious). as if that might effect his mounting an offen1863, with play ending in 1865 in all cases. sive? Supply wagons litter the map, adding to American Civil War (ACW) simulations on Graphically, Sumter is quite pretty, with its the confusion, often making the game appear computer are hardly new, the most notable 256-color VGA display (which I suspect like some distant cousin of the infamous might look even better on an Amiga). One boardgame Campaign for North Africa. Logisbeing SSI's Gettysburg: The Turning Point, demight look even be servedly enshrined in CGW's Hall of Fame. can easily get the unit manifest from a functies are certainly important in any simulation, tion key, and although the units look but for the amount of \"detail\" involved, there \"blocky\" in closeup, this is more the failings are still many abstractions. arren Arinel Capreol Core of the IBM than the graphic design — even Forage is included, of course, but why not Civilization has this problem to a degree. the option of scrounging for ammunition? In After a couple of playings, telling the various units apart becomes fairly simple. TITLE: The Road From Sumter to Appomattox SYSTEMS: Amiga, IBM What is not so simple is that all people who VGA have a passing interest in the ACW, may or PRICE: $54.95 (PLUS S5 S&H) DESIGNER: Frank Hunter may not know the difference between a diviAdanac Command Systems Corporation sion and a brigade. Since the designer states 102 1345 West 4th Avenue Vancouver, B.C. Canada V6H 3Y8 that Sumter was designed to be played rather (604) 739.1162 than set on a shelf, why not give some basic Carreleri Cerruel wees lap Gwerele 11. ME IL BY Tulele SOM I Carral City Carreal I er GRAPHICS: Aliu Hair aplies in Milline in Cautare Awilalla PUBLISHER: Ermal og Find Bercise 21 FILE In   Truar! CLILA RI, Trek Page 134 Computer Gaming World "


"Deview REGIO ELLULEUSERCE or ocean-sailing ships. Ironclads are available how hard he's worked.\") Regardless of which Uul a formar Chart for both sides, but their expense makes it rare side is chosen, putting the right leaders in the Head Ouatters for the Confederates to purchase onc. The right places takes a lot of skill. The best thing * Ammy HQ * blockade of Southern ports is handled ababout the leader system is that it allows leaders ICorps HQ stractly, with effects increasing throughout to be promoted to positions past their abiliA Division HQ the game, depriving Rebel units of supply. ties, retaining aggressiveness without the nec19 Cavalry Div. B Confederate raiders are effective during the essary initiative or tactical abilities to lead Ocean Transportation Land Transportation first two years of the campaign, then become larger forces. Ocean Ship as scarce as they were historically. Im Train \"After 'Em, Boys! Huzzah!» L River Boat 3 Wagon \"You Like These Oak Clusters? Sumter has a simple combat system to reWell, They Sure Cost Enough!» solve \"trivial\" battles, and an involved tactical many areas of the South, church bells and Leaders are the core of the game. This is sub-game for those with too much time on other metal works were melted for bullets and good, because they help Sumter overcome their hands. The simpler method evaluates cannonballs. At Pea Ridge, a company armed many of the more mundane and tedious deeach side and assigns a relative advantage to mainly with shotguns shot a mixture of rocks, sign elements. In general (no pun intended), the side with the best combination of fresh salt and nails! Here is where the designer the leader rules make sense. Most of all, chcy and experienced troops, good defensive tercould have gone for simplicity, perhaps giving are fun. rain, morale, and the best leader. Units are the players so many food and ammo points to Tactical abilities range from three to ten at pushed until their morale breaks, at which Pu pass around per state, instead of making 18 the start of the game, and leaders such as Lee point they are withdrawn by the computer. A Sumter the computer version of \"I Was Quarand Jackson increase their values termaster at Gettysburg.\" quickly as they win battles. InitiaPolitics muddle the issues in Sumter as tive ratings vary greatly and imSON much as in real life. This is evidently what the prove as the leader stays with a designer intended. Players must think about particular command, getting to ramifications of European Intervention, know the unit, as it were. Better Emancipation and the like. A broadening of EFFERSON CITY organized leaders (Lee again) imstrategic problems is quite appropriate in a prove initiative values more game on this level, and the player is not quickly, resulting in quicker reacburdened with tedious political detail as in No tion and mobilization to counter Greater Glory. Players can even experiment HANSEN enemy threats. Bartles such as RO D OLINE UKEE with ahistorical options, such as moving the Chancellorsville are therefore posDONELSER Confederate capitol to Atlanta. sible to recreate in the context of Slavery Combat role Naval avail the game. Aggressiveness comes Europe Frading Eastern Where Exactly is That Trail? Blockade ignored 44550 from a willingness to engage the Far West:O mometic politica di Movement in 19th-century America was enemy and can be as much a liabilquite difficult, something Sumter recreates ity as an asset. Overly aggressive commanders me similar fate awaits units having the misforvery well. Once again, wargame jargon gets in have appropriately higher casualty ratios. tune to become exhausted. the way — not everyone out there counts Having separate Rally ratings allows every Mr. Hunter joins a growing number of hexes, like sheep, in order to fall asleep each commander to affect desertion differently, computer wargame designers in providing innight. Still, movement is pretty simple; clickand also allows McClellan to have some use formation to the players on how the system ing first on the unit, then on its destination in the game. works. The astute player will be able to figure While the movement rates are listed, the hex the probability of success for individual units. scale is not given, so players will have a bit At various times, screens pop up, showing certain units being trained, armed or whatmore trouble figuring out how far their units Seen from this perspective, the game system seems to model combat much as a board are going compared to the actual wartime ever. A dynamic leader in a high-profile area, wargame would (although many wargamers marching rates. such as Washington D.C., gives the player the will want more control, which the simulation Basically, water is three times as fast as going feeling that he is accomplishing something allows them to adjust). by foot, while rail is five times as fast, provided between battles. The player may also reassign that the player has not exceeded his rail moveleaders and promote leaders after they have The inherent irony is that computer warment capacity for the turn. Units expcnd accumulated enough \"promotion points.\" games are supposed to be new and somehow different — able to free the gamer from the movement points to enter various types of (Sorry, Stonewall, but I gave that new openmundane restrictions imposed by cardboard ing at Vicksburg to Pemberton. You know terrain, much as in a boardgame, counters and paper maps. Sumter has some except that in Sumter, the movegood ideas. For instance, the tactical combat ment points are not printed on the system is entertaining for a while. However, units. Morale and supply also affect these very HORE ATLANTE CITY unit speed. In practice, the movestrengths that are sprinkled Silkeun maniston=roovek through Sumter are mirror images of games, ment rules work well, providing a degree of uncertainty as to when both board and computer-based, which have NARJLIS done those selfsame things much better. At units will reach their objectives, times, Sumter seems little more than an hommaking for interesting campaign E KACHUSD age to Eric Smith's The Civil War boardgame decisions. As in some SSI games, (Victory Games, 1983), with similar rules for units will sometimes act on their supply and leader removal. Smith's game also own initiative, retreating or enARNOULE differentiates between smaller (trivial) and trenching in the face of the enemy. Uni on Excellent morale larger battles, having different combat tables Fatigue : Fresh Sea movement is very detailed, Guns for cach. Both games emphasize naval operawith separate rules governing river en 18612 tions almost to a fault. Where the games differ Western CHARLESTES I FREDRICKSBURG THEREURO PRETEKURAT MONROE Sigel 1-star Troops H5250 July 1993 Page 135 "


"Deuren STREVENOS HOLEN TISTON DOES Columns, line deployment and facing are ACW. The research makes no claims to be all included, with changes in formation subperfect, yet the game has a wealth of informaALLE HF: ject to unit training and morale. Each brigade tion. Gameplay is often irritating, but certain BELI ROGA can be given separate orders, through the use aspects, such as the use of leaders, when used CORTE of operations points.\" Leaders may lead units with the simpler combat system, make all the directly into battle or stay in the rear and rally trouble nearly worth the while. A ALH troops. If all this sounds somewhar familiar, WAGAMOON it is because many board wargames, particu15:20 UBE larly those on the ACW, have accomplished 22 FTLIBELLE IN similar goals with less meandering (Terrible 14131-TORE ATLAN Swift Sword by TSR and Chickamauga by West End Games come immediately to ANNAPOLIS is that Civil Waris still surprisingly fresh after mind). FREDRICKSBURG ten years, all of its rules fitting in such a From a computer game perspective, SSI's LE RECHTSSE manner as to create an understanding of the ACW games have a much more authentic ACW, albeit in a fairly complex package. feel, particularly in the command area, where --  NOBBOLK Sumter attempts to emulate the success of its to overcome uncertainty, the players must foster parent, but has instead absorbed the think differently than a board wargamer. frappings of the design philosophy, without a Moreover, Sumter's biggest failure is that the Underneath all the confusion and various complete understanding of why its predeces\"tactical game\" simply does not fit with the bugs which surround every new release these sor worked so well. rest of the design, from either a complexity or days, Sumter offers a different perspective on Nowhere is this more evident than in the philosophical standpoint. the ACW. What Hunter & Co. need to do in \"tactical combat\" resolution game, where that \"Tough Time of it Today?\" \"Yep. future releases is to trust in the uniqueness of ancient ogre \"fog of war» rears its unwholetheir personal vision, and not feel the need to Lick 'Em Tomorrow, Though.\" some head. When deployed, units cannot see use every idea from every other ACW game the enemy until they move adjacent. Fair What Hunter and the fellows at Adanac ever done. When they implement things like enough, but there are enough rules covering Command Systems Corporation have fallen a cleaner interface, less cumbersome supply intelligence that exceptions could certainly be into is the old trap of realism vs. playability rules, etc. all mentioned previously in this made, especially since choosing when and which has plagued their boardgaming bretharticle, what a truly great game Sumter would where to fight was a great deal of Robert E. ren for the past three decades. Sumter risks be! Cow Lee's genius (except at Gettysburg, where he offending both control freaks\" and those just was without the \"cyes» of his cavalry). looking for a good, clean game about the SOFTWARE CLOSEOUTS $5.00 Star Glider $16.50 $14.50 THE ULTIMATE ROLE-PLAYING AID Introducing The Ultimate Character Editor. This exciting new product features! full mouse and keyboard support, online context sensitive help and a complete windowing system (does not require MS Windows to run). This editor allows you to edit most of the games listed below (including all of the Might and Magics, all of the Ultimas, all of the SSI games, all of the Bard's Tales, and more). The price | for this editor is $59.95. So, for the price of 3 editors, you will be getting approximately 30 editors. Upgrades will be available to handle new games as they are released for only $9.95. CHARACTER EDITORS $19.95 each Might and Magic (1, 2, 3 or 4). Drakkhen, Pool of Radiance, Hard Nova, Bard's Tale (1, 2 or 3). Wasteland, Dragon Wars, Space Rogue, Wizardry (Edits 1-3). Wizardry 4, Wizardry 5. Bane of Cosmic Forge, Crusaders of the Dark Savant, Treasurers of the Savage Frontier, Sentinel Worlds I. Knights of Legend. Secret of the Silver Blades. Curse of the Azure Bonds, Champions of Krynn, Space 1889, Keys to Maramon, MegaTraveller (1 or 2), Keel the Thief, Darklands, Escape from Hell Ultima (3, 4, 5, 6 or 7). Dark Heart of Uukrul, Savage Empire, Tunnels and Trolls, Lord of the Rings (1 or 2). Countdown to Doomsday, Martian Dreams, Eye of the Beholder (1 or 2). Death Knights of Krynn, Fountain of Dreams, Magic Candle (1 or 2). Pools of Darkness, Ultima Underworld, Twilight 2000, Planet's Edge, Dark Queen of Krynn, and Prophecy of the Shadow. IBM AMIGA, APPLE, COMMODORE 64/128, ATARI ST, MAC & MORE IBM BARGAINS UNDER $.10 IBM/MS-DOS BARGAINS. UNDER $20 WINDSCAPE/HITUNDER MOUNTAIN FAST BREAK, Accolade $9.501 $9.50 Monday Night Football VGA $16.50 SUPER BUNDLE FOR C-64/128 DONT GO ALONE. Accolade $19 501 Sharkey's 3D Pool $9.50 10_GAMES FOR $14.50 Microleague Football OUTRUN, Sega $ 9.50 Microleague Baseball $14.50 includes: Demolition Mission, Army $14.50 SPACE HARRIER, Sega $ 5.00 F-15 Stnke Eagle Moves, Bad Street Brawler, Tai-Pan, GUNSHIP, Microprose $ 9,50 Solo Flight $16.50 Fist, Tal-Ceti, Mutants, Cyrus Chess. CROSSBOW, Absolute $5.00 Tomahawk $14.50 Doc the Destroyer, & Uritium $14.50 MIND DANCE, Mindscape Xiphos $14.50 LEISURE SUIT LARRY BUNDLE MY GRAND PIANO, Fisher Price 5 9.50 MEGAFORTRESS FROM SIERRA for IBM/MS-DOS MAGIC JOHNSON BASKETBALL $ 9.50 Carrier Command $14.50 Includes: BEGINNING ALGEBRA, Dinosoft $ 9.50 Sky Chase GEN. KNOWLEDGE BUILDER $ 9.50 David Wolf Secret Agent $14.50 Leisure Suit Larry 1, 2 & 3 !! HUMAN BIOLOGY, A.E.C. $9.50 Blue Angels $14.50 Only $30 Rocket Ranger $14.50 SANDS OF FIRE, Three-Sody S9.50 Air Strike U.S.A. $14.50 ARMOR ALLEY, Three-Sixty $9.50 Blue Max $14.50 Dark Heart of Uukrul $16.50 MARVEL TRILOGY $19.50 SIERRA for IBM Buck Rogers 1 520 EACH Buck Rogers 2 FROM MICROPROSE for IBM 519.50 QUEST FOR GLORY 2, FIREHAWK Moroes of Lance $19.50 Includes: CODENAME ICEMAN, HEART OF Dragons of Flame $19.50 Amazing Spiderman, X.men CHINA, KING'S QUEST 1.0.4 Questron 11 $16.50 & Dr. Doom's Revenge. OIL'S WELL, COLONEL'S BEQUEST || Hillslat $19.50 NEWSROOM PRO $19.50 Only $20 !! LEISURE SUIT LARRY 1 -or3. CERTIFICATE MAKER $16.50 RISE OF THE DRAGON, THEXDER. EGA PAINT 2005 $14.50 MIXED UP MOTHER GOOSE DAS BOOT $14.50 STAR COLLECTION for IBM SPACE QUEST 1 -or2-or-3. MANHUNTER NEW YORK $14.50 10 GAME BUNDLE $19.50 X-MEN 2 CALL FOR OTHER TITLES! PUNISHER $19.50 from Electronic Zoo DR. DOOM'S REVENGE 514.50 LAND, SEA & AIR TRILOGY AMAZING SPIDERMAN $14.50 SUPER SALE $19.50 SUPER CONTRA 514.50 by Microproso. 3 GAMES $20 TWILIGHT 2000 Includes: Paris-Dakar, Skidoo, $14.50 Includes: AIRBORNE RANGER, 20,000 Leagues under the Sea, $14.50 COVERT ACTION $14.50 Legend of Djel, Mouldy Old PIRATES! & GUNSHIP. FOR IBM Dough, Balloon Lagoon, Mechanic IBM SPECIALS WHILE THEY LAST Panic, Plasma Pdot, Space Scape, Hoyle's Book of Games Vol. 2 RED BARON, by Serta & best selling TREASURE TRAP!! BATTLECHESS 2. by Interplay $19.50 SOLITAIRE, by Sierra. $15 HARPOON CHALLENGER PK $2500 TROIKA 3-pack Includes:28 Solitaire games with ADULT FUN FOR IBM FROM FREE SPIRIT from Paragon Software for IBM. mouso support. Tons of fun!! SEX VIXENS FROM SPACE SEX OLYMPICS (VGA only) For IBM on 3.5\" disks only. ......SALE....... $14.50. SOLD ONLY TO ADULTS 21 & OVER. Indudes: REBEL PLANETS, IVAN & METAL VISA/MC ORDERS CALL TOLL-FREE I s more liemelor HEARTS. Al we Widows I compatible with different computers... Apple, VGA mouse & sound card support!! Fast paced 1-800-676-6616 Alari, Amiga, C64120, MAC, multilevel arcade action with 100's of levels of Credit Card Orders Only 11 ( 325 minimum & lots more IBM MS-DOS 11 uciting play. Staley & quick refers tegured COMPSUIT TO ORDER: Send check or money order including shipping charges of S5 for U.S.A., $8 for Canada, $10 all others. Califomians must include 7.25% sales P.O. BOX 5150 tax. To receive our catalog with 1000's of closeouts for all computer types. SAN LUIS OBISPO send $2 in cash or U.S. postage stamps.. DONOT CALL FOR A CATALOGIII CA 93403 To check for an item not listed here, call (805) 544-6616. Includac. AIRBORNE RANGER LIGHT SPEED 57.00 HINT BOOKS $9.95 each Might and Magic 1, Knights of Legend, Curse of the Azure Bonds, Champions of Krynn, Legacy of Ancients, Dark Heart of Uukrul, Wizardry (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, Bane or Crusaders). Eye of the Beholder 2 Might and Magic 3 (12.95). IBM listed. Apple, C64 and Amiga versions also available. Please add $4.00 for shipping and handling. Open from 9AM 9PM every day for your convenience. 4 GOSSELIN COMPUTER CONSULTANTS P.O. Box 1083  Brighton, MI 48116. (313) 229-2453 MasterCard Circle Reader Service #61 Circle Reader Service #43 Page 136 Computer Gaming World "


"Lowest deliverd prices with great customer service. 800-448-6658 IT DISK-COUNT SOFTWARE 49 45 ona Hawoda 3903 34°E 33°S 25 26 Inst Viking 2995 1905 35 Rome 30 Tyyawiga www 30 Gero 2945 MASTER CARD, VISA, DISCOVER, AND AMERICAN EXPRESS ACCEPTED WITH NO SURCHARGE. SHIPPING IS ONLY $4.00 PER ORDER, PRODUCT INFO & OTHER BUSINESS: HOT PER TEM 908-396-8880 A Train 39 El Fish Leather God Phb 2 24 Print Shop, New 36 Studyware Blology, Manhole CD ROM Sound Cards Construction Set 22 Empire Deluxe Legacy Necromancr190 Graphics (ea). Clc.,Chem., Econ. 22 Magazine Rack Aces Over Europe 440 Entr Pak Win (ea) Legend of Kyrandia 35 Print Sp Companion 31 Physics, Statistic 25 Mantis 450 Ad Lib Microchannel 69 Aces of the Pacific 390 Eric the Unready Eric the Unrea 35 Legends of Valour 38 Privateer Studyware LSAT 37 Marketing Master 39 Ad Lib Gold 1000 179 Mission Disk 25 Eye of Beholder 2005 Legion's of Krella 37 Pro League Baseball35 Stunt Island Aloha Hawaii Mavis Beacon 39 ATI Stereo FX 109 AD&D Collect Ed 2 42 Eye of Beholder 2 38 Leisur Suit Larry 5 395 Prophecy 2 2 Summer Challenge 34 39 Amer Bus. Phnbk Mixed Up Mothe Gse 37 VGA StreoFIX 1MB 369 AD&D Starter Kit 42° Eye of Beholder 3 42 Lemmings 29 Prophecy of Shadow 38 Super Tetris Amer Hert Pict Dict 75 Monarch Notes 75 Covox Snd Mster II 145 75 cl AD&D Unlimited 31 F'15 III 44 Oh No More Addon 22 Protostar Take a break X-Word29 Arthur Teacher Trbl 41 Monkey Island 39 Gravis Ultra Sound 129 Adibou&Junior Vol1 34 F 15 ill Limited 490s Lemm.-Oh No More 31 Putt Putt Parade 32 Pinball 2008 Audubon Mammals 37 MS DOS Archives 35 Logitech Soundmn 179 Air Bucks F117a Stealth Fight 41 Lemmings 2 3505 Putt Putt Fun Pack 26 Task Force 1942 3705 Autodesk Explorer 119 MM Music: Mozart 33 Media Vision Air Duel Facts in Action Liberty or Death Quest for Glory 1 22 T.M.N.Turtle Arcade 25 Barney Bear Goes MM Music Vivaldi 33 Audio Port 139 Air Warrior SVGA 35 Falcon 3.0 45 Life and Death 2 32 Quest for Glory 3 39 T.M.N.Turtle Advnt 32 to School 26 North Amer Fax BK 55 CDPC / XL 1199 AlgeBlaster Plus 30 Oper Fight Tiger 25 Line in the Sand 25 Rags to Riches 35° Tengens Arcade Hit 25 26 North Amer Indians 57 Pro Audio Spec + 139 into Space Algebra Mado Easy 25 Family Tree Maker 42 Links Railroad Tycoon 19° Terminator 2029 393 Officers Bookcase 50 M.M. Upgrade Kit 765 Aliens Ate Babysitter 32 Farm Creativity Kit 45 18 Links 386 Pro 39 Trmtr 2 Cybrchess 35 ReachFor The Skies19\" Batik Designs 29 Pro Audio Spec 16 194 49 Our Solar System Alone in The Dark 350 Fatty Bear Birthday 31° Course Disk ea 16 Reader Rabbit Battlechess 35° Tetris Classic PC Game Room 49 Pro 16 Multimedia Alphabet Blocks 29°5 Femme Fatale 386 Courses ea 19 Reader Rabbit 2355 Tetris Trio Beauty & Boast 49 Peter & Wolf 45 Upgrade Kit 955 F. F. Data Disk Amazon Lord of Rings 2 37 Ready for Letters 35\" Beethoven Ninth The Legacy 59 30 Pool Shark 1995 Thunderboard 9 5 Ambush 3305 Fields Of Glory Lost File Sherick H 41° Read 'n Roll VGA 31 The Los Vikings Berlitz Think & Talk 29° Presdnt It Surt Geo 105 Thunder & Lightng 229 American Civil War 25 Flight Simul A.T.P. 37 Lost Treas Infocom 42 Reading Adv in Oz 36 105 Time Riders America35 French Programmers ROM 59 Sound Blaster Ancient Art War Sky 35 Flight Simul (M.S.) 41 Lost Treasures 2 29 Red Baron 39 Time Treks Spanish Publish it Snd Blast Pro MCA 259 Ancient Empires 30 Air Tre Cheri 340! Lost Tribe 25 Mission Disk 17 Time Quest 37 Bible Library Reference Library Sound Blaster Pro 189 59 75 Animation Studio ArcluScen Dsgn 28 Bibles & Religon 30 Realms Lost Vikings Tom Landry Football 30 Rotor Airball Time IS B Pro 16 2 39 Armored Fist 3705 Aircraft Adv Factry25 Lure of Temptress 32 Retum O the Phntm33\" Tony LaRussa Base. 17 Bookshelf 129 San Diego Zoo 49 SB Multimedia Kit 560 Ashes of Empire 45° # 685 Magic Candlé 3 37°5 Rex Nebular 37 Tony LaRussa II 37 Britanica Family Chc 75 59  8 MM Starter Kit 459 Secret Weapons A.T.A.C. 35 # 701 Mantis 39 Riders of Rohan 31 Expansion Disk Business Master 15 32 59 S B CDROM Inum Seventh Guest 360 Automap Airport Facty Loc 17 Mario is Missing 35° Ring World 34\" Top Class Sieries ea 16 Buzz Aldrin Race 59 Sherlock Holme 39 Sound Machine ind. Automap Windows 57 California Missing City Disk 17 Risk for Windows 29es Traders 1995 Carmen World Dixe 65 Sherl Holmes 2 42 S8, Speaker Joystick 95 Automap Europe 74 FS Pro Mario Teaches Type 25 Risky Woods 25 Treasure Cove 35 Career Opportunities42 Sleeping Beauty 37 Roland SCC 1 GS 375 B-17 Flying Fortres 39 Great Britian 37 Math Blaster Mystry29° Road & Track Pres 35 Treasure Math Storm35 Cautious Condor Sound Works 35 Sound Canvas 559 Bane Cosmic Forge 36 Hawaii Math Blaster Plus 29es Road to Final Four 37 Treasure Mountain 35 CD Game Pack 37 Roland MA-12C ea 105 Space Quest 4 Barbie Design Instant Fact Loc. 19 Math Blaster Wind 36 CD Speedway Robosports Wind 3405 Treehouse Space Series-Apollo 49 SPEAKERS Shielded28 Barbie Fashion Instrumnt Pilot Scen Math Copter Rodney Fun Screen 31 Tristan Pinball Challenge 5 Realms Spirit of Excalibur 37 w 3 band Equilizer 45 Barbie Adventure 25 Japan Scenery 1965 33 Rock & Bach Studio 35 Math Rabbit Trolls Christmas Carol Stellar 7 37 Altec Lansing 200 219 Bardechess 4000 VGA 30 Pilots Pwer Tis 24\" Math Zone Romance 3 King 2 39 Trump Castle 3 2995 CIA World Fact Strange Bedfellows 39 ACS 300 W subwof 299 Battlechess 4000 SVGA3G East/West U.S.ea 59 Mavis Beacon Type 295 Turbo Science CIA World Fact M/M 42 Star Child Battlefield Rescue Air 911 MIDI Interface 17 Rule Engagment 2 38 Mavis Beacon Wind35\" Clipart Goliath Turtle Tools Star Trek Enhanced 49 Battle Toads 2405 Scenery St A or B 37 McGee 3 Pack 32 Sargon Ultima 7 Conan Cimerion 36 99 Midiator 101 Serial 95 Street Atlas Battles of Destiny 35°S Scenery Enhn Ed 25 Mega Lo Mania 29°5 Science Adventure 42 Corel Draw Upgd 139 Forge of Virtue Boat the House Talking Classic Tale 75 PC Midi Card 29° Sound & Graphic 25 Mental Math Games 37 Scooter Magic Castle32 Crossword Cracker 32 Ultima 7 Part 2 Talkng Jungle Safari 75 MOX-32 179 Betrayal at Krondor 350 Mercenaries 37\" Scrabble Deluxe 30 Ultima Trilogy 1 3705 Curse of Enchantia 250 Time Mag Almanac 49 MPU-IPC 135 Betty Crock. Cookbook Western Europe 19 MetroGnome Music 31 Sea Rogue Ultima Trilogy 2 Deathstar Arcade 30 Bil Elliott NASCAR Time Table Science 59 Cakewalk Apprentic145 30 Follow the Reader 2905 Michael Jordon Flight42 Seal Team 370 Dictionaries & Lang 30 Ultima Underworld 47\" 325 Too Many Typefonts 35 The Miracle Birds of Prey w/ Sound Source 40 Mickey ABC's, Second Front 2045 Part 2 Don Quixote 33 Ultima 1-6 Blueforce 49 MIDI Software 390 Four Crystal Trazer Color or 1-2-3's 1995 Sort Weapon Luftwt3ges Education Master Ultrabots 32 Ultimate Shareware 59 Body Illustrated Free DC Ballade 3 7 Mickey's Crossword 19 Uninvited Windows 31\" Tour of Duty ea. 20 Electronic Cookbook 75 U S Atlas Bodyworks 42 Front Page Sports 39es Mickey Jigsaw Pul 31 Sesame St. Ln Clas 31 U.S. Atas DOS 31 26 Band in a Box Elect. Home Library 49 US Atlas w/Automap 49 Bridgemaster G-Force 1gos Mickey Word Advent 25 Sesame St. Publish 25 Utopia 30 Cadenza Elctmn Traveler:Call 33 US History Bug Bunny WrkShp 31 Gambit Micro Cookbook 4.0 32 Sesame St. Vol.1or 2 17 V for Victory 12 ea 42° Encarta Encyclpd 249 US Presidents Cakewalk Buzz Aldrin * Game Maker 6905 Microleagu 4 Base8 32 Seven Citios of Gold 38 Vegas Games Win 1905 European Monarchs 49 USA State Fact Bk 45 Cakewalk Pro Campaign Games:Summer Chig35 Microleague FB Dix 32 Cakewalk Window Shadow President 39es Veil of Darkness Family Doctor 37 USA Wars: Civil War 49 Encore Capitalist Pig Games:Winter Chlg 35 Microleague Soccer 25 Shadow Prophecy 30 Virtual Realty SI 2 595 Font Master 39 USA Wars:Korea Car and Driver 49 Gateway 35 Microsoft Golf 3 9 Wacky Funster 49 Shadowgate 1999 Food Analyst Piano Works USA Wars:Vietnam 49 Carrier Strike Gemfire Midnight Rescue Play it by Ear 35 Shadowlands 290 Waxworks 3 Fresh Arte 49 5 USA Wars: WWII 49 Carriers at War Global Conquest Master Tracks Pro 249 Might and Magic 3 38 Shanghai Il Wayne Gretzky 3 Front Page News 29 35 Voyage Planet 1-3ea.69 Castle 2 38 ght & Magic 4 40 Slogo Western Front 2205 301 Gobblins 1 or 2* Midisoft Studio White Horse Child 33 Castle of Dr. Brain Mike Ditka Ultimt FB 37 Dogs at War 20° When2Worlds War 3585 Game Master Who Killed Sam Rup 25 Music Bytos Vol 1 Ceasar 35 Grand Slam Brdge 131 Millie Math House 31 Sierra Action Five What's My Angle 25 30 Game Pack 2 Music Mentor Willy Beamish Chalinge 5 Realms 3305 Grandmaster Chess 36 Mixed-Up Fairy Tale 30 Sierra Award Winner 47 Wheel Fortune Vana 25 Gettysburg:MM Hist 43 Music Printer Plus 419 Win CD Champions 35's Great Naval Battle 43 Mixed-Up Mother Gs30 Sierra Family Fun 32 Where Carm SanDiego Goler Winkles Adv 33 Wing Comm & Miss 45 Music Time Chemistry Works 38 Super Ships 2005 Monkey Island 1 or 223 Sierra Starter Bndl 39es America's Past 340 Golden Immortal 28 Wing Com/Ultima 6 45 Musicator Chessmaster 3000 290s Greens Monopoly Deluxe 34 Silent Service 2 19° Europe 30 Great Cities Vol 1 49 Wing Comm 2 Quick Score Deluxe 99 Chessmst 3000 Win35 Gunship 2000 57 Ahythm Aco Moonbase 25 Sim Ant 3405 Guinness Book Rec 59 Time WC 2/Uni. Undwid 57 Children Writ & Publ 39 Scenario Disk Mystery at Museum 35 Sim City USA Guy Spy World Atas 42 Songwright 5 Civilization 60 New Math Rabbit 29\" Sim Ant French 35 USA Deluxe Ham Call 440 Civilization MPE Adults Only Must be 21 Trax for Windows 45 N.Y. Times X-Word 32 Sim City Windows 3405 World Deluxe Inspector Gadget 3705 4405 Animation Fantasy 65 Joysticks Classic Adventure 36 Data Disk ea. 170 NFL Challenge Prem59 Sim Earth 3905 Wild Science Arcad35° Interactive Old Test 52 PC Pix Vol 1 or 2 Coaster 65 CH Flightstick 25 Harpoon Designer 32 NFL F.B. Konami 30 Sim Life Dos/Wind 35 Wilson ProStaffgolf 25° Interactive Storytime 45 Private Collection 65 CH Game Card 3 Comanche 31 Harpoon Signature 49es NFL Video Pro 4505 Simpsons 31 Ween:The Pdcy Ind Bus & Econ Atlas 39 34\" Priv. Pictures 1 or 2 65 CH Mach 3 Mission Disk 3 1 25° Harrier Assault Nigel's World 31 Snap Dragon Intro Games Fr/Sp 79 Willy Beamish 25 Seedy Vol 1-7 ea. 65 CH Virtual Pilot Combat Classics 65 310 Headline Harry No Greater Glory 205 Snoopy Game Club 29 Jazz: Multimedia Hist 69 Wing Comandr 2 4705 Storm 1 1 2 Comic Book Creator 17 Health & Diet Pro 65 CH Virtual Pilot Pro 84 26 Nobunagas Ambition 37 Solitaire Window Jets & Props 29s Wizardry Trilogy 31°S 55 Visual Fantasy 65 Eliminator Game Cd 26 Cohort 2 1 90 Heaven & Earth 30 Number Maze Solitaires Journey 35 Jones in Fast Lane 37 Word Muncher 30 Volcano 65 Gravis Analog Pro Conquered Kingdom35 Heimdall 1g Omar Sharif Bridge 37 39 Space Ace 2:Borl Just Grandma & Me 36 36 Word Torture Caddies 7.95ea. 31$ 19 Gravis Joystick Conquest of Japan 35 Heros of 357th Operation Neptune 35 32 Space Adventure 42 5405 Jutland Ital. Germ. Span 25 Contraption Zak Gravis PC GamePad21 25° Hole in 1 Golf Dlx 25 Orbits Space Hulk 370 Kings Quest 5 Wordtris 42 Creepers Kraft KC3 Joystick 2 90s Hong Kong Mahjong 32 Oregon Trail 18 Space Quest 4 World Atlas DOS Land of Lore 39 3 405 Skins & Pads Kraft Thunderstick 28 Crusader Drk Savnt39° Hoylo Bk Game 2 22 Deluxe Space Quest 5 39es World Circuit Languages of World 99 Dust Covers 15 Mao Flight Yoke Cuckoo Zoo 69 310 Hoyle Bk Game 1/3 30 Origin FX Spaceward Ho Learn to Speak Span59 Writer Rabbit 30 Grounded Wrist Strap Cyber Space 340s Humans Maxx Pedal Once Upon Time 39 Leisure Suit Larry Spear of Destiny 42 3905 Keyboard Skins 15 Mouse Yoke Demonsgate 2995 3205 Inca Out of This World Special Forces Ubry of Art Renaisn 65 29 Your Prsnl Train SAT30 Static Pads Quickshot Game Cd 14 Dagger ol Amon Ra 39 Incredible Machine 29es Outnumbered Spectre 35 Libry of Art:Overview 65 Zodiac Signs 390 Large-System Dark Hall 39 Indiana Jones 4 15 Quickshot Warrior 18 Pacific Islands 2 Library of Future Speed Reader 99 36 Wrist Pads Darklands ... 8 Thrustmaster Flight 69 Inspector Gadget 35e Pacific Wars Loom Spellbound Zug's Spelling Adv 22 Stax (Dust Repellent) 5 Thrustmaster Pro Darkseed Island of Dr. Brain 290s 109 Paladin 2 Spellcasting 301 Lovely Ladies II. 49 Adv of Eco Island 22 Stabx Complete Dark Sun Weapons Control 47° 79 Jack Nicklaus Signt39 MacMillian Child Dict49 Paperboy 2 Spell Craft Dinosaur World Cleaning System 22 1 5 Thrustmaster Pedal109 Daughter of Serpnt 310 Jeopardy Silver 25 Patriot Spell-it Plus Race Thru Space 22 Hours: M-F9AM TO 8PM Sat 10AM to 3 PM Dlx Paint Animation 85 Jeopardy Super 25 PC Globe SpellJammer Store Hours: M-F 9 AM to 6 PM Dbx Paint II Enhned 85 Jetfighter 2 Sat 10AM to 3 PM PC USA Sports Adventure Mice & Trackball 33 Store: 1060 Randolph Ave. Rahway N.J. 07065 Deja Vu 1 & 2 3105 Adv. Mission Disk 19 PC Study Bible Sprout! 39 Appoint Mouse Pen 70 Design Yr Own Hm 39 Bundle Price 49 Peppers Adventure 2995 Star Control 2 35\" Microsoft Mouse 85 Design Your Railrd 35 John Madden 2 31°S Perfect General 36 Star Legions 37\" Mouseman Serial 69 TERMS AND CONDITIONS Designasaurus | 23 Jump Jet Data Disk Star Trek 25th Aniv. 37 Trackman Serial 79 Diet Pro DOS/Win25/36 KGB Phonics Plus Star Trek AudioClip 34°5 Master Card, Visa American Express & Discover Accepted. No Modems & Fax Dinosaur Adventure 34 Kid Cuts Pirtate's Gold 38°S Next Gonoration 38°5 Surchargo on Credit Cards. By mail: P.O. Box 3, Cartoret, N.J. Dog Fight Kid Desk Playroom w/ Sound 31 Star Trek Screen Sav37 MaxFax 9624 Fx/Md 99 07008. All Sales Aro Final. NO REFUNDS! Exchango on defective Dr Jam Wind. 5999 Kid Pictures Police Quest 3 Stickybr Math Tutor 30 Practical Peripherals merchandise with the same item only. No exceptions. All Dr. Quandry Kid Pix Populous 2 Stickybr Pre-School 30 PM 14.4 Int. 129 Products are now. We do not guarantee compatability. Shipping Dragon Kid Pix Companion 25 Pool Shark Stickbr Read Tutor 30 PM 14.4 Ext. 175 chargos: 48 contiguous states, $4 por order. Alaska, Hawaii, Dragon's Lair! Kid Works 2 Power Hits Kids 31 Stickybr Spell Tutor 30 Sportster 9600 Int. 129 and Puerto Rico $10 1st pc., $1 ea. add. APO/FPO and P.O. Boxes 2 or Singe Castle 37 Kings Ransom Movies Storm Across Europe38 Sportstr 14.4 V.42b8309 $6 190 pc. $1 ea. add. canada $8 13t pc. $i ea.add. Heavier Dragon Lair III 39 Kings Quest 1 VGA 37 Sports Storybook Weaver 2005 Zoom External 62 items oxtra. Foreign orders call for shipping chargos. N.J. Dune 2 36 King's Quest 6 45 Sci-Fi Strike Commander 47°S Zoom Internal Residents add sales tax. Call for current price and Dungeon Master 29's Knowledge Advent 42 Battletech-Mech 32 Strip Poker 3 32 Scanners availability. GOVERMENT AND SCHOOL P.O.'s WELCOMED. \"Quantities Dynamix Bundle 42 LA Law Powermonger Data Disk (ca) 17 Scanmaker 11 859 are limitod on this item. For your protection, wo will only Eagle Eye Mystery 31\" Land Of Lore Print Shop Deluxe Studyware for ACT Scanman 32 133 ship to the address the credit card company has on file. 20% Eco-Quest 1 or 2' 290s Laffer Unity 22 Graphic Coll. (ea) 30G MAT.GRE,SAT 30 Scanman 256 259 restocking fee on all refused items. 3405 G Force 32 37 Guy Spy Hardball 3 4205 32 X Wing Zoo Keeper 38 Sacs 39 59 Circle Reader Service #48 "


"Deview createst Battles Atles of the The Greate 20th Century A Scenario Disk for The Perfect General by Richard Savage he Perfect General has remained on the ' 'Top 10 Wargames charts for quite a while. Now, it has spawned its second sequel, Greatest Battles of the 20th Century (hereafter GB20). GB20 contains 20 new scenarios to further stretch the tactical imaginations of hard-core perfect generals, spanning WWII, Korea, Vietnam, and a few hypotheriST BA TLES HEATEST The 20 new scenarios included in GB20 1967 Suez Conflict 1973 Suez Conflict Kursk (Battle of all time) The Moscow Push Stalingrad (Battle over a dead town) Long Binh Inferno Malta Crete Falklands Victory Operation Sea Lion Inchon Pusan Perimeter Saigon Bataan Fulda Dnepr Bridgehead Guderian Forward Shenyang Line of the kill Hollywood Dream cal «what-if\" scenarios. These range from the mored car and infantry to a pile of smoldering conventional WWIII type, where the Rusjunk. Once this tactic was discovered, howsians attack in Europe, to the more bizarre, ever, I soon learned to fool the computer into such as the Japanese attacking Hollywood wasting its firepower on other targets, or I (figuratively, perhaps not so bizarre) and finally, Ross Perot getting elected president and invading Libya! As you can see, there's some THE PERFECT thing for everyone here! GENERAL The game offers a broad range of conflicts. Five of them are about the Russian front in WWII, one of my favorite theaters of war. MICENJURY Vietnam and Korea have finally made the list, along with only one WWII Pacific theater battle, Bataan. There are two covering the Arab-Israeli wars, and the aforementioned \"what-if\" scenarios. All in all, there is a lot of good modem-gaming ahead for those who already own The Perfect General. Unfortunately, modem-gaming is the only way to play these scenarios and derive any satisfaction from them. I had hoped that, by the third installment of this game, QQP COPwould have improved the notoriously abysmal artificial intelligence. Sadly, the only difference I could find was that the computer The Perfect General: Greatest Battles now uses more heavy tanks, obviously in an of the 20th Century attempt to compensate for lack of tactics. The Perfect General required) \"Better Al through superior firepower\" must GRAPHICS: EGA or VGA have been the motto used when creating these 1-2 (modem to modem) PRICE: $29.95 scenarios. At first, it was amusing to motor up PROTECTION: Documentation Lookup DESIGNER: Bill Sarubi to a victory point city with an armored car, PUBLISHER: Quantum Quality Productions infantry aboard, and find a monstrous heavy Flemington, NJ (908) 788-2799 tank inside the town, soon reducing the arIAMIC XT/AT & TONY Comes TITLE: SYSTEM: IBM (ownership of PLAYERS: Page 138 Computer Gaming World "


"0BURN) Dir Fire E Heavy Tank IN Light Tank Range: 100 Prob Hit: 32% simply used artillery to pulverize the town of value here. First, Vietnam finally breaks before cruising in. into the Perfect General wargaming world. The computer does seem to try, but with The three Vietnam scenarios are fun to play, sometimes hilarious results. If one puts a mine especially «Long Binh,\" where the Viet Cong in front of a bridge, the computer will try to vill try to player has only player has only infantry, bazooka, engineers hit the mine with artillery to neutralize it. or light artillery to choose from. Unfortunately, the computer also seems to Those wargamers who want to buy a lot of take out its own mines when they're in range. panzers will relish the thought of using 325 In one game, I watched in amazement as the build points as the German player in \"Stalincomputer artillery fired round after round at Please select starting location for Mediun Taik. e e one of its own mines that it had set up in its initial placement. None of my units were ncar, so I theorized that the computer AI must have a list of artillery targets, among them mines, though it pays no attention to which side the mine belongs to! I don't want the player to come away from this review thinking that this scenario disk is bad. In spite of the dense Al, there is plenty Armored Car beint fired upon by Armored Car ONUNU grad,\" or 350 points in the \"Moscow Push.\" Finally, there is the \"big ugly brother of all panzer battles.\" Kursk, where the German is in mechanized nirvana with 372 build points (400 in the long scenario!). Finally, the \"what-if\" scenarios provide some comic relief, and in one case, «The Hollywood Dream,\" a real nail-biter of a game. Previously unmentioned, but falling Placerent 21 432 into this category are \"Operation Sea Lion\" (German invasion of Great Britain), and \"Shenyang,\" (Soviet Union invades China). Both are a hoot, with see-saw battles that can go either way. I've played The Perfect General and its scenarios via modem more than any wargame on the market today. The modem set-up is clean and casy, the graphics pleasant, the sound satisfying, and the interplay superb. However, it's time for this venerable warrior to get face-lift. Rumors abound about a Perfect General II with much improved Al and a few much-needed new units. (Ed: Indeed, Andrew Visscher of Solitaire's Journey fame is diligently working on PGII and we hope to see the product by Christmas of this year. ) Meanwhile, GB20 will provide more field rations to nourish us starving grunts until that promised feast. Cow Dir fire The WARGAMER' SN FROM Computer Company VHPS POINT O SIMULATIONS ATTACK AIDE DE CAMP Authentic weapons capabilities with Take ANY board authentic combat wargame and play it results. on your PC, Unmatched detail Play-by mail or down to individual modem. rounds resolution. Save floor space and Over 100 weapons playing time. CPAP from 11 nations. Set in the volatile Middle East, Point of Attack operates on Create colorful maps, up to 30,000 hexes, by using the a platoon-section level. Create custom engagements, or drawing editor to design terrain and units. Multiple explore one of the five scenarios. Features night combat, user-defined zoom levels. Permanently save game set-ups adjustable weather conditions, morale and other intangible as well as turns including movement and combat for later factors, advanced artillery, and lots more. review/replay. Compatible with all game systems, theaters, scales and eras. Design your own game. The most realistic PC tactical combat simulation Imagination is your only limit. available! Requires a hard disk, VGA display, and at least 600K of RAM. Requires an EGA display and at least 512K of RAM. Mouse optional. (Board games must be purchased separately.) IBM only $54.95 IBM only $79.95 Available only by mail. Mail checks/money orders to: VISA/MASTERCARD CALL (408)554-8381 Please add $4.00 shipping and handling. HPS Simulations, P.O. Box 3245 CA residents add state sales tax. Santa Clara, CA 95055-3245 Please specify disk spec when ordering. July 1993 Circle Reader Service #62 Page 139 "


"Deview Moshi Wet sveta Aresha Neo-Moshi MADEIRA Mapping the Future tangir [80] Board and Computer Wargaming Link MOMBASA Through Aide de Camp EAST AFRICA by Alan Emrich Londoc Irang! Yanga THE MASAI STEPPE, Boiko ombo 10/251 AIDE DE SAMP 1, MP THEORI COLORS t the recent Computer Game Develaway from computers. Some readers of Comdo-it-yourself wargame kit on a disk. With it, opers Conference, I sat in the warputer Wargaming World might refer to them users can casily create computer versions of I games roundtable led by Three-Sixty as the Luddite Legion and mock their answer their favorite board wargames. Pacific's Dave Menconi (currently busy at to modems: playing games by snail mail with It's a snap to design board wargames with work on Jim Dunnigan's Victory at Sea). The hand written instructions being sent back and computer assistance using Aide de Camp, and den of debaters included Sid Meier, Mark forth. Mocking their use of typewriters init can be a great tool for playtesting them, too. Baldwin, Bob Rakosky, Ed Bever, Thurston stead of word processors, however, only widBoardgame variant freaks like myself can cnSearfoss, Andrew Visscher, Roger Keating ens the gap between board and computer joy the power of programming \"what ifs\" into and a host of other wargamers. The debate wargamers. If we want to broaden the wartheir boardgaming experience using Aide de drifted over to board wargaming as the roots gaming experience for all of this hobby's enCamp. What if a stack of new units I just of computer wargaming, and how each can thusiasts, we should encourage everyone in it invented appeared along this road? What if best borrow from the other, when Dave Mento be \"bi\" (as one California grognard wryly these armies had met 20 miles further south? coni poised the question, \"How many of you puts it), meaning players of both board and The possibilities are limitless and the tools in here also play board wargames?\" With only a computer wargames. this program are powerful enough to deal few exceptions, every hand in the room shot with them all. up. It seems as if many of us are, indeed, board Computer Wargaming 101 wargamers under the skin. If I were trying to convince a non-computer wargamer to play a computer wargame, I'd invite him or her (yes, I know several women wargamers) over and plop them down in front of my computer rig and dazzle them. However, they haven't been excited enough yet to buy a computer just to use that one piece of software. Now, I think I've found the program that will get computers into the homes of my board wargaming friends. Aide de Camp from HPS Simulations (a mom-and-pop operation featuring wargamer/computer programmer Scott Hamilron of Point of Attack fame) is the bridge The Bane of Board Wargaming between board and computer wargaming. It is enough of a \"Holy Grail\" product for board As many wargamers know, one of the great wargamers that they will actually plunk down The computer assistant for banes of this hobby is \"landing a live one\" to the money for a computer. Fortunately for all bogi wargame players play against. For better or worse, much of parties concerned, readers of this article can wargaming is done solitaire. While many sell them their old computers as the machine choose this isolationist path, I believe that requirements for Aide de Camp are extremely most of us would prefer to challenge a warmodest. It requires an IBM or compatible gaming friend than to play both sides of a with a 286 processor, hard drive, VGA display TITLE: Aide de Camp boardgame or beat up on a predictable comand at least 500K of free RAM. Even the use SYSTEM: IBM with 286 GRAPHICS: VGA puter Al with regularity. of a mouse is optional! PRICE: $79.95 Scott Hamilton To that end, modems have linked more and What it Isn't PUBLISHER: HPS Simulations more wargamers together via computer. Of Santa Clara, CA (408) 554.8381 course, there are those wargamers who will It is more proper to describe what Aide de only stick with their boardgames and who shy Camp is as well as isn't. It isn't a game. It is a 1082109 DESIGNER: Page 140 Computer Gaming World "


"Devlet EL TL \" DAB When a map and counters from a board three different sizes. These sizes represent once. Players of War in Europe or Europa will wargame have been translated into Aide de their presentation at the three different map be happy to hear that. Even if that isn't Camp (or invented completely from scratch display zoom levels. No values are given for enough, the system still makes it easy to mafor all the wannabe wargamer designers out terrain (such as movement and combat efneuver pieces between multiple games of there), the game can be played. The action is fects), so players will have to play honest with ADC. Thus, my panzer division could move performed in the traditional Igo Hugo (I go each other when considering terrain effects. from Russia to France by simply deleting it in you go) sequence but the program comes with After terrain is placed on the map, each hex this game and adding it to the other. It's a no artificial opponent to play against. Instead, can have a secondary terrain type, objects snap. as one is performing their move, the game is placed there (like a town or resource or whatCounter Balance \"filmed\" and saved as a file that can be transever one cares to create), hexsides (such as mitted either electronically via modem or rivers) and hex-to-hex lines (such as roads) Similarly, the counters are made up by through old fashioned snail mail to another can be defined and location names can be painting them in three different levels, one for wargamer who owns a copy of Aide de Camp. typed in. When completed, it is easy to end each zoom display. In addition to the That player then reviews the opponent's last up with a map thar is quite pleasant to look counter's face, six numeric values can be move, carefully studying the film to see that at, especially when the counters start to dance typed in for every counter created. They no unit exceeded its movement allowance, on it. could represent movement, combat, range, and the proper combat results were applied. etc., and can be raised and lowered on the fly Then, that player performs a turn, saves it, A single game on Aide de Camp can be as large as 30,000 hexes, and there can be up to during play. and sends the file back. 10 paper maps represented on the display at For those games where units are limited to a \"force pool,\" that feature has been built into Map Maker, Map Maker, Make Me a Map Strategies of the Month OOP Vol. 21 When I received Aide de Camp, it was a blank slate. Save for the tutorial, there was nary a map or counters available for me to A monthly column to improve the quality of play slam into the disk drive and start playing. CONQUERED KINGDOMS:  Ah, those nasty little sneaks spies! Although this may soon change as HPS Simulations nails down deals with boardgame Often under-used, they can be devastating and can turn a game in your companies to convert their products to Aide favor. Some examples: Sneak a spy into an enemy town behind enemy de Camp games, one must now create the lines. (Obviously this has to be a town with multiple squares.) Your game they wish to play before playing it. opponent probably has only one unit in sentry to get points. Slipping a Step one is to create a map. Both the map(s) and counters are created by way of a rudimenspy into a vacant town square will not get you any points, but it will tary paint program built into Aide de Camp. prevent your opponent from getting any either. As an example, in map It is here where one notices that the interface #1 there is a 1000 point town. If owned by your enemy, just slip a spy is plainly antiquared. This keeps it consistent with the packaging, documentation, tutorial in there and unless he is prudent and moves his unit around in the town and 16-color palette which are all safely to the each turn, he won't earn the 1000 points per turn for that town. rear of the industry's state-of-the-art. HowAnother good way to use a spy: After turns 3 & 4 go into his ever, I've seldom met a wargamer who was put off from playing a game that had a lesshinterland. When his units that were used to secure coal, gold, and than-scintillating look to it or a slightly longer wood move off these places, you can move your spy or spies onto learning curve than it should in an ideal those empty enemy resources and secure them for yourself. It may take world. To the true grognard, the game is the thing and, after the time is invested in masseveral turns before Mr. Opponent realizes what happened-if ever. tering Aide de Camp, the game rewards are More on these little buggers next month. there in spades. SOLITAIRE'S JOURNEY  Mrs. Mop is a game that you may have The map is created in \"hex squares.\" However, later revisions of Aide de Camp have to play a few times before you realize that it takes more than luck to graphically enhanced the map to lose its win. One rule is not to put any kings in the two reserves. You should squarish look and take on the comfortable very rarely keep a single card in the reserves. Use these piles sparingly hexagonal-looking pattern which wargamers have come to know and love. Terrain types because it's quite simple to get caught with no possible moves. are defined by name, and one paints them in Quantum Quality Productions 1046 River Avenue, Flemington, N. J. 08822 (908) 788-2799 July 1993 "


"DeuneIn HILTOKIN ROVERE I PAHP 10 R E: OTHER KEYNO DELAY 06 ADD A C HI HIT ENTER DA PLAVER DAILTE IH IDE avea TACTICH HOUR TO 10X1200 Ref. eit Aide de Camp as well. However, I found that when I remove a unit from the map, it doesn't return to the force pool (I have to re-add it). Aside from that nuisance, games like Advanced Third Reich and War in Europe greatly benefit from the inclusion of this feature (or, for a wild variant, it is easy to play without force pools and build unlimited quantities of whatever unit type is desired!). Getting Around the Battlefield Movement is usually done in tactical mode. where a unit's path is defined hex-by-hex and filmed for one's opponent to observe. Those wishing to move greater distances (by rail or sca, say) or with some trust of their adversary, can opt to move pieces by strategic movement. This mode entails picking up a unit and then seeing it teleport to its destination (thus skipping all of the intervening hexes). Strategic movement can be a real time saver. LOADING IN UNIT SYMBOLS FOR A House Divided . com hil Inf UML Int Ut lol u Crk In UNIT C U Vet CAV Le to your dee colline con un .cw am.co u Crk ON OMAT In ovat inf Crk In CHIT Cav Cunt Cav PA C Crk Crv Entrench U ntr Centr1 In suku Cau stb on each side. These totals don't take into game they want to play using Aide de Camp. account adjustments for supply, terrain, forts. Not only will regular opponents divide up the etc. so the players will have to do that math work (\"I'll make up the Panzergruppe on their own (as if we're not used to it!). After Guderian game if you'll do Stalingrad this is done, the replay shows all the moves, Pocker ), but certain wargame companies are battles and unit actions that have occurred on already joining the bandwagon and creating the map from the time the last replay was map from the time the last replay was Aide de Camp PBEM disks to support their shown. In other words, the other player's boardgames. As I write this, I know that The moves and combats are shown to the nonGamers has signed on and several others are phasing player, along with results as he apnearly aboard. plied them. Watching this film of an K eep in mind that this program is not for opponent's move is an absolutely absorbing beginners. There is a high learning curve inexperience and one I recommend to other volved at the outser, particularly for the Wargamers highly. graphically and artistically impaired. Those Cute little mnemonic devices are included who have memorized the rules to a \"monster in the program which remind players which units have moved and fought this turn (so one handling Aide de Camp. can keep from accidentally moving or fight Not only is this the kind of program that ing with the same piece more than once per makes so much sense that one wonders why turn, if that is the rule of the game being ir wasn't invented before, but now that it has played). Like the replays, these can be cleared appeared, I predict that it will have a major to conserve memory when saving the game. impact of the board wargaming hobby. I honOnce a player's turn is done, the game is estly believe that Aide de Camp is a piece of saved and the file can be transferred to the the grognard's Holy Grail and has built a next player. Note that cach participant must bridge that board and computer wargamers own a copy of Aide de Camp and whatever can cross freely. For any board wargamer with boardgame they are playing. The file size for an IBM computer (and, preferably, a moa saved game of A House Divided is only about dem), Aide de Camp is a must have product 2K. This means that wargaming by E-mail that will change the way you play wargames. over networks such as CompuServe, GEnie Frankly, I'm glad to see these two sides of and America Online can be very practical. my wargaming hobby merging closer toThe Wannabe Wargame gether. At first, some wargamers become a Tittle bit schizophrenic when they sit down Designer's Kit and play boardgames solitaire (by playing Another way to look at Aide de Camp is as their best for both sides). Next, the schizoa \"creation kit\" for wannabe wargame designphrenia continues switching between playing ers. With it, original maps and counters can board and computer wargames. Now, at least, be created, along with force pools, etc. One some of this is coming to a happy ending as can then create their own rules, terrain and Aide de Camp makes connecting up and playcombat cffects on paper and test the system ing electronic board wargames a reality. CGW out. If something doesn't work or playtesting discovers a change that needs to be made, it can be done simply and easily. The best part is that a would be designer can playtest his games by E-mail with interested grognards everywhere. After it is thoroughly polished, perhaps it can even be submitted for publication in print. Dispatches from the Emperor The best part is that one doesn't necessarily have to draw the maps and counters to every c Iof stk Co stk or Wat Inf Dr Crk Intor Ork Cav Urent 1 BARS 2013 223 Therman 1 Iner Rail er Generally, after movement, the combat phase usually ensues. Note that it doesn't have to be that way in Aide de Camp. At any time, one can roll a dic (or several dice— from 1-99 of from 1-99 sides each). After a die roll, it is usually a good idea to type in a comment, which can also be done at any time (they are particularly useful for explaining what one is doing after combat — i.e., retreating, taking losses, etc.). Combat is a flexible mechanism of die rolls and comments and one can easily make it work with most any combat system, even ones with multiple rounds and die rolls per round. Sam Peckinpah, Eat Your Heart Out For every combat result, a summary is displayed at the bottom of the screen. It shows the number of attacking and defending units plus a calculation of the various total points Page 142 Computer Gaming World "


"parlay One Day In The Life Of Velikiye Luki R. MacGowan 238 code illustration German player: Paul Saunders Soviet player: Michael Peck by Michael Peck The following article is a replay of Velikiye Luki by Three Sixty hold the line but not undertake any serious attacks. Many units spent Pacific, which covers the Soviet offensive to seize the town of the morning moving into attack positions. (In Velikiye Luki, combat Velikiye Luki in late 1942. The story begins on the opening day occurs before movement). The initial attacks went well. The Russian of the \"Fortress in the Snow\" scenario, in which the Germans try to infantry in the center were blitzed by a panzer/infantry attack well punch a hole through the Russian cordon around the city before the supported by artillery. Russians breach the city's defenses. The game was played using the Report of 3rd Shock Army: Given the strong Fascist relief forces optional rules for limited intelligence. lurking near the city, we decided to give priority to the assault on Velikiye Luki. But combat the previous day had left many of the Prologue besieging forces tired and disorganized. Consequently attack supply As the dawn sun shimmered off the deep white shroud that covered was given to 46th Guards Rifle and a supporting tank brigade. All the Russian landscape, two fiercely determined armies prepared to other formations were given defensive supply. The attack against race against time. After two weeks of hard combat and heavy casualVelikiye Luki was disappointing. 46th Guards concentrated all artilries, the Soviets had seized the outskirts of Velikiye Luki, but a hard lery, tank and engineer assets against a single fort defended by two kernel of heavily fortified defenders held the center of the town. For strongly entrenched artillery battalions. Despite the heavy firepower, their part, the Germans could at least breathe a sigh of relief that the Nazis still refused to retreat. Clearly bunker-busting is a slow sufficient reinforcements had arrived to mount a counteroffensive. business. But they had to break through the Soviet ring before Velikiye Luki collapsed. Turn 2 (12 p.m.) Turn 1 (8 a.m.) Gruppe Wohler: Now the assault gained momentum. Again, 8th Panzer and 20th Motorized push on. Contact was made with a Soviet Report of Gruppe Wohler: Our counteroffensive against the Red ski brigade in the north. Now the mysterious red stars on our situation Army would be a tricky proposition against the numerous enemy map began to resolve into tank and infantry symbols. The enemy formations. Would the superior training and seemed to be thickly clustered along the railroad into Velikiye Luki. organization of the Wehrmacht prevail? 3rd Shock Army: Again, the Velikiye Luki Gruppe Wohler faced two major problems. defenders held out against all-out assaults by First, many units were of mediocre quality, and 46th Guards Rifle. But reports indicated the they would be quickly spent in an offensive enemy suffered heavy losses; surely a couple of thrust. Second, the usual logistical shoestring artillery battalions cannot withstand the asmeant only a handful of troops could be given Hai 2014 BUDO sault of a reinforced Guards division. Meanattack supply over a sustained period. Accordwhile, the enemy relief effort became ingly, the hard-hitting 8th Panzer and 20th worrisome. Reconnaissance reports showed Motorized were given offensive supply (supply German troops massing along the rail in the allocations can radically boost or slash a unit's center. Divisional and corps engineers were h FR combat and morale ratings). The remaining dispatched to build entrenchments as a fall units were given defensive supply, sufficient to back line along the railroad. July 1993 Page 143 "


"Dàn lan Turn 3 (4 p.m.) grenadier battalion from 8th Panzer against a Sovier tank unit in Glazny succeeded. Even village walls and armor plate were no march Gruppe Wohler: Daylight faded but the fighting did nor. Night for an assault by high-morale troops. Other attacks in the center combat was tiring, but with two-thirds of each December day cloaked chewed up more Soviet battalions. An attack by 20th Motorized in darkness, pure daytimc assaults were luxuries the attacker couldn't against Chernezent failed. afford. Propelled by discipline and Benzedrine, we continued to punch into the Sovier lines. Although our artillery was less effective at 3rd Shock Army: Disaster at Glazny. A tank battalion had entered night, Soviet defensive artillery was totally ineffective. If only we had the village earlier in the evening and should have been able to just one more panzer division, we would already be in the streets of withstand an attack by a single enemy battalion. The commissars Velikiye Luki. Unfortunately, the bulk of our infantry continued to needed to create better morale! German attacks along the rest of the front were starting to bleed our front line troops. Chernezent held. merely screen the enemy positions. though the defenses have been reduced to a skeleton battery of 3rd Shock Army: The Velikiye Luki attack forces rested this turn in anti-tank guns. Even when we won a skirmish, we still seemed to suffer preparation for a major assault later than night. A tired regiment of bav nt of heavier losses than the enemy. In the north, the HQ and supply depot 46th Guards was replaced by fresh, full-strength battalions. That of a ski brigade were overrun. Tonight the Nazis illustrated the importance of keeping a reserve; will celebrate on vodka. Fortunately, another attacking with all your troops only means all 46th Guards attack on Velikiye Luki eliminated your troops will exhaust themselves at the one of the two enemy artillery units holding the same time. Along the main front, the Germans continued their push along the railway line into Velikiye Luki. In the snowy, trackless Turn 5 (12 a.m.) wilderness, the railway is the best road around, and the village of Chernezent stood 3rd Shock Army: Don't the Germans ever in the center of it. We garrisoned this village sleep! The last defenders of Chernezent were with a tank and infantry battalion backed by wiped out, but, strangely, the Germans did not anti-tank guns. Meanwhile, a tank brigade occupy the village. Fortunately, some field forwas moved up to hold the village of Glazny in tifications had been set up behind the village as the north (in deep snow, villages are about the an anchor point. An attack by a full tank brigade only defensive terrain visible on the map). against Glazny failed miserably; their commander blamed it on insufficient supply. HowTurn 4 (8 p.m.) ever, the main problem is that our brigades could only atrack individually, and lack proper Gruppe Wobler: According to the reports infantry and artillery support. On the other heavy combat and mixed results. In the hand, there was rejoicing around Velikiye Luki north, a long-shot attack by a single panzerthat night; after a whole day and night 46th fort. Rodger MacGowan OUT TIME DAYS Out Time Days is a Play-By-Mail game of life on a strange world. Emphasizing role playing and inter-player communication, OTD is a game for those who like lo join with other players around the world in figuring out puzzles, creating working economies, exploring large sections of worlds, undertaking or tracking criminal activities, or fielding capable armies. The worlds explored are living, vibrant locales that will change through your character's actions. With the ability to journey in many eras (you'll start in a medieval-like location), you'll enjoy adapting to new sets of abilities and restaints or you can focus on a single place and become well established. OTD is a combination Science Fiction-Fantasy game. It is 99% computer moderated to ensure fairness, and 1% GM moderated to allow for creativity. A maximum of I turn per week is allowed. Cost per turn is $5.00. The game is open-ended with cach new character playing a vital role. A special start. So up is available if you mention this ad. Receive a rule book, startup turn and 5 turns for just $5.00 ($20.00 outside U.S. and Canada), a $35.00 value! Dependable, weekly, error-free turns since 1984 Hit Mit lil XDUAFEY Wanna try a tactical space game and pay only $20 for the entire game? Then ask for information on Space Combat To sign up or for more information write to: Twin Engine Gaming, 3254 Maple Leaf Ct., San Jose, CA 95121 Circle Reader Service #95 Page 144 Computer Gaming World "


"0 File File Options Starr Duties Planning Phasu Options Staff Duties Planning Phase Ball a 53 62 NEX+ 20* O GO A T ornes O 20 BO OG KN + 1 wa NEZ ETTER PESCUIT LA SAS terdinand V. CHOIR ALL E S FOSIDDEES Guards finally captured the strongpoint. But there were still nearly a SS units which carry the burden. The remainder are not much better dozen more to capture—truly a sobering thought. than their Russian counterparts, and are adequate for holding the line. Gruppe Wohler: Our plan to kill enemy units was succeeding The Wehrmacht's deadliness is in the high morale of its elite units, handsomely a ski brigade overrun and a tank counterattack often one-third higher than their Red counterparts. Players will find squelched. Even though exhausted and disrupted by incessant fight that numerical superiority is nice, but it's nice to get three or four odds ing, the elite mechanized units continue to function well. shifts for superior morale. The Germans' excellent artillery is another major advantage. German players who were kicked around by AmeriThe Aftermath can firepower at Utah Beach will enjoy socking it to their Bolshevik By 4 a.m. the battle had petered out. The German mechanized opponents. German artillery can be used on-call rather than being units, maxed out in fatigue and disruption, were finally beginning to pre-allocated, and is more effective at night than Soviet guns. Like a show the strain. They would have to spend the next day recuperating. fast boxer the Germans can make narrow but sharp jabs all over their Even worse, the supply situation was so bad that almost no units could opponent until he finally weakens. be given offensive supply. Although the Soviet frontline troops had The Soviets, on the other hand, have a plethora of essentially taken a drubbing, the troops around Velikiye Luki were sufficiently d Velikive Luki were sufficiently mediocre units. Even the Guards divisions pale beside 8th Panzer or rested (or had been replaced by rested units) to renew the assault. 20th Motorized. Their assaults must be either probes or all-out blood Ironically, the Soviets were winning on victory points, at least after baths, and their defensive options are basically limited to stand and the first day of battle. Although the Germans slew hordes of Reds, the die. Similarly, while 3rd Shock Army has a great deal of artillery, most victory points were weighted towards territory (which the Soviers of it is low-value divisional pieces. It's the rocket batteries and heavy mostly held) as well as disproportionately penalizing Axis losses. howitzers that are the cutting edge, and they're needed to subdue Velikiye Luki. A major problem is that combat losses are expressed in Lessons Learned percentages, so even if a horde of Soviet battalions defeat a small but Velikiye Luki is a long game. Even the scenarios comprise over a high-morale German unit, the morale shifts mean the Soviets will probably suffer more losses than their opponents. Red players can only hundred turns, and night can see as much combat as day. That's why clutch their heads as high odds attacks are whittled into nothing by supply allocation is so vital, because it effectively determines whether a unit is a killing instrument or cannon fodder for the next six turns. terrain and odds shifts. And playing with the one division or brigade per attack rule adds to the frustration, because the array of Soviet Both sides easily have enough supplies for defensive purposes; it s the independent tank and infantry brigades are individually weak. huge logistic consumption of attack supply that's the problem. Especially To Options Starr duties Planninu. Phase In general, the best strategy is to for the Germans, juggling who gets pick one or two divisions and give what is a nerve-wracking task. No them decent supply. Then make a more than one or two divisions can be few high-odds attacks rather than exgiven attack supply, and that should haust all your units with attacks up be for key missions, such as storming and down the line. Because combat Velikiye Luki. On the other hand, (and moving at night) cause fatigue, though it's tempting to allocate minireserve regiments are vital. Take full mal supply to a division, be careful. If advantage of the cross-attaching feaby chance they are attacked, they're ture; reinforce assault divisions with dead meat. extra artillery and especially tanks. In V for Victory: Utah Beach, the The siege is a separate game in Americans and Germans had roughly itself, and to call it frustrating is an similar capabilities. In Velikiye Luki, understatement. In the replay, it the German and Soviet armies are HE took a whole day just to take a night and day. The war in Russia was strongpoint guarded by two weak more than a conflict between opposartillery battalions. Even the weakest ing ideologies; it was a battle between two military systems, and VL German units can get six odds shifts shows it well. The Soviets have a huge army, but with relatively poor for morale and terrain, and the deluge of Soviet shellfire is muted by morale and an inflexible artillery. The Wehrmacht is a mixed bag, urban cover. The only way is to whittle down the defenders by ranging from very high morale troops (especially the SS motorized repeated attacks. When a division or regiment is worn out, pull it out troops) down to Luftwaffe cannon fodder. and replace it with another. Velikiye Luki is a grinding match, and who grinds most wins. Cow The heart of the Wehrmacht are the high quality mechanized and * July 1993 Page 145 "


"neuneud The More The Harrier Climbing Aboard MicroProse U.K.'s Jump Jet by Paul Rigby The Harrier, with its complex flight models and unique military role, has been under-represented in computer simulations. Suddenly, like salespeople on the scent of money, several versions are showing up at once. One has already been released by urk, while another is the subject of this review. Named Jump Jer (D), this is the larest flight sim to be designed by Microprose UK. In ll one flies either an RAF GRS/7 or a USMC AV8B through day and night missions in practice flights, single sorties, a single day's worth of flying in any arena (to a maximum of cight missions) or one of three campaigns. Campaigns can be conducted in the Falkland Islands, Hong Kong or Nordkapp for up to 10 days. Upon completing a mission on any one day, the player is provided with an update of his side's progress. model and making it more realistic. The company also identified a number of advanced features that were targeted for // (see below for details) that never appeared in the final game. ]] cannot, therefore, be viewed as an action or \"fun\" game like Novalogic's Comanche: Maximum Overkill or an abstract tactical game like ATAC. Apart from heady statements of realism quoted in the manual, the company has marketed the game into the realm of realistic flight sims. \"You'll never get closer to the real thing,\" exclaims the box cover. This is the territory occupied by the Falcon 3.0s and Aces of the Pacifics of this world. With this in mind JJ immediately falls between two schools. Yes, the core flight model and in-flight operations appear to model the real thing quite well. They do not go to Falcon 3.0 extremes, but, on the whole, the effect is admirable. However, the real bummer is the campaign, the core of any flight simulation. Basically, MicroProse U.K. has taken a decent flight model, some fancy graphics and planted it onto an old-fashioned campaign structure derived from F-19. Witness the campaign 0001 1531 ... well, hidden (situated amongst a cluster of trees, for example). Thus, the action is forever available on the player's doorstep whenever one is ready to blitz into combat mode. As with most MicroProse simulations, the player can alter the difficulty and realism of a number of factors such as the flight model or the enemy. Other pre-mission factors include reviewing pre-selected waypoints on the tactical map, reviewing pre-selected targets, selecting one's armament and reviewing orders. \"Then, it's into the cockpit and away, from cither a carrier or ground base. The flight model appears to encompass most of the aircraft's actual characteristics, and meets all of the basic aeronautical demands. The stall model and the conversion from vertical to horizontal flight is competent, with reference points remaining constant during the process. In addition, the player is given a choice of HUDs for Nav, VISTOL and Attack. An example of 's realistic HUD can be observed when the jet is pulled up towards vertical. The HUD ladder bars then dip down and point in the middle towards the horizon, so that it is much easier to keep oriented at any time. This feature is portrayed well in the game. However, the HUD itself appears oversized. Microprose UK has developed a new graphic engine especially for JJ. It is a fractalbased landscape similar to Midwinter 2, but is \"gouraud shaded\" so that the scenery appears very smooth. Gouraud shading actually takes the individual polygons and smooths them out. The result is a virtually seamless landscape. On occasion, though, one can see the landscape being built, which doesn't help one's \"suspension of disbelief\" at all. The technique enables players to fly down valleys rather than over them, offering a tremendous visual experience. This scenic structure also yields some added tactical cnhancements, enabling enemy concealment on a hillside or, more alarmingly, just around the next corner. From here on in, ]] begins to rack up disappointments. A little background is in order. Throughout the game's development, MicroProse U.K. has boasted about the game's graphics and, more pertinently, its realism. Many times project managers and designers on the game have mentioned RAF Wittering (a UK, GR5 base) to recognize help and advice they received for improving the flight li Ta CES UMD The Hamer Strike Fighter In Explosive Front Line Action A word about the choice of Hong Kong as a potential flashpoint is necessary here. This was an inspired selection by MicroProse U.K. especially in light of present-day tensions between the U.K. and China over the status of the U.K. \"colony.» Of all the campaigns ofthe UK colony.\" Of all the campaigns of fered, Hong Kong offers the most imaginative arena. For example, one will observe a wide variety of esoteric aircraft, including the Jian6 (the Chinese MiG-19) and the Shenyang J-8 \"Finback.\" Realism takes a backseat on many occasions, though. For example, flying in the Falklands, one might be asked to strike against an Argentine aircraft carrier based off the north shore of the Islands. Of course, this never happened in the actual conflict as the Argentine Navy refused to get out of bed post-Belgrano. However, as a game, it does spice things up a little. Missions do not require long flight times because the player is based in a Hide. Hides are, of course, forward air bases which can be MR OPPOSE TITLE: SYSTEM: PRICE: DESIGNER: Jump let IBM (286/16 or better with at least 1 MB RAM, DOS 5.0 or greater, hard disk required) $69.95 Mike Brunton, Kristian Ramsey-Jones and Tim MicroProse Hunt Valley, MD (410) 771-1151 PUBLISHER: Page 146 Computer Gaming World "


"COBRA MISSION The sexy role-playing adventure game You stumble back to your office after a long, hard day of detective work. You can't wait to get. cozy with a bottle of whiskey, but your answering machine has an urgent message. \"This is a life and death emergency. Women are disappearing. Donna's missing. Please, come quickly.\"Donna's rescue is only the beginning of an adventure that indulges your wildest fantasies as it plunges you into fun and danger. While on screen you're dazzled by innovaWANTED: Private Investigator to Rescue Desperate Beauty tive and original Japanese animation that's taking other countries by storm, and is now available in the U.S. \"Cobra Mission is unique.\" Computer Game Review\" \"...quite an original.\" Strategy Plus\" \"I have to admit I enjoyed it.\" \"Game Bytes\" Available now at your nearest dealer or call 1-800-258-MEGA. Or write: Megatech, P.O. Box 11333, Torrance, CA, 90510 Visa, MasterCard, checks accepted, System requirements: 386 or faster machine with 640K RAM hard disk with min. 11 megabytes of available space required, mouse recommended. Graphics compatible with EGA, MCGA and VGA (VGA highly recommended). Sound support: Sound Blaster, Thunder Board, Pro Audio Spectrum and Adlib. This game is not for the faint-hearted. It contains violence and some material inappropriate for minors under 18. MEGATECH Circle Reader Service #69 "


"MeuneIn 848 features: fly a set mission which has been involved the player flying out on recon mistures are included as evidence of odd occurrandomly generated, fly along preset waysions to decide whether to return and destroyances. Some of the features, such as the campoints, hit a pre-set primary and secondary specific targets; being in control of one's own eos, were in advanced development — they target, fly back to base. End of story. There supplies and the essential supply routes; the were even shown to selected pilots at RAF are no wingmen, no interaction with one's use of wingmen; commanding a squadron of Wittering, who reportedly liked them a lot. own forces, no dynamic battlefield, no feeling Harriers; integrating minor role-playing as \"Their absence follows a trend that seems to of being involved. What is offered is another pects into the wingmen's characters (ic: winghappen all too frequently in today's entertainill-conceived \"You vs. The World\" flightmen improving their skills over time); ment software industry. ment software industry. simulation that purports to be a realistic simuwingman fatigue; wingman interaction and lation. Instead, it is reminiscent of flight sims so on. The clincher is that none of the features we thought we'd seen the last of two or three listed above have been succeeded by more advanced, more robust attributes. In fact the years ago. game has totally deteriorated from an intriguWith today's powerful hardware, I don't ingly advanced state into a dressed up version know why a close air support aircraft like the of F-19. The difference between my initial AV8B would be simulated without the dypreviews of JJ and the final product are so namic, vibrant, unique world that the AV8B 89:81\" aircraft flies in (c.g., the Forward Area Battle, stark as to warrant deep suspicion or, in my or FAB). It seems MicroProse U.K. has simucase, outright indictment. lated dozens of aircraft and then inserted Jump Jet contains much that is good. Howthem into ]] change the name and no one ever, the praiseworthy aspects of the simulawill know the difference. Once again, the tion are so much icing on a sour cake. The reason is because the world that aircraft flies core of Jump Jet is old-fashioned and tired. in is too generalized. After initial amazement at the beautiful seamAnother lost promise is the on-screen less graphics, frustration steadily mounts as This isn't the only shortcoming, though. cameo. For example, when a weapon is fired one sees how little this worthy feature is Other disappointments stem from conversain most games, the player sees the projectile «worked' how little any of the worthwhile tions with Jj project managers and designers. zooming out in front of the aircraft and that's features are used, for that matter. The result There had been many intriguing features revealed and discussed, some in great detail, it. Microprose U.K. discussed introducing an is, ultimately, boredom. Harrier devotees during the later stages of the game's developanimated sequence at this point showing the should take a look at Domark's AV8B Harrier ment. Among the features missing since those external view of the Harrier, then the Side Assault which, although flawed, contains conversations are «full-control\" campaigns winder firing, lifting off the wing-tip and more imagination, flair and invention than MicroProse's ornate, Jump Jet. CGW where the player would have had total control taking off. of the campaign situation. This would have The above abbreviated list of missing feaWe've Outdone Our Only Competition... Ourselves. Mark II WCS THE MARK II WCS . *User Programmable Functions *Allows Joystick Programmability ThrustMaster Get Real HOTAS\" ThrustMaster Inc. 10150 SW Nimbus Ave. Suite E-7 Tigard OR 97223 PHONE(503)639-3200 FAX(503)620-8094 Circle Reader Service #94 Page 148 Computer Gaming World "


"Create your own world in less than seven days. REALITY Now, you can design, create and playback your own 3-D worlds faster and better than ever before! Virtual Reality Studio 2.0 takes Domark's critically acclaimed 3-D graphics program to the next level with twice the control functions. Start with simple building blocks and stretch, shrink or rotate them as you like even making them fade or become transparent. Or use the clip art library complete with its full-color catalog. Create spheres and flexicubes with a simple point-and-click of your mouse. Then copy, animate or color your 3-D shapes to your heart's content. Add the final touch with sound effects — such as the slamming of doors, whistling of wind or a drum roll! To see your worlds unfold, use its VCR-style playback function. For example, design your dream house. Then walk through each room with doors magically opening before you! A video cassette tutorial comes with each package to help you quickly master the incredible power of Virtual Reality Studio 2.0. Visit your retailer today and create your own world for the unbelievably low price of $99.95! CLIP ART LIBRARY WITH COLOR CATALOG DOUBLE THE NUMBER OF CONTROL COMMANDS SOUND EFFECTS EDITOR FADING AND TRANSPARENT OBJECTS FLEXCUBES AND SPHERES VCR STYLE PLAYBACK FUNCTION DOMARK RODUC 1900 S. Norfolk St., Suite 202 San Mateo, CA 94403 415/513-8929 Available for IBM PC/COMPATIBLES & AMIGA incouve Virtual Reality Studio 2.0 gives you unprecedented creative power. Use it for architectural CAD, computer game developing, prototyping machinery, creating training scenarios and other applications. The only limit is your imagination! HIZI -22 A ja grogues 292929 2 9EB 2 D BA 40 dan Virtual Reality Studio 2.0 is designed and programmed by Incentive Software  New Dimension International Ltd. IBM PC screen displays shown Circle Reader Service #53 "


"  Elle 2 9 we cac en Azeroth 3020 Issaquah-Pine Lake Rd., Suite 341 Issaquah, WA 98027-7255 (206) 392-9941 . Umumi Dr. Jam DR. JAM: This program artificially injects the musically impaired with a little soul. Its horde of features will have even the most tone deaf wannabe playing decent sounding stuff. One can choose from a number of pre-defined styles (i.e., country, techno-pop, reggae) and then play up to four different instruments using the keyboard. Of course, the user can twiddle with all of the elements, changing rhythm, editing drums, changing the key, instruments, chords, etc. It's loads of fun if one is so inclined, and sounds wonderful-especially with a General MIDI sound board. All of the user's creations can be recorded and saved for future play-back. If it can have us White Boys playing funky music, it can probably do wonders in the hands of someone with the slightest hint of talent. IBM ($99). Circle Reader Service #1. Cactus Development Company 7113 Burnet Rd., Suite 214 Austin, TX 78757-2216 (800) 336-9444 CACTUS LEAGUE COLLEGE BASKETBALL and CACTUS LEAGUE PROFESSIONAL BASKETBALL: Anyone who is looking for a statistically accurate, up-to-date strategy game (in something of the style of XOR's old Basketball Strategy) would do well to consider both this product and its sister game which covers professional basketball. Whereas the old XR game displayed numbers moving about the court, this new game puts a diamond on the court to represent the ball handler, and the diamond will change color depending upon the offensive play invoked. Gamers can customize teams, rely on the computer as coach as much or as little as they desire, and develop customized league schedules with a couple of keystrokes. Unlike Bob Chaikin's B-Ball and Lance Haffner's Final Four College Basketball, however, the emphasis is on coaching rather than controlling the flow of play through the passing. IBM ($49.95, data disks sold separately from $19.95-$24.95). Circle Reader Service #3. DI Where in Space is Carmen Sandiego? FT A BELIT E FINO ALLY wir in l D LLY Cactus League College and Professional Basketball SC 003711 HI 010000 Gremlin Graphics Carver House, 2-4 Carver St. Sheffield S1 4FS England ZOOL NINJA OF THE NTH DIMENSION: One need not have an anth\" of brain to play this twitch and reflex action game. Zool, a British patchwork of several cartridge game characters, is one bad little dude, karate chopping his way through six worlds of goodies and baddies. Once past the torturous code wheel copy protection, Fruit World, Tool World, Toy World, Fairground World, Sweet World, and Music World will test the joystick prowess of those who dare. With Pomegranate Volcanoes, self-animated Chain Saws and psychotic Violins, to name a few every day artifacts gone bad, the Nth dimension might be a nice place to visit, but one wouldn't want to live there. IBM. Circle Reader Service #4. Broderbund Software 500 Redwood Blvd. P.O. Box 6121 Novato, CA 94948-6121 (415) 382-4400 WHERE IN SPACE IS CARMEN SANDIEGO?: Apparently driven from the Earth by hordes of young sleuths, Carmen Sandiego has taken to the stars and has taken to taking stars for her prurient pleasure! Gamers ages 12 to adult once again don their ACME detective badges and blast off after Ms. Universe in an attempt to recover stolen astronomical phenomena from Carmen and her 14 VILE agents. This is definitely the most colorful and wackiest game of the Carmen line, offering 50 digitized NASA images and dozens of goofy, animated cartoons. As per Carmen's style, the game package includes a book this time the Peterson First Guide to Astronomy and an on-line database which players will scour in search of the clues needed to nab Carmen and her gang. Another option, Star Search, offers an interesting part of the game where players scroll around an actual star chart, which illustrates the major constellations. For those new to astronomy, this aspect of the game provides an excellent introduction. With its extravagant graphics and crisp user-interface, there isn't a better way to learn one's way around the solar system. IBM ($79.95). Circle Reader Service #2. Zool-Ninja of the Nth Dimension Humongous Entertainment 13110 NE 177th Pl., Box 180 Woodinville, WA 98072 (206) 485-1212 CE PUTT-PUTT'S FUN PACK: Here's a collection of games for the youngest ones in the family. Putt-Putt, the little car hero of Putt-Putt Joins the Parade (reviewed last month in this column) will take kids through six simple games adorned with speech and animated fun. There's Tic-TacPutt-Putt's Fun Pack Page 150 Computer Gaming World "


"NOW AVAILABLE —ON PCZOOL NINJA OF THE \"Nth\" DIMENSION V ZOL ZDY Electronic Innovative Design 768 Two Mile Parkway Goodlettsville, Tn. 37072 Phone: 1-(615)-972-8085 Fax: 1-(615)-851-6098 Circle Reader Service #51 "


"Toe, where Putt will make his moves with his antenna; Checkers, with animated pieces a la BattleChess; Remember!, a Concentrationtype game; Cheese King, a hang-man variant; Pinball, which is more like a make-your-own Pachinko kit; and Blocks, where kids must spin blocks with graphics on them to form a completed picture. The package comes with a small coloring puzzle book for when Mom and Dad want to play their grown-up games. It's all good, quick, clean fun to introduce little gamers to the family's «big person» machine. IBM, IBM CDROM ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #5. T an obsession. IBM with Windows ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #7. SUPER STRIKE EAGLE: MicroProse tries their hand at sims a-la-cartridge, and the result is about what one might expect. The game tries to be two things, both a first person combat simulation and a third person shoot'em up. Taking off from their carrier, players will fly in an overhead view toward an enemy isle blanketed with «ackack\" sites and enemy bases. If the player's bird is intercepted by a bandit, the perspective turns to the first person, where the player does battle in a dumbed-down flight model. When over enemy bases, the view changes to \"chase-plane\" perspective, where the player flies over nicely textured terrain, similar to that in Strike Commander. The game's relationship to computer-based sims is comparable to that of Classics Illustrated comic books to classic novels. Super Nintendo ($69.95). Circle Reader Service #8. Buzz Aldrin's Race Into Space Coviagram Elle Darlene Coleguido Game Level Melo CODE BROKEN! SCOREO MONEY BLE DE LA LEE | CHI KH XDO | HD OQYUT CXZUR CXTC CXO OHTC ZOAHKCYUC CXZUP ZU WIELE HIER D AHHK RUHM CXYC 2C 2n -GERALD BRENAN Desktop Toys for Windows Ocean of America 1855 O'Toole Ave., Suite D-102 San Jose, CA 95131 (408) 954-0201 Interplay Productions 17922 Fitch Ave. Irvine, CA 92714 (800) 969-GAME BUZZ ALDRIN'S RACE INTO SPACE: Bite the moon dust, space cadet. This detailed strategic simulation puts its players in the moon boots of the leader of the U.S. or Soviet space programs in the '50s, '60s and '70s. The player competes with another human or the computer as he or she does their part for the Cold War; illustrating their nation's ideological superiority through a demonstration of technological prowess. The player directs nearly every aspect of a space program: scheduling launches, choosing rescarch programs, training astronauts, and tapping CIA/KGB spy information. Players run the show through a dynamic interface, laid out as a space station that changes as one's space program advances. Hundreds of digitized photos and animated clips will tell the story of the player's successes and failures. The package also contains a historical guide to space exploration lavishly illustrated with NASA photos. Educational and challenging, Buzz is a masterful treatment of its topic. IBM ($69.95). Circle Reader Service #6. N1106 Super Strike Eagle OPBERET EZSEFEEEEEEE! WIZKID: This game is just plain silly. As the story goes, Wizball, Wizard and Nifta the cat had banished Zark from the land of Wiz for being naughty...Nifta had 8 kittens, and the Wizard and Wizball got married and had a kid... Wizkid. Zark came back, threw Wizard and Wizball into dungeons in his castle and put Nifta in the turtle jail... asperated pause>... What are these people inhaling? The game is about as inanc as its premise. The player controls Wizkid, a rip-off without apology of Pacman, who scoots around the screen bopping bricks and gobbling up goodies and musical notes for the \"bonus tune.\" Uninteresting crossword puzzle variants are interspersed into the arcade action, again, leaving one wondering just what the hell these people were trying to do with the game. It's a case of strange people outstranging themselves, to a pointless end. Amiga, IBM ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #9. OMUO Wizkid MicroProse 180 Lakefront Dr. Hunt Valley, MD 21030-2245 (800) 879-PLAY DESKTOP TOYS FOR WINDOWS: When boredom strikes, clobber bunnies with mallers over their little furry noggins. Wallop is one of five games on Dr. Floyd's Desktop Toys, a new variety pack of dubious utility, Other games include Snark Hunt, a find-thefurball variant; word-puzzle Crypto Games, Web Spinners, an uninvolving geometric pattern maker that is a remake of EA's original Worms, Kye, an interesting puzzle-solving game; and Pentomino, which will drive puzzle-lovers to distraction. The head of the Pack is Dr. Floyd, who appears at timed intervals to offer witty remarks. The program also has a calendar for keeping appointments, if bonking bunnies doesn't become . Origin Systems 12940 Research Blvd. Austin, TX 78750 (512) 335-5200 SRH) MIOITTU1011 STRIKE COMMANDER: From the darkest mists of vaporware emerges one of this hobby's most awaited games, Strike Commander. This flight simulator is very much Wing Commander meets Falcon 3. The cinematic storyline tells the tale of a Strike Commander Page 152 Computer Gaming World "


"ZERO'S & ONE'S SUMMER SPECIAL YOU PAY GROUND SHIPPING, WE SHIP 2-DAY ON ALL SUMMER SOFTWARE PURCHASES* (800) 788-2193 *Offer good only for prepaid software purchases in Continental USA for orders received during June, July or Aug, '93. 35.95 HARDWARE CREATIVE LABS: Discovery 8:CDR Drv & SB ProSCD Sftware 399.00 Discovery 16:CDR Drv SB16GCD Sftware 469.00 Edutainment 8 CDR Drv. SB Pro,&CD Sftware 449.00 Edutainment 16 CDR Drv. SB 16 GCD Sftware 519.00 Snd Blaster 16 218.95 Snd Blastor Pro Dlx 119,95 Video Blastar 329.95 Video Spigot 427.00 MEDIA VISION: Fusion 16 CDRom Dry & 16 Bit Snd Co 499.95 Pro Aud Spect 16 Snd Cd 179.95 Pro Audio Spectrum 16 MM Kit 929.95 TOSHIBA 3401 200ms Int w/Pas Cable 499.00 AI TECH: Pro PC/TV Plus 309,95 Pro VGA/TV Plus 636.95 Wave Watcher-TV 419.00 Video Surge 615.95 OTHER SND, MM, & VIDEO CARDS: ATI Ultra Grph Plus w/2mb 308.00 Computer Eyes RT 434.95 Gravis Ultra Sound 138.95 TelevEyes VGA-TV 229.95 WIN TV 399.95 STICKS & YOKES CH PRODUCTS: Auto Ill Game Card 29.95 Flight Stick 35.95 Mach II 24.95 Mach III+ 29.95 Virtual Pilot Yoko 62.95 GRAVIS Analog Pro 37.95 Game Card Hi Speed 29.95 THRUSTMASTER: ACM HiSpd Game Card 26.95 Weapons Control 72.95 U-Prom for WCS 26.95 Flight Control 59.95 Flight Control Pro 99.95 Rudder Pedals 99.95 Sample Listing of Products MODEMS Challenge of 5 Realms 39.95 Sim Ant 35.95 Sim City Civilization:Master Playr 49.95 29.95 Prices too Low to Print: Classic Adventure-Lucas35.95 Sim Earth 42.95 Boca, Sportster, Supra, Conquered Kingdoms 35.95 Sim Life 41.95 Zoltrix, Zoom and others  29.95 Simpson's Arcade 29.95 FLT SIM/WAR Dagger Amon Ra 41.95 Space Quest V 41.95 A Line in Sand 26.95 Dark Half 34.95 Spear of Datiny. Wifnstn 35.95 Air Warrior SVGA 35.95 Dark Seed 41.95 Spellcrft Aspects Valor 35.95 Ambush 41.95 Darklands 41.95 Star Control II 35.95 Armored Fist 42.95 Daughter of Serpents 32.95 Star Trek 25th Anniv. 35.95 ATAC 34.95 Design Your Railroad 34.95 Stunt Island 33.95 B-17 Flying Fortress 41.95 Discovery.Columbus 35.95 Terminator 2029 41.95 Birds of Prey 31.95 Dragon Lair III 35.95 Ultima Underworld II 47.95 Campaign 35.95 Dragon Lnire:Singe's 35.95 Ultima VII Part 2 45.95 Comanche:Maximum Ovrkl43.95 Dune 11 35.95 Ultrabots 36.95 Carrier Strike 41.95 Dungeon Moster 29.95 Veil of Darkness 35.95 Carriers at War 34.95 Fish 35.95 Wacky Funsters 19.95 Conquerd Kingdoms 35.95 Elvira 11 39.95 Waxworks 35.95 Conquest Japan 35.95 Eric The Unready 35.95 Wing Commander 11 47.95 Empire Deluxe 35.95 Freddy Pherkas 41.95 Wizardary VII:Creaders 41.95 F15 Stirke Eagle III 43.95 Global Effect 19.95 X-Wing 41.95 Falcon 3.0 44.95 Goblins 2 24.95 CD ROM Flight Sim 4.0 37.95 Heimdall 21.95 Home Alone 2 7th Guest Flight Sim Add-Ons 27.95 52.95 call Humans Harpoon Chlgr Pak Sig Ed 47.95 25.95 Arthur's Teacher Trbls 41.95 Jetfighter 11 Chess Maniac-Natl Lampn 34.95 Inca 39.95 34.95 Composer's Qst MPC Jump Jet Indy Jones 4 54.95 41.95 35.95 Liberty or Death Compton Interact Encyc. 249.95 35.95 Kings Quest VI 44.95 Lost Admiral Compton Interact. Upgr. 99.95 Kyrandia (Legend) 35.95 34.95 LA LAW Dinosauer Adventures Megafortress Mega Pak 37.95 34.95 41.95 41.95 Eco Quest 1 Pacific War Legends Valour 47.95 37.95 Patriot Encarta MM Encycl. Leis. Suit Lorry 5 43.95 41.95 269.95 Patton Strikes Back Global Explrer-DeLorme 89.95 Lemmings 2 14.95 35.95 Guiness Bk MPC 1993 47.95 Perfect General Lord of Rings:2 Towers 35.95 35.95 Lost Treas Infocom II Inspector Gadget Secret Weapons Luftwffe 29.95 29.95 35.95 King's Quest VI Lost Treos. of Rain Forest 29.95 41.95 Special Forces 29.95 Strike Commander Magic Candle III Just Grandma & Me 38.95 47.95 37.95 Kodak Photo CD Magnetic Scrolls Task Force 1942 24.95 38.95 29.95 Mayo Clinis (jewel box) 29.95 Theater of War 19.95 14.95 Maniac Mansion MS Cinemania MPC Mantis V Victory 1, 2, or 3 e 54.95 31.95 43.95 Mario Is Missing! 34.95 Monarch Notes 61.95 ENTERTAINMENT Mercenaries (Tegel's) 37.95 Old Testmanet Interact 49.95 A-Train 41.95 Might & Magia IV 41.95 Our House-Fam Circus 41.95 ADD's call Monkey Island 2 25.95 Playing with Language 29.95 ADD.Unltd Adventure 31.95 Out of This World 36.95 Prophone 1993 Ed 149.95 Action 5-5 Sierra Gms 24.95 Paladin 11 35.95 Putt Putt Fun Pack 26.95 Adventre Starter Sierra 19.95 Police Quest 3 39.95 Rodney's Fun Screen 39.95 Air Bucks 35.95 Prophecy by Sierra 24.95 Sherlock Holmes 3 43.95 Alone in the Dark 35.95 Populous 11 37.95 Space Adventure 61.95 Amazons 38.95 Price of Persia 29.95 Space Quest IV 41.95 Arcade Hits 24.95 Quest for Glory III 41.95 VGA Spectrum 1 15.00 Armourgeddon 39.95 Ringworld 35.95 Willy Beamish 41.95 Back to Future 11 26.95 Romance 3 Kingdoms 39.95 Wing Commander || Dix 52.95 Bart Simpson-Wierdnes 29.95 Rome:Pathway to Pwr 29.95 Wing Commander 11/Ultima Batman Returns 41.95 Underworld SciFi:5 Actvision Games 26.95 52.95 Batltch 1,2&Mechwrior 31.95 Shadow President 41.95 World Fact Book \"9259.95  35.95 Shadowlands 29.95 WINDOWS Carmen SD-Space Deluxe 47.95 Sherlock Hims:Lst Files 42.95 Alphabet Blocks 29.95 Castles 11 35.95 22.95 Audio:Star Trek V.I 34.95 MS Golf 42.95 Musicator GS 197.95 Origin FX Screen Svr 24.95 Spaceward Ho! Star Trek Screen Sur 44.95 Take BreakCrossword 22.95 Uninvited 35.95 Winsense 44.95 SPORTS Car & Driver 37.95 Front Page Sports Ftbl 41.95 Hole In One Mini. Golf 24.95 Jack Nicklaus Sig Golf 41.95 Jordan in Flight 36.95 Links 386 Pro 41.95 Mauna Ken 19.95 Banff 19.95 NFL Pro Football 1992 35.95 NFL Video Pro Football 35.95 Sports Adventure 47.95 Tony LaRussa Bsbl 11 37.95 Wayne Grtzky Hocky 3 35.95 World Circuit Grnd Prix 35.95 World Tour Tennis 31.95 EDUCATIONAL ACT Studyware 29.95 Alge-Blaster 29.95 Calculus 24.95 Castle of Dr. Brain 29.95 Dinosauer Adventure 32.95 Inspector Gadget 34.95 Island Dr. Brain 29.95 Gd Works 2 34.95 Lost Tribes (Soc. Stdy) 24.95 Mario Teacher Typing 24.95 Math Rabbit (New) 29.95 Mickey's ABC's Ench. 19.95 Millie's Math House 29.95 Mystery at Museum 34.95 Operation Neptune 34.95 Oregon Trail Dix 35.95 Playroom 29.95 Putt-Putt Fun Pak 25.95 Ready for Letters 34.95 Rock & Bach 34.95 Time Treks 35.95 Treasure Math Storm 34.95 What's My Angle-Geom 29.95 AND A WIDE RANGE OF OTHER PRODUCTS FROM A...TO Z...! Siege ALL IBM COMPATIBLE ZERO'S & ONE'S 6472B WINDY RD. LAS VEGAS, NV 89119 ORDER: 800-788-2193 FAX: 702-897-1571 TECH/INFO: 702-897-2797 INTL: 702-897-2797 Prices and availability subject to change. All sales final. We do not guarantee compatability. All software is factory fresh and unopened. We are not responsible for manufacturer's defects. Contact publisher regarding defects. Shipping: 1st game $5; add'l games add $1 each inContinental US. 2nd Day Air $6 1st game, add'l games add $1 each in Continental US. COD add $5.00. All prices are US Dollars. WE ACCEPT M/C & VISA. Circle Reader Service #98 "


"| Jamm a par HE WAY NOT EVEN KNOW HE HAS H10. VIVE IT TO ME. band of mercenary pilots in the early part of the next century trying to earn a profit as the world political situation continues to deteriorate. The flight graphics are stunning, but very much require 486/33+ horsepower to fully enjoy. Neither having a very sophiscicared flight model, nor the kind of blistering action of Wing Commander, the game falls into a limbo zone somewhere in between, perhaps leaving hard core flight sim and hard core action gamers with a lukewarm feeling. IBM ($79.95). Speech Pack (sold separately), IBM ($24.95). Circle Reader Service #10. FAI GOBLINS VEO The AIDS Avenger! ROM Time 8601 Wilshire Blvd., 8th Floor Beverly Hills, CA 90211 (800) 926-7273 HYPER BACKGAMMON: This game is a variation on the standard backgammon theme, where each player has only three stones and the game board is squeezed down to 24 \"triangles.\" All the normal rules apply and the doubling cube is included. The package boasts that the computer opponent (no two-player option) determines the best play for over 32 million game situations. This vast database is apparently the reason why the game is published on a CD-ROM disc. This extensive artificial intelligence plays a very strong game, but, unfortunately, there are no difficulty settings offered, so the computer will trounce all but the best human players. If one doesn't mind this fact, nor care much about graphic presentation, this product will offer plenty of quick-playing challenge. IBM with CD-ROM ($39.00). Circle Reader Service #13. Razzle Dazzle Raya Systems, Inc. 2570 West El Camino Real, Suite 309 Mountain View, CA 94040 THE AIDS AVENGER!: This action game is a platform from which to educate young and old about the Human Immunodeficiency Virus and its result, AIDS. Players take the role of AIDS Avenger as he patrols his neighborhood in scarch of the goblins that are spreading incorrect information about the AIDS virus, irs causes and its effects. The AIDS Avenger is a thought policeman, listening in on conversations and reading people's minds, making sure they are thinking correctly. If not, he must input the correct information and then blast the goblin that was possessing the person and injecting these incorrect thoughts. There are four play levels, each escalating in the sexual explicitness of their content. Locks can be put on the levels to insure that its players are not exposed to information not befitting their age or maturity level. IBM. Circle Reader Service #11. Sierra On-line P.O. Box 485 Coarsegold, CA 93614 (209) 783-4468 to roll. Your turn ouble Denpust part 1 Your Hyper Backgammon . De GOBLIINS 2: Sierra's French friends at Coktel Vision have devised two more ways to frustrate and delight puzzle game fans. Named Winkel and Fingus, these two gobliins have set out on a seven episode Gobliin Quest to rescue the king's captured heir (To heir is Gobliin, too). As in the previous Gobliiins, players must use the individual skills of the goblins in concert in order to bypass many fiendish puzzles. The landscapes are colorful and the animated gobliin antics even more so. Gobliins is a good choice for young and/or beginner puzzle lovers. IBM ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #14. LOST SECRET OF THE RAIN FOR EST: This new Sierra Discovery Series game offers a graphically rich adventure gaming environment for kids 10 and up. Its Indiana Jones meets Opie Taylor as Adam Greene, a young American boy, ventures to Iquitos, Peru, with his ecologist father to unveil The Lost Secrer. However, nothing goes as planned, and soon Adam is himself lost in a lush jungle with talking animals and beautiful plants. Armed with dad's Ecorder, a device for identifying plants, animals and pollution, Adam's mission is to learn the forest's secrets, re-unite with his dad, and make it through the day without frosted Cocoa Bombs or TV. Children will love the stunning settings, and should have no trouble with Sierra's graphic interface while they try to solve SYUASAEROELOBLIGATS Road Scholar Software 2603 Augusta, Suite 1000 Houston, TX 77057-5618 (800) 443-7623 RAZZLE DAZZLE: Though perhaps a bit pricey for a screen saver, this is quite a screen saver nonetheless. The program creates incredible psychedelic images of an amazing variety. What's more, it not only works in the Windows environment, but in DOS as well. While the packaging bills it as a graphics program, in addition to being a screen-saver, this supposed additional graphics program is actually some simple configuration for the screen saver and the ability to print screen images to disk. Ever elusive medical studies\" have show this program to lower blood pressure, so it claims to have health advantages as well. In spite of the stretched marketing claims, the program is recommended for \"day trippers\" who enjoy wild graphic pyrotechnics. IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #12. Gobliins 2 Lost Secret of the Rain Forest Page 154 Computer Gaming World "


"Nominees for Computer Gaming Worlds | Games of the Year Awards Iminees for the 1993 ComWorld Game of Action argame MicroProse Crete (Bungie Games: Accolade) Woltastein 3-D Id Software) (MicroProse) (QQP) 1lone in tl Dan I-Motion) Eric The Unready (Legend). 2 (Accolade) CyberStrike (GEnie/Simutronics) oLeague Sports) | La Russa Baseball Wye Getzky Hockey II Role Play in Bicks 1.2(Impression 721 (SS) Underworld II (Origin) Veil of Darkness (SSI) Waxworks (Accolade) mpressions ber Iertisers Li Quarterdeck Office S Bit it Bltie Valley Softw Realism Entertainmcn Revell-Monoran Cape Cod Connection Ccrebel Info. Arts Sidclinc Software CyberDreams U.S.Videotel Mallard Softw Electronic Arts Electronic Innov. Design Entertainment Software Consult. National Videotex "


"  Score: 5 while graphically superior to these predecessors, it doesn't have half the interface elegance or story as either. IBM ($69.95). Circle Reader Service #18. N puzzles and learn about the diversity of life. IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #15. PEPPER'S ADVENTURES IN TIME: Another new product in the Discovery Series, Pepper's Adventures takes a young girl back in American history to fix the awful mess her whacked-out uncle caused. Pepper, accompanied by her trusty hound Lockjaw, hangs out with the colonists to find out what went wrong and who that Ben Franklin guy is. She'll be aided by a Truth Detector (would that we all were), a good wit, and a jaunty walk as she makes the puzzle-solving rounds through storybook scenery. Dialogue is decidedly contemporary as Pepper talks with characters who sound as if they're from Bill and Ted's Excellent Adventure. The \"learning adventure\" is geared towards ages eight and up, although it may be difficult for those that young IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #16. Pepper's Adventures in Time MAPS UTILITIES LOPEFT HALL: SOFESING HALLE JEDERT HALL: Velocity Development 1644 Colonial Parkway Inverness, IL 60067 (708) 991-0594 SPECTRE SUPREME: Last month we peeked at Spectre, a lightning paced multiplayer shoot'em up. This month finds Velocity with an update to their original Macintosh hit. In this new version, players still scoot around poly-filled cyberspace in tanks, but many new surprises have been thrown in the pot. There are new obstacles (acid pools, ice fields, cyber-mud) and new enemies (orbiters, slicers, hunt-killers) that can now be radar or optically cloaked. Fortunately, there are new weapons to battle these new baddies, including proximity mines, smart missiles, scattershots, among others. For gamers with access to a network, the game now supports eight nodes and 16 new types of multi-player games, including team cybersports like football and soccer. The original Spectre was one of the best network action games around, and they've only strengthened that distinction with this upgrade. Mac ($69.95). Circle Reader Service #19. Strategic Simulations, Inc. 675 Almanor Ave., Suite 201 Sunnyvale, CA 94086-2901 (408) 737-6800 JUD 19 HT 19 L , COL 9 ROH_4 HE LAS TO SKULLCAPLECE ALL ABKULLERHE TOUR MOVEMENT BLOCKED SELECT LEFT PLACE RIGHT RUNDO TOPEN Unlimited Adventures THOFORTE 22112112336 Hoe TUELT 4927 LOCATION11123,456 UNLIMITED ADVENTURES: SSI has handed their world building tools to the amateur game designer with this role-playing construction kit. Now, players can create Gold Box adventures using their own designs and imported art, or can select from the many resources provided for them. To ger players started, the package includes 70+ monsters, 40+ humanoid creatures, dozens of spells, plus all the tools one needs to map out entire dungeon levels and combine them into complete worlds. There are also tools for editing or creating one's own monsters, NPCs, objects, etc. When finished, the adventures can be shared or traded with friends. There are already groups of users on the major bulletin board systems that are trading art, ideas and completed levels, so there's no shortage of adventures. One might even say the supply is...unlimited. IBM, Mac ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #17. Virtual Reality Laboratories 2341 Ganador Ct. San Luis Obispo, CA 93401 (800) 829-VRLI Protostar Tsunami Media P.O. Box 790 Coarsegold, CA 93614 (209) 683-8266 Spectre Supreme VISTAPRO 3.0: It seems the end result of the Computer Revolution will be to eliminate the need to move from one's chair. This product takes a complete tour of the world's natural wonders and drops it into one's lap. With a few menu selections one can behold the grandeur of such landscapes as the Swiss Matterhorn and the Californian Big Sur coastline on the PC screen. It's quite an amazing program, taking U.S. Geological Survey Data Elevation Maps of natural landscapes and rendering them in beautiful detail. One can even create animated \"fly-throughs\" of the rendered areas, so one can soar through the craters of Mars or circle the peak of Mt. Fuji. This new version adds a heap of new features, including the addition of trees, fractal cloud patterns, extended video card support, the ability to map any PCX image onto the landscape, the ability to render 24-bit images, and refined image quality menus and functions. Additionally, it offers the ability to link numerous.PCX files into a single .FLC animation. Alternatively, a large.FLC file can be broken into individualPCX files. A powerful program for powerful-good graphic fun. Amiga ($99.95), IBM ($129.95). Circle Reader Service #20. cow PROTOSTAR: Protostar unites many different game elements around a generic space opera theme. The humans are threatened by a hostile alien race, and the call goes out for a star captain who can rally neighboring factions around the Human flag, disrupt the alien supply lines which feed a mounting offensive, earn cash to finance the Human resistance, and battle the enemy ship-to-ship. There are elements of role-playing in the outfitting of one's ship and crew, elements of strategy in the trading of goods for cash, and elements of action gaming in the starfighter encounters. Old time gamers will perhaps see Sundog or Starflight in the game, though Vistapro 3.0 Page 156 Computer Gaming World "


"COMPUTER GAMING WORLD HALL OF FAME The games in Computer Gaming World's Hall of Fame have been highly rated by our readers over time. They have been rated for their impact on the computer gaming hobby during their peak period of influence and acceptance by our readership. Note that the dates listed for each game are the copyright dates and may precede the actual release dates. Specific formats listed are those which CGW has in its possession. King's Quest V Sierra On-Line, 1990 Amiga, IBM, IBM CD-ROM King's Quest V was an amazing addition to the best-selling adventure game series of all time. It was the first game in which real painted images were scanned and used as the backgrounds for the adventure, and was the first game to sport Sierra's parserless interface. Although some players were disappointed in the move to a non-typing interface and the easier puzzles that this entailed, King's Quest V was an important landmark in a series that has defined a genre. Indeed, it points toward the future of interactive storytelling on the computer. The Bard's Tale (Electronic Arts, 1985) Many formats Chessmaster (Software Toolworks, 1986) Many formats Dungeon Master (FTL Software, 1987) Amiga, Atari ST, IBM Earl Weaver Baseball (Electronic Arts, 1986) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh Empire (Interstel, 1978) Amiga, Atari ST, C-64, IBM F-19 Stealth Fighter (MicroProse, 1988) IBM Gettysburg: The Turning Point (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1986) Amiga, Apple, C-64, IBM Gunship (MicroProse, 1989) Amiga, C-64, IBM Harpoon (Three-Sixty Pacific, 1989) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh Kampfgruppe (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1985) Many formats King's Quest V (Sierra, 1990) Amiga, IBM, CD-ROM M-1 Tank Platoon (Micro Prose, 1989) Amiga, IBM Mech Brigade (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1985) Many formats Might & Magic (New World Computing, 1986) Apple, C-64, IBM, Mac M.U.L.E. (Electronic Arts, 1983) Atari 8-bit, C-64 Pirates (MicroProse, 1987) Many formats Railroad Tycoon (MicroProse, 1990) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh Red Baron (Dynamir, 1990) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh SimCity (Maxis, 1987) Many formats Starflight (Electronic Arts, 1986) Amiga, C-64, IBM, Mac, Sega Their Finest Hour (LucasArts, 1989) Amiga, Atari ST, IBM Ultima III (Origin, 1983) Apple, Atari ST, C-64, IBM Ultima IV (Origin, 1985) Amiga, Apple, Atari ST, IBM Ultima VI (Origin, 1990) Amiga, IBM War in Russia (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1984) Apple Wasteland (Interplay, 1986) Apple, C-64, IBM Wing Commander (Origin, 1991) IBM, Sega Wizardry (Sir-Tech Software, 1981) Many formats Zork (Infocom, 1981) Many formats M-1 Tank Platoon MicroProse, 1989 Amiga, IBM PLATOON A PACE The first simulation to realistically depict armored warfare as platoon-oriented (both Accolade's Steel Thunder and Electronic Arts MAbrams Battletank treated the vehicles as operating independently), MI Tank Platoon emphasized leadership, platoon integrity, terrain effects and air support in a viable and entertaining simulation. M-1 Tank platoon not only set the standard for armored vehicle simulations, but pointed the way toward an update of MicroProse's classic Gunship that would emphasize platoon integrity as well. July 1993 Page 57 "


"MONELY Top Adventure Games Reader Poll #106 w 1 COMPUTER GAME Monkey Island 2: Le Chuck's Star Control II Indiana Jones: Fate of Atlantis The Secret of Monkey Island Quest for Glory Ill Sherlock Holmes CD King's Quest VI: Heir Today... Les Manly in: Lost in L.A. Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes Eric the Unready GAMING WORLD The Promler Computer Gamo Magazine W NOU AWN COMPANY LucasArts Accolade LucasArts LucasArts Sierra ICOM Sierra Accolade Electronic Arts Legend SCORE 9.99 9.87 9.84 9.72 9.56 9.55 9.50 9.28 Top 100 Games 8 9 10 Type ST SI 9.16 OOOO SP von AWN RP SI Underworld ST Top Role Playing Games the story GO Score 10.71 10.54 10.51 10.45 10.26 10.26 10.25 10.23 10.21 9.99 9.93 9.87 9.87 9.87 9.84 Origin ramica WG,ST AC SP AD WG AD.AC RP WG AD WG AD AC WG ST GAME COMPANY SCORE Ultima Underworld Origin 10.45 Ultima Underworld II Origin 9.87 Eye of the Beholder II SSI 9.51 Might & Magic III New World Computing 9.41 Ultima VII Origin 9.34 Might & Magic: Clouds of Xeen New World 9.34 Wizardry Vil: Crusaders of Savant Sir-Tech 9.25 Eye of the Beholder SSI 9.10 Bane of the Cosmic Forge Sir-Tech 9.05 Ultima V Origin 9.00 9.75 Virgin SI  / SSI 0001Game Company Civilization MicroProse World Circuit MicroProse Links 386 Pro Access Ultima Underworld Origin X-Wing LucasArts Solitaire's Journey QQP 7 Conquered Kingdoms QQP 8 Wing Commander II 9 Front Page Sports Football Dynamix 10 Monkey Island 2: Le Chuck's Revenge LucasArts 11 V for Victory: Velikiye Luki Three-Sixty 12 Star Control Il Accolade Ultima Underworld Il Origin Empire Deluxe New World 15 Indiana Jones: Fate of Atlantis LucasArts 16 The Perfect General QQP 17 The Secret of Monkey Island LucasArts 18 Wolfenstein 3-D Id Software 19 V for Victory: Utah Beach Three-Sixty Pacific 20 Dune II 21 Falcon 3.0 Spectrum Holo Byte 22 Quest for Glory III Sierra Aces of the Pacific Dynamix 24 Sherlock Holmes CD ICOM 25 Pacific War SSI Eye of the Beholder II 27 King's Quest VI: Heir Today... Sierra 28 Links Access 29 Warlords SSG 30 The Incredible Machine Dynamix Might & Magic III New World Computing 32 Comanche: Maximum Overkill NovaLogic 33 Hardball III Accolade 34 Might & Magic: Clouds of Xeen New World Ultima VII Origin 36 Chessmaster 3000 Software Toolworks 37 High Command Colorado Comp. 38 Les Manly in: Lost in L.A. Accolade 39 Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe LucasArts Jack Nicklaus Signature Golf Accolade 41 Wizardry VII: Crusaders of Savant Sir-Tech 42 Stunt Island Disney 43 Lemmings Psygnosis 44 Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes Electonic Arts 45 Second Front SSI 46 Eric the Unready Legend 47 Tetris Classic Spectrum HoloByte 48 Hong Kong Mahjong Pro Electonic Arts 49 The Castle of Dr. Brain Sierra 50 Eye of the Beholder SSI Top Simulation Games GAME COMPANY World Circuit MicroProse X-Wing LucasArts Falcon 3.0 Spectrum Holo Byte Aces of the Pacific Dynamix Comanche: Maximum Overkill NovaLogic Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe LucasArts Stunt Island Disney Chuck Yeager's Air Combat Electronic Arts 9 Red Storm Rising MicroProse 10 Silent Service II MicroProse NO AD,RP SI AD WG RP AD SP WG.ST SCORE 10.54 10.26 9.58 9.56 9.39 9.27 9.23 9.06 9.04 9.03 EXIS 9.72 9.70 9.63 9.61 9.58 9.56 9.56 9.55 9.51 9.51 9.50 9.47 9.44 9.41 9.41 9.39 9.37 9.34 9.34 9.32 9.29 9.28 9.27 9.27 ST RP SP RP CIVILIZATION RP ST WG Top Strategy Games AD SI SCORE 10.71 10.26 9.61 9.25 9.41 + NOO GAME Civilization Solitaire's Journey Dune 11 The Incredible Machine Chessmaster 3000 Hong Kong Mahjong Pro The Lost Admiral Mech Warrior The Island of Dr. Brain Hoyle Book of Games, Vol. 3 COMPANY MicroProse QQP Virgin Dynamix Software Toolworks Electronic Arts QQP Activision Sierra Sierra 9.32 9.13 9.05 8.94 8.91 8.78 AD WG AD AC 9.23 9.21 9.20 9.17 9.16 9.14 9.13 9.11 9.10 9 10 ST "


"Sierra SSI WINGINE AD WG SI RP AD,RP Top Wargames ST SCORE 10.25 9.93 SI AD 9.87 NON GAME Conquered Kingdoms V for Victory: Velikiye Luki Empire Deluxe The Perfect General V for Victory: Utah Beach Pacific War Warlords High Command Second Front Conflict: Korea COMPANY QQP Three-Sixty New World QQP Three-Sixty Pacific SSI SSG Colorado Comp. SSI SSI 9.09 9.09 9.06 9.05 9.05 9.05 9.04 9.04 9.03 9.02 9.02 9.01 9.01 9.00 Electronic Arts Sir-Tech Sierra QQP MicroProse Sierra MicroProse Sierra Microprose SSG Sierra Origin QQP Sierra 9.75 9.63 9.51 9.44 9.29 9.17 9.09 SI AD,RP SI WG AD RP 10 9.00 SSI WG,ST AD WG SI WG.ST 8.98 8.98 8.97 8.97 MicroProse VOS COMPEIDER SSI Top Action Games AD 8.96 ST.SI SI 2 AC LON GAME Wing Commander II Wolfenstein 3-D Lemmings Tetris Classic Oh, No! More Lemmings Out of this World Terminator 2029 Conan the Cimmerian Speedball 2 Ancient Art of War in the Skies COMPANY Origin Id Software Psygnosis Spectrum HoloByte Psygnosis Interplay Bethesda Virgin Konami MicroProse SCORE 10.23 9.70 9.21 9.14 8.92 8.57 8.28 8.10 7.92 744 51 The Dagger of Amon Ra Conflict: Korea 53 Chuck Yeager's Air Combat 54 Bane of the Cosmic Forge Quest for Glory I (VGA) The Lost Admiral 57 Red Storm Rising Conquests of the Longbow 59 Silent Service II 60 Quest for Glory II Gunship 2000 62 Carriers At War Police Quest 3 64 Ultima V Battles of Destiny 66 Space Quest IV Western Front 68 F-15 Strike Eagle lll Great Naval Battles 70 The Adventures of Willy Beamish 71 Mech Warrior 72 F-117A Oh, No! More Lemmings 74 The Island of Dr. Brain 75 Rise of the Dragon Martian Memorandum 77 Indianapolis 500 78 Elvira 79 Command HQ Spellcasting 301: Spring Break 81 Rex Nebular 82 Gateway to the Savage Frontier 83 Populous II Hoyle Book of Games, Vol. 3 85 Siege 86 Heart of China 87 Battlechess Tony LaRussa's Ultimate Baseball 1 Gateway 90 Starflight II 91 Battles of Napoleon 92 F-15 Strike Eagle 11 93 Pools of Darkness 94 Typhoon of Steel 95 Armada 2525 96 Amazon 97 Space Quest V: Mutation 98 Buck Rogers Carrier Strike Out of this World Dynamix Activision MicroProse Psygnosis Sierra Dynamix Access Electronic Arts Accolade MicroPlay Legend MicroProse AD AD SI RP 9 10 WG,ST AD AD SSI Top Sports Games Electronic Arts Sierra Mindcraft Dynamix Interplay SSI Legend Electronic Arts tott tone 8.94 8.92 8.92 8.91 8.89 8.89 8.83 8.82 8.81 8.81 8.80 8.79 8.78 8.78 8.77 8.75 8.72 8.72 8.72 8.71 8.70 8.69 8.68 8.67 8.63 8.62 8.60 8.57 8.57 8.57 SSI COVOAN GAME COMPANY Links 386 Pro Access Front Page Sports Football Dynamix Links Access Hardball III Accolade Jack Nicklaus Signature Golf Accolade Tony LaRussa's Ultimate Baseball i SSI NFL Pro League Football Micro Sports The Games: Winter Challenge Accolade PGA Tour Golt Electronic Arts Tony LaRussa's Ultimate Baseball SSI SCORE 10.51 10.21 9.47 9.37 9.27 8.72 8.54 8.50 8.49 8.49 MicroProse SSI SSI Interstel Access Sierra SSI SSI Interplay WG SI RP WG ST AD AD RP WG AC Poll is based on reader survey cards in each issue of CGW and published two issues subsequent. Data on more than 100 games is archived and top ten lists may contain games which scored below the Top 100 cutoff, Games on unnumbered lines have scores equal to the line above. = Top game of type. AD=Adventure, RP=Role Playing. SI=Simulation, ST Strategy, WG=Wargame, AC=Action, SP=Sports The Computer Gaming World Poll A monthly survey of the readers of Computer Gaming World Magazine. "


"uhat's hot PC Research Hits List of Top-Selling Software What You've Been Playing Lately March, 1993 Rank FOCONUDUN PC Games (MS-DOS) Title and Source X-Wing (LucasArts) Alone in the Dark (Inrerplay) Empire Deluxe (Broderbund) Space Quest V (Sierra On-Line) Ultrabots (Novalogic) Wolftenstein 3-D/Spear of Destiny (Formgen) Tony Larussa Baseball II (Strategic Simulations) Comanche: Maximum Overkill (Novalogic) Ultima VII (Origin) Hardball III (Accolade) Links 386 Pro (Access) Sim City (Maxis) Police Quest (Sierra On-Line) Links Pinehurst (Access) Wing Commander (Origin) Links Mauna Kea (Access) Microsoft Flight Simulator (Microsoft) Civilization (MicroProse) Leisure Suit Larry V (Sierra On-Line) Ultima Underworld II (Origin) inioNaia 12. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. Rank Every month our mailbox bulges with hundreds of Reader Input Cards from our most loyal and outspoken readers. Over the years we've found these cards to be an invaluable source of feedback. Within 10 days of releasing our latest issue we can expect to see cards pouring in with suggestions, encouragements, tirades and many good laughs, in addition to the data for our Top 100 poll. Through your efforts, we know exactly where we stand with our readers (you don't mince words!), and we are treated to well-articulated opinions on anything and everything related to gaming. This column is a forum for these responses and for the results of our \"Playing Lately:\" query on the Reader Input Card. Thanks for taking the time to fill them out... keep 'em coming! Playing Lately? Results For CGW #106, May 1993 X-Wing (LucasArts) Civilization (MicroProse) Empire Deluxe (New World) Gary Grigsby's Pacific War (SSI) Ultima Vil+ (Origin) Front Page Sports Football (Dynamix) Conquered Kingdoms (QQP) Ultima Underworld II (Origin) World Circuit (MicroProse) Star Control 2 (Accolade) Just Me and You...and our CPU In issue 106 the prying minds at CGW asked you about computer gaming's cffect on your relationships with other humanoids. The overwhelming response indicates that there are a lot of neglected Significant Others out there! Where families of gamers were concerned, the classic \"Battle for the TV Remote\" has been moved to the computer room where the power struggle continues. On the positive side, many of you have made cyber-friendships on networks and have made gaming a part of family Quality Time. Here are some samples: \"On any given evening, there are 4 chairs in front of my computer! One person playing X-wing, one controlling the keyboard (the \"on deck\" circle) and two people waiting. Not much progress is made either productive or in the game!\" E. Dahl, Northfield, MN \"What other people? Chips n'Bits and UPS love me. Who else do I need?\" M. Alderfer, Sugar Land, TX \"Since Civilization, my wife no longer argues that our computer is simply a very expensive Nintendo machine. I can't get much computer time anymore she became a Giv fanatid L. Johnson, Baton Rouge, LA \"Makes my eyes red, takes all my money. Keeps me outta bed, ticks off my honey. M. Brosnan, Upland, CA \"I stay up late too often playing games. It often irritares my wife when I don't come to bed on time. However, our three cats like it, because they get a midnight feeding that they wouldn't ordinarily get.\" (That's just you on the bus, but look to your left -the bleary eyed guy passing on the way to work might be me.) M. Rogers, Huber Heights, OH \"My friends all have computers. My wife, however, is considering putting a contract on Sid Meier.\" Unnamed Gamer, St. Paul, MN \"Careful management of one's time is essential. Negotiate for more gaming time. Change pants. Take out the garbage. Tolerate the relatives! K. Miller, Windsor, CT Significant Other??....oh yeah, she's the one I see in the reflection of my monitor all the time. -E. Reed, Odenton, MD \"In our house the only strife caused by gaming is due to us having one computer. My wife and I have to schedule our time on-line to be fair. Also, we found a good housepainter through the Sierra Network. What a surprise that was! J. Sogue, New Fairfield, CT Amiga Games Title and Source 688 Attack Sub (Electronic Arts) Medieval Warriors (Merit) Operation Combat (Merit) AD&D Gateway to Savage Frontier (Strategic Simulations) Legend of Kyrandia (Virgin) cim Rank Macintosh Games Title and Source Prince of Persia (Broderbund) Award Winners: KQV & Red Baron (Sierra On-Line) Civilization (MicroProse) Microsoft Flight Simulator (Microsoft) Lemmings (Psygnosis) CD-ROM Products Rank Title and Source Compton's Encyclopedia Upgrade (Comptons New Media) MPC Wizard (Aris Entertainment) Street Atlas U.S.A. (Delorme) Cinemania (Microsoft) Battle Chess (Interplay) Mantis (MicroProse) World View (Aris Entertainment) Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe (LucasArts) Key Clipmaster Pro (SoftKey) Grolier's Illustrated Encyclopedia (Software Toolworks) This list is based on units sold by Software Etc., Babbages, Waldensoftware and Electronics Bourique. For more information, please contact PC Research at (703) 435-1025 simona Page 160 Computer Gaming World "


"matches The Patch File Tomputer game programs have grown so massive and the lems with saved Tournament games and those having mouse troubles. number of possible configurations has become so huge that 21 2/12/93 Jincompatibilities and glitches seem to be breeding at an Space Quest 5 Patch: Corrects the following: (1) Inability to Restore or exponential rate. Consumers and publishers are both frustrated at Quit after running out of time on WD-40's ship. (2) Inability to skip polthe need for adding patches into \"buggy\" programs, but they seem ishing the Star Con crest in EGA mode. (3) Loss of cursor when Roger to be an interim solution that is going to be with the hobby for a steps off the log which spans the river on Kiz Urazgubi. 412073 steps off the log which spans the river on Kiz Urazgubi. 2/26/93 while (presumably, until a standard platform configuration is Star Legions Update: Fixes some machine-specific lock-ups, problems agreed upon). So, until the golden age of standardized platforms with phasers firing out of th with phasers firing out of the FOV, changes to mission ratings, fixes to and bug-free programs, Computer Gaming World will publish a regaward sequence. 1/15/93 ular list of the latest updates of which we are aware. Sumpter to Appomattox Update: Fixes the \"Build» routine and elimiThese patches can usually be downloaded from most major netnates the memory error that some gamers were having. 10 works (e.g. Compuserve or GEnie), but can also be obtained from Task Force 1942 Update: Corrects the waypoint problem, among othindividual software publisher's own BBSs or direct from the pubers. 21.03. lisher with proof of purchase. We continue to urge publishers to LaRussa's Ultimate Baseball V1.1: Upgrades SSI's baseball simulation keep us updated on the latest versions/patches to their games. to the latest version. 1/29/93 (** indicates new files.) Tom Landry Football V. 1.03 Update (IBM & Mac): Corrects probAces of the Pacific 1946 Add-On Disk Update: Single Missions will lems with high-speed modem play. 3/06/93 now be saved correctly, and several fixes have been made to Career Pilots, Twilight 2000 Colonel Upgrade (VGA only): Adds extra sounds and including the elimination of known Shell System Errors. 3/10/93. graphics, and adds a new ending to the game. 2/2/93 *Air Bucks Version 1.2: A major overhaul of the original airline strare Ultima VII Version 3.4: Lord British fixes some minor leaks in the gy game. 4/17/93 roof of Castle Britannia. Updates from Version 3.0 to 3.4. 2/17/93 Ancient Art of War in the Skies Update: Version 02 of the game. Ultima Underworld I Patch: Replaces old patch to UWI. 2/25/93 3/01/93 Ultima Underworld II Patch: Fixes the \"strike\" problem, local bus dif*Batman Returns Update: Corrects problems with MS mouse lock-ups and lock-ups on Day 8. 1/24/93 PS ficulties, and a few others. 2/24/93 Caesar with Stacker: Allows players to use Impressions' game with the *Wilson Pro Staff Golf Update: Corrects mouse driver problems and Stacker utility. 3/05/93 errors where incorrect driving clubs were selected for certain ranges. Civilization Version 1.0.8 (Macintosh): Latest and greatest version of 4/21/93 the reigning king of strategy. 2/23/93 *World Circuit Modem Update V1.05: Corrects problems with 2400 Darkseed Version 1.5 Update: Latest version of Cyber Dreams' advenbaud modems. 4/8/93 ture. 1/20/93 \"X-wing I/O Soundcard Patch: Allows I/O port settings of 210-260. Darklands Version 07 Update: Latest version of MicroProse's RPG. 4/15/93 3/05/93 *Dune II Patch File: Fixes problems with the delivery of items from *X-wing Roland Sound Patch: Fixes crash bugs associated with the CHOAM. 4/18/93 \" Roland soundcard on 486 machines. 4/15/93 F-15 Strike Eagle Help Info Text: Text file containing known problems and suggestions for those having problems with the sim. 1/08/93 F-117A Stealth Fighter V.04: Updare to Micro Prose's jet simulator. The PRODIGY Weekly Top Ten 1/29/93 Front Page Sports Football: A new version is available which improves Computer Gaming World is Prodigy's on-line games expert. Look for upon the original release in many ways. 2/15/93 us in their Game Center, a forum where users read articles posted onGreat Naval Battles/North Atlantic Update: Updates all GNBNA files line by CGW and exchange messages on the bulletin boards (we can to version 1.2. 2/23/93 be reached there at EXPT 40B). The Prodigy Game Poll is run by Gunship 2000 Islands and Ice Patch Version .085: Corrects keyboard Prodigy based on a list of games provided by CGW and is updated lockout problems some gamers are having. 2/11/93 weekly. Note that it is not a cumulative rating over time (like the Hockey League Simulator 2 Update V1.11: New version for the IBM. CGW Top 100 Poll). Instead, the Prodigy Game Poll is a weekly 2/3/93 \"Snapshot\" of game popularity with gamers rating their favorites on a 'IndyJones/Atlantis Mac Patch: Corrects the \"desert balloon\" crash 1 10 scale. The highest total point carners make their Top 10. We bug in the Mac version. 4/15/93 provide this data to our readers as another barometer of \"what's hot\" Island of Dr. Brain Update: Fixes \"Ooops 10\" error, music room puzzle, and several other problems. 12/23/92 in computer gaming Links 386 Pro Update Version 1.09: Includes new drivers for specific video cards, a new Sound Blaster Pro 16 driver, and fixes the Harbour Town Hole 14 lockup. 3/3/93 Magic Candle III Version 1.16: Fixes problems with Sound Blaster TOP TEN RANKED CAMES support, mirror of honesty/candlewick problems, difficulties with tranWeek of April 16 to Aprel 22 ferred characters from MC2, and other minor glitches. 2/17/93 Mantis Update (IBM): Adds new features and improves gameplay. For RANK SCORE TITLE RANE SCORE TITLE disk-based version only. 3/01/93 NFL Pro League Football 92 V1.1: Contains many upgrades, fixes, 2274 Wolfenstein 30 1651 Livilization 7 1138 Aces of Pacific and additional schedules. 1/26/93 1624 Yolding 8 1843 Monkey Island 2 \"Pacific War V1.1 Upgrade: The \"official» SSI upgrade to Gary 141 din Lut 2 16 FRONT PU Four Grigsby's Pacific War. 4/18/03 1316 Wing Commander 2 18 994 Lith386 Fro Shadow President Update Version 1.0b: This version will run in ca. 30k less memory than the previous version. It also includes minor adjust Keep on top of the most progressive THE DO ments to the internal processing. 2/12/93 Softare publishers in the industry SOFTWARE SimLife Upgrade V2: Fixes minor problems in Maxis' artificial-life Sales  Messaging  Brochures CONNEXION Look simulator. 2/10/93 Menu X-ref Jump Path Copy Tools Help Exit Solitaire's Journey Patch V1.03: This is a patch for those having probGATEPELE July 1993 Page 161 "


"og gditoma The Boffo New Tinseltown Entertainment Software Enters The Hollywood Era Ithough the full convergence of the enSega of America's Doug Glen later explained order to use our new morphing technology?\" tertainment software and motion picthat the company would market a tele-cartridge and «How do we prove we're using more colors ture industries may not occur for at least which would serve as DRAM and would store a in our game than they are in theirs.\" Will story another six to ten years, pre-production work program (to be downloaded from the cable in become a secondary element? It is all too probseems to have already begun on the corporate about two minutes) for as long as the console able. At least, it is probable in the short run. side of the fence. James Cameron, master of was turned on. Whenever the console was Third, we can expect to enter a grand new era special effects for Terminator 2, recently anturned off, however, the DRAM would be of cross-promotion and licensing deals. Hollynounced the formation of a new company to cleared and the gamer would have to download wood has always known how to exploit propercreate a digital studio. The idea is to rely more that game again or download another. ties and cross-collateralize in the most effective on computers to handle the special effects burAlmost in response to the Sega leak, Viacom manner. Let's just hope that the games are not den. This announcement began to generate reInternational (one of the largest television synunderfunded when the \"new money\" of the old newed speculation about building 3-D models dicators in the country) announced its acquisiHollywood discovers how small the current enof actors and sets for inexpensive post-production of ICOM. So, along with Sony Electronic tertainment software market really is. As a cortion work (cameo shots for sequels where the Publishing (which just took a major stake in ollary, don't expect prices to come down, even actor/actress doesn't want to take the time to Psygnosis), Paramount (which not only has its though the new players are more experienced at appear, but might let their image be used at a own clectronic games division, as well as workspreading the risk. reduced price). It also initiated discussion abouting with Spectrum Holo Byte and Interplay the possibilities of parallel production for comProductions on Star Trek: The Next Generation Fourth, expect it to become harder for small puter/video game development, allowing re-use and Star Trek properties respectively), Walt Disdevelopment houses and independent designers of properties and talent for interactive versions ney Software and LucasArts Games, most stuto get their products into the distribution sysof films. dios are starting to take an interest in interactive tem. Why should a Hollywood that used to own Cameron's announcement was greeted with entertainment. its own distribution system (before the governsuch interest in the Hollywood community that ment broke them up) hesitate to tie up the Though the Hollywood incursion means that it occasioned a rare public appearance by George software distribution for its new products, espeinteractive entertainment can potentially reach cially since they already have such a system in Lucas, chairman of the parent company for a lot more people and could feasibly turn some special effects house Industrial Light & Magic, the recording industry? Expect this incursion to entertainment software geniuses into wealthy slow down clectronic distribution of games via in which he announced a more solid relationship individuals, there are some potential downsides between ILM and Silicon Graphics, Inc. (makcable, except when the studio has a stake in the for both the dedicated computer gamer and the ers of the Reality Engine). Such a relationship cable system, whether through ownership or entertainment software developer. First, Hollysignificd that ILM did not intend to surrender royalty agreement. rova wood is a mass market industry. This means that their technological lead in the special effects the new blood which will be coming into the Finally, expect the content standards of games arena. entertainment software industry in order to suto be liberalized considerably. Up until now, At the same time, Tele-Communications, pervise Hollywood's new financial stakes will be there have been relatively few games which have Inc., one of the country's largest cable television some of the players we have seen around Hollyconcentrated on mature subject matter. Comproviders, announced that they would be conwood studios for years. They will be people who puter games are still looked upon as being for structing a fiber optic data network to provide do not understand interactive entertainment children and adolescents. Hollywood will atentertainment and educational programming, and will try to reduce game development to the tempt to broaden the market and the new as well as shopping, on demand. The new infralowest common denominator of the so-called money will force the old developers to take more structure would provide both a significantly \"High Concept.\" Developers will have to be risks in subject matter. Such risks will necessitate wider bandwidth for both downloading and careful that their designs do not become a reduca voluntary ratings system. Perhaps, with the uploading data through the cable television tio ad absurdem (reduction to the absurd) based motion picture studios participating in the softprovider. At the time of their national press on demographic surveys and the desire to be all ware industry, the MPAA ratings system will be conference, the company hinted that their new things to all people. We've seen that. It's called applied to computer games. data network would impact gamers, but TCI television. In short, Hollywood is bringing new money was unwilling to specify who their partners Second, there will be a heavy emphasis on and potential new distribution to the entertainwould be. They only hinted that a 500 channel pyrotechnics. Just as many movies are made as ment software industry. Yet, those who care system would need programming and that game special effects extravaganzas to draw in the mariabout the quality of computer games will have software companies were interested. They even nce and drive-in crowd (an archaic form of to be more vigilant and more dedicated than ever specified that multi-player games would be postheater which once appealed primarily to reentheater which once appealed primarily to reenin order to keep computer games from becomin order to kee agers who usually watched only part of the ing as numbingly uninvolving as that so-called The day after the press conference, a leak from movies), there will be a tendency to develop \"interactive movie\" that has toured the country Sega's corporate headquarters in Japan inditechnologies in search of a game. Naturally, this recently. Narrowcasting is the future, nor broadcated that the video game company planned to happens to some extent at the present time, but casting. Those who refuse to learn that lesson create a Sega channel which would allow gamers we can well imagine production review and new may discover that interactivity (i.e. personal to download Sega games to their cartridge conproduct meetings in the future where the princhoice and control) isn't quite as entertaining as soles for the price of a specialty cable channel. cipals spout questions like, \"What can we do in they thought it might be. CGW sible. Page 162 Computer Gaming World "


"Coming Soon GATEWAY II HOMEWORLD WLEGEND ENTERTAINMENT COMPANY Legend Entertainment Company 14200 Park Meadow Drive Chantilly, VA 22021 Distributed by Accolade, Inc. To order, visit your local retailer or call 1-800-245-7744  1993 Legend Entertainment Company Gateway II: HOMEWORLD is a trademark of Legend Entertainment Company. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. Circle Reader Service #75 "


"Stack the odds in your favor With a screen saver for high-powered PCs. ORIGIN ou purchased a high-end system for its blazing speed, added power and stunning graphics. So why settle for a screen saver that doesn't take full advantage of its capabilities? ORIGIN FX is the next-generation screen saver, with 256-color, high-res graphics running under Windows\". It's just what you'd expect from ORIGIN, the entertainment company that brings you the award-winning Wing Commander and Ultima series, But whether you're a game player or not, you'll enjoy amazing animations, sensational sound**, and innovative images. ORIGIN FX is a great way to showcase your system, amuse yourself during breaks and discover what \"state-of-the-art\" means in a screen saver. SCREEN SA VER Special Bonus: For owners of Wing Commander II, ORIGIN FX includes a module that plays all of WC li's cinematic sequences when the game is installed on your hard drive. And that's just the beginning look for add-on ORIGIN FX modules shipped with our future games, to showcase their cinematics, as well. RINK URITNX the lo her ORIGINX SCH EE SA SIXINHO Available at a software retailer near you or call 1-800-245-4525 for MC/Visa/Discover orders. HORIGIN We create worlds: Actual screens may vary. An Electronic Arts Company P.O. BOX 161750 AUSTIN, TX 78716 01992 ORIGIN Systems, Inc. FX is a trademark of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. ORIGIN, Ultima, We create worlds and Wing Commander are registered trademarks of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Electronic Arts is a registered trademark of Electronic Arts. Windows is a trademark of Microsoft Corp. Requires that Windows be configured in 256 color mode with SVGA graphics.\" Ad Lib, Sound Blaster or Roland MT-32/LAPC-1 or 100% compatible required for music. Circle Reader Service #78 "

