September 1989 Number 63

Features
SSI's "Curse of the Azure Bonds"

8

Scorpia Explores Another "Forgotten Realm"

Epyx's "The Omnicron Conspiracy"

14

"We'd Tell You More, But . . ." / Dennis Owens

SSI's "Hillsfar"

16

Linking Up for "Tournament Golf'
Hints for Infocom's "Arthur"

18

"Name The Game" Contest

20
22

SimCan's World War I Naval Combat Game / Lt. H. E. Dille

SSI's "Red Lightning" Strikes Twice

26

Modern Warfare on the ST and IBM / M. Evan Brooks

Here Comes the "Fire King"

28

SSG's Action/Role-Playing Game / Douglas Seacat

How to Plan for a Long "Journey"
Game Hints from Abroad / Roe Adams

40
42

Win A Free 3-Year CGW Subscription / DeNardo & Sipe

Departments

Software Toolworks and Spinnaker Face-Off / Roy Wagner

It's A "Grand [Old] Fleet"

38

Scorpion's Tale Offers "Roundtable" Discussion

CGW's Test Lab Explores IBM Sound Boards

"Chessmaster 2100" vs. "Sargon 4"

32

Playing a "Mean[er] 18" / Major David S. Stevens

"It Takes A Thief" To Be The Best / Roe Adams

The Sounds of Silicon

Star Saga Two: The Clathran Menace
Masterplay's New Adventure Game / DeNardo & Lombardi

30

Letters from Paradise
Taking A Peek
Conversions Received
Rumor Bag
Inside The Industry
Game Ratings
CGW Hall of Fame
Reader Input Device

4
6
6
7
11
24
25
48

Cover Art from "Curse of the Azure Bonds" 1989 TSR, Inc. All
rights reserved. Used with permission.

Letters

forces received reinforcements, but only
in the nick of time. Their salvation was largely due to the possession of a core of
elite fighting units, well armed and supplied, supported by saturation bombardment from air and artillery.

Parallel Viewpoints
As a long-time fanatic of CGW, and
lucky winner of the famous CGW writing
contest (#30, p. 35), you may recall my
name. By the way, thank you again for
the all-expenses-paid trip to Monona, WI,
which I won as a result of the afore-mentioned contest.
My interest in Jay C. Selover's article on
SSG's MacArthur's War was unique,
since I had the honor of working with
SSG on that project. It was my responsibility to conduct the research, create the
scenarios, construct the maps, and write
the articles. I knew that a review in CGW
would be an acid test, since CGW
reviewers always write frankly and such
reviews carry a great deal of weight. I was
very pleased with Mr. Selover's opinions
on MacArthur's War and wish to offer
some additional information which
should interest the readers.
Mr. Selover's comment regarding the research behind MacArthur's War is quite
correct. I logged 400 hours of research,
covering 40 books, over 100 actual battle
maps, and interviews with Korean War
veterans. The result: 10 historically accurate battle scenarios, each with several
variants. The variants were based on
documented and speculated 'What IF?"
situations.
I agreed with Mr. Selover that the first
several months of the Korean War was
one of a "certain sameness", but found
that fascinating. In contrast to the vast
number of WWII battles, most if not all of
the Korean War battles represented in
MacArthur's War were crucial. The outcome of a given battle could well swing
the momentum, or result in utter victory
or defeat. There was a sincere urgency
and desperation, magnified by the vast
differences between opposing forces.
UN Forces found themselves fighting
losing efforts early in the war, with little
realistic chance of defeating their enemy;
they were buying time with their blood. A
fighting withdrawal is certainly one of the
most difficult of military tasks, and the
communist forces were specialists in encirclement. As a rule, communist forces
tended to possess greater numbers, but
lacked air support. Later in the war, UN

In most battles, victory was dependant
upon such factors as timetables, weather,
supply and sheer luck. Having read intensely on the subject, I was awestruck by
the accounts of individual bravery and
self-sacrifice, depravity and barbarism. It
was a war which, in many ways,
developed the doctrine of modern warfare and could easily have become WWIII.
It is amazing to me that a non-programmer such as myself could ever be involved in the production of a software
package. I hope my good fortune will encourage other readers to do whatever
they can to benefit the computer gaming
industry. With any luck, CGW will always
be there to tell us about it.
Daniel H. Antolec
Monona, WI
Ed: Thanks for the information. But
what we really wanted to know was:
what was the highlight of your all-expense paid trip to Monona?

Enthusiasm Overrun
The fog of war is ever-present. I recently
found that I have contributed a certain
amount of "fog" concerning SSI's Overrun! and what will and will not be
upgraded/corrected in future versions.
Concerning the documentation, SSI informed me at the time I was preparing
my review that the documentation errors
would be corrected during the next printing of the Rulebook and Briefing Manual.
Apparently, unknown to the individual assisting me, SSI had placed a single order
covering the entire expected production
run. This will, unfortunately, preclude the
reprinting of the entire documentation in
corrected form.
In my review, I unintentionally may have
worded things to imply that SSI was correcting all of the items mentioned as errors or problems in the software. For
that, I apologize. That kind of influence
on the part of a reviewer is rare. During
my discussions with SSI, shortly after
Overrun!'s release, the only items which
were mentioned by SSI as items being
considered for correction were the following:
1. Missing units, such as the Marine
LAV-AT and LAV SPT PLTs;
2. Lack of a FOG-M platform in Europe
(for which FOG-M was primarily
designed); and
3. Correcting the "bug" which prevented
artillery units from changing states.

The following items which I gave a
"down-check" to in my review would require a prohibitively expensive re-write of
the entire code:
1. Fire control being tied to the unit's
vice weapons;
2. Reactive armour interaction with small
arms fire;
3. The inability for the
second-in-command to take over;
4. The reaction of an entire formation to
one unit coming under fire; and
5. The firing of missiles only on the 3rd
pulse.
As of this time, there are no firm release
dates for the revised Apple/C-64 versions
of the software. As mentioned above, the
documentation is not expected to be corrected en masse.
Nevertheless, Overrun! remains an
achievement in wargaming. Both fun and
challenging, its complexity and depth of
detail are awesome! If you aren't sure, go
defend the E4 or Hamadan!
Buddy Knight
Sherman, TX
Ed: The article written by Buddy (COW
#61) stated that most of the
problems/gripes would be corrected in
Version 1.1. The use of the term, "most,"
was overzealous and the context suggested that an updated version was imminent. The reality is that updates occur
on an "as needed" basis. Overrun! will
need to sell thousands of units before it
becomes economically feasible to
produce an updated version.

Boring Into CGW's Style
Gentelmen [sic],
Yours is without doubt the single most
boring magazine I've read to date. To be
fair, I made the huge mistake of giving
you two chances to redeem yourselves.
You failed horridly [sic]. Bad writing and
an upsetting overabundance of wargame
reviews make for serious [unreadable,
damaged in mail] time, put 'em down for
the [unreadable, damaged in mail] reading. I won't buy it again.
Vance P.
Salt Lake City
Ed: Just in case we didn't know where
you stood, you certainly made it clear in
your R.I.D. article ratings [Letters (F),
Abrams Battle Tank Review (F-),
Napoleonic Scenario (F--), Are You
Saved? (F), Batman Review (F-), Hidden
Agenda Review (F-), Scorpion's Mail
(F-), Presumed Guilty Review (F+), Fantastic Voyages IV (F), Journey Review
(F+), and Rumor Bag (FF-)]. Garth
Fitzmorris was so upset by your rating
and vote to "Dump the Column" that he
wore his bag backwards for two weeks.

Taking A Peek

Cinemaware
4165 Thousand Oaks Blvd.
Westlake Village, CA 91362
THE KRISTAL: The player takes the
part of Dancis Frake, space pirate, in
this adventure/arcade game. Piloting
spaceships, shooting down aliens,
swordfighting, interacting with the local
inhabitants, and piecing together clues
to the location of the long-lost Kristal of
Kronos will keep players hopping from
planet to planet. The good-looking
graphics and arcade sequences mesh
nicely with the adventure elements.
Amiga ($49.95). Circle Reader Service
#1.

EeeZee Systems, Inc.
2899 Agoura Rd., Suite 550
Westlake Village, CA 91361
KONKERS: Billed as a memory/skill
game for two, this unusual card game
plays somewhat like Canfield-style
double solitaire. Two players race to play
cards from their hand to the play field in
Ace to King order. Points are awarded
for each card played, with a special
bonus for playing the Konker card. IBM
($39.95). Circle Reader Service #2.

Omnitrend Software
P.O. Box 733
West Simsbury, Ct. 06092
UNIVERSE 3: Part three of this
popular adventure series puts players in
the captain's seat of a Federation
Worlds Starcruiser on a diplomatic mission to Tau Ceti III. After 50 years of
isolation, the Federated Worlds has sent
your ship to re-establish relations with
the Home Cluster. All is well until it is discovered that a murderous traitor is working to thwart this vital mission. Players
use a Breach-style interface to explore
the world and hopefully uncover the
Benedict Arnold among their crew. IBM.
Circle Reader Service #3.

Sport Time
3187-G Airway Ave.
Costa Mesa, CA 92626
OMNI-PLAY BASKETBALL: The

single most challenging job in the world
of sports is to take an expansion sports
team and develop it from a cellar-dweller
into a championship club. It takes years,
but it can be done (The NY Mets
baseball team being the most classic example). With Omni-Play Basketball you
are given the dual roles of General
Manager and Coach. Conduct trades
with the computer controlled teams,
recruit from the minor leagues, improve
you current roster at training camp. All
the options are here to begin building a
dynasty from scratch. SportTime has a
winner here. Amiga pictured ($49.95) &
C-64 ($34.95). Circle Reader Service #4.

OMNI-PLAY HORSE RACING: From
the touts to the tote board, this horse
racing game offers an excellent betting
simulation. The animation offers the
thrill of horse racing excitement and the
handicapping tournament allows players
to bet heavily (and sometimes, destructively) without really going broke.
Weather, track conditions, jockey
records, and past performances by each
horse add to the realism. A future
module which allows players to buy, sell,
own, and trade horses will be released
soon. We bet you Pete Rose will want to
play this game. IBM with CGA or EGA
and joystick optional, ($49.95). Circle
Reader Service #5.
(Continued on page 34)

Industry News

alking across the main quad on
the Stanford University campus, I
caught the uplifting strains of
Widor's "Toccata" emanating from the impressive pipe organ inside the Memorial
Church. My contact was sitting in one of
the back pews, the reflection of the
stained glass windows giving his face a
dithered look.

W

"So, what's new at Lucasfilm?" I asked in a quiet
whisper. He pointed to the
organ and smiled. "They're
publishing a pipe organ
simulator?" I asked incredulously.
"Not exactly," he replied,
"but the code name is Pipe
Dream. In the U.K., it's
marketed as PipeLine. It's a
real-time abstract strategy
game where the player is
randomly given pieces of
pipe and expected to build
a network of plumbing
before the sludge catches
up with him."
When I suggested that it
didn't really sound like a
Lucasfilm game, my contact reminded
me of Ballblazer. "Unfortunately," my contact went on, "the bad news is that Loom
won't be released until early 1990. The
good news is that it will be a worldwide
release, simultaneously available on
Amiga, Atari ST, and IBM."
"Speaking of global strategies," he continued, "New World Computing is working on a computer version of Flying
Buffalo's card game, Nuclear War. The
graphics should be great with animated
missiles, bombers, explosions, and world
leaders (with different personalities)."
I thanked my source and excused
myself, explaining that I was supposed to
be on my way to the computer center.
On my way to the computer center, I had
to cross the student center patio. This
wouldn't have been so bad if two jets
hadn't flown over in a low-altitude cat
and mouse game. I looked up at the jets
and ran into a fellow coming out of the
student pub. I ended up wearing most of
his beer. He recognized me as a reporter
for CGW (the bag over the head is somewhat distinctive). After telling me the stain
should wash out of all but the bag, he
asked, "did you know Accolade is close
to releasing The Blue Angels on the PC?
A friend told me it simulates, at least, ten
different maneuvers and you can choose
the position you take in the formation.
You get multiple camera angles to record
the action, too."
Not about to be outdone by a mere un-

dergraduate, I delved into my backlog of
industry intelligence and told him that if
he'd liked Panther Games' Fire Brigade,
he should watch for their upcoming
Fulda Gap game. Apparently, the U.S.
Army is impressed enough with
Panther's original product that they are
using it to study the logistics of supply

this game will have mechanical bull
riding, "Dowse the Damsel" (a "G-Rated"
Wet T-Shirt Contest), and "One Beer,
Please" (where players slide beer mugs
down the bar using a horizontal slider
similar to the vertical slider used in Mean
18 and Jack Nicklaus' Greatest 18 Holes
of Championship Golf). He smiled, assigned me to a Macintosh II,
and waved me away.

The
Rumor
Bag

I booted the machine and
clicked onto the Appletalk
Network used by the computer center. Frankly, I had
never seen so many Apple
logos in one room before. I
checked my Email and found
an anonymous tip about
King's Bounty, a Christmas
release from New World
Computing. King's Bounty
is supposed to be an action
game with an adventure
wrap. Player characters must
recruit an army of men and
monsters, defeat the master
villains who hold pieces of a
map vital to the central
by William Randolph Greeley
quest, assemble the map in
order to locate the Sceptre of
Order and rescue the Sceptre
and may formalize a deal for a future
as a means of saving the character's
product (a second generation ground
homeland. My informant told me to think
warfare simulator to be called, 2GWS).
of King's Bounty as a fantasy variant on
Cinemaware's Defender of the Crown.
If you've ever wondered whether lightnThe rest of the evening was quiet, so I
ing strikes twice in the same place, I have
finished my tasks and started to leave the
an answer of sorts. Just as I was ready to
cluster. I stopped abruptly behind a fellow
enter the computer center, a voluptuous
computer sciences student. This student
blonde streaker charged out of the stuhad programmed a Spacewar clone. I
dent center and collided with your dedicaught my breath in nostalgic euphoria.
cated reporter ("It's a dirty job . . .). By
Then, I broke the news. "I hope you're
pure reflex ("Sure, Bill!), I happened to
not planning on selling that game."
catch her in a bear hug. She blushed the
color of Mars when I recognized her as a
"Oh, no," he assured me, "not unless I
public relations person from one of the
could find some new spin for an old idea."
local game companies. I refused to
release her until she told me a Silicon Val"Well, I just wanted to let you know that
ley rumor. "Well, Infocom is going to
Accolade is working on a game which
release a science fiction role-playing adcombines elements of Spacewar and Arventure called Mines of Titan in the Fall.
chon. Like Archon, there is a strategic element, and like Spacewar, there is a very
It's menu-driven and the object is to find
a missing city and get off the planet alive
simple tactical system in the game. Since
it is a science fiction game, players plot
and rich. I can't tell you what our company is doing."
to conquer star systems and colonize
planets. Since it has action elements,
I replied in my best Jack Webb impresone to two players can fight it out using
sion, "That's all right, ma'am. I already
simple "Up, Down, Left, Right, Fire" comknow what your company is doing."
mands from the keyboard. The working
title is Starcon, as in "Starcontrol".
Entering the computer cluster, I handed
my card to the cluster buster (i.e. com"Well, that's what I get for letting my
puter room monitor) and he was taken
CGW subscription slip!" muttered the stuaback by the smell of the spilled beer on
dent, "Your column could have saved me
my clothes. "Have you been drinking
hours of coding. By the way, what do you
beer or swimming in it?" Since I had
look like under that bag?"
done neither, I tried to take his mind off
the issue by telling him about Accolade's
I answered truthfully, "Sorry, there are
Bar Games. In addition to the traditional
some industry secrets that shouldn't ever
air hockey and liar's dice competitions,
be revealed."

Review

Curse of The Azure Bonds
by Scorpia

C

urse of the Azure
Bonds is the sequel, of sorts, to
Pool of Radiance, although you needn't
have played POR to play
this game. The premise
is simple: while travelling
on the road to Tilverton,
your party is ambushed
and knocked out. When
everyone wakes up, they
find themselves at the Tilverton Inn, with five
strange blue marks (the
bonds, or sigils) on their
arms.

good at fighting giantsized creatures. At high
levels, both classes can
learn spells.
Character creation is
the same as it was in
POR, with the exception
of character portraits. No
individualized pictures
are displayed when
camping. You do, of
course, make up an icon
for each character (the
icons have not changed
at all) and you also have
the opportunity to
modify any character's
stats before play begins.
Transferred characters
bring their icons with
them, though, so you
don't have to make
them over again.

Each bond represents
a different evil group.
Through the bonds,
these groups can control
the actions of the characters. The object, therefore, is to seek out these
five groups and discover
the means of removing
the bonds.

Once the party is assembled, the game starts
in the Tilverton Inn. You
get a brief explanation of
how and why you're
there, after which you're
on your own. The first
order of business is to
equip everyone. Do that
before exploring the
town or you may regret
it later. The armory is
just across from the inn.
Remember to have all
spell-casters memorize
spells, also.

Since this is a followup game, you can transfer your characters from
Pool of Radiance and
it's a good idea to do so.
It will give you a
headstart in the game.
Characters will transfer
over with no weapons or
equipment, though, so
you won't have the use
of any of the goodies
you picked up in POR.
On the other hand,
each character does receive 300
platinum pieces (the equivalent of 1500
gold) with which to buy weapons and
armor at the start of the game. This sum
is more than enough to purchase the
best armor and weaponry for everyone in
the party.
If you haven't played POR or simply
prefer to start with entirely new characters, you can create a party from scratch.
Single-classed characters begin at level 5,
characters with two classes start at 4/4,
and triple-classed half-elves begin at 4 in
all classes except Magic-User, which
begins at 3.

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
REVIEWED:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

Curse of the Azure Bonds
IBM, C-64/128
IBM
IBM ($49.9S)
C-64/128 ($39.95)
SSI Special Projects Group
Strategic Simulations, Inc.
Sunnyvale, CA

Two new classes, Paladin and Ranger,
are available in the game. Both are worth
having. Paladins have healing abilities
and are under a constant "Protection
from Evil" spell (which adds +2 to all
saving throws). Rangers are especially

Tilverton is not a very
large town and there is
no way you can get lost (you can automap here). Nothing much is going to
happen until you've visited the sage
Filani. She gives you some information
about your bonds and seeing her sets up
the encounter that will send you searching after the first evil group, the dreaded
assassins called Fire Knives.
Once you've had the major combat and
rid yourself of the Fire Knife bond, you'll
be banished from the town (the King
doesn't trust you . . . but then, you did
try to kill him, so maybe he has his
reasons). So, you find yourself outside of

Tilverton with two places to go, Shadowdale and Ashabenford.
Either way forces you into an encounter. Heading to Shadowdale, you
must face a band of displacer beasts. On
the road to Ashabenford, you come
across a flock of hippogriffs. The 'griffs
are the easier ones to take out, so
Ashabenford is the recommended route
(it makes no difference, by the way, if you
go by trail or wilderness).
Ashabenford is a "cardboard" town. You
can't walk around in it. You simply
choose places to go from a menu. The
same is true for most of the others, with
the exceptions of Hap, Yulash, and Zhentil Keep.
After you've healed up your wounds,
gotten all your goodies identified, and
trained everyone who has enough experience, it's time to decide where to go
next to remove another bond. That is the
general pattern of the rest of the game,
with a few side tours thrown in to provide
you with experience and treasure, but
have no effect on the main action. These
"side tours" are mini-dungeons under
most of the towns. However, you won't
be able to get into any of them until you
have removed at least two bonds. At that
time, a new command, (S)earch, appears
on the wilderness map when you're outside a town. It should be used with care,
as some of these caverns can be quite
nasty.
When four of the bonds have been
removed (and only then), you go on to
the final showdown with our old friend
from POR, Tyranthraxus, in the ruins of
Myth Drannor. This time around, he's a
storm giant, which means, yes, more
lightning bolts (he really has an obsession with them).
The ending itself is, alas, rather disappointing. Unlike POR, once Tyranthraxus
has been defeated (for good and all, finally), the game ends. You won't be able to
go anywhere or do anything, except save
the final position (presumably for the next
sequel, whenever that arrives).
Combat is just the same as it was in
POR; nothing has been changed, although you generally face fewer opponents in any particular encounter. No
more hordes of 60 orcs or waves of
crazed kobolds. On the other hand,
monsters in Azure Bonds are tougher,
and even 5 or 6 can be quite difficult to
defeat.
I do have some concerns about the random number generator used in the
game. My experience over many combats
is that the RNG seems too often
weighted towards the low end for characters, and towards the high end for

monsters. If Azure Bonds is really using
the tables as put forth in the original Dungeon Master's Guide, then most of the
critters should not be hitting as often as
turned out during play, especially when
characters have very low AC's. An
armor class of -5 or better is not
easy to hit, even for high-level
monsters.
For instance, in the sewers below
Tilverton, a number of Otyughs
(nasty creatures that live in dung
heaps) have made their home.
While they are fairly potent, they
still need to roll a 19 to hit AC -6
and a 20 to hit AC -7. They certainly rolled a lot of 19's and 20's over
a fair number of combats. This
was also evident in combats with
lower-level opponents as well. Between that and the difficulty the
party often had (until they acquired
very low THACO's) in striking, I
wonder if the to-hit numbers are being
calculated properly. (See pg. 46 for more
information.)
Graphics are a little improved over
the first game, and many of the
animations for attacking monsters
are very good, except perhaps for
black dragons, who always look as
though they are losing their lunch
when they strike. Character icons,
as mentioned earlier, are exactly
the same as those in POR.
Speed in the game remains a
problem. The IBM version was
promised to be faster, but I did not
see much improvement over POR
in that respect. This is probably
due to the 8 Mhz clock speed of my
clone, as reports from players with
high-end machines (clock speeds of
10Mhz or better, preferably better) indicate that Azure Bonds plays, loads, and
saves quickly at those speeds (this
with a hard disk, of course ... playing from floppies is definitely
slow!). Thus, if you don't have a
fast computer, be prepared for
long waits, especially when loading
or saving.

from you before you can journey on to
wherever it was you were heading. So,
don't lose your codewheel!
In some ways, Curse of the Azure
Bonds is a bit disappointing. Except for

the two additional classes from the AD&D
system, nothing really new has been
added to Azure Bonds. The emphasis is

still very much on hack-and-slash; there
is no puzzle-solving at all, and opportunities for genuine role-playing remain

As with POR, the game comes
with a manual explaining game
play and an Adventurer's Journal,
with little paragraphs to read at
designated points in the game.
While it might be tempting to
browse the entries right off, it really
is more fun to wait until you're supposed to read them.
There is also, as before, the infamous rune code-wheel for piracy protection. One difference is that this time, instead of typing in a complete word, you
only enter a single specified letter. In addition, from time to time during play, an
old man pops up and demands a letter

limited.
On the other hand, there is certainly
potential here for adding more depth in
future games. For example, one of the
more interesting encounters (although,
(Continued on page 46)

Industry News

Inside the Industry
News, Notes and Quotes From the
Computer Entertainment Industry
Infocom's
West Coast
Move Stirs
Controversy
The dismantling of Infocom as an east coast subsidiary of Mediagenic offers
mixed signals regarding the
future of the storytelling
division. To many industry
observers, moving Infocom
to the Menlo Park headquarters of Mediagenic was
inevitable. The failure of
Cornerstone, the database
produced by Infocom,
necessitated an infusion of
capital. The acquisition of
the company which was
once synonymous with interactive fiction became inevitable. Infocom's corporate functions were assimilated by Mediagenic in a
gradual evolution designed
to reduce overhead and
streamline operations. In addition, Infocom's inability to
get new products out in
1988, tremendous research
and development costs in
upgrading the development
system, and technical snafus
with regard to releasing MSDOS SKUs during the initial
roll-out of new products in
1989 took its toll on the
viability of the Massachusetts
subsidiary.
Herein lies the dispute.
Sources inside Infocom
believe that Mediagenic
pulled the plug just when
the money invested in
graphics development (admittedly, more difficult and expensive to implement than
the original projections) had
started to pay off. Background sources suggest that
the entire Mac II development system is paid for, but
except for Marc Blank, there

is no real indication that it
will be used. In addition,
there are leaks about a completely new parser that may
never be used. ZIL (Zork Implementation Language),
the current development system, is functionally dead.
However, Rob Sears
(General Manager for Infocom), insisted that it
would have taken more than
two years for the east coast
subsidiary to recoup its losses. He noted the MS-DOS
problems and suggested
that the consolidation might
not have been necessary if
the IBM SKUs could have
been released initially. Nevertheless, he has noted that
Duncan Blanchard, a wizard
Macintosh programmer,
moved to the west coast to
join Mediagenic's Technology Group. Duncan is allegedly working on a hybrid
technology between ZIL and
future storytelling projects.
Of the 24 people who were
employed at the time of the
east coast shutdown, twelve
were asked to make the
move to the west coast and
five accepted. Of the five,
Donald and Elizabeth Langoisey are working on a hypercard story. Donald is a
computer artist who has
worked on some of the
latest Infocom products and
Elizabeth wrote two stories
for the Infocomics series.
Joe Ybarra, VP of Entertainment at Mediagenic, expressed great hope in the hypercard product, suggesting
that it would be more of an
adventure and less of a
simple exploratory toy (like
Manhole and Cosmic
Osmo). The new direction in
the company's approach to
storytelling products was
made clear when Ybarra suggested, "We cannot continue, in the marketplace,

living off products that take
eight hours to learn to play
well and up to 200 hours to
complete."

Broderbund
to Publish
"Distinctive
Software"
Gary Carlston (Broderbund Software Chairman)
and Bill McDonagh (Executive Publisher of the Entertainment and Education
Publishing Group) have announced a renewed commitment to entertainment
publishing. Carlston noted,
"We enjoy the game business. Our getting out temporarily was a result of some
entertainment products that
didn't fly, while we had
products in other areas, like
Print Shop, Carmen Sandiego, etc. that were doing
extremely well."
The two executives announced that they have
signed a long term agreement with Distinctive
Software, Inc., to jointly
develop entertainment
products. Distinctive
Software is the British
Columbia-based firm who
developed Test Drive, Grand
Prix, and others for Accolade.

Microprose
Acquires
British
Telecomsoft
In May of 1989,
Microprose acquired
British Telecomsoft. In the
past, British Telecomsoft

has marketed games like
Starglider, Carrier Command, and Guild of Thieves
under the Rainbird label.
Microprose plans to market
between six to twelve
Telecomsoft products per
year through their Medalist
International division. The
products will now carry a
MicroPlay label. At least, six
Telecomsoft products are
expected to appear under
the MicroPlay label prior to
the end of 1989.

Electronic
Arts Inks
Lucasfilm and
New World Pacts
Microprose is not the only
major publisher to make
major waves in distribution
of late. Electronic Arts Distribution has added New
World Computing, publishers of Might and Magic and
Might and Magic II, and
Lucasfilm Games, publishers of Maniac Mansion, Battlehawks 1942, and Indiana
Jones and the Last Crusade
games to its lineup of Affiliated Labels.

Sierra
Responds to
Virus Report
The Financial Times of
London and The Daily
Telegraph of London have
each reported that International Data Security, a
London-based security consultant, has received several
distressed calls from traders
in the financial district. Each
caller had been playing a
pirated version of the first
Leisure Suit Larry during
lulls in their work schedules.
Apparently, the pirate version contains a virus program that will destroy all the
programs and data files on a
user's hard disk. According
to the story in The Financial
Times, the virus had already
struck computers in Switzer-

land and West Germany.
Sierra, publisher of the
game in the U.S., and Activision U.K. distributor of
the game in Europe, both
note that the original game
did not contain the virus.
The problem only exists on illegal copies of the game.

Origin
Graduates
from Broderbund
Broderbund Software
and Origin, Inc. have announced an end to their affiliated label agreement.
Terming the departure of
the publisher of the Ultima
series as a "graduation,"
both companies underscore
the fact that the distribution/marketing agreement
has worked well in the past
and Origin, Inc. is moving
onward toward a new identity as publisher of a full line

of titles. Robert Garriott,
president of Origin, notes
that since his brother
Richard, a.k.a. Lord British,
and Charles Bueche originally worked as developers for,
then, Sierra, and moved on
to an affiliate relationship
with Electronic Arts, and
finally, Broderbund, the
company has learned from
the best. Gary Carlston,
chairman of Broderbund,
reiterated best wishes during
a brief light-hearted
ceremony at the recent Consumer Electronics Show and
indicated positive feelings
about Origin's foray into fullservice software publishing.

On-Line Games
Are Proliferating
With the success of their
new network game, Sniper!,
based on the TSR board
game of the same name,
Compuserve now offers a

four player version of the
game. Now, two players can
team up against their
favorite two foes for a true
multi-player version of the
game. Also, the service now
provides a directory of
modem game players which
can be accessed by typing
"Go Challenge." Opponents
who play Microsoft's Flight
Simulator III, Interstel's Empire, Electronic Arts'
Modem Wars, and
Spectrum Holobyte's Falcon may currently be located
on-line and a directory for
EA's 688 Attack Sub is due
to be added in the near future.

Meanwhile, Prodigy (the
joint-venture backed by IBM
and Sears) has joined with
Broderbund to feature an
on-line version of Where In
The World Is Carmen Sandiego? Each week, a mystery
is placed on-line and readers
who solve the case have
their names listed on-line.
Those with the very best
scores are posted in the
Acme Detective Agency Hall
of Fame.

Meanwhile, on GEnie, Air
Warrior, the popular Macintosh, Amiga, and ST game
designed by the Kesmai
Corporation, has made the
transition to the IBM world.
The aerial combat simulation allows, at least, 25
players to engage in highresolution graphic dogfights.

CGW On-line magazines or
news stories can be found
on Compuserve in the
GameSig; on PCLink,
QuantumLink, and AppleLink as CGW Magazine, on
Prodigy with three news
stories per week, and soon,
with special features on
GEnie.

The game allows players to
choose from vintage World
War I and World War II
aircraft running from Fokker
Triplanes to B-17G Flying
Fortresses.

Review

gainst all odds
and after facing
hordes of Stardust-sniffing evil Mentants, ravenous radioactive rodents, and scaly,
tentacled sewer-beasts
(and those are just the
females on this scraggly planet), you (Ace
Powers, Intergalactic
Star Policeman Extraordinaire, that is) have
finally succeeded in
cleaning up the planet
Cron. After scouring
every possible bar and
cheap motel for clues,

fact, you may find yourself going around and
zapping everyone you
meet just to see them
disintegrate or riding
back and forth to Cron
just for the thrill of the
transporter (ooh, it
tingles!). Nevertheless,
By Dennis Owens
be prepared to restart
the game if you do.
Killing innocent
civilians is not tolerated
on Cron or on its
moon and you will not
be able to hide behind
your badge if you are
caught.
There are numerous
ways to be killed or
have the game end,
Omnicron Conspiracy
SYSTEM:
IBM
but its designers must
PRICE:
$49.95
be credited for coming
PUBLISHER:
Epyx
up with several of the
TITLE:
Redwood City, CA
most inventive sequences ever utilized in a
graphic adventure in
order to depict your
fate after you breathe
your last. Modern
medicine can certainly
work miracles, but I'm
not sure I like the
result.
The manual which
comes with the game
is brief and exact. A
hint section takes up
half its space and, while it does explain exactly how to win and
what to do in each important location, at least it does so in a
series of steps: hints, tips, and solution.

Epyx Unleashes The
Omnicron Conspiracy

after interrogating--closely—every female,
at last, you have
avenged your partner's
death.
"You done good,"
your chief tells you.
Then, he sighs. "Now if
we can only find someone to help us stop
that nut from blowing
up the planet . . . "
So, what did you expect, hero?
Omnicron Conspiracy is a baffling,
wacky, charming conundrum of a graphic
adventure. It is chock
full of flying, caped offworlders, blustery bad guys, green long-tongued Frugs, and Vurlonians selling insurance. Death waits at almost every turn as
you try to solve the mystery of who killed Agent 786 and why.
Then, you must try to deal with the consequences—and then,
the consequences of the consequences of your actions.
Smoothly animated and graphically attractive, the game, which
shows us just how far graphic adventures have comes since the
days of Ring Quest, offers plenty of opportunities for interactions
with NPCs, whether it be trying to pick up that cute little shefly in
the Green Tattoo Bar or trying to score some dexBoosts off the
rude Sion (who really does tell you to "get lost, Space Pig!"
should you be dim-witted enough to approach him (it?) with your
badge flashing).
Alas, however, though the action (especially around that cheap
motel) seems to offer a lot of . . . how shall we put it . . . exploratory opportunity, Omnicron Conspiracy is strictly PG-Rateda surprise, considering the advertisements for the game being
bandied about by Epyx.
Still, though, the game is diverting enough and its visuals amusing enough to make the SciFi police adventure a success on its
own terms (consisting of a sort of feckless, innocent vulgarity).
The residents of Cron are not—usually—happy to see you.
Even though most will let you go your own way, at least grudgingly respecting your badge and the law you represent, none will
hesitate to tell you what they think if you get in their way. Nevertheless, most of the populace is irrelevant to your mission (to discover what Agent 786 was getting a little too close to and why he
was making those in power nervous).
Omnicron Conspiracy supports hard drive, joystick or keyboard
input (both equally easy to use), and graphics displays from
monochrome to VGA. The graphics are clever and handsome. In

Omnicron Conspiracy is not particularly linear. Though you do
need certain objects from time to time to make your job easier
(dexBoosts or Quickheals, for example, in the evil Mentants
temple), you can, in the course of your snooping around, resolve
any number of your problems—like any experienced Star
Policeman would—simply by being quick-witted, nimble-fingered,
and brilliant of mind.
Interactions with objects/NPCs are menu-driven. Walk up to
them until their name appears in the box above the main screen,
then press return. The objects you carry are used/examined/etc.
via the function keys.
The only drawback, if it can be called that, to the game is that it
is, unfortunately, almost as much fun watching the background
and interacting with the non-importants as it is actually tracking
down the bad guys. Soaking up the atmosphere and listening to
the tunes at the Mind Zi Tavern or the Green Tattoo is a terrific
way to while away some time—and you never know who you
might meet there.
Chris Ebert, the musical wiz behind the soundtrack, did a terrific
job with it; the music is catchy and melodic. And it is in the small
touches, the musicians at the Green Tattoo, for example, that the
game is the most fetching.
Omnicron Conspiracy, because of its logical puzzles, ease of interaction, and humorous (sometimes, downright sweet, small
touches), can certainly be recommended. It makes an interesting
change of pace and offers an entertaining story for anyone who
likes graphic adventures.

I

Review

illsfar is SSI's

l atest foray into

caliber of design.
While the storylines of
each quest are interesting and promise
much in the way of excitement, the graphics
and implementation
do not measure up to
the promise. The map
by Roe Adams
is full of mysterious
sounding locations,
such as Ghost Lake,
Wizard's Forest
Labyrinth, Dragon
Skeleton, and
Shipwreck. Yet, a visit
TITLE:
Hillsfar
to every place yields
SYSTEMS:
C-64/128, IBM
the same looking
REVIEWED:
IBM
PRICE:
C-64/128 ($39.95)
graphic modules with
IBM ($49.95)
the single secret door
DESIGNERS:
Westwood Associates
in always the exact
PUBLISHER:
Strategic Simulations, Inc.
Sunnyvale, CA
same topmost NW
corner. No attempt
has been made to customize any of the locations to match the
mood of the design.
The Arena is the
main quest module
for the fighters. It is
also most aptly
dubbed "punishment"
for other character
types caught looting
various locations or
being thrown out of bars. Characters are given only staffs to fight
with, and can purchase no armor. Magic is unavailable in
Hillsfar, so it is a sobering sight to see your Mage or Cleric in the
Arena, trying to duke it out with a staff against a big monster.
The joystick controls used in fighting are very difficult to learn
and most players will want to avoid the Arena whenever possible.
Because of the slow response to joystick input, whole sequences
of action moves need to be planned out before combat begins.
In fact, much of the idle chatter in the taverns is tied up in giving
long, detailed playing hints to the adventurer so he will be able to
fight each of the arena opponents effectively.
The archery field has a simple carnival type shoot. Various targets are offered and birds occasionally fly across for extra points.
If your character has high DEX, you ought to try hitting the very
elusive mouse that darts across the screen by shooting during
the instant he pauses before changing direction.
The worst aspect of this game is the travel action sequence on
horseback between location. The player must steeplechase his
way from place to place. Each strip of travel looks exactly the
same as every other strip, only the obstacles shift around for
variety. By the 10th trip, or so, it is such a dread that the player
begins to ask, "Is this trip really necessary?" To make matters
worse, the game implementers decided to require the players to
travel to a specified camp outside the city in order to "Save
Game". Yes, this is the only spot in the entire game that the
game can be saved or restored. So, "Save Game" necessitates, at
a minimum, two horseback strips and could require six if the character happens to be going and returning to a remote location
where something hazardous to their health was about to take
place (which in a RPG is very frequent).
The bottom line is that Hillsfar is a must buy for those who
aspire to becoming a super thief, such as Roger Zelazny's
Shadowspawn. Otherwise, imagine the absurdity of doing Mage
or Cleric quests without being able to cast any spells at all!

The Dark Arena

the TSR world
of Forgotten Realms.
Hillsfar is an ancient
elven city across the
Moonsea from Phlan,
the gutted city which
adventurers cleared of
evil influences in the
first installment of the
series, Pool of
Radiance. Long ago
the elves left Hillsfar
and it is now being
ruled by a MerchantMage named Maalthir
whose Red Plume
Guards are practically
everywhere. Step out
of line in this city and
you end up being
thrown into the arena
as sport for a
Minotaurs.
The module is
designed for single adventurers to go on
mini-quests. There are
separate sequences
for Fighters, Mages,
Thieves, Clerics, and
combo-class characters. Characters already generated in
Pool of Radiance may be transferred into this scenario, although
without any of their "goodies". Each quest consists of three or
four segments that are quite linear. Even if you know from a previous "Save Game" what the next leg of the quest is, you cannot
activate that sequence until all of the preceding segments have
been fulfilled. In short, Hillsfar belongs to the budding genre of
"action adventures" whereby the joystick-driven arcade action is
as relevant to a player's success as the role playing.
For those players who like to run thief characters, Hillsfar offers,
without a shadow of a doubt, the best simulation of thieving skills
ever done in any medium, not just on computers. There is something glamorous and exciting about being a thief and filching the
ruby eye out of the idol before the hordes of fanatic worshipers
can kill you. In Hillsfar, players are confronted with a cutaway
view of any lock that the thief must try to pick. Each tumbler in
the lock has its own shape and every professional thief carries a
lockpicking set with corollary shapes on the ten double-ended
lockpicks; 20 unique shapes in all. The player must select the
right side of the right lockpick for each tumbler. Doing it correctly
causes the tumbler to graphically sink in the lock—very gratifying
indeed. Choosing the wrong pick breaks the pick, rendering it
useless until the character can return to the Thieve's Guild for
somewhat expensive repairwork. To simulate working under pressure, each attempt at lockpicking is timed. A burning fuse on the
screen lets the player know how much time is left. Failure to pick
the lock in the allotted time can trigger a variety of painful lock
traps. The number of tumblers in each lock varies with the difficulty of the lock, from a mere 3 to an awesome 8. It should be
noted that it takes a considerable amount of practice, probably
over the course of a few days, to really develop the dexterity and
spatial skills necessary to do well as a lockpicker. The satisfaction
of ripping through a 6 tumbler lock, though, is unparalleled.
Westwood has set a new standard for skill simulation in a game.
Alas, the rest of the game fails to even remotely come up to this

SSI's "Hillsfar"

Survey

The CGW Test Lab

The Gamer's Guide
to Sound Boards
donned our smocks and locked
ourselves in the hermetically
sealed CGW Laboratory to bring you the
latest info on gaming hardware. This
month, our focus
is on IBM sound
boards.
Entertainment
software and
gamers alike have
long since outgrown the
pathetic, single
voice beeper Big
Blue bestowed
upon their
machines. To get
the full enjoyment
out of their
gaming software,
many IBM owners
are purchasing additional sound
equipment. To
help out prospective buyers, we've
listed the features
and prices of the
five top add-on
boards available
for the IBM. We
also want to give
garners an idea of
what industry support is like for
each board, so we
asked 25 of the
top game publishers about their future plans for
sound board support. Here's what
we found out.

Roland MT-32
Sound Module:
The Roland MT32 is the high
priced, but high
performance board on the market. Composed of eight individual synthesizers and
a percussion sound module, this 32voice synthesizer can produce 32 sounds
simultaneously. The synthesizer section
contains 128 preset sounds, including a

wide range of musical instruments and
special effects. The rhythm section also
offers variety with its 30 preset drum and
percussion sounds. The MT-32 has MIDI
capabilities, allowing it to interface with
any MIDI compatible keyboard or MIDI sequencer, and the board's package includes a piece of software called EASE
(Easy Arranging and Sequencing Environment) which aids in creating and editing
MIDI sound data. The MT-32 is by far the
richest sounding board tested but also
nceagith sCGW
bears the 'richest' price tag. You can
drive one off the lot for a mere $550. It's
probably a bit beyond the casual gamer's
needs, but a perfect system for those interested in its MIDI capabilities.
Despite its expensive price tag, the
Roland board has relatively healthy industry support. Electronic Arts and Accolade will each release three products
this fall which support the Roland. Further, Dynamix, Activision, and Origin
will support the board in future releases.
Sierra will also continue with their support and promotion of the Roland board.
If you want to hear the Roland board first
hand, Sierra offers an audio cassette
featuring both the Roland and the AdLib
boards playing pieces composed for Sierra products.

AdLib Music Synthesizer Card: The
AdLib Music Synthesizer Card, an 11
voice synthesizer based on FM technology, offers the same basic synthesizer
found on many keyboards. Of the 11
voices, six can be melodic and five percussive. In an optional mode, nine simultaneous voices can be sounded. The percussive sounds, such as the bass drum,
tom-tom, and cymbals are produced by a
clever trick combining the use of white
noise generation with FM synthesis. The
package which retails for $195 comes
with the Juke Box playback program of
25 prerecorded songs to sample. Visual
Composer, a sequencer program which
aids in the composition of your own
songs, is also available for an additional
$50.
Being one of the first sound cards available, AdLib has a great deal of gaming
software support. Eighteen of the companies we queried had AdLib on the top
of their list.

Covox Sound Master PC: The Covox
board's list of features includes the
AY8930 Programmable Sound Generator
(a chip similar to that found in the Atari
ST), a direct memory access 8-bit
digitizer, stereo amplifier, and two digital

O

joystick ports. The joystick ports accommodate the contact type stick
used by the Commodore and the
Atari. The package also includes
two, 2.25 inch speakers. The board
comes in on the lower end of the
pricing scale at a reasonable $89.95.
Industry support for the Covox
board is fair. Those who have made
a definite commitment to the Covox
include Electronic Arts, Data
East, and CapCom. Maxis, Omnitrend, and Konami are looking
at the board as a future possibility.

Innovation SSI2001 Sound
Board: The Innovation board is the
budget model on the market, selling for $69. The SSI2001 sound
board is driven by the Commodore
HMOS 6581 chip found in the Commodore machines. The chip is a
three voice synthesizer/sound effects generator called the SID or
Sound Interface Generator and is
among the simpler devices used in
the boards sampled. The sound
quality reflects this, though you really can't beat the price.
From our industry survey it seems
support for the Innovations board is
rather weak. Only one company,
Origin Systems, mentioned support
for this board.
speakers, headphones, or home stereos.
This package goes for $129.95.

Creative Labs, Inc. Game Blaster:
This spring, Creative Music Labs
released a music development package
called the Creative Music System (CMS),
which contains a plug-in adapter card
and five disks of software called the Intelligent Organ. This hardware/software
combination enables users to easily compose complex musical pieces using up to
12 voices, plus percussion. The user
'plays' the keyboard and the software
adds bass, chord, and rhythm accompaniment in real time. The software package
also enables users to add animation and
lyrics to any composition. This suggested
retail on this package is $195.
Of more interest to garners is the new,
stripped-down version of this package
released in June. This product, called the
Game Blaster, includes the adapter card
and a disk of 40 pre-recorded songs. The
12 voice adapter card can reproduce
sounds from a preset library of 32 instruments. It has a built-in amplifier to drive

Though the Game
Blaster is a new player
in the field, there
seems to be a high
level of industry interest. Of the companies
we talked to, the following plan to support the
board: Dynamix,
Cinemaware, Accolade, Omnitrend,
Lucasfilm Games,
Origin, and Sierra.
Mindscape and
Konami are considering the board but had
not come to any
decisions as of our
call. Creative Labs,
Inc. tells us they are
doing a fourth quarter
promotion with Sierra, featuring the
CMS Game Blaster in the packaging of
Silpheed.
(Continued on page 35)

Review

than previous versions. The Spracklens
continued to meet these challenges with
Sargon III and now, Sargon 4.
Chessmaster 2100 is the recent successor to Chessmaster 2000, both recent
entries in the market of chess programs.
From the humble beginnings of 2K,
these programs have now expanded to
being well over 100K in memory in size
and requiring 384K to run. The game
play of both of these programs will certainly challenge all. The features are what
separates one from the other.

by Roy Wagner

The Match-Up
Let's start with appearances. Both provide 2D and 3D displays. The PC version
of Chessmaster 2100 provides
monochrome, CGA, Tandy, and EGA display. The MAC display of Sargon 4 offers
five different sets of chess pieces that are
not very impressive by Mac standards and
offers an editor to design your own
pieces or enhance those provided.
Chessmaster 2100 provides only one set
of very nice pieces and suggests using
Deluxe Paint II to design new pieces.
The two-dimensional display is much
easier to use with both versions. Unfortunately, Sargon 4's display repaints part
of the board each time that a requestor
window appears over the chess board. I
found this particularly annoying.
Chessmaster 2100's display was clean
and quick.

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

Chessmaster 2100
Apple II, IIGS,
C-64/128, IBM
1-2
C-64/128 ($29.95)
Others ($39.95)
Fidelity
Software Toolworks
Chatsworth, CA

n the beginning, the noble game of
chess could only be played face to
face with another human player. With
the advent of the computer, programmers sought to match human with computer. Unfortunately, this took the largest
of computers to play but a trivial game of
chess. With the introduction of the personal computer the challenge continued,
but with greater success. Back in those
early days of the "home" computer, the
first successful entry was from Peter Jennings. He produced a commercial version a chess program that actually played
a good game of chess in less than 2K of
memory (actually less than 1700 bytes).

I

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

Sargon 4
IBM, Macintosh
$49.95
Dan and Kathe Spracklin
Spinnaker Software
Cambridge, MA

As home computers expanded with
more and more memory to 8K, 16K and
beyond, other programs appeared. The
first was a significantly expanded version
from Peter Jennings called MicroChess
on the Commodore PET 2001. This was
later challenged by Sargon from Dan and
Kathe Spracklen on the TRS-80.
MicroChess, though a good program,
faded away. Sargon II was introduced on
the new Apple II computer and gained in
popularity. From that point to the
present, many other chess programs
have been marketed by other authors,
each with better game play and features

Chessmaster 2100 comes with 110 classic games from 1834 to 1988. Sargon 4
comes with 107 from 1851 to 1980.
These games can be "replayed" as you
watch to help learn more about how the
experts play the game. A brief commentary for each game is included in the
manuals. The moves can be sent to a
printer.
Chessmaster 2100 features a multipart, animated tutorial of basic chess
moves. Sargon 4 comes with a collection
of 45 board positions in five categories;
checkmates, openings, tactics, strategy,
endgames. Text in the manual briefly discusses these setups, but they cannot be
automatically replayed. I found the
tutorial a nice added feature. Both
programs will let you set up any board
positions and save them to disk. In the
case of checkmate problems, both
programs will easily solve them.
I thought it was interesting to read in
the Sargon 4 manual that it "has an opening library of more than 68,000 unique
positions . . . by far the largest opening
collection of opening moves ever supplied with a commercial chess program".
Chessmaster 2100 has a library of over
150,000 positions. I should add that the
packaging for Sargon 4 does claim "an

opening library of
over 145,000
moves—more than
twice as many as
competing
programs".
For the new
chess player, Sargon 4 offers
"Novice" and "Easy
Play" modes.
Chessmaster 2100
offers "Newcomer"
and "Intermediate"
modes with the option to select "Normal", "Coffeehouse" (good & poor), or
"Best" moves. For the advanced player,
both offer a wide variety of timed options
from 2 seconds to an infinite time to
decide on each move. In the case of the
latter or for any move, you can force the
computer to move before the time has
elapsed.
You can also set the depth of moves
(ply) that the computer "looks" for each
move. A ply represents a half move. A
depth of 3 ply means that the computer
looks at its next move (1 ply), your
response to that move (2 ply), and it's
response to that move (3 ply). With Sargon 4, you can set a maximum depth of
20 ply. Chessmaster 2100 will let you
input any number with no indicated maximum. The more ply the longer it must
"think".
Sargon 4 beeps with each move and
you cannot turn it off on the Mac.
Chessmaster 2100 let's you choose to be
silent, have a bell, music, or even a
digitized voice inform you of events. Sargon 4 only offers coordinate notation (e2e4) for moves. Chessmaster 2100 offers
both coordinate and algebraic notation
(e4). With both, you can play against the
computer or it will play against itself. With
Chessmaster 2100, it will referee between you and another human player.
Sargon 4 will switch top and bottom displays, Chessmaster 2100 will rotate
through all four possible positions.
Both games offer hints for the next
move, the option to take back one or
more moves, verification of legal moves,
the option to change sides, and an optional replay from a list of moves.
Chessmaster 2100 has other nice features, including: an analysis of your
moves, opening move practice with
coaching, blindfold chess where the
pieces of one or both sides are hidden
from view, a display of captured pieces,
and a display of threaten pieces.
The most interesting extra with
Chessmaster 2100 is the ability to rate
your play. This is based on the system

in a program. This
is not to say that
Sargon 4 is not a
good purchase. It
is an outstanding
chess playing
partner, but lacks
the features of the
competition.

used by United States Chess Federation.
This is only an approximate and unofficial
rating. It is nice to have this relative
evaluation available to provide some
measure of ones ability.

End Game (The Decision)
When it comes down to making your
move as to which program to buy, I
would say that you will find the features
of Chessmaster 2100 to be the clear winner in the marketplace. Sargon 4 has a
long standing reputation, but that alone
will not give you everything that's wanted

I'm sure many will
wonder how these
programs perform
against one
another. A definitive answer to this
would be very difficult to provide without a great deal of
time to try and find a fair match of options and conditions. I tried several
matches at very quick levels of play and
would have to say in all fairness to both
programs that the results were a draw.
The beginning chess player will find
that Chessmaster 2100 is easier to beat
with it's "Newcomer" and "Coffeehouse"
option and this is something every
beginner's ego needs. There is plenty of
growth and challenge in both of these
games for any average chess player.

Review

he

period between the
end of the RussoJapanese war (1905)
and the Washington Conferences (1921-22) was a
renaissance for naval architecture. Lord Fisher, of
the British Admiralty, saw the
need for modernization
among his large, but aging
fleet. His advocation of scrapping obsolete portions of the
fleet, and focusing new construction upon heavily armored, big gun ships called
Dreadnoughts, was controversial, at best. Despite
debate within the Admiralty,
and arguments that such a
course of action would
provoke an arms race with
Germany (which it did), Lord
Fisher prevailed and naval
warfare was revolutionized.
Battleships became kings of the sea for the next thirty years and,
although they have since relinquished their predominance to
aircraft carriers, remnants of the battleship revolution are still in
service today.
Grand Fleet (OF) derives its name from that of the British Home
Fleet, under the command of Admiral Sir John Jellicoe and based
at Scapa Flow in the Orkney islands. The opposing German
Fleet, called the High Seas Fleet, was based in Jade Bay, and in
the estuaries of the Weser and Elbe rivers. Admiral Friedrich von
Ingenohl commanded the German Fleet from the beginning of
the war until 1915, when he was relieved by Admiral Hugo von
Pohl. The differences between the two fleets, with regard to number and type of combatants, effectiveness of damage control, gunnery accuracy and shell penetration characteristics, combine to
make GFs study of North Sea operations tactically fascinating.

T

Bracketing The Target
To place things in perspective, for those players who are still unfamiliar with Simulations Canada's operating system for historical naval wargames (see the Long Lance review in CGW #48 and
the In Harm's Way review in CGW #57), players assume the role
of echelon commanders onboard the flagships of their respective
fleets. In this capacity, players direct the formation and movement
of the fleet element they command and issue orders to subordinate fleets or light screening forces. Only two orders may be issued each turn thus, given that the number of elements you command in a given scenario may be as high as twenty-five, judicious
selection of what orders to send is one of the major keys to winning the game.
The second crucial skill required for success in GF is the art of
tactical maneuver. Aficionados of warfare in the age of sail will
recognize a maneuver known as capping the tee, wherein a
column of ships passes ahead of their opponents on a perpendicular course in order to bring the most guns to bear on the
enemy at the least risk to one's own ships. In addition to
maneuvering to cap the tee, players may wheel, column turn in
succession or order several other divisional tactics to either
engage or withdraw from the enemy.
Forces are comprised of capital ship squadrons, either Dreadnought or Pre-Dreadnought class, and light squadrons, their
largest ships being cruisers or destroyers. Capital squadrons are
groupings of individual major combatants, each of whom may be
detached to act independently if damaged such that they can no
longer keep up with the remainder of the group. Light squadrons,
however, are not represented as individual units. Instead, these
units are treated as a group with a strength rating equivalent to

Grand
Fleet
by Lt. H.E. Dille

TITLE:

SYSTEMS:
REVIEWED:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

Grand Fleet:
Tactical Naval Combat in
the North Sea, 1914-1918
Amiga, Apple, Atari ST
C-64/128, and IBM
IBM
$60.00
J. Baker
Simulations Canada
Bridgewater, Nova Scotia

the number of ships they
contain. As such, as elements of a light force are
damaged, its combat abilities
are reduced until the unit is
eventually rendered ineffective for continued service.
Light forces are best utilized
as scouts, to relay messages,
to conduct torpedo attacks
or to interpose themselves
between attacking forces
and main body units when
withdrawal is desired. German light forces are more effective at the latter than their
counterparts, due largely to
their ability to produce
smoke screens.

Battle Stations!

Seven scenarios are
provided with the game, including three which represent the Jutland action. Two of these involve the scouting and
main engagements, while the third takes players from the beginning to the end of this twelve hour conflict. As each turn represents two minutes of game time, but may actually take five
minutes of real time, the complete Jutland scenario can be very
tedious to play in its entirety. The seventh scenario is particularly
interesting because it is based on the fictional assumption that
the High Seas Fleet sortied in 1918 to engage British convoys
from Scandinavia. In doing so, of course, they encounter the
Grand Fleet, supported by an American squadron. Finally, when
players tire of the pre-generated scenarios, a powerful scenario
generator is included. Thus, it is easy to recreate WWI engagements that occurred in the Pacific theatre or create as many other
fictional engagements as desired.

Friendly Fire
GE utilizes a laminated map and grease pencils to track the positions of units. But, unlike SimCan's previous releases, some
units are often maneuvering and engaging the enemy off the
map! This is particularly true in the larger engagements like Jutland. Therefore, unless you have a very good conceptual ability
for spatial relationships, the best thing to do is make a larger map
utilizing the coordinates on the one provided as a starting point.
Another concern involves the lack of documenation provided with
regard to "immune zones", those areas where, for a given class of
ship, it is possible to attack the enemy with little fear of damage
from return fire. The program provides you with a recommended
range for the group, but does not account for the differences that
would certainly be a factor in a group of mixed ship types. Finally,
deadtime seems to be more of a factor in GF than it was in prior
releases. The action is still exciting once you get to it, but it certainly would have been nice to have had some manner of acceleration (a la Silent Service) to get to that point.

Returning to Port
GE, despite some minor flaws, is a good treatment of naval warfare during this period. Whereas Battlecruiser (SSI) illustrated
combat between individual platforms more readily, GF emphasizes
command and control, tactical maneuver and decision-making
based on limited intelligence. GE also allows players to modify variables such as British shell penetration and flash protection (i.e. affecting the frequence of magazine explosions) to handicap more
experienced players and provide balance to the scenarios. Overall,
this product is recommended for dedicated wargamers and enthusiasts of the historical period covered, but may prove too involved and time-consuming for "weekend warriors".

CGW's Top 100 Games
See Reader Input Device on page 48

The Categories
Strategy (ST): Games that
emphasize strategic planning
and problem solving.
Simulation (SI): Games based
on first person perspectives of
real world environments.
Adventure (AD): Games that
allow you to take your alter
ego through a storyline or
series of events.
Role-Playing Adventures
(RP): Adventure games that
are based on character
development (usually
involving attributes).
Wargames (WG):
Simulations of historical or
futuristic warfare from a
command perspective.
Action/Arcade (AC):
Computer games that
emphasize hand-eye
coordination and reflexes.

Game Rating Chart

THE HALL OF FAME
The Games In
CGW's Hall
Of Fame Have
Been Highly
Rated By Our
Readers Over
Time. They
Are Worthy Of
Play By All.

Review

by M. Evan Brooks

R

ed Lightning is SSI's latest wargaming release. An operational
land/air simulation of the Central
Front in a prospective European Conflict,
Red Lightning is the obverse to Red
Storm Rising (the book, not the computer game). This is because Red Lightning concentrates on the land battle in
Europe. The maritime struggle, as well as
the battles for Iceland and Norway, impact on the simulation, but are not necessarily decisive (and demand marginal
player involvement).

palette and map background), but would
have eased play considerably.

GAME PLAY
There are some truly interesting and innovative concepts in Red Lightning:
brigade strength is depicted as a
divisional subset with deployment choices
of "forward", "rest" and "reserve" (in order
for a unit to advance after combat, at
least one of its subunits must have a
"reserve" deployment); unit strengths differ markedly based on movement status
(units having time to "dig in" utilize a
much stronger "static" strength); the air
war, composed of air superiority, strike,
reconnaissance and close air support missions is easy to use; and the struggle for
the Atlantic, Iceland and Norway merge
with the main battle, impact upon it, and
yet remain sufficiently isolated as to not
overly draw the player's attention from
the Central Front.

With units representing individual
aircraft and divisions/separate brigades,
the player must either delay the Soviet Offensive until reinforcements can be
brought to bear (NATO) or strive to break
through the NATO defenses and into the
European heartland (Soviet). Each turn
represents twelve hours of real-time and
the game may last either 20 or 60 turns
(player choice), unless a decisive victory is
achieved earlier. The map uses "
wargame-standard" hexagons, each of which represents a 25-km distance. The entire map
depicts a geographic region from Poland
(east) to Benef (
Belgium-Netherlands-France) (west) and Denmark (north) to
Austria (south).

DOCUMENTATION
The documentation is up to usual SSI
standards, but be certain to read the
material carefully! There are numerous
new concepts which require complete
comprehension and they are mentioned
quite cursorily in the rulebook, e.g. Victory Conditions are totally dependent
upon morale. Morale, in turn, is dependent on battlefield conditions, casualties
and seizure of key terrain. Know the interrelationships of these factors and what is
critical in winning.
The Order of Battle is included as an
ASCII-file. The print-out runs well over 30
pages, but it is essential to player success. Even more important, the Order of
Battle includes all units and subunits.
Nowhere is there a succinct listing of
units actually appearing on the map. This
requires extensive editing of the ASCIIfile. In order to save CGW readers some
time and trouble, the unit order of battle
is reprinted herein (see offer on the following page).

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
REVIEWED:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
PUBLISHER:

Red Lightning
Atari ST, IBM
IBM (with 386, VGA)
1-2
$59.95
Strategic Simulations, Inc.
Sunnyvale, CA

Yet, despite these appreciated concepts,
the user interface is awkward, clumsy,
and annoying enough to deter all but the
most dedicated gamer from penetrating
its secrets. "Never in the history of wargaming has so little interface led so many
to so much frustration". The ST-version
utilizes a mouse, which does alleviate
some of the problem, but serious flaws
remain.
Each turn, the player must access the

Info Menu—composed of the strategic
GRAPHICS
The map and units are distinctively
colored and differing types of terrain are
easy to distinguish. The screen displays
an area 14 by 7 hexes (c. 4% of the total
map area). A map card portrays the entire field, although national boundaries
are not easily discernible.
The Soviet Forces are portrayed in red,
while NATO Forces utilize blue. Because
it is relatively difficult to determine which
units belong to what corps, however, this
reviewer would have appreciated a differentiation of colors by nationality (e.g.
blue for British, green for American, etc.).
This should only be true for the player
side (since he would not know the composition of the enemy) and could admittedly be difficult (given the computer

report, political report, full hex report,
weather report and supply net, and the
Orders Menu—composed of air operations, special operations, para/amphib,
and movement. Unfortunately, where the
basic premise of Red Lightning is to emphasize corps integrity (i.e. units fight better when they are in geographic proximity
to their corps headquarters), the user interface makes corps cohesion difficult to
attain and maintain. Unit movement allows one to move, but there is no "next"
key which will access the next unit in the
Order of Battle. In fact, one must "escape" to the Info Menu and go to the
"full hex report" in order to determine the
location and strength of the various
units; subunit deployment decisions (forward/reserve/rest) are made here. The
"full hex report" procedure is time-consuming and laborious. While a "next" key
does exist here, the subsequent unit's

location is noted only by map coordinates; referring back to the map forces
one back to the first unit accessed. Thus,
one must use the map card or a substitute to write
down the locations of the
various units in
order to utilize
corps battlefield integrity.
Also, as one attempts to move, it
is important to
determine
strength and
morale. But these
features can only
be accessed from
the Info Menu,
thereby compelling the player to
do a massive escape/access/escape/access between menus in order to properly
"play" the simulation. Movement is composed of "maneuver" and "travel".
Maneuver is limited to two hexes of movement and is used for combat operations;
it does not actually occur until the combat portion of the turn. Travel allows
more flexibility, although Red Lightning
does not allow one to retract a travel
order once it has been executed. Thus,
since travel orders
are executed immediately, and utilize
an IBM-keyboard
movement of 1-2-3,
7-8-9, an inadvertent keystroke can
easily ruin a game
turn and destroy an
hour of play. The
player is left with the
key decision as to
whether to return to
the last saved position or simply allow
the genesis of
defeat to be attributable to keyboard "stumbleitis".
SSI has dealt with
this situation earlier
and its civil war
simulations generally allow one to
retract the move, albeit with the loss of
some operation
points. A similar
treatment would
have been appreciated here.
Air operations are
critical, but strike
missions are not
well-depicted. Air superiority and close

support can well be factored into the
grand scheme of things; however, when
one executes a strike mission, one is told
of which unit has been the subject of the

strike. The flaw is that this is by text only,
and the strike is not shown on the map.
Thus, unless one quickly writes down
what units have been hit, he will have no
idea of what has happened. Target
analysis and interpretation are not
facilitated thereby.
Intelligence gathering is very important,
although its results are limited to simple
reporting that an enemy unit exists in a
certain hex (i.e. no strength data is

given). Granted that military intelligence
often acts as an oxymoron, this seems an
unfair implementation of an axiom that is
not always true by definition.
The side theaters
(the Atlantic,
Iceland and Norway) are critical
when considering
possible NATO
reinforcements.
This reviewer advocates quick reinforcement of Norway with two or
three airborne
brigades. They
may well swing
the tide. Further,
if Norway is safe,
the Battle of the
Atlantic and any
possible invasion of Iceland is rendered
NATO-favorable. However, if Norway falls
to the Soviets on the first turn (before
any reinforcements have a chance to arrive—a 1-in-33 chance), this reviewer
recommends a quick surrender and
rebooting the simulation. Why start out
with an albatross? Enough will be flying
toward you, anyway.
In gameplay, maintain corps integrity!
Corps headquarter and artillery units not
scheduled to
maneuver will contribute 1/2 of their
strengths to units
within 2 hexes.
NATO must take advantage of massive
artillery defensive
fires in order to slow
down the Soviet
onslaught; similarly,
the Soviets can use
this to crack a wellentrenched position
by overwhelming
fires.

CONCLUSIONS
Red Lightning has
some interesting
game concepts.
However, despite
this interest, the
awkwardness of the
user interface made
the game a "chore"
to this reviewer. The
mouse-supported
ST version is not as
flawed, but the overall ease of use is
sorely lacking in
what is supposed to
be software entertainment

Review

Fantasy
Aflame
SSG's "Fire King"
by Douglas Seacat
here's foulness afoot in fantasy land again. The Fire

King, one of the four elemental Mages of power, has

been murdered. The Wind Mage, Earth Mage, Water
Mage, and Fire King used their vast powers in balance to
keep the land in harmony and delightful bliss. With the Fire
King's death, however, everything has
gone wrong. In the
town catacombs,
where his highness's
royal corpse lies, a
Dark Beast has
taken over, killing
any who venture
near and sealing the
town off from outside aid or escape.
Alas, if only a hero
were to venture into
the catacombs and
save our poor town!
Fire King is the
newest game by
SSG, and is in many
ways a deceptive
product. From all accounts the game
would seem to be just another
Fire King
TITLE:
C-64
SYSTEMS:
basic RPG from the cast of
PRICE:
$39.95
many which have come before
DESIGNERS:
Stephen Lewis & Stephen Wang
PUBLISHER:
SSG
it. The packaging, the blurb on
Walnut Creek, Ca.
the back, and the premise itself
can easily lead a person to this
conclusion. In truth, however, while Fire King does have
many RPG elements, it is primarily an action game. The synthesis of action and RPG is an interesting, if not altogether
successful one.
In the game, the player can choose one of six different
"heroes", each with his/her own particular blend of attributes.
There are three of these: Armor, Strength, and Magic. While
all three come into play during the game, it is important to
remember that this is, despite an appearance to the contrary, an action game and, therefore, Strength is the most important characteristic. There are thousands of lurking creatures in this game, and the player that can kill the most has
the best chance of survival. Also, since there are some very
nice offensive spells, a strong Magical ability is vital. Armor
isn't nearly as important in comparison; if the player can kill
all his opponents before they even touch him, why bother
with defense? A good choice of characters is "Shadow" who
has strong offensive power, and good magical capabilities.
The actual game system is a close twin to the Gauntlet arcade/computer game, since the player shoots a crossbow

with endless ammunition. Enemy creatures are equally endless, arising from monster generators which must be
destroyed to gain any respite.
In addition to his crossbow, the Hero has pockets, each
able to hold up to nine of the same object. There are many
objects to be found throughout the game, such as keys
(each time one is used, they disappear), spells, and magic
boots. Eating food replenishes the Hero's health, and finding
objects such as belts, helms, and wands increases the Hero's
Strength, Armor, and Magic respectively.
What sets the game apart from Gauntlet is a more complete Fantasy plot and some complex puzzles. While most
RPGs have stronger plots than Fire King, it is an exceptionally detailed one for an action game. Most of the puzzles aren't
overwhelming, but require logical reasoning and even
(Gasp!), some note taking. This puts the game in a different
league than the more bash-n-smash Gauntlet. There are still
plenty of creatures to hack apart, but simply running around
killing things won't get the player anywhere.
At the beginning of the game, the player must explore the
town (it's really a castle, but why be picky?) and then descend into the catacombs below to find out the secret of the
Fire King's corpse. This introductory quest is a good starting
point. It allows the player to learn game play, figure out a
few rudimentary puzzles, and increase his combat proficiency. The puzzle itself is very easy, since there are clues scattered everywhere, and the documentation even provides a
step by step guide through this area if the player is completely stumped. Once the secret has been found, the player
must depart the town and head for the Fire King's castle,
and into the heart of the game, where the puzzles become
much more difficult.

Feeling the Warmth (Good Points)
The plot of the game is one of its most outstanding features. I enjoy a good exciting round with a joystick as much
as any action-fanatic, but it seems most games of this genre
don't even try to have a plot. They use ridiculous backgrounds and stories as convenient excuses to try out some
new graphics or joystick maneuvers. In Fire King, it is impossible to get anywhere without paying some attention to the
story line, as well as the various puzzles relating to the plot.
Secondly, I think that this particular synthesis of arcade/RPG is a good idea, and a nice change of pace. While
some games such as Fairy Tale, and Dungeon Master have
used an action oriented interface, they were RPGs first, with
only secondary action elements. In Fire King, the exact opposite is true. While the entire plot, and most of the puzzles
are heavily borrowed from RPGs, the game is an action
game first and an RPG second. When hordes of attacking
creatures pounce on the Hero, with an endless series of
glowing bolts firing from his crossbow, there can be no
doubt that this is an action game. The RPG elements only
provide a path for the action vehicle to travel.

Fanning the Flames (Bad Points)
Ironically, one of my complaints about Fire King directly relates to the synthesis which I admire. While playing the
game, I got the feeling that the programmers hadn't been
entirely sure which way they wanted to go. Did they want an
action game with RPG elements, or an RPG with some action? I think they eventually decided to go with the former,
but didn't commit themselves fully. I wish they had gone a little further in providing a solid action game first, and then
souped it up with the fantasy plot. As it is, while the plot
remains very good, the action game itself is lacking. The con-

trols aren't entirely smooth, the enemies are very stupid, and
there is little of the sense of fast-paced excitement which
makes an action game fun. The idea is definitely a good
one, but the execution falls flat.
An example of this is the awkward way the game handles
the "pockets". The player must stop movement, bring up the
pocket display, choose which spell he wants to use, and
then use it. All this goes on while the enemy monsters are
bashing away at the player, who can lose valuable health
points in the process. It would have been much better if the
player could instantly hit a key to enact a spell or item,
without the awkward interruption. There could be a separate
key for each pocket, thus allowing the player complete control along with speed. The process the game currently uses
wouldn't be bad in a slow-paced RPG, but in a real-time action arcade game, it is almost unbearable.
These two smaller complaints tie in to my largest problem
with the game, which is the overall "feel" of the product. The
entire game just seems to have a rough edge, as if it weren't
finished yet. The graphics are alright, but don't stand out,
even for the C-64. Many of the color choices are such that
some characters and items almost blend in with the background, making game play a strain upon the eyes. This
roughness extends to the action interface as discussed
above, the documentation, the packaging, and also to the
save mechanism, which is very crude. None of these items

are overwhelming in themselves, but together they take away
from the enjoyment of the product.

Conclusion
All things considered, I must
still recommend
Fire King, although it is with
reservations. The
plot alone is
enough to make
the game a worthy product, and
the puzzles are
an added treat.
However, this
game is definitely not for everyone. Strict RPG players should
stay away unless they also enjoy action games and action
fanatics need to be aware that the graphics aren't the best
available and the interface can be awkward. On the other
hand, Fire King will appeal to those garners who want more
intelligence and mental difficulty in their action games. Fire
King shows much promise, and is a good game; it's just too
bad the same thought didn't go into the action play as went
into the great plot or Fire King would be a first rate game.

Game Hints

"The first step of a
journey is always
the longest one."
—old Chinese
proverb, probably
attributed to
Confucius.

A
TICKET TO RIDE
Steps Along Infocom's "Journey"

n this case, your
first step is briskly
walking to your
nearest computer
store and ordering
this exceptional
game. After that,
your steps become much shorter as you
carefully tread through the many byways
of this game.

I

Frequent "Save Game"s are definitely in
order here (suggested number 20+).
When you get to the end game, you will
send money in to the magazine to renew
your subscription for just this one hint
alone!
Astrix Tours offers a rare treat for the
jaded traveler. Instead of having to decide
whether to go to the mountains or the
seashore this year, go to both! Astrix
Tours has booked you into the sleepy
mountain town of Lavos as your first stop
on the Journey. Be sure to stock up on
provisions and examine the AAA guides
(Astrix's Aerie Asylum) to be found inside
Webba's store. Free drinks are available
in the local Tavern where the friendly natives will beguile you with fierce stares
and cold shoulders . . . of meat. The disreputable louse-infested fellow in the
corner is your native guide. No expense
has been spared (literally none!) to find
such an experienced man who is willing
to sacrifice his life to lead you had such a
perilous trip. Why the last four trips he
led never had any complaints. Of course,
they still haven't been heard from, either.
Without his guidance, the party is surely
doomed to perish. With his help, you still
have an excellent chance of messing up,
but at least it wouldn't be his fault!
"You take the high road and I'll take
the low and you'll be at Astrix's before
me."—popular song of the mountain
people.
Don't feed the
roving bands of
bandits. Be sure
to Scout around
wherever possible in your
travels. If your
eyes get smokefilled, remember
that "Truthfulness is next to
Godliness". Our

by Roe Adams

tour goes through the mineral rich
streambeds which are quite dangerous in
the Spring when snow is melting high in
the mountains. Be sure to visit the bathing beauties around the pool and collect
some of the quaint native handicrafts.
The culmination of our first day's travel is
dinner with your Tour Director, the
famous Astrix himself. Despite all appearances to the contrary, he is IN. The
party needs to learn how to see what is already in front of them.
Day two delves into the home of the
friendly Dwarfs. The view from the towers
is spectacular, while the subterranean
vaults hold many surprises for the unwary. Through the gate, a brisk stroll will
enable the party to meet some of the
local fauna and talking flora. Late afternoon tea is scheduled at the elf village, although the temperature may be a little
toasty. Back to Astrix's for another fine
dinner and spellbinding tale of high adventure.
You must get up early for the Northern
route, but take heart because the forest
is fun-filled, indeed!
If you know how to get around the natives, you can have a spiritual experience
that you can tell your friends about for
years. A visit to the mine digging will be
most illuminating. Be sure to ask the old
miner for tips on prospecting. Don't
scare him as he is a recluse and very shy.
Be very careful to stay to the main areas
or it will be the death of you.
After lunch, the Southern route winds
through the woods. This is a good time
for individual sidetrips. Many interesting
places await the cautious traveler. At the
old mill, learn to operate ancient equipment. The tattered manual reads, "Now
you see it, now
you don't!".
The dilapidated
castle is
reputed to be
haunted. The
ghost's jokes
are said to be
earthy. Do be

careful in the woods as this is a bad
time for allergies. A must stop is
a local tribal village where the dinner
cuisine is four star. Join Astrix for an after
dinner nightcap and hear his tall yarns
about the traveling anvil salesman.
Day four brings the seashore. Your
party will travel to the quaint seaside
town of Zan. Along the way inclement
weather may speed your travel. Zan is
famous for its Curio Shop and Tavern.
The Tavern is a very rowdy place, so try
to be heard but not seen. The Zan Inn
actually achieved an unheard of 3 stars,
but the inspector was rumored to be currently vacationing on the Misty Isle. Do
take care while in Zan not to run afoul of
the local authorities. The Zan jail is supposed to be escapeproof. The tour party
has a choice of ships available to suit any
mood, so visit the wharf area and meet
the different Captains. Each Captain has
something quite different to offer the discerning traveler. Costs are commensurate with services!
Ah, the joys of relaxing on the high
seas. Feel the zephyr winds wafting
through your hair. Enjoy the gentle rock
ing of the waves. A truly memorable experience! All too soon you will arrive at
the Misty Isle where you will face one of
the greatest challenges of your life.
Only Astrix Tours can offer such diversity of travel vistas. Sign up now for a trip
that you will always be glad you had
taken. Discounts are given for large
groups and special musing are available
for repeat clients so that they can learn
to maximize their adventuring. Remember, Astrix Soars!

Taking A Peek
(Continued from page 6)

Conversions
Received
Apache Strike (Activision) C-64, IBM
Battletech (Infocom) Atari ST
Bubble Bobble (Taito) Apple ll
California Challenge (Test Drive II
Scenery Disk) (Accolade) Apple IIGS
Caveman Ugh-Lympics (EA) IBM
Decisive Battles of the American Civil
War: Volume Two (SSG) IBM
Dr. Doom's Revenge! (Paragon) C-64
The Duel: Test Drive II
(Accolade) Apple IIGS
Echelon (Access) IBM
Heroes of the Lance (SSI) C-64
Jack Nicklaus' Greatest 18
(Accolade) Apple IIGS
Jack Nicklaus' Major Courses Disk
(Accolade) C-64
Journey (Infocom) Apple ll
Might and Magic ll (New World) IBM
Rocket Ranger (Cinemaware)
Apple IIGS & Atari ST
Shangai (Activision) Mac
Shufflepuck Cafe (Broderbund) Mac
Space Harrier (Mindscape) IBM
Speedball (Cinemaware) C-64

Tech-Cessories
990 East Rogers Circle #2
Boca Raton, FL 33487

Taito
267 West Esplanade
North Vancouver
B.C., Canada V7M 1A5
QIX: Here is the personal computer
version of the game which once kept
many college students from their texts in
the early eighties. MIT and other "techie"
institutions once held a tournament to
see who could best engage the Qix, a
particularly nasty computer virus, in
geometrical warfare. The player's goal is
to encircle territory with their marker,
entrapping the Qix in a prison of
polygons, while avoiding the deadly
touch of the Qix and its evil minions, the
Sparx. C-64 ($29.95). Circle Reader Service #6.

COUNT DISK COMPUTER DART
GAME: If you enjoyed shooting darts at
the TV screen as a kid, then perhaps
this product has some appeal. This
"game" package includes a 9mm Baretta replica dart gun, six darts, and five picture files. the files include a selection of
targets including a standard dart board,
dart baseball, an executive decision
maker, and a shooting gallery of Count
Disk and friends. Just load up, lick your
dart, and shoot ol' Count Disk. These
static pic files even support VGA
graphics if you're willing to slobber-up
your high-res hardware. IBM ($19.95).
Circle Reader Service #7.

Virgin Mastertronic
18001 Cowan St., Suite A
Irvine, CA 92714
RISK: The classic board game comes
to the computer, complete and with
some new variations. Options include
the regular game, a short game, and an
objective-card game which gives the
players missions to fulfill in order to win
the game. From one to six can play. C64 ($29.99). Circle Reader Service #8.

The Supercars (Test Drive II Car
Disk) (Accolade) Apple IIGS
Take Down (Gamestar) IBM
War In Middle Earth
(Melbourne House) C-64
Where In Europe is Carmen
Sandiego? (Broderbund) Apple II
Zork Zero (Infocom) Apple ll

(Continued from page 19)

Garners'
Guide To
Sound
Boards
Coming Soon to A PC near you .. .
Creative Labs, Inc. has announced the
fall release of a new sound card, to be
called the Killer Kard. The new card will
boast the 12 voice stereo output included on the Game Blaster plus the 11
voice output included on the AdLib card.
It will also sport a library of digitized
sounds and special effects, and 23 synthesized voices. It will have the ability to
digitize sounds or speech input through a
microphone, using DMA for speed and
compression algorithms to conserve
memory. And that's not all! The board

will sport a speaker connection with a
built-in amplifier, a microphone jack with
amplifier, an analog joystick port,
and a MIDI interface. The 'Killer
Kard' is supposed to be out in October with the suggested retail under
$200.
So who's the leader in this pack?
Well, the Roland MT-32 is definitely
the performance leader, though the
price tag makes it out of reach for
most. The AdLib has the most support, due primarily to the fact that it's
been on the market longest and its
price is in the medium range. The Innovation is the budget choice, but
you know the old saying . . . The
CMS board seems the best buy, combining quality sound with strong support for a decent price. But before
we announce a winner, we must
wait until the release of the Creative
Labs 'Killer Kard'. If all is as
promised, this card may be just what
the market demands. It's ability to
use both the AdLib and CMS drivers,
it's long list of features, and it's mid
range price may find a nice market
niche. Until then, we'll have keep our
ears open.

Review

Star Saga II:
Mankind Strikes Back

T

by Vince DeNardo & Chris Lombardi

he ominous approach of the survey line of Clathran battle and colony ships was sweeping through the galaxy,
identifying, classifying, and exterminating all in its path.
Known collectively as the "Clathran Menace", it meant many
things to many people. To most of the human race, it meant
nothing, as they were being purposely kept in the dark by
their "superiors", so
as not to cause
any undue panic.
What good was it
to evacuate a city
in the face of impending disaster if
the only road out
of town wasn't
finished?
To Professor Lee
Dambroke, Dean of
the Department of
Xenobiology on the
university world of
Harvard, the
"Clathran Menace"
was a matter of
science and
knowledge; the line
must be breached and stopped, or
TITLE:
Star Saga: Two:
the darkness of ignorance and
The Clathran Menace
SYSTEMS:
IBM & Apple IIGS
stagnation would fall over the
# PLAYERS:
1-6
galaxy for all eternity.
PRICE:
$79.95
To Laran Darkwatch, mystic DisDESIGNERS:
Rick Dutton
Walt Freitag
ciple of the Final Church of Man,
Andrew Greenberg
it was a question of faith; faith in
Mike Massimilla
PUBLISHER:
MasterPlay
the ultimate triumph of good over
Tampa, EL
evil, faith in the Founders of the
Final Church, and faith in their
vision of mankind's place in the Cosmos.
To M.J. Turner, the top pilot in the Space Patrol, or the
whole galaxy for that matter, it was a question of pride; pride
in the abilities of mankind to overcome all obstacles in pursuit of its ultimate destiny ... to rule the stars.
All were impressive goals, solid tenets upon which to build
a society and a glittering future. Or were they merely brittle
conceits, ready to crumble at the first pressure from the
"Clathran Menace"?
So begins Star Saga:Two The Clathran Menace, the middle
game of the planned trilogy from the folks at Masterplay. Just
as Star Saga:One Beyond the Boundary took interactive
science fiction storytelling beyond the boundaries of the genre,
so does Star Saga:Two The Clathran Menace take us into
dark,foreboding, and menacing territory; unknown dangers in
an unknown future.
As in the first game (reviewed in CGW #50, pgs. 39 & 40)
Star Saga is an interactive novel, played through a stack of 14
booklets containing over 50,000 paragraphs of excellent fiction. The computer program is non-graphic, the only visuals
provided are a glossy, color map of the Galactic Arm, colored

stones as player markers, and the players' imaginations. The
computer's role in the game is akin to a dungeon master in
live role playing games. The Computer Game Master(CGM)
keeps track of player movement, trades, combat, and the like,
doling out paragraph numbers as the situation requires.
The game begins with each character (from one to six can
play) on the edge of an unexplored section of the universe
called the Galactic Arm, each with an individual goal to accomplish throughout the course of the game. From there the
characters traverse the Arm, explore the unknown, discover exotic locales and uncover strange alien civilizations, in order to
acquire new info and weaponry that will aid them on their individual quests. The real joy of the game is in discovering and
exploring each planet, experiencing their individual societies,
and learning their origins, history, and idiosyncrasies. Hats off
to Sheila Greenberg for writing some terrific prose!
Along with exploration, there is a very distinct economic
phase in the game. The Galactic Arm is a rough section of the
universe and even the most passive and peaceful of characters
must be armed to the teeth. This requires the acquisition of a
myriad of weapons, defenses, and abilities, which of course
must be purchased, sometimes with money or goods, sometimes with blood. The galactic economy operates on the barter
system and most planets produce a commodity that they will
happily trade for a commodity in demand. Success in this
phase of the game requires a bit of trader's savvy, with trading
information becoming a valuable commodity in its own right.
Acquiring that neat Phase Sword and Discontinuity Wave Generator you discovered on Middle Rialla will require a little (or a
lot of) time, organization, and a trading drone. Trading drones
travel instantly to any planet in the Galactic Arm and allow you
to trade with its market. Drones are a must and with their help
you can eventually build up your ship and personal weapons to
a respectable level. The economic phase has been changed
very little from game one. A few of the common trade items
found in Star Saga One have been dropped and some new
ones have been added, but the process of trading and building
weapons and skills has been left virtually intact.
Combat is a very important aspect of this game and is, unfortunately, completely handled by the computer. Ship and personal weaponry are both divided into six categories: three for attack and three for defense. The computer evaluates your opponent and chooses your best weapons and defenses against
that opponent. It then gives a score for each category and
adds them. If your total for the three attack categories adds to
one hundred, the attack is successful; if lower, it fails. It's very
simple, though far from perfect. There is no way to know what
weapons will be effective against a certain opponent. If you are
defeated in hand-to-hand combat by a Keresk, for instance, do
you buy a Stun Field or a Phase Sword to improve your combat score? There's no way to gauge weapon effectiveness so
players usually end up spending the time to buy both. When
we played Star Saga One, we felt that the combat could have
been fleshed out much more without changing the balance of
the game too much. In Star Saga Two, there is much more
combat than in One, and the frustrations of not being able to
pick and choose weapons and tactics appears magnified due
to the increased incidences of conflict. The current game also
doesn't seem to provide the players with an opportunity to use
non-violent skills to maneuver around opponents as much as
Star Sage One did. (Although, if you think of the universe in
terms of the Old West, the Bible-toting preachers of those days
also toted a six gun or two.)
Our group began with three players and fell to two for the last
half of the game. It seems that a three-man game plays nicely,
maintaining an interesting level of interaction while allowing
the game to progress at a fairly smooth pace. As in Star Saga
One, if a member of the play group is unable to play a session,
the game has a suspend feature which enables you to lock the

player out of the game and resume playing with the remaining
characters. The "locked-out" character is frozen in time, relatively unaffected by the other players' actions until logged back on.
There is a major difference in Star Saga Two from the Star
Saga One, however. The driving force in Star Saga Two is the
advance of the Clathran Survey Line, inexorably moving forward, sweeping up worlds, and closing off portions of the
game to players. Everyone must eventually penetrate that line
and, if you skip too many sessions and try to get back in the
game, you may find yourself too far behind! The solution, of
course, is to play every session and, in all honesty, the addiction of the game makes that fairly easy.
Though this is a great game, our play group did find a few
faults worthy of mention. Be warned that the game is very directive. One player felt it so linear that it destroyed the role-playing
element in the game for him. On the other hand, it's pretty impossible to make a game with this broad a scope and not use
some traffic copping to get people where they ultimately need
to be. There's enough to do, and, after the Clathrans have
been dealt with, enough time to go back and experience all the
adventures that time necessitated skipping the first time
around; and players will want to go back and explore further.
That's a real testimony to the scope and power of the prose.
After finishing Star Saga One in a four man group, I went back
and played a different character through solitaire. What I lost in
surprise was more than made up for in the richness of the additional experiences I encountered. It also broke up the long
year's wait between games One and Two.
The game pacing is somewhat uneven. Our first session had
one player reading so much fiction that he had to skim a few
paragraphs to keep the game moving. The next session, he
was trading and had maybe five paragraphs to read the whole
night. The game phases can be so distinct that it seems somewhat schizophrenic at times. This can be a problem if a few

players are exploring and have lots to read while others are
trying to move across the game board and trade.
The game breaks into three phases. There is the initial phase
of exploration and information gathering, followed by a long
period of trading and building which climaxes with the successful (hopefully) breach of the Survey Line. That is followed by
the final phase of exploration leading up to the climactic battles
for control of the Galactic Arm. The middle phase of trading
and building is much longer in Star Saga II than in its predecessor. The Clathrans are very tough and that damn Survey Line
keeps sweeping forward. This is a much tougher and
dangerous game than the first. Caveat Emptor! No quicheeaters need apply for this one.
Despite the few faults, Star Saga Two is a wonderfully written
and produced game that can really glue you to the computer.
It's a dangerous game in that you can easily and unwittingly
find yourself playing into the early morning hours, every session! It is tough, and frustrating at times, but a very refreshing
break from standard RPG/Adventures. The Masterplay people
have taken another step toward creating a game that truly captures the storytelling capabilities of the computer.
How does Star Saga Two stack up against its predecessor?
Just as "The Empire Strikes Back" was a turning away from the
far-reaching wonders and anticipated excitement of exploring
the "Star Wars" universe, to the darker and grimmer task of exploring self and combatting the enemy, so too does Star Saga
Two turn in towards solving the Clathran Menace. Until that
major obstacle is overcome, all else fades away into possible
projections of a dark future.
The journey you make in Star Saga Two will take you
through more twisted landscapes and into more hostile encounters than ever before, but oh what a ride you'll experience!
It's definitely an "E-Ticket" in computer games today.

Review

The Dream

Linking Up for
Tournament Golf

Approaching the 1st
tee at The Country
Club, the host of the
1988 U.S. Open, I
begin to notice the butterflies forming in my
stomach. By the time I
reach the tee of this
455 yard dogleg left, I
see numerous trees
partially obscuring
several large sand
traps along the left
side of the fairway. I
realize that if I follow
the safer route and
play the ball to the
right, I could be leaving myself a difficult
240 yard shot to an extremely undulated
green, guarded by two
bunkers in the front
and surrounded by
deep rough. From this
distance, the likelihood
of stopping the ball
close to the pin would
be minimal. In fact, failing to execute the perfect shot from this distance would mean
a difficult third shot from deep rough or
sand which would probably result in a
bogey for the hole. Thus, I take aim
down the middle and plan to draw the
ball around the corner and toward the
sand traps on the left. This approach, if
performed correctly, will set up an easier
approach shot to the green and a possible birdie. Careful not to overswing, I
meet the ball squarely, sending it flying
straight down the middle of the fairway.
this is not what I had planned, but at
least it's not sailing off to the right. Luck
is with me though, as the ball lands and
takes a favorable bounce toward the left.
When it finally stops rolling, I am left with
a simple approach shot to the green
which I execute perfectly. All that remains
is a testy five foot putt, which I sink easily
for a birdie. The tournament has begun.
Fantasy, or reality?

Reality
What true golf fanatic has not imagined
himself competing on tour each week at
the major golf courses around the
country? The idea of being able to drive
a perfect tee shot, 270 yards down the
middle of the fairway, and follow it by a
240 yard shot to within a foot of the pin
for an easy tap-in eagle, can have an invigorating effect on one's psyche. Of
course, a true hacker like myself realizes
that such fantasies are never going to be
a reality. Instead, I have had to resign
myself to the armchair in front of the

By David S. Stevens

the ball and where to
land it on the fairway
in order to obtain the
best approach shots.
When shooting at the
pin, one also has to be
keenly aware of the
slopes and contours
found on each green.
Landing in the wrong
location can often
make the difference between a birdie and
three putting.

Computer
Sports Network
While Mean 18 is an
excellent golf simulation, golf is more enjoyable when opponents
TITLE:
Tournament Golf
are involved in fierce,
SYSTEMS:
IBM
friendly competition. If
with Hayes Compatible Modem
Unlimited
# PLAYERS:
you can get together a
PRICE:
$49.95
foursome, you'll find
Packaged w/ Mean 18 ($69.95)
Course Disks ($9.95)
playing a round of
Weekly Tournaments ($2-$3)
computer
golf on
DESIGNER:
Scott Brown
some of the better golf
PUBLISHER:
Computer Sports Network
Houston, Texas
courses extremely enjoyable. However, at
times, finding opboob tube. There, each weekend, I can
ponents can be difficult and simply playfantasize about my abilities while I admire
ing against the computer can become
others consistently executing perfect
boring. Enter Computer Sports Network.
shots. That was until the advent of the
By using their Tournament Golf propersonal computer.
gram and a modem, one can compete in
Now, each week I find myself teeing off
a nationwide golf tournament each week.
on some of the most challenging golf
One simply runs the Tournament Golf
courses around the world and competing
program. The program automatically
nationally against hundreds of other
dials and connects the user through the
frustrated golfers for "funny money". It is
network. In less than a minute on the
all possible because of a company called
average, one can access CSN's host comComputer Sports Network (CSN). They
puter. Once on-line, one can access a
brought together the personal computer,
bulletin board which contains pertinent ina national computer network and
formation about the tour and other items
Accolade's Mean 18 to create exciting
of interest to the players. One can also
tournaments where one can compete
check the results and statistics of past
each week without ever having to leave
tournaments, as well as the leaderboard
the house.
of the current tournament. There is also
the capability of downloading golf courTips From A Would-be Pro
ses and other programs from CSN's host
computer to your own. Finally, one has
Mean 18 is an award winning, three
the option of participating in that week's
dimensional golf simulation which has
tournament.
been reviewed in previous issues of this
publication (numbers 33 & 46). The
The golf tournaments are played off-line
game follows the actual rules of golf and
and follow authentic PGA rules. Four
has incorporated nearly all the features
rounds must be completed any time
and challenges that one would expect to
during the week. The only stipulation is
find on an actual golf course, except for
that once any single round is started, it
maybe the weather.
must be completed without interruption.
To score well in this simulation requires
In other words, if halfway through a
that one develop a well-thought-out plan
round you decide to turn off your comof attack for each hole. One cannot simpputer and depart the course for the day,
ly just go out and slug away. The risks
you will be disqualified. Since each round
and benefits of each shot have to be
lasts approximately thirty minutes, this
weighed against one another. Decisions
should not pose a problem.
must be made as to which way to work
(Continued on page 43)

Game Hints

Warning: Although "The Scorpion's Tale" is a warm and
comfortable tavern of the mind with a nice cozy fire of
vibrant images, our resident storyteller conjures up illuminating hints about games. If the gentle reader eschews
hints, let him beware!
Ahhh, autumn again! One of my favorite times of year (actually,
any season except
summer is ok with
me . . . grin). Fred
is back from the
Grues Convention
and ready to serve
your favorite
beverage. We have
a special on ale
this month (for
As Told By Scorpia
those of drinking
age), to get you in
the mood for a little trip through Merrie Old England
during the time of
knights and
chivalry.

will have himself crowned on Christmas Day at noon. That's only
three days off, so Arthur doesn't have much time.
Once the churchyard is deserted again, Arthur can start moving
around. The first place he should move to is Merlin's cave outside
the town (Merlin told him to, anyway). However, he has to watch
out for the Invisible Knight. Any time Arthur steps into the
Meadow, the
Knight comes
along and snarfs
TITLE:
Arthur:
The Quest for Excalibur
anything Arthur is
SYSTEMS:
Apple II (w/ 128K)
carrying.
Macintosh (with 512K)

Scorpion's
Tale

"Arthur" is based
on the King Arthur
and the Round
Table legends, of
course. As you
might expect, the
game deals with
his getting Excalibur from the
stone to prove his
right to rule
England. Since, in
legend, Arthur
simply walked up
and pulled the
sword from the
stone, a few (well,
more than a few)
changes needed to
be made.
The game has online hints, but the
best way to play is
with them off. However, you should bring them up, at least once,
to read the notes. They provide some interesting background information to the game.
Basically, Arthur must prove he has what it takes to be King.
This involves solving a lot of puzzles and accumulating a whole
bunch of points: quest points, experience points, wisdom points,
and chivalry points. When he has a high enough score in each
category, he can pull the sword free and be acclaimed King.
It all starts in a churchyard where Arthur first tries, unsuccessfully, to pull the sword out. Merlin appears and gives him a pep talk,
then vanishes. Soon after, the soldiers of the evil King Lot arrive
on the scene. As there's a curfew on these days, Arthur needs to
get out of sight, fast . . . or the game will be a short one.
Arthur watches while Lot has his soldiers cart off the stone,
sword and all. Obviously, Lot is up to no good here. The next
morning, Lot appears on the churchyard steps, apparently wielding Excalibur. After giving a hyped-up talk to the assembled
peasantry (the man definitely has a way with words), he says he

REVIEWED:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

Supports Mac II Color
Apple II
Apple II ($39.95)
Macintosh ($49.95)
Bob Bates
Infocom
Cambridge, MA

Yes, it's that tired
old thief routine
that went out (or
should have) with
Zork I. Unfortunately, you'll have to
put up with it here,
at least until Arthur
finds the means of
thwarting the
thefts. Until then,
Arthur should avoid
going into the
meadow carrying
anything of importance as much as
possible. So, Arthur should drop
what he's carrying
before leaving
town (you have to
go to the Meadow
to reach Merlin).

At the cave, Merlin gives Arthur the
ability to change
into five animal
forms: badger, owl,
salamander, turtle,
and eel. Each of
these forms will be
necessary to solving all the puzzles
in the game. The
owl, in some ways,
is the best, since as
a bird you can fly almost anywhere, including places you might
not be able to reach in your human form without great difficulty.
It is also a fast way of travelling from place to place.
The only drawback is that you can't carry anything as an owl (or
as most other creatures). Ergo, the owl form is good for scouting
and some other purposes, but it's not an easy way to get around
obstacles that must be passed by solving puzzles.
After visiting Merlin (don't forget the bag!), Arthur should explore the environs past the Meadow, where he will soon come
across the Red Knight. The Knight guards the entrance to a
causeway that leads to an island in the middle of a lake. In order
to get past the Knight, Arthur must give him four special objects:
a golden fleece, the hair of a dragon, the tusk of a boar, and the
egg of a raven. Obtaining these items forms the bulk of the
game and the trials Arthur must pass to prove himself worthy of
Excalibur (Arthur can reach the island in animal form, but it won't
do him much good).
At this point, doing some exploring (as a human and otherwise)
is a good idea. The game has an auto-mapping feature (with

separate maps for human and animal forms, by the way) but it is
something of a pain to use on the Apple (more on that later), so
you may want to make your own as you go along.
Once you have a fair idea of what's where, Arthur can get down
to the serious business of proving himself the stuff of Kings. A
visit to the tavern in the town is certainly in order. Arthur should
pick up some information here as well
as an item or two.
Don't worry about
being kicked out;
only one visit is
necessary (provided
you get what you
need).
Moving right along
to the badger hole
(could anything be
more blatant?) by
the smithy, a trip inside is definitely in
order. Interestingly
enough, the badger
den is right next to
the castle prison. Inside the prison (the
means of entry is
rather obvious), is a
prisoner of great importance. Arthur is going to have to get the man out of the
castle. It's the chivalrous thing to do, after all, and besides, he'll
tell Arthur where to find something he needs.
Of course, there's a guard to dispose of first. Arthur will have to
be a bit physical here. Then, there's the matter of leaving the
castle. Arthur, of course, could just fly off as an owl, but that
doesn't help the other man much. However, poking around passageways and listening in the right place should provide the
means of leaving, although a visit to the armory should be made
before bidding a fond farewell to the castle for now.
Also in the badger hole, just a quick jaunt south of the den, is
the badger maze, full of twisty little passages, all alike. Yes, you
do have to go through it. Sigh. Since you can't carry anything to
drop, you'll have to think of another way to keep your place, so
to speak. I wonder if being in this place makes you feel itchy?
Somewhere along the line, you'll look in at the cottage on the
moor. The poor peasant inside appears to be in bad shape. Then
again, that's not surprising. It's not too warm in here, after all.
Well, don't just stand there gawking, Arthur, help the poor man,
for peat's sake!
And let's not overlook the Kraken in the lake (even if you'd
prefer to). Examine him carefully (just don't get too close). How
pretty! Wouldn't you just love to have that little bauble? Too bad
you can't carry a weapon underwater. That would help a lot.
What can you do about this? (Ever play Zork II? Remember the
dragon?).
By this time, you'll probably want to do something about the Invisible Knight. So, a trip to the ivory tower is in order. Of course,
if you joust had a key to open the door, it might be easier to get
inside (hehe).
Inside the tower, be sure to explore everywhere. Arthur has to
answer a riddle (the name of the old man in the tower) and the
clues are all there. Still, it won't be all that easy, as the name is
somewhat concealed. I hope Arthur knows his alphabet well.
Once that's taken care of, Arthur can pay a visit to the Invisible

Knight and get back anything that might have been stolen (and
the knight won't steal anything again). The knight also has an
item that Arthur can use, but first . . . another riddle (riddling was
a big pastime in those days). This one is a little easier, actually,
and I know I can count on you to solve it pretty quickly. Arthur is
now able to get the first of the four objects he needs for the Red
Knight.
Which object
should be next?
Well, the boar is not
too difficult. As a
matter of fact, Arthur doesn't even
have to fight him (it
would be a pretty
uneven fight). A
boar, you know, is a
sort of wild pig.
Think about a
whole roast pig for a
moment, and you'll
get the idea.
You may be
wondering about
the Black Knight. Arthur does have to
defeat him in combat. It's the only way
to get across the
river with items in hand (animal forms can, of course, do it easily,
but they can't carry anything). However, it's not something to try
too early in the game, as Arthur will do better should he have a
fair amount of experience under his belt. Save the game before
making the attempt. If it's clear that Arthur isn't going to win, try
again later.
Beyond the river, as you probably knew before this, is the
dragon (yes, the one with the hair). Dealing with him is rather
simple, provided you've done the right things at the glade in the
forest. Then, it's into the cave for some real fun.
Spooks! All sorts of ghosts (including those of things you may
have killed up to this point) start popping out of the woodwork,
so to speak. Feeling scared? There's no need. After all, ghosts
are immaterial.
Past the ghosts, you will find two rooms (in different directions).
One is the Cold Room. Brr, is it cold in here! How cold is it? Cold
enough to make your very words freeze (now, THAT'S cold!). Too
bad Arthur doesn't have a parka (this isn't a place to linger).
The other room has an occupant. The occupant is a basilisk.
Basilisks are relatives of Medusa: one look and you're stoned .. .
literally. So, you better not look, at least not straight on.
There's another room after that one. It's the Hot Room. Whew,
it's hot in here! How hot is it? Hot enough to dry up your throat
and tongue (now, THAT'S hot!). Arthur wouldn't want to stay in
here too long, either. Now, if he could just say the magic word
that would open the door, he'd be ok.
And in that last room is . . . a pretty young girl? Sure about
that, Arthur? I wouldn't be, if I were you. It's really the demon
trying to fake you out. That's about all he can do, since he happens to be chained (the chains aren't fake) to the chair. He also
happens to be sitting on the fleece.
But has he got a deal for you! Just open the manacles, and you
can have the fleece. Easy, eh? Of course, demons aren't known
(Continued on page 45)

Contest

Name
That
Game!
The art department was sitting around
the other day trying to find something to
do (the department only works one week
a month you see). Suddenly, and without
warning the "art department" sat up in
his chair. "Hey, let's do another contest!
But, let's not do those quiche eating overly easy contests the editorial department
comes up with. Let's kick buttski!" So
here it is.
Here are twelve images that appeared
on game box covers in the past eighteen
months. Can you identify the name of
each game? Hint, the games in question
were all mentioned in some fashion in
the pages of CGW.
Submit your answers to CGW Contest
Dept., P.O. Box 4566, Anaheim, CA
92803. Entries must be postmarked no

later than October 16, 1989. The winner
will receive a three-year subscription (or
three year renewal) to CGW. In case of a

tie, a winner will be determined by lot.
Look for winner's name and answers in
November CGW.

(Continued from page 38)

Tournament

Golf

Once a round is completed, your score
card can be turned in the next day, or
whenever it is convenient. Score cards
are automatically submitted to CSN's
host computer the next time it is accessed. The score card must, however,
be transmitted prior to starting another
round and the final round's score card
must be turned in prior to the end of the
tournament, which is Sunday at midnight. At the end of the week, the one
who has the lowest score is the winner
and is awarded a trophy along with
points which simulate the dollars awarded
in pro tournaments.
At the beginning of each tournament
round, the "Tournament Golf' program
checks to ensure that the correct unaltered golf course is in use and then invokes Mean 18 to begin the tournament.
During play, it maintains a record of all
shots. This record is also submitted to
CSN's computer at the end of each
round. Thus CSN is able to maintain a

myriad of statistics on one's performance.
Some of the more common statistics are:
average driving distance; per cent of fairways hit; per cent of greens hit in regulation; average putts per hole; average
score per round; and per cent of subpar
holes. One's ranking in each of these
and other categories is also maintained.
While Accolade has developed a number of golf courses which are used in the
tournaments, CSN has also modeled additional courses. They currently have five
volumes, with three courses on each
disk. Some of these courses include
Sawgrass, Pinehurst, Cypress Point, Oakmont, and the PGA West Country Club.
A sixth volume is in the works.
CSN has a toll free number, 800-7274635, which can be used to obtain an
user ID and password, as well as to order
any of their products. No PGA qualifying
school is required to join this tour.

In The Club House
In February 1988, CSN started with thirty players competing in their first tournament. Currently they have over 500 mem-

bers competing on the tour with an
average weekly participation of over 100.
During the 1989 season, CSN plans to initiate a handicap system and expand to
three different tours based on one's
ability.
I have found participating in CSN's tournaments to be exhilarating. Each hole
must be carefully analyzed. Every shot is
critical. As one begins to master the
ability to hit the ball consistently with just
a slight draw or fade, the desire to obtain
extra yardage on each shot increases.
The extra yardage obtained on a tee shot
can often simplify one's approach shot
and increase the probability of making a
birdie. But an errant tee shot caused by
the overswinging can also spell disaster.
For those tired of competing against
just the computer, CSN can provide plenty of stiff competition on some of the
world's most challenging golf courses.
That is something that neither family,
time, nor ability would allow us to experience in "the real world."

(Continued from page 41)

for their trustworthiness. On the other hand, Arthur can't just pull
the fleece out from under him. Looks like Arthur will have to accept the demon's offer.
However . . . there's a trick involved here. If Arthur is really
clever, he can avoid freeing the demon while still obtaining the
fleece. The demon really is bound by the contract between him
and Arthur, so it's very important to notice exactly what he says.
So, at last, Arthur has everything and can go running off to give
them to the Red Knight. There is, though, the little matter of
waking the Lady in The Lake. For that, you should pay close attention to the poem on the inside cover of the manual (the
manual, not the book of hours). Be aware also that you'll have to
wait a bit before the event. It won't happen at midnight, but quite
some time after.
Once she's been awakened, you'll have what you need to challenge King Lot to a duel. The only problem with the duel is that,
after all this business about being brave and chivalrous, you win
by what is essentially a cheap trick, rather than by skill or force of
arms. This takes the edge off the victory.
Anyway, once you've put Lot out of the picture (no, you don't
kill him), you can finally pull out Excalibur and be proclaimed
King of England.
Before closing the Tale for this issue, however, I must mention
some problems. Arthur is Infocom's most poorly produced game
ever. The number of disk swaps and disk flippings (the game
comes on three double-sided disks on the Apple) is simply outrageous, even in all-text mode. When you have to change disks
because part of a paragraph is on one, and the rest on another,
you know something is wrong with the design. This is also sometimes necessary with a single sentence.
The auto-mapping, while very nice, suffers from the same flaw.
As you get further into the game, the map naturally becomes
more detailed, and a lot of disk swapping is required as the map
is re-drawn.
The Apple II graphics are mediocre at best and are slow to
come on. On the other hand, the basic Macintosh graphics are industry standard and the Mac II graphics look very nice.
Disk access is generally slow. Your best bet is to forego pictures
and map in order to play in all-text mode. It will speed things up
a little, at least.
Speaking of disk access, the Apple II version is not very bright
in some circumstances. For example, it tells you to put, say, Side
2 in Drive One. Then it goes looking for the disk in Drive Two
first. Why? I have no idea, but that's what it does. Also, you have
to be careful when restoring a position. If you put the wrong disk
in the drive by mistake, or if you type in the save name wrong,
the game will buzz between the drives for awhile, then tell you the
save failed, and you'll have to do it over again. If you have a hard
drive, I recommend using it; your life may be a little easier.
Well, that's it for this time. Remember if you need help with an
adventure game, you can reach me in the following ways:
On Delphi: Visit the GameSIG (under the Groups and Clubs
menu). On GEnie: Stop by the Games Roundtable (type: Scorpia
to reach the Games RT). By US Mail (enclose a self-addressed
stamped envelope if you live in the Unites States): Scorpia, PO
Box 338, Gracie Station, New York, NY 10028.
Until next time, happy adventuring!
Copyright 1989 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

(Continued from page 9)

Curse of the
Azure Bonds
unfortunately, nothing much really
comes of it) happens in Rakshasa
country, a small part of the Myth Drannor
ruins. You can, if you wish, become involved in a gambling dispute between
two Rakshasa, which leads to a "who do
you trust (if anyone)?" situation.
Another is in the sewers under Tilverton. A group of Otyughs will gladly trade
you the "shiny thing" in their dung heap,
if you bring them the choice piles of filth
collected by some neighboring otyughs
(this is actually a fair trade; the otyughs
won't renege if you bring them the garbage).
More incidents like those, but having a
definite effect on the game, would be a
big plus. The ability to make deals with a
faction, or join one, or play one against
the other, properly fleshed out, could add
a stronger role-playing element to the
game. The addition of a few puzzles
would also be welcome.
These considerations are especially important now, as the characters have
reached (by game's end) fairly high levels,
where huge amounts of experience are
necessary to advance. If character transfer is to remain a part of the series (which
I certainly hope it does), then emphasis
needs to be placed on role-playing,
rather than a lot of fighting. The true
heart of AD&D is not rolling the dice, but
the relationship between the characters
and their world.
Bottom line: Standard follow-up; better
than POR in some ways, but combat still
predominates.
Copyright 1989 by Scorpia, all rights
reserved.

SSI Interoffice
Memo
Date: 8/2/89
To: George MacDonald, Project Leader
From: Scot Bayless, Programmer
Subject: Scorpia's Hit Probability
Questions in CGW's Azure
Bonds Review
OK, they got us. You're right. We don't
always give the player an even break. In
fact, there's even a place in the game
where we boost the monsters' THAC0 and
hinder the players'.
The basic method for determining

Azure Bonds Playing Tips

T

he

best order for removing the bonds is
Tilverton (Fire Knives), Yulash
(Moander), Haptooth (Dracandros), Zhentil Keep (Fzoul/Beholder), and finally Myth Drannor (Tyranthraxus). Remember when fighting
Drow that they are highly magic resistant and
spells usually don't work.
Note: the Beholders under Shadowdale are
really there and they are best left alone. One is
bad enough; ten or so are just a bit much (we
won't even mention the Dark Elf Lords, Rakshasas, and High Priests).
Tilverton: Search the Thieves Guild before
going into the sewers; their treasury has some
very nice items. Ditto for the Fire Knives
hideout (Their armory has a couple of good
swords, including a +3 Frostbrand).
Yulash: Buy a couple of magic missile
wands from Zhentil Keep first. Yulash is under
siege, so try to avoid encounters with the
marauders (as well as crumbling walls and
sinkholes) on your way to the Pit. Do fight the
Shambling Mounds by the cleric's body; you
will obtain a wand of defoliation and a wand of
lightning (stinking cloud, by the way, will affect
the mounds).
Inside the pit, take Alias and Dragonbait into
the party. In the encounter with Mogion and
company, use your regular spells (fireball does
nicely) against the cultists to wipe them out
fast. Try Hold Person on Magian (works about
50% of the time) so you can kill her easily (AC 5 is not easy to hit), leaving you only the
mounds to deal with.
Use magic missile wands, the wand of defoliation and hack'n'slash to defeat the critters.
After they're all down, do not end combat.
First, heal up everyone who is in need of it (or
at least in dire need), because you will have to
fight three "Bits O'Moander" when you end
combat. Each of them is a nasty super Shambling Mound of AC 0 and 140 hitpoints. Don't
even think of running. You have to kill them.
Haptooth: Clean out the Drow by walking
around the village and fighting every patrol
until there are no more. Head for the barn and
the major encounter there. If you kill off the
patrols, there will be fewer Drow to fight in the
barn (the dark elves in the barn are clerics and

whether a friendly character's attack succeeds is fairly simple:

IF Random(20) - THAC0 +
THAC0MOD > = - AC THEN Hit
Enemy attacks are calculated similarly:

IF Random(20) - THAC0 > =
- (ACMOD + AC) THEN Hit
Notice the terms THAC0MOD and
ACMOD. These are values that our
authors can use to alter the hit probabilities of friends and foes to account for
circumstances like bad footing, poor light
or whatever.
Scorpia's observation about the Otyughs
is, in fact, entirely correct. When you first

mages exclusively). When the Drow are
defeated, you will be able to go through the
caves to the Red Tower. Avoid the NPC mage
Akabar. He throws his spells with wild abandon, especially fireballs, and is likely to toast
your entire party. He isn't evil, just stupid.
Red Tower: You don't have to fight the
dragons. Just be nice. Against the Dark Elf
Lord (a toughie), F/MU's with Blink active are
good (Fire Shield will not work). On the way
down, it's best just to make for the next stairs;
there isn't much in the rooms. Two traps in the
tower: one is a note (my MU/Thief was able to
read it safely) and the other is a trapped stairway (no way to avoid unless the note is safely
read). The combat with Dracandros and
friends should not be too hard. Hint: he
generally uses a cold fire shield.
Zhentil Keep: This will be the hardest, and
most frustrating, battle of the game. Your opponent is a Beholder, whose powers include
disintegration, death ray, petrifaction, and
others. He can use four of these powers per
round. You will have to rely entirely on saving
throws to survive.
This is bad enough, but he isn't alone. He
has a troop of Minotaurs, plus a Medusa, with
him. Thus, on the first round, you must get rid
of them quickly so your fighters can run down
to the Beholder lurking in the second rank.
Then it's just a matter of hacking at the Beholder, and keeping your fingers crossed that
no one fails a saving throw, until you defeat
him. When it's over, heal up anyone who needs
it before ending combat. Once again, there is
an immediate conflict set up to take effect
when you end combat. When that's done, you
will be able to save the game (whew!).
Myth Drannor: Visit the Elven Queen in the
crypt; you will get some nice things from her.
Watch out for Rakshasa in disguise. At the final
encounter with the Big T, follow the same plan
as with the Beholder: wipe out the auxiliary
troops (margoyles and high priests in this case)
to clear a path. Tyranthraxus is vulnerable to
weapons and high-level spells. A high-level
ranger can do a lot of damage to him, because
of the storm giant body. Speed is essential, to
prevent characters being killed by lightning
bolts. Good luck!

enter the Tilverton sewers, you get a message warning you about slippery footing
and combat being difficult. What you
aren't told is that while you're in there
THAC0MOD is set to -2 and ACMOD is
set to +2. In effect, the good guys are all
at -2 to hit and the bad guys are at +2.
Ouch!
Obviously, the Tilverton sewers aren't the
only place where probabilities get skewed.
Like all good DM's, our authors bend the
dice to suit the story. Of course we usually
drop some pretty broad hints in the narrative text. So, if it looks like you're not getting the die rolls you should, odds are
you're not.

Reader Input Device

I

