I

-

April 1991

Features
Power From The People

It's A Dirty Job...
10

A PowerMonger's Delight / Peter Olafson

Sneak Preview: MegaFortress

16
24

The Bolts for Nuts about Command HQ
More Inside Information From the Designers

Discreet Romance or Stealth Affair?

43

Part 2 from the Consumer Electronics Show

Accolade's Test Drive III

54

Set Up Hints for Planet Builders / Stanley Trevena

As The Immelmann Turns
Dynamix' Red Baron / Timothy Trimble

Taking A Peek
Scorpion's Mail (Game Hints)
Rumor Bag

51

Front Seat "Passion" With Sexy Cars / David M. Wilson

Journey to the Center of SimEarth

73

SSG's Warlords Blends Two Genres / Alan Emrich

Departments

Interplay's James Bond Adventure / Allen Greenberg

As The Industry Turns

68

Dynamic Design Duo Tells All / Lori & Corey Cole

A Wargamer's "Fantasy"
38

63

Censored Scenes From Computer Games

Quest For Glory: Exposed!
35

60

New Meaning for the Term "Ratings War"/Michael Chaut

Screens They Wouldn't Let You See

Interplay's The Lord of the Rings / Charles Ardai

58

EA's New Space Opera: Hard Nova / Ken St. Andre

Live Studio's Thunderstrike

Take Two Megatons and Call Dr. Strangelove

A "Class" Ring

Number 81

56

Opponent's Wanted
Game Ratings Chart (Top 100 Games Rated)
Over There (European Games Report)
Conversions Received
Reader Input Device
Editorial (Taking A "Crack" at Copy Protection)

6
8
14
29
36
40
76
77
79
80

Taking a Peek

Britannica Software
San Francisco, CA
DESIGNASAURUS II: This new and
improved version of the highly
popular "Designasaurus" adds more
information, adventures and improved graphics. It is amusing for
ages five through adult (that's "egg
to fossil" in dinosaur lingo), since
entertainment and education are
presented in equal parts in presenting various epochs, dinosaurs, and
dinosaur mutations. IBM ($39.95).
Circle Reader Service #1.
SUPER SPELLICOPTER: Arcade action a la Nintendo is available in this
arcade/educational experience. The
objective, of course, is to improve
the spelling ability of children, ages
seven to fourteen. The kids will like
the heavy emphasis on the arcade
portion, but since winning will require improvement in the educational realm, the game should please the
parents, as well. Words can be cus-

tomized (into this week's spelling list,
for example). The word on "Spellicopter:" Well done. IBM ($34.95). Circle
Reader Service #2.
Data East
San Jose, CA
CONTINUUM: No, you're not hallucinating when you see the shapes
spinning around before you (and
that's just the copy protection!). Just
follow the "bouncing mobile" as the
player(s) search out the 32 crystals
and cubes hidden in the 256-room
arena. Either solitaire or more intensive competitive play (
human-versus-human at the same machine or one
player versus the clock) can be
done, complete with fascinating
camera angles (presumably so
players won't get dizzy). Akin to "Harmony" or "Darwin's Dilemma" in raw
fascination, "Continuum" is one to
watch (for hours). IBM ($49.95).
Circle Reader Service #3.
(Continued on page 78)

Game Hints

W

ell, the old mailbag's been pretty
full lately. If things keep up at
this rate, the post office will have
to start delivering by the truckload (grin).
Of course, with so many new releases
this past Christmas season, that's not
really surprising. And the spring-into-summer period looks to have a few interesting products on the market, too. Maybe I
should get myself a bigger mailbox?
Before we go on to the good stuff, however, just a reminder about those SASEs.
A surprising number of letters arrived
during the past couple of months without
that all-important "Self-Addressed,
Stamped Envelope" (SASE). Remember
folks, if you live in the United States, you
have to include one if you want a reply.
Otherwise... well, 'nuff said about that.
Let's reach into the bag and see what
comes up.
King's Quest V: The Forbidden Forest
is a one-way entry; once inside, you can't
go back out the same way. You have to
deal with the witch before you can find
another exit. Also, when traipsing
through the mountains with your trusty
rope, don't be deceived: if the rope
breaks, you're not using it in the right
spot. Try somewhere else for a real cliffhanger.
Quest For Glory II: In my article last
issue, I forgot to mention an important
thing (shame on me!). If you are playing
a fighter, eventually you receive a note
telling you to be at the Darb of Rafir at
sundown. Unfortunately, there is no such
street; it turns out this is a typo in the
game. The correct street is Askeri Darb.
By the way, it doesn't matter if you know
this ahead of time, as nothing will happen until you're told to show up there...
and remember, that's only for fighters.
Ultima VI: Some people are having
trouble getting a lens from Ephemerides.

They tell him they want a lens, he keeps
asking what kind. Dontcha just love circular conversations? Actually, you will
be able to get a lens from him, but that
comes far, far along in the game... practically near the end. At that time, you
should have the necessary item to shake
him out of his "what kind" daze and get
him working. Until that time, save yourself some frustration and don't ask about
it.
Secret Of Monkey Island: Interesting
how many folks are experiencing difficulty in getting the key from LeChuck's
cabin. Shucks, that ought to be easy.
After all, that key isn't made out of
wood, y'know? And I won't be happy
until you're happy, and I know you're
gonna be happy when you figure out the
answer. You just think about it.
Indiana Jones & The Last Crusade:
Getting through all those Nazi guards in
the castle is giving some people gray
hairs, not to mention bloody knuckles.
Well, I suppose if you're good enough
and lucky enough, you might be able to
left-hook your way through them. However, that's not really necessary. There
are some books in the Venetian library
that can help out in this situation. True,
it's rather a bore to go searching through
the stacks, but do it anyway. You'll be
glad you did.
Bane Of The Cosmic Forge: Locked
doors and grates seem to be the bane of
some people's existence. Let's deal with
grates first. Some of them you will never
be able to open. Others require either a
key or a special item (lockpick/Knock
Knock never works on grates). Unfortunately, there is no way to tell them
apart. If you can't get a grate open, leave
it and go on to something else.
Doors are a slightly different matter.
With a few exceptions, most doors will

yield to a high lockpick skill or knock
knock spell. However, if the lock jams,
then only the proper key can open the
door. Generally, if you see a lot of red
when trying to pick a lock, it's an indication that the skill level is far too low for
the lock, and you should try to find a key
instead (iron keys, by the way, will open
any door on the entry level).
Ultima V: This one is still going strong
and still causing trouble for a lot of
people, in particular for those searching
for the entrance to Dungeon Doom. Well,
you didn't think it would be easy, did
you? Don't worry, it's down there, all
right. Remember how you got the Shard
of Cowardice? The technique here is pretty much the same.
Dragon Wars: I've mentioned this
before (in a previous Mail column somewhere in the dim dark past), but as the
questions keep coming in, it looks like a
repeat is necessary. You can't get to Irkalla in the underworld or the island in the
lake in the Mystic Wood (or even to the
endgame) until you've done something
for the City of The Mud Toad. What
should be obvious. How is a little tricky,
but you should be able to spell it out with
a little thought.
Well, that's about all for this mailbag.
Remember, if you need help with an adventure game, you can reach me in the
following ways:
On Delphi: stop by the GameSIG
(under the Groups and Clubs menu). On
GEnie: visit the Games RoundTable
(type: Scorpia to reach the Games RT).
By US mail (remember that
SASE!): Scorpia, PO Box 338, Gracie
Station, New York, NY 10028.
Until next time, happy adventuring!
Copyright 1991 by Scorpia, all rights reserved

Review

Playing with
Power (Monger)
Electronic Arts' PowerMonger
By Peter Olafson

T

he player is not exactly a god any more, as he was in

Bullfrog's previous effort, Populous. Now, the player is a
soldier (a soldier with a rather goofy look on his face, in
fact) and while one's followers maintain nominal loyalty, they
obey an even higher authority: the growling in their stomachs!

tion, food, settlements and objects. The landscape can zoom in
and out through seven levels of detail, scroll in eight directions
and rotate in both. It is quite delightful to watch your army disappear into a mountain pass, give the map a spin, and watch them
come out the other side. (This also brings to light a number of
charming graphic features.)

Vox Populous?
In Populous, the player, as a god, had the power to influence
worshippers by turning the landscape to their advantage and
wreaking ecological havoc on their rivals. ("Have a volcano. No,
no, have three!") In PowerMonger, the land is varied (but
stable), and the people can be recruited and commanded directly. As one might expect, this is a good deal more challenging.
The task is huge; there are 195 rectangular slices of land to be
subdued, and the player may choose only those pieces adjacent
to those already conquered to maneuver towards.

Pastoral Pictures From The Front
Where Populous was handsome in a readily portable, squaredoff sort of way, PowerMonger is beautiful, and rather ornate and
spindly. Where Populous was "gamey," PowerMonger is imbued
with the depth of real life. The terrain is alive with activity. Carrier
pigeons are seen carrying your orders to sub-commanders; an encampment leaves behind a dead campfire; sheep shudder on the
hillsides, and where there are sheep there are shepherds; people
(all equipped with names, homes, jobs and histories) go about
their business; and the leaves on trees (all of specific species)
change color as the season cycle goes round and round. This is
a computer approximation of a living world and should be so
treated.
How does one learn all this? Well, all right, maybe one is something of a god, for PowerMonger is equipped with a lovely array
of tools to manipulate the view and bring up data. When the
"Query" command is highlighted, a mouse click on virtually any
object will summon relevant details. The miniature overhead map
shows one's position and uses atlas-style overlays to show eleva-

Degrees Of Decrees
The command set is fairly simple: attack, move, collect food or
men, invent, trade, offer alliance and spy, with other commands
available to reapportion forces and inventories. Still, a lot of
mileage has been obtained from the use of three postures (passive, neutral and aggressive) in conjunction with these commands. A passive attack may be little more than intimidation; an
aggressive attack is wholesale slaughter. A passive "invent" command may produce pots useful for nothing but trading; an aggressive one may open a mine in a neighboring mountainside.
The posture setting is a versatile engine, but it doesn't cover as
much as it might. For instance, it's rather dull and time-consuming to repeatedly issue the "equip invention" command to collect
the individual possessions of a destroyed enemy army that lies
strewn across the battlefield. High aggressiveness, in this case,
seems simply to ensure that one possession is equipped (while
on the "passive" setting, nothing will be) rather than how fervently the troops as a whole embrace your command.

Living In An Imperfect World
There are some quirks that make this patently realistic game
seem unrealistic in places. For instance, it's impossible to tell
what a community is inventing until they produce it. Also, even
when one's commander is widely separated from the main body
of his troops, they have access to inventory items he's only just
acquired. (Hence, he may pick up boats on an island and suddenly find troops stranded on another island for want of boats migrating toward him. Perhaps he is a god, after all.)

Review

Additionally, each territory is handled in isolation from those surrounding it — once it's conquered, it's done with. That permits
players to indulge in ruthless, scorched-earth style tactics that
might enrage the civilian population in a larger, integrated world.
Other elements such as partisans, famine and plague might have
been added to keep the commander looking over his shoulder
and worrying not only about conquering a land, but also holding
it together once he's moved on.

Putting The "Hard" Back Into Hardware
It is along the program's periphery that things get a bit hazy.
The copy protection verges on the absurd. Beyond an almost
non-copyable European Amiga DOS, users must also answer a
question about maps that appear in the margins of the manual.
Those maps are not exactly flashcards, and one is not even told
precisely where to find them, but given a range of a half-dozen
pages to search instead.
The game is also unsympathetic to peripherals. Bizarrely, while
PowerMonger won't save to or load from a saved-game disk in
DF1:, it nevertheless requires the presence of a disk in the
second drive in order to save to a disk in DFO:. It does not install
on hard disk, and it does not appear to use memory above 512K
(it's very much a European game in that sense). It also doesn't
multi-task, but apparently does run on the 3000.
Moreover, while the game will restore saved games at boot, it
restores them only at the beginning of that particular conquest,
regardless of how much progress has been made since then. To
get back to the point at which play left off, one has to restore it

again. For a game that supports just one drive, that's a real
nuisance.

Power Trip
Nevertheless, the game at the core of PowerMonger is simply
superb. It has that never-seen-before, awe-inspiring quality that accompanies all great games (much as it does great films and
great music). It has an elegant simplicity that makes it a joy to
play, an intimate level of involvement that makes it difficult to
put down, and a sophistication that makes every game a
surprise. (There's also the option to introduce data disks at the
outset, so there may yet be surprises to come).

Pointers For Potential Powermongers
A PowerMonger warlord lives for the moment. The typical
scenario begins with the easy conquest of the nearest village (at
the lowest aggression level, in order to preserve its resources),
the impressment of all available food, men and inventions for
The Cause and casting about for similar targets. It's a brutal but
effective snowballing technique that emphasizes military expediency at the expense of the region's future, and it will serve
players well in many of the earlier scenarios.
The spying, trading and alliance commands may well prove
mandatory in later conquests, but they have only limited usefulness in the first 45 or so. However, there's a useful form of
spying built into the game. Every so often, you should range
your mouse over the overview map to keep track of rival military
preparations. Keep a special watch for armies on the march. As

Review

the aggressiveness of enemy commanders increases, they'll
develop an affection for raiding your rear areas, and that may require diversion of your main force.

possible to break their power with a single decisive battle, and
then roll up the rest of the territory at leisure.

There are decided advantages in seizing the initiative and ambushing enemy armies on the march. In such cases, the leader is
often more vulnerable than behind the shield of troops in a setpiece battle, and the enemy force rarely has a chance to assume
its full fighting stance.

Don't be a control freak. Delegate authority to your lieutenants
whenever possible. They can be effective as garrison captains in
larger communities, running commando raids to regain lost
resources in the rear or drawing off enemy forces in joint assaults on larger towns. (Try keeping them near the main party
for better speed of response.)

Invent a catapult or a cannon as soon as humanly possible. It
may take some time, but it is PowerMonger's ballistic missile.
When attacking aggressively, each shot sends a flurry of white
souls flapping their way to heaven, and can quickly make short
shrift of even a numerically superior foe.

Chart marches carefully and camp at critical junctures (an
isthmus, a land bridge or a sharp bend in the coastline) so that
men are not lost to the vagaries of terrain and gymnastics will
not have to be performed to lure them back. The force that goes
into battle piecemeal is begging to be chopped up accordingly.

There will be instances in which food is in such short supply
that it will serve better to leave conquered communities intact
(and one's army of moderate size) in order to produce more. But
recall that what isn't taken, the enemy may take. As one doesn't
need a territory once conquered, scorched earth may be the best
policy. Pillaging a village and killing everyone in sight can be distressingly successful in slowing down the enemy.

Use a combined-arms approach. Even a good-sized party of
bowmen (a potentially devastating force) can be surprised and
overcome at close quarters. There's a decided advantage in
having sword or pikemen tie up the enemy in hand-to-hand combat while the bowmen are free to let fly from the rear.

On the whole, don't attack with an aggressive posture unless
enemy casualties are irrelevant — in other words, when a conquest is almost finished. It is often a good idea to attack at
neutral level and wear down defenses until an advantage can be
gained, and then switch to a passive posture. In larger towns, this
may earn you a lieutenant.
However, be merciless with enemy armies in the field. It's quite

Since one will not always be able to fight at first, know that
there is no shame in running away to fight another day. An example is found in the upper-right corner of the initial territory
selection screen. Here your force is overmatched by blue-suited
bowmen from the first (even if reinforced from the nearby village) and the only sensible alternative is to take the three available boats and head for the large island to the south in search of
more vulnerable targets. (Hint: Pick up some boats when arriving
there. The result will be pleasantly surprising.)

Industry News

The Rumor Bag

n last issue's episode,
our intrepid, bagenshrouded reporter had
just arrived in Bahrain. At
press time for that issue,
war had not yet broken out in the Persian Gulf. This issue should prove that
our correspondent is no Peter Arnett.
After all, his idea of a press pool is
where one goes swimming and SPA
reports involve hot tubs.

I

by Ali Allee Ak-shun Pheri

A jeep full of staffers from the U. S. Embassy pulled into the market, flanked by
Gurkha bodyguards (the famous British
troops from Nepal). They weren't carrying guns, but I spotted their famous kukris (curved knives) and decided to mind
my inveterately wagging tongue. One of
the staffers took me aside, warned me
that even though Bahrain is a rear area,
it might not be safe after the 15th of
January. He encouraged me to leave at
the earliest opportunity, strongly suggesting that I should get out to Bahrain International, find the next flight out and say,
"Beam me up, Scottie!"

Before the blue sapphire waters of the
gulf receded from my view, I couldn't
help but notice the fishing dhows coming
in from a hard day's work. I made a mental note to pick up one of the handmade
models of the traditional Arab fishing
boats while I was at the bazaar and
headed down the Shaikh Isa bin Sulman
Highway toward downtown.
Once my interpreter and I stopped the
car. We approached a hyperactive muddle of Arab merchants and I had my interpreter speak to them. That's when I got
my first surprise. Most of them spoke
English and I had spent all this money
on an interpreter. I felt something like a
Japanese consumer who just purchased
both a Sega Genesis and IBM-compatible machine, only to find out that the
two corporations are planning to market
a new machine in Japan that is both MSDOS and Genesis MegaDrive compatible.
IBM will provide the technology and Sega
will provide the manufacturing. The 2.5megabyte machine is supposed to use
both the 80286 and 68000 chips. It is to
be called the Tera in Japan, but it isn't
definite whether it will come to the U.S.
of A. or not.
My interpreter said something that

mat will allow Sony and Nintendo to open an entirely
new home entertainment
market using the former's
entertainment properties
(CBS and Columbia Studios). Between
the new drive and the laptop they are
building for Apple Computer, Sony is
going to be a busy corporation.

wasn't in English to one of the merchants and he smiled a toothy grin in my
direction. He said he had information to
sell concerning a company we monitor.
Of course, one never buys at the quoted
price. So, feigning disinterest, I told him I
already knew the name of Three-Sixty's
land-based version of Harpoon was
going to be Patriot. I even laid it on thicker by noting that MegaFortress will
probably have an add-on scenario disk
covering the Philippines/ China region
with missions based on Dale Brown's upcoming Skymasters novel.
However, when he said the information
had to do with a deal between Sony and
Nintendo, I was immediately all ears. I
had to have it. He told me he wanted 18
BD; I offered 10. He screamed that I was
a thief, but dropped his price to 15. I
said, "Twelve!" He scowled. I began to
walk away. He rushed to my side,
spouted something about stealing the
falafel from his children's mouths and
lowered the price to thirteen and a half.
We agreed.
He told me that Sony and Nintendo
have agreed to market a CD-ROM drive
for the 16-bit Nintendo. Expected to be
released in the $700.00 range for the
Japanese consumer, he didn't know if it
would be coming to America or not.
Sony will sell the unit as an add on, but
Nintendo will package the drive and
SuperFamicom into a package deal. In
Japan, many people are expected to use
the system for desktop publishing keyboard. According to my source, the CDROM format will not be compatible with
other CD-ROM formats, but the new for-

With discretion the better part of valor, I
recalled all the preparations for war I'd
seen and "reluctantly" agreed to leave.
However, to show me there were no
hard feelings, he handed me a grimy envelope. "One of your subscribers has a
friend in Arizona," he whispered. It was a
letter from Mike Stackpole, one of the
Wasteland designers. Mike implied that
he was working on a high-profile science
fiction project that was going to be both
a video game and a computer role-playing game. "It's StarTrek!" I cried excitedly. "That's what Interplay is doing!
They're programming the video game for
Konami — that's what they're going to
use those neat fractal graphics of planets
for! Finally, a real role-playing game's
going to be based on the TV series!"
Giving the staffer a mock salute, I
jumped back into the rental car, longing
for the "good old days" of peace and tranquility. "Good old days!" my interpreter interrupted my reverie. "This is the Middle
East! We've had war since the days of
Father Ibraham." I readily admitted this
was true and, by way of apology, noted
that Norm Koger was making excellent
progress on a new wargame for SSI.
Based on the 1973 Arab-Israeli War,
Jihad will offer a refined Red Lightning
system and a construction set.
It was frustrating to realize that I had
been in Bahrain for a full day and hadn't
even managed to get one of those great
lamb sandwiches they put on pita bread.
Oh, well! Maybe I could buy one of those
model dhows at the airport. Then, the
trip wouldn't be totally wasted.

Sneak Preview

Sneak Preview: Three-Sixty's MegaFortress
by Bruce Maurier and the CGW Editorial Staff
first paid writing was a review of Ft.
Apocalypse for Compute's Gazette.
Then, he wrote Flight of the Old Dog on
a C-64 word processor. He admitted to
CGW that he really bought the computer
to play games, but told his wife he was
getting it for the word processor.
Brown never actually experienced combat during his period of active duty with
the Air Force, but trained for eight years
of rigorous combat exercises to be
capable of dropping tactical nuclear
weapons (especially the two- to fivekiloton high-altitude containment drops
of "Enhanced Radiation Devices" —
neutron bombs). Dale did share with
CGW about two false alarms, however.
"They were the most frightening experiences of my life. In such a situation,
the first thing the navigator does is
decode the messages from the command post. The first letters decoded will
indicate whether the alert is actual or
merely an exercise. If he shouts out, 'Exercise,' everyone will be a little less harried. If he says, 'Actual,' that's a sobering
experience."

M

ore than one type of gambling oc
curs in the Nevada desert. In the
top-secret realms of "Dreamland,"
service personnel and defense department experts place billion-dollar bets on
defense technology. In Flight of the Old
Dog, a best-selling techno-thriller by Dale
Brown, the Nevada desert becomes the
birth site of the B-52l, a high-tech
delivery system that does the B-52H
StratoFortress one better.
Dale Brown explains that "I made up
the plane, but Three-Sixty has done so
much work on the simulation that it really feels right." Although Brown is a
former U.S. Air Force Captain and actually served as navigator
on B-52s, he readily admits that he wasn't aware of the actual existence of some of the ordnance that he placed on the plane
during the writing of the book, but he is pleased with how close
he came to what was really happening. "Some weapons," he observed, "I sort of made up and later found out they existed."
MegaFortress, the combat flight simulation based on Brown's
book, has become a true labor of love for the best-selling author.
Brown has been a long-time fan of computer games. In fact, his

Now, working in conjunction with designer/producer Jon Correl and lead
programmer Rick Banks, Brown has a
chance to help others "experience" such
harrowing moments in a modified way.
The design team began with brainstorming the "way it is" with Dale and having
reality checks for each crew station.
Even such details as wondering what it
sounds like when a threat comes across
the electronic countermeasures equipment were handled in these sessions.
Then, Dale provided unclassified
manuals for the B-52G and B-52H. Finally, Dale has tried to talk the design team
through the emotional impact of the
game. Brown says he is not primarily concerned with what lights go on when and
making the bomber turn at just the right
angle when the arrow keys are pushed.
Rather, "I've brought things to the game
that force the user to use his own intelligence and see the big picture; then he has to maneuver the airplane or switch between stations and react to the entire situation.

Ac"Crew"ed Assets
One of the most interesting aspects of MegaFortress is that the
emphasis is not simply on how good the pilot is or how well the
plane handles (the B-52 is obviously too prodigious for dogfighting). Rather, the em phasis of the game is on completing the mis-

Sneak Preview

sion using all the assets of a well-trained crew. Brown, trained as
a B-52 and FB-111 navigator, comments, "If you are at the radar
navigator's station, for instance, not only do you handle navigation and terrain following and so on, but you also operate some
defensive weapons. You have the responsibilities you have been
trained for plus other responsibilities as well. It's really tough!"
Players are required to alternate between five different crew stations in MegaFortress. The five positions are pilot, navigator (mission commander), electronic warfare officer, weapons officer and
co-pilot.
Naturally, the navigator's position is given a top priority because B-52 navigators do much more than keep track of the
plane's location. The radar navigator directs the weapons and
bomber defense for the forward part of the airplane, looks for
bogeys, tracks the terrain when the plane is at low altitude and
makes sure that they can put the weapon on target. In fact, the
Air Force actually calls them mission commanders now, rather
than navigators. So, in MegaFortress, whenever players are in
the radar navigation station, they become the "mission commander."
The pilot's position is probably second place in mission priority.
In the simulation, players have to handle takeoffs and landings
as pilots, but avoiding terrain and steering the airplane is dependent on commands from other stations. A major difference between the typical combat flight simulator and MegaFortress is
that most require the pilot to engage the enemy. MegaFortress
requires the pilot to avoid detection and get away when necessary.
Brown notes that the B-1-style nose of the MegaFortress only
adds .1 Mach to the B-52I's speed. However, he says that this is
very important with regard to the plane's capacity for succeeding
in a low altitude mission. "You can fly lower if you can fly faster
because you will have more power to get outside the ridgeline. If
you fly slower, you don't have the power to fly up and down the
mountain very steeply." Hence, the fictional plane used in the
game can travel about eight miles per minute as opposed to the
B-52H and its five or six miles per minute. The faster the pilot
can fly the plane, the less time in the sights of the bogeys and
the more likely the crew will succeed.
Another crew position is that of the defensive system operator.
This crew member uses sensors to detect and jam enemy
aircraft. He/she also directs the tail-firing missiles, air-to-air missiles, chaff bundles and quail decoys. If the threat is on the surface, the defensive system operator directs air-to-surface
weapons (particularly HARM missiles against enemy radar).
Naturally, the primary job of the electronic warfare officer is to
classify and call out threats. Should those threats be enemy
fighters, the EWO will coordinate with the gunner. In the course

Sneak Preview

of flying through enemy territory, jamming is not usually activated until the EWO is certain that he has been "painted" by
enemy radar. Then, if the plane faces imminent attack, the EWO
takes control of the bomber.
The final position is that of the co-pilot where players will discover a detailed equipment screen (though there is no exterior
view). This position will handle some of the more mundane functions of the mission.

Designing Hitmen
The aircraft model for MegaFortress was developed from unclassified B-52H manuals, then tweaked to make things simultaneously fit the fiction of Dale's book and become more userfriendly. For example, the product started with the actual preflight checklist for a B-52H. Then, the list was slightly reduced so
that the game didn't seem like work. The designers also have the
eight different checklists that a mission commander goes
through prior to, during and after the bomb run. Part of their chal
lenge is to balance the realism and skill with what players will actually want to do.
Several realistic aspects have been designed into this simulation that are not usually seen in combat flight simulations. First,
rather than sending up the circling planes as fodder for the practice missions, the training missions in MegaFortress are modeled
after combat exercises and will increase with difficulty as the
players move through them. Most real-world practice missions
are terribly boring, but those in this game feature an increasing
challenge and more realistic aspects than those in most games.

Second, players will never really get an ID on a target. So,
there will be both known and unknown targets on the screen at
all times. Players will have to determine which is which in much
the same way that real crews have to make those decisions. In
fact, even the handling of target assignments is significantly different. Rather than offering a primary and secondary target for a
given sortie, the crew is given a list of targets integrated into the
flight plan. As the route is flown, three to ten targets become active. According to Brown, the only reason not to hit the targets is
because something was going on that was outside the rules of
engagement. In contrast, Brown notes that A-10s might be given
a certain area and told to take out anything that moves, but B52s stick to their list and flight plan.
Third, damage is extremely significant in the design of MegaFortress. B-52s are large planes and can take a lot of damage,
but increases in damage will create multiple opportunities for mal
functions. Hence, malfunctions will be part of the game. Since a
recurring theme in Brown's fiction is the necessity of back-up sys
tems, this seems to be an important feature.
Another significant factor in the MegaFortress design is the fact
that the progression of threats is logical. Encounters are built off
patrols and are affected by how well the B-52 crew has avoided
detection. This means that one will encounter the right types of
planes flying the right kinds of patrols as opposed to the "anything goes" randomness of some designs.

Scissors, Iraq, Paper
The missions for MegaFortress will be largely drawn from at

Sneak Preview

least two and possibly three geographical areas. First, of course,
the game will feature the "Old Dog" scenario. The victory conditions are simple in that one takes the plane in, bombs the target
(a killer laser complex) and gets away. The "Old Dog" scenario
begins in the top secret Dreamland hangar. There, players will
have to take off with their B-52 while under fire from terrorists.
By the time players can successfully accomplish that task, they
should be emotionally hooked into the game.

side-looking radar that uses the direction of the airplane to get
precise resolution of targets. It can then pass this information
along automatically to other aircraft. Currently, unclassified information is that this data is passed verbally to other aircraft, but if
successful, it is designed to eventually send data packets from
computer to computer. The information collected by Joint
STARS provides targeting information and weapons recommendations.

Second, the game will include B-52 missions in Iraq. The
venerable 36-year-old design has proved itself to still be a formidable weapon with tremendous range, massive firepower and
a marvelous view of the battlefield. Missions in the Persian Gulf
area will include all the targets heard about in the briefings from
the front: bridges, fortified hangars, bunkers, oil refineries, infant
baby formula... er... chemical warfare production facilities,
nuclear facilities, mobile SCUD launchers and targets of opportunity. The "Old Dog" (unlike the B-52s we read about in the Gulf
War) uses smart weapons, as opposed to converted bombs
suited for so-called "carpet-bombing."

Other geographical areas which might yet appear in either the
game or in add-on disks include the narrow gap between Alaska
and Russia, as well as the Philippines to Red China area depicted
in Brown's upcoming Skymasters novel.

An added dimension to the Persian Gulf missions is the use of
the Joint STARS plane. Basically a roving 707 with almost as
much sophisticated electronics equipment as an AWACS, the
STARS is an acronym meaning, Strategic Targeting, Attack
and Reconnaissance System. It does for ground targets what
AWACS accomplish for air targets. Hence, the inclusion of this
system in the game is a natural for a game dealing with heavyduty bombers.
The Joint STARS uses a synthetic aperture radar, essentially a

"Bear" Brown's Debriefing
At the conclusion of each mission, players will be treated to a
debriefing from Brown himself. Brown will judge how the crew
did in avoiding detection, as well as how they handled threats
(SAMs, MiGs and mechanical failures) and what the BDA (Battlefield Damage Assessment) indicates.
If MegaFortress sounds both different and more complex than
many combat flight simulations on the market, Brown says that
this is as it should be. "At the risk of turning people off, the
game as it is meant to be played should be complex. I don't
want people to get the impression that it's easy to fly a B-52,
even with all the automatic equipment." One thing is certain:
MegaFortress is not being designed to be a "run of the mill"
flight simulation.

Review

One Ring to Rule Them All
Interplay's The Lord of the Rings, Vol. I
by Charles Ardai

t could be argued that in all recorded history there has only
been one truly successful collaboration between an author
and a computer game company. That project would be
Infocom's text adventure, The Hitchhiker's Guide to the
Galaxy, designed in conjunction with Douglas Adams. The game
quickly became a bestseller and still remains a favorite six years
after its release. Other attempts to work with authors to develop
either original or licensed games have generally been failures,
sometimes noble and sometimes not.

I

Synapse's Mindwheel, carefully crafted by poet Robert Pinsky,
was both exquisite and exquisitely boring; Telarium's line of
science-fiction collaborations had their heart in the right place,
but little else; and even Douglas Adams' second foray into computer game design, Infocom's Bureaucracy, flopped like a
Babel fish out of water.
Attempts simply to adapt literary properties, sans authorial
input, have fared little better. Isaac Asimov's Robots of Dawn
turned into an earnest but forgettable adventure game from
Epyx; ditto Anne McCaffrey's Dragonriders of Pern; and who

can forget Mindscape's plodding version of Stephen King's The
Mist? (Although one tries.)
Why this should be is something of a mystery. A bad game is a
bad game, of course — but most of these games are not bad,
per se. What they are is sincere, dedicated attempts by fans of a
given work to translate that work to the computer game
medium. If this does not usually work, it is because sincerity and
dedication do not, by themselves, make good games.
What does make good games is inspiration and creativity. If
working with another author's material does anything, it is to
usually to inhibit a designer's own inspiration and creativity.
Some designers hew so close to the original that they may just
as well have typed the original text into an ASCII file and left it at
that. Others are so bold that they attempt to inject their own
ideas into the author's work — a hubristic misstep, since such accretions invariably announce themselves to be just that, by blending into the author's universe as inconspicuously as a stripper at
a wake. Readers of the author's work escape such games either
bored, offended, or in some memorable instances, both.

Review

Word on the Rings (Description)
What all this has to do with The Lord of the Rings should be
clear enough to garners familiar with the myriad of fantasy roleplaying games based either explicitly or implicitly on Tolkien's
seminal saga. One cannot swing a dead cat in a software emporium without getting fur all over a dozen games which draw
their inspiration (and sometimes more) from Papa J.R.R.'s imaginings. Many of these have been successful, because they capture the spirit and enjoyment of the original without having to
carry the burden of actual fidelity.
This is why one approaches a game such as Interplay's The
Lord of the Rings, Vol. I, which purports to be the first part of a
definitive and faithful three-volume adaptation, with trepidation. It
has all been done, and overdone. There have been quite enough
Lord of the Rings games already! What can yet another offer?
More to the point, if what it offers is unprecedented fidelity,
should one greet that news with applause or a yawn?
The answer, as is so often the case, is a little bit of both. The
mechanics of the game are ordinary and will be familiar to
anyone who has ever played a CRPG before. One essentially has
the same commands at one's disposal. It is simply that an icondriven command system allows access to the party's possessions, skills, weapons, magic, and so forth, rather than a "menu"
per se. This allows the action to take place on a bigger canvas
and makes the screen appear more aesthetically pleasing and
the game world seem implicitly larger. The interface seems comfortable and this reviewer found little to take issue with in the
gameplay. Combat is smooth and fair; movement is as quick as
one can expect (if it seems at all tedious, it is only because the
landscape is so enormous); and the designers make a genuine effort to incorporate different racial characteristics and personal
skills into the narrative.
"Narrative" is an important word in discussing Lord of the
Rings, since this is not a hack-and-slash campaign. Encounters
are rarely incidental — everything that happens in the game has
some impact on the plot. Then, too, weapons, treasures, and
(especially) magic items and spells are hard to come by, in keeping with Tolkien's approach in the novels. This may disappoint
more hardened garners who want bang for their buck, but the
complexity and depth of the storytelling should definitely attract
others.
In fact, Interplay describes their intent as to create an "almost
Infocom-style" story within an RPG format. With a large roster of
vibrant characters and a clever set of nested puzzles and quests
(solve this before you can do that, talk to 'A' before you can
pass 'B,' etc.), Interplay has gone a long way toward accomplishing this goal.

Creature of Hobbit (Negative Observations)
However, it seems almost inevitable that the game suffers for
being an adaptation. The overall plot is the plot of Tolkien's
novels: Frodo Baggins, a hobbit, inherits what turns out to be the
One True Ring from his Uncle Bilbo, who won it from a decrepit
ex-hobbit called Gollum. The Dark Lord Saddam — oops, Sauron
— wants the ring to cinch his universal dominion, but to do that,
he has to find it and steal it. Frodo's task (and yours, Jim,
should you choose to accept it) is to drop the pesky thing into a
volcano at the other end of Middle Earth and be rid of it once
and for all.
That's the big story. Along the way there are lots of little stories
as: Frodo tangles with agents of Evil; meets friends, helpers, and
enemies; encounters dangerous monsters; and tries to make his

Review

party strong enough to do battle with Sauron. Old friends crop
up along the way: elves, dwarves, Balrogs, Gandalf, Tom
Bombadil. There are also new friends and challenges, most centered
around a search to unearth the "Golden Wheel" and "Durin's
Axe," two magic items one wants to get to before the orcs do.
All this is good enough, as far as it goes. The problem is that it
does not go far beyond where Tolkien went. The new material is
generally in the Tolkien spirit, but it owes more to Zork and
Enchanter than to anything distinctly Tolkienesque; and the old
material... well, it is old material. Wonderful old material, but better on paper than on a monitor.
If this isn't enough, the game has yet another problem: it is
only a third of the total story, much as The Fellowship of the
Ring is one-third of The Lord of the Rings. It draws to a close
with a semi-cliffhanger outside Lothlorien, and then one has to
wait perhaps a year for Volume Two, and another for Volume
Three. There is something inherently unsatisfying in this, as there
is in reading in the instructions about things one can do... but not
in this game. (About Bravado, the manual says, "This skill is not
useful in [this game], but will play a role in... the next two games
in this series." About a certain magic item: "These items will not
appear until the second game in this series." Great).

and pride that has gone into the meticulous re-creation of Middle
Earth. [LIFT?) Tolkien, perfectionist that he was, would be
proud. [Close Lift?) Still, what Tolkien fan will do more than
offer up a grudging smile at that old chestnut, "Speak, friend,
and enter?" By the same token, what Tolkien fan will enjoy the
liberties taken with Strider's character in the name of "challenging" the knowledgeable gamer? Fidelity may be dull, as the marriage counselor said, but infidelity will surely get one into trouble.
In any event, Interplay's game is what we have, and it is certainly good enough to provide hours of entertainment for the more
demanding CRPG player. What it is not, is special enough to
carry the Tolkien name. Not that any previous LOTR incarnation
has been better — none has — but one could be, and that is
enough to diminish one's appreciation of this game. As Jorge
Luis Borges wrote, on a different matter entirely (but not so different at heart), "It is a victory... all is well... and yet nothing has
happened. In our veins the blood runs no faster. Our hands have
not sought the bow. No one has turned pale."

Tolkien Gratification (Conclusions)

No one will turn pale from The Lord of the Rings, Vol. 1, either
from exhilaration or from offense. This is not a bad thing, nor is
it particularly a good thing. The Lord of the Rings may well hit
the bestseller lists, and more power to it if it does. It deserves it.
Yet, one must remember, this only means there is nothing else
available that is better.

There is a great deal to enjoy in The Lord of the Rings — richly
detailed graphics, a soundtrack that doesn't get irritating even
after being repeated in an endless loop, some pulse-pounding
catastrophes and escapes — and one has to respect the diligence

In short, The Lord of the Rings is a bright and enjoyable and
perfectly harmless game which would have benefited greatly
from an active, rather than a posthumous, collaboration with the
author.

OPINION

1

Scorpion's View
Scorpia Casts Light on Hard Nova

J

Scorpia is an experienced and
respected adventure game expert.
CGW is pleased to be able to provide
this forum for her distinctive and,
often, controversial perspective.

ust let me get my crystal ball out
here... clink... clink... Ah, there we
go. Ahem, looking into the depths, I
see... ouch! Someone get me my cool
shades! Those laser blasts are pretty
bright! Almost as bright as a nova....

Hard Nova is a re-working of a previous game system, Sentinel Worlds I:
Future Magic. Anyone who has played
Sentinel Worlds will notice similarities in
the two products, but Hard Nova contains much that has improved since the
prior game. However, the two are completely stand-alone and you can't bring
over your team from Sentinel Worlds
(so if you've been hanging on to them
for the sequel, well, better forget it).
Hard Nova is set in an area of space
known as the Four Systems, not exactly
the most peaceful of regions. Your character — either Nova (if female) or Stark
(if male) — is a freelance mercenary for
the Starkiller group. The Starkillers take
on jobs from whoever has the money to
pay for it and send you out to do the
dirty work. It's one way to make a living.
You begin by choosing either Nova or
Stark as your main character. There is
no creation process involved, since both
come with pre-defined abilities and those
can't be changed, at least not at the
start. Skill improvement can occur, however.
Skills are all-important in the game. Unlike virtually every other CRPG on the
market, Hard Nova has no physical
stats. Typically in games of this type, a
character has a separate set of attributes
representing strength, dexterity, constitution, intelligence, and so on. That is not
the case here.

The closest you come to that is with fitness (which determines how many hit
points you get upon advancing a level),
aptitude (which governs the number of
skill points you receive), and agility (how
well you avoid being hit in combat). All
other skills relate directly to doing something, such as using weapons, piloting
spacecraft, programming, and so on.
This is an interesting approach, and
something out of the ordinary.
In fact, it's a refreshing change not to
have to go through a long, tiresome rerolling process to create a viable character. Of course, this technique is not necessarily suitable for all types of CRPGs, but
in the case of Hard Nova, it works quite
well.
One skill that didn't seem of much use
here was hand-to-hand combat. Your opponents are armed with tough weapons
and are best killed as quickly as possible
from a distance; you don't want to go running up to them (which isn't easy,
anyway) to slice them with a knife. What
you need to concentrate on at the start
are firearms, fitness and aptitude; later
you can work on special weapons, tactics, agility and various spaceship skills.
The game begins with Nova (or Stark)
on Mastassini, taking in some R&R. Nova
has just had an unpleasant experience:
her ship was destroyed by a freak
meteor hit, killing everyone but herself
and her Bremer navigator. The Starkillers
have replaced the vessel, but it's up to
Nova to replace the crew.
One recruit can be found almost immediately in the bar; others will turn up as
the game progresses. Some join willingly;
others may have to be bribed or convinced, one way or another. All come
with their own sets of skills, which can be
increased as they gain experience.
After you've fooled around enough on
Mastassini and blasted off into space,
you are recalled to Starkiller Head-

quarters for your first assignment: retaking a hijacked Ciberan transport ship.
Since this is not as easy as it might
seem, you'll want to build up some skills
before you go running off to Ciberan.
That's where the robomaze comes in
very handy.
Unlike many games of this type, there
are very few random encounters. Hence
the robomaze, a good replacement for
tedious random battles. For a fee, you
enter an arena and fight against robots,
while picking up little flags (bronze, silver
or gold) which can be traded for cash at
any weapons store. That's important,
since (a) the fee for the maze rises each
additional time you go in and (b) you
use up ammo pretty fast in there.
The best part, though, is that you don't
die if your hitpoints go to zero or lower.
You're just "knocked out" and the team
is removed from the maze, with whatever
experience and flags they've managed to
garner up to that point. You also learn
how to handle yourself in combat generally. Nova (or Stark) is under your control,
but your teammates (as they did in the
previous game) fire at will at any available targets. Unfortunately, while that
aspect works out well, some parts of
combat don't.
Targeting, in particular, is an aggravation when there are many opponents on
the screen. Whether you're using a
mouse or the keyboard, the only way to
pick a target is to cycle through all available enemies, one at a time. This would
not be so bad, if only the targeting began
near instead of far. However, invariably,
the targeting begins with someone who is
far away, and moves in slowly from
there. Sometimes, it takes "forever" to
light up someone nearby you can shoot
at in the first place, and second, you're
often cycling so fast that it's easy to hit
the bar one time too many and find yourself starting all over again at the other
end of the screen.

OPINION
start flooding the system with warships.
It's just another fun day in the life of a
Starkiller merc.

The only other awkward part of the
game is inventory handling. Each character can individually hold "eight" objects
(actually, five, as three slots are already
taken up by armor, weapon and medical
suit (an item for automatic healing when
damage is taken).
Since that's not much, there is also a
generic "pool" that can hold twenty
items. Anything picked up or bought
goes into the pool, if there's room. If not,
you can't buy it or pick it up. To get an
item out of the pool, you choose a character, go to that person's inventory
screen and type "P" to bring in the pool
item.
The pool itself is represented by a small
window displaying the icon of the current
pool item along with its name. If what
you want to take isn't displayed, you
have to cycle through the objects one at
a time; there is no way to scroll back and
forth.
To give an item to someone outside the
party, the object must be in the pool window, but you have to go to Nova's personal inventory screen for the command
to transfer the item to the NPC. On the
other hand, to use a special item, such
as a magcard, it must be in Nova's inventory, not the pool.
This system can become very tedious,
especially in the game's latter stages
when you're running around with plenty
of ammunition and special items. Then
you have to do much shuffling around,
dropping and picking up items. Fortunately, items dropped do not disappear; they
stay where they are and you can go
back for them whenever you want.
Space travel/combat is pretty much the
same as it was in Sentinel Worlds, except for the addition of missiles that can
be fired at distant targets. There is a
large screen that shows your ship and
the immediate area, plus a smaller
screen to the right that encompasses
most of the system you're in. It's the
small screen you use to see which direction to go to reach a planet, ship or stargate (the stargates are the portals to
other systems).
Fighting in space is simple: target a
ship, and turn on the lasers. Your vessel
automatically fires at the target when it's
in range until you run out of energy, your
lasers are too damaged to fire or the target is destroyed or leaves the vicinity.
For ships not in laser range, you activate
a missile and hope it hits. Usually, one
missile hit will take out the enemy vessel.
If you'd rather not fight, or your ship is

The game is fairly linear, although
some assignments overlap a bit, and
there are times when you may have to
drop what you're doing to go do something else. If you just take things as they
come, and don't get ahead of yourself,
you won't run into trouble. Events happen mainly by "triggers" rather than the
passage of time, so if your party comes
up against a situation too tough to handle, back off, build up skills and try again.
taking too much damage, you can "step
on the gas" and run away. Most enemies
only pursue for a short time, then give
up the chase. This tactic also works with
enemy missiles; if you go fast enough,
you can outrun them (a recommended
tactic, since you can't shoot down enemy
missiles).
An interesting feature is the use of "ship
signatures." This allows your vessel to
"disguise" itself as a different type of
spacecraft. As you target different ships
(you can always target something
without shooting at it), your spacecom officer analyzes the target's signature. After
a time (and with sufficient expertise), you
can duplicate that signature. Of course,
this only works at a distance. Once in
visual range, the deception ends (since
the signature is only a signal, and
doesn't change the shape of your
spaceship). Still, this is useful at times,
especially for passing through the Ariel
system without paying a toll (you need
an Ariel cruiser signature to do this).
Aside from the robomaze, and selling
excess equipment you don't need,
money (needed for the usual accoutrements and situations) is obtained by
smuggling. You pick up a cargo at the
Mastassini space station, take it to its destination and drop it off. The more the job
pays, usually the more dangerous the
mission (someone is likely to shoot at
you). Since Ciberan and Ariel happen to
be at war, the Ciberan runs pay the
most, and getting past the Ariel ships
can be a bit nerve-wracking at times.
In between smuggling and robomaze
workouts, other assignments from
Starkiller will come your way.
Ciberan/Ariel isn't the only dispute going
on. The Lantas are at each other's
throats over a philosophical difference.
Strange things are happening at the
Rouyn mining colony. Someone wants
the dictator of Ariel assassinated so, from
out of nowhere, alien invaders suddenly

Conversation, especially Nova/Stark's,
is rather on the snappy, wiseguy side,
and held via choices from a menu. The
bars are inhabited by a variety of weird
and wonderful (and a few not-so-wonderful) denizens. Some just provide local
color and the opportunity to have "fun
chats" (such as the Zero-L merc in the
Mastassini bar); others are very important. Talking to everyone (who isn't immediately hostile) is a must (not to mention an interesting experience, however
you do it).
So is checking out every area to ensure
you don't miss an important item, bit of
information or neat weapon. Anything important will always show up on the floor
as a small orange square; you must step
on it to take the object.
Graphics are much improved over
those in Sentinel Worlds. Gone are the
agonizing movement system, the empty
interiors and little green and red dots that
represented people. Everything is now
fully detailed, giving a better sense of
being in a real place, and moving around
is much faster.
Overall then, except for the awkward inventory handling and combat targeting,
Hard Nova is a pretty decent game, with
some interesting touches and a good
storyline. While not a long-term epic, it
should keep you occupied for awhile.
That's it for this look into the crystal
ball. In the meantime, if you need help
with an adventure game, you can reach
me in the following ways:
On Delphi: Visit the GameSIG (under
the Groups and Clubs menu).
On GEnie: Stop by the Games RoundTable (type: Scorpia to reach the Games
RT).
By US Mail (enclose a self-addressed
stamped envelope if you live in the
United States): Scorpia, PO Box 338,
Gracie Station, New York, NY 10028.
Copyright 1991 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

Designer's Notes

ere are some of the
latest notes compiled
by the folks at Ozark
Softscape, the people who
designed Command HQ.

H

Latest Readme Notes

2) Modify the layouts using
the LAYOUT ARMIES main option in Command HQ, being
sure to select CUSTOM as the
type of layout. LAYOUT ARMIES works like the "cold
war" or "cease fire" in the
1986 scenario except that the
player cannot give foreign aid or flip sides
(since each side is laid out individually).
One can use the special cheat key, CTRLALT-M, to give more money (or less money
by "wrapping" past 150 billion) and the
CTRL-ALT-K key to "kill" any unit currently
"selected" (click on a unit to "select" it and
press CTRL-ALT-K to "kill" it). Give initial attack plans to units by "double-clicking" on
a unit and then setting its destination.

The Latest Scoop
on Command HQ

Dated December 10, 1990,
here are the latest notes to add to the September 27, 1990 (initial release) version of
Command HQ.
Corrections:

1) The solo opponent "SGT STAN STILL"
is the same as "no solo opponent."
2) In the Control Summary Card, the key
"CTRL-ALT-G" is assigned the function
"Change Film to Game." This is true only
when pressed during a film. If pressed
during a solo game, the solo opponent is
replaced with the next stronger opponent or
reset to "SGT STAN STILL." Thus, players
can adjust the strength of the solo opponent during play.
Additional Notes:
Port Conflicts: Since Command HQ
uses both mouse and modem in very intimate ways, it may uncover port conflicts
heretofore unknown. Anyone having mouse
problems that happens to be using a Microsoft driver 6.0 or higher (or 100% compatible) may find that there is a port assignment problem. Make sure there are no
extra serial ports or that no two of them are
assigned the same number. (Port assignment problems can also cause the modem
to fail to initialize).
Connect Problems: If the modem works
in most cases but there is a problem in connecting with a particular opponent, try
making the opposite connection (the dialer
modem becomes the answer modem). If it
still doesn't work, use another communication program (like Procomm) to make the
connection first (use 1200 baud, 8 data
bits, no parity). Then, exit the communication program without dropping the connection. Now, it is possible to start CHQ as
though it were being played through a
direct serial connection.
Model Constraints: Under certain
methods of play, players have hit what
were supposed to be "invisible" limits. The
designers never expected players to regularly bump against these constraints — but, for
the record, there is only enough memory allocated for: 100 total units (troops and
ships); 30 total planes; and 10 total satel
lites. If the message "too many units" appears, it means the limit has been hit and it
is time to stop building and start fighting.

Recovering With Only One
Side's Saved Game
For discussion, let's assume a player is unable to save a game that was disrupted for
some reason, but his/her opponent did
manage to save it. It is still possible to
resume that game by following these steps:
1) Tell the opponent he/she can find the
saved game in the \HQ\SAVE directory. It
has the name CHQ-nn.SG where "nn" usual-

ly corresponds with the order in which
games are listed in the save/resume game
directory. Use this number or the date and
time to pick which file seems to be the correct one. (For further confirmation, load the
file into a text editor and, amidst all the
weird characters, the saved game's name
should show up — actually, it begins at the
6th byte and ends at the 25th).
2) Next, have the opponent send the
saved game file using a file transfer program like ProComm or BitComm (the
sender "uploads" and the receiver
"downloads" the file).
3) Then, rename the file to a name that is
not the same as any other file in the
\HQ\SAVE subdirectory ("CHQ-99.SG"
would probably work). Copy the renamed
file into the \HQ\SAVE subdirectory.
4) Finally, start Command HQ and select
RESUME SAVED GAME. Pick the file
received from the opponent. Although it will
be for the "wrong" side, one simply has to
press CTRL-ALT-W to flip sides (back to the
"right" side) when CONNECT OPTIONS is
offered. Then, play normally.

Custom Unit Layouts
These notes explain how to do some
fancy fooling around with the 1986 scenario. The default layouts for this scenario can
be modified by using the LAYOUT ARMIES
main option. This is true of both the solo
and human sides of these wars.
1) The first step to modifying the initial
layouts is to convert them into files that
"LAYOUT ARMIES" will recognize. Copy the
existing layouts to the \HQ\SAVE directory
with this DOS command — "COPY
\HQ\?QLAYOUT.2?? \HQ\SAVE" (the question marks must be filled in with information and are explained below). Next, the
scenario designer can simply change the
default directory to where the files were just
copied ("CD \HQ\SAVE") and rename the
files individually, as explained below.
The format for the files used as initial
layouts for the scenarios is as follows:
HQLAYOUT files are the human layouts
and SQLAYOUT files are the solo layouts.
The first digit of the extension name is the
scenario ID (0=1918, 1=1942, 2=1986); the
second digit is the "side" ID (0=blue, 1=red);
the last digit is always 0.
The format for the files recognized by
"LAYOUT ARMIES" is as follows: CHQnn.BLO are "Blue LayOuts;" CHQ-nn.RLO
are "Red LayOuts;" the digits "nn" are unique ID numbers and need not be sequential since files are listed in Command HQ
directories in "directory order" and not in
"numeric order." For example, to make the
solo 1986 red layout accessible to LAYOUT
ARMIES use this DOS command — "REN
SQLAYOUT.210 CHQ-01.RLO".

3) Rename the files and copy them back
to the \HQ directory. The game will now
use them as the default layouts. Use the formats given above. (It is possible to combine "rename" and "copy" by giving the destination file a new name. For instance, to update the solo 1986 red layout that was
renamed in the above example, type —
"COPY \HQ\SAVE\CHQ-01.RLO
\ HQ \ SQLAYOUT.210").
Warning: Modifying the HQLAYOUT.nnn
files means that it will be impossible to play
against human opponents until either the
modified files are presented to one's opponent or the original files are restored to
their previous state (by re-copying them
from the original floppy).
Special Note: Although it is theoretically
possible to revise the default layouts for the
1918 and 1942 scenarios, it isn't recommended since the cities, oilfields and their
ownership will be initially set for the 1986
scenario (which can cause some
problems). However, if a player really wants
to do some fancy footwork, it is possible to
start a game with "STAN STILL" as the opponent, set the speed to 0, and use CTRLALT-M, CTRL-ALT-K and CTRL-ALT-W keys
to set up both sides. Set the speed back up
to make cities available, advance units and
"change the borders" however desired.
When satisfied, press ALT-S to save the
game. Finally, when resuming this game, it
is only necessary to press CTRL-ALT-G to
"toggle" through the opponents to the level
desired. (To make a two-player game, press
CTRL-ALT-H while watching a film and use
the notes in the previous section of this article to send the game to your opponent).

Latest Version Available
The latest version of Command HQ
("[V2]") is currently available directly from
Microprose. This version has fixed a
couple of minor bugs, and greatly enhances the artificial intelligence during solo
play. The MARS GOD OF WAR opponent
has been particularly strengthened to be
more aggressive. To receive this latest version, players should send their original floppy disks directly to:
Microprose
Attention: Customer Service
180 Lakefront Drive
Hunt Valley, MD 21030
and request the game's latest version.

Opponents Wanted

Review

Taking Stock on Bond
Interplay's

James Bond -

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
PRICE:
DEVELOPER:
PUBLISHER:

James Bond — The Stealth Affair
Amiga, Atari ST, IBM
$49.95
Delphine Software
Interplay Productions
Santa Ana, CA

The Stealth Affair

by Allen L. Greenberg
"I am not dead. Nor have I been bludgeoned, perforated, ignited, dismembered, or offered up as piranha fodder. I have not even been made the victim of
some malicious, sardonic wit. Therefore, I conclude, I
must be in the wrong town." This, we may theorize, is
a sample of the deductive reasoning process belonging
to Bond... James Bond. He is the hero in James Bond The Stealth Affair, an action-adventure game distributed
by Interplay Productions, but he is certainly no addition to the line of deep-thinking "Sherlock Clones" who
have appeared in other computer mysteries.
The Stealth Affair (wherein the purchaser has been
granted a non-exclusive software "License to Kill") is Delphine Software's follow-up to their immensely entertaining Future Wars. As reported in earlier issues of Computer Gaming World, the Stealth Affair program arrived in the US sans Bond for distribution by Interplay. It
was Interplay's decision that the mission would best be
handled by agent 007, rather than some generic superspy. Their decision was appropriate. This is not a
mystery to be solved, but rather, survived. In the spirit
of the Bond films, Stealth requires the player to master
several action sequences in order to complete his mission. There
are, however, many conventional puzzles to be unraveled as well
and the program includes a few non-interactive animated
episodes.
The story, presented in the standard, two-dimensional animated
format, tracks Bond's efforts to reclaim a stolen killer aircraft
known as the Stealth Bomber. Evidence points toward a small
Latin American country and its enigmatic dictator. Before the
game is complete, Bond will come to blows with members of the
KGB (apparently putting in overtime here in the US) and the
leader of a secret terrorist organization. To aid him, this byte-size
Bond has access to gadgetry of the same breed as the standard
fare in his films. While this equipment is necessary to complete
the adventure, its improper use will likely result in life-terminating
complications.
The player manipulates 007 and interacts with the story using
Delphine Software's "Cinematique" game system. This is a notyping, menu-driven interface which has been improved upon
since its debut in Delphine's Future Wars. The player may now
freely examine and operate the items listed in his inventory.
Nevertheless, the awkward command structure of the system
remains — "Operate girl" is not a request to remove a woman's
appendix. The actual result of this command, and others like it,
are dependant on the circumstances in which it is given.
Another disconcerting feature of Cinematique is that it often requires players to engage in a search for a pixel-in-a-haystack. Although less often than in Future Wars, there are times when the
game will not progress until the player manages to find some
nearly invisible object by passing the cross-hair cursor directly
over its location on the screen.
As to the aforementioned action sequences, each adventure
game epicurean must sooner or later decide just how much dodg-

ing, chasing or shooting can be
peppered amongst a platter of
story-solving before it actually
takes away from one's enjoyment. Stealth Affair contains
several such episodes in which
007 must become a sort of PacMan. None of these are exceedingly difficult. However, arcadeloathing secret agents should be
aware that they will be shaken,
and perhaps a bit stirred....
When Future Wars first appeared, a problem with the
program's off-disk copy-protection shortly became obvious. The user was required to match
colors and patterns between the screen and the documentation.
Unfortunately, the two sources only loosely resembled each
other. With Stealth Affair, this problem has been admirably addressed. The requirements are still the same, but the objects to
be identified are now clearly marked and legitimate users should
experience no difficulty accessing the program. A representative
from Interplay has even indicated that color-blind users may contact the company to obtain a special version of the program
which does not cause a problem for those so impaired.
Stealth Affair is a competently written and programmed piece
of work. Unfortunately, very little of it is particularly memorable.
The graphics and animation, while not lacking in nuance or
detail, contain none of the eye-popping imagery displayed in Future Wars. Likewise, the strong background music quickly
begins to resemble unrequested noise from the neighbor's stereo
which is more distracting than enjoyable.
Finally, the plot, the central story of the Stealth Bomber itself,
has very little to do with the puzzles and arcade sequences which
it links together. What seems to be missing from Stealth Affair
is a dash of inspiration. It was present in Future Wars and can
only be described as that same quality which makes a novel a
"page turner." The game is just too easy to put down only partly
completed, with the player feeling not terribly concerned with
what might have happened next.
James Bond — The Stealth Affair is certainly not a game
without merit, but it is, unfortunately, somewhat of a disappointment. The Cinematique system deserves to be used in future
releases and its creators at Delphine have likewise proved themselves no second-rate artists and story-tellers. Next time out, perhaps the results will better reflect the talent behind them.

Computer Gaming World's
See Reader Input Device on page 79

The Categories
Strategy (ST): Games that
emphasize strategic planning
and problem-solving.
Simulation (SI): Games based
on first-person perspectives of
real-world environments.
Adventure (AD): Games that
allow you to take an alter ego
through a storyline or series of
events.
Role-Playing Adventure (RP):
Adventure games that are
based on character
development (usually
involving attributes).
Wargames (WG):
Simulations of historical or
futuristic warfare from a
command perspective.
Action/Arcade (AC):

Computer games that
emphasize hand-eye
coordination and reflexes.
Games are often listed In more
than one category. in this
case, the first listed category is
considered primary. In order
to be recognized as the 'Top
Game" in a given category, a
game must be listed as being
primarily of that specific type.

Top 100 Games

THE HALL OF FAME
The Games in
CGW's Hall of
Fame Have Been
Highly Rated by
our Readers
over Time.
They are Worthy
of Play by All.

Industry News

What's Happening in the "Computer Gaming World"

T

he computer gaming world has ex-

perienced considerable seismic activity since the Winter Consumer
Electronics Show in Las Vegas, Nevada.
At CES, industry insiders chatted about
unconfirmed rumors of a "hostile
takeover" of Mediagenic, a possible acquisition of Cinemaware by larger corporate entities, a possible merger for Virgin Mastertronic and new publishing
partnerships with overseas firms announced by Accolade, Konami and
Spectrum HoloByte.
The Mediagenic "takeover" was of particular concern. Some perceived the acquisition of more than 20% of the
corporation's common stock as indicative of major management changes,
while others perceived the move as friendly toward current management. Within
weeks, industry watchers were to learn
the answer. Bruce Davis was to step
aside as Chief Executive Officer (while
remaining as a member of the board of
directors), while Robert A. Kotick (principal shareholder in BHK Technologies
Corp., the company which made the
major purchase in Mediagenic stock)
was to become the new Chairman and
Chief Executive Officer. Fears that the
new shareholder might intend to strip
Mediagenic of its assets were allayed
when part of the agreement to change
corporate management included a potential credit line of up to five million dollars.
BHK's statement of intent, filed with the
Securities and Exchange Commission, indicates that the new management is committed to producing computer games
and provides welcome assurance that
Mediagenic will continue to publish
game software.
Meanwhile, Cinemaware was allegedly
being considered for acquisition by entertainment companies involved in both
software publishing and film production.
Any of these acquisitions would seem

like an excellent move. Unfortunately,
Cinemaware was perceived by prospective suitors to be under-capitalized and unlikely to turn around its relatively poor
recent quarterly performances in the
short term. Thus, in a move intended to
save the company as, at least, a
developer, the company laid off 43
employees (lowering their current total to
14). Contrary to early rumors, the company is not planning to file for protection
under bankruptcy laws as they are current with outside obligations. The
company's goal is to license and develop
their products rather than continuing as a
publisher. Cinemaware is expected to fulfil its obligation to provide NEC products
like TV Sports: Hockey and It Came
From The Desert, as well as its obligation to Commodore to deliver TV Sports:
Football for the CDTV system. Consumers will still be able to purchase the
finished products from Electronic Arts
Distribution.
In more positive news, both Konami
and Spectrum HoloByte have entered
into publishing partnerships with Britain's
Mirrorsoft. Spectrum HoloByte's new
line of imports will be called Arena
Entertainment and will include:
Cadaver (an adventure game by the Bit
Map Brothers), Reach for the Skies (a
Battle of Britain game developed by
Rowan Software) and Red Phoenix
(based on the Larry Bond novel).
Konami just released Back to the Future II and Theme Park Mystery, both
developed in association with
Mirrorsoft's established Image Works
line. In addition, Konami will establish a
publishing partnership with another
European software house, Gremlin
Graphics. Gremlin Graphics previously
produced Lotus (a Formula I auto racing
game) and BSS Jane Seymour (an adventure game set on a spaceship).
Accolade has announced a new dis-

tribution agreement with U.S. Gold. The
agreement allows Accolade to market titles like International Soccer (Italy,
1990 in Europe, this seems to be
Europe's idea of what TV Sports: Soccer
should be), Gold of the Aztecs (an action/adventure with 80 screens of action
and logic puzzles), Vaxine (Harmony
with a faster pace), and Rotox (an action
game with cyborg warriors where the action seems like Centipede meets Zaxxon
in a zero-gravity Marble Madness world).
Finally, at press time, Virgin
Mastertronic revealed that it was about
to merge with a U.S. software corporation. The identity of the East Coast company had not been confirmed at press
time, but it is believed that the two companies will consolidate their operations in
order to provide for more efficient overhead.

Between Iraq and a Hard
Place (Simulations)
Naturally, the world of simulations is
dominated by a focus on modern combat. Microprose will reprise two of their
most successful titles in new incarnations. Gunship 2000 could possibly be
considered Gunship meets M-1 Tank
Platoon. The new version not only
boasts 256 color VGA graphics
throughout the game and full sound support, but it has literally been redesigned
from the ground up. The game demands
squadron action and offers a variety of
squadrons to work with, is more missionoriented than the earlier game and features both European and Desert
scenarios.
Meanwhile, F-117A Nighthawk is expected to be to F-19 Stealth Fighter
what Silent Service II was to the classic
Silent Service. Not only have the
graphics and documentation been updated, but the flight model has been
revised to more accurately reflect the

Industry News

reality of the F-117A and specific Iraqi
scenarios have been added.
Alert readers will ask a very good ques
tion about MegaFortress from ThreeSixty. "If the game is based on Dale
Brown's best-selling novel, Flight of the
Old Dog, why does it have Iraqi
scenarios? After all, the book doesn't
have any." See the Sneak Preview on
page 16 of this issue for the answer.
falcon 3.0 may be Spectrum
HoloByte's masterpiece of all time. In addition to the editing capabilities and multimedia aspects noted last issue, innovations in this program include: the use of
an anti-aliasing chip in cooperation with
a math co-processor in order to get crisp,
clear images, even in a polygon-filled environment; support of an upcoming
sound board which will allow directional
sound cues with earphones; and authentic terrain based on U.S.A.F. terrain maps
with actual heights and depths as
recorded on those documents. Finally,
the program uses every unclassified
aspect of the F-16C with every possible
unclassified armament.
Those who are not concerned about cur-

rent events may find themselves more interested in Activision's Death or Glory.
Self-styled as the "Time-Life Books" approach to aircraft simulation, Death or
Glory offers 76 years of air combat. The
game will feature twelve pre-designed missions covering six different eras: World
War I, World War II, Korea, Vietnam,
Falklands and Syria (1982). The missions are historically based and enable
players to compare their performance
with actual historical results at the conclusion of each sortie. European-based
Vektor Graphics developed the game
using ellipses to shape the polygon-filled
graphics into more identifiable shapes
than the typical polygon technology.
Also, they developed some "What if?"
capabilities where F-16s could fight Fokkers or Harriers could challenge Spitfires.
The aerodynamic model was developed
by the company in conjunction with their
Space Shuttle simulation being prepared
for Virgin Mastertronic.
The Space Shuttle program features
everything in real-time. The VAB roll-out,
launch, orbit and landing (complete with
eleven different missions) are all as
authentic as possible. NASA cooperated

so well with the product that it was difficult to distill the material down from the
800 page flight manual and other
esoteric publications. This simulation
promises to be the one for a person who
wants the ultimate detail, but it features
several help functions that move the
game along or help players with the
more difficult aspects of the game.
The simulation scene is filled out with
two similar style automobile racing
games: Mario Andretti's Racing Challenge from Electronic Arts and Bill
Elliott's NASCAR Challenge from
Konami. Both feature replays from multiple perspectives, considerable technical
consultation from racing celebrities,
smooth action and beautiful graphics.
Mario Andretti's Racing Challenge features a role-playing aspect patterned
after Mario's career. Players try to obtain
sponsors and work their way up through
six different circuits, driving six different
types of cars. Bill Elliott's NASCAR
Challenge spends much more time in
having the player set up the car and features eight different tracks and three different NASCAR-approved cars (see
"Taking A Peek" in this issue).

Industry News

Active Imagination (Action)
Naturally, the world of film is still considered to offer some of the most fertile
ground in designing action games.
Bethesda Softworks has tapped into
that genre for The Terminator. This action game follows the film script almost
verbatim and allows the player to walk,
fly and drive through the terrifying future
as either the Terminator himself or as
Reese. Those who dislike linear games
can disregard the storyline, however, and
simply move into death and destruction
mode. In something of the same vein,
Ocean is following the script fairly carefully with its long-awaited The Untouchables action game, complete with shootout in Union Station, Chicago.
Of course, no one should be surprised
that Walt Disney Software is producing
action versions of their hit films. Arachnophobia is an action/strategy game
based on the movie. Due to be released
in the late third quarter, the game features seven levels representing seven different towns and players take on a
search and destroy mission to get rid of
the killer spiders and their eggs before

they get the player's on-screen persona.
Players choose different weapons and
there are fourteen different attack patterns which the spider "villains" might
use against them.
Dick Tracy is the late second quarter
release from the software division. The
graphics are somewhat reminiscent of
Ocean's Batman: The Movie game (distributed in the U.S. by Data East), only
with smaller figures. Interestingly enough,
however, the design team has elected to
focus on the Dick Tracy of the 1940s
radio series and comic books rather than
the Warren Beatty approach to the hero.
The program generates hundreds of random crimes throughout the fictional city
and Tracy's job is to stop them and capture the bad guys.
Accolade has always been
synonymous with action games and
1991 will be no exception. Their new
agreement with U.S. Gold will guarantee
a steady flow of European-designed action titles, plus they will be unveiling
three action releases on the Sega
Genesis: Star Control, a version of
Hardball that is closer to the original

than Hardball II (featuring a seven game
World Series rather than league play)
and a European shoot-'em-up with 3-D
Parallax scrolling called Onslaught.
In addition, Accolade's Hovercraft will
combine elements of arcade-style games,
three-dimensional simulations and adventure. The fiction pits the player as an
agent in a futuristic drug war. The agent
"drives" a hovercraft through urban environments looking for a drug called
"Aftershock" and attempts to both
destroy the drugs and pick up new
weapons/equipment to improve his
vehicle.
In Software Toolworks' D-Generation
(working title), the futuristic world finds itself in danger from a biological
laboratory where mutations are rampant
and everything has gone awry (something like the old HMS Pandora's Box
boardgame). The player travels through
150-200 rooms in this first quarter
release and observes the progress of
his/her "sterilization" campaign from an
oblique 3/4 perspective.
Speaking of action games with something of a scientific twist, Psygnosis is

Industry News

readying Atomino for late first quarter
release on both the Amiga and IBM.
Atomino is a real-time challenge in
which players build molecules almost
Tetris-style from atoms with distinctive
electron patterns. Data East offers a
similar product, called Continuum,
which has just been released (see
"Taking A Peek").
Sequels are also fertile seed beds for
developing action games. California
Dreams has decided to one-up themselves with Street Rod II. The new version
of their action/strategy hit will feature a
new decade, new cars and new types of
races. The goal of the game and basic
system will still be the same, but the
graphics are enhanced and a construction set has been added. Access is
preparing Cartel, a Crime Wave-style adventure as their primary second quarter
action release. Also, as noted in last
issue's "Rumor Bag," Wing Commander
2 is being readied to follow in the
footsteps of its number one rated
predecessor.
Sports titles also fulfil part of the action
gamer's fantasy life. Cinemaware is attempting to develop TV Sports: RollerBabes as a complement to their TV
Sports series of games. This roller derby
game features a sleazy announcer, those
classic interview segments and four
male/four female teams. Also,
Cinemaware is developing TV Sports:
Hockey for NEC (described in last
issue's report) and UbiSoft has just
released Pro Tennis Tour 2 (both
described in last issue's article).
Finally, Psygnosis is attempting to create a new line of action games with three
"cartoon" products. The first of the series
to be unveiled is Lemmings. This game
features an obstacle course for one or
two players in which the object is to rescue the dumb lemmings before they end
up falling off the screen.

Strategic Intervention
(Strategy)
Perhaps, one of the most original
games unveiled at the show is scheduled
to be published by California Dreams.
Entitled Solidarity, this political simulation was Polish-designed and
programmed. Coming in the early
second quarter, this game of Eastern
European politics allows players to organize a political party, develop activists
to be developed according to use, plan
legal activities (speeches, strikes, passing
leaflets, etc.), and authorize illegal activities (jamming television signals, using
a radio and setting up printing presses).

Time, personnel and resource management unite with political acumen to create a fascinating challenge.
Another strategy game that presents
some different challenges has just been
released from PC Globe. Bushbuck
Charms, Viking Ships and Dodo Eggs
is a global scavenger hunt. Players travel
the globe from destination to destination,
seeking exotic treasure like those
described in the game's title. Since each
destination point has six different departure points, the goal of the game's designers was that a player would never play
the same game twice.
Of course, in addition to being a staple
of the action game environment, sports
games are vital to the strategy world.
Earl Weaver Baseball II will not only feature significantly improved graphics and
the editor features described in the last
issue, but also a computer manager
which players design themselves (using
a 60 question quiz), ability to download
statistics from the USA Today network,
enhanced sound and an extended (40
man) roster. The product might even feature salaries and salary limits, but this
had not been determined at press time.
Earl Weaver II developer Mirage
Graphics has also been working with
Bethesda Softworks. As yet untitled,
the college basketball game will feature a
player editor to customize teams,
capacity for "coaching on the fly" from a
pre-set playbook and, for pure strategy
players, a "Coach Only" mode.

This Means War (Wargames)
A subset of strategy games is the declining genre of wargames. This year,
Broderbund is offering a hybrid action/wargame in Ancient Art of War in
the Skies. The Murry brothers have
redesigned the Ancient Art of War system to integrate air and ground battles.
Players can edit campaigns (deciding on
such matters as bomber construction,
repair rates for both the offensive and
defensive sides, and flight range) and use
a map twice as large as those in previous Ancient Art of War games. Actual
combat takes place in action sequences
that, for fighter combat, look something
like Wings of Fury. There are two new
types of sequences for bomber gunners
and bombardiers, however. The action sequences are designed to reflect the
average plane of World War I, however,
and not any specific plane. The campaign game is interesting because the
front line is dynamic and moves back
and forth depending upon the player's
prowess as a pilot.

As noted last issue, Mindcraft will
release a real-time castle defense game
called Siege. However, the company will
also release Rules of Engagement in the
late second quarter. This is the
ship-to-ship tactical space combat game
developed by Omnitrend that is intended to use the IGS: Interlocking
Game System. Space vessels slug it out
using Rules of Engagement until one
ship's crew is ready to board the other
ship. Then, players can save the game
and use Breach 2 to resolve the man-toman combat. If a player does not have
Breach 2, the computer will resolve the
boarding sequence automatically.
In addition, Mindcraft plans to include
a powerful editor in their next two Omnitrend products. Players will be able to
design alien races, fleet commanders,
captains, ships, races, systems and missions. The second product, Mercenaries,
will be similar to Breach 2, but will allow
alien mercenaries and every character
will be handled like the squad leaders
alone have been updated in the Breach
series to this point.
Koei Corporation plans to market
Romance of the Three Kingdoms II on
the IBM PC in June and Bandit Kings of
Ancient China on the Nintendo immediately. The former will be their first PC program with sound board support and, if it
is anything like Nobunaga's Ambition
II, should feature significantly improved
graphics and artificial intelligence. In the
fourth quarter, Koei's Napoleonic game,
L'Empereur, is due. It will integrate
politics, economics and military strategy
into another historical challenge from
Koei. Alas, the company suggested that
their World War II in the Pacific game
may not arrive by December 7, 1991 as
originally expected.
Strategic Simulations was not showing any of their Revolution '76-style
American Civil War game at CES or their
Medieval Lords. Both should provide
great interest. Three-Sixty informed
CGW that they are working on a landbased version of Harpoon. The
boardgame gurus (and authors of the
Desert Shield Factbook), Game Designers Workshop will assist in the design
of the new Harpoon game.
The world of wargames is sparse, but
not quite forgotten.

Role Out The Peril
(Role-Playing)
Although best known for its wargames,
Koei will unveil a new direction in 1991.
Called "ReKoeition" games, hybrid

Industry News

products like The Big Voyage will further
blur the divisions between strategy, wargame, adventure and role-playing. This
icon-driven challenge is expected during
the fourth quarter of 1991.

treatment given to Sherlock Forest in
Conquests of the Long Bow. In addition
to announced titles, a second "Laura
Bow" mystery is in the early stages.
A new project from Jeff Tunnell of
Dynamix has been announced. Entitled
The Adventures of Willie Beamish and
described as a "light and colorful story
about a nine-year-old and his quest to get
to the World Video Game Championships," this adventure promises to be
more than "Leave It To Beaver" in the
1990s. CGW will print more details on
this groundbreaking project as they become available.

Origin's Martian Dreams sounds like
a mesmerizing CRPG for anyone interested in history. Players meet historical
figures like Freud, Rasputin, Lenin, Peary,
Edison, Carnegie and Curie. It is not immediately obvious whether one has to kill
Rasputin the Mad Monk in order to win
this game (good luck if it is!), but it is cer
tain that Martian Dreams is the first "Ultima" in which a player can actually lose.
In addition to historical figures, the plot
features belated tributes to cinematic
geniuses like Fritz Lang (Metropolis) and
Georges Melies (A Trip to the Moon).

Legend Software's TimeQuest appears to be a fascinating adventure in
which players visit six different cities
across a time span of three thousand
years in order to save the world. Players
encounter Moses, Cleopatra, Charlemagne, King John, Genghis Khan, Sir
Francis Drake and host of other famous
dead dudes as they chase the ultimate
bad guy through time, bravely attempting to undo his dastardly deeds. The
designer assures us that players will not
have to know a lot of history in order to
succeed. They might learn some, but
they do not have to know it.

Space opera is the vehicle for New
World's Planet's Edge, as well. Sixty different worlds populate this fictional
universe and each one is unique in appearance and life forms. Players can customize the party's exploration vessels, as
well as their personal equipment.
Planet's Edge has a beautiful look to it
(with 256 color VGA graphics) and allows players to choose whether to play
as a pure strategy-based CRPG or as a
real-time action/role-playing game.
Sequels have always had a vital place
in the role-playing genre. As noted last
issue, Mindcraft's The Magic Candle II
features a number of new features.
Another sequel, New World's Might &
Magic III: Isles of Terra builds on the
famous system with new features like:
detailed portrait icons of the characters,
the largest three-dimensional viewing window for on-screen action, cinematic sequences to enhance the game's pacing,
additional magic spells and new character classes. Perhaps most importantly,
Might & Magic Ill was designed to be
replayable.
Strategic Simulations continues to enhance the value of its Advanced Dungeons and Dragons line. In addition to
Eye of the Beholder, the beautifully
crafted first person perspective role-playing experience and Death Knights of
Krynn, the sequel to Champions of
Krynn, the company plans to go on-line
(America On-Line) with a multi-player
version of these graphically resplendent
CRPGs.
Finally, as described last issue,
Darklands from Microprose will use an
authentic map of Medieval Germany
(A.D. 1400-1500) and a magic system
based on what the people of that era
believed was true to develop a rich "fan-

Interplay is importing yet another Delphine Software product with Cruise for
a Corpse, a tribute to Agatha Christie in
a period piece set in the 1920s. One
major improvement in this adventure
over Delphine's previous efforts is that
the interface now allows players to question non-player characters.
tasy" world. The game will feature, at
least, 100 saints to pray to (reflecting
"religious" perceptions of the supernatural) and 100 alchemical potions
(reflecting "occult" and pseudo-scientific
perceptions of magic). Darklands should
combine the strengths of Microprose's
design staff's historical expertise with
their personal role-playing experience,
providing a potentially fascinating
product.

Thirst For Danger
(Adventure)
Aficionados of adventure have nothing
to worry about in 1991. Sierra plans to
release six titles. In addition to Space
Quest IV and Dynamix's Heart of China
(originally scheduled for late 1990), the
company expects to reprise the polyester
protagonist in Leisure Suit Larry 5 and
the long arm of the law in Police Quest
III. Fans of 1990's Conquests of
Camelot can anticipate the same basic

Capstone has licensed a summer
movie for their next adventure game.
The company believes The Taking of
Beverly Hills will be 1991's Die Hard
and they are doing their best to move
away from the company's arcadeoriented products in order to create a
true adventure game.
Finally, as noted last issue, Accolade's
Conspiracy: The Deadlock Files, a murder mystery/intrigue adventure, and
Cinemaware's The Enemy Within, an interactive police "buddy" picture, will use
multi-media effects to tell their stories.

Settling Down
No matter how severe the quakes were
that sent shivers through the "computer
gaming world" over the last few weeks,
the upshot is that there is plenty of exciting new product on its way to our
readers. We do hope things will settle
down for a few weeks, though. We could
use the peace and quiet.

Review

A Passionate Tryst with Speed
Accolade's Test Drive III: The Passion
By David M. Wilson
creaming down the highway at over 200 mph, I heard the
first panicky beep of the radar detector. The squealing
tone warned that radar was operating somewhere nearby.
When the second L.E.D. lit up I was faced with the choice of slowing down or trying to outrun the "County Mounties." It took less
than two seconds to decide to run for it. After all, even if the
vigilant Smokey caught me, this would be one ticket that would
not affect my insurance premium.
Accolade's Test Drive III: The Passion is a foray into the battle of

the speed demons. The player buckles up and competes in an epic
road race from the Pacific Coast to Yosemite National Park. (Keep
the gas tank full, because Accolade promises that additional courses and cars will be available.)
There are three great "fantasy" cars, fresh from the drawing board
to the player's monitor. The Lamborghini Diablo jumps from 0-62
mph in a quick 4.1 seconds, utilizes a V-12, has a top speed of
202 mph and costs a mere
$200,000. The Pininfarina is based
on the Ferrari 12-cylinder, zips
from 0-60 mph in 6.2 seconds, has
a top speed of 180 mph, and cost
a paltry(?) $2,516,250. On the
domestic front, Chevrolet offers
the CERV Ill (Corporate Experimen
tal Research Vehicle Ill). This
American beauty boasts a 4-cam,
32-valve zr-1 v-8 engine fortified
with Garrett T3 turbochargers and
intercoolers (the practical meaning
of which is that the first two cars
only seemed fast). The CERV Ill
rockets from 0-60 mph in an impressive 3.9 seconds and has a
top speed of 225 mph. The list
price is estimated at $400,000.
Like a car owner's manual, the
game manual takes the space to
describe each of these wonder
cars in careful detail.
Test Drive Ill is an interesting
mix in a game. The 3-D, polygonfilled play screens aren't exceptionally beautiful, but are certainly playable and "realistic" enough. One
nice touch (of "chrome?") is the
fact that bugs splatter on the
windshields of the car (with an important departure from reality in
that real insects don't swish off
with one easy pass of the
windshield wipers). The EGA
graphics lose some of the "flash"
of the VGA title screens, but, in
general, the playing screens in
EGA do not seem substantially different from the VGA ones.
One complaint relating to the
graphics might be the "stupid"
cows. The cud-chewing beasts just
stand in the road, expecting those
expensive sports cars to go
around them. They never budge!
When cruising (racing?) around
the beautiful California
countryside, players must be
aware that the cops only have to

get close enough to the car to take a picture of its license plate to
"nail" someone. This begs the question, "Is that fair?" How do they
know it wasn't the owner's spouse or kid driving? (Like anyone
would really let them behind the wheel of his Lamborghini.) Oddly,
one would think that the Accolade programmers would know that
the California Highway Patrol doesn't use radar except in a few experimental situations. (Don't these people ever speed to work?)
Assuming the player opts for a rather exciting chase when the
police are in the rearview mirror, if the cops get too close in their pursuit, a viable option is to just drive off the road until they go by.
Players can even hide in some of the barns along the way. Be careful
not run over the "stone(d?)" cows or the wrong party in that accident
will end up hamburger.
This reviewer was disappointed that there was no hot-key for a
horn (after all, most people like to blow their horn in long tunnels).
To make matters a bit worse, reaching the hot-keys was somewhat
difficult while driving down the road. Why not just use the "W" key
for wipers and the "H" key for headlights? Hitting CTRL-W takes
more hands than a person doing 185 mph can safely spare.
The most interesting aspect of the game is the increasingly standard instant replay mode. After a
crash, players can control a
TITLE:
Test Drive III: The Passion
camera which views the latest
IBM (8 MHz or faster)
SYSTEM:
catastrophe from varying views
# PLAYERS:
1-4
and angles (ever see Red Asphalt
PRICE:
$59.95
Tom Loughry
DESIGNER:
in traffic school?).
DISTRIBUTOR: Accolade
San lose, CA

Test Drive III offers a player nine
levels of driving skills. As in the
previous games, the beginning
levels allow the computer to do
the shifting, but the tougher levels
provide extra shifting, traffic and
damage. The upshot is that lower
levels allow more leeway for "fantasy" driving. Thus, on the easier
levels, a player could drive on the
sides of hills to some degree without tearing up or rolling the car. Although Test Drive III is not primarily an "off road" simulator, most
players become highly amused
checking out the vast countryside
areas built into this game.
For players who wind up "off
road" (where it is easy to get
frustratingly lost), hitting the F6
key immediately returns the
vehicle safely to the road. A final
note: Players who go the wrong
way down the highway will not be
able to read the (occasionally important) road signs.
While a fine driving simulator
(particularly the "off road" aspects, oddly enough), it is not a
"wow" that will knock a player's
racing gloves off. However, Test
Drive III is a well-designed package that does its best to emulate
real driving conditions with an emphasis on "power machine fantasy." Since this is as close as
most people are likely to get to actually driving these exotic cars,
this will be the game's main appeal to many.

Strategy

"It is something
to be able to
paint a particular
"
picture, or to
carve a statue,
and so to make a
few objects
beautiful; but it
is far more
glorious to carve
and paint the very atmosphere and medium through
which we look, which
morally we can do. To affect the quality of the day,
that is the highest of arts."
— Henry David Thoreau

Sim " plifying SimEarth

Some Hints On Improving Game Play
by Stanley R. Trevena

The Tone Monitor option is
a valuable tool that can be
used through all time scales.
This option allows the player
to monitor a specific output
using sound instead of visual
data. This translates output
data, such as air temperature, to a tone. The higher
the tone, the higher the value
of the output. This reviewer
also left the Atmosphere
Sample Window on-screen
throughout the game.

imEarth is the muchanticipated next step
in the Maxis line of
systems simulation software.
It is not a sequel to SimCity,
and any player who approaches it as such will be
disappointed. SimEarth is a
global biosphere simulation
that allows the player to experiment, explore and discover the intricate interrelationships of the various
systems that make up a
planet's ecosystem. The
player can choose to take a
planet from formation to
civilization, or start anywhere
in between.
SimEarth is based on
James Lovelock's Gaia hypothesis. In brief, the theory
states that the Earth is a selfregulating living organism.
As Johnny Wilson noted in
the original review of SimEarth (CGW #78), the Gaia
hypothesis is brought to life in a dynamic
simulation. This article will focus on
specific aspects of the simulation.
First, note that the basic interface of
SimEarth is closely related to that of Sim
City. The Edit and Map Windows are almost identical. The Edit Window shows a
close-up view of a portion of the planet
while the Map Window gives a flat twodimensional view of the whole planet.
This reviewer found that by making the
Edit window slightly smaller than the entire screen and centering it, it was possible to place smaller data windows, including the Map Window, around the
perimeter of the screen. These, then,
could easily be brought to the front of
the screen by a click on the exposed
edge of the hidden windows. This mini-

dow, Civilization
Model, Tech Ratio
Graph and History
Window. These
windows will allow
the player to effectively allocate energy to advance the
technological level
of the civilizations.

mized the time spent pulling down
menus and loading the needed windows.
The key to success in SimEarth is the
effective use of the interrelated data windows. The importance of the different windows varies with the different time scales.
For instance, this reviewer keeps the History, Model and Air Sample Windows onscreen throughout the geologic and evolution time scales.
After the player brings life to the planet,
the Report Window keeps the player
abreast of the species racing toward sentient status. Once a life form becomes
sentient, the player will want to disable
the display of life forms using the Life button in the Edit Window; this removes unnecessary clutter from the screen. Now
in the civilization time scale, the player
will want to make use of the Report Win-

Advancing the technology
level of a planet's civilizations
requires conservation of the
energy resources available to
the planet. Technology level
determines the efficiency
with which the population
uses energy. A player should
closely monitor the energy efficiency percentages and output levels displayed in the
Report Window. Allocate energy investments from the
civilization model to produce
those energies that can be
used efficiently by your population. Focusing a population's use of either fossil fuels
or nuclear energy too early in
the game will leave one's
planet without these precious resources
later when they are needed to advance
through the technology time scale.
SimEarth is a cerebral exercise. It leans
toward a left-brain orientation and gives
your analytical and logical skills a
workout. A player looking for the construction-set feel and cute animations of
SimCity will not find much in SimEarth,
unless using the experimental mode.
This writer does not see SimEarth reaching the record levels of success of SimCity. Rather, this game is complex and
will require an investment of time by the
player. Players who make the investment
will be rewarded with a fascinating simulation that takes this genre to new levels.
SimEarth is a diamond in the rough and
one can either pass it by or shape it into
a personal gem.

Review

Timothy Trimble is a computer professional who works for
Ashton-Tate. He is a flight simulator aficionado and has previously published in Plane and Pilot.

he

simplicity of flight, basic air-to-air combat tactics, situational awareness and wind rushing over the cockpit is what
flying in World War I was all about. Being able to see the opponent only 30 yards away while beating on a jammed machine
gun or building up enough air speed to do a full inside loop are
concepts that Dynamix' Red Baron brings to the arm-chair pilot.

T

Dynamix provides a rich feel for the Western Front environment of the 1915 to 1918 period with a high level of quality
throughout the entire simulator. From the user interface and
graphics to the flight dynamics and the use of a VCR for replay,
it is easy to see that much time and energy was placed into the
quality features designed for Red Baron.
While some flight simulators require a strange contortion of the
player's hands between the joystick and the keyboard, Dynamix
has been able to squeeze 24 different functions out of one joystick. Flight controls, throttle, views from the cockpit and external
views can all be controlled via the joystick without having to
touch the keyboard. The various configurations of holding down
one or two buttons while moving the stick was a little confusing
at first, although it soon becomes very easy to fly, fire and switch
views without peeking at the reference card.
While playing Red Baron it became quite obvious to this
reviewer that this is not just a simple "game" but is, indeed, a
complex flight combat simulator. That is, it is complex in the
sense that the flight dynamics of the various aircraft are very
realistic and the personal characteristics of each of the Famous
Aces is reflected in how they fly against the player. So, depending on which of the various missions one is flying, proper selection of aircraft for the job can have a great effect on the outcome. For example, the German Fokker Dr.l "Triplane" (the Red
Baron's favorite) can fly circles around a French Spad 7, but
would not be able to keep up with the Spad in straight flight.
This would be good to remember before flying against Manfred
von Richthofen, the game's namesake. However, it can also be
noted that von Richthofen did not believe in the use of loops
during combat, whereas Werner Voss, another ace pilot, will use
many different types of acrobatic maneuvers.

What's It Like Up There?
The flying environment of Red Baron provides many enhancements to the "feel" of flying combat during WWI. The terrain is
well mapped out and detailed and includes the entire Western
Front. A pilot can take advantage of the environment by hiding
in the clouds, which greatly reduces visibility, or jumping on an
opponent from out of the sun. This can also be a disadvantage
since looking towards the sun will reduce the pilot's vision. Flying
under the clouds will provide shade and block out the sun, which
slightly darkens the screen. If the pilot is wounded during combat, the screen will fade between red and normal, depending on
how bad the wound is. If it is fatal, the entire screen will go red
and the current flight is ended, usually along with condolences
from the rest of the flight squadron.
In many cases, when being shot at by the opponent, bullet
holes will appear in the support spars, engine cowling and frame
of the aircraft. As long as the shots do not hit anything vital, the
holes will not cause any problems. Wind can also play a factor
since it usually blows towards Germany. A strong wind can make
it difficult to get back into allied territory, especially if the aircraft
is damaged.

Dynamix'
by Timothy

What Do We Do Now, Captain?
Red Baron allows players to dogfight a famous ace, fly a single
mission or start a career. Although the dogfighting and single mis
sion selections are good for immediately meeting up with triggerhappy opponents, the Career option is, by far, the most challenging part of the simulator. The player can begin a career as either
a Second Lieutenant in the Royal Flying Corps or as a Leutnant
in the German Air Service. The career begins in December of
1915 and will last until the end of the war on November 10, 1918
— providing, of course, that the player can last that long.
The player is assigned an aircraft and given various missions at
random locations. The missions reflect the historical situations
during the pilot's time frame, with the introduction of new aircraft
as the war progresses. Players also get the opportunity to fly in
more significant missions as their experience (and record) improve. The missions include attacks on balloons and Zeppelins,
escort reconnaissance aircraft, patrols, dogfights and much
more. As the player becomes more experienced and gains more
victories, he is promoted until finally reaching the rank of Captain (or Rittmeister). Once this rank is obtained the real fun
begins. A Captain will get to select the type of aircraft that he
wants to use and also gets to select the color. (Although histori-

being grounded permanently. However, successfully completing
the mission results in a high score and a possible promotion. As
the player's reputation and experience increases, invitations from
some of the better (elite) squadrons will arrive. There will also be
challenges issued by various famous ace pilots to meet in the
skies for one-on-one dogfights.

Play It Again, Manfred
TITLE:
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

Red Baron
IBM, Amiga
$59.95
Damon Slye
Dynamix
Subsidiary of Sierra
Coarsegold, CA

One of the most interesting features of Red Baron is the ability
to use the VCR option for "taping" the mission and then playing
it back later. The VCR is very well implemented and allows much
more functionality than just doing a replay. What makes the VCR
so special is the ability to change the "camera" angle and viewpoint from just about anywhere imaginable. The camera can be
placed inside the cockpit, following the plane from the outside,
following the opponent's plane from the outside or from an external position that is independent of the aircraft being viewed. Plus,
there are two modes of operation, "Director" and "View-Only."
The Director mode allows the player to make view point changes to the original tape and then save it for later viewing. This
places the player into the role of "Movie Editor" by allowing the
player to take the original tape of the mission and change the
views and perspectives to capture the best action shots. ViewOnly mode is just for reviewing the tapes without saving any
viewpoint changes. Another nice feature is the ability to enter
into the simulation, at any point on the tape, and fly the mission
all over again! (The old "if only..." feature.)

Red Baron
Trimble
cally the Germans were the only ones who did this, the Allied
player gets to enjoy this little perq, as well.)

The Mission Airy Position
Once a mission is assigned, the player can review his assignment and set the "mission conditions." This allows the player to
set the aircraft type, the location of the battle, the altitude,
weather and the position of the sun. A realism panel is also avail
able for adjusting the quality of the player's aircraft, the pilots on
the player's flight group and the ability of the opponent's pilots.
When the mission begins, so does the fun. Usually, the missions begin in the air with the pilot flying in formation with the
rest of the flight group, although one of the more challenging missions involves taking off from the aerodrome while the enemy is
attacking from overhead. Upon sight of the enemy, the dogfights
begin.

Buzzing Around The Not-So-Friendly Skies
Now with all the confusion of dogfighting when there are from
two to eight aircraft in the air, all in close proximity, it becomes
quite easy to shoot down a friendly airplane. Doing so will take
the player before the Board of Inquiry, and if done three times
during a career, it will result in the player losing his wings and

To the novice player, it can be difficult trying to stay in the air
against the best pilots of the Western or Eastern Front, but there
are a few things to keep in mind that will help. First of all, the
player should become familiar with the aircraft and its characteristics. Trying to fly a Spad 7 in a maneuvering battle with the
von Richthofen will result in being shot down every time. Instead,
a Sopwith Snipe might be more appropriate for tight maneuvers.
Second, the player should fire the guns only when the opponent
is at close range and properly in the gun sights. Ammo is limited
and the guns tend to jam if fired in long bursts. Third, turn
toward an attacker instead of turning away. The opponent will
usually end up on the tail of the player if he turns away. By turning toward the attacker, the player can cut inside the attacker's
turn and prevent him from following. Finally, the player can
sometimes gain an advantage by disengaging from the dogfight
and then reengaging. This gives the player the ability to refocus
on where the opponent is and possibly to gain an advantage of
speed when reengaging.

Three-Point Landing
Overall, Red Baron is a well thought-out, quality flight combat
simulator that provides an historically accurate depiction of air
combat during World War I. The flight dynamics of the aircraft
are very realistic and offer a "instant" education on what the first
"Top Guns" had to go through during their missions. Red Baron
is a great break from the flight simulators that require twenty
fingers on each hand and an eye on fifteen different instruments.
This is true "back to the basics" and "seat of the pants" flying. In
CGWs sneak preview (#75, October 1990) it was observed that
Dynamix set three goals for Red Baron: Get the flight dynamics
right, make sure the dogfighting is realistic and get the historical
color right. They have accomplished all three goals with vigor.
Let's see now, where did that Richthofen go? I just saw him a
second ago....

Review

Hard Nova Hard Look
EA Launches a New Space Opera
by Ken St. Andre

Ken St. Andre is the designer of
the pen and paper version of Tunnels & Trolls and has recently
published a short story in the
Shadowrun universe.

portant NPCs. The same really
ugly bartender portrait pops up all
over the four systems. Also, all Lantas, D-Coros, Zero-Ls and Darcators look exactly the same.

Space: The Marketing
Frontier

Nova, however, is called a "quietly attractive" woman who would
not draw a second glance. In fact,
she is drop dead gorgeous, as are
the other ladies who will join your
mercenary band as the game goes
on. The IBM version supports
MCGA 256-color graphics as well
as VGA, EGA and Tandy 1000.
The oblique angle of view for the
flight scenes gives a true feeling of
three-dimensionality. On the other
hand, the highly symmetrical
dot-and-square top-down view of
ground combat is a throwback to
much more primitive arcade
shootouts and is strictly two-dimensional.

For some time now, the computer game industry has had a perception that what computer
garners want is "a really good
space opera computer role-playing
game." There have been a number
of attempts to satisfy this demand:
notably Starflight I and II,
Megatraveller, Space 1889, Buck
Rogers, Star Command, and the
works of Karl Buiter, EOS: Earth
Orbit Station (although not a
CRPG per se, it certainly turned
Karl's attention toward space), Sentinel Worlds I and Hard Nova. In
many ways, Hard Nova is one of
the best of the many computer
space operas available.

In Space, Which Way is
Up?

The player takes the part of
either Nova or Stark, anima and
animus of a mud-drinking, triggerhappy, tough-talking space mercenary in
the best tradition of Han Solo. In the
course of adventuring, one will have to
recover a Ciberan transport, track down
the leader of an alien religious cult, assassinate the dictator of the planet Ariel and
stop an interstellar invasion. Mostly, this
means killing lots of unsavory humans
and aliens while looking for special equipment and items.

Among the flashy graphics included with the game is a very
nice 11" x 21" full-color map of the
Four Systems Group. Not only does this
show the location of the various planets
and stargates, it also shows eight very attractive (and well-known) astronomical
photos of such things as the Pleiades
and the Horsehead Nebula (along with
eight numerical facts about each). As the
program starts, one of these pictures appears on the screen and the player is
asked to enter a Messier number, constellation name or such from the eight facts
associated with each picture. As copy
protection goes, this is actually educational, remarkably relevant to the game
and very easy to tolerate.

Full of Sound and Fury
Karl Buiter and his design team have
obviously put a lot of work into the
flashier parts of Hard Nova. Even on this
reviewer's decrepit old Tandy, without a mouse to
click on things and speed up operations, Hard Nova
still looks and sounds extremely good. The hi-res character portraits of player and non-player characters
are exquisitely done. It's too bad, however, that the
decision was made to re-use the portraits for less im-

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:

PUBLISHER:

Hard Nova
IBM
$49.95
Karl Buiter
Eric Lindstrom
and Jeff Haas
Electronic Arts
San Mateo, CA

Hard Nova is also pleasant on the ear. The theme
music is appropriate for whatever is being done and
will play using several sound boards, including the
popular Ad Libs and MT32s. If never-ending tweetling
drives a player crazy, however, it can be turned off

Review

before starting the game. In fact, the music for the bigger
shootouts really rocks and rolls! It isn't the classical symphony
that one gets in Loom, but is certainly as good as any other
game music around.

Tracking Targets to Plots
Another thing that should be mentioned is the real-time combat
system. The program keeps track of the positions of over 100
moving targets (for lack of a better term) at all times, and continues moving them around without missing a beat. Big
shootouts, either planetside or in space, are a quality trademark
of Hard Nova, and if one likes plenty of combat, this game will
have great appeal. Programmer-designer Karl Buiter feels that he
has done a much better job with this aspect of the game than he
did with his Sentinel Worlds.
While there is plenty of flash in Hard Nova, there is also more
than 250k of screenplay/story by Eric Lindstrom and Jeff Haas.
That would actually work out to somewhere between 40,000 and
50,000 words — a short novel. That is quite a lot of story, and
structuring it so that it will make sense no matter what order the
gamer accesses it is no easy task. It is also a fairly involved story
which builds to a big conclusion. If one can get over his or her
qualms at being more of a hired assassin than a mere mercenary, this game should be quite enjoyable.
There are a lot of nifty technical programming tricks in Hard
Nova — nothing new, but it is still nice to see such features as
automatic targeting, planetary rotation, inverse parsing for the
conversations, et cetera in the game. The amalgamation of such
techniques makes for a product that is actually as fun to play as
it is to look at. Still, Karl missed a few tricks. To shoot something, one must first target it. Targeting is easy — merely press
the space bar (on a planet) or the "/" key (in space) to change
targets. However, it would have been easier and more effective in
real-time combat to merely click on the desired target with the
mouse instead of slowly cycling through every target on the
screen.

"Yes, But is It Role-Playing?"
Hard Nova is also a true role-playing game in that the attributes of the player characters determine how well they can perform the various actions in the game. The better the personal
agility, the better are the reactions in combat, the higher the chances become to hit with a weapon, and the more often actual
damage to the foe is likely to occur. Players get the standard
role-player's reward of going up in level (frequently, although it
still amazes this reviewer that all one has to do is kill enough
enemies to improve in every skill and attribute which a character
possesses).
Despite the many good things about Hard Nova, the game still
has its weaknesses and rough edges. There are misspelled words
in the text of the conversations and everyone reacts to Nova as if
she were the male Stark instead of the uniquely female mercenary that she is. Much of the humor is scatological in nature. Darcators get their kicks by evacuating(?) on other sentients. At one
point in the game one gets to spit in another sentient's mouth,
etc.
Oddly, the zero-g roulette has a miscalculation in the payoff
routine that enables a player to almost always win when gambling. (Hint: Bet all three thirds of the table. The payoff for winning is set at 3 to 1 plus the original bet back!) Still, Karl
deliberately designed the game so that money would be easy to
acquire, stating he doesn't want players to worry about
economics — just shoot things up.

Shoot First, Then Keep Shooting
The main strength of Hard Nova is also its main weakness. It
is a very good real-time shoot-'em-up game. This reviewer likes
to shoot things, but after 10 or 20 hours of killing everything that
moves, one can lose interest. Every single spacecraft, other than
the player's, exists only to be shot down. This shows a sort of
emotional immaturity that is hard to condone in game design.
Hard Nova panders directly to a sort of amoral adolescent arcade power lust in its players. This reviewer would like to think
that his gaming alter-egos have more to them than a desire to
shoot everything that moves and make lots of money while
doing so.

Although it is something of an "apples and oranges" comparison, there were also some things in Starflight, both I and II,
that were missed in Hard Nova. Hard Nova uses only four solar
systems and eight planets. Starflight used a larger section of the
galaxy with hundreds of worlds. The capacity to "simply explore"
was much greater in Starflight and its aliens had greater depth
and humor in their interactions with the player. Ideally, a good
space opera game should have the Hard Nova game graphics
in the Starflight universe. As gamers go, this reviewer is atypical
in that he is not really interested in "solving" or winning the
game. Instead, he is much more interested in the experience of
living in and exploring the game universe. Still, the Hard Nova
"miniverse" is an interesting place to visit, but who would want to
live there?

Review

We Who Are About
to Fly, Salute You
Live Studio's Thunderstrike
by Michael Chaut

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

E

ach combat

was a life or
death issue to
the gladiators of ancient Rome, but the
contests were strictly entertainment to
the masses. In
Thunderstrike, the
pilots are the
gladiators, challenging enemy drones
in a live-fire arena
where television
ratings decide the
success or failure
for modern
gladiators. After
nearly 2,500 years,
it's still "bread and
circuses" to the masses. Thunderstrike
is a straightforward
3-D flight "game/
simulation" with a
simple enough interface that even the most novice player can immediately pilot
his/her craft with some degree of skill. In Thunderstrike, one
can enjoy something of a flight simulator without having to earn
a degree in aeronautics.
As the game opens, the player is asked to choose one of the
five pre-approved ships, each with its own advantages and disadvantages with regard to speed, acceleration and maneuverability,
from the MegaCorp Referee's Committee: the ThunderStrike 18,
the StrikeHornet 22, the StrikeHornet 24, the ThunderFly 10, and
the ThunderFly 25. The player must make a wise initial choice,
because this craft will be the one piloted throughout the entire
course of the game.
After choosing the craft, players move to an arena. Initially,
there is no choice with regard to arena, but as one progresses to
higher levels (level 10 or above), five different arenas (with ten
different difficulty levels each) become available. Each arena sig-

Thunderstrike
Amiga (512K Version), IBM (512K Version), Atari ST
$39.95
Brian Pollock, Tony Beckwith
LIVE Studios Inc.
San Juan Capistrano, CA

nifies a different level of achievement. Deinon
(levels 0-9), Xerxes (levels 10-19), Polloi (levels
20-29), Canton (levels 30-39), Synaps (levels
40-49).
The IBM version even has a distinctive automatic auto-save feature. In that version, one
does not have to start over a level zero if
his/her craft is destroyed, simply at the last
level successfully completed. Unfortunately, the
"auto-save feature" is only good while the computer is on, since the data is stored in RAM and
will be lost if the computer is re-booted or
turned off.
As the game begins, the player gets a colorful
3-D polygon-filled view of the battlefield. Looking to the right side of the screen, one can see
the Main Overview Radar (MOR), the most vital
part of the HUD). The MOR shows the position
of all installations and drones from an overhead
perspective. Used in conjunction with the Terrain Map [F4], the MOR will present valuable information to the player. In the center of the
screen the player will see the Attack Radar
(AR). This radar is only active when, at least,
one drone comes within threatening proximity
of the player's craft. Unlike the MOR, this radar rotates around
one's position so that the play-er's craft is always positioned at
the center. Saboteur drones are shown as cyan "blips" on the
AR, while other drones are depicted as yellow "blips." Installations are not visible on the AR.
On the bottom right of the screen, there are diagonal yellow
and red bars. Yellow depicts the pilot's shield energy and red indicates the TV show's ratings. The TV ratings help to determine
the final game score and are also interesting to observe. As
one's shields begin to lessen and the number of attacking drones
increase, so does a pilot's ratings. In other words, as the action
and the chance of death increase so do the number of viewers
tuning in to the broadcast. Obviously, then, those who can fly
"closest to the edge" will have the highest scores.
The rest of the screen is fairly intuitive. The panel marked "Inst"
indicates the number of ground installations left to defend, while

Review

"Gen" displays the number of drone generators are still in play
for the current round. Drones will be randomly fired into the
arena until all of the generators have been destroyed by the
player.
The object of the game is for the player to defend their bases
(ground installations) from enemy drones while trying to destroy
the enemy drone generators. As the player begins the game, this
task will seem very simple. As one moves up through the fifty
levels of the game, however, this task will become very formidable. Players lose the game if all of the ground installations
are destroyed in any single round or if their vessels are
destroyed by enemy fire.
After entering the arena, the gamer will now be able to access
his Terrain Map so as to ascertain the location of ground installations and the enemy generators. This will help the player to plan
his strategy for the ensuing round.
The game interface allows the player to fine-tune the controls of
his ship. Specifically, one can reverse the dive/climb and
fire/thrust buttons on the joystick and mouse as well as left/right
and up/down sensitivity on the mouse. The Amiga version does
not have an option for joystick or keyboard.
At the end of each round, the player's performance will be assessed by the referees on the basis of: Hit Rate, Defense Rate
and Vid Rate. A good hit rate is scored by efficient use of ammunition and results in a five point upgrade in each of the three
attributes (speed, acceleration and turn rate) of your craft. Good
defense results in no bonus, but a poor defense rate (anything
under 100%) will result in downgrading the craft's attributes by
five points. When the game ends (either in victory or by defeat),
an overall point value is awarded to the player. This value is calculated as a function of the player's overall performance in Hit,
Def and Vid Rates and placed (IBM version only) in the Top Ten
High Scores List.
Warning: The following section contains specific hints on
game play. Readers who prefer a more general briefing
should avoid this section.
The player should always check the Terrain Map upon entering
the arena [F4]. This will allow for an opportunity to design a
strategy of attack. As one begins to move through the different
levels of play, it will quickly become evident which strategies
work and which do not.
Players will also note that after each level, the target hit rate
(for bonus points) will increase (i.e. bonus points become
tougher to receive as one's target hit rate becomes larger and
larger). This reviewer discovered that the target hit rate does not
increase as fast if the gamer just marginally achieves his/her acceptable hit rate. This made it possible to achieve higher craft attributes more efficiently.
When a player notices that a ground installation is being attacked by a saboteur, it is very important to immediately rescue that
installation. Not protecting one's installations will cost the gamer
a 5-point downgrade in each category (which can be very costly
as one moves to the more difficult levels later in the game).
Players should try to accumulate the Military Hardware Pods
that are sporadically left in the debris of destroyed enemy
drones. These pods can provide for additional shield strength,
fire power, speed and defensive abilities. Additionally, the Black
Tracks that encircle the arena can provide the player (through
"tracklocking") with a high-speed method of reaching a trouble
spot in lieu of using turbo speed. This alternate method of highspeed travel can become very useful in level nine or above.

Conclusions
On the downside, the player will note that the attack radar (AR)
and the main overview radar (MOR) are very difficult to distinguish. The Amiga version does not support a joystick and this
was sorely missed. Conversely, the IBM version presents the
player with sharper graphics and the opportunity to use a joystick. These attributes were seen as great enhancements.
The game only offers a slot-view camera angle. At first, this
took some getting used to. It seemed to this reviewer that the
storyline was just too convenient to the gameplay. In other
words, this reviewer would have enjoyed additional views (i.e. a
true cockpit view).
Although there is nothing new about the 3-D graphics, the normally unrealistic nature of polygon technology does not get in
the way of enjoying Thunderstrike. In fact, due to the futuristic
feel of the game, the look of the ships and terrain actually work
in this case! The gameplay is smooth and the music and sound
effects (using the Ad Lib) help to make the game move quickly.
Those who want a flight simulation are looking at the wrong
game. Those who want a challenging game with more than the
average arcade style, however, are bound to be pleasantly
surprised.
Upon first play of the game, one might think that
Thunderstrike is just another run-of-the-mill, "shoot-'em-up" arcade game. However, after closer inspection, this reviewer came
to the realization that Thunderstrike is fast-paced, requires a
modicum of thought, and is addicting.

Behind the Scenes

Bringing Imagination to Life
A Portfolio Highlighting Selected Computer Game Artists

T

he painting that opens this exhibi-

tion is entitled "The Dream." At the
time it was painted, artist Mark Ferrari was living in a back room of a house
in Albany, California, performing domestic chores and yardwork in order to pay
for room and board. He was building a
portfolio in order to work full-time as an illustrator. Computer art, such as his
revolutionary work on Loom and The
Secret of Monkey Island which brought
the term "dither" to the forefront of computer art discussions, was the furthest
thing from his mind.
"The Dream," winner of both "Best Fantasy" and "Best of Show" at the 1989
Baycon (science fiction and fantasy convention), has become his personal signature. It is printed in Computer Gaming
World by Mark's permission and is unavailable for publication elsewhere. It is
used as an introduction to this article because "The Dream" was not always
Mark's dream, and the dreams of computer artists differ. Yet, the desire is the

same. Artists want to reach an audience
with their visions. They want to bring
their images to life. Computer art is both
a friend and foe in this endeavor. This article will introduce CGW readers to five
computer artists in the computer game industry.

Mark Ferrari
(Lucasfilm Games)
Mark has only been making a living as
an artist for three or four years. Before
that, he worked with delinquent boys in a
home in Livermore. Ironically, his college
degree is in English rather than either art
or social work. When he was younger,
everyone thought he was going to be an
artist. Yet, he remembers using his talent
to win the approval of other people and
basing his entire self-esteem on how
people reacted to each picture. By the
time he was a sophomore in college, he
hated art. He gave away all of his stuff
and thought he would never touch art
again. For seven years, he didn't.

Behind the Scenes

box cover. They changed their minds
and he ended up doing the Creatures of
the Dreamland book which illustrated
their H. P. Lovecraft role-playing universe
(see the illustration reprinted in this article). Two months later, he displayed his
work at Baycon, where "The Dream" won
the aforementioned awards. Gary Winnock, of Lucasfilm's game division, was
there and invited him to lunch at
Skywalker Ranch. He told them he
couldn't go to work until September because of the book and walked away from
the interview thinking he had blown his
chance to work for Lucasfilm.

Then, after seven years of working with
juveniles, he discovered that while he really enjoyed working with youths, he didn't
enjoy working with the adults that were
in charge of those programs. He decided
that he could best fulfill his potential by
working as a volunteer, so he looked for
another way to make a living.
He came up with a number of potential
ideas on how to make a living and
decided to dabble until he found out
what he would like. He readily admits
that he took up art first because it was
easiest to dabble in; he was sure that he
would hate it; and he could eliminate it
immediately. However, he discovered
that his old feelings were gone and that
his work, subject matter and style were
completely different. So, he never got to
the other things he was planning to dabble in.
At that point, he enrolled in art school
and stated in his statement of purpose
that the only thing he didn't want to do
was be an illustrator. He didn't want to illustrate mechanical blunders. By the end
of the second semester, he was out of
money. His completed degree in English
kept him from getting financial aid, but
he finally knew what he wanted to do. He
created a portfolio and tried for a month
and a half to show his work at Lucasfilm. He did not get anywhere, but an il-

lustrator friend, Gary Rudle, told him not
to worry because when Lucasfilm
wanted him, they'd find him. He thought
it was incredibly unlikely, but met Steve
Purcell through a former art school instructor.
Rumor had it that Steve was working
for Lucasfilm, but he ended up putting
Mark in touch with Chaosium to do a

As it turned out, he finished the book at
2:00 AM on September 6 and started
doing test screens for the high-res version of Zak McCracken and the Alien
Mindbenders at Lucasfilm by 9:00 AM
on the same day. When he began, he
confesses that he was a technophobe
and knew nothing about computers or
paint programs. Gary had him do a test
of the native village and library in Zak so
that he could get started. After a couple
of hours of using the 16-color palette, he
started mixing up colors using the, by
now, characteristic dither to create
colors. Everyone thought the picture was
great, but the programmers carefully explained that they couldn't compress
enough data to be able to do pictures
like that.
Mark was frustrated because the
programmers couldn't compress dither.
So, at one point, he took a machine
home over a holiday weekend and drew
a twilight scene (that eventually found itself in a modified form in the opening
scenes of Loom). He brought the
machine back, punched up the screen he
had drawn and left the room. After lunch,
he came back to discover several people
gathered around the screen. Most importantly, Lucasfilm Games executive
Steve Arnold was asking why they
couldn't do pictures like that and assigned the programmers the task of figuring out how to do it. The rest, as illustrated by the test screen for Loom
reprinted in this article, is history.
According to Mark, the most enjoyable
challenge in doing these games comes
from the very limited nature of the
medium. He says it is impossible to do in
computer games what one can do on
paper. His most satisfying success has
come from trying to use sixteen colors
and make something beautiful. That situation is changing as the available color
palette expands to 256 color VGA and
beyond. However, in a year or

Behind the Scenes

two the technology will advance and
there will be a new challenge.
Mark noted that computer artists are
currently using a mouse to draw images
on the screen and made a vague reference to the fact that they may not be
drawing directly on the screen for very
much longer. "The kinds of skills we're
using," he hinted, "could become obsolete in the near future."
Right now, Mark is preparing to work
on a possible 100+ page coffee-table
book for Ian and Betty Ballantine (who
produced the successful Gnomes book).
However, he expects to return to computer art when the medium offers more
opportunity.

Steve Purcell
(Lucasfilm Games)
Steve Purcell never fought his artistic
ability. He started doing freelance illustration immediately out of art school. In
fact, one of his first jobs was drawing
package illustrations for computer games
(one of his publishers was Winner's
Circle, a software store that published a
few games under its own label). At the
same time, he began to illustrate comics
for Marvel Comics. His first "book" was
a toy-related title called Animax. Animax
was based on a series of bizarre toys that
never came out. They were cars with
animal heads that would drive around
and communicate with their drivers.
Later on, he was glad to get a chance to
do Sam and Max: Freelance Police for
Comico (see the cover pictured in this article).
Steve started work as a computer artist
about three years ago. His first job with
Lucasfilm Games was the screen art for
Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade:
The Graphic Adventure. Like Mark,
Steve hadn't had any experience with
computers before being put to work at
Lucasfilm. Gary Winnock's philosophy
seemed to be taking someone who could
draw and then showing them how to
work on a computer.
Steve has a fondness for Etch-A-Sketch
art and feels that his skill with the "toy"
has added to his skill with the computer.
He thinks this is so because the hand-eye
coordination required for the
Etch-A-Sketch is similar to working with a
mouse (i.e. the artist is performing an action away from the screen that has an effect on the screen).
Steve also feels that his ability with computer art is continually improving because he is able to learn to do what he
needs to do for the games piece by

piece. He uses both a paint program and
the in-house animation system BUYLE
(virtually all Lucasfilm acronyms are not
conducive to good lunchtime conversation). Like Mark, he looks forward to future technologies where paintings are
scanned and the backgrounds look more
like the delightful details in Disney's
animated films. In the current state of
computer art, the limited color palette is
always a problem, but Purcell believes
that future advances in scanning technology will improve the situation. Once the
basic image has been captured, he notes
that the computer will assist in tweaking
the product up to the standard desired.
Purcell's specialty tends to be the objects, expressions or animations that are
either funny or scary. He is often called
upon to execute the "special case anima-

tions" where something happens only in
one room or at one time during the
game. An example is when the bishop explodes in Loom. In fact, that is one of the
standard examples used whenever Lucasfilm is demonstrating special case animation to new artists.
CGW was told that some scenes
sketched by Steve had been axed from
The Secret of Monkey Island because of
lack of disk space. We asked him to
describe one and he recounted a scene
on the pier where Guybrush was supposed to be confronted by a bunch of
ghosts on the dock. He still had the
"head of the navigator" in his hand and
was supposed to bowl his way out of
trouble.
Steve went on to state that artists often
spend extra time on some sequences in
order to create something visual enough
to be able to convince the project leader
and programmers that it was something
they really wanted. For example, in Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade: The
Graphic Adventure, the sequence with
the whip where Indy is on the ledge of
the castle was added because the artists
thought Indy needed to do more with his
whip. Purcell found out where Lucasfilm
had gotten their whips and bought one in
order to get the animation just right.

Denis Loubet
(Origin Systems)
Origin Systems has also had a policy
of converting illustrators from the paper
and canvas media to the computer
screen. Denis Loubet is the artist supervisor at Origin. He never had any doubt
as to what he was going to do with his
life; he just didn't know where he was
going to plug in, comic illustrating or
painting book covers. The dominant influences on his art have been book il-

Behind the Scenes

lustrators Frank Frazetta, Michael Whelan and Boris Vallejo, as well as comic artists John Byrne and Frank Miller.
Today, Loubet states unequivocally
that, given the chance to illustrate comic
books, he would stick with computer
games. "We're getting to the top of the
form in this [the computer game]
medium and I want to ride this and see
where it goes," Denis observes.
About ten years ago, Denis was working for Steve Jackson Games, a pen
and paper game company based in Austin (see the "Lands of Mystery" cover
photo). Later, he went freelance for five
or six years and eventually ended up fulltime at Origin. The pilgrimage is interesting. While Denis was still working for
Steve Jackson, he met Lord British and
painted the cover for Ultima I. While he
was freelancing, he
drew the Ultima III
and Ultima IV
covers. After being
hired by Origin, he
painted Ultima Vs
and Ultima VI's
covers.
Interestingly
enough, Origin hired
Denis without knowing for sure whether
they had enough
work for a full-time artist. A couple of
weeks later, however,
they noticed that he
seemed to be booked
up until the year
2000. Now, the company boasts seven
full-time artists and
might need more.
Asked about differences between

computer art and illustration in general,
Denis says there are very few differences.
He calls the computer another tool. Perhaps the most important difference is
that when one does a painting, it takes
courage to make a change. With the corn
puter, one never has to worry because it
is possible to return to a saved form.
In fact, Denis wishes that he had computer tools to help with his paintings for
box illustrations. He observed that there
is a major difference between book
covers and box covers for computer
games. Book cover illustrations can be
subtle, but game covers generally have
some violence. The Martian Dreams
cover will be an exception, however.
At Origin, artists are assigned scenes
and sequences by project leaders and
creative directors. If a character walks

across the screen and kneels in one of
their computer games, for example, the
artist is assigned, videotapes a figure
going through the motions in live action
and illustrates the sequence. This is somewhat similar to the technique Ralph Bakshi used in making Wizards and his The
Lord of the Rings film. Bakshi filmed
live figures in shadow and drew on top of
the shapes. The artists at Origin use
some rotoscoping, as well.
Asked what technology would most
change the way computer game artists did
their work, Loubet had
two observations. He
would like to be able to
do sketches on the computer via graphics
tablets and wishes
Disney's Animation
Studio software was
available for the IBM.
If Denis could do any
comic book he would
like to do, he would
draw a horror comic in
such a way that it hides
more than it shows. It
would be Lovecraftian
horror. "Horror hasn't
been done in computer
games," he suggested,
"because you can't
scare people with little
scrunched-up figures."
He notes that the STUD
system (see the screen

Behind the Scenes

shot in this article) is getting to the fullfigured form where such a product could
be done.

Glen Johnson
(Origin Systems)
While he was still in high school, Glen
managed to land his first professional job
of illustration. It was not exactly a thrilling prospect, however, since it was illustrating a book on emphysema. After
graduation, he painted personal portraits
and watercolors to provide cash, occasionally rendering illustrations for
newspapers. Glen made his initial mark
when he went into illustrating comics,
however. He followed Pat Broderick as
the artist for Eclipse Comics Sunrunners. He was happy with the book until it
was cancelled by Eclipse because of allegedly poor sales and taken over by
Sirius Comics. Unfortunately, the design
team didn't like the direction Sirius was
taking the book, so they elected to quit
working on that title. Later, he worked
with Peter Quinones on Beast Warriors
of Shaolin, published by regionally distributed Pied Piper Comics (see the
cover in this article). The story idea in
that series was that martial arts was
created by observing animals. So, the
creators asked "What would happen if
they used mystical arts to turn animals
into humans in order for humans to be
trained by the animals themselves?" It
was a wild idea and Johnson still seems
intrigued by it. At the same time he was
drawing comics, however, he was always
doing illustrations for game companies
and portraits on commission.
After finishing a project with nowdefunct Blackthorne Comics, Glen was
looking for a change. Dallas Snell saw
some of his game illustrations and hired
him. Johnson jokes that Origin spent
more money on plane fare during his
first year than they did on his salary,
since the company moved him from
Texas to New Hampshire and eventually
back to Texas.
Johnson prefers computer art because
it allows artists to make changes easier.
He states that painting is more difficult because, once the color is down, one is
stuck with it. He contends that artists become "spoiled" once they get used to
working on the computer. He looks forward to the development of more
elaborate scanning technology and loves
some of the experimental processes that
Origin is using to make their products
more life-like. He believes that using scan-

ners to create backgrounds blends the
strengths of both computer and paper imaging in order to get the best of both
worlds. (See the landscape-background
for Wing Commander which was cut in
order to open up disk space by simplifying the story-telling aspects of the game.)

Cynthia Hamilton
(Electronic Arts)
Electronic Arts managed to recruit an
artist from yet a different milieu. Cynthia
Hamilton had been drawing storyboards
for advertising agencies for some time.
Then she moved to designing slides and
overheads for a management consulting
firm. She felt, however, that any graphic
artist in today's world needed to learn to
draw on the computer. She learned how
to use a paint program at Britannica
Software while working on a second art
disk for Jigsaw, but Greg Johnson and
Paul Reiche Ill were so impressed with
her work that they encouraged her to
join the art department at Electronic
Arts.
The fact that she had fashion drawing
experience (see the print ad featured in
this article) has enabled her to do lots of
figure and face work for Electronic
Arts. Readers will have seen her work in
numerous EA games, but she has also
worked on the art for several games that
were cancelled after she had finished her
work. She etched circa 96 different faces
for UFO (see the screen shot in this article), only to see the game "killed" after
several personnel changes had taken

place in what was formerly the "Interactive Stories" division. She also contributed considerable work on a personal
favorite, Thieves' World (where the
rights to the property reverted to the
editors of the anthology series).
As for differences between standard illustration and computer art, Cynthia suggested that she always likes to be able to
hang what she's done on the wall.
Naturally, that is not possible with computers, but they do provide the ability to
save pieces of work and manipulate
them in the future. Standard art media
are nicer to keep and computer tools are
easier to design with.
Her most frustrating experiences with
computer tools have been when one of
the in-house development programs
crashes on her and when she lost a hard
drive full of work and had to have a
programmer recover it for her. She
wishes she could work in an environment
that was using more scanning and capture technology since she sees the field
advancing in that direction.

To Dream, Perchance to
Digitize
The world of computer game art is just
beginning to attract a wide array of
proven talents from outside the realm of
the entertainment software industry.
These five examples are the tip of an exciting iceberg of talent being developed
in order to create aesthetically magnificent products in the future.

Designers' Notes

Lori and Corey's
Lori and Corey Cole form the
husband and wife design team behind the Quest for Glory series of
adventure/role-playing games.
This article serves to delineate
their design philosophy.

Quest for Glory
computer game genres. We intentionally set the game in the somewhat-overused "generic fantasy
medieval Europe" and kept the overall power level of both players and
opponents relatively low. This latter
decision also left the player's character
plenty of room for continuing development in the later games.

Game Design "Elementals"
by Lori and Corey Cole

W

en we first proposed the Quest
for Glory game series to Sierra
On-Line, we wanted to create a
different kind of adventure game. We
wanted to write the kind of game that we
would enjoy playing; one which combined the character development and first
person identification of a role-playing
game with the rich story and background
more commonly found in computer adventure games.
Lori: I prefer traditional pen-and-pencil
fantasy role-playing (FRP) games where
the emphasis is on character development and his/her abilities, as compared
to the computer versions where your
party of characters mostly hack this
monster and slash that one. So, in computer FRPs I want to create a strong
sense of identity between the player and
his character, and his character's goals.
Also, I prefer games which tell a story
and reveal the intricacies of the plot to
the player as his character progresses
through the game.
Corey: I am more puzzle-oriented than
Lori. My job was to ensure that, as well
as experiencing a rich and satisfying
story, a character would have to overcome a series of obstacles on the way to
accomplishing his main goals. This is the
concept known as "conflict" in traditional
writing. That is, achieving a goal has no
meaning unless the character has to
work, even struggle, to get there. I
developed most of the skill and combat
systems, and tried to balance them so
that the character could fulfill his goals,
but only by building up his particular
skills. We also tried to build in as many
"alternate solutions" as possible, both to
reduce player frustration and to let the
player create his/her own unique story, in
stead of slavishly following ours.
Quest for Glory was conceived from
the start as a four-game series, along the
lines of a book tetralogy (a trilogy written
by authors who can't stop at three). This
way, we could have character and story
development that flowed smoothly from
game to game. By planning the game as
a sequence from the start, we were also
able to foreshadow events of the later
games.

Lori: This also allowed us to balance
out the abilities and events so each
game builds in intensity and drama from
the previous game. On the other hand,
the games have to be designed so that a
new player can pick up any game in the
series and play without being lost and
overwhelmed by events from the previous games.
Corey: As we design and later "tune"
these games, we are constantly juggling
several, almost antagonistic, design
goals. We are telling a story, but we want
it to be the player's story, so we want to
provide as much freedom as possible
within the constraints of the game world.
We want the puzzles and challenges to
feel difficult, yet give the player character
a chance to succeed after reasonable effort. (It's no fun to "lose," but it isn't
much better to "win" so easily that
players feel they were handed the victory.) We want the game world to feel
"real" and the non-player characters to
"live," but not at the cost of making the
game boring.
Several themes are developed through
the entire series. For example, the "cycle
of the seasons" is a metaphor for the
player character's development and the
classical "elements" describe the game
settings. Game One, So You Want To Be
A Hero, takes place in an Alpine valley
in early Spring, with the protagonist just
starting out as a hero. The mountain barriers, the lush forest, and such game
magic as Erana's Peace represent the element of Earth. We also planned the
game to appeal to players unfamiliar
with either the role-playing or adventure

Corey: Trying to design games to appeal to both experienced and new computer game players involves having puzzles that are fair — they can be solved
strictly from clues available during play
of the game — but that take some effort
to solve. We used two main techniques
for this. First, clues are scattered around
the game, so that the player's character
must explore and talk to a number of
people in order to discover them.
Second, the player must use the Skill System. It may be "obvious" to the player
that his character should climb a steep
wall, but it takes sufficient climbing skill
to accomplish the task. Otherwise, the
character must either practice climbing
until "enough" skill is accrued or must
find an alternate solution that does not involve climbing. One thing we are
meticulous about is ensuring that every
puzzle is solvable in some way by every
character, no matter which skills were
chosen at the beginning of the game.
Lori: Having a choice of character
types was one way to accommodate the
varied amount of game-playing experience our players start the game with.
The Fighter in So You Want To Be A
Hero is an easy character to start out
with and is extremely likely to survive
long enough to finish the game. The
Thief is the toughest to win with, since he
is the most likely to get "caught" because
his character usually has to do things
that one normally shouldn't be doing.
So, the Fighter is just the right choice for
those who think it is fun to go out and
fight monsters without worrying about
winning. Those who don't like fighting/killing, and just want to explore and solve
puzzles, will find the Magic-User is the
right character for them to play. For
those experienced players who want to
have a more varied character, we allow
hybrid characters. One can create a
Fighter/Magic-User or customize a character by selecting specific skills. Each character has his own method of solving puzzles, so a player can play this game
several times without just playing the
same game over.

Designers' Notes

In Game Two, Trial By Fire, we moved
to summertime in the desert heat and a
much fresher fantasy setting drawn from
the Tales of the Arabian Nights. The
character is now an established Hero and
must undergo a series of challenges on
both personal and general levels. His personal initiation echoes the tasks he must
undergo to save the twin cities of Shapeir
and Raseir. Fire is the predominant element, but in keeping with the
stories-within-stories flavor of The Arabian
Nights, we also made the cycle of the
four elements a major sub-theme.
Lori: It was a case of "and now for
something completely different." I really
want to break away from the cliches of
computer games where all places look
basically the same and all people look
and act alike. This game series setting is
an entire world. The people are all unique individuals and must be dealt with as
such. Some are trustworthy, while others
will go out of their way to lie to one's
character. Even some non-player
"friends" may give one misinformation
about some subjects, because — like real
people — they don't know everything or
might simply be confused.

Corey: The difficult balancing act with
misinformation is to keep the game fair.
We make sure that there are several sources for any crucial piece of information.
Lori also uses subtleties of phrasing to
help the player spot when a character is
lying or is not really sure of an answer.
The player can also get clues from each
non-player character's personality (as
revealed in other text messages). For instance, Ali Chica in Trial By Fire (loosely
based on Chico Marx, just as Ali Fakir
gives a nod to Groucho), is a very friendly, "helpful" character, but so scatterbrained that his information is almost
valueless. Or maybe he just thinks a little
differently from the rest of us!
Game Three is set in autumn and
(loosely) involves the element of air. It
has already gone through several incarnations. The original working title was to be
"All Hallow's Eve," and it would be a sort
of Night on Bald Mountain setting. We
eventually settled on "Shadows of Darkness" as the title. It would have a Transylvania/Gothic Horror theme. Quest for
Glory III is tentatively scheduled for
release in Spring 1992 (each game takes
over a year to design and develop).

Corey: (The subtitle is supposed to
make the player think, "How can darkness cast a shadow? Shadows come
from light.") We had the story mostly
plotted out until a "friend" told us what
she guessed the setting would be, and
sent us scurrying back to the drawing
board. We're still not quite sure which setting we will use. More certain is the
theme, which will involve the character
becoming more mature and having to
make some difficult ethical and moral
decisions with no absolute "right" or
"wrong" answers.
Lori: Originally, I had a different ending
for Trial By Fire which would lead into
the Transylvania ("Mordavia") setting.
The artist didn't think he could pull it off,
and so we ended with an ambiguous leadin. This may work out anyway, if we
decide to change our setting.
Game Four doesn't have a title as yet.
It will be set in a series of islands, probably ancient Greek culture (but don't hold
us to it!), and will cover the winter or mature phase of the character's life. Obviously, water is the predominant element. In
Silmaria, the character must become

Designers' Notes

more than a hero in order to bring
together a number of disparate, and fiercely independent, peoples. The character
will need to be "all things to all people,"
while retaining his own essential integrity.
Lori: One of the goals Corey and I are
trying to accomplish is to have the
player really identify and care about the
character she/he plays. This isn't just a
pixel image moving a screen, it's a real
character you've built up from just a
"wannabe" Hero to someone powerful
and important.
Corey: We also want the game series
to have a definite beginning and ending.
It is not a series of excerpts from the life
of a character, but a story that tells of his
growth and development through conflict. The story must have a resolution;
the player should go away satisfied that
he/she has really accomplished something at each stage of the game, and
through the series as a whole. We also
have a pragmatic reason for this. We
don't want to devote a lifetime to creating sequels to the same game!
One aspect of creating Quest for

Glory, that has been both fun and
frustrating at times, is the need to work
within the limitations of current computer
systems and software tools. We would
have liked to let the player choose a
male or female character, or to play as a
Centaur or an Ogre. That's how we conceived of the game originally. Unfortunately, we would need 30 disks just to
hold all the animation needed to show
the player character's actions on-screen.
Lori: On the other hand, by knowing
the character is a human male, we can
write the story around this character. We
want to have this character feel real and
have realistic relationships with others. It
is hard to set up a believable romantic
situation if we don't know what the sex
of the character is.
Corey: We also have to constantly
make tough decisions as to whether a
given piece of animation really adds to
the game or if we can replace it with
text. Text is much cheaper. We also need
to consider the range of computers Sierra supports. One of the reasons we went
from the "close-up" combat of So You
Want To Be A Hero to the smaller views

in Trial By Fire was to make the action
more responsive on slower machines.
We also saved a lot of disk space this
way. In game three, however, we will go
back to the more involving close-up
views and we will have VGA 256-color
graphics to add realism. Hopefully, none
of our players will be on 8088s by 1992!
We are looking forward with both joy and
trepidation to the upcoming "CD-ROM
era." Many of our restrictions will be
loosened by the CD-ROM, but only for
players who have them. We will actually
have to do twice as much work to create
games that make the best use of
whatever hardware the player actually
has.
We're trying to make each game a little
better, and a little more fun, than its
predecessors. If we can get the player to
believe, even for a few minutes at a time,
that he/she is in the role of a real character, with real problems in a real world,
and is interacting with other real people,
then we've succeeded in most of our
goal. If, on top of that, the player has a
lot of fun in the process, we all win.

1

Review

The Game Which Would Be King
No "Pretender," Warlords Usurps Crown
by Alan Emrich

T

he fantasy/strategy genre has had no shortage of games with

legitimate claim to the throne as "King of Fantasy/Strategy
Games." In the boardgame world, Fantasy Games,
Unlimited's Lords & Wizards, Avalon Hill's Titan and TSR, Inc.'s
Divine Right are but three of the finest to vie for the crown. In the
computer game world, Avalon Hill's early Parthian Kings and
more recent Darkhorn, PSS' Sorcerer Lord, SSI's early The Shattered Alliance and more recent Sword of Aragon and War of the
Lance, along with Virgin Mastertronic's War In Middle Earth have
gained loyal factions that pledge their fealty to one or another of
these games.
Now, however, some of these games may well find themselves in
exile on many a gamer's shelf. SSG's latest offering, Warlords, not
only succeeds as a "pure" strategy
game, but also blends the elements
TITLE:
Warlords
of fantasy into the campaign so
SYSTEM:
IBM
smoothly that they add to, rather
PRICE:
$50.00
than detract from, the strategic naDESIGNER:
Steve Fawkner
PUBLISHER:
Strategic
Studies Group
ture of the game.

Walnut Creek, CA 94598

(415) 932-3019
The game is set in the land of IIluria, where the peace has
been broken and eight empires fight to control the
eighty castles (cities) of
the land. (The game ends
when 41 are controlled by
a single player, at which
point the remaining rulers
grovel for mercy.) The
map is the same each
game (there are no terrain
or unit design kits in Warlords, unlike SSG's other
wargames where their
Warplan and Warpaint features are legend), but there
are so many different opening moves and strategies available to
each of the eight players that diversity is no problem during play.

A Magic Mixture (Hold the Magic, Please)
Perhaps, Warlords most resembles a hybrid between Interstel's
Empire and SSG's own Reach for the Stars. The former is invoked
because of that sense of exploration and discovery combined with
quick, efficient battles and the latter is suggested because of the
similarity to be found when both games present a multi-player struggle against competent, nay, belligerent computer opponents, forcing
the player to fight the good fight against long and grueling odds.

With Enemies Like These, Who Needs
Humans?
This is, perhaps, the real beauty of Warlords. The game is always
played as an eight-sided contest. Although it is possible for up to
eight humans to play (at the same computer), the artificial opponents provided in Warlords guarantee that one always has competent, ofttimes ruthless, opponents. Unlike computer strategy
games where the computer's advantage lies mainly in "cheats" (such
as more money, faster production, etc.), Warlords uses an evolved
version of SSG's already superior Al routines and, this time, has real-

ly succeeded in creating opponents who seem to think like human
competitors (shudder)! There are no "cheats" for computer players
and the lower Al ratings (there are four for each computer-controlled
player: Knight, Baron, Lord and Warlord) actually handicap the computer players by allowing them to make increasing numbers of
human-like "dumb moves."

Waging Cruel War
The computer players wage a vicious style of warfare to eliminate
opposition. There is a mean logic to what makes a computer player
hate another player (human or computer; note that human players
are not "artificially hated" more by computer players, either). The
computer opponents react to other opponents on a scale which goes
from apathy through distrust, dislike, disdain, disgust and hatred, all
the way up to loathing. This antipathy factor increases whenever
players capture a computer player's "rightful" castles (any castle previously occupied by that computer player during the course of a
game) or whenever one player seems to be taking a lead in the
game. Should a computer player reach a level of loathing toward an
opponent and follow this by a "declaration of war," one can expect
him to prosecute an unrelenting struggle against that player until,
and unless, a truce is formed. Truces, by the way, are only formed

Review

as a matter of convenience with one player when a far greater
hatred is built up for another player!
Of course, one does not even have to do anything in particular to
gain the wrath of some computer opponents. This level of unpredictability means some might still decide to loathe you and declare
war, simply on a whim, even when they're on the other side of the
map. About the worst thing one can see is the "Hate Menu" reading
"Loathing" from top to bottom, with all the other players bearing
swords of the player's own color (meaning they have declared war
on that player).
The computer players are fine strategists, too. While they'll never
be as sharp as humans, they know to attack a player where he is
weakest, how to set defensive priorities and hold important cities and
how best to penetrate deep into the heart of a player's empire. Those
devils will even raze a player's castles to the ground in a form of brutal economic warfare, knowing that they cannot hold out against a
prepared counterattack!

"Those Aren't Bombers. They're Dragons!"
Warlords has many of the trimmings of a fantasy game, although
it is much more a strategy game. (The fantasy trimmings appear to
be added to this game for either spice, to loosen the confines of
modeling reality or to provide a marketing gimmick — probably all
three.) As in Sword of Aragon, certain types of fantasy troops are
better situated for their "natural" terrain (elves in the forests, dwarves
in the hills, etc.). Since griffons, pegasi and dragons move through
the air (along with any heroes in their stack), literal "flying columns"
can be sent over the most tortuous terrain for deep raids or surprise
attacks. The various unit types are given in the supplemental charts
and tables in this article. From the Warlords Unit Averages Table,
one can see how units are rated, on average, for the time they take
to produce, the cost to produce them, their strength and speed on
the board.
A special note to wargamers: units' "movement allowances" might
actually go up a bit if the unit did not spend its entire movement allowance on the previous turn. This is an interesting feature which
makes slogging through slow terrain a bit more bearable.

Heroes to Go
Heroes are crucial to a player's chance to succeed. Each player
has an initial allotment of one and additional heroes can only be acquired when a player manages to amass the fortune required to entice them. Heroes are not particularly strong (with a strength of five
on a one-to-nine scale), but are the only units which can explore the
various ruins, oracles and libraries of the land. These sites offer
knowledge, items of power (which only heroes can wield), gold and
special units with which to enhance a player's position. Of course,
there is risk. Many of these sites are guarded, and there is a fair
chance that a hero will be gloriously impaled as "Purringa Monster
Bait" very early in his exploratory career (although there are no
direct penalties for "monster baiting").
Venturing into the unknown is not the only quest for a competent
hero. They also lead armies, adding to the strength of all the units
they lead (depending on their personal strength and the value of any
items of leadership which they might possess).
Note that there is a de facto "ceiling" of five heroes for any single
player (although players who amass a tremendous number of cities
can occasionally add extras). It is desirable to hire every hero possible, because they tend to arrive with special units (undead,
dragons, etc.) in tow as "allies." These special units are vital to forming effective legions, as described in the next section.

Combat Made Simple
The combat system is very simple. Basically, units in battle line up
against each other, with the first unit on each side's line fighting a
one-on-one battle (heroes are last in line). The battle is resolved by
each opposing unit rolling a 10-sided die versus the opposing unit's
combat strength. If one unit rolls higher than an opposing unit's

strength, while that opposing unit rolls lower than the first unit's
strength, the low rolling unit takes a hit (if both sides roll high or low
there is a re-roll). After two hits, a unit is dead and all battles are a
fight to the finish (there is no retreat).
Terrain, castle walls (for the defender), the presence of a hero, a
hero's command items, having a flying troop in the stack, having a
special unit in the stack (dragons are ideal in battle because all units
stacked with them get a +2 to their strength; +1 for a flying unit and
+1 for a special unit) and previous blessings from the various
temples on the board can all modify a unit's combat strength. No
unit can be modified above a strength of nine (thus, are always vulnerable). Thus it is theoretically possible for the weakest unit to
smite the strongest unit (the maxim about "the fight not always
being to the strongest, but that's the way to bet" comes to mind),
but quality matters more than quantity (usually, one high-strength
unit can hold off many, many weaker ones). Thus, players will be
well served to make up stacks (up to eight units per stack) of ATeam troops (i.e., a mix of units whose modified strengths are all
raised up to eight or nine for maximum effectiveness). Often, several
of these elite stacks will die storming important castle walls, but
cities are the name of the game.

Buckets Full of Ducats
Ah, money. The economics of Warlords is really quite simple.
Every unit costs a certain amount to produce, paid in full when the
unit begins production (no C.O.D. units). Each turn a unit is on the
map, half of its production cost is deducted from the treasury for
"maintenance." Thus, players experience a military capacity tied
strictly to their economic infrastructure (no communist economies allowed). Fortunately(?), casualties usually keep players from hitting
their heads against this military build-up/economic ceiling, so one seldom has to worry about paring down military production.
Other uses for money include raising fortification levels of cities
and hiring heroes. Usually, important production cities (like a
player's capital) need to be well-fortified and garrisoned, as should
front-line cities (to discourage cheap, easy raids).
Hiring heroes is another matter. One can be sitting on a mountain
of gold and still not see a hero emerge for several excruciating turns.
Like fortification levels, the more heroes you have, the more expensive it is to hire the next one (somewhat like professional athletes in
the present day). In the case of heroes, however, their acquisition is
the usual source for players to acquire vital "special" units which are
both powerful in combat and add to the strengths of all the units
they are stacked with.
A final note about money. This is where the computer players have
their big advantage. While they cannot manage every nuance of
movement and combat across the vast terrain of Illuria, they "know"
how to manage money. They ruthlessly squeeze every garrison down
to a calculated minimum and only maintain forces which they plan
to use (unlike humans). There is little inefficiency in a computer
player's pursestring management, so it is often the case that computer players will have more money (and what money buys) than
will human players.

Remember, Thou Art Mortal
This reviewer encountered sound problems on three different computers (with three different sound systems). This is only a trifling
problem, though, since the sound effects are not important to the
game. There is also a bad toggle on one of the menus which always
reads "observe off," even when this is "on." When activated, "observe
on" makes it possible for players to observe all the movement and
battles of the computer players as they happen. Also, an unmapped
ruin, the Druid's Temple, was discovered in the north-west corner of
the board (it is not a place of healing, however).
These minor quibbles aside, Warlords has everything to offer the
strategy gamer who has a taste for a bit of the fantasy genre. Basically, players who hated themselves for all the time spent enjoying Empire or Reach for the Stars are in for some serious guilty pleasures
with Warlords!

European Games Report

any of our readers will be familiar
with the solid 3-D games
produced, over here, by Incentive. Driller, Castle Master and so on introduced leisurely 3-D adventuring with
the emphasis on puzzle-solving and maze
exploration. Now Incentive, via Domark
in the UK, are to release a 3-D Construction Kit (3DCK) based on the same 3-D
system that will enable anybody to create
their own run-time, royalty-free game with
the previous games' features plus animation, a shoot-'em-up capability, etc. Available for the PC, Amiga and ST, the
3DCK allows the user to create, edit and
manipulate 3-D solid polygonal shapes
via a user-friendly control panel.

M

Over There
From Construction to Destruction
by Paul Rigby

Triangles, cubes, hexagons and pentagons can be generated and combined
to form more complex or irregular
shapes, each having their own position
and status in the user's 3-D environment.
Above the neat control panel is a window
onto the world you are building. You can
move about this world during the editing
process, either examining what you have
done or adding/editing other objects. Although you are limited to regular
polygons you can, in fact, combine picture elements and use transparent options to create some very complex game
elements.
The 3DCK is very memory-efficient,
with objects taking only a few bytes and
even a complex world (a house complete
with rooms and furniture, for example)
could be squeezed into a mere 10K of
memory. Image files can be imported to
enhance to the screens, Deluxe Paint
and Neochrome being two examples.
Dynamic displays, such as score tables
and energy graphs, can also be included.
On the sound front, 3DCK can import
sampled sounds that can be added to
the Kit's default sound library. Sounds
can be assigned to objects so that, for example, shooting an object would result in
an explosion sound being generated as
well as, if you wish, trigger an animation
explosion effect. The 3DCK is to be
released in April for £49.99 (PC and
Amiga), £39.99 for the ST and £24.99
for the C-64 (cassette or disk).
Activision's Hunter is a sixteen-color
solid 3-D game set in a fractal-generated
landscape. Playing from a second-person
viewpoint, the player takes full control of
the main character movement and
decision making. The story? A small
group of strategically important islands
have been occupied by a superior enemy
force. You are a soldier, highly trained in
undercover intelligence and sabotage warfare. Your purpose is to carry out a num-

European Games Report

ber of dangerous missions to clear the
way for your army to ultimately defeat
the enemy and liberate the islands. Missions involve a large amount of solitary
work behind enemy lines with only your
ingenuity, what you have in your kit-bag
and a variety of vehicles and aircraft to
aid you.
Each mission begins with a comprehensive briefing which will furnish the player
with information regarding the location of
enemy positions, artillery and movements. You will also be told the objective
of your mission and the time in which it
must be completed, ranging from a few
hours to several days and nights (five
real minutes equals one game hour).
Available for L24.95 for the Amiga and
ST around March of this year.
It had to happen... The first flight simulation based upon the aircraft that flew the
spirit of glasnost to the Farnborough Air
Show in England — the MiG-29 Fulcrum
— has arrived from UK software house
Domark. MiG-29 has, apparently, been
under development for two years with assistance from the likes of British
Aerospace and playtesting from John

Farley — the only European pilot to testfly the Fulcrum.
There are six missions in the game, the
first being a training scenario, the last
simply called Final. As the player progresses through the missions, each aspect of
the aircraft and its capabilities will be introduced to you via air-to-air,
air-to-ground missions and so on. Waypoints
are also included during the mission. All
of the usual 3-D terrain and internal/external viewpoints are available.
Though on first impression the cockpit
looks unconvincing and simplistic, the
flight model is reported to be complex, at
least on the PC version. Apparently the
Amiga and ST versions will use a simplified model (available as an option on the
PC). Available now on the PC for £29.99.
Pick 'n' Pile is the name, piling and
picking is the game from French
software house Ubisoft. Three different
colored balls drop from the skies and the
aim is to stack them into similarly hued
piles. Everything on-screen can be picked with a mouse click and moved into a
pile with a second click. Once they are
neatly stacked, the balls will disappear,

Conversions Received

Wayne Gretzky Hockey (Bethesda Softworks) Amiga
The Bard's Tale III: Thief of Fate (EA) IBM
Battle Squadron (EA) Sega Genesis
Chuck Yeager's Advanced Flight Trainer 2.0 (EA) Atari ST
The Immortal (EA) Nintendo
John Madden Football (EA) Sega Genesis
Lakers vs. Celtics (EA) Sega Genesis
Skate or Die 2 (EA) Nintendo
Sword of Sodan (EA) Sega Genesis
D.R.A.G.O.N. Force (Interstel) IBM
Night Shift (Lucasfilm) Amiga
Golden Axe (Sega) Amiga
Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles (Ultra) C-64/128

as long as the pile touches the floor and
there is nothing blocking the top. Each
screen has a set number of balls, blocks
and various other bits that drop. You
must clear the screen of spheres before
the time runs out. Available now on
Amiga and ST (£19.99) with a possible
PC conversion in the future.
Note: The above games, and any of the
other games mentioned in "Over There"
in past issues, can be obtained from:
Computer Adventure World, 318 Kensington, Liverpool, England, L7 OEY. Tel:
011-44-51-263-6306
Miles Better Software, 219/221 Cannock Road, Chadsmoor, Cannock, Staffordshire, England, WS11 2DD Tel: 01144-54366-577/8/80; Fax: 01144-543466-579
Premier Mail Order, Trybridge Ltd., 8
Buckwins Sq., Burnt Mills, Basildon,
Essex, England, SS13 1BJ. Tel: 011-44268-590-766; Fax: 011-44-268-590-076
All of the above telephone numbers
assume you can dial direct. If you
have any trouble, contact the international operator.

Taking a Peek

Taking a Peek
(Continued from page 6)

Konami
900 Deerfield Parkway
Buffalo Grove, IL 60089-4510
BACK TO THE FUTURE PART II:
Arcade action and logic puzzles
punctuate this movie-based computer game (all that's missing is the
smell of popcorn and the loss of
quarters). Time to help Marty and
Jennifer's kids in the year 2015
while avoiding Biffs bullies (just
don't slip off the hoverboard!). While
not history-making, the loyal movie
tie-in gives this game a "future."
Amiga ($39.95), C-64 ($29.95).
Circle Reader Service #4.
BILL ELLIOTT'S NASCAR CHALLENGE: Drive into another auto
race/driving simulator, this time with
a twist (and turn). Nascar Challenge allows the player to pick from
among three different stock cars,
race on eight different courses and,
most importantly, actually fine-tune
the car's design. Modifying the engine setup, spoiler angle, gear ratios
or tire stagger could make the difference between the winning edge or
winding up parked "out of the circle"
on a given track. Racing seasons,
maintenance in the pits and camera
replays of crashes (where one can
observe the crash from any car involved in the accident) round out the
package. Fasten your seat belts (and
keep your fire extinguisher handy).
IBM ($49.95). Circle Service #5.
Ocean Software
c/o Electronic Arts
San Mateo, CA
LOST PATROL: This British import
combines an effective graphic presentation with the first-person perspective of the vagaries of guerilla warfare (although South African forces
are pictured on the cover, this is a
Vietnam game). Unfortunately, both
the clumsy keyboard interface and
lack of mouse support recreate the
helplessness our military must have
felt (in a quite unintentional manner). Amiga, Atari ST, IBM ($49.95).
Circle Reader Service #6.

Psygnosis
Brookline, MA
OBITUS: Part fantasy adventure,
part arcade game, this Psygnosis
title delivers everything those bouncy
Brits are famous for (great graphics
and challenging play). With its amazingly brief documentation, players
quickly find themselves working their
way through smooth-scrolling mazes
and manipulating objects through a
point-and-click icon-driven interface
while attempting to escape a mazeriddled alien world of fantasy and
magic. Amiga. Circle Service 117.
Sierra
Coarsegold, CA
ZELIARD: Like Obitus, this foreign
import offers action/adventure with
plenty of emphasis on arcade sequences. Arriving from Japan via
Sierra, Zeliard has a more Japanese
flavor than a British one (i.e., the
characters which maneuver around
the screen are smaller and the arcade sequences are more frequent
and fast-paced). Although it is much
like the "quarter pumpers" one finds
in arcades, Zeliard adds many more
storyline elements for PC campaigns
than these. IBM ($34.95). Circle
Reader Service #8.
SimSystems
1311 Castro Street
San Francisco, CA 94114-3620

FIRETEAM 2200: This futuristic wargame offers rich tactical combat
details that will really tickle
"hardware buffs." Command a single
unit or a team of up to sixteen
vehicles and fireteams to achieve
military objectives. Multiple combat
unit types and weapons systems
over detailed tactical maps give a
good "feel of battle." Suitable for twoplayer action via modem play or
direct cable, the small icons are a bit
of a challenge to play with, but can
be overcome. IBM ($49.95). Circle
Reader Service #9.
Software Toolworks
Novato, CA
LIFE DEATH II, THE BRAIN: The
IBM goes pre-med. While not entirely
serious, this game is more of a
"hospital simulator" than you might
expect. VGA graphics show medical
scans, x-rays, and other diagnostic information. On-line "med school" information makes operating this game a
cut above (hey, suture 'self). Listen
to the digitized voices (which, fortunately, won't get you lost going
down endless white corridors) and
don't say "oops" in surgery (remember, a mind is a terrible thing to
waste). Apparently, the only thing
not included in the box is a white
coat. IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #10.

Reader Input Device

Editorial

Safe Software

S

Is Copy Protection Necessary?

tate of the Industry: In order to
answer the question in the subtitle
effectively, one must conjure
names of successful games from the
past, like M.U.L.E. and Empire.
Everyone has played them, but how
many people actually own them? Both
are considered by most consumers to be
classic hits, but both had sales figures
that fell far short of expectations. Across
all formats combined, Empire has failed
to surpass the 100,000 mark. M.U.L.E.,
available on fewer formats, has only sold
around 30,000 units. If ever figures could
underline a problem, these should.

Mark Baldwin, designer of the personal
computer version of Empire, believes
that the reason comparatively few copies
sold was because the "look-up" protection was so simple to break. Dan Bunten
believes the reason so many copies of
M.U.L.E. were pirated was a combination
of the fact that the on-disk copy protection was antiquated enough that virtually
anyone who wanted to could break it,
and many retailers were not convinced
enough that it was going to sell (thus,
they pulled it quicker than they did his
150,000 unit seller, Seven Cities of
Gold), so M.U.L.E. ended up going
"back channel."
Early copies of Computer Gaming
World bear out Bunten's theory of piracy
because the numbers of responses from
garners rating the 30,000-selling M.U.L.E.
and 150,000-selling Seven Cities of Gold
were nearly identical. Bunten argues that,
in one sense, M.U.L.E.'s success killed it.
It received great "word of mouth," but as
Bunten notes, "At that time, word of
mouth was 'Have a copy.'"
Piracy is still a hydra that raises its
many heads in numerous forms. Ultima
V had not been on the streets a full week
before the first pirate version showed up
on the specialized pirate bulletin boards.
Over the past two and one-half years, the
Software Publishers Association's
(SPA) Anti-Piracy Program has initiated
more than sixty lawsuits against corporations, training schools, mail-order operations and bulletin boards. The SPA even
has a toll-free hotline (1-800-388-PIR8)
for individuals to report flagrant violators.
Yet, CGW continues to hear from
garners who wish the companies would
do something about copy protection.

They question the necessity of the protec
tion (citing the fact that any protection
scheme can be broken) and insist that
the honest gamer is the one who is being
penalized. At CGW, we still believe that
copy protection (like locking your car or
house) is a way of keeping honest
people honest. We are not unsympathetic to those who get annoyed with
copy protection. We have done more
than our fair share of grumbling as we
pulled out our microscopes to look up
that number on non-reproducible paper;
discovered that the picture on the screen
did not really match any picture in the
manual; flipped madly through pages to
find the right shape or picture portrayed
in the margin; miscounted words in the
"seventh word in line ten of the third para
graph" type of documentation check;
and had the game call us thieves when
we typed in the wrong information.
Nevertheless, we believe that copy
protection serves a purpose. It may have
minimal effectiveness, but it serves to
remind us that piracy is stealing the fruits
of someone else's labors. If, then, we
wondered, copy protection is a necessary
evil, which type of copy protection is
least offensive?
State of the Magazine: In CGW #79,
we asked our readers to identify the type
or types of copy protection that they
found least objectionable. Almost 70% of
our readers said that they found
"documentation checks" to be least objectionable. Several readers noted in the
margin on the "Reader Input Device"
card that they preferred games where
looking up the answer in the documentation was part of the game's fiction. 20%
of our readers believe that code wheel
protection is least offensive, almost 10%
of our readers are willing to use "key
disk" protected programs (although we
hear from many who absolutely refuse to
purchase any products with "key disk"
protection) and only 4% are willing to put
up with looking up material on nonreproducible paper.
It is to be hoped that software publishers will listen to their customers. If so, we
can expect to see massive stocks of nonreproducible paper auctioned off at bargain basement prices and more creative
effort spent in making even the documentation checks part of the game.

