May 1990

Number 71

Features
Sneak Preview: SSI's "DragonStrike"

14

Survival Techniques for M-1 Tank Platoon

18

57

Sneak Preview: "Sid Meier's Railroad Tycoon" 60
Definitely On The Right Track / Russell Sipe

Background for Microprose's Simulation / J. Mitchell Cobb

Baseball Without Pictures

Data East's "Batman"
Wait Till You Get A Look At This! / David M. Wilson

A "Fantastic" Simulation / Johnny L. Wilson

20

Statistics-Based Text Games / Duane E. Widner

Vote For The Best Games of 1989

22

Ballot for the 1990 Origins Game Convention Awards

Star Trek: The Next Generation

24

Scorpia Offers Hints For 'The Transinium Challenge"

What's New In Computer Sports Games?

26

Basketball, Boat Racing, Boxing and More / Wyatt Lee

"2088: The Cryllan Mission"

34

An Apple IIGS Adventure Game / Dennis Owens

EA's "Indianapolis 500: The Simulation"

38

A Race Car Driver Looks At The Game / Barry Werger

Scorpia Stings Playtesters
CGW's Newest Column Talks About Playtesting

42

Departments
Taking A Peek
Editorial
Over There (European Games Report)
Rumor Bag
Game Ratings/Hall of Fame
Inside The Industry
Letters
Conversions Received
Reader Input Device

6
8
10
12
32
50
63
64
64

Taking a Peek

Access Software, Inc.
545 West 500 South, #130
Bountiful, UT 84010
CRIME WAVE: This game may not be
for everybody, but with the plethora of
gratuitous violence and titillating
animated scenes of the President's kidnapped daughter (A VERY sexy young
lady!), you can bet it tries to be. Non-stop
killing, maiming, bloodletting, and flying,
burning body parts dash across the
screen (only broken up by the animation
sequences between the President's voluptuous daughter and her vile kidnappers).
Don't kid yourself, though, the graphics
of the girl are completely state of the art!
IBM ($59.95) Circle Reader Service #1.

Accolade
550 South Winchester Blvd.
San Jose, CA 95128
EUROPEAN CHALLENGE: This is the
new "Test Drive II" scenery disk which
takes you on a whirlwind tour of some of
the toughest roads and countrysides that
the Old Country has to offer. The Dutch
countryside, the German Autobahns, the
Swiss Mountains, the French Riviera, the
castles of Moorish Spain and more await

you as you put the pedal to the metal.
Travel stickers optional. IBM ($21.95).
Circle Reader Service #2
GUNBOAT: THE RIVER COMBAT
SIMULATION: Drop your jammies and
grab your cammies, because you're in for
the river ride of your life (or death)! This
simulator style action game puts you in a
U.S. Navy river patrol boat with three missions to survive. First, it's off to 'Nam to
deal with those pesky Cong. Next, you'll
find yourself on the rivers of Colombia
dealing with the drug cartels, and then,
it's off to Panama to oust the dictator.
The documentation is first rate, the commands fairly easy and the action gets
hellfire intense. IBM ($49.95). Circle
Reader Service #3.
HEAT WAVE: If power speedboat racing
is your thing, you might warm up to Heat
Wave. With four muscle boats to choose
from, you decide how much gas and how
many spare parts you'll need to carry you
through the race before it even begins.
Several courses are provided for variety,

but you'd better be pretty handy cutting
through the chop, or Heat Wave will
leave you all wet. C-64/128 ($29.95),
IBM/Tandy ($39.95). Circle #4.
JACK NICKLAUS COURSE DISK VOL.
II: This adds three more courses for "Jack
Nicklaus' Greatest 18 Holes of Major
Championship Golf" from Accolade. The
new courses include: the Australian Golf
Club, Saint Creek Golf Club, and St. Mellion Golf & Country Club. IBM ($19.95).
Circle Reader Service #5.

Artdink
c/o Seika Corp.
20000 Mariner Avenue, Suite 100
Torrance, CA 90503
RAILROAD EMPIRE: With the clock running day and night, your challenge is to
build a transcontinental railway within
one year. Building it, however, is only a
small problem. As you expand, you must
also manage it. Making the trains run on
Continued on page 54

Editorial

The Play Is The Thing
R

ecently, when members of the Software Publishers Association were being asked to vote on the best software
products of 1989, CGW received a fascinating protest letter
in which the author urged the SPA members not to vote for any
product which allegedly glorified war. Later, when the editorial
staff attended the Computer Game Developers' Conference in
San Jose, one speaker eloquently prophesied against the destructive machismo of nationalism which allegedly undergirds both
simulations of military vehicles and traditional wargames. Judging
from other comments and BBS messages which have come to
this editor's attention, this anti-wargame perspective seems to be
growing.
Although almost anyone who has observed the evolution of
computer games over the last decade could have seen this
neo-fundamentalism coming, it is still disconcerting to see continuing
confusion with regard to what play or, perhaps, art actually is.
Within the rapidly shifting context of our current social environment, it seems to be inevitable for both those who are politically
on the left and those who are on the right to jump to hasty
generalizations regarding the causes and effects of society's ills.
Is there an increase in teen-aged suicide? The radical right
would have us to believe that the simple cause may be found in
less-than-wholesome rock lyrics and fantasy role-playing games.
Is there an increase in violent crimes? Some would have us
believe that violence on television and in films is the culprit. Does
pornography cause sexual crime or do those who are already sick
enough to be drawn to those crimes simply add pornographic
material to their already perverse repertoire? Now, it appears that
the same leftist mentality that believes banning war toys will stave
off our violent society may be targeting computer wargames, as
well.
This belief is, in fact, a hasty and unreasoned generalization.
There are many wargamers and wargame designers (both on the
boardgame side and the computer game side) who are, quite
simply, pacifists. In the early 1980s, a Southern California
television station covered a local gaming convention and showed
about two minutes of resplendently painted Napoleonic miniatures on the screen. "Doesn't this glorify war?" asked the reporter
"Not really," answered the gamer, "it really makes you wonder
about the generals who actually send young men out to die."
Since the reporter had already made up his mind about the way
the story was to be handled, he segued into some footage about
some actual military exercises being held in the desert. He didn't
hear what the gamer said. He did not even consider the possibility that wargaming may have the same effect upon gamers
that viewing the Vietnam war on television had upon the majority
of United States television viewers in the late '60s and early '70s.
Many of those who criticize the computer wargame genre have
not heard what the developers have said, either. They haven't
heard how wargame designers want to give wargamers enough
data to help them understand the high cost of war, not simply in
terms of machines and budgets, but in terms of its highest cost—
human potential. Indeed, they may even have a fundamental misconception about the nature of play.
What is the nature of play? In speaking of a child's play, Erik
Erikson suggested that play is " . . . the infantile form of the
human ability to deal with experience by creating model situations and to master reality by experiment and planning . . ."
(Childhood and Society, p. 195).

Play creates, then, a model or "controlled" situation where the
player can observe the results of his/her experiments and plans in
order to test out the potential results of those strategies with no
risk to the player him/herself. In play, one can rattle sabres with a
foreign power, knowing all the while that should nuclear war
ensue, it will only occur on the screen. Nevertheless, one will
probably not be as quick to advocate sabre rattling as a matter of
public policy when reality is on the line if the simulation/game is
sufficiently convincing about the uncertainty/danger of that activity. In play, one can calmly send that cavalry unit on that hopeless mission of taking that bloody hill. Yet, perhaps, as one looks
at the body count flashing in a numerical report or watches the
unit rout across the computer screen, one will think about the
tragedy and the waste of warfare.
Why, then, do pacifists play wargames? It is not only because it
is entertaining to solve the conundrum of the situation, but because it is fun to play with the "what if"s attendant to both
hypothetical and historical battles. In addition, wargames offer an
educational value, as well. In wargames, one learns from the mistakes of the past, begins to understand why a battle went a certain way, and tries to comprehend both why the battle was fought
and what each army hoped to gain. Pacifists play wargames to
learn the lessons of history and to solve the conundrum of the
situation. Many who invest hours in such "play" would never want
the actual task. The model, the controlled situation, allows wargarners to experiment without actually having to commit lives
and less precious resources to the task. This is a vital part of play.
The key to the understanding of play is to be able to try a
myriad of solutions to a given problem without risk. This is one
reason why "saved game" positions are very important. Part of the
"control" in a given situation is the ability to get discernable feedback from a given action. "Why did the witch doctor cook me in
the pot when I tried to give him money?" It may not be a situation we would ever face in "reality", but it may teach us something about diversity of cultures (an important lesson in terms of
the global community) or interpersonal understanding. If one is
not given the chance to go back and try a different approach
under the same exact parameters, however, the lesson may go
unlearned.
Now, computer game developers find themselves caught between two similar opinions. From the right wing, they are told
that fantasy role-playing games are evil because they dabble in
magic and myth and from the left wing, they are told that military
simulations are evil because they glorify war and promote
nationalism. In reality, both sides underestimate the value of play.
The role-player who learns to manage his inventory of
skills/spells/artifacts/strength in a fantasy game, just might learn
to manage his time/possessions/health/goals better as a result.
The wargamer who learns to manage his men/units/vehicles/supplies just might become a better manager, in general.
When Will Wright, designer of SimCity, was asked what he
most wanted people to learn from his product, he answered, "I
just hope that they'll think about their own cities differently.
Maybe, they'll take more interest in the whole process." Will understood the nature of play. As the metaphors of a game take hold,
they change the player's way of viewing the situations and events
outside him/herself. If the game is successful, the metaphors
change the player itself. Finally, if the game is successful, it is not
the content of the game which changes the player, but the playing of the game itself.

Foreign Correspondence

OVER THERE
Of Bards, Shards and Blackguards:
The Latest Games From Europe
by Paul Rigby

"Marry, 'Us a strange churl, that standeth over there. Methinks it knoweth not
the time of day."
Well, is it any wonder? There you were
strolling along, with the hundreds of
other tourists along the banks of the
River Avon, perusing the souvenir shops
of Stratford-Upon-Avon (Shakespeare's
birthplace) and noting the rather strange
characters you often come across. The
three old ladies in that antique shop, for
instance. They weren't very pleased when
you wouldn't buy their cauldron, were
they? Maybe they had something to do
with the predicament in which you currently find yourself.
Utilizing a variety of Shakespearean
plays and language, Avon is a humorous
text-only adventure for the PC from UK
adventure veterans Topologika. The
player has to escape from the
Shakespearean world in which he is
trapped. Don't worry though, one doesn't
need to have any knowledge of
Shakespeare to play or enjoy this adventure. Avon is awash with atmospheric
descriptions and comes complete with a
free adventure called Monsters of Murdac. Both games have an on-line help
feature, if needed. Available now, for
£19.99 (Visa accepted), Avon/Monsters of
Murdac (as well as a wide range of other

text adventures for the PC) is available
from Topologika, PO Box 39, Stilton,
Peterborough, England, PE7 3RL.
Coded by a group of UK programmers,
Imperium is Electronic Arts new "complex" strategy game set in space. One becomes the Emperor of Earth and its allied
planets. The player's objective? Stay in
power for the next 1,000 years or be the
sole surviving Emperor of the Galaxy. A
variety of diplomatic, economic and
military decisions will have to be made (although the computer can be instructed
to take some of the workload off your
shoulders). To expand one's Empire, a
player can build fleets and invade neighboring planets (from which various
reports are received). The discovery of
Nostrum, a life-preserving drug, is an essential chore. To aid in this quest are a
variety of subordinates, each with varying
levels of competence. One must survive
frequent elections, though, to succeed
and a popularity chart will act as a good
indication as to the player's success in
the political arena. Available on the
Amiga and ST in April for £24.99.
From the French software house, Art of
Dreams, comes Antago—a rather
abstract puzzle game. For one or two
players, Antago has them taking the role
of either an angel or a devil. The aim of
the game is pretty simple, one must
make a row of five symbols. Does that
sound simple? You can bet your life it
isn't! Including a wealth of comical animation and music, Antago is currently available on the PC, ST and Amiga for
£19.99.
Another French game, this time from
New Deal Promotions, leads you
around a 50 location adventure known
as Astate. The player is an archaeologist
who must find the five pieces of the
Statue of Theomorphe, from the legend
of the same name. Starting with nothing
more than a metal detector, drill and pickaxe, one must search for the pieces. Finding one piece will give clues as to the
locations of the rest. Available now on
the ST with an imminent release on the
Amiga, Astate retails at £19.99.
Available now on PC, ST and Amiga formats is Demon's Tomb, a text/graphic adventure from Virgin/Melbourne House.
Set in deepest rural England the adventure begins on a one-man archaeological
excavation in a remote English forest. Little does the archaeologist know that he is
doomed to die a violent death. Yet, the
player must take part in his fate, controlling the good Professor in an effort to
secure certain objects for the use of
anyone who is likely to follow. This sort of
"foreword" has been used in Zork Zero,
for example. Once the Professor is dead,
Continued on page 58

Industry News

either Divine Wind or Pacific Storm,
Main Battle Tank: Northern Germany,
and a World War III game of grand
strategic naval combat from SimCan.

The
Rumor
Bag

Meanwhile, back at our table, an amazing Sidney Greenstreet look-alike had
joined our party. He leaned over and
whispered confidentially in my ear that he
knew how to get a "Flying Kirov" in
Three-Sixty's Harpoon. He said that in
the early versions of the game, you could
select a Kirov class carrier, put it in your
mix of ships and give it the last order
before saving the game. Then, when you
restart the game, there is a 50% chance
that it will become an "airplane". Talk
about a versatile platform!

by Youssef Bismillah Bingara

t

was one of those classic Moroccan
restaurants, the kind with the ace of
spades doorways and the brass
tabletops that look like an Aztec calendar.
The Near Eastern influence was almost
as prevalent as the Moorish castles and
mosques which are being drawn by Rob
Stein for Ivan and Carol Manley's upcoming Excalibur II, Virgin Mastertronic's
sequel to their soon-to-be-released game
of Arthurian legend—Excalibur.

I

with proportionately huge scimitars,
Bates informed me that he did indeed
have two games coming out (as reported
in CGW #70) and that Steve Meretzky of
Leather Goddesses of Phobos fame was
indeed authoring one of those games.
He even informed me that just as Sierra
has three games (either recently released
or in production) that have belly dancing
scenes, his latest game also has a belly
dancer. However, he informed me in no
uncertain terms that the development language produced for his games is not
based on ZIL, the Zork interpreter.

No sooner did we begin dining than the
lights dimmed and a drum roll sounded
over the loudspeaker system. "And now,"
boomed a voice like a foreign Ed McMahon, "to enhance your dining
pleasure, the Miss America of belly dancing, the lovely Una." As we watched her
performance and became as entranced
as a King Cobra weaving in time to a
snake charmer, she tauntingly placed her
veil around the paper bag I normally wear
over my head. Embroidered upon the veil
were enough Arabic characters to let us
know that Hero's Quest 2: Trial By Fire
will offer players a chance to undergo the
mysteries of an initiation ritual, solve
numerous puzzles and unravel a number
of interwoven tales (complete with
Nishiuye and Moore animation of strange
characters and sexy females, a Mark
Seibert soundtrack, and plenty of the outrageous Cole humor) which abound in
the land of Shapeir.

I looked at Bob's bodyguards again and
realized that I was really glad he hadn't
been playing the upcoming revision of
CEO on the PRODIGY Interactive Service Network. The new version is supposed to offer murders and hostile
takeovers among other options and I
sure didn't want to deal with anyone experienced in either wicked practice. I
promised not to ever say anything about
ZIL again if he'd call off the mean looking thugs at his side. Those guys looked
like they could single-handedly win the
far future war depicted in Data East's upcoming Full Metal Planet. Originally
released in France by Infogrames, the
game combines exploration, economic
management and warfare; offers very attractive graphics; and is based on a
French boardgame with the same name.

Una also motioned for me to stand up,
offer a semblance of a belly dance (I had
more to shake than she did, but it wasn't
nearly as graceful) and move across the
floor. There, I was confronted by Bob
Bates, designer of Sherlock: Riddle of
the Crown Jewels and Arthur for Infocom. Flanked by two massive warriors

As they escorted me back to our table, I
felt like I was in the Strait of Gibraltar.
This "fleeting" thought reminded me that
Simulations Canada's Fleet Med would
be the last game to use their Long Lance
system of tactical naval games. Fortunately, wargamers would still see: a strategic
naval game set in the Pacific to be called

We washed our hands and the waiter
lined up some tall glasses in a row. He
brought in a steaming pot that looked
like something the caterpillar in Alice In
Wonderland would have smoked. Pouring the tea from shoulder height, the hot
liquid flowed out of the pot like a streaming waterfall and filled all of our glasses.
He didn't spill a drop. I asked the
Greenstreet character if this was like
"high tea". Instead of answering my irreverent interrogative, he told me that Virgin Mastertronic will publish a game
called Wonderland this summer.
Designed by the veteran adventure game
group, Magnetic Scrolls, the story will
be "darker" in atmosphere than the Disney version of the story in an attempt to
get closer to the original. In fact, I almost
expected the mutant creatures from
Trans Fiction's Mammal Club, the adventure game set in far-future New York,
to show up at our table. I could just see
some rabbit/human creature shooing us
away from the table saying, "No room!
No room!" In fact, I was planning to write
more in this column, but my editor just
said the same thing.

Sneak Preview

Here Be Dragons
SSI's "DragonStrike"
by Johnny L. Wilson
hey are terrifying, gargantuan
creatures. They are archetypes, shadow images of
the primal serpent in the garden of
innocence which are enlarged to
monstrous proportions by our subconscious. The chivalrous knights
of legend opposed them and the
fantastic races of Middle Earth
feared them. They have symbolized
ravenous greed and senseless
destruction to the point at which
they have become the ultimate villains in the worlds of fantasy.

T

Yet, there are positive aspects to
the dragons of legend. As fierce as
the villainous worm of Dragonslayer
was, its scales could be utilized as
armor and the society perceived its
power as a divinely ordained force
for "right". Anne MacCaffery's
dragons are not only the primary instruments of protection against the
threat of destruction by alien infestation (called "thread" in the books) by
burning the alien menace with their
fiery breath, but they hold a
telepathic and telempathic bond
with their masters, the dragonriders
of Pern. Even Robert Don Hughes'
schizophrenic villain, the twoheaded Vicia-Heinox in The Prophet
of Lamath (Del-Rey Books),
served an important purpose in
providing stability between three
quite distinctive cultures.
In DragonStrike, Strategic
Simulations, Inc.'s first VGA
product on the IBM (also to be released on the Amiga), these
prodigious winged reptiles are some of the most important assets
for the "Champions of Krynn" in attempting to defeat the dark forces of Queen Takhesis. All action takes place in the DragonLance world during the era known as the War of the Lance.
There is one important difference, however. DragonStrike is
neither a pure role-playing game nor an action/adventure game.
Instead, it is a "flight" simulator set in a fictitious universe with a
role-playing shell to bind the story/campaign together. The player
takes on the role of a dragonrider during the War of the Lance
and flies his dragon(s) through more than thirteen different combat scenarios of three-dimensional, polygon-filled scrolling
graphics (some scenarios are different, depending on whether the
player takes a diverging track or not). Though the game is a
flight simulator, its style and flow of play is most similar to
Activision's MechWarrior. Like MechWarrior, DragonStrike offers an exciting challenge whether one is interested in simply
booting a scenario here and there or actually playing out a full
campaign. If anything, the role-playing wrap for DragonStrike is
even more effective than that in MechWarrior because there are

three different tracks for characters to
play through in order to win, rather
than one basic storyline to complete
as in the earlier game.
View From The Heights
DragonStrike works on several different levels. As a role-playing experience, it solves some of the difficulties many DungeonMasters have
had in dealing with dragons in their
scenarios/campaigns. The present
writer tried to avoid using dragons
very often because they were hard to
play-balance in a campaign unless
the player characters' party had a
dragon in their arsenal, as well. Since
dragons had an awesome destructive
power, tremendous range, and, as a
rule, magical attacks as well, they
were often more trouble to referee
than they were worth. This writer confesses to occasionally placing a formidable dragon to guard a special
treasure or confronting the party with
a Vicia-Heinox style dragon to provide comedy relief and a modicum of
a challenge, but never allowed a
player character in one of his campaigns to fly a dragon. That would
have been too unwieldy to referee.
Characters not only fly several different types of dragons in DragonStrike, however, but they face a
variety of dragons as opponents, as
well. Though the program has
elected to eliminate the percentage
chance for magical attacks, it
suc¬cessfully enables players to use long-range weapons (breath
weapons consistent with the Advanced Dungeons & Dragons
Monster Manual) and short-range weapons (a dragonlance affixed to the saddle and aimed by the player). In addition, it automatically handles the claw and bite attacks which are often so
time-consuming to resolve during pen and paper gaming sessions. So, even the combat works better than the pen and paper
game's.
DragonStrike also successfully conveys the sense of being
there. The point-of-view perspectives that allow the player to view
the tail and wing views, the VGA graphics (as well as the EGA)
that almost make the dragons seem alive, the variety of terrain
(consistent with the map of Krynn itself), the welcome ability to
control the dragon with a choice of joystick, mouse or keyboard,
and the relatively smooth frame rate (it isn't quite as smooth as
MechWarrior's) all work together to kindle an illusion of reality.
With all of this going for it, one can imagine how much
Continued on page 16

Sneak Preview

DragonStrike
Continued from page 14
adrenaline can be produced in each combat. This writer noted his heart pounding
and his hands shaking as two white
dragons took shape on the screen and
headed in his direction. With finger
poised over the breath weapon key, he
anxiously awaited that point in time in
which he could blast the white dragon
with a cone of cold. That's entertainment!
Add to this the fact that the scenarios
are nicely balanced in terms of: number
and types of enemy dragons, mission objectives, terrain, and story. Then, you
know that this is an extremely versatile
and potentially popular product.
Finally, the design/programming team
of DragonStrike should be commended
for allowing the user to toggle the level
of realism in order to opt for performance rather than graphics. Although
the realistic graphics are superb, they do
have a tendency to bog down the action
on slower machines. Therefore, the
game allows players to toggle between
polygon-filled graphics with their maximum aesthetic effect and functional, fastdrawing wireframe graphics that do not
look as nice, but draw considerably faster
on the screen. Therefore, the player can
decide what is most important in terms
of game play. In graphics, play and userfriendliness, Westwood Associates has
taken a great leap beyond the
company's previous efforts in Hillsfar
and Infocom's Battletech: The Crescent
Hawk's Inception.
Down in the Valley
The fiction is solid, reflecting the
product's close ties with TSR, publishers
of the pen and paper games, novels and
comic books. Yet, here is where some
may be disappointed. Whereas MechWarrior gave the player's character some
freedom to explore the storyline outside
of his 'mech, DragonStrike (at least, in
this first release) keeps the player's character firmly attached to the saddle (except when he is dislodged in combat and
tumbles toward the ground).
Second, the interface is not altogether convincing. Although it
creates the verisimilitude of flying a dragon better than this writer
ever thought possible, its very success makes one long for a little
more. The crystal ball and arrow of enemy detection given to the
player's character by the wizard, Fizban, are extremely helpful and
fit well into the DragonLance universe. The crystal ball serves the
function of "radar" in a credible fantasy fashion, as does the arrow
of enemy detection. However, the altitude gauge might have
been handled more effectively as some primitive mechanical
device (a la Leonardo da Vinci) or as a "rod" powered by the
wizard. The lack of a fictitious explanation for the gauge will

bother the purist, but many will simply
find the gauge so useful they will not
give it a thought.
The most telling deficiency in the interface, however, is the inability to
show peripheral vision on the screen.
Even though the program is userfriendly enough to automatically
resolve close-combat whenever the
dragon is in tooth or claw range or
the rider is within sword range, the
mere presence of the on-screen messages which indicate that one's
dragon has attacked the enemy or the
player's character has struck the
enemy with his/her sword whets the
appetite for more on-screen action.
To be sure, the present writer is unaware of any way to resolve this disappointment, given the present state of
the technology, but the design does
have a discouraging tendency to underscore the dimension that is missing.
Finally, one cannot help but wonder
about some of the design choices
with regard to pacing. In a couple of
scenarios, one must fly the dragon
across an icy sea or beyond certain
geographical points before contact
can be made with the enemy. This
process of having to fly a specific distance before engaging the enemy is
certainly realistic and undoubtedly serves to delineate the distances in
Krynn to a scale of simulated time
and space. In future DragonStrike
games, however, it would be nice if
the user could toggle this
time/space/distance attribute on and
off.
On the other hand, the system is
wide open enough that players who
do not like certain scenarios can always move on to the next ones. The
game is set up so that one can play
through the scenarios in a narrative
order through the three tracks or play
whatever scenario one wants, either in
sequence or out of sequence. Therefore, the pacing question may be of little consequence to many users.
Verdict from the Lord Clerist
DragonStrike may be the most
polished product yet to arrive from the collaboration of SSI and
TSR. It does what many licensed products fail to do, it uses the
computer to create something that cannot be done with pencil
and paper. In this case, it creates the illusion of dragonflight and
combat in an exhilarating fashion. In addition to the usual computer game accoutrements, DragonStrike's package offers colorful player's aid cards that simplify the Monster Manual descriptions down to that which is relevant to this game system. Finally,
DragonStrike enriches the world of computer simulations in
general by treating a very unique subject. If the true value of a
simulation is to enable players to feel like they have done something that they would not have the opportunity to accomplish in
real life, DragonStrike is an amazing simulation.

Game Hints

Platoon Survival Techniques
Tips for Microprose's
"M-1 Tank Platoon"
By J. Mitchell Cobb

anking is a dirty, greasy, and exhausting business. A soldier in
an Armor unit spends most of
his time fixing his tank; seldom does
he actually fight in it. Preparation is
ninety percent of the battle. His
leaders have it even worse. They
must care for and encourage their
crews; find the food, fuel, spare
parts, and ammunition that those
tired troops need and, ultimately,
plan for the next battle. To a
tanker, sometimes it is a relief just
to have a target to shoot at!

T

These are the most obvious differences between Microprose's M1 Tank Platoon and reality. In
reality, a leader's job consists of
much more planning, coordinating, and other such necessary
(and dull!) detail work. The game
distills this minutiae into its Outfitting and Briefing screens, allowing players to move their vehicles
quickly into the fight. In those battles,

the action becomes much more
lifelike—visually and tactically.

Visually Rich
M-1 Tank Platoon lets one switch
between a map overview and assorted viewpoints in or around the

tanks. Each vantagepoint offers
value, so it is advisable to use them
all. The graphics are nothing less

than stunning. The images on an
EGA screen are virtually equal to
those of the gunnery simulators used
to train military personnel (which
uses a minicomputer to process images). The terrain scrolls smoothly as
the player's tanks maneuver and the
crew positions are accurate, detailed,
and fully functional.
There are only two basic difficulties with the display. First, the terrain seems too open. The German countryside is far more
wooded, populated, and hilly than
M-1 Tank Platoon reflects. One
rarely sees a full 3000 meters in
Central Europe, with much longer
lines of sight available in the
game. Open terrain, however,
does conserve memory in a
simulation, so one can understand why Microprose did this.
Second, the Soviets do not paint
their vehicles bright red! Dull brown
Continued on page 44

taut

Review

BASEBALL IS
THE NUMBERS
A Brief Survey
of Statistics-Based
Text Baseball Games
by Duane E. Widner
"It's a deep fly ball to left... Kirk Gibson's going back... Back .
He jumps . . . HOME RUN!!"
There is a whole slew of computer baseball games on the
market, many featuring awesome graphics with sounds right
down to the crack of the bat and packaged in flashy boxes
emblazoned with endorsements from big name players. However,
there is another room in the house of computer baseball; one
which is filled with the stat-based text games. These are the
games which produce accurate, historical representations in text
format rather than graphically depicted grand slams.
The majority of these stat-based products are produced by
smaller companies and are, almost exclusively, computer versions
of their board-game products. Strat-O-Matic, Lance Haffner Full
Count Baseball, APBA Major League Players Baseball, and Pursue the Pennant PC Baseball are the major players in this league.
Others, like Radio Baseball, and Statis-Pro Baseball from Avalon
Hill, were more "first generation" efforts and are not the focus of
this article.
What sets these statistics-based games apart from their more
graphic oriented cousins? Statistics-based games are basically
text games, showing a scoreboard, current batter, pitcher,
baserunners, and the like. All stat-based games use actual major
league statistics and strive for accurate re-creations of major
league performances.
At this point a curious reader may ask, What's the purpose of
playing a statistical game, instead of one with spiffy graphics?".
Good question. What if you were the manager of the California
Angels and were able to draft and sign Bo Jackson before the
Royals got a chance? Would the 1988 pennant race in the AL
West have been affected? Using any of the statistics-based games
reviewed below, you could make that change, play out the
season, and answer that very question. What if you added Babe
Ruth to the 1987 Seattle Mariners? Could the Sultan of Swat
have raised the lowly Mariners to the promised land? What if Ted
Williams had been healthy for the 1950 pennant race? Would
Boston have won the flag?
Answering these questions and a thousand more "what ifs" just
like them form the raison d'etre behind stat-based computer
games. The player's role is that of manager, general manager, or
league commissioner (instead of merely becoming just another
joystick-controlled player).
With this understanding of statistics-based games presented,
what follows are brief reviews of the four major statistics-based
baseball games for you personal computer:
Strat-O-Matic Baseball: The current king of stat-based board

games first put their computer entry on the market in 1986. An
exact duplicate of their card-based game, one is almost forced to
buy both the computer and board games in order to fully enjoy
the computerized version. There are two methods of play,
manual and automatic. In the manual mode, you actually use the
Strat-O-Matic cards, and input the results of the play into the keyboard. The Computer becomes the tool for rolling the dice, figuring the odds of stealing or taking the extra base, and other
statistics keeping. The automatic version requires a separate data
disk for the season you wish to play. You don't HAVE to use the
Strat-o-Matic player cards, but often you won't know what's
going on if you don't! It's obvious this company, operating out of
Glen Head, NY, views the player cards as the keystone to their
product and are intent on keeping it that way. For statistical accuracy, few games have ever reached the level enjoyed by StratO-Matic. Many of the intricacies are captured in varying levels of
play, with the basic game, advanced and super advanced rules allowing the player to add to the complexity and accuracy of the
game at will. Strat-O-Matic PC Baseball comes with the manual
and advanced games, statistics compiler and league leader
utilities. Season data disks and player cards must be purchased
separately.STRAT-O-MATIC Game Co., 46 Railroad Plaza, Glen
Head, N.Y. 11545, (516) 671-6566, (Apple, C-64, and IBM),
$66.25.
Lance Haffner Full Count Baseball: Lance Haffner produces a
series of various sport simulations, all programmed in basic.
Many past and present teams are available with the baseball
game and the most recent past season disks are ready almost as
soon as the season is completed. One nice feature is the ability
to input your own players and teams. This capability, combined
with one's own baseball encyclopedia, allows a player to program
virtually anyone that has ever picked up a bat (including his
minor league seasons). Statistical accuracy is fairly good, but
there are some irritating flaws that cause the basic code to abort
the game at inopportune moments. It is possible to play against
the computer or play the computer against itself, which is useful
for long seasons and getting quick results. This autoplay feature
will produce a box score in only a few minutes. Lance Haffner
Full Count Baseball comes with a variety of past teams, good
and bad, all 26 current major league teams, a stat compiler, and

a player/team creation utility. Other season disks and league
leader utilities are available separately. Lance Haffner Games, PO
Box 100594, Nashville, TN 37210, (615) 242-2617, (Most Formats), $39.95.
APBA Major League Players Baseball: This is another cardbased boardgame product turned computerized. It is a clean, wellproduced package that has a few interesting features. One of
these is the taking an extra base feature. To wit, in most games,
a player is given the option of sending a runner on first base the
go-ahead to take third on a single to center or right. Naturally,
the decision will depend on whether Vince Coleman or Terry Kennedy is running. In APBA, the decisions are real-time and, if you
don't send the runner, he stays. Unfortunately, the game does
not take advantage of all available RAM and accesses the disk
drive on every play. That could be a concern over the course of
an entire major league season because APBA is fairly slow compared to the others (meaning it takes as long as 30 minutes to
complete a game). APBA comes with the current season disk and
the master game disk. Past season disks, stat compiler, and
league leader utilities are available separately. APBA Game Company, 1001 Millersville Rd., PO Box 4547, Lancaster, PA 176049975, (717) 394-6161, (IBM), $59.95.
Pursue The Pennant PC Baseball: This is the latest entry in the
market, and possibly the best. The 2.00 version combines nearly
every conceivable feature mentioned above. The game itself allows for the creation of individual players, using one of three sources of information: McMillan's Baseball Encylopedia, The Sporting News, or Elias Baseball Analyst. The games are fast, accurate, and demand both baseball knowledge and good player instincts. This is the only game to provide for up-to-date computer
league stats and real-life performance during the game. A transfer stats utility allows league statistics to be added to, subtracted
from, or to be used to replace the accumulated statistics on
another disk. This is very handy for league play where the games
may be played on different computers. A complete stat compiler
and league leader utilities are included with Purse the Pennant.
Past season disks are available separately. Pursue the Pennant,
PO Box 38364, Greensboro, NC 27438, (919) 299-4388, (IBM),
$69.95

SUMMARY: If the dog days of Summer have you chomping at
the bit to replace the manager of your favorite major league
team, or you long to become your own "Trader Jack", and wheel
and deal your way to a world series, then grab one of these
games, a hot dog with mustard, and "Play ball!" CGW

RATING THE ENTRIES:
Stat
Leader
Compiler Utility

Player
Creation

Computer
Opponent

Overall
Evaluation

Strat-O-Matic

I

I

N

N

Good

A

Y

Y

Average

A

N

N

Good

Y

N

Excellent

Lance Haffner

A
APBA

A

Pursue The Pennant

I

I

KEY: A=available I=included Y=yes N=no

Game Hints

Scorpion's Tale

A New Generation
of Star Trek Games:
The Transinium Challenge
As Told By Scorpia

ell, here we are, chugging through spring into summer.
Fred is performing the yearly ritual of spring cleaning (fortunately, when no customers are around). You really
don't want to see what goes out. (Believe me, you'll feel much
better not knowing). Speaking of out, however, this time we're
going far out—in fact, right into outer space.
Star Trek: The Transinium Challenge is a graphic adventure
game, based on the Star Trek Next Generation TV show. You
take the part of Commander Riker, who is to lead a mission
which will determine if he has the stuff of which starship captains
are made. It's up to you to prove that he does.
Unlike other adventure games, Challenge has no vocabulary
whatsoever. Everything is accomplished through the use of icons
and menus; nothing needs to be typed in from the keyboard.
This eliminates the usual frustration players have as they try to figure out just how to phrase commands to get things done.
However, that doesn't mean the game is not without other
frustrations of its own. Challenge is very different from the typical
"find object X and figure out what to do with it" adventure. While
there are items of importance in the game, most of the action is
concerned with people. Talking to them, agreeing or disagreeing
with their demands and consulting with other crew members is
where you will spend a great deal of your time in this intriguing
adventure game.
Also, this one is quasi-linear in design. There is no specific, stepby-step, golden path through the game (there are some actions
that need to be done early on, or at least before doing some
other things). Getting the sequences right is not always easy and
will require some trial and error.
Coming into this one with the usual adventure game perspective, therefore, may cause you some problems. You might be rolling along when, suddenly, all the action seems to stop and you
have no idea why. Or, you might have trouble simply getting
started, because the format and presentation are not of the standard design. So, let's see just what's up with this game .. .
It begins on the bridge of the Enterprise, where a call for help
comes in from an asteroid belt in the remote Aquila system. A
mysterious ship is terrorizing the area, attacking the various mining installations located on some of the asteroids. Naturally, the
Enterprise immediately proceeds there to investigate.
The whole affair is puzzling. Transinium, the ore being mined, is
a low-grade mineral of only limited use. While rare, it isn't especially valuable; certainly not worth killing people over. Yet, someone is definitely trying to drive the miners out and doesn't care
who gets hurt in the process.

After you've talked to the locals, you might get the feeling that
the terrorists may have the right idea (grin). Ms. Jansen, who
runs the "El Dorado" operation, is snotty and rude. Mr. Velura
and his buddy Smith at "The Doghouse" are a pair of longwinded bores. The Mhulli (a new race) are convinced that the
Klingons are behind the attacks, while the Klingons are openly
contemptuous of Riker's ability to stop the terrorists. Dr. Parks, a
retired scientist, apparently wants peace at any price and practical
ly demands that the Enterprise leave before things get worse.
Denning, who runs the local bar, is full of gossip and it's
rumored that his drinks are full of more than liquor. There's a
Ferengi flitting around, too, although it seems that he has no interest in anything beyond wheeling and dealing.
You could say that Riker has quite a nice little mess on his
hands. He'd better clean it up quickly, too, or he'll be relieved of
command. What's a poor Star Fleet Officer to do?
Well, the first thing, of course, is to start talking to people. This
often means accepting or rejecting proposals they put forth.
Each of these should be given careful consideration, as pretty
much all of them have an importance in the game. You have to
decide on the spot, too, because once you're talking to someone, you can't leave until a choice is made.
Riker doesn't have to go it alone. He can take two crewmembers with him whenever he beams down somewhere (anyone except Picard, who never leaves the ship). These away team members are available for consultation during conversations with the
locals. They will offer advice, opinions, and suggestions, but the
ultimate choice of action in any situation is always Riker's.
On occasion, the composition of the away team is critical to advancing the plot, and this is particularly so when investigating the
abandoned base. Don't get into a rut by always dragging the
same people with you. Someone you think is of no use might
just be the person you need. If that crewmember isn't in the away
team, something important may be overlooked, or a crucial event
may never happen.
This, in turn, means you should save often. Many choices trigger the unseen and those effects are not immediately obvious. It
may be awhile before the results of a wrong decision rears its
ugly head (and by then it's too late to do anything except restore). Since the game has many hidden complexities, it is a
good idea to keep notes of your progress, and exactly where
you do your saves.
One thing which can cause a lot of trouble is not going to the
bridge from time to time. It's an easy thing to overlook, because
Continued on page 30

Survey

What's New In Sports Games
by Wyatt Lee
APBA PRO LEAGUE FOOTBALL: This is the computer version
of the respected boardgame of football strategy. It was developed
by the same company and offers the same style of quality play
and statistics handling as fans of the classic game have come to
expect. Unfortunately, the computer version does not feature
enough "idiot proofing" in the interface to keep from frustrating
the average user. Pressing a direction key at the wrong time can
kick one completely out of the program and the control key
layout is extremely awkward for two player games. In addition, the
program has some unsightly bugs in the play-by-play feature.
Where the descriptions within the play-by-play messages are
generally well-written, the program fails to insert the team names
from the current game into the messages. So, what should read,
"The Bills now have the ball," ends up reading "The now have the
ball." Even so, the game plays relatively well once you get used to
the flow of play, but the overall feel is of an incomplete product
which is only for dedicated aficionados. (APBA Game Company, 1001 Millersville Road, Post Office Box 4547, Lancaster,
PA 17604-4547).
HEAT WAVE: Offshore Power Boat Racing is a thrilling and
colorful spectacle to watch. In Accolade's Heat Wave, players become more than spectators. Race preparation includes choices
between: four different boats, six pre-set courses or up to ten
courses designed by the players themselves, and loading extra
fuel, propellers and shafts. The choices are handled efficiently
using pop-up windows with menu-driven choices. After the race
is set up, players drive the boat from joystick or keyboard, much
like any other vehicle simulation. The frame bounces to simulate
the look of driving a high speed boat and the polygons scroll by
at a nice clip. Players can even choose a lower detail level if they
want a faster frame rate. The crashes are dramatic whenever the
boats hit the shore, but we were unable to duplicate the most
spectacular crashes (where the boats flip and roll) in the sport.
The game offers plenty of chrome, though. We were expressly impressed with the helicopter view of the races. (Amiga, $44.95,
Atari ST, $49.95, IBM, $39.95, and C-64/128, $29.95).
LOW BLOW: Professional boxing was never like it is presented
in this new action game from Electronic Arts. The action is fast,
furious and, at times, funny. The interface is simple (the easier to
convert to a cartridge game, my dear), the animation is even
smoother than the designer's previous Jordan vs. Bird:
One-on-One product, the tutorial segments fit cleverly into the game's fiction and the pompous, pretentious, purveyance of pugilistic
profundity by a ringside personality who seems vaguely familiar
("Who goofed, I've got to know?") is just right for the flavor of the
game. At first, the game looks like any number of coin-op and
cartridge boxing games, but it provides for a modicum of
strategy, as well. Each opponent is susceptible to a certain combination of punches. Players can train for a fight and master that
combination before entering the ring. Then, it's a matter of
timing and tactics in order for the player's character to climb up
the rungs of competition from contender to champion. (IBM,
$39.95).
PGA TOUR GOLF: CGW received an early look at Electronic
Arts's upcoming PGA Tour Golf game. The game will feature attractive graphics (polygon-filled with more than 16 colors in VGA
mode) and extremely realistic physical models. Wind is handled
dynamically and is a very important factor (it is constantly changing and figures into each shot), club selection is handled according to strict PGA rules and a variety of statistics are now available

which were not available in previous games. As the first Professional Golf Association license, the simulation incorporates the expertise of 60 professional golfers. Ten pros will be featured and
fifty others had input. The ten featured pros offer helpful comments during fly-bys (aerial views prior to playing the holes) on
each hole and the tournaments feature actual "cuts" which the
player must avoid. (IBM, $49.95)
TV SPORTS: BASKETBALL: Those who are familiar with the TV
Sports philosophy of colorful graphics, television-style chrome,
and league play will know what to expect from this latest release
in the series. The animation is smoother than ever, but the real
beauty of this game is the way it handles statistics. In the past,
statistics have been strictly a fringe portion of the game and
players who wanted to run a league missed the vital ability of
being able to print out even the basic statistics on cumulative
team performances. Now, those who wish to administer leagues

work allow players to connect to the network, make some basic
decisions and download information in order to play games offline using readily available software packages (Accolade's Mean
18 for Tournament Golf and Random House's APBA Major
League Players' Baseball for the baseball leagues) and upload
the game results back onto the network. In this way, one can participate in a human vs. human competition without having to
schedule precise times or running up exorbitant phone bills. It is
an elegant way to eat one's cake and have it, too, by combining
the best elements of computer game competition with the excitement of participating in a complete league with other human personalities. (Contact CSN at (713) 952-1060 for further information).

have all the usual league statistics available, plus some that
Cinemaware added as bonus value. Although the heart of the
TV Sports line has always been in the arcade action, those who
like the coaching aspects of sports games will not be disappointed because TV Sports: Basketball has a playcalling feature
that functions very smoothly within the game framework. As the
offensive team crosses the mid-court line, the computer handles
the on-screen players while the "coach" inputs a play using a joystick-driven menu/diagram in a window above the court. TV
Sports: Basketball is a well-balanced arcade/strategy game with
more than the usual Cinemaware flair. (Amiga, $49.95).

COMPUSERVE: On Compuserve, typing "Go Fans" will send
players to the area where fantasy/rotisserie leagues are administered. Players can join leagues where they draft major
league players, trade via electronic mail, set line-ups and score
points based on how the actual professional players perform in
real life. Interested parties can download the rules, which are
quite exhaustive, and enroll in a league that lasts all season long.
The league administrators are authentic baseball fans and will
provide players with an incredible amount of support information,

On-Line Sports
One fascinating way for computer owners to participate in statistics-based sports games is to enter an on-line competition. We
have looked at three different ways to compete against other
owners in on-line competition: APBA leagues (using the baseball
cousin to the football product described earlier in this article) on
the Computer Sports Network, fantasy baseball on the USA
Sports Network and fantasy/rotisserie league baseball on Compuserve.
COMPUTER SPORTS NETWORK: Like Tournament Golf, the
networked series of golf tournaments described in CGW #63 (p.
38), the baseball leagues refereed by the Computer Sports Net-

league statistics and benevolent guidance. Essentially, players
have $260 in imaginary money to bid on players and establish
salaries. The great thing is that these leagues are administered in
such a way that they have continuity from year to year. The worst
thing is that the initial draft day takes about five hours or so of online time, which can be expensive. ($6.00 per hour of on-line
time).
USA TODAY: The USA Today Sports Network offers fantasy
sports with a more casual approach. Players can draft major
league stars or adjust their lineups on a weekly basis using an online utility. The system stores the fictitious teams thus created
and matches two teams together for competition during that particular week. For those with limited funds, but a desire to participate in fantasy baseball on a regular basis, this is the most
painless access. In addition to fantasy baseball, the USA Today
Sports Network offers fantasy basketball and football, NCAA
and professional "Pick 'Em" contests during the football and basketball seasons, card game tournaments and strategy boardgame
tournaments. Also, when Data East releases its Bo Jackson
Baseball game later this year, players will be able to use the network to download up-to-date statistics and import them directly
into the game. (IBM, $29.95).

Game Hints

New Star Trek Games
Continued from page 24

(a) you can do almost everything from the transporter room and
(b) you do a lot of beaming down, so moving from transporter to
bridge doesn't appear worthwhile.
However, if you stay off the bridge, certain events will not take
place. The game then seems to stop, and before long, you'll be
getting nasty notices from Starfleet about the stagnant nature of
the mission. This warning should not be taken lightly. If things
don't start happening soon thereafter, Riker will find himself in
big trouble. It's a good idea to visit the bridge between beamdowns, and to sometimes hang out there for awhile.
Another easy thing to overlook is asking the crew's opinions
about any odd or unusual objects. This includes not only those
in the away team at the moment, but also those back on the
ship. Contacting them via communicator isn't good enough; they
have to be there in person. And don't forget to check Riker's
opinions, too (yes, he does have a few of his own).
Re-visiting people and places is a definite must. Sometimes you
won't learn or find anything new, sometimes you will. You might
(after saving first!) try agreeing to a proposal you refused before,
or vice versa, to see what comes of it. Taking different crewmembers might also help.
You can send crewmembers to different places, but this feature
is of hardly any use as they can't really do anything on their own.
Besides, if you beam someone down, then go off to another location, that person will automatically beam back up before the ship
leaves.
Sooner or later, Riker will start encountering the mystery ship,
and this always begins combat. It's best not to try anything fancy;
just pound away at it. Catching the intruder will clear up a lot of
the mystery over the who and why of the mining attacks. In fact,
this is the only way of stopping the terrorists, so pulling out of battle is not recommended. Just don't expect to catch them easily.
Triumph in space combat is not the end, however. There is still
more to be done, especially in regard to the mysterious children.
Who they really are, what they want, and what to do about the
intruder's revelations, make up the endgame portion of the adventure. This part, though, is fairly straightforward, and should
not give adventure gamers much trouble. You'll know when
everything's done, as the game will go into the final automated
sequences, followed by congratulatory messages from both
Starfleet Command and Captain Picard.
Well, I see by the old invisible clock on the wall, it's that time
again. Remember, if you need help with an adventure game, you
can reach me in the following ways:
On Delphi: Stop by the GameSIG (under the Groups and Clubs
menu).
On GEnie: Visit the Games Roundtable (type: Scorpia to reach
the Games RT).
By US Mail (enclose a self-addressed, stamped envelope if you
live in the United States): Scorpia, PO Box 338, Gracie Station,
New York, NY 10028.
Until next time, happy adventuring!
Copyright 1990 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

Computer Gaming World's
See Reader Input Device on page 64

The Categories
Strategy (S7): Games that
emphasize strategic planning
and problem solving.
Simulation (SI): Games based
on first person perspectives of
real world environments.
Adventure (AD): Games that
allow you to take your alter ego
through a storyline or series
of events.
Role-Playing Adventures (RP):
Adventure games that are based
on character development
(usually involving attributes).
Wargames (WG):
Simulations of historical or
futuristic warfare from a
command perspective.
Action/Arcade (AC):
Computer games that
emphasize hand-eye
coordination and reflexes.
Games are often listed in more
than one category. In this case,
the first listed category is
considered primary. In order to
be recognized as the "Top
Game" in a given category, a
game must be listed as being
primarily of this specific type.

Top 100 Games

THE HALL OF FAME
The Games In
CGW's Hall Of
Fame Have Been
Highly Rated By
Our Readers
Over Time.
They Are Worthy
Of Play By All.

Review

2088: The Cryllan
Mission
by Dennis Owens

course, are as expendable as those
red-shirted crew members on the old StarTrek series and Mission Control has no
idea of the conditions you will face.
Written specifically for the Apple IIGS,
2088: The Cryllan Mission, by Victory
Software, is a science-fiction hybrid of
Ultima III and Wasteland which combines enough new features, deft uses of
the IIGS' abilities, and innovative twists
on old gaming standbys to present a
game that is both promising in its possibilities and frustrating in not carrying
those promises far enough.
2088 plays smoothly once the player
gets used to its rhythms, flow of windows,
combat options, and mouse/keyboard interactions. Its premise is imaginative, consistent and, unfortunately, limited in the
way it is carried out. For instance, although Vivek and Vinay Pai, the game's
designers, tout its unique use of windows
and menus (through Apple's system 5.0)
to access everything from combat options to conversation with NPCs, real interaction with NPCs is extremely limited
because of the inherent nature of windows. Questions are impossible and
topics are addressed by clicking on the
same few standard choices: introduction,
background, new topic, and more detail.
Once NPCs are met, they need never
be addressed again. It is entirely possible
for an unscrupulous player to pick every
NPC's brain in the city and then
slaughter the entire population. Such behavior might, of course, be considered
relatively antisocial. Still, there is no
reason to keep these little bumping icons
around to impede one's journey through
useless repeated contact and, even
though the experience points gained
might be slight, there is some reason to
do something with them other than just
talk to them (a stance shared, sadly, by
the game's most heinous villain).

hen the crew of the spacecraft
U.S.S. Houston, on a mission of
exploration in a previously uncharted region of the galaxy, discovered a
planet, the scientists at Mission Control
cheered. When the crew reported that the
planet appeared inhabited—and that the
lifeforms seemed intelligent, humanoid,
and completely devoid of any type of aggressive, warlike behavior—the Earth's
population was astounded.
Now, six months after the planet was
supposed to have passed from behind its
mother star, and communications with
the Houston's crew, which had been
blocked, were supposed to have resumed,
there has been no word from the planet

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

2088: The Cryllan Mission
Apple IIGS
$69.95
Vivek and Vinay Pai
Victory Software
P.O. Box 821381
Houston, TX 77282-1381

known as Crylla. Messages radioed
toward the star system have been
answered only by the quiet, threatening
hiss of deep space.
A new crew must be assembled: a team
of scientists, soldiers and doctors. A new
craft must be sent toward Crylla, and the
mystery of what happened to the original
crew must be solved. Your crew's lives, of

Make no mistake; 2088 does require
the player to make certain ethical
choices. Once the true horror of the situation on Crylla is uncovered, the player
must do something. There is nothing in
the game requiring the player to kill every
creature he encounters in the wilderness.
However, when the game limits the
player's interactions with the outdoor's
creatures to either attack or do nothing,
what else is a game player going to do?
Quit the game? Attack only the creatures
which attack the party?
(A side note: 2088 cannot be won if the
latter strategy is followed. Thus, some
consideration of moral conduct must be
made. But, come on, what else would a
"real gamer" do? Plunk down his money
and then not finish the game? Seriously,
Continued on page 36

2088: The Cryllan Mission
Continued from page 34

when it comes to seeing that end-game
victory screen, other considerations are
often made secondary).
In this age of computer gaming, with
the sophistication of the moral dilemmas
faced in Ultima V and Wizardry lV, the
question of how to correct a society corrupted by outsiders is an enticing one.
However, the question is not, in this
reviewer's opinion, satisfactorily examined
by 2088.
The game is also rather combat intensive. Once the characters in the party of
six each reach about 8000 in body
status, the party becomes well-nigh invincible (and that is nowhere near the
amount of body points the characters
can wind up with). Although a single hit

from a monster can cost a character 600
body points, with strong armor, good
weapons, and a fair supply of GammaPlasma (restores body status), no encounter is unwinnable.
Toward the end of the game, combat
sequences will have occurred so often,
and will have begun to take up such a
large amount of the time spent in playing
the game, that one might want to avoid
them completely in the interests of saving
time. Whole sections of caverns and
buildings can be left unexplored (as long
as the player has found whatever it was
he was looking for).
The 3-D perspective in dungeons is
colorful. At times plain in design, at
others, original, the parties of monsters

also can be seen one behind the other
when the characters' party has stumbled
upon a hallway full of beasties.
In a game with the scope and visual
complexity of 2088, such dichotomies are
common. Weapons can be sold back to
stores, but armor cannot. Further, only
the most common weapons can be sold,
and not the top-of-the-line "specials"
(which, seemingly, would attract the
highest prices); almost all functions are
most easily handled by mouse (but the
most redundant are handled the quickest
by keyboard), ad infinitum.
Overall, 2088: The Cryllan Mission
marks a promising entrance into the still
underdeveloped market of IIGS-specific
software by a new company. Especially
since rumors have the Ultima series
moving away from the Apple II, support
for such an encouraging debut is almost
mandatory for IIGS role-playing enthusiasts. The game supports hard drive,
mouse and keyboard interfaces, and requires 1.25 MEG of RAM to run.

Review

The Great Race
A Driver's View Of Electronic Arts'
Indianapolis 500
Barry Werger has been an autocross
champion, a racing steward, and a member of the New York Region SCCA Race
Management Committee. He is currently
taking a break from racing to live the life
of a poet at Risley Castle in Ithaca.

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:

Computer

PUBLISHER:

by Barry Werger

Indianapolis 500
The Simulation
IBM
$49.95
David Kaemmer
Richard Garcia
Electronic Arts
San Mateo, CA

rGaemignuWolds

may be wondering why I am writing this review instead of just dictating "expert" quotes to my friend, Charles Ardai [Ed: As he did in "Once Around
the Block," CGW #57, p. 451. The explanation is simple. Indianapolis 500 is
billed not as a game but, rather ominously, as Indianapolis 500: The Simulation.
Readers will recall that Charles has
refused to get into an actual race car and
may not be surprised that at the sight of
such a realistic simulation, he panicked.
Let's just say his therapist is working
overtime.

throughout history which doubles as a
clever anti-piracy device. Welcome as this
vast store of information is, however,

This is a game for those who
take racing seriously.
most of it is non-essential to the simulation. What is important is the detailed
and lengthy explanation provided of
suspension configuration and how its

I'm happy with the way things
worked out, however. It takes a true
motor-sports enthusiast, at least, to
appreciate the intricacy of this program. The game is not only a hyperrealistic simulation but a valuable
educational tool for any aspiring race
car driver.

To allow players to experiment with
various car set-ups, the simulation
provides a practice session in which one
can alter any of the car's characteristics
at any point on the track (Note: In the
Qualifying and Race sessions, only a few
such modifications are possible once the
race is underway and these can only be
made in the pits.). In fact, the settings
can be so intricate that players will
want to start with the default settings
the first few times out.
On the Right Track

A Month At the Races
The amount of research that went
into the game is obvious as soon as
one cracks the surprisingly detailed instruction manual. Not content with
spelling out the mechanics of the game,
it offers a wealth of information on the entire spectacle and history of racing's most
celebrated event. All facets of the race
are covered, from a driver's month-long
schedule of pre-race activities to the
layout of the speedway complex, including bathroom locations. There is even a
section of photographs of Indy winners

tings noticeably affect the car's handling,
but they interact so thoroughly that one
has to remain constantly aware of their
potential for cancelling effects on one
another.

modification affects a car's handling.
The suspension elements that players
can adjust include: shock absorbers,
wheel stagger, camer, anti-roll bars, tire
pressure and rubber compound; also adjustable are the car's downforce-generating wings and transmission gearset.
Remarkably, not only do all these set-

Since racing games typically offer a
variety of unusual track shapes, one
might expect a game limited to a plain
oval to be tedious. In Indianapolis 500,
this is not the case. The realities of handling a car at more than 220 mph are
so well-represented as to make even
the straightaways a challenge. When
one takes into account additionally the
interaction with fellow racers and the
constant attention one must pay to wear
on the vehicle's various components, it
becomes obvious that this simulation is
anything but boring. It also becomes obvious that this is a game for those who
take auto racing seriously. Gamers looking for immediate gratification should
stick to Out Run.
Even with all its technical sophistication,

the game is highly entertaining. The
graphics (in VGA mode, at least) are astounding. Although individual objects
(the cars, the track walls, etc.) are not particularly well detailed, the changes in
perspective that occur as one moves
around the track leads one to believe
that the entire world of the speedway is effectively contained within the computer.
Adding to this illusion of reality are the six
camera angles available for instant
replay, which can be called up at any
time: driver's view, behind the car, track
mounted, grandstand, helicopter, and
leader/crash. (The last shows important
events which the driver might not have
been able to see from his car.)
The only disappointment in the game is
the PC soundtrack. Every sound the
game makes with the internal speaker is
annoying, at best, and unbearable at
worst. One loses something if one plays
with the sound turned off, however, because some sounds (especially the squealing of tires) are important indicators of
the car's performance. [Ed: Of course,
those who have Ad Lib and Roland
sound boards will not have this problem. The soundtrack is outstanding
with these boards.]
The controls are very responsive. While
utilizing the keyboard effectively takes a
lot of practice, it is quite functional once
one gets used to it. If one should happen
to have access to a joystick, however,
control is natural and transparent. Steering is highly responsive, a pleasant
surprise after so many recent sluggish
driving games.
Checkered Flag
Any serious attempt to master Indy 500
will require a great deal of practice—perhaps, also a little madness. Each suspension change requires many laps of testing and each complete set-up means
hours of (re-)learning how to drive
smoothly. Only the most dedicated and
determined players will ever win a race
(Of course, this is the way it is in real life,
too . . . ).
This means that Indy 500 is not for
everyone. (Charles, you can come out
now!) For gamers who might actually be
interested in racing some day, it offers invaluable experience; for die-hard simulation nuts, it offers a truly in-depth portrait
of its subject; but for casual gamers it
can offer headaches and heartache and
hair-pulling frustration. Keep this in mind,
readers—you know who you are.

I

Scorpia's Column

O

ver the last few years,
there has been a distressing trend in computer
games in general, and not merely in the adventure/CRPG genres, either. Too many releases
have hit the racks with flaws and
bugs that should never have
been in a production version.
I'm not speaking of minor
problems, but major gaffes that
seriously interfere with game
play: unwinnable conditions,
game crashes, seams that allow
wholesale cheating, areas that
are never activated, awkward
and hard-to-use interfaces, poor
combat balance and infuriating
parsers, to name just a few.

Scorpion's
View
Scorpia Stings Playtesting
and Apple-Plexy

There are several reasons for
this, the major ones being the
lack of adequate playtesting in
the first place and insufficient
time allowed for testing and the
fixing of problems in the
second. Playtesting is one of the
most important factors in the
development of any game. Yet,
it seems that in recent times, it
has been taking a back seat to
getting a product out the door.
Good playtesting requires a fair
amount of dedication, as well as
tough-mindedness and independence of thought. While
there are some good playtesters
out there, there are too many
people who see playtesting main
ly as a way of getting their
hands on a particular game well
in advance of everyone else.
They are generally not aware that playtesting means more than
simply running through a game and noting where it crashes or
where strange things happen.
These people (and there are too many of them) view the test
versions more as finished products, and play them that way, thereby missing many of the problems in the code. They just never
see them, and no one knows about them, until the game is in
the hands of the paying customers, and by then it's too late. This
is not testing a game!
Non-testing can also come about when companies provide hint
sheets, walkthroughs, maps or other aids to their testers. The
temptation to use these crutches is almost irresistible. It may cut
down on testing time, but it does not give the product the
rigorous workout that is necessary, and which can come only
from going through the game knowing no more than an average
customer will.
So what makes a good playtester? Patience, intelligence, an eye
for detail, a sense of humor, a good knowledge of the game's
genre, enthusiasm, and a critical turn of mind are all, in my
opinion, necessary qualities.
Good playtesters take nothing for granted. If the command card
lists only sixteen keys in use, they will still try every key on the
board to see what happens. If something is listed as being impossible, they will try it anyway, just to be sure.

They step on every square in
the dungeon, walk through every
door, talk to everyone several
times over, try out any number
of bizarre commands, and in
general proceed through the
game with as much thoroughness as they can. They do this
because they aren't trying to
"win"; they're looking for trouble
spots of all kinds, which, after all,
is what testing means.
Now certainly, there are testers
out there who are like this. They
do a good job and are generally
worth their weight in gold for the
work they do on the games.
Then, why is it that, in spite of
such people, some products
come out in such terrible shape?
The answer is time. It is often
the case that not enough time is
allowed for a game to be properly put through the mill. This is, in
turn, related to the fact that
many games today are extremely
complex (in terms of code) and
the trend is toward even more
complexity as ever more powerful machines continue to appear
on the market.

With the average game taking
two years or more to develop
and program, pressure from the
general public, not to mention
marketing departments, has a
tendency to put a severe damper
on anything that will keep the
product from going out the
door. Companies become reluctant to make too many changes, as changes mean, naturally,
more testing and more time before the game goes on sale. That
nasty word "deadline" gets bandied about, corners are cut where
possible, and suddenly, the customer finds in his hands a game
that isn't really finished.
What can be done about this? First, game companies must
come to realize and accept that they have a responsibility to provide the paying customers with a product that is not buggy and
only partly-tested. This means finding good playtesters, and allowing them sufficient time to do their job. It is worth moving back
deadlines when a better product will result.
However,the ultimate responsibility rests with you. You are the
paying customer who puts down $40, $50, $60 or more for a
game. If you find the game is not up to standard, if it's full of
bugs or crashes, if you feel that you're not getting your money's
worth, don't just sit there and take it! You'll only get more of the
same in the future.
Tell your friends, so they don't get stuck. Write letters to the
game company, expressing your displeasure, and demand better
quality control. Tell them exactly why you are not pleased (this is
very important). A letter that says "Game X is junk" will go into
the trash basket; one that begins "Game X is a flawed product,
and here's why" will get attention. This is especially true if a lot of
letters start arriving with the same complaints.
Continued on page 52

Game Hints

M1 Tank Strategy
Continued from page 18

or dark green would have been more
appropriate.
The Tanks Behave Like
Real Tanks
Garners can assume control over
any of the positions in any of their
tanks except for the Loader's. When
assumed, one can perform the functions of that crewman. Additionally, it
is possible to issue orders to the rest
of the crew. Those crewmen, and the

ones in the other tanks, will perform
according to their individual skill
levels (and possibly, improve over
time). The Tank Commander primarily finds targets; the Gunner shoots
them; the Loader feeds the gun; and
the Driver gets one where he needs
to go. Most garners will find that
they, personally, are often their own
best crewmen. The trick is knowing
where to be at the right time.
Of all the crew positions, the
Gunner's station is the most versatile
and realistic. From it, after one has
moved the tank to a hull-down (barely exposed) position, one can find targets at long ranges and shoot at
them before they even have an idea
or firing back. The firing sequence is
easy enough—laser (with the
spacebar) and blaze (hit return), just
like in a real tank! If the ballistic computer or laser rangefinder has been
knocked out, use the Battlesight gunnery, which the manual has docu-

mented very well. One problem
which seems immediately obvious to
"real life" tankers is the need to "lead"
a target. Although the manual says to
simply track a moving target, one
must lead it by half of a vehicle
length to insure a hit. In a real tank,
one just tracks it and shoots.

works both ways. The U.S. Tank
Commanders are continually frustrating, because they cannot independently execute any but the
simplest orders or drills ("Who are
these guys and what are they doing
in my platoon?"). One must personally perform two of the most important
defensive drills for each tank: berm
drills and Sagger dances. This vital requirement can overwhelm a player
when more than one tank is engaged.

The Soviets Behave Like Real
Soviets (Usually)
The manual gives a superb explanation of Soviet tactics and
the program implements
them well. The computer
Soviets maneuver very
authentically when on the
offense. Their combination
of mass and momentum is
very hard to stop. However,
they perform less effectively
than I would expect actual
Soviet troops to defend.
Individual Soviet vehicles
defend passively in the
game, and rarely move. A
good rule of thumb to
remember is: if one is
spotted, look for
two more. If
three are spotted, look for
more close by. Sometimes,
a Company (9 to 10
vehicles) will all sit
together, and only three of
them can see over the hill
in front to shoot. Other
times, they will simply sit
out in the open, with no
cover at all. Even though
they are defending a
strong point, the vehicles
all face west, and do not
secure their flanks. It becomes easy for one's
platoon to utterly destroy a
defending enemy much larger than itself. This situation contrasts very
much with current Army doctrine requiring a 3-to-1 odds advantage in
the attack. Usually the military
employs an attacking company to
defeat a defending platoon!
TC's Know Less Than They Should
Unfortunately, this lack of flexibility

Berm drills and Sagger
dances are vital tasks.
A berm drill involves moving a tank
from a hidden position to a hulldown position, firing a few shots, and
backing up before the enemy can
return fire. Every tanker learns this
basic technique on his first gunnery
range, and it is usable whenever one
has some cover to hide a tank behind. Once in a hull-down position
for a stationary tank, it can overwatch for others as they move. However, once the tank starts taking fire,
the player has to back it out of
danger himself.

At this point, a player must shift his
attention again because any moving
tank is more exposed and probably
also drawing fire. To save a tank
drawing enemy fire, enter the Driver's
hatch and dodge violently! Move randomly from side to side at top speed
and head for some kind of cover.
This makes one's tank a less predictable target, and incoming shots,

especially slower missiles, will be
less likely to hit. The origin of the
term "Sagger dance" should be
very obvious.

into the Kill Zone previously laid
out. One must be careful not to
bunch the tanks in the platoon too
close together. Vehicles on the
flanks of a U-shaped pocket are
less likely to be spotted and will be
firing at the lighter, side armor of
the approaching enemy tanks.

Halting The Horde
Successfully defending in the
game is quite difficult. The Soviets
usually set the tempo of the battle
by their speed; one can be rushed
and overwhelmed before he knows
it. To defeat a Soviet offensive requires three basic principles: identify a Kill Zone, disperse forces correctly, and concentrate high
volumes of fire.
To identify a Kill Zone, look at
where the enemy is coming from and
where he is headed. Assume he will
detour slightly to take advantage of
available cover. Then, decide on an
area 1000 to 3000 meters before the
well-covered position to which they

are headed. This will be the optimal
area for killing most of the enemy forces (i.e., the Kill Zone).
Next, identify where each vehicle
will maneuver, including attached
units. Place them where they can fire

The first two steps, that of determining a Kill Zone and deciding
how best to position friendly forces to take advantage of it, can be
done by careful study of the briefing map. The last step, killing the
enemy tanks, requires some rapid
keyboard action on the player's
part. Ideally, friendly units should
volley fire as the enemy enters the
Kill Zone, with artillery coordinated to
hit at the same time. In the game,
the best a player will probably
manage is a ragged ripple-fire effect,
since it is not possible to get

Game Hints

everyone to move up and fire concurrently. If a tank receives individual orders, it will not
respond to a platoon order. Disregard artillery; except for smoke,
it is virtually useless in M-1 Tank
Platoon. Skilled loaders will give
one's tanks the best rate of fire.
Be sure to combine a skilled
loader with a good gunner to
make each shot count.

Modem-based, head-to-head play
is a must in any new game. Establishing one's own unit Standard
Operating Procedures via macros
or Omega-style artificial
intelligence would be nice. Finally,
the inclusion of obstacles, fortifications and resupply operations
would add a great deal of realism
(and complexity!) to the simulation.

After Action Review
(Conclusions)
M-1 Tank Platoon is easily the
best armchair simulation of armor
tactics that this author ever seen.
It compares very favorably with the
Army's specialized simulators. Some
minor improvements could result in a
much better product, however, especially creating additional routines for
dealing with subordinate tanks
maneuvering out of enemy fire. They

would give the Tank Commanders
more autonomy, but the documentation describes autonomy as an
American strength.
Where should the industry go from
here? This author has a "wish list" for
the next generation of simulations.

Until the next generation arrives,
though, this author strongly
recommends M-1 Tank Platoon
to anyone interested in modern armored tactics. Not only does one
get a versatile game, but the
documentation concisely and accurately addresses the philosophy behind the design and use of modern
tanks. This author intends to use this
program to help train his own tank
platoon—and that is high praise indeed!

Industry News

Inside
the
Industry
Access Unveils 'World Class Leader Board: VGA"
At the recent Software Publishers Association meeting, held
at the Hotel Del Coronado in San Diego, California, graphics
wizard Steve Witzel provided CGW with a sneak preview of the
artwork (pictured) to be used in World Class Leader Board: VGA
(working title). The game will use advanced "shading" techniques
developed by Witzel to soften the normally unrealistic edges of
the polygon-filled technology and offer a more natural looking
fairway. Note that the screen pictured is not complete in that the
trees lining the fairways have not yet been added.
Sierra Purchases Dynamix
As of March 27th, Sierra On-Line, publishers of The Colonel's
Bequest, King's Quest IV, and Space Quest III (among others)
reached an agreement in principle to purchase Oregon-based
Dynamix, developers of Arcticfox, Caveman Ughlympics,
Skyfox, Skyfox II and Project Firestart for Electronic Arts, F-14
Tomcat, MechWarrior and DeathTrack for Activision, as well as
A-10 Tank Killer and David Wolf, Secret Agent under the
Dynamix label. The purchase of Dynamix offers great versatility
for Sierra. Dynamix is reported to have several worthy products
under development, including: a World War I flight simulator
(probably entitled Red Baron), Blade Hunter: Rise of the Dragon,
an adventure game with what seems to be a marvelous new interface and graphics which look like they came from a graphic
novel, and Heart of China, a romantic adventure game.
Under the letter of intent, Dynamix will become a wholly-owned
subsidiary of Sierra. The Dynamix label may stay on all the new
products, but the decision is yet to be made by Sierra. Asked why
the deal was necessary, Dynamix President Jeff Tunnell stated,
"Sierra is doing so much so right and we can be helped so much
by their distribution, marketing and support."
Cinemaware Buys, Sells and Restructures
March was an eventful month for Cinemaware Corporation,
publishers of Rocket Ranger, It Came from the Desert and TV
Sports: Basketball. On March 14, 1990, the company announced that NEC Technologies, principally known in the entertainment market for its TurboGrafx videogame system, had purchased a minority interest in Cinemaware and acquired a seat

on the board of directors of the software publisher. Bob Jacob,
Executive Vice-President of New Business Development for
Cinemaware indicated in an interview with CGW that the minority
interest was less than 20% of the total share holdings.
In addition to the NEC interest, Cinemaware purchased the entire inventory of Masterplay's Star Saga series and plans to
market the titles at a $49.00 price point through Electronic Arts
Distribution. This should provide better visibility for the products
according to Jacob. He also indicated that the company will be
acquiring other disk-based products from outside the company in
order to continue to have a presence in that market while
Cinemaware focuses its efforts on multi-media based products.
Finally, the company restructured its corporate officers with Phyllis Jacob being recognized as President and CEO and David Riordan promoted to Vice-President of Product Development.
Electronic Arts Inks Pact With Nintendo
On April 5, 1990, Electronic Arts and Nintendo of America,
Inc. announced that they had signed an agreement in which
Electronic Arts became a Nintendo licensee. To date, EA has
licensed 13 of their disk-based action titles to other Nintendo
licensees as cartridge-based videogame products. The latest title
to be so licensed was Ski or Die, which was licensed to Konami.
Now, EA will not only produce an original title for the NES, Skate
or Die 2, but are expected to publish versions of Budokan, their
highly acclaimed martial arts game, and Low Blow, their recent
boxing game, on the videogame system. Don Traeger's group,
the in-house production team which has specialized in EA's action and arcade games to date, will have production of cartridgebased products as a primary emphasis. Noting that joystickoriented products that used to do well on the C-64 are performing considerably better on the NES, EA Vice-President Bing Gordon observed that the transition from disk-based action games to
cartridge-based action games was inevitable.
Asked if the company's commitment to Nintendo and unconfirmed future Sega commitments would force a cutback in the
production of disk-based software, Gordon noted that the plan
(to be presented to EA's board of directors) calls for, at least, sixteen new MS-DOS products (equal to the last fiscal year) and
eleven new Amiga products (two more than the previous fiscal
year). The MS-DOS products will focus more on story-telling and
less on action games and the new Amiga products will feature
more strategy/simulation games during the same period.

Scorpion's View
Continued from page 42

The point is to make the companies see that they can't get
away with sending out severely flawed games anymore, that they
must take the time to test their products properly, or they're
going to lose business. You're the business; make yourselves
heard!
Bad News Dept: The prospects for an 8-bit Apple version of

Ultima VI are very iffy. Origin Systems is dubious about doing
one, although there is an outside chance they might change their
minds. Here is Origin's official current position, from Greg
Malone, Marketing and Communications Manager for Origin:

In response to the many inquiries being made by Apple users
regarding whether or not Ultima VI:The False Prophet is going to
be made available on the Apple platform, I'd like to fill you in
on Origin's current view.
Unlike all previous Ultima's, number 6 is the first one which
was completely designed and implemented on the IBM PC (&
compatibles) first. When Richard "Lord British" Garriott learned
that he could make use of the hugely growing IBM compatible
market which has machines featuring 640K RAM, a hard drive,
and 256-color graphics, he couldn't resist the opportunity to as
he put it, " . . . create the ultimate Ultima!" Couple that with the
ever disturbing fact that the Apple market is continuing to disintegrate at an alarming rate (beginning with base support from
Apple Computer, Inc., and trickling down to the Apple-specific
magazines and even to disaffected Apple users), it is little
wonder that the question about developing Ultima on the Apple
has arisen. As of this date, a technical evaluation of such an endeavour is being conducted by ORIGIN. When one considers the
daunting task of converting a 640K game to 128K and doing so
in a timely and cost-efficient manner, the air of pessimism is unavoidable. Also, it is a widely recognized trend among entertainment software publishers today to focus title development on
the remaining strong markets, namely IBM & compatibles,
Amiga (especially for Europe) and the Commodore 64. (This
mix is certain to evolve and change as time passes!)
However, the subject regarding an Apple Ultima VI will not be
entirely decided until all of the facts are in, including whatever
comment or enthusiasm YOU (the Apple users) can muster. If
you wish to express your support for an Apple version of Ultima
VI, you should send (by U.S. Mail) a letter to the address below.

Also, while sending us your comments, send a copy of your letter to your local software retailer and to your favorite Apple
magazine publisher. If you don't, you could end up fighting a
lost cause.
Send comments to:
Apple ULTIMA Comments
ORIGIN
P.O. Box 161750
Austin, TX 78716
So, there you have it, folks. If you're an Apple owner, now is the
time to send those cards and letters, so Ultima VI won't pass you
by. Good luck!

Taking a Peek
Continued from page 6

time in order to avoid the dreaded
"cornfield collision" is as important as the
revenues your trains generate. Abstracted
quite a bit, this rail road strategy game is
still fairly challenging. One wishes the
game could be extended beyond a year
and that other railroads were involved in
the competition. IBM ($49.95). Circle
Reader Service #6.

Blue Valley Software
29 Shepard Street
Walton, NY 13856
MERLIN and THE MAGIC MIRROR:
These two programs are both text-only,
self help packages. Merlin takes place in
a fantasy underworld where you will deal
with darkness and light. This bit of fantasy and mysticism cuts you through dealing with fear, love, past mistakes, etc.
The Magic Mirror is more clinical in its approach, offering you a self help toolbox
of life changing techniques. One can explore emotions, roles in relationships,
belief systems and more. IBM ($24.95).
Circle Reader Service #7.

Data East
1850 Little Orchard Street
San Jose, CA 95125
DRAKKHEN: This is the first of a
proposed series of Fantasy Role-Playing
games from Data East. Originally published in Europe by Infogrames, the object is
to grab the eight dragon jewels from their
respective princes. If you manage to succeed in gathering these together, you will
be able to put the old dragon back on
the throne and save the land of Drakkhen. Drakkhen uses real time interaction, 3-D graphics, and the likes of 200
magic spells. Amiga ($59.95). Circle
Reader Service #8.

Electronic Arts
PO Box 7578
San Mateo, CA 94403
THE HOUND OF SHADOW: Set in the
Cthulhu Mythos of H.P. Lovecraft, this
text/graphic adventure uses the
"Timeline" role-playing system to create a
shadowy world of spiritualism and magic
in post-WWI England. Using an extensive
character creation system, players
generate unique personas with attributes
and skills will affect the course of each adventure. The game system, which melds
role-playing and adventure gaming elements shows promise and the setting is
colorful and refreshingly different, but the
game is plagued by an awkward text inter-

face and parser. Amiga ($39.95). Circle
Reader Service #9.

50 Dunham Road
Beverly, MA 01915

Free Spirit Software
P.O. Box 128
Kutztown, PA 19530

TRIVIAL PURSUIT: If you haven't already burned out from playing the board
game, you will probably enjoy the computer version of this classic from the
eighties. The computer version of "Trivial
Pursuit" does give you many, many
categories of questions to base your
game play on, but even though the computer opponents have distinct personalities (areas of specialized
knowledge), they just don't get excited
enough to rail and cajole like people do.
IBM with two disks ($39.95). Circle
Reader Service #11.

DRAGONSCAPE: One thing you notice
right away about this little shoot 'em up
arcade game, is that it's pretty. The
graphics are well done (which is rare in
this medium—get it? Rare, medium and
well done!). Ahem, yes. The screen
scrolls smoothly while you fly your dumb,
but trusty, dragon Garvan around Techno City and WasteLand in a quest to
match puzzle pieces (battery with flashlight, etc.) while zapping the nasties constantly buzzing around you. The tunes
are worth keeping the volume left on,
too, which is a rarity for an arcade game.
Amiga ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #10.

Parker Brothers

Psygnosis Ltd.
S. Harrington Buildings
Sefton St. Liverpool L3 4BQ
INFESTATION: Psygnosis joins the 3-D
poly-filled graphics club with this interesting entry. Set in a planetary colony overContinued on page 56

Taking a Peek
Continued from page 64

run by aliens al la "Aliens" (and a
hundred others), the player maneuvers
himself freely in a 3-D first person environment (a la Mindscape's "The Colony").
The goal is to uncover the mysteries of
the human outpost's demise. The Psygnosis graphics are top-quality, but the interface is not a simple one and the
documentation is typically sparse. Amiga
(no price). Circle Reader Service #12.

Sierra On-Line, Inc.
P.O. Box 485
Coarsegold, CA 93614
CODENAME: ICEMAN: Recognized as a
leader in computer adventure games,
Sierra On-Line has just unleashed Jim
Wall's latest: a cold war technothriller
game. "Codename: Iceman" is a combination adventure game AND action game,
complete with a stealth submarine
simulator. Best of all, the "Iceman"
delivers one particularly "cool" feature: a
mouse interface so that one may "point
and click" rather than "look this" and
"look that". Typical of recent Sierra
releases, "Iceman" utilizes nine 5.25"
disks or four 3.5" disks, supports several
16 color graphic and many sound cards.
IBM ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #13.

Ultra Games
(a division of Konami)
900 Deerfield Parkway
Buffalo Grove, IL 60089
TEENAGE MUTANT NINJA TURTLES:
Those slice 'em, dice 'em heroes on the
half shell are all here for plenty of arcade
action. Out in force to rescue their lovely
heroine (April O'Neil) from the clutches of
the evil Shredder, the green guys have to
kick 'em below the shell through six New
York territories, each full of bad guys.
With a slice of pizza in one hand and the
joystick in the other, it's off to the sewers
to clean up the city of New York (and you
thought Hercules cleaning the stables
was tough!). Amiga ($44.95). Circle
Reader Service #14.

Villa Crespo Software
P.O. Box 1818
Highland Park, IL 60035
AMARILLO SLIM'S REAL POKER 5
CARD STUD: Okay, here's the deal .. .
Amarillo Slim is the voice in your ear,
counseling you when to hold 'em and
when to fold 'em. Of course, if you don't
follow Slim's advice, you'll find out Slim's
idea of when to scold 'em, too. You play
against three computer opponents, each
with a personality which can be psyched
out, just like a human opponent. The

computer keeps your stats, gives you a
rating (depending how much your style
coincides with Slim's) and even gives you
expressed, written suggestions as to how
to improve your play. A good buy-in for
poker players. IBM ($49.95).Circle Reader
Service #15.

Virgin Mastertronic
18001 Cowan
Irvine, CA 92714
BUTCHER HILL: For all you quarter
pumpers out there, here is another joystick jockey's delight. Butcher Hill presents
you three challenges to complete your
mission, each with a different style of arcade play. Plenty of shoot 'em up and
quick reflexes are required as you speed
down the river, grunt through the jungle
and devastate a village. C-64/128
($9.99). Circle Reader Service #16.
HOUSE OF CARDS: This could be the
deal of the day if you like a few of the six
card games in this package. Two handed
bridge, hearts, cribbage, spades, pinochle

or gin rummy are the challenge, each
with a variety of game options to keep it
lively. The graphics are what one would
expect, the computer play is crisp and intelligent, and the value is really there.
IBM ($14.99). Circle Reader Service #17.

Visionary, Ltd.
15235 Shady Grove Road Suite
100
Rockville, MD
DRAGON'S LAIR: ESCAPE FROM
SINGE'S CASTLE: Dirk the Daring, that
suave arcade adventurer of yesteryear,
lives on in part two of the personal computer version of the original laser disk hit
"Dragon's Lair". This version contains
several more graphically stunning rooms
from the original arcade game. Remember the mudmen room and the crumbling pathway? The smithy and the flying
horse? The rooms are abbreviated somewhat but are faithful to the original in
sound and graphic detail. Amiga
($59.95). Circle Reader Service #18.

Review

Wait 'Til They Get A
Load Of This!
Data East's "Batman: The Movie" Game
by David M. Wilson
he odds are
always
against the
Caped Crusader.
Many dedicated Batmaniacs
prophesied that the
Batman movie
would be a financial disaster due to
the choice of
Michael ("Mr.
Mom") Keaton to
play the Dark
Knight. The odds
were against him,
yet the movie went
on to become a
box office bonanza.
Bathysteria and Batcapitalism proved
that just about anything with the Batlogo on it could,
and would, sell.

T

found by working
to the right of the
screen. Then,
when one gets to
the end of this
maze, there is Jack
Napier himself. Nail
him with the
Batarang. He'll topple down into a vat
of toxic chemicals
and then, "Holy
toxic waste, Batman, you've
created the Joker!"

Scene two is a
race through the
streets of Gotham
City in the Batmobile. Players
must avoid collisions with other
cars while following
TITLE:
Batman
the prompts to the Batcave.
SYSTEMS:
Atari, Amiga, C64/128
The challenge is in using
REVIEWED ON: Amiga and C-64/128
Amiga ($44.95),
Data East has jumped on PRICE:
the Batrope to make some
Atari ST ($39.95), and
the Batman bandwagon
of the hairpin turns involved
C64/128 ($29.95)
(Batwagon?) with their
in Gotham's dense traffic
DESIGNER:
Ocean Software
PUBLISHER:
Data East
second Batgame, Batman
pattern. There will often be
San Jose, CA
(their first being Batman,
cars between the Batmobile
The Caped Crusader). Batand the corner, but players
man is based entirely on the cinematic trican go ahead and shoot the Batrope,
umph of last summer.
anyway. The other cars will back off if the
Batmobile slows slightly when the
Scene one places the player at the Axis
Batrope is fired off. Remember, speed is
Chemical plant. The player must find his
of the essence in getting to the Batcave.
way through this maze in order to stop
Jack Napier from cleaning out records of
Speaking of essence, scene three recriminal activity. This time, Batrnan has
quires the player to use some rudimenthe ability to swing on a Batrope (a detail
tary skill in logic. First, the screen displays
neglected in the earlier Batman game).
a sampling of objects. Then, using the
Players must take care when swinging on
highly developed and sophisticated Batthe Batrope because of the many
computer (actually, the player's own
obstacles (like brick walls) inside the
brain), players must find the three
chemical plant.
products which contain the various elements of the compound called Smilex.
The Joker's henchmen can usually be
The program will tell the player how
felled by a thrown Batarang, but Batman
many out of the three chosen items are
can also take the bad guys out of comcorrect (as in the game Mastermind). So,
mission by swinging into them or dropthe player continues selecting items until
ping on top of them. Batman must not
he runs out of time or until he has
only avoid their bullets, but also the dripchosen the three correct items.
ping toxic waste caused from bullets striking pipes, etc.
In scene four, the Gotham City Carnival
is certain to be a disaster if the player fails
Getting through the maze in scene one
to pilot the Batwing aircraft properly. In
is difficult at first. Players should rememthis sequence, would-be Batpilots try to
ber that the ultimate goal can always be

catch the balloons which contain
poisonous gas and cut their towlines. It is
very difficult to judge the correct angle to
hit the lines and will cause some consternation to even the most coordinated joystick veteran. To make matters worse, the
Batwing sustains damage whenever it
catches the balloons at the wrong angle.
Piloting is much easier in the Amiga version, because it offers a more realistic
viewpoint in terms of the Batwing.

The final setting is Gotham Cathedral.
Another maze awaits players here as our
hero climbs the stairs to do battle with
the Joker. Collapsing staircases and
machine-gunning henchmen are the
obstacles one finds here. This is all in a
day's work for Batman, however.

Batman, the game, catches most of the
flavor of the Batman movie. However, the
C-64 version is very disappointing because machine lock-ups continually
occur. For instance, hitting the joystick
button at the wrong time causes the program to freeze up. Indeed, there are quite
a few other computer gremlins lurking in
the C-64 version, including villains that
just float on-screen for a moment and
then mysteriously disappear.
The Amiga version is more lovingly
crafted, making the Batwing and Batmobile scenes in the C-64 version seem
thrown together. The Amiga version has
a view from above and behind the Batmobile, while the C-64 has a view in
which the player looks down from a distance. Some would blame the limitations
of the machine, but not this author
(having previously seen C-64 based
games, such as TechnoCop from Epyx,
that used the same point of view as the
Amiga version of Batman does).
If one has an Amiga and loves action
games, this can be a very enjoyable
game. Due to the frequent lock-ups and
freezes on the C-64, however, that version cannot be recommended (even to
Commodore owners). Data East has
come much closer to producing the look
and feel of the Batman genre with Batman than they did with Batman: The
Caped Crusader. Now, we can await the
game and movie sequels, with their new
storylines and villains. -

Over There
Continued from page 10

the player must control his son in an effort to track down the "murderer". The
one major feature that stands out from
this "good vs. evil" adventure is the interface. It is totally adaptable and can be
customized to suit your needs. You can
have text input or a complicated menu to
select commands from. The menu can
be of any size. The screen can not only
be 40, 60 or 80 column, but you can include the text within windows or as two
columns. The text, background, status
line (which can be turned off) can be of
one of a variety of colors. The usual
undo, ramsave/load, etc. features are included as well as an advanced parser.
Further interesting commands include a
"think about" command and a randomizing feature (throw a book and one will be
randomly thrown from the batch carried).
The parser is intelligent, so if one wishes
to open a door, and already has a key,
the parser will automatically open it. If

there are a variety of doors, the player will
be presented with a list from which to
select a choice. The list of features goes
on and on!
UK software house, Palace can now
offer you the chance to control your
own stable of Dragons in their latest tale
of arcana called Dragon's Breath.
Legend has it that the secret of eternal
life lies in the throne room of Dwarf
Mountain palace. Before one can reach
that, however, he must collect the three
pieces of a talisman. The player will start
the game with one Dragon, so a bit of
breeding won't go amiss here. Wealth
must be generated, which can be
achieved via conquering villages (this includes an arcade-type sequence as the
player controls his dragon's attack on the
village). The game also includes a complicated magic system which can be used
to increase wealth and your dragon's
powers. Dragon's Breath, for up to three
players, is available now on Amiga and
ST (£29.99).
Then there's the game produced
by...oh, crumbs, I've run out

of space. I dunno, I just get into the
swing of things and it's time to bid
farewell. See you next month. mind how
you go.
NOTE: The above games, and any of
the other games mentioned in "Over
There" in past issues, can be obtained
from:
COMPUTER ADVENTURE WORLD,
318 KENSINGTON, LIVERPOOL,
ENGLAND, L7 OEY. TEL: 01144-51263-6306
SDC, 60 BOSTON ROAD, LONDON,
ENGLAND, W7 3TR. TEL: 01144-1-5677621
PREMIER MAIL ORDER, TRYBRIDGE
LTD., 8 BUCKWINS SQ., BURNT
MILLS, BASILDON, ESSEX, ENGLAND,
SSI 3 1 BJ. TEL: 01144-268-590-766
All of the above telephone numbers assume direct dial. If you find that
problems occur, call your international
operator for assistance.

Sneak Preview

Workin'
On The 01'
Railroad
Sid Meier's Railroad Tycoon
Is Right On Schedule
by Russell Sipe

I love trains. And that is why I have been so disappointed until
now. As a railfan and a model railroader I have had a computer railroad game in my mind for several years. For a variety
of reasons, it has never been developed. To be sure, other computer railroad games have been produced. But these did/do not
have the depth (e.g. Abracadata's Design Your Own Train) or
breadth (e.g. SSI's Rails West and Artdink's Railroad Empire) to
excite me.
But now there is Sid Meier's newest game, Railroad
Tycoon. To put it succinctly, this is Sid's best design yet.
And that's saying a lot, when you consider that his last two
designs were the award winning F-19 Stealth Fighter
and Pirates.

designs were the award winning F-19 Stealth Fighter and
Pirates.
Overview

Sid Meier's Railroad Tycoon (Tycoon) recreates railroading in the U.S., Britain, and Europe from the early days
(1828) to the present. In doing so, Sid has brought
together three great railroad themes: corporate financing,
track laying, and operations/dispatching. In Tycoon, all
three themes are treated in depth. The beauty of the
design is that you can set your level of involvement for
each of the themes. For example, you can specify "friendly" or "cutthroat" competition to determine the intensity of
conflict with other railroads in the game. The operations
mode can be set to dispatcher mode wherein you are
forced to pay more attention to train movements and the
location of signals, or you can chose to let the computer
control operations. Finally, the economy can be set to
"complex" or "simple". This affects the difficulty level of
matching the correct cargos to particular destinations.
The Background

The spiritual predecessors to Tycoon are 1830 (a board
game from Avalon Hill) and SimCity (the award winning
computer game from Maxis Software). SimCity you say?
That's right! The elegant construction sequence and underlying "engine" that runs the world in SimCity was the inspiration for the construction interface and "world" of
Tycoon. Like SimCity, the player gets immersed in the
building of his world/railroad empire. Tycoon is, at least, as
addictive as SimCity, perhaps even more.
The Particulars

Tycoon is a one player game in which you compete
against up to three computer controlled opponents to
build a profitable railroad empire. There are three theaters
or scenarios: England (with an 1828 starting date); Eastern
U.S. (1830); Western U.S. (1866) and Western Europe
(1900). Each scenario has certain peculiarities. Cargos and
therefore strategies differ. For example the Western U.S.
scenario poises you at the historical moment when the
transcontinental railroad was begun. By giving you a one
time cash bonus when you complete your transcontinental
line and by doubling the revenue for some cargos
delivered East-West and halving the revenue of some cargos delivered North-South you are "forced" into building
your own transcontinental road. Note: once your transcontinental line is completed and your bonus collected, the
doubling/halving of revenues is eliminated.
The actual location of resources, industries, and population distribution change each game (thus each game is unique). Cities are always in the same location, but their sizes
vary. For example, New York may start as the largest settlement in the area in one game, but merely a minor settlement in another.
Course of Play

The game is played in real time with a user selectable
time scale. At "moderate" rate, one month passes each 10
seconds (plus time outs that occur when certain screens

are accessed). Although the time scale is unrealistic in one
respect (trains take several months to reach their destination), this anomaly does not affect the perceived realism of
the simulation. A typical 10 minutes with the game might
go something like this:
It's August 1850 and your Golden Empire Eastern Railroad has $615,000 in operating funds. Your road
dominates Western Maryland. As the month opens two passenger trains arrive (one in Harper's Ferry and one in
Johnstown) bringing $146,000 in revenue. Using Regional
Display, you notice a large population area to the southwest. You go to an Detail Display of the area and learn
that the city is Bluefield, West Virginia. It was the terminus
of a now defunct railroad company (thus it's large size).
Here is a city ripe for picking.
You check the economic climate: "normal". Buying rightof-way and laying track is a bit more expensive than you
would like right at the moment. You decide to wait, hoping
for a downturn in the economy which will cause land and
labor to be cheaper. In the meantime your established
trains follow their appointed schedules producing revenue.
Your patience pays off. In January 1951 the economy
slips into a recession. Now, you can afford to build. But,
just to be safe you decide to call your broker and check on
the activities of the other railroads (you'd hate to be in a
big building project if one of your opponents decided to
made a run on your stock).
Your broker informs you that, at $43 per share, your
stock is currently the most valuable RR stock on the board.
Although Jay Gould has a million dollars in operating
funds in his Bangor & Portland RR, it is doubtful that he
would make a run at you. Your broker also reveals that Cornelius Vanderbilt's Akron and Cleveland RR is hurting financially. The stock is going for $8. However, with 50% of
A&C's stock in the A&C treasury, Vanderbilt is safe for the
moment. You make a mental note to monitor this situation.
Now it's time to build your line to Bluefield. The Southwest terminus of your line is currently at Winchester (in the
midst of vast coal fields). From Winchester you strike out
to the southwest heading down the Shenendoah Valley.
You turn west to build through a gap in the Appalachian
Mountains and lay track into Bluefield. Because there are

steel and paper mills three squares from your railhead you
decide to build a Terminal in Bluefield (pretty expensive,
but the Terminal's 3 square radius allows you to pick up
loads from the mills). With the completion of the
Winchester-Bluefield line you go to your engine facility in
Harper's Ferry and "build" a new train. You buy a 4-4-0
American steam engine and add some passenger cars.
Now you establish a regular run for this train between
Harper's Ferry and Bluefield (via Winchester). Finally you
add a couple of signal towers along the route to expedite
your train movements.
In the mean time you have received a series of messages
informing you that Gould has been selling stock in the
B&P (thereby amassing a war chest in excess of
$1,500,000) while Vanderbilt has been selling stock in the
A&C. It may be time to think about an acquisition... or perhaps you should be preparing to avoid a hostile takeover attempt. It's a dog eat dog world out there. What will you do?
Other Points of Interest

The documentation is typical for Microprose, over 200
pages cover the rules, historical background, and some
strategies. Note that the EMD GP Diesel portrayed on the
title screen and in the documentation is not available in
the game. Sid says he hopes to implement the EMD GP
with later scenario disks. Yes, that's right, Sid hopes to
develop a series of support disks for this product (no
details yet).
This game is detailed and realistic enough that it could
serve as a teaching tool in history, economics, and
management classes. Teachers take note.
The sound routines on the Roland and AdLib are excellent. Great steam engine sounds accompany your engines
as they come out of the shop. Nice functional sounds
during play serve as audio cues to events in the game.
Even the IBM sound is functional, although obviously a far
cry from the AdLib and Roland.
Summary

I love trains . . . and that is why I am so excited. This is a
great game. This is the game I wanted to design, and
more. Since I didn't design it, I'm glad Sid did. All Aboard!

Letters

Letters From
Paradise

Beckett Betrayed
I was disappointed to learn that M. Evan Brooks' review of our product,
Battle of Austerlitz (CGW #70), was inaccurate and incomplete. This
reviewer claims to spend the most time on the games he reviews versus
other reviewers (a claim he made to me during a phone conversation).
However, after noticing the glaring inaccuracies and obvious omissions, I
can only conclude that he did not spend an adequate amount of time with
our product.
For example, in the title box, Austerlitz is described as a one player
game, while in reality the game can have one or two players, along with
the option of having the computer play itself. How could this have been
missed!
Also, the reviewer recommends the use of the military symbology over
the icons "since it yields more information as to a unit's status." This statement is false. Unlike any other wargame we are aware of, the icons in
Austerlitz animate, revealing exactly what each unit is doing, such as
melee, marching or firing. Nothing is more exciting in Austerlitz as seeing
an entire line of infantry raise their muskets to their shoulders and proceed
to rout enemy attacking formations through blistering fire, all of which unfolds continuously.
The most outstanding feature of Austerlitz is the way leaders are handled, though the review only casually mentions their existence. In the game,
each army the computer controls can have one of six different overall
army leaders put in charge. The computer will then assume the persona
and fight the battle using his characteristics: aggressive, cautious, etc.
Each leader is modeled accurately and has a noticeable effect on the
game, though in our phone conversation with the reviewer, he implied that
he had only played the game with the historical leaders in charge.
However, it does not end here. Each corps in the game is also rated
based on the historical commander of the corps. When a player utilizes a
corps order, which can be move, attack or defend a certain location, the
corps will attempt to carry out the order very intelligently based on the
capabilities of the commander. One who has played the game will notice
how slow and cautious some of the Allied columns are compared to the
fiery Bagration's. These corps commander levels, along with each army's
morale, can be adjusted at the beginning of play for balance. Of course, if
the player desires complete control of a corps, he has it by not issuing a
corps orders. Thus, both styles of play are present. All of this was omitted
in the review.
Major features of the game also escaped the reviewer. Hidden movement
is available, which takes range, weather and battle effects into account for
determining visibility. One can choose to have the computer use the historical strategy, or randomly choose among many alternate strategies. A combat watch window can be turned on or off, providing a text and graphic
result for each combat in a pop-up window for those desirous of knowing
the numbers in our calculations.
Finally, I must take issue with the reviewer's historical remarks. His assertion that it would be necessary for the French to attack the entrenched allied positions had the allies suddenly gone to the defensive shows only an
elementary understanding of the campaign. He claims that had the French
not attacked on December 2nd, it would have been a strategic defeat for
Napoleon. This does not take into account anything which could have happened subsequently. I must confess that I am not among those that
believe the French army was going to mysteriously vanish on December
3rd.
In conclusion, Austerlitz is many orders of magnitude better than our
Borodino game, which won the Charles S. Roberts award for best pre-20th
Century Computer Wargame. Maybe the reviewer would have been pleased

with Austerlitz had he utilized all that it offered. I hope in the future, when
CGW prints an unfavorable review, they will contact the publishing company so as to prevent inaccurate reviewslike this one getting published
without an immediate response.
Stephen M. Beckett II
Project Leader, Austerlitz
Cornerstone Software, Inc.
Other than that, how did you like the review, Steve? Seriously, the
Basic Information Box error cannot be blamed on the author. We try to
reference that information against in-house products as a fact-checking
device. In our hurry to cover Napoleon at Austerlitz, we did not have a
production copy of the game in-house to doublecheck the information
against. "Mea culpa," said editor Johnny as he realized his mistake.
Many of the assumed oversights which you mention are not mistakes,
but a difference in philosophy. Hidden movement, weather, etc. were not
mentioned because most wargames have those features. Further, we
could turn every page of CGW over to discussing the "What if's of the
campaign without settling it. We appreciate your explanations of those
areas which remained unclear after the review, but want to remind you
that it is not our policy to allow software companies to respond to a
review until it has been published. If an error occurs, it is better to err independently than to err on the basis of publisher/designer influence.

Point of Purchase
I purchase games, in part, based on the company and the designer. I
would like to see the name of the designer on the packaging. Also, certain
companies, such as Koei and SSG would find their sales would increase
if their products were easier to find in normal retail outlets.
Steve Burgess
Stanton, CA
Both companies face some resistance in the retail market. Wargames
do not seem to be moving fast enough to suit some retailers and their
primary distributors, so some quality games have trouble reaching the
retail market. If there is sufficient customer demand, however, the stores
will stock them. Talk to your local store. That's where the action is.

Reader Input Device

