"COMPUTER GAMING WORLD The #1 Computer Game Magaz MechWarrior II Big Mech Attac Test Your Metal in Activisions' Futuristic Trial by Fire Space Combat Lock Your Lasers on a Galaxy of Games 4th Sneak Previews Silent Hunter  Duke Nuke Em 3D "


"With the right game, it's fifty times faster than any kid's system. "


"The right places to get the right game, PEWTESE electronics Babbage's abochone boutique boutine America's Software Headquarters MICRO CENTER BEST THE COMPUTER DEPARTMENT STORE DYGODIN UD/LITE Radio Shack THE COMPUTER SUPERSTORE software ETC COMPUTER SEARS Hranu central SUPERCENTER ,   E ] EGGHEAD STATWARZ Tiger Direct Zelers or call 1-800-GTE TODAY. 01995 GTE Vantage Incorporated. All rights reserved. The GTE logo is a trademark of the GTE Corporation. GTE Entertainment, FX Fighter and the FX Fighter logo are trademarks of GTE Vantage Incorporated. Argonaut, the Argonaut logo and Brender are trademarks of Argonaut Software Ltd. (BRender Bargonaut.com.) GTE Interactive Media is part of GTE Vantage Incorporated. P.O, Box 4358, Carlsbad, CA 92018-4358 2 PLAYER "


"T,. Ant "


"Here's the right game. Break into a new dimension, Attack, sidestep-even hurt your opponent towards the camera 19 DO Flying 3D Camere Not just a highlight filmi, the point of view changes as you attack, Hear that giant sucking sound? Little brothers everywhere are kissing up to play FX Fighter, the most advanced fighting game ever created for the PC. But before you slam the door on the little Desperado, tell him what he's missing: Arcade Action & Incredible Speed. FX Fighter was specifically designed to take advantage of your new Pentium, but it still screams on a 486, too. Real-Time 3D. FX Fighter is first to use Brender technology, the most advanced 3D rendering system ever developed. Real Motion Capture. We recorded over 350 actual sequences from martial artists and acrobats for this game. Roundhouse kicks have never been so smooth. 00 112 Flying Camera, Forget side-only views. We've got every angle covered in three dimensions. More Moves. Choose among eight characters, with over 40 attack moves each-including incredible combinations. MOON l.Q. Points. For about the cost of a two-bit game cart you'll get a superior game with fifty times the speed, four times the color, and twice the resolution. Very smart, Confidence. To get previews, more information or order, call 1-800-GTE-TODAY. Or access our web page at http://www.im.gte.com. PC Gamer magazine described FX Fighter as \"ground-breaking.\" And we're grateful, But to be honest, with all that power sitting on the desktop, we just felt that the last thing the world needed was another damn word-processor. = GET IT OR DIE TRYING For 486/Pentium PCs with CD-ROMs. CARGONAUT GTE Entertainment. Circle Reader Service #69 "


"Thundering engines. Insane weapons. Maximum destruction. Terminal Velocity Fast texture mapped 3D flight with full 360 degree movement. 9 Planets and 27 levels to explore-with over 400,000 sq miles of terrain. CD-ROM includes over 70 Mb of cinematics. 8 player network and 2 player modem support. Non-stop air-to-air and air-to-ground realistic action and futuristic Comm-Bat«. \"The 3D environments are simply breathtaking...the worlds are like nothing seen before in computer games.\" -Computer Player, April 95 Professional music soundtrack and fully digitized sound effects. SVGA support. Kick some asteroid! \"It's a 3D vehicle shooter that's par Star Wars and part Descent.\" .-Computer Gaming World, March 95 Note: The shareware version of Terminal Velocity is a subset of the full game and contains only 3 of the planets. The shareware (D-ROM version does include \"Terminal Velocity cinematics. is a symphony of titillating action and g-force slurping excitement.\" Strategy Plus, March 95 \"The charm of the game is it's open-endedness, it's extensive multi-stage level..[which] can be explored and destroyed at will -Computer Gaming World, May 95 REALM FormGen INCORPORATED REALITY IS OUR GAME. Shareware version-Now available in stores from formGen 3D Realms FormGen Inc. Entertainment 7641 E. Gray Road P.O. BOX 496419 Scottsdale, AZ 85260 Garland, TX 75049 Circle Reader Service #44 annALDREI SHAREWARE The Apogee Model: Try before you buy! Developed by Terminal Reality, Inc. Published by 3D Realms Entertainment. Published Commercially by FormGen Inc. 3D Realms Entertainment is a division of Apogee Software, Ltd. All rights reserved. All trademarks are the property of their respective owners. "


"4* Triad is a truly awesome game!\" But don't take our word for it. RISE MITRIAD -4. 1891 \"Rise of the Triad is sure to have every DOOM freak in the world lining up iust to drool all over it -Interactive Entertainment \"Rise of the Triad provides everything an action gamer could want.\" Oomputer Game Review \"This game is the most multiplayer-friendly product we've seen. DeathMatch will never be the same again. Computer Gaming World 209 1612 ET3643823 Taunt your opponents with RemoteRidicule during 11-player network games. DUUDUZD w An industry firse Violence Level Adjustment with password only get gore if you want it! WOWOUTUBTITUIE e 3m Die as one of five unique characters (male & female) on over thirty levels of action! This is the game you've been waiting for. An all-out blast-fest. The unrelenting blood and fire rampage of your most twisted nightmares. With ten incredibly vicious weapons, you annihilate the enemy. Your machine gun blasts holes in the walls. Sparks and.metal fly as you blow apart everything in sight. Mass destruction has never been this fun! Circle Reader Service #43 INCORPORATED Created by Apogee Software, Ltd and distributed by FormGen Inc. 7641 E. Gray Rd, Scottsdale, AZ, 85260 (800) 263-2390 Available on disk and GD. Supports serial, modem, and 11 player network (individual or team play. (oody bags not included) "


"BOOT UP. STRAP IN. HOLD ON. ---and blast away on the ultimate thrill ride. Looking for a little adrenaline rush? Then lock and load Chaos Control, pal. The CD-ROM that turns your PC into the arsenal of democracy. You're Lt. Jessica Darkhill. The cucumber-cool, razor-sharp, lightning-fast space fighter, and the only thing standing between an army of Kesh Rhan extraterrestrials and the annihilation of Planet Earth. Now, if you're a motion sickness wuss, leg off. 'Cause you're gonna find yourself screaming through the corridors of Manhattan, swooping inside a virus-infected supercomputer, swerving down the labyrinth of the enemy mother ship, blasting, bombing and alliterating the Kesh Bhan armada. Four heart-wrenching battles in four overpowering 3-D IT U universes. For more information or to order, call information or to order, call 1-800-340-7888. Chaos Control. What a ride, man. CONTROL "


"TAKE THE ULTIMATE THRILL RIDE Win a weekend trip for two on your own private Lear Jet. HOW TO ENTER: No purchase necessary. Complete an entry form available at stores, or maila 3x5 card with your name and address and zip code to Codes Control Sweepstakes, P.O. Box 8708, Dept. 561, Newport Beach, CA 92658. Requests must be received by 8/31/95. Odds of winning depend on number of entries received. PRIZES: Ono Grand Prize: A Loor Jet weekend trip (Friday Sunday) for two (2) to any one of 21 specified destinations in the conti nontal United States (including hotel and $500 cash) (ARV $30,000; CASH Substitution $10,000); Three (3) First Prizes: A PentiumM Computer (ARV S3,000); Fifty (50) Second Prizes: A Chaos Control Bomber Jacket (ARV $150). FOR A COMPLETE SET OF RULES: Send a self-addressed, stamped envelope lo Choos Control Rules, P.O.Box 8708, Dept. 561, Newport Beach, CA 92658. Requests must be received by 8/31/95. Void where prohibited. KIDS TO ADULTS PC CDROM Philips Media ACES  1. MOTION 1995 Philips Media, Inc. All rights reserved. 1995 Infogrames/1-Motion, Inc. Circle Reader Service W337 "


"the Walak WanusOULU FEATURES 32 SNEAK PREVIEW! MECHWARRIOR II A millennium from now, engines of war will tower like skyscrapers over the battlefield, crushing all who block their path. CGW's Johnny Wilson climbs into his Wolf Clan battlemech and challenges you to, \"Mech my day!\" in a 31st century duel to the death. 38 GO SPACEWARD, YOUNG MAN From galaxies long ago and far away to a star system near you, space simulators take you where no human has gone before. Martin Cirulis destroys Death Stars, ignores Admiral Tolwyn's orders, and snares odd-looking Gorene ships in tractor beams in his quest to find the ultimate interstellar experience. Enlist lthe Sparcorps Today! ADVENTURE ROLE-PLAYING 59 SCORPIA'S STING CGW's most famous anthropologist grabs her Jane Goodall hat and journeys into Virgin's Lost EDEN. 64 THE SCORPION'S TALE Lost and wandering on DISCWORLD? Instead of slipping off the edge, you might let yourself fall under our sorceress' magic spell. 68 JEWELS OF THE ORACLE Peter Olafson puzzles out this prettily-packaged adventure from Discis. 78 ALIEN VIRUS Arinn Dembo finds that bug-hunting without a script leaves gamers in a vacuum in Vic Tokai's sci-fi world. 82 THE DAEDALUS ENCOUNTER Tia Carrere looks as sleek, sexy and serious on the computer screen as on the big screen—but is it enough to keep a gamer's attention? Grab your popcorn and join Charles Ardai for another interactive sci-fi movie. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1995 ACTION 86 SNEAK PREVIEW! DUKE NUKEM 3D Space Commander Peter Olafson briefs you on riding spaceships, leaving footprints, and even drinking from the water fountains in Apogee's new action-packed blast fest. 98 SUPERKARTS Driving a go-kart at 30 mph may not seem like much to a NASCAR vet, but Vox Day says that this game has more horsepower than its 125cc engine would lead you to believe. 102 TANK COMMANDER Domark moves from simulations to arcade fare, keeping the action fast-paced and the explosions loud. 108 ATARI 2600 ACTION PACK Well, Sherman, this month the Wayback Machine takes us to the long-lost days when KABOOM! was King, and 8K games were a dim vision on the horizon. Come now, don't fret a little nostalgia will do you good... Duke Nukes In A New Dimension Duke Nukem 3D 86 "


"Go Ahead, Mech Our Day! 32 SIMULATIONS 123 BOGEY'S BAR & GRILL If you haven't been invited by the military to train in a state-of-the-art simulator, join Denny Atkin for a private seminar in the CGW Virtual War College. 128 SNEAK PREVIEW! SILENT HUNTER SSI dives deep in trying to out-perform ACES OF THE DEEP. Kevin \"Sumo\" Turner puts the new SVGA propellers through some difficult maneuvers in the WWII Pacific theater. 130 1942 GOLD Does everything MicroProse touch eventually turn to gold, or are the enhancements merely multimedia electroplating? Michael Rymaszewski logs several hours in a virtual cockpit to find out. SNEAK PEEK: Silent Hunter 128 STRATEGY WARGA MES 137 BROADSIDES & GRIPESHOT Alan Emrich wonders whether good artificial opponents will be left behind in the age of on-line strategy games. 142 X-COM: TERROR FROM THE DEEP In exploring the sequel to CGW's Game of the Year, Martin Cirulis dons his aquanaut gear and scours the ocean floor for aliens. 148 JAGGED ALLIANCE If you take an X-COM style tactical engine and replace the research with more character interaction and role-playing elements, Jeff James says you end up with a most interesting situation for strategic mayhem. 156 1830 Avalon Hill's plan to convert award-winning board games to the computer is picking up steam. Bob Proctor arrives on the 7:30 express just in time to file this report. 160 THE PURE WARGAME Easily the most historical of QQP's many strategy/wargame titles, THE PURE WARGAME needs some of that old-fashioned QQP play balance. Tim Carter finds the historical research superb, but the game system wanting. 168 PIZZA TYCOON Listen up, youse mugs. Y' know what's good fer ya, you make da pizza all day even dough dis game is in real time. Ya got me? Dis here is my godson, Randall Black, an' he's gonna tell you alla 'bout it. Capice? 172 MACHIAVELLI: THE PRINCE In a new translation by Renaissance scholar Arinn Dembo, we discover why even loyal MERCHANT PRINCES should consider changing their loyalties. DEPARTMENTS 12 EDITORIAL Gaming Technology Explosion 16 INTERFACE The Gamers Talk Back 20 READ.ME The Latest Buzz, Whir, And Click 172 THE GAMER'S EDGE The Hacks, Codes & Cheats You Need X-COM: Terror From The Deep 142 180 SHAREWARE SHOWCASE Strategy Slugfest 186 HEX, BUGS & ROCK 'N ROLL Polygon Secrets Revealed 192 ADVERTISER INDEX Where To Find Games 194 UNDER THE HOOD 3D Graphics Acceleration 203 HALL OF FAME All-Time Great Games 204 THE TOP 100 Readers Rate The Top Games 206 PATCHES Game Files To Kill Bugs Dead 208 WHAT'S THE DEAL? Clones Are Among Us 000 DO Gama e t le Conweg "


"6:02 AM 7:03 AM HAD TEQUILA 9:31 AM PUNCHED 12:02 PM 6:31 PM KICKED THE MIDNIGHT TOOK A RIDE ANE Full Throttle\" and 1994 LucasArts Entertainment CORDORU. KIl Rights Reserved. Used Under Authorization. The Lucasaits logo is a registered nutemark of LucasAITS Entertainment com "


"WOKE UP IN DUMPSTER. WITH CORN FLAKES. OUT THE BARTENDER. CALLED MOM CRAP QUT OF 18 BIKERS. IEVER LOOKED BACK. You're Ben. You're on the road. You re indestructible. ad you'll do whatever it takes to clear your name from a bum murder rap, Like fighting ugly gangs with futuristic bikes and Neolithic weapons. Running big-rigs off the road at 100 mph. Making people pay. But that's what happens when you live your life at \"Full Throttle! JILLTHROTTLE LUCAS edrij L Your biker adventure awaits QUOD PC CD-ROH. Call 1-800-STBEWERS for availalim Circle Reader Service #230 "


"A DASH OF HISTORY, A SPLASH OF TESTOSTERONE, AND A TOUCH OF H.G. WELLS ON ACID. "


"200 00030 00022 00000 .0040 00040 Meet the Chaos Engine-a side of merry olde England you'd rather not know. But forget about tea and crumpers and all that jolly rotten stuff. 'Cause this arcade-action style CD-ROM game transforms your PC into a gruesome battlefield of psychotic monsters and ruthless warriors. We're talking armor-plated, razor-toothed killing machines here. The Bitinap Brothers \"The best two player game on the PC... a strong contender for the best PC action game of all time.\" PC Games (HE (HAOS ENGINE So pick one of six mercenary buddies, stock up on twenty-five deadly weapons and explore four fiendish worlds with 16 levels. But keep an eye peeled for mincemeat-making traps, life-saving power-ups and assorted keys. It's Britain's awardwinning designers, the Bitmap Brothers, at their bloxxly best. God save the Queen? God save your ass. 01165 Circle Reader Service #255 00750 i 03 20440 00425 PUITMAP BROTHERS WarnerActive FOR PC AND PC CD-ROM. CALL 1-800-MY-DEALER FOR THE NEAREST DEALER 01995 WARNER MUSIC GROUP, WARNERACTIVE CHAOS ENGINE 61995 THE BITMAP BROTHERS "


"Rants & Raves Don't Start The Revolution Without Me Three Technical Trends Sure To Be Gamers' Friends SOUND WAVE by Johnny L. Wilson EXPLOSION WIN 95 EY realize that the above title expresstechno-aristocracy from the coming revoluthis editoes the opposite sentiment of the tion. In fact, over the next 18 months, we're rial and Gene Wilder and Donald Suthergoing to introduce you to the Corsican correspond land film Start The Revolution Withtriplets of technological revolution: the to the Corsiout Me based on the legendary WINDOWS 95 Explosion, the 3D Graphics can triplets deCorsican Brothers in preRevolution, and the next Sound Wave. scribed above. revolutionary France. Like the legendary brothers, what What's so important about these trends? You remember, don't you? the architects of these trends do First, for those of you who missed last Each brother would feel in the next year and a half are month's WINDOWS '95 games preview, Miwhat the other one norgoing to affect each other's crosoft's new operating system is potentialmally would. If one performance and benefit sigly a tremendous boon to gamers. We brother was stabbed, the nificantly. There will be plenbelieve WINDOWS '95 could mean the end other felt the pain. If one ty of interesting developments of most configuration headaches, provide a brother got lucky, well, it with regard to all three perfor transparent interface by which graphics accouldn't all be bad, could it? mance areas in the near future, celerator cards can make games run faster, Yet, as with the citizens of the and we are gearing up coverage to incorporate sound and video drivers that French Revolution which served as help you sort through the confusion which will eliminate many compatibility problems the backdrop for the bizarre little inevitably surrounds a revolution. (making sound/video installation transparWilder/Sutherland comedy, the current Like Robespierre's Committee ent), and enable you to insert an Autoplay state of computer gaming has citizens who of Public Safety, we may CD-ROM disc into your drive and be able are restless. They've had it with the aristohave to lop off a few GRAPHICS R. to start playing a game without having cratic notions of hardware manufacturers heads of decadent to go through a lengthy configurawho insist on creating their own stantraditional technolotion process. dard.\" They've had it with elitist ideas like gy in order to help Second, we are going to see light adapting their CONFIG.SYS files for every you reach a new levyears of improvement in the area \"state of the art\" game. They've had it with el of gaming satisof 3D graphics over the next 18 supporting the patrician overhead of faction, but we think months. We have all seen over the memory-hogging TSRs. They want \"Plug the new order will be last couple of years how 3D graphics 'n Play\" and they want it NOW! worth it. To help you have become an integral tool for estabWell, I can assure you that at CGW, we're identify our coverage of this lishing real-time, first-person perspective not going to play the Scarlet Pimpernel fast-paced era of change, you'll grow familgames, modeling virtual worlds for graphic and rescue these archaic remnants of the iar with the three emblems which adorn adventures, building virtual sets, and creat. 3-D GRA EVOLUTION 12 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1995 "


"MERICA INVADAS ETIOFIEL D-Day:America Invades is the latest in the World at War series of games from the team that brought you Operation Crusader and Stalingrad. The game includes classic scenarios from the original Utah Beach game (V for Victory), plus all new graphics, updated troop data and maps, improved game mechanics, play by E-mail, and three scenarios that cover the bloody Omaha Beach landings-including a combined Utah/Omaha campaign game played at the new 3km scale. Dah Beach Be on Omaha Beach when the Alltes storm the beach head. ESOFT Available at leading computer game stores, including Babbages, Best Buy, CompUSA, Computer City, Egghead, Electronics Boutique, Fry's, Micro Center, Software Etc, Walden's Software, and independent retailers worldwide, or call 1-800-999-3222. Ask for Dept. CGW7. #4010360-IBM/MAC CD-ROM System Requirements: PC-486DX 33mhz or higher, 8MB of RAM SVGA(VESA), AD LIB, ROLAND & SoundBlaster Compatibles ROM Color MAC-68030 or higher, 8MB of RAM, Power PC compatible I h ate Control the Allied Forces' march into Europe, The Avalon Hill Game Company Volume III STRO DIVISION OF MONARCH AVALON, INC. 4517 Harford Road, Baltimore, MD 21214 1-800-999-3222 / 410-254-9200 Circle Reader Service #297 WAMES OF "


"COMPUTER GAMING WORLD ing synthetic actors. We've observed the enrichment of these 3D graphics through the techniques defined in this issue's \"Hex, Bugs, & Rock 'n Roll.\" Now, imagine what happens when your game machine has hardware assists, specific chips designed to enhance 3-D graphics performance without dependence upon CPU time. Both performance and technique should improve. For an update on important news in this area, be sure to see the articles marked with the 3D Graphics Revolution logo in this month's \"READ.ME\" section and \"Under The Hood.\" Third, we're going to see some exciting new advances in sound. The next Sound Wave will feature advances in sound modeling that should shatter our former thresholds of suspended disbelief. Use of sound to convey spatial awareness, direction, echo, and mass, as well as custom sound design akin to that used to develop dinosaur sounds for Jurassic Park, will enhance our gaming experiences. Further, the ability to use voiceover-data technology will greatly expand our pleasure in on-line gaming experiences (as anyone who las played DOOM simultaneously over computer and an office intercom system can testify). We will be looking at both the coming hardware that is designed to assist these newest sound technologies and some of the design techniques which underlie them over the next 18 months. Just watch for the Sound Wave logos in future issues. By offering these logos as visual pointers, we hope to not only make it easier for you to find our technology coverage within the magazine but to pull together for you the trends behind some of the fast-breaking events and announcements that we have been observing. So, enjoy our expanding coverage and, \"Don't Start The Revolution Without Me\" because I plan to be beefing up my computer to take advantage of the new advances, too. The #1 Computer Game Magazine JULY 1995, NUMBER 132 Publisher Jonathan Lane Editor-in-Chief Johnny Wilson Editor Chris Lombardi Managing Editor Ken Brown Technical Editor Mike Weksler Assistant Editors Terry Coleman Allen Greenberg George Jones Art Director Edwin C. Malstrom Graphic Artist Jack Rodrigues Advertising Director Lee J. Uniacke East Coast District Sales Manager Cathy Conway West Coast District Sales Manager Lynne Killey Account Representative Marci Yamaguchi Marketing Coordinator Cathy Lin Administrative Assistant Linda Philapil Contributing Editors Scorpia (Adventure Games) Alan Emrich (Wargames) Charles Ardai (Interactive Fiction) Loyd Case (Technology) Martin Cirulis (Science Fiction) Founder Russell Sipe Contents are copyrighted by Zill Davis Publishing Co., 1995. Computer Gaming World is not alliliated with IDG. Subscription Rate: The subscription rate is $27.91 for a one year subscription (12 issues), Canada and all other countries add $11.00 for postage. Airmail subscrip tions are $78.00 per year. Canadian GST registration number is R123669673. Payment must be in U.S. dollars made by check or money order drawn upona U.S. bank. Visa, MasterCard, AMEX accepted. Subscription Services: For subscription questions, address changes or ordering information, call (303) 665-8930 or fax (303) 604-7455 within the U.S. and Canada. All other countries call (303) 604-1464 or fax (303) 601-7155 (international subscribers only) or write to Computer Gaming World, PO Box 57167. Boulder, CO 80322-7167 Editorial Offices: 135 Main St., 14th Floor, San Francisco, CA 94105. Back Issues: For back issues (subject to availability). $6,00 per issue ($8.00 outside the U.S.), send check, money order or credit card information to Back Issues Dept. Zift-Davis Publishing Co., P.O, Box 53131, Boulder, CO 80322-3131. HOW DO WE RATE? The Guide To CGW's Review Rating System CompuServe (76703,622) America On-Line: CGW Prodigy: EXIT:10B Genie: CGW Internet: 76703.622@compuserve.com *Telephone: (415)357-1900 Editorial Fax: (415) 357-4977 Sales Fax: (415) 357-4999 For advertising information only, call: (415) 357-1930 *** Outstanding: That rare game that gets it all right. The graphics, sound, interface, and, of course, the game play come together to form a Transcendent Gaming Experience. For quality reprints in quantities of 100 or more, contact REPRINT SERVICES/COMPUTER GAMING WORLD, 315 5th Avenue N.W.. St. Paul, MN 55112. (612) 582-3800, FAX (612) 633-1862. **** Very Good: A quality game that succeeds in many areas. May have minor problems, but is still worth your time and money, especially il you're interested in the subject matter/genre. *** Average: A mixed bag. Can often be a game that reaches for the stars, but falls short in significant areas. Can also just be a game that does what it does well, but lacks flair or originality. Weak: A game with serious problems. May be buggy, may not have much play value, may be ill-conceived and you may want to think twice about buying it. Abysmal: That rare game that gets it all wrong. Usually a buggy, incomplete, and/or valueless product. ZIFF-DAVIS PUBLISHING COMPANY Chairman and CEO. Eric Hippeau President, Consumer Media Group: J. Scott Briggs President, Computer Intellegence/InfoCorp: Bob Brown President, International Media Group: J.B. Holston III Senior Vice President, Circulation: Baird Davis Senior Vice President: Rachel Greenfield Vice President, Assistant to the Chairman: Tom McGrade Vice President, Business Manager: T.L. Thompson Vice President, Circulation Services: James F. Ramaley Vice President, Corporate Research and Analysis: Elda Vale Vice President, Controller and Treasurer: Timothy J. Mitchell Vice President, Creative Services: Herbert Stern Vice President, General Counsel and Secretary: J. Malcolm Morris Vice President, General Manager: Bruce W. Bourne Vice President, Human Resources: Rayna Brown Vice President, Marketing and Development Group: Herbert Stern Vice President, Production: Roger Hermann Vice President, Technology: Bill Machrone Chief Information Ollicer: Wellington Y. Chiu Executive Director, Information Systems: Owen Weckley Executive Director, Marketing Services: Jim Manning ABC Production Director: Walter J. Terlecki AUDITED Executive Director. Licensing: Gertrud Borchardt Director of Public Relations: Gregory Jarboe 14 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JULY 1995 "


"The New Falcon MACH V. Pentium 100 MHz: SPEED LIMIT NO LIMITS. ou want to go all out for games, the Falcon is the bet for your money.\" C. Schuytema, Computer Gaming World Pentium 90 they sent me is a beautiful of work, primarily because they don't look e lowest bidder when shopping for Hard componentry Overall Score Chapman, Computer Game Review NEW! BIGGER HARD DISK SMALLER PRICE!!! MHz peatum HE FALCON MACH V: THE ULTIMATE GAMING MACHINE TM If you don't care about playing games, buy any computer. If you don't care how fast your games run, buy any \"multimedia\" computer. If you're a serious gaming enthusiast, you need a MACH V Gaming PC. MACH Vp-100 MHz Pentium NOW ONLY $2,795! 1-800-258-6778 ndard features as of 6/1/95: To Order Call: Pentium 100 MHz Processor Compatible with All IBM PC Software en PCI Bus Motherboard, 256K Cache exp. to 1 meg it PCI Graphics Board with 1 Megabyte 16.8 Million Colors! en PCI Bus Enhanced IDE Hard Drive Controller gabytes of RAM expandable to 128 Floppy Drive legabyte Enhanced IDE 8ms Hard Drive with 128K Cache-NEWI ms QUAD-Speed CD-ROM Drive tive Labs SoundBlaster 16 & Shielded Multimedia Speakers Products FlightStick PROTM 4 Button Joystick with Viewing Control Products Automatic Speed Sensitive Dual Gameport Tower Case with 250 Watt UL approved power supply Non-Interlaced Super VGA Monitor, 28dp, Edge-to-Edge Display Key Keyboard, 3 Button Serial Mouse DOS, Windows (latest versions) & 10 free CD-ROMS! Year Parts & Labor Warranty. One Year On-site Service VISA, MasterCard & Discover Accepted SSA, TUV and FCC class B certified Financing Available on Approved Credit. 50 UARTS. Temperature sensitve fans, Customized BIOS and many other unique features! MACH V is custom built to meet your specific needs. There are hundreds of options to choose FALCON NORTHWEST When you're ready to buy, please call or lax us for the latest quote. 263 South Bayshore Dr. Coos Bay, OR 97420 marks are the property of their respective owners Ph: (503) 269-0775 Fax: (503) 267-2575 Circle Reader Service #141 "


"Interface LETTERS FROM CGW READERS GOO MISTAKEN maining members of the design ated HOD 'N' Pod rather role-playing games will not IDENTITY team. Since our art department than my dozenth or so advenappeal to these newcomers, I found, when I looked at was expecting a picture of Vijay ture game. Let me respond neither will reviews which apyour Premier Awards issue and Julian, the main designers, this way: out of my circle of pear to be aimed only at the that my game, THE ELDER and we received a picture of two acquaintances, there are a hardest core portion of the SCROLLS: ARENA, had won the designers, that's what we ran. mere handful who would enaudience. CRPG of the Year award. ExSince our Editor-in-Chief was the joy, or even understand, a typCharles, in his most jaded cellent! Thank you and the only staffer who actually knew ical adventure game. Yet statement, compares Hong 'N' other reviewers for your faith. who was who and he was speakthere is no one—NO ONE-Podj to a screen saver, and Imagine, however, my sur-ing out-of-state as we went to to whom I would hesitate givwrites that he'd be surprised prise when I looked at my picpress, no one caught the error uning HOD 'N' Podj; for the first to hear of anyone playing with ture and found I had til it was too late. The error does, time, I have deit for more than a few minsuddenly changed (quite drashowever, give us a chance to ansigned a game utes. Well, tically) into someone of anothnounce that Vijay is now heading which my 4er race! While blonde hair up the Action/Role-Playing Game year-old and fair skin look good on Division of Magnet Interactive daughter and Ted (the assistant designer Studios. my 70-yearpictured), I prefer to look old mother A MESSAGE both enjoy. FROM MERETZKY As you I'm writing in response to mention in the review of HOD 'N' Povj by your editoCharles Ardai in the May isrial in the sue. I have received countless same isreviews over the years, both sue, the favorable and unfavorable, number of households with but this is the first time I have multimedia PCs is exploding; ever felt the need to write a millions of these people are drop that jaw, Charles. From rebuttal. The criticisms were brand new to the universe of our publisher to the compaunfair, and, in my opinion, computer gaming. Unlike nies that produce our graphic detrimental to the long-term Charles, and I, and other art, from right coast to left, health of our industry. hard-core gamers, these are people who've never liked or like myself. I'm sure it was an I object to the repeated impeople who are not familiar even played a computer game honest mistake by Bethesda plication that Hobj 'N' PoDj is with every variation of every before are hopelessly addicted Softworks, wishing me well at derivative. From the extensive kind of game produced over to HOD 'N' PODJ. my new job at Magnet Interboard game to the completely the last 15 years. They may I also object to the cheap active Studios. I'm sure you'll original mini-games like Beanot have played SAM AND MAX shot about the HODj 'N' PODJ be seeing more of my games con and Barbershop Quintet HIT THE ROAD, let alone installation placing its icon in in the near future. Enclosed is to the profusion of \"easter games going back to the early the Games group \"right next a more accurate photograph. eggs» hidden in almost every '80s. Like many in the game to SOLITAIRE and MINESWEEPBest wishes and thanks mini-game, Hodj 'N' Podj is development community, ER,\" implying a similarly shalagain for the award. full of new material. Boffo Games is striving to aplow gaming experience. True, Vijay Lakshman More importantly, I object peal to this potentially huge most WINDOWS games create a Washington, D.C. to the jaded attitude that new audience. At the same group named after the comCharles exhibits throughout time, I know that CGW is trypany producing the game. I When we asked for a picture of his review. Reading between ing to broaden its circulation find this self-serving and anthe ARENA design team, Bethesda the lines, it appears that tremendously. Ever more noying; invariably, I immediSoftworks sent a picture of the reCharles is unhappy that I crecomplex flight simulators and ately move the icon to my 16 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1995 "


"\"One Must Fall 2097 is the best fighting game available for the PC, bar none\" COMPUTER GAME REVIEW ONE MUST FALL Supports dual joystick head-tohead combat in 5 unique arenas 11 robots with over 120 frames of 3D animation per robot! Win cash for repairs, upgrades training & buying new moves Run out of cash and your repairs are over «MOVE OVER, DOOM, FOR BID ONE MUST FALL: 2097 IS A SURE WINNER!\" GAMEBYTES Are you tired of PC beat-em-up games that don't live up to their hype? PC Gamer says \"this is a truly excellent game\" and \"you won't be disappointed\" with One Must Fall 2097. PC Answers calls it «outstanding\", PC Home calls it «a must\" and PC Gamer says it «plays brilliantly\". Computer Game Review says One Must Fall 2097 is \"fast, furious and fun above and beyond the call of duty\". PC Gamer also calls it \"the definitive\" and \"most awesome beat-'em-up on the PC\". es on Even people who tend to not like fighting games seem to enjoy the sheer CompuServe just playability and fun of One Must Fall. GO EPIC Play head-to-head against your friends or fight your way through increasingly difficult tournaments. Use your winnings to upgrade, trade robots and purchase training in an attempt to defeat diverse enemies with unique personalities. shannel metal-crushing sound effects and heart-pounding digital music. One Must Fall 2097 is only $39. Or, get the game, the 60-page OMF Strategy Guide and a color poster for only $49. NOT AVAILABLE IN STORES CALL 1-800-972-7434 TO ORDER! EPIC Please add $4 s&h. Visa, Mastercard and checks accepted. MD residents add 5% sales tax. Every order includes a bonus shareware game. In UK/Europe call Epic MegasGames UK Ltd. at +44 (0)1767-260903. Epic MegaGames Inc. 3204 Tower Oaks Blvd #410 Rockville MD 20852. (301) 983-9771 . Fax (301) 299-3841 TRY THE SHAREWARE VERSION TODAY! On CompuServe GO EPIC and visit the Epic Forum or call Exec-PC BBS at (414) 789-4360 or on the Internet ftp any of our shareware games from ftp.um.edu in the /msdos/games/epic directory "


"Games group and delete the chase a 16 bit card augmentthat General MIDI peripherals vorite games. unwanted new group. I've ed with a General MIDI enhance the music in a given Then I reinstalled my fav, talked to several people who daughter card. I have a Sound computer game-they have nothWINGCD to configure it to appreciate Hobj 'N' Ponj takBlaster SCSI 2 and have been ing to do with sound (i.c., voices GMIDI music and started the ing a friendlier, less arrogant considering dropping the and sound effects). game.... WOW! X-WING now approach to installation. dough for the upgrade. But Most, if not all, of the comsings to me! It's as if John With HOD 'N' PODJ, I tried before I do that, I must know pelling games in the market now Williams himself was conductto craft a game which would more about it. What is Gener-are compatible with General ing in my computer! The \"orhave tremendous appeal to al MIDI wavetable synthesis? MIDI synthesizers. The difference chestral\" quality of GMIDI these newcomers, while still Are wavetables even used in simply must be heard by you, the has brought a new life to my providing a great deal of qualmost popular games? Will I consumer, in order to justify its game-playing. DESCENT has ity playtime for most of the notice a considerable increase value to your overall gaming extaken on a new edge with its current game players. Alin sound quality and /or per-perience. In my opinion, listening techno-funk music, and TIE though Charles may disagree, formance? Also, while on the to some of the wonderful game FIGHTER has become more opI think I succeeded, and so do audio subject, what will the music that's out there on a sound pressive and more ominous. most of the people who've Advanced Signal Processor card without General MIDI Add on the 2MB+ of MIDI seen HOD 'N' PODJ-includupgrade also by Creative Labs wavelable synthesis would be like music files I've picked up over ing most other reviewers. do for the average gamer. Is it listening to my favorite audio CD the past year, and GMIDI reSteve Meretzky just a gimmick or a tool for through a couple of tin cans and ally does justice to these files Concord, MA the professional recorder? I a string! that 16-bit audio could never have contacted Creative Labs . The ADVANCED SIGNAL do. I'm still trying to get used We know not what course other already on my own over PROCESSOR upgrade is mainly for to hearing actual drums and reviewers may take, but as for us, phone and modem. They the computer audio enthusiast realistic piano coming out of give us criticism and give us don't seem to be able to give who wants to add effects, such as my speakers! depth. We have to meet our readme an answer that applies dian echo on recorded sounds or And before I was like your ers' needs. Though we hear your rectly to the user with gaming play with Q-Sound. It's not suptypical safari-hunter...I'd nevconcerns, feel your pain, agree as the primary interest-or I ported in any computer games er heard of GMIDI outside of with some of your points, and unjust don't get it. Give it to me that I know of, and I haven't actual synthesizers. Retailers derstand your disagreements with straight in layman terms... I'm heard developers, sound card were of no help, they used the Ardai review, we still feel not much of a General MIDI companies, or PC game music buzzwords like \"16 bit\" this Charles' perspective was right for kind of guy. composers refer to it when disand \"32 bit\" that and had no our audience-hard-core, dediRichard Amos cussing current audio technology. idea of the actual difference cated gamers who are neither Canton, MI For a gamer's perspective on between GMIDI and FM synfour-year-old girls nor 70-yearthe difference a General MIDI thesis. One dealer tried to sell old women. We congratulate you We cornered Mike in between board can make, check out the fol me a $300 sound card he said on the success of your effort to turns of PANZER GENERAL for this lowing letter. was GMIDI but in reality was reach an expanded market. reply: only GMIDI-capable. I only General MIDI is a widely acONE TROPHY purchased the Roland upon AVOIDING cepled standard for wavelable SOUND CARD recommendation of an onMIDI-OCRITY synthesis. Using wavetable syntheI am writing in supportive line gaming friend. I am a new subscriber to sis, real instruments are sampled response to the \"Under The The impact of GMIDI on CGW and would like to take (i.e., recorded) and stored onto Hood\" in the May '95 CGW my system has been a trementhis opportunity first of all to ROM chips (or in some cases, as (\"Stalking The Great White dous joy, and pure gamers say GREAT MAGAZINE!! I small sound files on your hard Sound Card\"). should see and hear what a find your reviews to be right disk). Think of a MIDI file as a As luck would have it, I pur$200 upgrade can do for their on the money most of the player piano scroll that can tell chased this mag on the same enjoyment! time and they heavily influthe computer what wavelable night I bought Roland's Saturn S. Padua ence my purchasing decisions. sound to play back. The result, in Sound Canvas Daughtercard San Francisco, CA I have a question that has the better implementations of this SCD-15. Installation to my been plaguing my mind for technology, is rich music with inSound Blaster 16 was very SPEAK UP! months now. What will the struments that sound like their simple. But I am still in awe of Got something to say? Write to Creative Labs Wave Blaster real-world counterparts (not linny the difference it has made in us at: daughter card do for gamers? approximations as with FM synmy games. I had always Interface, clo Computer GamMike Weksler advises in his thesis-the synthesis that we all judged the SB's performance ing World, 135 Main St., 14th article \"Stalking The Great know better as \"Ad Lib\" or as \"pretty good,\" as it was Floor, San Francisco, CA 94105. White Sound Card\" to pur\"Sound Blaster\" music). Note \"humming\" music to my fa6 18 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD  JULY 1995 "


"PICTURA PRAEFERENDA EST MILLE 1 VERBIS* * A picture is worth a thousand words. CAESARTI BUILD A CITY.BUILD AN EMPIRE! co M 1 N G Circle Reader Service #180 Impressions , 1995 Impressions Software "


"READ.ME THE LATEST NEWS FROM THE GAMING WORLD Aliens, Body Snatchers, Chessmasters and Quarterbacks Mindscape's New Blueprint Calls For Aggressive, Quality Game Designs \"Blue 32! Blue 32! Alien Blitz! portunities for your mercenary er Doom-clone, the designers bat and even some giant robot Pawn to King four! Hut, Hut!\" captain character to negotiate, are creating a graphic advenblast-fest fun to go with its Such a confusing mix of digiuncover fiendish plots and ture based on the successful wide range of live-action and tized sounds echoing through role-play his/her way through Dark Horse comics series. cinematic-style graphics. the halls of Mindscape's game a dark future world. They've already captured Back on Earth in 2069, Then again, much of the dark, moody atstrange oblong objects rain Mindscape's mosphere in the graphic novdown from orbit and attempt biggest license els. So, if the storyline can to take over the world, as STEEL HARBINGER plays off the Puppet Masters/Invasion of the Body Snatcher theme for modern audiences. In a welcome twist, the character you portray is female. A more unusual kind of aldivision is easily understandternative fiction forms the baable with a dozen games, covsis for AIR POWER, where ering nearly every genre, dirigibles become the domiplanned for release in 1995. nant military technology in a This is hard to believe from a Wood Elf Archers attack Orc company that, when it was known as Software Toolworks, released an averWood Elf Archers age of two games per year. The most high-profile product would seem to be the WARHAMMER FANTASY BATTLE EXPLORE WORLDS OLD AND NEW Mindscape opens up science SYSTEM, adapted from the fiction and fantasy lands alike for gamers, with THE RAVEN PROJECT (top left) and WARHAMMER FANTASY BATTLES (above) scheduled for this Games Workshop miniatures fall. For more down-to-earth action when the leaves turn, every game. The real-time tactical major college team will be represented in NCAA FOOTBALL (right), combat system allows you to possibly the FRONT PAGE SPORTS of the college gridiron. set your Orcish, Dwarven, Elvish or Human formations prior to battle, stage ambushes might be ALIENS. Those walkcome anywhere close to those very different 20th century and engage in frenzied melee ing biological nightmares bein the comics, ALIENS could be Europe. Designed by Rowan very similar to its tabletop gin the tale by annihilating a a major hit. Software, this is like crossing cousin. The intricate plot is human outpost, and it's your Other aliens are attacking, CARRIERS AT WAR with ZEPstill early in development, but job to rectify the situation. as well. Cryo's THE RAVEN PELIN, and adding sexier seems to offer plenty of opSurprisingly, instead of anothPROJECT has a little space comgraphics a la DAWN PATROL. PETER Warband... uc 18 (24) 20 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JULY 1995 "


"Readers' PLAYING LATELY? Here are the games that your fellow players are blowing the most time with. Let us know which game you've been playing the most by writing the name of your current addiction in the \"Playing Lately?\" blank of the CGW Top 100 ballot (page 160).   Results for CGW #130, MAY 1995 1. Panzer General (SSI) 2. Dark Forces (LucasArts) 3. X-COM: Terror From The Deep (MicroProse) . X-COM: UFO Defense (MicroProse) 5. Master of Magic (MicroProse) Wing Commander 3 (Origin) 8. 9. 10. Descent (Interplay) NASCAR Racing (Papyrus/Virgin) Jagged Alliance (Sir-Tech) NBA Live (Electronic Arts) For more down-to-earth action, CYBERSPEED is essentially MEGARACE on steroids: futuristic race courses, supersonic speeds, near-elastic collisions, and network play for up to eight players ups the ante for this offering. And, while it will never challenge NASCAR RACING for realism, AL UNSER JR'S ARCADE RACING delivers what you'd expect from its name-especially with the added attraction of better computer opponents than the average arcade racer. If you have any doubts that Mindscape is going all-out for the action market, merely look at SAVAGE WARRIORS and its new 3D Bio-Motion technology. In addition to the smooth character animation of the fighters, there are a number of secret moves, cheat codes, camera angles and even hidden characters to provide a rationale for more replayability. Mindscape's multi-faceted attack on the gaming market includes a pumped-up METAL MARINES and LEGIONS EMPIRE (which may finally include the tactical module Ancients fans have demanded). CHESSMASTER 5000 has more opponents modeled after all-time great chess masters, plus a new tutorial, a wider range of chess puzzles, and of course, an AI which can beat 99% of the pawn-pushers on the planet. With that in mind, the designers will have both tougher and easier levels this time around. The strangest strategy game of the bunch, though, is THE DOONESBURY ELECTION GAME. Can you imagine Zeke or Boomer running against Bob Dole in '967 \"I just got X-COM: COM: Notable Quotes was LucasArts thinkTERROR FROM THE ing anyway?\" DEEP, I haven't seen Wit, wisdom and caustic quips Robert, Puzzled in daylight in a week, from gaming's harshest critics Akron, Ohio and I'm living on \"You know life is canned tuna. Thank good when you are faced with the decision to God this one is not as addicting as the first.\" race around Talledega, push some tanks Tom Esposito, Atlantis Base around in PANZER GENERAL, or take on Shaq \"I now have a dozen board games, comwith Vlade in NBA LIVE! plete with lengthy rule books, sitting in my Scott Morze, Alhambra, CA closet gathering dust thanks to PANZER \"My wife says to me, I'm a computer widow GENERAL.\" Allen Kaczor, Goldsboro, NC again! Why didn't you kill all those aliens the first time? \"DARK FORCES is a great game that only W.S. Corney, Oneida Castle, NY needs a save game feature to be perfect. What To complete the eclectic PAGE SPORTS FOOTBALL Pro's will be up to the task. picture Mindscape is trying to audience-quite a hurdle. It will be a busy year for paint, consider that their Huge players, SVGA graphics, the Mindscape folks, and NCAA FOOTBALL game is not plenty of stats, and an easy-tohopefully a busy one for only one of the toughest lilearn play-calling system have gamers as their ambitious censes to obtain, but the degiven them a good start, but schedule of releases nears sign is trying to target FRONT it's too early to tell if the AI completion. JULY 1995. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 21 "


"READ.ME right then click o IOCHIP DISPLAY BURIED IN TIME ditches, as well as the usual It's tough being a temporal side-to-side views security agent. You make it And then there are the four included several difficulty levsim,\" GTE has extended the through a long, demanding painstakingly detailed and els. There is also a special pergenre into a new dimensionadventure, put the flow of wondrously varying locales to sonality-on-a-chip named the third dimension. As the time back on the straight and which you travel. Chichen Itza Arthur who will give clues (altwo outer-space combatants narrow path, save the universe has ancient Mayan monubeit at a loss of victory points) square off, the camera conin the process, and quite reaments that INCA II could only while making pithy references stantly changes vantage points sonably expect to return as a dream of. And to everything from Mayan to give the game a TV-broadhero. Instead, you find that minutiae to Monty Python. cast feel. The \"ring,\" a large, someone has been While the script won't make square-shaped platform, has wreaking havoc with hisyou forget Poul Anderson's an open boundary like a tory again. And worse yet, The Time Patrol, the story and Sumo wrestling circle, and it's they've framed you for it! the puzzles are a lot more inpossible to lose a fight by simBut then, what would an tegrated than most \"interacply being tossed out of it. adventure game be without tive fiction,\" and there is The graphics are simply a little chaos? So you once much more game than multiamazing. Using comic book again don your cumbersome media fluffery inside this style art and beautifully renpackage. dered backgrounds, this game's visuals rival its coin-op INTERFACE FX FIGHTER counterparts. FX FIGHTER'S incredible visual appeal rests Fighting in the Streets is primarily in Argonauts' decigreat, and Kombats to thesion to utilize two budding death are Mortally thrilling new technologies: B-Render But the 2D fighting genre is and motion capture. B-Rengrowing old, and many action der, short for Blazing gamers are Render, is a new 3D desperate programming library for somethat allows software HAVE SUIT, WILL TIME-TRAVEL Your biosuit a little confining? there's thing to put developers to quickly Maybe, but its interface lets you look up at high towers and enough the karate render 3D objects at even to pass as an armored knight from a distance. chain-mail back in their lightning speed. machismo at chop. Motion capture is yet essential bio-suit and go Chateau Guillard that even a Well, from the process of flitting through the ages, medieval scholar would feel at what we've recording organic looking for clues to your inno home. More visionary gamers seen, hope is in motion from real cence. can peruse the artistic and scisight if GTE This sequel to THE JOURentific treasures of Leonardo Interactive NEYMAN PROJECT retains the Da Vinci's studio, or get a and Argcinematic feel of its predecespeek of the future in the onaut Softsor and supplements it with 23rd-century Farnstein Lab. ware deliver such technological brilliance But BURIED IN TIME isn't all on the that even Myst fanatics will be pretty pictures. The environpromise of impressed. The bio-suit conment is very interactive, with their new struct is clever, and provides a lots of \"hot spots,\" and the digital neat justification for the puzzles actually relate to the brawlfest FX game's interface. One big imstoryline (unlike those of FIGHTER. provement over the original is many adventure games these While that your view of the world isdays). keeping inTHE MONSTER MASH The best hand-to-hand combateers in n't as limited as it once was. Of course, not everyone is tact the underlythe universe have been handpicked to test your mettle in You can look up at towering an expert on Mayan religious ing concept of the EX FIG battlements or down into rituals, so the designers have one-on-one \"fight 22 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD  JULY 1995 "


"SHORT TAKES ON GAMES UNDERGOING BETA TESTING AND SOON TO BE RELEASED ESPN trocar from dhe me PIPELINE ESTIMATED RELEASE DATES BASED ON THE LATEST INFORMATION FROM GAME DEVELOPERS NAME OF GAME, COMPANY ................RELEASE DATE KUWAIT creatures and then using it to statistics. In short, the perfect ESPN HOCKEY from the rest animate digital characters; game-that's all PC hockey of the hockey sims on the used in films like Jurassic Park fans want. Currently Elecmarket? Well, according to (elephants were used for the tronic Arts has the digital Sony, more than a few things, movements of some diStanley Cup race locked up, starting with the game action. nosaurs), it is finally making but the developers at StormIn addition to laster play, its way into the realm of comfront Studios, in conjunction gamers will have much more puter gaming with Sony Imagesoft and control over their players' These technologies should ESPN, are feverishly attemptmovements. Not only will give FX FIGHTER, which ing to build a title challenger. gamers be able to attempt should be shipping this sumESPN NATIONAL HOCKEY slap shots and wrist shots like mer, a leg up on the competiNIGHT is that would-be conmost other games, but tion. At its core, this is a tender. In keeping with the wannabe Messiers will be able MORTAL KOMBAT type of spirit of the number one to execute five different types game—you'll still be fighting sports network, players will be of checks, which should proin best of three (or five) greeted with what is vide for some hard-hitting acmatches, and now becoming the tion. Another feature that ESPN computer caught our eye is the ability to game standard—a control a single player full screen digi-throughout the course of a tized video introgame. While we're not quite duction. Also sure if Stormfront will be able consistent with to pull this off (if you don't the ESPN line is have the puck, your teamthe slick TV mates' Al had better be good), style interface. this control mode could be an Novices and vetappreciated change of pace erans alike will from most games where you appreciate the simply play \"puck hog.\" ease with which Additionally, ESPN's name they'll be able to on the label means access to jump into statisthe sports network's retics, gameplay sources. Dan Patric will proand team rosters. viding the play-by-play and Graphically, Bill Clement of the National like most hockey Hockey Night show) will be sims, HOCKEY doing the preand post-game STICK IT TO 'EM With two different ways to shoot and five NIGHT won't commentary. A new feature different types of checking, ESPN's hockey season stray far from for the ESPN sports games is promises to be full of strikes (the good kind, of course). the NHL HOCKthe presence of a digital liEy look, utilizing brary containing some of the the challenge ladder will rea vertically scrolling screen best plays in ESPN's extensive main intact. But gamers are that provides close-to-the-ice video library. going to be spoiled once they action (a slightly steeper angle Statistically, Stormfront is get the opportunity to exthan BRETT HULL. HOCKEY). going to provide the basics change hostilities in a deadly And although the gameplay and not much more. In addi3D world. won't be radically different tion to the +/ratings comthan other entries, we witmon to the sport, the obvious ESPN NATIONAL nessed a little more speed and statistics will be provided, all HOCKEY NIGHT finesse in the players than of which will be tracked and we've seen in other hockey saved throughout the course Flawless graphics, fluid mosims. of a season. tion, and incredibly accurate So what's going to separate 11TH HOUR Virgin ........... 7/95 ACROSS THE RHINE MicroProse .. 7/95 AWFUL GREEN THINGS QQP.......7/95 BATTLES IN TIME QQP ......... 7/95 BEYOND SQUAD LEADER AH.....9/95 BURIED IN TIME Sanctuary Woods 8/95 CAESAR II Impressions .........9/95 CHESSMASTER 5000 Mindscape ..9/95 CONQUEST OF THE NEW WORLD Interplay ...... .....8/95 CYBERMAGE Origin ............9/95 DAGGERFALL Bethesda .........9/95 DUKE NUKE 'EM 3-D Apogee ... 7/95 DUNGEON MASTER II Interplay ...8/95 EMPIRE II New World ..........9/95 EXPLORATION Interactive Magic ..7/95 FAST ATTACK BOATS Time-Warner 8/95 FRANKENSTEIN Interplay ........9/95 G-NOME 7th Level .............. 8/95 GUARDIANS OF DESTINY Virgin ...9/95 LAST BLITZKRIEG SSG. WWW.7/95 MAGIC: THE GATHERING MicroProse ................. MECHWARRIOR II Activision .....8/95 MILLENNIA GameTek ...........9/95 METAL LORDS New World ....... 9795 MISSION CRITICAL Legend ......9/95 NAVY STRIKE MicroProse...... 9/95 NECROBIUS Microprose .........7/95 NETWORK CIVILIZATION MicroProse ......... PHANTASMAGORIA Sierra ..... 7/95 POLICE QUEST: SWAT Sierra .....9/95 PRISONER OF ICE I-Motion ..... 8/95 7TH FLEET Avalon Hill .10/95 SILENT HUNTER SSI ............9/95 SIMISLE Maxis ................10/95 SPACE BUCKS Impressions... 10/95 STAR CONTROL III Accolade .....8/95 STEEL PANTHERS SSI .....9/95 TEKWAR Capstone ........... ..9/95 TFX 2000 Ocean .............10/95 THE DIG LucasArts .............9/95 THIS MEANS WAR! MicroProse ....9/95 THUNDERSCAPE SSI ...........7/95 TOP GUN Spectrum HoloByte .... 7/95 WARHAMMER Mindscape ......9/95 WOODEN SHIPS & IRON MEN Avalon Hill.. ...10/95 JULY 1995. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 23 "


"READ.ME Matrox 3D Accelerator Board Takes Graphics To Next Millennium Wanna add a little zing to ten to take advantage of the be a 3D-DDI (WINDOWS' 95 your gaming? Check out the 3D acceleration, so the MILLElow-level 3D library) acnew Matrox MGA MILLENNINIUM will not enhance an excelerator. The software UM. This 64-bit PCI Windows isting game's 3D graphics. bundle includes an enand 3D polygon accelerator We tried the MILLENIUM dri-hanced version of has hardware support for texving an enhanced version of NASCAR RACING and ture mapping, uses new NASCAR RACING in hi-res nifty 3D demos. At a sugWRAM (which is both cheaper with all the textures on using a gested retail price of and faster than VRAM) and 90MHZ Pentium, and it's the $379 for the 2MB verhas a hot-rod 32 bit VGA core fastest we've seen the game sion, you'll get the first for running your DOS VGA run. The MGA MILLENNIUM is 3D accelerator on the and SVGA games at hyper compatible with leading 3D li-market that's poised for the speeds. Note, however, that a braries like Criterion's RENnext generation of 3D games game must be specifically writDERWARE, and is positioned to without killing your existing Tv GAE Millennium NEW games dead. For more information, call (800) 361-1408. The 4 Gigabyte If there were a Parliament in the Computer Gaming industry, David Lester would probably sit in the House of Lords. Born and raised in the land of nobility, Lester is a self-made publishing Lord with games such as Air BUCKS, DETROIT, LORDS OF THE REALM, CAESAR and the soon-to-be-released CAESAR II to his credit. We thought Lord Lester would make a fine guest speaker to address this distinguished audience on the topic: what game would you design given unlimited processing power and an unlimited budget. May we now present, Sir David Lester! own. A greater level ities restricted to areas within your effecof economic mantive control. Players will have more eleagement detail will ments available to include within their be available, with castle, and will be able to take a virtual several computertour throughout their creations, should controlled stewards available for hire to they so wish. Dungeons will be available relieve you of some of the micro-manwithin which to hold worthy prisoners, agement, should you so wish. some of which may generate ransom income. Combat will be a more detailed version of today's crude attempt, with larger, better detailed soldiers moving realistically and in swift response to your command; players will feel truly a part of the action via the surround sound, and indeed might choose to step in and join the fight themselves, using an advanced first-person perspective \"medieval melee\" simulation! Graphics and audio will be an equivalent resolution to HDTV, and installation hassles will be long-forgotten! In short, the game will be, if not all things to all men, more things to more men: more bells and whistles will attract a wider audience, more detail will be of course, the AI will not only be of a available for the micro-managers, while high standard, it will have multiple diffia seamless interface and challenge as culty and style settings, and will use good as their friends can muster will neural net techniques to develop stratekeep the grognards long into the next gies to beat your opponents. Castlecentury! Plus ca change... as we say in Eubuilding will be a more necessary task, rope! [The more things change...] with tax collection and conscription abilI see an \"ultimate\" version of LORDS OF THE REALM, where up to six human players compete over cable in real-time. Each player assumes a \"virtual\" identity from a wide selection of rendered physical forms; these forms will be used onscreen for all interactive scenes between players, where the virtual chacters' animations are rendered on the fly according to the circumstance's needs; players will be able to \"speak\" their minds using either computer-resident voices, again from a wide selection, or using their 24 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JULY 1995 "


"COGN WANTED CONG WANTED Jounty NASTY DAN HANDSOME HARRY TM COLN WANTED WANTED 11ASTY DA EL LOCO WANITE THE CACTUS KID OTT CAN YOU COLLECT THE BOUNTY ON ALL FOUR OF THE MOST CUNNING OUTLAWS IN THE TERRITORY? -BIM An Old West outpost needs your help to clean up the town. Be quick on the draw and careful how you shoot to collect the most bounty and upgrade your weapon from a six-shooter to a shotgun. The Last Bounty Hunter automatically adjusts gameplay to keep it challenging the better you are, the harder it gets. Try your skill against fast draw world record-bolder Wes Flowers in American Laser Games' largest live-action production to date. The PC GAMEGUN will let you experience the arcade sensation on your personal computer. IBM OR COMPATIBLE PC GAMEGUN the PG PC GAMEGUN MERICAN MERICAN  compatible with all American Laser Games live action shooters. LASER GAMES, INC 4801 LINCOLN ROAD NE / ALBUQUERQUE, NM 87109 505-837-5447 Circle Reader Service #60 "


"READ.ME C:\\Game\\Gurus\\Grow More Than 2,200 Attend Eighth Annual Computer Game Developers Conference AFLA What Did Gibson Say? Play TERMINAL VELOCITY And Visit CGWeb In 1987, 27 game designers ary Chris Crawford chose a work, a strong point convened in Chris Crawford's few moments at the end of his in the Crawford living room to discuss their lecture on Interactive Fiction style. art. The meeting lasted one to announce his removal from Although Crawday, but left the attendees the board which oversees the ford's farewell foclamoring for more. This year, conference and to offer his cused on the past, nearly 100 times that number formal good-bye to assembled his lecture clearly of designers, artists, musicians, admirers. Crawford received a focused on the fuand programmers from as far well-deserved standing ovation ture, positing the away as Moscow and Melfor his past efforts and is exneed for algorithbourne attended the conferpected to continue his work of mically driven stoence. challenging developers in rylines and artificial Ironically, founding visionsome type of small group personality for satisfying interactive fiction. As he has done for several years, STAND AND DELIVER Origin Executive Producer Crawford clearly Warren Spector appeals to designers and programmers demonstrated the to join his company by saying, \"We've got the money to take chances.\" futility of branching structures for building games and the bogus, un(Electronic Arts), X-COM: satisfying nature of story loops UFO DEFENSE (MicroProse), which fold back into the WING COMMANDER III (Oribranching structure. Such gin/Electronic Arts), MAGIC work must continue i story CARPET (Electronic Arts), REThe \"Father of games are ever to reach their LENTLESS: TWINSEN'S ADVENCyberpunk\" William full potential. TURE (Electronic Arts), TIE Gibson conducted an Another major moment in FIGHTER (LucasArts), FIFA on-line interview rethe conference was the annual SOCCER 3DO (Electronic cently to promote the banquet where the developers Arts), MASTER OF MAGIC (Migame based on Johnny recognize the quality games of croProse), UNDER A KILLING Mnemonic. For a tranthe year. Unlike guilds and MOON (Access), and DESCENT script of the interview, professional societies which (Interplay). which was moderated usually present awards for outBy far the most significant by CGW's own Johnny standing achievement, the event at the conference, howWilson, crack the ice of CGDC has always steered clear ever, was Microsoft's unveiling Computer Gaming World's three months since CGW of the \"C\" wordcompetition of the Windows 95 Software Forum on ZiffNet, Library carved out a Web site on the Ironically, the creative talent Developers Kit for games (pre16, Special Event Files. The net, so we decided it was time behind an industry which is viewed in CGW #130, p. 26). download code is for a major facelift. Featuring built upon competition prefers As Origin's Richard Garriott GIBSON.TXT. CGW reviews, original editor not to have a competitive (Lord British) commented, While you're jacked in, ial content, downloadable awards program. Instead, the \"Windows 95 is a fact of life.» swing by Library 5, Arcade patches, game cheats, saved registered attendees nominate The SDK unveiled at the deAction to download Apogee's games and more, CGWeb is games to be recognized as velopers conference will insure new action game TERMINAL becoming the focal point for primus inter pares (i.e. first that the promise of Windows VELOCITY, code-named gamers with Internet access. among equals). This year, pre'95 (described in CGW #131, 3DTV.ZIP. Surf http://www.ziff.com/ and sented in random order on a p. 58) will become available Well, it's already been you'll see what we mean. special videotape, the honfor gamers before this time orees were: ROAD RASH 3DO next year. EMRE 26 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JULY 1995 "


") )  ) WITH AN AR WARRIOR. FOR REALE LT. COLONEL ROBERT \"MOUSE\" SHAW VETERAN T-IG FALCON PILOT AND GENIE USER HE'S JUST ONE OF HUNDREDS WHO ARE WAITING TO TAKE YOU ON -ON GENIE MULTIPLAYER GAMES. If you're a box sim pilot, it's time to fight for game every time. Not into sims? Genie feareal. Time for multiplayer Air Warrior on tures 21 other multiplayer games, including GEnie. With up to 100 aces online at a role playing games and casino games. To time---some of them real fighter jockssign up online, turn on your modem and you'll have the dogfight of your life. And dial 1-800-638-8369. Enter JOINGENIE at because all Genie multiplayer games feathe prompt. When asked for the offer code, ture real opponents, you'll play a different enter ANN198. FOR UP TO 17 FREE GAME HOURS* CALL 1-800-638-9636 TDD 1-800-238-9172 (FOR TIIE HEARING IMPAIRED) Some restrictions apply. Must be over 18 years of age to subscribe For games to be free of charge for up to 17 hours, user must observe the following: play in non-prime time (between 6PM and BAM EST), access speed must be set at a maximum of 2400 bauduser must dial into a local access node remain solely in gaming area. Otherwise, normal Genie usage fees may be incurred during the 17 hour complimentary period. This offer is in lieu of all other offers, and is for new subscribers only. Additional long distance phone charges may apply. Available in US and Canada only Offer expires 12/31/95. CyberStrike and GemStone III are trademarks of Simutronics Corporation. Air Warrior is a registered trademark of Kesmai Corporation. Harpoon is a trademark of Game Designers Workshop, Inc. All other names are trademarks or service marks of their respective owners AIR WARRIOR HARPOON GEMSTONE IT FEDERATION IN CYBERSTRIKE NI GEnie OUR GAMES BLOW EVERYBODY ELSE'S AWAY! Circle Reader Service #30 "


"READ.ME Captain Kirk Gets Tekkie An Interview With William Shatner TIES William Shatner, best known will bring to the game in some himself. I've only been as the captain of the starship fashion on television. There's able to play one game so Enterprise in the original Star also potential from other comfar, but in my imagination Trek television show, has disponents of my life for more I've played the games that covered computer gaming, games; I can't say what it is I've seen in the arcades and has taken the game denow until it becomes reality, and those that I've read sign plunge. Although Shatbut the possibility exists for about. What I saw in that ner did voice-over work for something really large. I'm one game, Myst, was Interplay's Star Trek: 25th Animmersing myself in ideas. I enough to make me realniversary, it wasn't until Capjust put down Computer Gamize that I could visualize a sentences out of it. stone/Intracorp pitched a ing World, and as I thumb game concept. But I also realCGW: What unique pergame based upon his TekWar through it and see what other ized that I couldn't be so cal spective and twists do you anbooks and television series people are doing-the games low as to think I could make ticipate incorporating into this that he trully caught the bug about war, the games about the game by myself, with all game? We caught Shatner between naval technology, the games these experts lolling about WS: Well, the computer shoots on the set of his latest about fantasy-I get intrigued looking for work. So my conhacker is an integral part of project to ask him a few questribution to TEKWAR TekWar, so it's my expectation tions about his involvement on is that of idea man, that we'll be sliding down the the TEKWar game and his editor, and as the tubes of the information hightake on the future of computperson with the viway solving some sort of prober entertainment. sion they are strivlem. At the same time, we'll be Computer Gaming World: ing to bring to the trying to enter an environJust how involved are you in screen. And accordment that is riddled with Tek TEKWAR? ing to them, [my Lords, from which we'll also William Shatner: I'm really role) is an imporhave to escape. Arcade and involved. I think that this is tant one. This puzzle elements should be inthe entertainment of the fuseems to make the terwoven throughout. ture. Computer games, up ungame somewhat difCGW: What do you see as til now, have heralded the BEAM ME IN TEKWar, designed by Capstone in ferent from everythe future of entertainment? entertainment that's going to conjunction with William Shatner, is a hybrid thing else. WS: The future of enterbe. So I've gotten my feet wet action/adventure that will feature 16-player network CGW: So how are tainment is in the direction with TEKWAR, but I have ideas play as well as head-to-head modem play. you approaching that we're all headed; I see the for other games as well, which this particular proscience fiction element of what I'm currently speaking to Inas hell about the possibilities ject and this particular mediwe're attempting to do here. traCorp about. And TERWAR of game development. um? Computer generation is the has the potential to be a great CGW: Have you had a W S: I'm approaching it like spectacle of the future; we can game. It follows the outlines of chance to play any other coma movie. I suggested the thrust no longer afford to have the television series and its puter games? of the game and the mix of ar10,000 extras pulling a concepts, like the matrix and WS: Strangely enough, I cade action and puzzles using Sphinx like in Cecil B. Dethe information highway. This haven't. I'm really a computer the type of planning, storymille's Ten Commandments. game should be able to take novice. It's really bad. I only boards, and other devices I'm These huge productions will the visualizations we've done recently found out where the familiar with. I saw the game] be artificially generated. The on the show so far and extend \"on\" switch was on my new engine for example-they future of entertainment bethem. Plus I think that there is system; to my astonishment itsent me a tape of it—but first I longs to the computer much that can be learned was in the back of the computhad to learn what an engine painters and those artists who from the game itself and aper, not in the front. They're was and what it could do. So can use the computer for draplied to future episodes of trying to make these things idI'm beginning to learn the almatic advantage. TEKWAR. I'll probably use the iot proof, but they made it so phabet of the game while tryInterview conducted by creative elements IntraCorp that this idiot couldn't proveing to create Hollywood Shane Mooney 28 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JULY 1995 "


"Historical Strategy Game COMING BATTLEGROUND: SUMMER VER THE ATTLE OF THE BULGE VOL I Actual screens may vary TANPA BRUKORG 22 USIC CHAKALAURO Bagong na 22 Interface provides detailed information on all units Experience unparalled historical realism! Battleground ArdennesTM is like no other historical strategy game you've ever played! With the BattleviewTM combat system, you can relive crucial moments during the Battle of the Bulge, the most famous American land battle of WWII. Can you hold off the advancing German war machine? Dig in with the U.S. 101st Airborne defending freedom from the Nazis at Bastogne, or ride to victory with the legendary German King Tiger tank. Take command of Peiper's infamous SS or lead a blistering U.S. counterattack to retake Stoumont. Simple Point and click Windows interface Drag & Drop movement and combat Realistic stereo combat sounds A plethora of scenarios Modem to Modem play Vivid SVGA color graphics \"Battle View\" showing American defense of Stoumont against determined assualt by Peiper's troops PO BOX 632 Forest Hill MD If it's not FUN O who cares! F ROM CROM PO BOX 632 Forest Hill MD 21050-0632  Copyright 1995 TalonSoft Inc. Circle Reader Service #289 Voice: 410-821-7282. Compuserve: GO GAMEPUB CCIS: 75162,373 . INTERNET: 75162,373@compuserve.com . GENIE: XRG98298 VALON "


"READ.ME NOV THE PERFECT GENERAL II THE PERFECT GENERAL is a most beloved WWII wargame, and justifiably so, despite its lame artificial opponent. One of the best of the early modem-play strategy games finally gets a much-needed upgrade in PERFECT SVGA graphics are an imcommense improvement over muters, Slipthose in QQP's recent THE STREAM 5000 casts you PURE WARGAME. If bang for the in the role of ace buck is what you're after, PG combat racer on II has 98 scenarios, including a 10 race world such esoterica as Persian Stalincircuit. But grad and Octa-Spider, along that's not really with more reasonable important. what-if battles such as What is imOperation Olympic. The portant is new battle toys include pulse-poundfighters, armored cars ing action and machine guns, that can but these don't really even create work that much difsweat on the ferently than the old hands of CGW's battleunits, so PG vets hardened action gamers. Percan fire up the mohaps learning a lesson from Burn out is a serious occupational hazdem and jump New World's ZEPHYR, this ard in the fast lane of Slipstream 5000. right into the acgame seamlessly integrates tion. IBM, $64.95. Cirimpressive visuals, fast-paced like an action game winner, cle Reader Service #3. (but not unplayable) racing acand not even the cheesy voice QOP, INC., FLEMINGTON, NJ tion and simple, ruthless comacting and campy pre-race an08822. (908) 788-2799 bat. Sure it's fun to hammer tics can bring this one down. away at the opponent in front IBM PC CD-ROM, $59.95. SLIPSTREAM 5000 of you (and with full network Circle Reader Service #4. Blast 'em and pass 'emplay it's even more fun), but GREMLIN INTERACTIVE, CHICAthat's the key to SLIPSTREAM what really counts is what GO, ILLINOIS, (312) 244-0040. 5000. Set in the distant future place you finish, not how and undoubtedly inspired by many opponents you blow ZIG-ZAG the frustration of travel-wearyaway. SLIPSTREAM 5000 looks QQP seems to have a knack THE PERFECT GENERAL II adds SVGA battlefields, machine guns, Elefant tanks and more pyrotechnic explosions to its strategy game engine. GENERAL II. The AI, while hardly up to say, PANZER GENERAL standards, is improved over the original, and the FULL THROTTLE He's tough as a roadkill fillet, got more guts than a slaughterhouse flume, and a chin you could dig a ditch with. He's Ben (and he ain't gentle), the hawgmounted anti-hero of the post-apocalyptic Interstate and the lead in LucasArts latest adventure game masterwork, FULL THROTTLE. Ben's been forcefed a bum rap, accused of murdering the one man in the world he respects. And he ain't going down for it, not without a touched by few games. While fight. Gamers the game is a bit short by take control of most gaming yardsticks, it's as Ben as he dense as re-bar concrete. And rides, punches, while strict adherents to the kicks and solves No Reflex school of advenpuzzles in an alture gaming might be unsetmost classicaltled to find a number of adventure game action sequences, they should mode. Almost, set their jaw, grit their teeth, because you've find a spine, and deal with it, never played such cause the ride is worth it. a well-produced IBM CD-ROM, $69.95. adventure as this. Everything Circle Reader Service #1. in it-artwork, puzzles, music, LucasArts Entertainment, San and voice-acting-is on a level Rafael, CA. (800) STARWARS ple Players take the role of the hard-riding, hard-drinking Ben in LucasArts' new action-adventure, FULL THROTTLE. 30 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1995 "


"THESE JUST IN, REVIEWS TO FOLLOW PLAYING Principality of Poland of putting new spins on classic games. At its best, Zig-Zag is a game comparable to any puzzle this side of the New York Endue BED Formy Trade De 27000 MI 1105 RISE OF THE WEST empires, diplomatic coups, asBack in wargaming days sassinations and a myriad of gone by, when gamers had to random events make for good Word by suller through thick rulebooks solitaire or multi-player e-mail guessing smaller and cheap cardboard compoplay—at least for those who words (from two to six letters nents, there was a don't need the latest in SVGA each). The twist is that the game called Emgraphics. computer offers instant feedpires of the Middle back, scoring 1000 points for a Ages. James F. correct letter in the correct Dunnigan's 14 place within the mystery unique medieval word\" (a \"zig») and romp now comes 250 points for a to WINDOWS correct letter alone courtesy of (a \"zag\"). The RAW Enterhigher levels are tainment, reincreasingly diffitaining its cult, with enough charm and obscure terms to with its rules please even the loopholes neatly tied up. You most portray a royal family from sesquipedalian one of the great European dy You can be as Byzantine or barbaric as of vocabularies. Finally, pasties of 600-1500 AD, playyou like in RISE OF THE WEST; just make SOLITAIRE'S JOURNEY-like ing \"cards\" to advance the sure that your royal family doesn't end up heirless. \"quests\" offer the professional social state of your empire, puzzle-buster near-endless raise armies, and conquer WINDOWS, $34.95 plus shiptours of word mazes. Mac, your enemies. The formulae ping & handling. Circle ReadWindows (same CD) $49.95. used to resolve your actions er Service #6. Circle Reader Service #5. are handled by the computer, RAW ENTERTAINMENT, HOUSQOP, INC., FLEMINGTON, NJ making for much quicker play TON, TX 77058, (713) 28608822, (908) 788-2799 than in the boardgame. Minor 2386 500 1250 1000 1000 500 500 250 AB Round 2161000 93 DE DOELDE-PLEEE MOD D BB 2 333 DIFFICULTY LEVEL=2 EASY 000 5000 VOOW Show Alpha Erlend Why wait for tomorrow's crossword in the local paper when you can click on ZIGZAG at your leisure? Times crossword. In this anacrostic style word game the object is to deduce The Secret JOHNNY MNEMONIC necessary to download the against bad guys like Kurt most interactive and exciting We've never seen a game data or it's cranial meltdown Rambis, are the parts of the game. We bethat looks as much like a good time. Enhancing the appearcame immersed in the hip, movie as JOHNNY MNEMONIC. ance of an \"intersubversive near-future setUnfortunately, when meaactive movie\" is ting that captures the sured as a game, it doesn't the game's miniessence of Gibson's charhold up as well. Based on mal interface. As acters and the ambience William Gibson's short story the storyline and of his world, but we were of the same name, Sony Imvideo footage) undisappointed by the agesoft's JOHNNY MNEMONIC folds, there are oppresence of a maze in places you in the role of a cyportunities cyberspace which serves berpunk data courier with 320 (indicated by the little purpose than to gigabytes of smuggled data screen's shift to letextend gameplay. IBM overloading an implant in his terbox format) to inCD-ROM, $69.95. Circle head. You've got 12 hours to teract via a few JOHNNY MNEMONIC faces a bubbling brain Reader Service #2. build a \"data rig,\" jack into cysimple key strokes. if he can't overcome several cyber Sony Imagesoft, Santa Moniberspace and find the codes The fighting sequences, punks and dump his data. ca, CA. (800) 922-SONY JULY 1995. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 31 "


"COVER FEATURE Clan Destiny Activision's MECHWARRIOR 2 Is A 31st Century Slagfest by Johnny L. Wilson WA ' SH A BLAS Mifs, When Dynamix was deBRED FOR WAR history of the BattleTech universe). If you don't like veloping the first MECHMECHWARRIOR 2 has not strayed from this basic apthose mechs, the game provides a mech laboratory WARRIOR computer game peal, this emphasis on the heroic individual. Indeed, where you can reconfigure some of your mechs by alfor Activision, I didn't by placing the gamer in the role of a clan member, the locating armor, swapping out engines, weapons, and know much about the game universe expects brilliant success from the ammo, and adding/subtracting heat sinks. BattleTech universe. I gamer because he or she (to the clans, gender makes As in the game's fiction, you will have to face trials knew that there was a no difference) is Bred For War (the title of Stackpole's by combat. Such one-on-one battles, combined with boardgame. I knew that latest book and an apt description of the clan ethic). training missions, will swell the number of missions there were miniatures The clans firmly believe that being a warrior is the in the game to approximately 40. to use with the game. I highest calling. So, all advancement within the clans knew that there were novels that took place in the Batand the clan's system of justice depend upon individSUNRISE, SOME MECH tletech universe. And, I knew that Virtual Worlds Enual rites of combat known as trials. You move from Naturally, in the five years since Activision retertainment was about to open the first BattleTech light mechs to medium Center, a cockpit-oriented multi-player gaming experito heavy to \"star\" comPS ence. I knew that the fans I had watched at gaming mander (small unit comMPEASY MPLAS conventions were passionate about the universe, but I mand), if all goes well. MPLAS Sa k didn't know that I would personally get hooked. So, where the original Long before I finished the sneak preview on that MECHWARRIOR allowed you first MECHWARRIOR (CGW #66, p. 22), I was hooked. I to assume the role of a couldn't understand it. I had never been much of a mercenary during the fan of real-time, first-person gaming experiences battles for the stabilizaand, at first glance, this game seemed like a computtion of the Inner Sphere erization of the Rock-'Em Sock-'Em Robots of my (The Fourth Succession younger brothers' generation. Then, I read Michael A. War-AD 3028-3030 — Ingr!! Stackpole's WARRIOR: EN GARDE series. Suddenly, I unHouse Steiner and House 28 liph derstood. These weren't giant robots. These were giDavion versus the CapelJADED IMAGE A Jade Falcon pilot readies a medium plasma burst against ant robotic extensions of the warrior mystique. The lan Confederation). a close-range Wolf Clan's rocket launcher. mech pilots were analogs for knights in shining arMECHWARRIOR 2 moves the mor; their 'mechs were suits of armor that had story along and allows you to advance within either leased the original MECHWARRIOR, more than the ficevolved into machines of destruction. Even the feudal the Jade Falcons or the Wolf Clan (Post-Tukayyid tional history behind the game has changed. The politics which undergirded the universe gave chivalric Line—AD 3052—Internecine Clan Warfare). The Falmechs are not only 3-D, like the polygon-filled mechs overtones to the entire concept. cons want to continue their Pre-Tukayyid Line invasion of MECHWARRIOR, but the machines in MECHWARRIOR 2 The 'mech pilots were a nobility, saddled with the in order to conquer the Inner Sphere, while the Wolf are texture-mapped with enough detail to let you see noblesse oblige of defending their House (a monarchy Clan wishes to align themselves with the monarchies clan insignia on the cockpit, missile tips peering out within a balkanized group of monarchies). They fought of the Inner Sphere. of opposing rocket launchers like hungry eels, and desmall tactical battles, battles where the heroic acts of In order to move up through the clan, you can fight grees of charring on the opposing mechs as you pulsingle individuals could turn the tide. Simply put, much with approximately 15 different clan mechs, as well verize them toward polygon purgatory. of the appeal of MECHWARRIOR is that you play the role of as some possible Inner Sphere (traditional) mechs The 3-D mechs also enable you to fight from differan elite warrior who can turn the tide with bold, sucand Elementals (another group of alien warriors ent perspectives. MECHWARRIOR 2 features the stancessful actions. which, like the Clans, appeared at a later point in the dard first-person cockpit view, but offers a 3-D virtual 32 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1995 "


"PEÇ PRC MELAS AAPLAS MPLAS MPLAS MPLAS SRMS 90 canyons, mesas, volcanic craters, lunar craters, and sand dunes. There are also a number of smart objects within the terrain, such as pop-up turrets which start firing as you approach, that add to the variety of the game worlds. MW2's missions also vary from the traditional rescue, search and destroy, and patrol assignments of the earlier game to escort missions, insurgent pacification (zone securing) missions, and trials (one-on-one duels which take place in totally enclosed domed obstacle courses) that have an entirely different dynamic than those all-out combat scenarios of the past. This is especially so when you encounter mechs of other clans and neutral vehicles during the missions. Fortunately, even the mission objectives do not all look the same as did the bases and ammo dumps of its predecessor. NOU A 30311 AUTOPILOT 63 kph RAMBLIN MECH FROM LUNAR TECH A mechwarrior is viewed moving toward a navigational point in this top-down 2-D map view of a lunar-like planet. MECH MY DAY Of course, the real point of any game is its game play. MECHWARRIOR 2 appears to be strong in the game department. You earn your way upward through ranks and mech classifications and this provides something of a role-playing shell. Each mech has different strengths and weaknesses due to speed, weaponry and armor. So, you have to learn how to exploit the former for yourself and the latter against your enemies. This will require dodging cockpit complete with dynamic light. The lighting of slalom course), your DI berates you with epithets like your cockpit changes as you move, and there is even \"free birth\" (a tremendous insult to warriors cloned by a dynamic color palette to reflect the sun's changing an intergalactic eugenics program to insure superioriposition as the battles rage and time moves on. Not ty) and talks you through the exercise with a patronizonly does MECHWARRIOR 2 allow you to fight from the ing hostility. I don't recall any interactive tutorial quite traditional view, however, but it allows you to switch like it and it's very effective. Also, the computer voices to an oblique outside perspective and fight your mech (both male and female) are perfect for setting the \"remotely.\" This doesn't help your suspended disbestage and establishing a mood for each mission as lief, but it lets you catch some of the rich graphics they offer status reports on planetary conditions from a more cinematic perspective. In addition, MW2 and weapons status prior to actual combat. gives you small windows to represent a rear camera Finally, there is a greater variety of misview, a top-down camera view, and a weapons camsions and combat environments than were era view. available in the first MECHWARRIOR. There Also, since you will eventually be commanding oth are the requisite ice worlds (but now, er mech warriors, you will need something of a tactithey sometimes feature a convinccal perspective. The first MECHWARRIOR gave you a ing and effective fog) and crude overhead map with your team members and desert worlds, but the combat enemies marked by colored letters. In MECHWARRIOR 2, situations in MW2 also feayou can jump to a similar overhead map view on the ture dark urban environfly and have full zoom capability in order to keep tabsm ents with high-rise of the \"points\" in your \"star\" (your subordinates). buildings and dark The special effects are light years beyond the pristreets and alleys to mary red polygon blasts of the original, as well. Now, navigate, as well as there are blue blasts for PPC hits, fiery bursts of deworlds with ruins, struction when missiles tag the enemy, and fast pinpricks of light that lance out from your mech when you fire lasers. Add to the visual effects the sound design provided by Sound Deluxe media labs (the shop who did sound effects for the movies, True Lies and Cliffhanger and you gain significantly more satisfaction from the combat than in previous mech games. The use of digitized voice is particularly effective within the game context, as well. On training missions (whether learning to use the navigational system and weapons system or how to pilot through a "


"Sno through various terrain types, learning This Is My Cockpit, This Is My Gun Weapon Status Displays (red = currently unavailable) how to ambush your enemies when you're .(green= available) outnumbered, selecting the right weapon Heading Indicator PPC = Plasma Projectile Cannon Radar Display (for both torso and turret) for the job, and developing your skills in MPLAS = Medium Plasma Guns SRM6 90 = 90 Short Range Missiles small unit tactics. fired in rounds of 6 Most mechwarriors will play MW2 from K 1.0 the first-person cockpit view, using the X 1.9 lilililTITITIPPC PPC keyboard to pilot the mech itself and the MPLAS MPLAS mouse to direct the turret and aim the MPLAS MPLAS MPLAS reticle. However, the game also supports SRM6 90 Thrustmaster and CH Flightstick joysticks. Either way, it is much more effiForward cient than the pure keyboard layout of the (Green) first game. Either way, you will also be or able to do something with nearly every Altimeter Reverse key on the keyboard. There are lots of sys(Blue) tems and lots of options within the game. Velocity Perhaps one of the most important options is the ability to command the other points of your star. You were limited in Unknown your ability to command the non-player 314m 64 kph mechwarriors in the original game, but now you can tell them to: 1) attack your Targeting Reticle Delta Heat Change Speed Indicator target; 2) disengage your target; 3) join (the current rate of change) up in formation; 4) patrol around your Targeting Identifier target; or 5) flee the area in full-scale retreat. This makes the group missions Heat Scale (amount of heat built-up) Damage Display much more enjoyable. After playing an early version of the game, I found two aspects of the original game missweapon arms of the enemy. Also, I liked the fact that bidding prior to combat. For those unfamiliar with the ing, features which I considered worthwhile and there was an explicit cost to using ordnance in the BattleTech novels, one measure of both bravado and which may disappoint fans of Multi-PLAYER BATTLETECH earlier games. If you expended an entire rack of miscourage is to bid away air support or part of your on Genie. In the earlier game and in the on-line siles, you had to replace them with your funds. This troops to show that you don't need all of your regame, it was possible to aim for a leg of an opposing doesn't happen in MW2, but the designers say that sources in order to win. Some type of bidding seTECH Destroyed successer your honor/prestige will quence would have added a lot to the game's suffer if you get a repuatmosphere. Also, at press time, it is as yet unclear tation for using too whether you will be able to win your blood name withmuch ammo. If so, it in the game's context or not. needs to be made clear Finally, we can't help but be disappointed that the to the player and I don't net version of MW2 will not ship with the original see that yet. product. The net version will ship later as a package My early experience for up to eight players (assuming each has their own with MW2 also concopy of the MW2), but the shipping version will only vinced me that the enehave a demo of the net version. Two years ago, the mies are going to be plan was for the both versions to be in the same tougher in this game. package. Now, gamers may merely be thankful that They are fast. They know MW2 is going to ship at all after encountering so lichiato how to take evasive acmany technical difficulties in the past. MECH WOLF BURGER A Falcon pilot toasts his Wolf Clan opponent with a tion. They don't get 31st century Molotov cocktail of short range missiles and PPC fire. stuck up against walls WOLF AT THE DOOR mech and concentrate fire upon that leg. Once you or terrain like they did in the first game. They have exYet, the big question many would-be mechwarriors caused that leg to crumble, you had virtually neutralcellent aim and, usually, superior numbers. You'll are asking is, \"Was it worth the wait?\" For those in ized that enemy and could move along. I haven't been need to be able to use all your tactical resources to be doubt, I have to say, \"Yes!\" In fact, it is so worth the able to duplicate that in the new game, but have got successful in moving up the clan chain of command. wait that I wish Activision would use this technology ten extra satisfaction at being able to concentrate on About the only thing MW2 is missing for the sibkoto rework the first game, even if it took them another the business end of the mech and blow away the born (you know who you are) is the clan tradition of two years. 34 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1995 "


"IV NETWORKS THE WORLD's Most POWERFUL JOB IS OPEN. YOUR APPLICATION AWAITS. or decades, the A-IV Group has enjoyed unparalleled growth. But now, their C.E.O. has disappeared.. and you are among the candidates to succeed him. 3 To assess your executive potential, the A-IV Group has. devised a hyper-realistic economic simulation. You will be challenged to buy and sell assets; build and manage transportation infrastructures; allocate resources among more than 100 subsidiaries; and above all, maximize the profitability of your simulation. Via your modem or phone you can compete with other executive candidates to take over as C.E:0. So, manage your empire wisely — A1 A-IV, success equals succession. ARTOINK In Association With Your application is now available on PC CD-ROM. C.E.O. is Windows compliant and Sound BlasterTM compatible. For information or to place an order, call 800-443-3386. 1.MOTION Circle Reader Service #75 "


"Special Feature: Space Combat Sims PERUTNINE umanity is beset from all sides. Killer Cats, Sith Lords, feuding Aliens, and Neo-Romans, plus a few creatures who are just plain hungry. Hot-to-trot fighter pilots are needed like never before. We've got Commanders BattleCruisers, Crusaders, Renegades, Privateers, Infernos, Assaults, Retributions and many more. Whether you're an old rocket-jock from wayback or \"fresh out of the Nintendo academy, we've got a star-war for you! Not interested in glory, you say? Just wanna make a fast buck? Well we've got that kind of universe too, Sign your lease, forge the paperwork and you'll be out wheelin' and dealin' amongst the stars faster than you can say \"Millennium Falcon\"! Whatever your taste, space goes on forever, and if you're thinking of trading up from afterburners to hyperdrives, you'll probably find something that interests you somewhere along the way. So just stay together, check your six and remember, in space nobody can hear you restart the mission. by Martin E. Cirulis 36 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1995 "


"hile the real world seems to be turning its back on the stars and concentrating instead on profit mar gins and nationalism, our world of entertainment software is thankfully embracing deep space for all it's worth these days. The Science Fiction realm of spaceships and starfighters has always been popular fodder for games, but only recently has the game industry started to churn out in-the-cockpit space combat games en masse, with the intention of challenging the reign of The Big Two: Origin's WING COMMANDER series and the Star Wars series (X-WING and TIE FIGHTER) from LucasArts. And rest assured, these two space-simulation giants, not content to rest on their laurels, continue to push the boundaries of Man and Machine. But new contenders are arriving almost every month, each looking to carve out a niche of their own. One of the nice things about the resurgence of this genre is the variety of gaming experiences available to the player, especially those new to the scene. If you've ever been intrigued by the glitz and glory of flying and fighting in the depths of space, now is the perfect time to cruise the stars. And while sophisticated games like TIE FIGHTER or WING COMMANDER 3 may intimidate the novice crowd, there are new products out there that provide varying levels of detail and immersion. Starstruck gamers of any experience level can find a product to suit them. Probably the most popular (and possibly the most face and cannot roll over or loop-you can at least bundled CD-ROM in existence) intro-level sim these practice some of the basics, like trying to avoid the days is REBEL ASSAULT, from the Jedi Knights at Luground while making things go boom. casArts. With an eye towards the novice gamer, REBEL For those who are ready to slip into full three-diASSAULT takes the player through training missions, the mensional space-flight, but still want an arcade-like battles for Hoth, and finally into the Death Star itself experience, there is INFERNO by Ocean. Overshadowed in a series of arcade-style flying sequences. While the by its own hype and crippled by uninspired design, portions of the game that take the top-down, slidethis game might serve adequately as a trainer, espeand-shoot view of things aren't very helpful, there is cially if you can find it in the bargain-bin, as it constill plenty of cockpit for those looking to make a catains what has become standard in the space-sim reer out of this sort of thing. Though you never really world: full 3-D situational awareness, linked mishave true 3-D freedom (you're more or less flying in a sions, and eye-candy in-between. constrained path), novices will be able to get the hang Finally, there is a little product, all but gone from of cockpit perspective and the whole aiming on the fly the shelves but well worth searching for, called WING concept that is so valuable in the more serious sims. COMMANDER: ACADEMY. Of all these Novice-Class games, A step up from REBEL ASSAULT, at least as far as acACADEMY is the only one truly intended to be a primer. Using Wing COMMANDER Il-era technology and a scenario generator, this game gives you all the bells and whistles of a full-powered sim in an environment where things can be tailor-made as easy DAMAGE PILOTSW SCORE 000 160 or hard as you WOMP RAT ALLEY Although the gameplay is pretty limited in LucasArts' REBEL ASSAULT, want. While its prithe production values are (or were) high. See the box on page 38 for info on the sequel.md on page 38 for info on the sequel.mary purpose is to draw you in and tual control of the ship is concerned, are a couple of train you up to speed in the Origin Systems side of games that make fine trainers not because they were The Big Two universe, it will also teach you all the SF specifically designed for that purpose, but because combat skills you could want except ground attack. If they missed their intended mark as serious space you want an introduction to the genre, this is about sims so badly. Sim pilots of even moderate experience the best place to start. Perhaps Origin will re-issue it, should avoid these titles, but newbies, especially bundled on some future space-sim CD-ROM. youngsters, might want to give them a whirl. A good Of course, once you've played one of these games, place to continue our training is in the universe of or any standard flight-sim for that matter, you'll probRETRIBUTION, a title imported from Europe by Gremlin ably want to see something a little more \"realistic,\" or Interactive. Here, players take on the role of a brave at least a little deadlier. pilot who must, with the help of a single human-controlled space-station, defend and alert SUND humanity against the predations of a traitorous alien race intent upon serving man for dinner. The player proceeds to execute a series of missions against the insidious Krell in two different vehicles: a starfighter and a ground-based All-Terrain-Vehicle. After each combat run, you return to base for debriefing and further plot developments. Then you're sent out again. Though you aren't quite flying-fightPAY BACK TIME Players battle man-eating aliens by land and by air ers can only fly so high above the surin Gremlin Interactive's RETRIBUTION. \"YOUR PRIMER, MR. SKYWALKER\" As with most discussions, it's best to start with the basics. If you have no combat experience at all then it might be a good idea to start off with a game that offers some of the feel of space combat without an encumbrance of details. Games at this level closely resemble straight arcade games in both their ease of play and graphic punch, but even here the major difference between space and flight sims becomes apparent-most of these games have some sort of plot line. While historical flight sims can depend on common knowledge as a backdrop to set their missions against (I hope the educational system is still pointing out little things like WW II), space combat sims usually create some sort of storyline in order to keep the player coming back for more after each mission. At this level of simulation detail, the storylines involved are more or less eye-candy, but they also serve as a clue that bigger and better things await those who graduate from elementary space school. SHHI SACT. 900 FREMTID JULY 1995. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 37 "


"SPECIAL FEATURE: SPACE COMBAT SIMS HIGH SCHOOL CONFIDENTIAL puting-power requirements are a little more down-tostrategy to the endless action, Origin tried to broaden These mid-level games for the most part are all earth, so gamers away from the upgrade curve can the scope of their Universe by offering up the graphistrong, quality simulators and pretty much equal the still get a good game for their buck. cally-stunning WING COMMANDER: ARMADA. Unfortunately, initial accomplishments of The Big Two. While some Take 2's STAR CRUSADER is a nice piece of work from they sacrificed brains for looks. While the idea was times lagging a little in terms of gameplay, graphics a company with little sim experience. The graphics more than worth the effort—they tried to create a or story, most have something to offer to even the exare well done, using all the tricks of the trade to make simple SPACEWARD Ho! kind of spaceploitation game perienced sim-pilot. They certainly demonstrate what VGA all that it can be, although sometimes their conwherein combats are resolved by the player in the this genre is really capable of. The other advantage to cept of color and shape is a bit alien. The plot is solid cockpit instead of the computer-the execution left two of the three games at this level is that their comand more involved than your average sim, allowing something to be desired. players to explore questions of the speed and beauty of the combat graphics in ethics and loyalty as well as who ARMADA were a real breakthrough. Players could actuhas the best fighters. Another nice touch in CRUSADER is that 14TH. there are a half-dozen odd alien races in contention, providing a nice change from the \"Good-Race, Bad-Race\" political standard of the genre. Players not yet caught up in the world of SVGA flight sims will probably find this game WING COMMANDER TOO Take 2 Software enhanced the concepts of an enjoyable challenge. ADMIRAL OF THE FLEET WING COMMANDER: Armada brought branching stories and wingman management in STAR CRUSADER. In an attempt to add a little strategic considerations to the space combat table. TE CAEED Joia Return Of The Rebel LucasArts Dusts Off Darth's Helmet For REBEL ASSAULT II ew games have been as eagerly anticipated and as terribly disappointing as LucasArts' REBEL ASSAULT. Maybe it's not fair to expect that anything on a computer could compare with that glorious experience of seeing Star Wars in the theater. But, dammit, why is the flight path restricted, and why can't you save the game when you want? Despite these problems, the lure of the Star Wars Force simply proved too great, and REBEL ASSAULT sold over a million copies worldwide, making it one of the highest selling (and most \"bundled\") computer games of all time. The lure of The Force also pulls at its creators, albeit for different reasons. So when the creators conspire to develop a sequel, their efforts are a lot like the Empire's--they get bigger and badder with each onslaught. Which is why it's possible that LucasArts' upcoming REBEL Assault II may once again surprise gamers, this time by exceeding expectations. REBEL ASSAULT || (tentative title) will be a graphidreamed of nearly 20 years ago. Other levels let players fly speeder bikes or take the controls of the Millenium Falcon for that long-awaited date with destiny when your senses and those of Han Solo finally converge. There will be a total of 15 different levels in the game, all cinematically designed, richly detailed, and actually ALL CHOKED UP Darth Vader puts the telekinetic squeeze on an Imperial SAVABLE after each one. Unlackey in this scene from REBEL ASSAULT II. This is the first original Star Wars fortunately, the flight paths footage George Lucas has allowed to be shot outside of a Star Wars film. and range of motion will still cal leap over the original. It will feature full-mobe limited, but from what we've seen of the game, tion video segments of real-looking Star Wars it should be engrossing and impressive nonethecharacters blended seamlessly into high-resolu less. And if that isn't enough to lure you to the tion 3D rendered sets. That means that there will dark side, maybe this guy will: Darth Vader, in all be scenes in the game that look something like his dark-helmeted glory, cuts a menacing swath the movie: you'll see a Rebel pilot at the controls through the game. He'll even choke an admiral of his fighter bouncing in the cockpit just before with the famous pincer grip if you succeed in disthe perspective changes so that you are flying the abling his Star Destroyer. It's enough to make ship. Or you'll shoot at real Storm Troopers with even a skeptic of the Alliance think about signing blaster weapons like every kid in America up this winter for a tour of duty. 38 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JULY 1995 "


"THE NASCAR RACING SEASON HAS JUST BEEN EXTENDED. INTRODUCING THE NASCAR TRACK PACK. SEVEN NEW TRACKS TO ADD TO YOUR ORIGINAL NASCAR RACING FOR MORE FUN AND EXCITEMENT! NASCAR SENAT ILI NASCAR AUDI L for Chile inals Dove Doces f f  e ast great North to Speak Birth Pole  estadenal Crisi WE'VE HYPED NASCAR RACING JUST ABOUT AS MUCH AS WE COULD. NOW WE'LL SIT BACK AND LET THE EXPERTS HAVE THEIR SAY. TRACK PACK OU PONY PAPY PAPYRUS NASCAR Track Pack requires NASCAR Racing 1834 PC Gamer's Best PC GAMER Sports Program of the Year Computer Game Review's Golden Triad Award and Best Sports Program of 1994 CES Innovations Award for Outstanding Simulation Interactive Gaming's 1994 Game of the Year Award for Best Sports Program Interactive Gaming's Editor's Choice Award In Recognition of Outstanding Achievement in Game Design and Execution of Production COMPUTER Computer Gaming World's Best P RIMER Simulation of 1995 SPA's Codie Award for Best Sports Program 1995 CHECK OUT THIS NEW EXPANSION KIT AND WITH THESE RACING VENUES. Charlotte Motor Speedway Dover Downs International Speedway Pocono Raceway North Carolina Motor Speedway CALL North Wilkesboro Speedway Sears Point Raceway Richmond International Raceway NASCAR TRACK PACK OFFERS SEVEN NEW CHALLENGES TO ROUND OUT YOUR FULL RACING SEASON. Available on PC CD ROM at your local retailer. Or call 1-800-836-1829 to order direct Y CALL ABOUT OUR FREE FLOPPY FOR CD EXCHANGE PROGRAM NASCAR Racing, officially licensed by NASCAR, is the most realistic driving simulation available for your PC. PAPYRUS\" Distributed by Virgin Interactive Entertainment, Inc. Papyrus BBS# (617-576-7472), CompuServe (GO PAPYRUS), Internet Dealer inquiries please call: (ftp std.com, ftp papy.com, www.papycom), AOL (keyword PAPYRUS) (714) 833-8710 NASCAR is a registered trademark of the National Association for Stock Car Auto Racing, Inc. NASCAR Racing is officially licensed by NASCAR. Papyrus is a registered trademark of Papyrus Design Croup. Inc. Virgin is a trademark of Virgin Enterprises, LTO DuPont Automotive Finishes trademarks used under license from Motorsport Traditions. DuPont, Jeff Gordon and Hendrick Motorsports Sterling Marlin name and likeness and KODAK, GOLD and Trade Dress are trademarks licensed to Papyrus Design Group, Inc. by Eastman Kodak Company Maxwell House is a registered trademark under license from Advantage Management Circle Reader Service #153 "


"SPECIAL FEATURE: SPACE COMBAT SIMS The Interviews with The Stars Conversations with a  Kle An interview with Wing COMMANDER designer, Chris Roberts ally see the shields light up on enemy fighters as their is a pleasure to look at as well as to fly in, but it's a shots hit home. In some ways they are still superior to little too Spartan at this point to seriously challenge the VGA mode of any sim around, Wing COMMANDER 3 The Big Two. Oh, the elements are all here: extensive included. Added to this were the wonders of networkbackground, great graphics, smooth flight models ing, which made for the first multi-player space-sim and an accent on squadron tactics. But everything to grace our screens. But while everything looked lacks that extra bit of detail required to immerse the great on paper and on the screen, the initial product gamer fully into the action. Cockpits and instrumenoffered only two-player support. And even more disaptation are too sparse to be useful, the plot is a shade pointing was the lobotomy given the artificial oppotoo thin to keep things interesting, and the game is nents and flight-models, a serious departure from the just a little too short for comfort. While these could all usually high Origin standard. This oversight basically be growing pains of a series with real potential, SSI ruined this game's promise. Multiplayer play does has yet to publicly commit to a full series of games, shine however, and remains the only way available to and without a strong sequel RENEGADE will remain a resolve those \"Who's the best star-pilot?\" arguments. mid-level game more suitable to newcomers. In other words, the search for the space-sim equivalent to network FALCON 3.0 goes on. To their credit, TRADE SCHOOL though, Origin did release a patch allowing up to six \"Sure,\" you say, \"being a hero is great, but it doesplayers to join an arena-style dog-fight. It's nice to n't get the bills paid. I want to get some job skills see this kind of support from a big company these here.\" Well, there's even a branch of the space-sim days. universe dedicated to a more bread-and-butter perspective. There's even a little room in this class of sims for actual reality. The idea of the lone merchant and his rustbucket Starship has been a staple of SF since the 1930's; thankfully this concept hasn't been overlooked in the modern age of spacesims. One of the first to enter the vast reaches of the mercantile universe was ELITE, where you had literally hundreds of worlds to venture, buying cargo low and selling it high, all the while dodging pirates and the police, if you chose to run some of the more illicit goods. GREAT CAESAR'S GHOST SSI'S RENEGADE pits the player While the action of this combat-sim was basically non-existent, you still flew from a cockpit against a revived Roman Empire in a Super VGA forum. view and combat, when it did come, was The last of the contenders is also the newest on something you took a little more personally since the shelves at the time of this writing, RENEGADE: BATTLE every hit you took meant money out of your virtual FOR JACOB'S STAR is a simulation by SSI drawn from wallet. And if you were a real pilot-type you could FASA's popular Renegade Legion series of sweat out manual space station docking yourself. boardgames. The player is suddenly thrown into command of a Renegade squadron and charged with defending a backwater system against a Blitzkrieg invasion by the seemingly endless forces of an evil Neo-Roman Empire. The player must not only be a hot pilot, but must also be able to Get 82420.2 kmh wisely allocate personnel and ct-5375.5 kmh\" Fortress O'Cor machinery in order to successfully complete missions and eventu... m. ally win the game. NOT THE FIRST OR LAST From the name, you'd never know it, but This SVGA space combat sim Game Tek's FIRST ENCOUNTERS is actually the next installment of ELITE. CGW: So Chris, tell me what do you think of the other sims out there? Chris Roberts: Well, X-Wing and TIE FIGHTER are fun but, to be honest, we've been playing DescENT a lot around here lately. It's great but I don't know if it counts as a space-sim. <laughter> CGW: The wingmen in your games have always been strong, sometimes stealing a kill from under your guns. Was this a conscious choice or more of a side-effect of the character-driven plots you use? CR: Yes, strong wingmen were a very conscious choice for me because of the core approach we took that you were not alone and there were always going to be others flying with you, with all the pros and cons involved with that. Wing COMMANDER 4 will have even more detailed personalities and flight characteristics. The player will be capable of giving more complex commands to wingmen such as ordering them to go in and complete the primary mission while the player covers them. CGW: What direction do you see space-sim engines taking over the next couple of years? CR: Well, I think everything is equaling out 40 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1995 "


"Cana multimedia accelerator make you more presentable? Stealth 64 Video Ith Video Melisa Arrierater MOND You're on, and it's all up to you. No time for to upgrade to our presenting anything but the Stealth 64 Video daughter card, the Series, from Diamond. Delivering true multimedia Motion Video Player. acceleration. With both blazing fast graphics The Stealth 64 Video and full-screen, full-motion video that will carry Series comes bundled with Software Drivers Included you to the pinnacle of CorelDRAW 4.0 CD the leading Windows 3.1 Windows for your performance Windows NT 3.5 Worlgroux 3.11 yu graphics application plus 3D F/X\" a 3D animation 3D Studio 11-14 Bago silap software, and Digital Video Producer\" a digital BM OS/2 Warp Because there's only MicroStation 5 And More... one way to deliver video editing program, from Video CODECS Supported Software MPEG Cinepak your ideas with true Asymetrix.* Diamond InControl Video CD Playback Indeo 3.2 CD-I Video Playback MS Video visual impact. Starting Tools for Windows makes it easy Hardware Mita ble for Soothbf Video with 16.7 million colors, to set up and optimize your Stealth 64 Stealth Video VRAM Video photo-realistic images performance. Diamond also Controller: 53 Vion 969 53 Vision 9.8 Vic Reese To 120H: 01207 and fast, up to 120Hz, provides a five-year parts and Meer 1600x1200 1280 X 1024 Complete Multimedia Memory 2495 cp 498 110 poze flicker-free refresh labor warranty, 24-hour fax-back, Desktop Control With rates. The Stealth 64 and convenient on-line support InControl Tools Software Video Series provides TV-quality playback in services. Giving you the confidence to put your scaleable, full-screen video, including software image on the line. Anytime. For more information MPEG, that will put your thoughts in motion. contact your local dealer or call Diamond at Plus if you need professional quality 1-800-4-MULTIMEDIA today. MPEG, or live video input, the Stealth Multimedia acceleration without compromise. DIAMOND 64 Video VRAM gives you the option Would you present it any other way? MULTIMEDIA Circle Reader Service #87 24-Hour Fax-Back: 1-800-380-0030 Internet: www.diamondmm.com * CorelDRAW 4.0 CD & Asymetrik software al bundled in real version only, 01995 Diamond Multimedia Systems Inc. 2880 lunction Avenue, San Jose, CA 951341922. Al trademarks and registered trademarks are the property of the respective holders COMPUSA www.dty MICRO CENTER ELEKTEK Fry's FUTURE SHOP COW Boreas Sammeln tho good guys! "


"SPECIAL FEATURE: SPACE COMBAT SIMS Deference All Can Th Tu TARYER. 115902 IN as far as the technology goes, we've hit a plateau of sorts. Instead of driving for better looks see a turn towards more strategy and story in spacesims. CGW: Any plans for another multi-player product after ARMADA? CR: No, we have no immediate plans for another network game but I see things evolving in two directions. The first is the single-person cinematic games like WC3 while the other will go towards networked strategy games where you set up situations and then invite others to come and play in your sandbox. After all, playing against other people is always fun. CGW: Where do you see the Wing COMMANDER franchise evolving over the next couple of years? CR: Well, first of all there will be more ground interface in WinG COMMANDER 4 and even more of that sort of thing in the PRIVATEER sequel. After all, just flying around in space can start to get boring after awhile. Klaughter And yes, there will be more side-products with less cinematic budgets but with at least as good simulator engines. PRIVATEER 2 will have better graphics than WC3. CGW: Wow! Well thanks for taking the time to answer a few questions for our readers. CR: Any time. 26114127 UT 12 Jan 2072 Time seal Central Rotation While Eute had no real end, there were a series of missions embedded in the free form of the game. Through them some semblance of a plot developed, albeit not much of one. The most recent incarnation of this series is called FIRST ENCOUNTERS and will be marketed by GameTek. It boasts better graphics, more worlds and nigh-infinite replayability. Though the word appears nowhere in the title, this is an Elite game. Trust me. Origin, in an effort to expand their Wing COMMANDER universe MICROSOFT IS EVERYWHERE SPACE SIMULATOR is more an educational tool (and, incidentally, to have a than a game, as it lets you explore the farthest reaches of the Milky Way. game in every category of this article) took the ELITE products can now be found bundled together on a concept and narrowed the focus. In PRIVATEER, you are discount CD-ROM being published by Electronic Arts. still a lone captain with a little freighter trying to A great deal for all but the most jaded. make a living, but here there is a tighter plot with The third and most practical of the \"working\" fewer worlds to visit. While you're still free to explore space sims is from the hallowed halls of Microsoft at will and make a profit whenever you see fit, events and is called, appropriately enough, MICROSOFT SPACE in the WC universe eventually draw you into the danSIMULATOR. This game is different from most of the fare ger-zone where Humans, Kilrathi and crazed cultists we are covering here in that there is no plot or even vie for power. While the flight model is much simpler combat in this game. The SPACE SIMULATOR is all about than in the Elite series—no tough docking maneureal physics and real spaceflight. Not since Microvers here—the action is definitely hotter, and most captains will find themselves struggling to survive, with the majority of profits being reinvested into better weapons or stronger ships. Origin published an add-on module called RIGHTEOUS FIRE which fleshed out the game even more. They also released a speech pack for PRIVATEER, and all three Tales From The Jedi An interview with Larry Holland, the designer of X-Wing and TIE FIGHTER F f10 SLT 250 CGW: Assuming you have any spare time at Prose's debacle with MANTIS: EXPERIMENTAL FIGHTER has anyone attempted to make a realistic spacecraft sim. Microsoft pulled it off fairly well, and although it is not the most exciting sim ever made, it is educational and has just the right mix of the historical and fanciful. Players can explore a rich galaxy in ships PIRATE YOU'RE CLEAR FOR KLICKS. SPACE SWABBIE Origin's PRIVATEER cut players loose to live the life of a moneygrubbing rogue in the WING COMMANDER universe, 42 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1995 "


"CODE BWV 177.A WORLD DOMINATION IN A BOX. POWER SUIT PROTO-TYPE X-O UNIT WELCOME TO THE new world order. A gritty, high-tech world where the art of electronic intelligence and covert surveillance reigns supreme. Where guerrilla strategies and savage combat are the norm. Build bases, muster forces and lacerate your enemies to the bone. All for the love of power. IN THE HYPER-REAL combat experience of Command & Conquer, you're thrust into the heat of an all-out race for global control. DOMINATE YOUR opponent through modem or network play. Will you side with the humanistic GDI or bring the world to its knees with the Brotherhood of Nod? Decide fast. Your adversaries are without mercy. And so are you. Westwood distributed exclusively by Wirnir TEEN COMMAND & CONQUER 15 a trademark of Westwood Studios, Inc. 01995 Westwood Studios, Inc. All rights reserved. Virgin is a registered trademark of Virgin Enterprises, Lid. I TEEN AGES 13+ Animated Violence Circle Reader Service #25 ka REPORT TO: www.westwood.com <cond transmission>> "


"It's time to JAM! SIMULATION SYSTEM SHOCK DEFENDER THE F-14 TOMCAT SIMULATION NO VAPOR in a box Just a SYSTEM that SHOCKS JAM PAK NO SHAREWARE benderJust an F-14 FLEET DEFENDER 1994 AWARDS Computer Game Review Golden Triad Award INDY CAR RACING PC Gamer Award for Best Wargame PANZER GENERAL OZO CARBELA TEK PC Gamer Editor's Choice Award F-14 FLEET DEFENDER Software Publisher Association CODIE Award Best Sports Program INDY CAR RACING INDYCAR PANZER GENERAL RACING Game Bytes Award of Distinction F-14 FLEET DEFENDER CABADOS Computer Game Review Military SIM of the Year PANZER GENERAL NO PRIMADONNA dancer just a buttkickin' PANZER NO HYPE in your faceALUMAX Game Bytes Best Sports Simulation INDY CAR PC Gamer Award Best Adventure Game SYSTEM SHOCK Compute Best Sports Game INDY CAR just a wild INDY CAR chase The JAM PAK 4 HOT Titles for One Cool Price OXOCARBELA TEK 1210 San Mateo Dr. South San Francisco, CA 94080 Phone 415-873-6484 FAX 415.873-6486 Circle Reader Service #91 MADE IN USA 1995 CARBELA TEK INC. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. CARBELA TEK AND THE CARBELA TEK LOGO ARE REGISTERED TRADEMARKS OF CARBELA TEK, INC. JAM PAKIM IS A REGISTERED TRADEMARK OF CARBELA TEK, INC. ANY OTHER COPYRIGHTS OR TRADEMARKS ARE THE PROPERTY OF THEIR RESPECTIVE COMPANIES "


"SPECIAL FEATURE: SPACE COMBAT SIMS ranging from the Apollo lander to an alien scoutship, all of which are beautifully rendered and behave realistically. One can re-create the historic moon landings or fly low and slow over a near-future Mars base in an EVA transit suit. If you'd like a feel for real spaceflight, then this is probably the best sim for you. independent of the successful ULTIMA series. They couldn't have gone farther away if they had tried. Fantasy role play gave way to space opera of the highest order. Wing COMMANDER broke onto the computer gaming scene while I still had an Atari ST, and I remember thinking that this game would be converted or KPS S CT 492 AUTOTH all over there to look over the competition, what do you think of some of the other sims out there? Larry Holland: Oh, I can't imagine who you'd be referring to! Zlaughter> You mean Wing COMMANDER 3, etc.? Well, certainly one can't be but impressed by a number of things WC3 has done. They've taken some different directions than I have with projects but I think that is good for the field. I've also heard good things about the hi-res graphics in Renegade but haven't played it myself yet. CGW: X-Wing and TIE FIGHTER are generally regarded as having a more \"realistic\" flight model. What are your thoughts on that? LH: It's interesting actually, a lot of my entry into the sim side of things was through historical sims which prepared me well for doing Star Wars. If you look at the movie closely the sort of spaceflight modeling they prepared for the spacecraft was actually a very WWII-ish, dogfights and cannon-fire sort of thing and actually when they were doing the research work for the original movie they spent a lot of time studying gun-camera footage from WWII. I enjoy the visceral feeling of a dogfight and that is what our flight model tries to focus on. CGW: Speaking of WWII, in your historical sims you modeled some more complex aircraft, like the B-17 or the German medium bombers. Do you have any plans to model more complex starships in your space sims? LH: Absolutely, as we design and plan for multi-player games, multiple position craft are a natural choice. Frankly the way I enjoy playing multi-player games is cooperatively, and a multiposition craft with, say, a pilot and a few gunners is the perfect design for future multi-player games. There's no technical reason preventing us, it's just a matter of coming up with a wellbalanced design of craft. And I find balance to 'be a much more important factor in multi-player environments. CGW: And that leads nicely into my next question: What are your thoughts on networkable space-sims? LH: Absolutely exciting and absolutely part of our future though I can go into much detail about it now. Certainly one of the hot topics in our office is getting the wrinkles out of multiGRADUATE STUDIES Now we come to the cutting edge of spacesims: The Big Two. For the past three or four years the space sim genre has been dominated by two companies, LucasArts and Origin, and the visions of two men, Larry Holland and Chris Roberts. They have brought two long wars to the small screen; Rebels vs. The Empire and Humanity vs. The Kilrathi. Origin started years ago, searching for success WING COMMANDER 3-D In addition to the vaunted live-action video, WING COMMANDER 3 added a true three-dimensional combat engine to its universe. It'll Test Every Nerve You've Got... SIR-TECH Circle Reader Service #163 JULY 1995. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 45 "


"WATCHAVETA ..DARE TO ENTER INTRACORP BM CD-ROM Capstone For More Information Call: 1-800-468-7226 Visit Capstone Online: America Online (Keyword: Capstone); Software Creations BBS (508)365-9352; Web Page Site: http://www.gate.net/-intracor Or Call Capstone's BBS (305)374-6872. THE PINNACLE OF ENTERTAINMENT SOFTWARE Software  1995 IntraCorp, Inc. All rights reserved. Artwork  1994-en Kelly, 3D engine licensed from 3D REALMS ENTERTAINMENT Witchaven, Capo one and The Pinnacle of Entertainment Software are trade was of Intracorp inc. Circle Reader Service #328 OC.COM, '92 "


"SPECIAL FEATURE: SPACE COMBAT SIMS player TIE FIGHTER. We are pretty far along developing the technologies required for multi-player capability. CGW: Well, just to wrap it up, Larry, can you ever see yourself doing a non-Star Wars space-sim? LH: A non-Star Wars sim? Oh definitely. But we still have a lot of places to go with Star Wars. would. Well, they never did put out a version of WC for the old ST, so here I am, DOS-ridden and a few thousand dollars poorer, but very content. WC was like nothing I had ever seen before. I suppose I will always have a soft spot for the series, in memory of how blown away I was by the damn thing at the time. Here was all the action of the best arcade games, looking a hundred times better, and there was an involving storyline to boot. Here was the prototype almost all space-sims would follow. WING COMMANDER was set in a universe where humanity had explored the stars and found somebody far more vicious than themselves, the Kilrathi, a race of big cat-like creatures that made Klingons look like crossing guards. It wasn't the most original idea around—I'm sure Larry Niven rolled in his grave, and A Long And Winding Road A BATTLECRUISER 3000 AD update from the de, signer himself, Derek Smart CGW: Well, It's been a long trip, hasn't it? TRANS-DIMENSIONAL THESPIAN Mark Hamill and the latest in video technology showed the gaming world how full-motion video could advance the art of storytelling in games. Derek Smart: In the four years I've been doing BATTLECRUISER it has grown totally out of proportion because I wanted it to be the ultimate game and it is, as far as I am concerned. Basically the main reason it has taken so long is that I have been working on it by myself with the help of a handful of people scattered across the world. The bottom line is I haven't given up on BATTLECRUISER and it's pushing a million dollars in development cost over the past four years. CGW: Wow. So refresh our memories. What is BATTLECRUISER? DS: It's basically three games in one. It's a space-flight sim, a planetary flight Sim and an adventure game. I've recently switched it completely to 32-bit mode and it now supports SVGA and the planetary graphic engine has been completely rewritten and will put Magic CARPET in the shade. There's nothing like it in the industry, peIt's Ruthless, Ingenious & Downright Dangerous... SIR-TECH Circle Reader Service #163 JULY 1995  COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 47 "


"SPECIAL FEATURE: SPACE COMBAT SIMS he wasn't even dead yet—but what the hey, it looked controls. While the first game is graphically simplistic and sounded so good. And you weren't even alone in compared to the latest offering, its flight mechanics the fight; there were other personalities fighting are nearly identical, so one doesn't really get to learn alongside you with their own unique styles and attimuch by starting at the beginning and novice gamers tudes. Even better, the story and missions to be flown may find things a little fast and complicated for branched along different paths depending on your them. On the other hand, anybody with some flightsuccess and failure, like one of those \"Make Your Own sim experience will have a field day, and WC3 does Adventure\" books we read when we were kids. allow for multiple skill settings that can make the Hot on the heels of Wing COMMANDER's success came game enjoyable for any player. And just for the sake of a couple of mission disks, and then Wing COMMANDER 2, continuity and a good story, I encourage people new to with improved graphics and intelligence, taking the the series to start at the beginning. It's more fun to universe and turning it upside down. All the fame you see the live actors playing roles that have become so had gained by defeating the kitties in the first game familiar, and the first two installments of the WC sevanished, as a cosmic frame-job forced you to start atries are very easy to get at a good price these days, the bottom and re-earn the respect of your fellow pibeing the second most bundled pieces of software in lots. As in the ULTIMA series, characters followed you the CD-ROM world. from game to game and became, if not friends in a weird sort of way, at least familiar faces. Along with YODA IS MY CO-PILOT better programming, the SF technology created faster Meanwhile, on the other side of the galaxy we have ships and deadlier weapons for both sides. LucasArts and the Mother of all Space Operas, Star At about the time of WC2, Origin wisely began to Wars. Although Wing COMMANDER came first as far as flesh out their little Universe with associated Wing sims go, it probably owes its existence to the movie COMMANDER games, all of which have been covered in that revitalized SF on the silver screen and spawned other sections of this review. These served the purpose of establishing WC as a real franchise, as well as keeping interest up while work on the truly revolutionary WC3 was in progress, a multi-media 1021 extravaganza in every sense of the word and the STO: RELENTLESS most expensive computer game ever created. Built 1252 on the identical gameplay 0:00 concept as the first game, WC3 used full-motion video, live actors—with the stature of Malcolm McDowell and Mark Hamill-and SVGA graphics near in quality to computer-generatGUN: HU 2 ed SFX for TV shows. Together, the 12b2 three main games 80 12:46 are almost identical as far as game X MARKS THE SPOT Larry Holland's WWII flight sim experience served him well when mechanics and he designed X-Wing, which set the \"look-and-feel\" standard for space combat. riod. Take what you read in the CGW preview article last year and multiply it by four and you have the game in it's current state. CGW: That's an impressive accomplishment DS: The neural net has been revamped to immense proportions. I mean the entire game, lives and everything is free form. It will support campaign disks, add-on modules where you switch to a first-person perspective and walk, through the BATTLECRUISER. Not only can you fly the BATTLECRUISER and four interceptors, but you can now fly the shuttle and deploy ATVs to ride along the planet surface to explore. It's a complete commander's game. It has eight different flight models built in for the different vehicles you can fly. If you went to the store and bought Wing COMMANDER 3. FALCON, BREACH, EARTHSIEGE and then DARK FORCES you still would not get the equivalent of BATTLECRUISER. CGW: Now that you mention FALCON, how much will resource management be a part of BATTLECRUISER? DS: The flight model for BATTLECRUISER is actually built on top of the resource management system. You have access to your entire crew who are moving around the ship eating, breathing and doing things. If a crewmember gets tired they will walk to their quarters and if combat is occurring and they get injured they will end up in the medbay instead of their quarters. CGW: Any plans for a network module? DS: Yes. I don't have the networking built in because it is a complex issue in itself, but I do have plans to have a multi-player version avail-, able for on-line services and the network version will probably ship with the first mission disk or the boarding module. It will allow the game to be dissected into 16 different alien groups and allow players to join any group and help or hurt each other. CGW: Well, this all sounds very ambitious, wish you luck and know space-sim fans are rooting for you. DS: Thanks. OR 48 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JULY 1995 "


"se Save A Shattered World... Or Die Trying. Shattered World... JAGGER CE It starts with 6o ruthless mercs, an army of cut-throat enemies, and an ingenious adversary. By the time you're done, you'll know them all... real well. Strategy and role-playing... so engaging, you'll be up all night. Hey, this ain't no drill... it's in your store right now. Circle Reader Service #163 To order, visit your local retailer, or call 1-800-447-1230 Strategy Guide Available ENHANCED 100% DIGITAL SPEECH SIR-TECH P.O. Box 245, Ogdensburg, NY 13669 Tel: (315) 393-6633 Fax: (315) 393-1525 E-Mail: 76711.33@COMPUSERVE.COM Jagged Alliance is a registered trademark of Sir-tech Software, Inc. "


"SPECIAL FEATURE: SPACE COMBAT SIMS tary. so many imitators. Larry Holland, fresh from his sucside; all the more glory for the player, I suspect. Also might be tempted to make those pesky little TIE Fightcessful WW2 triumvirate, BATTLEHAWKS 1942, BATTLE OF reflecting a more traditional flight-sim aesthetic, the ers a little more durable for the sake of the player's BRITAIN, and SECRET WEAPONS OF THE LUFTWAFFE, took all his campaign game had a story to it, but it was purely happiness, he retained the feel of the movies, and experience as a pioneer of the flight-sim world and linear, the player either succeeded at a mission or TIE's remain the Zeroes of Space. You better know how applied it to the depths of space, creating the legtried, tried again. The lack of a branching story to fly fast and hard if you want to survive a mission. cramped a bit TIE FIGHTER also showed that the Star Wars series of 92 BAYA but allowed for sims were not only loosely following literary developmany more misments in the Lucas Universe, but that the sim line itsions to be laid self was going to be a dynamic entity. Many of the out before the limitations of X-Wing were addressed and improveplayer. X-WING ments made, aside from the obvious ones of graphic also followed in quality and frame rate. Though the missions were still the footsteps of linear and failure still meant repetition, there was SECRET WEAPONS less of a \"puzzle-solving\" feel to things, and the story by creating addline became a truly interesting thing with betrayal SITE HAS on disks featurand intrigue surrounding the players in every mission. 100\" ing other The add-on disk, DEFENDER OF THE EMPIRE, continued to \"famous\" Rebel develop the twisting plot and complex missions where 202 NO CARGO FW5LHCE fighters, namely one must fight not only for The Imperial Navy, but also 2-45. Hendhunter Blue 2 has heen destrowed T: 218 the A, B and Yfor the Emperor himself, and sometimes the two have Wings which opposing desires. made for more As for which of these two great Sim-lines is the Now, You shall pay for your tierchery. missions and best, I leave that to someone wiser or pickier than I. more details of For some, the Star Wars sims are number one because the Rebel milithey just \"feel\" more like a starfighter; others swear by the branching missions of the WING COMMANDER uniWhile this verse, and eagerly await the next generation of ships early segment of and weapons. Certainly WC has diverged into the the series was a strange world of game-movies, while Star Wars rehit, Holland didmains true to the spirit of the flight simulation. All I n't try playing it know for sure is that while The Big Two continue to try safe; instead, and outdo each other, the space gaming public will be he took a walk the ones really coming out on top. on The Dark Side and develTHE SHAPE OF THINGS THE TIES THAT BIND LucasArts' TIE FIGHTER added gouraud shading to the X-Wing flight oped TIE FIGHTER. TO COME engine, and shady morals in a pro-Empire storyline. Here was the This current wave of space-sims shows no sign of chance to play in breaking yet, and there are many titles yet to come in endary X-Wing. With a built-in recognition factor that the real high performance machines, and move in the the next year or so. For the arcade pilots out there, made marketing executives slaver like dogs at a really scary political circles of Pavlovian bell festival, plus a kinder, gentler learning the Empire. To his credit, Holcurve and a flight model that gave a real sense of beland not only tried hard to give ing in a fighter, X-Wing was an instant hit and sudthe game the proper \"Champidenly there were two horses in the race for our ons of Law and Order\" fascist space-sim buck. Lucky for us, and the companies infeel for the Imperial Navy. involved as well, most of us eagerly bought and played stead of just giving you the imboth. pressions of thousands of guys X-WING was true to Larry Holland's design philososhuffling around in Star Dephy; it looked and sounded exactly like the \"period\" it stroyers congratulating each was meant to emulate, it was easy to pick up but other on how evil they are, but harder to master, the player was always at the center he also stuck to the \"reality\" of the mission and, while the enemy pilots were comcreated by The All-Powerful LuNEED FOR SPEED Apogee's TERMINAL VELOCITY will offer intense action and petent, your own wingmen tended to be on the useless cas. Even though a designer multi-player competition in a futuristic milieu. 50 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD  JULY 1995 "


"Remote First there was DOOM. Now comes HERETIC! From the Publisher of DOOM ! AERETIC A SWORD & SORCERY BATTLEFEST SO AWESOME, IT'S UNBELIEVABLE! rom the publisher FEATURES of the shareware Supports up to 4 megahit DOOM players via network, comes a virtual 2 by modem world of medieval Cooperate with your buddies or massacre fantasy. The them in a bloody advanced 3-D deathmatch! graphics are so State-of-the-art real and everything 3-D, 360° smooth moves with such scrolling in real smoothness time for the fastest, you are there! deadliest combat! In HERETIC Walk, run, fly! you'll cast Look all around, even up and down! eldritch spells  Choose from 7 from the Tomes weapons and a of Power. host of magical Wield fantastic artifacts to cast weapons such mystical spells. as the Firemace Order HERETIC and Hellstaff. today and become All to destroy a believer: the undead 1-800-ID GAMES and bestial ($40 plus $5 S&H) horrors that On CD-ROM or 3.5\" disks for your slaughtered IBM PC Compatible. your race. By the spirits of your Elders, the Heretic must have his vengeance! Circle Reader Service #71 CREATED BY PUBLISHED BY SOFTWARE RSAC ADVISORY VIOLENCE Blood and gone Heretic and Raven are trademarks of Raven Software, Inc. Doom and id are Trademarks of id Software, Inc. 1994 id Software, Inc. All rights reserved. SOFTWARE "


"I feel its presence, icy fingers upon my throat, I hear its eerie Sounds, unsettling my every thought. I try in vain to slumber, my reveries gripped by Violent terrora My only salvation, the shock of awakening. Something is very, very wrong here. .. "


"HEART-THLIMPING TERROR LINFOLDING IN SUSPENSE-FILLED CHAPTERS, COMBINING THE BEST OF CLASSIC HORROR AND MODERN PSYCHOLOGICAL THRILLERS. BLENDING THE TALENTS OF RENOWNED ADVENTLIRE GAME WRITER ROBERTA WILLIAMS AND THE MOST ADVANCED DIGITAL EFFECTS EVER, PHANTASMAGORIA CREATES AN EXPERIENCE SO STARTLINGLY REAL, YOU'LL LIVE THIS INTERACTIVE NIGHTMARE AS IF IT WERE YOUR VERY OWN. "


"PIIANTASMAGORTA PRAY IT'S ONLY A NIGHTMARE PHANTASMAGORTA SIERRA SI ERRA YOUR NIGHTMARE AWAITS ON SEVEN CDS. VISIT YOUR LOCAL SOFTWARE DEALER, OR CALL 1-800-757-7707 Circle Reader Service #120 1995 Sierra On-Lins, Inc Bellevue, WA 98007 All rights reserved, and I designato trademarks of, or licensed to Sierra On-Line, Inc. "


"SPECIAL FEATURE: SPACE COMBAT SIMS Microsoft Fury 0.75 Game View Options Heb THE ULTIMATE CHEATING EXPERIENCE GAME WIZABA my the genre this Christmas. STAR RANGERS is, in Stealey's words, \"an homage to STAR RADERS,\" the Granddaddy of all space combat games, originally released in the prehistoric days of the Atari 2600. Indeed, the mission structure is modeled after STAR RAIDERS, which is to say that the player will hyperspace around several sectors of space defending bases against attack. The graphics will be Super VGA, but they probably won't challenge the established competition in LOOK FAMILIAR? Microsoft's Fury uses the same graphics engine as the genre. Still, STAR RANGER'S TERMINAL VELOCITY (previous page), but it will be Windows 95 only and won't might make for a nice bit of nossupport network play. talgia, and, with its adjustable both Microsoft and Apogee are currently developing difficulty levels, should be a perfect game for newentry-level starfighter-sims, with the accent on comers to space combat and the junior star pilots in ground attack on beautifully rendered alien worlds-a kind of Descent meets MAGIC CARPET. The Apogee offering, TERMNAL VELOCITY, will arrive first, and recent version look great, while Microsoft is currently calling their sim Fury, and it boasts very high frame rates in both WINDOWS 3.11 and 95. Both games will be offering smart enemies and dynamic worlds riddled with tunnels to find and explore, but I suspect the edge will go to whoever offers multi-player network capability first Interactive Magic, the new company headed by MicroProse founder \"Wild YOUR SPACE OR MINE? Players protect a human mining colony Bill\" Stealey, will submit an entry into try into from alien invasion in Domark's upcoming ABSOLUTE ZERO. THE MOST ADVANCED GAME CHEATING SOFTWARE EVER CREATED FOR IBM AND COMPATIBLE COMPUTERS The only software capable of cheating in almost any program, including full support for popular DOS extender based games >Become INVULNERABLE, INVINCIBLE or UNBEATABLE! Finish games that you have not been able to complete previously >Never run out of LIVES, MONEY, HEALTH or AMMO again! > Enhanced search engine that is capable of finding almost anything imaginable Speed-up or slow-down game for optimal playability > Supports SUPER VGA and most popular sound cards >Create personal cheat files > View hints or solutions within games Save & load most games at any point during play > Shell to DOS within any game >Built-in screen saver and much more! CHEAT DEATII FOR ONLY $3995 the house. Domark will be applying its tool kit technology to a different kind of space-sim, called ABSOLUTE ZERO, where players will be forced to defend colonists on Europa from an alien menace hidden deep under the ice. Instead of the usual military might at the disposal of players, pilots on Europa will have to make do with weapons and ships cobbled together from mining equipment. Whether this game will mount a serious challenge to The Big Two should be better known by the time you read this, as it should Please include $10.00 for shipping & handling GAMEWIZARD To order please make cheque or money order payable to: Enhanced Software Design Inc. P.O. Box 92241 2900 Warden Ave., Scarborough, ON Canada M1W 3Y9 Allow 4-6 weeks for delivery. Distributor inquiries welcome Limited Shareware version thru BBS: (416) 497-8337 Game Wizard is currently used worldwide to cheat in almost any game in existance! Circle Reader Service #265 TIME WARP Interactive Magic's STAR RANGERS is a blast to the ancient past, being a tribute to the first space combat game, STAR RAIDERS. "


"SPECIAL FEATURE: SPACE COMBAT SIMS THE EPIC CONQUEST 900 YEARS IN THE MAKING! FATAL MED TCT SPEED SET GOES ACT Com 1 CONQURPOP A.D. 1086 SUDARAN be on the shelves. Later in the year, Domark will follow up with BERSERKER a space combat sim set in the universe created by SF author Fred Saberhagen. Although the details of the game as still sketchy, the Super VGA graphics look very nice. As for The Big Two their plans continue apace. but both companies are relatively mum about details. Rest assured there is more cinema in the future for Wing THE BIG PICTURE If it's ever finished. BATTLECRUISER 3000AD could be the most Commanders, and other comprehensive and sophisticated space game yet. portions of the Star Wars universe will be fleshed out before the Imperial Navy THREE in space-sims. is done. As it stands now, WING COMMANDER 4 is due out personally would like to see sims take a turn toaround Christmas, using much the same engine as wards detail as the technology begins to even out a WC3, while the PRIVATEER 2 project has become a fullbit. While the sims we have now are great, there is fledged multi-media extravaganza and will arrive still no equivalent to FALCON 3.0 out there, wherein the sometime in '96. full implications of managing a squadron are worked Of course the sim that everybody is still waiting to into the sim--and of course, multi-player linked missee is Derek Smart's BATTLECRUISER 3000 AD, which is sions would be nice. Being able to get through a plotseemingly about to see the light of day. BC3000 line with the help of a friend would be a pleasant switch from the solitary nature of space games. It also might be nice to see other SF properties developed as sim themes. While Battlestar Galactica has faded from memory, it might be fun to play against the backdrop of Babylon 5's warfare and intrigue. and most of the computer graphic work has already been done. Regardless of what BITE THE DUST, SPACE CADET Domark's forthcoming BERSERKER is a space comproducts actually do apbat opera starring an alien menace of Fred Saberhagan's design. pear and how well they perform, you can be aspromises to be far more of an immersive experience sured of two things: there will always be another than anything yet seen, with the player responsible for space-sim just around the corner, and the best ones the actions of an entire cruiser as well as auxiliary will probably make you upgrade your machine in order ships in a dynamic universe. If this game turns out to to play them. be half of what its designer says (see sidebar), then by this time next year we may be referring to The Big \"Stunning graphics exciting action sequences... a visual feast.\" Johnny L. Wilson Computer Gaming World THE CONQUEST BEGINS JULY, 1995 Circle Reader Service #314 TIME WARNER INTERACTIVE BBS: 1-818-295-6730 E-mail: TWlinfo@aol.com America Online Keyword: TWI World Wide Web: http://www.pathfinder.com/twi 01995 Time Warner Interactive. Congueror: A.D. 1086 is a trademark of Soltware Sorcery. "


"ONE SMALL STEP FOR MAN, ONE BALD LEAP FOR MANKIND! ETOD COCO 160 LEVEL | NETWOR (MODEM PLAY! EXPLORA POWS! NO HAIR MEMOUS Build a Baldy Village to House Your Hairless Hoardes... Sinister Structures and Sadistic Traps. cosas Full Motion Clay Animation Sequences-Live from Baldsville! Arctic Levels Feature Awesome Ice Cream Architecture! Thinking about shaving your head? Don't wig out yet; you are about to be invaded by the year's most addictive new game, BALDIES! You command an entire race of BALDIES as they fight for control of multiple mini worlds and more than 100 levels of hair-raising game play. You decide if they're builders, workers, scientists or soldiers. Need an exploding cow or another new weapon to wipe out the enemy Baldies? Invent one! Need a heliport for your castle? Build one! Features include Multiplayer Option, Advanced Enemy Artificial Intelligence, Full Motion Clay Animated Cut Scenes, Indigenous Life Forms, Realistic Weather Effects and more! Get Bald! Get BALDIES! For PC, PC CD-ROM, Macintosh and The 3DO System. DEO DOO Every Baldy's Home Can Also be His Castle-If You Have Enough Resources! Give'em Hell Hairy! Even Beelzebub is Bald in Baldies! Developed by BALDIES GAMETEK trentive Edge Great Software On Any Hardware TM Circle Reader Service #1129 Get Bald! Visit your local retailer or call 1-800-GAMETEK (1-800-426-3835) Baldies  Creative Edge, Inc. Baldies is a trademark of Creative Edge. O Game Tek (FL), Inc. 2999 Northeast 191st Street, Suite 500, Aventura, Florida 33180. "


"Trust No One. THE n a future dominated by vast megacorporations, and corrupt governments, a single citizen stands little chance of altering the course of human events. You're about to find out what happens when one tries. Presented with breathtaking graphics and special effects THE ORION CONSPIRACY is a murder mystery that spins an intricate web of intrigue and deceit. In this graphic adventure, blind trust equals death. And friends ... morph suddenly into foes. Don't lose your head. 100 hand-painted background scenes displayed in stunning SuperVGA. Full speech with subtitles. CD-quality music and spot FX throughout. Rendered, animated cut-scenes. Highly involved storyline. DISTRIBUTED BY On CD-ROM for IBM PC & Compatibles. Spectrum_To order, visit your nearest  Domark Software, Ltd. All rights reserved. software retailer, or call 1-800-695-GAME Circle Reader Service #210 DO MARK "


"ADVENTURE/RPG Dances With Dinos EVERYONE (OR ALhelp and occasional advice during the quest, but SCORPIA SEARCHES MOST EVERYONE) the main burden rests on Adam's shoulders LOVES DINOSAURS, alone. He is, after all, the leader. so it's not surpris The action starts in the Fortress of Mo where FOR AN ADVENTURE ing to see a prodAdam must first relearn the means of citadel conuct where they play struction. After that—and persuading his reluca major part in the tant father to allow him to leave the GAME PARADISE IN story. LOST EDEN, the fortress-Adam begins his journey across the new adventure game from Virlands to reunite humans and dinosaurs. VIRGIN'S LOST EDEN gin/Cryo, takes place on a sort of alternate Earth Interfacing with the game is simple, and quite where dinosaurs have evolved into sentient bereminiscent of DRAGON LORE. The graphic style ings, although not much more than that; aside and presentation are similar to Mindscape's from being able to speak, they still live like digame, although instead of a dragon cursor, you nosaurs. have a small cube that changes into various icons Dinos and humans used to get along well, until as it moves over hot spots on the main screen. A the rise of Moorkus Rex, of the breed T. Rex. He hand appears on items that can be taken, while gathered up his brethren and began a campaign an eye indicates something you may want to take of slaughter and carnage a closer look at. An arrow throughout the land. Only LOST EDEN appearing on the cube's one place is secure from surface means you can Price: $49.95 this rampage: the great System move in that direction. Citadel of Mo, an impreg Requirements: IBM Below the main screen is nable fortress in the land of compatible 486SXthe scrolling inventory bar, 33 or better, 4 MB Mashaar. Huge and indeRAM, VGA graphshowing what Adam is carstructible, the fortress proics, 2x CD-ROM rying with him. Above the vides a safe place for the mouse; supports main display is the compeople of Mashaar, and is Sound Blaster panions screen, with small (+Pro) compatible sound cards. the home of the story's portraits of Adam and Protection: None hero, Prince Adam. Designers: Cryo Interactive Entertainment those who are currently in Adam dreams of redis Publisher: Virgin Interactive Entertainment his party. Clicking here covering the secret of Irvine, CA brings up a full screen (800) 874-4607 building the citadels (lost showing all the party memthanks to the treachery of bers in detail, and you can his own grandfather) and then talk to them or give of reuniting the populations against the Tyranthem objects from the inventory bar. nosaurs. These actions form the basis of play in Movement is accomplished in one of two ways. LOST EDEN On the edge of a land, the travel map comes up, That's a big job, and Adam isn't left to do it by and clicking on any available area takes the party himself. He has several traveling companions directly there. Once in the land, the group moves throughout the game; some are with him to the from location to location via the arrows on the end, others for only a short time. Some are ditumbling cube. nosaurs, and some are human. They provide Conversations are a one-way street. Adam himby Scorpia JULY 1995 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 59 "


"od > G MS Still, play becomes peal to children); experienced gamers are Chomaor mechanical after a likely to find it no more than an idle afterwhile, even with a few noon's entertainment. interesting plot twists involved, and the game ERRANT EDITOR ERRATA descends into a dreary Last issue, sorry to say, some ham-landround of rote actions. ed editor inserted an error into the openNone of the puzzles ing paragraph of my article on STONE (such as they are) are esPROPHET. pecially difficult, espefor reasons known only to himself, the cially if you just follow editor inserted the subtitle \"Wake of The along as suggested by Ravager\" after \"Ravenloft,» thereby causthe various characters. ing great confusion, prompting puzzled The save game feacalls to SSI, and making me look like an FOREST OF THE APES Each map location has people who need your ture is irritating. You idiot. Everyone (well, almost everyone) help; unfortunately each races' problems are exactly the same. have only three slots, knows that RAVENLOFT and DARK SUN are and they are automatitwo separate and independent series. How self never speaks; others talk to him when cally named for you. Unfortunately, they are a title from one became attached to the he first meets them, when he shows/oller's named by location and visit, and you can't other is a mystery, but I would like to clear them some object from the inventory, change that. For instance, when you save at that up. Below, therefore, is the correct when he clicks on someone in the comthe start of the game, it's called \"Citadel of paragraph as originally sent to CGW. My panions screen, or sometimes spontaMo 1.\" All the saves you make while in the apologies to all who were in any way inneously in certain situations. Citadel are called the same thing. After convenienced by the error. The game supports only Sound RWENLOFT: THE STONE PROPHET follows in Blaster and Ad Lib cards; if you We A BAR the wake of the original RAVENLOFT and MENdon't have either of those, or can't ZOBERRANZAN. It isn't exactly a sequel to the first emulate them, you can turn on gume; while you can transfer in characters from the subtitles, which display text in RAZNLOFT (but not MENZO), there isn't much place of speech. This wise proviconnection between the two products otherwise. sion (which more games ought to There are a couple of other mentions of have) thus allows you to play LOST \"Ravager\" in the text; when you see them, EDEN regardless of sound card. simply substitute the word «Ravenloft\" for Game controls are brought up a correct reading by clicking on Adam himself in Also, for space reasons, a paragraph was the companions screen. This disTHE BEAUTIFUL PEOPLE Although this group looks straight excised from the article that mentions a plays the save/restore functions, from a prehistoric Beverly Hills 90210, each party memsmall but important flaw in the conversamusic and speech volume bars, ber plays a valuable, albeit completely programmed role. tion interface, which I now add here: and the tape replay. In case you On a minor note, the appearance of \"lalk balmissed something in a speech, or want to loons\" is inconsistent. Ordinarily, when the curreview what you've heard recently, the reyou've been out a while and return, the sor louches on someone (or something) that you play allows you to hear again any of the 32 saves are named \"Citadel of Mo 2.\" can talk to, il changes into a little balloon with a most recent comments macle. After a few saves, it's easy to lose track of question mark on it. However, often this did not LOST EDEN ran cleanly; the game never which one is the most recent, and there are happen in the village; the cursor stayed the same crashed or exhibited other bizarre behavtimes when you might want to go back to when it passed over many of the inhabitants (inior. Everything worked as it was supposed an earlier position instead. Unless you've chuding some important ones), and the first time to, which, alas, is something of a minor been noting down the saves on paper, you around, I missed a few things there. miracle these days. may end up trying all the positions to find Since you can pick up a couple of \"karmaFor all that, the game is not without its the one you want. Surely it would not have building\" quests by talking to the villagers, it's drawbacks. Much of the action is repetibeen difficult for the designers to allow you important to know that you can, in fact, speak to tive; Adam treks from valley to valley, doto name your own saves. them. Especially if things go wrong at the Haring mostly the same things to get the Overall, LOST EDEN is a step up from west Temple and you need some extra brownie citadels built. That doesn't mean the game DRAGON LORE, having at least a real story points. is strictly linear; a fair amount of running to it, but more diversity in the playing We offer our humblest apologies to our readback and forth between locations is neceswould have been welcome. This one isers and Scorpia for the errant edit. We would sary before the citadels can be fully conmore a game for the novice adventurer or sack the responsible editor if he hadn't already structed. family play (dinosaurs being likely to apsucked himself. -Ed.) 60 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1995 "


"EVEN SPOCK WOULD NERVOUS. ABSOLUTE ZERO S BIRTRAV peste DOMARK coMING SUMMER! DMARK Ask for Absolute Zero at your local software retailer or call us direct at 1-800-695-GAME. Circle Reader Service #220 "


"GAME CONSTRUCTION SETAIL TIGERS ON THE PROUJL THE WARGAMER'S COMPUTER COMPANY ON THE OPERATION NAMENU ARLARDO MO DO CAUSADERS CRUSADER. =* PANZER GENERAL PAVYZER GENERI A | . NOD 3 Impressions TACTICAL   HARD TO PLAY "


"TANTRA NIT U FEATURES NEURA AMOUBA Spectrum HoloByte DI MARK HARD NOT TO PLAY. For multi-player action, irse a modem to play against a buddy. Or get on a network and chul lenge np to three other players! If you enjoy instruction manuals and learning curves from hell, then you're looking at the wrong page. But if you're looking for fast-paced, multi-player tank warfare in which hair-trigger reflexes and nerves of steel are the only things that keep you breathing, you're on the right track. Tank Commander from Domark slams you into the heat of the battle. With some of the world's most lethal, technically advanced weaponry at your fingertips, you'll be directing artillery strikes, analyzing satellite intelligence and orchestrating aerial assaults not long after it's out of the box. You'll quickly discover whether your survival instincts measure up as you command your tank unit in increasingly difficult missions against ferocious, heavily armed forces sworn to your speedy destruction. For the ultimate battlefield adventure, challenge a friend by modem or compete with up to three other players over a network. Either way, it's trial by fire and you're in the hot seat. Everyone is counting on you to bring them home alive. Can you deliver? The game includes over forty challenging missions and will test your skill and courage against airborne enemies like Ibis Apacbe gunship. Stunning Texture-mapped As commander: call in your own squadron of tank-busting A-10 Wartboys to thwart enemy advances in desert missions. and intensity of battle, as does the inclusion of several landmarks such as Stonehenge. COMMANDER Ask for Tank Commander at your local software retailer or call us direct at 1-800-695-GAME. DOMARK DOMARK MULTI-PLAYER ACTION! Circle Reader Service #215 "


"GAME HINTS : The Secrets Of 7 Discworld SCORPION'S Scorpia Leads A Tour Through Psygnosis' Latest Adventure TALE O, THE SUMMERTIME IS UPON US, items to build a dragon locater. It's best and a fascinating little tale from the AND ONCE AGAIN FRED IS LOOKING to talk to the Arch-Chancellor before visScared Guy should revive Rincewind for FORWARD TO THE ANNUAL GRUES iting the library, otherwise you won't get more action. Convention in Colossal Cave very far down there. Once you have the A quick swing through the Livery Stable (held, as always, in the Dark dragon book in hand, read it for yoursell, and Palace, and Rincewind is about ready Room). It's about all he has to look forso you know what Rincewind has to pick to poke into the Alley. The view from the ward to this time of year, which, lately, is up; the Arch-C's rendition of the items is rooftops is marvelous, especially the tower more than gamers have had; the warmer a bit obscure. in the background. Yes, that is the dragon months aren't noted for being bountiful in the dining room, you'll want to pay across the way. If you reflect a little, what in new releases. The market flattens out, special attention to old Windle Poons, parto do here will become obvious. as it were, and speaking of flat... ticularly what he's holding. This is a good As long as you're here, drop in on the DISCWORLD is a tough and zany adAlchemist and see if any corny ideas venture game based on Terry Pratchpop into your head (Rincewind needs ett's books; if you've read any of them, that imp more than the Alchemist you may have some idea of what's in does). Finally, a return trip to the Unistore for you. If you liaven't, not to worversity and a peek through the window ry; the game isn't derived from any of in back should provide our boy with them in particular, just set in the envithe last of the locater items. ronment of Discworld. The game is divided into four acts.  II During each of the first three, Rincey collects six gold items from Rincewind (our hero) collects a bunch the Brotherhood to free the dragon COUNT THEE NOT UNTO FOUR...BACKWARDS Infiltrating the from their enchantment. This episode has his final confrontation with Big Red Brotherhood requires a lot of time-travel. Doing a little is a complicated one, because (the dragon, of course). Hold on to research in the library will put you on the right track. Rincewind makes several trips through everything you come across in this one; L-Space, travelling back in time to the some items are picked up early and used place to make a clean sweep. By now previous night, and has a lot to do in later in another act, so don't assume an you've seen most of Unseen University, both the past and the present. object is worthless because you can't do and it's time for the great outdoors. The The first order of business is learning anything with it right away. Town Square is a good place to begin. who belongs to the Brotherhood, which An important aspect of the game is reRemember that being in the middle of means spying on the theft of the library visiting locations in each act; often new things can net you an item, but only if book (do not prevent that from happenitems will have appeared in them. So Rincewind is persistent. A chat with the ing!), and then getting inside the hidewhether or not a place is mentioned, you lovable street urchin brings a handy (ha!) out. That last can't be done on the first should always look in on it to see if any skill. Don't overlook the man in the visit, but while you're here, also stop at thing is there. This is also true of talking stocks, and feel free to express yourself at the inn, park, street corner (the light is to people; some of them have new things his expense a couple of times. important) and tavern. to say each act, so be certain to have a tour of the Street should prove interOn the day side, you'll want to see if chat with everyoife. esting, especially the barber shop. Do anything is hanging on the line next to take a good look at his customer before the privy by the Fishmonger's. If not,  1 indulging in conversation. Then a stop at Rincewind neglected to do something last In this episode, our hero gathers five the Broken Drum for some refreshment evening. If yes, another trip to the tavern 64 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD  JULY 1995 "


"THE INNER CIRCLE Two computing giants, New World Computing and SimTex Software, team up to give you the biggest strategy game of the year: Metal Lords: The Inner Circle. droids. These incredible machines of doom are the ultimate weapons in a lightning war of interplanetary conquest. In Metal Lords, you must isolate your enemies, fend off an alien menace, and most of all, think and play BIG or rival Lords will eat you for lunch. You build and control huge robot fighting  From SimTex, The Makers of Masters of Orion and Master of Magic Build Custom Battle Machines . Unique Combination of Diplomacy and Combat  Diverse MissionObjectives SELECT A NOBLE 5 BEOOGG Strade Weight uses DEUS Celop 1 BLUE Toprette be trus Wafinir Sardons, please choose your new destination RECER Gana DIFICUL NEW WORLD COMPUTING, INC Wailable at your local software retailer or order direct from New World. Computing at 1-800-325-8898 (818-889-5650 outside the U.S.), or by mail: 2.0. Box 4302,Hollywood, CA 90078-4302. P.O. Box 4302, Hollywood, CA 90078-4302 1995 New World Computing, Inc. Metal Lords is a trademark of New World Computing. New World Computing and its distinctive logo are registered trademarks of New World Computing, Inc New World Computing Inc. is a wholly owned subsidiary of NTN Communications Inc. All rights reserved. IBM screens shown. Actual Screens may vary. Circle Reader Service 151 "


"and our hero should be ready to enter bunch of items to prove he's a hero, and Note how the kid holds it over his head; the hideout. Now he knows who's responthen confront the dragon. In this act, it's a new angle of attack is needed here. The sible, and the serious work of collecting important to talk to people to find out dunny machine (or part of it) will be usethe gold items can begin. what items denote a hero, so you know ful here. The jester is an easy one; it's hardly what to get. Many new objects have also We haven't been to the Alchemist's in a worth mentioning how he gets trashed. shown up, and going around to all the lowhile, and now would be a good time to However, if grabbing his item is a probcations is a must. visit. Once you get him out of the way, lem, perhaps the solution will come bub Speaking of locations, a new one has help yourself to anything you may not bling up from your mind in time. appeared in the game, namely a dunhave, and then look in on the Livery StaAt the barber's you should see a cusgeon at the palace. A couple of old ble. The bumper bar is important. Not tomer in his chair. If not, Rincewind has friends are there for (haha) a stretch. If only do you finally get the number of n't talked to the Dibbler or given Rincewind can't do anything here, maybe that donkey cart,\" Lady Ramkin's Dragsomething to someone. Of course, you he's not feeling cranky enough. Oh well. on Sanctuary shows up on the map. She have to get rid of the barber, but he's still At the inn, Rincey may have trouble has a lew things you'll be needing. lovesick, so that ought to be simple talking to the morose sailor. Probably the And let's not forget Nanny Ogg; that By now, Rincewind is probably longing clog hasn't had its calcium ration today. truth potion of hers can come in handy for the wide open spaces, and should This could be a sticky situation. When when dealing with the less-than-humble. have the gate pass. There's no one Sorry to say, this time Rincewind reat Nanny Ogg's, but don't leave ally does have to kiss her. empty-handed. Ditto for the Edge Speaking of braggarts, a fourth of The World. picture is necessary, but sea life just Our hero has likely had his eye on won't do the trick. Something a bit a certain belt buckle. He'll have to more cucelly is called for. That will give the owner that \"get up and go\" get you to the Temple of Olller. Refeeling, but certain preparations are garding the Monk in the way, it necessary beforehand. Try not to get takes a rugged man to deal with all tangled up, or go to pot. him. As for the temple (or rather, It's about time Rincey proved he's the altar), I say only \"Indiana a man, and Big Sal in Shades can Jones,\" which should be more than definitely help with that (if he's hav BARBER'S HEAD REVISITED Avoid a close shave later by askenough. ing trouble getting the \"special,\" ing the right questions now—the lady and our hairstylist are So now our hero really is a hero. Rincewind hasn't been reading the more closely linked than they might at first seem. Unfortunately, he blows his millionright door at the right time). This to-one chance of dispatching the makes obtaining the fourth item ridicuyou finally do have that chat, be sure dragon. All that work, and the world still lously easy, and while you're in the viciniyou've noticed the man's decorations. hasn't been saved. Obviously, Rincewind ty, Rincewind might just as well drop in Finding Polly isn't hard, but getting needs a new approach. on the thief and help himself to the key. her is another matter. Rincewind will Too much noise? Try a little padding: have to do something not approved by ACT IV That leaves one more item, and the the ASPCA. Even then, the parrot may be This episode is extremely short and procedure is a bit complicated, requiring out of reach. Our boy will need a new fairly obvious. Rincey needs just three a bit of stufling in the right place, and a handle on things. Good thing Windle things: the right dance step, a small exblowout down below (Rincewind did, of Poons is still around. When you lose the plosion, and a slapstick comedy act. And course, note the boxes by the city gate?). whistle, try a hat trick. they lived happily ever after (and I want a Now the dragon is free. Yay! UnfortuThere's still the matter of that eldercopy of that clickie...). nately, it wasn't happy about being ensorberry wine for the Dwarf. As long as Whew! That visit to Discworld should celled, and wants some revenge. Ooops. Rincewind is returning the parrot, he hold you for a while. In the meantime, if There's nothing for it now but to prevent may as well check out the bedroom door. you need help with an adventure game, the summoning. Check out Nanny Ogg's And there's no need to be nice about it, you can reach me in the following ways: stall for a couple of things. Remember, either (by the way, when you do get that On Delphi: Stop by the GameSIG. you can't just take the library book; you'll wine, don't give it to the luggage). have to do something with it. Round about now, you ought to be Table (type: Scorpia). able to get the barber back to his shop By US Mail (enclose a self-addressed,  III and talk to him there. Well, transfers are stamped envelope if you live in the U.S.): Darn, all that work, and the dragon is better than needles any day. Too bad the Scorpia, PO Box 338, Gracie Station, still around. The only possibility, it lovable street urchin isn't cooperating. New York, NY 10028. seems, is for our boy to collect another Rincewind will just have to steal the item. Until next time, happy adventuring! 66 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1995 "


"PARK INTERACTIVE 196 Circle Reader Service #40 600 MPH IN ZERO GRAVITY. IN OUR GALAXY FALL '95 AGBALL INTERACTIVE TRIMARK "


"REVIEW Gemstones in the Myst JEWELS OF THE ORACLE Casts The Puzzle-Adventure In A New Light Of The Same Color by Peter Olafson 've never really liked puzzle games at them and they stare impatiently back at for good things. Those who didn't...well, all that much. Mainly, I suppose, be me, disgusted at my inadequacy. We are weren't. You know the routine; there's cause I am not very good at them. brick walls, both of us, and nothing much good and not-good-enough and not much Sure, I still play them-they drive happens except mortar dust falling. Puzzle in-between in computer games. me crazy, yet I am strangely attractgames, obviously, are some kind of inside This is hardly another \"15\" (you know, ed to them. But in the long run, they joke, and while I've been granted a guest that little sliding tile puzzle where you make me feel stupid. And I don't like feelpass to the pool and the putting green, I've have to rearrange numbers in sequence), ing stupid. never learned the handshake. though there are a couple of very neat I still don't know the handshake, but at turns on that mother of all sliding-block JEWELS OF THE ORACLE least now I no longer feel stupid (well, not puzzle games in here. You'll notice the Price: $59.95 as stupid). For this, I have to thank JEWELS 7TH GUEST influence right away as you System Requirements: OF THE ORACLE (JEWELS), Discis' gem of a navigate your way through the stony but IBM: 486/66 or puzzle game for the Macintosh and Winlavishly modeled environment. better, 16 MB dows, which, while it sometimes persudYour principal workplace is a circular RAM, SVGA video sively simulates a brick wall, is delightfully chamber with high windows, three hierocard, 2x CD-ROM, free of unreasonable barriers. Windows 3.1; supglyphic doors and a central well. Once ports Sound you've sorted out your task in the altar Blaster and comA FOOL'S ERRAND? room (retrieve the scattered jewels), appatible sound JEWELS builds on the puzzle-game-asproached the well rim from any of six dicards. Mac: 68040 or better, 12-16 MB RAM, 2x adventure concept first popularized by rections and depressed one of the 24 CD-ROM, System 7.1 or later. Cliff Johnson in THE FOOL's ERRAND. madorned border stones, a green-tinted Protection: None That is, the puzzles do Developer: Eloi Productions, Inc. not exist merely for Publisher: Discis Entertainment Buffalo, New York their own sake. They are (800) 567-4321 building blocks toward something larger-in I suspect puzzles are like chess in that this case, a test of characyou are good at them to the extent that ter. Despite the docuyou can see ahead. And I've never masmentation's talk, this is tered that prophetic art. My cousin Nick much more of a game knocks off puzzles as though he were than a \"place.\" The backwashing dishes or writing checks. My dad ground postulates a lost couldn't start his day without first solving complex built by a prethe \"Word Jumbles\" buried in the ClassiSumerian civilization for fied section. My wife completes crossword the purpose of honing PUZZLE OF THE ORACLE Several puzzles require that you figure out puzzles as easily as I tie my shoes. logic and reason. Those the rules before you can solve them; here you have to match these But my relationship with brain twisters who successfully completsul complete seemingly random objects together in pairs. consists of the following: I stare helplessly ed its trials were destined 68 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JULY 1995 "


"CENSORED OUR NEW Intimate Possibilities CD-ROM IS SO HOT THEY WON'T LET US SHOW IT TO YOU. Play Intimate Possibilities and participate in our 35 hot, intimate encounters! There are literally thousands of possible storylines with the exclusive company of 4 eager female hardbodies exposing 15 erotic tropical locations in this 2 1/2 hour VR Cinemat interactive experience. We broke all the rules and defied most laws of physics in creating the most talked about game of 1995. Macintosh and Windows Hybrid CD-ROM VENUS INTERACTIVE CINEMA SC095 1-800-714 -73 4 9 Free! The making of Intimate Possibilities bloopers video tape is absolutely free with every order. The hilarious, behind the scenes activities, foul-ups, bloops and blunders have been top secret and unavailable to the public...until now! 2-DISC SET SET Quicktime and the Quicktime Logo are trademarks of Apple Computer, Inc. used under license. Circle Reader Service #319 "


"representation of a puzzle appears within Some of these games, the pool. Click on this, and you are transvariations on Hi-Q and ported to the relevant room amidst a blaze Soko Ban, will be instantof lights, which could rellect either an outly familiar and, with paof-body experience or previously-unseen tience, easily completed. archacological floods. It all depends on Some are simple in conthe level of mysticism with which you apcept but cliabolical in exeproach this project, I guess. cution, like the puzzle And here, well, maybe over there just a that has you transferring bit, is the puzzle. Usually its location is obseeds among five cups, or vious the moment you arrive, but now and the one that requires you then you'll have to seek it out by stumbling to figure out relationships around in your immediate environment. between odd household MISTY INTERFACE JEWELS OF THE ORACLE has a Myst-like quality, although items. And some you'll the environment in JEWELS is more a wrapper for puzzles than a fullNEWFANGLED CLASSICAL LOGIC first need to sort out by blown adventure realm. These conundrums work on a lot of levasking (or clicking on the els. They are clever yet rarely ever seem local Virgil, a slit-eyed guide shaped like an est. It just added another layer to the puztoo smart for their own good. They treat inverted pyramid. In response to your zle, and gives the game an almost philoconventional problems in innovative ways. queries, he'll drone out riddles in lieu of insophical depth. You have to learn a A maze is spread over six sides of a cube. A structions and instructions that sound like society's rules before you can live in it. sliding-block puzzle uses gravity. And while riddles. JEWELS' charm is enhanced even further puzzle games typically adopt a handful of And in some puzzles, as in the twister by its friendly approach to the puzzles. Not themes and stick to them like glue, each of dealing with a box full of odd emblems, being able to solve a puzzle no longer JEWELS' rooms leaves the impression of beyou probably won't have even the faintest means «game over.\" You can reset a puzzle ing one of a kind. Upon reflection, you'll clue what you are doing, even with input at any point by clicking on the space-barbe able to pick out certain themes, but it is from old inverted-pyramid head. Surprislike button at the top of the screen. You can n't so obvious when you're playing. ingly, this didn't bother me in the slightalso adjust the difliculty level (easy or hard) "


"to fit your puzzle-solving ability. But most me wrong; the puzzles are splendid, even find-the-hot-spot treasure hunt. importantly, you can simply leave it unwhen you don't know which end is up, and Perhaps the environment is only insolved and return later, without penalty. Althat's what the game is about. But there's a tended to be a commercial shell to make though you can bypass a game altogether pervasive feeling of empty space here, the game more salable. And from a marwith the \"decline\" option—a sort of borspace that might have been put to better keting point of view, that is understandderline cheat mode that grants you the reguse with interesting gadgets (perhaps a able. Puzzles for puzzles' sake probably do uisite jewel but forfeits your honor-you false puzzle or two) or hidden clues to the not sell all that well. People seem to want a don't want to. The ending for the player tougher puzzles (found, say, by decoding colorful wrapper-a story, some jazzy visuwho doesn't complete all the puzzles is a litthose door hieroglyphics). You can coax als and some neat toys to wind up and set tle like getting flushed down a toilet. Well, old inverted-pyramid head into revealing in motion. at least the game's puzzles don't loom over something of the last, but there's typically But this is precisely where JEWELS OF you like an entertainment guillotine. more labored poetry than content in his \"THE ORACLE comes up a bit short. It's not This general friendliness makes for a spiel. Designer Courtland Shakespeare is that the environment is horrible. It just ismellow, restful tone. It's entirely conperfectly right. This isn't a history lesson. n't that relevant. The puzzles, on the other trolled from the mouse; you're guided by But if a game adopts a theme and prehand, are wickedly brilliant and easily an intelligent cursor that tells you what is sumes to be a \"place,\" the environment worth the price of admission. clickable and what is not. No one's crackought to reflect that. THE EDITORS SPEAK ing the whip, watching the clock, breathAs it happens, most of the gadgets here JEWELS OF THE ORACLE ing down your neck asking if you finished are the puzzles themselves. I can recall your homework. And when you're done, only one or two items that weren't directly RATING you're done. I found working at my own related to a solution. Happily, one puzzle PROS Brilliant puzzles in a graphipace rather appealing. requires a five-part key, scattered throughcally-rich, gamer-friendly environout the various puzzle rooms, to gain enment. THE FLAW IN THE GEM try. But while this will send players CONS Aside from the puzzles, there's One problem I have with JEWELS is that scurrying around the map revisiting much little interaction with the beautifully I can't help but feel that its lush environof the game and clicking on every rock in rendered world. ment is in some measure wasted. Don't get sight, this \"quest\" is little more than a http://www.ea.com/eastudio.html FADE TO BLACK _nu IN PLAY I IT PLAYS Du If you don't have access to the interactive Web tema, call 1-800-245-4525 for a free tema disk (8495 fur shipping & handling) and $500 off your purchase of FADE TO BLACK UR Delphine Software PINTERNATIONAL \"SINSAME E CAR radeth Ekonus Off on a worl d wide Circle Reader Service #64 "


"CHIPS & BITS INC. Sre tno Call 800-699-4263 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'l 802-767-3033 Source 10289 PO Box 234 Dept 10289 Rochester, VT 05767 W SAL95 FULLTHROTLE ARMORED COMBAT CREW 'SAIL 95 Experience the challenge of high performance racing as you control a multi-million dollar IACC yacht. The official simula tor of the America's Cup features advanced AI, sound, and fully animated 3D graphics in 1024 x 768 resolution. CD $44 *ACROSS THE RHINE' Control history's famous tanks and experience the fierce combat and tough decisions that gripped WWII tank commanders. Offers multiple command levels and 3D graphics. Blast your way through enemy units across war torn Europe. CD 547 \"FULL THROTTLE' When you are beaten, deserted by your gang and framed for a murder, the only instinct left is to survive. You are Ben, battle hardened biker, in this adventure about one man against the world. CD $46 America's Cup Racing Simulator. MICROPROSE SIMULATION FREE Collector's Edition West StarTEN \"POWERHOUSE You will command one of four empire building, power grabbing megacorps. These cutthroat behemoths will stop at nothing to control mankind's vital energy supplies. Superb SVGA graphics, 9 energy sources, live video, and random world generation. CD S39 SHIPPING! Place an order for an out of stock software item and recieve FREE overnight shipping when product becomes available. Handling $2 per shipment. GUE BUILD AN ÉNERGY EMPRE! 'STAR TREK TNG: A FINAL UNITY COLLECTORS EDITION' Along with the CD In this collectors editon, you will recieve a starship Enterprise LCD Pin, \"A Final Unity Collectors Box\" and an exclusive poster. CD $79 Impressions IBM HARDWARE IBM HARDWARE IBM ADVENTURE IBM ADVENTURE IBM ADVENTURE IBM ADVENTURE $39 AUDIO HARDWARE Adlib Sound Card $29 Ad Gravis Ultrasound $119 Ad Gravis U-snd ACE $79 Ad Gravis U-snd Max $169 EZ Sound S-Blaster 16 MCD $138 S-Blaster 16 Value $99 Snd Blaster 32 AWE $263 S-Blaster Pro Value $74 S-Blaster Value $57 S-Blaster Vid Spigot $199 S-Blaster Voice Assist $42 Sound Man Wave $125 Sound Galaxy BX2 Wr $29 Snd Galaxy NX2 wspkr $49 Vivid 3D Plus Sound $72 Vivid 3D Pro $105 Vivid 3D Sound Vivid 3D Studio $105 SPEAKERS Altec ACS 200 $209 Altec ACS 3 Sys $179 Altec ACS 300.1w/SW$199 Altec ACS 50 $79 Audiophile Ref 10A $122 Jazz -306 $32 Jazz J-351 $43 Jazz J-590 $62 Koss HD 100 $63 Koss HD 40 $22 Labtec CS-600 $24 Labtec CS-800 $32 Yamaha SBS 300 $88 $29 7th Guest CD S 44 7th Guest 2:11th Hr CD$51 Adrenaline Factor CD $35 Adv of Wil Beamish CD $24 Alien Virus CD $38 Alone in the Dark CD $28 Alone in the Dark 2 CD $40 Alone in the Dark 3 CD $42 AMAZON $35 Atmosfear CD $34 Awful Green Things $36 Beneath a Steel SkyCD$33 Big Red Adventure CD $40 Bioforge CD $44 Black Thome $25 Blake Stone CD $28 Blind Date CD $38 Bloodnet $39 Blown Away CD $39 BrainDead 13 CD $38 Buccaneers CD $48 Bureau 13 or CD $33 Burn Cycle CD Cadillacs & Dino's CD $49 Campgn Cartographer S46 Central Intelligence CD $25 Chaos Continuum CD $29 Commander Blood CD $39 Compans of Xanth CD $33 Conquest of New Wrld $46 Conspiracy CD $30 Corridor 7 $28 Creature Shock CD $48 Cyberia CD $45 Cybermage CD $44 Cyberwar CD $48 Daedalus Encounter S47 Damnesia CD Dark Seed 2 $42 Dark Seed CD $39 Death Gale CD $32 Defcon O CD $39 Depth Dwellerd CD $29 Dinonauts CD $29 Dinonauts WIN $24 Discworld or CD $35 Doom CD S46 Doom 2 $39 Doom 2 CD $44 Doom 2 Collectors Ed $52 Doom 2: Extra Levels $26 Doom2: Extra Levels 2 $26 Dracula $32 Dracula Unleashed CD $39 Dreadnoughts Bismark $29 Dreamweb $34 Dune CD Dust CD $42 Ecstatica or CD $36 Elf $24 Entombed CD $37 Evolution or CD Extractors CD $34 Flash Traffic CD $39 Flashback CD $35 Fort of Dr. Radiaki CD $32 Frankenstein WIN CD S46 Fred's Frontier Pharm $24 Fred Front Pharm CD $32 Freelancer 2120 $35 Freelancer 2120 CD $41 Full Throttle CD $46 G.Nome $43 G-Nome CD $43 Gabriel Knight $29 Gabriel Knight 2 CD $48 Gadget CD Gateway 2 or CD $29 Gender Wars CD $49 Guy Spy CD $29 CONTROLLERS Auto Cockpit $159 CH Flight Stick Pro $57 CH Pro Pedals $75 CH Pro Throttle $89 CH Trackball Pro $85 CH Virtual Pilot Pro $75 Cyberman $54 Flight Stick $35 Game Zapper $47 Gravis Firebird $59 Gravis PC Game Pad $19 Gravis Phoenix J-stick $83 Joyswitch $38 Logitch Trackmn Live $139 Logitch Wng Man Extrm $45 Notebook Gameport $42 PC Virtual Golf Club $119 Spacebil Avenger Ctrl$165 T-master DCS (T1) $110 T-master F16TQS $110 T-master FLC F16 $110 T-master XL Action Ctrl $24 Total Contri Virt Contrir $34 Universal Cockpit $219 Gobliiins 1.2 or 3 each $19 Goblilind 4 CD $24 Hand of Fale CD HardJack CD $48 Harvester CD $42 Hell Cab CD $38 Heretic 2 CD $46 Heretic Extra Levels $26 Heretic w/Ex Levels CD S52 Hired Guns $36 I Have No Mouth CD $44 Ice & Fire CD $48 In Extremus $42 Inca 3 CD $39 Indy Jones Fate Atlant $32 Inherit the Earth CD $24 Iron Helix CD $56 Jagged Alliance $46 Jewel of the Oracle CD $39 Johnny Mnemonic CD $44 Jonny Quest Journeyman Project 2 $55 Jurassic Park $29 King's Quest 6 or CD $45 King's Quest 7 CD $49 King's Ransom CD $33 Kingdom O' Magic CD $48 L-Zone CD $40 Lands of Lore 2 $42 Last Dynasty CD S48 Laura Bow 2 or CD $24 Lawn Mower Man 2 CD$49 Legend of Kyrandia $24 Leisure Suit Larry 6 $39 Leisure Suit Larry 7 CD$44 Leisure Suit Larry Anth $47 Little Divil CD $39 Loadstar CD $49 Lost Eden CD $39 Lost Mind of Dr Brain $36 Lost Treasures Infocom$29 Lost in Town CD Lunicus CD S42 MTV Club Dead CD $39 MYST MAC $48 Maabus CD $29 MacBeth: Game CD $35 Madness of Roland CD $29 Mission Critical CD S34 Morph Man CD $25 Myst CD $48 Nibelrung Ring Cycle $39 Night Trap CD $48 Noctropolis CD S47 Nomad $35 Odyssey CD $44 Out of this World 2 CD $45 Pagemaster CD $44 Panic in the Park CD $39 Phantasmagoria CD $54 Pitfall or CD $38 Police Quest 5 CD $48 Power Dome CD $48 Power WIN CD $35 Prince of Persia 2 $29 Prisoner of Ice CD $42 Psychotron CD S25 Quest for Glory 5 CD Relentless CD $44 Return to Zork $39 Return to Zork w Anth $44 Riddle of Master Lu CD$48 Riftwar Legacy $23 Road Warrior CD $30 Robocop 3 $32 Robot City CD $46 Room For Rent CD $42 Sam & Max Hit Road $29 Scroll CD $38 Sea Legends CD $44 $29 CD ROM HARDWARE 4 Plox Quad Spd Drve$429 Diamond 1000 Kit (2x)$329 Diamond 4000 Kit (4x)$379 Digital Edge 3x Int CD $699 Mitsumi 4 Speed CD $215 NEC 4XE M-spin Ext 5489 NEC 4XI M-spin Int $405 NEC 4XI w/Interface $489 Plextor 4 Plex w Ctrir $439 Plextor 4 Plex int Drve$329 Plextor 6 Plex Int DiveS529 SanyoConcord 3 4XEX$325 Sanyo Concord 3 4X $215 S-Blaster Omni2x Ext $369 S-Blaster Omni (4x) $412 S-Blaster Omni (2X) $207 S-Blaster Omni (3X) $329 Teac Super Quad 4X $220 $45 $36 CGW 7951 1995 CHIPS X BITS, INC "


"OVERNIGHT SHIPPING in US $4 per order. Mail to Canada, PR, HI. AK, APO, FPO 54 por order. Worldwide airmail $6 per item. Handling $2 per shipment. Hardware orders may require additional shipping charges. All sales linal. Call for details Visa, MC and Discover accepted. Checks held 4 weeks, Money Orders under $200 same as cash. COD $8 Detectives replaced with same product. Most items shipped same day, Shipping times may vary. Price/ availability may change. * 100 FOL FREE GAME OFFER* See detalls below WINDOWS IE INTERACTIVE CRYSTAL CAL IBURN' A truly great pinball game is more than great graphics and spec tacular sounds. more than the latest arcade features like 3D ramps and three multi-ball play, more than fast ball movement and precise flipper control, it's one that keeps you coming back for more. $29 'UNDER KILLING MOON Transports you to the virtual world of the feisty detective Tex Murphy New features allow you to save and splice scenes together. An amazing level of detail & freedom of movement make this game visually and aurally stunning. CD $44 'INTERACTIVE ENTERTAINMENT CD MAG CD ROM AZINE' is a monthly CD Rom publication covering the computer gaming industry. Warhammer 40K Preview Every episide feaHarlan Ellison Interview tures hundreds of QQP Company Profile Free Game: Magic Candle 34 screen shots and hours of digitized speech describing the hottest upcoming releases. Features interactive video interviews with industry celebrities. Get definitive reviews of the latest releases, along with previews of upcoming games. CD $9.95 IUNDERA Crystal Caliburn PERFECT GENERALI \"PERFECT GENERAL 2 is an unbeatable strategic and tactical experience with stunning graphics, intuitive interface, and the sharpest artificial intelligence ever. Feel the power as you command missions in the most exciting eras of world conflict. 5 levels of difficulty. CD $38 X-COM TERROR FROM THE DEEP' brings the alien terror into a totally new dimension. Your combat now extends to the strange new worlds of the deep where superior alien technologies threaten the very survival of this planet. Your planet: Earth. CD $39 *FREE GAME OFFER Spond the spocified amount on any in stock software and choose a free IBM game from the corresponding list below. Offer subject to change or cancellation without notice. Valid from Juna 1st July 31st or while supplies last. Request must be made at time of order. SPEND $60 Airborne Ranger 5.25, All IE up to Episodo 9, Cohort 2 3.5, Conquered Kingdoms Scon 3.5, GNB Scon Disk 3.5. Gunship 5.25, Morconarios 5.25, Pirates 5.25. SDI 5.25 SPEND $100 Bridge 7.0 3.5. DRAGON Force 3.5/5.25, Falcon 3.0 MG 29 3.5, MacArthur's War 3.5, Megatraveller Zhodani 5.25. Return of the Phantom 3.5, Terminator 2029 3.5 SPEND S160 Alone in the Dark 3.5 Battles of Destiny 3.5. Links Pro 386 3.5, F15 Stnke Eagle 113.5, Railroad Tycoon 3.5, Rules of Engagement 5 25 Silent Service 2 3.5. Simon the Sorceror 3.5, Star Trek Judgement Ritos 3.5. Ultima Underworld 2 3.5, Worlds at War 3.5/5.25 SPEND $200 Harpoon Collection CD. Falcon 3.0 3.5 Jutland CD. Links Pro 386 CD, V Victory: Market Garden 3.5. Warlords 5.25 TERROR FROM THE IBM ADVENTURE IBM ARCADE IBM ARCADE IBM ROLEPLAYING IBM ROLEPLAYING IBM ROLEPLAYING $37 S45 Secret Monkey Island $25 Secrets of Stargate CD $28 Shadow of Comet CD $25 Shadows of Cairn CD $39 Silverload CD Simon the Sorcerer 2 $37 Slaughterhouse 5 CD $46 Space Quest 6 CD S45 Space Ship Brainlock $49 Spaceship Warlock CD $29 Spawn or CD $42 Star Reach $36 Star Trek: Judge Rites $42 Star Trek:Star Fleet CD$46 StereoWorld CD System Shock $41 Terminator 2029 CD S29 Terminator Rampage $34 Terra Nova $48 Terror of the Deep $35 The Dig $40 The Journeyman Projct $32 The Trial Thief of Dreams Touche $39 Trouble is my Biz CD 546 Under a Killing Moon $44 Virtuoso CD Vortex CD S45 Voyeur CD Walker $32 Wetlands CD $29 Where in Time Carmen $29 Witchaven CD $46 Wolt:Hunt or Hunted $39 Wolves of Moordeth $39 Wrath of the Gods CD $36 XS CD $48 Zombie Dino CD $30 Zorro CD $39 3D Ultra Pinball CD $40 500 CC Race Bike $29 5th Dimesion CD $19 Alien Breed $19 Aliens Ate Babysitter $27 Atar 2600 Action Pack $25 Animation Classics 2 $42 Breakthru WIN Cannon Fodder CD $23 Corpse Killer CD $48 Creepers $24 Crime Patrol CD $35 Crystal Caliburn WIN $29 Crystal Skulls CD $40 Dragon's Lair CD $34 Dragon's Lair 2 CD $39 Dragon's Lair 3 Drug WarsCD Eight Ball Deluxe $29 FX Fighter CD $43 Glider 4.0 $29 Gobliiins 3 $19 Gorg CD $19 Hammer Slammers CD $46 Hodj & Podj CD $40 Ishar 3 $33 Jump Raven CD $42 Jurassic Park CD $25 Lode Runner Network $40 Lode Runner WIN $29 Lode Runner WIN CD $39 Mad Dog McCree CD $35 Mad Dog McCree II CD $35 Magnaflux Runner S29 Mario Game Gallery $25 Mega Man X $23 Metal & Lace $27 Metal & Lace Upgrade $5 Mickey Mania CD $39 Microcosm CD $36 Microsoft Arcade WIN $29 Mirage Thunder $39 Monty Python's Waste $48 Mortal Kombat $24 Mortal Kombat 2 CD S44 Mortal Kombat 3 CD $48 Novastorm CD $35 Oxyd Magnum $36 Pinball Fantasies $29 Pinball Fantasy Dix CD $29 Pinball Illusions $29 Pinball Illusions CD $29 Pinball Worlds or CD $35 Power Rangers CD $25 Raiden $29 Raiden CD $32 Rebel Assault CD $44 Revolution X CD Rise of the Robots Rocket Boy CD $49 Royal Flush Pinball CD $30 Silverball 2 $19 Sink or Swim CD $19 Slam City CD $48 Sleepwalker $21 Space Ace 2 $34 Space Pirates CD $39 Striker or CD $46 Super Bubsy WIN '95 $34 Supreme Warrior CD $48 T2: Arcade Game S23 Take-A-Break Pinball $19 Tetris Gold CD $32 The Last Bounty Hunter $35 Thoxder 2 CD $40 Time Pockets CD $46 Total Domination CD $39 Tubular Worlds $36 Ultimate Pinball CD $29 Wrath of the Demon S21 ADD Collector Pck CD $35 ADD Cictor Edit V.3 $19 ADD Three Worlds CD $24 Al-QadimCD $39 Alien Legacy $36 Alien Legacy CD $39 Amberstar $16 Arborea Journey Sanct $34 Arena $39 Arena CD $45 Betrayal in Antara CD $48 Campaign Cartographer $46 Cobra Mission $29 Cyclones $39 CyClones CD $39 Cyber Space CD S38 CyberJudas CD $35 Daemonsgate $19 Daemonsgate CD $19 Dark Sun 2 $47 Dark Sun 2 CD S49 Dark Sun $47 Dark Sun CD Darklands $19 Demon Hunter $42 Devil's Gate CD $40 Disciples of Steel $34 Dragon Lore CD $47 Druid CD $45 Dungeon Master $19 Dungeon Mster 2 or CD $37 Elder Scrolls 2 CD $48 Eye of the Beholder 1 $19 Eye of the Beholder 2 $19 Eye of the Beholder 3 $19 Goldtree Buildings $10 Goldtree Characters $10 Goldtree Dark Tower $15 Goldtree Engine $26 Goldtree Outer City S15 Hell CD $45 Hunters of Ralk CD S54 Ishar 3 CD $33 Kingdoms CD $40 Knights of Xentar CD $38 Knights of Xentar $44 Knights Xentar Upgrade $5 Lands of Lore $34 Lands of Lore CD $41 Legacy:Realm of Terror 39 Lord of the Rings 2 CD $38 Lord of the Rings CD $33 Lord of the Rings 1 C E$14 Lord of the Rings 1 & 2 $19 Lords of Midnight CD 548 Menzoberranzan $42 Menzoberranzan CD $47 Might & Magic 3 S24 Might & Magic 4 $19 Might & Magic 5 $19 Pirates Gold $19 Pool of Radiance $15 Pools of Darkness $38 Ravenloft 2 CD $46 Ravenloft $48 Ravenloft CD $49 Realm of Arkania 3 CD $45 Realms of Arkania $25 Red Crystal $19 Return to Ringworld CD$19 Riftwar Legacy CD $23 Rings of Medusa Gold $18 Rng of Medusa Gld CD S23 Robinson's Requiem $33 Robinson Requiem CD S33 Rome: Pathway to Pwr $29 Stonekeep CD $44 Secret Silver Blades $15 Sentinel Worlds C Edit $14 Shadow Caster CD S18 Shadow Caster CD S18 Sherlock Holmes 1 CD $29 Sherlock Holmes 2 CD $29 Sherlock Holmes 3 CD 539 Skyrealm of JoruneCD $39 Star Reach CD $36 Star Trail $41 Star Trail CD $45 Star Trail Speech Pck $18 Star Trek Deep Spce 9 $41 Star Trek TNG:Unity $47 Stonekeep CD S44 Stronghold Summoning $16 S-hero League Hobokn $34 S-hero L Hoboken CD $34 Sword of China $42 Syndicate Syndicate Plus CD $40 Tales of Magic Char EdS14 Thunderscape CD $40 Treasures Savage Frnt $19 Ultima 6 False Prophet $19 Ultima 7 Series CD $29 Ultima 8 wSpch Pk CD $32 Ultima 8: Pagan $26 Ultima 8: Pagan S Pck $17 Ultima 9: Ascension $52 Ultima 9:Ascension CD $52 Ultima Uworld 1 & 2 CDS29 Ultima Uworld 2 $19 Ultima Uworld $21 Unlimited Adventures $19 Vampire: Masquerade $48 Wizardry 4 $19 Wizardry 5 Char Edit $14 Wizardry 5 ODCPS19 Wizardry 6 Cos Forge $22 Wizardry 7 Crusaders $19 World of Xeen CD $40 $44 $49 S42 $39 $46 CGW 7052 1996 CHIPS & BITS, INC Circle Reader Service #54 "


"CHIPS&BITS INC. Han er eneste for det Call 800-699-4263 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'I 802-767-3033 Source 10289 PO Box 234 Dept 10289 Rochester, VT 05767 The greatest on the planet PTIC JOST ADMIRAL The Adical Re 'THE LOST ADMIRAL 2 Dare to enter the waters once again, with The Admiral's Revenge. The predesigned maps are monumental, the randomly generated scenarlos are tremendous and the campaigns round out a titanic gaming experience. CD $39 \"LINKS PRO 386 CD' The most award winning golf game in software history has now been enhanced for the CD platform. From tee to green Links 386 CD is unrivaled in recreating a true golfing experience. Play at Hilton Head Island or Banff Springs Resort, Canada. CD $22 *THRUST-MASTER F-16 TQS' You've got one of the best flight simulators on the market and the software is more sophisticated than the best the military had just a few years ago, but you're still using your keyboard to fly it? With the TQS\" you'll be flying that bird from an F-16 Cockpit! User configurable, thumb trackball, fore and aft throttle movement, dogfight switch and throttle tension adjustment wheel. S110 LINKS 386 ACCESS FREE LAS VEGAS SILENT UNTER khi tu lich | TIN LIT STRATEGY PLUS! LAS VEGAS SCENERY' Go on a trip where you just can't lose. The startlingly realistic Las Vegas Scenery, gives you an entirely new dimension of 3D level detail. This scenery uses actual satellite photos enhanced with special aerial and ground based photography, CD $32 SILENT HUNTER' Authentic W.W.Il film footage, cinematics, and narration throughout the game will give the player a historical feel of what it was like to command a submarine during the war in the Pacific. Choose a vanety of American submarines used in W.W.II. CD 546 Receive an issue of Strategy Plus magazine FREE with any in stock software order. Offer subject to change or cancellation without notice. Valid from 6/1/95 to 7/31/95 or while supplies last. Quantities limited. SEL Pella IBM SIMULATIONS IBM SIMULATIONS IBM SIMULATIONS IBM SIMULATIONS IBM SPORTS IBM STRATEGY $52 1st Encounters or CD $29 A10 2:Silent Hunter CD$48 A320 Airbus S29 AH-64 B Longbow $54 Absolute Zero CD 948 Aces Over Europe $32 Aces of the Deep $44 Aces of the Deep CD 548 Aces of the Deep 2 CD $48 Aces of Deep Mission $29 Aces of the Pacific CD $39 Aces Over Europe CD $38 Across the Desert 1941948 Across the Rhine CD $47 Across the Rhine Exp1 $30 Air Combat Pac 1942 $24 Air Combat Pac'42 Gld $48 Air Combt Series: Navy $47 Air Havoc Ctrlr WIN CDS39 Air Warrior 2 or CD $34 Air Warrior SVGA or CD $35 Apache CD $45 Armored Fist $43 Armored Fist CD $47 Army Air Corps: 1942 $48 Army Air Corps: 42CD $48 Art of the Kill $24 B17 Flying Fort w/SS2 $37 Battle of Britain 2 WIN $34 Battlecruiser 3000 $43 Big Red Racing CD $40 Chaos Control CD $39 Chopper Pack CD $38 Chopper Strike $48 Chopper Strike CD $52 Combat Air Patrol or CD$29 Confirmed Kill CD Cyber Race CD S32 Cyclemania CD $34 D-Day CD $39 Dark Ride CD $49 Dawn Patrol $35 Dawn Patrol CD $41 Dawn Patrol 2 CD $42 Delta V $25 Delta V CD $25 Descent 2.0 CD $46 Descent or CD $37 Dream Web CD $34 EarthSiege 2 CD $48 Evasive Action $28 F117A Stealth Fighter $23 F15 Strike Eagle III $34 FA 18 Hornet CD $54 Falcon 3 Scen 3 FA 18 S25 Falcon 3.0 $29 Falcon 4.0 CD $49 Falcon Gold CD $52 Fast Attack $46 Fast Attack CD 546 Fighter Duel Pro 2 $33 Fighter Wing or CD S39 Fleet Delender F14 $42 Fleet Delender Gld CD $48 Flight Sim Tool Kit CD $39 Flight Unlimited CD $48 Fly Grand Canyon CD $29 Flying Aces CD $49 Flying Circus $39 Formula 1 $24 Great Naval Bat 2 CD $39 Gunship 2000 VGA $32 HAW.C. $32 Harrier Assault CD $35 Indy Car Racing Infemo or CD Iron Angel CD Iron Assault CD Jet Fighter 3 $41 Jet Pack CD $39 Jump Jet $22 Kawasaki Super Bikes $24 Lawn Mower Man CD $35 Lode Runner $36 M1 Tank Platoon 2 CD $48 M4:Sherman Tank Sim S34 Magic Carpet CD $43 Maximum Overkill Bun $40 Maximum Overkill CD $48 MechCommander orCD$42 Mechwarrior 2 or CD $45 Megarace CD $34 MetalTech Metaltech: E-siege $45 MiG 29 (Stand Alone) $39 MS FS 5 Las Vegas $32 MS FS 5 Portland CD $33 MS FS 5 Wash. DC $29 MS FS 6 CD $54 MS FS Flight Shop $36 MS Space Sim 1.0 $44 Mig 29 Fulcrum $29 Mig 29 Gold CD $49 Mule 2 $44 Nascar Racing $39 Nascar Racing Tracks $24 Pacific Strike $25 Phoenix Fighter CD $49 Power Boat Simulator 3546 Privateer $48 Rally $29 Rapid Assault CD $28 Red Baron A10 T-Killer $39 Red Baron W/M Builder $29 Red Ghost $39 Renegade CD $41 Retribution CD $32 Sail '95 or CD $44 Sail Simulator $59 Sailing Sim 3 East $39 Sailing Sim 3 West $39 Sailing Simulator 3 Sea Wolf CD 544 Shuttle or CD $26 Silent Hunter CD $46 Silent Steel $46 Sky Warriors CD $35 Slipstream 5000 CD $40 Space Clipper $42 Spectre VR CD $35 Star Base $42 Star Crusader $29 Starlord $39 Stim Slum $42 Sub Battle Simulator 2 $39 Sub Balt Sim 2 Win CD$39 Sub War 2050 $33 Sub War 2050 Plus CD $40 SuperKarts $39 Syndicate Scen 1 TFX or CD $36 Tank Com Network CD $46 Tank Girl CD $48 Task Force Admiral Pk $39 Terminal Velocity CD $44 The Big One CD $26 Tie Fighter $46 Top Gun CD $40 Tomado CD $39 Tower $42 Train Engineer $29 Trophy Bass CD $48 U-Boat 2 $36 U-Boat WIN $34 Wing Com Armada CD $47 Wng Com Armada WN $40 Wing of Glory Enhance $40 World Circuit 2 S42 X-Wing $39 X-Wing Collector's CD $46 APBA Baseball $24 All Americn Clge FB'94 $38 Barkley: Shut Up &Jam $42 Baseball for Windows $29 Blood Bowl or CD $34 Brett Hull Hcky '95 CD $34 ESPN Total Bball CD $39 FIFA Internat'l Sccr CD $36 Fairways to HeavenCD $29 Front Page FB Pro '95 $44 F-P Sprts Bball '96 CD $48 F-Page FB Pro '96 CD $48 Gone Fishin' CD $39 Hardball 4 $32 Internat'l Tennis Open $44 J Nicklaus Golden Bear $34 Links Pentium CD 549 Live Action Football CD$34 Microsoft Baseball CD $51 M-soft Golf 2.0 WIN CD $45 M-soft Golf for Win $48 NBA Jam $44 NBA Live 95 CD B $47 NFL '95 WIN $24 NFL Chal Prem Ed $59 NFL Coach Club FB 2 $44 NFL Super Bowl CD $39 NHL Hockey '95 CD $40 Nick Price Golf CD $45 PGA Tour Golf 486 CD $47 Picture Perfect GII CD $42 Planet Soccer $29 Proleague FB Comm $38 Road to Final Four 2 $38 Tony LaRussa Bsbil 2 $37 Tony LaRussaBb 3 CD $48 Troy Aikman Ftball CD $49 Unnecessary Rough'95$34 Winter Sports CD $28 World Cup Golf Dorado $44 1830:RR & Robr Baron $34 18th Air Squadron $36 A Train $34 A-Train WConstruct St $29 Advanced Civilization S34 Advance Civilization CD $34 Archon Ultra $32 Arctic Baron or CD $29 Ares CD $42 Baldies $32 Battle Bugs $37 Battle Isle 2200 CD $34 Battle of Chickamagua $38 Bat of Chickamagua CD $42 Battles in Time or CD $35 Black Beard or CD S34 Breach 3 or CD $34 Castles 2 CD Celtic Tales or CD $39 Chessmaster 4000 Trb $36 Civilization Civilizatn Network CD $48 Civilization WIN S 48 Colonization or CD $46 Colonization Gld CD $48 Colonization WIN OCD $48 Conquered Kingdoms 2$38 Conquerer CD S46 Conquest $36 Crusader: No Remorse $44 Darklegions $36 Darklegions CD $38 Dead Zone CD $52 Deadline CD $38 Detroit Dscvry Stop Columbus $34 Dominus $25 Empire 2 or CD $42 Empire Builder $36 Exploration CD $40 S44 $39 S44 $44 $39 CGW 7953 109 CHIPS & BITS, INC "


"OVERNIGHT SHIPPING in US SA per order. Mall to Canada, PR, HI, AK, APO, FPO S4 por order. Worldwide airmail SG per item. Handling $2 per shipment Hardware arders may require additional shipping charges. All sales linal. Call for details Visa, MC and Discover accepted. Checks held 4 weeks. Money Orders under $200 same as cash. COD 88. Defectives replaced with same product. Most items shipped same day, Shipping times may vary. Price / availability may change. FREE GAME OFFER* See detalls below III NASCAR TECKTACH \"NASCAR TRACK PACK' Owners of NASCAR racing can test both racing and garage skills with the new NASCAR Track Pack which in cludes precise replcas of seven new challenging race tracks including super speedways, tri-ovals, road courses, and more. CD S24 'SPACEBALL AVENGER' Say 'Later to the clunky, herky jerky action of keyboard, mouse and joystick play! Enter the next generation of super cyberdynamics. Get a grip and hang on. 'cause you're gonna move like you've never moved before. Natural, intuitive, smooth continuous 3D motion control. Just like reaching into the screen and moving things directly! Unbelievable breakthrough. $165 COUPONTS THE DOLPHIN VIRTUAL HELM CONSOLE' Clamp the Helm Console to your desk or table, plug it into your PC gameport and sail away! This complete simulator interface comes fully equipped with wheel and tiller. $139 QUECIL TUCAN 'STAR TREK: NEXT GENERATION' You are part of an original interactive mystery that will take you from Federation space to shields up confrontations. Offers voice-overs by the stars, control of the seven main characters and command of the ship. CD $47 \"MIDWAY' CincPac, short for Commander-inChief Pacific Fleet, is played by the computer. Choose to play either Admiral Spruance. Commander of Enterprise and Homet or Admiral Nagumo, in charge of four Japanese fleet carriers. $24 *FREE GAME OFFER Spond the specified amount on any in stock software and choose a free IBM game from the corresponding list below. Other subject to change or cancellation without notice. Valid from Juno 1st July 31st or while supplies last. Request must be mado at time of order. SPEND $60 Airborne Ranger 5.25, All IE p to Episode 9, Cohort 2 3.5, Conquered Kingdoms Scen 3.5, GNB Scen Disk 3.5. Gunship 5.25, Morconnrios 5.25, Piratas 5.25, SDI 5.25 SPEND $100 Bridge 7.0 3.5, DRAGON Force 3,5/5.25. Falcon 3.0 MiG 29 3.5, MacArthur's War 3.5, Megatraveller Zhodani 5.25, Return of the Phantom 3.5. Torminator 2029 3.5 SPEND S160 Alone in the Dark 35, Battles of Destiny 35. Links Pro 386 35. F15 Strike Eaglo II 3.5, Railroad Tycoon 3,5, Rules of Engagement 5.25, Silont Service 2 3.5. Simon the Sorceror 3.5. Star Trek Judgement Rites 3.5. Ultima Underworld 2 3.5, Worlds at War 3.5/5.25 SPEND $200 Harpoon Collection CD, Falcon 3.0 3.5 Jutland CD. Links Pro 386 CD. V Victory: Market Garden 3.5, Warlords 5.25 THE NEXT GENERATION noc Selex Mount IBM STRATEGY IBM STRATEGY IBM WAR GAMES IBM WAR GAMES IBM HINT BOOKS IBM HINT BOOKS $45 $10 $16 $40 $12 Fantasy Empires CD 542 Fantasy Fieldom CD $48 Feudal $39 Flight Commandr 2 CD $38 Front Lines CD $39 Genesia $35 Genghis Khan 2 $34 Global Domination $34 Gold of the Americas $24 Great Naval Bat 3 CD 546 Hammer of Gods CD $39 HercForce WIN CD 548 Hero of Mght & Magic $34 High Seas TraderorCD $39 Hollywood Mogul $38 Incredible Mchine 2 CD $39 Jagged Alliance CD 546 Kingdoms of France $34 Kingdoms of Germany $34 Kingmaker $32 Legions WIN $34 Lemming Chronicle CD $35 Lords of Realm or CD $39 Lost Admiral 2 CD $39 Machiavelli Prince CD $38 Marco Polo or CD $42 Master of Magic or CD $39 Master of Orion or CD $40 MechLords CD $34 Navy Strike CD S40 Networks CD $39 New Horizons CD S34 Nobunaga's Ambition 2 $34 Onslaught WIN $35 Operation CrusaderCD $39 Outpost Planet Pck CD $33 Outpost WIN $38 Patrician Pax Imperia $39 Perfect General 2 CD $38 Pirates Gld M-M CD S48 Pizza Tycoon or CD $40 Power House WIN CD $39 Power WIN $35 Rags to Riches $36 Romance 3 kngdms 3 $39 Romance 3 Kngdms 4 $39 Second Conflict WIN $34 Sert City $37 Sid Meir's Civil War $58 Sim Ant CD Sim City 2000 S29 Sim City CD SimClassic Col Simisle CD Simcity 2000 WIN CD $59 Space Miner $36 Space Raiders CD $42 Spaceward Ho! $36 Star Control 3 CD $39 Starship Troopers $39 The Complete UMS $49 The Orion Conspiracy $48 The Rogarian Agenda $39 Theme Park $38 Theme Park CD $39 Transport Tycoon orCD$48 Transport Tycoon Scn $24 Ultimate Domain or CD $36 Unnatural SelectnorCD $29 Victory or Defeat WIN $42 Vikings 2 $36 Warcraft 2 or CD $40 Warcraft or CD $39 Warlords 2 $29 Warlords 2 Scen Ed $29 Worlds of War CD $48 X-Com 2 or CD $39 X-Com or CD $38 Zeppelin CD $25 7th Fleet CD $39 Action North Atlantic $26 Action off River Platte $24 Aegis CD $46 Aide de Camp Air Raid Pearl Harbour $22 Battle Tank Barbarossa$29 Battle Tank Kursk $29 Battle of Austerlitz $24 Battle of Leyte Gull S24 Battle of the Atlantic $29 Battle of the Bulge $39 Battleground CD S44 Battleship Bismark $26 Bynd Squad Leader CD$45 Big 3 WIN CD Blitzkrieg or CD $39 Blue & The Grey S38 Borodino Napoln Invade $24 Carriers at War 1 or 2 $39 CincPac or CD $39 Civil War: 1861-64 CD $39 Command & Conquer $48 D-Day: America Invade $39 D-Day:Beginning / End $39 Dreadnoughts Deluxe $59 Fall Gelb $29 Fields of Glory $37 Fifth Eskadra $29 Fifth Fleet $38 Fleet Med $27 Flight Commander 2 $38 Gettysburg CD S42 Golan Front $29 Grey Seas, Grey Skies $29 Harpoon 2 Dix CD $42 Harpoon 3 CD $39 Iron Cross 2 CD $39 Kriegsmarine $29 Kursk Campaign $29 Last Blitzkrieg $40 Long Lance S29 Main Bat Tnk Mid East $29 Malta Storm $29 Man of War $36 Moscow Campaign $36 Napoleonics $34 Northern Fleet $36 Operation Crusader $36 Operation Europe CD S34 Operation Overlord $36 Pac Storm Mdwy Cpgn $29 Pac Strm Solomn Cmp $36 Panzer General or CD $39 Point of Attack $32 Red Sky Morning Return to Falklands $28 Rising Sun $24 Rommel at El Alamein $36 Rommel at Gazala $36 Seventh Fleet $36 Sid Mier's Civil War CD$58 Stalingrad Campaign $36 Stalingrad or CD $39 Steel Panthers CD $42 Tac Ops WIN $40 The Great War The Pure Wargme CD S29 Third Reich or CD $34 Tigers on the Prowl $42 To The Rhine $29 USS Ticonderoga CD $34 V Victory:M Garden $24 V Victory G.Juno Swrd $34 V Victory:Utah Beach $29 V Victory:Velikye Luki $24 Victory at Sea $41 War in the Falklands $24 Warpoint $36 Warship Chang History S22 7th Guest 2: 11th Hour $16 A-Train S16 ADD Three Worlds $12 Aces Guide $16 Aces Over Europe $16 Aces of the Deep $16 Across the Rhine $16 Advent Wil Beamish $10 Aegis $16 Aircombat Pacific $16 Al-Qadim $12 Alien Legacy $16 Alone in the Dark S12 Alone in the Dark 2 $10 Alone in the Dark 3 $16 Arena $16 Armored Fist $16 Bioforge S17 Blackthorne $16 Bureau 13 $16 Castle Wolfenstien $16 Castle of Dr Brain $10 Champions of Krynn $12 Civilization $16 Colonization Compoter Advent Gms S16 Conquests Robin Hood $10 Curse of Azure Bonds S12 Cyberia $16 Cyclonos $12 Dark Forces Players $16 Dark Queen of Krynn $12 Dark Sun 2 S12 Dark Sun $12 Day of the Tentacle $12 Descent Strat Guide $16 Doom 2 Guide $16 Doom 2 Survival Guide $12 Doom Battlebook $14 Dragon Lore Guide S16 Dungeon Master 2 Adv $16 EcoQuest $10 Flights of 13 Mike $16 Frankenstein $16 F Page Sprts FB '95 $16 Full Throttle Players Goblins 2 $10 Gold Rush Harpoon 2 $19 Hell Guide Heretic Guide $16 Inca 2 $10 1 Jones 4 Fate Atlantis $12 Inherit the Earth Internet for Windows $14 Jagged Alliance S16 Jet Fighter 3 Guide $16 Journeyman Project 2 $16 King's Quest 7 $17 Legend of Kyrandia 3 $12 Leisure Suit Larry 6 S10 Lemmings Chronicles $16 Lode Runner Guide $16 Lord of the Rings V2 S12 Lst Fles Shrick Holmes $14 LucasArts Air Combat S16 Machiovelli the Prince $16 Master of Magic $16 Master of Onion $16 Mechwarrior 2 $16 Menzoberranzan S12 Metal Tech Earthslege $16 Microsoft Golf 2.0 S16 Microsoft Space Sim S16 Might & Magic 3-5 ea $16 Noctropolis $12 Outpost Guide $16 Dodoet Gonoral Perfect General 2 S16 Phantasmagoria $16 Pool of Radiance S12 $16 $39 $34 CGW 7054 0 1996 CHIPS A BITS, INC C ircle Reader Service #54 "


"CHIPS&BITS INC. Categorier som har tenen Call 800-699-4263 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'l 802-767-3033 Source 10289 PO Box 234 Dept 10289 Rochester, VT 05767 MIIANTASMAGORTA SPACE QUEST 6 PHANTAS MAGORIA' The story of a woman lighting for her life against the forces of evil in the most adventurous multimedia suspense thriller ever. Film techniques and digital effects create a frighteningly believable night mare from which you may never awake. CD $54 'SPACE QUEST 6: THE SPINAL FRONTIER' Join forces with hundreds of your favorite outer space heroes, past and present in the most uproarious, outrageous Space Quest ever. No video game, TV show or sci-fi movie is exempt from the relentless comic parody. CD $45 'THRUSTMASTER F-16 FLCS'A versatile stick with virtually unlimited programmability. It looks and feels like it was nipped out of the jet. The ultimate edge for any flight sim. Offers a grip modeled after the F-16 Fighting Falcon, four 8way hat switches & a dual stage trigger. S110 FREE 16T CENTU INTERACTIVE ENTERTAINMENT 'JUTLAND' Command a fearsome dreadnought and fight for control of the No. & So. Atlantic for the German Imperial Fleet or the British Royal Navy. Stunning SVGA graphics, digitized video and sound effects. Historically accurate combat including night combat. CD $29 'MECHWARRIER II' Climb into one of 16 BattleMechs and prepare to set your imagination on fire. You're strapped into a 100 ton machine that can annihilate a sqadron of F-15S in a heartbeat. From ice to desert to urban land scapes. Fight for survival, glory and honor. CD 546 MAGIC CANDLE 3 INCLUDED! Request your FREE Interactive Entertainment Episode 13 with any in stock CD ROM software order. Offer subject to change or cancellation with out notice. Request must be made at time of order. Valid from 6/1/95 to 7/31/95 or while supplies last. Quantities limited. ACTIVISION IBM HINT BOOKS IBM BUNDLES IBM BUNDLES IBM ACTION IBM BUDGET IBM BUDGET $9 $6 Pools of Darkness $12 Power Monger $16 Privateer Playtester S14 Quest for Glory 3 ordea$ 10 Questbusters 2 $18 Ravenloft 2 $12 Realms of Arkania $16 Rebel Assault Insiders $16 Return to Zork $10 Rise of the Triad $19 Sea Wolf Guide S16 Shadow of the Comet $16 Sherlock Holmes Del $16 Sim City 2000 Guide $16 Simiste $16 Simon the Sorcerer HntS12 Skyrealms of Jorune $12 Space Quest 6 Players $16 Slar Crusader Guide S16 Star Reach &MstrOrion $16 Star Trail S16 Star Trek TNG $16 Star Trek: Judge Rites $12 Stonekeep Guide $16 Stunt Island $16 Subwar Guide $16 Summoning $12 Systern Shock $12 The Dig Guide $16 Tie Fighter Ultima 8 Guide $16 Ultima Underworld 2 $12 Under A Killing Moon $16 Wing Commander 3 $19 Wings of Glory $17 Wizardry 7 $16 X-Com 2 $16 X-Com: UFO Defense $16 X-Wing Collectors CD $16 X-Wing Guide $16 $9 7th Guest / Dune CD $36 ADD Collecters Edition $46 Aces Collection CD $48 Aces over Europe, Aces over Pacific Red Baron, Red Baron Tank Killer, A-10 Tank Killer Air Combat Classics $19 All Star Sports Col CD $23 Allied Forces $12 Award Win Wrgms CD $39 Carrier Strike, Grigsby's Pacific War Clash of Steel Grigsby War in Russia Bullfrog Compilation Pk $22 Combat Classics 3 $22 Day Tentacle/I.Jones 4 $44 Dynamix Bundle 1 $24 E. Arts Top 10 CD S32 Chuck Yagers Combat PCA Tour Golf Uitabots. Financial Workshop, Wing Com 2, Kasparov's Gambit. Ultima 7, Seal Team, Indianapolis 500, Grand Slam Bridge 2 Eye of the Beholdr Col $49 Eye of Beholder Trilogy $51 5 Foot 10 Pack #2 CD $29 Sherlock HolmesV1. Space Quest 4, Bat Ches. PC Karaoke, Rock Rapin Roll. M-media, Jumpstart, Movie Select For MPC Home Medical Advisor 3 Art & Letters War Birds, 2000 Fonts by Fantasia Fleet Dlendr wTmaster $72 Heimdall Bun (182) CD$19 Interplay's 10th Yr Anth $24 Jungle&Desert StrkCD $34 King's Quest Anth CD $54 Land Sea Air Trilogy $12 Lemming's 1 & 2 CD $28 Lst Treasure Infocom 2 $25 Max Overkill W/ Disk $39 Mile High Club CD $26 Perfect General Trilagy $34 Police Quest Anth CD $48 Populous 2/Pwrmonger $19 Power Games 3 CD $31 Power Hits: BTech CD $19 BTech 182,Mechwarrior SSI's Fantasy Fest CD $39 Stalongrad, Fantasy Empires, Dungeon Hack, Ultimate Adventures Space Quest Anth CD 548 Space Quest Bun(1-4) $42 Spellcasting Bun CD $28 Star Ctrl Col 182 CD $19 Strk Com/PrivateerCD $43 Top 50 Games CD $26 Turning Point Gettysburg, Spanish Armada, Waterloo Ultima Bundle 1-6 CD $29 Ultima Trilogy 2 $24 Ultimate Game Col CD $29 Ultima 1-5, Spectre VR Classic, Jetfighter 2, Quantum Gate Spaceship Warlock, Spear Destimy. 2 Free CD's ($15 Value) Wing Com 182 Dx CD $32 Wizardry Trilogy 2 $33 Zool Bundle (182) CD $19 Castle Wolfenstein M 2 $19 Castle Wolfenstein M 3 $19 Castle Wolfenstein CD $24 D!Zone CD $24 Dark Forces CD $47 Doom 2 $39 Doom 2 CD ROM $44 Doom Heaven 1 CD $12 Doom Heaven 2 CD $12 Doomsday Collection S12 Heretic $42 Heretic CD $42 Nerves of Steel $22 Nerves of Steel CD $22 Quake Shareware S12 Quake Shareware CD $12 Quarantine $30 Quarantine CD ROM $25 Rise of the Triad CD $41 Rise of the Triad Skull Cracker CD $41 System Shock CD $47 Tek War CD $46 $34 ATP Flight Sim 1.00 $12 Air Force Commander $9 Allied Forces $12 Alone in the Dark S12 Banzai Baseball Facts $6 Battle Command Bball Chal 1987 Teams $6 Bball Chal 1988 Teams $6 Blake Stone Episode 1 S9 Bodycello CD Caplain Blood Cstle Wolfenstein Sware $6 Challenge of 5 Realms $12 Charge of Light Brigade $9 Cohort 2 Conquer Kngdms Scn1 $12 Conqueror Multi Tank S6 Covert Action $12 Dark Queen of Krynn $12 Darklands $12 Demon Blue Descent Shareware $6 Doom Episode 1 $7 Dr Floyds Desktop Toys $9 Dr Thorp's Mini Blckjack $6 Dragon Lord Dreadnoughts Bismark $12 Empire Deluxe Scen 1 $9 Erotic Virtual Sampler $12 Falcon 3 Scen 2 Fighting for Rome $12 Flames of Freedom $12 Goldtree Buildings $10 Goldtree Characters $10 Harrier Assault $12 Heart of China $12 Hearts Heretic Shareware CD $10 Horde $12 Hoyle's Book Gms V3 S12 Interactive Adult Smplr $12 Land Sea Air Trilogy S12 Lightspeed Lost Vikings ML Baseball All Stars $9 Magic Candle 3 Marianas Turkey Shoot $12 Matrix Cubed $9 MegaTraveller:Zhodani $9 Megafortress Miss Disk $6 Megatraveller Zhodani S12 MLeague 89 FB Season $9 Millenium $6 NFL Chal Dream Teams S6 NFL Video Football $12 New Facilities Locator $9 Operation Combat $12 PT Boat Simulator $12 Rex Nebular $12 Return of the Phantom $12 Return to Zork Anth CD$12 Rings of Medusa $9 Rotox Rules of Engagement S9 SDI Sentinel Worlds 1 Sex Planet CD Shadow Sorcerer 59 Space Vegetables $6 Star Legions $12 Storm Across Europe $12 Sub Battle Simulator $12 Taking of Beverly Hills S6 Tales Magic $12 Tate of Erotica Smplr 2 $8 Terminator 2029 $12 Tom Landry Ftball Dlx $12 Top 100 Games V2 CDS12 World Circuit $12 S6 IBM EDUCATION $16 Annabel's Dream Egypt 835 Castle of Dr Brain VGA $19 Destination Mars $25 Dyno-Quest EcoQuest VGA $19 Frantic Factory WIN $24 Island Of Dr. Brain $29 Island of Dr Quandry S26 Multimedia:Vivaldi CD $24 Pacific Theater $19 Print Shp Dix Bus Grph $26 Profess Zany Gveaway $29 Quarky Quaysoo's Sci S29 Scooter's Magic Castle $32 $12 CGW 7955 1985 CHIPS & UITS, INC "


"OVERNIGHT SHIPPING in US $4 por order. Mail to Canada, PA, HI, AK, APO, FPO SA per order. Worldwide airmail $6 per item. Handling $2 per shipment Hardware orders may require additional shipping charges. All sales final. Call for details. Visa, MC and Discover accepted. Checks held 4 weeks. Money Orders under $200 same as cash. COD S8. Defectivos replaced with same product. Most items shipped same day, Shipping times may vary. Price availability may change. FREE GAME OFFER See detalls below COMMAND CONOUER FRANKENSTEIN' Become what you most fear and discover the true meaning of horror. Man creates monster. The classic premise takes on new meaning when you are that monster in this all new story based upon the classic tale. CD 546 \"COMMAND AND CONQUER' In a real time world where every move could trigger a fast and violent countermove, you must choose whether to fight for a secure future for all mankind or a dicta torship run by a brutal few. Join the Brotherhood and bring the world to its knees. CD S48 'THUNDERTHUNDERSHANE SCAPE' As the Darkfall spreads it's evil across their land. the Nocturnals it has engendered have grown bold. A vast army of the vile creatures have gathered under the command of Anthrax which threatens to overrun the whole of the Northlands and turn it into a festering den of evil. CD $40 dem 'STAR TREK: JUDGEMENT RITES' You are being watched. By what type of file for it is not known. An ancient WWI triplane is heading for you at warp 9 and your sensors report life forms on a dead planet. The tension increases as you encounter mysterious worlds and strange adversaries. $15 'ALONE IN THE DARK A suspicious suicide. And a chilling curse. In this Louisiana mansion you are drawn into a world of shadows. Had you known the danger you might of refused your task but you accepted and now you must do it alone in the dark. S12 *FREE GAME OFFER Spend the specified amount on any in stock software and choose a free IBM game from the corresponding list below. Oller subject to change or cancellation without notice. Valid from June 1st July 31st or while supplies last Request must be made at time of order. SPEND S60 Airborne Ranger 5.25 All IE up to Episode 9, Cohort 2 3.5, Conquered Kingdoms Scen 3.5, GNB Scen Disk 3.5. Gunship 5:25. Mercenaries 5 25. Pirates 5.25, SDI 5.25 SPEND $100 Bridge 7.0 3.5, DRAGON Force 3.5/5.25, Falcon 30 MiG 29 3.5, MacArthur's War 3.5, Megatraveller Zhodani 5.25. Rotum of the Phantom 3.5. Torminator 2029 3.5 SPEND $160 Alone in the Dark 3.5. Battles of Destiny 3.5. Links Pro 386 3.5. F15 Striko Eagle Il 3.5, Railroad Tycoon 3.5. Rules of Engagement 5.25 Silent Service 2 3.5, Simon the Sorceror 3.5, Star Trek Judgement Rites 3.5. Ultima Underworld 23.5, Worlds at War 3.5/5.25 SPEND S200 Harpoon Collection CD, Falcon 3.0 3.5 Jutland CD. Links Pro 386 CD, V Victory Market Garden 3.5, Warlords 5.25 Ins pite behet 3DO 3D0 MARS 32X NEO GEO PLAYSTATION SATURN $46 $54 Shadow Caster $52 Shock Wave $56 Slam City 52 Slayer $52 Space Ace $52 Space Pirates $54 Star Control 2 $52 Star Trek Next Gen $54 Super St Fighter 2 Tb $59 Supreme Warrior $52 Syndicate $54 Theme Park $52 Top Gun $54 Twisted $49 Virtuosa $52 Way of the Warrior $52 Wing Commander 3 $54 $69 $52 $54 S46 $169 $52 $59 3DO Ceri Pad $39 3DO System $399 11th Hour $54 BrainDead 13 $52 Burning Soldier $49 Clayfighter 2 Corpse Killer $52 Creature Shock $54 Crime Patrol S52 CyberClash $52 Demolition Man $58 Drug Wars ESPN Baseball $52 Escape Mnstr Manor $52 FIFA Internat'l Soccer $52 Flashback $49 Flying Nightmares $52 GEX $52 Guardian War $49 Jammit! $54 Killing Time $52 Kingdom:Far Reaches $46 Lemmings $49 Mad Dog McCree 2 $54 Madden Football $49 Myst $54 Need for Speed S52 NovaStorm $52 Off World Interceptor $52 Ou of this World $42 Panzer General $59 Pataank $52 Pebble Beach Golf $52 Real Pinball $52 Rebel Assault $56 Rise of the Robots $49 Road Rash S56 Robinson's Requiem Rock & Roll Racing $49 Samurai Showdown $52 CDI Saturn System $399 3D Baseball 95 $54 AD&D Fighters S46 Alone in the Dark $46 Casper $46 Cyber War Cyberia Dark Seed Daytona USA Deadalus $54 Defcon 5 Descent 2 Dragon's Lair 1 or 2 GEX Hardwired Kingdom O' Magic $54 Lawnmower Man 2 S54 Myst NHL Hockey $54 Pebble Beach Golf S54 Primal Rage $64 RayMan $54 Space Ace S52 Upper Deck Basketball $54 VR Baseball S56 VR Basketball VR Hockey Virtua Fighters XS $54 Alien Trilogy Alone in the Dark CD $52 B.C. Racers $54 Brutal Above the Claw $52 Bump & Run Driving $54 Chaotix $58 Claylighter 2 $52 College Basketball $62 Cosmic Carnage S49 Doom $59 Dragons Lair 2 $52 Incredible Hulk 2 $54 Loadstar CD $56 Metal Head $59 Midnight Raiders CD $56 Mortal Kombat 2 $62 Mother Base $49 NFL Quarterback Club $59 Night Trap CD $59 Pitfall S59 Power Rangers CD $52 Primal Rage CD $58 RBI 95 CD $57 RayMan $58 Revolution X $59 Shadow Squadron Slam City CD S52 Supreme Warrior CD $56 Tee Olt $56 Tee Time $54 Tempo $59 Tough Man Contest S56 Vikings $46 Virtua Fighters $56 Virtua Racing Deluxe Voyager Star 2 $54 Wirehead CD S52 Wolves of Moordeth $56 World Series Baseball $62 Zorro $54 Neo Geo CD System $399 3 Count Bout CD $69 Aero Fighters 2 $169 Aero Fighters 2 CD $69 Alpha Mission 2 CD $69 Andro Dunos CD $69 Art of Fighting 2 CD $69 Art of Fighting CD $69 Blue's Journey CD $69 Burning Fight CD $69 Cyber Lip CD Double Dragon $199 Fatal Fury 2 Fatal Fury 3 $249 Galaxy Fight $229 King of the Monsters $99 Last Resort CD $69 League Bowling CD $69 Magician Lord CD Mutation Nation CD S69 Nam 1975 CD $69 Ninja Combat CD $69 Ninja Commando CD 369 Panic Bomber CD $69 Puzzled CD $69 Riding Hero CD Robo Army CD $69 Samurai Showdown 2 $229 Sengoku 2 CD $69 Sengoku CD $69 Soccer Brawl CD $69 Spin Master CD $69 Super Sidekicks 2 CD $69 Super Sidekicks CD $69 Super Sidekick Scor 3 $229 Super Spy CD $69 Top Hunter S169 Top Players Golf $69 World Heroes 2 Jet $199 World Heroes 2 $169 Playstation System $299 Air Combat $54 Alien Trilogy $54 Alien Virus $54 Batman Forever $54 Spot Goes to H-Wood $54 Casper $52 CyberWar Cyberia S52 Dark Legend $54 Death Crusader $54 Defcon 5 S54 Doom $59 ESPN Extreme $54 GEX Gender Wars HardWired Horde King's Quest 7 $58 Kingdom O' Magic S54 Last Dynasty Lawnmower Man 2 $54 Lost in Time $58 Myst $54 Power Pro Baseball S54 Primal Rage Quarantine Raiden $54 RayMan $54 Ridge Racer $54 Rock & Roll Racing 2 $46 Star Blade $54 Toh Shin Den $59 Top Gun:Fire at Will $54 Upper Deck Basketball $54 Upper Deck Football VR Baseball S56 VR Basketball $56 VR Hockey $56 XS $54 $58 $56 $69 $54 $56 CD-1550 Magnvx Plyr $479 7th Guest $52 Apocalypse Now $22 Axis & Allies $44 Backgammon $30 Beverly Hills Cop 3 $24 Burn Cycle 546 Dances With Wolves $22 Dark Castle Defender of the Crown S34 Earth Command $44 Hunt for Red October S22 Jeopardy $36 Kingdom $44 Mad Dog McCree & Gun $72 Microcosm $44 Star Trek 3,4,5 each $24 Thunder in Paradise $56 Voyeur $44 Zelda's Adventure $44 $54 $56 $34 ULTRA 64 $54 Ultra 64 System $249 Cruis'N USA $56 Doom $56 Killer Instinct $56 Red Baron S56 Robotech $56 Top Gun:New Advnture 556 Turok: Dinosaur Hunter $56 $52 Cow 7956 1995 CHAPSATS.INC Circle Reader Service #54 "


"REVIEW Inoculation, Impossible! Join The Bug Hunt In Vic Tokai's ALIEN VIRUS by Arinn Dembo OMETHING'S GONE WRONG ON STAALL SYSTEMS GO jects that are similar in nature. You wanTION ZEUS. THE HALLS AND ROOMS The designers have put up some wallder from room to room, collecting objects ARE DESERTED, AND EVERYWHERE paper and given you a few film clips to and using them to solve the problems you the deckplates groan with menwatch in the course of the game, but ALIEN encounter-most of which have to do with ace. It's a great set-up for a mysVirus basically carries with it the limitagetting to the next room. tery: What the devil happened here? tions of the classic text adventure. It is a ALIEN Virus is a CD-ROM product, and Where is everyone? In ALIEN VIRUS from game that hearkens back to the days when the designers have taken advantage of Vic Tokai, Inc., you will find yourself small companies were trying to capitalize some of the features that can be added to docking at a starbase in the deepest dark on the success of Infocom. They've made a multimedia package such as graphics, boonies of colonized space. It's a first-perthe format a great deal more playable for sound effects, voice recordings and animason game in which your viewpoint characthe average player, of course, since sometion. There are approximately 65 \"rooms» ter is Joshua, a how it all makes morc in ALIEN VIRUS which range from hangars young pilot ALIEN VIRUS sense when there are and hallways to ventilation ducts, and even bringing cargo Price: $69.95 pictures to accompany a spacewalk or two. The graphics are not to the station, System the story! consistent-it's easy to see at least two difRequirements: and hoping to The interface is ferent artists at work here—but they are at IBM compatible rendezvous 386DX or better, mouse-driven and easy least bearable, and in some cases quite with his 4MB RAM, 30 MB to master. The default nice. Water dripping from a cracked pipe, beloved, scihard drive space, command is \"ExamMickering lights, steam hissing out of a SVGA graphics, ence officer CD-ROM, mouse; ine.\" Thus, Cara Oceana. supports Sound commands Both Joshua Blaster or compatible sound cards. such as Exand Cara work Protection: None amine door,\" Publisher: Vic Tokai, Inc. for the same \"Examine Torrance, CA incgacorpora (310) 326-8880 corpse,\" \"Extion, owned amine melted and operated by the enigmatic Mr. Ukido.alien\" form your basic reperUnfortunately, in a game in which the toire. The \"examine\" command initial scenario, graphics, sound and aniyields a line of information at the mation prove at least competent, the plotbottom of the screen, which is eiAS P EN AVONS ? Our ting and writing of ALIEN Virus are ther useful or sarcastic. For intersurprisingly weak. Alter successfully \"comaction with sentient beings, there HANGAR WITH A VIEW Upon debarking your ship, you find an pleting this game, you will have rescued is also a default \"chat\" command. eerily empty hangar and a lifeless robot. Cara Oceana, evacuated the majority of Other than \"examine\" and the human survivors, and reduced Station \"chat,\" you may also \"use,\" \"take,\" \"open\" valve in an empty room...there are some Zeus to sub-atomic particles. You will not, or \"close.\" That's it! The interaction with careful, artistic touches here, which tend to however, enjoy a satisfying resolution to your environment is very limited, as limitobscure the fact that the rooms are just the mystery. There are only a series of ined as it has always been in text adventures, posters with a few action sites. Some effort teresting hints which, ultimately, lead and there is never more than one solution has been made to elevate Station Zeus nowhere. to a puzzle, even when you have two obfrom a thinly-veiled \"dungeon\" to a rea78 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JULY 1995 "


"LOSE BLOOD OO NOW! ASK ME HOW This fast-paced, splatter-packed CDROM movie-based interactive adventure features real movie clips (from the movie Pumpkinhead II: Bloodwings), real movie music, and real movie stars, such as Pumpkinhead himself, smiling above, and Roger Clinton, the President's more successful brother! You'll get everything but real blood on your computer. This game is sure to get your blood pumping! SOLEIL MOON FRYE DDCMEDE TUICQU LIVIILID TO OU MEN FUR YOUR PODI-BOK. UNTUUD RUN ROGER CLINTON STEVE KANALY ANDY ROBINSON AMI DOLENZ PUMPKINHEAD'S REVENGE Circle Reader Service #62 MOTION PICTURE CORPORATION OF AMERICA INTERACTIVE LOGOWNSHKILAS NYOKAA TAAK OF OPEA D 196 TON GREGORIO TOTO AMERICA ALL RIGHTS RESERVED ANAFILATEO VUEL OF ELECINCO MIS L A TVEVA "


"JAVE COND sonably interesting science fiction setting. venture's weak writing. Like a leaky vaccrawl through an alien habitat on your way There are animated sequences as well. suit, you can slap a patch on only so many to the station's generator room. Even this Not many, mind you, but most of them holes in the story before you're in real doesn't tell you much, except that the are quite grisly. As the player I came to trouble. ALIEN Virus includes many intergame designers weren't shy about ripping dread them, because the start of such a seesting plot elements, but somehow the deoff a scene from the Alien films, quence generally meant I was about to die, tails are never knitted together properly. A It is unlikely that \"To Be Continued\" trapped aboard the exploding space-stadecent explanation for the events on Stawill prove a satisfying conclusion for most tion, clubbed over the head by a crazed, gamers. ALIEN VIRUS may starving survivor, sucked through the work as a game, but its ficblades of a giant fan...you get the picture. tional elements can't realOn the other hand, there are also a numly stand alone. Had it only ber of animated sequences which serve to been the first half of a resolve plot points once you have completmuch larger game, in ed a task or ligured out a puzzle. Hence, which the rescue of Cara the beginning of an animated sequence and the survivors was foldoes not necessarily mean \"Game Over.\" lowed by an expedition to The style and quality of animation in the track down your employgame are also inconsistent, but there's no er, Mr. Ukido, and great cause for complaint. Like the screen squeeze some answers out shots, they are competent, if not inspired of him, giving you a work. MESSY DRAWERS One of the drawers in this room contains an imporchance to figure out what The best attribute of the game is its tant key card you'll need to get around the ship; grab it and give it to the aliens were and how your robot friend. sound, which rates better than average. they arrived there, and There are at least 11 conversations then to discover whether throughout the game, complete with indition Zeus is never offered. Perhaps the or not you have made a terrible mistake by vidual voices. Your character, unfortunate program's greatest mystery is how it evacuating the human survivors from Staly, loses his voice following the earned the title \"ALIEN VIRUS.\" tion Zeus, the story could have been one introductory sequence. The sound effects, What you will find as you play is that of epic stature. as you travel from room to room, are suitStation Zeus is suffering from a particularIn addition, there just isn't enough danably creepy and ominous. The sound dely horrible form of infestation. The halls ger. I was pleased at first, as I was playing, signers have done some outstanding work are crawling with hideous alien monthat ALIEN VIRUS wasn't annoyingly lethal: here, creating a background hum in every sters-creatures so gruesome that they save every two seconds or end up doing beggar my powers of description. Not things over and over. However, I soon reonly are they nasty to look at, but their alized that I wasn't able to find more than table manners leave a lot to be desired a half-dozen ways of getting killed, and as well. These carnivorous alien partynone of them involved the monsters crashers are running around in aboard the station. You're a lot more likely droves, attacking anyone who lacks to be killed by the station's architecture the sense to stay in strong light. Furthan by the dread beasties in ALIEN VIRUS. thermore, no one seems to have any Strange, considering how mindlessly idea what they are, where they came homicidal they're supposed to be. from, how they arrived aboard the staThis game is fun to play and an imHH SHOW GIVE AVS tion, and what they are doing with provement on the old text adventure forYO, ROBOT Dialogue is handled in standard graphical their victims. mat in many respects. However, it is also adventure format-you select questions and responses Don't bother getting your hopes up, lacking in effective text, the greatest and your talk buddy mechanically doles out the because you'll never find out! Even strength of the best text adventures. answers. when you arrive at the top and track THE EDITORS SPEAK down the Captain, you'll find he's just room that is both subtle and effective. It's another working grunt like you, without a ALIEN VIRUS their contribution, more than anything clue in the galaxy as to what's happened. else, which is responsible for the chilly, unThe aliens are just, well, there—and he nerving atmosphere of ALIEN VIRUS. just wants to get away from them. UnderPROS An intriguing premise, imagistandable, of course, but not terribly satisnative aliens, and impressive sound effects. THE WRITE STUFF fying from the audience's point of view. CONS The text is weak, and the mysDespite the work that has gone into the The closest you get to an explanation of tery story leaves you hanging. giftwrap, there is no way to hide the adthe invasion takes place when you have to Have you see cara? WRC TE CUTRECON? LMHHL CH V.. HOW CII SCT TH5 996cos cocc FOR THE RAIL V oof TO GO 80 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JULY 1995 "


"WORLD OF ADEN THUNDERSCAPE SSI's all-new WORLD OF ADEN\" is a big, brawny, boisterous rcalm! Driven by mechamagic the marriage of steam-age technology and ancient sorcery-Aden is a huge world of unbridled imagination and limitless possibilities. THUNDERSCAPE\" is your maiden voyage into the WORLD OF ADEN. It is the time, of Darkfall, a mysterious blight that stains the land with its spawn mindless horrors known simply as nocturnals. Aden will fall unless a true hero rises to lead the way out of the darkness. This masterpiece features raucous combat Deadly traps. Brain-draining puzzles. Killer graphics and sound. It's everything you'd expect in an SSI fantasy roleplaying adventure... and more! Come, a whole new world beckons! THE DAWN OF A WHOLE NEW GAME WORLD FROM SSI! On CD-ROM for IBM and Compatibles To Order: Visit your retailer or call 1-800-601-PLAY with Visa/MC (North America only). Screens shown: 256-color SVGA. SESEL Listent A MINDSCAPE COMPANY WORLD OF ADEN and THUNDERSCAPE are trademarke of Strategie Simulations Inc, 1996 Strategio Simulations, Inc. ESS SOR 29 .1 Circle Header Service #106 "


"REVIEW I Have No Mouth. But I've A Screen Life As A Brain In A Box In Virgin's THE DAEDALUS ENCOUNTER by Charles Ardai HE DAEDALUS ENCOUNTER IS A control of all sorts of nifty electronic deThe only hope for survival is for our heVERY GOOD-LOOKING GAME, A FACT vices. Chief among them is a little flying roes to enter the alien vessel and set it LARGELY ATTRIBUTABLE TO ITS probe that follows Ari and Zack around back on course, but once they enter it stars, Tia Carrere (from the on their adventures. You can steer the they discover that there's no way back Wayne's World movies and Christ-probe around, turn its searchlight on and out. ian Bocher (from nowhere you've ever off, use its laser and grappling claw, and Also, it turns out the ship's infested heard of), who are very good-looking transmit pulses of light at any of a dozen with Krinn, a species of acid-oozing space people. These two grace the front of the frequencies. Rest assured that every one slug that make the Vakkar look like game's unusual and very good-looking of these abilities comes in handy during cream puffs and might even survive a few package and spend the better part of the game. rounds of one-on-one with the face-hugthree CD's traipsing through some very Things begin with a simple salvage gers from the Alien movies. What's a team good-looking computer-generated mission. Zack and Ari set out to scavenge of hardy adventurers to do in a situation scenery. useful scrap from Vakkar wrecks drifting like this? A lot of exploration down You go along for the ride in the chararound the solar system, which requires spooky, intestinal corridors; a little target acter of Casey, who was once a goodCasey to pilot his way over to a boobyshooting when the Krinn pop out of a looking space marine like Ari (Tia) and trapped alien ship and briefly explore its ventilation duct or an alien corpse; some Zack (Christian), but who recently sufinnards. Ari and Zack coach Casey innuendo-filled bantering and comradely fered a terrible through this seone-upmanship; and, since this is a comaccident. To The Daedalus Encounter quence, helping you puter game, plenty of puzzle-solving and ward the end of Price: $69.95 get the hang of the a pinch of maze navigation. the war against System controls. the Vakkar, a Requirements: DAEDALS It's when Casey's STAR-CROSSED IBM compatible race of interstel486/33 DX or probe is back on The exploration of the spaceship is lar boogeymen better (Pentium board, though, that pretty linear: there are six doors out to enslave recommended), the story really starts. arranged in a circle around the perimehumanity, 8MB RAM, Vesa Zack sends the ship ter of a central hub room, and Ari and Local Bus or PCI Casey got so SVGA graphics, into hyperspace and, Zack lead the player through each in sebadly hurt in a 2x CD-ROM Han Solo-like, quence. There are six mysterious orbs to battle that the Windows 3.1 or better. Supports most emerges at the worst collect, basically one behind each door; if only part of him major sound cards. possible time and you don't get them all on the first atProtection: None the doctors were Designer: Mechadeus place. (At one point tempt, the game lets you go back for a able to salvage Publisher: Virgin Interactive Entertainment he even says, «I've got second try later. was his brain. Irvine, CA a bad feeling about The puzzles are fairly straightforward, (You should (800) VRGINO7 this,\" a line Star Wars too. There's one to unlock each door have seen the fans will find famil(plus a few scattered elsewhere) and other guy.) iar.) A monstrous spaceship is right in they're all geometric brain-teasers of the Now, Casey's been bionically linked front of them, and there's no time to put tangram or Rubik's Cube variety. The tarinto the main computer on Ari and on the brakes. The ensuing crash sends get shooting is your basic target shootZack's spaceship, which leaves you in the two ships hurtling toward the sun. ing—the mouse cursor turns into a DAED 82 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD  JULY 1995 "


"Deploy. Destroy. Enjoy! ommand a single squad or an entire battalion as any Allied or Axis nation and get ready to rumble! Game play is fun, easy and gorgeous! Explosive SVGA graphics and intense animais tion help you feel the destruction as buildings burn and tanks explodel All this plus digitized photos of over 200 fanks make STEEL PANTHERS as exciting to watch as it is to play. Add digitized sound effects and this WW. Il blockbuster will have you running for cover! To Order: Visit your retailer or call 1-800-601-PLAY with Visa/MasterCard (North America only, please). (UTC EUR On PC DOS CD-ROM for IBM and Compatibles J Screens shown: 256-color SVGA. A MINDSCAPE COMPANY STEEL PANTHERS is a trademark of Strategic Simulations, Inc  Stralegie Simulations, Inc. All righis reserved. Circle Reader. Service #104 "


"1HDUTTOTITITIT REIHUNSIS   2 VSTARTUP VIS GRCOOLASTE ASKER MAT Amphoe Popcon Cape ATH END Renderin crosshair and you point and click to fire Yet another puzzle has you shifting coltor shaft and at another, a queen alien Casey's laser. The maze is your basic adored triangles around on a board to form emerges from a sticky cocoon to chomp venture game maze, and the less said certain shapes the computer requests, Ari into little pieces. But in between about it the better. while another has you building shapes there's not much to speak of. out of various combinations of some of the banter is clever, but much lines. Such is the variety the of it's cheap stufl-gags about Zack accigame offers. None of the puzdentally drinking out of an alien toilet zles are awful, and none are and the like. What isn't cheap is derivaSTORUOSIES especially good. A few make tive: if it hasn't become clear already, She 1 no sense. The biggest problem Alien and Aliens are strong influences is that they all resemble each here, with smidgens of Star Wars and other. 2001: A Space Odyssey thrown in for good This sort of repetitiveness is measure. These are fine sources, but if DEPLOY SRAPPLE-RITE SEND a problem throughout the I'm going to spend several hours with a game. For instance, you would game, I'd prefer one that referred to the expect the various corridors of classics a little bit less and told its own a spaceship to resemble each unique story a bit more. other, and they do here. Chalk BRAIN'S EYE VIEW Most of DAEDALUS ENCOUNTER is viewed from one up for authenticity--but DAED OR ALIVE? Casey's point of view, which also doubles as the game intertake away points for lack of vaSo, what does this leave to recommend face. riety. Granted, the corridors in the game? Tia Carerre, looking sexy in Alien all looked the same, but her sleek space outfit, all bare arms and In what way, then, is this game an imperfect makeup: about two hours provement over STARCROSS, the classic of video scenes, displayed cither in Infocom text adventure from 1982, that a little QuickTime window or fullhad you stranded on a monstrous alien screen depending on your preferspaceship with several unfriendly races, ence and the speed of your some tough brain-teasers to solve, a set system; Christian Bocher, who is a of obscure artifacts to collect, and a better actor than Tia (which isn't maze to navigate? Well, that's a matter saying much, but actually he's of taste. You see, STARCROSS didn't have quite good); and some simple logTia Carrere. ic puzzles for people who can nevWhat it did have was smarter puzzles. er get enough of that sort of thing. The ones here are really quite easy, even The story is fun and the sense of if you set the game's difficulty level to cosmic awe the designers appear \"hard.\" (Doing so tends to lengthen the RUBIK'S TRIANGLE Although there are plenty of alien puzto feel comes across. For this it puzzle sequences, not make them zles in DAEDALUS ENCOUNTER, most of them are very familiar may be worth a look. But while and not very interesting. tougher.) In fact, although the solutions DAEDALUS ENCOUNTER is a reare simple enough to figure out quickly, spectable resume-piece for all especially if you keep pen and paper Ridley Scott had the incomparable H.R. concerned, it's a far cry from the groundhandy, clicking randomly on the screen is Giger as his designer. At their best, the breaking interactive science fiction movie almost as likely to see you through. sets in THE DAEDALUS ENCOUNTER look it clearly yearns to be. One puzzle has you rotating channels like Giger Lite. on a circuit diagram to create paths perThen there's the endless procedural THE EDITORS SPEAK mitting current to flow from a central repetition. Each door needs to be opened reservoir to receptors on the edges of the in the same way: Casey analyzes the door DAEDALUS screen. Trial-and-error wins the day here, at length, records a message, and then RATING RATING though a tight time limit means you'll transmits a light pulse to trip the lock. probably have to try and err a few times Acquiring the orbs has its painstaking PROS Tia, plus a pulp sci-fi story that will hold your interest the first before you're done. Another puzzle has routine, too-more light pulses, and time through, and some eye-catchyou competing against the computer, they'd better be in the correct order or ing graphics. taking turns to build a polygon out of you can just start over. CONS The gameplay can get electronic toothpicks. No time limit here, Exciting scenes do turn up here and repetitive, and experienced gamers and the computer is easy to beat as long there, and the designers do what they will quickly tire of the Rubik's Cubeas you build trapezoids while it's trying to can to keep the tension level high. At one style puzzles. build parallelograms. point Zack takes a tumble down an eleva84 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JULY 1995 "


"STORMFRONT STUDIOS Big League Heat The first true multimedia action baseball game! Powerful and dynamic 256-color hi-res graphics!  Player animations based on real video of pro players! BASEBAL Choose one of three announcers including Hall of Famer, Mel Allen! This is baseball, baby. Just ask Tony. We're talking trades. Teams. The players. The parks. The pitches. The streaks. The stats. (Want to be the new GM in the year 2012? Be our guest.) Heck, while you fire in a few fast balls, we'll even throw in wind factors. Humidity. Altitudes. Big time physics. You name it. It's all right here. So grab a dog and settle in. And welcome to the big leagues. THIS STRIKES stus INNM Highest quality digitized voices! The Best Stadiums TONY LA RUSSA The Best Animations Circle Reader Service #66 PLAYERS MAJOR LESTE LASERATI Tony La Russa Baseball 3' is a trademark of Stormfront Studios, Inc. Stormfront Studios is a registered trademark of Stormfront Studios, Inc. Copyright 1995. MLBPA Officially Licensed by the Major League Baseball Players Association @MLBPA Stormfront Studios, Inc. P.O. Box 11686 . San Rafael, CA 94912 415 . 479-2800 CD-ROM "


"PREVIEW Nukem Glow! 0 3 Apogee's New 3D Realms Label Launches A Full Scale Attack At The Action Game Market With DUKE NUKEM 3D by Peter Olafson SNEAK PREVIEW ng blue Game Still In Development HIS LAUNCH VEHICLE FOR APOGEE's up, leaving blue Game turning this NEW 3D ENGINE COMES ON LIKE YET geysers behind, and that Hall-of-Fame game into an ANOTHER VARIATION OF Doom: one stall has a magazine on the RPG, but it never came off. Now, some another metal-lined moonbase, floor. You'll also notice that lights years later, through the accrual of telling another crew of single-minded can be made to flicker and plate glass to detail, this is essentially what Apogee is troopers who evidently do not have Mrs. shatter. And that you leave muddy foot onto with DUKE 3D. You're not simply an Troopers, another hunt for keycards and prints on the pavement after leaving the exterminator. You're a visitor with a score The Way Out. sewers. to settle in a world where you can be as Then you notice that spaceships-real This is something else. Something with nosy as you wanna be. 3D spaceships that you can ride-are extraordinary potential. touring the base perimeter. You notice DUKE NUKEM 3D, due in August on YOUNG DUKIE that the drinking fountains and security Apogee's 3D Realms label, is not the first. The name should be familiar to monitors work. That toilets can be blown improvement upon Id Software's seminal Apogee devotees. Duke's life began back action game. in 1991, in the era of COMMANDER KEEN HERETIC added a as the key character in Todd Replogle's user-controllable platform game, DUKE NUKUM. (Replogle inventory. DEremains on board as the coder of DUKE SCENT a full 3D 3D.) In DUKE NUKEM II, released in late world, and DARK 1993, our hero got beefier and prettier FORCES a classic (not to mention undergoing a minor sci-fi mythology name change). And now, here he is, manand sophisticated high, impassive face, blond brush cut and puzzles. big gun intact, roaming a richly interacBut the label tive game world. that put PC action How do I know how he looks? Well, it's games on the map another one of those telling details. See, is back and on the among other things, DUKE NUKEM 3D has verge of making mirrors at key locations, so your characits first generater can stare back at himself as well as tional advance spot anyone sneaking up behind him. since WOLFEN Wild, right? Put it this way: I'm told NEW AGE NUKEM Gamers familiar with previous Duke Nukem games will STEIN 3-D. There double-take at the rich, attractive graphical environment. that, in the final game, you'll be was talk, a couple able to step up to a urinal and, of years back, of um, do your business (with an as86 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1995 "


"HOW ABOUT A BIG 'MECH WITH AN ORDER TO FRY? "


"sociated health bonus, yet) a jetpack. Did I mention you A The character isn't the only can blow up bridges and hold-over from the early days. buildings? The Cola cans that gave Duke a health And things look good too, boost in the platforms are on hand as even in standard 320 x 200. well, sometimes hidden away behind panBut DUKE will also run in els or inside of lockers. And there are crisp SVGA at resolutions of times when experience in platform-hopup to 1024 x 768, although ping will definitely pay off, as in a seyou'll need a next-generaquence that finds Duke atop a string of tion Pentium to enjoy it. Alrotating interlocking gears, or exploring though a Pentium will be the subways in mid-game. necessary for smooth KICKEM IN THE RIGHT KNEE... Duke Nukem plants his stanSpeaking of subways, the game in fact scrolling in the higher-res dard-issue work boots squarely on the forehead of a foe. has two subway systems, complete with modes, gamers equipped running trains (the city one is covered in with high-end 486 systems graffiti), stations, entry stairs, a nerve cenwill be able to enjoy smooth ter and even the occasional would-be passcrolling gameplay as well. senger. But gamers won't be Even the auto-map looks overwhelmed by immense floor designs. good. Striking and innovaThe designers deliberately sought to tive, it has several different keep the levels (24 are planned) to a modes, one of which even manageable size, which is the most realisdisplays textures. tic for tight and compelling multi-player play. And Apogee, realizing that the best A WEAPON FOR Doom levels are often those most closely EVERY tied to real life, is designing their levels to OCCASION mirror the real world. For example, Okay, okay, so a lot of THE BFG WAS A POP-GUN The BFG's got nothing on the the moonbase has a barracks, arDoom-style games look sophisticated hi-tech weaponry at Duke Nukem's disposal. mory and mess. The futuristic good. Indeed, sometimes, Los Angeles in the mid-game comes that's all they do. But complete with sleazy bars (with here it's a bonus. Among DUKE's prey into them. This in turn should make dance floor and disco lights), no-tell neater features is the integration of opponents think twice before racing off motels (there's some nudity in the game), weapons with strategy. That is, they're in hot pursuit of a seemingly helpless opa movie theater with a lit-up marquee not simply a set of bigger and bolder kill ponent. And because you can jump and and an abundance of very tall skyscrapradii, as was more or less the case in duck in Duke, bombs can be placed high ers. And since the game is in 3D, you'll DOOM. or low, setting up all sorts of potential find bridges, air ducts, overpasses and Consider, for instance, the Trip Bomb. barbed-laser entanglements. spiral stairs littered throughout. You can It's about the size and shape of a TV reAnother nice touch is a Pipe Bomb that even fly among the various buildings with mote, and it has an uncanny ability to can be remotely triggered. Hit fire to toss turn enemies off...for it where you want to (which includes good. A second or two afhigher levels or down shafts—DUKE has ter you fasten it to a wall, look up, look down and tilted views). Hit it emits a laser beam fire again to detonate. Foom. Hope you which crosses open space weren't too close by. There's something until it reaches an obstamost compelling about wreaking havoc in cle. Anyone, or anything one section of the game while standing in breaking the beam will another. It almost persuades you that you enjoy a really warm and are indeed in a real place, where events close-up encounter with proceed apace whether you're present or an orange fireball. not. And that, of course, is precisely the Among other things, point. weapons like this will inThe Shrinker/Expander, another BY LAND, SEA, AND AIR Duke will battle with a host of new creavite multiplay players to unique weapon, is more for fun than for devise completely new strategy, and is probably intended for tures, including those that bring fiery death from above. strategies, like laying multi-player contests. It brings the traps and luring an enemy down a peg. Many pegs, 88 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JULY 1995 "


"MECH WARRIOR 2 31ST CENTURY COMBAT F EE LT HE BUR B N PRO 1959 EXPLODING THIS SUMMER ON CD-ROM heat up the highway and win @ http://www.activision.COM ACIIVISION BATTLETECH MechWarrior, BattleTech and 'Mech are registered trademarks of FASA CORPORATION. Activision is a registered trademark of Activision Inc. Circle Reader Service #68 "


"actually. Enemies code custom weapons and struck by the Shrinker's green insert them into the game, bolt shrink until they're about as well as reprogram game the size of a Ken doll, in which state they characters. Apogee's also can be trod upon (with attendant squishy planning to release its intersounds). The Expander's red plasma innal editors and tools to the flates enemies until they pop. public, which means that Other cool weapons the designers are gamers will have no need to playing around with include the concept wait for a DeHack-style proof a laser sword akin to the ones in the gram before they can tinker Star Wars movies, which didn't make it around with the levels. into DARK FORCES. Incredibly, you'll be able to draw and COLLATERAL MIRROR, MIRROR... Using reflective surfaces strategically placed around the levels, Duke can check his make-up and DAMAGE watch for foes around corners. HOW TO BUILD A 3DREALM Weapons aren't DUKE NUKEM 3D is the first in an initial sethe only things that ries of four games created under can kill you though. Apogee's \"Build\" engine. It is expected Indeed, there's a spot on the first DUKE doesn't carry the concept quite to be followed in two or three months by moonbase level where, if you're that far, but if you're the temperamental SHADOW WARRIOR, a ninja game with specinjudicious in your use of explotype, there are loads of stull for you to sives (and placement of poor blow up. If you liked video screens shattacular graphics. Ruins, an Indiana Jonesish game with an Egyptian setting, looks Duke), you can demolish a keytering in DESCENT, you'll love this game, section of wall and blow yourself which allows them to be broken in at least set to arrive late in the year, and BLOOD, a out onto the moon surface. four different ways. Containers are rehorror-based game, will either appear in Thankfully, if you're far enough duced to rubble and their contents tandem with Ruins or early in 1996. away, the airlock doors close be(sometimes toxic) will spill forth. ComIn the words of Apogee's Scott Miller, fore the sudden vacuum drags puters react almost volcanicly when de\"Build' is the Doom engine carried to the you out. The bulkhead doors are stroyed. Bottles disappear from bars. maximum extent it can be taken. It is the unforgiving, and will quickly reWhole sections of wall wink out. How's most evolutionary step possible with the duce you and your opponents that for affecting your environment? current technology.\" Although not a true into a long thick strand of bloody Sneak preview notwithstanding, I do 3D game engine, this texture mapping muck if they pinch you. have a few caveats. I saw DUKE in several system provides sophisticated high-res Yes, DUKE NUKEM 3D is going incarnations over the course of its develgraphics up to 1280 x 768 (although even to be violent, and I'm sure it will opment, from pre-alpha to near-beta, Pentiums will take a steep performance carry a warning label of some and the game was never quite done. Only sort. But I'd be dishonest if I about a third of the levels were comdidn't allow to this same plete, certain features (a flashlight, violence being a large for instance) weren't working fulchunk of the fun. Mindl y yet while others were being less destruction is a muchadded. The speed had yet to be opunderrated part of the Doom timized, and characters tended to move lifestyle. Remember the way bulin an angular fashion that suggested that let holes appeared in the walls in wires were attached to their joints. I have PRODUCTION Infogrames' late 1980s strategy. to admit that I'm a little concerned that shooter, HOSTAGE? It was the so much attention is being paid to the enhit at that level) and is able to place the crowning touch that brought the vironment that the critters, which gave user in a richer environment due to its in game home, that told you that DOOM such an immersive fear factor, may credibly fast rendering mechanisms. The you weren't just a player but a get short shrift. I hope not. \"Build\" engine also permits the recording participant. I've always liked the But I still have nothing but enthusiasm and playback of third person \"chase\" idea of an action game that refor DUKE NUKEM 3D. The haunted, if deviews popular in flight sims. llects the chaos you've populated, darkness of the early versions The new technology, with some RPG wrought in it and in is maturing into a beckoning world desadaptations, will also be seen later this which, conceivably, you tined to eclipse the competition. It's not year in Capstone's WITCHHAVEN and could damage a level to simply Doom too, but Doom articulated, TEKWAR. the point where it became its potential drawn out, its depths soundinescapable. ed. It is an event. Do wh the Duke of 90 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JULY 1995 "


"The best just got better. Bloodier. Tougher. Deadlier. THE ULTIMATE THE COMPLETE ORIGINAL MEGAHIT PLUS ALL-NEW EPISODE IV: THY FLESH CONSUMED On CO-ROM and 3.5 Disks for IBM PC & Compatibles | 988  :smd LANGOR SOFTWARE Saming Network! of DOOM on DWANGO's Multiplayer You thought you'd survived DOOM the greatest computer action game of all time. Wrong. You still have to face THE ULTIMATE DOOM. All three DECO 22100 original episodes plus a fourth that's so deadly, it will grind you up and spit you out! Now at a software store near you. 2009 Distributed by GT Interactive Software. This program contains copyrighted material from DOOM DOOM 1993 software, Altants reserved. THE ULTIMATE DOOM 1995 to software. Alle reperved DOOM. the DOOM 1ooo, the DOOM likeness and id are trademarks of id software. GTI is a trademark of Grinteractive Software Corp, DWANGO is a registered trademark of interactive Visual Sypeme Corp "


"CYBERJUDAS BRAINDEAD 13 COMPUTER Express & CyberJudas WORLDWIDE SHIPPING 800-228-7449 As President of Earth's most powerful nation, you are armed with money, weapons and influence. In this Shadow President sequel, one of your advisors wants to destroy you! IBM CD #35768 While on a late-night \"fix it\" call to Dr. Neurosis' mysterious castle, Lance, the world's hippest computer repair guru, learns of the Doctor's master plan: world domination! A wild adventure! IBM CD #38614 STRIP POKER PROFESSIONAL CH PRO PEDALS NOW ORDER 24 HOURS ext.361 CUSTOMER SERVICE, CALL 508-443-6125 9am 5pm EST WORLD HOCKEY 95 ROLAND SOUND CANVAS DB Roland D SCX Canvas 8 blasts thru the FM Sound karier PROFESSIONAL iOCKey» The ultimate ice hockey experience! Choose from over 25 international teams or select from the 8 \"User\" teams. Game includes 3200 players with individual stats, 3 playing levels and more. IBM CD #39447 The add-on upgrade board that easily attaches to most popular sound cards. Instantly access professional CD quality synthesized sounds. Enhanced, sophisticated software gives you ample incentive to stretch your poker skills to the limit! Features high-resolution and crystal clear graphics. Get added flight simulation and auto racing support with dual operating modes for realistic forward and back pedal motion for flying, plus an independent accelerator and brake control for driving. Hardware #36876 Hardware #35628 IBM CD #38625 CD ENTERTAINMENT CD ENTERTAINMENT CD ENTERTAINMENT CD ENTERTAINMENT 45 37357 Complete Baskeiball MPC 1.0.. 38673 Conquest of the New World 34659 Cowboy Casino ... 38483 Create Your Own Games. 36884 Creature Shock 35768 Cyberjudos.... 36477 Cyberia........... 36043 Cyclemonio.... 39620 D Day America Invades....... 34973 D Day Operation Overlord.. 39167 Doedlus Encounter ....... 36302 Dark Force....... 38448 Darkride........ 36749 Ecstatica.... ....... 35361 Empira Deluxe Masters Edition 39146 Exploration 39205 Extractors... 36731 FIFA International Soccer ... 38987 FX Fighter... 34740 Folcon Gold...... 35944 Family Feud .............. 39810 Fantasy Collection 39169 Fast Attack 35769 Fighter Wing....... 36918 Flash Traffic............... 35714 Feet Dofonder. F.14....... 40 38 40 47 35 49 mo 55 H 32903 11th Hour... 36593 1830: Railroads & Robber Barons... 39741 5 Fool 10 Pak Volume lll... 38127 Sth Floet 39618 7th Fleet... 29037 7th Guest.......... 35878 AD&D Dark Sun Wake Ravager... 34165 AD&D Ravenloft: Strohds Posses... 38162 Absolute Mayom...... 36009 Absolute Zero........... 38907 Aces Collection...... 36729 Across the Rhine: 1944... 38164 Advanced Civilization.... 39812 Adventure Collection...... 36757 Air Havoc Controller 35806 Allen Legacy. 34944 Alien logic: Joruno... 39206 Alien Virus.... 39212 Alone in the Dark II 34857 Ancient Civilization.... 39144 Apache 36911 Arc of Doom... 37596 Areno Elder Scrolls 35869 Armored Fish 38582 Atari 2600 Action Pack #1 39804 Atari 2600 Action Pack #2. 37039 Award Winning War Games 39008 Baldies 39409 Baseball for Windows... 37199 Botilo Chess Compilation..... 37205 Bolle Cruiser 3000AD 36042 Bottle Oslo 2200............. 34650 Botilodromo 38854 Big 3.... 34638 BioForge Interactive Movie 38597 Blackbeard..... 38209 Blockthorne 35593 Blood Bowl 39617 Bloodwings: Pumpkinhead's Revenge 36939 Blown Away....... 38614 Braindead 13. 39100 Brandish 39019 Brett Hull Hockey '95.... 39011 Brutal...... 34279 Connon Fodder... 39147 Coveworld 35442 Celebrity Poker 39096 Celtic Tales: Balor Evil Eye 39395 Choos Engine 38011 Civilization Network 38651 ClockWorx 38568 Club Cyberlesque 36016 Colonization 39808 Comedy Collection ! 3 -CFAX: 001-1-508-443-5645. XI. CompuServeID: 7XX7. 1531 CU ADUFU. ,  & 38524 Grey Woll: North Atlantic..... 34009 Guilty... 35444 Hammer of the Gods 38077 Hard Ball: The Collection.. 36998 Hard Boll ......... 35696 Harpoon Classic...... 21557 Harpoon II........... 33905 Harvester ......... 35946 Hell: A Cyberpunk Thriller ... 37695 Heretic ................. 36246 High Seos Trader... . 39166 Hodi N'Podi....... . 37003 Ice Hockey...... 353 46 Incredible Machine 2........ 35721 Inferno...... 37982 Inside the NCAA Basketball 33865 Iron Assault....... ...... 39353 Iron Cross 31162 Iron Helix 37704 Ishar 3:7 Gates of Infinity 37465 Isle of the Dead..... 36047 Jack Nicklaus: Tour Collection 36388 Jogged Alliance........ 37895 Jommit... 34571 Jeopardy 37204 Jet Fighter III.... 38600 Jewels of the Oracle.. 38730 Johnny Mnemonic. 39568 Journeyman Project Il.. 36852 Kasparov's Gambit. 34702 King's Quest Anthology 35326 King's Quest VII.. 37202 Kingdom of the for Reoches 38231 Klik n' Play 35209 Knights of Xanlar 32526 tonds of Lore...... 39912 lost Bounty Hunter..... 38913 Last Dynasty ..... ... 33294 lawnmower Man... 36831 legend of Kryandia III...... 35328 Leisure Suit Larry Anthology 36741 lemmings Chronicles ........ 37754 Links 386 Pro........ 36459 Live Action Football......... 37291 Loadster... 35322 lode Runner... 35711 lords of Midnight......... 37327 Lords of the Realm .... ... 38858 Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes..... 31815 lost in Time... 37939 MTV's Club Dead... 38291 Maabus...... ............ 37713 Machiavelli: The Prince......... 35219 Mad Dog McCreo ll... ................ 43 34 35738 Dawn Patrol 39718 Deadline 36044 Deathgate... 39738 Demon Gote. 38831 Depth Dwellers 38675 Descen! 38296 Desert Strike 39220 Diggers 36746 Discworld. 39685 Doom ll Collectors Edition 39689 Doom I: Extra levels 36320 Doom I Hell on Earth 38909 Or Brain I 31493 Drogon's fait... 35231 Dragon's loir il Time Warp 37702 Dungeon Master 2 36945 ESPN Baseball Tonight 36591 Flight Commander II........ 36696 Flight Sim. Europe #1 5.0... 37980 Flight Sim: Japan Scenery 5.0... 36692 Flight Sim Las Vegas 5.0 36694 Flight Sim: Portland 5.0. 36979 Flight Simulator 5.1.. 36629 Flight Unlimited..... 39726 Frank Thomas' Baseball... 35312 Front Page Sports: Baseball... 35315 Front Page Sports: Football 95 36392 Full Throttle..... . 32784 Gabriel Knight..... 38196 Gadget....... 39837 Girlfriend Nikki... 38540 Girlfriend Teri w/ Speech 37917 Go Digital... 38602 Great Naval Battles II 26 ..34 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 1995 WDP II "


"DUNGEON MASTER 2 CRYSTAL CALIBURN PINBALL DAEDALUS ENCOUNTER SAIL 95 CHLE ungeon DAEDALUS ENCOU TOP NLEX jortor $35 The Master of Dungeon games returns! Command a party of warriors through the most realistic role-playing world ever created! JIEN ORAL OPINBALO Crystal Calil, 52 Pinball with an allitude! Features expert flipper control, spectacular sounds and authentic speech. Play multiball, or aim for the 3D ramps. A scavenger ship is speeding through the galaxy toward the center of an alien sun! You must save your old war comrades from solar cremation! A riveting sci-fi odyssey featuring Tia Carrere. IBM CD #39167 Man the helm of a $5 million IACC racing yacht in the official simulator of the 1995 America's Cup. Sophisticated Al, sound, and fully animated 3D graphics in 1024 x 768 resolution! IBM WIN # 39650 IBM CD #37702 IBM #36303 PHANTASMAGORIA FLIGHT SIMULATOR 5.1 MECHWARRIOR 2 HARPOON 2 MULTIMEDIA HARPOON DELUXE The Next Generation is launched! MECHKARRIOR PULANTASMAGORIA HAR ELU OVCD ROM ACNO $53 You're in the command center action like never before! Features 30 new scenarios, kan all-new scenario editor, 100+ full-motion video and sound clips and more! Used as a Naval Academy training tool! IBM CD #21557 Evil lives in a beautiful estate on a private island. Now, Adrienne Delaney, desperate and frightened, must uncover the clues and objects she needs in time to save her husband from its grip. IBM CD #34085 Now on CD-ROMI Highly realistic, graphically advanced computer simulation of civil aviation. Packed with detailed scenery, day/night effects, user-definable visibility levels and more. IBM CD #36979 Join one of six warrior clans and maneuver 31st Century weaponry as you confront opposing clans in every conceiv. able alien environment-including intimidating ice planets and desert terrain. IBM CD #34155 CD ENTERTAINMENT CD ENTERTAINMENT CD ENTERTAINMENT CD ENTERTAINMENT 34 39 40 36292 Total Distortion......... 37565 Transport Tycoon.... 36885 Trivial Pursuit......... 37538 U.S.S. Ticondoroga.... 36278 US Navy Fighters... 15416 Ultima Vill: Pogon w/ Speech 39692 Ultimate Pinball... 32937 Under a Killing Moon.... 36045 Unnecessary Roughness 195 38592 Virtua Chess........ 38672 Virtual Pool... 35816 Virtual Vegos Volume 1 38661 Virtuoso... 37708 Vortex: Quantum Gate II 36707 Voyeur... 37916 Wanderlust... 39103 WarPatrol..... 36701 Warcraft: Ores and Humans.......... 34284 Werewoll.. 32927 Wetlands... 39042 Wheel of Fortune...... 35300 Wing Commander Armoda MPC... 36291 Wing Commander I / Il Deluxe....... 34276 Wing Commander III 35405 Wings of Glory 1917-1918......... 30408 Wolfpack...... 38914 Woodruff & Schnibble. 38244 World Cup Golf-Dorado Beach. 39447 World Hockey '95......... 38344 XCOM: Terror From the Deep...... 34292 XCOM: UFO Defenso.............. 36940 XWing Collectors CD-ROM..... 39451 Zig Zag..... 36366 Zorro.... 39 36 36 44 58 35773 Maelstrom...... 86853 Magic Carpet.......... 84277 Magic Carpet: Hidden Worlds 37926 Magic: The Gathering 87567 Master of Magic..... 89607 Maze 38677 Mech Commander..... 34155 MechWarrior II.... 99795 MechWarrior II Add On 38305 Motal Marines....... 34865 Metaltech: Earth Siege... 31659 Microsoft Golf.... 36049 Mission Critical 95 39148 Modern Air Combat 88906 Mortal Kombat II. 38094 Ms. Melovers... 26 33204 Myst MPC............... 89806 Mystery Collection... 35818 NASCAR Racing .... 48 39723 NBA JAM Tournament Edition 89725 NFL Quarterback Club.. 35863 NHL Hockey 95 36755 National Lampoon Blind Date 89098 New Horizons........ 35722 Noctropolis.... 36482 Novostorm........ 36364 Operation Body Count. 38593 Operation Crusader 88014 Orion Conspiracy 34173 Outpost............. 36280 PGA Tour Golf 486..... 88549 Poc In Time... 87087 Pacific Air War: 1942 B6481 Panzer General 39800 Paparazzi 39322 Perfect General 11... ..35 86980 Peter Gabriel Xplora.... 34085 Phantasmagoria... 36941 Phoenix Fighter... 35005 Pinball Arcode.... 39450 Pinball Fantasies Deluxe... 36773 Pitfall... CALL 39687 Pocahontas... 32791 Police Quest IV.............. 38113 Poolmaster MPC.. . 36244 Power House... 39728 Primal Rage 38299 Pro League Football 75th Anniv... 38874 PsiMaster.. 39317 Pure Wargame.... 39290 Puzzle Power........ 30 36829 RELENTLESS: Twinsen's Adventure.... ...43 39734 Rapid Assault................. 39298 Re ElectFK................. ............31 36385 Realms of Arkania: Stor Trail.. 32155 Rebel Assault............ 37024 Renegade: Jacob's Star... 38969 Retribution 39569 Riddle of Master lu. 36917 Rise of the Robots... 36937 Rise of the Triad 35238 Robinson's Requiom...... 38447 Rocket Boy 38420 Rogorian Agenda 39814 Science Fiction Collection 30700 Scrabble Deluxe... 39207 Scroll 36934 Shadows of Cairn... 38583 Shanghai Great Moments... 39208 Silverload... 31518 SimAnt Enhanced.... 39255 SimCity 2000 Collect MPC w/Sampler.. 31479 SimCity Enhanced... 34086 SimEarth Enhanced 39031 Sim Tower.... 36575 SimTown..... 38627 Simon the Sorcerer 39396 Skins at Big Horn 38732 Skulleracker 37025 Sorority House... 35225 Space Ace 34603 Space Quest Anthology 39449 Space Quest VI. 38507 Space Sirens...... 34608 Spectre VR ... ... 38129 Stalingrad...... ... 38200 Stor Control Collection...... 29366 Star Trek 25th Enhanced 37193 Star Trek Judgment Rites..... 39732 Star Trek Omnipedia... 34278 Star Trek Star Fleet Academy 34350 Star Trek ING Tech Manual 34568 Star Trek: ING. A Final Unity 36893 Stonekeep... 36290 Strike Commander / Privateet.... 38609 Strip Poker 39006 Super Street Fighter Il Turbo..... 39575 Super Karts. 34425 Superhero. League of Hoboken... 35872 System Shock... ..... 33743 TFX, Tactical Fighter ...... . 38456 Tank Commander..... 39735 Tok War... .......... 33320 Tetris Gold Compilation ..... 34916 Theme Park..... 38595 Third Reich.............. 38876 Tony la Russa Baseball 3. 38656 Top Gun.... 800-228-7449 38 35 ..46 30 CUSTOMER SERVICE, CALL 508-443-6125 9am 5pm EST NOW ORDER 24 HOURS ext.361 Complete on-line catalog with over 5000 software and hardware titles. O Prodigy Computer Express CompuServe GO Express O Internet info@cexpress.com O AOL Computer Express www:http//cexpress.com:2700 O World Computer Express .No surcharge is added to credit card orders..PO's, wire transfers, personal and cashiers checks accepted. Some items are not returnable. Relurns require authorization # and are subject to 15% restocking fee..All items offered for sale are subject to availability. We are not responsible for typographical errors..Shipping and handling charges apply. Worldwide shipping! All prices are subject to change without notice COMPUTER Express 31 Union Ave, Sudbury, MA 01776 Info: 508.4436125 Fax: 5084435645 Circle Reader Service #56 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 1995 WDPI1 32 46 .40 48 ....38 "


"11TH HOUR SIM TOWER desire. SIM TOWER COMPUTER Express 800-2287449 3 WORLDWIDE SHIPPING Hou255 Seventy years ago, Henry Stauff went on a murder spree in his mansion. Now, Reporter Robin Morales has disappeared within its walls. Rely on puzzles, logic games and treasure hunts to save her! IBM CD #39195 Build a high-rise skyscraper, rent out space, satisfy your tenants' and customers needs, and manage your property into a profitable commercial empire. Will you be a \"towering\" success or a dismal failure? IBM CD #39031 NOW ORDER 24 HOURS ext.361 CUSTOMER SERVICE, CALL 508-443-6125 9am 5pm EST TEAC 4X MULTIMEDIA UPGRADE CIVILIZATION MULTIPLAYER LINKS-DEVIL'S ISLAND LINKS 386 PRO \"The greatest golf game on the planetlo VE pavis Island Fantasi CONTO OF LINKS FORUM COURSE LINKS$2990 Dynamic multi-session upgrade for your PC. Comes with 4X internal CD-ROM drive, sound card, speakers, 110 multimedia titles and much more! Sid Meier's Civilization is now a multiplayer Windows game! Build the Pyramids and the Great Wall. Conquer Earth or another planet. Up to 7 players at once via the local network or modem. IBM CD #38011 The world's most challenging course, se! in the heart of the Bermuda Triangle. The breathtaking scenery and unforgiving traps will have you begging for mercy Requires Links Links 386 or MS Golf 2.0 IBM CD #39649 Play championship golf at the famous Harbour Town Golf Links and Banff Spring Resort Course. The action includes simulated aerial fly-bys and comic Bobcat Goldthwait as your caddiel IBM CD #37754 Hardware #38586 3.5\" ENTERTAINMENT 3.5\" ENTERTAINMENT 3.5\" ENTERTAINMENT 3.5\" ENTERTAINMENT 30 34765 Dawn Patrol 37076 Descent 38295 Desert Strike..... 39219 Diggers 34307 Disciples of Steel.... 36747 Discworld..... 33894 Doom 1: Knee Deep in the Dead 39690 Doom It: Extra Lovels........ 35719 Doom I: Hell on Earth.......... 32978 Dungeon Mostor 2... 39914 Entertainment Digest . WINDOWS 35288 FIFA International Soccer ....... 34272 Falcon 4.0...... 33664 Falcon FA-18 Hornet 36832 Fighter Wing.......... .... 32880 Fleet Defender: F-14......... 36 .CALL 26 26 26 37040 1830. Railroads & Robber Barons.......... 34 35976 1st Encountot... 36454 5th Fleet... 39619 Sth Fleet Scenario Module ... 35877 AD&D Dark Sun. Wako Ravager. 36068 AD&D Monzoberranzon.... 34164 AD&D Rovenloft. Strohds Posses. 34302 Advanced Civilization...... 37304 Aide De Camp..... 37489 Alien 3.......... 34695 Alien Legacy 33809 Alone in the Dark II.... 32011 Arcade 33341 Arena Elder Scrolls 33708 Armored Fist.... 39913 Attapant WINDOWS 38608 Atari 2600 Action Pack #1 WINDOWS 26 39805 Atari 2600 Action Pack #2 WINDOWS... 36959 Award Winning War Games 33637 Axis the Gamecheater... 39007 Baldies 36027 Battle Bugs... 33857 Battle Cruiser 3000AD 34448 Battledome...... 21151 Bottles of Napoleon... 38662 Beat the House.. 11575 Beyond Squad Leader 36485 Blockbeard........... 36654 Blood Bowl ... 33738 Breach 3...... 35715 Break Thrul. WINDOWS 33941 Brett Hull '95... 39010 Brutal..... 27743 Carrier Strike..... 33047 Cosino Lito: Omaha Hold'em .... 37676 Cosino lito. Texas Hold'em... 34074 Celtic Tales: Balor Evil Eye ............. 39394 Chaos Engine... 32522 Chess Master 4000 Turbo. WINDOWS 26806 Civilization.... 36251 Clossics Pinbali.......... 38649 ClockWerx. WINDOWS.... 37445 Collegiate Pennsylvania Stoto. WIN... 37435 Collegiale U of Florido. WINDOWS.. 37439 Collegiote U of Michigan . WINDOWS.. 37434 Collegiate UCLA. WINDOWS....... 35717 Colonization 32930 Comanche & Mission Disk #1.... 22035 Corridor 7. 36303 Crystal Coliburn. WINDOWS 36087 Cyclones... 33602 D Day: Operation Overlord 34028 D Day. The Beginning of End 34162 Dork legions ORDER YOUR CATALOG NOW! Includes $10 Rebate! 32130 Gabriel Knight.... 38607 Gettysburg: Turning Point.... 34001 Girlfriend Lisa... 34436 Girlfriend Tari... 36461 Glider 4.0. WINDOWS 25 37764 Goal '94. 37081 Goldtree Engine 26 28300 Golf. WINDOWS 43 34826 Golf Coursos: Bantl Springs WINDOW...... 23 34827 Golf Courses: Mouno Koo. WINDOWS....... 23 34828 Golf Courses: Pinchurst.WINDOWS........ 36790 Good to Firm 33704 Great Novul Battles il........ 39086 Greyhound 2......... .. 34008 Guilty.. 32527 Hand of Fate... 32594 HardBall lll Diamond Collection 34006 HardBall IV....... 32 38076 HardBall IV MLPBA Addon... 32122 Harpoon II...... 39453 Harpoon Il Bartleser #3......... 26 37696 Heretic ........... CALL 34761 Heroes of Might & Magic..... 36245 High Seas Tradet............ 39 27109 Hollywood Mogul. WINDOWS..... 38601 Hudson City 37466 Ice Hockey 35349 Incredible Toons. WINDOWS 28 31471 IndyCar Racing 35105 IndyCar Circuits Expansion Pack 35106 IndyCar Indianapolis Speedway... 36393 Iron Cross 40 37703 Ishor 3: 7 Gates of Infinity 39090 It's a fair Bel... 28696 Jack Nicklaus Signature Tour 1.... 30628 Jack Nicklaus Signature Tour 2 31480 Jagged Alliance.... 36389 Jagged Alliance Addon... 34166 Jeopardy Deluxe ........ 37203 Jet Fighter II...... 33741 Jurassic Pork..... 34303 Kingmaker36972 Klik n' Ploy . WINDOWS 35210 Knights of Xentar Upgrodo NRIB 37527 legions. WINDOWS 32785 leisure Suit Larry VI.... 30372 temmings II.... ..... 27660 links 386 Pro 31444 Links. Belfrey Course SVGA 36148 links: Bighorn Course SVGA.... 34306 linis: Castle Pines Course SVGA.. 39648 links. Devil's tale Course SVGA... 32478 Links: Firestone Course SVGA....... 31507 links: Innisbrook Course SVGA...... 32479 Links: Pebble Beach Course SVGA 30798 Links: Pinehurst Country SVGA 39068 Links: Prairie Dunes SVGA 35319 lode Runner ...++ 34029 Lords of the Realm.................. 33501 M4 Sherman Tank WINDOWS.. 35 35741 Master of Magic 31433 Master of Orion....... ..... 31594 Metal & lace PG13.............. 33223 Metal & loce Upgrade Disk NR18....... 37302 Metal Marines.... 34698 Motaltech: Earth Siege.... 37023 Mutaltoch: Earth Siege Speech Pack.... 38905 Mortal Kombat II..... 36997 NASCAR Racing SVGA........... 33215 NCAA: Road to the Final Four .. 35937 NFL '95 WINDOWS... 26 37092 Navy Strike................. 39097 New Horizons.............. 37763 One Nil 39101 Onslaught.... 34451 Operation Crusadet-WINDOWS 33340 Outpost 38 38548 Pae In Time 33087 Pacific Air War: 1942 35739 Pocific Air Wor: 1942 Scenario 36480 Ponzer General..... 31956 Pax Imperia... 33735 Perfect General il 32948 Perfect General Trilogy..... 25088 Pinball Fantasies 30098 Pirates! Gold........ 37083 Pizza Tycoon. WINDOWS 36057 Planet Soccer 37305 Point of Attack. 32079 Police Quest IV.... ... 38118 Poolmaster  WINDOWS 30630 Prince of Persia II..... 34655 Pro League Boseball.... 35935 Quarantine... 34 32863 Quest for Glory IV... 34596 Raiden....... 36304 Realms of Askonio: Star Trail... 36386 Realms of Arkanio. Star Trail Addon.......... 35355 Red Baron........ ....... 31630 Return to Zork.. 36598 Reunion. 33938 Rise of the Robots WINDOWS............... 45 36936 Rise of the Triad........ .. 35236 Robinson's Requiem ........ 33206 SSN-21: Sea Wall... ..... .. 35590 Sabre Team..... 39650 Sail '95 WINDOWS........ ..... 32979 Sam & Max Hit the Road...... ...... .....34 36 30 23 35744 Fleet Dufonder. F-14 Scenario .................... ...30 36589 Fight Commander II..... 32632 Flight Light ........ 37558 Flight Sim: Caribbean Scenery 5.0..... 36695 Flight Sim Europe 1 5.0... 37557 Flight Sim Jopen Scenery 5.0. 32901 Flight Sim: Las Vegos 5.0.... 31728 Flight Sim, New York Scenery 31657 Flight Sim: Paris Scenery 36693 Flight Sim: Portland 5.0 31273 Flight Simulator 5.0.... ... 30373 Freddy Pharkas........ 36247 Front Lines.... ... 34894 Front Page Sports: Baseball... 35314 Front Page Sports Football 95..... ....42 35313 Front Poge Sports: Footboll Upgrd 95......28 35 35 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JULY, 1995 WDP II "


"HARVESTER MAZE SOUND BLASTER 16 VALUE MACHIAVELLI THE PRINCE IN WAR NOMAT MAZE HARVESTER Machiavelli VALUE U V the Prince BLASTER Sound REG32IGZASOBRE MAZE. You were born and raised in the charming town of Harvest. But now, you suffer from amnesia, and everything's strange. You've been plunged into a terrifying nightmare!' IBM CD #33905 SAVARIVAZCARRARUMERE Test your powers against the world's most complex and confusing mazes. Features a 3D Virtual Mazewalk, a gallery of maze designs, legends of historic mozes, amazing printouts, and lots more! IBM CD #39607 CREATU The latest audio technology with professional CD quality sounds, plus a library of professional software, including Creative Wavestudio, Soundo'le, Ensemble, Talking Scheduler, Mosaic, and much more! Hardware #34807 In 15th Century Europe, you seek world domination! Manipulate military, political and religious powers with bribery, manipulation! And, your every move could mean exaltation-or excommunication! IBM CD# 37713 ORION CONSPIRACY FLIGHTSTICK PRO HARDBALL 4 GIRLFRIEND TERI Thos! Anteractive HARDBALL 4 salt ware aynilable! Gefriend ORION CONSPIRACY They Enjoy conversations with a girlfriend living inside an apartment in your PC! Your girlfriend moves around and responds to anything you say When your son Danny McCormack is killed in a tragic accident, you travel through space to the perimeter of a black hole-in your search for answers to his mysterious demise. Nail-biting intensity! IBM CD #38014 Top Gun precision for computer pilots. Realistic professional jet grip puls controls at your fingertips. Trigger and 3 fire buttons, responsive throttle control, 4-way viewing, trim controls, plus much more Hardware #31417 Balter up! Manage and play baseball with 700 real players in 28 realistic ballparks, Famed Sportscaster Al Michaels delivers the play-by-play. IBM CD #36998 IBM CD# 38540 3.5\" ENTERTAINMENT 3.5\" ENTERTAINMENT KIDS/FAMILY/HOME MACINTOSH TITLES 34 34 32 CALL 39 35821 Universal Never lock for Gomes... 36041 Unnecessary Roughness 95........ 32859 Victory of Seo 36708 Warcraft: Orcs and Humans............ 31521 Worlords ....... 32510 Wheel of Fortuna Deluxe WINDOWS.. 27287 Wing Communder I Deluxe .... ... 36271 Woll, Hunt or Be Hunted .. .... 34590 Wolfpack ........... 39727 World Hockey 95....... 38343 XCOM: Terror from the Deep..... 35215 XCOM: UFO Defensa 28941 X Wing............. 32034 X Wing: B-Wing Tour of Duty..... 30899 X-Wing: Imperial Pursuit 34181 Zig Zag WINDOWS 36840 Quicken 40 WIN 36838 Quicken 80 DOS 36841 Quicken Deluxe 40 CD 36842 Quicken Deluxe 40 WIN 39744 Ram Doubler WINDOWS 10 38017 SAT I Studyware CD.... 32960 SAT NEW Personal Trainer 2.0 36110 Sharks CD....................... 36803 Sports Ill. Swimsuit CD... 38678 Stacker Multimedia 4.0 WINDOWS..... 37887 Star Trek: TNG Screen Saver WINDOWS.. ...30 34170 Star Wars Screen Saver WINDOWS.. .30 36412 Treasure Pack 1 CD.. 32 36594 TriplePlayPlus! Spanish CD. 21493 WinFax Pro 4.0 WINDOWS........ .80 35647 Windows 95 4.0...... .145 35648 Windows 95 Upgrade 4.0............... 34081 Windows Upgrade 3.11.. 33603 11th Hour CD 36011 Absolute Zero CD 33864 Alone in the Dark 39398 Alone in the Dark II CD 39145 Apache CD 36912 Arc of Doom CD 39802 Atari 2600 Action Pack #1.... 36588 Beyond Squad leader CD 38615 Braindead 13 CD.... 36789 Casino Master w/Kit CD 36376 Casino Tournament of Champions CD.. 29214 Civilization...... 38569 Club Cyberlosque CD......... 33084 Crystal Caliburn.... . 39173 Crystal Crazy 1.0. 39640 Dark Forces CD...... 39686 Doom H: Hell on Earth... ..22 92 16 30 78 KIDS/FAMILY/HOME 33 40 34 1731 Scenery Collection USA West 50 14656 Seri City $316 Serious Soccer 4289 Shodow of the Comet 2... 15287 Shanghai ll . WINDOWS 4033 Shiloh.... 26824 SimAnt Classic.. 1457 SimCity 2000.... 3915 SimCity 2000 Great Disasters.... 8245 SimCity 2000 Urban Renewal Kit......... 1410 SimCity Classic....... ..... 7042 SimClassic Collection....... 24473 SimEarth Classic... 1454 Simfarm... 5115 SimHealth 9724 Simlife Classic.... 7593 Simlower WINDOWS.. 32882 Simon the Sorcerer...... 2085 Solitaire Antics. WINDOWS 17228 Solitaire Deluxe  WINDOWS 11656 Space Simulator 13342 Spectre VR............ 16483 Stalingrad. 15723 Star Crusader............. 15940 Star Crusader Mission & Speech.. 33245 Star Reach 26706 Star Trek 25th Anniversary 31772 Star Trek: Judgment Rites 27188 Strike Commander... 30608 Strike Commander Speech Pack... 32114 Strike Commander Tactical #1 5014 Strip Poker Pro #12 Data Disk.......... 1886 Strip Poker Professional.... ...... 53331 Subwar 2050................. 7091 Subwar 2050 Scenario... 9005 Super Street Fighter Il Turbo... 26041 Super Tetris... 396B8 SuperKarts 84383 Superhero: League of Hoboken..... 33858 System Shock ..... 34305 TEX: Tactical Fighter... 32154 The Dig...... 33332 Third Reich. 32152 Tie Fighter 38236 Tie Fighter: Defenders...... 29906 Tigers on the Prowl. 35308 Tony LaRusa Baseball 11 2.0.... 26142 Train Engineer WINDOWS..... 37084 Transport Tycoon WINDOWS 36961 Transport Tycoon Scenario.... 37588 True Lies.. 86452 U-Boat WINDOWS......... 32879 Ultima VIII Pagan 39691 Ultimate Pinbail. 800-228-7449 35 26 35 23 35 32 29 35923 After Dark 3.0 WIN 35924 After Dark MPC 3.0 CD................. 31340 American Heritage Dictionary WIN....... 38270 BOB CD.. .... 89 36987 Beavis & Butthead Screen Saver CD... 36627 Curtoon History of Universe CD ......... 37767 Cookworks. On the Menu 1.0 CD... 33036 Creative Writer WIN....................43 33549 Design Your Own landscape WIN ........ 17177 Dr. T's Sing Along Kids CD 36174 EasyKeys CD... 30760 Emperor's New Clothes CD...... ........ 36855 Encarta MPC Encyclopedia '95 CD...... 39553 Guinness CD of Records 1995............ 39065 IQ Test Multimedia...... ...... 37775 Internet Membership Kit 1.0 WINDOWS 33625 JFK Assassination........ . .......36 35615 Lion King Print Studio WIN.......... . 35281 MS DOS Upgrade 6.22..... ... 37662 Managing Your Money 95 2.0 WIN..... 33528 Mayo Clinic Family Health CD 349B6 Mayo Clinic Pharmasis CD.............. 33 36519 Mayo Clinic Sports Health CD......... 39614 Medical House Call CD...... 37123 Metamorf 3D............ 37156 Monty Phython's Complete Waute CD... 38207 Ne Cruiser Plus............. 36828 Oregon Trail II CD............. 36968 Page Master CD....... 36538 People vs. OJ Simpson CD..... 34999 Piano Course I w/ Midi Coble.... 36030 Print Shop Deluxe WIN ...... 31527 Publisher 2.0 WIN.................. 36843 Quicken 4.0 CD.............................. 32 CUSTOMER SERVICE, CALL 508-443-6125 9am 5pm EST NOW ORDER 24 HOURS ext.361 Complete on-line catalog with over 5000 software and hardware titles. O Prodigy Computer Express CompuServe GO Express O Internet info@cexpress.com AOL-Computer Express O www http//cexpress.com:2700 O World Computer Express .No surcharge is added to credit card orders..PO's, wire transfers, personal and cashiers checks accepted. Some items are not returnable. Returns require authorization # and are subject to 15% restocking fee. All items offered for sale ore subject to availability. We are not responsible for typograph ical errors. Shipping and handling charges apply..Worldwide shipping! All prices are subject to change without notice. COMPUTER Express & Victor BICOV 31 Union Ave. Sudbury, MA 01776 Info: 508-4436125 Fax: 508-443-5645 Circle Reader Service #56 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD, JULY 1995 WDPH 34 50 26 34 20 34 "


"TONY LA RUSSA BASEBALL 3 CARDINAL 28.8 INT. MODEM COMPUTER Express 28.8 134 Fax/Modem TONY WORLDWIDE SHIPPING $138 800-228-7449 Step up to the plate with true multimedia action Animation is based on video of pro players! Includes 28 stadiums, video tips lrom Tony, commentary by Mel Allen, Lon Simmons, and Hank Greenwald. IBM #38876 Delivers high-speed, 28.8 Kbps transmis sion. Meets V.34 and V.FC specs for world-wide compatibility. Easy to install and use. Includes free Value Service Pack and more! Hardware #38278 NOW ORDER 24 HOURS ext.361 CUSTOMER SERVICE, CALL 508-443-6125 9am 5pm EST THE LAST BOUNTY HUNTER RAM DOUBLER DYNASTY LEAGUE BASEBALL SUPER KARTS More memory with just one click Dynasty League BASEBALLA RAM DOUBLETES $44 GAME GUN COMPATIBLE Can you collect the bounty on all four of the most cunning outlaws in the Old West? Be quick on the draw, shoot straight, collect the most bounty and upgrade from a six-shooter to a shotgun. IBM CD #39912 Eliminates \"insufficient memory messages forever! Lets you double your RAM capacity and run virtually any game or flight simulator. Requires Windows & at least 4MB of RAM Windows #39744 THE LAST WORD IN REALIS IN BASEBALL SIMULATIGDE GAMING All the excitement of Opening Day, the AllStar game, and the Pennant races! As General Manager, lead your team through the season in quest of the Pennant. Loaded with features, special effects, and more! Windows #39915 Combines all the wild excitement of racing with all the fun of Go Karting! 16 exhilarating tracks test your driving skills to the max with speed and 3D graphics rivaling the best coin-op arcade hits! IBM CD #39575 MACINTOSH TITLES STORAGE DEVICES JOYSTICKS & MICE MEMORY/CPU UPGRADE 36656 Wingman Extreme loystick.... 36655 Wingman Jaystick. ... 33052 Y Cable for 2 Jaysticks ...10 38556 Lighting 730MB 1 1MS IDE.......................265 38557 Lightning 730MB IIMS SCSI MAC........ 277 37824 ST-31200A INT 1GB Hard Disk 599 38970 ST-3391A INT 341MB Hard Disk 37823 ST-5660A INT 545MB Hard Disk 293 38180 Trakker 350MB EXT Tape Backup 332 38181 Trakker 700MB EXT Tape Backup.... 396 226 PRINTERS SSSS 36149 4X9 Simms 70ns (4 Simms)...... ...CA 36176 72 PinAMB Module 6 Ons 36177 22 Pin BMB Module Ons. CA 36555 72 Pin 16MB Module 60ns. 31738 Cyrix CX486DRX2-33/66 386DX-33 34409 Cyrix CX4865RX225/50 3865X25 35134 Overdrive 486DX50 CPU... 30884 Overdrive 486DX50 CPU WO/OD 31505 Overdrive 486DX-66 CPU WO/OD 35502 Overdrive 486DX-66 FOR SX/DX33 36727 Overdrive 486DX4-100 CPU....... 36728 Overdrive 486DX4-100 CPU WO/OD........CA 36725 Ovurdrivo 486DX4 75 CPU...... 36726 Overdtive 486DX475 CPU WO/OD....... 38604 Overdrive PENT63..............................CA JOYSTICKS & MICE 261 379 410 .700 224 559 313 CA 89 89 34228 BJTOSX Bubble Jet Printer... ........ 36658 BJC-4000 Bubble Jet Printer..... 37912 Brother HL-630 Laser Printer.. 37976 Brother HL-660 Laser Printer...... 37978 Brother P-Touch Label Printer 35800 Epson Stylus Color Inkjer.......... .... 38190 HP Deskjet 320.... 38192 HP Desk Writer 320 MAC. .. 38544 HP LaserJet 4L 38543 HP OificeJet..... 30754 KX P2023 24 Pin 240cps Narrow ... 34119 KXP3124 24 pin 320cps Narrow.......... 27788 KX P44004PPM Laser Printer... 38744 KX P1250 Inkjet 300dpi.... 119 40 1.39 799 128 530 1.39 34 SCANNERS 49 33702 Dragon's Lair CD 37227 Dungeon Master 2... 38664 Dungeon Master 2 CD 33534 Empire Deluxe.... 38210 Gadget CD... 39172 Glider Pro 10.... 38522 Go Digital Volume 1 CD 35698 Hotpoon Classic CD 25497 Harpoon II 35351 Incredible Toons 38731 Johnny Mnemonic CD 36298 Journeyman Project Turbo CD 37022 King's Quest VII CD.... 38966 -Zone CD.... 33353 lawnmower Man CD 3339B Leisure Suit Larry VI.. 35257 Links Pro w/ Harbortown Course..... 35321 Lode Runner 39448 Marathon Gamonet... 39013 Master of Orion CD.. 38570 Ms. Melaverso CD..... 32296 Myst CD......... 36756 National Lampoon Blind Date CD 39102 Onslaught......... 38594 Operation Crusader.... 33824 PGA Tour Golf It... 35331 Phantasmagorio CD... 39729 Primal Rage CD 35135 Prince of Persia II 34581 Rebel Assault CD 36935 Shadows of Coin CD.... 32616 SimCity 2000 35754 Simlower 35755 Sim Town CD 22090 Solitaire Antics 38596 Stalingrad CD 36830 Star Trek 25th Enhanced CD......... 34351 Star Trek: TNG Tech Manual CD 38875 Super Wing Commander CD 36080 Top Ten Mac Pack CD 38174 Virtual Vegas Volume 1 CD 37195 Voyeur CD 38480 Wanderlust CD.. 39104 WarPatrol CD 38234 Warlords II 37192 Wallenstein 3.0 MONITORS 99 40 46 81 37035 Aero Mouse.... 37034 Anto Pen 37036 Acto Dual 3D (Mouse and Pen) 38163 Cyber Maxx VR Headgear Display..... 39377 F-15 Eagle Tactical Stick 39874 F-15 Hawk Tactical Stick 39875 F-15 Raptor Tactical Stick 39876 F 15 Talon Tactical Stick...... 29442 FX2000 Pistol Grip 33226 Flight Stand....... 16439 Flight Stick........ 31417 Flight Stick Pro IBM.. 27914 Flight Stick Pro MAC 31148 G-Force Flight Yoke 37753 Game Zapper 24017 GomeCard II Automatic 24018 GameCard Ill MCA Automatic 38124 GomeGun 29404 Gravis Analog Pro Joystick 28366 Gravis Eliminator Card 39627 Gravis Firebird PC Controller 27815 Gravis Gamepad IBM 30003 Giovis MouseSlick 1 MAC 38108 Gravis NHL Hockey 95 Pack 35133 Gravis Phoenix Control System 37715 Jeblick. 36886 Jayswitch 36562 Natural Keyboard...... 35458 PC Golf System 36876 Pro Pedals 30825 Thrustmaster ACM Game Card 35104 Thrustmaster F-16 FLCS.... 38027 Thrustmaster FCS MKII IBM... 33344 Thrustmaster Formula 1 29522 Thrustmaster Pea FCS 29863 Thrustmaster Rudder Pedals IBM... 33804 Thrustmaster Rudder Pedals MAC 38156 Thrustmaster TQS for FICS 33780 Thrustmaster WCS Markl MAC 31258 Thrustmaster WCS Markil IBM 38950 Trackball PRO 38462 Virtual Pilot Pro 29434 Virtual Pilot Yoke .88 33597 Epson Action Scanning PC. 39110 HP ScanJet 3P Scanner..... 39111 HP Scander 3P Scanner 38342 HP ScanJet ICX Scanner 39109 HP ScanJet ICX Scanner... 36436 Scan Magic Color 24Bit Handheld 38758 ScanMaker 35T Slide Scanner 38752 ScanMaker ll Color Flatbed.... 33906 ScanMaker IIG Grey Flatbed. 35052 ScanMakor HR Color Flotbed 35050 ScanMaker Ill Color Flotbed. 35498 SconMaker ISP Color Flatbed 38755 ScanMaker IISPX Color Flatbed 38754 ScanMaker IIXE Color Flatbed. 28975 Scon Mon 256... 32389 ScanMan 32...... 31238 ScanMon Color... 33371 Scon Mon EosyTouch ........ 34812 SconMan Powerpage 400 DPI.... 1096 1.463 304 450 1066 267 331 746 224 .33 18 35553 Alphascon 15 15\" Monitor 35554 Alphoscan 178 17\" Monitor 35556 Alphascan 17E 17\" Monitor 35555 Alphascon IC 20\" Monitor 35557 Alphascon LF 20\" Monitor 35552 Alphascan Plus 14\" Monitor ........ 38151 Diamond Pro 15FS 15\" Monitor .......... 38153 Diamond Pro 17\" Monitor 37863 H14860 14\" SVGA Color Monitor Monitor 37864 HL5860 15\" SVGA Color Monitor 37866 HL7682 17\" SVGA Colar Monitor 37861 HN483AP 14\" SVGA Color Monitor 38390 MultiSync 2V 14\" Monitor 32896 MultiSync 3FGE 15 Monitor 38388 MulSync lens: 2v.... 38386 MultiSync Lons: XE15 or XP15 38070 .Syric X615 15* Aonitor , 38072 MultiSyne XP15 15\" Monitor 35059 SyncMaster 14GL 14 28MM 35060 SyncMaster 15GL 15\" 28MM 35061 SyncMaster 17GL 17.28MM 34223 SyncMaster 2E 14 SVGA 39MM...... 34222 SyncMaster 3E 14 SVGA 28MM.... 40 38 331 40 604 29 19 SOUND CARDS 64 579 .26 43 318 39 408 032 231 232 STORAGE DEVICES 37755 Aztech SoundGalaxy BXlll... 35277 Aztech Wave Rider 32 Wavelable.............13 30823 Daytona PCMCIA Sound Card 16bit.............36 39030 Gravis Ultrasound Ace................ ...82 26292 Gravis UltraSound Max..........................16 33725 Gravis UltraSound Midi Adapter 33240 Mavi Wavelablo Synth. Upgrade ..............14 36498 Monte Carlo Game Card................. 89 34189 Multitound Monterey lo bit.................33 36771 Multisound Tahiti 16 bit ... ....... 31059 Port Able Sound Plus. 32312 ReelMagic Multimedia Playback.. . 35 MEMORY/CPU UPGRADES 38178 Jumbo 3SOMB INT Tape Back Up.. ...162 38179 Jumbo 700MB INT Tape Back Up................237 38554 lightning 540MB 1 1MS IDE .... .216 38555 Lightning 340MB 1 1MS SCSI MAC.........226 36147 1X3 Simms 70n (4 Simms... 36136 1X9 Simms 70s (4 Simm 60 . CALL CALL COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 1995 WDP 11 "


"STAR TREK A FINAL UNITY THRUSTMASTER T-1  OMAR SHARIF BRIDGE 2 nu APACHE. BOLE OBridge $45 A Star Trek experience like none before! Assume command of this official inspec tion tour and investigate the Starship Enterprise NCC-1701-D. The most realistic controls for all of today's driving simulators! A fully functional steering wheel, brake and gas pedals, a sturdy shift lever, and more. Attack helicopter simulation that pushes air combat to the limit! Hot new 3D visual technology, high-resolution, lowlevel terrain graphics and highly variable explosion graphics add to the excitement IBM CD #39144 The most comprehensive bridge game everl loaded with features that will challenge even the most expert players. Also great for polishing your skills! IBM #34317 IBM CD #34568 Hardware #33344 THRUSTMASTER F-16 TQS ART APART ENTERTAINMENT DIGEST ROLINE 11 INFINITY MACHINE INFINITY MACHINE Collector's Edition 30 tahalos Pazin entertainment digest New Lane C reolo fr PULZUSS SOLVE RESOLYE The ultimate in control and precision for our PC! Designed after the F-16 Fighting Falcon Throttle Quadrant System. Features dogfight, radar, and antenna switches, orced throttle movement, and more. Hardware #38156 Your complete game library. Suitable for the entire family, games include: Jewel Thief: Alien Checkers; Quadrille; Double Match; Maze Master; Word Hunter; Art Apart. Special bonus offer also included! Windows #39914 Come out the winner with the ultimate game cheating utility! Search for known values, or for unknown \"meter bar\" variables. Even freeze variables while playing. 4GW and Netwk. Compatible. IBM #39740 Finally! A jigsaw program with real interlocking pieces! Can't find a missing piece Use the Assist mode and the computer does it for you! 30 fabulous puzzles to solve and resolve! Windows #39913 SOUND CARDS CD DRIVES & UPGRADES MODEMS/FAXES MODEMS/FAXES ...CALL 156 .238 136 .. 179 8352 Reelmogic SCSI MPEG w/ Zork.. .......... 423 5366 Rio Soundcard.... . * .131 2031 Roland RAP-10 Audio Producer........... ..235 8019 Roland SCC1B GS SoundCard..................265 5480 Roland SCD-10 DB Sound Canvas...... 5628 Roland SCD 15 DB Sound Canvas....... CALL 2530 Sound Blaster 16 MCD. 2531 Sound Blaster 16 SCSI-2 .172 2532 Sound Blaster 16 SCSI-2 ASP. 197 4807 Sound Blaster 16 Value Edition 7027 Sound Blaster AWE32 Value Ed. 1.56 4661 Sound Blaster Pro Value Ed 74 4660 Sound Blaster Value Edition 52 3751 Sound Man Wave... 117 6587 Tropez 16-bit Sound Card 208 6883 Video Bloster FS200 16-Bit 304 6580 Video Blaster R1300 16-Bit 338 0931 Wave Blaster Daughter Board .... 38276 Cardinol MVP144E 14 4EXT F/M...... 76 38277 Cordinol MVP1441F 14.4INT F/M...............73 38281 Cardinol MVP 144CC PCMCIA F/M......... 118 38275 Cardinal MVP144WIN 19.2INT F/M........50 38279 Cardinal MVP288CC PCMCIA F/M......... 238 38278 Cardinal MVP2861 28.8INT F/M.................138 38280 Cardinal MVP288XF 28.8EXT F/M ... .161 33712 Connection 14,4 Int. Fax/Modem ........ .77 37974 Connection Pro 19.2INT 14.4Fox...... 90 37601 Coutier DS 14.4 PCMCIA F/M............. 355 37602 Courier DS 28.8 PCMCIA F/M............... 409 36433 Courier V.34 EXT 28.8 S/R Fax/Modem.......433 36434 Courier V.34 INT 28.8 S/R Fax/Modem..... 398 31908 Practical PM144HC II INT Fax/Modem....... .89 31896 Practical PM144MT I EXT Fax/Modem.........107 35195 Practical PM288HC I INT Fax/Modem......... 197 37837 Practical PM288MT V.34 EXT Fax/Modem....215 37031 Digital Schoolhouse INT CDROM.......... 39271 Discovery CD16 4X INT CDROM........ 339 30216 Discovery CD16 INT CDROM......... 270 21560 Gamo Blaster CD 16............................ ..391 36267 Legend Executive INT Multimedia Kit........... 302 36826 Legend INT Kit w/6 Titles... 38060 MultiSpin 2V Deluxe INT CDROM....... 300 38062 MultiSpin 2VI INT CDROM.. 38059 MultiSpin 3XP Plus Portable. 402 34923 MultiSpin 4XE EXT CDROM 303 38058 MultiSpin 4XI INT CDROM 38065 MultiSpin 4XI INT CDROM Kit 479 39565 Multimedia Home 4X 37028 Multimedia Office INT CD ROM 37026 OmniCD 4X...... 415 31809 OmniCD Upgrade Kit Internal 179 34133 Reelmogic CD ROM Kit 646 39272 Sound Blaster Volue CD INT. 238 38588 TEAC 4X INT CDROM Kit 207 38586 TEAC 4X INI Multimedia Kit...... 259 38737 Toshibo EXT QuadSpeed Kit .675 38710 Toshiba INT QuadSpeed Kit.... 464 36266 Scout 28.8 VFC VFast Fax/Modem....... .129 39528 Smart 14 4 PCMCIA F/ M2MB ....248 39529 Smart 14.4 PCMCIA F/M 4MB 284 39530 Smart 14.4 PCMCIA F/M-6MS 320 39526 Smart 14.4 PCMCIA F/M w/voice. 31139 SuproComCord 14.4 PCMCIA w/fox... 232 34802 SupraExpress 14.4 INT FOX/Modem.... ...78 32317 SupraFax Modem 14.4 EXT MACINTOSH ... 178 26938 SupraFaxModem 14.4 EXT V.32BIS.... 178 32314 SupraFax Modem 14,4 INT V.32BIS..........110 38528 SupraFaxMadem 28.8 v.34EXT..... ...206 38527 SupraFax Modem 28.8 v.34EXT MAC..........213 38529 SupraFaxModem 28.8 v.34INT... 39269 TDK DF1414 PCMCIA 14,4 F/M.............158 39267 TDK DF2814 PCMCIA 28.8 F/M....... 39537 TraceCard 28.8 v.34 PCMCIA.. . 293 31236 WorldPort 14.4 PCMCIA F/M....... 402 180 325 201 SPEAKERS 800-228-7449 VIDEO CARDS 5543 ACS 52 Shielded Speakers... 86 9264 ACS 250 Subwoofer........... 8122 ACS 300.1 Speakers w/Subwoofer.. 6504 Jazz J511 Speakers ......... 6500 Jazz J590 Speakers........ 78 6501 Jazz 1702 Speckers 120 6503 Jazz 1818 Speakers 0730 Koss HD. 6 MPC Speakers 73 -8255 Koss HD.100 Speakers 46173 Kon HD50 Speakers..... -2220 Labtec CS 900 Speakers... 2228 Lobtec CS-1000 Speakers....... 48 10475 Partner 570 Speakers ...246 0474 Partner 622 Speakers w/ Subwoofer............190 3649 Powered Speaker YSTMIOH (Pait)... 06 7714 Powered Subwoofer YSTMSW10 ...... ... 137 2101 Roland MA 12CP Powerd Speakers... 215 8308 Vivid3D 37712 Vivid3D Plus...... 70 8455 Vivid 3D Pro.. 104 28570 Boca Super VGA..... ............ ...59 36035 Boca VL-Bus SuperX IMB Accel...................106 36036 Boca VL-Bus SuperX 2MB Aceel...................161 38290 Diamond Speedstar Game Kit ISA...... 38599 Diamond Speedstar Game Kit PCI... ..144 38598 Diamond Speedstar Game Kit VLB.... 38288 Diamond Stealth Game Kit PCI....... 38289 Diamond Stealth Game KIA VLB ...... 38132 Diamond Stealth 4 DRAM 2MB PCI.. 38133 Diamond Stealth 4 DRAM 2MB VLB. 206 35691 Diamond Stealth 4 VRAM 4MB PCI.. 458 35692 Diamond Stealth 4 VRAM 4MB VLB............458 29259 Graphics Ultra Pro ISA 2MB... ...... 36470 Graphics Ultra Pro PCI 2MB......................272 37157 Graphics Xpression 1MB ISA................. 142 38226 Graphies Xpression IMB VIB..................142 37182 Graphies Xpression 2MB ISA..... 189 38319 Graphics Xpression 2MB VB..... ........189 38286 Kelvin MPEG SVGA IMB VIB.... 319 38287 Kelvin MPEG SVGA 2MB VLB ...367 39280 Realmagic Rave 1MB Win Accel... 406 39281 Realmagic Rave 2MB Win Accel..................489 34615 RealMagic lite. .. .... 272 CUSTOMER SERVICE, CALL 508-443-6125 9am 5pm EST NOW ORDER 24 HOURS ext.361 Complete on-line catalog with over 5000 software and hardware titles. O Prodigy Computer Express CompuServe GO Express Internet info@cexpress.com O AOL Computer Express www:http//cexpress.com:2700 o World Computer Express .No surcharge is added to credit card orders..PO's, wire transfers, personal and cashiers checks accepted. Some items are not returnable. Returns require authorization # and are subject to 15% restocking fee..All items offered for sale are subject to availability. We are not responsible for typographical errors. Shipping and handling charges apply. Worldwide shipping All prices are subject to change without notice. COMPUTER Express 31 Union Ave. Sudbury, MA 01776 Info: 5084436125 Fax: 5084435645 Circle Reader Service #56 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 1995 WDP II CD DRIVES & UPGRADES 376 552 469 37007 3DO Blaster ........ 55857 4PLEX Quod speed EXT w/Controler 5855 4PLEX Quad speed INT w/Controler 39574 6PLEX Sixspeed INT w/cl... 59265 AMC2000 Portable Multi Medio 380S1 Aztech Stellar Double MM Kit 35734 Aztech Voyager INT MultiMedlo Kit.. 37759 Diamond 5000 INT 250M CD KL.... S87 445 106 256 MODEMS/FAXES 438 31921 ACE 14.4 INT S/R-Fax W/Voice.................166 "


"REVIEW Kart Whee Do Bo ne SUPERKARTS Steers Small-Fry Racing Toward Big-Time Gaming by Vox Day T'S THE DAY OF THE BIG RACE. THE ly, my initial negativity didn't hold out. simply keep the joystick locked forward HELMETED WARRIORS MOUNT THEIR After choosing between the four diffiand move it left and right to keep your WHEELED STEEDS, GUN THEIR ENGINES culty settings, I chose my driver from a kart on track. With some skill and a little and head to the diverse group luck, you should be able to complete the line. The throngs SUPERKARTS of eight people five laps before any of the other seven of fans come out to Price: N/A from around competitors. Winners take home the crowd the speedway, System the world. Drag whole enchilada; losers have to settle for Requirements: there to experience 386SX/16 or racing has altable scraps. speed, strategy, and, better (486/33 ways excited While you can race individual tracks in yes, the possibility of a recommended), me, so I elected the game's arcade mode, the real chalten vehicle, high speed, 4 MB RAM, VGA to be one Katie lenge is SUPERKARTS 16-race full season graphics, CDpile up in turn #2. Is it ROM; supports Clark, a wildmode. The eight host countries have two Grand Prix? Formula AdLib, Sound Blaster and compatible eyed Aussie different racetracks, each of which has a One? NASCAR? Nope, sound cards. sporting a \"local» look-and-feel. The U.S. tracks are it's Go-Kart! # of Players: 1 to 8 (network) funky hairdo constructed on the beach, while the Protection: None Okay, so maybe RSAC Rating: Violence (1) and a pink helMoscow tracks are made of pure ice. The buzzing around a race Designer: Manic Media met. The first British and German tracks are both neotrack at 30 mph pow Publisher: GT Interactive course, US #1, industrial, the Brazilian tracks are grassy New York, NY ered by a meager 125cc was on a Los and tribal, the Australian tracks are (212) 726-6500 engine doesn't exactly Angeles beach. wooden and wet, and the Tokyo courses inspire awe in racing sim fans. Some I was shocked midway through the first are run at night under the neon lights. might even consider the thought downrace: the computer controlled turboSure, it's sort of a shallow, stereotypical right boring when compared to the seriboosted karts were literally burning past form of multi-culturalism, but it does ous horsepower rush that premier racing me, accompanied by a signature 125cc provide a nice variety of looks and keeps simulations provide. But for sheer fun, whine. I was also surprised to learn that the scenery from getting boring. it's hard to beat the concept of driving my first session took 3 hours and 17 mintwo inches off the ground in the open utes of real time, not the half hour I cockpit of a go-kart. thought I'd spend. Lap3.b ke 90% tel. 29 st. I have to admit that it was with some B4: i trepidation and rather low expectations \"KART\"-OLOGY that I popped SUPERKARTS into the PC. SUPERKARTS is a very And although I was impressed by the simple concept and a lively pop techno audio track, I still exvery simple game. It's pected the worst when an extremely long, not very hard to drive a 3D-animated sequence began playing go-kart in the real world, The colors were garish, the graphics were and it isn't hard in this cartoon-like, and the driving controls game. But this doesn't PU seemed non-existent. Its style seemed to mean that races are easy have more in common with a Saturday to win, especially at the morning kids show than the average Pro level. The basic idea EAT HEAT Using SUPERKARTS' turbo booster gives you some serious computer game-usually not a good behind the game is not a acceleration, but successful racers will avoid using it in the turns. sign, especially in a racing sim. Thankfuldifficult one to grasp: FUEU CUCCIO 98 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1995 "


"After hearing his favorite games on a Sound Blaster, Vincent regretted the ear thing. Sound BLASTCR AWES? Inferior sound cards can drive you to some crazy ends. Sound effects built into this year's MLASTEN hottest new games might seem muffled and flat. Like you're only getting half the experience. But a Sound Blaster sound card can spare you that insanity. You get real 16-bit, CD-quality sound that brings games to life. You hear ships explode, swords clash, tires squeal. That's why Sound Blaster is the PC sound standard. Sound So only buy genuine Sound Blaster cards. And look for the Sound Blaster Compatibility Logo on software and multimedia kits as well. That way, your software will sound exactly like it should. And you won't feel atinge of regret. There are six different Sound Blaster sound cards to satisfy the most discerning ear. CREATIVE To find the one that's best for you, call 1-800-998-5227 Ext. 114. al 1901.009_5297 v 114 muhimsiais Cat 0 1995 Creative Technology Ltd. Sound Blaster and the Creative, multimedia is Creative, and Sound Blaster Compatibility Logos are trademarks of Creative Technology Lul International inquiries: Creative Technology Ltd., Singapore. TEL: 65.77.3.0233 FAX: 65.773.0353. All riehts reserved. Circle Reader Service #280 "


"BAS FARMS TOP OF THE KARTS peaceful with only the occasional inadhave been much more convenient. In addition to providing you with the vertent bump in the corners to keep you opportunity to race the great go-kart honest. The computer-controlled comKART BLANCHE courses of the world, full season mode petitors seem to prefer burning past you The race graphics are good, although also gives you the chance to improve on Turbo over rough-housing and play they're remarkably bright, with a lot your racer over the course of a season. ing dirty. The same cannot be said, of more neon and pastels than you'd norSUPERKART awards points and cash decourse, for your networked human commally expect to see. The cut-scenes and pending on what place you finish in. petitors. Bumping into walls and other character graphics are a little cartoonish; Points count towards the season title, of karts racks up the damage to your kart, apparently most of the drivers on the circourse, while cash can be used to purwhich requires a pit stop to repair. Too cuit either juice steroids or have a close, chase improvements 37 AM personal relationship with the Domino's for your SuperKart. delivery boy. The high-pitched hum of Besides being able to the karts occasionally comes pretty close purchase additional to irritating, but as the game's action season points and draws you in, you quickly cease to notice powerups, you'll also 10 OR anything but the next curve on the track. be able to buy a bigger LAP 2074 3.1 MH The graphics engine is a fast one, and engine, stronger chasconsequently SUPERKARTS plays very sis, better tires, and a quickly, even on a middle-of-the-road bigger fuel tank. 7.7 486. However, the engine does have one It's the powerups glaring weakness: there are no diagonal that transform Suwalls. It is very easy to get trapped in the PERKARTS from a runmany little corners around the course, of-the-mill driving TWIN CAM RACING Eight players can race over a network, or two play and you will often see a computer-congame into a serious ers can go head-to-head on the same PC. trolled racer stuck in one, mindlessly threat to your sleep butting against the walls. schedule. There are three different items USA Of course, the solution is that can be purchased from the shop beLOS ANGELES 2 an easy one-keep your tween races or picked up as they appear SET IN THE SNADOMS kart on the track! OF THE WOLLYHOOD randomly in the course of a race. Turbo HILLS, TNE LA 2 GIRDespite its shortcomings provides your kart with a brief burst of GUIT IS ONE OF THE WIDEST, EASTEST, HOST and econo-ESPN feel, I like super speed, which is extremely useful on LAID BASR TRAZRS OF TWE SUPERKARTS. It has a funky SERIES. 50 LAID BASR, the straight-aways. Oil is used not as a lu THAT IT'S ACTUALLY ON sort of Speed Racer feel to it TWE BEACH bricant, but as a weapon that gives you that will appeal to almost the means of sending a closely trailing TRY TO STAY everyone. While it isn't goOFF TNE SAND competitor sliding off the track into the ing to blow the mind of side walls. SuperGrip usually proves to be most gamers, it does prothe most important powerup though, RACE TRACKING Each track's brief write-up describes the terrain, vide a fun, fast-paced way since losing speed around tight curves gives race tips, and displays the fastest lap time ever recorded. to spend some quality time and getting trapped in corners will do with your PC. Because it is horrid things to your finish time. so easily accessible, this is Using the powerups in SUPERKARTS is much damage, and you'll find yourself also an excellent game for new gamers, admirably simple. Pressing the second crawling along in a billowing cloud of as well as for younger gamers whose parjoystick (or gamepad) button switches besmoke as your opponents fly past you. ents can't deal with video violence. tween the three Special Features, as the Like most games, SUPERKARTS is at its game calls them; button one activates the most intense when played against other THE EDITORS SPEAK chosen Feature. When first playing, you'll humans. You can play with up to eight find it tempting to keep the Turbo Boost players on an IPX-compatible network, SUPERKARTS at hand most of the time, but don't forget or you can go head-to-head on the same REATING about the SuperGrip-you'll need to computer, using a split-screen view. Surlearn to use it properly if you want to win, prisingly, SUPERKARTS does not provide PROS: It's fast, it's fun, and it's easy especially in Brazil. to get into. modem play support. Also, because it CONS: Once you've quickly burned Despite the ability to use oil as a plays off the CD-ROM, cach network through the 16 tracks, the game runs weapon, this is not a go-kart, PC version player has to have his own copy of the out of gas. Sweet, but short-lived. of ROAD RASH. game as well as his own CD-ROM drive. SuperKarters usually keep it pretty Some sort of multiplayer licensing would 100 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1995 "


"IT CAME FROM THE EIGHTLES ACTIVISION CLASSICS . BARNSTORMING RIVER RAID II MEGAMANIA ACINGOK ACIMION The Sequel That's Already A Classic. ACTIVISION'S ATARI 2600 ACIMSO STIVISION ING FOR WINDOWS Just when you thought it was safe to go back onto your PC...Activision spawns Action Pack 2! Witness the return of fifteen ENDUR more pulse-pounding video games from the dawn of gaming now in Windows\"! It's Part Two of Activison's Atari 2600 video game collection back with the same riveting graphics and gripping sound . effects of the originals. Activision's Atari 2600 Action Pack 2 --more addictive fun than you remember! for Windows\" ACITY KEYSTONE KAPERS STAMPE S . LASERBLAST SIA ACTION IBM CD-ROM CD ROM 15 Games for your PC Available on PC CD-ROM and 3.5\" disks. Coming soon for Macintosh! ACTIVISION Aclivision is a registered trademark of Activision, Inc. Atari 2600 is a trademark of Atari Inc. Windows is a trademark of the Microsoft Corporation.  1995 Activision, Inc. All rights reserved. Circle Reader Service #33 "


"REVIEW REVIEW See Shells By The Score 2 = Domark's TANK COMMANDER Comes Out With Guns A'Blazing, But Can't Find Its Target by Martin E. Cirulis The most difficult thing about a big the game that would surpass the benchviewpoints, some within the vehicle and a creative project, be it computer mark set so long ago by MicroProse's M-1 couple outside, although lighting ellectivegame, novel or painting, is mainTANK PLATOON. While various titles have ly from the external views would require a taining a clear vision of what you come and gone, some with faster play or far better judge of angle than I. are trying to achieve. Sometimes better graphics, the balit's good for a book to end up someplace a ance of realism vs. playalittle different than the author intended, bility struck in M-1 TANK but it is usually not good for a computer PLATOON eludes designgame. A case in point is TANK COMMANDER ers to this day. TANK from Domark Software. While the recent COMMANDER, unfortuads and marketing materials suggest that nately, is no exception. it is a light, shoot-em-up romp that is not While all the elements of to be taken too seriously, the documentathe old classic are here, tion contains such quotes as \"...surpasses they aren't carried far the realism of any other lank simulation.\" enough to make this It seems this project didn't quite end up game a real contender. 20 where the designers hoped it would, and The game seems to the result is a rough beast with a paw in have started out with BRIDGING THE GAP Although TANK COMMANDER Occasionally hints at seriboth the action and simulation worlds. good intentions. It is cenous simulation, it is, at its core, an action game. tered on the British ChalTANK DREAMS lenger II Main Battle Tank, a pleasant Players can choose from a number of For years now, there has been an unspo change from the M-1-centric world we campaigns that use linked scenarios to ken quest in the tank-sim world to create seem to live in, and it also seems solidly conduct them from inception to success, TANK rooted in the platoon-level world of stanand there is very little in the way of perCOMMANDER TANK dard armor tactics. The player can give manent death here; you simply restart the movement orders via waypoints to any of scenario if you should fail. While the initial Price: $59.95 System the four tanks under his command, and scenario of most campaigns is a fairly simRequirements: jump from direct control of one to another ple allair, missions rise in difficulty so IBM compatible with the touch of a key. The other stanquickly that by the third mission most 386DX or better, dards of tank-simming, such as air-strikes players will be scrambling just to stay alive. 4MB RAM. 30 MB hard drive and satellite update maps, are here as well; Threats range from individual soldiers, EMRI space, SVGA there are even some refreshing touches, who are great fun to run over, to machinegraphics, CD-ROM, mouse; supports Sound such as the use of a roving camera above gun carrying jeeps and trucks to deadly Blaster or compatible sound cards. the battlefield in the guise of helicopter reMBT's and Apache gunships. While these Players: 1-4 (2 by modem), (4 by network) Protection: None con. Movement mechanics also have nice units sometimes are more annoyance than Publisher: Domark Software touches like sliding on steep grades and threat, they are fairly intelligent, and most San Mateo, CA becoming pinned against tank traps. The are mobile enough to make tagging them (415) 513-8933 tanks can be controlled through multiple with a shell a tricky task. Luckily, the playCONTANDER 102 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JULY 1995 "


"Great Announcing Columbia House CD-ROM Direct. Everything from games to reference to \"real-world\" entertainment. New Sels Choose fr KINDERGARTEN MAN Compton's Interactive Encyclopedia MYST Doom 11 Arcade Game 5021506 Jumpstart Kindergarten Children's Ed. DOS 386 1mb Myst Interact. Game 5004304 WIN 386/33 MAC LCI 7th Guest Interact Game 5004700 DOS 386733 MAC LCIII 4mb Astronomica Astronomy WIN4A6 MAC LCII 4mb Compton's Encyclopedia '95 Encyclopedia 5009006 127701 DOS316:28 4 mb MTK WIN 3864mb M MAC LCIO Amo Take 2 CD-ROMs for $9.95 each. How To Select CD-ROMs For Your System. WIN 386 MAC LCITami JK SYSTEM CPU RAM PERIPH. Microsoft Bookshelf Gen. Reference 5009402 WIN 3864mbH MAC LCII WIN. 3864mb Lode Runner Arcade Game 5030002 WIN 4864mbMH MAC LCI WIN 3861254mb Cool Crafts Children's Ed. 5025309 WIN 246/25 mb M MAC LCII SYSTEM Button indicates the availablc operating environment(s) for a given selection: DOS (for PC). Windows (for PC). Macintosh, CPU Button indicates the minimum processor required. Il a uitle is available in PC and Macintosh formats, the top half of this button represents PC system requirements and the bottom half represents Macintosh system requirements. Note. Ser=Series. Class Classic, Pent=Pentium For Mac LC series includes LC 475, Performa 475, Quadra, Centris. Powerbook 180C, IIFX or better. RAM Button indicates the minimum amount of RAM required PERIPHERALS Button indicates required peripherals. M=mouse, Jajoystick K=keyboard P-printer. Plus 1 more at great savings! (See details below.) The Pagemaster King's Quest VII: Leonardo AAA Trip Planner Advent Game 5027008 The Princeless Bride Historical 5020003 Travel 5011614 WIN 486 4mb Arcade Game 5024401 WIN_386. Amb MILI WIN. 388/38 Amb MMAC TCIT Ami MACLcm 4mb Aces Over Europe Dr. Ruth's Wings Over Europe Flight Sim. 5000005 Me, Myself and I Encyclopedia of Sex Historical 5029301 DOS 4864mb Children's Ed. 5032800 Home/Personal 5027602 WIN 486 4mbM WIN 486 MAC LC 5mb m MAC LC 4mb Police Quest: Open Season Shanghai Great Front Page An Interactive Advent. Game 5002803 Sports Baseball Moments Journey with Sharks Sports Game DOS386 4mbM 5007406 Animals Strategy Game 5031802 5023403 DOS 386 4mbMIK WIN 386 mb WIN 486/33 Smt M The Bible Bible 5031703 Instant Internet Access Fighter Wing Jammit: WIN 3864mb Internet Guide 5031000 Flight Sim. 5033907 PC Propad Included Sports Game 5034301 WIN 386 DOS 386,38 Amb M WIN 386254mD Compton's Encyclopedia UK of American History Front Page Sports The Random House Children's Ed 5033006 Football 95 Kid's Encyclopedia Metaltech Earth Siege WIN 496 amb MP Sports Game 5024708 Children's Ed. 5027909 Arcade Game 5029202 DOS 3864mb MK WIN_4864mbM DOS 36/33 Amb M Mac Pak: Beginning System 7 & 7.5, Intro to Claris Works, and Audio Guide to Vitsie Visits the Me and My World The Complete Quicken Ocean Picture Dictionary Bartenders Guide Computer Tutor. 5032404 Children's Ed. 5033204 Children's Ed 5029509 Gen. Interest 5034103 WIN 486 WIN 486 amb MAC MAC Hl4mb MAC LCI 4mo MAC Class Safari Animals 5025507 WIN 486 4mM 4mbM Productivity Pak: Tutorial for Windows 3.1, Works 3.0, and Quicken Computer Tutor. 5032206 WIN 3867334mb MH OLUMBIA For all titles, the minimum system requirements recommended (unless otherwise indicated) are: Hardware SVGA monitor (256 colors), sound card, 40MB hard drive, double speed CD-ROM drive. Operating System: DOS 5.0. Windows 3.1, Macintosh System 7.0. WIN 386 2mb MAC TC4mbMD CD-ROM DIRECT A whole new way to get the most exciting CD-ROMSgames, reference, edutainment and more all at great prices! Just write in the numbers of the 2 CD-ROMs you want for $9.95 each, plus shipping and handling. In exchange, you agree to buy 4 more CD-ROMs in the next 2 years, at our regular prices (currently as low as $39.95, plus shipping and handling) and you may cancel membership at any time after doing so. What's more, you can get one more CD-ROM right now for the low price of $19.95 and have less to buy later (see com plete details in coupon). Free CD-ROM magazine sent approximately every 4-6 weeks (up to 13 times a year) reviewing our Featured Selection plus scores of alternate choices, including many lower priced CD-ROMs. And you may also receive Special Selection mailings up to four times a year. (That's up to 17 buying opportunities a year!) Buy only what you want! If you want the Featured Selection, do nothing it will be sent automatically. If you'd prefer an alternative selection, or none at all, just mail the response card always provided by the date specified. You'll always have 14 days to decide; if not, you may return the selection at our expense. Money-Saving Bonus Plan. If you continue your membership after fulfilling your obligation, you'll be eligible for our generous bonus plan. It enables you to enjoy great savings on the CD-ROMs you want for as long as you decide to remain a member! 10-Day Risk-Free Trial. We'll send details of how Columbia House CD-ROM Direct works along with your introductory package. If you're not satisfied, return everything within 10 days at our expense for a full refund and no further oblig. ation Act now, membership in CD-ROM Direct may be limited, For faster service, use your credit card and call us toll-free 24 hours a day Di -Dept. XBS, 3109 Canterbury Court, Columbia House CD-ROM Direct Blo D ecl Bloomington, IN 47404-1498 Yes, please enroll me under the terms outlined in this advertisement. As a member, I need buy just 14 more CD-ROMs at your regular prices within the next 2 years. Send my CD-ROM selections for: (check one only) PC (1) Macintosh (3) Write in the selection #'s below Send me these 2 CD-ROMs for just $9.95 each plus $1.75 each shipping/handling (total $23.40) Buy your first selection now and have less to buy later! Also send my first selection for $19.95 plus $1.75 shipping/ handling which I'm adding to my $23.40 payment (total $45. 10) Tihen need buy only 3 more (instead of 4) in 2 years Please check how paying: My check is enclosed (BYM/BYQ) L Charge my introductory CD-ROMs and future CD-ROM Direct purchases to: (BYN/BYR) I Ma MasterCard Diners Club AMEX VISA Discover Account Number Exp. Date Signature My main CD-ROM interest is: (check one) (NoteYou are always tree to choose from any category) L Entertainment Education Edutainment Productivity (includes clarens ties) Name Phone Address Apt State Zip Important! Did you remember to choose PC or Mac? Will your selections run on your system? Note: Columbia House reserves the right to request additional information to limit membership or reject any application, or to cancel any membership. Offer limited to residents of the contiguous United States Residents of Alaska, Hawaii, Puerto Rico, U.S territories, APO and FPO addresses please write for separate offer Anglicanto sales tax added to all orders. 60 1995. The Columbia House Company Cry 1-800-792-1000 eest. Dept. XB'S "


"er has more than the main gun, and pesky that action gamers are accustomed to. dards of today's top-notch sims. targets can be riddled with the coaxial maRight from the get-go, this product Even though TANK COMMANDER is a chine gun, blasted with guided missiles, or screams \"Quick and Diriy.\" From the dumbed down attempt at a tank sim, I was incinerated by flame-throwers. sparse documentation-printed on only hoping for just a few features that model a one side of every page—to the characterreal tank's capabilities. I didn't find them. GETTING TANKED... less crew position screens, the game while not an expert on British armor, I do Now, this list of weapons may sound a seems drawn from the \"Freddy Laker know enough to expect little things like little odd to the grognards out there, who Business School\" philosophy. While the laser range-finding/target acquisition thought they were pretty clear on the araction is definitely here, production valequipment and smoke dispensers. Also, maments of the more popular MBT's on tes are not. The graphics are from a cou last time I checked, tanks didn't have a the market. They are correct in their susple of years ago and the sound, while damage bar that is eroded by enemy shells picions, and the armaments aboard these marginally useful, is not up to the stan and bullets until you finally explode. There tanks are your first clue are no subtleties of combat like thrown that the «realism\" was tracks, damaged equipment or wounded ditched at some point in crew to bother the player in this reality. If the game's development. the damage bar isn't enough to convince Unfortunately this may you that you're in an arcade universe, the turn out to be a huge tactipresence of \"power-ups\" that can augment cal error. A serious simweapons or armor is a dead giveaway. jockey might gladly exchange crude polygons THE FIRST LAW... for good modeling and The war is not completely lost for TANK detailed weapons, but if 2014 COMMANDER. Some things it does fairly the plan is to hawk this Home well, such as the large variety of target vegame as an easy-to-learn hicles, and innovation isn't a complete ROAD KILL Infantry men may look intimidating, but their soft pink flesh blast fest then it is seriously is no match for your tank treads. stranger. The pre-game interface is very devoid of the eye-candy well done, giving the player complete setBER EARTH IS URTH MAN IS GRUB. MLI 104 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1995 "


"in 11.08E1 TANK COMMANDER has been designed to allow for multiple players to fight it out across a handful of terrain types in a version of capture the flag, with as little muss and fuss setting TARGETS things up as possible. For two players there are the two old reliables of the modem and serial connection, both of which are easily set up with the TANKS A LOT Things get difficult quickly in TANK COMMANDER; before you opening interface and the know it you'll find yourself outnumbered and outgunned. fairly extensive text-file support on the CD. And, up and control choices at the beginning of for those lucky enough to be on a network, every session, and this is very useful confour players can link up over any IPX-casidering how much the game stresses its pable net. While the experience isn't anyone strength-connectivity. TANK COMthing like a real battlefield, it is a fun, MANDER benefits handily from Martin's adrenal game of cat-and-mouse struggle First Law of Networking, restated here for on a par with SPECTRE. those who haven't been studying, which says that «The Lameness co-efficient of RETREADS AND RECALLS any computer game varies inversely with When all is said, though, I'm afraid I the number of people capable of networkcannot recommend TANK COMMANDER TO ing to it.\" the solo gamer. It just doesn't have enough to offer-everything it does has been done better elsewhere. Its dated look and its simplistic design won't even permit the average sim player to overlook its shortcomings in realism and execution. On the other hand, if you do have access to modem or network technology, then the game becomes significantly more attractive, although you have to convince each of your friends to buy the game. TANK COMMANDER is a decent try, but it looks like the crowns for King of the Armor-Sims and King of the Network Action Game are in no danger of changing heads. THE EDITORS SPEAK TANK COMMANDER RATING RATING PROS Network and modem play can be fun if you don't mind the arcade flavor, and there are some innovative view and control features. CONS As a solo game, it sits in the lukewarm waters between a simulation and an action game, with little to recommend it. THE GODS ARE ANGRY RAGE IS HOME. (PRIMAL RAGE.COMING TO YOUR HOUSE AUGUST 25, 1995.) Sega Genesis Sega Game Gear Super NES Nintendo Game Boy PC-CD ROM Prima Pago\" 40+Atan Games Corporation Licensed to Tird waren eractive INC Alches role Saga. Govobis, 3.X and Satu are trademarks of Sofa Lorrisos. L. 1 Rights Reserve Ardo L a rer Syster. Nord, GaroBoy and the Olicial Soals and sisterse Tierarts of Ninde Aralica. Inc. All Rights Reserved JULY 1995. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 105 "


"ulu . no . "


"ARE HERE... -Garden. Da Vinci Studio OL-01-2486 1500 AD 2000 AD 250 AD You emerge again into the sights and sounds of another time. Somewhere in the shadows of seven incredible worlds of the past and future hides the secret of a conspirator bent on framing you, agents of the Temporal Security Agency, for the most unforgivable of crimes altering history. Prepare for an adventure so real you'll forget you're playing a game. Prepare to be. TIE JOURLEYMAN PROJECT BURIED INTING 144 Breathtaking full-motion 3D animation. A richly-detailed story An incredible soundtrack  Seamlessly-integrated live-action video Circle Reader Service #363 Available as a 3 CD-ROM set for Mac & PC SANTO SANCTUARY STUDIOS For more information call 1-800-943-3LL4 WOODS  Presto Studios. Inc. All rights reserved. The Journeyman Project is a registered trademark and Buried In Time is a trademark of Presto Studios Inc. Sanctuary Woods is a registered trademark and the Sanctuary Woods tree logo is a trademark of Sanctuary woods Multimedia. "


"REVIEW KARDOM. PISA ACH tay ND PRIX OPPER COMMAND GRAND PRIX VORIGAM Should Auld Acquaintance Be Forgot? 0 = An Old Geezer Of Gaming Trips Down Atari's Memory Lane by Charles Ardai TEP UP TO THE ROCKER, BOY, AND you seem to have skipped at that fancy this, boy?-took up all of 2K. A monster SPEAK INTO YOUR PAPPY'S GOOD school of yours. Sit on your pappy's knee game for the Atari 2600 was 4K. That's as EAR. WHAT'S THAT? No, we and we'll rectify that right now. compared to some of your new computer didn't have Nintendo in the old games, which take up ten thousand times days, at least not the way you ACTIVE VISION that much memory, or some of your CDmean it. We had Colecovision, and beUsed to be, the only company that ROM games which take up a hundred fore that Intellivision, and before that made games for a cartridge game system times more even than that. right at the start of it all, we had the Atari was the company that made the system in So, those designers had awfully little to 2600. Now, there was a game system a the first place. So, Atari made all the carwork with. And even so, they managed to boy could call his own! Brown and square tridges for the Atari 2600, Mattel made put together some games that were and ugly as sin, came complete with two all the cartridges for the Intellivision, and snazzy to look at and loads of fun to play. joysticks, a pair of paddles, a freeso forth, right down the line. Then, along While Atari was churning out crap by the Don't interrupt me when I'm talking to comes this bunch of upstarts calling bucketload, such as their versions of E.T., you, boy. \"Paddles\" were like joysticks, if themselves \"Activision,\" fulla' big noPAC-MAN and RAIDERS OF THE LOST ARK, you've gotta ask, only they had a knob on tions about how games ought to be deActivision came out with games that were them that you'd turn clockwise or counsigned and how game designers ought to consistently clever, addictive, and better terclockwise, instead of a stick that you'd be treated. than anything else on the market. push left, right, up What's that? Like KABOOM!, yes, and also like RIVER or down. ATARI 2600 ACTION PACK Like artists, is RAID and PriFall! and H.E.R.O, which I \"Why?» What kind Price: $29.95 how. The same must say I never liked, but other people of question is that, System RIVER RUND KNOOM as folks who must have since it sold a lot of copies. son? You needed Requirements: IBM write novels or And FREEWAY, which was sort of like compatible 486/33 paddles if you wantor better, 4 MB screenplays, with FROGGER, only it was a chicken you were ed to play games like RAM, 10 MB hard their names in moving across a busy highway, not a frog. KABOOM! and PONG, drive space, SVGA the credits and And CHOPPER COMMAND, which was sort that's reason enough graphics, Windows everything. of like DEFENDER, only you were flying a 3.1, CD-ROM; supright there. ports Sound Oh, you helicopter, not a spaceship. And BOXING Lord almighty, Blaster compatible sound cards. meant how the and FISHING DERBY—you can probably child, you mean to Protection: None games ought to figure out what those two were about on Tell me you never Designers: Various be designed your own. Publisher: Activision heard of KABOOM!? Los Angeles, CA That's simple. Oh, so you have heard of them, have Hell, there's even a (310) 473-9200 The boys at Acyou? Why didn't you say so? What's that version for your tivision figured you've got there? ever-lovin' Nintendo-I saw it in a catatheir games ought to push the limits of Oh, my. Oh, my. A CD with all those log coupla months back. And PITFALL!? the technology-which was none too games I just mentioned on it, and anothPlease don't tell me you never heard of hard to do, since there was hardly any er seven besides. Is that for me? For my PITFALL!. technology to speak of, and plenty of limbirthday? What can I say, son? You've just Okay. I can see there's a bit of learnin' its. Your average game—you listening to made an old man very happy. PITALU ATARI 2800 ACTION IBM CD-ROM 108 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JULY 1995 "


"\"SO MANY WAYS TO KILL OR DIE...WHO CAN CHOOSE?\" Download a FREE exciting Demo from the World Wide Web http://www.nuke.comlegri sponsoric_ad_65/wartizip For the dealer nearest you or to buy, call 1-800-234-3088 KNIFEP, CLAWED & BEAT UP SPRAY PAINTEP ANP STOMPER LUNGS RIPPED OUT BY LIONFIRE FRAGMENT GRENADE AND IMPALED ZAPPED BY INDIAN MAGIC FIRE Introducing Savage Warriors More Realistic, More Interactive and More Deadly Than Any Other PC Fighting Game No Kompare With Mortal Kombat II\" and you'll Buy Savage Warriors The 1st Fighting Game Specifically Ecouture MKII Warriors Designed For The PC CD-ROM Weapons (standard) Yes Movable perspective 3D Bio Motion Gives Characters Arcade Fluidity Yes No Interacts w/background No 11 Warriors In Full 3-D With Weapons Replay mode CD Quality Music Tracks 3D Bio Motion Realtime Shadows, Interactive Backgrounds Yes Yes NO Yes JTM WARRIORS MINDSCAPE Circle Reader Service #103 is a tepistered trademark and its lopa, Savage Warioes, and ND Ils Matinate trademarks of Mindscup. I. All the product uses are trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective bilders and are hereby acktura local 0.1995 Munduespc.lic. All rights rexned. Mina "


"Program Manager KNEEDIT Dale Grand Prix YOU CAN'T GO HOME AGAIN coming and you keep dropping Well, don't just sit there, let's boot the until too many have scooted past thing up! you, and then the game's over. Funny they put it on a CD. Fifteen And the keyboard controls, games, even at 4K apiece, you should be that's no way to play this game, able to fit that on a floppy disk with room with a keyboard instead of a joyleft over for the Encyclopedia Brittanica. stick. I could hardly get my guy Here we go. How do you like that, the positioned over the windows propway they did the Windows icons to look erly. Let's try another. like the original game boxes in miniaThat's funny; I remembered ture? Okay, Mr. Bigshot: you're not imFREEWAY being more fun, too. All pressed. I think it's pretty. Which one you you do is move your chicken up, L et Walk Here Mocks Wallide Sant Accessed want to try first? CRACKPOTS? Fine. up, up, up, until he's safely across U DROP THE BOMB ON ME KABOOM! was the king of eyeNow, hold on! It's one thing to show or a truck's creamed him. That's hand coordination games in its day. But can it be the the came boxes in miniature, but the the whole game. How about KAsame without those goofy Atari paddles? whole game screen? What's going on? BOOM!? Am I supposed to play these games on a Oh, man. It's still addictive, if you ask bridges, and refueling in the nick of screen that's smaller than a playing card? me, but all there is to it is moving a tray time? Running through a jungle, swingWhat's that you said? Click where? Oh. back and forth along the bottom of the ing from vines, leaping across ponds on Well, that's better. But now I see Program Manager To the backs of alligators' heads? Think why they start 'em off so small. When how revolutionary this was back in the you blow them up to full-screen size, *80s, when the nearest competitor was the graphics start looking mighty a game in which you were dropping chunky. Were they that bad in the old flowerpots on bugs or catching bombs days? I remembered Activision's in a tray! games being the best-looking ones Oh, I daresay you're right there's around...but maybe this was as good as no reason to play games this primitive it got. today, when everything else out there Nice how they've added bits of comis so much better-but these aren't mentary from the original designers games you play, son. They're a history that you can read before you play the lesson. They're nostalgia. It's not like game. They could have bothered to THE LOST TREASURES OF INFOCOM, spell \"COBOL\" correctly, but it's not THE GRANDDADDY OF THEM ALL GRAND PRIX set the pace which you got me last year; those for hundreds of racing games to come. my place to be too picky, games are as good now as they were Let's start this thing ten years ago. These are...relics. But Well. That wasn't so much fun. Kinda screen, catching bombs as they fall. Yes, I so's a piece of the true cross or the finger simplistic, you just going back and forth, did know that beforehand, son; but bone of a saint. I knelt before 'em for dropping flowerpots on bugs as they somehow I remembered there being hours as a boy, hands clasped before me come crawling up the screen. They keep more... passionately.... Just seeing 'em again Fine. Forget about boxing and makes me choke up. DO fishing: those games were old even \"Thank you, son. That was a great when they were new. And forget birthday present. about Cosmic COMMUTER and Now how about a game of Doom, SEAQUEST, which were half-baked champ? ideas to begin with. If any of them THE EDITORS SPEAK will have held up over time, it'll be ATARI 2600 ACTION PACK the complex ones. RIVER RAID and PriFALL. RATING: NOT RATED That's better! Okay, not much, as you say. When you're right, PROS These are the games we grew you're right, boy. Still mighty sim up playing plistic, still kinda' ugly. But comCONS These titles are to modern computer games what sequential cave CHOPPER SUEY CHOPPER COMMAND, a DEFENDER-like, sidepare them to the others! Flying a P drawings are to the movies. Of scrolling flight game, became a big hit on 8-bit computwhole mission over a multi-screen historical interest only. network of sea lanes, shooting ers as CHOPLIFTER. down 'copters, blowing up AERSION 1 Det WESOK Hercules Merokone Woche_Sandute Account Program Manager Eile Options Window Help Chopper Command ACTISSION 110 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JULY 1995 "


"Stop: Yeah you. Takin' 15 items into the 10 items or less lane. Doin' 75, passin' everybody on the right. Gettin' ready to zip past the next few pages without even realizing you could be missing the best PC games you've ever laid eyes on. And that would be bad. Worse than a cashier in training. Worse than a blue-haired motorcade at rush hour. STOP So, do yourself a favor. Slow down. Take a nice long look at our games. Then, if you see something you like, take off like a windsock in an off-shore tropical storm and pick it up. (So we're hypocrites. It could be worse.) MICROPROSE "


"\"... A prince must act like a beast ... a fox to recognize traps, and a lion to frighten off wolves.\" Machiavelli the Prince It's 15th century Europe resources are bountiful and deception is king. It's the perfect time to execute your plan for world domination. Manipulate military, political and religious powers using bribery, piracy and assassination. Acquire wealth by trading with over 40 cities. But plan your strategy carefully, young prince. Because every move can mean the difference between exaltation and excommunication. Machiavelli the Prince 1995 MicroProse. All rights reserved. Image courlesy of Archive Photos Circle Reader Service #13 MICROPROSE MICROPROSE 1-800-879-PLAY. For IBM-PC & Compatibles on CD-ROM. "


"You lika this game or we slappa you face. HH TM PIZZA TYCOON Survive the Mob and make millions. UOOZ Mama mia! There's no toppin' Pizza Tycoon. Build a pizza empire with your personal recipe for success. Decide on a location. Decide on the menu. Decide on your relationship with the mob. Borrow money from them. Buy and sell guns for them. Anything goes. So uncork that bottle of Chianti and get ready for the game that really delivers. Capisce? MICROPROSE MICROPROSE For IBM-PC & Compatibles on CD-ROM. 1-800-879-PLAY. http://www.microprose.com Circle Reader Service #80  MicroProse Software, Inc. All rights reserved. "


"THE MOST CELEBRATED STRATEGY GAME IN HISTORY GOES ON-LINE. INTRODUCING SID MEIER'S CIVNET! CIWE XPERIENCE SID METERS KING CIVILIZATION ON-LINE Build in Empire To Stan Of Time MICROPROSE MILIZATION HAS COME TO THE INTERNET. Experience the best-selling Sid Meier's Civilization as a multiplayer Windows game! With Sid Meier's CIVNET play on-line via the Internet, over a local network or go head-to-head by modem. Build the Pyramids and the Great Wall. Conquer Earth or an undiscovered planet. Play history's greatest leaders and your friends in any combination, up to seven players at once! Broadcast messages simultaneously to your opponents. Become allies with some. Taunt others. You decide. Because once you get your hands on Sid Meier's CIVNET\", Civilization will never be the same. MICROPROSE For IBM PC & Compatibles on CD-ROM. 1-800-879-PLAY. http://www.microprose.com Circle Reader Service #298  MicroProse Software, Inc. All rights reserved. "


"An F/A-18E Hornet reports. Hostile troops are on the move. Your palms sweat. By morning, they'll stake their claim. Your heart beats faster. The enemy is small and crude. But they fight dirty. You hold your breath. Yes. They'll fight to the death. Will it be theirs or yours? TASK FORCE COMMAND Today's ultimate military strategy thriller. MICROPROSE For IBM-PC & Compatibles on 3.5\" HD. 1-800-879-PLAY. http://www.microprose.com  MicroProse Software, Inc. All rights reserved. Circle Reader Service #349 "


"Sid Meier's COLONIZATION\"Gold Multimedia Experience the thrill of Sid Meier's ColonizationTM in multimedia! You're the Viceroy, leading a group of colonists into a New World of promise and peril. Watch settlers come alive as they speak to you via striking footage from famous historical sites. There's even more of the art and music that you loved in the original. With ColonizationTM Gold Multimedia, you can bring a powerful new nation to life. But choose the wrong plan of action and you're history. ODCE CD-ROM MULIIMEDIA The Landing of the Pilgrims at Plymouth, Mass. Dec 22nd, 1620, Currier & Ives, 1876; Museum of the City of New York, The Harry T. Peters Collection  MicroProse. All rights reserved. MICROPROSE 1-800-879-PLAY. For IBM PC & Compatibles on CD-ROM. MICROPROSE Circle Reader Service #38 "


"AUTHENTIC MEXICAN TAKE-OUT AZTEC: EMPIRE OF BLOOD If you have an appetite for adventure, the gods. (Please them with human spend some time with the Aztecs. With sacrifices and you're in for a real treat.) EMPIRE OF BLOOD Aztec: Empire of Blood\", build an Or, witness the end of the world as empire as Montezuma or one of eight your empire falls victim to drought other Aztec Emperors. Form alliances and famine. No matter what happens, with guidance from your Councillors. you can be sure that with the Aztecs, Win battles with Divine Favor from MICROPROSE you'll have a lot on your plate. MICROPROSE Circle Reader Service #380 For IBM-PC & Compatibles on CD-ROM. 1-800-879-PLAY. http://www.microprose.com Artwork courtesy of \"Collection de la Bibliothèque du Musée de l'Homme Paris. 01995 MicroProse Software, Inc. All rights reserved. "


"COMMAND A LITTLE RESPECT. ARMORED COMBAT You're in command. Living the epic tank battles of World War II Europe. With 1944 Across the Rhine\" fight a single battle or a decisive campaign. Lead a single platoon, company or an entire battalion. Climb into the turret of your own tank and get closer to the action. You make every decision. It's tank warfare so realistic, you can almost smell the smoke. MICROPROSE MICROPROSE For IBM-PC & Compatibles on CD-ROM. 1-800-879-PLAY. http://www.microprose.com Circle Reader Service #381  MicroProse Software, Inc. All rights reserved. "


"WEIRD WAR 11 DO THIS MEANS Looking for fun and excitement? Try This Means War!\" The year is '10 AG (After Game). A decade after the hideously addictive Snark Hunter made computer gamers its helpless prey. The strategy building game for Following a series of riots, explosions people who like to blow things up! and bad hair days, mankind was nearly MICROPROSE For IBM-PC & Compatibles on CD-ROM. 1-800-879-PLAY. Circle Reader Service #382 extinct. Except for a handful who beat the game. The few. The proud. The totally weird. Now, you must stop these demented dictators from rebuilding the world in their own images. Because if they succeed in War, things could get pretty ugly. http://www.microprose.com  MicroProso Software, Inc. All rights reserved. "


"Heart-pounding white knuckled Stomach in the throat-racing. in a go-kart. Put your pedal to the metal, 'cause the pack don't wait for Sunday drivers. VIRTUAL KARTS\" Swervin', curvin', movin' and groovin'. That's what Virtual KartsTM is all about. Shoot through a series of serpentine speedways. Go bumper to bumper with the tyrants of the track. And if you've got the drive, capture the checkered flag. No matter which road you choose, it's the most fun you can have with your butt four inches off the ground! MICROPROSE For IBM PC & Compatibles on CD-ROM. 1-800-879-PLAY. http://www.microprose.com 1995 MicroProse Software, Inc. All rights reserved. Circle Reader Service #383 "


"Miami 5:47 p.m. Mark draws power from his mana pool and summons a Mesa Pegasus. New York City 5:48 p.m. Angela taps her mountains for one point of red mana. She casts Earthbind. Mark's Pegasus flies straight to the graveyard. MAGIC DE 23 ALTRO PROBE AGIC The Gathering The computer strategy game that will hold you spellbound. Now on CD-ROM. MICROPROSE For IBM-PC & Compatibles on CD-ROM. 1-800-879-PLAY. http://www.microprose.com  MicroProse Softwaro, Inc. All rights reserved. Featuring cool music from some of SPIN's hottest bands. MicroProse Software, Inc. is an official licensee of Magic: The Gathering Magic: The Gathering is a trademark of Wizards of the Coast Inc. OF THE COAST Circle Reader Service #347 "


"So I'm traveling through this dead guy's brain No, not stompin' on mushy gray matter. That'd be sick. I'm cruising thism mad scientist's neuro net as a pulse probe. Poking around for information that could unlock the secrets of this electrolytic underworld And I'm right on the verge of solving a highly intense puzzle when my wife asks me to take out the garbage. Bummers Necrobius A psychedelic trip through the living brain of a dead professor. For IBM-PC & Compatibles on CD-ROM. 1-800-879-PLAY. http://www.microprose.com MICROPROSE Circle Reader Service #72  MicroProse Software. Inc. All rights reserved "


"SIMULATION Virtual War College ROGEYS WHEN YOU Force and Naval Academies aren't likely to start SIGN UP FOR BOOT UP YOUR offering extension courses for sim pilots any FAVORITE FLIGHT time soon, so novices will have to find training sim and jump somewhere else. MULTIMEDIA BAR & GRILL into the virtual cockpit, you MULTIMEDIA MATRICULATION may just want If you have a CD-ROM drive, you can get that GROUND SCHOOL to take off and blow things up. That's fun for a training right on your PC. Between multimediawhile, especially if you've had one of those enhanced flight simulators and aviation-related days.\" But to really make the most of the experireference titles, the novice PC pilot can learn earn TO INCREASE 10 ence, you've got to dive into the part of the lots from those shiny silver discs. lighter pilot. The real fun isn't in piloting a sim1942: THE PACIFIC AIR WAR GOLD is a good ulated aircraft, but in putting yourself in the primer for the wannabe piston-engine pilot. YOUR SKILLS place of the pilot you're simulating, imagining The enhanced CD release of Micro Prose's yourself in a life-and-death situation. Flying World War II naval air combat simulation adds around and shooting things can be a blast, but more than just a few gratuitous video segments. AND KILLS building real fighter pilot skills can leave you The Flight School section explains basic flight with a lasting sense of accomplishment. principles and procedures, covering takeoff, You wouldn't expect the Air Force to hand a landing, formation flying, and control and innew recruit the keys to an F-15 and say \"have struments. Advanced flight tutorials for both fun.\" Real pilots undergo rigorous training, fighters and bombers cover the tactics that you'll learning all they can about both their aircraft need to learn if you're going to destroy your tarand about combat tactics. Of course, the Air gets and get home with a plane still wrapped around you. A narrator explains maneuvers such as the Immelman, Split-S, Skid, and Scissors, while diagrams and Tired of fixed-wing flight? Then stop griping, boy, throw a rotor on your video clips illustrate the techbeanie, and take to the skies. The latest fad in simulations is Apache niques. Bomber pilots will attack helicopter sims, and we'll see at least three over the next year. learn how to set up their runs Interactive Magic will be the first to liftoff and deliver ordnance on-tarwith their APACHE, THE COMBAT HELICOPTER SIMUget. Some tips are included LATION, which is hitting the shelves at press which seem obvious but are time. Developed by Digital Integration and worth mentioning, such as published by \"Wild Bill\" Stealey's Interacavoiding llak and not concentive Magic, APACHE is a mission-based comtrating so hard on your strafbat simulation set in Korea, Yemen and ing target that you fly directly Cyprus. If the mission-planning elements are as interesting as those in into it. DI'S TORNADO, this could be a sim to fly for. 1942: GOLD also includes a Domark's take on Apache combat is still a year away, but it may be reference section with develworth the wait. Designed by Bryan Walker, an Apache pilot who flew opment histories and basic inmany missions in Desert Storm, Domark's game should have a flight formation about the planes model and mission structure of the highest fidelity. Set in Colombia, used in the game. The inforBosnia, the Middle East, and Russia, the game will offer 2-18 day mation isn't as thorough as campaigns and a complete 3-D environment. (continued on page 124) that in some of the reference by Denny Atkin IN THE RADAR plains mancuvers such as the JULY 1995. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 123 "


"Pacific Air War Gold SaatGAME titles I looked at, but there's Fortress, P-38 Lightning, P-51 Mustang, enough information there and the Me-262 jet fighter. You'll learn that beginning pilots will FLIGHT about the planes, the battles they fought learn not to get into a turnMANEUVERS in, and the men who flew them. For each ing fight against a Zeke. plane you'll find an introductory video You'll also find some good SIMPLE ADVANCED (taken from Discovery's popular Wings Ateru Ruri Inreinar historical background on Burrel Rai television show), a 3-D model which can the strategies and chain of Logo Decor Sol be viewed from any angle, a profile of a events of the battles cov Wiry Dr crew or pilot, and a play-by-play of a maered in the game. Lingo Under Server jor battle or campaign flown by that If jets are more your plane. Click on the P-38 and you can view speed, FLEET DEFENDER (Choose a maneuver) a film about Operation Overlord, read an GOLD, MicroProse's F-14 interview with General Robin Olds (who simulator, sports similar SUZ made his first five kills in a P-38 during reference material related PREV NEXT SLICE World War II and his final four against to modern carrier combat. CHALK IT UP TO EXPERIENCE The Flight School section in 1942: MiG jets in Vietnam), and watch a playGreen pilots will appreciate THE PACIFIC AIR WAR GOLD explains combat maneuvers, while dia by-play of the 79th Fighter Squadron's atthe Flight School section's grams and video clips illustrate the techniques. tack on Salzwedel, Germany in 1944. procedural walkthroughs of A reference screen lets you compare arming planes, taking ofl, searching for the size, range, ceiling, gum LOEREED 131 LIGHTNING the enemy, defensive and offensive maarmament, bomb load, neuvers, and landing. A cockpit tour lets speed, and climb of various you click on any instrument to get a full planes. You can test your explanation of its function and operation. newly-learned knowledge This is especially helpful for learning how by taking armament and to operate the various modes of the Fsilhouette quizzes, or by fly14's sophisticated radar system. Excerpts ing the bundled version of from Aviation Week and Space Technology's Dynamix' ACES OVER EU\"Flight Deck\" video afford good backROPE. The disc is packed ground on how carrier operations work, with information that and a riveting audio recording of the CAMOUFLAGE / MWEKINGS might even be new to seadowning of two Libyan MiG-23s gives you soned aviation history an impression of how intense real air bulls. When reading about combat can be. LIGHTNING ON THE WINGS There's a wealth of aircraft, pilot and the Ilyushin Il-2 Stormovik, The tutorials and background informabattle information on The Discovery Channel's WINGS OVER EUROPE for example, you ll also be tion provided with these sims are geared CD-ROM, including footage from TDC's popular Wings TV show. able to learn about The toward their own products, but the tactics Night Witches, a group of will translate to any authentic simulation. HISTORY LESSONS female Soviet pilots who bravely flew PoliJust as important as understanding baparkov Po-2 biplanes against the Luftsic combat techniques is knowing the cawalle. RADAR (continured from page 123) pabilities and limitations of the planes Similar in concept is Spectrum When players land their craft, they'll be you and your opponents are flying. You HoloByte's Wild BLUE YONDER series. able to walk around a 3-D base. If the can find some great background informaThe \"Golden Age\" disc chronicles combat base is attacked, the player had better run tion on CD-ROMs targeted at aviation aviation from its inception through for cover or risk being taken out by shrapaficionados. These multimedia reference World War II, while \"50 Years of Gs and works are information-packed, profesJets\" picks up with America's first jet, the Origin Systems will probably fly third in sional-quality presentations from the likes P-59, and carries through to the F-22. the Apache formation. They've recently of the folks behind The Discovery ChanYou'll read about the development of hired Andy Hollis, formerly of MicroProse, nel's Wings and A&E's Brute Force. each plane while listening to great period to put together their sim. The details are The best of these titles for the World music, and then take in the stories of the still sketchy on this one, but it wouldn't be War II sim pilot is The Discovery Chanpilots who flew them while battle sounds too presumptuous to guess that there will nel's WINGS OVER EUROPE CD-ROM. This rage in the background. You can combe a little cinema sprinkled on top of Orireference work is packed with detail on a pare performance statistics such as climb gin's air combat action. selection of aircraft used in the European rates and top speed, and view each theatre, including the BC-109, Ju-87 Stuplane's weapons load and instrument ka. Spitfire, Il-2 Stormovik, B-17 Flying panel (with close-ups of major instruPS INTERACTIVE STATISTICS DEVELOPMENT OF THE ROOT THE PSO IN ACTION 7 THUNDERBOLTINS HAWKER TYTHOON A TEMPEST DOHAVILLANO MOSQUATO HEAR MACHINE GUNS HEAR ENGINES ALLIED TOPICS nel! 124 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1995 "


"SIMULATION APACHE  COMBAT HELICOPTER SIMULATION 252 T 2521 16 War may be hell. But not from where you're sitting. It's 100% pure adrenaline, white knuckle, non-stop, in-your-face action with Apache. From the company committed to providing the WG 0.0 1-20 20 most gut-wrenching CD-ROM games. Interactive Magic. It will hurl you into the middle of unbelievable 3-D graphics. It's equipped with an incredible arsenal of weapons. FASTEN YOUR SEATBELTS, THE RIDE MAY GET A LITTLE BUMPY. And the explosions are so realistic, you'll be thankful it's just a game. So pick up Apache, the ultimate combat helicopter simulation for your PC. And strap yourself in. APACHE INTERACTIVE MAGIC The Combat Helicopter Simulation From Digital Integration Circle Reader Service #14 1995 Interactive Magic 919 461 0 9 48 "


"Lacking And Engaging Mica Yox Bar Ovur Libya, 2008 COCOT TOUR INERT SCHOOL DECK ments). The audio on these disks media. Spectrum HoloByte's ART OF especially the recordings of actual THE KILL is a book and videotape battles is superb. combo created by F-16 pilot Pete Medio's JETS! is more inclusive Bonanni. This excellent reference than the Wild BLUE YONDER discs, covers offensive, defensive, and with video, statistics, and articles on head-on basic lighter maneuvering dozens of military jets from the 40s in a thorough manner, but without to the present. It's not quite as careLocking and going over the head of novice pilots. fully put together as the other Engaging Learn the maneuvers in the book discs-purists will find such glitches and listen carefully to Bonanni's as Phoenix-equipped F-14 missile video tips, and you'll be dominating pylons attached to an F-15's wing in the skies in no time. Click \"Next\" the 3-D section annoying-but it's QUIT QUIT to Continue... waru No reference work list would be crammed with information and pilot complete without mentioning the interviews. Not only will you find TAKE THIS MESSAGE TO MOAMAR FLEET DEFENDER GOLD's audio bible of simulation pilots, Fighter video of mainstream aircraft such as recording of the shootdown of two Libyan MiG-23s is a powCombat: The Art and Science of Airthe F-15 Eagle, but also lots of covererful testament to the intensity of real air combat. to-Air Combat, published by Naval age of more obscure planes such as Institute Press in Annapolis, Marythe XFY-1 Pogo. If that wasn't enough, WHAT YOU CAN LEARN land. This book can be heavy reading the disc also contains the full text of two FROM DEAD TREES at times, but if you study it carefully books dealing with test pilots and the XThe discs I've mentioned are all great and really learn the techniques outplanes. With profiles and performance for learning the basics of fighter combat, lined by Shaw you'll end many more statistics on virtually every lighter, but if you really want to make sure you missions with a successful landing at bomber, and attack plane you'll ever encan dominate the air instead of flying home base rather than by riding down counter in a light simulation, JETS! is a home in a plane whose wings look like the silk elevator. superb backgrounder for jet sim pilots. cheese graters, you'll want to check out a 'Study well, men. You never know when product that's a different kind of multithe enemy is going to give a pop quiz, THE NEW EXCITING QUIZ GAME FROM SOFDEC, INC. $ 39.95 S&H $ 5.00 in FL add 6 % tax Four games in one with questions about the whole world Enter the world of education. For school and family. Programmed for ages 16 and up with multiple choices, different play levels, various skill levels. Select from a wide range of topics such as history, literature, art, music, sports, theater, movies, travel and more.Delve into the world of science and nature. Beautiful pictures and great sound accompany you as you match wits with your opponent whether it is computer or human. Have fun !! to order call toll free 1-800-631-5141 Circle Reader Service #310 126 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1995 "


"CUTTING EDGE F-16 FLCS. \"I can't shake him!» Cries your wing man as the MiG matches his every move. Fearlessly, you push the ThrustMaster. F-16 TQS.. throttle forward and your Falcon roars to the rescue. The force of acceleration slams you into the ejection seat as you tear through the sky. Your skilled fingers dance over the fully programmable switches as your thumb works the TQS trackball. Your other hand tightens around the ThrustMaster. F-16 FLCS stick as you maneuver behind your enemy. Suddenly, the MiG falls into the funnel of your HUD. Squeezing the trigger, a lethal hail of cannon fire rips through his ship sending him down in flames. Unlimited Programmability Unparalleled Performance Uncompromising Reality F-16 TQS THRUSTMASTER THE REALITY SPECIALISTS 10150 SW NIMBUS AVENUE PORTLAND, OR. 97223-4337 PHONE (503)639-3200 FAX (503)620-8094 Circle Reader Service #161 "


"PREVIEW America's Answer To e|The Uberwaffen . Set A Bearing For Axis Ships In The Pacific With SSI's SILENT HUNTER by Kevin Turner SNEAK PREVIEW 0 Game Still In Development T WASN'T THAT LONG AGO Game ance between accuracy and THAT SUBMARINE SIM CAPOF THE DEEP, only entertainment. The historiTAINS HAD TO CONTENT THEM in the Pacific with the US Sub cal faithfulness of AOD is selves with old standbys like SILENT Service, and in high resolurenowned, and SILENT SERVICE II and RED STORM RISING. tion.\" While that is essentially HUNTER is striving for the That was until Dynamix released their exvalid, and comparisons with same faithfulness by emcellent ACES OF THE DEEP, where players AOD are inevitable, SILENT ploying the services of plied the icy waters of the North Atlantic as HUNTER has a lot going for it William \"Bud\" Gruner, who German U-boat captains and sent allied in its own right. is the technical advisor for mega-tonnage twisting down to the ocean In SILENT HUNTER the the game. floor. But il AOD made you want to see player commands an AmeriIn January of 1939, Mr. Axis ships ripped into flames by American can diesel submarine in Gruner reported to a fleet torps, it's time you looked through the WWII. Starting with the infasubmarine and spent the scope of SILENT HUNTER. mous attack on Pearl HarSSI'S EXPERT XO Former US Naval next seven years in the When I first heard about SILENT HUNTER bor, hunting season for r bunting season for Officer William \"Bud\" Gruner submarine service. He from SSI, it was described to me as \"ACES Japanese warships and mercommanded the USS Skate in served as Executive Officer three war patrols, bagging thouchants opens in of the USS Pike, USS Sunsands of tons of enemy vessels. the South Pacific fish, and USS Apogon. In His expertise and multimedia The general idea anecdotes add a lot to SILENT 1944, he took command of of the simulation HUNTER, just as former U-boat capthe USS Skate for three is to sink as much tains did in ACES OF THE DEEP. war patrols which resulted tonnage as possiin the sinking of a Japanble without ending up on the ese cruiser, destroyer, and several merchant \"Still on Patrol\" list at the end of ships. As skipper of the USS Skate, he rethe war. ceived the Navy Cross and the Silver Star. The approach SSI has taken Mr. Gruner's wartime experiences should with SILENT HUNTER parallels provide a wealth of historical data on which that taken by Dynamix in ACES to base historical missions and careers. In OF THE DEEP. Both games are addition to aiding the designers of SILENT based on historical submarine HUNTER, Mr. Gruner will also deliver multiMILES OF DIALS The accurate displays in SILENT HUNTER were reconstructed from dozens of photos taken inside a real US campaigns of WWII. Both use media presentations of his real-life anecWWII sub. very similar interfaces, and both dotes, as well as narration of technical and strive for that mysterious baltactical matters. 128 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JULY 1995 "


"VIRTUVEGAS DDESENTS 1023 TAPEANT Double Disc CD-ROM Game For MAC, Windows & 3DO! ee A Demo & More At http://VirtualVegas.com ONLY COMPUTER 39.00 Order Now 1.800.228.7449 Express 0 195 VITUIA PIECES, INC. Check Out Computer Express Online At http://cexpress.com:2700/ Circle Reader Service #59 "


"As a veteran submariner, it is rewarding Submarine defor me to know that SSI has gone to the velopment dur\"horse's mouth\" for information on the ing the war years submarine war in the Pacific. This is a conwill be mirrored, tinuing trend in the submarine simulation allowing the playmarket, and will hopefully be emulated by er the opportunimore game companies in other products. ty to captain NOUVEAU PROFILE This side view from beneath the waves is similar to RED different classes of STORM Rising, but SILENT HUNTER looks far better, even including different CLEAR SKIES, CALM SEAS boat, including color Shades for the varying temperature gradients of the water. SILENT HUNTER uses high-resolution the Balao class, graphics, which really brings SSI's virtual the Tambour, and Pacific to life. The fully realized coastlines targeting solution. This is pretty realistic, the Salmon class. Command of advanced should allow the player to travel into enesince it took a tracking party of eight (in my types will be awarded on merit. my harbors to observe and engage the enedays) on a real boat to accomplish the same The chart view allows a quick overview of my. The coastline I saw in the pre-beta thing. But I'd still like to input my own data, the area in which the boat is operating. The version was very well done, as were the set my own angles, and do all the work. only downside to this approach seems to be Japanese warships. Imagine my surprise when I took to sea that the chart is doubling as both a navigaAs is true with SILENT HUNTER's contemin a Gato-class boat. As I prepared to take a tional reference and as a tactical reference. I poraries past and present, the control torpedo shot, a working model of an honwould much prefer a separate entity for room and a mouse provide the means of est-to-god Fire Control System appeared both, as both have their unique needs. A controlling the boat and most of the boat's before my eyes. I could hardly contain mytactical display is essential when confronting functions. Clicking on the periscope brings sell! At last, one of my submariner dreams a formation of ships, especially while setting the periscope up, clicking on the bridge had become reality. up the approach and carrying out the atladder gives access to the bridge, and click The Fire Control System gives the player tack. Being able to refer from the periscope ing on the Fire Control System brings up the option of either doing all the work or to the tactical display on the fly is critical the controls for firing torpedoes. letting the computer do the work. Since the 'The only complaint I have is with a The Fire Control System, incidentally, is enemy Al hadn't been installed yet, and I gauge on the Ships Control Panel. This one area in submarine simudidn't have to worry about gauge looks like a depth gauge, but prolations that has always had getting shot, I spent most vides depth under keel information on a something missing. Having of an evening shooting at constant basis. This is physically impossiJapanese warships using ble. In order to have a constant reading of manually-input observadepth under keel, there must either be a tions to generate gyro anvery long pipe sticking out the bottom of gles and other such the boat scraping along the ocean's floor, submarine esoterica. or the fathometer must be constantly runAfter manually calculatning. The very long pipe would provide ing my attack and insea pressure which can be translated into putting the data into the depth. Running the fathomcter is like weapons, I fired a spread putting a strobe light on a sniper. The fathSUBMERGED SPYGLASS Because of the SVGA graphics, periscope at a nearby target. I was pleasometer functions by using active sonar, views are impressive, even up close (right). This detail makes it antly surprised to observe a trail which is the same as saying \"Here I am, easier to identify ships from more realistic ranges. as the weapon closed on the tarcome shoot me.\" It's like that old Sesame get. This accurately mimics the Street game, \"One of these things is not old steam torpedoes, which left like the other. One of these things just spent the better part of a decade in the a bubble trail as they traveled through the doesn't belong.\" submarine service, I tend towards a purist's water. It also provided immediate feedback approach to simulations. I can remember into my weapon's accuracy, as I followed RESURFACING with fondness our vintage Fire Control Systhe trail visually, willing it towards the midSILENT HUNTER should prove to be a very tem, which was purely analog and looked ship area of a warship. entertaining and historically accurate game, like it came out of a WWII submarine. and the multimedia elaboration should be Come to think of it, most of our boat BE ALL THAT YOU CAN BE fascinating. The submarine war of WWII in looked like it came out of a WWII submaThe player will have the option of single the Pacific is a topic that has lain dormant rine. missions, or taking on a career. The career for too long, and SSI has awakened the Submarine simulations usually do all the will progress according to the abilities of beast. It's a great time to be a fan of submawork of plotting the target, while the player the player, providing more and more chalrine simulations, and I look forward to makes target observations and firms up the lenging scenarios as the war progresses. SILENT HUNTER's imminent release. 130 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD  JULY 1995 "


"«A contender for the digitized Stanley Cup \"The way hockey was meant to be seen? Computer Gaming World See for yourself. If you own another hockey game, upgrade to Brett Hull Hockey '95 on PC CD-ROM for only $29.95. Call 1-800-245-7744 for details. YOU ARE HERE YOUR TEETH ARE HERE SPORT You get 600 real NHLPA stars, real 1994 stats and real play-by-play from Al Michaels everything but the dull ache in your jaw when the novocaine wears off. For PC CD-ROM. NHO ACCOLADE BRETT HULL ANY MORE REALISTIC AND YOU WOULDN'T WANT TO PLAY IT. Brett Hult Hockey 95 is a trademark of Accolade, Ing. Al Michaels name is used under license by Accolade, Ino Accolado is an official license of Brott Hall and the National Hockey League Players Association. ONHLPA 1995. The Sport Accolade Logo arid name are trademarks of Accolade, Inc. All rights reserved. Circle Reader Service #287 "


"REVIEW EE O The Gold Of 1942 MicroProse's Refurbished 1942 Returns As THE PACIFIC AIR WAR GOLD by Michael Rymaszewski HEN 1942: THE PACIFIC AIR PAW: GOLD also has modem WAR MADE ITS DEBUT LAST play. You and a friend can light YEAR, IT WAS CLEAR FROM THE on the same side, on opposing start that this was the simsides, or even design custom misthat would separate the true sions, as long as they have no sim pilots from the video shooters. Unformore than six planes. Getting tunately, its cumbersome gameplay and things to work properly can be numerous bugs made it no more than a difficult, as I discovered from my diamond in the rough. Reissued recently own experience, but it is certainon CD-ROM as part of MicroProse's Gold ly possible given enough effort series, 1942 has been renamed. The and patience. WHERE THE ZEKES AND ZEROES PLAY P-51s, new to 1942 \"Gold\" refers to all the chrome the CD PACIFIC AIR WAR GOLD, stave off Japanese interceptors during format has made possible, an extensive FEAR OF FLYING a strike on the Madang air base in New Guinea. multimedia section that makes a reason1942 did for WWII sims what able effort at transcending «mere\" game RED BARON did for WWI: it status and broadening it into an educamade players realize there is a vast differmere 10% of your score you can turn the tional tool. Of ence between pirealistic llight off, and enjoy zooming course, it helps i the 1942 THE PACIFIC AIR WAR GOLD loting a around the blue yonder with all the abanoriginal title is a Price: $49.95 propeller-driven con of a drunken Pappy Boyington. great game. System airplane and a flyThe new flight model embraces both Requirements: However hot anyIBM compatible ing saucer. Each the new planes and the ones present in thing connected with 386 or better of the planes in the game's previous version, so don't be the multimedia 4MB RAM, 1942 felt like the surprised if your Wildcat is harder to fly. might be, this isn't Windows 3.1 or real thing, and Another consequence is that the differthe big news. The higher, SVGA each plane in ences between American and Japanese graphics, 2x CDbig news is that PAMICROPROSE ROM drive, PAW feels even planes are sharply emphasized, leading to CIFIC AIR WAR has re 10MB hard drive space, mouse: 486 or more so. In other a corresponding change in tactics. That is, ceived a major higher recommended with 8MB RAM and a words, flying is should you forego the historically correct makeover that rejoystick; most major sound cards supported more difficult. In route and get into a turning duel with a # of Players: 1-2 (via modem) moves almost all of Protection: None the new flight Zero, you'll likely end up being shot down the old bugs, making Designer: Ed Fletcher, John Paquin, model, planes go or spinning out of control. the game much Mike Rea into a spin after more playable than Publisher: MicroProse stalling, and getONE MAN'S MEAT IS Hunt Valley, MD it was before. The (800) 879-PLAY ting out of the ANOTHER MAN'S POISSON new version has also spin is extremely With the addition of the six Army added six American and Japanese Army hard. What's more, joystick jerkers will planes, PAW now boasts a total of 14 types planes, and features a dramatically imfind they lose control of the plane regardof aircraft (counting the two Zero versions proved AI and updated flight model. less of its speed. I hasten to add that for a as one) that you can actually fly. The YIBENITON W08.03 132 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1995 "


"BAO Publishing Presents the Complete PC Aviation Experience. BAO Publishing, developers of Microsoft Flight SimulatorTM presents the ultimate flight simulation experience with BAO's Europe 1, Las Vegas Scenery, Flight Simulator Flight Shop and Tower, the most realistic ATC simulation available. Feel the tension mount and the sweat start) as you direct heavy traffic from the tower at Chicago's O'Hare airport; take a chance and play the odds in Vegas as you complete a fly-by of the casinos and surrounding desert; proudly step back and admire your latest plane design with custom colors and graphics all ready for her maiden customized flight adventure or fly the Alps and discover Europe from the air. All this and more is possible with BAO. File your flight plan today and start your adventure. \"A sure bet for computer pilots who demand realistic scenery\" -Greg Harris, Editor of Full Throttle LAS VEGAS EUROPEI S URTON Challenge your skills with a fly-by of Hoover Dam and other famous Las Vegas landmarks. Europe I includes over 100 airports with taxiways, moving objects, unique buildings and approach lights. IBAO kwanie Las Vegas Scenery offers you startling, realistic, 3D-level detail of Las Vegas and the surrounding desert. The scenery combines actual satellite images with special aerial and ground-base photography to faithfully recreate more than 4,000 square miles of the Nevada landscape. Tour scenic Lake Mead, the famous Vegas \"Strip\" or catch a stunning view of Hoover Dam, one of the man-made wonders of the world. You set the itinerary. Europe I lets you explore from the air the scenic countries of Germany, Austria, Switzerland and the Netherlands. You'll discover beautiful cities like Berlin, Munich, Vienna, Geneva and Amsterdam. All major roads, waterways, lakes, cities, the Alps and landmarks are realistically recreated including all IFR/VFR airports. Experience Europe from your own cockpit. \"Best of Show\" at C.E.S. -Awarded by Game Bytes Magazine FLIGHT SHOP TOWER When An easy-to-use (windows-baseel) aircraft factory lets you design your own plane. You'll calmly choreograph the movement of incoming and outgoing air traffic high above Chicago's O'Hare airport. Flight Simulator Flight Shop puts the tools in your hands. You build, customize and paint your own planes and a flight dynamics cditor allows you to specify the flying characteristics. Share your designs with other flight enthusiasts through BBS's such as CompuServe. Create your own flight plan and send it to the built-in Flight Service Station (FSS) and then hop in your flight simulator airplane for an ATC controlled flight. With Tower the responsibility is all yours! As a tower controller, thousands of passengers will rely on your ability to make split-second decisions. You'll handle realistic aircraft takeoffs, landings and ground movements through a 360 degree panable window view. Based on FAA and Transport Canada's professional training simulation software, Tower puts you in the middle of all the action. Circle Reader Service #293 IBAO See your local retailer or call: (217) 356-0188 for more information TM Developers of Microsoft Right Simulator 01994 Bruce Artwick Organization, Ltd. Microsoft is a registered trademark of Microsoft Corporation. Flight Simulator is a registered trudemark of Rre A. Artwick. Europe I was designed for BAO by Alting Software under license, and produced by the Bruce Artwick Organization, Lul. Tower is a trademark of Aviation Simulations, Inc., a joint venture of Wesson International, Inc. and Bruce Artwick Organization, Ltd. CompuServe is a registered trademark of CompuServe, Inc. BAO is a trademark of Bruce Artwick Organization, Ltd. All rights reserved. Printed in the U.S.A. "


"m Lana Lact planes represented form a pretty compreswitch on the autopilot even when there background, and the Flight School, where hensive collection, though not without are enemies around. The latter should you'll find info about the game and how to gaps. To my regret, the Japanese Army make nearly all 1942 fans with bandaged play it. The tutorials include both the the lineup does not feature the Hayabusa/Oswrists breathe with relief-lighting the enory and practice of combat flying and are car, which was produced in greater num gine torque for many long minutes at a illustrated with numerous sequences from bers than any of the three Japanese time was simply too realistic. Another piece the simulation as well as historical footage. fighters represented in the game (Tony, of good news is that you can actually use The true value of this section is that it literGeorge and Frank). The Army additions the autopilot mode without fearing death, ally opens the door for many newcomers on the American side include the Lightalthough it will still kill your pilot occasionto sim combat flight: everything you need ning, Warhawk, and Mustang. ally in the time-compressed mode. to know about flying a plane is both covThe big thing about ered and explained. PAW's planes is that The Briefing Room is full of goodies. they are all so very, very Click on the film projector and you'll be different to fly. For exrewarded with a short documentary movie ample, all aircraft tend about the Pacific War; click on the file cabito get nose-heavy at low net and you'll open a short list of biograpower, but they all get phies of the key players of the watery nose-heavy differently. battlefield; click on the desktop model of a You'll need to spend plane and you'll find every aircraft repremany hours in the cocksented in the simulation. It's all nicely pit to master all those done and perhaps a little predictable, with planes, and that means XO one exception. The map stand contains ilterrific replay value and lustrated narratives describing the three great entertainment for most important battles of the war: Coral NEW TOYS In addition to the P-40 Warhawk and the P-51 Mustang, Sea, Midway and the Philippine Sea. This The enemy Al is conArmy Air Corps wannabees can also fly the P-38 Lightning. Two is where the power of multimedia becomes siderably better than it engines on those long over-water flights, long range, and killer fireapparent: the combination of text, power should blow computer jock's socks off. used to be, and that apvoiceover, and short video clips does an plies to both the flying excellent job of telling you how each battle and the shooting. Unlike in ACES OVER As for the AI crashing other planes all was fought and why. My only slight critiEUROPE, this new shooting accuracy is still over the map-yep, that still tends to bapcisms here would be that the clips used are within realisitic limits. When you choose pen. It seems the computer pilots have as from the game rather than from docuskilled enemy pilots, be prepared for some much dilliculty with the realistic llight mentary footage, and that the overall qual new and pretty aggressive tactics-Zeroes model as many humans will have. Someity of the voiceover leaves something to be will go head-to-head without hesitation. times, you'll be grateful for it, as I was desired—the narrators sound like young The AI overhaul also involved programwhen I emerged from a desperate dive in actors trying to sound like war heroes. ming new evasive maneuvers. Most often, a Warhawk to find out that the two pursuIn sum, the graphics are great, the flight the enemy pilots will dive to the deck and ing Zeroes lost their wings. In this inmodel is great, the sound is excellent, and lead you in a throat-tightening chase right stance, what happened was both the multimedia is very good. Yes, money over the treetops—and here we come to a historically accurate and personally gratifyspent on PAW: GOLD is money well spent. problem. Although PAW allows you to ading. All in all, the simulation part of PAW: You'll be playing this game several years just many detail levels, the only way you GOLD lives up to the glittery name. from now, no matter what else comes out can tell how far you are from the ground is in the meantime. In fact, I've already rewhen you have high land detail. And high THE \"MULTI\" IN THE MEDIA moved all other historical flight sims from land detail will mean some very choppy PAW essentially consists of two largely my hard drive. frames on slower machines, so no matter independent parts. The simulation is inTHE EDITORS SPEAK what the box says, you need at least a stalled in its entirety on your hard drive, high-end 486 to really enjoy things. and is played from DOS. The multimedia 1942: PACIFIC AIR WAR GOLD Mercifully, almost all of the flaws presection on the CD is accessed through RATING ** sent in last year's release have been reWINDOWS. Essentially, this multimedia secmoved. The missing rear machine gun in tion contains information both about the PROS Great graphics, improved career-mode Kates has been added, and game and about its historical background. flight model, superior virtual cockpit so has the possibility of switching to the You find yourself in the interior of an airview, and a multimedia bonus. After rear gunner in the career pilot mode, as craft carrier and proceed to explore by a rough start, this sim has evolved long as you're not actually doing a bombclicking the pointer at the Briefing Room, into one of the best on the market. CONS Not all bugs were squashed. ing/torpedo run. In addition, you can now where you go for info on the historical 134 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1995 "


"NEWCH PRODUCTS IL PILOT PIFIED Fly higher with VIRTUAL PILOT PROTM! Taking the best features of the award-winning VIRTUAL PILOTTM plus added viewing capabilities and fire buttons, it is ideal for advanced flight simulation and driving games. For those who take their game playing seriously! For IBM PC-compatible computers. PRO PEDALS are the only rudders which feature both forward and back rudder motion for flying and a pivot movement accelerator and brake control for driving games. Compatible with CH Products' entire IBM PC-compatible line. Jump into the cockpit and experience your most intense flight ever with FLIGHTSTICK PRO for 3DOTM, the first 300 analog joystick. A thrill to use with 3D0 software from companies like Crystal Dynamics, Domark, and Dynamix! TRACKBALL PROTM is a great alternative to the traditional mouse. It also serves as a professional pointing device for desktop publishing, CAD/CAM, and games. Available for both IBM PC-compatible and Macintosh computers. Take total control of your aircraft without ever removing your hand from the stick! features a FLIGHTSTICK PRO for Macintosh programmable trigger, three fire buttons, and a programmable eight-way switch. It attaches to the ADB port found on Mac SE or later models and requires 6.0.7 software or higher. the best! DUCTS ark Center Drive. Vista, CA 92083. Phone: 619 598-2518 FAX: 619-598-2524 Macintosh is a registered trademark of Apple Computer, Inc. 3DO is a trademark of The 3DO Company. Circle Reader Service #190 "


"I BETE TEK lords of the FILED  PR TOGEL William Shatner's TEKWAR INTRA CORP THE  BM CD-ROM Advanced 3D Tek-nology Arrives on IBM CD-ROM All New Full Motion Video Starring William Shatner Visit Capstone Online: America Online (Keyword: Capstone); Software Creations BBS (508)365-9352; Web Page Site: http://www.gate.net intracorr. Or Call Capstone's BBS (305)374-6872. Software  1995 IntraCorp, Inc. All rights reserved. Artwork  1994 USA Networks. 3D engine licensed from 3D REALMS ENTERTAINMENT. Capstone and The Pinnacle of Entertainment Software are trademarks of IntraCorp, Inc. Software based on Tek War novel authored by William Shatner. NETWORK Circle Reader Service #325 Capstone NAMUN ENTEKTENE VIWA "


"STRATEGY/WARGAMES The Casualties Of On-Line War GOOD FEATURES GAME PUBLISHERS WERE LOOKING BROADSIDES community, it's reasonable to assume WHEN WARGAMES TO THE FUTURE AT THIS YEAR'S that within a couple of years we'll be COMPUTER GAME DEVELOPER'S playing the latest SimTex or Gary Conference, and the future, as Grigsby game via the Internet or GO ON-LINE, WILL they see it, is multiplayer and onsome other computer network serline. Modem-to-modem features vice. These games might even have were a novelty just a few years LAN (local area network) and direct ago, but now it seems that almost modem play features as well. If your every company has at least one ultimate gaming dream is one in project on the drawing board that features modem which a human opponent is always just a mouse BE LEFT BEHIND? and network play. Pioneer modem game guru click away, your future looks very bright. Danielle Berry (formerly Dan Bunten) smiled B ut before we march off toward this brave new when I mentioned this trend to her. No doubt she multiplayer world, I suggest that we pause and wonders what took everyone so long to jump on think. As is the case with any shift in focus, there the multiplayer bandwagon; after all, it's been are problems to overcome, and there is the danger nearly four years since she designed COMMAND HQ that good things will be lost in the shuffle. and six since MODEMWARS. With all of this multiplayer interest and activity NO-E'RAINERS in the game At the top of the endangered feature list is good publishing solitaire play. My fear is that if game companies focus their resources on headto-head play, it may come at the cost of research and development of good artificial * The Multi-Player Games Network, not satisfied with bringing opponents. We've all watched boardgames such as GDW's Market Garden and Mayfair Games' Empire computer opponents make Builder to the connected strategy gamer, is now joining forces with Mi dumb moves and groaned at crosoft. As the software publishing giant prepares to launch its Win how often they cheat just to dows 95 product, complete with an online service, MPG Net is keep pace with their human stepping in to help cover its gaming flank. opponents. Granted, pro* Atomic Games' proceeds apace with BEYOND SQUAD LEADER. Graphic ele gramming a truly challenging ments are being added to sharpen the game's appearance, including artificial opponent for games tank turrets that turn independently of the chassis and even cast their as rich and detailed as PACIFIC own shadows. D-DAY: AMERICA INVADES, the next installment in the WORLD WAR or MASTER OF MAGIC is AT WAR series covering the landings at Omaha and Utah beaches, is very diflicult and time-consumshaping up for a late Summer release. In addition to covering some fa ing, but that doesn't mean demiliar ground, there will be a combined Utah Omaha campaign game at signers should stop trying. And the 1 km/hex, battalion/company scale. I'd hate to see multiplayer op* Avalon Con, the Avalon Hill-sponsored gaming convention, continues tions used as an excuse for (continued on page 138) publishers to cut corners with by Alan Emrich JULY 1995  COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 137 "


"the Al. Not everyone will want to play huplay. Most strategy/wargames are still network, a snail-like opponent is doubly mans all the time, so games will still need turn-based, and for a good reason. The annoying, especially when the on-line decent solitaire play if they are going to beauty of turn-based games is that they meter is running and every second have any longevity. Let's hope that as deallow for thoughtful, considered moves means a few more pennies. signers look toward multiple players they which bring out the depth inherent in So what's the solution? Play-by-email don't lose sight of the individual. the position. But when played by multifeatures are currently in vogue, but these ple humans, turn-based games can be a lack the appeal of online, live, connected THE WAITING GAME real snooze, especially if your opponent is gaming. A lot of designers believe that The other threatened traditional annoyingly slow. When you're playing a real-time games are the answer. Problem wargame element is deep, turn-based turn-based game via modem or on-line is, it's difficult to have a deep strategy 0 0a G-2 (continued from page 137) ambitious plans are to support play on Nov universe. FASA claims that the combination ell-type networks, direct modem, null-mo of neo-feudal \"Houses\" in this setting and to grow, with over 100 boardgame tourna dem and even \"hotseat.\" Only registered the word \"Mech\" is their intellectual propments scheduled this year. The big news, owners will be able to upgrade to the net erty. SimTex could change their Houses to though, is that the boardgaming bastion is work version of Civ, so send in that registra Corporations, but a lawsuit could force the being infiltrated by computer games. Arm tion card now. cancellation of the entire project. Ironically, chair generals may take on both silicon and * An equally ambitious undertaking is Norm designer Steve Barcia has long claimed that human generals in STALINGRAD and FLIGHT Koger's Rifles, the third offering in SSI's the paper role-playing game Spacemaster COMMANDER 2 tournaments. Also, Atomic WARGAME CONSTRUCTION KIT series, covering was his primary inspiration for MECHLORDS, Games will reportedly be on hand for the the period between 1850 and 1900 at two and not BattleTech. debut \"screening\" of BEYOND SQUAD * MicroProse and SimTex still don't LEADER. For more information, call seem to have their minds made up Avalon Hill directly at (410) 254about MASTER OF ORION (MOO) GOLD. 9200. Some of the multiplayer features are * Strategic Studies Group has foralready developed (network and momally announced WARLORDS II DELUXE dem player), and will be featured in for a summer release. Look for this MASTER OF XENON (MOX) at the very enhanced version to include: netleast. Mox, due by Christmas, is ruwork, e-mail, modem, and null-momored to feature such things as interdem play, an Undo function for racial planetary populations movement, new \"underground\" (complete with slavery, rebellions, (castle, dungeon, and cavern) teretc.), multiple colonies per star, and rain sets, an improved Scenario more. Builder, over two dozen brand new TEXTURES, TURRETS & TENSION In Avalon Hill's upcoming BEYOND SQUAD * If you ask Jim DeGoey scenarios, and better and faster artiLEADER you can zoom in to get an \"up close and personal\" view of the (JamesD6201@aol.com) \"What's ficial opponents, all on a single CDdetailed tanks, stone walls and wounded bodies littering the battlefield. Ops with Windows?\", he'll tell you ROM. Creating this product required that the specs for the Windows verthat all of the original code be rewritten, so different scales (regimental: 200 yards per sions of TacOps are posted on the Internet SSG took this opportunity to make a number hex/20 minutes per turn, and brigade: 400 (comp.sys.pc.games), America Online, and of improvements to the WARLORDS II SCENARIO yards per hex/40 minutes per turn). Look for CompuServe. Arnesal's latest alpha build BUILDER, and to redo all scenarios in 256 about 50 scenarios in the box covering looks very promising and a Summer release color SVGA graphics. An upgrade offer will British colonial warfare, the Crimean War is still on track. They are still hard at work be made to owners of the original WARLORDS (Balaclava is already done), the American on a TacOps Battlebook, and Ed Rains has II and its SCENARIO BUILDER. Civil War, etc. The Austrians will be includ begun preliminary work on the Panzers East * Speaking of upgrade offers, MicroProse ed in the database, even if no scenarios are Battlebook. Meanwhile, work continues on will allow owners of QQP's original MERCHANT included in the set, so crafty players can their other projects: Gettysburg, Weapons PRINCE to get MACHIAVELLI for $23.97, plus create many battles from the German Wars Free!, and Imperial Crisis. On a final note, shipping and handling, if they send in the of Unification. Rifles should be fired out late Arsenal is said to be doing fine with their original MERCHANT PRINCE disk #1 to MPS Di this Summer, with Novastar contracted to do marketing policy of direct sales only. rect. For more information call (800) 879 25 Civil War scenarios at the double. They're expanding their toll-free order-takPLAY. * On the ever changing SimTex front, it ap ing and fulfillment flow-through in time to * CivNet, the online version of Sid Meier's pears that MECHLORDS will have to take a accept orders for both TacOps for Windows CIVILIZATION, is scheduled for a Summer re new name. Boardgame company FASA and both the Mac and Windows versions of lease for the Windows version, and a Christ seems to be flexing their muscle, indicating Panzers East mas release for the Mac version. The MECHLORDS is too much like their BattleTech 138 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1995 "


"FIGHTING FALCON BACK TO BAGHDAD WHAT MAKES A «SH*T HOT\" PILOT? Matching wits with the deadliest opponents in the world and winning Now, you can hone your skills with the same accuracy as the military. \"Fighting Falcon = Back to Baghdad\" is created directly from «Red Flag\" and \"Top Gun\" flight simulators used in Air Force Pilot training. Fighting Falcon is the most realistic and accurate flight model on the market complete with satellite photos from the U.S. Department of Defense, precise geographic data and 40 missions packed with Air to Ground attacks. Fighting Falcon will provide you with the most advanced combat simulation you have ever experienced... Are you ready for the challenge? Night missions High resolution texturemapped graphics The most accurate weapons modeling in a combat simulator COM64 FAAC INCORPORATED SPOT IMAGE CORPORATION MIRCREW TACTICAL AIR MING SYSTEM WD OLRG KLST HA OLP LIMITED RenderWare NAS FALLON MILITARY SIMULATIONS INC 5910 N.E. 82nd Avenue, Vancouver WA. 98662 PHONE (360)254-2000 FAX (360)254-1746 World Wide Web: HTTP://www.military-sim.com Circle Reader Service #79 "


"game in real time, because there is little turn-based structure of the game. So, an play, there would be more opportunity time to strategize deeply. With real-time alternating\" sequence of play is being for action and reaction, and a greater games there's also the threat that more considered for the online version of the need to maintain some reserves to meet a and more of the thoughtful elements of game. Under this structure, each player sudden crisis or opportunity. In scenarios wargames will be replaced by action-oritakes a turn moving and lighting with where one side has more units or the ented elements, that the quickness of only a few pieces at a time. They then alburden of attack, its opportunity to actione's mouse hand will become more imternate, back and forth, until every piece vate more units per pulse could simply be portant than the quickness of one's wit. has either moved, passed, reinforced, increased. Are thoughtful, turn-based wargames taken supply, etc., that turn. Then a new This alternating \"action pulse\" apDoomed, so to speak, in the multiplayer game turn begins and all units are once proach has been around for ages in the future? I don't necessarily think so. Inmore free to move and fight. boardgame market. It was developed to stead, I see the turn-based, online game For example, let's say we're looking at avoid the monotony of waiting for anothevolving to use more integrated sequence the familiar France 1940 scenario of PANZer player's move, long a factor in comof play features. In THE PERFECT ER GENERAL. For an online version of the plex board wargames. That it has not GENERAL, for instance, most of the playgame, players would alternately take \"acbecome standard in the paper game marer-only, non-interactive phases (like artion pulses\" with 3 to 5 units at a time. ket should serve as a warning to computtillery fire plotting) are fairly short. The Thus, battles around key geographic er game designers that no game system is longer movement and combat phases are points would develop on a per-pulse baa panacea for all ills. Still, computer more interactive because you must pay sis: First might come air strikes, followed game designers should be praised for tryattention to your opponent's fire and by artillery and shore bombardment, with ing a variety of approaches to avoid the movement, particularly when a nice opground units coming on yet another dull side of turn-based gaming, while portunity fire shot presents itsell. pulse to subdue the last of the city's dekeeping the depth and subtletics of planSimilarly, as SSI develops online verfenders. In the interim, the defending ning which keeps wargamers coming sions of both PANZER GENERAL and its seplayer could study the attack and attempt back for more. quel, ALLIED GENERAL, they are dealing to counter the enemy's impending aswith the problem of modifying the sesault. quence of play without destroying the Under this alternating sequence of 308 The Serious Wargamer Knows His True Allies Tigers On The Prowl Aide De Camp Point Of Attack WULATIONS HPS Simulations P.O. Box 3245 Santa Clara, CA 95055 (408)554-8381 The WARGAMER'S Computer Company 140 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD  JULY 1995 "


"HARDBALL 4 15SH With all due respect to Minnesota and Atlanta, HardBall may be the greatest series of all time. \"HardBall 4 isn't merely better (than ESPN Baseball), it's in another league entirely.\" Entertainment Weekly \"HardBall 4 is without a doubt the most realistic baseball simulation you can buy.\" Electronic Entertainment her 11 \"Great graphics and fantastic arcade action are what have made the HardBall series the most popular action-oriented ball games around.\" -Computer Gaming World coc There is no debate. HardBall is the best-selling PC baseball game series of all time. And now, HardBall 4 has refined playability and realism to an unfair level that has the experts adjective-silly. You get 28 stadiums that are now more detailed, from the nasty winds at The Stick to the ERA-bruising altitude at Mile High. Stat compilation in over 75 categories. And HardBall's greatest graphics ever, with unequalled high-resolution digitized video graphics that'll have you SPORT PTXYERS swearing you see all 108 stitches. If you want a PC baseball game, get HardBall 4. And when talk turns to the greatest game ever, you can say you were there. ACCOLADE Want to try HardBall 47 Download the demo from the internet via anonymous tip or through your WWW Browser at ftp://ftp.netcom.com/pub/ac/accolade/hb4demo.zip or via our BBS at 403-296-8800 Hardbal 4. Sport Accolade, and the Sport Accolade logo are trademarks of Accolade, Inc. 1904. Accolade is an office consee of the Major League Baseball Players Association. OMLOPA MSA Distributed by WEA (Warner/Elektra Atlantic Corp.I. a Warner Music Group Company. All rights reserved Circle Reader Service #288 "


"REVIEW Terror Times Two MicroProse's Puts The \"Sea» In Sequel With X-COM: TERROR FROM THE DEEP by Martin E. Cirulis FLENME amplifier to increase the power of this weapon. FROM THE DEEP couple of months back I had the DEJA VU, ALL OVER AGAIN... HQ and awoke the alien vessel from its dubious pleasure of sitting No matter how hard you try, the good slumber, setting the wheels in motion for a through the most recent installdays never seem to last. Though humanity whole new guerrilla war. The aquatic-alien ment of the Highlander movie trounced those kidnapping, gene-splicing, plans for world-domination progress slowsaga. While this was not somebase-buildin', cattle-mutilatin', city-terrorly, but gather speed with time, exchanging thing one would ordinarily brag about, I izin', big-eyed Alien Creeps during the subtlety for brutality as their power grows did achieve some insight into the nature of course of the original X-COM, the peace until, some four decades later, the complathe sequel, and decided that the real title that comes lasts a mere 40 years before cent X-Com organization must undergo its of the film should have been Highlander 3: alien evil rears its deformed head again in own awakening. Cool Places To Have Sword Fights. I have TERROR. Unfortunately, instead of menacOnce again, the Alien plan isn't at all ing you from the skies, X-Com: Terror from the Deep this time the body-snatchSonic-Blasta Rifle Price: $59.95 ers come from below. 3.5\" floppy or CDIn a serious surprise for A more powerful Sonic device. ROM Not even high carbon steel is you dino-enthusiasts out immune to this weapon. The System highly compact wave emitter is Enhanced by a super conductor Requirements: there, it seems that the giIBM-compatible ant rock that wiped out 386/20Mhz or TERROR the tiny-brained saurian better processor, 4MB RAM, SVGA lords of the carth was, in graphics, 3MB AROENIE reality, a massive alien TYPE ACCURRCY TU COST hard drive space starship with braking Snap 40% for CD (16MB space for floppy), CD-ROM, problems. The result of Rimed 110% 60% MORE mouse; supports AdLib. Sound Blaster, Covox and General MIDI sound cards. this fender-bender, other MASTA BLASTA Researching new underwater weapons makes Protection: Manual look-up (floppy only) than giving a small breed Designer: Stephen Goss sense, but why can't you have laser technology from the first Xof simians a shot at world Original Game Design: Julian & Nick Gollop Com for topside firefights? domination, was to lock Publisher: MicroProse Software Hunt Valley, MD the alien Invasion ship (410) 771-0440 into a long sleep. Deep under the ocean, clear at the beginning; all you know for damaged extra-terrestrial computers sure is that it probably involves the utter much the same feeling as I slog my way slowly repaired themselves, subtly subvertdomination of humanity. Only your Scienthrough MicroProse's sequel to the stuning portions of the natural world in prepatists can provide the much-needed anningly successful and all-around great ration for the emergence of the sleeping swers, and they need your brave soldiers, game X-COM: UFO DEFENSE. While a evil under the ocean floor. or in this case, «Aquanauts,\" to go out much more enjoyable experience than Oddly enough, it's the alien defeat at there and return some clues for study. watching immortals trying to chop each the end of the first X-Com that forms the Provided, of course, that they aren't too other's heads off, TERROR FROM THE DEEP wake-up call for the Wet-Ones from Bebusy dodging sonic blasts and rescuing has just a slight case of sequel-itis enough yond. While your troops were planting the terrified survivors, all the while hunting to smack of \"Same movie, cooler sets.\" flag on the sands of Mars, a secret signal down the slimiest horrors to ever climb shot from the smoking remains of Alien out of a test-tube. While newbie X-COM 142 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1995 "


"Have you ever wondered what it mutiny and vicious battles with rival ships, you may be would feel like to be on top of the lucky enough to reach the New World. However, your world? How about beneath it? There are those who have journey is far from over. You must now embark on your Today, you could be on top of the world. already experienced such exhilaration. Their quest to found a colonial empire. Conquering names? Columbus, De Gama, Le Maire, Cook villages, winning over and Bougainville the world's most famous the natives and tilling explorers. Now you can create your the land are own adventures in Exploration but a few of the challenges a remarkably in-depth facing you and your game of strategy 4Exploration weary crew. and world conquest, The graphics are -new from Interactive Magic. nothing short of brilliant. Before you set sail from Spain, Complemented by unlimited, Portugal, England, realistic animation scenes, every new France or the game brings new territories to conquer. Netherlands, you New adversities to overcome. The tour your home port. Oversee tour your home port. Oversce Tomorrow, beneath it. adventures and newfound adventures and newfound the construction of your shipyard. fortunes are virtually limitless. STRATEGY Enlist your crew. Equip your ship. Buy For more information on Exploration, and sell commodities. In fact, you may simply give us a call at 919-461-0948. EXPLORATION even want to make a trip to the local The New World awaits your ADAMH OF STRATEGY AXD WORLD CONOUTST banker for information about funding arrival. Do you have what it Mac PC CD-ROM INTERACTIVE MAGIC your expedition. After surviving possible takes to make it there? Circle Reader Service #37 A game of strategy and world conquest for PC CD-ROM.  1995 Interactive Magic "


"lanciscal TEFTTIER @ O3 Omo commanders should be fascinated by this number of action-points with which to cartakes place has attained the same level of process, veterans have definitely seen this ry out movement and combat during a excellence as the actual combat system. movie before. turn, modified by characteristics such as The map is large enough to invoke the strength and dexterity. For instance, a feel of dangerous exploration, but small ATTACK, ADMINISTRATE AND high-dexterity soldier could fire a cumberenough that you don't spend too much ACCESSORIZE... some weapon for a lower point cost than time wandering aimlessly about the pretty The mechanics of TERROR are identical an incompetent newbie. landscape. The terrain itself is well done, to those of its predecessor, and form a While the basic concept is very easy to and there are many beautifully rendered game of three equally important compoget the hang of and everything is conterrain types, both on the ocean bottom nents: one part tactical, man-to-alien comtrolled by simple point-and-click mouse and on the surface. One battle might be commands, the depth of fought on a clear ocean bottom and the Conner McLoud KOD detail is quite deep, so to next amidst the twisted stone ruins of an AIGHT SHOULDER LEFT SHOULDER BACK PREK speak, and players with a ancient city. Also, much of what you see good understanding of can be destroyed or mangled by stray AIGHT HANO LEFT HAND squad-level tactics will weapons fire. Near machinery or other have a definite advantage seeming \"props,\" the danger of secondary here. Line-of-sight is explosions is very real. AIGHT LEG strictly controlled, and The tactical board also has multiple levonly those portions of the els; hills, buildings and alien structures GROUND terrain visible to any of rise up to three or four levels above the HUOOT your troops are revealed, main level, with all viewing advantages of WIDODO ATUTSOUD with unexplored portions height conferred. The controls make it being blank screen. Even fairly easy to jump between levels without I'M AN AQUANAUT & I'M OK Despite their cumbersome (and flimsy) after you have explored getting lost or confused, though somewetsuits, X-Com soldiers can carry a lot of ordnance. If you want an area and it becomes a times line-of-sight between levels can be a more protection, you'll have to research alien technology. permanent part of your little mysterious, given the player's viewing display, opponents can angle. Even more intricate are the battlebat, one part strategic management of still move through unseen unless they fields set entirely inside large structures resources and research, and one part SIMcross into the viewing-cone of one of your such as ocean-going vessels or alien bases. Criy-esque base-building. A minor fourth troops. More than once I have lost an Things here are so well done and claustroaspect involves the sending out of interAquanaut to a sneaky alien that has phobic that you will have perfect sympathy ceptor craft to bring down alien subs in orfor any veteran of Stalinder to disrupt alien plans as well as grad. capture technology and personnel for While most of your study. The system for this is very basic, gameplay time will be and other than telling your flying subs spent in the tactical comwhen and where to go and what attack bat engine, to master this posture to take, ship-to-ship combat preportion but neglect the cedes automatically. One merely watches other two areas is a sure units do or die, though a commander path to defeat; no matter quick on the mouse can order a sub to re2 how good you get at figurtreat before the death blow can arrive, ing out alien tactics on the thus saving several hundred thousand dolbattlefield, if your troops lars of equipment. O aren't supplied with the If you have to choose a priority amongst JACQUES TALL AND CARRY A SPEARGUN Our intrepid extra-terres latest technology and these three aspects, then I suspect the tac trial pest exterminator makes a house call at a colorful alien base supported by a complex tical system is the most vital to your sucenough infrastructure, cess. Here you are presented with a you cannot win. skewed 3-D viewpoint where the terrain is slipped up from behind. Also very well Everything in TERROR costs money, and laid down over an invisible grid, cach done is the blast radius of area-effect lots of it: bases must be built and mainsquare acting as a unit of distance; the terweapons, and the use of covering terrain tained; soldiers, scientists and technicians rain in the square acts as a movement for reducing and even negating damage must be hired and salaries paid at the end modifier and may possibly obstruct line from these kinds of devastating devices of every month; and everything, except of-sight. It's a combat system that recalls which the computer opponent generally for the goodies you pry out of dead alien miniatures gaming on tabletop terrain. uses at least as well as you do. manipulators, must be paid for-down to Each human, alien or tank has a certain the board on which all this mayhem the last round fired. The financial realities 1999 20 Uma Kemp 122 144 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD  JULY 1995 "


"SAY-GAME ADOWFI THE EXCITING NEW COLLECTIBLE TRADING CARD GAME SET IN THE FAST-PACED WORLD OF ACTION MOVIES! MUSTER YOUR FORCES OF MARTIAL ARTISTS, SUPERNATURAL CREATURES, SORCERERS, AND FUTURISTIC SUPER SOLDIERS AND FIGHT THE SECRET WARI Lite JOIN THE SECRET WARA MHESHINE VARGAMES WEST-SPONSORED STORES: NY CA CO TX TX Bruce's Book-O-Rama Fresno Crazy Egor's Rochester Gator Games San Mateo Saratoga Sci-Fi Shop Saratoga Sprngs NY Game-A-Holics Santa Clara Green Dragon N. Charleston SC Village Vidiot Ft. Collins Gamesmasters Unltd. Clearlake Aaron's Sportscards Bethel CT Commissary Games Houston TX Shanandoe Enterprises Boise ID Gamesmasters Unltd. Houston Heroes Unlimited Roselle Players Texas Sports Huntsville The Comic Pit Howell MI Games People Play Logan Game Master Fair Lawn NJ Games People Play Orem Gamesquest Albuquerque NM Games People Play W. Valley City My Book Store Las Cruces NM Games Plus Woodinville WA Retailers: Wargames West should be your store's distributor! We offer America's fastest shipping, up to the minute computerized inventory, and free advertising in top magazines! Call us! FOR A FREE 136-PAGE CATALOGS PO Box 9496, ALBUQUERQUE NM 87119-9496 Shadowflst is a trademark of Daedalus Games. Card art is copyrighted in the artists names, counter-clockwise from top: Anthony Waters, Phil Foglio, Melissa Benson Heather Hudson, Ed Beard Jr, John Snyder, Mark Tedin. Circle Reader Service #165 "


"g y LINI w C V irgil Conusy g ISIL of this game are tied very closely to your years earlier I had already pertactical considerations. As each base can fected the Laser Cannon-never only \"cover\" a certain portion of the Earth's mind the total absence of any of oceans and cach new base is very expenthe mastered alien technologies sive, you must sometimes make a painful that allowed me to trounce the choice between economy and optimal stratbug-eyed little farts in the first egy. Since your only source of steady inplace. Coupled with the fact that come is donations from the member @ @ @ia 61 this new tableau lacks the amusnations of the UN, keeping them noning anchor in modern mythology happy is your biggest priority next C olt Ehui Mantsu that the first did, this title felt a to stopping the actual Alien plan. little flat at times, which is a Should a country feel you are not shame, considering that it would have redoing enough to reduce alien acquired only a little more innovation to be tivity in their waters, they may recompletely satisfying. duce funding or even sign an alliance with the Alien Menace and ALIENS AND THE HUMANS withdraw funding altogether. You FADADO 1 WHO LOVE TO HATE THEM... can survive one or two of these road. All this being said, TERROR FROM THE quislings, but should you fail to DEEP is still superior to most measure up to your task of exterstrategy games out there. The minator, more and more of your funding play is solid, the graphics amuswill disappear until you finally go broke ing, and it will return more than and cease to function as an organization. If enough bang for the buck. It this occurs, the aliens win just as surely as if may be a little tough for newbies, they had destroyed your last base. but on the other hand, the stratAnd speaking of your bases, you not egy guide for X-Com will serve only have to decide what facilities are re0 1 0 just as well for this title as the quired for each base, but where to place . . original; almost all the importhem on the base map. While this may tant lessons are still true. And OC seem trivial, the first time aliens rush your perhaps best of all, in this world homestead under the sea, you will wish SWIM FOR COVER, LADS Whether combing the undersea of Pentium-hungry games with depths, capturing alien vessels, or protecting port cities you had paid a little more attention to the no regard to the hardware budfrom alien incursions, you'll find the terrain just as varied way things are laid out. Careful base deas in the first X-COM. gets of gamers, TERROR delivers sign, with due attention paid to the enall this on a lowly 386. It would trances available to undesirables, can pay be nice if more companies realhuge tactical dividends when the intake to be made. And while they still do ized the game is more important than the evitable attack occurs. odd little things, like walking up to a muscle. trooper and then just walking away, their As an interim product, to keep the world FRUSTRATION AT 40 FATHOMS long-range ability makes it look like they've of X-Com near and dear to the hearts of But of course, for those of you familiar been reading the strategy guide to the first gamers while the system is evolved into with the first X-COM, none of what I've X-Com very carefully. While a challenge is something even better, TERROR is a good told you so far is anything new-and never a bad thing, newcomers to the series return trip to the game that a lot of people therein lies most of the problem I have may feel unfairly bludgeoned by aliens that fell in love with. I just hope the next installwith this game. TERROR is virtually identican shrug off one or two hits from all but ment takes a few more risks. Perhaps it's cal in structure and execution to its predethe most powerful weapons in the game, time we infiltrated their world! cessor. This is good for people who were and combats that last half an evening. THE EDITORS SPEAK in love with the design to begin with, and The feelings of sequel-itis that surround it definitely means we now have a fairly this product are further increased by the X-COM: TERROR FROM THE DEEP bug-free product, with a tried and true inuninspired initial conditions of the game. terface. But the flip-side is that if there was You are just as bad off at the beginning of anything that annoyed you about the first this second alien attack as you were at the PROS Uses the same great game eninstallment, you can safely assume the anfirst-and that is just plain stupid. While I gine that won Game of the Year. noyance still exists. can sympathize with the need to research CONS The only significant difference between this game and its preThe difficulty level of this game has a whole new set of underwater technolodecessor is that it's much more been cranked way up. Even at intermedigies, I really have a problem with having difficult. And \"more\" does not always ate skill levels, the aliens rarely allow a misto use spearguns on the surface when forty mean \"better.\" Co More Revenu RATING 146 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1995 "


"Wanted: Manager for 36 Major League All-Stars. (Must Provide Own Antacids.) With 36 MLBPA stars at your disposal, this is your chance to use your managerial skills and your CD-ROM to the fullest. Now you'll think twice before you call the big-league skippers bums, chokers, and losers. NATIONAL LEACUE koster C PIAZZA IB BAGWELL MCGRIFF 2B GARCIA SS O. SMITH 38 CAMINIT WILLIAMS LF ALOU BONDS CE GRISSOM GWYNN RF BICHETTE JUSTICE DRADEC JACKSON MADDUX BECK MYERS Lineup 1 GRISSOM RF 2 GWYNN CF 3 BONDS LF 4 BAGWELL. 1B 5 MCGRIFF DA 6 PIATZAC 7 WILLIAMS 3B 8 O. SMITH SS 9 GARCIA 28 ORABEK P Subs ALOU JUSTICE BICHETTE CAMINTTI Ok! You get actual live video footage. 600MB of video. And virtually unlimited play combinations for real game feel. So when your runner gets gunned down, you do too, Railom Retail STIONER LEAGUE AMERICAN LEATRE OUTLET LET STEAL MALL-STARE BASEBALL.SK Numerous coaching options. Which means numerous states of sanity. And as the game's artificial intelligence learns your tendencies, it adjusts to get even tougher. Now, how's that make you feel? 2.LE Circle Reader Service #288 SPORT Think your day job's tough? Managing 36 live Major League stars is no day in the park. But if your mind can stand it and your heart can take it. get All-Star Baseball. And reach a stress level that'd make a cardiologist nervous. ACCOLADE FAYERS com Sport Accolade and the Sport Accolade logo are trademarks of Accolade, Inc. Al Michaels is used under license by Accolade, Inc. Accolade is an official licensee of the Major League Baseball Players Association. OMLBPA MSA. Major League Baseball trademarks and copyrights are used with permission of and under license from Major League Baseball Properties, Inc. All-Star Baseball is a registered trademark used under license from the Rapid Mounting and Finishing Company, 1995 Accolade, Inc. All rights reserved. "


"REVIEW : A Jolt Of Jungle Juice u od 300 Parched Gamers Can Get Their Fill With Sir-Tech's Addictive JAGGED ALLIANCE by Jeff James ET IN A SWELTERING JUNGLE Jack and Brenda Richards, the fatherfend a sector from incursions by Santino's TABLEAU, SIR-Tech SOFTWARE's daughter research team who discovered men). Once you've kitted out your JAGGED ALLIANCE ATTEMPTS TO the fallow tree and its amazing sap, have gruts, checked your finances and hired marry an addictive small-unit fallen victim to avatars of avarice. Their enough guards and tappers, you're ready combat engine with a heady dose former partner, Dr. Lucas Santino, bas to hit the combat zone. of role-playing adventure. Madlab Softbetrayed them in an effort to harvest and The island of Metavira is divided into ware's brainchild is yet another ambitious sell all the sap himself. To solidify his 60 sectors of equal size, arranged in a attempt by a software developer to turn hold over the island's most valuable regrid six sectors high by ten sectors long. the Computer Gaming World genre-classifysource, Santino has hired a band of thugs At the start of the game, you control only ing system on its ear. Is it a strategy and placed most of the island under his one sector in the lower right corner of game? Is it role-playiron grip. Holdthe map; the rest are under the control of Jagged Alliance ing? Adventure? A ing out in one Santino and his band of goose-stepping floor wax? A dessert Price: $59.95 small corner of sap stealers. As the game progresses, you CD-ROM and topping? Answering 3.5\" floppy the island, Jack must move your team of mercs into enethese questions may System and Brenda conmy sectors, clearing them of Santino's be difficult, but one Requirements: tact you and men. Once all opposition is eliminated in thing is for certain: IBM compatible hope that you a sector, it reverts to your control, allow486-33 MHz or JAGGED ALLIANCE is a better, 4 MB and your band of ing you to assign tappers and guards to winner regardless of RAM, VGA graphmercenaries can each of the new sectors. Your goal is to how it's categorized ics, 15 MB hard rescue them eventually sweep the island of Santino drive space, CD-ROM drive, mouse. from their plight and his henchmen, culminating in a cliSupports AbLib, General MIDI, Gravis JUNGLE FEVER UltraSound, Pro Audio Spectrum, and and boot the mactic battle in sector one, located in the The story revolves Sound Blaster (including Pro, SB16, money-grubbing upper left corner of the map. around Metavira, a AWE32 and 100% compatibles) sound Santino off the fictional South cards. island. LOCK N' LOAD Protection: None American isle whose Your first task AND ROCK N' ROLL RSAC Rating: Violence 2 (Humans killed), sole claim to fame is Nudity/Sex 2 (Clothed sexual touching), is to hire a team The heart of the game is the tactical the extraordinary Language 3 (Obscene gestures) from A.I.M., the combat portion in which your mercenarfallow tree. The sap Designer: Madlab Software Association of ies will engage in direct combat with SanPublisher: Sir-Tech Software of this tree (identiOgdensburg, NY International tino's forces. You view the battlefield fied by its golden(315) 393-6633 Mercenaries, from an isometric overhead view, not unhued foliage) is a who will arrive like that of ULTIMA VI or VII. Using the medical mother-lode that promises to the following day ready for action. You mouse, you can select each of your mercure even the most virulent of the world's then journey to the base camp, where cenaries individually and tell them to diseases. Not surprisingly, pharmaceutiyou begin and end each day of play. It is move, fire at an enemy, pick up an item, cal companies are paying top dollar for here you equip your squad, hire \"tapetc. The interface is mostly mouse driven, this amazing substance, which leads to pers\" to extract the tree sap, and place relying on a system of mouse-button greed and, of course, bad guys galore. guards on sentry (who'll automatically decombinations to perform certain actions. 148 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1995 "


"NIGH K = | | | For centuries, war has raged among the demons and fairies, devastating this mystical land. Twin brothers, born to mortals, are separated at birth, chosen for the ultimate battle that will decide the fate of heaven and earth. They later meet, never knowing their true relation-or their own dark destiny. Fated to duel your twin to the death, you must fight to stay alive and rescue lovely, innocent maidens from the clutches of menacing foes. And perhaps, become ruler of all. W00000 nter a world f Demons nd Damsels So the challenge is on! An incomparable role playing fantasy game for your PC, with stunning, hand sculpted graphics throughout, numerous 'scripts and a thrilling plot. But be warned-with its voluptuous women and intense action, Knights of Xentar is for mature audiences only. And not for the faint hearted you Dare. Available now at your nearest dealer or call 1-800-258MEGA. Or write Megatech P.O. Box 11333, Torrance, CA 90510. Visa., Mastercard and checks accepted roguirem B633 or faster machine ( 486 recommended) RAM Mouse recommended. Operating Sys.: abo n d 3.1 Graphics compatible with VGA. uppe n Sound Blaster Pro, Pro Audio Spectrul Adlib Gole, and Spe er For y free detto, caller 24 3 10-539-7739. (8N1) NR 13 MEGA TECH WARNING!!! T RECOMMENDED FOR PLAYERS UNDER 13 Circle Reader Service #86 ompanies and product names mentioned are trademarks of registered trademarks of the respective owners.V N "


"TYRUM IL HLHLTH Each person that walks onto the battle something, sounding relieved when the ample, the intuitive inventory managefield wears a specific color. You meres are area is clear, and adding greatly to other ment system allows you to easily drag and identified by their green shirts, Santino's events. drop items from one merc to another men are in red, your guards are in blue, In addition to the personalities of indiwithin a certain range. Hired guns will and tree-tappers are in yellow. reload their weapons Although limited to .38 caliber automatically, letting REST handguns and grenades at the you concentrate on outset, you'll come across winning the battle inmore sophisticated weapons as stead of chasing MODIFIED 351 6/10 100% the game unfolds, such as down ammo clips. THIS 391 HINGNUM HAS BEEN MODIFIED WITH A shotguns, M-16s and other imGUSTOM-BUILT BARREL EXTENSION FOR BETTER The artificial intelliACCURACY AND EVEM HORE POHER. plements of destruction. Since gence is especially you can't buy or sell any good when you send weapons, equipment or amyour mercs off to a munition, your only source of location on the map. supplies will be those scavEven if the location is enged from the battlefield. SALARYS 750 HEDERALD 5 HOST RCL COST hidden within a EXPLOSTWEST 10 2229 2685 At the end of each day, your MGILITY 90. HE HAHL CAL: 10 building and shroudHMS COST OK DEXTERTY PROBAL 15 HRYSHKSHIP 91 squad travels back to home MISDORA 83 EXP LEVEL: 2 4505 MERA ed in foliage, they'll base for rest and recuperation. usually find their way As you arrive, Jack will give BARRELS OF FUN Although you can't buy firearms, the adventure-game aspects of the to the location with you his no-holds-barred opingame allow you to modify existing weapons. out much trouble. ion of your efforts that day. There are plenty Kill lots of Santiof other details, too, covering even no's men and agthe most frivolous behavior. For gressively grab example, with one mercenary acterritory, and tive, holding down the CTRL key \"Securing the fresh Jack will congratwater supply was and left-clicking on another merulate you. Other definitely a step in the Fight direction. Let's hope cenary will cause the former to wise, expect a it doesn't take too long goose the latter, evoking an always tongue-lashing for us to feel the Jack benefit.\" humorous response. If you slip up The highlight during combat and accidentally of the game is have one mere target and shoot unarguably the another, you might see them trade 60 mercenaries TOTAL .. E R T TM  . a few choice invectives then begin you can recruit to HERC BEATISS SECTORS B ETE EXCELLENT blasting away at one another, MATIVE DEATHS T 1291 STREES OHNED your cause. They heedless of the raging fire fight ELEWW.DEATHS H ARVESTELLE come in all expearound them. Some mercs excel at rience levels and PAPPA JACK Jack is a grumpy character, but he does compliment you when warrantrepairing damaged equipment, alspecialties, ranged, such as when you secure the fresh water supply. lowing you to repair defective ing from the psyfirearms and perform custom chotic \"Unusually modifications. Ruthless\" Rueben (an unstable psyvidual Mercs, there is a complex inter-rechopath) to the enigmatic \"Mike,\" a lationship between individual mercs and GRAPHIC VIOLENCE world-class assassin rumored to be in Dalyour behavior. Some mercs won't work The graphics are crisp and detailed, allas in November, 1963. Each mercenary with other mercs, while some will dethough I'd hesitate to call them state of has his or her own unique voice and permand more money if you make them do the art. Most of the mercs are only differsonality. Ivan Dolvich-an ex-Red Army so. Finally, all of your mercs have differentiated by their hair color, often making ollicer-speaks entirely in Russian, and ing moral standards. Some will guard any it essential to click on a mere to find out all his text messages are displayed in money they find with their lives, while who he or she is. The isometric viewpoint Cyrillic script. The voice acting behind others will rob you blind and vanish the is extremely usable, but the angled topcach of these characters is superlative, next morning. down perspective means that it's hard to making each seem that much more real. Madlab obviously spent a great deal of spot soldiers hiding under clumps of Your mercs will speak on a variety of octime thinking through the many game brush and trees. The sound effects are casions, alerting you when they spot an features, resulting in several simple but very impressive, with a different sound enemy, exclaiming when they've found extremely useful design elements. For exeffect for each firearm. Bullets impact TOTAL CHRIGE OK 150 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JULY 1995 "


"ALONE THE DARK THE GOLD'S BEEN UNEARTHED, NOW ONLY SECRETS REMAIN... an incredible visual adventure for serious game players to enjoy by all acounts, they've succeeded. Dimension 3, April 1995 You'd better bring your shootin' iron and a night light.. Electronic Entertainment, May 1995 Alone in the Dark 3 is a PC GAMER worthy addition to the series, EDITORS no doubt about it. PC Gamer, May 1995 CHOICE ADDLE-UP FOR A 3-D ADVENTURE IN THE WILDEST WEST EVER As 1920's supersleuth Edward Carnby, you'll solve puzzles and uncover clues explaining the disappearance of Hill Century Studios film crew. Last seen on location in Slaughter Gulch where even tumbleweed fear to roam. You'll have to use your investigative expertise and your six shooter. Enjoy up to 70 hours of dodging outlaws on the way to your final showdown to save the young heroine, Emily Hartwood. So, sharpen your spurs and get ready for the draw... you can't imagine how wild the west can get. I-MOTION Your Wild West adventure is now available on PC CD-ROM. It's Windows compliant and Sound Blaster compatible. For product information or ordering, call: 800-443-3386. Circle Reader Service #70 "


"noua TDBTRAWWEOFYA BORT purchase machine and informative, written in a lively, inforguns, shotguns mal style. The manual is liberally sprinand grenades en kled with short jokes, puns and other INTERRUPT! masse would seridelightful diversions, making a trip to \"I's gots a loser heres'. Looking to puts him outta his miseries!\" ously knock game find information within its pages an enbalance out of kiltertaining diversion in itself. ter, but giving Aside from a few minor interface and gamers the oppordesign issues, JAGGED ALLIANCE is a sutunity to purchase perlative product. The complexity and the most basic, detail exhibited in all aspects of the game mundane supbreak new ground and the effective use plies—such as first of individual, computer-driven \"personaid kits, crowbars, alities.\" Although it is truly a genre-bustUSELESS canteens and othing product, it does fit into one category: TUFF TWALK The personalities of the mercs are drawn from crude stereoer staples—would Must-buy. types, but the dialogue and voice-acting add a human element to the game. go a long way toTHE EDITORS SPEAK wards making this targets with sickening thuds, usually folgame more accessible to novices. This JAGGED ALLIANCE lowed by a sharp grunt of pain from the supply problem is especially annoying RATING damaged individual. when your entire squad is heavily injured As impressive a product as JAGGED ALand you find yourself without a first aid PROS Multifaceted and deep. It's LIANCE is, there are a few minor gripes. kit. If you're low on funds (making it imgot detailed tactical combat, strategy Although you can locate, hire and transpossible to hire fresh mercenaries), and adventure game aspects, and loads of personality-all of which gel port some of the world's deadliest merceyou're locked into a week of continuous into an engrossing game. naries to a remote island, you are rest and recuperation for your injured CONS Minor glitches, and the interabsolutely unable to buy even the most grunts. face has its idiosyncrasies. basic equipment. Granted, letting gamers The 53-page manual is entertaining the The computer Chronicles As seen on PBS'S \"Computer Chronicles \"I don't want to read the manual!\" GAME DOCTOR NEVER USE A BOOT DISK AGAIN. NUI ENVUC TM Look famillar? You bought your PC. You pald extra for all that Important RAM. Now your new games say, \"INSUFFICIENT MEMORY!\" Wrong! You have plenty of memory -It just needs to be configured properly. You have three choices; study your DOS manual for two days, try to make a boot disk that works, OR BUY THE GAME DOCTOR AND START PLAYING IN TWO MINUTES! EASY TO INSTALL Type 'Install' and you're done. The Game Doctor scans your system for Information about your hardware and uses it to bulld effective startup files. COMPLETELY AUTOMATIC After The Game Doctor Is Installed, every time you start your computer you will be presented with a menu of configuration choices (e.g. Windows, DOS, Games, or Custom). You just pick the configuration that fits what you want to do and you're set! INCLUDES CUSTOM CONFIGURATION BUILDER The Game Doctor's custom configuration builder has easy switches which allow you to construct your own configurations. These custom configurations can automatically launch programs right from startup -all you do is pick the Item from a menul JUST $19.95 ORDER NOW!: 1-800-558-6674 Circle Reader Service #195 152 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD  JULY 1995 "


"the Power behind the Power could be you! In the next energy starved millennium, you will command one of four empire building, power grabbing megacorps. POWERHOUSE These cutthroat behemoths will stop at nothing to control mankind's vital THESE energy supplies. POWER  BEHIND Explore, build, expand, and THE plot your way to global POWER energy dominance. Only one can triumph as the undisputed PowerHouse. FIGHT FOR FUEL And the others...? Check out the recycling bin. Dronary Y Corp Tel ESS Features: 9 Energy types Superb SVGA graphics Windows CD-ROM only Impressions  Live video: ENN News!  Speech  Cutting edge R&D Build and Explore Global economic and political models 1995 Impressions Software, Inc. 222 Third Street, Suite 0234 Cambridge Massachusetts 02142 IBM PC screenshots may vary Circle Reader Service #78 "


"CD ROM HEADQUARTERS WISSION IBM DISKS 38 44 47 38 Panzer General Perfect General 2 Raiden Rise of the Triad Robinson's Requiem Sim Tower Stalingrad StarTrek NextGeneration The Dig Theatre of Death Third Reich Tie Fighter Defender of Empire Timeout Sports Baseball Victory at Sea X Com Terror from the Deep 5th Fleet 7th Guest 11th Hour Absolute Zero Advanced Civilization Alone in the Dark 3 Arkania 2 Star Trail Avalanche Battle Isle 2200 Beyond Squad Leader BioForge Blood Bowl Blood Net Bureau 13 Buried in Time Celebrity Poker Comanche Command & Conquer Conqueror Creature Shock Cyber Judas Cyberia CyberWar Cyclones Daedalus Encounter Dark Forces Death Gate Deep Space 9 Hunt Descent Discworld Dominus Doom II Hell On Earth Dragon Lore 44 Flight Light Plus 69 Full Throttle 41 Gadget 38 Hammer of the Gods 50 Harvester 44 Hell Cyberpunk Thriller 29 Heretic 38 High Seas Trader 54 Inferno CD 50 Inherit The Earth 37 Ishar 3:7 Gates Infinity 50 Jagged Alliance 44 Jorune Alien Logic 50 King's Quest VII 33 Knights of Xentar 40 Lands of Lore 2 50 Legend of Kyrandia 3 48 Litil Divil 50 Lords of Midnight 52 Maabus 50 MadDog 2 Lost Gold 50 Magic Carpet 50 Mortal Kombat II 50 Ms. Metaverse 54 Myst 37 NHL Hockey '95 43 Noctropolis 44 NovaStorm 40 Panzer General 38 PGA Tour Golf 486 46 Phantasmagoria 50 Python's Waste Time 41 30 32 Quantum Gate 2 42 Quest for Glory IV 50 Raiden 44 Renegade 59 Retribution 50 Reunion 50 Rise of the Triad 40 Shadow of Comet 49 Space Pirates 49 Star Crusader 38 Star Reach 47 Star Trek Tech Manual 44 StarTrek Next Gen 49 Stonekeep 43 System Shock 46 Tank Commander 44 The Scroll 33 Third Reich 50 Transport Tycoon 38 Under a Killing Moon 38 US Navy Fighters 47 USS Ticonderoga 50 VRStarter Kit 1 37 Voyeur 52 Wild Blue Yonder 39 Wing Commander III 50 Wings of Glory 38 Wolf Hunt or Hunted 44 X Com Terror Deep 50 X-Wing Collector's 56 Zephyr 44 38 33 42 1830 5th Fleet Across the Rhine Advanced Civilization Alien Legacy Arctic Baron Arkania 2 Star Trail Blackbeard Blake Stone: Planet Strike Breach 3 BreakThru Cannon Fodder Cyber GO CyClones Dark Forces Deep Space 9 The Hunt Descent Doom II Hell On Earth DreamWeb Dungeon Master 2 Fighter Wing Cd-Rom Flight Light Forgotten Castle Awakening Front Lines Heroes Might & Magic Hexx Hired Guns Jorune Alien Logic Lands of Lore 2 Lords of the Realm MechWarrior 2 MechWarrior 2 Data Disk 1 Metal and Lace Nerves of Steel 38 27 44 THRUSTMASTER 56 E-MEDIA $109 $89 F-16 Flight Control Weapons Control II Rudder Pedals Flight Control MK1 T-1 Driving Pedals $99 $119 22 VIRTUAL VALERIE 2 TI ak The queen of cybersex is back. The ultimate in cybererotism and the embodiment of every red blooded technophiles deepest disires. Sophisticated 3D modeling. erotic sound effects, create a mind blowing extravaganza. Only $39! Ms. Metaverse Go Digital $14 Club Cyberlesque $24 $37 dl-Time uses state of the art, patent pending technology to make your CD-ROM drive perform as fast as your hard disk. Access time is lowered considerably, and d-Time makes Full Motion Video clips flow more smoothly and more realistically. ONLY S49 3 GREAT CD ROMS Sample A Bundle VIRTUAL VEGAS VAMPIRE'S AROI SANDER  A Taste of Erotica 2  Arcus  Pixis Sampler  Virtual Vibrations KISS CD $16 Element's of Desire $34 Hot Slots $37 $39 Phone (201) 783-3600  Fax (201) 783-3686  FAXBACK Line (201) 783-3374 800-999-7995 Send Orders To: Mission Control 7 Oak Place. CGW0795  Montclair, NJ 07042. MC, Visa, Discover, Checks & Money Orders. Checks held 14 days. Please include Phone # /Shipping $7 OVERNIGHT (most areas) Int'l Shipping $25. E-Mail MissionCD@aol.com "


"INTERACTIVE NEW MACHINE PUBLISHING Samurai Pervert See Some, 3 Some 49 SS2: Megababes from Ajia 49 Spy Club 54 Streets of New York 54 Stripper P.I. 49 Texas Table Dance 49 Tokyo Nightlife 49 Tokyo Nightlife MAC 49 Treasures of Spice 39 Vampire's Kiss 49 Virgins 49 Virgins 2 39 Virtual Director 39 Virtual Photoshoot 1 19 Virtual Photoshoot 2 49 Virtual Photoshoot 3 59 Virtual Sex 49 Virtual Valerie 2 49 Virtually Yours 2 49 Vivid Sampler 14 Wanderlust 49 Wet'n Wild Adult Movie Almanac Adventures of Sman CyberStrip Blackjack CyberStrip Poker Dirty Debutantes DD2 Asian Invasion Dream Machine Electric Swing Fantasies Interactive Fantasy Chamber Girlfriend Teri Hot Wire Hot Wired Lingene Interactive Maddam's Family Monte Carlo Intimate Nasty Parts Nightwatch 2 PeepShow Interactive Pixis Adult Sampler Private Prison FREE! ADULT CD SAMPLER. 89999888888888 SEYMORE, BUTY 2 CD Only $49 6 PACK The best way to get started with Adult CD Roms. Set includes: Digital Dancing, Legends IV, Biker Babes, Legends of Pom II, Insatiable & CD Sampler! WHAT A DEAL! $49 IQ With a One Year Subscription to: Your Guide To Adult CDs. The Hottest News, Views, Reviews Go behind the scenes! Find out what's really going on! INTERACTIVE TFUL Touch The Future! New Wave Hookers $29 Asian Invasion $49 Dirty Debutantes $39 Girls On Girls $39 Adventures Seymore $39 Private Video Mag $34 Model Wife Hidden Obsessions $24 Traci I Love You $24 NIGHTWATCH $24 DICHOME IS THE INTERFACE V2: SPACE SUNCES RENS SIRENS You venture into the domain of the alluring and beautiful Space Sirens only to realize that you've been entrapped in VR chamHOUS ber to fulfill their every desire. State of the Art CD $44 Incredible Savings at ONLY $9.95 for an entire YEAR! Say YES now INTERACTIVE QUARTERLY VRSOY Dream Machine $49 NightWatch II $49 MOVIES & VIRTUAL VIXENS 2 VIRTUAL VIXENS PART 1 CD PICTURES YES! Start my subscription to Interactive Quarterly for $9.95 & send my FREE Adult CD sampler: Select One Sampler: New Machine Pixis Interactive Digital Playground Name $44 Touch Me, Feel Me Urotsujidoji Legend Overfend 49 Adventures of Mikki Finn 39 Virtual Vibrations Sampler 14 Always 29 Wild Innocence Amorous Asian Girls 39 WPINK TV Babes Illustrated 2 Baby's Got Butt Blondage Amateur Models Blor de Justice Amateur Models 2 Candy Snacker American Girls College Girls Asian Ladies 2 CyberStuds Bet Your Sweet Booty Darker Side of Shayla Boyfriend 1 Daydreams Busty Babes 2 Defending Your Sex Life Busty Babes 3 Elements of Desire Elite American Models 1 Ginger Lynn: The Movie Elite European Models 1 Girls Doin Gints 2 Elite European Models 2 Lady in Spain Endless Beach Babes 24.95 Lethal Passion Garo Picture Disc Collection 24 Mind Teazzers Girls of 3. Stephen Hicks Night Creatures Girls of Vivid Ontental Action Girls of Vivid 2 Other Side Chelsea 29 Girls on Girls Private Video Magazine #1 39 High Volume Nudes Racquel Released Melon Man 1 Rise of the Roman Empress 39 Private Photodise #1 Sex Select A Pet Sex Over 40 29 Sizle Screen Saver SuperStars Japanese Porn 49 Tabloid Beauties The Dinner Party Tokyo Glamour Girls MAX THE NAUGHTY DOG $59 Ever dream of being invisible? Take full control of a ultra sophisticated remotely mechanical dog equipped with a video transmitter and advanced surveillance system. Get away with the unimaginable through the eyes of a cute and cuddly cybernetic creation. 88888888 283&&& Address Stare Zip SCISSORS N STONES Journey into a realm where beautiful women are available to challenge you in a game of chance. $29 NEURODANCER NEURO DANCER CD $39 Birthdate o Visa Discover O Check 823 29 Land exp. MISSION CONTROL Signature PIXIS CLASSICS! PIXIS SAMPLER $14 BUTTMAN'S VACATION $24 HOUSE OF SLEEPING BEAUTIES $24 PASSION FILES $29 SEX & MONEY $29 Send $5.00 for our 32 page all Adult CD Rom Color Cataloguel Over 21. Only \"Milto: IQ Magazine, 551 Valley Road, DW0795, Montclair, NJ 07043. EMail Mag@aol.com Fax to 201.783.3686. taxing, please include info from above na white cover sheet. Circle Reader Service #96 Circle Reader Service #93 "


"REVIEW REVIEW Working On The Railroad Avalon Hill's 1830: One Sleek, Powerful Locomotive by Bob Proctor GAMR I NFO HISTORY STOOK TRANS 0 STATION HERE EXISTS A BREED OF GAMERS ethical position. Playing against WHO PREFER CONTESTS WITH NO the computer version makes this ELEMENT OF CHANCE, WHERE THE choice somewhat simpler, since it outcome is based on pure skill. doesn't remember your backSome devote their lives to a single stabbing methods quite so well as game like Chess or Go. Others search for your gaming buddies. new challenges that haven't been analyzed for several hundred years, games that lack BUILDING RAIL EMPIRES the symmetry of classical board games Winning a game of 1830 is a while retaining good play balance. TIES THAT BIND The president of the B&O considers playing matter of acquiring the greatest This latter group will benefit most from another track tile in order to forge a more lucrative route. Net Worth. This seemingly sim1830, the computer adaptation of the ple goal requires a careful blend Avalon Hill board game first published in THE AGE OF STEAM of strategies in several areas. You 1986. Very faithful to the original, 1830 1830 was the year that the Baltimore & must invest wisely in the stocks of the cormay be played by up to six human railOhio Railroad began commercial service porations. If you acquire enough to beroad magnates, or with as many as four using trains pulled by steam locomotives come the President, you can operate the computer opponents. The computer plays (as opposed to \"hay-burners\"), a catalyst railroad to make a profit, finding the best well—so well, in fact, that devoted 1830 which initiated a period of railroad conpaying routes and planning for advances board gamers will want this program just struction in the populated Northeastern in technology. There is never a best strateto sharpen their skills! U.S. At first, these were small private railgy as everything depends on which railroads, owned by a single individual and roads are active and which choices the 1830: RAILROADS AND ROBBER typically only 20 to 40 miles long. It was other players are making. Nor can you foBARONS quickly discovered that building larger cus on a single area and do well: I have railroads to connect major cities was bePrice: $49.95 had, at different times, the best stock portSystem yond the resources of even the richest infolio, the highest paying route, and the Requirements: dividuals. Something new was needed for most cash on hand and still lost to a player IBM compatible such large projects and the Corporation with better balance. 386 SX or better, was born, allowing one man to control The basic mechanism for getting money 4MB RAM, VGA graphics, 2 MB the wealth of many stockholders. is to buy the majority share in a corporahard drive space, The men of vision, the Empire tion, run it to produce revenue, and then, mouse. Supports Builders, thus gained the power they pay dividends each turn. Paying dividends Adlib, General MIDI, Gold Sound needed to connect centers of manufacalso raises the price of the stock, so not Standard, PAS16, Roland and Sound Blaster sound cards. turing with resources and markets. Of only are you pocketing the cash, but the # of Players: 1-6 (single computer only) course, the power and wealth also attractvalue of your stock portfolio is rising. One Protection: Manual look-up ed men of greed, the Robber Baronsgood strategy is to try to drive the price of Designers: Steve Barcia and Russ Williams Vanderbilt, Gould, Fisk, etc.-who are Original Boardgame Designer: Bruce your stock as high as possible. But you Shelley represented in the game. In fact, 1830 cannot own more than 60% of the stock of Publisher: The Avalon Hill Game Company does such a good job of recreating this any corporation under normal conditions, Baltimore, MD tumultuous era that one of the major so other players will also benefit from your (800) 254-9200 facets of the game is choosing your own well-managed corporation. They also have Matheus RM TIS 156 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1995 "


"Kingspoint Roleplaying software that makes your game real... and real easy. e ConTeslo W C GATICE King Fahd Search tselp Well You 17MM Kingspoint for Windows is a living city for your PC MC Lala that makes it easy to immerse your players in an exciting adventure environment. Kingspoint for Windows is a sophisticated Data Manager, Game Master's Assistant, Creativity Tool, Custom Dice/Form Manager, NPC Behavior Editor, and More! When your players face a Game Master armed with the power of Kingspoint for Windows they face Supreme Organization, Unbound Creativity, and a world of richly detailed fantasy Net 2 GO GITICE T Search Help beelden (cale BPG E Hallora Adelante Aber w ww CHRISTI EN LA BIG E Ses ete Nowada TypeAppR HOURTED CITY UVERE ABO2k Nach Athens 200 W FNCO HAM Closet CwOverlay ! IMWISS Map Navigation allows players to adventure in the cities thousands of locations one by one in a realistic manner. With comprehenEsive Building and Character ACO C O 0317 Management, no longer will you lose history, information, or identity. Forget rewriting character sheets; advanced printing options make updating quick and easy. ) Nire Boseru Or DO The Dice Manager allows you to create, save, modify, and insert dice rolls for any gaming system. Create Ho w 12:17AM.am unlimited forms for Character Sheets, Histories, or any Copa topic needed! With the NPC Character Editor, the city comes to life as you define when and where Characters LETA d appear, how they look, and what happens when they arrive. Create, Import, and Attach Graphics and Sounds to any Location, Character, or Timed Event. Multimedia Tools add sensory richness for compelling realism. GoldTree Engin seves te I dit les GO VACHCOAT Direct Sales: 1-800-746-3772 International Sales: 214-690-9195 Information: 504-833-7678 Retailers: Please contact your favorite game distributor to place your order today. ROLEPLAYING SOFTWARE COMPANY P.O. Box 24819 New Orleans, La. 70184-4819 Internet: GoldTreel@AOL.COM System Requirements: 386 or Higher, Windows 3.1, 8mb of Ram, 10mb HD space Circle Reader Service #239 "


"307 930066707662 118 119 120 1220226 G O !.70 2690 100 111 120 15.5 1201005 TON BE3 3 2176210 100 110 120 130 BE the power to sell your stock at any time. If you find it difficult to keep track of will keep 1830 fresh for a long, long time. driving the price down. Of course, you can what's left, you can play with unlimited do the same to them. tiles as an option. Stations are placed only BIG STEEL RAIL Operating a railroad means building in large cities and once a city is filled with GONNA CARRY ME HOME routes. The 1830 map shows the Northstations from rivals, a railroad can trace a The production values of this game are eastern United States and Southern Canaroute into it but the route must end there. excellent. The manual is colorful, clear da, bounded by Montreal, Richmond, An additional complication comes from and informative, with numerous illustraBoston and Cleveland, divided into large obsolescence. When the first Four-Train is tive screens and examples of play to go hexagons. Each corporation is allowed to purchased, all Two-Trains are retired and along with the biographical information lay one \"tile\" of track into a hex per tuin. when the first Six is purchased, all Threes on the Robber Barons represented in the This costs nothing unless you are the first disappear. So, if you choose to invest heavgame. The programming is solid, and the to place a tile on a mountain ($120) or rivily in Twos and Threes, you can increase only bug I know of is a rare one that allows er ($80) hex. Each railroad starts at its your early revenue but pretty soon the cora computer player to buy too many private home city and generally builds toward the poration will be low on cash when the companies and end up with a negative nearest town. Once two or more towns are Twos and Threes go away. cash amount. It's infrequent, but if this connected by track, the railroad can buy a Once your corporation is on its feet and happens you can either restart or contintrain that can run between them collecting paying dividends, you must find someue—the AI will eventually work back to a revenue. Towns and cities both grow in STOCK MARKET positive figure. value as new tiles replace old. 71 7602300112212 2 00225 250 275 300 325 350 As mentioned at the beginAt first, trains can only connect two adjaning, the computer plays very, cent towns, so runs are short and revenues very well. There are four levels of low. Once all of these \"Two-Trains\" are difficulty: Easy, Average, Hard, purchased, Three-Trains become available. CORP PRICE PAR REV TREAS and Hardest. On the Easy set150 100 300 731 Although more expensive, these are capaBOERNO 50 60 160 60 100 290 ting, the computer plays the 105 ble of connecting many of the big cities DO stock market aggressively but 100 330 (with one intervening station). After Three100 100 80 doesn't manage trains well. It will 67 200 Trains come Fours, lives, and Sixes, each 67 120 483 often be possible to put a comincreasingly more expensive. Alier Sixes puter player in a position where come Diesels, which can make runs of unTRACKING STOCK PRICES The familiar boardgame perspective he has one train for two railroads limited length. These can be big earners, of the stock market can be selected to assist you in your next and continually sells it back and but you have to plan carefully as the long \"robber baron\" move. forth never collecting any revruns can be blocked by your rivals. enue. About the most \"cheating\" Blocking can be done in two ways, with thing profitable to do with your money. the computer players ever do is that they all tiles or with stations. Not all combinations Generally, this will mean investing in stock buy stock in each others' railroads but nevof routes are represented on the tiles, so of the other active corporations or possibly er in yours-an accusation we could often you try to place them to ensure the confloating a new one. It is when you become levy against human opponents as well. Also, nections you need and prevent those your President of two or more corporations that on rare occasions as you near the endgame the possibilities for the really dirty and things become more complex, the YOUR SHARES INITIAL OFFERING BANK tricks arise. How about using all of computer may not calculate the most opti$75 HARI PER 567 PHIN $75 PBB the money from one corporation to mal revenue producing route. $426, NYC 5100 DE NYC $126 MYC buy a Diesel, then selling it for $1 to 1830 has made the transition from table another railroad you control? This is to computer very well. If you like pure $100 .0 especially sweet if you can then dump strategy games, this game will give you $75 IS $67.3982 the stock of the first, forcing the Preshundreds of hours of pleasure. 11111111 2ERIE idency on another player and leaving LEONEE EES that unfortunate soul with the probTHE EDITORS SPEAK DELEN : 013281 lem of buying a train. FUNDS: 1830: RAILROADS & ROBBER BARONS $280 LIMIT: 8 One of the nicest features of the R OUND PASSORTE game is the ability to customize it. SURPRISE AND DEMAND The stock market can be a great RATING D There are 12 options to modify the place to invest, but watch out for rivals dumping stock. basic game, most of which are popuPROS A fanatically faithful rendition lar \"house rules\" already developed of an elegantly-designed boardgame. competitors want. As in the board game, for the board game. Giving the Bank The computer opponent can eat the there are limited numbers of each tile, so best gamers for lunch. more or less money allows you to adjust CONS There are a few Al flaws that you can block a rival by using, possibly the game's length, and along with the opcan unduly help or hinder an expert even wasting, the last tile of a certain type. tions for randomized maps and revenues, player. $112 $75 158 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1995 "


"1-800-983-4321 SPECTRUM ELECTRONICS 46 8 35 & 15 34 Hel S 19 32 19 19 25 39 23 24  19 46 3782 19 39 28 24 colsprayco Condor 7CD3.5) 15 15 P.O. BOX 6295 OPEN: 6AM-11PNI PST EVERYDAY SALINAS, CA AIR SHIPPING $4 93912-6295 OR UPS GRND SHIPPING $2 CALL FOR CURRENT PRICES AND (ENTIRE SOFTWARE ORDER) PRODUCTS PLUS $2 HANDLING SOFTWARE ORDERS OVER $125 RECEIVE FREE AIR SHIPPING!! SPECIALS Award Winning Wargate (CD/3.5) 39 Frontines (CO2,5) Operation Crusader CD3.5) Utime 7 Serpent 158(3.5) 24 Cyberia Aegis (CD) B-17 Flying Fortress (35) Full Throttle CD) Operation Europe (CO3.5) Utina 8 Pagan(35) 25 Cyclones Alen Logic Jorune CD) Bate Bugs CD35) 3936 FX Fighter (CD) CALL Orion Conspiracy CD) Utime &Pagan w/SpeechCD) 32 Darkseed Carier Surko(35) Batle Isle 2200CD) Gackpit(CD) Oupost CD 3.5) Utima Underworld 1 & 2CD) 30 Descent Clash of Slek3.5) Beneath a Steel SkyCD) Gateway 2CD35) Panzer General0/3.5) 39123 Utimate Domain(CD 3.5) 26/33 Doom 1 Batle Bock Cyclones CD35) Best Microprose CD) Gazilionare (CD) Pertad General 100) Utmate Footbal CD) Doom 2 Batle Book Betrayal at Kondor Day of the Tentacle/CD3.5) /3.5) Gemfre(35525) 19/15 Pertadt General 1 Bunde/35 Undy a King Moon CD) Dracula Urleashed Genghis Khan 23.5) Bg300) Dominus CD) Pered General 2CD) US Navy Fighters CD Dragon Lore Bidor (CD) Dragonsphere/CD3.5) 19/16 Gobins 3/CD 3.5 PGA Tour Gol|CO) USS Toondiroga CD) Dunyon Master 2 Blackthome(CD3.5) Goldd the Americas(3.5 25 Phantasmagoria(cb) Dream Wet/Cb3.5) Ve a part3.5) Empre Deluxe Fight Simulator Toola/CD3.5 Back Beard CD/3.5) Gone Fishin(CD) Prbal Arcade Cb) Virtual PooXCD) F-14 Fleet Defender Great War 1914-1835 Blake Stone. Pintstrke(CD/3.5) Grandest Fleet|CD3.5) Pinbal Fantas.rsCD3.5) V for Vidoy 1,23,0 4100) Front Page Basebal or Footal Blood Bowl CD) Great Naval Baltes 3CD) Prides Gold CD25) Voyeur(CD) Hapoon Classic Colection CD) Gabriel Krigt Bloodnet(035) Gunship 2000(3.5) 23 Pizza Tycoon (CD35) Indana Jones Fale Atlantico s.5) Wals d Rome(3.5) Harpoon 2 Hammer at the Gods/CD) Body Blows 3.5 Porto Attack 35) King's Quest 500/35) WardatCD35) Hartal 3 Coledon (CD) Body Cound CD/3.5) 19 Primal Rage CD Pacic War(35) Wargame Cans Sat 2:TANKS(3.5) 39 Heretic Bandead 13(CD) Harchal 4C035) Prince di Persa 23.5) Panzer General35) Warors 2(35) Hislar Breach 3CD.3.5) Harpoon 2&aditions CALL PrivateedSerie CommCD) Rebel AssaulCb) Warlords 2 Soenaro Blot(3.5) Japad Aliance Brett Hul Hockey 95CD) Harvester(CD) Pro League Baseball35) Sam & Max Hit the Road CD 3.5) Wax Works(5:25) Kings Quest 7 Bulog Compiaton Pack CD) Hor to the Throne(3.5) Psychotron-WIN(CD) Te Fighter/3.5) Lands of Lore Bureau 13(CD13.52 When Two Worlds War(3.5) Heroes Might & Magio CD) 42 Pure Wargame CD) War in Russa(3.5) Leod d Kyranda 18 Cannon Fodder(CD) High Sans Trader(C Wing Commander 1 DaCO) 35) 40 Quantum Gale CD) W. Commander 182 D (CD) Legends of Valur Carrier Stie(3.5) Hired Gurs(35) QuaterPole CD EA CLASSICS Wing Com 3CD) Magic Cande 3 Carers at War (35) Horde CD35) Quarantine (CD) Wng Comm Amanda Cox 5) Martian Drsarts Caries at War Cons. K:35) Incredible Machine 2/CD3.5) 4237 Quest for Gory 235 Chuck Yeager's Ar Combat CD Indana Jones Fate Atants(CD35) 19 Wings d Goyco) Carriers at War 2/3.5) Master of Magic Quest for Goy335 Lost Fles d Sherbck Holmes CD) Master d Oron Wizarty 43.5) Castrs 2CD) Indy Car Racing(3.5) Quest for Gory 40D35) PGA Go World Tour Tennis CD) Mat & Magic World d Xeen Indanapois Motor Speed(3.5) Ceo Tales Baby Evil Eye CD) CALL Wizardy Triogy 23.5) Raidan(CD) Popubus 2Powermanger(CD) MS Space Simulator 1.0 Chalony of the 5 Realms 3.5) Indy Car Circuts (35) WON(CO/3.5) Ralroad Tycoon (3.5) Prvator(CD). Inhert the Earth (035) Chaos EngineCD) Wof 30 ManiaCD) Myst Railroad Tycoon Duri(3.5) SEAL Team CD) Civilization 3.5) Iron Assaut Mech Force(CO) Noctropolis Wol 30.Spear of DestinyCD) Reach for the Stars(35) Shadow casterCD) Outpost CIVNET(CD) Ion Cross/CD/3.5) R Alara Blade of Destry(35) Wolension Missions 102(35) Space HukCOL Iron Hob/CD Cvization Rh Tyc DxCO) R AkataSa Tai Paac Site Playtester Woodrit & Sabble CD)' 35 SSN-21 Seawol(CD) Ishar 3003.5) Rebel Assaut CD) CM WarCo) Panzer General Wrath of the Gods (CD) Strike Commander CD) Isle of the Dead CD3.5) X-Com 1C035) Relentless: Twinsen's Adv.CD) Clash of Steel (35) Syndicate PlCD) Pered General 2 X-Com 2 Terror Deep CD 3.5) Colonization (CD.3.5) Ufima 1-6CD) 4643 Jagod Alance(CD) Populous 1 & 2 Renagade Jacobs StarCD) X-Wng(CD3.5) Powermonger Utabgs/CO3.5) Jamm (CD) Comanche Missions CD) Retum of the Phantom CD) X-Wing 1:Imporal Persut (35) 4943 Prince d Persia 1 & 2 Jefighter 3 CD3.5) Wing Commander Academy/CD) Command & Conquer CD Retum to RingworldCD) 19 Jewels of the Oracle (CD) Command H0/35 Privateer Playtaster's Wing Commander 2 Deluxe.co) X-Wing 28-Wing(35) Reunion CD3.5) 29 Prophecy of the Shadow Commander Blood Co Johnny Mnemonic(CD) Zephyr (CD) Rise of the Robots/CD3.5) Companions d' Xanthico3.5) SSI CLASSICS Quest for Glory 14 Jump Raven CD) Zeppeln(cb) 35/30 Rise of the Trad/CD/3.5) Jutand/CD) Road from Sunter Accomato:(3.5) 33 Zorro(CD) A Artana Blade Destiny Kngdom Far Reaches CD) R Arkana Star Trai Rabinson's RequemCD15 3430 IBM USED CD'S ONLY 15 Batle of Arbetem Kingmaler(3.5) Creature Shock CD) Romance 3 Kings 335) Rebel Assaut 39 Battes of Napoleon Crtal PathCD) Kngs Quest 1-6CD) Rules d Engagement 2(35) Retum to Zork 32 Condict Mode East 15 Crystal Calbum/3.5) Kings Quest CD) Sabre Team Cb35) Savage Empire 35/30 Tu Gues (CD) 15 Cyberba(CD) Getysburg Tuming Point Klik & PlayCD35) Sam & Max Hit the Road CD 3.5) Aces of the Pacha 19 Shadow of the Comet ) Great Naval Battesi addons Cyber Judas CD ADD Dark Sun 1 or 2CD) Knights of XontarCD 3.5) 10ea Secret Monkey Island 1(C035) 25/20 Shadow Sorcerer Kampioruppe 15 Lards of Loro 1C0/3.5) SimCty 2000 CyberWarCD) Sort Chy35) ADSD. Menzoberanzan(CD) Mech Brigade 15 Cycle Mana(Cb) Legend of Kyrarda 1C035) Shadow of Cam CD) ADSD.RavenloftCD) SSN-21 Seewol 18 No Greater Gloy D'Day Operation Overlord CD) Lond d Kyranda 2CD25 Shadow of the Cometico) Star Crusader Betrayal at Kondor (CD) Rebel Charge af Chidamaug 15 Dacialus Enmuter(CD) Lnd d Kaa 3CD) Sherlock Hmes Cons. Del 1-300) 19 Star Trek 25 Dark Lapons/CD) 15 Red Lighting Daemonsgate (CD3.5) Legends of Valour(3.5) Sd'Als Increoble ToonsCD 3.5) 40/37 Star Trek Judgement Rites Day d the TertaciaCD) Second Front Dark Forces CD) Legions(35) Sege(3.5) Gabriel KnightCD Sarlight 1or 2 Day of the Tentacle CD 35) Shich Grant's Trai Lesuro Sut Larty 1-6CD) 13ea 40/19 Gobins 120 3Cb). SmartCD 3.5) Stone keep Dawn Patrol CD3.5) 43/39 Losure Sut Lamy 6CD35) Sons of Lberty 19 SmCry 2000 Bonus CD Great Naval Baties 2CD) Ste Corner Deathgate(cb) Lemmings 1 82 CD Star Command SimEarth (CD3.5) 40/19 HolCD) Summoning Slekar Crusade Decisive Bits Civil War 1,206 313.) 25 Lhis 386 ProC035) Indiana Jones Atlantis(CD) System Shock SimTower (CD43.5) Defend the Alamo(315) Lhis 386 Course Disks CALL Slom Agnes Europe Te Fighter 47 King's Quest 7(CD) Sam Cây CD Lode RunnerC035) Definive Wargame Colection(CD) 3936 Wargate Construction Set Ulima 5 or 6 Lebure Sut Lary 6CD) Space AceCD) Warship Dela V[CD3.5) LO.T.R & Two Towers 3.5) Ulima 7 Part 1 of 2 Lord of the Rings CD) Space Quest 1-SCD) Westen Front Descent|CD 3.5) Lors d MidnightCD) Space Ouest 6CD) 45 Nascar Racing CD) Utire 7 Part 1tima Underworld 1 Dscples Lorus of the Palm CD3.5) Steel(3.5) Spaceward H40035 Utma 8 Outpost(CD) CALL SCENARIO DISKS DiscworldCD/3.5) Lost Eden(CD) Panzer General CD) Uitma Avatar Adventures/4,5,6) SSI Strategy Colactono) Doom 1 8140 Now Levels 35) Lost Treasures Infocom SSI Fantasy Fest (0) Polce Quest 4CD) Utima Underworld 102 Batles of Napoleon 16 Doom 1 4340 Now Levels 3.5) Lost Viking (3.5) Stalingrad CD/3.5) Rebel AssaultCD) 36 Under a Kiling Moon Betles of Napoleon 1-3 1060 Lucas Arts Adv. Pack3.5) Doom 2CD)3.5) Star Control 1 & 2 CD) 19 Rehim to Zorkico) Veid Darkness Wargame Cris Set 2 Tanks 1-22 15 ca Doom Companion(CD) Lunicus(CD) SimCty Enhanced CD) Star Crusader(CD)3.5) 32728 Wing Commander Amada Maabus CD) Doom ManiaCD) IBM NEW SinCty 2000CD) Doornday Colection CD) Star Fight 1 Wing Commander 1 & 2 Machiavelli the Prince CD) 23.9 15ea Star Crusadeco Star Legons 3.5 Wrg Corrimander 3 Dracula UnBashed CD) Mad Dog 1 or 2CD) Wolf CD) 11h Hour CD) Wngs d Glory 55 Star Reach(03.5) Dragon's Lar 1 CD) Magic Cande 3CD) xcom ico) 18304C0/3.5) Wizardry 6. Bane Cosmic Forge Dragon Lore(CD) S.T: Judgement ResCD135) 45/35 Magic Carpet CD) 1942 Pacic Ar WarC03.5) Wizard 7. Crusaders Dark 46/42 Dune 235) Magic Carpet Hidden Words CD) Star Trek Omnipedia/CD) HINT BOOKS 1944 Aques the Rhine (CD) X-COM Dungeon Master 2 CD 35) Star Trek Tech Manual CD) Master of Magic/CD 3.5 11th Hour 9/10 PAK Vd for 2(Cb) X-WING EA Simulation Pak CD) Star Trek: TNG(CD) Master of Orion (CD/3.5 ADULT 1942Pacic Ar War STH Fed (CD3.5) 36 EA Sports Pak(CD) Star Trek 25thCD 3.5) MechWarrior 2 CD3.5) 39/30 Absolute Zero CD) 7th Guest EA Top 10 Pak 1 a 2CD) MegaDoom 1(CD) 600 Levels Street Fighter 2(35) 15 AD&DAI Caqim 12 Aces Coledors Edition CD) A-Vsion 1,2 a 3/CD) Stet Fighter 2 CD Packco) Ecstatca CD3.5) MegaDoom 200) AD&D Champions Krynin Aoss d the Deep(035) 11 46/43 Subwar 2050 CD3.5) Bubble Butts (CD) pia Dene 35. 36132 works w Doom 12 o Hercc) AD&D Cuse Azure Bonds 11 ADID 9 Game Cordion(CD) Celebrity Nudes(CD) Summer Winter Chalings (CD) 35 Empire Da Master Ed CD) Merchant Prince 3.5) ADD Dark Sun 1 12 2 Summoning(3.5) Cub C ADD Colectors Ed 2525 arlesque CD) Metal Mares(3.5) 18 ESPN NBA 36 Atome 60354236 11 AD&D:Eye Beholder 1 of 2 Cyberstrip Poker a BladjackCD) AD&D Colectors Ed 3 CD3.5) Super Hero League CD/3.5) 39ea ESPN Sunday Night FootaCD) 42 18 Metal & Lace(3.5 AD&D Dungeon Hack(35) 12 AD&D.Eye of the Beholder 3 46/43 18 Dream Machine CD) Metaloch Earth SeigeCD13.5) Evasive Action (3.5 Super Stadt Fortr 2 Turbo CD35) 32 11 AD&D Gateway Svg Frontier AD&D Eye Beholder 1.2, GO Digtal CD Magazine #1[CD) 3/3,5) 16 SVGA Harrier(CD835) M&M Clouds of Xeen(3.5) Exploration CD) 12 AD&D: Menzoberanzan/D/3.5 47/39 F4 Fleet Defender CD135) AD&D. Menzoberanzan Syndicale/35) Hot Sbs(CD) MM Darkside d Xeen(3.5) AD&D Pooks of Darkness 11 AD&D Ravenibt: Stone Prophet (CD)45 System Shock/CD3.5 Maximum Moments 11 o 2CD) MM.World d Xeen(CD) F-117A Sisath Fighter35) AD&D Three Words (CD) AD&D Pools d Radiance 11 Neurodancer(CD) Fabon 3.C3.5) 25 Mortal Kombat 135) Tank Commander CD) AD&D Ravenih 12 ADD:United Adv. 25). 12 Mortal Kombat 2 COX3.5) 18 Task Force 194235) New Wave Hookers 1 o 2CD) Falcon 30 Tomado(CD) Advanced Civization CD 3.5) MTV Club Dsed CD) Falcon Gold CD) Terminator 229 Dx CD) 11 ADSD Socre Siver Blades Nightwatch 2CD) Abe De Camo/35) 46 Mysl/CD) Felds of Gbry3.5) 11 46 Terminal Velochy (CD) Perthouse Interactive 12 of 3CD) AD&D Trezzure Savage Frontier Al Havoc Controller (Co) FIFA SoccerCD/3.5 NASCARICD3.5) 47/39 Theme Park/CD 3.5 Abga Guardand the Foel 15 Seymore Buts 1 2100) Alen Broed 3.5) Fighter Wng CD/3.5) Alen Lori Jorune NASCAR Track PackCD) Third Reich CD35 12 Sassors & Sons CD 3936 FlashbackCD) Alen Legacy/cb3.5) Navy Strike CD) Thunderscape(CD) Alone in the Dark 1 & 2 CALL 15 Space Sirens 1 a 2cb) Abne in the Dark 1CD3.5) Flash Traffic (CD) NBA Jam(CD) 46 Te Fighter (3.5 Abne in the Dark 3 15 Vanpre's kas CD) Abne in the Dark 2 CD3.5) 15 NBA Live 55CD) Fight Commander 2003.5) Virtual Vaens (CD) Te Fghter Deonder Empire(3.5) Amored Fist 19 Abne in the Dark 30 NCAA Road Fnal 472 CD 3.5) Fight Unimed CD) 12ea Vrtal Valerie 2CD Tms on the Prowl35) Bard's Tale 12 of 3 Formula 13.5) Ambush at Sorno CD 3.5 Nerves d SteelC035) TOP Map Builder or Campaign 3.514 15 Betayal at Kondor Vrualy Yours 200) Apache Gunship C) Fortress Dr. Radald (C035) NHL Hockey (35) Tomado Operation Desert S CD Bidorge 16 Wanderlustco) Archon Ultra(35) Front Page Baseball 54CD3.) 46/43 NHL Hockey 95 CD) Tony La Russa BB 3CD) 47 Blackthorne 15 CALL FOR MORE TITLES Arena: Daggertal CD35) 4539 Front Page Football Pro 35 19 Night Owl 13,14 or 15CD) Tower Controle (CD 3.51 Buck Rogers Countdown Arena Elor Satis/CD 3.5) Front Page Footbal 95/CD3.5) 46:43 Nodropolis.(CD) Transport Tycoon (CD3.5) Buck Rogers Matrix Cubed WE ALSO SELL: Armored Fis(CD3.5) 46/43 Frontiers 1st Encounters CD35) 32 Nomad CD 3.5) Transport Tycoon Scenario(3.5) 23 Civilization 15 JAGUAR, 3DO.CO ROVIRO.MOV Atari 2600 Pack #1 of 2003.5) 24 Frontier. Ere 2CD3.5) NovaStorm(CD) Usima 7 ComolewCD) Cobonization 15 Sandgre n Prices subject to change. Defectives covered by manufacturer warranty. Returns are subject to 20% restocking foo.(CALI. FOR RMA#. Returns taken at our discreation. All shipping charges are not refunduhle. PAYMENT : Money orders.checkstorder shipped when chock clears).Visu. Mastercard.COD'S SHIPPING: Air S-Vorder. Priority Mail $Vorder. UP's Ground $2/order.for software(call for hardware). Hundling $2 per order, COD'S $10 total per order. International orders call for charges. FM & APC) $6 total per order. CA residents add 7.25% sales tux. Most orders placed by 2pm PST ship sume day. Shipping times not guurunteed. Most Items listed are in stock. If you don't see what you need please call us at 800-983.321 or 408-751-6975 Fax 408-757-5565 Circle Reader Service #115 Bassss 15 47  R288288288 UUTUUDETECTO 15 34 cata CALI 23 15 39  22 30 VISA oto Como "


"REVIEW Ripcord Relics QQP Parachutes Into Wargaming's Past With THE PURE WARGAME u 1003 by Tim Carter DEAD S WITH MOST AFICIONADOS OF HISbridges over the Dnieper River in 1914— Of course, a simple design requires that TORICAL WARGAMES, I APPRECIATE DEATH FROM ABOVE provides a cross-secthe game have at its core a challenge or RELICS OF THE PAST IN MANY tion of some historically interesting, but set of challenges that will keep players forms: books, maps, buildings, usually one-sided encounters. As subject coming back. In DEATH FROM ABOVE, the battlegrounds, and artifacts of all matter goes, this collection of battles prodesigners have achieved, for the most shapes and sizes. I draw the line, however, vides ample opportunity for tense and part, the goal of making a simple, accessiat computer games. While modern graphthoroughly enjoyable gaming. Unfortuble wargame. It is easy to move units, and ics, sound and animation often strike me nately, DEATH FROM ABOVE just doesn't demost of the commands are simple and inas frivolous in a strategy game, advances liver. tuitive. However, flaws in the design unin artificial intelligence, interface and docnecessarily complicate gameplay. umentation tend to make today's games a BUILDING THE PERFECT EDSEL . For example, a key element to winning cut above their ancient predecessors. This The designers of DEATH FROM ABOVE is organizational integrity. If your units are is why, upon reviewing QQP's THE PURE have clearly attempted to make a simple, in radio contact with their HQ, they reWARGAME: DEATH FROM ABOVE, VOLUME 1, clean and enjoyable game. The graphics ceive supplies and recover fatigue and I feel a bit like a cavalryman riding alongare somewhat rough by current standards, morale more quickly. They are also able to side a tank division: My horse may stride and while the sound support is better than launch joint attacks with other friendly majestically and charge bravely, but it most strategy games out there—some 48 units, an important element to winning stands little success against the technologidifferent scores are included—it really battles. All in all, a reasonable concept cal superiority of an armor-plated enemy. adds little to the game. around which to build a game system. This is your father's wargame. DEATH Simplicity can be a virtue. As the success Unfortunately, the documentation FROM ABOVE, the first installment of of games like EMPIRE DELUXE and PANZER doesn't explain very well how radio conQQP's THE PURE GENERAL have tact is actually to be established and mainWARGAME series, The Pure Wargame: Death shown, simple, hontained (even though this manual has a plays like a com Prom Above, est wargames are table of contents and more indexing than puter game from Volume 1 tremendously popuI've ever seen in any QQP product). Frethe late 1980s. Price: $59.95 CDlar. Why? Well, quently, units that are side-by-side will fall Many of the faults ROM probably because in or out of contact for no apparent reaof earlier designs, System their simplicity alson. It is impossible to identify a unit by corrected in more Requirements: IBM compatible 386 or lows the game playlooking at the map, adding to the frustrarecent games, better, 1MB RAM, ers to quickly and tion. reappear here. VGA graphics, 5MB easily get to the Determining the parent HQ requires DEATH FROM hard drive space, CD-ROM drive, mouse; supmeat of the game. calling up the individual unit data. Since ports AdLib, Advanced Gravis, Pro Audio ABOVE recreates Spectrum, Roland, SoundBlaster, and 100% The central probthis can only be done for one unit at a airborne opera compatible sound cards. lems to be solved time, it is dillicult to conceptualize larger tions from the Sec Protection: None are casily recognizorganizational structures. Even if you are ond World War. Designer: Steve Magestro able and, while able to figure out the right battalion to Publisher: QQP, Inc. From well-known Flemington, NJ strategies for achievwhich a company belongs, there is no easy battles like Crete (908) 788-2799 ing one's goals may way of finding the battalion HQ. HQ and Arnhem to identities aren't displayed on the map, eilesser-known engagements like Kanev nizing and moving units or resources is ther. You must access every HQ on the the Soviet attempt to take a series of not. board until you find the right one. This is 160 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1995 "


"TM SPACESIRENS 2 MEGA B A B ES FROM AUT XA xia999@aol.com $59.95 LIMITED TIME OFFER! Ist 500 Callers Who Order Space Sirens 2 Receive S10 Off the regular price of $69.95 and a FREE PIXIS Sampler 3 CD-ROM (A $9.95 Value). CALL TOLL FREE TO ORDER: 800.999.7995 TEL: 201.783.3600 FAX: 201.783.3686 Send Orders To: Mission Control. 7 Oak Place IQ 0695-PIX Montclair, NJ 07042. MC, Visa, Discover, Checks & Money Orders. Shipping S7 OVERNIGHT (most areas) Must be 21. To Order. AN INTERACTIVE GAME ON CD-ROM PIXIS PRESENTS A DIGITAL BOY PRODUCTION XIA AKINA AND MISCHA written By TETSUO DIRECTED BY RYU SHINOBI PRODUCTION MANAGER ROBERT BOE VISUAL SPECIAL EFFECTS BY D. LO GRAPHIC DESIGN BY LEON WAS COSTUME DESIGN F. GADO LEAD PROGRAMMER ANTHONY GOMEZ (18+ MATURE AUDIENCES PRODUCED BY MARK MEDIA MUSIC BY TASC PIXIS RELEASE E -I--I-S WISS ON CONTROL EXPLICIT SEXUAL INTERACIMI ENDURTAK [ TOUCH the FUTURE] INGRID DISC Coovticht 1995 PIXIS, Dealer Inquiries Coll:714.669.1818 Fox:714,573.1210 Online Aldress: pinisintcool.com. Circle Reader Service #213 "


"OOOOO just plain silly. A further problem arises out of the lack HUNG IN THE BALANCE Of course, this is particularly problematof information presented to the player as The scenarios are, in most cases, horic since most airborne operations begin the game unfolds. Most scenarios have a rendously unbalanced and seem to lack with units scattered and intermingled. A few crucial objectives which must be either foresight and extensive testing. While a simple numbering system on the unit captured or defended in order to win. play-balance mechanism is built in to the icons would have greatly increased the Neither side, however, is told exactly game, all it does is alter the strengths of playability and enjoyability of the game. where these objectives are. At the beginunits on one side. While one can play a ning of each new scenario scenario several times in order to find the players must spend 10 or 15 proper balance, this unnecessarily wastes minutes scrolling across the further time just to reach the point from map identifying the key cities which one should be starting the game. or bridges before they can There is no real justification for the uneven begin to plan strategy. balanced scenarios. Certainly, many of the Again, failing to provide this battles in question were one-sided, but as information is a totally unnecvictory is determined by arbitrarily attribessary omission. Would sceuted points, it would have been quite easy nario maps have been that to skew the points system to make up for difficult or expensive? historical imbalances. For instance, the FALL OF THE FALLSCHIRMUAGER The Reich's finest paratroops While all of the units on both Arnhem scenario could have victory conresemble their historical counterparts in little more than name, sides are visible at all times, ditions which required the Germans to todue to the lame computer opponent. players are never told when and tally annihilate the British in order to where reinforcements can be claim victory, thereby making the game By making the job of sorting out the units expected. This is downright ridiculous. A challenging without messing with history. unnecessarily difficult, the designers have simple chart at the back of the rule book We have a right to expect better from undermined one of the fundamental princould have solved the problem long after QQP; even the weak Al of THE PERFECT ciples on which this type of game is based: the computer interface had been deGENERAL was forgivable to a degree, beease of play. signed. cause the scenarios were pretty well balS50 919 $25 85 8445 VERTRONIX INC. presents the Best Values in ENTERTAINMENT! 230 Plaza Professional Bldg., El Cerrito CA 94530, 9-6 M-Sat. (PST) (510) 527-4699 (Info) (510) 527-4690 (fax orders) 1-800-478-0217 (orders only) Visa, MC. Checks, MOS, CODs HARDWARE IBM GAMES ADULT Pentium PCI MM Systems NEW TITLES! Alien Logic................$25 Goldtree Engine..........$25 Realm Arch Blade........ 826 HOT ADULT TITLES!!! w/8mb Ram, 540mb HD, 11th Hour... Alone in the Dark3... $44 Grandest Fleet.. ...827 Relentless.. .843 Adv. or Snatchman... 14\" SVGA, 1.44FDD. 1944 Across Rhinc ..... $47 Armored Fist..............$45 Great Naval Bat 2 .. $44 Renegade............... 843 Amature All St ... 843 Amature All Star ...... Absolute Zero... $41 Atari 2600 Act. Pak...... 825 Hand of Fate .. 838 Rise of Robots.... 823 Asian Palate..... Mouse, 2X CD-Drive, Adv. Civilizntion $34 Battle Isle 2200 .833 Hardball 4. 838 Rise of Triad...........837 Busty Babcs 2 & SB 16 Snd. Crd Apache... 844 Battledrome $40 Harpoon Classic... 917 Road to Final 4 838 Depraved Fantasies2 60 Mhz/256kb Cache 81738 Brain Dead 13 837 Betrayal at Krond 624 Harpoon 11 $44 Sabre Team 835 Dream Machine 75 Mhz/256kb Cache 81805 Breach 3.... ..$35 BioForge... 842 Hell.. $18 Shadow Comet ... 837 Eruption 90 Mhz/256kb Cache S2068 Buried in Time Blackthurone 834 Heretic S16 Shadows Caim 839 Extreme Gall CDR DRIV'S BLOWOUT! Command&Conquer... 845 Blood Bowl. S32 Heroes of M&M... 839 Shanghai Grcat Mom $44 FAO Gold lor2or3 ... LCS-7260 2x S 95 Cyberjudas ....... $37 Bloodnet..... 949 High Seas Trader ... .837 Situerload 835 ForbiddenPleasures. Mitsumi guad 8194 Deadlius Encounter $46 Blown Away $38 Iron Assault .. . .837 Sim City 2K $45 Hot Pics!.... Pioneer 4.4 Fast! $199 Deadline.. 838 Bureau 13 .. 831 Ishar 3...... 834 Space Hulk $26 Lace & Lingerie..... Plextor Quad... 8410 Dungeon Master II. .837 Campaign $35 Jewels of Oracle........$40 Space Quest An. 848 Lascious Lips......... Sony 2X IDE 8120 Full Throttle S13 Casino. 834 Journeyman Turbo.. $39 SSNSeawoy.... $19 Madonna's Family SB Discovery Kit ....... $260 Harvester. $42 Civilization $44 Jump Raven 840 Stalingrad 3.5. .840 Nasty Nurses.. SB Game Blaster ....... 8390 Infinity Machine.... 829 Cobra Mission.. 832 King's Q7... 848 Star Crusader.. $30 Naughty Pusses.. Toshiba Quad.. .. $212 Jagged Alliance $45 Colonization.. 846 King Maker 3.5 830 Star Trail $40 Neurodancer SOUND CARDS Johnny Mnemonie..... $41 Corridor 7 828 Knights Xentar.... 839 Star Trek Tech.... $41 New Wave Hookers 2. Gravis Ultra ............ 8100 Last Bounty Hunt........ 828 Creature Shock ..$47 Kyrandia 3..... 839 Stonekeep...... $47 Night Watch 2 $37 Gravis Ultra Max... ... $164 Machiavelli Prince....... 837 Cyberla.. . .824 Legions.. Strike Commander.... $19 Orient XXXpress... Roband SCD-15 DB $Call Magic the Gathering... 839 Cyberwar...... 848 Little Devil 831 Super Hero Hoboken $34 Red Hot............ SB 16 MCD $ 86 MechWarrior 2.. Cyclones 845 Lords of Midnight $47 Syndicate Plus 919 Samural Pervert.. $40 SB 16 MCD/ASP $170 Nascar Track Pack.. 530 Dark Forces... 843 Lords of the Realm. 842 System Shock $45 Seymour Butts 2.. 845 SB 16 SCSI 2.... S170 Perfect General 2 Dark Legions. $25 Maabus 832 The Big 3 829 Songbird... 820 SB 16 VALUE E......... $100 Phantasmagoria.......$49 Darksun Wake... S22 Magic Carpet.... .. 841 Theme Park ... $39 Space Siren... $42 TB Tropez..... Ravenloft 2: Sin Proph 846 Descent 2.0 $45 Master of Magic .... ..$37 Transport Tycoon.. S49 Straight A's Riddles of Master Lu... 845 S42 Master of Orion...........838 Ultima 8..... Memory/Motherboards Doom 2... 842 Strip Poker Intern Space Quest VI. 4MB 72Pin 70ns SIMM SCall $42 Dragon Lore..... .833 825 Metal & Lace .... Ultima I-VI $33 Swimsuit & Lingerie Spaceward Ho 8MB 72Pin 70ns SIMM SCall .830 Dragonsphere. $40 Metaltech: Earthslege... $46 Ultima VII Comp 833 T & A to Max ............. Star Trek TNG... 16MB 72Pin 70ns..... $Call $44 Ecstatica 835 Milennium Auction ... 845 Under Kulling Mn 849 Taste of Erotica Samp..$ 8 The Scroll ..... Empire Deluxe 466 motherboard ...... $Call .844 $27 Monty Python.. $54 US Navy Fighters.. $46 Tokyo Nightlife Pentium motherboard Call Tony L. Russa Base 3 846 Extractors 834 Mortal Kombat II.... $43 USS Ticondaroga .. 834 Tract I Love You .... Top Gun.... $41 F-14 Fleet 850 Myst.... 846 Virtuoso $39 Vampire Kiss MISC. $36 Wukung ...$26 FPS Football .844 N Lamp. Blind D.. .844 Voyeur .. $45 Virtual Valerie 2... $40 Gravis Phoenix ........$ 97 X-Com: Terr Fr. Deep. $37 Falcon Gold .857 Nascar Racing .... .827 War Craft.. $38 Virtual Vixens.. 837 Logitech Wingman....$ 25 BEST VALUES! Fifth Fleet... $41 NBA Line 95 .845 WC Armada Wingman Extreme..... $ 42 $42 Wander Lust...... Flash Traffic 1830 Rail & Rob 836 Noctropolis 845 Wing Commd. I Dla. Stealth VRAM. 851 and manny more... .. 8278 Aces of the Deep... 848 Flight Command 2 841 Operation Europe. 836 Wings of Glory .... Dia Stealth DRAM..... $168 $43 Fortress Radaki Aces of the Pacine. $35 Operation Crusade .839 Wizardry Trilogy 3 Realmagic Lite.... $35 8290 Front Lines... Aces Over Europe. .840 $57 Outpost.. We have thousands of Woy. 836 USR Sport 14.4 INT... S 90 Across the Rhine Frontier Elite 2 .851 841 Pacific Air War.... ... $49 Wrath of Gods 843 USR Sport 14.4 EXT S101 Games and Adult Titles 824 Gamemaker AD&D Gold 1. 830 Pagemaster.. WWII Pack.... USR Sport 28.8 INT ... 8229 S45 in stock! Call for other AD&D Gold 2 834 Panzer General.........$19 Xcom UFO Der USR Sport 28.8 EXT .. $246 824 Gateway 2.. $39 titles! Webuild systems Air Havoc... 837 Gazillionaire $27 Quarantine 840 Xwing Collec BEST 28.8 134 INT.... 8160 $47 to your configuration! Alice. .843 Goblins 3.. $16 Ravenloft ... 818 Zorro... FREE SHIPPING! AND CD on all orders over $100 (contin. US) Overnight. 2-day, or other shipping call! CA residents add sales tax. Not responsible for typographical errors. Returns not accepted w/o prior approval. Refund on unopened or damaged Items only. Price and availability subj. to change w/o notice. Please call for catalog and adult titles (510) 527-4699 162 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JULY 1995 Circle Reader Service #126 ... S206 2012 23232 ..819 "


"HARPOON II DELUXE The Next Generation is Launched! The shock wave is just beginning. Announcing the most advanced naval battle simulation ever! ... Empowered to let you re-write history. Used in training by the Naval Academy, HARPOON II DELUXE puts you in the command center action like never before. OOON WA TWA 45 350 CAPA 15 450 loo 100 5131 DDS Oo972 MULTI-MED ON CD-ROM MEDIA EDITION ITION INTRACOR BILSTEIN PAAR DEMAMOOI Actual video clips of weapon launches and explosions. PZER Altitude, depth, and weather information.  2 additional battlesets, for 30 new, startlingly realistic scenarios.  All-new Scenario Editor. You design the encounter. . Over 100 full-motion video and sound clips for unbelievable realism.  Detect, track and engage all forces.  Realistic weather modeling.  Military-style vector maps.  Vast database with tech specs and pictures of hundreds of ships, subs and aircraft. Lifelike communications models recreate electronic warfare. Add an incredible array of features like toolbar control buttons, easy user interface, and you have the most realistic battle game ever. Circle Reader Service #51 ASU Logo Formation editor defines threat axis and patrol zones. Hundreds of database specs, photos and drawings of military hardware. Visit Capstone Online: America Online (Keyword: Capstone), Software Creations BBS (508) 365-9352; Web Page Site: http://www.gate.net-intracor/. Or Call Capstone's BBS (305) 374-6872 Software and Artwork  1995 IntraCorp, Inc. All rights reserved. Harpoon II and Three-Sixty are trademarks of IntraCorp, Inc. Harpoon is a registered trademark of GDW, Inc. BattleSet and Staff Assistant are registered trademarks of ACSI. All other trademarks and copyrights acknowledged. "


"151102) SEBE BOE 30 DEN anced for two-player contests. computer opponent is absolutely fixated game is simple, most of the game's faults Aside from changing the strength of a by the victory objectives. It is unable to do scem to arise out of bad planning or an inside in each scenario, there are no other much more than charge headlong at complete understanding of good game ways of altering the computer player's them, regardless of the odds or the situabalance, rather than technical or programability. This is not surprising, since it tion. ming difficulties. It's a shame that all the seems like very little effort went in to the combat model in DEATH FROM research that went into this game is wastbuilding the Al in the first place. The ABOVE makes clear distinctions between ed, because the genre needs more games HQ units, armor, infantry and artillery. with focus, and the paratroop angle is a Each type has a specific mission, and good one. Somehow, though, the focus success depends on using the types in got lost along with the playability which is combination. Very nice, except that no normally QQP's trademark, resulting in a one remembered to tell the artificial game which will satisfy neither the veteran intelligence. Instead, it tends to send nor the newcomer. Let's hope that QQP's units, in the order it selects them, PERFECT GENERAL II is a return to their solstraight for the objectives. A panzer id strategy game roots, rather than this division advancing towards the enetepid and uninspired fare. my led by its HQ and artillery, with THE EDITORS SPEAK the tank battalions kept safely to the rear, is not an unusual sight. THE PURE WARGAME Not surprisingly, unless the oppos RATING W ENN ing forces are hopelessly outnumbered, the computer stands little PROS: Interesting subject matter and unit mix; runs well on a 386. chance. lalane Suda Bay, Crete 20 May 1941 All in all, THE PURE WARGAME: CONS: Weak computer opponent, MY CRETAN VACATION Malame Suda Bay is evocative when poor documentation, and grossly unDEATH FROM ABOVE looks, feels viewed from the strategic perspective, but the harsh light of balanced scenarios leave this game the tactical map exposes the outdated graphics. and plays like a below-average '80s bailing without a parachute. era computer wargame. While the $30 THE DEFINITIVE WARGAME COLLECTION $30 CD-ROM SSG IMPRESSIONS SSI CD-ROM American Civil War I Wargame Construction Set II: TANKS! American Civil War 11 Battles of Napolcon American Civil War III Sword of Aragon Reach for the Stars D-Day Gold of the Americas Conquest of Japan Panzer Battles Global Domination Warlords When Two Worlds War * Includes many additional scenario files. Wargame Construction Set II: Tanks! has won Strategy Plus' 1994 Wargame of the Year! and is rated #9 in CGW's Top Wargames. It has an easy to use editor to build your own battles with 1300 platoon-sized units from 1918-1990's. Novastar and Norm Koger continue to support new versions of the game (v. 1.27) with many new rules such as variable end game, variable weather, defensive fire, automatic dismounting in combat, and we have developed a Modern Database with 350 units/150 nations! Over 200 additional scenarios can be added. See below. Wargame Construction Set II: TANKS! Scenario Disks Disk 1: Eastem Front Disk 7: Sicily Disk 13: 1973 Israeli Disk 2: France 1940 Disk 8: Bastogne Disk 14: North Africa Disk 3: Utah/Omaha Disk 9: North Africa Disk 15: Victnam Disk 4: Gold/Juno/Sword Disk 10: Remagen Disk 16: Modern Korea Disk 5: St. Vith/KG Peiper Disk 11: France 1944 Disk 19: Korea 1950's Disk 6: Desert Storm Disk 12: 1973 Israeli Disk 21: Modern 1st US Am. TANKSI Scenarios: $15 each Modern TANKSI Database Scenarios: $25 each SSI's Classic IBM Wargames For Only $15!! Battles of Napoleon Gettysburg B-24 Second Front Battle of Antielam Kampfgruppe Shiloh Westem Front Conflict: Middle East Mech Brigade Warship Star Command Wargame Construction Set Sons of Liberty Rebel Charge Red Lightning Storm Across Europe Stellar Crusade $10 Carrier Strike $39 Panzer General $10 Great War S42 Tigers on Prowl $10 War in Russia S10 Clash of Steel $10 Pacific War $42 Staling Battles of Napoleon Scenario Disks: 1-6 S10 cach, ARW $25, 8-9 S15 cach $10 Mo' Slo (This will slow your computer processor down to play old games.) Add $4.50 Shipping. CA add 7.25% tax. Novastar Game Co. Hours: 8:00 am to 5:00 pm PST MT P O Box 1813, Rocklin CA 95677 Accept Visa, M/C, Checks, Money Orders (916) 624-7113 WANT TO PLAY THE LATEST GAMES? How about make some CASH? How about BOTH? CALL BARE BONES! 1-800-638-1123 Sell us your used software, then pick up the latest games at great prices! Call with list of your software for fast quotes. Prompt payment. NO WAITING! Bare Call for free used software Bones listing. Ask about latest ADULT CD's! 19 Software (over 21, please) 3060 East Rt 60 Hurricane, WV 25526 8.24 Circle Reader Service #45 Circle Reader Service #219 164 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD  JULY 1995 "


"CYBERNAXX\" TOTAL IMMERSION Doom 1 Heretic Rise of the Triad Lightning fast tracking -75 samples per second Depth Dweller the CYBERMAXX VIRTUAL REALITY COMPATIBLE 20 VICTORMAX Advance Optics technology for advance game play TECNNOLOGIES True 3d viewing / 60 degree field-of-view ER MAXX GAEFALDA PIRTUAL COMPUTER press ORDER NOW! 1-800-228-7449 REALITY Visit Computer Express Online at http://cexpress.com:27001 Circle Reader Service #52 "


"lay with thousands of gamers on the Information Super Highway and lose yourself in the graphic adventures and traditional games offered on the Multi-Player Games Network. MPG-NET gives you something you just can't find on a floppy disk...another human mind. Whether you like fantasy role-playing, 3D action, war simulation or card games, MPG-NET offers games 24 hours a day, seven days a week with players from all over the globe. PLAY GAMES WORLDWIDE ON THE INFORMATION SUPER HIGHWAY. Operation Market Garden Kingdom of Drakkar OMICE Warlords of the Apocalypse ANGE Fief Quest War Room Empire Builder 220 MPG-Net Lobby 6009.1515 BOB a ACCESS THROUGH INTERNET FOR ONLY 1000000 $200 per hour "


" More games than you've ever seen before! Now, MPG-NET goes all graphic!  Download files from our database No more text menus. No headaches and read the latest in gaming news, trying to log on. It's never been updates and stories from other easier to be on-line! members. It's as easy as visiting your hometown library! Here's what else you'll find:  Electronic Bulletin Boards filled  The Persona Creation Room-lets you generate a face to match your on-line with the latest adventure reports and personality! discussions by gamers from all over the world!  Conference Rooms-have real-time conversations with people all over the  Electronic Mail-send and receive world and see more than just their messages with all your friends and words, you'll get a chance to see what plan when to meet and play your they look like! favorite game! MPG-Net News MPG-NET can be accessed with a local phone call from over 600 cities in the USA and 40 nations worldwide. All you need is a modem, a phone line and a computer to join the fun! Call our 800 number from 9am to 8pm Eastern time on weekdays to receive our free starter kit. MPG-NET-twenty four hours a day, seven days a week, bringing you games that will take you out of this world! Call now: 1-800-GET-GAME. MPG-NET NEWS Conference Table Electronic Database 2 20al Conference Room 3D DEN 1000S Electronic Mail Persona Creation Room INC ÉRTELETE ES 20OOL Access Room TANTALUS 1994 MPG-NET, Inc. Multi-player Games Network and MPG-NET are service marks of MPG-NET, Inc. The Kingdom of Drakkar is a trademark of Drakkar Corp. Empire Builder is a trademark of Mayfair Games, Inc. Operation Market-Garden and Star Cruiser are trademarks of GDW Games, Inc. Fiefquest and Warlords of the Apocalypse are trademarks of the Dreamers Guild. All other brand and product names are trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective holders. MRGNELSE Your Multi-Player Games Networks 1-800-GET-GAME Tho Dreamers Guild Circle Reader Service #250 "


"REVIEW : Cheesy And Half-Baked OOR GS MicroProse Searches For The Right Strategy Game Recipe With Pizza TYCOON by Randall Black O OOO RECIPE or SALORICS: ESCHL he plot begins with the owner of a Mode, you are given nothing but small pizza shop, desperate to save your bank roll. That means you his struggling business, contacting need to locate a restaurant to rent, the underworld. From a simple call the real estate office via a \"tebeginning of seemingly benign lenet\" screen, pay the first month's courier jobs, our protagonist is drawn ever rent, buy and install furniture, and deeper into a life of crime. By day, his then set about making your own knack for concocting bizarre combinations pizzas from scratch before they can of pizza ingredients brings him a measure PRESENTATION IS EVERYTHING Whether or not you go on the menu. believe that customers \"eat with their eyes,\" you can of financial success. By night, his increasThe art of pizza making involves have some fun designing pizzas. Just make sure you ing status in the underworld earns him refollow the basic recipe! selecting ingredients and arranging spect and ever more lucrative assignments them on pizza dough. To get you from the gangsters. Using the profits from started, the game comes with a the now booming pizza shop, he buys exthe game and truly earns the title of \"Pizza recipe booklet that tells you the ingredipensive weapons-flame throwers, chemiTycoon.\" ents and amounts for a list of standard pizcal sprays, bazookas and bombszas. Occasionally using a chopper to delivering them to pre-arranged drop WHAT'S AMATTA YOU?! reduce the weight of ingredient items, you sites for profit and greater status among You begin by selecting a character from duplicate the amounts listed in the bookthe denizen of the underworld. After a few a roster of mug shots, each associated with let. Then your finished pizza goes before a of these weapons deals, he is entrusted a starting sum of money and a set of traits panel of cartoon judges who flash with the lucrative, white-collar crime of such as energy, health or dexterity. The Olympic-style scorecards, with the results laundering money. Pizza Tycoon vast majority of the determining the sales potential of your Now inured to a characters seem to pizza. The process of copying pizzas from Price: $44.95 life of crime, it is a be there only to be a recipe book is mind-numbingly teSystem small step to begin Requirements: the object of fun. In dious-a lot like picking lint off your carusing the weapons IBM compatible Quick Start mode, pet with a pair of tweezers. of his nighttime 386 or better, you are given a furBuying and arranging furniture is much 4MB RAM, VGA trade to make graphics, 7MB nished, rented the same, as the only real challenge comes \"hits\" on rival piz hard drive space, restaurant but still when your restaurant reaches capacity and za makers, trash CD-ROM, mouse. MICROPROSE need to buy supyou need to cram more seats into your ing their shops Supports Sound plies and an oven, restaurant. Improper placement of furniBlaster and 100% compatible sound and forcing them and hire a chef and ture actually can prevent customers from cards. out. When he has Protection: None a waiter. You also entering the restaurant and waiters from taken over ten per Designer: Software 2000 select pizzas from a leaving the kitchen, although this isn't cent of the market Publisher: MicroProse prepared recipe list readily apparent. A misplaced chair or Hunt Valley, MD in ten cities, our (800) 879-PLAY to put on your telephone can cause your restaurant to fail amoral hero wins menu. In Free and you won't notice it unless you repeatUOOZ 168 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1995 "


"SPACE QUEST:6 THE SPINAL FRONTIER IN SPACE, NO ONE CAN HEAR YOU CLEAN. Fight grime and battle evil adversaries with Roger Wilco, janitor turned space adventurer, as he joins farces with video games, TV and sci-fi movies, past and present in the wildest Space Quest ever. Take home the newest adventure in the award-winning series that has sold over one million games. UVUT THE PARDON OUR DUST! SWORMATION KECUTIVE Opens 34EVET WITH STUNNING NEW 3-D-RENDERED SVGA GRAPHICS AVAILABLE NOW! See your local software retailer or call 1-800-757-7707 today. SIERRA Circle Reader Service #271 01995 Sierra On-Line, Inc. All rights reserved. Space Quest is a registered trademark of The Children's Museum of Indianapolis, Inc. and is used by license. "


"cdly look in to see customers attempting If you ignore the economic asto enter and failing pects of the game, about all that's The \"fun\" doesn't stop here. You must left is making custom pizzas based also keep track of food stocks, although the on the tastes and trends of your cuschore can be mercifully, if temporarily, taktomers. Bizarre combinations of, en over by hiring a manager. However, say, anchovies, squid, radishes and once you have enough business to require a lemon work just fine, as long as they warehouse, you must personally keep it wellconform to taste preferences of cusstocked by holding the mouse button down tomer classes and the \"in\" ingredion scores of individual items. Don't forget to ents. If there is anything akin to visit every few days to repeat the process. excitement in this fun-forsaken RESERVED SEATING Being a floor manager takes on a game, it's seeing one of your crewhole new meaning in Pizza TYCOON. A SMALL PEPPERONI ations pack your restaurant and WITH A LARGE SIDE OF CRIME make it onto the most popular pizThe restaurant is now open, which find its way into a computer game; yet Pizza\" list. But the monthly pizza-making would seem to be where the game action ZA TYCOON seems obsessed with time. No contests and challenges to competitors reshould take off. It is, but not in the manmatter how early you set your alarm clock, volve around more copying: watching an ner you might expect. After the first week you will be summoned at some ridiculous animation of a pizza being made and then of business, you have to pay your staff. Fair hour (even 0:00 AM), whereupon you copying the ingredients and placement as enough, except that there's a good chance travel to the rendezvous point and wait exactly as possible. While there must be you'll already be bankrupt and out of the until the clock is at the exact increment of some age during child development when game. It's apparent that the designers inten minutes specified in the gang's inthis sort of activity is considered interesttended this set of hopeless financial condistructions. This means that you have to siting, I think most adults would be happier tions as an incentive to undertake criminal and wait through increments of ten sec watching a good pizza commercial on TV. activity. Perhaps crime would be more exonds in real time, with typical waiting citing? Well, unfortunately, it isn't. times of a minute or more. Try this: Check A PIE IN YOUR EYE Your first crimes are pick-up and delivyour watch, turn to the nearest wall and Lacking game-play information, the ery jobs. By telenet, you receive detailed keep checking your watch until exactly 30 manual is simply awful, reminiscent of a instructions from a local gang, which gives seconds have passed. Are you back? You sell-indulgent stand-up comic who thinks you time/space coordinates to pick up have just experienced a completely accuhe's funnier than the audience does. The initems that have nothing to do with the rate simulation of the charm of petty terface is balky and unnecessarily convolutgame. Impossible to memorize, the incrime in Pizza TYCOON. ed. The gangland \"hit\" action sequence is After scribbling down instructions primitive and mostly involves running away. and completing, say, 10 or 15 missions. Overall, the game seems to select the you move up to weapons deals. These most tedious details of an otherwise interGet lost old man, I don't want to are an improvement on pick-ups beesting plot: something like designing a talking to yout cause you only have to make one rengame of high finance to revolve around dezvous. With both types of missions, balancing a check book. Perhaps the hidthere is a probability that you will be den message is that a life of crime is borcaught by the police. Eventually, the ing as hell, in which case every successful criminal will be offered the impressionable child should own a copy. DO job of laundering money. Here's how it But if you've passed the age of six and works: the gang gives you a large sumthink a strategy game should be more CAN'T GET GOOD HELP ANYMORE Making an honest of money and a list of four long numchallenging than arranging furniture, Pizliving in Pizza TYCOON is impossible, since you bers. Your mission is to call banks and ZA TYCOON is an offer you can refuse. quickly run out of money and employees. deposit the money evenly into those THE EDITORS SPEAK four accounts. When you perform this structions must be written down. Only challenging feat of note-taking and diviPIZZA TYCOON then are you told the fee you will receive sion, you are rewarded with an absolutely (which ranges widely), and your odds of huge amount of money, equivalent to sevsuccess. Often, after writing all the instruceral months take from a successful restauPROS The subject matter is fresh... tions down, you find that the mission simrant. The business aspect of the game thus CONS ...but the implementation is \"cheesy and half-baked,\" which is to ply isn't worth the bother. becomes meaningless: Imagine playing say that there are many repetitious Considering all the real life activities CIVILIZATION for many hours and then beand uninteresting elements, and magamers seek to escape, setting and obeying given ten full-grown cities for buying a jor design imbalances. ing an alarm clock seems the least likely to frigate-it's that stupid. Pistoolit 15:50 MOPLO 10.1 waste my time LE LA LOCAL SHARE 32 7643 WENN 170 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JULY 1995 "


"WE DARE YOU FIRST CENTURY ENTERTAINMENT Pinball Fantasies won the PC Gamer Best Arcade Game of the Year and was runner up in Strategy Plus magazine. Now 21st Century has added four entirely new tables, a multi-ball feature and CD sound to bring you the best pinball simulator ever. Find out for yourself why Pinball Fantasies was so highly acclaimed. Shoot those ramps, feel the silky smoothness of the table scrolling, switch resolution, beat the high score, become addicted all over again to classic pinball on your PC. 21ST CENTURY ENTERTAINMENT, INC.  P.O. Box 415  WEBSTER, NY 14580  (716) 872-1200 Circle Reader Service 135 "


"REVIEW A Second Honeymoon In Venice MERCHANT PRINCE Is Reborn On The MicroProse Gondola As MACHIAVELLI: THE PRINCE by Arinn Dembo TEX c fano T WAS TOO GOOD TO BE TRUE: TWO TITLES DEALING WITH THE ITALIAN Renaissance in less than     three years? Two sepa The Popz SANA rate games, each chock full of RENAISSANCE PORTRAITS From the Pope's sudden illness (did someone say poison?) to the hanging of traitors and the that unbeatable combination inexorable march of The Black Death, the many events, both random and player-induced, add a devious flavor even old of brutality and wackiness that Niccolo himself would love. made the 15th century so much fun? Bribery, murder, mercenaries furtherance of which was the main reason played MERCHANT PRINCE, I can heartily and The Plague, traveling to exotic lands, for writing his classic work, The Prince. recommend MACHIAVELLI; it's a superior killing equally exotic people, developing for the past two years, I had been playversion of a good game. This is a deliexotic skin diseases-twice? I thought it ing another good Italian Renaissance ciously cynical romp through the 15th too good to be true, and it is...almost. game called MERCHANT PRINCE from QQP century, full of good, clean, vicious fun, which focused on the life of the average where you assume the role of a powerful HEREDITARY PRINCIPALITIES Venetian merchant-aristocrat. I was lookVenetian family in the year 1301. A basic I was looking forward to the release of ing forward to a game that would take the game lasts for 100 years, at one turn per MicroProse's new title, MACHIAVELLI: THE Florentine's more militant point of view. year. You begin with a note from your UnPRINCE. I wanted to see Silly me. cle Niccolo urging you to improve the what a big company Machiavelli: The Prince MACHIAVELLI is family's fortunes, a stipend of 150 florins a could do with the Ital Price: $47.95 really Anchiavelli MERturn, a map of the known world (which System ian Renaissance-havCHANT PRINCE gets more and more inaccurate the further Requirements: U V the Prince ing assumed, of IBM compatible GOLD in disyou venture from Venice), a little capital course, that Micro 386 or better guise, an enwith which to buy cargo, and a couple of Prose had developed a 4MB RAM, SVGA hancement of ships—one slow cog and one fast galley. graphics, 10.5 MB new product. Also, givthe original hard drive space, en the name on the CD-ROM, mouse; MERCHANT HOW THE PRINCE MUST ACT TO box, I thought it was supports General PRINCE deACHIEVE HONOR obvious that this game MIDI, Sound Blaster and compatibles. signed by SeverThe game reflects perfectly the tunnel would focus exclusively # of Players: 1-4 by hotseat or e-mail, 2 by al Dudes vision of the typical 15th-century Venetian. modem on war and politics, Protection: None Holistic GamAll life is centered on Venice; your family's with the object being Designer: HDI ing and pubpopularity in Venice is an important factor, to unify and rule all of Publisher: MicroProse Software lished by QQP. one you will have to keep track of during Italy-a dream dear to Hunt Valley, MD (410) 771-0440 For those who the game. You can increase popularity by old Niccolo's heart, the have never spending money on parties, commissionkell med 172 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JULY 1995 "


"\"ANGELO Bred for ultra-low level strike missions, the Harrier revolutionized the gritty business of ground attack. JUMP JETS: Explore the highly realistic VTOL flight models of the AV-BB Harrier II, FRS.MK 2 Sea Harrier, and the Yak-141 Freestyle. capable of Vertical Take Off and Landings, his unique aircraft can go anywhere and destroy anything. Explore VTOL technology in the expansion disk to the ground-breaking U.S. Navy Fighters\" SPOOL UP: Launch your Harriers off the deck of the Navy's new amphibious assault ship U.S.S. Wasp. MISLAND HOPPING: 35 all new missions as you seek to retake Japan's Kuril Islands from elite Russian air and sea forces. 01905 Electronic Arts. All rights reserved. Air Combat Series, Marine Fighters, and U.S. Navy Fighters are trademarks of Electronic Arts, OPEN UP: Deal out destruction with AC-130E Spectres, SNAKEYE bombs, 30mm guns and rapid fire rocket pods. DOWN IN THE WEEDS: View a fully texture-mapped environment based on actual satellite and aerial photography Critical Acclaim for U.S. Navy Fighters Computer Gaming World: **** ***** PC Gamer: 91% Rating FIGHTERS A TILISTMASTER  CONTID COMPATIBLES DUVAR U.S. NAVY FIGHTERS EXPANSION DISK ELECTRONIC ARTS Circle Reader Service #139 REQUIRES U.S. NAVY FIGHTERS "


"19XX 169S European CCCSS ing works of art, or building yourself a fanpassed under the CD chrome-ifying ray, normal conditions; but they still skyrocket cy villa; you can lose popularity for attackpolishing every pixel of the graphics, and when a city has been under excommunicaing fellow Venetians, or by getting caught adding the new noises inevitable with any tion or siege, or when there is Plague, nevin some particularly nasty bit of skulldugenhanced version. er fear. gery-assassinating the Pope, say. Only the In addition to the bells and whistles, Maneuvering in the Senate is now a bit Venetian Senate and the Vatican have some improvements in gameplay have more expensive, since the senators are meaning within the context of the game, been made as well. Refinements in the now sharp enough to raise their prices and the world outside of Venice exists only trade process now allow you to build warewhen they can give you the deciding vote. as a means of making money. To win you houses in any city and stockpile trade Also, the artificial opponents are brighter, will need to explore, but you are seeking goods. You need no longer suffer the anand can actually serve to make a game new markets and new products, not a new noying loss of profits from being unable to with two or three human players much world. There is no political power to be transfer cargo from caravan to shipboard, more interesting-especially if the huseized abroad, making it somewhat ridicuand vice versa. To balance the powerful mans are clever enough to stay at each lous that MicroProse chose to name this wenzee 390 other's throats, rather than ganging up on 1992 product after Machiavelli. 250 / X 243 the machine. Playing alone against three You must build trade routes and outto computer opponents is still a bit of a drag, strip your opponents in the fine art of et une 2854 4 1 but the computer does serve as something profiteering. Coincidentally, you will 152 2. 70 of a tutorial, demonstrating interesting find yourself scrabbling for power in 2352 game options which you can use later the Senate and longing to seize the Paagainst human opponents. 307 pacy; high oflice can be translated di Sent at Overall, there's only one problem with rectly into money, if you plan carefully DOOOOOOOOOOO MACHIAVELLI: THE PRINCE, and it's that and seize your advantage. You can  we've seen it before. At least MicroProse is bribe senators and buy seats in the Pastom Dong offering an upgrade for owners of MERpal college for your family, and you will CHANT PRINCE-a nice gesture, given that find yourself doing it, if only to inQQP, and not MPS, published the origicrease your regular yearly income. nal. (Send in the disk # 1 from MERCHANT Power in the Senate can be parlayed PRINCE and $23.97, plus shipping and into a lucrative cabinet position, like handling to MPS Direct. But call (800) General of the Venetian Army (1,000 879-PLAY first.) And hey! There's a brand florins a year), and your cardinals pay new, shiny copy of Machiavelli's The Prince access Venice off 1/10th of the indulgence rate directin the box! Yes, one of the world's most inly into the family coflers. famous, oft-misinterpreted and seldomMACHIAVELLI includes mercenaries, read books, straight from Penguin assassins, arsonists, slanderers and the XXXXXXXXXXXXXXX Classics. It's true, the ideas and advice set Scriumble: for holy relics ICS a changer   forth in The Prince have very little to do ous world; pirates and storms can send NEW GUILD, SAME OLD PRODUCT The graphics have with this game (other than the fact that your cargo to the bottom, and your changed, but the game remains much the same as you have to be ruthless), and the inclusion land caravans can suffer from brigands, MERCHANT PRINCE-albeit with a better Al. of the book is probably just a guilty gessandstorms and avalanches on land. ture on the part of the marketing crew at And all this without even mentioning the warehouse feature, there is now a limited MicroProse...but it's tempting, isn't it? In kind of random events that can really rock demand for all goods, especially the highany case, I can heartily recommend the civilized world-major outbreaks of the cr-end items. In any given city, you will MACHIAVELLI for newcomers to Venice, but Black Plague, Mongol hordes, and the Rerarely be able to sell a whole cargo-hold old-timers may need more of a reason to formation, to name but a few. full of diamonds or holy relics in any one return to the Renaissance. year-a concession to realism which I apTHE EDITORS SPEAK HOW THE PRINCE MAY RETAINpreciated. To the great relief of old MERCHANT HONOR MACHIAVELLI: THE PRINCE If you like a little scheming, swindling PRINCE fans, MACHIAVELLI will give you and backstabbing to spice up your trade more control over the random map. You PROS A significant revision of a routes and empire-building, this is a game can determine some of the more useful strong, playable, and re-playable for you. Of course, if you already own settings, like the percentage of water on game. MERCHANT PRINCE, then the decision bethe map of the known world, and the deCONS The revision may not go far comes somewhat tougher. I'm such a big gree of scatter on the land masses. Also, enough to justify another purchase by enough fan of the original that I genuinely prices now fluctuate slightly within the those who have played the original. enjoyed this upgrade. The game has been towns, rather than being invariable during access Access TO Warehouse RATING 174 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JULY 1995 "


"More Memory! More Speed! More Action! INCLUDED INSIDE THE GAME CHEATERS GAME RUNNER! THE PLAYER'S ACCELERATION PAK Quarterdeck IF YOU'RE NOT USING THIS, YOU'RE NOT HAVING FUN. What's the difference between playing a game to run the most demanding game software. and having a blast? Enough to satisfy those memory-hogging Load Game Runner and see CD-ROMs and sound cards, too. for yourself. THREE PRODUCTS Instead of patiently waiting IN ONE BOX. Instead of \"out of memory\" around for the action to resume messages, boot disks and other MORE MEMORY while your games needlessly QEMAT Game Edition technical annoyances, MORE SPEED! access your hard disk or your you'll automatically free Allrice! Cac/NS6 AM CD-ROM, you'll get top perforup the memory you need MORE ACTION! mance, and game play that's a AXIS\" The Gamecheater whole lot faster and a whole lot more fun. Instead of playing by their rules, you'll instantly add time, lives, money, extra fuel or ammunition, even jump to different play levels. Whatever it takes to win. Intrigued? Who wouldn't be? So head for your nearest dealer. Or call us right now at 800-354-3222. And let the games begin! Circle Reader Service #304 Quarterdeck "


"INC. BOARDGAMES & RPGS Heng PLAGUE FLEET DENVER THE LITY USINGS. DENVER! Welcome to the Front Range Free Zone. It's a subdivided, drek infested, dead dry tinderbox waiting for some political pyromaniac with slippery fingers to drop a match. Denver, is a boxed campaign set for Shadowrun, Second Edition. It contains a player's guidebook full of public and shadow information. $19 PLAGUE FLEET The people of the Old World live in constant fear of Chaos. To them it is a two fold danger armies of unnatural creatures prowl the borders of civiMAROWAR ICTeALOG lized lands and sail the northern seas, waiting for any opportunity to attack, while the corrupting influence of Chaos threatens their society. From deep within the dread Seas of Chaos, the Plague fleets sail forth. $29 City by the Silt Sea 'CITY BY THE SILT SEA' The burning world has reached a critical stage. For Athas, it could mean the start of a time of renewal, or it could herald the end of the world! It all begins in the ruins of Giustenal, in a place from another age, in the corpse of a shattered, long dead city. Something stirs in the City by the Sit Sea. $19 POBLOOD LRERE RED OTEET CONTROL OF ME 'BRITANNIA is a new multiplayer game about the 1000 year history of the birth of Britain. Play begins with the Roman invasion of 43 AD, and ends with the last great invasions by Norwegians and Normans in 1066. Each of the sixteen game turns represents about 85 years. Each player controls several nations. $19 \"RED STEEL' is an melal lighter than common steel, and more precious than gold. It is the object of quests and the cause of war. Only one place holds this treasure the Savage Coast. This grand frontier is also home to the Red Curse, an ancient bane that hideously deforms some victims, while mysteriously granting powers to others. S22 TUT \"BLOOD BERETS' They say that when the corporate armies aren't enough, you call on the elite. When weapons hum into action and rapid fire bursts level the jungle, the Blood Berets have arrived. S29 BOARDGAMES BOARDGAMES BOARDGAMES BOARDGAMES BOARDGAMES BOARDGAMES ECONOMICS Global Survival Stocks & Bonds $19 The Stock Market Gme $19 $17 $15 MEDIEVAL Age of Chivalry Age of Chivalry 2 Black Prince Henry V Ironsides The Crusades II $12 ANCIENT 4 Bat of Ancient Wrld $21 Alexander at Tyre $18 Alexander's Generals $33 Ancients Barbarians $33 Battles of Alexander $33 Caesar: The Civil Wars $38 Hannibal Peloponnesian War Siege of Jerusalem $27 VI Against Rome $27 $25 $27 $25 $28 $28 $28 $25 RAIL ROAD 1830:RR & Robber Bar $20 1835 $49 1856 $37 1870 $38 Australian Rails $21 British Rails $21 Empire Builder $25 Eurorails $25 Express $11 Nippon Rails $21 North American Rails $21 Rail Baron $19 SPORTS Baseball Strategy Bowl Bound Football Strategy Regatta Statis Pro Basketball World Cup FB Wrasslin' $19 $24 $38 $15 $35 $25 $27 $19 $19 $29 AMERICAN REVOLUTION 1776 Give Me Liberty $25 Rebels & Redcoats 2 $25 War of 1812 $22 FANTASY Advanced Heroquest $42 Balllo Masters $42 Dragon Lords $29 Dungon Masters $16 Dragon Quest $19 Dungeon $16 ElfQuest (2nd Edition) $20 Hero Quest $29 Iron Dragon $25 Magic Realm $23 Man O' War $42 Man O' War/ Plague Fit $29 Man O' War/ Sea of Bld $29 Sindbad $33 Talisman (3rd Edition) $44 Titan $23 Warhammer Fantasy $48 Warhammr Army:Chaos $25 Warhammer Quest $47 Xanth $21 MODERN 6th Fleet $23 7th Fleet $27 Across the Suez $13 Aegean Strike Attack Sub $19 Back to Iraq $18 Crisis: Korea 1995 $29 Flashpoint: Golan $29 Flight Leader $21 Gulf Strike $29 Harpoon $25 IDF (Israeli Del Force) $29 Main Battle Tank $24 Modern Naval Battles 3 $19 Nato $15 Phase Line Smash $25 Tac Air $19 Thunderbolt $27 STRATEGY Advanced Civilization Blackbeard Britannia Civilization Colonial Diplomacy Diplomacy Feudal Guerilla History of the World Kingmaker Maharaja Republic of Rome The New Acquire We the People $42 $19 $18 $19 $27 $19 $23 $29 $25 $29 33 WORLD WAR 2 1944: The 2nd Front SE A Line In The Sand SZ Advnced Squad Leadr $3 Advanced Third Reich $3 Afrika $2 Afrika Korps Ambush Ardennes Axis & Allies B-17 $1 Battle of the Bulge S1 Breakout: Normandy S2 Britain Stands Alone $2 Campaign to Stalingrad S2 Cross of Iron Hitler's War Last Blitzkrieg Legend Begins Luftwaffe Midway Naval War Operation Crusader Pacific War Panzer Leader Run Silent, Run Deep $2 Russian Front Sink the Bismarck $2 Squad Leader $2 S. L. Mod: Cross of Iron $1 S. L. Mod: Anvil of Vict $2 Storm Over Arnhem FolioS1 Tactics 2 S1 The '45 $C The Longest Day SC Third Reich $1 Thunder at Cassino Tokyo Express Turng Point Stalingrad S1 Ukraine: '43 Up Front Up Front Mod: Bonzai S1 Victory in Normandy ST War at Sea $1 WestFront:War in Europese Western Front CIVIL WAR 1863:American Civil Wr $28 A House Divided $20 Across Five Aprils 2 $25 Antietam Campaign $25 April's Harvest Barren Victory $26 Bloody Roads South $27 Blue & Gray $25 Brother Against Brother $33 Campaigns of Civil War $21 Chancellorsville $34 Civil War $19 Embrace Angry Wind S24 Gettysburg Guns of Cedar Creek $32 Hallowed Ground In Their Quiet Fields $26 Lee Takes Command $22 Lee Vs. Grant S16 Longstreet's Assault $25 Mississipi Fortress $22 No Better Place To Die $24 Raid on Richmond $21 Roads to Gettysburg $24 Stonewall in the Valley $29 Thunder at Crossroads $27 VIETNAM / KOREA Battles of Korean War $33 Frozen Chosin $25 Platoon $16 The Korean War S18 Vietnam $18 SCIENCE FICTION Alpha Omega $19 BATTSC Object Raids $13 Battle Tech Blueprints $10 BatTech Compendium $13 BatTech Compend CD $33 B-Tech Scn Hse Steiner $13 Battle Tech 3rd Eition. $19 B-Tech/Tech ROCitytch$19 Blood Berets $29 Blood Bowl Blood Bowl Death Zone $29 Comic Encounters $29 Federation & Empire Dix $38 Fury of the Clansmen $29 Hacker 1 or 2 $16 Illuminati $10 Imperium, 2nd Edition $20 Merchant of Venus $25 Roadkill $19 Space Marine $49 Spce Marine/TitanLegion$49 Spce Marine/Renegade $25 Star Fleet Bat Advnce M$25 Star Fleet Battles $25 Star Fleet Bat Capt Abk $38 SFB Mod.J/ Fighters $13 SFB Tactics Manual $13 Stellar Conquest $19 Warhammer 40K $47 WH 40K/ Codex Eldar $16 WH 40K/ Codex Space $16 $15 und LEISURE / FAMILY Acquire $19 Alibi $12 Circus Maximus $11 Dinosaurs of Lost Wild $15 Gangsters $23 Greed Tube $13 Hexagony $11 Legends of Robin Hood $11 Moonstar $12 Organized Crime S25 Quest for Ideal Mate $15 Restaurant $25 Road to Whitehouse $25 Shakespeare $15 T.V. Wars $12 The Brickyard $20 Tycoon $15 Tyranno Ex $23 $42 NAPOLEONIC Austerlitz $30 Battles of Waterloo $33 Empires at War $24 Empires in Arms $27 L'Armee du Nord $33 La Bat de Mont St. Jean $33 La Bataille de Wavre $25 Napolean Bat Exp Mod $13 Napoleon al Austerlitz $20 Napoleon on Danube $19 Napol Peninsula Camp $22 Napol Russian Campn $22 Napoln/ Waterloo Camp $30 The Napoleonic Wars $31 War & Peace $23 War to the Death $21 Wooden Ships&lron Men $19 WAR GENERAL Alamo $15 Battle of Alma $28 Blood & Iron $25 Campgn of Fred the Gri$24 Kolin: Fred's 1st Defeat $34 Lion of the North $29 sa WORLD WAR 1 Aces High Knights of the Air Landships Lawrence of Arabia Richtofen's War $24 $19 $27 $20 $19 CGW 7/95 BG1 1995 CHIPS & BITS, INC. "


"Call 800-699-4263 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'l 802-767-3033 Source 10325 PO Box 234 Dept 10325 Rochester, VT 05767 OVERNIGHT SHIPPING in US $1 por order. Mail to Canada, PR, HI, AK, APO, FPO $4 per order Worldwide airmail Sporitom. Handling $2 por shipmeni. Hardware orders may require additional ship ping charges. Call for details. Visa, MC and Discover accepted. CHECKS HELD 4 WEEKS. MONEY ORDERS UNDER $200 SAME AS CASH. COD $8. Dolectivos replaced with same product. Most items shipped some day. Shipping times may vary. Price / availability may change. All sales final ADVENTURES IN THE NEW REPUBLIC This Hallowed Ground ARKHAM COUNTRY DARK FORCE RISING Five Adventures Along The Miskatonle Valley STAR WARS THE NEW REPUBLIC: DARK FORCE RISING SOURCEBOOK'Grand Admiral Thrawn's plan to restore the Empire to absolute power proceeds with horrifying efliciency. Only the ADVENTURES IN ARKHAM COUNTRY' Five separate adventures are found inside, taking investigators the full length of the Mis katonic Valley from Kingsport on the Atlantic coast. through busling. busy Arkham, past grimy, industrial Bolton, to the headwaters of the Miskatonic. $14 bravery and skill of princess Leia. Han Solo and Luke Skywalker can stop him from delivering a killing stroke to the New Republic. $15 THIS HALLOWED GROUND' The Confederacy has occupied Fort Sumter and Union forces have entered St. Louis. As one of the leaders, you must lead your forces to military and economic victory. $42 DUNGEON DOOM *TALISMAN; TALISMA DUNGEON OF DOOM' Beneath the ancient ruins lies the dark and terror haunted realm of the dread Lord of Darkness. The corridors and rooms of his dungeon realm NI BILA ANDREASA FILER are home to an amy of powerful monsters that guard his fabled hoards of treasure. Meanwhile, beyond crags lies the mountain realm of the force Eagle King. This fierce and noble ruler will help any adventurer but first you must defeat him. $25 'PLANE SCAPE: CAMPAIGN SETTING' Discover the multiverse! Enter infinite universes of infinite variety. worlds beyond the prime material settings of the AD&D game. Explore Sigil, the City of Doors, filled with portals to every layer of every plane. All you need is the right key. $25 \"COLONIAL DIPLOMACY is set during the height of the great age of imperialism, when nearly half the world's population in Africa, Asia and Persia are under the control and domination of colonial powers. $42 RPG: FANTASY RPG: FANTASY RPG: FANTASY RPG: HORROR RPG: HORROR RPG: SCI-FI A. D. & D. 2nd Edition ARS MAGICA CALL OF CTHULHU GURPS HORROR GURPS SCI-FI Dungeon Masters Gde $15 Monster Manual $19 Players Handbook $16 Monstrous Compendium Al-Qadim Creatures $10 Dark Sun:Terror Desert $11 Mystara Monstrous Cmp $15 Outer Planes Creatures $11 Ravenloft Appendix 3 $15 Ravenloft Creatures $10 Ars Magica 3rd Edition $19 Black Death S11 Festival of the Damned $10 Mid Summers N Dream $10 wizard's Grimoire $15 Creatures of the Night $14 Cthulhu Punk $16 Horror $14 Mage: The Ascension $16 Vampire Companion S16 Vampire: Masquerade S16 Werewolt: Apocalypse S16 Audio Adventure First Quest $22 Fail the Heroes $13 Karameikos S22 Night of the Vampire $13 Red Steel Campgn Exp S22 Track of the Vampire $13 Track of the Werewolf $13 GURPS Aliens $14 Atomic Horror $14 Callahan Xtime Saloon 514 Cyberpunk Adventures S14 Cyberpunk S14 Cyberworld $14 For Love of Mother-Not $8 Lensmen $14 Robots $14 Time Travel Adventure $14 War Against the Chtorr $14 Boxed Sets Council of Wyrms $19 Dragon Mntn Dlx Adv $22 MAGE $14 Adventures in Arkham S14 Blood Brothers 1 $15 Blood Brothers 2 $15 Cairo Guidebook $10 Call of Cthulhu $16 Creatures of Drmlands $13 Dire Documents $7 Investigator's Campgn $10 Investigator's Cmpan 2 $10 Keeper's Compendium $11 Keeper's Screen $12 London Guidebook $10 Miskatonic University S10 Sacraments of Evil $14 Strange Eons $11 Ye Book of Monstres $10 Arkham Unveiled $16 New Tales from Lovecrft $9 Secret Societies Taint of Madness $16 PLANESCAPE $14 S19 Ascention's Right Hand $13 Mage Storyteller's Screen $8 Virtl Adepts Traditn Bk $10 Campaign Setting $25 Planes of Chaos Boxed $25 STAR WARS VAMPIRE Star Wars Hardcover $19 Star Wars Sourcebook $18 Dark Sun Accessories Complete Gladiator $13 Dune Trader $10 Slave Tribes $10 Terrors of the Desert $12 Valley of Dust & Fire S10 Veiled Alliance S10 Bestiary $14 Bunnies & Burrows China Cliffhangers $11 Deathwish $7 Espionago $14 Fantasy 2nd Edition $15 GURPS Rulebook S16 Magic Items 2 $14 Martial Arts Adventures $14 Operation Endgame $14 Psionics $14 Supporting Cast $14 Timeline $14 Ultra-Tech 2nd Edition $14 Vehicles $16 Planescape Accessories In the Cage S13 $14 Storyteller's Handbook S15 Storyteller's Screen S10 Vampire (2nd Edition) $19 Vampire Players Guide $18 $9 Planescape Adventures Deva Spark Eternal Boundary $9 Fires of Dis $9 In the Abyss Well of Worlds Dark Sun Sourcebooks City by the Silt Sea $19 Citystate of Tyr $10 Dragon Kings(Hardbnd) $16 Elves of Athas $10 Star Wars Sourcebooks Cracken Rebel Operat's$13 Dark Empires Srcebk $19 Dark Force Rising $15 Heir to the Empires $15 Imperial Sourcebook $18 Rebel Alliance Srcebk $18 The Jedi Sourcebook $19 Wanted by Cracken S13 $9 $13 CASTLE FALKENSTEIN Vampire Adventure Blood Nativity $5 Dirty Secret of Blk Hnd $13 Elysium:The Elder War $13 Hunters Hunted $10 Under Blood Red Moon $10 Castle Falken Hardbnd $25 Castle Falken Sftcover $19 Comme Il Faut $12 GURPS Fantasy Camelot Conan Fantasy Adventures Fantasy GM Pack Grimoire (Reprint) Magic 2nd Edition Forgotten Rlm Boxed Set City of Splendors $19 Elminster's Ecologies $19 Horde $15 Maztica FR Setting $16 Menzoberranzan $22 Ruins of Myth Drannor $16 Ruins of Undermntn 2 $19 Ruins of Undermountian $16 Call of Cthulhu Adventure Cthulhu Casebook $15 Curse of Cthulhu $15 Dreamlands 2nd Editn S13 Escape from Innsmouth $16 Fatal Experiments $14 Fearful Passages $14 Great Old Ones $13 Horror on Orient Exprss $29 King of Chicago $10 Mansions of Madness $14 Return to Dunwich $14 Thing at the Threshold $13 $14 $14 $14 $8 $14 $14 WEREWOLF Star Wars Supplements Creatures of Galaxy $13 Deathstar Companion $13 Gamemaster's Screen $10 Planets of the Galaxy 3 $13 Tramp Freighters DICE POLY MEGATUBES GM Screen $10 Werewolf (2nd Edition) $19 Opaque Sets Assort ea 53 Pearlescent Set Assrt ea $6 Transparent Sts Asst ea S5 Twinkle St Assort each S6 GURPS Times Aztecs Imperial Rome Robin Hood Scarlet Pimpernel Vikings $14 $14 $14 Werewolf Adventures Rite of Passage S10 Valkeburg Foundation $20 Ways of the Wolf $11 $10 INDIANA JONES $14 C of C Licensed Items Devil's Children $6 Dwellers in the Shadow $14 End of the World $13 Grimlock Isle S13 In the Time of Lovecraft $7 Lurking Fears Walker in the Wastes $15 Whispers in the Dark $12 Forgotten Rim Sourcebk Drow of the Underdark $13 Elves of Evermeet $13 Gde to Forgotten World $13 Volo Gd to Sword Coast $9 Volo's Gd to Waterdeep $9 Volo's Gde to the North $9 WRAITH Star Wars Adventures Batle for Golden Sun S10 Black Ice $10 Crisis on Cloud City $10 Death in the Undercity $10 Domain of Evil $10 Jedi's Honor S12 Scavenger Hunt S10 Scoundrel's Luck S12 Strike Force: Shintipole $10 WARHAMMER FANTASY 1.Jones & Goldn Vampire$16 Indiana Jones $25 Indiana Jones, World of $16 Raider of Lost Ark Srsebk$19 The Enemy Within V.1 $11 Warhammer Fantasy $19 Character's Kit Storyteller's Screen Wraith $10 $10 $19 Circle Reader Service #200 CGW 7/95 BG2 "


"THE GAMER'S EDGE Cheat Like A Pro Hack Your Way To Victory With Four Commercial Cheat Utilities by Jeff James ver the past few years, comFor example, once Axis is installed on far the easiest to install and use. puter games have become your computer you can load your favorite AXIS: THE GAME CHEATER. Price: increasingly more complex game normally. In PRINCE OF PERSIA, for $39.95. Baseline Publishing, 1760 Moriand detailed. From FALCON example, pressing F9 will restore your ah Woods Blvd., Ste.5, Memphis, TN 3.0 to X-COM: TERROR character to full strength. On the down38117. Tel: (901) 527-2501, Fax: (901) FROM THE DEEP, games side, Axis must have a \"game enhance-682-9691. have evolved into richlyment module,\" or GEM, written textured products with multiple layers of specifically for the game you wish to use GAME WIZARD PRO V2.0F complexity and difficulty. For gamers Axis with. Most of the GEM modules sup The GAME WIZARD PRO is the commerfrustrated with overly difficult games and plied with the program diskette are forcial version of the GAME WIZARD shareobtuse gameplay, a number of game older titles; you may find a GEM for Xware cheating utility, and it boasts a wide cheating utilities have appeared. Usually WING and SimCity, but you won't find range of game-hacking features and carunning in the background as a termianything for WING COMMANDER 3 or MAS pabilities. Game parameters can be nate and stay-resident (TSR) program, frozen, game speed can be adjusted, and these utilities allow you to make yourself CHEAT OF THE MONTHCLUB you can use the memory address search invulnerable, fiddle with game settings, Descent Cheat Codes feature to search for game variables hidand provide information you weren't Having trouble with that boss robot on level 7 of Interplay's De den in RAM. Like most of the other meant to see-often while in the middle SCENT? Don't take any more crap! Dish out the pain with these game utilities mentioned here, the GAME of a game. handy cheat codes. WIZARD Pro is a TSR program which runs By the nature of their design, most of in the background while you're playing these products will appeal to a relatively GABBAGABBAHEY Activates the cheat mode. your favorite game. Unlike the others, small section of the gaming market. RACERX Renders your ship invulnerable to attack this program only occupies a frugal 10K Novice gamers, frustrated by overly diffiSCOURGE Provides all weapons. of memory when loaded, making it more Gives you all keys for the level. cult games and Byzantine instruction likely to work with memory-hungry proGUILE Cloak mode. manuals, have the strongest need for TWILIGHT grams. There are a few other niceties as Restores ship to full power. these utilities. Unfortunately, most of the FARMERJOE Warp to another level. well, such as a \"boss\" screen, a DOS shell, products featured here overlook the and compatibility with the DOS 4GW needs of the new gamer: good technical DOS extender used in games like DOOM support, clearly written manuals, and TER OF MAGIC. Additional GEMs routineand X-COM. The manual is passable, but consistent operation. Conversely, morely become available, often months after the real hallmark of ESD's technical supadvanced gamers who are experienced the release of a new game. Most of the port is their 24-hour dedicated BBS syswith hex editors and other programming GEM modules work as advertised, altem. Using their BBS, game hackers can utilities can usually hack their way though I did run across a few modules exchange tips and tricks on cheat codes through to their own cheat codes without that behaved erratically or refused to for nearly all of the most popular games. too much trouble. However, most of work at all. Using Axis with the latest verOther game utilities and new program these utilities do provide a useful set of sion of SECRET WEAPONS OF THE LUFTupdates are also readily available. As il game tools for intermediate and adWAFFE, for example, I could get none of stands, the GAME WIZARD PRO narrowly vanced game players. the codes to work. The 8-page instruction emerges as the most comprehensive manual is next to useless, with nearly hall product in a somewhat lackluster field of AXIS: THE GAME CHEATER V1.0 its length devoted to acknowledgments, contenders. The extensive feature list, AXIS: THE GAME CHEATER is unique credits, and self-congratulation. dedicated BBS support, and solid operaamong the programs listed here because Mediocre documentation and modest cation make the GAME WIZARD Pro the best it is simultaneously the easiest utility to pabilities aside, Axis is probably the best software-based game utility program curuse and also the least effective. Axis congame utility for new game players. It rently available. centrates on providing games with \"cheat might not work as well as some of the GAME WIZARD PRO. Price: $39.95, Encodes\" that can be accessed during play. other utilities discussed here, but it is by hanced Software Design, Inc., P.O. Box MITZI 178 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JULY 1995 "


"www.care You've just arrived in a bustling city... a strange, wonderful, dangerous place. Full of unpredictable people. People you've never met, strangers. Enter the cityscape. Move through public places. Go to a nightclub, café, restaurant, movie or the theater. Explore the limits of emotion and discover startling things about them and yourself. YOUR WORLD JUST BECAME STRANGER  NGK An interactive game that never plays the same way twice. BEST STURY. Rate: **** \"The game never plays the same twice.\" Electronic Entertainment Rated *** \"Mature audiences will find themselves captivated...\" Computer Gaming World Rated ***** \"...a multimedia tour de force...cool, totally cool...\" Nautilus CD Ton 50 CD-ROMs kvision Award Finalist New Media Ton 10 CD-ROMS \"A realistic look into other people's lives.\" -American Way MATURE : AGE$17  An interactive social experience  Interact with 18 characters  Explore 28 different locations . 100's of variations for endless interactivity  First CD-ROM to employ Virtual Intimacy Available on CD-ROM for the Macintosh and Multimedia IBM PC & Compatibles. For more information or to order call toll-free: 1-800-237-6675 CG1 Dealer inquiries welcome. Circle Reader Service #49 Gazelle Teclinologies, Inc. ANIMATICS Multimedia Corporation STEREO HEADPHONES FREE "


"THE GAMER'S EDGE 92241, Scarborough, Ontario, Canada, well-written of all the game utilities reand pause the currently loaded game. In MIW 3Y9. Tel: (603) 598-2704, BBS: viewed here, featuring several useful tutoaddition to searching for hidden game (416) 497-8337. rials and examples, making the INFINITY values and other features, it offers a numMACHINE a better choice for novice game ber of unique features. It can easily grab INFINITY MACHINE V2.0 hackers. In the end, however, the INFINIand save screenshots, search for viruses, I found the INFINITY MACHINE from TY MACHINE just can't quite equal the levmonitor byte values, and even boasts a REM Software to be a solid, workable el of features and functionality present in simple program that can unassemble game cheating utility. Like the other prothe GAME WIZARD PRO. 8086 program code. On the downside, grams reviewed here, the INFINITY MAINFINITY MACHINE. Price: $69.95. TiACTION REPLAY is expensive, technical CHINE runs as a TSR in the background. tansoft and REM Software, 1 W Seminary support is negligible, and some of the inWhen loaded in this fashion, it occupies Street, Brandon, VT 05733. Tel: (802) cluded features have limited spheres of 25K of RAM in the high memory area, 247-4326, FAX: (802) 247-4327. operation. For example, the screengrabwhich is more than twice the amount of ber won't grab SVGA high resolution the GAME WIZARD Pro. Using basic and ACTION REPLAY V2.2 screens, and it can only save graphic imadvanced search utilities, you can freeze ACTION REPLAY is unique in two ways: ages in .PCX format. game variables (such as giving yourself a It's expensive ($89.95) and is the only ACTION REPLAY. Price: $89.95. Datel permanent 100% health in Doom) and hardware device of the bunch. InstallaElectronics Ltd., Givan Road, Fenton tinker with other game settings. After tion is a snap: simply install the 8-bit exInd. Est., Stoke-On-Kent, Staffs, England, you've discovered a few useful cheat pansion card in an open slot and run the Tel: 44-782-744707 (England), FAX: 44codes, you can assign each code to a included software installation program. 782-744292 (England). U.S. technical \"cheat table» which is then attached to Key to the successful operation of ACTION support provided by Advanced Console the game in question. This allows you to REPLAY is the \"freezer controller,\" a small Technologies, Tel: (708) 706-6720, FAX: create a custom list of cheats (up to 99) plastic device with a single red button (708) 706-6721. for specific games which can be loaded at which connects to a port on the back of So which utility program do you any time. The INFINITY MACHINE is comthe ACTION REPLAY expansion card. Unchoose? The best all-around software utilpatible with the DOS 4GW DOS extender like software-based utilities which can ocity is the GAME WIZARD PRO, but by a small and is also fully network compatible, alcasionally be prevented from operation margin. All of these programs could use lowing you to tinker with game network by a program which \"locks out\" the keybetter documentation, better technical variables during multi-player game board, a single press of the control butsupport and more printed examples. The matches. The manual is easily the most ton will activate the ACTION REPLAY TSR ACTION REPLAY may be too pricey for most gamers, but some of its unique feaIs she real, tures are worth the price of admission. or is she virtual? Admittedly, an expert game programmer Does it matter? or hacker with a hex editor and a willingness to do some exploring can perform a lot of the same functions as these utilities can. Gamers familiar with hexadecimal numbering and basic memory structures may find these utilities-especially the GAME WIZARD PRO-to be invaluable game accessories. Otherwise, you'd be well advised to stay away from most of these utilities, with the possible exception of Axis: THE GAME CHEATER. As with all game cheats and hacking utilities, be aware that use of these programs carries with it the risk of corrupted aftershave! game files and other problems. Before attempting to use any of these programs Who says Artificial Intelligence (AI) has to Girlfriend has our trademarked Intelligent you should back up your saved game files be boring? Does Virtual Reality (VR) always User Interface (TUI) that allows her to talk, involve killing? Are you tired of the \"interlisten, think, and remember. No other game has to a safe location. active\" buzzword hype? Then it's time for you Al on this scale. You'll think she's alive! Jeff James, CGW columnist and Associate Edto wake up to some real interactive AI! There are several different personalities to Here's what serious gamers are saying about choose from some with full motion! Call our itor of InterActive Gaming, is available on Comthe Girlfriend\" interactive virtual women: Order Line for details, or ask for a free catalog puServe at 74774,1635 and through the \"Undoubtedly the best Al program I have of all the personalities, rated GoAdult! Put an ever used...\", and \"Exceeds my expectations by artificially intelligent Girlfriend in your compuInternet at 74774.1635@compuserve.com. leaps and bounds...\" or \"Since I met Girl t er then put on the aftershave! friend Teri, I have become an Al junkie...\". and Priced from $39.95. Circle 260 \"One of the few I haven't deleted after a week\" for info on adult personalities! 709 Lingco #106, Dept CG505, Richardson, TX 75081 (800) 324-2487 GIRLFRIEND This game is so real, you'd better break out the Corporation Circle Reader Service #42 "


"W A FREE TRIP TO CANCUN IQ Contes Enter the Contest You're smart if you enter our contest and subscribe to Vateractive Quarterly, the hot new magazine that gives you the inside track on Adult CD-ROM software. 1Q features stories on the incredible lifestyles and creative breakthroughs of the stars and star-makers of Adult CD-ROMs plus product reviews to guide you in your search for interactive pleasure and perfection. De CD Rom, page 53 SEYMORE BUTTS AND SHANE, REVEALED BSCRIBE Marlants WWE Wors DO DEBITALI Is Print Obsolete Plus RIVIEWS NEWS & BUYER'S CUIDE YES! Start my subscription to Interactive Quarterly for $9.95 & send my FREE Adult CD sampler: (check one) New Machine Pixis Interactive Arcus Digital Playground Name Phone (area code) A one-year subscription includes your choice of a FREE Adult CD-ROM sampler, all for only $9.95! Mailing address And all new subscribers are automatically entered in our contest... YOU MAY WIN ONE OF THESE FANTASTIC PRIZES: First Prize: A Vacation For Two at a Luxury Resort in Cancun* 50 Second Prizes: IQT-shirts 100 Third Prizes: IQ Mouse Pads * Airfare not included. City State Zip Payment enclosed: check or money order (allow 14 days to clear) MC Visa Exp. Date Discover Signature certify I am 21 years of age or older) (Date of Birth) Mail to: IQ, CGW0795, 551 Valley Road, Suite 373, Montclair, NI 07043, fax: 201-783-3686 or E Mail at: IQMAG@aol.com. OFFICIAL CONTEST RULES: Every subscription purchased by December 15, 1995 is automatically entered into the contest. You may also enter by sending in a postcard the words \"Interactive Quarterly\" along with your name, age, date of birth and address, and mail to: 1Q Contest CGW0795, 551 Valley Road, Montclair, NJ 07043, postmarked by December 15, 1995. Only one entry per household. No mechanical reproductions. You must be 21 years of age or older to enter this contest. Winners will be selected in random drawings and notified by mail. A list of the prize winners may be obtained by sending a self-addressed, stamped envelope to the above address  Odds of winning depend on the number of entries received. Void where prohibited by law. Circle Reader Service #96 INTERACTIVE QUARTERLY AMERICA'S PREMIERE ADULT CD-ROM MAGAZINE "


"SHAREWARE SHOWCASE Share-war A GO-GO by Chuck Miller games.\" Africa Sreta Pasx pour turn to the next player IVE ME A SOLID, PLAYABLE, ized version of RISK, WORLD EMPIRE III a better fortified country with leanings IMMERSIVE GAME ANY DAY OVER offers a fast, abstract strategic contest. toward your faction or a less fortified ONE OF THE NEWLY CRAFTED, WORLD EMPIRE III's most interesting country which will have to be more heavimultimedia extravaganzas. It advance over its boardgame inspiration ly garrisoned. seems that no matter how the may well be the political proclivity The Real World Simulation mode adds zeros and ones are stacked appended to each country. Each country a new feature. In this version, armies are up, I always find myself has a political leaning randomly assigned determined by population rather than by returning to the less visually and audibly to it in the standard game and based random determination, so you end up stunning titles rather than to having to \"risk\" more to get World Empire III v2.0 games that offer barely-interacmore. Military strength tive smoke and mirrors. I guess becomes a known quantity, I'm just one of those gamers and the outcome of battles is who cringe and grit his teeth at far less random. Further, the the mention of \"Hollywood\" in political proclivities are based the same phrase as \"computer on real life. Some campaigns can go on Thus far, I honestly haven't for hours, though you could seen or played an interactive just as easily find your armies movie\" that I consider even the hacked to the bone in a matter least bit memorable. Maybe of minutes, especially when that's why I've spent more time confronting multiple forces. lately playing shareware games Thus, you'll have to learn good than commercial releases. You EXIT strategies quickly in order to see, in a very positive way sharesurvive and triumph over ware has been spared the intruSHAREWARE GOES TO WAR You can fight up to seven human or computeropposing troops. This is where sion of the film industry into its controlled opponents in the attractive, RISK-like strategy game WORLD the game's chief weaknessgame designs, if only due to the EMPIRE III. the inability to adjust the comlack of the necessary bankrolls to puter opponent's intellipull it ofl. In this light, let me mention upon political alignment in the realitygence-rears its head. You can vary the two enjoyable games that don't feature a based game. If you play the Populist difficulty somewhat by toggling off certain single digitized actor or frame of video: leader and your troops conquer a game options, but you can't adjust the WORLD EMPIRE III and GOMOKU NARABE. Populist-leaning country, you will only \"strategic sagacity\" of your digital opponeed a token garrison of one army nents. Hopefully, this will be addressed in WORLD AT WAR (assuming you don't have enemies at the the next update. Hot off the nets and eminently playable gate, naturally). If the same Populist If Risk was too abstract to be satisfying, is WORLD EMPIRE III from Viable Software leader were to conquer a Militarist counbut you still like the idea of a quick-playAlternatives, a traditional game of world try, however, it would require two or three ing strategic challenge without being conquest for WINDOWS. As events unfold armies to pacify the angry citizens. bogged down with economic production in this test of military acumen, you're Without the minimum number of armies considerations, you'll like WORLD EMPIRE thrust into armed struggle against one to to garrison a non-sympathetic country, III. It might not be THE PERFECT seven human or computer generals hellthe country can revolt and invite your GENERAL, but it doesn't cost as much as bent on calling the world their private opponent in as liberator. This effectively big-name strategy games, either. playground. Best yet, war and strategy gives your opponent a free country and WORLD EMPIRE III (WEMPIR.ZIP) is gamers can test drive the old \"crush foes lets him have a beachhead adjacent to available on most major online services mercilessly under the jackboots\" theme your operations. This political procliviand private BBSs. All you need to start before having to ask the empress or ty/garrison/rebellion feature adds to the your own armed conflict is a 386 or faster emperor of the household for any cash. strategy in that you have to consider running Windows 3.1 or higher. For the Most closely resembling a computerwhether it is more worthwhile to capture registered version, and some additional 182 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JULY 1995 "


"INTERACTIVE ENTERTAINMENT The #1 Entertainment CD MAG Each monthly episode contains previews of upcoming games, reviews of current games and interactive interviews with the major players in the entertainment industry. Plus playable demos and a free game in most episodes. INTERACTIVE ENTERTAINMENT CD ROM \"IE can showcase product features like no printed publication can...\" \"The ideal way for gamers to get an in-depth look at what's \"IE provides me with an interactive, audio visual experience that I can't get in a traditional gaming magazine.\" new.\" Frankenstein Preview Magic: The Gathering Preview Bob Bates Interview Free Game: Walls of Rome MAU Bob Bates Legend Entertainment Robert Sirotek Sir-tech Software ASE MONES CD RON rankenstein Magic: The Ga Bob Bates Inter Free Game: Wall. \"Impressive, a must have for computer gamers\" Steve Wartofsky, Editor Strategy Plus Magazine Interactive TV for your CD ROM Available at Software Stores and Newsstands for $9.95/episode or Subscribe for $79/12 episodes and save! Call 800 562 3624 to Subscribe Today! Source 97505 Fax (610) 532-9001 Local phone (610) 532-4700 Interactive Entertainment, PO Box 636, Holmes, PA 19043 All prices and payments are in US dollars. Vermont residents add 5% sales tax.  1995 Interactive Publishing, Inc. Circle Reader Service #111 "


"SHAREWARE SHOWCASE The shareware version of GOMOKU NARABE (GOMOKU.ZIP) is fully functional. If you enjoy playing it, you'll be asked to register for a modest fee of $10. Perhaps i enough players take the time to register, author Steve Neeley will update the game with a much needed collection of board variations. Chuck Miller is the editor of InterActive Gaming and CGW's Shaman of Shareware. He can be reached on CompuServe at 74774,1476 and through the Internet at 74774.1476@compuserve.com. games at no charge, send $29.95 to played in a short period of time (great for Viable Software Alternatives, P.O. Box those coffee breaks at the office). If there is 98134, Las Vegas NV 89193-8134 or call a weakness in this game, it is probably the (800) 854-4902, plastic in hand. unappealing board. Aside from this one criticism, GOMOKU NARABE will entertain ALL YOUR DOTS IN A ROW Gomoku Narabc Options Help Undo Exit Based on an ancient Japanese game \"Your movel (Black) of \"five-in-a-row,\" GOMOKU NARABE for WINDOWS is played on a representation of a GO board using small, smooth convex black and white stones. The idea is simple: get five stones in a row (horizontally, vertically or diagonally) before your opponent does. However, being a continual struggle of blocking moves, GOMOKU NARABE is actually easier to pronounce than it is to play. Unlike tictac-toe, there are no set win or draw strategies. While the mathematics whiz may fare better than the numerically GOMOKU YOURSELF Placing five stones in a row challenged, the best playing strategy is isn't as easy as it looks in this adaptation of the practice. classic Japanese strategy game GO. GOMOKU NARABE is a simple game to play, one that children as young as four or five years old can quickly learn. It's also a for hours, though you'll probably be seeing quick diversion allowing many games to be its bright yellow board in your sleep. Ziff MET To locate these games on-line, tune in to the CGW headquarters on ZillNet. Games featured here can be downloaded from ZiflNet both on CompuServe and on Prodigy. On CompuServe, go to Computer Gaming World's own forum (GO GAMEWORLD), Library 7, Shareware Sizzle. On Prodigy, jump ZillNet and Search by Title for the games listed here. Or, Search by Category to browse the entire Games Library. BLOW ONLY YOUR MIND! SHAREWARE SPECTACULAR TOP SHAREWARE GAME ONLY $1.50 PER DISK I The Game Factory For Shareware Games and CD-Roms  Heretic NEW from ID  Mystic Towers . Another Planet and  Bio Menace  Doom  3D Chess Me with No Beer  Tetris 3D NEW Version 1.91  Corridor 7  Roadwars 2000  Flight Simulators . Duke Nukem 2  Simulations of Risk, Major Stryker  Kiloblaster  Eternam Scrabble, Monopoly, Uno  Mystery Manor  Executioners  Cheat Machine Spear of Destiny Hockey Stratsys  Trolls  Sango Fighter  Raptor  Baseball . Kung Fu Louie  Blake Stone Wolfenstein 3D PLUS Many,  Hocus Pocus  Pinball Super Android Wild West Many More FREE CATALOG INCLUDING WINDOWS, BUSINESS, UTILITIES, EDUCATION, GRAPHE Now you Can Have Your Own GIRLFRIEND ... ... a sensuous woman living in your compute GIRLFRIEND is the first VIRTUAL WOMAN. You can watch her, talk to her, ask her questions and relate to her. Over 100 actual photographs allow you to see your girlfriend as you ask her to wear different outfits, and guide her into different activities. As a artificial intelligence program GIRLFRIEND starts with a 3000 word vocabulary and actually grows the more you use it. She will remer Ir birthday, and your likes and dislikes. GIRLFRIEND requires 7-10 MB of free space. We offer the ADULT VERSION 2 different girls, LISA and SUZY of a special price of only $69. (reg. price $120.) NEW! Voice Kit $29. NEW! SG20 Girlfriend Teri CD-ROM (Includes Free Voice Kit) $69. INTERACTIVE GIRLS CLUB Challenging interactive adventures Full-motion video scenes IG1 Teresa The House Guest IG2 Jo Guest The Milk Round 1G3 Vida . At the Ca Price: $49 each, 2 for $89, all 3 for $119. FREE PC Foreplay Bonus Program ($15 value) with any Interactive Girls Purcha On CD-ROM: NEURODANCERS Interactive movie and game navigate through the NoutoNET in search of the NUERODANCERS. ORDER CD On CD-ROM: VIRTUAL VIXENS 1 & 2 Interactive movies become a servant of the Space Sirens escape from a 3D Virtual Rem Chomber. ORDER CD 88, CD 89 On CD-ROM: SAMURAI PERVERT Interactive action you direct the action and choose the comera anglos.. ORDER CD 91 CD-ROM PRICES: $59 Each or SUPER BUNDLE: 3 for $149 $19 ADULT CD-ROM BLOWOUT CALL FOR DETAILS ADD SAS/H  3.5\" Or FOREIGN ORDERS ADD S2/DISKIN PA ADD TAX MUST STATE AGE OVER 21 YEARS. VISA/MC Orders Only: 800-462-7399 Ext. 600UL / 24 HRS / 7 DA: FAX (215) 997-2571. Or CK/MO to:SeXXy Software, P.O. Box 220., Dept. 600UL, Hatfield, PA 194 Circle Reader Service #291 Great Games at Great Prices Top rated games like Heretic, Rise of The Triad, One Must Fall, Sango Fighter, Doom, Jazz Jackrabbit, F18 No Fly Zone and many, many more at just $3.95 cach! Call now for your FREE graphic-packed, eye-popping, 256-color VGA disk catalog. Catalog requires: IBM PC or clone, a 1.44 MB Noppy drive, a hard drive and 640 x 480 256-color VGA 1-800-843-5178 Circle Reader Service #110 184 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JULY 1995 "


"17 OVER 15 12 HINT BOOKS CALL HYPERSPEED INCA 10 INCA 2 15 INDY JONES LAST CRUSADE 14 IRON CROSS ISLE OF DEAD JACK NICKLAUS & AD-ONS CALL JEOPARDY JETFIGHTER 2.0 14 KING'S QUEST 5-VGA KING'S QUEST 6 VGA 15 KOSHAN CONSPIRACY 10 LEGACY REALM OF TERROR 15 LEGEND OF KYRANDIA LEGENDS OF VALOR LEISURE SUIT LARRY 1 13 LEISURE SUIT LARRY 2 13 LEISURE SUIT LARRY 3 LEISURE SUIT LARRY 5 LEISURE SUIT LARRY 6 20 LHX ATTACK CHOPPER LINKS & PRO COURSE DISKS CALL LINKS 386 PRO LORD OF THE RINGS 1 LOST ADMIRAL LOST TREAS INFOCOM 2 LUCAS ARTS CLASSIC BNDL 14 PACIFIC ISLANDS PACIFIC STRIKE PACIFIC WAR PALADIN 2 PANZER GENERAL PERFECT GENERAL POLICE QUEST 1 -VGA POLICE QUEST 3 -VGA POLICE QUEST 4 POOLS OF DARKNESS POPULOUS 2 POWER HITS, MOVIES PRIVATEER PRIVATEER SPEECH PAC 5 PRO LEAGUE BASEBALL 94 18 PROTOSTAR 15 QUARANTINE 24 QUEST FOR GLORY 4 QUEST FOR GLORY SERIES CALL RAILROAD TYCOON RALLY RAVENLOFT REALMS OF ARKANIA RED BARON VGA RED CRYSTAL RED LIGHTNING RED STORM RISING RETURN TO ZORK SPECTRE SPELLCASTING 101. 201. or 301\" CALL SPELLCRAFT ASPECT VALOR 7 STAR CRUSADER STAR LEGIONS STAR TREK 25TH ANNIV. STAR TREK JDGMNT-AD-ON 7 STAR TREK JUDGEMENT STELLAR 7 STORM ACROSS EUROPE STORMOVIK STREET FIGHTER 2 STRIKE AGES STRIKE COMMANDER STRIKE SQUAD STRONGHOLD STUNT ISLAND SUBWAR 2050 SUMMONING SUPER HERO LEAGUE SYSTEM SHOCK TAKE-A-BREAK PINBALL TERMINATOR TERMINATOR 2 CHESS TERMINATOR 2029 TERMINATOR: RAMPAGE USED IBM GAMES COMPLETE & VIRUS FREE: WITH THE ORIGINAL BOX, DOCUMENTATION AND DISKS 12 GD REBEL ASSAULT 24 CD-REIN TO RINGWRLD 24 CD-RETURN TO ZORK CD-RISE OF THE ROBOTS CD. SAM & MAX CD-SHADOW OF THE COMET 23 CD-SPACE SHUTTLE CD-STAR CRUSADER CD-STAR TRAIL CD STAR TREK 25TH ANN CD STELLAR 7 CD SUBWAR 2050 CD-TEX CD-TORNADO. OP DESERT CURSE OF AZURE BONDS 11 CYBER EMPIRES 8 D-DAY BEGINNING OF END 22 D GENERATION DAEMONSGATE DAGGER OF AMMON RA 12 DARK QUEEN OF KRYNN 15 DARK SUN 22 DARKSEED 14 DEATH KNIGHTS OF KRYNN 14 DEJA VU 182 DUAL PAC-WIN 12 DISCOVERY STEPS COLUMB 11 DOOM-REGISTERED VER 28 DOOM 2-REGISTERED VER 29 Soon TEX GAMER'S GOLD WE PAY CASH FOR USED GAMES We want your current used games 1-800-377-8578 a WE NEED GAMES, IBM GAMES Got Something To Sell? Follow these Easy Steps 1. Prepare a list of the games you are selling. Call fox, or mail your list to GAMER'S GOLD 2. GAMER'S GOLD will quou the current buying prices & issue on outhorization number for your shipment Games will not be accepted without an authorization no. Price quotes are good for 14 days 3. Pack games in box. Write authorization no. clearly on outside of box, Mail to GAMER'S GOLD Save your authorization no. We can't answer questions about your shipment without your number! in Canada, call 605-339-2060 coll for authorization before shipping or FAX list for current quotes to 605-334-8766 include your return address & FAX no.) HINT BOOKS AVAILABLE $4 and UP WE SELL USED GAMES THEATRE OF DEATH THEME PARK TIE FIGHTER TONY LARUSSA GAMES TORNADO TREASURES SAVAGE FRON. 7 TUNNELS & TROLLS TWILIGHT 2000 -VGA ULTIMA 5 ULTIMA 6 ULTIMA 7 ULTIMA 7 FORGE OF VIRTUE ULTIMA 75 SERPENT ISLE ULTIMA 8: PAGAN ULTIMA UNDERWORLD 1 ULTIMATE DOMAIN ULTRABOTS UNLIMITED ADVENTURES V FOR VICTORY GAMES VETTE WAR IN MIDDLE EARTH WARLORDS 2 WESTERN FRONT WHEN TWO WORLDS WAR 17 WING COMMAND ACADEMY 15 WING COMMANDER 1 WING COMMANDER 2 WING COMMANDER ARMADA 25 WIZARDRY 5 WIZARDRY 7 WOLFPACK WORLD CIRCUIT RACING 12 WORLD CLASS SOCCER 10 WORLD WAR 2: BATTLES 13 WW2: AIR FORCE COMNDA 10 X-WING X-WING AD-ONS (EACH) YEAGER'S AIR COMBAT CALL 25 4. If you would like to use your money or credit to purchase games, include a 'wish list of titles you are interested in All games are tested & IBM disks virus checked games ore in original box with original documentation Call for current title availibility MER'S WE ACCEPT ONLY VISA/MasterCard/Discover Money Orders/Cashiers Check \"Call for the availibilty before sending MO. Most items shipped same day. $5 UPS/S9 2nd Day Air call for information on Canadian shipments GAMER'S GOLD 1008 W.41st Street Sioux Falls South Dakoto 57105 5. Your check will usually be mailed within 10-14 working days of receiving your games Some \"wish list game credits may take slightly longer to fill Gomes will be checked for viruses & completeness. Gomes must be complete with all disks, printed materials, & in original box. Incomplete games will be retumed at your expense. Game Title Price AD&D GAMES CALL ADV OF WILLY BEAMISH-VGA 12 AIR BUCKS AL-QLADIM GENIES CURSE 19 ALIEN BREED ALIEN LEGACY ALONE IN THE DARK AMBUSH AT SORINOR APBA BASEBALL ARENA ELDER SCROLLS ARMADA 2525 ARMORED FIST ATAC B17 FLYING FORTRESS BATTLE BUGS BATTLEHAWKS 1942 BETRAYAL AT KRONDOR BLOODNET BLOODSTONE BLUE AND GREY BLUE FORCE NEXT OF KIN 12 BUCK ROGERS 1 -COUNTON 5 BUZZ ALDRIN RACE SPACE 13 CAESAR CAMPAIGN 2 CARRIER STAIKE CASTLES CASTLES 2 CDHELL CAB WINDOWS CD 7TH GUEST CD AEGIS GUARDIAN FLT CD ALIEN LOGIC CD. ARMORED FIST CD-CRITICAL PATH CD-CYBERIA CD DAGGER OF AMMON RA CD DARK FORCES CD DARK LEGIONS CD-DARK SUN 2 CD-DAWN PATROL CD-DEATH GATE CD-DRACULA UNLEASHED CD-DRAGON LORE CD-DRAGON'S LAIR CD-DRAGONSPHERE CD-DUNGEON HACK CO ELECTR ARTS: TOP 10 19 CD-FANTASY EMPIRES 25 CD FIGHTER WING CD FRONT PAGE FB 95 29 CO GABRIEL KNIGHT CD GREAT NAVAL BATTLE 2 25 CDHELL: CYBERPUNK CD HORDE CD INCA 2 CD INDY JONES FATE CD INFERNO CD INHERIT THE EARTH CD IRON HELIX CD-JOURNEYMAN PROJECT 17 CD JUMP RAVEN CD JURASSIC PARK CD-KING'S QUEST 6 CD-KING'S QUEST 7 CD-LANDS OF LORE CD-LAWNMOWER MAN CD LEISURE SUIT LARRY 6 24 CD MAD DOG MCCREE 19 CD-MAD DOG MCCREE 2 22 CD-MAN ENOUGH CD MEGA RACE CD-MENZOBERRANZAN 25 CD-MIGHT AND MAG WRLD 29 CD MYST CD OUTPOST CD POLICE QUEST 4 CD PRIVATEER CD-PSYCHOTRON CD-QUANTUM GATE CDRAVENLOFT 16 12 T8 23 M-1 TANK PLATOON MAELSTROM MAGIC CANDLE 2 MARIO ANDRETTI RACING MASTER OF MAGIC CD ULTIMATE FOOTBALL 26 CDUNDER A KILLING MOON 34 CD WARCRAFT CD WHO SHOT JOHNNY CD WING COMM. ARMADA 25 CD-WING COMMAND 2 DLX 19 CD-WINTER OLYMPIC GAME 19 CD-X.COM 25 CD ZEPHYR 30 CD ROMS MANY MORE! CALL CHALLENGE OF 5 REALMS 10 CHAMPIONS OF KRYNN 9 TO GET OUR NEW UPDATED PRICE SHEET Call 800-377-8578 In Canade, cell 605-339-2060 We'll mail or FAX our latest price sheet with all our current lilles! REX NEBULAR RISE OF THE DRAGON-VGA 10 ROBINSON'S REQUIEM ROCKETEER ROME: PATHWAY TO POWER 10 SAM & MAX:HIT THE ROAD SECRET WEAP OF LUFTWA 12 SHADOW CASTER SHADOW OF YSERBIUS SHADOW PRESIDENT SILENT SERVICE 2 SILVERBALL SIM CITY 2000 SIM CITY 2000. GREAT DIS 8 SIM CITY GAMES ETC CALL SIMON THE SORCERER 13 SPACE QUEST 4 -VGA 12 SPACE QUEST 5-VGA SPACE SIMULATOR SPEAR OF DESTINY SPEAR OF DESTINY MISS 1 9 SPECIAL FORCES 24 24 Prices & availability subject to change. Call Toll Free for Current titles and those not listed-weve got lots more! All Used Games are complete & virus free with original box, documentation & disks. System compatibility is not guaranteed. All sales are final-defective games replaced with same title. Free shipping (Regular Ground) in the continental USA on orders over $150. 17 DRACULA -BRAM STOKER'S 11 DRAGON'S LAIR 3 15 DREAMWEB DUNGEON HACK DYNAMIX SAMPLE PACK ELVIRA 2 EMPIRE DELUXE EMPIRE SOCCER '94 EYE OF THE BEHOLDER EYE OF THE BEHOLDER 2 12 EYE OF THE BEHOLDER 3 17 FALCON 3.0 19 FALCON AD-ONS CALL FANTASY EMPIRES FLIGHT SIM 4 & AD-ONS CALL FRONT PAGE FOOTBALL 11 FRONT PAGE FOOTBALL PRO 18 FRONTIER ELITE 2 22 GABRIEL KNIGHT GAMES NOT LISTED? CALL GATEWAY 2: HOMEWORLD 15 GOBLINS QUEST 3 14 GRANDEST FLEET 22 GREENS GOLF HAND OF FATE HANNIBAL HARDBALL 3 14 HARPOON HARPOON 2 23 HARPOON AD-ONS CALL HARRIER ASSAULT HARRIER SUPER-VGA 17 HEAVEN & EARTH 12 HEIRS TO THE THRONE 10 HEROES OF THE LANCE HEXX HIGH COMMAND FREE GAME OFFER On orders over $75 Choose from list below  Rex Nebular  Power Monger  Jordan Vs. Bird  When Two Worlds Wor  Reolms  Dagger of Amon Ra 17 25 CHAOS CONTINUUM CIRCUITS EDGE COASTER COHORT 2 COLONIZATION COMPANION OF XANTH CONAN CONFLICT KOREA CONQUEST OF JAPAN CONQUEST OF LONGBOW CONTINUUM CORRIDOR 7 COUNTDOWN MASTER OF ORION MATRIX CUBED MAXIMUM OVERKILL MEGAFORTRESS METALTECH EARTHSIEGE 29 MICROLEAGUE SPORTS CALL MICROSOFT ARCADE -WIN 12 MIG 29 MIGHT & MAGIC 4 -CLOUDS 14 MIGHT & MAGIC 5-DARKSIDE 15 MONKEY ISLAND -VGA MONKEY ISLAND 2 MORTAL KOMBAT NFL COACHES CLUB NIIL HOCKEY (4MB RAM REO) NO GREATER GLORY NOMAD OPERATION COMBAT 2 OUT OF THIS WORLD weBuy & SELI cao 17 Circle Reader Service #241 "


"HEX, BUGS & ROCK 'N ROLL GRAPHICS Where, Oh, Where Has My Polygon? 3-D CO EVOLUTION Discover The World Of The Polygon, The Geometric Workhorse That Powers Many of Today's Hottest Games by Paul C. Schuytema magine that Kilrathi furball you're By the early 80's, the kingdom of the is that it is a shape made up of straight tailing, the one who has just called \"lilled polygon\" was firmly established. lines, and it is a flat shape. you a son-of-an-ape, is piloting not Because a polygon is a flat shape made a space fighter but just a primorDON'T KNOW MUCH out of absolutely straight line segments, it dial soup of numbers. What if that ABOUT GEOMETRY can be represented very casily by a comA-Wing you've been dogging for Can you remember back to high-school puter. Remember the old Cartesian coorten minutes wasn't really a rebel geometry? Just what is a polygon? The dinate system? Those annoying graphs ship, but just a mathematical construct. American Heritage Dictionary describes a you always waited until the last minute to Would the experience seem just as real? polygon as a \"closed plane figure bounded draw? Computers actually enjoy working For over a decade, flight simulators and by three or more line segments.\" That's with these equations. space combat simulators have utilized the accurate but not all that insightful. EssenTo represent a two-dimensional polytrusty polygon to represent the \"real\" tially, a polygon is a shape, almost any gon in a computer, all that's required is world. Originally, these polygons were shape. It doesn't posses any magical mathjust a bunch of number pairs. For a trianonly seen by their gle, it's three pairs outlines, in someeach representing thing called \"wireone of the vertices frame graphics.\" in the shape. From One of the earliest here, we can use a and best Mac flight series of polygons sims, P-51, was rento create a simple dered entirely in shape. All you realwireframes. The ly need to make a shapes of the two-dimensional SHADES OF GREY In these three images from planes had no volLucasArt's TIE FIGHTER We see (1) the venerable little rocket are four ume—the fusefighter from the rear with a minimal number of shapes: a tall, lages were flat polygons and no textures applied; (2) the same pointy triangle silhouettes, just like image with maximum polygons and the triangle tex(capsule), a tall recthe wings. tures on the panels: (3) and finally, maximum polytangle (the body of gons with gouraud shading applied. Notice how the Vector graphics, gouraud shading eliminates the discrete boundthe rocket) and two a type of wireframe aries between the polygons, lending the TIE Fighter right triangles (the rendering using the appearance of a homogenous object. lins). Presto, inspecialized hardstant Saturn V! ware, was used in such arcade classics as ematical properties like a circle, square or ASTEROIDS, TEMPEST and TAIL GUNNER. As triangle (though the last two are definitely SMOKE AND MIRRORS computer speeds accelerated, the special polygons). A polygon can have virtually If you consider my rocket example for vector graphics hardware, which actually any angular total you can imagine, but it long, you will notice a gaping flaw in my aimed the electron gun to paint images on will always be a multiple of 180 degrees (I oversimplification. What if you wanted to the phosphorous of your CRT screen, was guess that's slightly \"magical\"). What is imanimate the rocket? Or, what if you wanted unnecessary for high-speed animations portant about a polygon, for our purposes, to create a similar, but shorter rocket? 186 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1995 "


"Take a multimedia journey through the life of Marilyn Monroe Norma Jean perdun The Birth of Manila WOULD The Goddess Persona Renaissance 1818 The Legacy Portrait of My Dad Video Clips >> > I WOMEN WHEEL Timeline The A Draw ngle Ad Abstwere the Mary Bernard The A INSTI Hollywoods WAS 194.1936 russ CATWO SINO QUER SUPER MARILYN COF CD kol The timeless mystique of Marilyn Monroe is unveiled through the eyes of renowned Hollywood photographer Bruno Bernard. This fascinating CD-ROM biography is a must-have\" collector's item for all of Marilyn's devoted fans, lui For Windows and Macintosh $48 High-resolution graphics on CD-ROM Since 1982 Call Now! ComputAbility 1-800-554-1635 fill Consumer Electronics KUR-0110 Call now for taxed literature! 1.613.728-0825 tot 3080 Document 1066 \"USS plus applicable taxe Circle Reader Service #132 "


"HEX, BUGS & ROCK 'N ROLL Would you need another set of numbers? In addition, the computer must calcu\"lightsource\" shading, meaning that they I've given you a rocket shape in \"ablate such things as perspective and hidden reacted to the effects of a central light solute\" geometric terms, not \"relativistic\" surface removal (called \"backface culling\"), source. terms. For a computer to move things, it so the computer doesn't waste your time Flat shading is the technique that most needs to have much more freedom. For a by drawing polygons you won't see. of the earlier flight sims utilized. Look computer, a shape can be more accurately back at such classics as ACES OF THE PACIFIC described as an origin point, the number I'VE BEEN FRAMED! or RED BARON and you can clearly see how of vertices, and numbered pairs which repThe essential lesson gleaned from the flat shading works. The planes are disresent the position of the vertices in relaabove paragraphs is that a shape, such as a cernible and unique, but they look like tion to the origin. In this way, if the value spaceship, is built out of a bundle of polythey're made out of cardboard, since all of of the origin is changed, then the shape gons. Generally, developers use some type the polygon borders are clearly visible. data is still correct. of 3D drawing package to create the basic Things get rather murky when we want shapes for an object. If you have spent any WAITING FOR GOURAUD to talk about rotation, changing the size of time designing objects in Domark's Recent sims such as TIE FIGHTER and a shape, and other such movements. Then FLIGHT SIM TOOLKIT, then you know how ACES OVER EUROPE utilize a technique we are talking about much more than just the process works. called gouraud shading (pronounced changing an origin point—we're entering One of the main concerns to game pro\"guh-row\" and named after the French the realm of matrix algebra, which is es grammers is making sure that these polycomputer scientist, Henri Gouraud, who sentially tables of data that represent such gon objects have as few polygons as developed this process in 1971). This is a things as points, shapes and vectors. Withpossible, because the more polygons, the type of shading which fools the viewer into out going into the math, I'll just say that more computer power is needed. As an exthinking that he or she is viewing a curved computers can do matrix math far more ample, if you consider the \"splash intro\" of surface, not a shape made up of flat faces. elliciently than we humans, and matrix many games, such as the introductory seFuselages and engines are a perfect candimath operations can be combined, letting quence in MECHWARRIOR 2, you see a nondate for gouraud shading in a sim. the computer calculate a rotation and a interactive movie which was created using Imagine a wireframe model of a beer position change in a single pass. This saves something like 3D Studio or one of the Silmug. The cylinder of the mug can be cretime, which is very important once we get icon Graphics packages. The Madcatated by extruding the shape of an octagon. into three-dimensional polygon graphics. mech in the intro has thousands upon With flat shading, the mug looks like it's thousands of faces which create an almost made up of Nat polygons. Add gouraud WARP 3-D, SCOTTY! photorealistic animated image. But the shading, and you would swear that you are Polygons can also live quite happily in computer is not calculating the movement looking at a smoothly curved surface. three-dimensional space. Each vertex is of these thousands of polygons. The scene Gouraud shading is a way to visually then defined by three numbers: our familis \"pre-rendered\" or \"canned,\" and all the \"warp\" a flat polygon, so it isn't really iar x-y of high school geometry and a z cocomputer is doing is playing back the anineeded on a polygon which is supposed to ordinate to represent depth. This brings mation like a movie. Once you get into the look flat, such as the panels on a TIE us to the concept of world and screen cogame and you are actually controlling the FIGHTER. The cockpit, though, is another ordinates. Imagine the 3D world of TIE mech, the level of realism seen in the intro story. It is supposed to look spherical, and FIGHTER: parsecs upon parsecs of space, is gone. The animated mechs that you that's where gouraud shading comes in. It and clustered here and there are interestcontrol have perhaps only several hundred dissolves the visual boundaries between ing things like Y-Wings, transports, Imperpolygons, because that's the maximum polygons, and using color blending and ial Destroyers and the like. They all \"live\" number that a computer can process in highlights, it will create the appearance of in a three-dimensional world and move as \"real time.\" a smoothly curved surface. we expect them to move. Only our VGA Imagine a triangular polygon. Shine an monitor is just a two-dimensional area-a THE WORLD IS FLAT imaginary flashlight on the face. If you sheet of very expensive graph paper. Okay, so we have created our simple were to measure the light accurately, there One of the most crucial programming wireframe for the TIE FIGHTER, a very simwould be subtle differences between the operations is the moment when a program ple ship, really. The key components are light at each vertex because of different takes all of the information of the world only the cockpit and those two odd panels distances to the light and different angles data and creates an image on your screen. on each side. Not many polygons at all. from the light source. These variations Many, many things are going on, but two How do we make it look as real as possible smoothly transition from one to another of the most important tasks are translating for the player? so that you don't notice any difference. the 3D world coordinates into a series of In X-WING, the polygons were flat shadYet if we were to exaggerate the color 2D data which can be displayed on your ed, meaning that a single color was apdifferences at each vertex of the triangle, monitor. Also, the image must be plied to the face of each polygon. These then this blending of colors would create «clipped\" so that you only see a portion of shades could be tweaked to be lighter or the illusion of a curved surface. Look down the world, and not the whole thing. darker to give the appearance of true on our polygon, and it would look convex; 188 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD  JULY 1995 "


"COREL OFFICE Companion THE BEST CD TO COMPLETE YOUR OFFICE SUITE OFFICEX fennollicem RYBOS FICO Perfect Office You've got your office suite... but to maximize your productivity you need Corel CD Office Companion. It's value-packed with World Wide Web and fax communications, business graphics, PIM, clipart, fonts, reference libraries and Incredible multimedia utilities—all on one power and value convenient CD-ROM! all on one OFFICE The best CD lumplete your office suite IUS convenient CD-ROM Business Graphics CorelFLOW 2* 2,000 \"drag and drop\" symbols 90 customizable Smart Symbol Libraries Built-in spell checker Automatic shape connectors Personal Information Manager Corel PLANNER Cross-reference information easily by linking related items together Daily, Weekly, monthly and yearly calendar views for planning appointments and activities Complete Electronic Reference Corel BOOKCASE 6 comprehensive references Correspondence Library—700 standard business letters Internet Web Browser and Fax Corel Web Mosaic Built-in playback support for AIFF and AU audio files Direct display of GIF and JPEG images Full printing applications CorelFAX Send faxes from within any Windows application Built-in OCR and TWAIN-compliant scanning Send and receive faxes in the background Fonts Corel FONT MASTER 500 high-quality Bitstream and URWM fonts Preview fonts, assemble font groups, install and deinstall True Type fonts on the fly Clipart and Photos Corel GALLERY 2* 15,000 clipart images 200 photos and 75 sound clips Full-color reference guide with thumbnails of each clipart image Multimedia Utilities Corel CD Audio -Listen to your favorite audio CD from your CD-ROM drive  WinTune 2.0-System diagnostic indicator to optimize the performance of your PC WinDat .WAV File Editor-Record and edit sound clips Corel Screen Saver and Wallpaper Flipper *Clipart, font and photo libraries vary from the standalone versions of Corel FLOW 2 and Corel GALLERY 2 KUR-0115 TigerDirect 1-800-CD-TIGER COREL Microsoft is a registered trademark of Microsoft Corporation, PerfectOffice is a trademark of Novell, Inc., and SmartSuite is a registered trademark of Lotus Development Corporation. Microsoft Corporation, Novel, Inc. and Lotus Development Corporation make no endorsement of Corel or Corel CD Office Companion 1-800-238-4437 Please mention code BUL $US plus applicable taxes. Circle Reader Service #130 Call now for faxed literaturel 1-613-728-0826 ext. 3080 "


"HEX, BUGS & ROCK 'N ROLL look at it from the side and it would still be space ships in WING COMMANDER III. GenThis helps give the illusion of reality serias flat as an Illinois cornfield. erally, a single screen frame (what you see ous visual credibility. In addition, the texon your monitor) is composed of between tures can be swapped as the game is being MIGHTY FINE PIXELS... 70-100 polygons, yet the fighter that we're played, allowing for certain parts of the When creating your killer spaceship, doggedly pursuing has enormous detail ship to show the battle damage expected simple polygons and gouraud shading still belying that simplicity. in an up-close-and-tight dogfight. might not give you the variation you need. In WCIII, the ships were first designed Textures may even be animated. The afYou might want to add some \"space by Origin's artists using Alias (a 3D model terburner glow in WCIII is essentially a grunge,\" some vent ports for your engine, ing package) on a Silicon Graphics comtransparent cone coming off the back of or an escape hatch. If you created detailed puter. This high-quality design was made an engine. When the afterburners kick in, polygons for all of these, you would have a up of tens of thousands of polygons, and this cone is then textured with several shape that's far too complicated for your every detail imaginable was applied, so frames of animated, translucent bitmaps to computer to manipulate in real time. that the finished ship would truly look like represent the intense fuel-burning power The solution is to cheat, to paint your a real Kilrathi fighter. The artist would of high-speed flight. polygons with complicated images. This then render a top, bottom, back and other To animate a complex object such as a Kilrathi fighter, the computer first loads in a list of vertices for a space ship, and then an integer list of faces. WCIII ships use triangle and \"quad» polygons exclusively, so this integer list is either a set of three or four numbers, each representing the vertices which make up that particular polygon (remember, in a POLYGON COMMANDER To create the craft for wireframe model, several WING COMMANDER III, Origin first made a wire frame polygons can all share a commodel (1). Then, they created texture maps on a mon vertex). Information is Silicon Graphics machine (2), and pasted the texalso loaded in for each polyture maps onto the polygons of the wire frame model (3). gon telling the computer just what it is (texture mapped, texture mapped and shaded, technique is called texture mapping, and it etc.), and the needed texture appears in a great number of today's map data is loaded into games, from WING COMMANDER III to memory. DOOM to FLIGHT UNLIMITED. needed views and save those images to a Then for each frame (about 24 per secBasically, texture mapping is taking an file which could be read by a PC. The ond on a screaming Pentium), the comimage (a bitmap) and pasting it on top of a artists were then charged with creating a puter performs a perspective polygon. Imagine a rectangle which is part simplified wire frame model in Origin's transformation on the vertices, and the of our long, tall spaceship. You could paste proprietary «EOR\" 3D modeling program. projected coordinates are shuffled off to on a texture map which contains grunge of This simplified model would be the shape the primitive draw routines (coded in asthe engine exhaust at the bottom, an which is actually controlled by the game. sembly language for maximum speed), to emergency blast door and several fins, Taking an image of the top view of the draw everything you see on the screen. pipes and conduits. wireframe, as well as the high-quality siliHow does this save us processing powcon graphics image of the top view, an WHERE WILL THE POLY GO? er? Easy, since the computer is still only artist would then sit down in a standard While other graphical approaches to transforming the vertices of our original paint program to tweak the high-quality creating believable and active 3D worlds polygon, and then pasting on the skewed image so that it fit exactly to the simplified have been used, from video technology to bitmap. We're not calculating the position wiremesh. Then, the high-quality image is sprites to voxels, polygons are truly the of the hatch, the rungs of an escape ladder \"glued\" on top of the polygons of the ship, workhorse of the sim world. Now that or the exhaust fins; the computer still creating a stunningly detailed model of a CPU horsepower is up to the task of such treats the spacecraft fuselage as a simple ship with a workable number of polygons. mathematical trickery as gouraud shading rectangle. In WCIII, some of the polygons are and texture mapping, the tried-and-true Perhaps the most impressive use of texdrawn using both light-sourced flat shadpolygon has a whole new lease on life. ture mapping to date can be seen in the ing and semi-transparent texture maps. 190 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JULY 1995 "


"THE MARKETPLACE Call your Account Representative, Marci Yamaguchi, at (415) 357-4920 for information on how you can advertise your game, product or service in the economical MARKETPLACE section. GET THOSE OLD JOYSTICKS OFF THE SHELF. and plug them into the NEW MAXPort Adapter! Then choose the stick you want to use with a flick of a switch. As low as $15.95 THE BEST PO/SHAREWARE! GAME EDICORS & WALKTHRUS! CHEACS & APPLICATIONS FOR IBM PC! ORDER Bonuses! CRICE OR CALL FOR A FREE CACALOG. Don't crawl around behind your CPU, and never settle for a pad style stick in your flight sim again. The MAXPort Adapter is the Quality Alternative you need to minimize your frustration and maximize your enjoyment. And Maxporto technology is available in four different kits designed to fit your budget and specific needs. Order a set of MAXPorto Adapters, and plug them into any standard 25-pin socket 2 or 4-way switchbox, or request IT DON'T TAKE NO GENIUS, one of our complete kits including a high quality switchbox and cable. Be sure to get the original MAXPorto, and MAXimize your gaming experience! MPS-2 : 3MAXPorto Adapters and instructions...$15.95 +2.50 S+H MPK-2:3MAXPort Adapters, I cable, 1. 25pin A/B 2-way Switch and instructions...$32.95 +5.00 S+H MPS-4: 5-MAXPorto Adapters, and instructions...$24.95 +3.50 S+H MPK:4:5. MAXPort Adapters, 1 cable, 1. 25pin A/B/C/D 4-way Switch and instructions...$55.95 +6.00 SMYTHICRAFT INNOVATIONS Stick 2 40 MONROE AVE, DeBARY, FL 32713-3204 (209) 358-1160 voice & FAX Stick 1 «k2 LOTSA BYTES BOX 1756, Winton, CA 95388 1 Circle Reader Service #155 Circle Reader Service #370 145,000 Volume Game Buyers Each Buying an Average of 18 Games a Year COMPUTER GAMING WORLD WE HAVE THE IG H T Advertisers who want to place their print R Put the power of this audience to work for you. Call Marci Yamaguchi for advertising information (415) 357-4920 Advertisers who want to place their print ads in a quality publication ask the question: \"Is your circulation audited ?\" We're very proud to answer \"Yes.\" We are a member of the Audit Bureau of Circulations because we share ABC's belief that circulation audits are an essential assurance of value. ABC is the premier circulation auditing organization in the world, and has been since 1914. Each year, ABC auditors test and verify that our circulation figures are facts, not claims. An ABC audit is the sign of a sound investment for advertisers. Not all publications are audited, but they should be. Because when advertisers ask \"Is your circulation audited?\" there's only one answer. Audit Bureau of Circulations \"Yes.\" JULY 1995 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 191 "


"ADVERTISER Comp PhOne Inde FREE FREE INFO. # PRODUCT COMPANY PAGE INFO. # PRODUCT COMPANY PAGE 171 370 230 287 288 286 195 MicroProse 112 293 BAO 380 117 381 382 51 163 383 120 121 328 347 72 122 190 200 111 245 79 103 93/96 213 362 96 181 250 151 219 sos 153 337 132 304 175 130 198 21st Century Entertainment Pinball Fantasies Deluxe Accolade BRETT HULL HOCKEY '95 Accolade HARDBALL 4 141 Accolade All Star Baseball 147 Activision Action Pack 2 101 Activision Mechwarrior 2 87,89 Advanced Gravis Firebird and Phoenix AIVR Corporation Girlfriend 180 American Laser Games Last Bounty Hunter/PC GAMEGUN 25 Las Vegas 133 Bare Bones Software Buy and Sell Pre-Owned Software! 164 Capstone Software TEKWAR 136 Capstone Software Harpoon II Deluxe Capstone Software Witch Haven Carbela Tek The Jam Pack 44 CH Products New From CH Products 135 Chips & Bits Board Games and RPG Games176-177 Chips & Bits Interactive Entertainment 183 Chips & Bits Sail '95 199 Chips & Bits Mail Order Adult Software 200-201 Chips & Bits Mail Order Products 72-77 Columbia House CD-ROM Direct 103 Computer Express Ms. Metaverse 129 Computer Express Cyber Maxx 165 Computer Express go DIGITAL 202 Computer Express Mail Order Products 92-97 Corel Corporation Marilyn 187 Corel Corporation CD OFFICE COMPANION 189 Creative Labs Van Gogh. Awe 32 Sound Cards 99 Diamond Multimedia Systems Stealth 64 Ad 41 Discis Knowledge Research Jewels of the Oracle Domark Software Orion Conspiracy Domark Software Absolute Zero Domark Software Tank Commander 62-63 Educorp Midnight Stranger 179 Electronic Arts Marine Fighters Electronic Arts Fade to Black 70-71 Electronic Arts Pumpkin Head Electronic Arts Tony La Russa Enhanced Software Design, Inc Game Wizard Epic MegaGames, Inc. One Must Fall 2097 Falcon Northwest Falcon MACH V FormGen, Inc. Terminal Velocity FormGen, Inc. Rise of the Triad Gamer's Gold Mail Order Products Gametek Baldies GEnie AIR WARRIOR GoldTree Enterprises Kingspoint GT Interactive Software Ultimate Doom GTE Entertainment FX-FIGHTER C2-1 HPS Simulations Tigers on the Prowl 1*Motion, Inc. Alone In The Dark 3 151 I*Motion, Inc. CEO id SOFTWARE Heretic Impressions Software, Inc. PowerHouse Impressions Software, Inc. Caesar II Interactive Magic Apache Interactive Magic Exploration Lotsa Bytes The Best PD/Shareware 191 LucasArts Entertainment Co. FULL THROTTLE 8-9 Mad Mouse Warehouse The Game Doctor 152 Megatech Software Knights of Xentar 149 Machiavelli MicroProse Pizza Tycoon 113 MicroProse CivNet 114 MicroProse Navy Strike 115 MicroProse Colonization Gold 116 MicroProse Aztec Empire of Blood MicroProse 1944 Across the Rhine 118 MicroProse This Means WAR! 119 MicroProse Virtual Karts MicroProse Magic The Gathering MicroProse Necrobius Military Simulations, Inc. Fighting Falcons 139 Mindscape, Inc. Warriors 109 Mission Control Mission Control 154-155 Mission Control Space Sirens 161 Mission Control Interactive Quarterly MPG-Net Multi-Player Games Network166-167 New World Computing Metal Lords or Wetlands Novastar Game Company Wargames ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Wings of Glory Papyrus NASCAR Racing & Track Pack Philips Interactive Media Chaos Control Quarterdeck Office Systems GameRunner R & G Games Used Game Software Roberts Enterprises RED ZONE S Software Mail Order Software 184 Sanctuary Woods Buried in Time 106-107 Sierra On-Line, Inc. Space Quest 6 Sierra On-Line, Inc. Phantasmagoria 52-54 Sir-Tech Jagged Alliance Sir-Tech Jagged Alliance Sir-Tech Jagged Alliance SmythCraft Innovations MaxPort Adapter Sofdec, Inc. Risky Spectrum Electronics Mail Order Products 159 STD Entertainment INTERACT PC Game Accessories 195 Strategic Simulations, Inc. THUDERSCAPE Strategic Simulations, Inc. STEEL PANTHERS Talonsoft Battleground: Ardennes The Avalon Hill Game Co. D-Day The Game Factory Games/Shareware ThrustMaster, Inc. F-16 FLCS stick & F-16 TOS Time Warner Interactive Primal Rage Time Warner Interactive Group Conqueror TRIMARK Interactive Magball Turtle Beach Systems Tropez Venus Interactive Cinema Intimate Possibilities Vertronix, Inc. Vertronix, Inc. Virgin Interactive Entertainm't Command & Conquer Wargames West Shadowfist 145 WarnerActive Chaos Engine 10-11 280 307 346 198 87 291 207 58 210 220 215 58 61 363 271 120 69 163 45 163 139 173 155 310 115 126 265 275 106 141 289 22 297 241 110 129 161 30 NO 314 239 40 140 248 319 126 162 25 43 165 255  * Please see advertisement for contact information 192 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1995 "


"..... Play to win and save yourself some money. Covering Interactivo & Multimedia Entertainment GAMING WORLD GAM de bares 100 CALE MAGASINE COMPUTER EXCLUSIVE COVERAGE! DOOM II SAVE UP TO Feature Reviews l Pagan Ultima Dragonsphere Great Naval Battles II AEGIS In-Deuth Strategies F-14 Fleet Defender Aces Over Europe Merchant Prince Sneak Preview Aces of the Deep Secrets of the Computer Game Developers Make the ultimate move I for serious gamers who know the score when it comes to buying computer gaming magazines. Subscribe to Computer Gaming World now and save up to 47%! BRILLA Score points and cosmic savings now with Computer Gaming World. We're worlds apart from any other computer game magazine. . One year/12 issues $27.94. YOU SAVE 41%! . Two years/24 issues $49.97. YOU SAVE 47%! Savings based on annual cover price of $47.40. Every monthly issue brings you exclusive first looks at the hottest, newest games... the latest in multimedia, CD-ROM and interactive environments. Plus winning strategies, master clues, in-depth reviews — all the help you need to pump up your system and play out your fantasies on this planet and beyond. CALL NOW TO SAVE UP TO 47% 1-800-827-4450 To ensure savings, mention this code to the operator who answers your call: 4295. "


"UNDER THE HOOD GRAPHICS REVOLUTIO . 3-D CO 3D Graphics Acceleration TEORIAK 574 What Is 3D Graphics Acceleration And What Will It Do For Games?? by Mike Weksler ery soon you will hear a lot a minimum of 30 frames per second, and mapping, and in some cases, the lightabout 3D graphics accelerayou can see that we may have a gaming sourcing, transforming, and clipping tion cards that promise to revolution on our hands. You'll be able to chores which the CPU presently slugs out speed up complex 3D comsee smoother, richer, more realistic worlds with cutting-edge 3D games. This won't puter games. Companies such than we ever thought possible on the PC. leave the CPU laying back in a hammock as Diamond, Creative Labs, What is 3D graphics acceleration and drinking Pia Coladas, but rather, free its and Matrox are feverishly dewhy would you want it? To explain, let me resources to perform other tasks, like runveloping these plug-in cards and cooperatback up a bit. As most of you know, for ning enhanced Al routines, for instance. ing with game companies so that versions every new state-of-the-art, hot-rod comput One thing to consider is that the quality of popular games will be written to take ader system that's introduced, there's always a of graphics, level of enhancement, and the vantage of their acceleration hardware. game or two that could benefit from even a product cost are all going to be based on These cards have the potential to run faster computer. Typically, these games are the differences in these optimized 3D ar processor-intensive 3D games like fast, real-time 3D games like Papyrus' chitectures. Some architectures render in NASCAR RACING and US NAVY FIGHTERS NASCAR RACING. Even with a 90 MHz four-sided polygons, some in triangles, at amazingly high resolutions and frame Pentium, when all the features and texture and others use exotic techniques which rates. Imagine resolutions of 800x600 with mapping are turned on, NASCAR starts to don't render in polygons at all (see 65,000 colors! Combine that with hardslow down. The problem is that the burden nVidia's Multimedia Accelerator in ware texture-mapping technology that can of processing the complex calculations READ.ME). Additionally, texture maps can take into account perspectives, run it all at necessary to move 20 texture-mapped vebe stored in your system's RAM (less exhicles around a texture-mapped track is pensive but slower in performance), or in placed upon our single, overworked 486 or the graphics card's RAM (more expensive SHORT CIRCUITS Pentium processor. What is needed to but potentially faster performance). Wanna insult your buddy while chas speed up the process is a division of laSeveral 3D accelerator products are ing him down the hallway with a BFG bor-several processors doing different pending from chip makers including: 9000 in DOOM? Check out U.S. Rojobs for the good of the whole. And this is nVidia, Yamaha, Rendition, 3D Labs, S3, botics' new simultaneous voice-overwhat 3D accelerator cards will do. ATI, Matrox, Cirrus, Artist Graphics, and data modem. While the SPORTSTER Vi is How does this new technology work? Video Logic. Most of these will be incorpopositioned to meet the \"needs of the Well, using technology passed down from rated on graphics cards later this year. The burgeoning small office,\" we all know that we'll be using it for-games. Using the military simulators and CAD workstaonly one that you can purchase in stores two SPORTSTER Vi modems, CGW tions, the 3D portion of your games will be now is the Matrox MILLENNIUM (see this staffers played Interplay's DESCENT and accelerated with hardware just as digital month's READ.ME), which ships with an talked to each other simultaneously, on video and 2D graphics are in current WINenhanced version of NASCAR. On the the same line with no gameplay degra Dows graphic accelerators. The 3D game product side, large multimedia companies dation. Both the 14.4 and 28.8 bps ver graphics process can be better accelerated like Diamond, ATI, and Creative Labs sions of the Sportster Vi are V.34 fax by offloading some, if not all, of the graphhave 3D graphic accelerator products in modems. Price: Sportster Vi 14.4 inter ics processing chores to a processor archithe works. Sources also indicate that leadnal $149, external $179. Sportster Vi tecture optimized for it. There are ing-edge 3D game developers like Look28.8 internal $399, external TBA. Call graphics accelerator cards in the works that ing Glass, Papyrus, Interplay, Domark, 800-DIAL-USR for more. will have chips hard-wired to perform 3D and Origin all have games under developalgorithms, perspective-corrected texture ment that will take advantage of 3D hard194 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1995 "


"IS THIS YOUR GREATEST FLIGHT EXPERIENCE? Then it's time to test-fly INTERACT Game Accessories. With these full-featured flight controllers, you'll develop the skills to complete even the toughest missions... grip with built-in hand rests for both right and left-handed pilots, four fire buttons, 4-way view, throttle control, calibration software, \"smart\" auto-fire, and sturdy metal base will equip you for all phases of your mission. PC FLIGHT FORCE Take to the skies with this ergonomic flight stick. Comfortable grip and hand rests, rapid fire PC FLIGHT FORCE control, solid metal base, and two highly-responsive fire buttons prove to be a deadly force against enemy fighters. FLIGHT FORCE WCS Add this Weapons Control System to any joystick to put innumerable functions at your command. The take-off & landing throttle function and programmable keys give you access to all of your cockpit controls. PC FLIGHT FORCE PRO Join the ranks of the flying elite with this advanced flight stick. The contoured For IBM-PC/Compatibles FLIGHT FORCE WCS (Coming Soon) PC FLIGHT FORCE PRO THE BEST NEVER REST! INZERAGE INTERAG .To Ematenoncus9, he notaeten van belang van rug S STD ID GAME PRODUCTS STD Entertainment (USA), Inc. 110 Lakefront Drive. Hunt Valley, MD 21030 410-785-5661 .  1995 STD Entertainment (USA), Inc. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. ENTERTAINMENT Circle Reader Service #275 "


"UNDER THE HOOD ware acceleration to some degree. sounds great, it's still on the horizon. In connect to your existing VGA card. The compatibility and performance of a the meantime, you should expect to see The one thing to remember is that these given game with a given card is going to be several one-off DOS conversions of the cards will not enhance your existing 3D a crucial issue for gamers. The products leading DOS 3D games, followed by some VGA games. They may run VGA games a likely to gain the widest support, though, original DOS 3D games, enhanced to be bit faster by virtue of their fast VGA techare those which accelerate the WINDOWS 95 bundled with the various 3D products. nology, but only the games specifically 3D-DDI (a low-level 3D interface) and are Initially, you'll encounter a large variety written for 3D acceleration will be able to compatible with emerging real-time 3D of products for 3D acceleration. Some will take advantage of these products. graphics tools, like Microsoft's RENDERcombine 2D and 3D acceleration like MaThe proliferation of accelarators and the MORPHICS and Criterion's RENDERWARE. trox's MILLENNIUM. Others like nVidia's hype surrounding them is going to create Using the 3D-DDI, game companies will MULTIMEDIA ACCELERATOR will combine a lot of confusion. It will take a while for be able to port their existing programming WINDOWS acceleration, General MIDI the smoke to clear, but when it does, we code more easily so that their games will wavetable synthesis, and 3D acceleration will be looking at a new world of 3D games run under WINDOWS 95. all in one chip. Perhaps the easiest cards to and far more realistic gaming experiences. While WINDOWS 95 and the 3D-DDI deal with will be simple add-in cards that THE PARTS DEPT. Enhancing Video Quality In Windows by Loyd Case ike it or not, digital video is here to stay. It has become an integral part of some games, and it will be inIcreasingly prevalent in multimedia and even business applications in the future. Yet most video on a computer, even a fast computer, is jerky, fits inside of a postage stamp screen and looks like it was created by a myopic pointillist painter You'll experience an interesting contrast when you demonstrate even the latest computer game video segments to nongamers. When I show WING COMMANDER III to experienced computer types, they are stunned and impressed with the quality of the image. When I demo it to someone who is unfamiliar with computers, they comment on the poor quality of the video. After all, despite the technology, it doesn't look remotely like the quality of a lowly $300 color television. What can be done to improve the picture? Let's take a look at two products that can enhance a game's video playback in WINDOWS. The first one is the Diamond STTALIHI VIDEO DRAM, which uses the S3 Vision868 processor. The other one is the Hercules GRAPHITE TERMINATOR PRO, which uses the S3 Vision968. confused, because many people mix the term \"graphics\" and the term \"video.\" For example, VGA stands for \"Video Graphics Array\"; unfortunately, video in the larger context means images captured with a video camera and somehow digitized. We had sales people think we meant the Diamond STEALTH SE, the DIAMOND STEALTH 64 DRAM, and several other cards. The first time we saw this card, we were amazed by the size and the number of chips. There are a total of 11 chips on the card; four of them make up two megabytes of DRAM. The card itself is tiny, about four by five inches. Installing it Stealth Video was simple in our 90 MHz Pentium PCI system, and the software (utilities and drivers for WINDOWS) was also easy to install. The card delivers good DOS performance (see table), which is essential for gaming. While not quite as fast as the current favorite among some gamers, the Hercules DYNAMITE POWER, it's faster than past S3-based cards and offers stunning WINDOWS performance. We tested it on a number of SVGA games: WING COMMANDER III, PANZER GENERAL, DEATHGATE and U.S. NAVY FIGHTERS. All of them ran without a hiccup. The frame rate for WING COMMANDER III was glass-smooth, but U.S. Navy FIGHTERS did show a frame rate hit in a furball at 640x480 with all options on, althought the game remained playable. Next, we took a look at some video. The first point: this card will NOT accelerate video in DOS. It only accelerates video under Microsoft WINDOWS. So don't expect the digital video in, say, WING COMMANDER III to speed up. The second point is that the card ships with a soft MPEG driver, which allows the user to view MPEG compressed video. This sounds neat on the surface, but games that use MPEG-compressed video usually expect MPEG decompression hardware to be present, and often won't recognize the software driver. It will automatically play MPEG-formatted MovieCDs—when we did run MPEGcompressed digital video, the picture quality was superb, even at full screen. (Diamond has a daughtercard connector on their higher-end Stealth 64 Video VRAM to add actual MPEG acceleration hardware; this hardware will recognize games which have used MPEG compressed video.) At a typical street price of $199 for the 1MB version and $259 for Multimedi Accelerater DIAMOND STEALTH VIDEO DRAM This is an awkwardly named product. When talking with dealers, it's easy to get 196 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JULY 1995 "


"VOTED THE BEST MULTIMEDIA SOUND CARD. PERIOD. \"Turtle Beach Systems once again earns an Editors' Choice ... the midrange Turtle Beach Tropez, which combines Turtle Beach quality, SOUND BLASTER compatibility, a fine software bundle, and a fair price.\" PC Magazine March 28, 1995 \"With this many high-quality features, Tropez is a potent package and an excellent value ... All in all, the Tropez sound board is a remarkable value.\" Multimedia World — April, 1995 \"In short, the Tropez board is a winner because it raises the bar for all-around quality, and it does so at an affordable price.\" Computer Life — April, 1995 Terde Beach Turtle Beach has done it again! Tropez, our first 100% game compatible sound card, has won the coveted PC Magazine award for being the best sound card in its class, plus other great reviews from the industry's leading magazines! That's what happens when you combine sterling, 16-bit, CD quality digital audio with realistic wavetable synthesis. Tropez also includes: The best digital audio with sample rates up to 48kHz. Wavetable synthesizer with 128 realistic General MIDI instruments, 2 megs ROM. Circle Reader Service #248 SampleStoreTM ... lets you add an unlimited number of new instruments of your choice, up to 12 megs RAM. New, enhanced IDE CD-ROM connector. Wave SET professional digital soundediting software. StratosTM MIDI song-writing software. Plus loads of excellent gaming software! See your favorite computer dealer, or call 800-645-5640 today for more information or the Turtle Beach $5 demo CD! TURTLE BEACH SYSTEMS MAGAZINE EDITORS CHOICE. March 28,1995 Turtle Beach Tropez 52 Grumbacher Road. York, Pennsylvania 17402 717-767-0200. 1-800-645-5640  FAX: 717-767-6033 A Division of Integrated Circuit Systems All trademarks are registered by their respective companies. Specifications may change without notice "


"UNDER THE HOOD the 2MB version, the Diamond Stealth Video is definitely worth looking at. HERCULES GRAPHITE TERMINATOR PRO The TERMINATOR PRO is a high-end graphics card, and can be equipped with up to 4MB of VRAM, enabling the card to handle up to 16 million colors at a resolution of 1172x870. The WINDOWS graphics performance is somewhat slower than the STEALTH VIDEO DRAM (a tribute to the WINDOWS driver developers at Diamond), but is slightly faster in DOS. Also, the Hercules application for switching color depth and resolutions in WINDows doesn't seem as well-considered as the Diamond version. While the hardware was easy to install, there were some oddities in the software installation. For example, setting the refresh rate of the monitor requires that you be in WINDOws. There is a way to set the refresh rate in DOS, but it requires a TSR program to be loaded, eating up precious DOS memory. Once a refresh rate is set, it remains at that setting for subsequent use, so having to use the WINDOWS program to change the setting is not that onerous. The card performs smoothly, and the same DOS games we tried with the Diamond card ran well. Hercules doesn't ship a soft MPEG driver with the card, but based on our experience with Diamond's soft MPEG driver, this is no big loss. This is a high-end card, with a price to match: $389 suggested retail for the 2MB version or $559 with 4MB. Considering the price, it is spartan in features and wasn't all that easy to use. Hercules does offer superb support, and their cards have a reputation for being very solid. If you need the high-end features, take a look at the Hercules, but check out the competition as well. Grall PERFORMANCE BENCHMARKS Card 3D Bench Vidspeed Low (read/write) Vidspeed High (read/write) PC Bench Video Winbench 95 Stealth Video DRAM Terminator Pro 83.3 83.3 19835 / 3241 19835/3268 17472/2140 19826/2332 4907 4992 15.1 14.4 Notes: Winbench 95 is at 640x480x256 colors; Vidspeed Low is 320x200x256: Vidspeed High is 640x480x256; system is a Pentium 90, Intel PCI motherboard, rev 12 BIOS, 32 MB RAM. Operating system is DOS 6.22/Windows for Workgroups 3.11. @ RED ZONE EN FOR TIIE SERIOUS GAMER RR & G GAMES PO Box 5008 Glendale Hts. IL 60139 We Buy & Sell New and Used Game Software & Hint Books. Call 1-800-525-GAME Get CASH for your games or get an additional 10% in credit, good for future game purchases at great prices on used games like these...and many more ACTION/ADVENTURE 7th Guest 11th Hour /CD 51.00 Alone In The Dark 2 /GD 40.00 Bioforge 45.00 Deathgate /CD 34.00 Discworld /CD 36.00 Dragonsphere CD 32.00 Ecstatica CD 36.00 King's Quest 7 DOS/MAC... 49.00 Magic Carpet 43.00 Relentless Twixens Adventure.... Star Trek Tng Final CD 56.00 Star Trek Tng /CD..... ..... 77.00 System Shock 46.00 Under A Killing Moon /CD 56.00 Under A Killing Moon Sample CD. 6.00 Zorro/CD Windows 36.00 WAR GAMES 1942 Pacific Air War CD 48.00 1942 Pac Air War Scenario....... 32.00 Armored Fis! DOS/MAC 46.00 Boltledrome 43.00 Flight Commander 2 42.00 Front Lines.............. 39.00 Panzer General 40.00 ROLE PLAYING Dungeon Master 2 36 00 Elder Scrolls Arena 40.00 Pirates Gold /MAC CO 48.00 Ravenloll Strads Possession 50.00 Super Horos/Hoboken/MAC CD... 36.00 SIMULATION Aces Of The Deep 45.00 Falcon Gold DOS/MAC... 52.00 F-14 Fleet Defender Gold /CD........ 50.00 Gone Fishing /CD    40.00 Nascar Racing .... 42.00 Privateer Special Ops .............. 25.00 Strike Commander /CD 25.00 U.S. Navy Fighters /CD 47.00 Wing Commander 3 ICD...... 54.00 Wings Of Glory ..... 45.00 Yeagers Air Combat IMAC 40.00 SPORTS NHL Hockey 95 40.00 PGA Tour Golf 486 48.00 PGA Tour Golf IMAC 45.00 STRATEGY Iron Assault /CD 40.00 Jogged Alliance /CD 47.00 Lords Of The Realm ICD . 38.00 Master of Magic /CO 39.00 Master Of Orion /CD 40.00 Oh No! More Lemings /MAC 38.00 Sim Tower /MAC 3.5 CD 34.00 X Com Ulo Defense... 41.00 X Com Terror.... 38.00 EDUCATION Little Turtle, The IMAC 32.00 Putt Pult & Falty Bears IMAC........ 22.00 Three Little Pigs Windows ............. 15.00 Tortoise And The Hare Windows .... 15.00 $33 $25 $37 $39 $23 Dragon Lore CD Dark Legions Bureau 13 CD $29 Aces of the Deep Civilization Dracula Unleashed CD Great Naval Battles 2 $29 V-Victry Markt Garden King's Quest 7 Doom II Under a Killing Moon Tie Fighter Ultimate Football CD Wing Commander III Metaltech Earth Siege Cyberia System Shock X-wing Privateer $25 Quest for Glory 4 Outpost $24 Betrayal at Krondor Dark Sun Il $33 Creature Shock We Accept Visa, MC, Cashier Check & Money Order Shipping $5 UPS, $9 Overnight Al games must be virus free games will be checked. Al games must be in original box with al instructional materials and original disks. NO COPIES accepted. All games must be sent with account number in order for your check or credt to be processed. Any unacceptable games will be sent back at your expense. Any defective games can be exchanged for same title only when accompanied by receipt within 2 weeks of purchase $28 CREDIT CARD ORDERS, CALL: GAL: 1-800-823-3017 QUESTIONS: 1-941-923-1998 . FAX ORDERS: 1-941-925-7614 We accept Visa, Master Card, Discover Make Checks Payable To: Roberts Enterprises All Checks Held For len Days. Florida Residents Add 6% Sales Tax Returns Require Authorization And Are Subject to 15% Restocking Fee Price And Availability Subject to change without Notice Shipping And Handling: UPS Ground $5. 2 Day And Overnight Available Red Zone  4023 Sawyer Rd, Suite 103. Sarasota, FL 34233 Circle Reader Service #346 Circle Reader Service #307 "


"Man the Helm of a $5 Million America's Cup Racing Yacht! SHEETING 10 RUDDER 0:02:19 20 MUSIC SOUND COURSE >22 MENU SFINNAKER DOO 045 MB 2006 /6 060 300 1 91 060 C1030 0905 12.6 213 C:\\> Prame Rate: 8.53 Your Bad Air: Okts/Odeg Hnedy Bad Air: Olts/Odeg You have right of way: IYRR 37.2 (clear astem). In the groove. On favored taek. SPEED W WW.000 DIRECTION 344 2813 281 3 120 So ng 371 9.82 210 240 6000 200 150 TRIM NAV ENEMY WIND HISTORY At Vivid Simulations we believe a picture is worth a thousand words. Available From CHIPS & BITS INC. We could tell you about SAIL 95's incredible ease of use, the sophistication of the opponent artificial intelligence, the phenomenal accuracy of the dynamic LACC yacht modeling, the remarkable realism and flexibility of the wind generation engine, the quality of the sound and music, or about the breathtaking 1024 by 768 256 color photorealistic graphics. PO Box 234 Dept 10308 Rochester, VT 05767 Call 800-699-4263 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'l 802-767-3033 Source 10308 OFFICIAL OF THE 1995 AMERICA S CUP We'd rather show you the full SAIL 95 screen and let you judge for yourself. SAL 95 \"Simulates the Cup course in a significant manner.... accurate to what's on the water.\" -John MacGowan A Women's Coach We will tell you that SAIL 95 is both educational and FUN for all levels of sailor from the absolute beginner to the America's Cup crewmember. \"Great game! Wonderful graphics! Blows existing simulators away! This simulator does for sailing what Microsoft Flight Simulator did for flying.\" Chris Hefele Customer We'll also tell you that you'll need a fairly new PC. SAIL 95 is a Microsoft Windows application requiring a 486DX or better, 8 Mb of RAM, an SVGA video card with 1 Mb of VRAM, and a mouse. Local bus video is recommended, as is a sound card. Joystick input is supported. \"Makes America's Cup racing approachable. and a lot more fun than watching it on ESPN.\" -CGW May, 1995 America's Cup Racing Simulator Swatar, Lator SALL 95 has a suggested retail price of $69.95 and is available now at marine stores. You may also order it directly from us for the limited time \"America's Cup Finals\" discount price of $45 +$5 S&H (CT residents add $2.70 CT state tax). America's Cup '95 Circle Reader Service #245 Vivid Simulations, Inc., 164 Higganum Road, Durham, CT 06422. Telephone: (203) 349-2011 "


"IBM ADULT INTERACTIVE TOLL FREE ORDER ' LEISURE TIME UNCUT The Moonlight shines off the sharp knife she holds in her hand. She steps closer to the bed. where he sleeps UNSUS pectingly. Now in this history making video, John Wayne Bobbitt's first and last adult feature film, his story is told. CD $32 \"VIRTUAL VALERIE 2 VALERIE The queen of cybersex is back! Virtual Valerie 2 is the ultimate in cyberotica and the embodiment of every redblooded techno phile's deepest desires! Sophisticated 3D modeling, tantalizing animation, erotic sound effects, and a sizzling music score combine to create a mind blowing sextravaganza! CD 542 BIT 2011 $28 SENSUOU DREAM MACHINE Radway 'SENSUOUS GIRLS IN 3D' Using Rom-soft's 3-D viewing glasses (included with purchase), you take these sexy and sizzling beauRMS. FT ties from the normal 2 dimensional world into an exciting and tantalizing 3-Dimensional world! Look at your screen with the enclosed 3-D glasses and you'll feel as if you can touch these exotic, erotic girls right in front of you. CD $29 DREAM MACHINE Travel through a AUCON 3D rendered virtuIn the future. al world where your only limita Wakebite tion is your imagination and your libido. This full motion video, has the most beautiful women in adult film. Interact with your seductive escort, telling her what your sexual tastes are, and she will guide you through a fantasy world to your ultimate climax. CD $49 $39 $39 ORDERREE 800-699-4263 ! a i. CD Brothel $28 Cheap & Dirty $19 ClubCyberlesque $38 Come Play w Me $36 Cyber-Peep $19 Daily Teasers S32 Dark Tunnels $29 Dsktop Mistress $49 Desktop Voyeur $49 Deva X $49 Digital Dancing $32 Dream Girl Dream Machine $49 Electric Swing $39 Encyclopedia of Sex $49 Fantasies $35 Fox Pack $37 Gfriend Maria $39 G-friend Nikki $49 G-friend Speech $19 G-friend Suzie $44 Girlfriend Teri $46 Hot Slots $39 IA SxualTherapy $54 Internat'l Pokr $22 Intimate Journey $24 Lady Club Poker $26 Love Slaves $39 Lust Connection $39 Maddams Family Max $49 Midnght Strnger $45 Mind Teazzer 2 $32 Mind Teazzer $32 Mirage $49 Mustang l-act S42 Neurodancer $39 Neuropak $54 Nightwatch 2 $39 Nightwatch 3 $49 Nightwatch $39 Paradise Club Party Time $19 Penetration S24 Penthouse 2 $49 Penthouse 3 $59 Penthouse $59 Pleasure Zones S33 Poker Party $45 Porn Mania $49 ScissorsN'Stone Secrets l-act See Some 3 Some Sex Therapy $59 Sxy Slot Mchine $24 Seymore Butts $54 Seymore Butts 2 $49 Sorority House $34 Space Sirens 1 or 2 ea $49 Spy Club $49 Strip Poker Data 1 $16 Strip Poker Data 2 $16 Strip Poker Data 3 $16 Strip Poker Data 4 $16 Strip Poker Data 5 $16 Strip Poker Data 6 $16 Strip Poker Data 7 S16 Strip Poker Data 8 $16 Strip Poker Data 9 $16 Strip Poker Data 10 $16 Strip Poker Data 11 $16 Strip Poker Data 12 Strip Poker Pro Strip Pot $36 Texas Tble Dnce $39 Vampire's Kiss $44 Velvet Dreams $35 Vrtual Director $49 Vrtual Sx Shoot $44 Vrtual Strp T'Z $25 Virt Valerie 2 $42 Virtual Vixens $39 Virtually Yours $49 Wanderlust $44 Winner Takes All $39 SPACE SIRENS 2 Ate Vlaud gane TLMVL TAIALI FATALE FEMME FATALE FEMME FATALE The Adult JePande WINDOWS Build your dream girls with Femme Fatale! A hot adult jigsaw FULL MOTION support FOR WINDOWS ing 256 up to 16 hapa harga Bandhee million colors resulting in an incredible photo realistic view of our beautiful nudes. Includes 62 different girls and a total of 250 stunning 24 Bit images. CD $33  THIP TEASE 'SPACE SIRENS 2: MEGABABES FROM AJIA' You've encoun tered the Space Sirens and lived to tell the tale. Now face the new challenge, a deadlier form of alien. Amazing graph ics, pulsating sound and gorgeous women also Touch and Feel User Interface. CD $49 $29 $35 $39 BM MOTION IBM MOYION IBM MOTION IBIM MOTION $25 Adults Only PO Box 234, Dept. 10324 Rochester, VT 05767 $16 101 Sex Positions 2 $24 A Woman's Touch CD $26 Adult Movie Almanac $59 Adult Superstars CD $26 Advnturs of Mikki Finn $39 Advnture of Snatchman $39 After Dark Trilogy CD $33 All That Sex CDI Always CD $39 Amateur Models 2 CD $30 American Blond CD American Built CD $24 Amorous Asian Girls $32 Animated Fantasies 2 $34 Asian Heat CD $24 Baby's Got Butt CD $32 Bambi & Friends Cart $29 Bare Assets CD $39 Bare Truth CD $36 Best of Blonds CD $26 Best of Digital XTC CD $39 Best of Inferno CD $39 Best of Vivid CD $24 Best of the Best 2 CD $29 Betrayal CD $27 Beyond Explicit CD $28 Big Boob Babes CD $32 Big Bust Babes CD $28 Bikini Beach CD. $44 Blind Spot CD $24 Blond Fever CD $36 Blond Justice CD Blondage CD $24 Bra Busting Babes CD $25 Breast Wishes CD $22 Busting Out CD $39 Busty Babes 3 CD Butt Of Course CD $26 CD Rom Collectables $26 California Calendar CD $29 California Daydreamer $29 Camp Double D CD $29 Candy Stripers CD S29 Cat and Mouse CD $39 Channel Blonds CD $26 Cheating CD Chessie Moore CD $39 Condo Cuties CD $28 Dangerous Blondes $29 Danish Girls Exlusive 1 $25 Danish Girls Only 1 CD $25 Debby Does Dallas CD $38 Deep Throat Girls 1 or 2 $29 Depraved Fantasies CD $26 Digital Seduction CD $34 Dinner Party CD $39 Dirty Laundry CD S 35 Drty Ltle Adit Cartoon2 $36 Doors of Passion 2 CD $27 Dripping With Desire $32 Dungeon of Dominance $36 Electrosex CD $26 Elements of Desire CD $39 Endangered CD $29 ErotiCafe CD $48 Erotic Dreams 1 or 2 $32 Erotic Fim Sensation 2 $22 Evil Seductress CD $26 Fantasies 2 CD S 26 Fantasy CD Film Club Seychelles S3 Frat Girls of Dble D CD $2 Freak Club CD $2 Full Motion Production $2 Gang Bng at O.K. Corral $2 Girls Doin' Girls 2 CD $2 Girls Doin' Girls CD $2 Girls From Big East CD $3 Girls Games CD $3 Girls Gone Bad CD $2 Girls Will Be Boys 3 CD $2 Girls of Mardi Gras CD $ Girls on CD 2 Grls on Gris CD Girls on Sunset Strip $$ Girls with Girls CD $ Graduation From F.U. $3 Group Therapy CD 33 Heidi's Girls CD $2 Hidden Agenda CD SE Hidden Obsessions CD $2 Hollywood Biker Chicks $3 $38 Source 10324 MUST BE AN ADULT TO ORDER CGW 7954 1995 CHIPS & BITS, INC "


"IBM STILLS VAZ-20 3322 ad 'ORIENTAL ACTION' In Oriental Action, you'll find a veritable fortune cookie packed with nookie! Weve picked the most pop ular oriental starlets and tracked down their very best scenes just for this series! From golden age superstar Mai Linto new wave fave Kristara Bamington, Oriental Action dishes out the action in 111 eye popping scenes. Confucius say. \"Don't miss it!\" CD $26 ACTION .CLUB CYBERLESQUE Sometimes you want to go where everybody knows your name, and they're all so glad you came. But G other times LOOKING FOR A COORD: TOIN NIE CLUB. you just want to get drunk and watch pretty girls take their clothes off. If your taste leans toward the latter, you've come to the right place. Sit down, relax and watch these beauties bare it all. CD $38 $32 $34 3 $26 $24 $29 $26 $24 101 Sex Positions 3D Darling 3D Dream Girls Adult Palate 2 All Beauties $24 Amateur Allstars $26 American Girls 2 $29 American Girls Asian Palate Asian Palate V. 2 Babe Watch 3D Biker Babes Blond Bombshells Bodacious Beauties $34 Erotic Fantasies Erotic Giant European Erotica Extreme Delight $28 Femme Fatale $33 Garo Collection $24 Girls of J Steven Hicks $34 Girls of Risque Girls of Vivid $29 Heavenly Bodies 1 Heavenly Bodies 2 or 3 $39 High Volume Nudes $28 Hooter Heavens S36 Hot Pix Lady in Spain $29 Leather & Lace $29 Massive Mellons $29 More Northern Delights $34 Northern Delights Nova Collection $26 Nova Collection 2 Ona Zee $34 Oral Fixation $32 Overexposed $39 Private Video Magazine $29 Public Fantasies $29 Select A Pet S29 Sensuous Girls in 3-D $29 Sexiest Women on 2 $24 Shaved Pink Sizzle Southem Beauties Super Smutware Sweet Cheeks $26 Sweet Dreams $29 Tabloid Beauties $28 Total Fantasy $24 Women of Moscow $34 M 1 N D TEAZZER II You've finished with the first set and now you're ready for more! Mind Teazzer II has a plethora of brand new puzzling sexcapades to challenge you. After you complete the puzzles you are rewarded with your Vivid girl of choice who will show you her favorite film clips. CD $32 MIND TEAZZER II \"VAMPIRE'S KISS Journey through the corridors of the vampire's ancient virtual 3D castle. Astounding interactive graphics allow you to search for the secret passageway that leads to the vampire's private chamber. Your actions determine the outcome, but beware of things that go bump in the night they just might suck more than your blood! CD 544 $32 $24 ADULTS ONLY LIKE WATER 015 VIRTUAL VIXENS \"VIRTUAL VIXENS' *THELL Save your friend from Crystal who has imprisoned him in a virtual reality pleasure world for his failure to please ZZANE her. You must satisfy three women before you can reach Crystal and solve the mystery of her strange erotic existence. A virtual reality science fiction adventure with 3D animation CD $39 \"WANDERLUST Mercilessly sent to the outer reaches of cyber space, your quest is to return to reality. In order to return, you must find the key that will unlock the doors to new encounters within this vast oasis of high-tech decadence. Amazing 3D rendered environments coupled with beautiful women could make you want to stay for eternity. CD $44 Call 800-699-4263 International 802-767-3033 ADULT 3DO Fax 802-767-3382 $32 Source 10324 33 IBM MOTION IBM MOTION IBM MOTION IBM MOTION Blond Justice $32 Cheating $32 Endlessly S32 Immortal Desire Love Bites Mask Neurodancer Passion Files Sex Super Models Go Wild $32 The Coven Winner Takes All $32 ADULT CDI $32 Adults Only PO Box 234, Dept. 10324 Rochester, VT 05767 $32 $29 $34 Hollywood Glamour $34 Hot Stuff CD $36 Immortal Desires CD $25 Indiscretion CD $36 L.A. Strippers CD $34 Ladies Club Pool Night $28 Legends of Porn 1or 2 $25 Lethal Passion CD $26 Lip Stick Lesbians CD $26 Loads of Fun CD Love Bites CD $26 Main Street USA CD $26 Mark of Zara CD $38 Mask CD $25 Menage A Trois CD $26 Mom on the Make CD $26 Naked Edge CD Naked Reunion CD $24 Nasty Neighbor Girls $29 Nasty Nurses CD $29 Naughty But Nice CD $29 New Machine Six Pack $29 Night Creatures CD S26 Night Trips 1 or 2 CD $25 Night at the Drive-In $26 Novel Desires CD $33 One Nine Hundred CD $33 Only the Very Best CD $26 Orient XXXPress CD $29 Oriental Action CD $26 Oriental Treatment 3 $28 Pleasing Your Lover $25 Pleasure: East Mt West $28 Pleasure: Love Slaves $28 Princess of Persia CD $34 Racquelle Released Rain Women CD $38 Rimfire Pacific Video $32 Samurai Pervert CD Sex Foot Slut Pack $59 Sex Games CD $32 Sex In Dangerous Places $26 Sexlandia CD $36 Sexual Instinct CD $32 Sexual Obsession CD $29 Smore Bits Blwn Away $36 Circle Reader Service #362 S-more B Inside Shane $36 Sindy Does it All CD $29 Sinful Girls CD $32 Sinfully Yours CD S29 Sleepwalker CD $42 Sorority Sluts CD $29 Spring Break Fantasy $32 Spring Break Girls CD $32 Starware Gift Pack CD $59 Steamy Windows CD $25 Stocking Stuffers CD $33 Strap On Palace CD $34 Super Models Go Wild $39 S-stars of Jap Porn 2 $39 Swingers Worldwide $34 Take Me Hard CD $32 Temptation CD $28 The Coven CD The Devil in Miss Jones $29 The Face CD $35 The Fisherman's Wife $38 The Private Collection $48 Tokyo Nightlife CD $59 Touch Me, Feel Me CD $29 Toy's Not Boys CD $29 Tracy I Love You CD $24 Ultimate Teasers CD $26 Urotsukidoji Collection $59 Ultra Sex $29 Ultra Sex V.2 $19 Virgins 1 or 2 CD each $39 Volcano CD Virtual Vivid $8 Voices in my Bed $24 W.A.C.S. $29 Wanda 2 $24 Weekend At Ernies $26 Wet Dreams S18 Wicked Q-Time Movie $39 Wicked Whispers CD $29 Wide Open Spaces CD $34 Wild Innocence CD $26 Woman to Woman CD $26 Women Who Love Men $32 Women of Beverly Hills $39 X-Rated Bloopers CD $27 MUST BE AN ADULT TO ORDER Overnight Shipping in US $4 per order. Mail to Canada, PR, HI, AK, APO, FPO $4 per order. Worldwide airmail $6 per item. Handling $2 per shipment. Hardware orders may require additional shipping charges. Restrictions apply, Cannot guarantee customs clearance. Order at own risk. Call for details. $24 American Blond Bad Girls:Lockdown $29 Channel Blonde $29 Cheating $29 Dirty Looks $29 Endlessly $29 Ice Woman $29 Intimate Journey Mask $29 Naked Reunion $29 Parlor Games $29 Sex Shame $29 Suite 18 $29 Super Models Go Wild S29 The Coven $29 $29 $54 $26 $29 Visa, MC and Discover accepted. Checks held 4 weeks. Money Orders samo as cash. COD $8. Defectives replaced with samo product. Most items shipped same day. Shipping timos may vary. Prico/availabllity may chango. All sales final. COW 795A 1995 CHIPS & BITS, INC. "


"Premiere CD-ROM Issue! New Media Entertainment CO-ROM for MAC & Windows Volume 1, No.1 ONLY $14.95 INCLUDES FREE WWW INTERNET SOFTWARE & ACCESS TIME! DIGITAL IGO Digital interactive Magazine Check Out Elizatilaktlig Christine FOX She'll Make You Glad You OWN A CO-ROM 11-AVE! Music And The 'Net CON!This Meal 7lie End Of Record Stores Timotiu Leary Interactive Luter view With An Accidental Icon Tank Gill Multimedia Superstar? Behind The Scenes With Creators, Cast and crew In eireann LucasArts See Where Cinema and Computer Games Meet CD 18 Mature Audience O SC HYBRID QuickTime COMPUTERA Order Now 1.800.228.7449 Visit Computer Express Online At http://cexpress.com:2710 And Visit Go Digital Online At http://www.Gobigital.com Circle Reader Service #57 TEELLE 1995 e Media "


"=SCORE Welcome to the Cooperstown of Computer Games. Here, raised upon pedestals, you'll find the games that broke the records, established the benchmarks, and held gamers in delighted trances for hours untold. HIGHLIGHTS MECH BRIGADE MECH BRIGADE MIGHT & MAGIC SSI, 1985 NEW WORLD COMPUTING, 1986 Producing a follow-up to KAMPFGRUPPE, In the carly days of computer role-playing one of the best WWII tactical games ever games, there were only ULTIMA, WIZARDRY CAD created, was a difficult task. But SSI didn't and a few pretenders. Then MICHT & MAGgain its reputation as the leading computI gleefully tossed the hierarchy about. The er wargame company in the '80s by giving game world of this epic RPG was huge, esup without a fight. They refined the conpecially given the limitations of memory and data storage at cepts of the award-winning system to reflect the increased the time. The 3D views certainly can't be compared to later lethality of the modern battlefield, and even corrected the games like Doom, but their new, distinctive appearance added one nagging problem of its storied predecessor. No longer to the atmosphere of the world. Early RPGs often emphasized could players stack too much armor on narrow frontages, combat, but MIGHT & MAGIC's prolific hack n' slash fests served which only added to the tension (and caused armchair gento advance the plot as well as keep players on their toes. Decrals to devise new tactical tricks). MECH BRIGADE offers neisigner Jon van Canegham thought that tactical successes ther SVGA battlefields nor stereophonic explosions, just a should build toward achieving an overall strategic goal, and he good AI and numerous scenarios packed with a lot of bang structured the numerous fights, puzzles and encounters to that for the buck. One of the original inductees into the CGW end. With van Canegham involved in the design of MIGHT & Hall of Fame, it reigned supreme until the release of M-1 MAGIC IV, it's obvious that New World feels the claims of roleTANK PLATOON. playing's imminent demise are grossly exaggerated. CIVILIZATION (MicroProse, 1991) FALCON 3.0 (Spectrum HoloByte, 1991) GUNSHIP (MicroProse, 1989) HARPOON (Three-Sixty Pacific, 1989) KING'S QUEST V (Sierra On-Line, 1990) LEMMINGS (Psygnosis, 1991) LINKS 386 PRO (Access Software, 1992) M-1 TANK PLATOON (MicroProse, 1989) RAILROAD TYCOON (MicroProse, 1990) RED BARON (Dynamix, 1990) THEIR FINEST HOUR (LucasArts, 1989) THE SECRET OF MONKEY ISLAND (LucasArts, 1990) ULTIMA VI (Origin Systems, 1990) ULTIMA UNDERWORLD (Origin Systems, 1992) WING COMMANDER I & II (Origin Systems, 1990-91) WOLFENSTEIN 3-D (id Software, 1992) INDUCTEES PRIOR TO 1939 BATTLE CHESS (Interplay Productions, 1988) CHESSMASTER (The Software Toolworks, 1986) DUNGEON MASTER (FTL Software, 1987) EARL WEAVER BASEBALL (Electronic Arts, 1986) EMPIRE (Interstel, 1978) F-19 STEALTH FIGHTER (MicroProse, 1988) GETTYSBURG: THE TURNING POINT (SSI, 1986) KAMPFGRUPPE (Strategic Simulations, 1985) MECH BRIGADE (Strategic Simulations, 1985) MIGHT & MAGIC (New World Computing, 1986) M.U.L.E. (Electronic Arts, 1983) PIRATES (MicroProse, 1987) SIMCITY (Maxis, 1987) STARFLIGHT (Electronic Arts, 1986) THE BARD'S TALE (Electronic Arts, 1985) ULTIMA III (Origin Systems, 1983) ULTIMA IV (Origin Systems, 1985) WAR IN RUSSIA (Strategic Simulations, 1984) WASTELAND (Interplay Productions, 1986) WIZARDAY (Sir Tech Software, 1981) ZORK (Infocom, 1981) JULY 1995 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 203 "


"E ADVENTURE GAMES SCOREE  READER POLL #130 1 TOP 100 GAMES lentino GAME 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 TOP ADVENTURE GAMES GAME COMPANY Day of the Tentacle LucasArts Gabriel Knight Sierra Star Control II Accolade Sam & Max Hit The Road LucasArts The Seventh Guest Virgin Under A Killing Moon Access Ecstatica Psygnosis Ouest for Glory I (VGA) Sierra Eric the Unready Legend Relentless Electronic Arts SCORE 9.87 9.42 9.33 9.30 9.25 9.12 9.09 9.05 9.04 8.98 SCORE 10.68 10.54 10.37 10.33 10.24 10.21 9.97 9.97 9.95 9.87 9.84 9.44 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 TOP ROLE PLAYING GAMES GAME COMPANY SCORE Betrayal at Krondor Dynamix Ultima Underworld II Origin 9.42 Might & Magic: Darkside of Xeen New World Computing 9.37 Lands of Lore Virgin 9.25 Might & Magic: Clouds of Xeen New World Computing 9.11 Ultima VII: Part Two Serpent Isle Origin 9.08 Wolf Sanctuary Woods 8.88 Arena: The Elder Scrolls Bethesda 8.85 Veil of Darkness SSI 8.74 Menzoberranzan SSI 8.26 52259ta 25558259 Seurayat Rrondor SCORE *1 Panzer General *2 Wing Commander 3 *3 X-COM 4 TIE Fighter 5 DOOM 6 Master of Orion 7 Dark Forces  NASCAR Racing 9 Warlords II *10 Day of the Tentacle 11 Magic Carpet 12 DOOM II 13 Dune II 14 Stalingrad 15 Master of Magic 16 Wings of Glory 17 US Navy Fighters *18 Front Page Sports Football Pro Warcraft 20 Front Page Sports Football 95 21 X-Wing 22 Sim City 2000 V for Victory: Market Garden 24 Conquered Kingdoms 25 V for Victory: Velikiye Luki Aces of the Deep 27 NHL Hockey *28 Belrayal at Krondor War in Russia 30 Indy Car Racing 31 Ultima Underworld II Gabriel Knight 33 Heretic 34 Operation Crusader 35 Might & Magic: Darkside of Xeen 36 World Circuit 37 Carriers at War Construction Kit 38 Pacific War Flight Commander 2 40 Star Control II 41 Sam & Max Hit The Road System Shock 43 Comanche: Maximum Overkill 44 Lands of Lore The Seventh Guest Fleet Defender 47 Incredible Machine 2 48 V for Victory: Gold Juno Sword 49 Privateer 50 Under A Killing Moon 9.83 9.82 9.70 9.67 9.66 9.65 9.64 9.64 9.63 9.60 9.58 9.58 9.53 9.52 9.52 9.49 9.44 9.44 9.43 9.42 9.42 COMPANY TYPE SSI WG Origin MicroProse LucasArts id Software MicroProse LucasArts Papyrus SSG LucasArts Electronic Arts id Software Virgin Avalon Hill MicroProse Origin Electronic Arts Dynamix Blizzard Sierra LucasArts Maxis Three-Sixty Pacific QQP Three-Sixty Pacific Dynamix Electronic Arts Dynamix SSI Papyrus Origin Sierra id Software Avalon Hill New World Computing MicroProse SSG WG Avalon Hill WG Accolade AD.AC LucasArts Origin NovaLogic Virgin Virgin MicroProse Sierra Three-Sixty Pacific Origin Access 9.97 9.66 TOP SIMULATION GAMES COMPANY NASCAR Racing Papyrus Wings of Glory Origin US Navy Fighters Electronic Arts Aces of the Deep Dynamix Indy Car Racing Papyrus World Circuit MicroProse Comanche: Maximum Overkill NovaLogic Fleet Defender MicroProse Hornet Spectrum HoloByte Aces Over Europe Dynamix 9.65 1 NASCAR 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 PAPYRUS 9 10 9.52 9.43 &a PUNT 9.36 9.27 9.25 8.96 9.41 9.39 9.37 8.66 9.36 WG SSI 9.35 9.34 9.34 9.33 9.30 9.30 STRATEGY 9.27 TOP STRATEGY GAMES GAME  X-COM MicroProse Master of Orion MicroProse Warlords II SSG Dune II Virgin Master of Magic MicroProse Warcraft Blizzard Sim City 2000 Maxis Conquered Kingdoms QQP Incredible Machine 2 Sierra Merchant Prince QQP 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 UFO DEFENSE & SCORE 10.37 10.21 9.95 9.82 9.67 9.64 9.58 9.53 9.23 9.25 9.25 9.25 9.23 9.18 9.16 5 MICROPROSE 9.08 9.12 "


"au RP AD AC SSI 24543334454 Wing Corranda 8.95 9.83 8.86 TOP WARGAMES 51 Might & Magic: Clouds of Xeen New World Computing RP 9.11 52 PGA Tour Golf 486 Electronic Arts 9.09 GAME COMPANY SCORE | 1 Panzer General SSI B: 10.68 Ecstatica Psygnosis 9.09 2 Avalon Hill Stalingrad 54 9.08 The Grandest Fleel QQP 9.70 3 V for Victory: Market Garden Three-Sixty Pacific 9.58 Merchant Prince QQP ST 9.08 4 V for Victory: Velikiye Luki Three-Sixty Pacific 9.52 Ultima VII: Part Two Serpent Isle Origin 9.08 57 5 War in Russia SSI 9.07 9.44 Syndicate Electronic Arts STAC Operation Crusader Avalon Hill 9.39 58 Quest for Glory I (VGA) 6 Sierra AD,RP 9.05 7 Carriers at War Construction Kit SSG 9.35 59 Eric the Unready Legend 9.04 8 Flight Commander 2 Avalon Hill 9.34 60 Descent Interplay 9.01 PL 9.34 Pacific War 61 QQP Battles of Destiny 9.00 10 V for Victory: Gold Juna Sword Three-Sixty Pacific 9.18 Tanks SSI 9.00 VGA Planels Tim Wisseman 9.00 64 Relentless Electronic Arts 8.98 TOP ACTION GAMES Clash of Steel 8.98 66 Tigers on the Prowl HPS Simulations 8.97 GAME COMPANY SCORE 67 Hornet Spectrum HoloByte 10.54 1 8.96 Wing Commander 3 Origin Freddy Pharkas Frontier Pharmacist Sierra 8.96 2 TIE Fighter 10.33 LucasArts 69 Alone in the Dark I-Motion 3 DOOM id Software 10.24 70 Legend of Kyrandia 3 Virgin 8.94 4 Dark Forces LucasArts 9.97 71 The Incredible Machine Dynamix 8.92 5 Magic Carpet Electronic Arts 9.84 72 Wolf Sanctuary Woods 8.88 6 DOOM II id Software 73 Transport Tycoon MicroProse 8.87 7 X-Wing LucasArts 9.60 74 Incredible Toons Dynamix 8 Heretic id Software 9.41 75 Arena: The Elder Scrolls Bethesda 8.85 9 System Shock Origin 9.30 76 Empire Deluxe New World Computing ST 8.82 10 Privateer Origin 9.16 Carriers at War II SSG 8.82 78 Seri City SSI 8.80 Front Page Sports Baseball Sierra 8.80 TOP SPORTS GAMES 80 Harpoon II. Three-Sixty Pacific 8.78 M SCORE Tony La Russa Baseball II SSI 8.78 1 Front Page Sports Football Pro Dynamix 9.64 82 Myst Broderbund 8.77 TSONT PHCE SPORTS 2 Front Page Sports Football 95 Sierra 9.63 83 Genghis Khan II Koei 8.74 3 NHL Hockey Electronic Arts 9.49 Veil of Darkness 8.74 4 PGA Tour Golf 486 Electronic Arts 9.09 Dracula Unleashed Viacom 5 Front Page Sports Baseball 8.80 86 Mortal Kombat II Acclaim 8.73 6 Tony La Russa Baseball II SSI 8.78 87 Aces over Europe Dynamix 8.66 A 7 Hardhall IV Accolade 8.39 88 F-15 Strike Eagle III MicroProse 8.65 RU 8 Jordan In Flight Electronic Arts 7.85 89 MiG-29 Spectrum HoloByte 8.64 9 Microsoft Golf 2.0 TDI Microsoft 7.43 King's Quest VII Sierra 8.64 10 Ultimate Football MicroProse 91 Superheros of Hoboken Legend 8.62 92 Space Quest V: Mutation Sierra 8.60 93 Hand Of Fate Westwood Studios 8.56 Vote! 94 Kasparov's Gambit Electronic Arts 95 Rules of Engagement 2 Impressions 8.52 You ve read our take on the latest games, now here's a chance to see what your fellow 96 Lords of the Realm 8.51 Impressions 97 The Horde Crystal Dynamics AC,ST 8.50 gamers think. The CGW Top 100 is a monthly tally of game ratings provided by our 98 Star Trek: Judgment Rites Interplay AD 8.49 readers via the CGW Poll ballot found in each issue. Approximately 50 games are ratPrince of Persia 2 Broderbund AC 8.49 ed each month, and the results are added to the aggregate results from past months. 100 The Lost Vikings Interplay 8.46 This historical database serves as a terrific reference for what you, the gamers, feel are Games on unnumbered lines have scores equal to the line above. *= Top game of type. Dark Teal = New Game the best plays in gaming. AD = Adventure, RP = Role Playing, SI = Simulation, ST = Strategy, WG = Wargame, AC = Action, SP = Sports The Computer Gaming World Poll A MONTHLY SURVEY OF THE READERS OF COMPUTER GAMINGWORLD SSI 8.74 Sierra FOOTBALLPRO 2 22222ntots 7.26 8.54 AC "


"-SCORE PATCHES Alien Logic V1.1 Update: Fixes several problems, including the \"Cleash General *Null Jig Tokens* Crash,\" as well as adding command line switches for many sound boards. 5/2/95 guns, variable weather, horse drawn artillery, reduced effectiveness air and artillery and much more. 1/25/95 Computer game programs have grown so massive and the number of hardware configurations has become so huge that incompatibilities and glitches are frustratingly common. Software fixes, or \"patches,\" for buggy programs have become a necessary evil until we reach the golden age of standardized platforms and bug-free programs. These patches can usually be downloaded from the major onZimnet. line networks (CompuServe, Genie, ZiffNet), but can also be obtained from individual software publisher's own BBSs or direct from the publisher with proof of purchase. Red indicates new files. Ultima 8 V2.12: Comprehensive patch includes fixes to many problems as well as several game Big 3 for Windows Update: Updates Big 3 to the latest version, fixes several problems: in the retreat function, defender retreating function, control array element errors, and several other problems. 4/6/95 eral other enhancements and bug fixes. 4/2/95 problem with later scenarios. 3/29/95 Warcraft V1.21 Upgrade: Offers improved sound card support, increased 2-player game speed and many more fixes. Also included are the WAR EDIT unit editor and a complete list of cheat codes. 3/20/95 Colonization Version 3.0: Corrects reported problems and adds a map editor. Works only with the U.S. version of the game. 2/13/95 Front Page Sports: Baseball '94 V1.02: Fixes many reported problems, including crash bugs and General Manager Al as well as roster handling bugs. 2/3/95 Links: The Challenge of Golf Update: Fixes lockups with Soundblaster 16 cards. 3/22/95 Harpoon 2 Upgrade: Fixes some reported problems. 3/14/95 Daedalus Encounter V1.01: This major maintenance update fixes most if not all of the sound card-related crash problems with lowerend sound cards. Several other new bug fixes are also included. 4/25/95 Master of Magic V1.31 Update: Latest upgrade to MicroProse strategy/magic game with numerous fixes, new features, and major AI enhancements. Updates all versions. 3/07/95 Harpoon Classic for Windows V1.55: Corrects several reported GPF errors, and fully implements all version 1.32 missile changes including bearing-only attacks; works with any version. 3/29/95 Descent V1.2 Update: Includes several bug fixes and adds support for multiple sockets during netgames, hooks for Spaceball controller support and alternate joystick reading methods. 3/24/95 Pacific Air War Gold CD-ROM update: Contains a new version of the lile 1942CD.COM, which will correct a problem seen if your copy of the game has a volume label of PAW 1942 instead of 1942_PAW, where the game will not run from a minimum installation. 3/16/95 High Seas Trader Sound Update: Should fix any soundcard-related crashes. 4/4/95 Publisher BBS Numbers Many of these patches are available directly from the publishers' bulletin board systems. Call with your modem parity settings at N-8-1. Accolade (408) 296-8800 Apogee (508) 368-7036 Bethesda (301) 990-7552 Blizzard (714) 556-4602 Broderbund (415) 883-5889 Capstone (305) 374-6872 Creative Labs (405) 742-6660 Id Software (508) 368-4137 Impressions (617) 225-2042. InterPlay (714) 252-2822 LucasArts (415) 257-3070 Maxis (510) 254-3869 MicroProse (410) 785-1841 Microsoft (206) 936-6735 NovaLogic (818) 774-9528 Origin (512) 328-8402 Papyrus (617) 576-7472 Sierra Online (206) 644-0122 Spectrum HoloByte (510) 5228909 SSI (408) 739-6137 or (408) 739-6623 Virgin Interactive (714) 8333305 Doom V 1.9: Official Id upgrade works only with version 1.666. 2/8/95 Jagged Alliance V1.10: Fixes a few problems, including keyboard lockout and offers several enhancements to the interface, AI and gameplay. 4/14/95 Flying Nightmares V3.1a (Macintosh): Fixes several errors and provides improved joystick support. 3/29/95 Panzer General V1.2 Update: Separate CD-ROM and floppy patches fix some reported problems, including sound drivers, crash bugs and bridge engineer problems. 3/4/95 FrontLines V1.02: Includes modem play as well as sevLegions Windows Update: Allows Legions Windows to run under Windows NT and corrects a very rare Tanks V1.25: Unofficial patch by Norm Koger adds panic fire and retreats, hidden AT 206 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD  JULY 1995 "


"Mind Bending! Discis Entertainment presents an ELOI Production ewels Vacle Blow your mind on the challenges of the Oracle's puzzles. Indulge yourself in a 3-D animated world, with seductive music, captivating sounds and mysterious voices. Discover hidden chambers and test your skills of logic and reason with interactive and intricate puzzles. Circle Reader Service #58 CD-ROM Game for Windows and Macintosh Available Now at Your Favorite Retailer or Call 1-800-567-4321 Unlock the fascinating secrets of an ancient and long forgotten civilization. Actual screen images. "


"WHAT'S THE DEAL? \"What's the deal with... Clones?!\" by Martin E. Cirulis loning! Contrary to current count bin. Why? Surely game publishers I realize that slaves to demographics media beliefs, cloning is alive must be higher up on the evolutionary must read the low numbers for networkand well, not in the realm of scale than those fuzzy little cliff-divers. capable computers and make the call Dinos and dead fascist I have the same sense of morbid won from there—but wasn't there anybody Tyrants with bad hair, but derment every time I see a new Battle of standing around the LucasArts office sayhere in the land of computer Britain simulator. Do we really need aning \"Ummm, excuse me...this is a beautigaming. We've all seen it beother one? Or another Pacific War sim ful looking game and all, but haven't we fore. First there is a hot, ground-breaking where I can't join the Australian, New really cloned WOLFENSTEIN-3D? Maybe we game; and then, for the next couple of Zealand or British Air arms? Here's an should think about what made DOOM years, there is the flurry of imitators. idea: instead of rehashing Spits and immortal, and network it. Maybe let playSome of these are improvements on the Stukas yet again, why doesn't some brighters choose how their characters would aptheme, but more often than not they miss bunch of guys figure out where the vast pear to other players-little Wookies or the mark. I personally view game cloning majority of air-combat occurred, especialSmugglers or even Ewoks.\" the same way I view a band covering ly ground-attack, and do a Russian Front Who knows, maybe there was somesomeone else's song: it's not the most flight sim? I realize it might body who said it—but certainly they were original thing in the world, but hey, if you shouted down by the Dark Forces that dehave a bee in your bonnet to do it better, sire mediocre clones instead of great more power to you. ones. Sometimes it pays off. Certainly And don't get me started on the horManfred Mann clarified Springstein's , rors of STARFLIGHT clones. Let me just Blinded by the Light. On the other say this one thing to anyone contemhand, did Guns 'n Roses really think plating one: ten actually interesting Paul McCartney was on to something worlds/aliens are better than a thouso good when he penned the immorsand tedious ones! The secret to tal words \"... In this world in which we STARFLIGHT's success was not volume, live in,\" that it needed repeating volume, volume. It was depth, depth, when they covered Live And Let Dic? I depth. don't think so. And the same silliness ocThen there is the matter of games that curs in the gaming industry when pubtake a leap in imagination to simulate a need to be cloned, and nobody ever lishers are so desperate to imitate a part of the war that didn't involve Engseems to get around to it. Where is our formula that they seem blind to the realilish-speaking people, but hey! Live on the high-tech M.U.L.E. clone? Our new SUNties of life. The fact is that you either edge, sim-designers! DOG? A straight up IMPERIUM GALACTIUM have to do something a little bit novel And, of course, there is the little matter with pretty pictures? Maybe there should with the product, or suffer the dreaded of DOOM. be a space at the bottom of those endless \"Been there, done that\" response. Of the whole raft of born-again shootregistration cards for writing in which of Witness the seemingly endless LEMem-ups, only two of them seem to truly the company's games you would like to MINGS games and clones that march by, justify their existence: RISE OF THE TRIAD sec re-done most. on the average of one per quarter. Not and DESCENT. A couple of others, while in the meantime, it appears it's not just since the first sequel to LEMMINGS has not breaking new ground, at least perpetthose wacky Dino-doctors who have trouanything even remotely new been done to uate the most innovative part of DOOM, ble with the realities of cloning. the idea of helping little idiots from one the multi-player capability. And then we If there's something going on in the industry side of the screen to another. Even the get to the Muzac category, the singleyou think Martin should be praising/butchermost die-hard manipulator must be getplayer DOOM-clones. I look at these ing, let him know by sending a note to: ting a wee bit tired of it all—yet still the games, especially the really nice ones like \"What's the deal with....\" C/O CGW, 135 clones come, marching one by one to the DARK FORCES and I ask myself, \"What Main St. 14th Floor, San Francisco, CA edge of the shelf and over into the diswere they thinking?\" 94105. 208 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD  JULY 1995 "


"MORE BANGS! FOR YOUR BUCK Gravis UltraSound ACE\" (Audio Card Enhancer) \"... low price, and solid performance\" ***** -Multimedia World, May '95 ULTRASOUND CADI CARDINIAN BANGS like you've never heard before with Ultrasound ACE's CD-quality sound. Ultrasound ACE is an add-in card that upgrades any FM or Sound Blastercard to stereo wavetable sound. For a price that's hard to beat, you get dynamic music and digital sound effects with most current games and total compatibility with every game and application you already own. Amaretable add-in card that brings professional asit and Cancel digital elfects to any Sound Blaster or compatible FH sunt care GRAVIS only $99.95* TM Gravis Firebird Programmable Flight & Game Controller \"Overall 90%\" -Computer Game Review, May '95 More BANGS, bombs, and bullets with the Firebird's 17 programmable buttons. Ready-to-play settings included for today's hot games. More control than you've ever had before without touching your keyboard. Firebird works with every PC game that supports a joystick. only $69.95* Call Now to Order! 1-800-679-0024 Purchase BOTH Firebird and Ultrasound ACE, and we'll throw in a game* that's making a BIG BANG at the top of the charts-your choice of Descent Destination Saturn, DOOM II\", or US Navy Fighters\". GRAVIS PLAY TO WIN * Applies only to purchases direct form Gravis Retail policy and price may vary. All brands or products names are trademarks owned by their respective companies Circle Reader Service #113 Advanced Gravis Computer Technology Ltd. 1790 Midway Lane, Bellingham, WA, USA 98226 "


"Three out of four experts agree 92% — BOTTOM LINE: The best WWI simulation ever; this one flies with the eagles. PC Gamer 4'/, out of 5 stars: Without a doubt, Wings of Glory is the best-looking and sounding WWI flight-sim to date. — Computer Gaming World The final word on Wings of Glory? A must for flight-sim fans. Electronic Entertainment Whaddaya mean, no afterburners?! Wild Bill's Defense Journal WINGS GLORY Wings of Glory WWI's frequent flier program, SET neverch and Audio 12 727505325 ORIGIN Systems is an Electronic Arts Company. 12940 Research Blvd. . Austin, TX 78750-3235 http://www.ea.com/origin.html H EURE N MI N O We create worlds. 1995, ORIGIN Systems, Inc, Wings of Glory is a trademark of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Origin and We create worlds are registered trademarks of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Electronic Arts is a registered trademark of Electronic Arts Circle Reader Service w99 "

