November 1988

Features
Have Sword Will Travel

7

Omnitrend's "Paladin" Reviewed / Jasper Sylvester

Magical Mystery Tour

10

Scorpion's Tale Gives Hints On "Wizard Wars"

Christmas Buying Guide

16

CGW's Second Annual Hint List (Check It Twice)

Game of the Year Awards

21

Reflections on the Selections

Preparing for Your "First Expedition"

22

Interstel's Adventure Game Reviewed / Dennis Owens

Diving Into "Red Storm Rising"

28

Review and Tactics / Evan Brooks

Battlehawks 1942

32

Lucasfilm's Air Combat Game / Russell Sipe

Winter Thunderland

36

Scorpia Reviews SSI's "Demon's Winter"

Fantastic Voyages II

42

Meet Real People at Mediagenic and Epyx

Departments
Taking A Peek
Inside the Industry
Video Gaming World (Katz, Kunkel, Worley)
Reader Input Device
CGW Hall of Fame
Game Ratings

4
15
54
62
62
64

Number 53

Taking A Peek

Accolade
550 S. Winchester Blvd,
Suite 200
San Jose, CA 95128
FAST BREAK: Three-on-three, joystick
controlled action highlights this full court
action/strategy game of roundball.
Players choose from a variety of fictitious
"professional" basketball players and
select from 20 offensive & defensive
plays in this fast-paced game of "slam 'n
jam." C-64/128 ($29.95). Circle Reader
Service Card #1.
JET BOYS: One or two players work
together to penetrate a nuclear reactor
that has been taken over by Megabeasts
on one of Saturn's moons. Multi-levels of
play make surviving this horizontally

scrolling, coin-op based action game a
difficult challenge. Joystick driven, C64/128 ($14.95). Circle Reader Service
#2.
STEEL THUNDER: A simulation
where players operate their choice of
America's modern battle tanks in a
variety of theaters. After selecting the mission and AFV, the tank is controlled from
the cockpit. Promotions won't come
easy. C-64/128 ($29.95). Circle Reader
Service Card #3.

B.J. Toolkit
Alexander Lane
Croton-on-Hudson, NY 10520
CONTROL TOWER: Have you ever
wanted to be a rookie air traffic controller? Have you ever wanted to get ulcers
while consuming huge quantities of coffee? Control Tower puts you in the center of the action. Choose how many
planes to control, the kind of weather

and the number of emergencies (!) you
want to handle, then sit back, but don't
relax! Find out why Patco went on strike.
IBM & compatibles ($29.95). Circle
Reader Service #4.

Electronic Arts
1820 Gateway Drive
San Mateo, CA 94404
SENTINEL WORLDS I: FUTURE
MAGIC: This is a futuristic, role playing
adventure game that provides stunning
graphics and a tangled web of subplots
to keep adventurers busy. Character
promotion and development,
ship-to-ship and face-to-face combat, planetary
exploration and character interface all
combine to make this an attractive package. IBM, Tandy with EGA or CGA
($49.95). Circle Reader Service #5.
(Continued on page 58)

Review

Quixote, the paladin, watched in horror
as Wilson plummeted from the sky like a
boulder launched from a catapult. He had
known the swordsman since both men
had been squires in the service of other
knights. Now, the leather clad body of his
brother knight lay mangled and bleeding
in the branches of a large boled tree.
With words that tiptoed softly through
the air, Nichols whispered, "It was the
amulet. Amulets of Levitation oft exude
strange energy and consume their user."
"Wizards! Fools of the ethereal plane!"
thought Quixote. "They know everything
about everything, but they never tell you
until it's too late! Knowledge, thou art a
cruel taskmaster!"
Paladin is a game of small unit fantasy
combat with both versatility and playability.
Those who have played Breach,
Omnitrend's game of small unit combat
in a science fiction milieu, will be both
familiar and comfortable with the system.
Those who are looking for the typical fantasy role playing game will be disappointed
with this game. The scenarios can be
loosely tied together to make a campaign
game, but each scenario is primarily an excuse for pure, fast, and simple to resolve
"hack and slash."
Players begin by creating a paladin
character, a white knight with extra advantages who functions like the squad
leader in Breach. In fact, squad leaders
from Breach can be imported into Paladin.
The player selects a scenario from one of
the ten available on the game disk,
chooses from those available on the
"Quest Disk," or creates his own scenario
utilizing the "Quest Builder." Victory conditions for any quest utilize one or more of
the following tasks: 1) rescue prisoners or
obtain scrolls, 2) exit the combat zone,
and/or 3) kill a given percentage of
enemies. To add to the intensity of any
given quest and increase the difficulty, the
screen displays a "time clock" which counts

down thirty seconds of game time for every
movement phase used by the party.
The documentation is neither
voluminous nor pretentious, but the information is absolutely essential to players,
even as the paladin character discovered in
the fictional introduction to this review.
The fiction describes a situation which actually occurred when the game was being
played prior to this review. The party of
heroes happened across several of the
amulets during a raid on a magic shop.
Since they needed to make better time in
order to rescue a friend held hostage by
some evil trolls, the party elected to use
the amulets to fly over the forested terrain.
The command interface in Paladin made
it easy to start using the artifact without
bothering to read the manual. Of course,
the manual warns players that there is a
10% chance of crashing at the end of any
turn whenever an "Amulet of Levitation" is
used. This is an important "object lesson"
to teach those who want to be successful
at Paladin not to be seduced by the
remarkably simple interface and to pay
close attention to the manual.

On A Clear Day,
Icon Play Forever
Once the scenario actually begins, the
monitor display is divided into sections
which show character information, a tactical map with animated characters, and a
set of command icons which can be accessed by the mouse interface. One icon
drops an object, another picks up objects,
and a third uses the object. Both common
objects and arcane artifacts may be accessed using this interface. If the action is
impossible or inappropriate, an error message is displayed in a pop-up window.
Ranged combat using the crossbow or
orbs of fire (conjured hand grenades) is
handled by clicking on the "Use Object"
command icon, as well. A separate combat
icon pictures the outline of a sword and is

Omnitrend's
"Paladin"
by Jasper Sylvester

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

Paladin
Amiga, Atari ST
1
$39.95
(Quest Disk—$29.95)
Thomas Carbone
Bill Leslie
Omnitrend Software
West Simsbury, NJ

used to literally swing the character's sword
at an enemy/monster or, with the Shift key
depressed, to cast a spell (Spells such as
"Fireball" and "Mind Stun" supplement the
party's ranged weapon selection). If the
character lacks movement points or ability
to perform the action or cast the spell, an
appropriate error message appears in a
window and explains how the problem can
be corrected or why it cannot be done.
Even climbing stairs and opening doors
can be accomplished with a simple "point
and click" on the appropriate images.

A Cardinal of a Gremlin
In the course of play, animated characters appear one by one upon the screen in
a spot called an "entrance pentagram."
After this, the player may cycle through his
party at will until each character has used
all of the movement points allotted and
finished the movement phase. Combat occurs during the movement phase and
costs movement points, as well. Herein lies
a significant weakness to the game. All
movement and combat must occur in one
of the four cardinal directions. In movement, characters may only make ninety degree turns. Forty-five degree turns are not
permitted, so one can only travel a
diagonal path in a circumlocuted manner.
This is simply inconvenient in movement
and the designers may argue that they
provided enough movement points to take
this into consideration, but this is a tremendous hassle during combat, especially
ranged combat.
The inability to take ranged shots from a
diagonal means that the party must actually flank an individual opponent or monster
on both flanks in order to allow more than
one member of the party to get in a shot.
One could argue that attacks from the
diagonal are relatively impractical when
every attacker is swinging a sword, axe, or
war hammer at close range, but there
seems no logical reason for this limitation.
Instead, it seems that ease of programming has dictated this decision rather than
design philosophy.
Admittedly, these design limitations existed in Breach, but one would have
hoped for an advance in a product built off
the same system. Also, players should note
that the limitations work both ways; the
monsters/enemies cannot move or fire on
diagonals, either. Therefore, this criticism is
directed more toward a lack of realism in
the model rather than a serious quibble
with playability.
A more serious problem with the game
system has to do with combat. Since both
combat and movement are governed by

the expenditure of movement points, a
curious anomaly can regularly occur. If the
player can deploy his party in such a way
that a hero contacts the enemy with a lot
of movement points to spare, it is very possible for the hero to actually strike multiple
blows at the opponent and even annihilate
the enemy before a single retaliatory slash
or thrust can be directed at the hero.
There are certainly many games, particularly combat simulations, where phased
movement allows combat to take place
and be resolved prior to the enemy's movement/combat phase. Usually, however, the
model assumes simultaneous fire and
counts damage in both phases against
both opponents. In Breach and Paladin,
no such model is used.

Lifestyles of the
Rich and Dangerous
In spite of any limitations within the
game system, there are plenty of reasons
for gamers to like both of these games.
Both games offer an opportunity to play
simple, yet challenging, tactical scenarios
that last roughly an hour to an
hour-and-a-half as opposed to the lengthy scenarios offered in some other systems. In addition,
the ability to use the same squad leader or
Paladin in published or personalized
scenarios adds continuity, as well as
replayability to the game. Even though this
reviewer wishes that the squad leader or
Paladin files were not immediately erased
when the character dies, this does offer a
realistic approach to role playing. Further,
the "point and click" interface, bright
colors, digitized sounds, and cute character
graphics make the game both easy and interesting to play.
Another enjoyable aspect to this game is
the capacity for exploration without a lot of
heavy-duty puzzles or a long-term commitment to following an intricate plotline. The
fact that some scenarios can be replayed
(or modified) insures that gamers will get
as much "bang for buck" in this product as
in adventures that require a greater time
commitment.
In short, those who liked the "feel" of play
in Breach, but prefer a fantasy environment shouldn't miss Paladin. In addition,
those who like the tactical combat and exploration of a role-playing game, but want
the satisfaction of being able to complete
a quest in one sitting will be pleased with
Paladin. Finally, those who want to bring
the scenes of their favorite fantasy novels
to life in a computer game will find
Paladin an ideal product for this purpose.
This system is clean and cleverly designed
with much to commend it.

Game Hints

Warning: Although "The Scorpion's
Tale" is a warm and comfortable
tavern of the mind with a nice cozy
fire of vibrant images, our resident
storyteller conjures up illuminating
hints about games. If the gentle
reader eschews hints, let him beware!
Ah, here we are, in November (my
favorite month!) again.
Christmas is just around
the corner, and it's time to
start thinking about gift
lists, especially computer
game lists (No, don't ask
me about Fred's; you really
don't want to know). What
better way to spend those
cold winter nights than
cozied up to a hot adventure game? Of course,
some games are better
than others.

spells, drinking potions, regulating game
speed, and turning the sound on or off (I
recommend Off).

Middle Ground
Travelling to a location in the First
Dimension is quite simple (thanks to the
teleport spell). A map comes up with the

As Told by Scorpia

Just about everything in the game is
menu-driven and is very simple. At the
start, the main menu provides options for
saving and restoring a game, travelling to
a territory in the first dimension (or to the
second and third dimensions), checking
inventory and character stats, creating

Unfriendlies, the sort
you're likely to encounter
most of the time, are not
open to reason. These
offer the options of fighting
or fleeing. Sometimes, you
will get the "Attack, Flee,
Reason" choices as soon
as you meet them, thus
giving you the opportunity
to get away fast.

However, a lot of the
time, you won't see that.
Much of the time, the creature will attack first. Also, on many occasions, the monster you're fighting may
get several attacks on you before it's your
turn. Unlike most games of this type, combat is not a straight-forward back and
forth matter. You may get to attack once
or twice, then the monster may get
several shots at you, and so on.
Temeres starts the game with 100 hitpoints, and that never changes. He can
regenerate slowly between rounds, but a
powerful opponent with multiple attacks
can put him out pretty quickly. So it's important to keep an eye on hit points
during combat in order to retreat if things
are not going too well.

Primary Point

There are three segments to the game.
In the first, appropriately called the First
Dimension, Temeres searches for a
variety of spells and objects to increase
his power. In the second (creatively
referred to as the Second Dimension), he
must make his way through a series of
seven mazes, defeating a powerful wizard
in each one. In the last (named, to no
surprise) the Third Dimension, Temeres
has his showdown with Aldorin.

With friendly types, you always get the
choice of Attacking, Fleeing, or Reasoning (essentially, that's talking to them).
Wise players will always talk to friendlies
because they either tell you information or
give you something.

WIZARD

Wizard Wars (Paragon Software), on
the IBM, is a sort of quasi role-playing
game. You take on the part of Temeres, a
young wizard seeking the means of overcoming Aldorin, a mad and evil mage
who is wreaking havoc on the world. Aldorin has upset the balance between
good and evil, unleashed all sorts of unpleasant monsters, and, in general, made
a real nuisance of himself.

Temeres, however, doesn't start off in
too good a position. After losing a previous encounter with Aldorin, he was
stripped of all his magical spells, leaving
him rather powerless. Fortunately,
Temeres comes across a dying wizard
who gives him two spells: one of teleporta.
lion and one of lightning bolts. Now that
he has something to work with, Temeres
can search the world for the spells and ob
jects that will make him powerful enough
to confront Aldorin once more. That, of
course, is where the game begins.

What happens after that depends on
whether or not the inhabitant is friendly.

30 territories displayed, each numbered.
You simply enter the number of the territory you wish to explore. A scroll is displayed on the screen, giving the territory
name, plus some details about it, and
then asks if you want to go there or not.
Once inside a territory, you explore it
through another menu. This menu gives
you the options of searching for items or
inhabitants, using or storing an item in
your inventory, or returning to the travel
map. There is no actual moving around
here. You don't manipulate any icons
across the screen. When you search for inhabitants, you see an outdoor scene with
a castle in the middle. Then, a banner
comes up on the left-hand side of the
screen, showing Temeres peering into a
crystal ball. When he finds someone, a
second banner appears on the right-hand
side, showing who he's encountered.

There is no experience to be earned in
the game for killing monsters. Further,
Temeres does not advance in level.
Rather, his spell casting energy increases
over time as he defeats monsters and his
wisdom increases as he finds important
items. Eventually, both wisdom and spellcasting energy will reach 500, as high as
you can get. A high wisdom score is important, as there are some items or
friendlies you will not be able to find until
wisdom has reached a certain point.
The most important things to find are
the components for the special spells
listed in Morgaine's Handbook and scrolls
with spells. The spells in the handbook
are only for specific circumstances in the
game, while the scroll spells can be used
at any time without special preparation.
In addition, there are a number of miscellaneous magic items, including potions, gemstones, and other objects that
can be useful or harmful (you have to experiment to determine which) in your
quest. Finally, there are some strange
items you will find that seem to be spell
(Continued on page 12)

WIZARD
WARS
(Continued from page 10)

components, but which have no use in
the game and cannot be used to make
spells.
All this searching in the First Dimension
eventually becomes drudgery. At first, you
tend to find a lot of items, but eventually
you are down to locating only a few
remaining ones. Since you don't really
know where any of the items are in the
territories, you must go through these
places several times over, hoping something will come up. This takes a great
deal of time.
The one item you won't find is the
Sword of Mazeus. Before you can obtain
this very important spell component, you
must go through the mazes of the
Second Dimension. These mazes are fairly simple to get through. You simply need
to map accurately. There are no tricks,
traps, secret doors or passageways in any
of the mazes, nor any puzzles to solve. It's

simply a matter of going through the
hallways until you find the resident wizard
and manage to defeat him or her in battle. Or course, there will be monsters
along the way that you will have to fight.
The one difference here is that everyone
you meet will definitely be unfriendly and
they always get in the first attack.
The first couple of mazes are not too difficult. As you progress, though, your opponent wizards become more powerful.
For this reason, I recommend not attempting the mazes until you have the Light
Shield spell. Once cast (only in combat),
the shield remains up until it has absorbed its quota of damage, after which it
fades away and has to be replaced.
The wizards in the mazes (as well as Aldorin) have light shields of their own.
Also, they will not take you on immediately. Instead, they summon in monsters
(one at a time) to fight for them prior to

the showdown. Eventually, you get to
fight the wizards and then it becomes a
question of which side can wear the other
down first. Fortunately, they never use
more than one light shield, while you can
cast as many as you need (one at a time,
of course) as long as your spell energy
permits.
You can leave a maze at any time by hitting the escape key or fleeing in combat.
This brings you back to the main menu.
However, if you haven't finished a maze
before exiting, you must start at the beginning of the maze again. Therefore it's
best to do each maze in one sitting,
saving the game in between.
The first maze has one level, the rest
have two or three, which means a bit of
going up and down here and there until
you reach the wizard. Still, this is pretty
straightforward, except perhaps for the
seventh maze, which has many up and
down portals. Even so, persistence and
good mapping will see you through.
Overall, the mazes haven't much to
recommend them. The one good point to
them is that, having finished one maze,
you never have to go back to it again.
For example, after completing the first
maze, you will automatically be placed in
the second one the next time you go to
the Second Dimension, and so on (by the
way, you don't get anything special for

defeating any of the wizards, except the
last one).

dorin will be the single most difficult part
of the game.

When the Second Dimension has been
completed, you will learn where the Sword
of Mazeus can be found, which happens
to be a thirty-first territory that now appears on your map for the first time. The
Sword is guarded by a dragon, which you
will have to kill first. Then, you can search
for items and obtain the Sword (this is the
only thing to be found here).

Aldorin is a tough customer, make no
mistake about it. This combat will not be
over in a round or two. First, he will summon in, one at a time, a total of seven
monsters to fight for him. Most, if not all,
will be of the nastier variety.

You may now complete the final spell
from Morgaine's handbook and this will,
in turn, open the way to the Third Dimension. When you first go there, you will
face three dragons, one at a time. You
have the option of fighting them or
answering their riddles. If you answer the
riddles, they will leave in peace and allow
you access to Aldorin. Since these riddles
are, to say the least, incredibly easy (the
last two being hardly riddles at all), I highly
recommend you take the "answer riddle"
option.

Final Conflict
When the last dragon has left, you are
presented with the choice of fighting Aldorin, or going back to the First Dimension. Going back is a good idea, so you
can save the game at this point, as well
as check on your stats. The fight with Al-

Having gone through those, you face
the big A himself. He has 250 hit points
and a lot of mean spells. As with the
wizards in the mazes, it comes down to
who can wear out who first. For some
reason, which I was never able to determine, spells cast at Aldorin were always
weaker than when they were cast at a
regular monster (even when I was
equipped with the item that was supposed
to make my spells more powerful). This
means it will take a lot of spells to kill
him. In the meantime, he is casting spells
at you. Even worse, his spells are usually
more powerful than yours and he gets
more attacks than you do. Expect to
renew your light shield more than once in
this encounter, if you live long enough to
do that.
When the combat is over, Temeres is
proclaimed the new master wizard of the
realm, at which point the game ends and
you have to hit the escape key to exit the
program.

Final Wisdom
The EGA graphics in Wizard Wars are
quite well done, being very detailed and
very colorful. They are the best part of the
game. However, with no puzzles to solve,
no mysteries to unravel, no problems to
overcome, and no real challenges to face
(except possibly the battle with Aldorin),
Wizard Wars is best suited to those who
want to do hack and slash and not worry
about intellectual puzzles.
Well, I see by the old invisible clock on
the wall, it's about that time again.
Remember if you need help with an adventure game, you can reach me in the
following ways:
On Delphi: Stop by the GameSIG (under
the Groups and Clubs menu). On GEnie:
Visit the Games RoundTable (type: Scorpia to reach the Games RT). On The
Source: Send SMail to ST1030. By US
Mail (remember to enclose a self-addressed, stamped envelope if you live in
the United States): Scorpia, PO Box 338,
Gracie Station, NY NY 10028.
Until next time, happy adventuring!
Copyright 1988 by Scorpia, all rights
reserved.

Inside the Industry
News, Notes and Quotes From the
Computer Entertainment Industry
Marvel Super
Heroes
Discovered
Inside Home
Computers
J. Jonah Jameson, the
journalistic nemesis of your
friendly neighborhood
webslinger, would put out
an extra edition of the Daily
Bugle to trumpet Marvel
Entertainment Group's
latest licensing agreements.
In separate transactions, the
comic book publisher has
agreed to allow Paragon
Software, as well as
Mastertronic
International's Arcadia
coin-op division and Melbourne House home computer division, to publish arcade versions of several of
their popular heroes. CGW
learned from an inside
source that Mastertronic's
Arcadia division plans to
have a coin-op version of
the Silver Surfer in operation during the Spring of
1989 and has set a goal of
launching an Amiga version
of the game (through Melbourne House) during the
Summer Consumer
Electronics Show in
Chicago. Company sources
do not confirm the projected
release dates on the
product, but usually reliable
sources state that the surfer
is graphically portrayed in a
real metallic-looking silver.
The graphics arts at the company are reported to be very
enthused over the work that
they are doing, particularly
on the popular Nova figure
from the Marvel Universe.
Paragon Software has
inked an agreement to
portray Captain America,

Spiderman, and Doctor Victor von Doom in a longrange project which will attempt to combine the action
of arcade games with the artistic quality of the comics. If
all goes well, the company
plans to attempt projects
utilizing a certain greenskinned giant, the most
popular group of mutants in
Marvel history, and a certain
armed vigilante. CGW will
report on these future
projects as soon as definite
agreements can be verified.

Ad Lib Music
Synthesizer
Card Gains
Support
With the announcement by
Sierra On-Line, Inc. that

King's Quest IV, Space
Quest III, Police Quest II,
Leisure Suit Larry II, and Silpheed will support the Ad
Lib Music Synthesizer Card
synthesizer card, Ad Lib Inc.
has announced that the Ad

Lib Music Synthesizer Card
now sells separately from the
original Ad Lib PCMS package. This means that the

card will now sell for
$195.00 suggested retail
price. In addition to Sierra's
announced support, the
software publisher is cosponsoring a promotion
where Sierra's customers
can receive a $20.00 rebate
on the card. Well-placed
sources inside Electronic
Arts, Epyx, and
Microprose indicate that
several future products from
those companies will probably support the card, but no
"on the record" announcements have been
made.

Software
Toolworks
Acquires
Intellicreations
In two major corporate actions during September of
1988, The Software Toolworks enhanced its public
image. The company purchased 100% of the holdings
of Intellicreations' coowners Samuel Poole and
Ted Hofmann, making Intellicreations (publishers of
Datasoft products) the

entertainment division of
The Software Toolworks,
and consolidated its stock in
a 1-for-150 consolidation
that took the company off
the "penny stock" market
and onto the "over-thecounter" market. The company has received NASDAQ
status and is currently trading under the symbol,
TWRX.V (with the .V to be
phased out). The new acquisition, together with the
company's previous acquisition of Priority Software
makes The Software Toolworks a three division company: one for creativity and
productivity, one for entertainment, and one for
production. The production
division (Priority Software)
duplicates nearly 50,000
disks per day for both
Software Toolworks and
Intellicreations, as well as
companies like AshtonTate. The company plans to
house all three divisions in a
22,000 square foot facility in
Chatsworth (current home of
Intellicreations).
Les Crane will remain President and Chief Executive Officer of the company, while
Ted Hofmann and Samuel
Poole will assume vicepresidencies at the parent
company. Hofmann will assume administrative duties
for all three divisions, while
Poole will handle creative acquisitions for the entertainment division. The new corporation will boast a crew of
20 in-house programmers
and has a current estimated
valuation of $38 million dollars.

Formation
Flying
Simulators
To Soar
The most neglected niche
in flight simulators and one
that we have been encouraging the industry to fill,
precision or formation flying,
is about to be filled. Though
neither of the two companies working on formation
(Continued on page 24)

Christmas Buying Guide

CGW's Second
Annual
G

Giftgvnsa
time-honored
tradition in
both the
Christmas and Hannakah celebrations. Of
course, some of us have
also developed the
holiday habit of "hinting" into an art form.
For those who need that
extra help in suggesting
to your Santa (or Mrs.
Santa) that you would
rather have a new computer game than
another cheese assortment, we have provided
a holiday "wish book"
for diehard garners.
Each husband is advised, once again this
year, to place this article underneath his
wife's pillow for maximum subliminal effectiveness; college students should append annotated copies of this article to the next
telegram requesting
funds; and offspring
living at home should
carefully tape the summary of each desired
product to the mirror in
their parents' bathroom. Each entry in
the guide contains a statement from the
publishers of the product, a brief note
from our perspective, price information,
and format listing. The Reader Service
Number is to be used with the Reader
Inquiry Service Card at page 4.

Christmas
Buying
Guide

Access Software:
HEAVY METAL: "Do you have the

courage, skill, and intelligence to move
up the ranks in today's modern army.
Heavy Metal is a follow-up game to
Beach-Head, our biggest seller to
date."—Kevin Jones, Access.
This is a hybrid action-strategy game
with plenty of firepower and very little
"downtime." Those who liked BeachHead should be thrilled with this game.
Amiga, IBM ($44.95), C-64/128
($39.95). Circle Reader Service #30.
Accolade, Inc.:
STEEL THUNDER: "When I started

map graphics and 3D
space technology, we
believe this will be of the
Holiday best." Kelly
Flock, Product Manager
of F-14 Tomcat.
The graphics artists
from Dynamix know
how to make action flow
on the screen and they
have created a visually
stimulating environment
for this flight simulator. C64/128 ($39.95). Circle
Reader Service #32.
Avalon Hill:
POLICE BLOTTER:

"With seven challenging
mysteries by the designer of Murder By The
Dozen and an expanded
clue book, this should
be an excellent purchase
for crime solvers."—Bill
Peschel, Avalon Hill

out, I didn't know much about tanks. I
thought they were slow, weak things
that were easily defeated. I learned differently."—Tom Loughry, designer of
Steel Thunder.
Although Loughry admits to no prior
knowledge of armored warfare, he
seems to have done his homework.
Would-be tank commanders choose
their tank (from four modern choices),
crew (loader, gunner, and driver),
ordnance, theater of operations (Cuba,
Syria, or West Germany) and external
armor in this simulation of modern land
warfare. C-64/128 ($29.95). Circle
Reader Service #31.
Activision:
F-14 TOMCAT: "This is Activision's

first true simulation product. It's a "Top
Gun" fighter school simulation, patterned after the film, and it provides
more of a storyline than most simulations and features several fighter
scenarios based on real events. With bit

This product will be
published on two disks
with four sides full of interesting crimes. Those
who enjoyed the original
should enjoy the most
recent chance to match
wits with this system.
Apple II ($29.95). Circle
Reader Service #33.
Broderbund:
DOWNHILL CHALLENGE: "Featuring

four ski events--downhill, slalom, giant
slalom, and jumping—Downhill Challenge is the only winter sports simulation program that focuses exclusively
on skiing. We believe ski enthusiasts
will find Downhill Challenge to be the
most realistic and thrilling ski simulation program available."—Jenay Cottrell, Broderbund
Up to five players may compete in this
second product in the "Challenge Line."
The animation moves lively at 12 frames
per second in this French import of
Microids' Super Ski. Amiga, Apple IIGS,
Atari ST and IBM ($29.95), C-64/128
($24.95). Circle Reader Service #35.
OPERATION: CLEAN STREETS:

"As Cleanup Harry, an undercover cop,
the player faces an assortment of

thugs, punks and hoodlums in an allout effort to wipe the city's streets
clean. The backgrounds, 3-D animation, detailed graphics, variety and freeform nature of the fighting combine to
make this game exceptionally realistic
and challenging.—Jenay Cottrell,
Broderbund.
This improved version of the popular
French game, Manhattan Dealers (Silmarils),
features nine scenarios
distributed over five
levels of play. Think of it
as an urbanized version
of classic martial arts
games with both a
storyline and topical
moral lesson. Amiga,
Atari ST ($39.95), IBM
($34.95). Circle Reader
Service #36.

on strategy if they so desire. Amiga
($49.95). Circle Reader Service #37.

IBM ($39.95), C-64/128 ($29.95). Circle
Reader Service #39.

TV SPORTS FOOTBALL: "We
believe this is a genuine breakthrough
that combines three things never done
as a mix: 1) a satisfying arcade game
with 2) a complete statistical game that
3) emulates an actual television broadcast."—Bob Jacob, Cinemaware.

Datasoft:
ANNALS OF ROME: "Players will be

Part of the new "Wargarners Series" (other titles include: Android
Decision, Firezone, and
Sorcerer Lord) imported
from Great Britain, this
strategy game features
historical situations from
the era of the Roman
Republic through the
end of the Roman Empire and possibly
beyond. Amiga, Atari ST,
IBM ($34.95), C-64/128
($24.95). Circle Reader
Service #40.

Buena Vista Software:
WHO FRAMED
ROGER RABBIT: "Now
you can bring home the

excitement of the movie,
Who Framed Roger Rabbit?, with this new computer game from Buena
Vista Software. Using

Electronic Arts:
CAVEMAN UGHLYMPICS: "The old saying

'The race goes not always to the swiftest, but
to those who can avoid
being eaten' was probably coined by a participant in this event."—
Zina Yee, Caveman
Ughlympics documentation.

state-of-the-art computer
animation and graphics,
plus music and sound effects, captures the zany
humor and adventures
in Toontown, just like in
the movie."—Debra
Keene-Carter, Buena
Vista Software.
If the challenges of
racing "Benny the Cab"
through the streets of
Tinseltown, retrieving
the missing will at the Ink and Paint
Club, and using cartoon gags to get
past the weasel gang are anything like
the fun we experienced when we saw
the film, this should be a delightful
game for the whole family. Amiga
($44.95), Apple II, IBM ($39.95), C64/128 ($29.95). Circle Reader Service
#36.
Cinemaware:
LORDS OF THE RISING SUN:

"Directly inspired by the classic film,
Ran, this game has more animation
than any computer game in history. It
has two-and-one-half times the animation of Rocket Ranger and offers the
strategy of an SSI-style wargame, as
well."—Bob Jacob, Cinemaware.
This game offers the visual stimulation
we have come to expect from
Cinemaware, but allows players to toggle off the arcade sequences and focus

sitting on the edge of their seats, perhaps indefinitely, as they skillfully attempt to conquer and rule throughout
the ages. In fact, there is no conclusion
to this game unless you get defeated."
Brenda Franklin, Intellicreations.

This first in a series of sports games
should prove interesting to joystick jockeys and statistic savants alike. The
capability for league play with a mix of
both human and computer managed
teams presented with the company's
usual stunning visual effects makes this
a unique action-strategy product.
Amiga, IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #38.
Data East:
GUERRILLA WARS: "The newest title
from Data East, Guerrilla Wars is an ad-

venturous combat mission based on the
arcade game and offering the same
clear graphics and action of the coinop. The arcade version is currently in
the top 10 on the industry charts."—
Diane Orr for Data East.
Players attempt to rescue hostages in
this conversion of a popular action
game from the coin-op world. Atari ST,

This arcade game offers cartoon-type animation, humorous
documentation, and challenging competition.
Players engage in Matetossing, Saber
[Tooth Tiger] Racing (adding new meaning to running for your life), Fire
Making, Clubbing, Dino Racing, and
Dino Vaulting in this "prehistoric" pastime. C-64/128 ($39.95). Circle Reader
Service #41.
JORDAN VS. BIRD:"/ never knew
that games existed with such details
and knowledge of the game."—Michael
Jordan, Chicago Bulls.
From slam dunks to three-point shots,
fast-moving action is the order of the
day in this game for one or two players.
There is much more to this release than
the best-selling One-on-One of previous
years. IBM ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #42.
Epyx:
FINAL ASSAULT: "There is nothing

like this product. It's a mountain climbing simulation designed with help from

Eric Escoffier the mountain climber."—
Debra Simshauser, Epyx.
Players choose equipment, evaluate
weather conditions, and select the slope
for the assault in this carefully crafted
product. A variety of routes to the top of
the mountain are available (marked by
familiar ski slope icons).
The graphic of the
mountain is very nicely
done. Amiga, Atari ST
($49.95), Apple IIGS
($44.95). Circle Reader
Service #43.

Written by Mike Breggar (Prime Time),
the game attempts to bring a dimension
of sight and sound to your computer
screen and offers a patented Twilight
Zone plot twist for its conclusion. Amiga,
IBM ($39.95), C-64/128 ($29.95). Circle
Reader Service #46.

back to our roots in this
product. It's like Dungeons and Dragons, but
with incredible
graphics."—Debra Simshauser, Epyx.
Players face eighty-two
different monster-types
(with names as hideous
as "Rotlung parasites"
and the "maggot-infested Fetid Wheeze") in
this latest fantasy adventure from John and Charles Dougherty
(Questron, Legacy of the
Ancients, and Questron
II). Apple II, IBM
($49.95), C-64/128
($39.95). Circle Reader
Service #44.

Infocom:
BATTLETECH: THE
CRESCENT HAWK'S
INCEPTION: "This is

the largest computer
role-playing game available, with a geography
of over four million locations. Emotive outtakes
display emotive responses of the characters, as
well as zoom in on particular battle action sequences in the game.
You will feel as if you
have been thrown into
the middle of the battlefield, going
head-to-head with an enemy
BattleMech!"—Eileen
Milauskas, Infocom.

Final Frontier:
SPACE M+A+X: "It

models all the problems
and challenges of
designing an authentic
space station."—Tom
Keller, designer of Space
M+A+X.

First Row:
TWILIGHT ZONE: "Based on the excitement of the famous TV series, the
game thrusts you into several stories
which seem, at first, unrelated, but eventually weave themselves into a single fascinating plot with suspense, excitement,
and a thrilling, mysterious ending."—
Linda Shaifer, First Row.
[Read the following with a Rod Serling
accent] Submitted for your approval, this
is the first of a series of graphic adventures based on the television program.

earlier versions with many bells and
whistles added."—Ralph Bosson,
Garde'.
The focus of this game
of fighting sail is on the
period from 1750 to
1810. Those interested
in naval conflict during
the Seven Years War,
American Revolution,
Napoleonic Wars, and/or
War of 1812 will find this
a flexible system. The
game is particularly excellent in one-on-one
frigate duels and small
squadron actions. Apple,
C-64/128, IBM ($49.95).
Circle Reader Service
#47.

LEGEND OF BLACKSILVER: "We're getting

This sophisticated simulation has been
made more user-friendly in the latest version, but it still offers the kind of realistic
challenge that has enabled it to be used
in course work in several major universities. IBM ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #45.

ing. IBM ($39.95). Circle Reader Service
#46.
Garde':
HIGH SEAS: "The IBM version of High
Seas is a vast improvement over the

Gamestar:
PETE ROSE PENNANT FEVER:

"Designed in conjunction with the legendary 'Charlie Hustle,' baseball's all-time
leading hitter, Pete Rose Pennant Fever
is bound to be one of the season's top
sellers. It offers on field perspective and
lets you guide your own team to the
pennant. You're on the field, in the
dugout, and in the front office. Like Pete
wanted, it's simply faster, harder, and
better."—Lou Viveros, Gamestar.
From Scott Orr's conception to the
able execution of the programming crew
at Dynamix, this action-strategy game
has plenty to offer. Statistics-oriented
players won't like it, but those looking
for a blend of on and off the field
management with plenty of actionoriented options will find this game excit-

Richly detailed and entirely consistent
with the BattleTech universe created by
FASA, this product has been heavily influenced by Japanimation (science fiction-oriented animated cartoons) and
Japanese monga (phenomenal selling
comic books) to produce a daring new
approach for an adventure game (especially an Infocom adventure game).
IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #48.

ZORK ZERO: "From the exciting
prologue, where you will come face to
face with Lord Dimwit Flathead the Excessive, to the climactic epilogue;,
where you'll meet the most powerful
wizard ever to set foot on the soil of
Quendor, Zork Zero has something for
(Continued on page 27)

Game of the Year Awards

Game of the Year
Awards
On September 3, 1988, Computer
Gaming World presented the Computer
Gaming World
Game of the Year
Awards at the Los
Angeles Airport
Hyatt Hotel during
the Gateway 1988
gaming convention. Editor,
Founder, and
Publisher Russell
Sipe was the
Master of
Ceremonies and
the program began with an audio-visual
stroll down CGW's memory lane. Then,
some candid shots of the staff and work
environment at the
magazine's offices were
shown. After these brief
presentations, the
nominees for Adventure Game of the
Year were presented:
Electronic Arts for
Bard's Tale III: The
Thief of Fate—Bill
Heineman, Michael A.
Stackpole, and Bruce
Schlickbernd (designers), Todd J. Camasta
(graphics), Kurt Heiden
(music), Brian Far!(executive producer for Interplay Productions), and Dave Albert (producer for

Electronic Arts).
Infocom for Beyond
Zork—Brian Moriarty
(designer).

Origin Systems for Ultima V: Warriors of
Destiny—Richard "Lord
British" Garriott
(designer).
Electronic Arts for Wasteland—Alan Pavlish,
Michael A. Stackpole,
Brian Fargo, and Ken
St. Andre (designers),
Todd J. Camasta
(graphics), Elizabeth T.
Danforth (additional maps), Brian Fargo
(executive producer for Interplay Productions), and Dave Albert (producer for

Electronic Arts).
Sir-Tech Software for Wizardry IV: The
Return of Werdna—Andrew Greenberg,

Robert Woodhead, and Roe R. Adams III
(designers).
And the WINNER of CGW's Adventure Game of
the Year is:
Electronic Arts for

Wastelnd—[E:
Wasteland offers in-

teresting encounters via invisible attribut
checks, one of the
cleverest uses to
date of skill-based character growth,
and an intriguing storyline.]
Next, nominees for Action Game of
the Year were
presented:
Spectrum Holobyte for
Falcon—Gilman Louie
and Mark Johnson
(designers), Bob Coston, Gilman Louie,
Jody Sather, Jeffrey
Stokol, and Mark
Johnson (graphics),
with Ed Bogas (music).
Sublogic for Jet
(68000 versions)---Charles Guy (original designer), Chris Green
(68000 versions), and Bruce Artwick (executive producer for Sublogic).
Microprose for Pirates—Sid Meier and
Arnold Hendrick (designers), with Michael
Haire (graphics).
Microprose for Stealth
Fighter—Jim Synoski
and Arnold Hendrick
(designers), Michael
Haire and Michele
Mahan (graphics), Ken
Lagace (music and
sound), and Ed Bever
(scenario development).
Cinemaware for The
Three Stooges—John
Cutter, Bill Zielinski,
Timothy Skelly, and
David Thiel (designers), Richard Ditton
(video compression), Larry Garner
(sound compression), and Phyllis and
Robert Jacob (executive producers).
(Continued on page 35)

Review

Longing for
Shandola
Interstel's "First Expedition"
by Dennis Owens
Day 76
Nine days since we last saw a ship—ammo, fuel, and supplies running low. No food' Haven't eaten in such a long
time, my first mate is starting to resemble a chicken leg. I
caught him staring hungrily at me yesterday.
That island must be in these waters. The charts, the natives'
superstitions, even our own legends indicate that it must be
here. Somewhere.
Time is running out. Long past the point of turning back,
we circle and backtrack endlessly. Even, I fear, if we should
find the sun sphere, we will not have the fuel or the food to
make it back to Shandola.
We will search one last day: tomorrow. It is one thing for
us to die; quite another for the planet to be doomed.
Interstel's First Expedition is a simulation of a seagoing
simulation. Neither as complicated nor as breathlessly
exhilarating as actually sailing a vessel, it is, nonetheless, an accurate depiction of what goes on at sea. Unfortunately, short
of taking a few potshots at sea beasts for food, squinting at
ships on the horizon to tell if they are pirates or not, and
wandering around a very tiny bit on a few islands, virtually
nothing happens for long stretches of time in this game.
The object of the quest is to recover three sun spheres
which have been stolen from their repository in the holy
shrine on the island of Shandola. Without these spheres in
their proper place, the planet Yorland will be defenseless
against the destructive rays which the comet Halistrom due
back in 100 days—emits.
To succeed in the quest, player characters are provided with
a ship, first mate, compass, star chart, map, and some
money to buy food, fuel, and other necessities. Basically,
then, First Expedition becomes a process of motoring back
and forth across the world represented on the map; attempting to pick up messages; trying to find the sun spheres; and,
occasionally, stopping to refuel or replenish the ship's supply
of food/ammo/rockets.

Bad Tidings
Part simulator and part quest game, First Expedition is not
a role-playing game. The only attributes that can be increased are those of the ship (see chart). Neither is it the excit
ing science-fiction adventure that the game's designer,
Steven Englestad, seemed to have had in mind. What it is—
besides trying mightily to be an educational game—is relatively slow-moving. Days on end of being surrounded by water
may sound romantic, but much of this game is less stimulating than sitting and watching barnacles grow.
Perhaps the biggest problem with the game (and I quote
from the manual) is that it "was designed so that some terrible event will not 'kill' you suddenly and unexpectedly." The

result, though, is that
it is virtually impossible to die. The only
undesirable ways for
the game to end is to
go without food for
two days or not find
the sun spheres in
time. Since sea beasts
are so plentiful (and it
only takes one wellaimed shot to obtain a
three-days' supply of
fresh meat), once you
get used to the ship's
cannon's ballistic system, you will almost
never need to go
hungry again.
Players also rarely
have to do without
money. Simply defending one's ship successfully against pirates—
who do nothing more
than board the ship
and take a third of its
supplies—garners more money and nothing in this game is very expensive.

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

First Expedition
IBM
1
$49.95
Steven Englestad
Interstel
Webster, Tx

Fuel, depending on the distance you
need to travel, can sometimes last for
three or four trips between islands
(longer as the boat class goes up). Rockets (which provide an aerial view of the ship's surroundings),
ammo, fuel, food, and doctor's assistance, can be purchased
at any island which has a pier.

So, while it is thoughtful that Interstel wanted to make this
a game which was easy to begin (who can ever forget the
horrors of trying to get started in the original Might and
Magic?), what gameplayers really want is to have a game
start slowly, let them get comfortable with the system, and
then, let the weirdness start. We do not want the games to
be inanely simple.
Options allow players to set the speed of the game, the skill
level needed to fire the cannon accurately, toggle the sound
on/off, and use autoplot for navigation. Even playing the
game at as fast a speed setting as possible, left far too much
of the time for staring at the screen and waiting for something to happen.
First Expedition has some interesting premiums, however.
The compass, map, and star chart are nice cardboard
enclosures, but they end up becoming cumbersome to use
and ultimately detract from, rather than enhance, game play.
All their features could have been included in the program itself.
Autoplot was a tremendous assistance because, even
though the manual suggests the use of triangulation (and
provides several pages of the documentation to explain the
process), the procedure simply takes too long. First, the
player looks at the night sky and chooses a star; then, he examines the star chart carefully enough to locate the star he
saw in the sky; this is followed by looking up the star's abbreviation in the star catalogue; and finally, . . . you get the
idea. All of that is done and the player still hasn't even gotten
(Continued on page 61)

Inside the Industry
(Continued from page 15)

flying simulations is ready to
go on the record, CGW has
had two different projects
confirmed by inside sources.
Don't be surprised if a
license and design consultation has been obtained
from the Blue Angels
precision flight team for one
of the projects. Marketing
and legal considerations
keep both companies from
going "on the record" at this
point in time.

Origin Plots
New Corporate
Strategy
Signifying a new positioning among software
publishers, Origin Systems, Inc. has changed
both the corporate and
product brand name to
Origin. Robert Garriott, president of Origin, recently outlined the company's new
strategy by stating, "For the
past six years, Origin has
generally been known as a
one-or-two product-a-year
company, with the Ultima
series clearly being our
hallmark accomplishment."
The executive, co-founder of
the software company with
his more famous sibling
(Richard "Lord British" Garriott), went on to state that
the company has been involved in intensive internal
product development for the
last two and a half years and
the time has arrived when
the company can project
more than a dozen new
releases over the next two
years. "We're sitting on a
goldmine of diversified new
entertainment software titles,

and we've developed some
pretty bold strategies and
business plans to bring
them to market." The softspoken president envisions
more than a series of fantasy
role playing games and expects that: "The next two
years will see the introduction of altogether new
categories of computer entertainment from Origin." [Ed.:

For more information, see
"Fantastic Voyages 11" in
this issue.]

Jack Nicklaus
Eagles Accolade
License
Accolade, Inc. and Jack
Nicklaus Productions have
signed a three year agreement for the purpose of
developing golf simulations
for the home computer.

Jack Nicklaus' Greatest 18
Holes of Major Championship Golf is the first slated
product. Based on Nicklaus'
ABC Sports videotape
presentation, this game also
includes two Nicklausdesigned courses (Castle
Pines and Desert Mountain).
CGW was allowed an early
preview of this product and
the editorial staff was impressed. The product will include five "male" and four
"female" golfers as computerized opponents. One of
these opponents is Jack himself. Nicklaus claims that he
can be beaten in this
program with more powerful
shots because he has always
been a position player. The
program takes the strengths
of Accolade's Mean 18 and
builds upon them with the finesse and expertise of Nicklaus. The company intends
to have the program on sale
prior to the 1988 Christmas
season.

Christmas Buying
Guide
(Continued from page 18)
everyone and promises to be the best offering yet."—Eileen Milauskas, Infocom.
With more than 200 locations, more
puzzles than the original
Zork trilogy combined,
the first graphic puzzles
to be utilized in an Infocom title, and the insane humor of Steve
Meretzky, it is no wonder
that thousands of fans
are anxiously awaiting
this title. Macintosh
($49.95). Circle Reader
Service #49.

Koei:
GENGHIS KHAN: "If you thought
Nobunaga's Ambition was the greatest
simulation game you had ever played,
it's time to change your mind. Genghis
Khan combines the realism and sophistication of previous Koei games with a

more complex battle system and
graphics that will set a new industry
standard."—Bill Swartz, Koei.

Mindscape:
THE COLONY: "A

sophisticated 3-D modeling system brings to
your computer screen
the smooth, real-time,
hidden-surface animation formerly found only
in expensive military
and commercial
simulators. Add to that
a high quality soundtrack featuring digitized
sound effects and you'll
feel as though you're actually inside the strange
environment of this distant world."—Karen
Novak, Mindscape.

Bard's Tale and Wasteland."—Brian Fargo,

Interplay.
For those who missed
the "Sneak Preview" of
Neuromancer in the September issue of CGW,
this is a marvelous
presentation of the environment, characters,
technology, and basic
plotline (with a gameoriented twist) from William Gibson's Hugo,
Nebula, and Philip K.
Dick award-winning
novel. C-64/128
($39.95). Circle Reader
Service #50.

The approach to this game is multifaceted. It is neither a clone of other
post-nuclear holocaust games nor a
game that fits neatly into any category. It
is a fresh approach to survivalism. IBM
($49.95). Circle Reader Service #51.

Everything we've learned in terms of
flight simulation, 3-D graphics, and
gameplay has been put
into this one product."
Sid Meier, Microprose.

Microprose continues to
"expand the envelope."
IBM ($64.95). Circle
Reader Service #54.

think it's hot! It's the
first cyberpunk computer role-playing game;
has a soundtrack by
Devo; and comes from
the designers of The

all your CD's melted, and your dog got
eaten by a zombie. What else can you
do but join the Scavengers—a futuristic
fantasy/adventure/role-playing/strategy
game that takes you through RAD
storms, mutant monsters, and a salvage mission to save the world."—Erin
Green, Interstel.

Microprose:
F-19: "We feel it's the culmination of
four or five years of effort at Microprose.

With products like F19, the creative team at

Interplay:
NEUROMANCER: "We

Interstel:
SCAVENGERS: "The planet is toast,

with the original, but John Elway's
Quarterback delivers more than the
usual conversion. Apple II, C-64/128,
IBM ($29.99), Apple IIGS ($39.99).
Circle Reader Service #53.

This science fiction adventure offers a unique
interface, perspective,
and feeling as the player
dons the role of a space
marshall and patrols a
space colony where
something has gone terribly wrong. Macintosh
($49.95). Circle Reader
Service #55.
This series of games has a serious historical basis and a challenging
playability. Everything from the excellent
graphics and detailed documentation to
the numerous permutations of
gameplay underlies this company's intent to enable the player to "make history." IBM ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #52.
Melbourne House:
JOHN ELWAY'S QUARTERBACK:
"Quarterback has been my favorite

game since I discovered it in the Arcades."—John Elway, Denver Broncos.
Rarely does a home computer version
of an coin-op hit convey the graphics excellence or excitement of play associated

ROAD RAIDER: "Chris Gray, author
of the best-selling Infiltrator, has done it
again with Road Raider. A wild and
crazy demolition derby . . . brings the
game to an action-packed climax."—
Karen Novak, Mindscape.
The game sounds like Mad Max meets
The Terminator in the car chase scene
from The French Connection. Amiga,
Atari ST ($39.95), C-64/128 ($29.95).
Circle Reader Service #56.
New World Computing:
MIGHT AND MAGIC II: "After over a
(Continued on page 52)

Review

Introduction
Red Storm Rising was sneak previewed last month, but with less
than two weeks to play with the system, this reviewer was able to
give only a brief overview of the product. This article will delve further, concentrating upon successful (and not so successful)
tactics.
The game itself is a simulation
of modern submarine warfare. In
fact, the title might be more accurately given as Red Storm
Rising: Part I. Currently, MicroProse has no concrete plans for
additional simulations (air, land,
CVBG [carrier battle group]), but
who knows what the future
holds. The simulation is in line
with Microprose's product
philosophy—professionally produced, historically accurate and vastly entertaining.

without offensive weaponry and are easy prey once the escorts
have been dispatched. In fact, they are so easy to destroy that this
reviewer recommends closing and finishing them with torpedoes.

HELICOPTERS: A helicopter is the most deadly foe. Generally,
one will not even realise that a helo is in the attack until it is too
late. However, if most of the escorts have been sunk, and missile
torpedoes are still falling like an
ungentle rain, this probably
means an enemy helicopter. To
verify this, adjust depth to a maximum of 55' and use radar. The
best defense is not evasion. It is
use of a Stinger missile. Although the documentation notes
a maximum range of 6,000
By M. Evan Brooks
yards, kills may actually be
achieved at ranges up to 11,000
yards. When exposing the sail
(the conning tower), be prepared to
evade numerous torpedoes while getting
ready for the Stinger shot; the closer the
helicopter is, the more the chance of success.

Diving Into Red
Storm Rising

Game Play
Basic appearance and game play was
covered in the prior article, so this review
will concentrate on survival in the icy
waters of the North Atlantic. There are
certain paths to success and even more
routes to the Deep Six. However, Red
Storm Rising is relatively easy to learn
and win. This reviewer does not mean
that the challenge is absent, but while
the challenge is omnipresent, it is surmountable.
When players first view the documentation, they will fear the worst. However,
most of the documentation is composed
of historical data, while the actual game
play becomes intuitive after 2-3 scenarios.

Tactical Guidelines for Offense
Unlike Silent Service, Red Storm
Rising offers quick and easy access to
the enemy. While World War II submarines often spent long periods looking
for the enemy, Red Storm Rising
lates that modern sensor mechanisms (e.g. aircraft reconnaissance, satellites, etc.) will generally pinpoint enemy locations. Getting there was never really half of the fun, and in Red Storm
Rising, contact is usually quick. Even when immediate contact is
not achieved, be aware that some enemy vessel is within your
sphere of operations and for every enemy vessel, there is an adequate offense.
SURFACE VESSELS: Generally, these are the easiest kills. When
possible, achieve early contact, use missiles (Tomahawks or Harpoons) and sweep the seas. To utilize missiles, the submarine
must be at a depth of 300' or less. Speed, however, is not a factor, so one's vessel may be travelling at maximum speed while
firing at the enemy. Usually, enemy warships are protecting something, so firing several missiles in a warship's general direction
may often sink a rearward transport. While one missile hit is often
sufficient for a kill, a carrier (Kremlin class) may require as many
as 4-5 missile hits. Also, be aware that both Harpoons and
Tomahawks may be destroyed by defensive missiles and gunfire
systems. Usually, a 75% hit rate will be achieved. This is somewhat higher than that in Strike Fleet (Electronic Arts), but since
actual combat experience is, thankfully, non-existent, it is hard to
tell which is correct. Transports, supply ships and base ships are

ENEMY SUBMARINES: Enemy nuclear
submarines pose no serious threat. Since
they are louder than their Western
counterparts, they are easily located.
Enemy diesel boats are virtually silent,
however. When opposing submarines, be
ready for the enemy to materialize quickly. In fact, to optimize one's chance
against a submarine force, when the tactical screen appears, quickly zoom in.
While surface forces are often detected at
maximum ranges, enemy submarines are
usually detected at a zoom factor of 4.
Thus, zoom in, make contact, and be
ready to loose a quick torpedo at the
nearest enemy boat. Enemy boats located a distance away may be harassed
by use of Sea Lance missiles. Their
evasionary maneuvers may buy sufficient
time to be able dispose of the near
enemy and turn to those located further
away at one's convenience.
COMBINED FORCES: These are tricky, but they can be
defeated. With torpedoes roaming and missiles flying, one may
not have time to sufficiently identify an enemy submarine as an escort. However, if Harpoons and Tomahawks keep overflying the
target, it is most likely a submarine escort and should be
destroyed by torpedo.

Tactical Guidelines for Defense
It can be said that there are old submarine officers and bold submarine officers, but not old bold submarine officers. Defensive
maneuvering is essential to survival. The Defense Display zooms
to a 3 factor, so one can drop noisemakers, decoys and literally
dance around the incoming torpedoes. However, this takes time
and concentration which denies one the chance to take the battle
to the enemy. While high speed evasive maneuvers may throw off
the enemy torpedoes, they also easily sever the wires to one's
own torpedoes. Since wire guided torpedoes may be driven into
enemy vessels by joystick (and must be carefully monitored to insure that enemy jamming does not deter them from striking the
target), a maximum speed of circa 15 knots is necessary to assure control of the wire.

Therefore, although it looks dangerous and feels even worse,
maintain the tactical display and avoid enemy torpedoes by dropping noisemakers only when they have homed in. Hopefully, they
can be decoyed at a range between 1,000-2,000 yards, because
they have an uncomfortable tendency to reacquire one's boat
when they pass closer. If this occurs within 500 yards, it is usually
fatal (within 300 yards, it is always deadly).
Do not get too close to the enemy surface vessels. RBU (enemy
rocket attacks) are short-ranged, but deadly when repeated.

that 83% of Soviet submarines will be "quiet." Since the Soviet
submarine fleet (3 times as large as the American fleet) is the
strategic offensive arm of the Soviet Navy, as well as the primary
anti-submarine weapon (see Soviet Military Power: An Assessment of the Threat 1988), it is apparent why Navy planners are
concerned.

Assessment of Game Play and Historicity

The Maritime Strategy envisions a forward defense as a keystone. In fighting a war, the U.S. Navy must "seize the initiative and
carry the fight to the enemy." The objectives involved in succeeding at this goal include denying the Soviets their kind of war and
the destruction of the Soviet Navy, as well as influencing the land
battle (cf. Maritime Strategy, US Naval Institute, January 1986).
The submarine is the vanguard of the offense. Its mission carries
out these functions and it protects the SLOC (Sea Lanes of Communication) in order to allow US Reserve Forces to make their
presence felt in the land battle.

Certain aspects of Red Storm Rising have been adjusted for
playability. There is nothing wrong with this, as long as the user
understands what has been adjusted and realizes the impact upon
the simulation. In the game, a total of four offensive weapons
may be in play at any one time. This is independent of whether
the weapons are torpedoes (and being wire-guided) or missiles
(which are fire-and-forget). Larry Bond (former Naval officer,
recent NATO war games referee, and current expert on Naval warfare) asserts that, currently, a submarine can probably handle only
two wire-guided torpedoes at any one time. However, the new
weapons computer on the Seawolf could possibly alter the situation. The problem is that this is intruding on sensitive ground, so
there is no definitive answer. There is certainly no question that
the submarine could expend all its missile load quickly.

The game's 1996 scenario offers the Seawolf, the $1-billion
prototype whose keel is currently being laid. With an offensive
weapons inventory virtually doubling current submarines, this is a
vessel that will rarely have to return to port for armaments.
However, some observers see the Seawolf as an interesting vessel, but the wrong boat for the times (see Newsweek, September
12, 1988). The Walker Spy Family's deleterious effect upon submarine security will probably never be fully told, but currently, only
13% of Soviet subs run "quiet;" by the year 2000, it is estimated

Microprose has responded that this limitation is due to design
parameters on the C-64/128 (any more than 8 weapons on the
display [4 incoming and 4 outgoing] tend to lose resolution).
Also, contemporary Naval Doctrine (which holds that with the
shortage of Tomahawks and Harpoons, definite target acquisition
would be required before expenditure) would support the game
design. This reviewer discussed the matter with a Navy captain, a
former commander of the USS Los Angeles. His response to the
official doctrine was, "Sure,—in a peacetime mode; in wartime, if I

Reflections Upon Doctrine

saw a CVBG [carrier battle group], I'd expend every bit of
ordnance I could and then, get the hell out of the area!"
In the World War III scenarios, an American submarine can take
up to 3 torpedo hits, and even when the submarine is sunk, the
player is generally rescued. This was obviously done for playability.
Navy personnel have stated that since most of the submarines are
not double-hulled, there is little chance of their surviving a single
hit and any chance of rescue is miniscule at best. In fact, this was
their most vocal criticism—they are proud of their calling, and
regard it as much more dangerous in a wartime situation than the
game depicts. Recognize this and empathize with them, but overall, the effect on the simulation is negligible.

Miscellaneous Notes
There are anywhere from 8-16 endings. Last month, this
reviewer noted that abject failure resulted in Gulag imprisonment.
In addition, a limited defeat leaves one beached and forgotten like
the "Vietnam vets;" a successful resolution may result in one's
eventual promotion to Navy Captain; and a reputation as the
"Number 1 sub skipper" will yield a tickertape parade, promotion
to Rear Admiral, and the press offering "millions for your
memoirs." While this last ending may well be true, this reviewer
thought it a shade cynical. If patriotism is the last refuge of a
scoundrel (Samuel Johnson, 1775), it can also stand for putting
country ahead of self (Adlai Stevenson, 1952).

Save and Replay (All's Fair Dept.)
Scenarios may be saved and, in the World War III scenario, one
may "cheat" appropriately. Save the game, do a scenario, and
then decide whether or not to continue. Not like the result? Play

the scenario again until a more successful kill ratio is achieved.
Plus, the second time around, the player is cognizant of the total
enemy force structure, can make quick identification and react accordingly. A total of four scenarios may be saved per separate
disk; this may be formatted without leaving the game, and when
the disk is full, one can delete a prior save (this feature is not explicitly mentioned in the documentation).
After a scenario is completed, a replay feature is offered.
However, it will not replay the entire scenario -- instead, just the
last few minutes. Be aware of its limitations.

Important Strategic Consideration
In the strategic movement phase (World War III scenario), movement with the joystick button depressed is at 30 knots, with joystick alone, 15 knots and with joystick centered, a drift at 4 knots.
While this is mentioned in the documentation, it took this
reviewer several scenarios plus an explicit explanation from Larry
Bond to realize that when contact is made with the enemy, one's
speed will reflect that of the joystick. When one suddenly realizes
that his speed is 30 knots at 200' in shallow water and making
severe noise, it is too late. Thus, insure that speed is a more
reasonable 12-15 knots when contact is imminent.

Conclusions
As may be seen from the tenor of this article, Red Storm Rising
is highly recommended. Truthfully, this reviewer did not expect a
simulation as entertaining and apparently accurate as this was.
Available from Microprose Software on the C-64/128 for
$44.95, Red Storm Rising will be out on the IBM in January 1989.

I

Review

History Lesson
Midway, Coral Sea,
Yorktown, Enterprise,
Shokaku, Hiryu; names
which get the wargamer's
adrenaline flowing. A very
popular subject for wargame design, the Pacific
theater has been modeled
by well over 100
boardgames and by more
than a dozen computer
games (including such
popular titles as Carrier
Force, Guadalcanal Campaign, Carriers at War, PT109, Gato, Sub Battle
Simulator, Warship, and
Long Lance).

IBM is My Co-Pilot
Lucasfilm's "Battlehawks 1942"
by Russell Sipe

I remember many an evening spent in rapturous
play of the Battleline board
games, Air Force and
Dauntless. I learned important facets of WWII air combat such as: the necessity
of conserving your altitude
(difficult to regain under
combat conditions); the
reason Japanese Betty
bombers were called
'Zippos' (they tended to explode in a fireball when hit
with gunfire); and why German aces had so many
more official victories than
allied aces (the verification
of kills was much more
lenient for the Germans
than the allies).

of 1942: Coral Sea, Midway, Eastern Solomons,
and Santa Cruz Island. You
can take on the role of
either an American or
Japanese pilot (Lucasfilm
plans to market the game
in Japan as well). As a
fighter pilot you learn to fly
and fight with an American
Wildcat or with a Japanese
Zero. On dive bombing missions, you fly a Dauntless
(American) or Val
(Japanese) and, on torpedo
missions, you learn to successfully execute attacks
with Avengers (American)
or Kates (Japanese).
The more than 30 missions lead you through all
phases of WWII naval air
tactical engagements.
Your heart will beat faster
as enemy bullets rip
through your Dauntless
while you complete the
final 1000 feet of your dive
before releasing a deadly
payload at the Japanese
carrier directly below you.
Dropping the bomb, you
immediately climb and go
into a tight turn, while
trying to avoid the Zero on
your tail. While this is going
on deadly ack-ack shells
burst all around you.

Turning the tables
around, you find yourself
diving desperately into the
My first experience with a
midst of a flight of enemy
computerized air combat
Val torpedo bombers on
game was SSI's 1980
their final attack run on the
release, Computer Air
Yorktown. You feel responCombat (which was basicalsible
for the safety of your
ly a computerized version
carrier. Zeros escorting the
of Air Force and DauntVals tear into you from beless). CAC covered air comhind.
Should
you
pull
off the attack on the Vals
TITLE:
Battlehawks
1942
bat in both the Pacific and European theaters
SYSTEMS:
IBM, Tandy
to engage the Zeros and live to fight another
via a third person bird's eye perspective.
CGA, EGA, VGA
day, or press on, bullets piercing your aircraft
Joystick or Mouse Recommended
Now, some eight years later we have another
# PLAYERS:
Solitaire
and try to survive long enough to stop the Vals.
PRICE:
$49.95
serious study of WWII Pacific air combat (Hellcat
Your pilot is flying his 12th mission, with
DESIGNERS:
Larry Holland
Ace from Microprose and Wings of Fury from
numerous decorations and victories to his credit.
Noah Falstein
Broderbund were/are fun, but cannot be conPUBLISHER:
Lucasfilm Games
He stands high on the score list. Should you
San
Rafael,
CA
sidered serious simulations of WWII Pacific air
save his skin to fight another day? Will you stay
combat). However, unlike CAC, this time we
on the Vals with no guarantee that he will stop
have a first person inside-the-cockpit view backed by eight years
them and, could conceivably die in the process? What do you do?
of advances in the art of game design. The result is that Larry HolTough choice.
land and Noah Falstein have created both a realistic strategy
On the other side you can play the role of the Japanese pilot as
game and an intense action game that will set new standards for
he seeks to give himself with honor to fight for the Emperor and
combat simulators.
the Imperial Japanese Navy.

Miss Me, Kate!
Battlehawks 1942 is a WWII Pacific naval air combat simulator
The game allows you to train and fight in both American and
Japanese planes for missions at the four pivotal naval air battles

The outstanding hi-res graphics and animation give you a
detailed 3-D view of realistically rendered aircraft and ship images
(no polygon fills here). As with any good flight/combat simulator it
is difficult to describe in words or with still photos the realistic feel
and excitement the game produces. It is outstanding.

Not only is Battlehawks 1942 an outstanding flight simulator, it
is an accurate portrayal of WWII air combat. It should be, Lucasfilm retained the services of WWII pilots from both sides, including Dick Best (see our interview), to assist in making the game
act and feel as real as possible.
The documentation is nearly a reference work on WWII naval air
combat. Over 100 pages long, it covers not only the rules of the
game, but sections on the history of the four battles, flight fundamentals, aerial tactics and tips; details on the aircraft and ships;
and designer's notes.

Pushing The Envelope
As good as the animation is, as realistic as the game is, and as
detailed as the documentation is; it all takes a secondary role to
the incredible new element this game adds to the art of simulation design. They call it an "instant replay" feature. I call it a Mach1 Camera Plane.
Most of us have played around with the chase plane view in
such games as Flight Simulator II, Microsoft Flight Simulator,
Sublogic's Jet, and the like. Further, we have used the replay feature to observe our maneuvers. Well, hold on to your seat. The
boys and Lucasfilm have accelerated that idea into hyperspace!
Now, when you begin an attack you can turn on the camera. It
makes a recording of the world around you. All the planes, ships,
bombs, bullets, etc. All of it is recorded. You can fly for what
seems like several minutes before the "film" is used up. When you
want to replay your film, hit the replay button and you receive a
first person perspective from the camera plane. The camera
plane, however, can fly anywhere in the world that has just been
recorded (and at much higher speeds than the planes in the
game). Turn on the camera at the beginning of that dive bomb
run and you will be able to replay the tape after the run. Start the
replay and fly your camera plane to a nice vantage point to watch
your attack. Or, if you prefer, you (in your camera plane) can follow yourself (in your dive bomber) down as the attack takes place
and see events, to borrow a phrase: "up close and personal".
This feature comes close to simulating the making of a movie of
your maneuvers (leave it to Lucasfilm!). Actually, it is even better
than a movie, since you can rerun the tape again and fly to yet
another vantage point.
This camera plane feature is the biggest advance in flight simulations we have seen in a long time. Look for future products to include similar features. [Ed. Note: Microprose's F-19 has a couple
of new features called "TrakCam" and "TactiVue" which give outside the cockpit views of you and your opponents. We did not
have any hands on experience with F-19 before we went to press,
but . . . stay tuned]

Debriefing
The staff of CGW recently made a "fact finding tour" to the Bay
Area. Of all the products they previewed (and they saw a lot of out
standing product) Battlehawks 1942 stood out as the most exciting. Battlehawks 1942 will almost certainly be a contender for
next year's CGW Action Game of the Year honors.
This game is a must for both the serious simulation gamer and
the action gamer as well.

A WWII Pilot Talks About Midway
and Battlehawks 1942
Dick Best was the commanding officer of the Enterprise's Bombing
Squadron 6 during the battle of Midway. Lucasfilm is using his expertise and advice to help make Battlehawks 1942 a more realistic
simulation. We interviewed Mr. Best and Lucasfilm's Noah Falstein
while they were working on the game at Lucasfilm's Skywalker Ranch.
COW: Dick, are you assisting with game design for all three types of
air combat (fighter, dive bomber, torpedo)?
Best: I'm helping with all three. I was involved with dive bombers for
the first six months of the war. Prior to the war I was a fighter pilot.
From 1938-1940 I was an instructor at Pensacola. As part of my job at
Pensacola I learned and subsequently taught torpedo bombing. So,
aside from being opinionated anyway, I have some ideas on all of them.
COW: We understand that you scored the first hit against a carrier at
Midway. Could you tell us about that?
Best: As the commanding officer I led my squadron of SBDs in an attack on the Japanese carrier Akagi. True, I did make the first hit. My
getaway after my dive was at such an angle that I could look back and
see the first three bombs hit. My bomb struck just forward of the superstructure about amidships. My number two man's bomb hit right in the
middle of the fighters that were spotted on the fantail and were preparing to take off. One of the fighters had run through my bomb sight as
I turned it on. Number three hit among the planes. I saw those first
three hit, put down my nose, and got out.
COW: The history books tell us that the first attack wave that morning was by torpedo bombers. No hits were scored and most of the
bombers were shot down. However when the dive bombers arrived for
their high level attacks all the enemy fighters were still at low altitude
because of the torpedo attacks. Thus the dive bombers had a easier
go of it on their attack runs. Is that accurate?
Best: That is entirely accurate. However it was a mistake. We were
supposed to attack simultaneously. The torpedo bombers went in at
about 4000 feet. For some reason they seemed to have better information or navigation and consequently arrived maybe as much as 20
minutes before the dive bombers. We were up at 20,000 feet. We
missed to the south. We cast about and finally picked up a destroyer
wake and followed that for the course line and found the carriers. So
we came in after the first two torpedo squadrons.
Because of all the damage done at the Coral Sea engagement by torpedo planes, the Japanese were down on the deck waiting for the torpedo planes to come in. The combination of the torpedoes getting
(Continued on page 47)

Game of the Year
Awards
(Continued from page 21)

Andy Jaros, Mike Newton, and Dennis
Walker (designers), Wayne Holder
(sound).
The nominees for
Strategy Game of the
Year were:

Omnitrend Software
And the WINNER of the 1988 CGW
Action Game of the Year is:

Microprose for Pirates—Sid Meier and
Arnold Hendricks (designers). [Ed: Billed
as both action and adventure on the
package, this game offers strong action
sequences such as swordfighting, sailing, and ship-to-ship combat on the
Spanish Main to add to the adventure
aspect of the game.]
Although the Special Award for Artistic Achievement in a Computer
Game was not intended to be an annual award, the awards committee felt
that the award was in order for the
second year in a row. The winner of the
special award was recognized for exceptional graphics and sound. The WINNER of the Special Award for Artistic
Achievement in a Computer Game is
FTL for Dungeon Master—Doug Bell,

for Breach—Tom Carbone and Bill Leslie
(designers).
Interstel for Empire:
Wargame of the Century—Walter Bright
and Mark Baldwin
(designers).

Strategic Simulations,
Inc. for Panzer
Strike—Gary Grigsby
(designer), Keith Brors
(graphics), Gunter
Meyer (scenario research and design), with Joel Billings
and Dick Vohlers (producer/developers).
Strategic Studies Group for Russia:
The Great War in the East 19411945—Ian Trout and Roger Keating
(designers).
Electronic Arts for Strike Fleet—Noah
Falstein and Lawrence Holland (designers), Ken Macklin (graphics), Tom Jeffries and Nic tenBroek (music and

sound), Richard Hilleman and Randy
Breen (producers for Electronic Arts),
and Noah Falstein (producer for
Lucasfilm).
And the WINNER of
the 1988 CGW
Strategy Game of the
Year is:

Strategic Simulations,
Inc. for Panzer Strike—
[Ed: Panzer Strike must
be considered as a
breakthrough game because of its complexity,
constructability, command control, and the
advancement of its particular style of wargame.]
Finally, the 1988 Computer
Gaming World Overall Game
of the Year: Interstel for Empire:
Wargame of the Century.
[Ed: Originally written for the VAX environment by Walter Bright, Mark

Baldwin added escorts, patrolling,
cruiser and battleship bombardment,
and a mouse interface. Empire has
tremendous replayability.]

Review

Winter
Thunderland
wo
Scorpia Looks At "Demon's Winter"

hundred years have passed since the Shard of
Spring was recovered from the dragon sorceress
Siriadne, two hundred years of peace and prosperity for
the land of Ymros. Now, suddenly, as though from nowhere,
hordes of monsters appear to ravage the land and slay the inhabitants. Once again, the
call goes out for heroes,
heroes to find the new
source of evil, and put an
end to it.

T

As is pretty obvious, this
game is the sequel to
Shard of Spring. However,
it is a greatly expanded effort with a much larger
world, a raft of new character classes, a plethora of
new skills, and several new
features, as well as many
familiar old ones.
Creating your party is
similar to that of Shard,
but you must start with
new characters (no transfers from the earlier game
You first choose a race ,
then the program
generates the stats and if
you don't like some of the numbers
TITLE:
Demon's Winter
you can ask for up to two re-rolls
SYSTEMS:
Apple II
# PLAYERS:
1
on those you consider unaccepPRICE:
$29.95
table Then, you choose his/her
Craig Roth and
DESIGNERS:
profession from among ten posDavid Stark
PUBLISHER:
Strategic Simulations, Inc.
sibilities: Ranger, Paladin, BerMountain View, CA
serker, Monk, Cleric, Thief, Wizard
Sorcerer, Visionary, and Scholar.
After this, pick the character's two starting skills (more on
that later), give him/her a name, and save the profile to disk
Your party is limited to a maximum of five (five is definitely
recommended), and you can't have extra characters on the
disk. Thus, once your party is full, you must delete an old
character to create a new one.
The only problem with creating new characters is the fact
that the program will automatically save it, whether you want
it to or not. For instance, if the final re-roll produces
miserable stats, you certainly wouldn't want that character in
the party. The only thing you can do is delete it from the disk
and try again. This becomes annoying and time-consuming
It would have been far better if the program asked you at the
end whether or not you wanted the character written; this
would save both time and wear on the disk drive.
Before creating any characters, however, spend some time
with the manual, reading up on the classes and skill system.
Now, unlike Shard, any character can learn any skill. The
trade-off is the cost in intellect points needed to learn the skill.

For example, it is easier for a wizard to learn, say, "Fire
Runes" (5 points) than it is for a Barbarian (10 points). In the
same vein, a Barbarian only needs 1 point to learn the "Axe"
skill, while it would cost the wizard 9 points.
The number of points you have to learn skills is equal to
the character's Intellect score. Thus, a character with Intellect
12 at the start of the game has 12 points to put into skills. As
characters advance in level and Intellect increases, they gain
more points.
However, just having the points doesn't do much good.
After learning the two skills you start with, you must find the
places in which to train to learn new skills. These places are
called "Colleges" and there is one for each skill in the game
(some skills have more than one college). When you locate
the college you want, you enter it, specify the character to
train, pay the cost in both Intellect and gold (training here
isn't free), and the character has learned the skill.
On the other hand, going up in level when you have the experience points is free of charge. When characters gain a
new level, they get an increase in hit points, spell points, and
three attributes chosen randomly (each attribute goes up by
one, to the limit set by race). There is no difference in experience for different classes; all professions advance at the
same rate.
Choosing the right mix for the party is very important. Since
there is a certain degree of overlapping in skills, some professions seem superfluous. For example, a Cleric has no particular advantage and must buy Priesthood skill just like any
other character (the Paladin even gets this skill for less
points!) and it works just as well for them.
By going over the chart and cross-checking skills, you can
work out a party with what is essentially multiple classes. For
instance, you create a Paladin, and give him Priesthood
along with Sword. Now you have a fighter who can also turn
undead, eliminating the need for a Cleric and freeing up a
party slot.
The one skill for which I found no use at all was "Potion
Lore." Unless you have a lot of extra points to spare, I don't
recommend learning this skill. Food was also not too much
of a problem, so the need for "Hunting" never arose.
However, two skills you do want are "View Land" and
Weapon Lore." The latter identifies weapons found after a
combat and tells if it's magical, cursed, or not. "View Land"
(usable once per day) lets you see much farther than your
current location. It is extremely helpful. On land, it helps in
locating interesting places and on the sea in finding land.
Having two wizards in the party is a good idea, giving you
some extra spell-casting power. One wizard should have
"Spirit Runes" (for healing), and one should have "Ice Runes,"
because the college that teaches Ice Runes will be hard to
find and you may have to wait until well into the game to
learn them otherwise.
Once your party is created, you begin the game near some
ruins. You have a small amount of cash, several days rations,
and (of course) nothing in the way of weapons or armor. Fortunately, there are a couple of towns nearby, and you should
be able to reach one of them without running into trouble.
Each town has its own set of shops (i.e. not all towns have
all shops). Write down which towns have what shops and the
prices in each, as costs vary widely from one place to
another. You may also want to make note of what magical
items are for sale in each town, so you know where to go
when you can finally afford one of them. I suggest you equip

your party by spending most of the money to buy weapons
and armor for the front-line fighters.
As mentioned earlier, the world is much larger than before.
The island you start on is only a very small part of it; eventually you will need to buy a ship to reach the rest of it, but that
won't happen for awhile yet.
Take your time while moving around. Don't go too far from
the towns you know about until you've had a few encounters
and made some money to buy additional food (and better
weapons and armor). After that, you can really begin to
roam, but remember to save the game often. Some parts of
the island have nastier monsters, which beginning-level
characters won't be able to handle.
Speaking of monsters, combat is very much the same as it
was in the earlier game. When fighting begins, the program
zooms in for a close-up of the area with your party and the
monsters all displayed individually. Who goes first depends on
speed; those with higher speed will be able to act sooner and
perform more actions.
Characters can do a variety of maneuvers on their turns.
These include: moving, attacking, dodging, turning undead,
casting a spell, using an item, etc. Some of these actions
(such as attacking) can be repeated to the limit of your speed
points, while others (such as spell casting) can only be done
once per turn.
One change from the previous game is that mass damage
spells (those that affect a large area, rather than an individual

monster, such as Fire Storm) can't be cast on the first round
This tends to reduce their usefulness, since monsters on
their turns will begin spreading out, making it difficult in
many cases to hit more than one or two with an area effect
spell.
Fighting continues until one side is victorious or the party
flees (monsters never run). In retreating, all party members
must exit from the same spot on the combat map. The exact
exit must be used by everyone.
If the party runs, they get no experience for the encounter,
even though they may have killed some of the monsters
before running. If the party wins the battle, all survivors
receive an equal share of experience, and some money is
added to the common pool. Once in awhile, an item of some
kind may be found, usually weapons or armor. It helps to
take these things at the start, because even if you have no
use for them, they can be sold for cash.
Aside from merchants in town, there are also wandering
merchants who ramble around the countryside. Their stock is
varied, and no two merchants offer the same items. It pays to
be careful when buying from them since not all are honest
(actually, the real problem is they will often have Neat Magical
Things for sale which you can't afford...very frustrating).
Eventually, you will be making your way into the dungeons.
A new feature here is manipulating objects to make things
happen. For example, in one room you find a crowbar. In
another room, you come across a sealed door. By using the
crowbar on the door, you can get it open (this doesn't actual-

ly happen in the game, but you get the idea). Objects found
in dungeons (and only such objects), can be dropped
anywhere, even outdoors, and you can come by later and
pick them up again.

much have to fend for yourself. Generally, if you enter a dungeon and find your party being creamed in encounters,
you're probably in the wrong place. Wait until you've gone
up a few levels before trying again.

Dungeons have traps in them, so it's smart to search a corridor several times before walking through it. The "Detect
Traps" skill gives you a better chance to find them, and Disarm Traps will automatically make them harmless once
found. You can also try to bypass a trap if you don't have the
Disarm skill, although there is a chance it will be set off
anyway (ouch).

Two items you absolutely must get are the Demon Crystal
and the Orb of Evertime. Make absolutely certain that you
get the crystal first. If you take the Orb first, you will be in big,
big trouble. In fact, you will probably have to start over again
with a new party. So, be very careful and make sure you get
these objects in the right order.

Ocean travel is simple; just turn your ship in the direction
you want to go and start sailing. Don't worry about wind
direction, just watch out for pirate ships, ghost pirate ships,
and sea monsters.
Sea combat is slightly different from land battles. Your vessel has one speed, which never changes, and comes with 75
hitpoints. If that is reduced to zero, the ship sinks and
everyone drowns. Attacks are made only with the ship's cannon. Spells cannot be cast. On the other hand, damage
taken in sea fights is applied only to the ship, not the crew.
Experience for sea battles tends to be higher than many
land confrontations (at least for part of the game). This offsets the lack of treasure. However, ship repairs can become
very expensive if you spend a lot of time fighting on the
ocean. Unless you have a nice cash surplus, you may want
to avoid too many combats of this nature.
Once you've started travelling by ship and visiting other
places, you'll find that "where to go next" is not an easy question to answer. Clues are scarce in this game and you pretty

Overall, Demon's Winter is an improvement over Shard of
Spring, but it does have its weak points. Combat tends to be
uneven once one gets past the beginner stage. Opponents
are either easy to defeat or extremely difficult to overcome.
The tests for obtaining the Orb are wildly imbalanced. For example, my wizards only had to face a single rinky-dink imp,
while my poor barbarian had to take on a dragon single-handedly.
A coordinate system of some type would have been very
helpful when travelling on the oceans. Mapping can be useful, but at best it's only a rough guide to some of the places
you must reach, and it's easy to get lost when you're sailing
around.
The addition of new classes was a good idea, but perhaps
not as well thought out as it could have been. Ten is too
many. Given the overlap of skills, some consolidation would
have been better.
Bottom line: An improvement over Shard; essentially a
game for the mid-level adventurer.
Copyright 1988 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

Field Trip

The Halls of Mediagenic

Fantastic Voyages II
The Whirlwind Tour Inside the
Entertainment Industry Continues

The exterior looks like any other exterior in the Menlo Park industrial park.
A rainbow-hued logo adorns the corporate sign; visitors walk into a central
reception area to be greeted (and
granted access); and the office space is
divided into cubicle after cubicle. Of
course, visitors might notice a few
strange sights: the cubicle decorated in
early National Enquirer headlines, the
artist's nook with a skeleton at the console, conference rooms named after
properties in a Monopoly game, a
workout room for employees, and
software packaging displayed as art. This
is the headquarters of Mediagenic, corporate patriarch of three companyowned publishers (Activision, Gamestar, and Infocom), a direct mail subsidiary (Triton), and several "Affiliated
Publishers" (Absolute, Acclaim, Interplay, Lucasfilm, microillusions, New
World Computing, and Rainbird to
name a few).
Each company-owned publisher at
Mediagenic fills a particular product
niche. The Activision label is as
focused on action/arcade games as it
has always been, but the company is
branching out into simulations during
1989. In addition the Gamestar division
aims at sports-oriented entertainment
and the Infocom division directs its energy toward interactive stories (whether the
text adventures of its early history or the
graphics adventures due to be released
shortly). The Activision and Gamestar
divisions share the Menlo Park headquarters, while Infocom still resides in
its Cambridge, Massachusetts headquarters.
Sherry Whitely is the general manager
of Activision Entertainment. Her coworkers jokingly suggest that she was
brought to that position because, "She
knows what young boys like." Her
division has historically provided what
young boys like, since young boys seem
to like action/arcade games with lots of
intensity which require plenty of handeye coordination and, being the first
third-party company to provide software
for video game systems, Activision has
always been a leader in this market.
Nevertheless, Sherry insists that Activision has broadened its perspectives
to include mature men who like serious
simulations (F-14 Tomcat) and children
who want to explore a fascinating environment via the company's first CDROM game (Manhole).
In reality, Sherry knows what her customers like, because she originally
worked in the graphics and testing
departments at Activision. Testing is
where the companies try to squash the

bugs and decontaminate the code
before any bad product gets to the
public. Testing is the immunological system of any software company. Kelly
Zmak is currently the company's
product testing supervisor. He knows
that customers want "bug free" software
and they want it fast. He also knows, as
he likes to quote Mediagenic Vice-President Dick Lehrberg, that: "Software
moves at the speed of software." It
depends on the product how difficult it
is to test and finalize.

General Foods and Ringling Brothers
(among others). His marketing background emphasizes a foundational
philosophy in game design: Is the
gameplay engaging enough to keep the
gamer involved and does the simulate
accurately reflect the strengths and weaknesses of the players in the sport being
simulated?
At the time CGW was visiting
Mediagenic, Lou was extremely excited

The testing department is usually juggling around seven products at a time.
At Mediagenic, this requires the services of eight full-time testers outside
the company and four full-time testers inside the company. Kelly says the testers
become so proficient that, for example,
they can run all the way through a new
SKU of The Last Ninja in 45 minutes.
For those who are interested, products
are usually developed in portions of a
program called "cells" and each tester is
usually responsible for about 15 cells at
a time.
Sometimes, however, even when a
product goes out the door without a
problem, people have problems. That's
where the Customer Support Department comes in. We asked customer service employees, Ken Balthaser and Tony
Van, to share with us some of the
humorous conversations with customers
they could remember.
Ken thought one of the best was
probably when Hacker was first released.
One customer called up and complained that he couldn't break into any
computer systems with the program. He
actually thought the program assisted
people in breaking into computer systems. Another time, he couldn't believe
the nerve of the fellow who called up,
said he was building a pirate BBS to
download illegal software, and offered to
give Ken the number.
One customer service story with a long
history dates back to the Activision
cartridge days when the Atari 2600 was
king. It seems that one little old lady is
reported to have called the company because the cartridge didn't fit into her
machine correctly. The customer service
representative calmly asked her if she
was sure it was a VCS. "No," the little old
lady replied, "it's an RCA."
The other company-owned publisher
at Mediagenic's Menlo Park plant is the
Gamestar division. After a recent shakeup, Lou Viveros is directing the division.
Lou is new to the entertainment
software industry. Before joining the
company, he worked with Ogilvie and
Mather, a high profile public relations
agency which handled accounts for

about the upcoming release of Pete
Rose Pennant Feuer. He also tipped us,
however, about the future plans to
release a football game with celebrity
background and endorsement from a
former Super Bowl quarterback and basketball game designed with a prominent
scorer in the NBA.
In short, the people at Mediagenic are
people persons. They genuinely love
what they do and, as symbolized in the

rainbow hue of their logo, want customers to expect a promise of sunshine
in every product.

Of Epyx Proportions
The well-landscaped exterior and business-like reception area belies the funloving attitude of the people behind the
products from Epyx. There is a quiet
dignity to the workplace, even in those
cubicles, affectionately known as the
"rabbit warren," where the programmers
work. Nevertheless, there is an enthusiasm, humor, and genuine caring
within their company.
For example, Cheryl Knowles is the artistic director at Epyx. When Cheryl's
daughter, Shannon, was born, the company allowed her to come to work with
her mother. Now, when you walk into
Cheryl's office, two things stand out: a
computer and a baby crib. The younger
Knowles became affectionately known
as, 'The Company Baby."
On the other side of the rabbit warren,
Kevin Furry (Project Manager and
Programmer) placed an empty, six foot
tall, plastic tube beside his office door.

He allegedly promised to quit when the
tube was full of pennies. With irreverent
glee, the "lower echelon" programmers
began to cram the tube with spare copper coins. When CGW visited the company, Kevin had just moved into his new
office (Legoland), but he was only five inches short of having to fulfill his hasty
promise.
On executive row, Carl Hess serves as
the controller for the company. One
doesn't usually think of those who serve
as financial "bean counters" as having a
sense of humor. On Carl's birthday,
however, his office was awash with
paper mache and balloon fish, even
dead fish nailed to a board. R.J. Michal
(one of the fathers of the Amiga)
dressed up as a mermaid and Dave
Niedl, one of the programmers, assumed the role of King Neptune. R.J.,
who is working on a secret project
rumored to be more mind-boggling
than a nuclear-powered toaster, and
Dave opened the birthday celebration by
proclaiming that Carl was being "tried
for crimes against nature." As judge and
jury, the mermaid and god smashed a
pie into the executive's face.

As our tour continued, CGW discovered that even the Customer Support Department has a sense of humor.
When the ladies became tired of being
asked, "Who's the blonde babe on the
California Games package?", Mitzi McGelvray wickedly responded that she
was. Of course, the women have their
own version of the California Games
poster, complete with a very masculine
blonde hunk where the "blonde babe" is
normally portrayed. Brandy Wilson still
chuckles about the dealer who was
prompted by a program to "Hit Any Key"
and called her to ask, "Where's my 'Any'
key?" Patricia Stoesser remembers the
fellow who mailed in a Sub Battle
Simulator disk in the 3.5" format. It
seems the fellow's wife had run over the
disk three different times because he
was playing it too much. The letter
promised that if the company would
replace the disk, he would never, ever,
ever play the game unless his wife gave
him permission.
Epyx continues to have its reputation
as a leading publisher of action games,
but to CGW, it has a reputation for interesting personalities, as well.

IBM is My Co-Pilot
(Interview Continued)
(from page 33)
there first and the fact that the Japanese were waiting for the torpedo attacks means that everything worked against the torpedo squadrons.
However, the dive bombers came in completely undetected and unopposed. I was over the Kaga first and when McClusky came in on top of me
I pulled off to go to the Akagi. When I got to the Akagi I made my dive
from 15,000 feet and there wasn't a single gun turned on during my entire
run.
COW: Really!?
Best: Yes, really!! In fact Mitsuo Fuchida in writing his book "Midway: The
Battle That Doomed Japan" said that they were steaming along, launching
fighters. He happened to look up just as the first bomb was released from
a diving airplane above him. Nobody had seen or heard anything.
COW: You mention Fuchida's book on Midway. What books would your
recommend as background information for the period covered by Battlehawks?
Best: The best overall book is Walter Lord's Incredible Victory [Harper &
Row, 19671, it gives you a feeling of personal involvement. The Battlehawks
bibliography includes a very complete list of books on the subject.
COW: Turning to the game itself, what do you think of Battlehawks 1942
now that you have seen it?
Best: When Lucasfilm first talked to me and told me that the game would
have movie quality I had reservations and was skeptical. However, I am
tremendously impressed with the look and feel of the game. Tremendously!
COW: The dive bombing sequence in Battlehawks 1942 is really exciting.
In reality, when you go "over the hump" and point your aircraft down in that
70% dive, what do you see? What do you think? What do you feel?

Best: As you approach the target you see it below you off to one side.
The target disappears under your wing before you begin the dive. You
push the stick straight forward, going over the hump, and all of a sudden
you are vertical. It feels like the first big drop on a rollercoaster. Your
stomach starts to float up into your nostrils.
As to what you think during the attack. You don't. You are doing something you have practiced a hundred times. It's like shooting baskets in bas
ketball, you don't really have any particular thoughts just before you do it.
You are doing unconscious coordination.
When you go into a vertical dive from 20,000 feet you have all kinds of
time to study the ship below you; to check the wind indications; to check
your angle of attack; to check the aircraft around you. In my case there
were fighters being launched as I came down and that was a matter of
some concern to me in getting out.
But there really isn't any excitement. There isn't any courage or fear.
While you are in the dive it's just a problem to be solved.
COW: Wow! ... OK. Now tell us about torpedo bombing in Battlehawks. In what ways does the game give us an accurate feel for torpedo
bombing?
Best: The visualization of the torpedo attack is very good, but the stall
speeds are a bit off.
Falstein: We are reworking that sequence. The stall rate and angle are
being adjusted based on what Dick has told us.
COW: In what specific ways is Dick adding to the realism of the game?
Falstein: He has helped us fine tune the responsiveness of the controls.
He is helping us a lot with the documentation, and is giving us the feeling
that we are on the right track.
COW: In closing, do you have any final comments about Battlehawks
1942?
Best: I am exceedingly impressed by the game to the point that I am
thinking about buying an IBM just so that I can play the game at home.

Christmas Buying Guide
(Continued from page 27)

year of working on Might and Magic II, I
really need a vacation, but all / really
want to do is play Might and Magic II.—
Jon van Canegham, New World.

($49.95), C-64/128 ($39.95). Circle
Reader Service #57.

Incredible graphics, better play
balance, new character classes, and a
new storyline should make this program
irresistible to adventure garners. Apple II

fantasy game for one person, which features digitized sound and animated
graphics. The package also includes a
quest builder which allows the player

Omnitrend:
PALADIN: "Paladin is a close-combat,

to design his own quests."—Bill Leslie,
Omnitrend.
This game does for small unit fantasy
combat what Breach did for science fiction combat. Garners should like them
both for the same reasons. See the
review in this issue. Amiga, Atari ST
($39.95). Circle Reader Service #58.
Origin:
TIMES OF LORE: It has the best of

both worlds— the best of arcade action
as in Gauntlet and the best of fantasy
role-playing with an Ultima-type conversational interface—combined with an
icon-based over-all interface which allows you to sit back and play with
only a joystick and a space bar. A fullblown fantasy role-playing game that's
easy to get into."—Lord British, Origin.
This game is completely joystick/space
bar driven, but offers more depth and
animation than the typical action game.
Chris Roberts is the designer of this
game which has Lord British applauding. Apple II, C-64/128 ($39.95). Circle
Reader Service #59.
Paragon Software:
GUARDIANS OF INFINITY: TO
SAVE KENNEDY: "Guardians of Infinity: To Save Kennedy is a unique,

one-of-a-kind strategy/text adventure because it centers around actual human
communication as if your computer
came to life and you were actually
speaking to, and getting natural responses from, the characters in the game
and President Kennedy himself. Coming
complete with an extensive background
novel and picture disk, Guardians of Infinity offers many hours of exciting challenge and unique entertainment."—F. J.
Lennon, Paragon Software
Aficionados of time travel adventures
should be intrigued by this fresh idea
and approach for an adventure game.
IBM ($44.95). Circle Reader Service #60.
Polarware:
THE SPY'S ADVENTURES AROUND
THE WORLD: "The Spy's Adventures
Around The World series takes you on

a search for the fiendish Dr. X. A travel
adventure for the entire family—learn
as you play or just play for fun."—
Peggy Smith, Polarware
Separate adventures are currently available for North and South America, as
well as Europe. Very reasonably priced
and easy-to-use, these games are ideal
for young families to play around the
"silicon hearth." Apple II, C-64/128
($17.95), IBM ($19.95). Circle Reader
Service #61.
Rainbird:
STARGLIDER II: "The game is fast and

furious! Starglider II features superfast
3D solid graphics which give you an incredibly realistic feeling of flight."—Cynthia Bruschi, Rainbird.

pictures that troubled action. Apple II, C
64 ($40.00). Circle Reader Service #66.

action from start to finish."—Anita
Deiter, Taito.

Taito:
OPERATION WOLF: "Voted the num-

The sequel to the popular Starglider
proves that follow-up products do not
have to be inferior to the original. The
graphics are improved, the sound is
good, and the intensity of play is still
there. Amiga, Atari ST ($44.95), IBM
($39.95). Circle Reader Service #62.

ber one arcade game in North America
[by arcade operators, as reported in
Replay magazine], this hot arcade hit
features incredible graphics and a full
range of sound effects that explode with

This is the home computer version of
a combat-oriented coin-op game.
Players assume the role of a rescue/attack team during a hostage rescue mission in the South American jungle.
Amiga, Atari ST, Commodore 64/128
($39.95). Circle Reader Service #67.

Sierra:
KING'S QUEST IV: THE PERILS OF
ROSELLA: "I like Rosella. She's a part

of me that comes out in the game. I
think that other people will enjoy the
game because she is such a strong
character."—Roberta Williams, designer
of King's Quest IV.
Gentle in tone and graceful in presentation, this is certainly the most artfully
presented adventure in the series. It offers numerous refinements to the earlier
game system and a storyline designed to
touch your emotions. IBM ($49.95).
Circle Reader Service #63.
Spectrum-Holobyte:
FALCON A.T.: "With Falcon A.T., the

best of the flight simulators just got better. You'll get the most realistic flight of
your life, with new perspectives and full
EGA color, and you'll also get the best
game in its class."—Phil Adams, President of Spectrum Holobyte.
This product has been acclaimed almost from its publication. Now, it takes
advantage of the faster processors available for IBM and clone systems and offers new missions and perspectives, as
well as camera viewpoints. IBM with
286/386 and EGA ($59.95). Circle
Reader Service #64.
Strategic Simulations, Inc.:
HEROES OF THE LANCE: "Advanced
Dungeons & Dragons is extremely

popular. People have just been eagerly
awaiting each release."—Linda
Blanchard, SSI.
This is the action game based on the
popular DragonLance series of books.
Players can take on the personae of
their heroes from the books and play a
fast-moving dungeon romp with some
strategic options thrown in. Atari ST
($39.95). Circle Reader Service #65.
Strategic Studies Group:
MACARTHUR: "Finally, after all the

people who have called up and asked,
`When is that Korean game going to be
out?', this is it."—John Gleason, SSG
This is a game covering the Korean
Conflict and utilizing the Battlefront system. It is a command simulation which

Video Gaming World

Video Gaming World
-by Bill Kunkel,
Joyce Worley, & Arnie Katz
In the spirit of our
"Christmas Buyers Guide"
theme, the trendy trio from
Brooklyn offer their
opinions on the best games
for Sega and Nintendo

on such stalwart opponents
of the "Italian Stallion" as
Apollo Creed and Clubber
Lang.

Best Target Game
-3DMislefn
Sega's light phaser games
are all superb, but this
game, which combined the
light gun with the Sega 3-D
system is the undisputed
creme de la creme of target
videogames.

The Best
of Sega
It was a mixed year for the
Sega system. The highs
were explosive, including
several classic action games
and the best 3-D system
ever offered in any medium,
but there were also some discouraging lows for fans of
this system.

Honorable Mention:
Gangster Town/Shooting
Gallery

action videogame, Space
Harrier stole even their

The biggest disappointment was the small number
of new releases and the difficulty many users had in obtaining what few there were.
Unlike Nintendo, Sega
steadfastly refused to allow
third-party publishers into
the market. This was true, at
least, until their late-summer
agreement with Activision.
As a result, while NES library
grew by leaps and bounds,
Sega's just inched slowly forward. When a dud is
released for the NES, the
pain is assuaged somewhat
by the simultaneous
presence of several winners.
New Sega software has
been like drops of water in
the desert, and when one of
those drops is bitter, it's not
so easy to wash away the
taste. Enough complaining,
though, this article is mostly
about successes and there
were several that were absolute revelations.

thunder. The player is represented by an on-screen surrogate equipped with a jet
pack and armed with a zap
gun. He flies away from the
screen, toward the horizon.
Coming toward the screen,
and right at the player, are a
gallery of monsters,
boulders, and trees which
must be either blown up or
dodged. For visceral, pulsepounding excitement, Space
Harrier is this year's pick of
the litter.

Best Action Game

Best Sports Game
-SpaceHri

In a year when Sega's
astonishing 3-D games
eclipsed almost every other

Honorable Mention:
Choplifter
Best Action-Strategy
-Monply
The classic Parker
Brothers' board game so
beloved by budding
capitalists everywhere got a
first-class videogame translation. It's still the same game,
but Monopoly never looked
this good!

-GreatVolyb
Sports games are Sega's
weakest category and, in
fact, Sega came pretty close

to getting no award this time
out. Great Volleyball is not
a triumph of design, but it is
playable and realistically
simulates Olympic-style volleyball. This places it head
and shoulders above the rest
of Sega's sports entries. It is
a tough game, but it includes a practice mode that
allows players to work on
their weak points.

Best Arcade
Translation - Out Run
The best feature of this arcade smash couldn't be
translated to this home version (the hard-to-control
steering wheel), but the
glorious graphics arrived largely intact. This is a driving
game for auto fans with highly satisfying action and control.

Best Sound and
Graphics - Rocky
Rocky isn't the greatest
boxing game we've ever
seen, but it definitely boasts
the most eye-popping
graphics. As movie pugilist,
Rocky Balboa, the fat city
prelim guy who became
champion, the player takes

The Best
of Nintendo
This was a breakthrough
year for Nintendo in the
United States. In many ways,
Sega and Nintendo started
1988 on an equal footing.
True, there were more Nintendo systems than Sega
systems, but Sega was
taking large strides to close
the gap with its superior 3-D
system and light gun. Not
only has the gap not closed,
but Nintendo has seemingly
blown it even wider. By supporting regulated third-party
publishing for its system,
Nintendo has built up a
non-pareil library that reflects
a diversity of entertainment
genres.

Best Action Game
(Nintendo)
-R.CProAm
One of the most compelling, addictive videogames
ever published, R-C ProAm's only drawback is its
lack of a two-player mode.
Players manipulate a "radiocontrolled" pick-up truck
over a series of tracks, competing against a trio of computer-guided vehicles. This is
(Continued on page 56)

Video Gaming World

more than a simple race car
game, though. The track is
salted with a wide variety of
obstacles (Would you believe
a huge metal wall that periodically shoots up from underground?), dangers (oil
slicks and puddles), and
bonus objects. The bonus
items include: special tires,
top speed boosters, and
super accelerators, in addition to bombs and missiles.
The slightly elevated sideview offers an optimal view
of the proceedings and the
thrills are non-stop.

Arkanoid is a high tech permutation of the old wallbashing ball-and-paddle
games and it proves that a
good idea is forever. This update adds bonus tokens
which fall from busted

Most Innovative
-Jaws
(LJN)
Jaws is a combination action-strategy and, occasionally, both simultaneously.

Target games are the
weakest area of the NES
library, but Hogan's Alley is
an entertaining variation on
the theme. It forces the
player to discriminate among
targets rather than simply
blast away willy-nilly. Before
players pull that trigger, they
must ask, "Is that a good
guy or a bad guy you're
about to waste?"

This game was rescued
from Broderbund's computer software vaults, updated slightly, and sent out
to challenge all the bright
new games for the Nintendo system. Frankly, it blew
them out of the water. Great
overhead perspective and
multi-directional scrolling
make this assault on the
Beungeling Empire's war
machine a delightful game
experience.

Okay, so professional wrestling isn't a sport, strictly
speaking, but this
videogame is presented in a
totally straightforward manner that reflects both an understanding of and appreciation for the grappling game.
This game offers mat fans
realistic graphics, non-stop
action and real wrestling
moves (piledrivers, clotheslines, and suplexes). There
are even moves off the top
rope and outside-the-ring action. Pro Wrestling is the
only wrestling videogame
that really understands what
it is simulating.

Honorable Mention:
10 Yard Fight (Nintendo)
Best Arcade
Translation Arkanoid (Taito)

Honorable Mention:
Metroids (Nintendo)
Best Target Game
(Nintendo)
-Hogan'sAley

Best ActionStrategy Game Raid on Bungeling Bay
(Broderbund)

Best Sports Game
(Nintendo)
-ProWestling

tional success. Watch for the
soon-to-be-released sequel,
Zelda II

Video
Gaming
World's
Newswire
-Compiled by Joyce Worley

bricks. When caught by the
player, they translate into
special powers (expanded
paddle size, multiplying balls,
etc.). The graphics are incredible and the play
mechanic is positively addictive.

Honorable Mention:
Tiger-Heli (Taito)

Best Sound
& Graphics Side Pocket (Data East)
Side Pocket is, quite simply, the finest pocket billiards
simulation ever seen on any
videogame or computer. A
big part of its appeal can be
attributed to its gorgeous
sound and graphics. Everything from the "clack" of the
balls to the slightly worn felt
around the table's pockets is
captured perfectly. You can
almost smell the brandy and
cigars.

Guide your ship through the
ocean (represented by a
macro-overview with multidirectional scrolling) in
search of "Big Bruce" and
many of his smaller associates. Players build up
power by capturing seashells
and gain wealth by collecting starfish. Eventually, they
can stand a chance against
the infamous Jaws himself.
In the meantime, they must
deal with armies of jellyfish
and other aquatic denizens
who help make this game
the year's most pleasant
surprise.

Best Adventure
-The Legend of Zelda
(Nintendo)
With Legend of Zelda, Nintendo took many of the elements commonly found in
computer action-adventures
and brought them to the
videogame universe where
they proved to be a sensa-

Activision has become the
first third-party publisher of
Sega cartridges. Until now,
Sega purchased licenses of
well-known games from their
originating companies for
publication and distribution
by Sega. The recently inked
agreement allows Activision
to create and publish games
under their own logo, games
for play on the Sega Master
System. This repeats history.
Late in the 70's, Activision
became the world's first thirdparty videogame publisher
when the company won the
right to publish Atari 2600
cartridges. The first Sega
cartridge to bear the Activision logo will be
Rampage, scheduled for preholiday release and based
on Bally's runaway coin-op
hit. . . . NESers will also
have a chance to Rampage
through cities as George the
Ape or Lizzy the Lizard. Data
East expects it to be on
retailers' shelves, soon. . . .
Acclaim has expanded into
the Nintendo peripherals
market with their infrared
wireless remote controller,
scheduled for winter release
(Continued on page 61)

Taking A Peek

Free Spirit Software
P.O.Box 128, 58 Noble St.
Kutztown, PA 19530
SEX VIXENS FROM SPACE: Colorful
graphics enhance this adventure set in
the future. You are Captain Brad Stallion
on a mission to save the male population from kidnapping and degradation at
the hands of beautiful sex-starved
females from the planet Mondo. Nice
work, if you can get it! Amiga, IBM.
($39.95) Circle Reader Service #6.

Gamestar
3885 Bohannon Dr.
Menlo Park, CA 94025
PETE ROSE PENNANT FEVER: In
this hybrid action-strategy game, the only
things the player doesn't control are the
lines at the concession stands. Competitors act as General Manager, Field
Manager, and Player in this joystick optional baseball game. Different-view
player perspectives, individual player control, player drafting, free agents, pinch hitting & running, stealing, throwing and
hitting will keep you busy on and off the
field. IBM & Tandy ($39.95) Circle Reader
Service #7.
TAKE DOWN: One or two players compete in this action game of tag-team
wrestling. Choose from eight different
braggadocios and inflict as much pain as
you can before you get "atomic
dropped." Each wrestler has his own set
of individual moves and holds in this joystick-driven, computer version of wrestling
mania. C-64/128 ($29.95) Circle Reader
Service #8.

Interplay Productions
1575 Corporate Drive
Costa Mesa, CA 92626
BATTLE CHESS: Combine medieval
3-D combat, Monty Pythonic humor, and
one of the world's oldest games, and you
have the latest creation from Interplay.
Stunning graphics and animation combine with a powerful chess program to
put new life into an old game. Watch
knights literally chop each other up in a
scene reminiscent of Monty Python &
The Holy Grail. You can turn off the
animation and use this as a straight
chess computer, but you'll miss all the
fun. Amiga ($49.95) Circle Reader Service #9.

this air combat simulation. Great
graphics and lots of special effects (What
would you expect from Lucasfilm?)
make this game a real eye-opener. See
the review in this issue.

Mastertronic International Inc.
711 W. 17th St.
Costa Mesa, CA 92627
BARBARIAN: Hegor the Barbarian (a

Lucasfilm Games
P.O.Box 2009
San Rafael, CA 94912
BATTLEHAWKS 1942: A variety of

character who looks suspiciously like
George of the Jungle) is the hero of this
action game. His mission (and the
player's task) is to run the gauntlet of
nasties and traps that the evil Necron
has placed in front of him. Attack (with a
variety of weapons), defend, and flee are
among the options to be chosen in this
smooth scrolling, joystick driven, action
game. C-64/128 ($29.99) Circle Reader
Service #10.

planes and missions from the Pacific
Theater of WWII forms the attraction of

One or two players can now fight it out

JOHN ELWAY'S QUARTERBACK:

on the gridiron in this computer version
of the popular arcade game. Choose
from a variety of offensive or defensive
plays, then control a key player on either
side of the line. Running, passing, kicking and tackling are all under your control. Unfortunately, there's no provision
for spiking the ball. Joystick required, C64/128 ($29.99) IBM with 5 1/4"
($29.99), with both 3 1/2" & 5 1/4"
($34.99). Circle Reader Service #11.

Mindscape
3444 Dundee Rd.
Northbrook, IL 60062
CAPTAIN BLOOD: The Problem:
Five, life-draining clones are scattered
throughout the galaxy. The Mission: They
must be found and assimilated ASAP. Interplanetary communication via an icon
based language, smooth flowing fractal
graphics, hyperspace jumps and stunning graphics combine to make this a

in this action/adventure game. Great
graphics, tough arcade sequences and a
fascinating story line make this an interesting contest of wits. You'll follow up
leads by traveling around New York, collecting information and accessing data
banks. You may even be called upon to
literally spy on yourself! IBM ($49.95)
Circle Reader Service #16.

Strategic Simulations, Inc.
1046 N. Rengstorff Ave.
Mountain View, CA 94043
TYPHOON OF STEEL: The Pacific,
Asian and European theaters of WWII
can now be re-fought in this sequel to
the CGW award-winning Panzer Strike
game. All the weapons, AFVs and support elements found in actual combat appear here. Armchair officers can fight
single battles or enlist for the entire campaign. In the jungle, everyone can hear
you scream, "Banzai!" Apple II series, C64/128 ($49.95) Circle Reader Service
#17.

Conversions
Received
For the Amiga:
4th & Inches (Accolade)
Skyfox II (EA.)
Warlock (Three-Sixty)
World Class Leader Board
(Access)

very unusual graphic adventure. Originally published in France, the music is by
Jean-Michel Jarre. C-64/128 ($34.95).
Circle Reader Service #12.

Paragon Software
600 Rugh St, Suite A
Greensburg, PA 15601
WIZARD WARS: Good versus Evil

SPACE HARRIER: Grab on to your
joystick and get ready to dodge the
myriad of invading aliens in this home
version of the arcade hit. Crashing into
the landscape can be just as dangerous
as the monsters in this 3-D action game.
Watch out for that tree! C-64/128
($29.95) Atari 520 ST, Amiga ($49.95).
Circle Reader Service #13.
OUT RUN: Drivers choose from a
variety of courses in this joystick-driven
version of the arcade hit. Players drive
past a wide variety of scenery and other
race cars as they shift gears, accelerate
or brake for a hairpin turn. Wiping out at
200 mph will literally flip you out. C64/128 ($29.95) Atari 520 ST, Amiga
($49.95). Circle Reader Service #14.

redux. The player-character is a wizard
with depleted powers and must restore
his power and spell book by recovering
relics, gaining spell scrolls and defeating
over 50 different monsters. There are
over 30 magical kingdoms to explore
and three different dimensions to travel
before the final confrontation. Attractive
graphics supported by EGA or CGA. IBM
($44.95) Circle Reader Service #15.

Sierra
P.O.Box 485
Coarsegold, CA 93614
MANHUNTER:NEW YORK: It's the future, it's New York, and you've been
hired by alien invaders to monitor
human activities and report subversives

For the Apple IIGS:
4th & Inches (Accolade)
King's Quest III (Sierra)

For the C-64/128:
AD & D: Dungeon Masters
Assistant (SSI)

For the IBM:
Fire Brigade (Panther)
requires 640K
4th & Inches (Accolade)
Night Mission Pinball (subLogic)
PT 109 (Spectrum Holobyte

Video Gaming World
(Continued from page 56)

First
Expedition
(Continued from page 22)
to the point of plotting the star's coordinates on the map or trying
to use the compass or anything else that seems even remotely related to game play.
Though it was included apparently to try to make the game
more educational and realistic, why in the world—whether Yorland
or any other one—would anyone on a ship equipped with computerized triangulation want to depend so heavily on a clumsier,
less accurate, more time-consuming method? Navigation is still
clumsy with autoplot, but it is not as much a pain in the portside
as manual triangulation.

Commendations
Kudos must be given to Interstel for marketing a game in
which violence has very little emphasis. Nevertheless, the game
might have been better if it had had more battles and some of
those thieving aliens had still been around.
and priced at $39.95. The
controller weighs less than a
pound. . . . Quarterback,
the coin-op by Tradewest,
has been endorsed by Denver Bronco QB John Elway
and renamed John Elway's
Quarterback. Melbourne
House, through a joint-venture agreement with
Tradewest, is introducing
the game for personal computer play, but the
videogame version will be
Tradewest. It lets one or
two NESers play
head-to-head, control offense and
defense, run, pass, kick and
tackle, in a high-skill simulation of real football. . . .
Jaleco's City Connection
for the Nintendo has a different twist on auto racing
games. Players control a
sedan over a high-action
obstacle course that
stretches from New York to
Tokyo, by way of London,
Paris, and India. Drivers collect oil cans to throw at the
enemies in pursuit of the
car. The vehicle lays down a
color trail behind it as it
toots on down the unusual
three-tiered highway, dodging bad guys, good guys
(the cops), and hurdles on
the roadway. . . . According

to Sunsoft, the current
champ on Spy Hunter racked up an astounding
2,250,155 points. . . . A new
joystick from Wico boasts ergonomic design (that means
it has been tested for comfort and usability). The Ergostick is made of soft, pliable
material, and form-fitted for
perfect hand grip. The fire
button is on the bottom for
easy operation by the index
finger and the shaft is
centered on top to operate
easily with finger-tip control.
The Ergostick provides feedback—a slight click—when
you move in any direction or
press the fire button. It
retails for $24.95 and is compatible with Atari 2600,
7800, 400, 800, 1200,
ST, and XE systems, Commodore 64/128, Vic-20,
and Amiga computers. . . .
Konami's Track & Field II
turns every gamer into an
Olympic star. Two players
compete (or one gamer
plays against the computer)
in a catalog of sporting
events which include: Taekwondo, pole vaulting, canoeing, skeet shooting, gliding,
pistol firing, arm wrestling,
fencing, triple jumping, and
swimming.

Bottom Line
Not recommended for adventure garners unless they are interested in intricate navigational techniques.

Hall of Fame / R.I.D.

Reader Input Device #53
On this page, a number of games and articles are listed for
evaluation. For each game you have played or article you
have read, place a 1 (terrible) through 9 (outstanding) next
to the appropriate number on the card placed opposite
page 4.

Be it known to all gentle persons that the
games inscribed above are honored for
their high popularity with the people of our
fair land. These august games have been
well spoken of by our readers over a goodly period of time and, thereby, have gained
the respect and good will of the powers
that be at CGW. Be it known to all that
read these words that any game found on
this list is a game of renown and worthy
of play by all.

Game Ratings Chart

Both CGW's overall Game of the Year, "Empire," and
Adventure Game of the Year, "Wasteland," strengthened
their position at the top of their respective ratings lists by
slightly improving their score. In the only real movement
in the Action/Adventure Top Ten, "Stealth Fighter" and
"Falcon" looped around each other in their continuing

dogfight over fifth position.
Except for the continual downward slide of older titles,
the Strategy list seems firmly entrenched. "Rommel: Battles for North Africa" is the only fresh title in the top 20,
but that could change when "Red Storm Rising" is rated
and "Battles of Napoleon" is finally released.

