November 1989

Number 65

Features
Lights, Camera, Action for Indy

16

Lucasfilm's "Last Crusade" Action Game / David M. Wilson

Accolade's "Don't Go Alone"

18
22
24
28
30

Software Toolworks' "Cribbage King/Gin King" 32
A New "Deal" for Card Sharks / Michael S. Lasky

34

Britannica Software's "Revolution '76" / Alan "the" Emrich

"Decisive Battles" Gets A Face Lift

36

"DBACW: Volume II": A Second Look / Dr. Jay Selover

Krellan Kill Zone
Interstel's "Star Fleet II" / M. Evan Brooks

Lights, Camera, Graphics for Indy

72

Origin's/CGW's "Omega" Tournament

84

Monthly Tournament Results

Excerpts From a Unique New Book / Peter J. Spear

"Run For Your Fife"

68

Lucasfilm's New Graphic Adventure / Charles Ardai

Own Your Own Pro Team / Michael Chaut

"The King's Quest Companion"

Koei's "Bandit Kings of Ancient China"
"Ho! Ho! Ho! Merry Christmas" / Johnny L. Wilson

Elven Magic for Santa's Helpers / CGW Staff

SportTime's "Omni-Play Basketball"

52

Origin's "Omega"
A Cybernetic Tank Simulator / Russell S. Sipe

Microprose Updates A Classic / M. Evan Brooks

Christmas Buying Guide

44

SSI's "Sword of Aragon" / Biff Kritzen

A Look at a New Horror Game / Scorpia

F-15 Strike Eagle Comes of Age

A Strong Right Arm

40

Departments
Editorial
Contest Results
Taking A Peek
Letters from Paradise
Inside The Industry
Rumor Bag
Over There (A New Column)
Game Ratings/Hall of Fame
Conversions Received
Reader Input Device

4
4
6
8
10
12
14
48
94
96

Contest

"Name
The
Game!"
Contest
Answers
Only nine perfect entries were
received on our
Name The Game
Contest from
CGW #63 (September). Five of the nine came from
the Midwest, two from the East
Coast, and two from foreign
countries. Hey, all you laid back
readers in the West, whut (sic) happened? Gerrie Adams, our lovely
circulation manager, picked Paul
Butler's entry out of a hat as the
overall winner of a three year subscription to CGW. Paul is from
Aberdeen Scotland. Thanks a lot
Gerrie! Do you know how much
postage a three year subscription to
Scotland is going to set us back!?
Oh well! Congratulations Paul!.
Ok, all you dudes in the West,
lets make a better showing in our
next contest coming up in
November.

"Name The Game"
Contest Answers
(See CGW #63, September,
page 42 for the questions)
1. Wayne Gretzky Hockey
2. Wings Of Fury
3. Typhoon of Steel
4. Knight Games
5. Modem Wars
6. Renegade
7. Might & Magic II
8. Rocket Ranger
9. Ultima V
10. Twilight Zone
11. Paladin
12. Carrier Command

Editorial

The Good,
The Bad
& The
Uncertain
The State of the Industry: For many
of us, there is an indelible image from
the opening moments of the Academy
Award winning film, "The Graduate". A
party is being given for Dustin Hoffman's
character, but his alienation from the
value system of his parents is emphasized
by a middle-aged businessman walking
up to him and offering one word of advice, "Plastics". In the film, it is clear that
Hoffman wants nothing to do with business/industry and that the very term
strikes him as "plastic".
In today's computer entertainment industry, there is an old term with new spin
which must be dealt with, "video games".
Dedicated game machine technology is
significantly impacting our world. Epyx
will cease to be a "publisher" of diskbased computer entertainment at the
end of 1989, focusing instead on
"developing" software for dedicated game
machines and incidentally, software for
other companies. Cinemaware, as noted
in last issue's "Rumor Bag", has become
an Affiliated Label with Electronic Arts
Distribution, in order to concentrate
their attention on developing games for
new technology and NEC's Turbo Grafx
16. In addition, Spectrum Holobyte has
already announced its plans for developing Falcon for the Sega Genesis
machine.
Further, Lucasfilm is establishing a
video games group in order to enter the
Nintendo market. In an exclusive conversation with CGW, Lucasfilm sources indicated that, as of press time, substantive
discussions were being held with NEC
and "others". Also, Electronic Arts' "Initial Public Offering" specified that the
largest portion of capital to be generated
was for video game development. In a
similar vein, inside sources at Dynamix
guardedly admit that much of their current digitizing development is being conducted with an eye toward future CDROM products.

What does this mean for the sophisticated computer gamer? At first, gamers
can expect to see the disk-based software
publishers porting their best-selling
designs into video game versions. This
would be the most efficient way to enter
the market. Eventually, however, one can
expect to see original designs which take
advantage of the improved graphic and
memory capacities of the newer game
systems. Then, the disk-based gamer
could possibly find himself/herself in the
same "pop" cultural backwater as the orphaned 8-bit owners of a few years back.
The State of the Magazine: To date,
there really haven't been very many
original video game products which merit
the attention of CGWs readership. However, and this is a big distinction, the
renewed emphasis and influx of capital
seems certain to change this. Therefore,
we will pledge to be industry watchers.
When changes occur, we will strive to
monitor them and alert our readers to
those changes which will impact them.
As of press time, however, the future of
disk-based entertainment software seems
somewhat uncertain.
At present, the best course of action for
our readers is to vote with your dollars. If
sales figures for disk-based computer
games seem soft, we can expect to see
less and less great products on PCs in
the future. If the challenging, deep, and
high quality disk-based products sell particularly well, however, we can continue
to expect publishers to support our
machines in the future.
Special Announcement: Dungeon
Master, winner of the 1988 Special
Award for Artistic Achievement, has been
inducted into the CGWs Hall of Fame
after a significant tenure at the top of the
Reader Input Device ratings. See the listing on page 49.

Taking A Peek

Broderbund
17 Paul Drive
San Rafael, CA 94903
WHERE IN TIME IS CARMEN SANDIEGO?: That slippery criminal genius,
Carmen Sandiego, and her V.I.L.E.
henchmen are on the prowl again. But
you won't find them traipsing around
the U.S., Europe, or the globe. At least
not in this time. Carmen has stolen the
secret of time travel and is now filching
famous artifacts throughout history.
Players track the criminals across the
globe and over the centuries while investigating clues using the packaged copy
of the "New American Desk Encyclopedia". A fun, educational, adventure package for all ages. IBM ($44.95).
Circle Reader Service #1.

General Quarters Software
28631 S. Western Ave.,
Suite 101
Rancho Palos Verdes, CA
90732

cruiser fleets and subs, the British must
defend the British coastline and commercial sea interests against the marauding
Germans. One or two players compete
in this deadly game of "hide and seek".
IBM ($35.00). Circle Reader Service #3.

MIDWAY: This simulation of the WWII
naval battle between the U.S. and Japan
allows players to control either side or
play solo as the Americans. The game
contains several different initial Japanese
deployments, thus increasing the challenge to the American player. IBM
($35.00). Circle Reader Service #2.

Electronic Arts
1820 Gateway Drive
San Mateo, CA 94404

PRELUDE TO JUTLAND: Players get
a chance to control the British interceptor fleet in this game of WWI battlecruiser action in the North Sea. With
seven battlecruisers, augmented by light

INDIANA JONES AND THE LAST
CRUSADE ACTION GAME: Players
search a giant cavern looking for the
Cross of Coronado, escape across a
moving circus train, explore a Venetian
catacomb looking for the Grail Knight's
shield, scale the walls of Schloss Brunwald, dodge Nazis on a zeppelin, and
survive the Grail Temple test (whew!) in
(Continued on page 92)

Letters

there was a total replacement of the design
team in mid project (a very rare occurrence.).
As for the marketing departments, they
might be due something of a reprieve. The ad
agencies and marketing departments must
often coordinate an advertising campaign for
a particular product six months to a year in
advance. They must also commit to the space
in the magazines a significant time in advance. Thus, they are victimized by the delay
as much as the consumers. In fact, they may
actually be hurt worse, because they are
spending more money on promoting the
product before they can possibly recoup any.

Please Release Me
This letter was posted to CGW via the
PRODIGY® interactive personal service.
I read CGW and find it a good source of information. As an insider, can't you let us know
what we can do as buyers of these games to
get the software companies to be more realistic
in their release dates. You may have heard this
before, but it gets annoying. As a comic book
fan, I experience the same thing with release
dates on comics. What is it about marketing
people that they have to push release dates
that are not met. I could see it if it happened
once in awhile, but it is now the norm for
release dates to be a bunch of baloney!
I also realize that some of us in our quest tor
news about what is latest and greatest may
cause some of the problem. This type of hype
with no delivery or very late delivery has to hurt
sales. It probably also leaves a bad taste in the
mouths of people waiting forever for the likes
of Harpoon and others. Sometimes I think the
overhyping (if I may make up the word) leaves
us wanting when we actually see the finished
product. When we get it and boot up it is anticlimactic and we let ourselves in for a letdown
because the anticipated product is better than
the real thing. But, I digress. Again I ask, what
can we all do to let the software people know
that we want it to stop and that it is irritating to
have to be subjected to this type of treatment
which I feel shows a lack of concern for the
buying public?
Thomas Del Conte
DHKJ71A

Ah, the release date question surfaces once
more. During the last two years, CGW has
made a concerted effort to avoid announcing
specific release dates in our editorial
coverage. In artistic endeavors which involve
teams of people and technical problem-solving, it is impossible to be absolutely certain
as to when the project will be finished. Some
parts of the project come together easier than
others and designers/developers tend to build
in benchmarks based on these optimal time
frames rather than more realistic ones. We
have tried to speak of seasonal releases
rather than specific release dates, because
most games which miss the projections do so
by only a few weeks rather than a few
months. An obvious exception is Harpoon. As
the designers pointed out in CGW #62 pg. 42,

As for what consumers can do about the
problem, there are limited options. Writing letters is certainly one way to get a company's
attention. Refusing to pre-order products from
companies with poor track records in terms of
timely releases is a more emphatic way.

Degenerative Nerve
Concerning the game Omnicron Conspiracy,
advertised in the July issue of your magazine, I
cannot help but express the repugnance I felt
on seeing the ills of society turned into a game.
As an educated adult, I can see this type of
thing for the offal it is; however, a younger person not yet possessing mature judgment in all
probability would not.
Am I advocating the abridgement of your
First Amendment rights by asking you to censor such trash? Absolutely not. Print what you
like. I would say, however, that as advertising is
intended to sway the judgment of your readers,
then by the same token, I am entitled to attempt to sway your judgment by stating my
views on what you print.
One would expect to find advertisements for
such products as Omnicron Conspiracy in the
back pages of some scuzzy girlie magazine, not
in your publication. This type of advertisement
does a disservice to our society and exhibits a
degeneracy of principles, morals and propriety.
Claude Peachey
Myrtle Point, OR

Actually, Claude, we have turned down advertisements because we felt they were inappropriate for our readership in terms of tone,
content and quality. We didn't find the tonguein-cheek science fiction adventure in question
to be offensive. As for your concerns about
tuming the ills of society into a game, please
note that the ad said "You'll be tempted lour
emphasis] with cheap booze, wild sex and
mind-altering drugs." Temptation is not the
same as giving in to temptation and, in this
particular case, players would be penalized
for taking the mind-altering drugs. As for the
"wild' women, the extra-terrestrial appearance
(hence, unreality) should have been obvious
from the green-skinned "woman" in the ad.
Detective stories have always dealt with the
seamy underside of society, whether it be
Dashiell Hammett and Raymond Chandler or

Robert W. Parker and Dick Francis. In any
form of art, one cannot adequately depict the
triumph of good over evil without sufficiently
portraying the evil.

Keyboard Counterpoint
I am a wargamer who mainly plays with
paper and cardboard (Squad Leader, etc.). I
purchased Bomb Alley, my first computer wargame in 1984. I loved it at first, but then I
found the computer player to be rather a
blithering idiot. This problem has yet to be
solved and I can sympathize with the technological constraints.
What I do not understand is why software
manufacturers make it so difficult for more
than one player to participate. With most computer wargames, the player who is not at the
computer must twiddle his thumbs while the
other is at the computer. This problem could
easily be solved by using the computer to print
all information necessary for both players and
then, using the keyboard only to input orders
which the players have simultaneously written
down.
The only game I have successfully played
with more than one player is Cartels and
Cutthroats. I've, in fact, played it with six. In
Cartels, players can quickly look at their data
without inputting any orders. After looking at
the data, they can make decisions at their
leisure somewhere else in the room. When
everyone is done writing orders, all orders are
input into the computer very quickly. This
made for a fast-paced six player game with lit
tle idle time for any of the players.

Stellar Crusade is the only computer wargame I have found with as much detail as
many of the boardgames I have played. The
computer player is an idiot, and I can't play the
game with a human because no one wants to
play musical chairs with the keyboard. Why
can't all the information be printed out so that
we can take out turns simultaneously, using
the keyboard only as an order input device?
Chris Kolenda
Richmond, TX

We liked Dan Bunten's now out-of print Cartels and Cutthroats, too. In fact, your letter
prompted us to wonder why print-outs of
game positions were not a standard feature in
computer wargames. So, we asked Strategic
Simulations, Inc., publisher of the games you
mentioned, why it was not. The informal survey of their development personnel indicated
that "Although it sounds simple to have maps
printed, there are so many different types of
printers available that configuring our games
to work with most of them would entail a
major amount of work. At this point in time, it
seems that most people are concerned with
the best sound and graphics in their games,
so that's what SSI is currently concentrating
on."
Nonetheless, CGW agrees with you and
asks the manufacturers to give serious consideration to your suggestion. If maps are too
difficult, then they could at least give us unit
data.

Industry News

Inside the Industry
News, Notes and Quotes From the
Computer Entertainment Industry
Massive Layoff
at Epyx Signals
End of Era
On September 15, 1989,
Epyx officially released more
than half of its work force.
Some sources indicated to
CGW that as many as 60
out of 76 total employees
may have been given notice.
The shocking layoff signaled
major changes at the
software publisher which had
been specializing in action
computer games since its inception as Automated
Simulations in 1979. According to company
spokesperson, Noreen
Lovoi, Epyx plans to
withdraw from its position as
a full service publisher by
the beginning of 1990. The
company will finish developing and market the titles already announced for the
holiday season (like California Games 11 and Ishido),
but will focus on developing
games rather than publishing them in the future.
One significant factor in
the changes at Epyx is that
the company will concentrate on videogame
development, particularly in
relationship to the cartridge
system which they recently
developed for Atari. The
company will still design
some disk-based products,
but will limit its responsibilities as publisher to, at
most, an "affiliated
label/publisher" role.
Epyx had been reported to
be in a weak position financially since its first quarter
returns (like those
throughout the disk-based
software industry) were excessively high. According to Ms.
Lovoi, the company's price
slashing promotion earlier
this year seemed like it was

Britannica
Changes
"Archipelagos"
In CGW #62, Wyatt Lee
offered a Sneak Preview
of Britannica Software's
upcoming Archipelagos,
the first product in the
company's new "Fanfare"
line of entertainment
software products. The
early look was based
upon Archipelagos as it
was published in Great Britain and described the fiction
surrounding the game as it is described in the British version. When Britannica actually released Archipelagos in
the United States, the fiction had been extensively
modified. Now, the player is attempting to undo the major
effects of serious pollution and save a badly devastated
planet rather than rescue the "Dreamlands" of the British
version. The article in the August issue of CGW does a
good job of describing game play, but all the terminology
utilized is relevant to the British version rather than the
U.S. product. As pictured on this page, the packaging is
significantly different from that pictured in the August
issue, as well.

turning this vulnerable financial position around, but unanticipated financial difficulties forced the company to
take the current drastic action. Rumors have attributed
the company's financial difficulty to a combination of
significant investments in
hardware development
which have not paid adequate dividends and poor
sales in the disk-based entertainment software market in
general, but the company
has offered no official
description of the financial
pressures. The company had
just raised $8 million in new
financing for their consumer
electronics division (i.e. VCR
games) during 1988, but the
influx of new capital did not
allow the company as much

flexibility as it had anticipated.

Lucasfilm
Games
Establishes
Cartridge Group
CGW learned at press time
that Lucasfilm Games has
recruited Greg Hammond,
currently a producer for
Broderbund Software, to
head up a new projects
group with special focus on
cartridge-based videogames.
According to Steve Arnold,
General Manager of the
Games Division at Lucasfilm, the expansion into
cartridge based games will

begin with cartridge versions
of Lucasfilm games which
have been hits in disk format
and should continue into
the development of original
titles unique to the cartridge
format.
Asked if recent reports of
inventory overstock did not
indicate a softening of the 8bit videogame market, Arnold responded that even if
the Nintendo market has'
peaked (and he did not
believe that this has been
proven by any means),
software publishers will certainly be able to ride the
downhill slope profitably for
a very long time. Questioned about the new dedicated game machines: Sega
Genesis and NEC's
Turbo-Grafx 16, Arnold would only
smile and indicate that
Lucasfilm would be willing
to enter those markets if
details were mutually acceptable. CGWs sources indicate
that substantive conversations have been held with
NEC (i.e. a deal could be in
the works) and that initial
dialogues with "others" have
been established.

Polarware
Purchased by
Texas Investors
On September 13, 1989,
Polarware, Inc. (publisher
of The Spy's Adventures
series and Transylvania),
was acquired by Merit Acquisition Corporation, a
Texas-based company, and
merged with the latter's
educational and productivity
software division, Merit
Software. Future games
from Polarware will still bear
the familiar label. Polarware
has been publishing computer games and educational software for years, but has
never really had the capital
to expand. Both the software
firm and the investment company have expressed hope
that the merger will enable
Polarware to expand its
product line and market its
software more effectively.

Industry News

T

he paddlewheel churned in the
muddy Ohio and the "Belle of Louisville" steamed majestically past the
riverfront. A concrete embankment
loomed beside us with a painted message revealing the high water line
of a old flood. "There hasn't been
a storm like that since," muttered
one of my buddies from the Falls
of the Ohio Wargaming Society.
I couldn't resist flaunting my inside information as the worldfamous CGW gossip columnist,
so I interrupted my companion/travel guide. "Of course," I
lectured, pronouncing the pearls
of computer game wisdom trippingly on the tongue, "Simulations Canada has something of
a storm to introduce late this year.
Malta Storm, their operational
level World War II game is undergoing the finishing touches even
as we speak." Then, to suit the action to the word, I followed my
journalistic thrust with yet
another, "In fact, they're now working on a Mediterranean Theater
version of Kriegsmarine, to be entitled Fleet Med."

no longer be publishing Light Division
and that they intend to create a spin-off
company in order to publish Kanev.
"That probably means," he said, "we
shouldn't hold our breaths for either one."

The
Rumor
Bag

"Sounds like a Yuppie vacation
to me," muttered someone next
to me. I couldn't allow my authoritative
pronouncements to be undermined by
levity, so I informed him that the company is also hard at work on Main Battle
Tank: Middle East. Just then, my friend
pointed and said, "There's the Candy
Bridge. We're almost back."
By "Candy Bridge", I presumed he
meant "Kennedy Bridge" and I had simply
misunderstood his southern accent. The
skyline of Louisville looked imposing on
the horizon, but the fiery colors of the
sunset betrayed the amount of pollution
in the air. One member of the group said
he'd like to sit the entire Louisville City
Council down and force them to play
Sim City until they could solve some of
the congestion and pollution problems.
Another said he wished they could get all
the world leaders together and make
them play some kind of geopolitical planning simulation. I told them all the good
news that Maxis Software should have
Sim Earth ready in 1990.
The riverboat docked and we headed
for our cars. One of my friends pulled me
over and whispered something in my ear.
Now, that's not easy for one person to do
when the other person's trademark is a
bag over his head, but he managed to
get through to me. He asked me if I
remembered writing about Light Division
and Kanev, two board wargames that
were due to be converted by 3W Computer Games. He told me that 3W will

eyes, so did the knowledge that
Dynamix is already working on a sequel
to their adventure/simulation game.
I explained to the officers that I was the
Rumor Bag guy, but they wouldn't
believe me without my sharing a
tip on a new game. "Well," I stammered, "Maxis is working on a
new title called Robot Combat."
They still weren't quite sure, so
they took me over to the patrol
car and asked me to do something with their laptop. I used
their modem to call GEnie. They
weren't that impressed until I told
them that the Games Round
Table's conferences for November
would include designers: Ed
Bever, Gary Grigsby, and
boardgame guru, Jim Dunnigan.

"Okay, okay," I said in a panic,
"how about if we call the Computer Sports Network?" They
agreed. So, I showed them how
to access Tournament Golf and
told them that the network would
be using APBA Baseball in order
to run General Manager, a major
by Ezekiel Rutherford Beauregard
league baseball simulation where
players set up their teams and the
schedule is decided via APBA
Baseball. I also told them that the
network would eventually be refereeing
He insisted that I give him some new infull-scale rotisserie leagues.
formation in exchange for that insight. I
told him what I knew about Second
The police officers let us go and we
Front, Gary Grigsby's redesign of War In
passed a city park. The "boys of summer"
Russia for the IBM. I told him that the
were playing softball and it reminded my
new design allows for reinforcements; offriend about Cinemaware's TV Sports
fers air combat that is so detailed it can
series. "Aren't they going to come out
handle losses of airplanes down to the inwith TV Sports Baseball?" he whined. I
dividual plane; details land combat losses
consoled him with the good news that
down to the battalion or battery, gives
they were, but then told him the bad
leaders a resupply bonus; and simplifies
news that we weren't expecting it until
the handling of railroads so that players
mid-1990.
don't have to specifically rebuild them (if
the player hangs on to them, the rebuild
Finally, we arrived at the Kentucky
is automatic).
Derby Museum. Wandering among the
He seemed satisfied and we got into his
memorabilia of the fastest two minutes in
car. He'd promised to take me to the Kensport, I imagined myself in the colors of a
tucky Derby Museum out at Churchill
Derby winner. I told my friend about my
Downs. On the way, we drove through
dream and the "Jockey Competition"
the middle of a car chase that would put
module of Omni-Play" Horse Racing,
a "Dirty Harry" movie to shame. The
due in the first quarter of next year. It's
police cars caromed past us with their
supposed to come in a package with
blue lights creating a laserium in the city
Track 3 in which you see everything from
streets. The noise was unbelievable.
the perspective of the horse's back. "It's a
Probably something like Access
good thing the computer simulation is
Software's RealSound soundtrack for
coming out," he laughed, "because you'd
Crime Wave, their arcade shoot-'em-up,
never make a jockey."
similar in style to the coin-op game, Narc.
"Why," I asked in all innocence, "don't
Unfortunately, it is not a good idea to
they let you ride with a bag over your
be wearing a bag over one's head when
head?"
the police are chasing a couple of bank
robbers. They pulled us over and had us
"Sure," he replied, "but I don't think
spread-eagled across the hood before
they let the horses carry the extra weight."
I sucked in my gut, but quickly realized I
you could say, David Wolf, Secret Agent.
Along with my life passing before my
needed the computer game.

Foreign Correspondence

Over There
Wargames and More
by Paul Rigby

The British are coming, as well as the
French, the Germans, and others.
European games are appearing on U.S.
retail shelves in increasing numbers. We
thought it was time to take a look at
what is happening "over there". Our new
European correspondent is Paul Rigby
(Liverpool, England). In the context of
his column, "available now" means that
the game is presently available in
Europe.
(Ithough 8-bit machines are still
popular in Europe, there have
been a number of growing trends
and changes since an "Over There"
column was last seen within these pages.
On the hardware side, the Amiga and the
ST have an increasing user base (the latter being far more popular in Europe
than in the US), the PC has emerged as
a game machine, and there has been a
relatively low infiltration of videogame
consoles. On the software front, we have
seen the emergence of RPGs and
strategy games as popular game subjects
and observed the growing strength of
France and Germany as serious competitors in the market. In fact, the following report highlights many of the above
trends.
Originating from PSS, one of the UK's
top wargame houses, comes Waterloo
(PC, Amiga). Written by Peter Turcan
who, incidentally, wrote Borodino for
Atari's new software wing, Waterloo continues Peter's 3D aspect to wargaming.
Coming with 108-page manual and a
glossy fold-out map of the combat area,
Waterloo uses the Borodino system of
play. Hence, you can view the combat
from any direction. You are able to view
your troop dispositions and movements
and clicking on troop "blocks" identifies
the unit. Orders are typed in English for
example, "Reille form a defence line from
the west flank to La-Belle-Alliance linking
with D-Erlon."
You may play either Wellington or
Napoleon, whether solitaire, human vs.
human, or computer vs computer. With a
variety of orders and reports, all modified
by your supporting general's characters
(impetuous, cautious, etc), Waterloo is

an intriguing product and is available
now.
Continuing the wargame theme is
Mirrorsoft's Conflict Europe (PC, Amiga,
ST), which simulates the action during
World War Three from a strategic level.
You take the position of Supreme Commander of NATO or the Warsaw Pact. In
addition to land and air strikes, you may
call upon "special" offensive actions such
as Special Forces and Chemical/Tactical
Nuclear Strikes. A variety of reports are
available including: population distribution, areas of high radiation, logistics, victory conditions and command ability, special missions (e.g; anti-satellite) and air
missions (counter air). Also, you can communicate with the enemy, issuing threats
and so on. Available now.

Imageworks' Bloodwych (PC, Amiga,
ST, C64, Amstrad CPC, Spectrum) can
best be described as a two-player version
of Dungeon Master. The people of Bloodwych fear the awakening of the Behemoth, entombed within the castle. He
is stirring, certain to bring with him
famine, pestilence and death. To seal the
Behemoth within his tomb forever, you
must find and unify the crystals of Sanguis. A maximum of two character teams
must search the castle for hidden crystals. Although Bloodwych can be played
solo, the two player option brings interesting questions into play. Do you cooperate with each other, compete as
enemies or allow more subtle treachery
to come into play? Bloodwych has a
horizontally split-screen interface, a
variety of character levels, magic, character interaction, minimal animation and
sound. The Bloodwych release is imminent.
Originating from France's Exxon (publishers of Captain Blood & Purple Saturn
Day) comes Kult (Amiga, ST, PC) - a
graphic adventure. The Protozorqs are a
primitive, but powerful, mountain race.
They worship brutal Gods who, it is
hoped, will deliver them from their guilt
and shame (it's a long story). You play a
Tuner, a human with unusual powers.
You must rescue your girlfriend who is
being held prisoner by the Protozorqs.
(Continued on page 91)

Review

cave leads to quick loss of life from running into walls,
taking bad falls, etc.
Once Indy gets the cross, he climbs out of the cave and
catches a ride on the circus train. This segment is the most
like the movie because Indy has to jump from car to car and
avoid the giraffes' heads and the rhino's horn. He even has
to fight a bad guy on the last car. Unfortunately, this segment is sadly lacking in challenge.

The Whole Gauntlet
For The Holy Grail
by David M. Wilson

O

nce every decade or so, a hero comes along that captures the hearts and imaginations of the American
people. Such a hero is Indiana Jones, a
schizophrenic cross between an archaeology professor and
swashbuckling adventurer. Now,
once again,
Indy makes
the momentous leap
from silver
screen to
computer
screen in the
multi-leveled
Indiana
Jones and
the I a st
Crusade:
The Action
Game.

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

Indiana Jones and the
Last Crusade: The Action Came
C64/128, Atari ST,
Amiga, and IBM
C-64 ($29.95)
Others ($39.95)
U.S. Cold
Lucasfilm Games
San Rafael, CA

Upon loading the
game
players will
be treated to
a rousing
rendition of
John
Williams'
theme song
from the
movie. The
music is stimulating and the
graphics clear and concise.
Each level is filled with different types of scenery,objects and obstacles.

The first level is a quest for
the cross of Coronado. Indy
must leap from ledge-toledge, rope-to-rope and over stacks of barrels as he searches
for the treasure. Our hero quickly learns not to leap from the
tops of the barrels because he will more than likely hit his
head on Stalactites hanging from the ceiling. He must also
avoid falling stalactites in this sequence.
The most important part of level one is to pick up torches
as you progress, since each torch will only shine for a limited
amount of time. When the torch being carried runs out,
players will find their hero in total darkness. Being in a dark

Perhaps, part of the problem is that the bad guys on all of
the levels are most cooperative. Those with throwing axes or
guns will throw their hatchets or fire their guns twice and
then, obligingly turn their back. Those without weapons
simply allow the player to walk up and sock them. Every villain in the game can be dispatched with a single blow from
Indy's fist or his whip. The fight segments should have lasted
longer and been more challenging.
Level two takes Indy into the catacombs in search of the
Crusader's shield. The designers have incorporated a bit of
interesting copy protection here. A series of arches with
hieroglyphic symbols appears at the beginning of the level.
Above the arches appears a date. Players then match the
date on a non-reproducible grid and select the arch which
matches the corresponding date. Players who choose the
wrong arch can still play, however they will never find the
shield. When the player makes the wrong choice, the program removes the shield from the maze making the level impossible to complete. Even if the player chooses the correct
arch, but he is unable to complete the level before losing the
amount of lives he has left, he will have to use the grid all
over again to continue where he left off. I understand the
publisher's desire to copy protect their programs, but the
player who is stuck on level two of this game will be extremely annoyed by having to repeatedly refer to the chart in order
to restart the level.
Once into the level, players will be dodging rats and avoiding falling fireballs. Once the player collects the crusader's
shield, he must scale the castle wall and have Indy use his
whip to swing across from ledge to ledge. Lightning is striking regularly during this segment and will occasionally tear
away a portion of the ledge Indy is standing on.
While playing level three, Indy will be found on board the
airship. There the search begins for the Grail diary that his
father has left on board. If the player fails to collect passes
from the passengers, an alarm will sound. Big Deal! Since
the soldiers don't really fight, what does it matter? About the
only important consideration is that picking up the passes
will lead to a higher score.
If players will go to the left and keep travelling downward,
they should find a room with the diary and a control panel.
Then, by reversing their path, they should be able to get all
the way back up. Whenever Indy encounters a guard, that
means he is more than likely heading the right direction.
Level four is, by far, the shortest level. Since Indy's father is
dying, Indy is pressed for time to find the grail. He must
maneuver over obstacles quickly, but give heed to the lettering on the blocks. Finding the blocks with the odd lettering
is the key to being able to leap across to the right spot.
The game could have been much more. The game does little to put the player in the role of Indiana Jones. Indy is a
good fighter, but he doesn't beat the villain with one punch
in any of the three movies which featured him. Further, there
are only two places where he can use his whip for swinging
(Continued on page 56)

Review

"Don't Go
Alone"
Accolade's Terrifying
New Adventure

D

by Scorpia
on't Go Alone is a sort of computer role-playing

game, with a modern-day setting. The basic objective
is simple: go through ten levels of an old house, find
the nasty Ancient One, and kill him. It's your typical "destroy
the evil wizard" romp.
You begin by choosing your party of four
characters. Each character represents a different class (chemist,
physicist, psychic, and
adventurer) and you
must have one of
each in the group.
Selections are made
from a pool of sixteen
pre-generated characters. You aren't able
to create any from
scratch.

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

Don't Co Alone
IBM
$39.95
Sterling Silver Software
Accolade
San Jose, CA

The characters have
the standard set of attributes (strength, dexterity, intelligence,
etc), plus two that are
special. One is the
fear index and the
other is the concentration index. Concentration is necessary to the successful
mixing of formulas (more on that
soon), especially the more potent
ones. The fear index measures how
terrified a character is. If the fear
index goes too high, that character is
too scared to do anything (except

maybe gibber in fright).
In addition to muscle, there is also magic. However, since
this is a modern-day setting, the spells are called "formulas"
and are put together by selecting components from the
table of elements. Each character begins the game with a
"book" entitled Chemistry Volume / and the psychic gets two
more besides that one.
The various chemistry books contain formulas and descriptions of their functions. Except for volume one, the formulas
in the books are all incomplete. Instead of being written out
in full, they appear like this: Au +??+??+Ir. You will have to
figure out, as the game progresses, what elements belong
where the question marks are in each formula.

This can be done through a boring procedure of exhaustive trial and error; how long it takes will depend on how
long the formula is (three or four elements) and how many
components you already know. If you only need to find one
element, it won't take too long (the game does not use the
complete periodic table, which is fortunate). You simply substitute one element at a time and try mixing the formula
until you obtain a success. All formulas are unique, so you
can't create something else inadvertently, and you won't
blow yourself up with a bad mixture.
Formulas that are mostly or completely blank may seem impossible to figure out. However, this is not the case. As time
passes in the game, the formulas change. Therefore it is important to re-read the books every now and then to see if a
new element has appeared in a blank spot. Continuing with
the example given above, after awhile it might suddenly look
like: ??+0+??+Ir. The "Au" that was there before is now
blank, but the element "0" now fills the second position. At
this point, you know three of the four components, and can
find the last one through trial and error. Needless to say, you
should copy all incomplete formulas as soon as you find
them, and fill in the blanks over time.
The most interesting aspect of Don't Go Alone is that characters don't die. While there are monsters galore in the
house, none of them make physical attacks of any kind. Instead, they all generate fear to varying degrees. The more
powerful monsters are naturally more scary than lesser ones,
thus it will be some time before you come across anything
that can really freeze up team members. If everyone gets
frightened out of their minds, the group is moved to a "safer
area" to give them time to get over their fright.
The major problem in combat is not fear, but time. You
only have so long to defeat a particular critter. If you don't
manage that, it will fade away, taking with it something from
your inventory (any non-equipped item). This can lead to
serious difficulties if the monsters start vanishing with your
chemistry books (yes, they can nab those, too). While books
can be found in the game, my experience is that most of
them don't start turning up as treasure until you're way
down in the house, say around eighth level or so. That's a
long time to wait if you lose one or more volumes early in
the game.
Monsters will also take something from you if you retreat in
combat, so running doesn't help much; you're just as badly
off as you would be in fighting it out. Most of the items can
be replaced without too much trouble in other combats, so
losing a gem or spare weapon is not exactly a disaster. However, losing a chemistry volume can be bad news. So, it pays
to save the game often, and restore if a critter has walked off
with one of your books.
The fighting itself is a simple procedure; you either attack
with a weapon or mix up a formula. Only one formula can
be ready at a time, but you can scroll through your list to
change from one to another. The main drawback to combat
is that only one person can fight at a time. You choose the
active character, and he or she is the one who engages in
combat. You can switch to another character (this is not considered an action), but still, only one at a time can do anything.
The basic reasons for switching are concentration and
strength. Physical fighting makes a character tired, and therefore less effective. Mixing formulas lowers concentration; if it
goes too low, that person can't prepare any more of them.

(Continued from page 18)

Don't Go Alone
Thus, switching around is necessary, especially when you
start coming up against the tougher monsters. Strength and
concentration are restored over time as you wander around
the house.
Combat, by the way,
is relatively wellbalanced. There are
usually one or two
extra-tough critters
per level, with the rest
ranging from extremely easy to pretty hard.
The party should not
find itself overwhelmed or frustrated
unless you go too far
too fast.
Treasure comes in four types: weapons, armor, protective
items, and (rarely) chemistry books. Usually, something will
appear on the screen after a monster has been defeated (not
always, but usually). The active character is the one who can
take it. This is where you need to be careful, because characters cannot hand off items to one another. So, if you really
want Frank the Chemist to have the bomber jacket, make

sure he's the active person. Otherwise, if someone else picks
it up, Frank is out of luck until you come across another
jacket.
A character can have only one of a specific item at a time.
For example, if Bud the Adventurer already has a meat
cleaver, he won't be able to pick up another one. This
makes sense; he doesn't need more than one, anyway. Also,
as inventory space is limited, it's a good idea to dump unneeded items (extra weapons and armor) to make room for
more important things (such as protective gems). There is a
formula that will tell you the strength of any weapon or
armor, so you shouldn't drop something good by mistake.
Graphics are generally good in the game. Almost all encounters have animated monsters and some of these are extremely well-done. The blood demon, rising up from a puddle of blood on the floor, is one of the best in the game.
Others may not be quite as spectacular, but are equally fascinating to watch. A great deal of work obviously went into
this portion of the game and it definitely comes through.
Movement around the house is accomplished through the
four arrow keys, and the game has two very nice auto-mapping features. One is constant; you can see your party and a
small portion of the level displayed above the larger, 3-D
view of the area you're in. Thus you have two views at once,
overhead (Ultima style) and head-on (3-D).
The other mapping feature is invoked through a formula;
this shows you the entire level. Of course, if you haven't
been over much of it, you won't see very much on the map,
either, because areas you haven't yet passed through are
blank. This is a larger map, and the arrow keys are used to
scroll it around while your party remains stationary.
Exploring the house consists mainly of walking around, killing assorted monsters, and looking for the stairway to the
next level. In my version, there were no puzzles at all, no
mysteries to solve, and no particularly difficult obstacles to
overcome. Special keys were needed in a couple of places to
get through doors. Otherwise, it was generally plain (very
plain) sailing from one level to the next.
This is a grave disappointment, as it gives the game a very
empty feel. There is no real substance to it. Walking along
corridor after corridor, going through empty room after
empty room, with nothing much to do besides fight
monsters, soon becomes boring. There were three
mysterious pictures that showed up in a number of rooms
and hallways; for awhile I thought they might be important,
but they turned out to be totally irrelevant.
There is no way to use or manipulate anything; there aren't
any such commands in the game. That in itself is a very
severe restriction. A lot can be done with a limited command
set (as Sierra's Manhunter series ably demonstrated), but
Don't Go Alone does not seem to have any mechanism at
all for any type of puzzle solving.
Overall, then, the game is mainly an exercise in monstermash, although on a more limited scale than most CRPG's.
The simple interface, very nice auto-mapping, balanced combat, interesting monster graphics, formula components, and
unique use of fear are all pluses, but these are overshadowed by the large minus of having little substantive to
do in the game. Essentially, this game is best for those with
little or no experience with CRPG's.
Bottom line: Beginners only.
Copyright 1989 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

Review

-15 Strike

F E

agle II (1989)

an updated
look at MicroProse's
first best-seller, F-15
Strike Eagle (1984).
Although a simulator
of the same weapons
system, the F-15 jet
fighter, the products
differ radically in both
appearance and play.
In fact, for the oldtime computer
gamer (i.e. one playing since 1984!), a
look back at the
original product will
prove most disappointing.
The original F-15
was a great product
in its day. However, it
no longer satisfies. It
is amazing how
demanding (jaded?)
we have become.
The line-drawn opponent in the
original game
resembles Wonder
Woman's invisible
aircraft. In short, the
classic gave the appearance of being
"primitive" and even
arcade-like.

screen shifts to the
launch site. If an
enemy plane is
taking off, the view
shifts to the enemy
airfield. However,
once contact is initiated, this level may
become very confusing and is not recommended for continued use. Level 2
shows only actions
that the player initiates. These levels
may be toggled on
and off by a single
key-press. A potential
problem is that users
with older machines
(8088) may encounter occasional
computer "lock-up"
in cycling through
the graphic detail
speeds.
Multiple views offer
fascinating vistas as
to what is happening—left, right, rear,
slot, chase, side, missile, tactical, reverse
tactical (i.e. from the
enemy's viewpoint!),
and normal. The biggest problem with
having the wide assortment of viewpoint alternatives is
that one can become mesmerized and
literally fly into the ground.

F-15 STRIKE
EAGLE P
Review by M. Evan Brooks

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
PUBLISHER:

Now, MicroProse
has reworked the game, using the benefit
of five years of computer design experience and F-19: Stealth Fighter (F-19)
game technology, in order to bring Strike
Eagle up to contemporary standards. F15 Strike Eagle II (F-15 II) is not an innovation, but rather an update of a "classic", a sort of "F-19 Jr." Meets "F-15+".

Documentation
Up to Microprose standards, the
documentation is well-written and concise. Separate playing maps of the
scenarios are included, as well as a "Keyboard Control/HUD (Heads-Up Display)"
ready reference card. Installation on a
hard drive is easy (with a key disk protection scheme) and play is expedited by
using the hard disk format. Also, a joystick is strongly recommended for maximum ease of play.
The documentation offers a tutorial and
layered degrees of difficulty, so one may
progress to more "realistic" levels as
desired. However, it is important to
remember that F-15 II is more of a game
than a simulation—thus, even the most
realistic level ("Ace") is playable for the intermediate gamer.

F-15 Strike Eagle II
IBM with 384K
(Amiga soon)
$54.95
MicroProse
Hunt Valley, MD

Four (4) separate scenarios are offered:
Libya, Persian Gulf, Vietnam, and the Middle East. For those having a copy of F19, the scenarios for North Cape and
Central Europe may be "ported over" for
additional game play. However, F-15 II is
a simpler product----dedicated to those of
us who found F-19 too difficult. This is to
be appreciated, since F-19 can easily become a way of life as opposed to a
game. For those persons desiring the additional scenarios, it seems likely that
Microprose will be releasing them in a
separate "scenario package" together
with potential new "hot spots". Altogether, the documentation and play
aids are well done and assist the user in
easy access to air combat operations.

Graphics
Graphics are a continuation of F-19.
For those who possess a fast machine
and VGA, the horizon now utilizes the
256-color palette, which shows a shading
of the horizon by striated layers of sky for
added realism. In addition, two (2) director levels are available—Level 1 shows
anything happening in the theater of
operations. If a SAM is launched, the

F-15 II utilizes polygon technology in
which objects are represented by filled-in
polygonal shapes. This works well at a distance, but the effect breaks down somewhat at close range. Also, sometimes the
cloud cover appears "too" substantial and
resembles an overhanging roof. Still,
these aspects are minor and become accepted with experience.

Game Play
F-15 II is a player's game. Unlike F-19,
in which a successful mission required
avoiding the enemy, here the player concentrates on air combat. Even the designer notes characterize F-15 II as a
"Rambo in the sky". There is no stealth
technology here. One simply takes
names and kicks butt!
Note: In a throwback to the original F15, an enemy plane is always flying immediately above upon take-off. Albeit unrealistic, it allows a quick kill and initial
combat orientation/gratification.
(Continued on page 70)

Christmas Buying Guide

liminal purchase orders; college students
are encouraged to append annotated
copies of this list to the next telegram
home requesting funds; and offspring
living at home should carefully tape the
summary of each desired product to the
mirror in the bathroom of their parental
units in order to induce consumption of
mass quantities of computer games.

Simulations
A-10 Tank Killer (Dynamix): Since the
A-10 environment fairly swarms with targets and enemy threats, the design team
at Dynamix felt like this plane would be
the ideal subject for their first simulation
on their new label. Digitized graphics,
256 color VGA support, bit map explosions, cinematic external views, and
missions with interconnected goals make
this a distinctive product which will pump
up gamers' excitement. Not only does A10 Tank Killer offer a realistic-looking
cockpit, but real actors, sets, and
uniforms were used to add to the game's
atmosphere. The gift-giving value of A-10
Tank Killer should continue through the
next few years, since the game will be
supplemented with new campaigns and
battles through Dynamix's Simulation
System Module?". IBM ($49.95).

CGW's
Third
Annual
Christmas
Buying
Guide

F

or the third year in a row, CGW's

editorial staff has taken the time to
put on our elf suits and gather
together a distinctive hint list for our
readers to annotate and pass on to their
personal "Santa Claus". In general, CGW
asked the designer(s) or producer(s) of
each game to comment on why they
designed this game at this particular
time, how each game is distinctive from
other games in the genre, and why it
would make a good holiday gift. Since
many of these products were not fully
functional at the time we took the screen
shots and interviewed the designers,
readers should recognize that we have
basically taken the publishers' word for
what each product will be. The Christmas
Buying Guide is intended to be a catalog
of new games that should be very interesting to our readers.
For maximum effectiveness, each husband is advised to place this article underneath his wife's pillow to stimulate sub-

Blue Angels (Accolade): Accolade's formation flying simulator was developed by
the trio of Paul Butler, Robin Burgener,
and Rick Banks. They were interested in
designing the product for two important
reasons. First, they wanted to understand
the detailed nuances of flying in tight formations. Second, it was developed as a
tribute to Rick Banks' father, a pilot who
died testing planes. The designers believe
that this simulation is distinctively different because it is one of the first
products to specifically address formation
flying; it offers multiple options in terms
of positions in the formation and camera
angles; and it will offer both AdLib and
CMS sound support. The designers
believe that the potential hours of entertainment and excitement combined with
educational value make Blue Angels an
intriguing gift idea. Amiga ($44.95), C-64
($29.95), Apple IIGS and IBM ($49.95).
MechWarrior (Activision): According to
John Skeel, producer/designer of MechWarrior, the idea of the game is to move
beyond the Battletech role playing game

and allow the player to experience the

Battletech (licensed from FASA) universe
via a first person, out of the cockpit
perspective. It is the only BattleMech
simulation and by means of outstanding
graphics, as well as sound support for
both the AdLib and Roland MT-32 sound
boards, it presents a unique opportunity
for blending action and role playing. He
believes that the eight different "mechs"
to command, combined with multiple missions and objectives, give the game sufficient gameplay to make it an excellent
holiday gift. IBM ($49.95).
M-1 Tank Platoon (Microprose):
Microprose developed M-1 Tank Platoon
because they had been receiving customer requests for a realistic tank simulation for several years. The use of 3-D terrain with hills, buildings, trees, roads, and
streams, as well as the capacity for rain,
snow, and night actions and the ability to
command a full platoon of four tanks,
along with supporting vehicles, infantry,
artillery and aircraft, marks M-1 Tank
Platoon as a simulation which respects
its subject, rather than being a simple action game. Holidays are an ideal time for
play and the Microprose design team
believes that "After you've jumped into
real tank combat with M-1 Tank Platoon,
anything else will seem like child's play."
IBM ($69.95).
Tank (Spectrum Holobyte): When
Spectrum Holobyte set out to create multiple military simulations which could be
networked together, the development
team decided that Tank would be the
logical first release in the series (which
will be entitled the Electronic Battlefield
Series""), since modern battle tanks are
the cornerstone of today's military
strategy. The game's features include:
head-to-head competition against
another computer; topographic 3-D terrain with real slopes, mountains, and valleys; actions which include up to 32 different vehicles, as well as active air support and recon units; and provision for
thermal and night modes. It should be a
welcome holiday surprise for any gamer
because it allows play on multiple levels.
It offers everything from easy arcade-type
action to complex strategy. IBM ($59.95).
Wolf Pack (Broderbund): John Garoia
of of NovaLogic, developers of Wolfpack,
approached Broderbund with the idea for
Wolfpack. His enthusiasm for the project,
combined with the beautiful graphics already designed and the potential for a

realistic, but fun, World War II naval combat simulation sold Broderbund on the
idea. The uniqueness of the product
stems from the player's ability to assume
either side of the conflict, as either a German submarine commander or an Allied
destroyer/convoy commander. In addition, the built-in scenario builder makes
Wolfpack even a better value. Particularly
with more and more gamers wanting
simulations which take advantage of their
VGA-capable machines, Wolfpack should
be a colorful addition to anyone's holiday
bounty. IBM ($49.95).

Role Playing
Hero's Quest (Sierra): In writing a
game with the express purpose of introducing role-playing to adventure gamers
and adventure gaming to role-players,
Lori Cole may have created a whole new
genre of games, Role-Playing/Adventure.
Hero's Quest adds the plot and story of a
graphic adventure game to the character
creation and character building of a roleplaying game. Unique to most games in
the adventure genre, it also allows multiple solutions to most of the puzzles in
order to allow for replay value. Hero's
Quest would be an appropriate holiday
surprise for lovers of either genre. IBM
($59.95).
Knights of Legend (Origin): Todd
Mitchell Porter designed Knights of
Legend to bring forth a true fantasy roleplaying game with all the features he felt
had been missing in CRPGs to date.
Knights of Legend has taken more than
eight years in development and offers a
significant depth, particularly in the area
of character development. It offers the
most comprehensive combat system in
the genre, but mixed with its menu and
icon interface, it is destined to offer the
fun of discovery such as role-playing
gamers have never experienced it. The
game will round out any fantasy gamer's
holiday season because of the compelling drama of its story and its vivid
universe full of colorful non-player characters. Apple, C-64, ($49.95).
Starflight H (Electronic Arts): In reality,
this part of the story was planned when
the original Starflight was designed.
Since Greg Johnson and the rest of the
crew at Binary Systems received encouragement to continue the saga in

hundreds of fan letters and the design
team believed that both the story and system could sustain a sequel (or more),
they developed Starflight II. Though
there are plenty of space games and plenty of "large" games on the market,
Johnson insists that the Starflight series
is distinctive for the freedom it allows the
players. Since players can express themselves through the role-playing experience, he suggests, it is a satisfying
one for them. In addition, the unique personalities of the alien races combined
with the custom histories make the game
have its own special flavor. Johnson says
that mail from Starflight players indicates
that people really enjoy playing the game
together. Since togetherness is part of
what makes the holidays special,
Starflight II is an excellent addition to the
packages under the tree. IBM ($49.95).
Swords of Twilight (EA): Jon Freeman
and Ann Westphal were concerned because the standard approach to computer FRPs (fantasy role playing games)
seemed rather clunky. With Amiga
graphics and 68000 power, they believed
that they could create a role-playing experience more immediate and life-like
than anything simulated by rolling dice—
or pretending to. Swords of Twilight, according to the designers, is distinctive because: No other game combines the action, excitement, and simple mechanics
of Archon with a real plot, characterization, eloquent prose, sophisticated
AI, and complex interaction. In fact, no
other game mixes the variety, color, and
scope of epic fantasy with real-world
logic, ethics, and consequences. They
believe Swords of Twilight is a great gift
because, as a multi-player game, it also
provides a great excuse to spend time
with the person you give it to. Amiga
($49.95).
The Third Courier (Accolade): Take
the role-playing genre and move it into
the modern world with realistic situations,
authentic locations, and logical constraints. That is what Ivan and Carol Manley have attempted to accomplish in this
espionage/detective adventure from Accolade. Because of the emphasis on
reality, the designers feel "No other
product that we are aware of competes
directly with The Third Courier." The husband/wife team feels that they have
created a different game, a family
present, that all family members can play
and enjoy. Apple IIGS and IBM ($49.95).

Windwalker (Origin): From a personal
interest in both the martial arts and oriental philosophy, Greg Malone created
Windwalker, the sequel to Moebius.
Windwalker offers animated action sequences crafted after observing real
human beings compete and detailed
graphics based on careful research of antique materials. Those who want to give
a present which offers a chance for the
gamer to grow in personal discipline and
understanding will want to consider
Windwalker. Amiga, Apple II, C-64 and
IBM ($39.95)

Strategy
Combots (Avalon Hill): About two and
one-half years ago, John Huff envisioned
a game that was more open-ended than
other computer games he had seen. Basically, he wanted to create a game where
computer garners could "play" with their
machines. Like Omega (reviewed on
page 52 of this issue), the game allows
players to design their own combat
robots (i.e. Combots). In Combots, however, players not only design routines for
the basic machines, but they design
routines for the special add-on devices,
as well. Combots offers a flexible computer opponent where players can optimize the Al for particular scenarios and
would be a delightful addition to a
strategy gamer's holiday "haul". C-64
($24.95).
Gold of the Americas (Strategic
Studies Group): In Gold of the Americas,
SSG unveils an entirely different approach. In this game, players will need to
explore, colonize, invest wisely, use
diplomacy, and engage in both land and
sea combat. Imagine a Reach for the
Stars style game of conquest set in a historical era of conquest and colonization.
Then, imagine colorful EGA graphics to
further enhance the game experience.
That's the colorful package available
when garners open Gold of the Americas
on Christmas morning. Amiga and IBM
($39.95).
Ishido (Epyx): Brad Fraeger (Shanghai), Michael Feinberg and Brodie Lockard developed Ishido as a "stone" game
of abstract strategy due to their interest
(Continued on page 76)

Review

ourteen seconds
remain in the
game. You hang
your head in disgust
as the referee blows
his whistle. He points
to your center who
has just committed his
sixth foul, prompting
his ejection from the
game. "What is he,
blind?" You signal to
your captain to call
"TIME-OUT" Now,
you're down three
points and your star
player just fouled out
of the game. You
know you have to
send in his rookie
reserve. Do you give
him the green light to
shoot? Do you make
him give it away? Or
maybe, just try to
draw a foul?

F

Smooth As Silk
SportTime's "Omni-PIay™ Basketball'
by Michael S. Chaut and Matt Rosenburg

up players from the
minor leagues. Of
course, the most important use of trading
points is in trading
players. In order to
trade a player, players
must have a base
amount of 50 trading
points to cover the arbitration fee. The
"SportTime Administration" is the computerized governing
body of your league.
This Al driven "Administration" makes
sure that all trades between teams are fair
and equal. You can
only trade one player
at a time and you can
only trade a guard for
a guard, a forward for
a forward, etc. (an unfortunate loss of
realism). Trading may
be expensive, but it is
more immediately effective than using a training camp or bringing
up rookies.

It's all up to the
player in SportTime's
new basketball simulation, Omni-Play"" Basketball (BB). BB
presents the player
with the ability to be
At the conclusion of
the coach, the general
a season, teams are
manager, and the star
awarded trading
player in this unique
points, depending
five-on-five full court
upon their records (i.e.
basketball game which
the winner of the
allows for expandability
"SBA" Trophy receives
in the future. Further,
50 trading points and
through SportTime's
the last place team
new OMNI-PLAY Sysreceives 1200.). This
tem, add-on option
system gives the undermodules have been
dogs the best possible
designed so that the
chance to improve
gamer will be able to
their team's perforTITLE:
OMNI-PLAY BASKETBALL
add new features to
mance for the next
(End-View, Side-View,
SBA & College League Modules)
the original program.
season (Hint: One of
SYSTEMS:
Amiga,
C-64,
IBM
(soon)
Presently, BB provides
the nefarious strategies
# PLAYERS:
1-2
the gamer with the
PRICE:
$49.95 (Amiga)
this reviewer used to
$34.95 (C-64)
ability to play in either
improve and speed-up
DESIGNER:
Ed Ringler
the SportTime Basketgame results was to
PUBLISHER:
SportTime
ball Association "SBA"
Costa Mesa, CA
run the first couple of
or the "College
seasons by computer
League" (optional) in
without watching or
the "End-View" or "Sideplaying the games.
View" (optional) Modes, thus providing four really different
When lousy records were accumulated, trading points were also
abstracts of play. As more option modules become available this
accumulated. Thus, giving an edge for training and trading of
number will obviously increase.
the team and players when he personally took over.).

Kentucky Fried Basketball (The Franchise)
Bench Mark (Coaching Options)
As owners of a newly formed franchise, players begin with a
twelve man roster consisting of aging veterans and young
rookies. As the general manager, players make trades, bring up
promising young rookies from the minors, and retire veteran
players. Expansion teams (which all players start out with) have
250 trading points initially. Trading points may be used to send
one's players/team to training camp for improvement or to bring

As a "coach", one calls the plays and makes the substitutions;
decides whether or not a given player is shooting too much and
should be taken out of the game; selects offensive and defensive
coaching options; and can either set the line-up oneself or allow
the computer to pick the line-up best suited for the game's most
(Continued on page 62)

Book Review

I

n The King's Quest Companion (published by Osborne-McGraw Hill Books,
$14.95, and available at fine
bookstores wherever CGW is
sold), Peter Spear weaves
together a variety of writing
styles and literary types in order
to offer game hints, background material and interesting
fiction on the "King's Quest"
universe (based upon the
"King's Quest" series from Sierra OnLine. Where other books about games
have offered straightforward walkthroughs, maps and hints, The King's
Quest Companion offers perspective on
the philosophy and folklore behind the
games, in addition to the standard fare
of hints and tips one has come to expect
from the genre. Here are some of the
passages which the editors of CGW
found both interesting on its own merit
and illustrative of what The King's
Quest Companion has to offer to our
readers.

The King's Quest
Companion
Excerpts from an Intriguing
New Book by Peter Smear

Quest for the Crown
Spear walks the reader through the
first King's Quest adventure using the artifice of discovering "The Chronicles of
Daventry" as told by one Derek Karlavaegen. As the wise reader will recognize in this brief section from Chapter 2
("Quest for the Crown"), the fiction
provides both a readable story arid the
hints necessary to solve the puzzles.
The only leads to the missing treasures
the young knight had to go on were slim.
One: the dwarf who had taken the magic
shield had been seen disappearing into a
hole in the ground. Two: the shapechanging witch, who had stolen the chest
of gold, escaped on her broomstick into
the clouds, clouds that clung to the
peaks above Daventry, solid seeming
masses that looked like snow-cornices,
impossible outcroppings poised out from
the mountains with no support. Three:
the nameless sorcerer who had
absconded with the mirror of Merlin had
said it would be kept in a safe place, and
guarded by some fearsome beast. There
were no easy answers in those facts, but
that was all anyone knew about the
mystery.
To these facts, as lightweight as fiction,
Graham added some home-brewed observation. "My daddy used to tell me, 'Boy, if
I have learned anything in my life, I have
learned this; When in doubt, or in
trouble, Pick up anything that is not
nailed down, and, if it is, check for loose
nails or boards. Check carefully into,
under, above, below and behind things.
Read everything, you might learn something. Wear clean undergarments, brush
after meals and always remember, nothing is as it appears'."

With all of this in mind, Graham took inventory of what he had. He discovered
nothing. That meant he had to get some
food, some gold or the like with which to
buy things, and a weapon. He leaned forward, harder and harder, as he set his
plans and sorted his situation. The rock
rolled. Graham stumbled but a little and,
as he recovered his balance noticed that
the rolling stone had revealed a hole.
"Well, it's time to heed some of Daddy's
advice," he said to the trees, and looking
into the hole, he saw what appeared to
be a dagger. So it was, and while taking
it, he breathed, "Thank you, Father," a
note of respect creeping into his voice.
"I sure hope this is an omen."

A Magical Primer
In the third chapter of The King's
Quest Companion, Spear uses the same
type of fictional approach to walk the
reader through King's Quest II: Romancing the Throne. In the fourth chapter, "A
Magical Primer", from which the following section has been excerpted, he introduces the magical spells from King's
Quest III: To Heir Is Human. The recipe
printed here plays an important part in
King's Quest III.

"Teleportation At Random"
Obtain the Following Ingredients:
1 spoonful of salt grains

1 sprig of dried mistletoe
1 smooth rounded stone of
unusual color
A Magic Wand
To Prepare the Spell:
1. Grind a spoon of salt in a
mortar (with a pestle)
2. Grind the mistletoe in the
mortar
3. Rub the stone in the mixture
4. Kiss the stone
5. (Recite this verse)
With this kiss, I thee impart,
Power most dear to my heart.
Take me now from this place hither,
To another place far thither.
6. Wave the Magic Wand
To cast this spell: Rub The Stone. In a
blink you will disappear from where you
are and appear in another place. This
spell may be used as often as one wishes
provided the stone is in your possession.
(Note: This is a powerful and most useful spell. It has been used to avoid
danger and peril, and legend claims that
it has been used on occasion in the exploration of unknown lands. Be warned
however; that which snatches away from
one predicament can just as well deposit
into another. The spell has been known
to leave one where they started. There is
one fable that talks about a poor
bumpkin who came into possession of
such a magic stone. Unprepared to face
the dangers of the wilder parts of the
world he rubbed the stone at will, poofing
himself from place to place in search of
wine, women and easy gold. The purveyors of luck were with him for the first
few times or so, and the stupid boy,
whose name was Bob Jack, flitted from
town to beach, across mountains and
over the seas. Then, the purveyors of
luck seemed to say "Alright Bob Jack,
you've won a few; now it's time to lose a
few!" When he rubbed again, instead of
vista, panorama or treasure, Bob Jack
was faced with a hungry lion. Quickly he
rubbed the stone again. Oops, he was in
a magician's chamber and the mage
looked not too delighted with the intrusion. Rub again quick, Bob Jack. This
time, up a roaring stream without a paddle. Thus it went. Having used up his
good luck, he used up his bad luck until
he had no luck left at all and perished.
The moral of the fable is; "Even when
you rub things the right way, soon you'll
rub them the wrong way, and if you do
that too often, you'll eventually get
rubbed out.")

To Heir Is Human
For those who want a more linear narrative of the third game in the series,
Spear presents the walk-through of
King's Quest III: To Heir Is Human as an

interview with the protagonist, Prince
Alexander.
Question: You must have been scared
that Manannan would return and catch
you red-handed, weren't you?
Of course I was! I may be self-taught,
but I'm not stupid. But at that point I
wasn't too worried that he would return
just then.
Question: Oh? Why was that?
My master was a man of extremely fixed
and regular habits. He would rise at exactly the same time each day. Likewise he
would retire to bed each night at the
same time, accompanied by the same
three fingers of the same awful brandy
that his taste favored. When Manannan
slept, it was for precisely the same period
of time, and when he travelled, he always
returned at the same time. It was as if he
were a clockwork person with gears that
repeated himself eternally.
Manannan kept in his house a magical
clock unlike any I have ever read about.
It was similar to an hour-glass in that it
would measure a certain short period of
time and then begin again, then again,
and again , for as many times as you
might count. The sorcerer kept the
device, he would say, as a curiosity, for it
measured the passing of time in an interval unknown to our kind. He told me
once—why, I do not know—that it was
created by another race, one that came
before the human, or after; he was not
sure which.
Over time, I came to see the strange
clock as a way to measure the man himself. His bath always took two measures
of the odd time, his studies eighteen, and
his sleep twenty-five—the same as his
travels. It was because I knew this of
Manannan that I wasn't worried that he
would return just then. I knew that if I
could keep track of time, as measured by
the unhuman device, then my master
could not catch me unawares.
Manannan would not return for some
while yet. I used what time I dared to continue my household search. From the
kitchen I took my favorite clay bowl from
a shelf, and a wooden spoon and sharp
knife from the rack next to the fireplace.
As I passed through the dining room, I
retrieved an old cup from upon the table.
Manannan's dining room is large enough
for a score of people to eat, yet my
master always ate alone under the eternal
gaze of a stuffed moose head. I will always consider that a most curious sight.
I took what I had gathered to my sparsely furnished room, and I hid it all under
my bed (a cot really). I was sure the
wizard would not search for them there,
even if he noticed them missing. Then, I
went to catch the cat for its contribution
to my future.
She was in the wizard's tower; she could

have been just about anywhere, but she
was on the third floor playing with a dead
fly. It took several attempts, and many
more scratches before I got her, but I
was able to hold on to her long enough
to take some fur. The unnameable cat
gave me an extra scratch as she
squirmed out of my hands, but the spell
ingredient was mine.
As were the fly wings. I recalled that the
spell for flying like a fly needed a pair of
those wings, so I took the fly to get the
wings. Yuk, but in a good cause . . .
saving my hide. I hid the fur and fly
wings under my bed with everything else.

Grave Matters
A travelogue advising readers about
venturing into graveyards is the literary
device utilized in Chapter 7 to prepare
the reader for King's Quest IV: The Perils
of Rosella. The following is a brief section of narrative which includes some
sound advice for adventurers and one of
the many humorous epitaphs to be encountered in the chapter.
Cemeteries change much when the sun
is gone; what seems normal and mundane by day turns supernatural and
ghastly by night. Then the restless dead
haunt between the crypts and moan their
ways between the tombstones. Zombies
search for fresh flesh and human brains.
In all, it is a most enchanting chance to
experience death without ever having to
cross over to the other side yourself.
If you are intrigued by a darkside
sojourn, do remember to carry along
some protection. Garlic, religious symbols, or prayer offer good security for
many, but if you have none of these,
black scarabs can be obtained occasionally from witches, hags, or other magic
users. These, too, offer sufficient protection from the undead. Prices vary from
gold coins or simple tasks, to various
parts of living anatomy, so do be careful
to know the price before you agree to
buy. In any event, heed this warning: Do
not enter the cemetery at night without
protection. Zombies, ghouls and ghosts
may be fun and exciting to watch, but
you wouldn't want to become their dinner. If you have no protection, leave
before dark.
Within this grave do lie,
Back to back, my wife and I;
When the last trump the air shall fill,
If she gets up, I'll just lie still.

Encyclopedia of Daventry
One of the most fascinating portions of
The King's Quest Companion is the "Encyclopedia of Daventry". In this fascinating resource Spear notes the specific
game each encyclopedic entry refer(Continued on page 84)

Review

There are two
types of Cribbage players:
those that play the
game and those
that play the game
fanatically. Cribbage King,
Software
Toolworks' computer card game
package, is for the
fanatics . . . and
for novices as well!

More Than A
House of Cards
Software Toolworks'
"Cribbage King/Gin King"

The game can
be either keyboard
or mouse driven
and can be customized. Game
parameters can be
set to full games of
121 points or
quicker games of
61 points. The
documentation is
so clear and wellwritten that it
should be a standard by which other
game manuals are
judged. This is
matched beautifully with context-sensitive online help.
Scores accrue
rapidly in cribbage,
so a scorekeeping
pegboard is always
used. In Cribbage
King, a 61 hole
board is graphically
depicted. In EGA
and VGA modes,
even the wood
tones of the board
are depicted. Since
only one hand can
be depicted on screen at any one time,
however, the game design only allows
solitaire play (human-against-machine).
Too often, these types of games become
predictable very quickly to the player, but
designer Donald W.Laabs, cleverly
created seven unique computer personalities to play against, or even get different advice from. While cribbage itself is
best played by two competitors, Cribbage
King can handle up to four (one human
and three computer) and there is a menu
to select the various computer opponents, each with a brief on-line description of their playing capabilities.
Shark is the toughest opponent
(natch!), but Mrs. Bass will give you a run
for your money. Alfie is a goof and you
can easily take advantage of him. Then,
there is Lady Ames, Lord Ainsley, Chesley, and Reggie. So veddy, veddy British,

Graphics are
clear and crisp
even in CGA, the
minimum graphics
board requirement.
But, of course,
EGA and VGA
offer even more
lifelike depictions
of the cards, the
pegboard and
other artwork. The
sound effects are
limited to shuffling
and scoring tones.
Shuffle options
allow for regular
random shuffling
and a replay with
the same deck in
the exact order
from the previous
game. This is as
close as one can
come to playing
against another
human opponent.
Each can then
take turns at the
computer and not
see the other's
cards.

In addition, a unique "User Supplied
Cards" setting lets
you enter the
cards you are acby Michael S. Lasky
tually dealing from
a regular deck.
TITLE:
Cribbage King/Gin King
This proved to be
SYSTEMS:
IBM
# PLAYERS:
1
somewhat of a
PRICE:
$59.95
hassle since one
DESIGNER:
Donald Laabs
must carefully
PUBLISHER:
Software Toolworks
19808 Nordhoff Place
input the card
Chatsworth, CA 91311
number and first
letter of each card
suit in order to
because, after all, Cribbage is of English
give the computer the correct information.
origin.

Some Features Optional

Each computer personality is different
from the next and fun to play with. But
much of the advice they offer is too
machine-like and often calculatingly
wrong. I found it best not to take their
suggestions concerning which cards to
throw too seriously. This is not to say,
however, that novices cannot learn from
them until they can intuitively do it on
their own.

If you don't like a particular rule, you
can turn it off. If you don't like the sound
and special effects (like the Las Vegasstyle shuffle and deal), you can shut
them off. If you decide you want a different player in the middle of game or a
different advisor, a simple touch of the
mouse button or a function key and the
game is made to order, once again.

Cribbage King is the first computerized
card game I've played that does not eventually bore me with the predictability of
the computer opponents. Although it follows all the rules of the actual game
closely and moves with the swiftness of
mano-a-mano playing, it still offers a mar(Continued on page 58)

The cut for deal goes to the low card,
but you can even override that if you
want. Counting of points after each deal
is critical and if you over or undercount,
the difference between that and the actual score goes to your opponent. This is
the Muggins option.

Review

Alan Emrich is the
former publisher of
Fire & Movement and
has considerable
seniority in playtesting and managing
conventions for the
board wargame
hobby. This is his
first article for CGW.
hen one is
an Apple IIGS
owner, one
naturally laments the
low number of "GS
specific" games available. When one is a
computer wargamer,
this is doubly true.
Fortunately, Revolution '76 alleviates
some of this drought.

W

Run For
Your Fife
Britannica's "Revolution '76"
by Alan Emrich

Play begins with
governmental organization. On the
first turn, the player
automatically constitutes the Second
Continental Congress, so this phase
amounts to appointing leaders to chair
four important committee posts: Army,
Navy, Treasury and
Foreign Office.
On future turns, the
player will have the
options of declaring
independence, confederating the states, creating a strong executive to manage the
war, reforming the economy, or reassigning the country's leaders.
The second phase in each turn involves administration. Here
you set the tax level (creating instant unpopularity) and establish
the policy regarding Tories. You can do anything from socializing
with to persecuting the Tories. It is usually better to prosecute
them within the law rather than persecute them beyond the law,
however.
Recruiting patriotic lads is the next major activity. Since regulars
tend to disappear each year, the new crops of militia and Continental Army soldiers are vital to the war effort. The major difference between the two is that the militia begins the game with
pretty poor training and has limited movement, while the Continental Army soldiers have a liberal enough movement rate to
allow players to mass the required numbers to actually win battles. On the down side, of course, is the fact that one must pay
to raise the Continental Army.
One must also decide how much support to give to privateers.
These "patriotic heroes" are nefarious villains as far as British merchants are concerned, since their activities both raise the insurance rates for seafarers and get more Whigs elected to Parliament.
The last step before actually fighting the war is dealing with the
National Debt. One decides just how high one is willing to push

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

Revolution '76
Apple IIGS with 1.25 MB
$49.95
Ed Bever
Britannica Software
San Francisco, CA

' the debt in order to
supply the army and
build American
Frigates. The more
demanded during this
phase, the more
ruinous inflation can
be in the long run.
War is fought via
area movement in
five areas with six
cities to move between. Unlike the historical commanders
in 1776, the player
knows exactly where
the British are, where
they are moving, and
what their strength is.
It does not take long
to get a feel for the
size force (in Regulars
and Militia), the level
of training, and the
amount of supplies it
will take to stand a
fair chance of defeating the hated lobster
backs.

Unfortunately, since
each moving unit requires a general and
only one general can
command in a given
area, this means the
player must perform a
political juggling act.
When more than one
group converges for
, a decisive battle,
some of the generals
who must, of necessity, be removed from command may become
alienated enough to defect to the British.
Of course, winning battles is what the game is all about. The
computer informs the player of each battle's outcome and automatically retreats the losing forces. The profound effects which
the results of the war have on American and British domestic
politics, plus America's foreign diplomacy, makes battles quintessential to winning or losing the game. Success is contingent on
carefully selecting only battles which can be won, rather than marching to the beat of the local politicians.
Each turn/year ends with the Diplomacy phase where the player
sends John Adams and Benjamin Franklin abroad to woo
France, Holland, Spain, Britain and other European Powers.
When the war does end, on whatever note (surrender, pardons,
autonomy, independence or expansion), a victory schedule is displayed. Added and subtracted to the status described at the end
of the war is: current patriot morale, economic situation, strength
of the American government, foreign support, the length of the
war, etc.
The "victory schedule" for Revolution '76 is extremely clear. The
game offers depth, challenge and one thing that more games
should have, replay value. Experimenting with new policies and
strategies is a great deal of the fun. Revolution '76 is what IIGS
owners had hoped to see more of when they purchased their
machines.

Review

Decisive Battles of the
American Civil War: Volume II
Strategic Studies Group's Game System Revisited

N

ot

too long ago, I wrote a
review about a game and
included the line, "Few
games have ever been so difficult
for me to review as this one. I
have dragged myself back to the
computer time and again . . . .
and can now enjoy the relief of
being able to put the game up .
.. for a while." The game was
Decisive Battles of the American
Civil War: Volume II (DBACW2),
which I reviewed in its Apple II
64K embodiment (CGW #54).
Therefore, what more cruel assignment could the editors of
this magazine offer than to give
me another crack at the same
game? This time, however, I
have been asked to look at the
recent IBM release which includes EGA graphics. Given a
chance to redeem myself, I must
admit that the sheer enjoyment
of fighting on the beautifully
rendered battlefields of this version virtually offsets the frustration that I continue to feel about
the player's control of his forces
in this "absolutely true to life"
simulation of command effectiveness (and non-effectiveness).

by Jay C. Selover
but is handled by the computer
in terms of the actual hex-by-hex
path to be followed.

As is typical for SSG games,
the system places significant
(and realistic) constraints on the
player which limit his ability to interact with his army to that which
the historical commander was
able to exercise. The player is personally represented on the field
by the commander's icon and his
orders to subordinate formation
commanders are subject to the
same perils faced in history (orders may not even be possible
for some of the more distant subordinates who may have
wandered out of command
range). Orders are sent to Corps
and Divisional commanders and,
if received, will be interpreted
and carried out by the subordinate commanders (all played
by the computer). The subordinates will, in turn, order the
movement and combat of the actual brigades on the map.
The entire game system is so
highly realistic in placing the
gamer in the field general's
shoes and hamstrings the player
so effectively with his historical
Background
limitations that my one major
TITLE:
Decisive Battles of the American Civil War:
DBACW2 is SSG's second ofcomplaint (voiced in my prior
Volume II: Gaines Mill to Chattanooga
SYSTEMS:
Apple II, C-64, IBM
fering in their series of American
review and reiterated here) is that
REVIEWED:
IBM with EGA
Civil War titles, with this game
history is no fun. My presence is
PRICE:
$40.00
covering five battles from midDESIGNERS:
Roger Keating,
always required everywhere on
Malcolm Power, and Ian Trout
1862 through the end of 1863
the battlefield at the same time;
PUBLISHER:
Strategic Studies Group
(i.e. Gaines Mill, Stones River,
my subordinates constantly misDrummoyne, NSW, AUSTRALIA
two Gettysburg scenarios, Chickread or ignore my orders; my foramauga, and Chattanooga). The
mations move into position with
game uses brigades as the units of maneuver and turns which
the kind of slow plodding that makes you pull out your hair; and
represent one hour. The system uses an orders phase at the start
my troops seem to break and run at the first sound of gunfire!
of each turn where players can check the status of their army and
Closer to the point, and a bit more seriously, I continue to have
issue orders to particular units and formations. Movement and
trouble discerning the effect that the individual player has on the
combat routines which follow during the ensuing "action phase"
outcome of the battle. Each scenario starts with formations in
are all handled by the computer. Then, the computer metes out
position and with standing orders. Therefore, the battle is about
casualties based on well-defined parameters of the firing units, tarto commence, even if he does absolutely nothing with his pergets, range, terrain, etc. Combat effects include actual casualties,
sonal commander throughout the battle. Further, within the batlosses in morale, and eventually, shattered and routed units. In
tle, events tend to unfold along roughly historical lines, thanks to
addition, individual leaders from the divisional level on up can
one's computerized subordinates.
also become casualties or be captured. Movement is directed by
the player in terms of objectives (victory hexes or enemy units),
(Continued on page 54)

.1

Review

S

tar Fleet II: Krellan Commander
is Interstel's longawaited (over 2 years!)
sequel to Star Fleet I.
However, this time the
player's role is that of
the evil Krellan aggressor—an aggressive
alien species dedicated
to the destruction of
"truth, justice, and the
United Galactic Way". Intricate and richly textured, Star Fleet II offers an interesting, albeit flawed, perspective
of tactical and strategic
space conflict.

Torture and
Destruction for
Fun and Profit
Interstel's
"Star Fleet II:
Krellan
Commander"

However, Star Fleet II:
Krellan Commander is
not really a Krellan
by M. Evan Brooks
simulation. Instead, the
player takes on the role
of a UGA (United Galactic Alliance) commander
in a simulator. Why this
one-step farther
removal concept was
utilized is not explained
(but probably revolves
around ethical considerations). In effect,
NAME:
one plays a UGA comStar Fleet II:
Krellan Commander
mander playing a KrelSYSTEM:
IBM (512K)
lan. There are options
PRICE:
$59.95
Dr. Trevor Sorenson
DESIGNERS:
involving questioning
and Mark Baldwin
captured personnel (torPUBLISHER:
Interstel
ture is very effective)
Webster, TX
and destruction of entire planets (a quick way
to achieve the Krellan
Medal of Honor), but you don't have to
tion lacks "Examples of Play" and "Lesfeel guilty about it.
sons Learned". However, Interstel has
prepared the "Tutorial Disk and Training
Manual"—for an additional sum of
$14.95.
Documentation
The documentation is extensive but incomplete. The "Krellan Battle Manual"
provides over 140 pages of documentation. This is supplemented by an
"Officer's Manual" and a quick-reference
chart. It would appear, therefore, that
these should be more than sufficient for
play.
However, the documentation is somewhat convoluted in nature and can be
confusingly incomplete. For example,
while the documentation delineates how
to utilize the automatic targeter navigation mode, it does not clearly state the
steps to engage it. This reviewer spent 3
hours struggling over this before realizing
that one had to turn the engine on in
order to engage the targeter. Manual
navigation is a skill that requires extensive "training", but one will have to learn
this by trial and error. The documenta-

Accessible via the main program, the
tutorials will answer most of one's questions—both movement and combat. However, the tutorial was unavailable when
the program was initially released and this
reviewer does not appreciate the trend
towards programs needing additional "enhancements" merely to understand and
utilize the game mechanics. Some
gamers have indicated that they have had
no problem with the documentation.
While such gamers are to be commended for their intuitive insights, this
reviewer feels that if a tutorial and training manual is needed, it should be included with the main program and not
sold as an add-on. Since the tutorial was
still in the process of being written, many
"unintended features" in the program will
presumably be explained in the add-on
manual. These include certain omissions,
errors and outright flaws which may be

fatal to game play.
Thus, the documentation is extensive, incomplete and frustrating.

Graphics
Interstel has been
known in the past for
their challenging game
play, not graphics.
While Star Fleet II is a
colorful product, no
one will ever accuse it
of being on the "envelope" of graphic
design. The screen displays use a variety of
colors, but the icons
are primitive (e.g. control-type characters
used to represent different ships on the
radar displays as in "v"
for a frigate, "w" for a
destroyer). In fact, a
"@" sign represents a
black hole in space. It
may be functional, but
it's sure not awe-inspiring.

Numerous menus and
displays are available—
main command menu,
navigation display, engineering, planetary invasion screens, etc.
However, even with a
20MHz machine, the
shift between screen displays is amazingly slow;
Interstel attributes this
to the many calculations/computations
that the machine is making. This reviewer
simply notes the slowness of execution.
The design rationale may be significant,
but the slow calculations impact poorly
on the user perspective.

Game Play
Game play—the strength of Interstel
products—is present in Star Fleet II, although a number of bugs undermine
maximum enjoyment. The program
should be loaded on a hard disk. The
second disk consists of one executable
file and virtually fills the disk. It may be difficult to read such a disk and require
numerous attempts to back up or place
the program on a hard drive. The compressed file reading difficulty is known to
Interstel and they are attempting to correct this deficiency.
However, this is but one of many flaws.
Overall, the program resembles a Persian
rug. Such a carpet is always made with
(Continued on page 42)

(Continued from page 40)

Star Fleet II
an intentional flaw (since nothing is perfect except Allah), but the rich texture
and beauty of the product overwhelm the
end-user. Star Fleet II has both the rich
texture and beauty, but it is surrounded
by so much cheap carpeting that one
wonders if the end can ever justify the
means.
Beginning with a battlecruiser, one will
be promoted to commander of a task
force (battlecruiser plus four destroyer escorts) and on to admiral in charge of
eventual planetary invasion fleets. Each
level of command (from Altern to Admiral) consists of five missions, which in
turn, begin at a simple level and evolve.
However, at the lower levels, there is a
certain sameness—destroy a starliner/warship, capture a starliner/warship. While Interstel personnel can finish the first
three levels in an evening, this reviewer
spent three weeks of play merely to rise
to level three. Although one can play any
mission (using DEMO mode), successful
missions will not be saved for career advancement unless one starts from the

beginning. Also, attempting a level seven
invasion is made very difficult in demo
mode, since one's legions are relatively inexperienced, unlike those that would be
present if one had progressed "through
the ranks".

An early mission involves finding an
enemy starbase. However, one's ship can
only long-range scan one-quarter of a
solar system. Therefore, one has to adjust continuously in order to check the
potential star systems. Luckily, the starbase is normally located in an inhabitable
system (green or cyan in color), so the
search is somewhat limited, but the
process can become tedious.
The find/capture of different ships can
also become repetitive (
starliner-freighter/light cruiser/heavy cruiser). The
capture of enemy warships, however, offers a definite learning experience. Save
the game immediately after contact.
Since enemy warships do not surrender,
one must destroy their shields without
destroying the ship—a delicate operation
to say the least. Using tractor beams to
capture the enemy vessel offers its own
danger, as well. This reviewer captured a
light cruiser by tractor beam (which involves lowering the shields), only to discover
that the enemy ship still had sufficient
strength to reduce the Krellan vessel to
space slag.
Certain lessons must be acknowledged.
Occasionally, an instruction will tell the
user to "Insert Disk 2 in Drive C". Since
drive C is usually a hard drive, this does
present some difficulty. However, the message is an error and can safely be ignored. More important are problems associated with destroyer escort formations.
The "system search" formation allows a
maximum reconnaissance of a new solar
system. However, system search only
works intra-system. If one places his vessels in system search and then enters hyperspace, the program will eventually
lock-up. Do Not enter hyperspace in "system search" formation.
When one finally achieves sufficient
rank (Centurion) to have four escorts,
their usefulness may be limited. While
one can order them to disable an enemy
vessel by torpedoes, the tendency, with
all four firing, is for the ship to be "over-

killed". One feels somewhat like the "six
million dollar man" with a short circuit in
his arm. Optimization, therefore, calls for
varied orders to the destroyer escorts
(e.g. one on hold fire, two on disable,
one on slave to battle cruiser) and then,
when an enemy vessel is almost
destroyed, pause the game and quickly
adjust orders. This is admittedly not an
overly elegant strategy, but it does work.
Passwords are part of the protection
scheme. The user establishes his own
password, but the program sometimes
unilaterally adjusts one's password after
four missions. Unlike Star Fleet I which
had a Fleet Manager option to access all
records, Star Fleet Il's "Manager" only allows one to delete a record. The "quick
fix" is to use a password beginning with
an early letter of the alphabet, since the
computer merely adjusts the first letter by
moving it eight letters up the alphabet.
Of course, if one is unfortunate enough
to have used a password beginning with
the letter "s", he finds himself running out
of alphabet and having the new password
begin with a control-character. Hence, it
would more than likely not be accessible
without a corrected disk. Fortunately, this
"feature" has been corrected on later
releases.
When this reviewer reached level three,
garbage characters would appear on the
screen in the message boxes and remain
on the navigational maps. These errors
do not affect the computer's play, but
they do impact upon the player's conceptualization. Any computer game requires
a willing suspension of belief and such errors quickly bring the player back to a
sad reality. Finally, do not access
planetary maps until a corrected edition
is available. Access of such maps may occasionally engender computer lock-up.

Conclusions
Star Fleet ll is a richly detailed simulation. With consumers waiting for it for
over two years, it is apparent that a "Rush
to Publish" overcame any other considerations. Interstel is aware of the numerous
problems and is working diligently to correct all of them. They will replace user
disks with working copies. However,
when such corrections will be finalized is
still unknown. For this reviewer, at this
time, the bottom line is—Star Fleet II?
No, Star Dreck I. Fortunately, many
gamers have either not been plagued by
the problems described above or have
found their way around them and love
the product. Whatever one's feeling
about the game, Star Fleet II: Krellan
Commander is not quite the
breakthrough gamers had been hoping
for.
(c) 1989, all rights reserved

Review

T

he dying sun
was drenching
he sky with
deepening shades of
red as Severian the
Conqueror sat overlooking the fortified
city of Tetrada. His
mount tremored
beneath him, nostrils
twitching, as the
clouds of dust from
by Biff Kritzen
the seemingly endless, winding
column of troops at
his rear began blowing over them. The
long road that had
begun in Aladda, so
many years ago,
had finally brought
them to this final
confrontation with
the usurping
Lucinian IV. The big
bay's tail swatted at
the ever present flies
as Severian signaled
for his army to begin
deploying for their
final night of enTITLE:
Sword of Aragon
campment. By this
SYSTEM:
IBM
time tomorrow, the
# PLAYERS:
One
PRICE:
long campaign that
$39.95
DESIGNERS:
Russell Shilling & Kurt Myers
had started with the
PUBLISHER:
SSI
treacherous murder
Sunnyvale, CA
of his father would
be ended, one way
or the other, and the ground would match the evening sky with
its own bloody shades of scarlet.

A Strong Right Arm
SSI's "Sword
of Aragon"

Sword of Aragon is a fantasy, economic, military wargame that
challenges the player to conquer city states, manage the realm's
economy, keep the peace, fight off marauding invasions, explore
unknown territory, recruit and maintain armies, and, (oh yes),
reclaim a throne wrongly usurped by a despotic tyrant who sits at
the head of a huge army, camped behind the walls of a heavily
fortified city. Piece of cake, right?
The game opens with the player ascending to the throne of
Aladda, a small city state that is trying to regain its lost glory as
capital of the realm. The economy needs reinvigoration, the army
needs recruits and training, and the ruler/player needs seasoning.
The first choice to be made is what kind of player to be. The
choices include Warrior, Knight, Ranger, Mage, and Priest, each
giving the player a different makeup of initial forces, and establishing the costs of the different unit types for recruiting and training purposes. The unit types to choose from, typical of ancient
warfare, are infantry, cavalry, archers, mounted infantry, and
mounted archers. Each has different strengths, weapon and
armor availability, and movement values. It's left to the player to
discover the optimal weapon and armor mix for the forces he
wants to field. Lots of combinations exist, and it's quite a challenge to maximize a force's fighting ability. Knights will probably
field armies with strong, shock cavalry wings; warriors will fight
with large masses of spear carrying infantry, supported by
divisions of javelin troops; rangers will fight with large bodies of
mounted and foot archers, outfitted with a variety of bows and
slings; while mages and priests will contest the battleground with
large numbers of spellcasters.

Victory on the battlefield will ultimately
go to the side that
has the best mix of
forces and uses the
proper tactics for the
situation at hand.
This fantasy version
of "combined arms"
is necessary because:
attacking fortified
cities with foot infantry is doomed to
failure without artillery (oops, make that
archers and
spellcasters) to soften
up the defenses first;
archers, priests, and
mages caught out in
the open without infantry and cavalry
support will soon be
shredded by enemy
spearmen; and infantry butting heads
with opposing
ground troops will
never achieve
breakthroughs
without shock cavalry
to punch holes in
the enemy lines and
help conduct overruns.

After selecting the
' initial character and
forces, it becomes time to take a look at the state of the
economy. The economic subgame is an important part of successful campaigning. Troops can't be paid, trained and outfitted
with promises. They require gold and there's no deficit spending
in Aragon.
Each city's economy is made up with different sectors, based on
its geographical location. Seaports rely on trade, cities in the
mountains depend on mining, and agriculture is the main
product of towns on the plains. Committing money to different
areas will increase the revenue brought in and adjustment of the
tax rate will fill the coffers. Of course, too high a tax rate will
cause a loyalty and popularity decrease in the city and this will
negatively impact on production and recruitment. Careful allocation of gold will keep your city thriving and the population happy.
Garrisons are necessary in some of the wilder terrain, and maintenance for the armies all dips into the national treasury. So a
good warrior with a lack of appreciation for economic matters will
find himself fighting with fewer and fewer troops. Armies don't
march and fight on empty stomachs.
Each city has a net economic gain or loss that it adds to the
player's overall balance sheet. Thus, more cities conquered
means more potential gold for the realm's treasury. The down
side to this is that the more cities under the player's control, the
higher the corresponding maintenance costs that must be paid.
The above notwithstanding, the game is won and lost on the
battlefield. Each turn is represented by a month of game time, so
each year will see a series of campaigns launched in the spring
and, hopefully, concluded before the onset of winter. Winter
weather wreaks havoc on troops caught out in the open in the

form of attrition. Each hex moved into will cause a loss of men
through desertion, based on the severity of the weather and the
terrain moved into. The sight of an army melting away before
your very eyes is a most discouraging thing. It's too expensive to
recruit, train, and equip an army. To have it undermined by poor
planning and disregard for the weather is inexcusable.
As more cities are conquered, and treasuries grow, new armies
will be created. Some will be armies of occupation, their chief mis
sion becoming "keeping the peace". Other armies will arise for
conquest. These armies will be heavily laden with spearmen and
archers, perfect for siege and conquest. The final stages of the
game will see all theses armies coming together for one or two
final campaigns that will make or break the player.
As important as strategic planning is to the war effort, it's still

the "push of the pike" that wins or loses the day on the battlefield. The tactical battle subgame is really the heart of the
game. Each unit maneuvers and fights over the different terrain
that makes up the realm: rivers; forests, hills, mountains, villages,
and fortified towns. The player's divisions move individually and
can force march, entrench or fire range weapons as circumstances dictate. Since the enemies vary from area to area, so do their
battle tactics. This puts a premium on the proper mix of forces,
and their correct deployment and use. Archers and spellcasters
should always be entrenched and placed behind a wall of infantry. Cavalry should be positioned on the flanks or behind the
lines, kept in reserve for the appropriate time of the battle when a
weakened, demoralized foe can be overrun and crushed.
Enemies entrenched in towns should be bombarded with spells
(Continued on page 53)

Computer Gaming World's
See Reader Input Device on page 96

The Categories
Strategy (ST): Games that
emphasize strategic planning
and problem solving.
Simulation (SI): Games based
on first person perspectives of
real world environments.
Adventure (AD): Games that
allow you to take your alter
ego through a storyline or
series of events.
Role-Playing Adventures
(RP): Adventure games that
are based on character
development (usually
involving attributes).
Wargames (WG):
Simulations of historical or
futuristic warfare from a
command perspective.
Action/Arcade (AC):
Computer games that
emphasize hand-eye
coordination and reflexes.

Top 100 Games

THE HALL OF FAME
The Games In
CGW's Hall Of
Fame Have Been
Highly Rated By
Our Readers
Over Time.
They Are Worthy
Of Play By All.
CGW Congratulates
The Latest Addition
To The Hall Of Fame,
Dungeon Master.

Review

The Ploys of
Thunder
Cybernetic Combat in
Origin's "Omega"
by Russell Sipe
hush fell over the assembled throng as they
crowded close to the monitors before them. After
A dozens and, in many cases, hundreds of hours of
programming and fine tuning, the finalists were down to
the nitty gritty.
The tension
could be cut with
a knife.
DRAGON'S creaking treads pulled
it around for the
final showdown.
MUSTANG had a
one point lead
but DRAGON
had him 'lined
up'. A flash of
light and MUSTANG was
smashed into a
pile of misshapen ginzu
knives. All
DRAGON had to
do was outlast
just one of the
remaining two
robots and claim
the prize. But
fate was not
blowing
favorable winds
for DRAGON.
One of the
remaining combatants, SABOTUR, decided to
play the role of spoiler with a
HILL:
Omega
SYSTEM:
Apple II, C-64, IBM, Mac, ST
well aimed shot to the midsec1-?
# PLAYERS:
tion. The smoking DRAGON
PRICE:
$49.95
DESIGNER:
Stuart Marks
went down. MUSTANG and
PUBLISHER:
Origin Systems
DRAGON
ended the tournament
Londonderry, N.H.
in a "dead" tie (literally) for the
championship.
The scene was in the offices of Computer Gaming World
and the event was CGW's Third Annual Robotwar Tournament held in 1984.
Muse Software's Robotwar was a uniquely engaging game
back in those days. But, as with any game, time took its toll.
Muse Software went out of business, and with it, Robotwar's
availability.

Now, the folks at Origin Systems have developed an all
new and very excellent robot war game entitled Omega. To
say that Omega owes its heritage to Robotwar would be almost as much an understatement as it would be to say that
Omega has greatly improved on the idea. Omega has all of
the good points of the earlier game plus a whole lot more.

Cybertanks R Us
In Omega, you design futuristic cybertanks to fight on
simulated battlefields.
You begin the game in a fictitious future as an entry level
employee of OSI (Organization of Strategic Intelligence), the
world's leader in military cybernetic tank development. The
detailed 250+ page documentation is set up as your
employee manual. The fiction of OSI is carried out thoroughly, right down to an OSI electronic mail system, which posts
more or less humorous notes to you at the beginning of
each game.
There are two stages in the design of your cybertank. First
you spend what available credits you have to buy the
hardware that makes up your tank. This includes your chassis, fuel cells, drive system, weapons, scanners, and (if you
can afford it) special items. One of the special items is a
Comm-Link which allows tanks to communicate with one
another. This opens the door to designing teams of tanks.
The second stage in the design of your cybertank is the
development of the tank's Al (artificial intelligence). Herein is
the heart of the game. Inexperienced "cybertank engineers"
will want to use the pre-designed capsule routines provided
in the game (with such descriptive names as KillTank, BeeLineHunt, Panic, and BerserkAttack). You can pick and
chose from these preprogrammed routines to produce a
complete Al for your robot. More experienced cybertank engineers will want to use the full-featured Cybertank Command Language to develop more efficient routines of their
own.
When you have your cybertank built and programmed, you
put it up against OSI's predesigned test tanks. There are 12
increasingly sophisticated designs against which you will "test
your mettle." If your tank can defeat the test tank in, at least,
7 of 10 one-on-one battles, you will be "promoted" and
given a larger budget. The budget is then used to purchase
more expensive hardware (drives, weapons, etc.). The more
sophisticated the test robot you defeat, the bigger your
budget.

Goin' Off To War
The real excitement of Omega comes from pitting your
designs against those of human opponents. You can take
your design and transfer/port/modem it over to any of the
other versions of Omega: Apple, C-64, IBM/Tandy, Amiga, or
Atari ST. You can upload it to BBSs to fight in tournaments.
Finally, you can upload your design to the Origin Systems
Omega BBS and participate in the Official Origin SystemsComputer Gaming World OMEGA Tournament. Details of
the tournament are included in the game. Deadline for submissions is January 31, 1990. Ongoing results will be
printed in Computer Gaming World with the finals hosted by
CGW and fully reported in the March 1990 issue of CGW.

Design Tips and Ideas

• The task of designing a winning Al comes down to ac(Continued on page 86)

(Continued from page 45)

A Strong
Right Arm!
and missiles before any shock assaults are ordered. The defensive value of terrain can really bolster a unit's value, so never try
to storm a position without ample preparation, the losses will be
too high.
I've only just touched upon the more obvious aspects of
gameplay in Sword, there is much more to be discovered during
the 30-45 hours required to win the game. It's possible to
achieve victory in the game without getting a perfect score (500
points), so even when the realm is conquered, there's still a city
or two to discover and take, and a lot of those monsters just
won't take kindly to defeat, they'll keep coming back for more.
The only negative factor one could mention about the game
concerns the interface. Sword of Aragon fairly cries out for
mouse support. The keyboard interface is somewhat 'clunky' at
times. A better design, or mouse support could have eliminated a
few unnecessary keystrokes and made gameplay somewhat
smoother.
SSI has really developed a winning system in Sword of Aragon
By merely changing the unit types from, say, cavalry to armor,
and broadening the economic sectors to include different types
of manufacturing and trade, they could come up with a game
based on more modern warfare. Or by changing the geography,
they could aptly simulate the War of the Roses. The possibilities
are really endless.
The economic/military system in Sword is challenging and ultimately rewarding. There's still nothing like spending a winter
quartered in a newly conquered city, running the world as you
see fit. Ah, the Divine Right of Kings!

(Continued from page 36)

Decisive
Battles

Graphic Improvements
All of the above, plus a bunch more, can be found in my prior
review. What about the specifics of this release—the IBM version?
First, my IBM machine is inherently much faster than my Apple,
so the very noticeable increase in processing speed and reduced
"dead time" was to be expected. Next, the graphics . . . ah, the
graphics . . . This is truly what saves this version of the game for
me and makes me willing to sit there through playing after playing, just watching the action unfold. With the curious exception
of the Chattanooga scenario (What happened, run out of
memory?), the maps do not have single hexagonal icons for each
terrain type. Therefore, the player gets more of the feel of looking
down on a true aerial photograph as he surveys the battlefields.
However it was accomplished, the EGA graphics on the IBM are
truly a sight to behold.
If my prior review of this game did not put you off completely;
you may just have to go out and buy an IBM machine so that
you can, at least, properly enjoy the game.

(Continued from page 16)

had brought some of Indy's personal characteristics to the
game instead of settling for a "cardboard" caricature.

from one precarious
place to another. Instead of becoming a
game that features an
Indiana Jones which
fans can readily identify with, the game becomes just another
search and recover
game in which the
character icon happens to resemble a
familiar film hero.
It would have been
nice if the designers

(Continued from page 32)

Cribbage King
Gin King
velous capacity to surprise. Tournament
mode can be turned on for printed
scores and history
of past scores
broken down in
various statistical
forms.

Some
Restrictions
Do Apply
That said, I have
only one complaint.
The pegboard display does not completely satisfy. You
cannot easily determine what the scores
are from deal to deal because the it is

not numbered and, because of graphics
limitations, the display is only half the size
of a regulation cribbage board. There
is certainly room
on the screen for a
corresponding digital read out of

Factory
Incentive
Also included in
the package is Gin
King. Everything
said about Cribbage King goes equally for this welldesigned and easy-to-play gin rummy

game. Customizable games and excellent
on-line help make playing and learning
to play as fun as it is quick.
Two types of Gin can be programmed:
regular and Oklahoma. The latter's first
upcard determines the maximum deadwood allowed when "knocking" (or putting your cards down without actually
having gin).
Cribbage King is well worth its price. To
have Gin King also included makes it a
decided computer game bargain for any
card shark.

(Continued from page 28)

Smooth As Silk
crucial moment. Some of the options which "coaches" may consider are: trying to effect a steal, crashing the boards, protecting
or setting up the fast break, working inside or outside, working
the clock, making a quick shot, and fouling the opponent. If the
player desires, however, the "auto" option allows the computer to
make all of the coaching decisions so the gamer may concentrate on the play action. Pure action garners will find this a
valuable option. Others may want to control the play action while
having a friend set the strategies as the coach.

Cheap Seats (The Basic Game)
In the "End-View" Module, which
comes standard with the game, the
gamer does not actually control
his/her team members. Instead, with
the use of "Flow-Control", he/she
"yells" at them. Whether it be controlled by human or computer, the
"coach" helps players move the ball,
set picks, develop plays and handle
defense. "Flow-Control" allows the
gamer to make brief split-second
decisions that can make the difference
between victory or defeat. It allows the
gamer to react by passing and shooting the ball, as well as attempting to
block shots.
As the game loads, players see a
glimpse of the opposing head coach and his team. One then has
the option of viewing the Nick & Bob Pregame Show, which contains information which may lead to your team's success. If you
select the Pregame Show, the screen blanks out and you see a
view of the entire court with Nick & Bob in the foreground. As
they begin to talk about the two opposing team's strengths and
weaknesses, you will notice an odd sense of humor in these two
men. They exchange insults back and forth and still manage to
stay on the topic of the day's game. Their information is valuable
and one is advised to watch their show prior to every game. They
will identify the opposing team's star player, the best shooter, the
best rebounder, and any other pertinent data. It has plenty of
television-style color, as well. (The halftime show is less important.)
As in most leagues, this game provides a definite home court
advantage. This advantage should not be confused with the
players' "Hot Value". This factor measures the capability of a
player to shoot the ball at maximum potential (i.e. Are they on a
"Hot Streak"?). This component is also measured and recorded
by the game.

Stats, Stats, and More Stats (League Play)
In setting up the "SBA" League, the gamer can select the number of human-owned teams (1 or 2). You may also select which
division you will play in, as well as the minutes per quarter, the
number of games per season, and the length of the playoffs.
In the "College" League the player will be able to recreate the
NCAA tournament to determine the National Champion. The
player has a choice of 64 teams that qualified for the 1989 NCAA
tournament. There are four regions made up of 16 teams in
each region. The teams are ranked. All teams have their actual
starting five line-ups with their real stats from the 1989 regular
season. The other seven players on each team do not have real
names (they are referred to as forward 1, guard 2, etc.) and are
ranked randomly.

When the "College" League Module is loaded the player will see
a split screen with the close-up of the tournament tree on the left
and a miniature version of the entire tree on the right. The closeup will show the gamer their selected team, as well as their next
opponent. The player can choose if they wish to view their team's
or any other team's regular season's stats. As in real College Basketball, the three-point line is shorter than that of the "SBA". Injuries are for one game only, as opposed to the "SBA" where injuries can last up to 10 games. If the player advances to the next
round, the gamer's team records are saved and the tree displays
your next opponent.
In both the "SBA" and "College" League Modules, statistics for
each team are displayed at the end of each game (number of
minutes played (MN), shots/field goals attempted (FGA), shots
made (FGM), field goal percentage (FG%), free-throw attempts
(FTA) and made (FTM), percentage
scored (FT%), total points (PT),
rebounds (RB), personal fouls (F),
steals (ST) and blocks (BL). These
stats are recorded and compiled into
the team history statistics (Note: The
"College League" Module does not
have this team history option.). In the
"SBA", team averages for the humanowned teams can be accessed.
With the "Side-View" Module, the
end-of-game statistics are enhanced giving
the player "quarterly-points-scored" as
well as arranging the players in top
scoring order. Individual and team
records can also be displayed at will.
As stated previously, in the "Side-View" Module, the gamer controls the center. In the Amiga version, opposing centers are
denoted by their white jerseys. The way the gamer may identify
his center from that of his opponents is by the different colored
stripe on the socks of both centers. The stripe matches the color
of rest of the team's jerseys. Knowing the programming enigmas
associated with the differentiation of the centers, this reviewer still
felt that it was very difficult to distinguish one center from the
other while playing the Amiga version. (In the C-64 version, the
centers have different colored shirts.)
At half-time, the gamer is treated to a "dazzling display" by the
SportTime Cheerleaders if he/she so chooses. This bevy of
beauties will perform their fast-paced exploits to a pulsating beat
down on the arena floor. While a welcome diversion from the
Nick & Bob show, players need only watch this display once. A
cancel option is provided.
You can only make the playoffs if you finish either first or
second in your division. If you finished first, you will play the
second place team in your division and vice-versa. If a player has
been injured previous to a playoff game, he is not eligible to play
until he is healed. If you happen to win your first playoff game, a
humorous commercial will be shown. As previously stated, the
length of the playoff series may be set at the beginning of the
game when creating the new league. The gamer can choose a
best of one, three or five game series.

Post Game Report
Omni-Play Basketball has a minimum requirement of 512k on
the Amiga. It is hard disk installable and not "software" copy
protected (although you are asked for keyword identification from
the manual). Be sure to read the manual. A completely different
level of the game will be discovered. The game comes standard
(Continued on page 64)

,

(Continued from page 62)

Smooth As Silk
with the "End-View" and "SBA" Game Modules. Presently available
for additional purchase are the "Side-View" and "College League"
Modules (The retail price is $19.95 for both the Amiga & C-64)
The "Pro League" Module is due out in January of 1990 while
the "Fantasy League" and "Print" Modules are due by June 1990.
(Note: These additional modules are only available directly from
SportTime - they may be reached Monday - Friday 1PM to 4PM
PST at 1-800-PLAY GAMES.)
SportTime's expandability feature will also include updates to existing modules. For instance, if gamers want to see XYZ features
incorporated into the game this will be possible through future
releases and updates. This reviewer has been told that SportTime
will try to keep communication with its fans through a newsletter
called "Video League News" that will start circulation at the beginning of 1990.
This reviewer felt that in early seasons in an "End-View" Module
game, players seemed to commit an inordinate amount of fouls.
As players grew in experience and their "control" (C) skill rating
grew, this issue seemed to correct itself. This problem was not evident in the "Side-View" Module due to the differences in the style
of game play. Upon first inspection, the "Side-View" Module
seemed to have more "arcade type" features. This is because of
the difference in the play interface, i.e. garners now have full control over a player. Not just to pass and shoot but also to box out
opposing players, set picks, and call for the ball. Upon closer examination, however, there is an implied "strategy factor" for the
gamer due to the fact that the rest of the team continues to play
while you setup your center for different game plans. Scores in
this game module are lower because the gamer will find that
he/she is controlling the ball more than in the "End-View" Module.
The special effects incorporated into the program are superlative in every way. Some of the effects available with expanded
memory include: the swish of the net or the clank of the rim and
backboard as a basket is scored, the rolling noise as the ball
circles on the rim, cheers from the crowd for the home team and
boos for the visitor when baskets are made and/or fouls are committed. The game also allows for the referee and his whistle, fouls
and ejections, technical fouls when a player breaks the backboard, free-throw shooting, overtime, shot clock variation for different quarter lengths, the end of quarter buzzer, individual game
and season stats for your team, game forfeits and lost trading
points.
For this reviewer, the level of painstaking detail put into the final
product make this game worth purchasing alone. For instance,
when Nick & Bob are carrying on with their Pregame Show, the
arena organ can be heard riling the crowd in the background. It's
so real that gamers can hear the surge of the crowd as the excitement builds in a game. The programmers have even provided for
extra levels of cheers that can be heard when your player is
fouled (in the home court) in a shooting situation and the shot is
good!
The manual was found to be extremely thorough. The game
play as well as the real-life aspects of the game seem to be
covered completely. Overall, this game is a must for the sports
simulation and statistical buff as well as the multi-player game
fan. The game also takes into account whether the player is a
"joystick jockey" or not and allows a set-up where strategy is the
main concern. Considering the expandability factor and the
flexibility in game play, SportTime's Omni-Play Basketball is
tops!

Review

Guerillas In
The Myth
Koei Reveals The
"Bandit Kings of Ancient China"
by Johnny L. Wilson

A

nd lo, Myth begat Legend and when the Legend
had fully conceived, it brought forth History. The
ancient Chinese myth spoke of 108 demon spirits
set free on Lian Shan Bo mountain. The legends told of
ostracized heroes who lived
on the fringes of society until
they could gain the strength
to right the wrongs they had
incurred and restore the glory
of the Song Dynasty. In the
modern era, the legendary
deeds of these ancient outlaws were sketched so broadly on the canvas of story that
they inspired Mao Tse Tung
to hold his band of revolutionary guerillas together until
they could impact the world
with their communist coup.

Something Familiar

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
PUBLISHER:

At first glance, Bandit Kings
of Ancient China (Bandit
Kings) appears to offer the
same interface and same
strategic challenge as earlier
Koei releases (Romance of
the Three Kingdoms,
Nobunaga's Ambition, and
Genghis Khan). The game
covers a period of history with which most
Bandit Kings of
occidentals are not familiar. In this case,
Ancient China
12th Century China. Also, the graphics are
IBM
just as colorful as those in its predecessors,
1-5
$59.95
even if they are more finely detailed. In addiKoei Corporation
tion, the game is still primarily menu-driven
Burlingame, CA
and offers a marvelously detailed manual
with the highest production values Koei has
yet put into a manual. Players must still unite provinces
(in this case, prefectures), build a strong economic and
military base, and handle diplomacy. In fact, players
even end up reuniting the Song Dynasty in much the
same way China is united in Romance of the Three
Kingdoms and Japan is centralized in Nobunaga's Ambition. Finally, as in Genghis Khan, nearly every activity
has its cost in attribute points.
For those who have never played a Koei game, these
strategy games offer seasonal turns in which the player
controls a primary leader and must select the options
which indicate what the prioritized activity for each con-

trolled area/province/prefecture shall be during a given
season. Diplomatic negotiation, war, economic build-up,
military escalation or determining internal politics may
be necessary activities in any given turn. In Bandit
Kings, each turn is equal to a month of game time.

Something Peculiar
Yet, for every facet of the game which seems familiar,
there seems something new. For example, even though
the game touches base with actual history, the story line
of Bandit Kings is so intertwined with myth and legend
that magic becomes a vital factor. One may be able to
peer backwards through the mists of time and
demythologize the fireballs into flaming arrows and scorched earth attacks which assumed supernatural power
in the minds of ancient peasants, but "magic" must be
reckoned with in order to succeed in Bandit Kings. Also,
where the earlier games basically offered short versions
and long versions of the same game, Bandit Kings offers four scenarios with the same basic goal, but distinctive constraints.
The graphics in Bandit Kings have been enhanced
beyond Koei's earlier designs by the addition of more
than one screen to indicate defeat and development of
a beautiful victory/reward sequence. In Genghis Khan,
for example, the game indicated that the player was
defeated by portraying a screen of the player character's
death (penetrated by a score or more of arrows in the
world conquest scenario and facing public execution in
the Temujin scenario). In Bandit Kings, the screens
which tell the tale for a defeated player depict: a jail cell
door closing upon the forlorn figure of a disgraced
player character; an animated sequence where the conquered player character is convincingly beheaded; and
the burning and looting barbarian hordes during the invasion of A.D. 1127. The victory sequence provides the
player with the catharsis of having satisfying confrontations with both Gao Qui and the emperor.
In addition to managing the economic and military affairs of the player's controlled prefectures, management
of human resources is more important than in the earlier Koei games. Each hero (commander), including the
player's character himself, can only command a maximum of 100 soldiers. Thus, it is exceedingly important
to recruit and retain subordinate commanders. If the
player doesn't keep the loyalty levels of these subordinate commanders high enough, they will often defect
and take their soldiers with them. Timing is essential. It
is not a good idea to recruit a "hero" to serve with the
player's character unless the player has enough gold to
immediately purchase the subordinate's loyalty.
When the player's primary character builds up sufficient popularity, recruiting not only becomes a relatively
simple task, but non-player characters occasionally appear from all over the country, begging to be recruited.
Until this plateau is reached, however, recruiting is a
"touch and go" matter. The player's primary hero must
venture into town; examine the roll of prospective
heroes; and either divine the prospective hero's
thoughts (by paying a soothsayer) or attempting to
recruit. Utilizing the soothsayer saves time, keystrokes,
and popularity (i.e. "face"). If the player tries to recruit a
hero who is not kindly disposed toward his primary character, the character will lose "face", be chided to expand,
and become more popular.
To further complicate the player's efforts, Gao Qui's

magistrates wait around like vultures to pluck a percentage of any accumulated funds whenever the player's
character or subordinates seem to be getting ahead.
Much of the time, the operative principle is going to be
"Use it or lose it!" Note that whenever support in a given
prefecture goes over the 60 mark, the tribute demands
become more and more frequent.
Finally, where unification of a country or empire is the
final goal of Bandit Kings' predecessors, unification
takes something of a back seat to avenging wrong, vindicating personal honor, and bringing one particular
foul miscreant to justice. Said foul miscreant is Gao
Qui. Once a fine athlete who earned the emperor's attention on the playing field, the Gao Qui present in the
game is a lethargic and obese (with bulbous distended
stomach which rivals a water buffalo's) coward who
spends his days and nights jeering at his rivals, plundering those who work diligently and seizing power with a
megalomania that rivals his appetite for food. Any time
the player experiences a minor misfortune, an on-screen
caricature of Gao Qui laughs at the player's expense. Although the designers did not actually animate his fat
sweaty jowels and rolling flab, the caricature still seems
to take on a malevolent gleam as the game progresses.
Before the satisfaction of trouncing this diabolical villain can be achieved, however, the player character
must reach a plateau which did not have to be accomplished in the earlier games. The player's primary
character (called a "Good Fellow" in the game) must
reach a popularity of level of 250 before the emperor
will allow him to bring the fat, sleazy coward to justice.
Also, unlike the previous games where the player's characters could keep on playing until they were killed or
died of old age, the character has to accomplish his task
before A.D. 1127 when the northern barbarians invade
the empire.

Something Outrageous
Bandit Kings offers more than any previous Koei
product. One cannot help but be amazed at the solid research, brilliant system, and fabulous game play which
all of these games offer. Nevertheless, even the best of
games can be improved and the Koei interface in particular is no exception. There must be a thousand extra
keystrokes per game session which could be reduced
with a mouse interface. Mouse support is becoming
more and more standard in the MS-DOS environment
and charging through menu after menu in these games
makes the player understand why that support is so
popular.

Second, although the present reviewer appreciates the
fact that the combat screens feature zones of control
(Romance and Nobunaga did not), the computer opponents in Bandit Kings are not nearly as competitive
as those in the earlier games. In Bandit Kings, it is the
rare unit under the computer's command that acts aggressively. Most of the time, the computer's forces sit in
the castles and wait to be obliterated. In all fairness to
the Al, however, the combat maps contain more hexes
than ever before and there are more options in the combat menus. Therefore, the plethora of additional considerations creates more complex combat algorithms
which, in turn, probably has a tendency to induce a
more conservative computer opponent. This fact may
present something of a sameness to the tactical combat, but it certainly assures that the opponents will use
the terrain to full defensive advantage (something the
opponents in the earlier games did not accomplish
often enough).
There was one minor feature which this reviewer found
annoying. There is a major mechanism in the game
where Gao Qui's minions demand tribute. The player
has the option of acquiescing to or refusing the
demand. If, of course, the player refuses a villain who
happens to have a larger/stronger force than the player
has in a given prefecture, the villain will invariably attack. If the player builds up his forces sufficiently, the
bad guys will eventually give up. Unfortunately, no matter how strong the player's forces are, there is an annoyance feature, apart from the major mechanism,
where Gao Qui sneaks in and forces the player's characters to pay tribute. The player has absolutely no
recourse in this circumstance and Gao Qui takes no
risk whatsoever in plundering the player's funds. The
designer insists that this is an annoyance factor
designed to motivate the player to go after Gao Qui with
that much more enthusiasm when he can. "Paying
tribute" is the wrong term. One has a choice whether to
pay tribute or not (and often pays the consequences if
one refuses). Actually, Gao Qui is raiding the player's
treasury behind the player's back. The on-screen message which the player receives should suggest this more
sinister activity where Gao Qui is acting in cowardice
rather than implying that Gao Qui is acting from a position of strength. The motivation would be more clear
and the atmosphere would seem more authentic if this
message would change. Whatever the motivation,
though, trouncing Gao Qui and his minions is truly a
satisfying accomplishment with an expanded personal
(Continued on page 93)

(Continued from page 22)

even though another aircraft may be a
more immediate threat. When initial target acquisition is achieved, the targeting
square turns oval. When it changes
color, hit probability is very high. If a hit is
made on a primary or secondary target,
the computer will offer congratulations
(e.g. "great hit!"). This reviewer would
have liked to see a tone and lock-on
beep (a la "Top Gun") in the targeting
procedure.

F-15
Strike Eagle
II
Difficulty levels range from
rookie-pilot-veteran-ace, but flight characteristics
remain the same throughout the simulation. Higher levels of difficulty simply
cause more and better enemy planes and
air defenses and a more rapid accumulation of damage.
Flight and combat operations are easy
to learn. Weapons systems are fixed, and
may be selected by key-press ("G" for
ground, "M" for mid-range air-to-air, and
"S" for close-in air-to-air missile). Enemy
missile systems are of two (2) types: radarguided and infra-red homing. Chaff is an
effective countermeasure against the
former, while flares may be utilized
against IR-horning threats. Based on this
reviewer's experience, chaff is more efficient and, in most cases, will avert the

threat. However, newer missile and
homing systems require active avoidance
in addition to flares. In any case, if one
changes course to meet the missile at a
perpendicular, it will normally lose target
acquisition. The problem with this is that
in a high threat environment, one will be
all over the sky and lose sight of the mission.
Targeting the enemy is a simple matter.
For example, if the ground missile is
selected, one may toggle between visible
ground targets. The air option is similar,
except that the toggle is unavailable. If an
air threat is shown, one cannot switch,

Navigation is simplified by having the
"waypoint control" (no relation to Mr.
Peabody's "wayback machine") already
locked in with primary target, secondary
target and friendly airfield. The initial
Strike Eagle allowed one to set the
waypoint control manually and this
reviewer missed that option, but the current settings are easy to use and assist in
mission accomplishment.
In rookie levels, one begins in the air.
At other levels, one can take-off and land
from airfields/carriers. In order to land,
one must "target" the airfield. This option
was used in lieu of an ILS approach in
order to save memory. If one is a member of the CIA school of flying (i.e. "Clod
in the Air"), an auto-pilot option will land
the plane by itself. Careful attention to
this mechanism can be an excellent learning tool in learning how to land. MicroProse is to be particularly commended for
this option!
Historically, F-15 II is more of a game
than a simulation; but it openly admits
this. Thus, while the F-15 is not used in
carrier operations, most garners "want"
the option and so, it is available. Similarly, even though the F-15 is a two-seater
with both a pilot and weapons officer, the
game chooses to ignore the two-seater
aspect. Finally, while most enemy planes
are destroyed with one missile hit, the F15 can absorb 10-20 hits (depending on
difficulty level) before being rendered useless and the F-15 never suffers from midair explosion. At worst, one will have sufficient time to eject unless he flies directly
into the ground.

Conclusions
F-15 II is a gamer's game. Realism has
been deliberately minimized in order to
yield an entertaining product. There are
few combat simulators that my ten year
old son enjoys, but both he and I had a
lot of fun with F-15 II. The only hesitation this reviewer has is concerning the
large number of combat simulators currently available. For the dedicated
aerophile, this may be too simplistic. For
the neophyte, the large number of
simulators available offers a confusing
choice. But overall, F-15 Strike Eagle II
is a solid package of entertainment.

Review

Indy Beginning . . .

TRAVELS
WITH INDY
"Indiana Jones and
the Last Crusade:
The Graphic Adventure"
by Charles Ardai
About a third of the way through Indiana Jones and the
Last Crusade: The Graphic Adventure (Indy: Adventure), the player finds himself in an underground
cavern, on a narrow stone bridge There's a wooden panel
in the roof of
the cavern
and he finds
his onscreen persona, Indy
himself, carry
ing a longdead pirate's
skeletal
arm—complete with
hook. The
wooden
panel is dripping water
onto the
bridge something fierce.
In a moment
of inspiration, Indy
walks under
the panel
and, standing on tiptoe, teetering
precariously,
manages to
jam me arm (hookTITLE:
Indiana Jones and the
downwards) between
Last Crusade: The Graphic Adventure
SYSTEM:
IBM
two leaky planks.
PRICE:
$49.95
Then, our hero steps
DESIGNERS:
Noah Falstein, Ron Gilbert, and David lox
back, uncoils his whip,
PUBLISHER:
Lucasfilm Games
San Rafael, CA
leans and casts. The
leather arcs out before
him, snagging the hook to the accompaniment of a brief
John Williams fanfare. With a mighty tug, he pulls the
wooden plug free and a column of water gushes down,
obliterating the bridge!
Indiana Jones, of course, takes it in stride: all in a day's adventuring. The player, however, sits there slack-jawed and
prays that he has saved the game recently. Then, he tallies
up all the people he absolutely has to show this to. This is
no mere computer game. This is cinema!.

Remember in the beginning of "Indiana Jones and the Last
Crusade," when Indy finally recovers the Cross of Coronado,
thirty years after losing it to a gang of pothunters? He hands
the treasure over to Marcus Brody and tells Marcus how long
he's been looking for it: "All my life." I sympathize. That's
how I feel about a good Indiana Jones computer game. I've
been looking for one for a long time.
There have been many attempts to bring Indy home, starting with Atari's VCS version of "Raiders of the Lost Ark."
Some of these were good tries (Mindscape's entertaining
Temple of Doom arcade game adaptation, for instance) and
some were not so good (such as Mindscape's execrable
Indiana Jones and the Lost Kingdom), but until now none
had the same magic as the movies.
For Indy: Graphic, Lucasfilm decided to design the game
themselves. Obviously, that's what it took. As both the movie
and the game demonstrate, Lucasfilm still knows, and
knows better than anyone else, how to do Indy right.

A Passage to Indiana
When George Lucas and Steven Spielberg sat down to plot
out the third Indiana Jones adventure, people from the
Lucasfilm game division sat down with them. The game
designers were there from the start and, when either man
came up with an idea, even if it didn't end up in the movie,
it tended to go into the game. The result is a game
"designed", in a sense, by Lucas and Spielberg themselves.
Of course, the actual game designers and programmers
deserve all the credit for bringing the game to life with astounding graphics and animation, a strong control system
(essentially the same as was used for Maniac Mansion and
Zak Mckraken), and quite a few original puzzles. Nevertheless, Lucas and Spielberg were at the heart of this game and
it shows.
Some of the puzzles in the game are better than the ones
viewers saw on-screen. Everyone loves the scene in the
movie, for instance, in which Sean Connery accidentally sets
fire to the Nazi stronghold while trying to untie himself from
Harrison Ford. In the game, though, the solution to that
scene is not just funny, it's ingenious and it has nothing to
do with fire.
Similarly, in case the movie's ending didn't satisfy you, the
game has several completely different endings. Some of
these are as satisfying in their finality as the famous
warehouse scene in "Raiders". Even though it means replaying the entire endgame (you cannot save the game inside
the Temple of the Holy Grail), you'll want to try out all the
possibilities just to see what happens. What if Indy takes the
Grail himself? What if he gives it back to the knight? What if
he hands it to Elsa? The player becomes writer-director.
Throw in intensive support for the Ad Lib sound board
and for advanced graphics cards, six disks worth of locations,
breathtaking animated sequences, a variety of inventive
perspectives and "camera angles," and a fine balance between exploration, puzzle-solving and action sequences, and
this game comes remarkably close to being a better Indiana
Jones movie than "The Last Crusade" was.

Indy Morning, Indy Evening, Ain't We Got Fun
Almost everything from the movie is in the game. From the
(Continued on page 74)

(Continued from page 72)

vantage. One finds oneself cheering when there is something something remembered from the film on the screen
and one finds oneself cheering doubly loud when something
new appears.

circus-train chase
(here used as a backdrop for the credits)
to the deathtraps in
the Grail Temple, only
one major sequence—
the tank battle—has
been omitted.
Just as in the movie,
Indy's goals are to rescue his kidnapped
father and beat the
Nazis and Walter
Donovan to the resting place of the Holy Grail. Each sequence is at once both
familiar and novel, and both facets work to the game's ad-

The two substantial areas in the game are the catacombs
under Venice and the Nazi Schloss Brunwald in Austria. The
former is far and away the best maze sequence ever put into
an adventure game, accomplishing something I had thought
impossible: it makes exploring a maze simple enough to accomplish in a single attempt and enjoyable enough that one
can go back again just for the fun of it. The latter is reminiscent of Castle Wolfenstein (if one is old enough to remember Castle Wolfenstein!) with its overhead perspective, its
beer steins and treasure chests, and its dumber-than-Col.
Klink guards.
These are connected by smaller scenes in which there is
less to do: Indy's college, Dad's house, the library, Berlin, the
blimp, and so forth. Although the progression is strictly
linear, you are allowed a fair degree of latitude within each sequence. Many puzzles have more than one solution and, as
you will discover, it is virtually impossible to get caught in a
dead end. One can lose, of course—try choosing "Throw a
punch" when facing Hitler—but one would have a hard time
accidentally placing oneself in a no-win situation. This is appreciated, since it frees players from pointless anxiety and allows them simply to enjoy.

Indy Interest of Fairness
In fairness, it should be noted that what players may be enjoying may be a little simpler than it seems when one is playing the game. Ultimately, the game is just two play environments and a peppering of one-shot puzzles, nestled in a
mound of eye-candy.
This is not a very potent criticism, though. Not every game
has to be meat and potatoes. Candy is a pleasant change of
pace, especially when it's served up as deliciously as it is
here. The criticism becomes more potent only in those rare
instances when the service isn't up to par: when you finally
release Dad the payoff is lackluster (unlike the incredible
graphic when you finally reach Sir Richard's tomb); and the
final approach to the Temple drags on as you go through
checkpoint after checkpoint. Fortunately, these are very
much the exceptions and not the rule.

music, and several nice little puzzles. Even the hardcopy
"Grail Diary" which comes with the game is better written
than you'd have any reason to expect it to be. It captures the
elder Jones' lifetime of Grail-hunting with intelligence, sensitivity, and wit.
In short, Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade: The
Graphic Adventure offers more than any comparable game
does in the way of sheer wide-eyed pleasure. Just about any
gamer will find it enormously appealing. If one should also
happen to be an Indiana Jones fan to boot, it will be a special treasure.

Yes, it is true that the game doesn't really start until Indy
gets to Venice. Yes, while it is fun to watch familiar scenes
lifted straight from the movie, it can become tedious, as well
(After all, if that's what you want, there's always the
videotape.). Somehow, however, none of this detracts significantly from the entertainment the game delivers.
It is impossible to overstate the impact of the lovingly
detailed and abundant animation. On top of that, the game
offers: stunning background images, John Williams' theme

(Continued on page 88)

Christmas Buying Guide
(Continued from page 26)

in creating challenging solitaire strategy
games. The designers also enjoy the
study of oriental culture in general,
hence the inclusion of an oracle based
on the / Ching which the player can consult whenever certain four-way matches
are achieved. lshido offers a solitaire
mode, a cooperative routine where
players work with the computer, and a
tournament option with timed moves
where each player has an identical stone
"deck". Ishido is a fascinating gift selection which is both challenging and aesthetically pleasing. The Mac II color
graphics are even more impressive than
the IBM screen pictured here. Amiga ,
Macintosh and Mac II ($49.95), Apple
IIGS and IBM ($39.95).
Nuclear War (New World Computing):
For the first time, Nuclear War allowed
the New World designers the opportunity
to develop a game utilizing the Amiga's
graphic and sound capabilities. As leader
of a nuclear power in a fictional world,
players in Nuclear War participate in a
unique and humorous game. Diplomacy,
propaganda, and strategy combine in a
game where off-the-wall incidents like
space alien invasions, "Cattletech"
weaponry, and others can tip the balance
between the human players and their
comical computer counterparts (Ronnie
Rayguns, Tricky Dickie, and others).
Nuclear War is the only 20 megaton
present you can purchase which won't
bomb this Christmas. Amiga, IBM
($49.95).
Sim City (Maxis): Stanislaw Lem's
science fiction story about an exiled
tyrant who played a planetary government simulation which came to "life"
formed the inspiration for Sim City.
Designer Will Wright had finished the
game almost two years before it was actually published because it was so unique
that potential publishers did not immediately see the game play value. With a
combination "design your own city" editor
and added scenarios, the game play became more obvious. Sim City is a true
multi-tasking environment that allows the
player to become a hybrid city planner,
board of supervisors, and mayor/city
council as he plays with the "editor" interface and a sophisticated simulation constantly working behind the "editor" in
order to report fresh statistics and events
to the player at regular intervals. Santa's
elves had just started to ship the IBM version at press time. As CGW's Game of
the Year 1989, Sim City is an award-

winning Christmas gift. Amiga, C-64,
IBM, and Macintosh ($49.95).
Star Fleet II (Interstel): With the success of Star Fleet I, with game play based
heavily on the classic mainframe Star
Trek adventure, Dr. Trevor Sorenson
wanted to expand the framework of the
game to include ship-to-ship boarding sequences, planetary invasions, and significantly more detail. In the long-awaited
Star Fleet II, Sorenson and Empire designer Mark Baldwin have incorporated
these dream features into a complex and
challenging gaming experience. Add to
this the player's ability to "command" a villainous Krellan vessel with absolutely no
guilty feelings about wasting galaxies and
torturing prisoners in this "simulation of a
simulation" and one has a unique kind of
strategy/wargame. Advance looks have
revealed some rough edges in the game,
but the depth of the product forces any
strategy gamer's "Santa Claus" to seriously consider it. IBM ($59.95).

Action
FaceOff (Gamestar): Until the release
of FaceOff!, there had not yet been a
hockey game designed specifically for the
IBM environment. So, Mike Benna,
Wayne Townsend, and Mike Suarez
decided to change that. Their game features a hands-on fight mode, large sized
animated skaters, and the Shot Cam, an
on-the-ice/one-on-one perspective of the
player against the goalie. For casual hockey fans, the audio-visual heat of FaceOff!
should cause the wrapping paper to melt
off the package. For the statisticsoriented fan, this gift idea should enable
them to enjoy the challenge of coaching
their team through the Gamestar Hockey
League season. IBM ($29.95).
Indianapolis 500 (Electronic Arts): As
producer of Indianapolis 500, Randy
Breen set out to model the Indianapolis
Motor Speedway by using the same kind
of polygon-fill graphics as those used in
flight simulators. Where many driving/racing simulations simply put the
player behind the wheel, Indianapolis
500 allows eight different systems on
each car to be adjusted and saved for
later use; the "Instant Replay" feature
provides six different camera angles (to
(Continued on page 78)

(Continued from page 76)

view the last 20 seconds or save it for future viewing); and offers color (from 16
color VGA to 4 color CGA) and sound
support (AdLib, Roland, and Tandy) for
any budget. With variable race lengths,
plenty of chrome, and smooth animation,
the game should be an ideal purchase
for any motor sports fan. IBM with 384K
($49.95).
It Came From The Desert
(Cinemaware): This action/adventure
game based on the "B" movie horror
genre was developed for two basic
reasons. First, David Riordan
(Cinemaware's interactive guru) was always a fan of the genre and lobbied to
create the game. Second, It Came From
The Desert was perceived as an ideal
vehicle for porting into the new interactive technologies (it would translate quickly into a video format). It is distinctive because it has the best digitized sound and
graphics to date in a Cinemaware
product and features a story by an actual
screenwriter. With eight arcade sequences (the most ever in a Cinemaware
product) on three disks, this product has
the potential to be a real holiday treat for
experienced computer garners, as well as
new Amiga owners who would like a new
showcase product. Amiga ($49.95).
Lakers vs. Celtics (Electronic Arts):
The initial attraction for the producer of
Lakers vs. Celtics, Don Traeger, was the
deep, historical rivalry between the Los
Angeles Lakers and the Boston Celtics.
"We almost looked at it as 'team one-onone'," Traeger stated. Robert Weatherby,
the designer, offered a simpler rationale,
"We designed this game because we felt
that all game players deserved a good action-oriented five-on-five basketball game
for the IBM and compatibles." Both
producer and designer believe the distinctiveness of the game rests in the custom
graphics and moves for every player. The
game should be an ideal present for the
entire family because it's easy enough to
play that anyone can enjoy it and makes
a marvelous purchase for an NBA fan because, according to Weatherby, " . . . it
lives and breathes the NBA style of play."
IBM ($49.95).
Their Finest Hour (Lucasfilm): Larry
Holland, designer of Their Finest Hour,
became involved with computer games
like Strike Fleet and Battlehawks: 1942
because he liked wargames. He wanted
to be able to put the player in the middle
of one. Indeed, he has been successful in

the past and the simulated Spitfires, Hurricanes Dorniers, Messerschmitts, and
Junkers in Their Finest Hour look like he
has succeeded once again. Bob
Reynolds, former WWII pilot with the
R.A.F., told CGW that the way the plane
handled in the computer game was extremely realistic, particularly in terms of
fuel consumption and ability to gain altitude. As a sequel to Battlehawks: 1942,
Their Finest Hour continues the tradition
of offering cinematic replay features,
detailed manuals, pilot service records,
and marvelous audio-visual (hi-res bit
mapped planes and AdLib support).
Their Finest Hour is an appropriate gift
because it offers a "hands-on" look at history wrapped colorfully in an entertainment product. Amiga, Atari ST, and IBM
($59.95).
The King's Bounty (New World): At
New World Computing, the design team
wanted a game where they could actively
control the monsters they had previously
only fought. In The King's Bounty, the
team created a fantasy game which combines strategy and tactics in an fresh,
new adventure format. As a noble, the
player uses his power and prestige to
raise large armies of monsters and men
to do his bidding. The King's Bounty with
its quest to return the Sceptre of Order
to its rightful owner is an interesting gift
idea for the action/adventure fan who has
everything. Apple II with 128K ($39.95).
Wayne Gretzky Hockey (Bethesda):
Chris Weaver and the designers of
Wayne Gretzky Hockey have developed
their dream game, complete with the assistance of their hockey heroes. Hockey
talents such as Wayne Gretzky, Pete
Peeters, Doug Carpenter, and others
helped to create the model for this game.
A sophisticated statistical data base, realistic artificial intelligence routines, impressive graphic perspective and ability to
play as coach, player coach, or player
make this an outstanding game. CGW
loved Wayne Gretzky Hockey on the
Amiga and the only thing missing on the
IBM is the digitized sound. Wayne
Gretzky Hockey could thaw out the
coldest Christmas morning. Amiga and
IBM ($54.95).
(Continued on page 80)

Christmas Buying Guide
(Continued from page 78)

Adventure
Breach 2 (Omnitrend): Tom Carbone
and Bill Leslie, the design team for
Breach 2 felt that Breach fans would be
ready for an enhanced version of the
game which would take advantage of
today's higher resolution graphics and
sound capabilities (supporting AdLib,
CMS, and possibly other sound boards).
The sequel is a more involved and
complex strategy/adventure game than the
original, but actually ends up being
easier to play and more enjoyable due to
an improved interface. While it retains
complexity in terms of strategy, the interface makes it much more enjoyable and
accessible than traditional strategy
games. With challenging game play and
an editor for scenario development,
Breach 2 is an ideal holiday package for
strategy/adventure gamers because it has
potential for long life. Amiga, Atari ST
and IBM ($49.95).
The Colonel's Bequest (Sierra): Roberta Williams, designer of The Colonel's Bequest, has always enjoyed mystery stories.
Since Mystery House, her very first
game, was a mystery, this new adventure
is something of a return to her roots. Besides the beautiful Sierra graphics and
soundtrack we have come to expect as
standard, The Colonel's Bequest also
sports the distinction of having a female
protagonist, a young college coed during
the Roaring '20s. Mystery lovers and nostalgia fans would love to find The
Colonel's Bequest under their tree. After
all, isn't nostalgia part of the fun of the
holidays? Atari ST and IBM ($59.95).
David Wolf: Secret Agent (Dynamix):
In David Wolf: Secret Agent, the design
team wanted to tell a story while creating
a piece of entertainment software that is
accessible for the mass market. In doing
so, the game created its own genre. With
digitized graphics, 3-D animations, 4 complete 3-D simulations, an interactive and
changing storyline, realistic characters
and the new VCR Interfact", there really
hasn't been anything like it to date. Because of the ease of play, interesting
storyline, and incredible graphics, David
Wolf: Secret Agent should be a gift that
won't soon be forgotten, a high-quality
piece of software that won't sit on the
shelf collecting dust. IBM ($49.95).
Mean Streets (Access): The folks at Access designed Mean Streets to take full
advantage of two technological
breakthroughs: 256 color VGA and Real-

Sound (the company's proprietary sound
technology which allows MS-DOS computers to play digitized sound effects,
music, and speech without additional
hardware). The design team felt that because many programs which call themselves interactive movies do not offer real
character development and a definitive
plot line, they could carve out a product
where murder, politics, double-dealing
and revenge are all mixed together in an
interactive murder mystery. According to
Access' Kevin Jones, the discriminating
software buyer who is looking for an exciting challenge combined with the best in
digitized sound and graphics will find
Mean Streets to be outstanding holiday
entertainment. IBM ($59.95).
Star Trek V: The Final Frontier
(Mindscape): Since several members of
the Mindscape staff are Star Trek fans,
there has always been a desire to create
a distinctive game based on the series.
The rights to the movie, Star Trek V: The
Final Frontier, were acquired and the
designers have developed a game which
mixes arcade-type sequences, a flight
simulator-style routine, and elements of
adventure games. With photo-quality
graphics in 256 color VGA, as well as
AdLib sound support (among others), the
game will make an attractive gift which
will not only impress one's friends, but
allow the recipients to enjoy challenging
entertainment well into 1990. IBM with
512K and EGA or VGA ($49.95).
Sword of the Samurai (Microprose):
After the success of Pirates!, Lawrence
Schick wanted to employ the basic
"graphic window and text menu" interface
from that game into a role-playing experience which would introduce the culture of feudal Japan to occidental
garners. This game would offer more,
however, because the computer opponents would act intelligently; the
players would fight real-time battles; and
an atmosphere built on Japanese-style
music and art. Sword of the Samurai is
the game he envisioned and that makes
it an ideal gift selection for those who
want action, adventure, and role-playing
all rolled into one game. IBM ($54.95).

Wargames
Napoleon at Austerlitz (Tevex): The
folks at Tevex are used to selling games,
(Continued on page 82)

Christmas Buying Guide
(Continued from page 80)

but they were so concerned about the
minimal number of wargame titles available on computers that they decided to
publish their own. Napoleon at Austerlitz
has a look reminiscent of Napoleon in
Russia: Borodino (originally from Krentek; later, from Datasoft) and offers the
same type of sophisticated strategy in a
new scenario. It should be a fascinating
addition to the "Wargamer's Holiday Wish
List" because it is primarily a familiar system. IBM ($34.95).
Battles of Napoleon (Strategic Simulations, Inc.): CGWs Wargame of the
Year for 1989, this new IBM conversion
(not pictured) should be a very welcome
addition under the tree. Chuck Kroegel
and David Landrey developed Battles of
Napoleon to meet the public demand for
a Napoleonic era computer game. The
design is distinctive in that it is patterned
after miniatures and actually captures the
essence and tactical feel of Napoleonic
warfare, particularly the interaction between cavalry, infantry and artillery. Further, unlike some design philosophies, it
allows the player to have total control of
all aspects of a given battle. It is distinctive from the award-winning Apple and C64 versions in that it offers improved
graphics and a mouse interface. IBM
owners interested in the Napoleonic era
should welcome Battles of Napoleon as
a gift. Apple, C-64, IBM ($49.95)
Harpoon (Three-Sixty): When Tom
Frisina first approached CGW with his intent to publish Harpoon, he expressed
his desire to make the product deep
enough that it would challenge our
readers for a long time to come and accessible enough that it would engage
new gamers in conflict simulations. He
felt like the massive database of information on ships, planes, and 110 different
weapons systems, along with expert commentary provided by defense consultant
Larry Bond, would educate the gamers
who played Harpoon, yet he believed that
the simulation of modern naval warfare
would offer tremendous entertainment
potential, as well. The use of the Staff Assistant function, multiple levels of difficulty, and use of actual military symbology
should make Harpoon a stimulating
surprise for even the most demanding
gamer. IBM ($39.95)
Main Battle Tank: Central Germany
(Simulations Canada): At Simulations
Canada, the goal in game design is not
to create glitzy graphics and incredible
sound. Rather, the design team is composed of students of history who believe

in doing extensive research and developing simulations from a command perspective out of that research. The Main Battle
Tank series is distinctive from some of
the earlier SimCan titles in that it saves
the data and allows the player to review
the scenario via a special post mortem
feature. Main Battle Tank: Central Germany (not pictured) is the first in a series
that will place the player in the role of a
commander of a regiment/brigade or battalion of modern armor during a future
combat. It is an ideal purchase on behalf
of the gamer who wants a command
perspective complete with the uncertainty
of limited intelligence. Amiga, Apple II,
Atari ST and IBM ($60.00).
Rommel: Battles for North Africa
(Strategic Studies Group): Rommel: Battles for North Africa may be the best application of the Battlefront system ever
created. The desert war with all its
vagaries is the ideal subject matter for
SSG's system which stress command
perspective and limited intelligence. The
IBM version with EGA graphics and faster
play makes the game even better. Ian
Trout and Roger Keating expressed concern to CGW that the market for pure
wargames seemed to be softening at an
alarming pace. Therefore, one of the
reasons for new IBM versions with new,
more attractive graphics is to draw new
garners into wargames. With both the
beauty of the graphics and the grace of
the system, Rommel: Battles for North
Africa offers an ideal holiday package for
the computer garner seeking a new challenge. Apple II, C-64, and IBM ($39.95).

And To All A
Good New Year
Whether your holiday tradition involves
Christmas, Hannukah, or Saturnalia, the
computer games to be released between
this issue's press time and the gift-giving
season offer something of interest to any
gamer. This year's crop looks like the
new games will offer more substance
than tinsel, and may be the most exciting
hint list we've published yet. That's how it
should be, of course, and that means
gamers can look forward to an exciting
new year, as well. So, in the words of a
certain chubby elf in red pajamas (or a villainous looking fiend on a certain
magazine cover), "Ho! Ho! Ho! Merry
Christmas!"

(Continued from page 31)

The King's
Quest Companion
ences and, in addition to defining the
item/individual listing in terms of the
game's fiction, brings in a wealth of
folklore to enrich the discussion. The following is a typical listing in the Encyclopedia which demonstrates the technique.
Frog Prince: (KQ4) There are some interesting differences between Rosella's encounter with her Frog prince, and the
tale that is told in this world. It seems that
the beautiful daughter of a king was sitting under a cool tree, passing time and
playing a game of catch with herself
using a little golden ball. As these things
happen, the ball this day travelled too far
and dropped past her hands and down
into a deep well, too far down for her to
retrieve it. As she wept for her lost ball, a
frog's head came out of the water and
the creature offered to dive and bring the
ball back to her. There were conditions,
though—in return for the ball, the princess must accept the ugly frog as her
companion and play-mate, and it must
be allowed to eat from her plate with her

at the dinner table, drink from her cup,
and sleep with her in her bed. The pretty
princess accepted the frog's bargain, but
as soon as she held the golden ball again
in her hands, she ran away and deserted
the frog.
The next day, as the princess ate with
her family and their entire court, a small
voice came to the door and demanded
the princess let him in—it was the frog,
of course. Her father, the king, asked her
what the frog wanted, and she was forced
to tell him of her promise to the little
green one. The king informed the girl
that she must fulfill all that she had
promised the frog, and bade it join them
for supper. She was reluctant and unwilling, but the king pushed her plate and
cup closer to the frog so that it could
enjoy the meal. When the meal was
finished, the frog announced that he was
tired, and asked the princess to join him
in going to sleep. She didn't want any
dirty old frog in her clean bed, but her
father demanded that she honor her
promise.
The princess carried the frog to her
room, but when it was time to get into
bed, she picked it up and threw it against
one of the walls of her chamber as hard
as she could. All at once, instead of
dying, the ugly frog transformed into a

handsome young prince who informed
her that he had been captive of a wicked
witch's spell. Instead of being upset at
the girl for what she had done, he asked
her to marry him, which she did. They
lived happily ever after.
Most people, I suspect, recall a version
of the tale where the princess kisses the
frog to transform him. The first version of
the tale, however, is the authentic one.

The Final Score
The final section of The King's Quest
Companion, "The Final Score", offers a
point-by-point list of how to get the maximum score in each of the King's Quest
adventures. A final comment on the
book itself must be that The King's
Quest Companion is more than a hint
book and more than a reference work, it
is . . . well, a companion. We suggest
that readers will get even more out of
the fine adventure series if they play the
games (or replay them) with this book
beside them.
Copyright 1989, Peter J. Spear
Portions Copyrighted by Sierra On-Line, Inc.,
1983-1989
KING'S QUEST and the Names of the
KING'S QUEST Characters are Trademarks of
Sierra On-Line, Inc.

Origin/CGW Omega Tournament

Origin/CGW
Omega
Tournament
Report
AUSTIN (CGW) NIMBUS1, designed by Bob Willis of Silver Spring, Maryland
has won the September
Origin/CGW Omega Tournament. NIMBUS1, along with
five other tanks, survived a
crowded field of 39 entrants
to reach the finals of the
monthly tournament. Tournament officials described
NIMBUS1 as "persistent". He
"manages his system repairs
very efficiently". Other
finalists included SAMURAI
("sneaky. Lurks in hiding
then pounces."); SWAN
("Cool and cautious.
Responds well to simultaneous attacks"); TT1
("Uses defensive tactics to
his advantage"); CHAOS ("Extremely methodical in his

stalking"); and STRIKER
("Lives up to his name: aggressive.").
The following are comments from Omega Author
Stuart Marks Concerning the
September Tournament:
It was exciting to see all of
the tanks duking it out
trying to make it to the final
round of six tanks, and even
more exciting to actually
see the final round. Glued to
the computer screen I tried
to decipher how each tank
was working.
The original field of 39 was
reduced to six. At the start of
the final round all of the
tanks roamed around the
battlefield trying to find easy
prey, although none of
those left in the tournament
could be considered "easy
prey". SAMURAI would hide
behind obstacles waiting for
his mark to come slowly
creeping by, fire off a couple
of shots, then scamper off
towards a different obstacle.

This was an amazing
strategy. However, NIMBUS1
was not impressed. Catching
onto SAMURAI's little trick,
NIMBUSI simply took on
the other tanks before
SAMURAI could get to them.
It was indeed impressive to
see these tanks trying to outsmart one another. Only a
few times did finesse give
way to a slugfest.
During the final round,
many an OSI employee huddled around the computer
screen to watch the battles
and see would be crowned
"Champ". As laughter and excitement filled the air, not
one person could take their
eyes off the screen. When it
was all said and done and
the dust had settled,
everyone looked at one
another and said, "Wow!
When is the next tournament? I can't wait!"

enter the tournament is
January 31, 1990. That is
true, but doesn't tell the
whole story. In reality there
will be five monthly tournaments. NIMBUS1 has won
the September tournament.
Entries for the October,
November, and December
tournaments must be
received by 9:00 AM on the
28th of the month. In other
words, the deadline for entering the November tournament is 9 AM on November
28. The deadline for the
January monthly tournament (in keeping with the
printed flyer in the game) will
be 9 AM January 31, 1990.
The six finalists from each of
the monthly tournaments
will be allowed to submit
tanks in the Championship
Round to be held next
February. The results of the
Championship Round will be
reported in the April issue of
CGW (rather than the March
issue as previously an-

nounced).

(Continued from page 52)

OMEGA
Neural Cybertank
Design and Simulation
complishing the tasks at hand with the least number of
cycles. Every action you instruct your tank to perform requires time
(measured
as cycles).
For example
moving the
tank forward
requires 40
cycles, turning requires
16 cycles,
firing
weapon requires 40
cycles, scanning requires 8
cycles, executing a logic command such as an IF THEN argument requires 1 cycle. Smart programmers will realize that removing

one fire weapon command will allow your tank to do A LOT
of thinking in the same time span.
• Getting in the first shot is often critical to winning the bat
tie. To accomplish this Steve Cantrell (Omega playtester and
documentation editor) suggests that you include a routine
that stops your robot five squares from the enemy (Omega
weapon range is four squares). The enemy tends to walk
into your range and you can usually get in the first shot.
• Jeff Hillhouse (Omega Associate Supervisor) suggests
that when your tank is damaged, have it fire once. Then,
back up a square. Have it fire and backup again. Do this
until you reach the maximum fire range. Most rookie designers will string too many fire commands in a row. As they
face more sophisticated robots they will find that they are
firing on empty space. Good robots moue when hit.
• As a variant of the shoot-backup technique, you might
try a shot and circle technique. Be sure to use "jamming" to
negate "scan lock" if you plan to circle in close.
• Don't worry about saving up for the Nuke weapon. Its
cost is not worth what it delivers. A much better "buy" is the
quick and efficient Turbo-Laser.
• Never assume a "scan lock" will be effective. Jammers
and obstacles such as building and trees can cause you to
lose the lock.
(Continued on page 90)

(Continued from page 75)

To choose the correct Grail at the end, pay special attention to the inscriptions past the bridge and the painting in
the vault.
Hitler will sign anything you hand him short of your whip.
Consider where his name will do you the most good.

Warning: There are specific hints in this section.
Readers who wish to solve the puzzles without help
should avoid reading these playing tips.
One thing which hasn't improved since Maniac Mansion is
cursor control. You still have to fight with the crosshairs to
get them centered on small objects. The fight's worth sticking out in two places: with the skeletons in the catacombs
(you get the hook-arm) and on the third floor of Schloss
Brunwald (you get a silver key off a candelabra).
There are two "ordering" puzzles, for which you must consult the on-screen Grail Diary: the three statues and the six
skulls, both in the catacombs. For the statues, the order to
push is right, left, center; for the skulls it's left to right (skulls)
equals top to bottom (musical notes).

Yes, you can steal the biplane—if you're quick. Flick the six
switches on the right, go up and click on the gauge (it will
turn green), click twice on the 'L-R-B' dial, pull the pump
handle three times (you'll have to click six times), go to the
left and click on the throttle, then go back to the right and
press the red button.
If you're not fast enough, you'd better be prepared with
blimp tickets! You don't have enough money to buy them—
so, you'll have to pick a pocket or two, boys . . .
In Brunwald, remember which guards saw you in which disguise. If they see you dressed differently later, they'll be on
you in an instant.
In the Temple, you don't have to spell the Name of God in
order. Any tile whose letter is contained in the Name is safe.

(Continued from page 86)

OMEGA
Neural Cybertank
Design and Simulation
• Special devices are not of great value to less than expert
designers. Beginners and intermediate designers tend to
waste valuable cycles using the devices inefficiently.
• Despite what the documentation suggests, sitting and
waiting is not as effective as you might think. (In the
Origin/CGW Tournament it is a sure way to lose). Sitting and
scanning can use as much, or even more, fuel than scanning and moving (it depends on your routines).

Final Analysis
As wonderful as Omega is — it is not for everyone. This is
a game that will require thoughtful design work on the part
of the player. The massive 250+ page manual will have to
be read nearly in its entirety to get the most out of the game
(although you can get by with less and still have a lot of
fun). To those of us that are willing to spend the time,
Omega will reward the effort most handsomely. Omega is
the kind of game that is sure to develop the same kind of
dedicated following that Robotwar had. It's release has been

anxiously awaited around the offices of CGW. It is a real winner.
The review was finished. The file was saved. The editor
called in the gang. They crowded around the monitor as
the editor loaded up the robots for the next battle. -

(Continued from page 14)

Over There
Wargames and More
The game displays excellent graphics
along with some atmospheric digitized
sound (which includes some realisticsounding "alien" speech from the
Protozorqs). The game centers around a
group of separate puzzles which take
place within different rooms in the game.
Solving each puzzle presents you with an
object which furthers your quest. Kult is
totally icon driven and is available now.
Personal Nightmare (Amiga & ST—
available now) comes from the new UK
adventure house, Horrorsoft. You play a
Vicar's son who returns to his home, in
the sleepy village of Tynham Cross, in
response to a suspicious call from his
mother. As the son, you hear news of the
strange behavior of your father, notice
convenient accidents occurring, and end
up meeting some rather unsavory charac-

ters. Everyone encourages tourism in the
village but just who invited the Vampires
and the Hell-Hounds? Personal
Nightmare includes 500 sequences of
animation and 600K of digitized sound.
The game allows on-screen graphics to
be manipulated within the real-time
world. It is designed under Horrorsoft's
specially written system.
Finally, a few snippets. Electronic Arts
plans a scenario disk for the highly
popular Populous which will contain a
variety of extra worlds. French software
house, Infogrames, has released a new
graphic adventure - Quest For The Time
Bird. Coktel Visions has two interesting
games on the way, The Legend Of Djel, a
fantasy graphic adventure with integrated
puzzles serving as combat routines and
European Space Shuttle which looks to

be evolving along the lines of Space
M+A+X.
All of the above are, or will be, available
from the following UK mail-order retailers.
All telephone numbers included assume
you can dial direct. If you are in any
doubt please contact the International
Operator.
COMPUTER ADVENTURE WORLD,
BANK BUILDINGS, 1A CHARING
CROSS, BIRKENHEAD, ENGLAND, L41
6EJ. TEL: 01144 51 666 1132.
CASTLE SOFTWARE, 2 WILLIAM
CLOWES ST., BURSLEM, STOKE-ONTRENT, ENGLAND. TEL: 01144 782
575043.
SDC, 60 BOSTON RD., LONDON,
ENGLAND, W7 3TR. TEL: 01144 1 567
7621.

Taking A Peek
(Continued from page 6)

this action game developed by US Gold.
C-64 ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #4.

Mindscape
3444 Dundee Road
Northbrook, 11 60062
AFTER BURNER: another one for the
"Top-Gun" fan. In this action game
players fly a F-14 Thunder Cat against a
whole fleet of Migs. Fire the Vulcan
20mm cannon, lock on the air-to-air mis
siles, and barrel-roll to avoid the same. If
they survive the early rounds, players will
maneuver through canyons, dodge
kamikazes, and battle flying fortresses.
IBM ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #5.
SHINOBI: Straight from the scenes of
Kung Fu theater, this action game puts
players in the slippers of a Ninja warrior.
The cast of "bad dudes" includes a host
of nunchuka bearing, fire breathing, and
shurikan flinging terrorists. To survive,
players use the usual combination of
martial arts' moves, ninja weaponry,
magic, and, of course, "deesapline, grasshoppa". C-64 ($34.95). Circle Reader
Service #6.

Origin
136-B Harvey Road
Londonderry, NH 03053
SPACE ROGUE: This unique hybrid
combines a 3-D flight simulator with an
"Ultima-style" role playing adventure.
Players earn a living as a pirate, merchant, or bounty hunter, while slowly becoming involved in adventures that involve assassination plots, intergalactic
warfare, and all sorts of political intrigue.
A nice blend of action and adventure
that yields surprisingly balanced play.
IBM (pictured), C-64 & Apple II ($49.95).
Circle Reader Service # 7.

Sierra
P.O. Box 485
Coarsegold, CA 93614
HOYLE'S BOOK OF GAMES: Sierra provides the player with 18 variablyrated opponents for a "friendly evening"
of cardplay. Six games to choose from
(Cribbage, Crazy 8's, Gin Rummy,
Hearts, Klondike Solitaire, and Old
Maid), rules for each game, and
wisecracking opponents make up a
package designed for the whole family.
IBM ($34.95) Circle Reader Service #8.

Software Toolworks
19808 Nordhoff Place
Chatsworth, CA 91311
BEYOND THE BLACK HOLE: Three-

D comics, movies, TV commercials, and
now computer games. While this
product does sport 3-D visual effects,
(paper glasses are included), the actual
action game is another souped-up variation on the paddle and ball system. The
game consists of 35 levels of this Ponglike action, and the packaging contains
a book on the history of stereoscopic 3D. IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service
#9.
CRIBBAGE KING/GIN KING: Seven
different computer opponents match
wits with players in two of the more
popular card games. Billed as the
world's strongest computer opponents
in each game, the package also has online hints, scenario analyzers, and a
duplicate mode for replay using the
same cards. "If at first you don't succeed...". IBM ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #10.

Strategic Simulations
675 Almanor Ave.,
Sunnyvale, CA 94086
AD&D DUNGEON MASTERS ASSISTANT, VOL. II: CHARACTERS &
TREASURES: This utility package allows time-pressured DMs to generate
detailed player or non-player characters
and large treasure hoards. The program
creates the info requested on readymade character sheets that can then be
printed for instant use. C-64 (pictured) &
Apple II ($29.95). Circle Reader Service
#11.

STORM ACROSS EUROPE: One to
three players fight across Europe in this
grand strategic wargame created by the
(Continued on page 94)

(Continued from page 69)

the subordinate should try to build up the territory or attempt to conquer another one as soon as possible.

dimension beyond that found in Bandit Kings' predecessors.

Something Contagious
Bandit Kings is an extremely addictive experience. In
some ways, it is a more forgiving program than the earlier games. Where players had to continually fortify the
front lines in the earlier games, the watchword of Bandit
Kings is expand, expand, expand. This is often revealed
to the player by the prospective heroes to be recruited.
One can function quite effectively in Bandit Kings by
settling a prefecture; building the economy until it passes the public support level of 40 (at which time one's
efforts in the business sector begins to pay annual
dividends in gold and food); swearing brotherhood to a
subordinate; leaving a small garrison behind; and
moving to the next empty (or weakly defended) prefecture. If a sworn brother controls a prefecture, the player
can direct every month's activities. Even if an ordinary
subordinate controls a prefecture, however, the player
can issue general orders which will determine whether

One particular advantage of having sworn brothers in
command of several different prefectures is that once
the player reaches the mid-game, the intelligence to be
garnered from the sworn brother is invaluable. Normally,
if one wants to view a prefecture which is not controlled
by the player, it costs a full game month's worth of activity (i.e. one's entire turn). With a sworn brother controlling a territory where there isn't much action, the
player can "spend" the smaller prefecture's activity on
spying out the enemy. Using this method allows the
player to both spy and attack on the same turn. In that
manner, the computer opponent cannot usually build
up his standing army between the time of the intelligence report and the attack (Note: It would be possible
if the rotation happened to fall just right, but that is not
as likely as if one spies on one turn and attacks the
next).

Something for Everyone
(Sung to the tune of "Comedy, Tonight") "Hero and
brother both gain a prefecture, something for everyone
our strategy, tonight!" Pardon the play on an old comedy standard, but Bandit Kings of Ancient China offers
the proverbial "something for everyone" except the dyedin-the-wool arcade gamer. There are only a handful of
games that this reviewer has ever played that have
caused him to play into the wee small hours of the
morning without realizing it. Bandit Kings of Ancient
China is one of them.

Taking A Peek
(Continued from page 92)

Conversions
Received
After Burner (Mindscape) C-64
Ancient Art of War (Broderbund)
Apple Ile, IIC, IIGS
Archipelagos (Britannica) Amiga
Baal (Psygnosis) IBM
Blood Money (Psygnosis) ST
Curse of the Azure Bonds
(SSI) Apple
The Duel (Accolade) Amiga
Falcon/Operation: Counterstrike
(Spectrum Holobyte) ST & Amiga
Ferrari Formula One (EA) IBM
Gold Rush (Sierra) Mac
John Madden Football (EA) IBM
Manhunter 2 (Sierra) IBM, ST
Menace (Psygnosis) IBM
Might & Magic II

(New World Computing) C-64
Operation Wolf (Taito) IBM
Populous (EA) ST

Shufflepuck Cafe (Broderbund)
ST, Amiga
SimCity (Maxis) IBM
Star Wars (Broderbund) Mac
Universe 3 (Omnitrend) ST

designer of Colonial Conquest. Armies,
paratroops, U-Boats, strategic bombers,
raiding fleets, and amphibious troops all
fight over limited resources in a game
designed to be won or lost in an evening. C-64 ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #12.

XOR
7607 Bush Lake Road
Minneapolis, MN 55435
SHUFFLE MANIA!: Nine different
shuffle games (including shuffleboard,
bowling, & curling) come to the computer in this action game that allows
play by one or two and an option for
tournament play. Players can establish
handicaps, enter up to 32 people in a
tournament, or watch the computer play
itself. IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #13.

Advantage Ace
3542 Pheasant Run Ct,
Ste. 8
Ann Arbor, MI 48108
STRIKE FORCE NAVIGATOR: This
navigational tool can be used with any
vehicle simulation game that comes with
a map. It can be used to plot any path
to any target, plot intercept courses, and
determine enemy positions. Made of
clear, flexible plastic, the Navigator
comes with a handle and a 360 degree
navigational compass printed on the
face. The price is $7.95. Circle Reader
Service #14.

M

Reader Input Device

