"COMPUTER GAMING WORLD The #1 Computer Game Magazine ZD SPECIAL FALL PREVIEW X-Com Strategy CGW Guides You Through the 150+ New Games For Fall Sneak Previews  Empire 2 1 Top Gun Our Top 10 and More... "


"With the right game, it's fifty times faster than any kid's system. f f "


"yu ULA 1995 GTE Vantaan Incorporated All rights reserved The GTE logo is a trademark of the GTE Corporation GTE Entertainment. FX Fighter und the FX Fighter logo are trademarks of GTE Vantage Incorporated. Argonaut, the Argonaut logo and Brender are trademarks of Argonaut Software Ltd. (Brender Gargonaut com.) GTE Interactive Media is part of GTE Vantage incorporated. P.O. Box 4358, Carlsbad, CA 92018 358 2 PLAYER "


"Here's the right game. Break into a new dimension. Attack sidestep-even hun your opponent towards the camera MOO Flying 3D Camera Not just a highlight Julm the point of view changes as you attack. 00 Hear that giant sucking sound? Little brothers everywhere are kissing up to play FX Fighter, the most advanced fighting game ever created for the PC. But before you slam the door on the little Desperado, tell him what he's missing: Arcade Action & Incredible Speed. FX Fighter was specifically designed to take advantage of your new Pentium, but it still screams on a 486, too. Real-Time 3D. FX Fighter is first to use Brender technology, the most advanced 3D rendering system ever developed. Real Motion Capture. We recorded over 350 actual sequences from martial artists and acrobats for this game. Roundhouse kicks have never been so smooth. Flying Camera. Forget side-only views. We've got every angle covered-in three dimensions. More Moves. Choose among eight characters, with over 40 attack moves each—including incredible combinations. I.Q. Points. For about the cost of a two-bit game cart you'll get a superior game with fifty times the speed, four E times the color, and twice the resolution. Very smart, Confidence. To get previews, more information or order, call 1-800-GTE-TODAY. Or access our web page at http://www.im.gte.com. PC Gamer magazine described FX Fighter as \"ground-breaking.\" And we're grateful. But to be honest, with all that power sitting on the desktop, we just felt that the last thing the world needed was another damn word-processor, GET IT OR DIE TRYING For 486/Pentium PCs with CD-ROMs. ARGONAUT GTE Entertainment IELETIT Circle Reader Service #69 "


"SPACE QUEST:6 THE SPINAL FRONTIER IN SPACE, NO ONE CAN HEAR YOU CLEAN. Fight grime and battle evil adversaries with Roger Wilco, janitor turned space adventurer, as he joins farces with video games, TV and sci-fi movies, past and present in the wildest Space Quest ever. Take home the newest adventure in the award-winning series that has sold over one million games. PARDON OUR CUS UUTIRMATION SUPER WAY CUTIVE QUEDC OH BENE WITH STUNNING NEW 3-D-RENDERED SVGA GRAPHICS AVAILABLE NOW! See your local software retailer or call 1-800-757-7707 today. SIERRA  Circle Reader Service #271 01995 Sierra On-Line, Inc. All rights reserved. Space Quest is a registered trademark of The Children's Museum of Indianapolis, Inc. and is used by license. "


"This ain't no flights Super-fast beautifully texture mapped 3D flight with full 360 degree movement. Nine totally unique planets, with three levels per planet, and dozens of tunnels to explore! Over 400,000 sq. miles of terrain-incredibly large levels. Seven murderously destructive weapons, plus many other devastating power-ups. Non-stop air-to-air and air-to-ground realistic Comm-Bat \". Plus, play multiplayer cames in special Comm-bat levels, which are specifically designed for fun multiplayer games. SVGA support (640x480 resolution). This is a Pentium\", recommended mode. Light player network and two player modem support. DWANGO\" support too! Professional fully digital music and ear poppin' sound effects (up to 44 KHz-real (O quality!). Seventy Mb of 30 rendered, full-motion, eye-candy cinematics. RemoteRidicule\" allows players to send digitized voice messages to other players during multiplayer games. INRER E Wera CHAH am301 this Thundering engines. Insane weapons. Maxim terminal Velo "


"n... \"It's a 3D vehicle shooter that's part Star Wars and part Descent.\" -Computer Gaming World, March 95 * This game could easily become the new 'king of the 3D first-person jungle of games.\" \"Terminal Velocity is a symphony of titillating action and G-force slurping excitement...resulting in an experience most gamers won't want to terminate because of its sheer speed and fluidity.\" -Strategy Plus \"Not only are the levels beautiful, they are huge. There is so much to do and see on each planet that completing the missions for a level rarely means being finished.\" \"The 3D environments are simply breathtaking..the worlds are like nothing seen before in computer games.\" -Computer Player The charm of the game is it's open-endedness, it's extensive multi-stage levels... [which can be explored and destroyed at will.\" -Computer Gaming World, May «95 cks. Now available in stores from FormGen. FormGen INCORPORATED struction. DDC REALM ANDAL SEX Form Gen. Inc. 7641 E. Gray Road Scottsdale, AZ 85260 REALITY IS OUR GAME. Note: The shareware version of Terminal Velocity is a subset of the full game and contains only 3 of the planets. The shareware (0) KOM version does include cinematics Developed by Terminal Reality, Inc. Published by 3D Realms Entertainment. Published Commercially by Formen Inc. All rightsteserved. All trademaiks are the property of theit respective owners TM Circle Reader Service #44 "


"\"We made our existing PC ZOOM around the Internet, run multimedia, type 200 words a minute, show us a 3D world and Who says you need a brand new computer to get things done? We're doing some pretty amazing stuff, just by adding a few affordable upgrades to the PC we already own. So while other folks are scrimping to pay for a new Tyrannosaurus XL Super Computer that really does less than ours, we're able to handle braces, ballet and college funds. 38.800bps FAX Modem 4XOD-ROM Drive SPEED REVEAL Reveal has over a hundred exciting upgrade products, available at most major computer retailers. To learn more about us, zoom over to our Web site at http://www.reveal.com "


"answer the phone on Sundays. The other day, we watched a video of the Apollo moon landing with our multimedia encyclopedia. Incredible. My PC actually gave me goosebumps. What kind of people design this stuff?\" REVEAL THE POWER OF COMPUTER UPGRADING Circle Reader Service #100 Multimedia Kit QUAD ULTRA Voice Mail PC With Speakerphone TV3PC Quad Office Card Decathlon X REVEAL REVE AL REVEAL REVEAL Hello... REVEAL 29 VIDEO 2.0 "


"FEATURE 34 WHAT'S HOT FOR FALL '95? Everyone knows that computer entertainment software is now BIG BUSINESS. More and more new companies enter the fray, and older, more established companies put out more and more sequels to best-selling games, all trying to score that elusive Big Hit. With the number of new games planned for fall bordering on the incredible, CGW surveys the field to give you a sneak peek at the products most likely to set the gaming world on fire. Avalanche ADVENTURE / ROLE-PLAYING IK ESIEEE101 67 SCORPIA'S STING Neither black holes nor mysterious deaths will stop our interstellar sleuth from unraveling the shady doings behind THE ORION CONSPIRACY. 72 SCORPIA'S MAIL Spooked by the ghost song in STONE PROPHET? NOCTROPOLIS just a little too dark? Let our bright light show you the way out of the adventure game mysts. 80 FULL THROTTLE Braving brawling bikers, rough roads and dastardly focs, Charles Ardai finds that LucasArts hasn't lost their tale-spinning magic. 84 JOHNNY MNEMONIC William Gibson's vision arrives on the computer screen just as it leaves the silver screen. Thankfully, Keanu Reeves is conspicuously absent in this \"interactive movie,\" but so is quality gameplay. Charles Ardai jacks in and data dumps. 95 KINGDOM: THE FAR REACHES Interplay officiates the marriage of Saturday morning cartoons and adventure gaming. Allen Greenberg sends his best wishes to the happy couple. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD AUGUST 1995 98 SLIPSTREAM 5000 US Gold takes Paul Schuteyma on an exhilarating, if brief, hovercraft ride. 104 FIRST ENCOUNTERS On the 8th day, David Braben and Gametek created the vast heavens of simulated space in this open-ended cosmic opera. Jason Kapalka wishes they had waited until the 9th. 108 CLOCKWERX Like sands through the hourglass, so goes our free time with games like this, an abstract puzzle game endorsed by TETRIS inventor Alexey Pajitnov. Arinn Dembo <Alt-Tabs>through Windows to see if it is time well spent. SPORTS Bike The Big One In Full Throttle 80 110 TONY LA RUSSA 3 Is the third time the charm for Stormfront Studios' pitching staff? As much as Jim Gindin likes the chemistry of this graphical baseball game, he wonders if the team is pennant-worthy. "


"Sneak Preview! Into The Danger Zone Of TOP GUN 134 116 VIRTUAL POOL Rack 'em up, pretty boy! Paul Schuytema takes his cue and racks his brains to see if Interplay's got the chalk to match their talk. 122 BLOOD BOWL We've heard of playing rough, but this is ridiculous! MicroLeague applies their sports expertise to a rather unusual and bloody boardgame. Martin Cirulis counts the body parts to see if it all adds up. SIMULATIONS 129 BOGEY'S BAR & GRILL Old simulations never die if they have a dedicated group of hackers behind them. Denny Atkin hunts down tools and hacks that breathe new life into classic sims like Dynamix' RED BARON. 134 SNEAK PREVIEW! TOP GUN Can Spectrum HoloByte, creators of FALCON, really make a good \"Flight Sim Lite\"? Join veteran CGW joystick jockey Mike Weksler on this recon flight. 136 EXTREME COMPETITION DRIVING CONTROLS Racing junkie Gordon Goble gets his latest fix from this comprehensive racing wheel-and-pedal package. BENUINE: 282 SPEED: 0504 ALTIUNE: 03929 TIME: 08:15:17 CAME SPEED: XI Avropilor:OFF NISSION DURATION: 00:00:17 Sneak Preview! The Rise And Fall Of EMPIRE II 142 STRATEGY AND WAR GAMES 139 BROADSIDES & GRIPESHOT Alan Emrich examines SSI's New World Order and discovers that both PANZER GENERAL and Gary Grigsby have a lot of fight left in them. 142 SNEAK PREVIEW! EMPIRE II Both EMPIRE and EMPIRE DELUXE were classic games. Now, Terry Coleman tells you how the newest member of the Empire is different, and why it might be the longest-lived of the three. 144 THE PERFECT GENERAL II Can perfection be improved upon? QQP thinks so, as they've released a new version of a \"perfect\" wargame. Patrick Miller makes sure that QQP hasn't fixed what ain't broke. DEPARTMENTS 150 THE ROAD FROM SUMTER TO APPOMATTOX II Adanac Systems' new release not only has the longest title in gaming history, but may be the best Civil War game currently on the market. Josh Bruce fastens his bayonet and charges into the fray. 12 EDITORIAL Gamers Aren't Vidiots 16 INTERFACE The Gamers Talk Back 22 READ.ME The Latest Buzz, Whir, And Click 170 THE GAMER'S EDGE The Hacks, Codes & Cheats You Need 174 HEX, BUGS & ROCK N' ROLL Flight Physics Unlimited 180 UNDER THE HOOD The Ultimate Gaming Machine 155 STRATEGY! X-COM: TERROR FROM THE DEEP Wetsuit springing a few too many leaks? Study these excerpts from Jeff James' new strategy guide and you'll find new ways to plug breaches and plug alien. 166 RISE OF THE WEST Jim Dunnigan's Empires of the Middle Ages emerges as a Windows game from RAW Entertainment. Terry Coleman thinks it's about time. 194 ADVERTISER INDEX A Guide To The Vendors 199 HALL OF FAME All-Time Great Games 200 THE TOP 100 Readers Rate The Top Games 202 PATCHES Game Files To Kill Bugs Dead 204 WHAT'S THE DEAL? The Lost Art Of Playtesting STRATEGY! X-COM: Terror From The Deep 155 "


"Infiltrate Annihilate. Exterminate "


"CATCH THE BUZZ In a remote galaxy, a mutant strain of genetically engineered insects produced a honey so toxic it wiped out all life on the planet. Quarantined for decades, the planet has recently been inhabited by the Black Nexus Mob, who genetically re-engineered the insects FREE SAMPLE DISC and turned the toxic honey into a deadly biological weapon. You must infiltrate the Black Nexus, save a compatriot, annihilate The Hive, and exterminate the Hivasects. Awesome action/arcade gameplay, for use with Windows 95! True 32-bit autoplay. Killer graphics and non-stop action. Call (800) 424-7070 ext. 3061 for a free demo CD! Or, reach us on-line: www.trimarkint.com; trimark@aol.com; 7477.3632@compuserve.com THE HIVE TRIMARK WIERACTIV 95 is a registered trademark of Microsoft Corporation. The Hive is a trademark of Trimark Interactive.  Trimatk Interactive. All rights reserved. Window Circle Reader Service #131 "


"IT'S YOUR UNIVERSE, GOD'S JUST RENTING. "


"10,000 years of strategic time travel. The power is yours. Are you wise enough to use it? CS You are the master of time and space. The Microids will rule the Echelon Galaxy in the year ten thousand by destroying all other living entities. Four decimated alien civilizations and your life depend on your strategic decisions. Travel through time to alter events and battle an interstellar enemy. Your actions will change history. And save the galaxy. \"Millennia: Altered Destinies could be the most exciting game design of 1995.\" Steve Honeywell, Computer Game Review \"Here's a \"God Game' with a difference...Millennia will surely be one of the most elaborate, ambitious, and sophisticated galactic-adventure games ever to hit the market.\" Bill Trotter, PC Gamer \"This game has it all! Time travel, space battles, diplomacy. trade...everything! Count me in!\" Peter Smith, Strategy Plus MILLENNIA Another cutting-edge strategy game from award-winning designer lan Bird. Introduce inventions and technologies-from the wheel to laser fusion and transport them to and from worlds. Colonize and control 100 worlds as you communicate with alien races and attack alien cities. Lavish animation, video, and 3D-rendered graphics. Digitized speech and orginal music. KTNNeTi MILLENNIA: ALTERED DESTINIES. THE ULTIMATE GOD GAME. TAKE 3 1995 Take-Two Interactive et Mann Alt Desis and TabeIntractive ar registered trademik Take Twentive M 575 Broadway, www Yoo NY 10019 Circle Reader Service "


"Rants & Raves Welcome To Donkey Kong Country.. untry The Big Three—IBM, Intel and Microsoft—Must Think Gamers Are Vidiots by Johnny L. Wilson EXPLOSION OMETIMES YOU WONDER HOW sounding adventure. There are even rumost of Win 95's strengths. Win 95's 3D HUGE, MONOLITHIC COMPANIES mors about Microsoft planning to market DDI will allow point-of-view games and SURVIVED LONG ENOUGH TO Win 95 versions of third-party licensee flight simulators to operate faster by takbecome huge, monolithic Sega Genesis games all over the world. ing advantage of new WINDOWS-based accompanies. That's especially Yet, ask gamers what they want and celerator cards which assist the central true when companies have you'll get an entirely different picture. processor with additional chips. Yet, what been instrumental in forging Do these three techno-megaliths really is Microsoft touting? A stripped down veran industry and then seem to suddenly believe gamers want to use their $3,000 sion of Apogee's TERMINAL VELOCITY lose sight of the basics. Yet, that seems to computers to play the same games you (FURY), re-runs of coin-op arcade games be what has happened with IBM, Intel can play on a $300 console? Do they refrom the distant past, and cartridge and Microsoft. ally believe gamers will want Win games reincarnated. Do we real95 just to up the ante on tired WIN 95 EXP ly need PITFALL HARRY to NO INTEL INSIDE old concepts by resizing the jump faster? Sure the exHow dare I ask that question, you probplayer's view window and tra power enables the ably wonder as you consider the billions making the games harder? sprites and backgrounds made by this triumvirate of technological Do they really believe that to become more decapitalism. Microsoft is dominant in the the game buying audience tailed, but how many operating system market, as well as with with a median age of 31 mature computer gamers many basic applications. Intel holds the wants to regress back to playwill care? How many will lion's share of the processor market. IBM ing the games that 14-year olds even allow their younger offis still a power in the mainframe world found popular five years ago? And spring to play these visually enand sure to have reasonable success in the what good does it really do to tout the hanced video games on their Pentiums Mac clone market. Autoplay feature by converting games or upcoming P6s? Yet, when it comes to strategies involvfrom a medium which has always had Another presumed Win 95 windfall to ing computer games, these formidable \"autoplay\"? gamers will be the enhanced multitasking powers seem to want to advance games These companies must be using the capability. While this may be ideal for which mean nothing to people in a varikind of logic that Fred Schweb Jr. (Where multiplayer strategy gamers that want to ety of ways. Ask Intel what gamers want to Are The Customers' Yachts? Or a Good Hard play MicroProse's CivNET or New do with a Pentium and they're likely to Look at Wall Street) satirized stockbrokers World's SPACEWARD Ho! while they're upshow SONIC THE HEDGEHOG running and for in the 1940s, \"It is as though someone dating a spreadsheet or answering their ejumping on a PC. Ask IBM what gamers had invented Esperanto for saying nothmail, and while it might be useful for want out of OS/2 and they'll give you BUBing in a variety of ways.\" Their primary fanatics of Maxis' SIMCITY 2000 or ImSY-Accolade's feline challenger to Sonic. goal seems to be putting traditional video pressions' CAESAR II who want to get posiAsk Microsoft what gamers want and game designs on the computer. WINDOWS tive cash flow and let their creations they'll show you Activision's PrTFALL. HAR95 stands to be a tremendous boon to advance as they work, it doesn't do much Ry jumping over alligators and swinging computer gamers, but converting platgood with regard to Sonic's dynamic, from vines in a new higher-res, better form games to the PC doesn't make the ever-changing world. 12 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. AUGUST 1995 "


"D-DAY INVADES AMERIC From the team that brought you OPERATION CRUSADER and STALINGRAD, the latest in the \"World at War\" series of games. Includes classic scenarios from the original Utah Beach game, plus all new graphics, updated troop data and maps, improved game mechanics, play by E-mail, and three scenarios that cover the bloody Omaha Beach landingsincluding a combined Utah/Omaha campaign game and the initial Operation Cobra breakout. ISEEN LASTE #4010360 IBM/MAC CD-ROM ROM DAS Be on Utah Beach when the Allies storm the beach head. Available at leading computer game stores, including: Babbages, Best Buy, Compusa, Computer City, Egghead, Electronics Boutique, Fry's. Micro Center, Software Etc, Walden's Software, and independent retailers worldwide, or call 1-800-999-3222. Ask for Dept. CGW8. TANITTITTEN Circle Reader Service #297 . We Control the Allied Forces as they liberate Fortress Cherbourg. WORWAR The Avalon Hill Game Company DIVISION OF MONARCH AVALON, INC. 4517 Harford Road, Baltimore, MD 21214 1-800-999-3222 410-254-9200 GAMES OR STRATEGY Volume II "


"COMPUTER GAMING WORLD WELCOME TO DONKEY KONG COUNTRY So, you're asking yourself, \"Why does Johnny care? Why should he criticize the short-sightedness of these companies?\" It's because these companies have enough marketing muscle to limit the selection of the kinds of games you have told us you really want (via the Top 100 Poll and other feedback), and because they have enough development clout to inhibit publishers from making the kinds of games you want to buy. With video game publishers like Acclaim and Sega coming into the computer game market as their market declines, making extra noise with their big marketing bucks as they further clutter shelves with their running, jumping, killing, die-a-lot games, the issue becomes even more acute. If buyers in the retail channel and some people at these big companies don't wake up pretty soon, you're likely to walk into a CompUSA or Egghead sometime and see a huge banner welcoming you to \"Donkey Kong Country,\" home of the world's largest collection of Win 95 conversions of video games. When you ask about FALCON 4, you may be told that the store doesn't stock it. When you ask about QUAKE, you may be told to download it. And good luck to anyone who tries to find a niche product like a wargame or a reasonably dillicult role-playing game. Sound extreme? Maybe it is. But then again, Intel's own numbers indicate that consumers are buying Pentiums faster than corporate buyers. Intel, Microsoft and IBM should realize that people need Pentiums to play video game conversions like drivers need Indy cars to go to the corner market. And we don't want to see these companies pave over the games we really want with a Sonic on every corner. The #1 Computer Game Magazine AUGUST 1995, NUMBER 133 Publisher Jonathan Lane Editor-in-Chief Johnny Wilson Editor Emeritus Chris Lombardi Managing Editor Ken Brown Technical Editor Mike Weksler Assistant Editors Terry Coleman Allen Greenberg George Jones Art Director Edwin C. Malstrom Graphic Artist Jack Rodrigues Editorial Assistant Kate Hedstrom Advertising Director Lee J. Uniacke East Coast District Sales Manager Cathy Conway West Coast District Sales Manager Lynne Killey Account Representative Marci Yamaguchi Marketing Coordinator Cathy Lin Administrative Assistant Linda Philapil Contributing Editors Scorpia (Adventure Games) Alan Emrich (Wargames) Charles Ardai (Interactive Fiction) Loyd Case (Technology) Martin Cirulis (Science Fiction) Founder Russell Sipe Contents are copyrighted by Ziff-Davis Publishing Co., 1995. Computer Gaming World is not alliliated with IDG. Subscription Rate: The subscription rate is $27.91 for a one year subscription (12 issues), Canada and all other countries ack $11.00 for postage. Airmail subscrip78.00 per year. Canadian GST registration mimber is R123669673. Payment must be in U.S. dollars made by check or money order ciawn upon a U.S. bank. Visa, MasterCard, AMEX accepteel. Subscription Services: For subscription questions, address changes or ordering information, call (303) 665-8930 or fax (303) 604-7455 within the US and Canada. All other countries call (303) 604-1164 or fax (303) 604-7455 (international subscribers only) or write to Computer Gaming World, PO, Box 57167, Boulder, CO 80322-7167. Editorial Oflices: 135 Main St., 14th Floor, San Francisco, CA 94105. Back Issues: For back issues (subject to availability). $6,00 per issue ($8.00 outside the U.S.), send check, money order or credit card information to Back Issues Dept, Ziff Davis Publishing Co., PO Box 53131, Boulder, CO 80322-3131. HOW DO WE RATE? The Guide To CGW's Review Rating System CompuServe (76703,622) America On-Line: CGW Prodigy: EXPT40B Genie: CGW Internet: 76703.622@compuserve.com Telephone: (115)357-4900 Exlitorial Fax: (415) 357-1977 Sales Fax: (415) 357-4999 For advertising information only, call: (415) 357-1930 ke ke ***Outstanding: That rare game that gets it all right. The graphics, sound, interface, and, of course, the game play come together to form a Transcendent Gaming Experience. Very Good: A quality game that succeeds in many areas. May have minor problems, but is still worth your time and money, especially if you're interested in the subject matter/genre. For quality reprints in quantities of 100 or more, contact REPRINT SERVICES COMPUTER GAMING WORLD, 315 5th Avenue N.W.. St. Paul, MN 55112. (612) 582-3800, FAX (612) 635-1862. *Average: A mixed bag. Can often be a game that reaches for the stars, but falls short in significant areas. Can also just be a game that does what it does well, but lacks flair or originality. Weak: A game with serious problems. May be buggy, may not have much play value, may be ill-conceived—and you may want to think twice about buying it. ZIFF-DAVIS PUBLISHING COMPANY Chairman and CEO: Eric Hippeau President, Consumer Media Group: 1. Scott Briggs Senior Vice President, Consumer Media Group: Jim Stafford President, Computer Intellegence/InfoCorp: Bob Brown President, International Media Group: J.B. Holston III Senior Vice President, Circulation: Baird Davis Senior Vice President: Rachel Greenfield Vice President, Assistant to the Chairman: Tom McGrade Vice President, Business Manager: T.L. Thompson Vice President, Circulation Services: James E. Ramaley Vice President, Corporate Research and Analysis: Elda Vale Vice President, Controller and Treasurer: Timothy Mitchell Vice President, Creative Services: Herbert Stern Vice President, General Counsel and Secretary: J. Malcolm Morris Vice President, General Manager: Bruce W. Bourne Vice President, Human Resources: Rayna Brown Vice President, Marketing and Development Group: Herbert Stern Vice President, Production: Roger Herrman Vice President, Technology: Bill Machrone Chief Information Officer: Wellington Y. Chiu Executive Director, Information Systems: Owen Weckley Executive Director, Marketing Services: Jim Manning Production Director: Walter J. Terlecki Executive Director, Licensing: Gertrud Borchardt AUDITED Director of Public Relations: Gregory Jarboc Abysmal: That rare game that gets it all wrong. Usually a buggy, incomplete, and/or valueless product. ABC 14 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD  AUGUST 1995 "


"Introducing the new Falcon MACH V 120 MHz Gaming PC. SPEED MIT SPEED LIMIT Tuo MHZ MHZ LIEY want to go all. o n es, he Falco the best for your money -Paul C. Schuyloma, Computer Gamino Would \"The Pontiuny 90 they sont ma is a beau turpiake of work. primarily because they don't look for the lowest bidder when Shopping for standard componeniry. 96% Ovorall Score\" Ted Chapman, Computer Gamo Review THE FALCON MACH V: THE ULTIMATE GAMING MACHINE TM If you don't care about playing games, buy any computer. If you don't care how fast your games run, buy any \"multimedia\" computer. If you're a serious gaming enthusiast, you need a MACH V Gaming PC. The MACH V-120 MHz Pentium M $2,995! L Standard features as of 8/1/95: ntel Pentium 120 MHz Processor NEW! To Order Call: 00% Compatible with All IBM PC Software alcon PCI Bus Motherboard, 256K Cache exp. to 512K 1-800-258-6778 4 Bit PCI Graphics Board with 1 Megabyte 16.8 Million Colors! alcon PCI Bus Enhanced IDE Hard Drive Controller Megabytes of RAM expandable to 128 -44 Floppy Drive 50 Megabyte Enhanced IDE 8ms Hard Drive with 128K Cache .NEWE 50 ms QUAD-Speed CD-ROM Drive NEW reative Labs SoundBlaster 16 M & Shielded Multimedia Speakers H Products FlightStick PRO 4 Button Joystick with Viewing Control H Products Automatic Speed Sensitive Dual Gameport ini Tower Case with 250 Watt UL approved power supply \"Non-Interlaced Super VGA Monitor, 280p, Edgo-10-Edge Display 31 Key Keyboard, 3 Button Serial Mouse IS-DOS, Windows (latest versions) & 10 free CD-ROMs! ne Year Parts & Labor Warranty, One Year On-site Service VISA.MasterCard & Discover Accepted L, CSA, TUV and FCC class B certified Financing Available on Approved Credit. 3550 UARTS. Temperature sensitve fans, Customized BIOS' and many other unique features! ach MACH V is custom built to meet your specific needs. There are hundreds of options to FALCON NORTHWEST moose from. When you're ready to buy. please call or fax us for the latest quote, 263 South Bayshore Dr. Coos Bay, OR 97420 ademarks are the property of their respective owners Circle Reader Service #141 Ph: (503) 269-0775 Fax: (503) 267-2575 3D Objects courtesy of Visual Worlds Development "


"Interface LETTERS FROMC GW READERS REPENT! (and plays) over 150 games, as an individual cannot successware. They had PANZER GENThis magazine is so full of and bought about 24 last year, fully be all things to all people, ERAL listed for a very good Evil: death, terror, horror, I take umbrage with your neither can a magazine. Successprice, even considering the sex, immorality and more evil, derogatory implications. I am ful magazines identify the needs of shipping charges. Later in it's not even allowed in our not 76 years old by choice, a demographic segment and do the week when I received the home. Please stop sending it and you will have the pleasure their best to meet them editorially. package, I opened it to find I never ordered it anyway. of finding that out for yourself This does not mean, of course, that an unbundled version of the John Bedney in a few years, if you have luck exceptional members of other degame. There was a sticker on Renton, WA and the proper genes. mographic segments might not the wrapper that stated \"not I applaud Steve Meretzky's have the same needs and might for individual sale.\" The Hmm! We're pretty sure it was choice of making a game not be satisfied by reading it. It game came with the basic opa gift subscription from your minthat's just fun to sit down and can mean, however, that persons erating manual and the CD ister. Seriously, we don't want to play without having to go outside that target group may be itself. I did not purchase this go where we're not wanted and through the time-worn scataunamused at occasional generagame as \"used\" and I aswe'll cancel the subscription, but logical humor of DISCWORLD, tional references or humor and sumed it was new. I was not we wonder if, in games as well as ERIC THE UNREADY and DAY may become impatient with what told otherwise at the time of life, there can truly be a triumph OF THE TENTACLE. It's not that may appear to be a sophomoric purchase. How do you avoid of good without evil. Sure, games they offend me—they are just tone. We are delighted to have you the unknown when dealing have evil in them, but we don't so sophomoric that they are among our readership and comwith these software warehousbelieve the perpetration of evil is boring. Why do people find mend you for either unusual ases? All I can say is, \"Buyer Betheir central goal. the refuse of the intestinal Tuteness in catching the ware!\" Keep up the good tract so fascinating? generational references or incrediwork! I look forward to reAre you suggesting that ble patience in gleaning what you ceiving CGW each month. when people reach a cerneed from their midst. No, we Robert Bagley tain age (pick one, there don't think you should quit readCorona, CA are lots of choices) thating our magazine. We honestly beBurles they should not renew lieve our magazine meets the needs Readers can help reduce this their subscriptions to of both our target readership and dishonest practice by stating when your magazine? And those who are older. We apologize they order the software that they when Scorpia reaches for the unintentional slight. do not want to purchase unbunthat age, what then? dled software. This may not keep Octavia Reed, UNBUNDLED the mail order house from sending \"Hard-core Gamer\" DECEPTION such, but if enough customers Vero Beach, FL Thanks for your insight complained (stating that they and honesty regarding bunwould no longer purchase softWe stand corrected. dled software. The article on ware from a company which sent We knew our audience «What's An Honest Gamer To med hvern them unbundled software), it nt a wasn't the Pepsi GenDo?\" in the June '95 issue rewould have an impact. For our eration, but, assuming you're ally struck home after my latpart, we will pass along your letnot Steve Meretzky's mom, we are est software purchase. My ter to those in our sales staff who SPIRIT OF 76 pleasantly surprised by your misconcern is this. How do you deal directly with the advertiser Are you implying, in your sive. What we should have said know whether or not you are and attempt to change the busireply to Steve Meretzky about was that four-year-old girls and purchasing unbundled softness practice from this end. We HOD 'N PODj («Interface,\" 70-year-old women are not our ware, unless you can actually encourage other readers to let us CGW #132) that you think \"larget\" audience. In order to sucsee before you buy? My last know about such practices. As for 70-year-old-women cannot be ceed, a magazine has to be able to software purchase was with a the editorial, it is having some im\"hard-core gamers\"? As a 76identify and capture a demographcompany advertised in your pact within the industry, as you year-old woman who ownsic segment of the population. Just magazine, Bare Bones Softcan see by the following letter. you widget olari W e lux aknal k Herd wat geras all will yard sur mon side wwach play mus 160phes, and down about 2 Lutya holy tienen un par diwagalan are not to par w trestant,             les ut il te klaper hyaw you be Pozitul Stuu sem waring acane Matineet on a sth her ly the play surf with versteurde von 16 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. AUGUST 1995 "


"\"One Must Fall 2097 is the best fighting game available for the PC, bar none\" COMPUTER GAME REVIEW ONE MUST FALL Supports dual joystick head-tohead combat in 5 unique arenas 11 robots with over 120 frames of 3D animation per robot! Win cash for repairs, upgrades training & buying new moves Run out of cash and your repairs are over \"MOVE OVER, DOOM, FOR 2002 ONE MUST FALL: 2097 IS A SURE WINNER!\" GAMEBYTES Are you tired of PC beat-em-up games that don't live up to their hype? PC Gamer says \"this is a truly excellent game\" and \"you won't be disappointed\" with One Must Fall 2097. PC Answers calls it \"outstanding\", PC Home calls it \"a must\" and PC Gamer says it «plays brilliantly\". Computer Game Review says One Must Fall 2097 is \"fast, furious and fun above and beyond the call of duty\". PC Gamer also calls it «the definitive\" and \"most awesome beat-'em-up on the PC\" our games on Even people who tend to not like fighting games seem to enjoy the sheer playability and fun of One Must Fall. GO EPIC Play head-to-head against your friends or fight your way through increasingly difficult tournaments. Use your winnings to upgrade, trade robots and purchase training in an attempt to defeat diverse enemies with unique personalities. Features multi-channel, metal-crushing sound effects and heart-pounding digital music. One Must Fall 2097 is only $39. Or, get the game, the 60-page OMF Strategy Guide and a color poster for only $49. NOT AVAILABLE IN STORES CALL 1-800-972-7434 TO ORDER! EPIC MEGA GAMES Please add $4 s&h. Visa, Mastercard and checks accepted. MD residents add 5% sales tax. Every order includes a bonus shareware game. In UK/Europe call Epic MegasGames UK Ltd. at +44 (0)1767-260903. Epic MegaGames Inc.. 3204 Tower Oaks Blvd #410 Rockville MD 20852  (301) 983-9771 Fax (301) 299-3841 TRY THE SHAREWARE VERSION TODAY! On CompuServe GO EPIC and visit the Epic Forum or call Exec-PC BBS at (414) 789-4360 or on the Internet ftp any of our shareware games from ftp.uml.edu in the /msdos/games/epic directory . Z. "


"I wanted to thank you for nal two lines sum it all; \"I've thing about the technical feats about 50/50. Some people liked the excellent editorial on page seen software piracy hurt pubthey have accomplished. Third, the column. Others thought it was 12 titled \"What's An Honest lishers and computer platforms subscribe to Chris Crawford's Inlower than stupid. When we beGamer To Do?\" It was refresh(Atari's ST is the most dramatic teractive Entertainment Degan to departmentalize the gening to see the stand that you case). I believe debundling has sign newsletter (5251 Sierra res, we decided that it would be took in regard to directing the same potential.\" Road, San Jose, CA 95132, $36 easier for our readers to find the your readers not to buy unPeter Beruk US per year), Miller Freeman's rumors they were seeking in those bundled software-even from Litigation Manager, SPA Game Developer magazine, departmental columns than to one of your advertisers. The Washington, D.C. and/or Morph's Outpost. wade through the preposterous Software Publishers AssociaFourth, attend the annual Comfiction associated with the Bag tion, a trade group representThe SPA policy statement is puter Game Developers ConferGuy. We also started to run into ing over 1200 software available from Peter atence in Santa Clara, CA. (For logistical problems, because the publishers and developers has Pberuk@spa.org. We believe that more information write to 555 back page is one of the first pages been very active in trying to every software publisher and reBryant Street, Suite 330, Palo to go to the printer. So, the ruget organizations to stop sell seller, as well as every hardware Alto, CA 94301, or call (415) mors were no longer as fresh as ing unbundled product. bundler should sign it. 948-CGDC.) they could be. A committee of approxiSo, much as he was close to the mately 40 SPA members was WHEN YOU BRING BACK hearts of many of our editors, we formed this past fall to discuss WISH ... OLD BAG HEAD retired him to a dimension from what could be done to control First, let me congratulate What happened to the Ruwhich we can release him from this serious issue for the inyour magazine for all the immor Guy? We loved The Rutime to time. Expect a guest apdustry. Since that time, and provements you've made; a mor Guy! Get him back, pay pearance in an upcoming issue four meetings later, much has year ago I wouldn't touch it, whatever you have to and get in a non-obtrusive way. Meanbeen accomplished. now I never miss an issue! his head back in that bag. It while, we think you'll enjoy CirOne of those accomplishNow, I'd like to ask a queswas nice being able to hear ulis' commentary and find his ments has been the develoption: how does a creative and about the games I want to perspective to provide refreshing ment of a policy statement talented high-school graduate play months in advance. I've counterpoint to our Editor-inand bundled software update. like me go about becoming a been a subscriber for a little Chief's perspective in Rants & The policy statement is degame designer, a position covover a year now, and a readRaves. signed to facilitate the effieted by millions of gamers!? er a lot longer. Please bring Finally, to slake your thirst for cient and legal distribution of Igal Vainshteino him back. new games, you need only see our software products bundled Toronto, ON, Canada Michael Smith Fall Feature on page 35. More with hardware products. We via the World Wide Web filling, without all the fiction. are encouraging everybody P.S. Keep up the excellent from publishers to resellers to work! The Bag Guy responds: I find BRANDISHED sign on to this statement, at Thanks! Now, for all you myself trapped in this LovecraftNAPOLEON which time we would public would-be game designers, let us ian dimension, shackled by the loI'm a Napoleonic Wars fan. cize it so that it would pressuggest a course of action. First, gistical tentacles of Og Suggoth I would appreciate it greatly if sure other organizations to learn to program in C++. Most himself. I am not dead. I have you did a special on games of do the same. With an organigame companies cannot afford to not passed this veil as some have this topic. zation signing this, we hope take a chance on would-be designreported, as some have misunderMaxwell Hamilton that other interested resellers ers who have great ideas but don't stood by my disappearance. I inBaton Rouge, LA will be able to identify the know what it would take, protend to make good my escape from \"good guys from the bad» gramming-wise, to implement time to time. But be forewarned, I Our Editor-in-Chief is a and make an intelligent them. Second, start noticing the can only escape on brief occasions Napoleonic Wars fan. He would choice as to where to lawfully names of the developers who creand then, this horrid cesspool of appreciate it greatly if there were acquire their products. The ate the programs you enjoy-DEevil sucks me back into oblivion. enough Napoleonic wargames on unbundled software update is VELOPERS, not publishers. Try Therefore, gentle readers, rememwhich to publish a special. Except geared towards resellers/reto find out where they are located ber me with fond thoughts. Welfor two or three, none of the earlitailers and is intended to eduand, if possible, find one that you come me on those occasions when er games will work on the current cate their employees so that admire near you and try to beI reappear and peruse the IBM platform. Spectrum all parts of the chain know come acquainted there (developers columns associated with each HoloByte's FIELDS OF GLORY, what is legal, and illegal. aren't usually as big or wellgenre for such prescient tales of SSI'S WATERLOO, and SSI's BATI hope that through our mu known as publishers, so they're of the future which you desire. TLES OF NAPOLEON are the only tual efforts that we will be able ten willing to listen or talk to Editor's Translation: The mail land games we can think of in reto bring a stop to this. Your fisomeone who understands some on old Bag Guy has always been cent IBM history. 18 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. AUGUST 1995 "


" TWEP 1995 GETTING TO MORADA WAS EASY. NOTHING WAS AS IT SEEMED. IT WAS SHEER MURDER ONCE WE ARRIVED. 0IN THE SCHEME OF THINGS... INCLUDING US. WE HAD RE-INVENTED OURSELVES. THAT'S JUST THE WAY IT IS HERE. LIKE A MIND JOURNEY OF ADVENTUROUS DECEIT. BUT HEY, IT'S ALSO A HooT. AND TO MISS IT WOULD BE THE BIGGEST CRIME OF ALL. MODUS OPERANDI. THE FIRST TEXT-BASED ROLE PLAYING GAME ACROSS MULTIPLE ON-LINE SERVICES. FEATURING NEVER-ENDING FOUL PLAY. JOIN US ON PRODIGY, GENIE OR AMERICA ONLINE IF YOU DARE. Made in cooperation with Simutronics, the creators of Gemstone III, and Cyberstrike Q SHS Time Warner Electronic Publishing Anybody can filla screen. We'd rather fill your mind. For more information visit our website: http://pathfinder.com/t wep/games/mod op Circle Rentier senid/6 "


"STEEPER BANK SHALLOWEST BANK 90\"POINT 1: BANK APPROX 30 2 MINIMUM AIRSPEED 3. MAXIMUM ALTITUDE 4. LEVEL PITCH ALTITUDE EIFFEL TOWER FLY IN THE FACE OF DANGER. Wind gusting. Clouds building. You set the conditions, then you conquer them. New Microsoft Flight Simulator 5.1 on CD. You choose the cities and airports, now more than 200 airports worldwide. Cities and places so detailed you can spot the landmarks and rattle their windows. Buzz airport towers from Guantnamo Bay to Auckland, New Zealand. Circle the pyramids. Fly barrel rolls over the Taj Mahal Try a zero-visibility landing between the mountains at Geneva International Microsoft WHERE DO YOU WANT TO GO TODAY?\" "


"Migust 1E teme STEERER WIND Clinht HALLOWEST GOLDEN GATE BRIDGE STEEPEST BANK FLY IN THE FACE OF DEATH. Try stunts you wouldn't dare in real life. Set the weather so you can fly Cuban 8s around a fog-shrouded Golden Gate Bridge, and then land in 40 mph gusts at SFO. Fly Lindbergh's path from New York to Paris, using only your instruments to plot your way, using nerves of steel to handle the bone-jarring turbulence. With Microsoft Flight Simulator 5.1, real-life flight equations and models let you find out what it's like to actually fly, to fly in the most frightening real-life conditions. MODERATE BANK WIND SHALLOWEST LEVET SHALLOWEST STEEREST MODERATE WORLD TRADE CENTER FLY IN THE FACE OF THE FAA. Fly patterns that would get you arrested. Test your flight skills with 20 new gameplay scenarios. Land on the USS Nimitz. Slalom between buildings on Park Avenue, the Champs Élysées, North Michigan Avenue. Land a plane in the Los Angeles Coliseum. Touch down at some of the world's most difficult airports on days you would never get clearance to land. Your ability to customize weather patterns, choose airports, and fly above 3D clouds and scenery that changes with the time of day and time of year makes flying as realistic as possible. Get new Microsoft Flight Simulator 5.1. It's as close to reality as you want to get. For cool information on computer flight Simulation, try out the Flight Simulation Forum on Campuserve (\"GO FSFORUM\"). 1995 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved. Microsoft is a registered trademark and Where do you want to go today?is a trademark of Microsoft Corporation. Flight Simulator is a trademark of Bruce A. Artwick. Circle Reader Service #268 "


"READ.ME THE LATEST NEWS FROM THE GAMING WORLD Starflight, Carfights, And Mega-Bug-Bytes SSI's Ambitious Lineup Plugs into An Online, Multiplayer Future Strategic Simulations, Inc., <Alt-Tab> keystroke away, containing the single most prolific pubmodem lights a'blinking! strong action ellisher of computer games over in the realm of action ements. The gamings' 15 year history, is games, SSI has several multigraphic elemoving both literally and figuplayer projects in the works, ments of Assasratively. As SSI's Sunnyvale, the first of which may be RESIN are CA, offices expand, they are 'TURN TO JACOB'S STAR. This se important commaking room for an extremely quel to RENEGADE, the space ponents of the ambitious project line-up. combat game released earlier game; complex Besides the evolutionary this year, will have essentially lighting will enchanges the company is going the same graphics and game hance the through, there also seems to structure as the original, but game's feel, and be a scent of revolution in the with new missions, plus mo-motion-capture air, perhaps fueled by the comdem and network play. Hopetechnology is pany's new owner, Mindscape. fully SSI will flesh out the being used to At just about every level, the RENEGADE universe a bit more give fluid movenew buzz around the company than they did with the original.ment to the is \"online, multiplayer play.\" Next up is ASSASSIN (working player's characAll this is occurring just as the title), an action-adventure ter. company is making a greater game slated for release during NECRODOME, Kelson's last order was: Do Nothing commitment to support Winthe first quarter of 1996. This developed by dows '95. Thus, the SSI gamis a side-scrolling game that foRaven (of ing enthusiasts of the near cuses on exploration and puzHERETIC fame) future may find each other an zle-solving, while still and scheduled for FLESH & BONES? SSI's upcoming THUNDERSCAPE rolerelease in the first playing game will sport a lean-and-mean look, as these skeletal and demonic baddies may attest. quarter of 1996, SKE is basically a multiplayer demolition derby more intense as a multiplayer game in the Car Wars game. Up to eight people can boardgame tradition. The fight as individuals or as teams. player's car will be equipped Players can even have two peowith various weapons as he or ple per vehicle: one to fire the she peels around an arena, weapons, and one to do the keeping guns trained on rivals driving. Finally, plans are in all the while. By successfully place for implementing a surviving an arena combat, voice-over-modem and netplayers will win prizes, gain work feature so that players prestige and be able to equip will be able to scream at each GENERALS IN CIVVIES Relaxing in the command post from their ALLIED GENERAL labors are (left to right) Jonathan Korman, Chris Perry and Rick Martinez. For their vehicles with bigger, badother during play. more info on forthcoming SSI strategy games, see page 139. der weapons. Even in the midst of this NECRODOME will be even multiplayer wave, SSI is not 22 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD  AUGUST 1995 "


"The CGW PLAYING LATELY? Here are the games that your fellow players are blowing the most time with. Let us know which game you've been playing the most by writing the name of your current addiction in the \"Playing Lately?\" blank of the CGW Top 100 ballot. Top Results for CGW #131, JUNE 1995 1. 2. X-COM: Terror From The Deep (MicroProse) Panzer General (SSI) Dark Forces (LucasArts) Master of Magic (MicroProse) 6. 7. 8. NBA Live (Electronic Arts) Descent (Interplay) Wing Commander 3 (Origin) X-COM: UFO Defense (MicroProse) Jagged Alliance (Sir-Tech) Tie Fighter (LucasArts) straying from their roots, which are in wargames and role-playing games. Wargamers should see Broadsides & Gripeshot, page 139, for the news on that front. As for role-players, the word is \"Aden.\" SSI is proud of their new fantasy world (which is not, for the record, a TSR AD&D product), and several games are being developed to take place in that universe. The first will be THUNDERSCAPE a first-person RPG set in Aden. Here, players will move and conduct ranged combat in real-time, while hand-to-hand combat will be phased. A party of up to six characters is helped along by the 3D rotating automap. These characters can improve all skills including spell casting) use and experience. Better still, there is no experience level cap! The world of Aden is also the setting for an SSI actionadventure game, ENTOMORPH, due in September for WINDOWS and January for the Mac. Designed and developed by CyberLore Studios, ENTOMORPH offers a dark vision of a world overrun by... (can you guess?)...bugs! The player is a hero whose job is to save an unexplored island from these pests. Unfortunately, the only way to do this is to undergo a gradual metamorphosis into an insect as only Franz Kafka and Jeff Goldblum have fully experienced. As the hero undergoes various levels of this transformation, he develops new abilities, including magic, to use in his battle to save the island. A final dispatch from Aden is that this world will also form \"Thank God the Notable Quotes \"Thanks to LucasArts graphics in X-COM: for another amazing reTERROR FROM THE Wit, wisdom and caustic quips lease. DARK FORCES is DEEP are mediocre. from gaming's harshest critics outstanding and I can't Otherwise, with gamestop playing it!\" play this intense, I'd J. Coles, Stelton, CT have constant nightmares from the images.\" Andrew Prescott, Queens, NY \"My prayers have been answered! Thanks to NBA LIVE! \"95, I can play with the big boys...One \"I've turned into Fidel playing JAGGED ALthing: bring back # 23 in NBA LIVE! '96. I love LIANCE. 'Leave me alone-I busy!\"\" this game!\" Chip von Unwerth, New Orleans, LA Casey Lee, Seattle, WA \"I wonder what DARK FORCES could have been like with a multiplayer option and more levels?\" David Hayes, South Amboy, N \"All of the WING COMMANDER games are great, but they end too soon. Also, it is unrealistic to fly in twos 95% of the time. Otherwise, I love 'em\" Aaron Stoller, Albany, NY the basis for a paper-and-pencil role-playing game to be released in early 1996 by West End Games (which have had success with their Star Wars and Paranoia paper role-playgame. Clearly, SSI's marketing ing games). There are also department has found their plans to release the world of Garden of Aden. Aden as an expansion set for Alan Emrich an existing collectible card and Petru Schlunk AUGUST 1995. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 23 "


"READ.ME LORDS OF MIDNIGHT Morkin at the river.\" Have we met before? Well, Publisher Domark is well on yes and no. Gamers who have their way to creating a rich, in epic fashion, but the troops U.S. Gold). This sci-fi thriller, played MIDWINTER, FLAMES OF large real-world environment. you recruit don't fight en however, is looking to set itself FREEDOM and AsuES OF EMPIRE The level of detail in LOM is masse. Their numbers are simapart from its predecessor and will instantly recognize LORDS simply astonishing. The polyply lumped into the resolution the rest of the pack with an OF MIDNIGHT as a Mike Singlegons that made up the nondeof personal combat between entirely new approach, which ton game. script landscapes in leaders, a la PIRATES, on a sep-includes some groundbreakAt the outset, you control Singleton's 8-bit games are arate, static screen. ing visual perspectives. Prince Morkin, who starts off gone, replaced by a Although LOM is not yet a This is a sequel in storyline at a castle in the far rich, fractal-generatfinished product, we're fascionly-your trip home is hied tapestry. The nated by the notion of a Mike jacked and you are taken ground is almost Singleton world drawn in the hostage on the moon, only to never entirely level kind of detail never possible in be broken out by a faction of or linear. It's not his previous games. And human rebels that persuade drawn to scale, of something tells us that, amidst you to join in their rebellion. course—this the hype, this might be the After that, FADE TO BLACK is a wouldn't be a next RPG to seriously push whole new game. It's kind of fantasy game if the gaming envelope. like mixing the look of ALONE the rocky peaks IN THE DARK with the atmosdidn't look like FADE TO BLACK phere of OUT OF THIS WORLD unfathomably imand then using an over-themense, jagged Thrown in prison in the scishoulder point of view. Or Wythran the Weaver teeth—but fi future? No problem course, this first-and-a-half things seem there's always someone person perspective is suppleright when around to break mented with the usual cineyou're peering you out and assist matic camera angles down through you in finding gamers wispy clouds and destroying from your seat the ultimate atop a dragon evil. Of course Wythran is brimming with (that's right, you might die you can fly a once or thrice To halt the action press SPACE dragon). along the LORDS OF MIDNIGHT combines the makings of an epic fantasy Moreover, way, but hey, adventure with several unique twists like multiple character LOM gives the breaking out G napnak control and a fully inhabitable environment player the opof your portunity to enprison cell's northwest with a small circle of ter and roam around the the only part friends. This circle expands as multitude of buildings litterwe said was you make your way across the ing the landscape, although easy. countryside, meeting all manhow this will work in practice So it is ner of friend and foe in a jourremains to be seen. In our earwith FADE TO ney with all the makings of an ly preview copy, they all BLACK, Elecepic fantasy adventure. Of seemed to be endless and rantronic Art's course, the ultimate goal is domly constructed mazes that sequel to the putting down the evil intenbore little relation to the award wintions of Boroth the Wolfheart. shape and size of the buildings ning FLASHPlayers will be able to control as seen from outside. BACK (which up to 24 characters (not simThe group combat system incidentally Not everyone has deadly intentions, but you sure should-with ply the hero) either directly or could also stand to be fleshed has been reit's cool texture-mapped polygons and eerie atmosphere, FADE TO by setting specific missions for out a bit. You would think that cently re-reBLACK should have your trigger finger itchy. them, like \"rendezvous with epic battles would be handled leased by energy. 44 AUW TU NE PENSAIS TOUT DE QUEL PETITIE.CILA TENTIDEO AUSSI FACILEORUT O PAS 1-05-LATE Lao USENTE NEAR naoz N-DELADE Laduce UD1 LNADHAL ust-ANT 24 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. AUGUST 1995 "


"SHORT TAKES ON GAMES UNDERGOING BETA TESTING AND SOON TO BE RELEASED PIPELINE ESTIMATED RELEASE DATES BASED ON THE LATEST INFORMATION FROM GAME DEVELOPERS 9/95 File Chase Units Battle for Bastogne, December 19, 1944 Assault Reinforcements Status Display Options Lielp E c. 18. COZOARA DARBA are used to. And for the most director of Avalon Hill's comis followed by offensive fire part, this innovative approach puter division to form his own and then assault. Don't be works—as Conrad leans over company, and he defooled—even with the into peer around corners, the cided terspersed phases, this is camera perspective strictly a turn-based shifts accordingly, algame. Yet therein lies lowing the player to do one of ARDENNES' best the same. Rounding attributes: it may be corners is still a little played as a step up for tricky-the resultant those who want somecamera shift is a little disthing a little more seorienting-but we're rious than PANZER counting on the folks at GENERAL, but who Delphine and EA to solve still want to avoid loads of this problem. le rules and minutiThere are tons of misshapen, morphThe interface ing green things out helps the gamer there who would just along with userlove to get their friendly icons, like hands on you. That's a vanishing tire to where combat comes indicate that a unit into play. Simply has already press the approprimoved, faded bulate key, draw your lets to show that a weapon, and blast unit has already them as the camera fired, and binocuzooms in a bit (don't Timu 00.00 (Limt 03:00) Alied Arttery Fire Phase lars that pop up forget to reload when a unit is first though). The grand old hexgrid gets a new lease on life in the tactical view of spotted. ARDENNES The gameplay BATTLEGROUND: ARDENNES. runs well in Winlooks great, as do dows and shows the graphics (which have to concentrate first on recogoff the exquisite artwork of three different resolutions, nizable battles, and to \"do Charlie Kibler, probably best including 640 x 480) and them up right, and in style.\" known for his work on Adsound. The environment has So, Talonsoft finds itself tackvanced Squad Leader and oththe right \"eerie alien spaceling nothing less than the Bater Avalon Hill boardgames. ship\" feel to it, and is plenty tle of the Bulge in Having Kibler's talent on interactive, from opening seBATTLEGROUND: ARDENNES. board is probably the main cret doors to picking up The appeal of the subject reason that the tactical tools and weapons. FADE TO matter is obvious: Nazis, the board, which combines the BLACK should be moving to ultimate bad guys, versus the familiar hex-grid with 3D the forefront of gamers' scrappy, plucky and green representations of slopes and minds this fall. G.I. Joes. Without resorting valleys, works so well. Surto the hero worship or overly prisingly, the view is clear BATTLEGROUND: dry number-crunching of enough that gamers can easiARDENNES most Bulge games, ARDENNES ly identify units and quickly finds a comfortable middle ascertain the lay of the land. New companies rise and ground in dealing with slices With its blend of solid historifall, but the hot topics in of the Bulge at platoon level. cal research, narrow focus wargaming usually remain the The sequence of play will and unique visual perspecsame. Jim Rose realized this warm veteran boardgamers' tive, ARDENNES could be an when he left his position as the hearts: a defensive fire phase early fall wargaming hit. NAME OF GAME, COMPANY ...... ........RELEASE DATE 11TH HOUR Virgin .................9/95 ACROSS THE RHINE MicroProse.......8/95 AGE OF RIFLES SSI. ........... AWFUL GREEN THINGS QQP .........10/95 BATTLES IN TIME QOP ............ 9/95 BEYOND SQUAD LEADER AH ...........9/95 BURIED IN TIME Presto Studios .......8/95 CAESAR II Impressions ............ ..9/95 CHESSMASTER 5000 Mindscape ......9/95 CIV-NET MicroProse ... .....8/95 CONQUEST OF THE NEW WORLD Interplay 10/95 CRUSADER: NO REMORSE Origin ......9/95 CYBERMAGE Origin ............... 10/95 DAGGERFALL Bethesda .............9/95 DUNGEON MASTER II Interplay ........8/95 DUST Cyberflix... .9/95 EMPIRE II New World ...............9/95 FAST ATTACK BOATS Time-Warner .....8/95 FRANKENSTEIN Interplay .......... .9/95 G-NOME 7th Level ................ .8/95 GUARDIANS OF DESTINY Virgin .......9/95 KNIGHT MOVES Spectrum HoloByte ....9/95 LAST BLITZKRIEG SSG............ LORDS OF MIDNIGHT Domark .........8/95 MAGIC THE GATHERING MicroProse ....9/95 MECHWARRIOR II Activision .........8/95 MILLENNIA GameTek ...............9/95 MISSION CRITICAL Legend ..........9/95 NAVY STRIKE MicroProse ..9/95 NCAA FOOTBALL Mindscape ........ PHANTASMAGORIA Sierra ...... 8/95 PRISONER OF ICE I-Motion ..........8/95 7TH FLEET Avalon Hill .............10/95 SILENT HUNTER SSI ............ 9/95 SIMISLE Maxis .................... ..10/95 SPACE BUCKS Impressions .........10/95 STAR CONTROL III Accolade ....... 11/95 STEEL PANTHERS SSI TEKWAR Capstone 9/95 TERRA NOVA Virgin ................10/95 TFX 2000 Ocean 10/95 THE DIG LucasArts ...... THIS MEANS WAR! MicroProse ......9/95 TOP GUN Spectrum HoloByte .........8/95 WARHAMMER Mindscape ..........10/95 WOODEN SHIPS & IRON MEN Avalon Hill ....10/95 .8/95 9/95 ..9/95 ..9/95 AUGUST 1995. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 25 "


"READ.ME News You Can Use From The Gaming Biz The 64 Gigabyte? Sierra On-Line recently development will remain au4 development team, but the domized campaign game. ... purchased strategy/wargame tonomous, no decision has product's development should Chinon America Corporation, publisher Impressions Softbeen made yet whether its tinot be delayed, company a manufacturer of CD-ROM driware for an undisclosed tles will be labeled as Sierra or sources say. Spectrum Presives and other computer compoamount. Impressions PresiImpressions products. dent Lou Gioia says FALCON 4 nents, has begun to manufacture dent David Lester points to Struggling to cope with $18 will ship sometime in 1996. stereoptic glasses for use with the sale as further indication million in losses for fiscal '94, Interactive Magic plans to computers under the name Gof consolidation in the indusSpectrum Holo Byte recently publish Trevor Chan's CAPITAL berSludes. CyberShades will come try, and says it was necessary laid off approximately 10% of ISM. CAPITALISM is a tremendousbundled with an interesting proto increase his company's \"disits worldwide force of 400 emly detailed business simulation gram called DEPTH DWELLERS, a tribution clout.\" Although Imployees. The layoffs included with SVGA graphics and several game that causes you to feel like pressions' design and key personnel on the FALCON scenarios in addition to the ranyou're playing DOOM inside a View Master, as well as other power will be required for games. ... Amtex, known for its Kitty's intelligence. I envision line of pinball games and its a multi-processor subsump fishing program, is broadening tion architecture with exten its line to include: PRECISION APsive self-modeling capabili PROACH, a detailed landing simties (useful for honing ulation for the space shuttle; Will Wright isn't an ordinary and perhaps \"memory metadaptive strategies offline). ATP 3-D GRAPHICS EXTENSION, game designer (if there is such a als» would provide the loco Software: Since Kitty will an expansion of SubLogic's thing). The genius behind SIMmotive forces for Kitty. continually adapt, I can in ATP: AIR TRANSPORT PILOT City got involved with program Sensor systems would be very vent new games to play with game with more up-to-date ming because of his fascination it all the time. If I say \"Kitty, graphics; and SAILING SIMULAwith robotics. When he realized bring me the ball,\" it will try TOR, a sailing simulation for that the greatest challenges in rodifferent things until it has smaller (non-America's Cup) botics were software-related, he accomplished the task. Like craft that looks detailed in spite turned to computers in earnest. wise, if I say «Kitty, bring me of its dated graphics. ... Take 2 He still builds robots for a hoba beer,\" it might spend all Software wrapped their film by—he just finished something night trying to open the re shoot for Ripper at the end of called \"Kitty Puff Puff\" for the frigerator. I envision the fail June. Hollywood star Karen Robot War competition in San ure modes for some tasks to Allen (Raiders of the Lost Ark, AniFrancisco-which may have be quite entertaining. mal House) did 128 camera setsomething to do with his answer When I'm not interacting ups in one day, and screen to the 64 Gigabyte Question: extensive including: visual, with Kitty, it will choose new veteran Burgess Meredith did what kind of game would you sonar, RF, laser-ranging, autasks and skills for itself to 60 in one day to speed produclike to design given unlimited redio (with adaptive voicelearn (how fast can it get tion. ... Remember Prodigy's sources? recognition), tactile and from point A to point B, grand experiment in multi-playMy ultimate game would thermal sensing capabilities. what's the highest thing it er gaming in 1992? NEXT PRESInot run on a desktop com Power consumption will be can jump up on, etc.). After DENT? NEXT PRESIDENT allowed puter but rather in a small too high for current battery booting Kitty up in a new hundreds of gamers to partici(cat-sized), fast, agile robot. (or fuel-cell) technology; environment, the first task pate in a simulated presidential This robot (let's call it Kitty) therefore, Kitty will store enit will work on is mapping election from pre-primary seawould exhibit highly adaptive ergy in a flywheel/capacitor out all the available AC out son through the November elecbehavior and respond (and sub-system and recharge by lets (using visual and RF tion. Now, developer Crossover adapt) to my verbal feedback plugging into an AC outlet sensors). Technologies and Scholastic (positive and negative). for a few seconds every 15 One day, after I retire, I Software are putting a NEXT Hardware: Pneumatic acminutes or so. plan to build something like PRESIDENT for the '96 election on tuators, high current servos Considerable processing this. Really. their new Scholastic Network via the Internet 26 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. AUGUST 1995 "


"Take a multimedia journey through the life of Marilyn Monroe Norma Jean 1966 The Birth of Marilyok 31/07 103) The Goddess IUSTATORI Persona Renaissance POSTS The Legacy 2. Portrait of My Dad Video Clipe R ARV WOW Curator 1 Timeline TOS The Archer Aural and All Abou Eve were the MWANAM or of The Asphalunplein Traitind Sharing ayten Low Can Bernard Hollywoods 194019215446 9 150 1951 195472955 1994 59 290 291945 1942 CLARI EV WHO gun on MARILYN COREL CD HOMES The timeless mystique of Marilyn Monroe is unveiled through the eyes of renowned Hollywood photographer Bruno Bernard. This fascinating CD-ROM biography is a «must-have\" collector's item for all of Marilyn's devoted fans. Circle Reader Service #38 For Windows\". and Macintosh O!!! High-resolution graphics on CD-ROM $49 DELLWare 1-800-449-3355 COREL 11: KUR-0110 Call now for faxed literature! 1-613-728-0826 ext 3080 Document #1066 Please mention code WCRL8 *155 plus applicable taxes "


"READ.ME A Tribute In Time An Interview With Science Fiction Author Roger Zelazny About His Fantasy Adventure Game CHRONOS MASTER game? ing and his willingam an admirer of Farmer and together and talked over the ness to stretch his art knew the concept was similar. differences between a story beyond the convenIn CHRONOS MASTER, most of and the game. Roger is used tional bounds with these guys in the pocket unito being able to make a charwhich most writers verses were pretty nasty in acter do anything he wants. are familiar. We offer their time. So, they pretty well in a game, that just doesn't the text of that intercover up knowledge about happen. view in memory of a each other's residences and CGW: Jane, had you written brilliant, inspiraonly a few places are known to games before? tional and imaginaeach character. Lindskold: I had played tive man. CGW: Interdimensional travChaosium games and CGW: First, why el and time travel are recurring GURPS adventures. So, I did you decide to risk themes in many of your worksused those modules and a designing a computer the Amber books, Eye of Cal, and Dream Forge design docutime travel in Roadmarks. Is this ment for another game as Zelazny: To learn a Miniver Cheever-esque way of models. Working in the same what could be done. indicating your disappointment in house/office with Roger, I I didn't want to current reality? could always ask him how he come along live Zelazny: It's simply a would solve a given problem. Roger Zelazny, a speculative years from now and find that mixed bag to increase the CGW: So, what is the gamefiction author of the first everything had passed me by. number of colorful environplay like? magnitude (Chronicles of AmCapstone gave me an opporments I can use. Lindskold: It's very open. ber, Lord of Light, Roadmarks), tunity, so I sat down and Lindskold: It's because his You don't have to start at died of natural causes in June thought up a story that I imagination simply doesn't \"A\"—you can choose any of 1995. He leaves a legacy of thought would lend itself to hold any bounds. These point. Or opt out of a tough richly imagined worlds, vividthis medium. My girlfriend, pocket universes run the universe if your character isn't ly drawn characters and Jane, is a lifetime gamer. She gamut from cyberpunkish ready for it. I designed a lot pleasant memories behind. At read the story and came up high tech with Dysonspheres of puzzles, but if a person the time of his death, Zelazny with beautiful decision points and futuristic biker gangs to doesn't want to think, they had finished collaborating that just added so much to high fantasy in its most delican always fight their way with Jane Lindskold on an the story it was unbelievable. cate form with unicorns and through it. Of course, like in original story called CGW: So, what's CHRONOSmythology. many of Roger's novels, the CHRONOS MASTER to be develMASTER about? CGW: Is it a difficult transicombat won't always be useful. oped by DreamForge as a Zelazny: CHRONOS MASTER tion between writing a linear story His heroes have to be persons computer game for Intra involves a chase through a and an open game? of both action and intelliCorp. In spite of failing number of pocket universes Zelazny: I had a computer gence. health, Roger's work ethic with two protagonists who game back in '85, based on Zelazny: That's because was such that he was planning misunderstand each other at the Amber series, that was there is a lot of moral ambigua heavy schedule of public apthe beginning. One wants very linear. With this one, ity in the game. I think the pearances, including one as vengeance upon the working with Jane and longer you live and the more Guest of Honor at the Genproviders of the pocket uniDreamForge, there are new you see, the less black and Con Gaming Convention this verses because his home planpossibilities with every new white things appear and the August, to promote the game. et was victimized. wrinkle in the plotline. So, more shades of gray they beComputer Gaming World had CGW: That sounds something refinements are not like labocome. So, there is even a vilthe privilege of interviewing like Philip Jose Farmer's World of rious rewrites, and Jane helps lain who turns out to have a Zelazny shortly before his Tiers. Any homages to Tiers in the with the gaming part. sense of honor in the game death. We were struck by his game? Lindskold: We went which he didn't have in the dedication to life-long learnZelazny: Not directly, but I through Roger's first design earlier years. 28 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. AUGUST 1995 "


"Historical Strategy Game DO TADA COMING SUMMER RDENNES LIVEN THE BATTLE OF THE BULGE VOL I Actual screens may vary no PILVOSDA Interlace provides detailed information on all units Experience unparalled historical realism! Battleground ArdennesTM is like no other historical strategy game you've ever played! With the BattleviewIm combat system, you can relive crucial moments during the Battle of the Bulge, the most famous American land battle of WWII. Can you hold off the advancing German war machine? Dig in with the U.S. 101st Airborne defending freedom from the Nazis at Bastogne, or ride to victory with the legendary German King Tiger tank. Take command of Peiper's infamous SS or lead a blistering U.S. counterattack to retake Stoumont. Simple Point and Click Windows interface Drag & Drop movement and combat Realistic stereo combat sounds A plethora of scenarios Modem to Modem play Vivid SVGA color graphics \"Battle View\" showing American defense of Stoumont against determined assualt by Peiper's troops PO BOX 632 Forest Hill MD If it's not FUN 21050-0632 who cares! PCD CROM TALY  Copyright 1995 TalonSoft Inc. Circle Reader Service #289 Voice: 410-821-7282. Compuserve: GO GAMEPUB C CIS: 75162,373. INTERNET: 75162,373@compuserve.com . GENIE: XRG98298 "


"READ.ME NOV 178 0011 FLIGHT UNLIMITED through its use of advanced a mustThe greatest challenge in flight modeling which calcuhave for real creating a light simulation lies lates air flow over and under and virtual pilots alike. in crafting a realistic three diyour aircraft. The main interJust make sure mensional flight experience face is an FBO (Fixed Base you have a on a two dimensional computOperation) building from 90MHz Pentium er screen. Although flight sims which you coordinate all of for flying in will never truly give you the your air time, including dehigh-res. experience of real flight, tailed flight lessons. You get IBM CDFLIGHT UNLIMITED from Lookseveral colorful reROM, $79.95. ing Glass gions to fly over inCircle Reader cluding Dinan, Service #393. France and Secona, Looking Arizona) and Glass Techthere's an aerobatnologies, ic airplane in here Cambridge, MA for everyone. (800) 360-7455 Flight lessons will CAR JACKING 101 The Magic CARPET enteach you comHI OCTANE gine has been customized into a misplex aerobatic Fight or flight? That's the siles-and-mayhem hot-rod in Hi OCTANE. maneuvers, and defining question in Hi OCa large set of obstacle TANE, the latest release from walls on tight turns, and you'll courses will hone your skills. the wacky chaps at Bullfrog float slowly down to earth alter Additionally, glider fans may Software. Bullfrog has taken jumping off a high ramp. The GONE FLYIN' Life in the skies of FLIGHT opt for being towed aloft in the beautiful graphics engine six courses are varied and UNLIMITED is gorgeous, relaxing and unbelievably real. the Grob sailplane and then of MAGIC CARPET, given it challenging, and the car-to-car set free. These features, when some gravity, and turned it machine gun and missile warTechnologies comes as close combined with an abundance into a thrill-a-millisecond hovfare is intense. The standard as you can get. It does so by of camera angles, headercraft racing/combat game. VGA mode graphics are as imrendering photo-realistic termounted display support, and The feel of hovercraft control pressive as MAGIC CARPET's, rain on the fly-at resolutions some truly useful documentais perfect: momentum will and the display options even up to 1024x768!-and tion make FLIGHT UNLIMITED slam your careening craft into include a crisp Super VGA MULTIMEDIA CELEBRITY POKER \"Morgan Fairchild, Jonathan Frakes and Joe Piscopo walked into a casino to play some cards, Joe says to Morgan...\" Sound like the lead of a Hollywood joke? It's actually the premise behind MULTIMEDIA CELEBRITY POKER, a WINDOWS poker simulation where your opponents are the digital versions of the aforementioned actors. While those looking for fast-hand poker should probably look elsewhere the way the players stare at HOLLE VOU this is not a you between play can be a lit20-hands-intle unnerving. As you play 5 minutes seven standard variations of kind of poker, from 5-card draw, game card deuces wild to 7-card stud, players who you'll be entertained by your like a little visucelebrity hosts, particularly al spice with Joe Piscopo, who seemed to their gambling have entirely too much fun should enjoy it. during the filming. IBM CDSurprisingly, the ROM, $49.95. Circle Reader flow of the game Service #397. is smooth, as is NEW WORLD COMPUTING, THREE JOKERS Vegas and Hollywood the digitized HOLLYWOOD, CA, (800) 325join decks in MULTIMEDIA CELEBRITY POKER. video and sound, although 8898 30 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. AUGUST 1995 "


"THESE JUST IN, REVIEWS TO FOLLOW DITS VERSAR 0223 lots of bells and whistles game on the market for that (live video, great sound and matter. Poor graphics, subpar a random world generagameplay and a clumsy intertor), this Windows title face all join forces to put this looks like it might be the game out of championship ticket for gamers looking contention in the first round. for economic kicks. We Which is too bad, since the mode, alonly wish network or mogame offers some innovative though a very highdem play was included... ideas, like a training facility end Pentium (or P6) is needed IBM CD-ROM, for practicing offensive to run it smoothly. Multiplayer $69.95. Circle and network support is provided, Reader Service allowing up to eight players to LIKE A SMOKESTACK POWERHOUSE provides #395. face and race each other. IBM ample opportunites for the power IMPRESSIONS SOFTCD-ROM, $59.99. Circle hungry. WARE, CAMBRIDGE, Reader Service #394. MA, (203) 676ELECTRONIC ARTS, SAN MAfinancial superiority. The 9002 TEO, CA, (415) 571-7171. turn-based gameplay consists WORLD of sending out survey teams to HOCKEY '95 POWERHOUSE ascertain which regions will \"Do you believe Control the energy, control yield what natural resource in Miracles?\" Anyone familiar the world—that's the grim (coal, oil, nuclear reaction with the 1980 United States HOKEY HOCKEY WORLD HOCKEY '95 has thesis underlying POWERfuel, etc.), then building the Olympic Hockey team does. some great ideas, but never really gets HOUSE, the latest business means to convert that resource And they also know the joys of past the blue line. strategy game from the folks into power. Along the way International Hockey, which defensive skills, as well as mulwho brought you AIR BUCKS you'll have to deal with changMerit Studios is trying to captiplayer international tournaand DETROIT. In a power ing governments, environture with WORLD HOCKEY '95. ments. IBM CD-ROM, $49.95. starved world, you and three mental disasters and Unfortunately, this hockey sim Circle Reader Service #398. computer opponents will use dwindling resources, not to doesn't even come close to Meril Studios, Dallas, TX, every natural resource availmention hostile takeovers and challenging EA's NHL Hockey (800)238-4277. able (there are nine) to vie for war. With snappy graphics and line, or any other hockey 2171. THE CIVIL WAR War, a 48-page Where is Ken Burns when booklet by you need him? The producBritish historian er/director of PBS's highly-acPaddy Griffith is claimed mini-series The Civil also included. War could definitely teach The game itself is game designers and producambitious-some ers a thing or two about how might say too ambito properly capture the scope tious. The strategic of the greatest conflict in U.S. game requires that history. THE CIVIL WAR, a new you deal with Army attempt from Empire, cerorganization, supply, tainly tries to push all the morale, blockade right buttons. A huge datarunning, building base gives more biographical ironclads and riverine information than details on units...you get the idea. While units, and Battle in the Civil the effects of these options may be lessened, most cannot be turned off. All of this would be less of a problem if the game weren't played in daily turns! For individual battles, the real-time system is not that different than Impressions' THE BLUE AND THE GREY, although morale is more of a factor. And the usual caveats concerning the AI definitely apply here. IBM CD-ROM, $69.95. Circle Reader Service #396. EMPIRE SOFTWARE, GAITHERSBURG, MD, (800) 216-9706 BEAUREGARD'S BANE There's plenty going on in The Civil War, but the realtime action can get frustrating for any commander. AUGUST 1995  COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 31 "


"Available at your local software retailer or order direct from New World Computing at 1-800-325-8898 (818-591-4136 outside the U.S.), or by mail: P.O. Box 4302 Hollywood, CA 90078-4302 "


"WHEN THE SMOKE CLEARS ONLY HEROES REMAIN Orion strode across the battle worn field to gather the survivors among his victorious army. After a fortnight of fierce combat, two of Orion's arch rivals had been defeated and the bounty of Tundara Castle was secure. By day's end his troops had been safely encamped, yet his thirst for vengeance raged on. Only the destruction of the remaining warlord, Vesper the Warlock, would satisfy him ... after all, the ambitions of a true Hero of Might and Magic are not easily attained!  Complex Battle Scenarios  Atmospheric Sound Effects  Scores of Monster Types Exquisite SVGA Graphics  Extensive Replay Value Original Musical Score TENGO EROES of Might and Magic Circle Reader Service #151  1995 New World Computing, Inc. Heroes of Might and Magic is a trademark of New World Computing, Inc. New World Computing and its distinctive logo and Might and Magic are registered trademarks of New World Computing Inc. All rights reserved. IBM screens shown. Actual screens may vary. NEW WORLD COMPUTING, INC P.O. Box 4302, Hollywood, CA 90078 "


"MIT II CORDENS  (WEST NORTH PACFC CAROLINA AVENUE RVENUE SA?1224 CHRNCE SHARES COARDWALK IMG tren Avalanche El Autumn Un guided   IT 1 IM "


"Action in Autumn CGW's Guide To The Biggest Fall Season Ever C hen you think of autumn, you probably think of New England's fall season with its kaleidoscopic panoply of foliage. In the world of computer games, autumn signals the annual flood of graphfic plumage and crisp game play which begins in September and continues to warm you through the cold winter months. Just as movie studios try to wow you with their early summer and Christmas releases, computer game publishers feel it's necessary to win your attention as the leaves change in order to own your mindshare throughout the rest of the year. So, every year the software publishers target the latter part of the year for their hottest new technologies, most promising movie/game/book licenses, and latest concepts from their top game, designers. The fourth quarter of each calendar year is considered a \"make or break\" fiscal quarter for most companies, and shipping by \"Christmas at the latest\" is the heartfelt desire of every developer Of course, not all of the «Christmas\" products actually become available for that special \"under the tree delivery service, but nearly every software company shoots for the holiday season. This month, we forecast the upcoming Fall and Holiday seasons with our annual summer coverage of computer games in development. This is, to our knowledge, the biggest avalanche of new game titles ever. So, as an added bonus, we decided to choose our favorites for the Top Ten computer games expected to ship between August and December of 1995 and describe them in the accompanying story, as well as offer a few short descriptions of trends within the hobby. We hope you'll find them as interesting as we do. Pinball wizards, virtual video, car crashes, ment are beautiful, but the true measure of this space debris and cool 3D will pave the way for game is in the gameplay, which we haven't computer game action during the coming months. seen. Yet, if id can make the environment as Judging by how much larger this section is than all immersive and haunting as Doom, this could be the others, this Fall should produce a bumper crop yet another mega-hit. of action titles for grinning reapers. Delphine Software, the French creators of the THE 3-D SCENE: Of course, when you think of acside-scrolling action game FLASHBACK, have discovtion, you probably think of 3-D. And when you think ered the third dimension in their spin-off, FADE TO of 3-D, your mind turns to DOOM. For you hard-core Black. In the new game, the violent, far-future DOOM fanatics, D.ZONE 2 from WizardWorks world of FLASHBACK has been rendered in full 3D to should be dishing up 1,000 new levels for DOOM create something like a SF version of ALONE IN THE and DOOM Il shortly before this issue hits the DARK. Players will battle hideous creatures with stands. A new interface will let bloodthirsty DOOMtheir lasers; view the mayhem from many shifting nators change skill levels, challenge another player, camera angles; and manipulate plenty of high-tech select turbo, accelerate monsters, start levels withgadgets to solve object-oriented puzzles and add out monsters, respawn them, and more. And, if new cinematic splash. Deathmatch is your bag, keep your BFG aimed at Of course, DOOM-style games aren't the only WizardWorks' D!MATCH, their latest offering of 500 types of 3D action games that grab gamers. Bullnew levels for DOOM and DOOM Il that lets you frog Software has already gleaned great success practice your meat tenderizing on three unsuspectfrom MAGIC CARPET and is developing two new ing friends. games in that vein: MAGIC CARPET II: THE NETHERWORLDS In case you're still not DOOMed, GT Interactive and CREATION, a MAGIC CARPET-style game that unplans to take care of that by releasing a retail verfolds under the sea. The sequel includes undersion of the original Doom, complete with a brand ground and night levels, as well as new creatures, new level, Thy Flesh Consumed. The package will spells, landscape effects, and extended level goals. include five free hours on DWANGO, the multiplayer game system. They also plan to release MAXIMUM DOOM, a collection of 1000+ new levels for Doom and Doom II created for the most part by fans of the game. If that's still not enough, consider Capstone's WITCHHaven, a very close sibling of Raven Software's HERETIC. This violent, first-person action game is set in a fantasy universe ruled by a coven of witchBullfrog's THE INDESTRUCTIBLES es who must be eradicated from their lairs. As the The undersea game has terrific graphics that give player slaughters the witches' hordes, they gather you a real sense of being submerged. Plus, CREmore power and more powerful weapons to do yet ATION's gameplay looks to be hot and heavy, with more of the same. network play as a key feature. Indeed, net play apOf course, the game many action fans want to pears to be a key element in Bullfrog's product know about most is id Software's QUAKE, the strategy across the board. spiritual sequel of Doom. id is still being very For something completely different, the Bullfrog secretive about this one, though they have team is working on a very exciting project called THE shown us some of the technology. Quake will be INDESTRUCTIBLES. In this game, players will create set in a true 3D, high-res environment. The coltheir own superhero-determining physical and oring and lighting effects in the gothic environ m ental attributes, designating home town, etc.N AUGUST 1995  COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 35 "


"Autumn Avalanche and then bash their way through a 3D cityscape from a first-person perspective. The cities/battlegrounds are very detailed, with realistic traffic patterns, pedestrian traffic, and all sorts of objects like lamp posts and mailboxes to be used in combat with a supervillain. Eight-player network play is the goal for this ambitious project. Naturally, supervillains aren't the only opponents who can create havoc in an urban environment. Can you say, \"Japanese monster movie?\" Fans of the old Japanese monster movie genre will find two products stomping their way later this year. One is 47Tek's Go-Man Team 47, a giant monster fighting game in true 3D that pits different hero robots against menacing Japanese monsters. The battles will take place in several full-fledged city environments including San Francisco's Golden Gate Park and a futuristic downtown Tokyo. Another is MONSTER Island from Magnet Interactive (now distributed by gamers dancing to a semi-automatic beat. Also, the 20th Century Fox Interactive), a 3D action/strategy next LEMMINGS game will take away the familiar side game where up to eight players compete in atview of the action and replace it with a full 3D envitempting to become the Godzilla of the Net in the ronment where players can look at the puzzles from tradition of the classic CRUSH, CRUMBLE AND CHOMP. Some other 3D titles seem to be enhanced versions of old friends. Chaos CONTROL (developed by 1-Motion for Philips Media) looks something like Simutronics' CYBERSTRIKE, except with more detailed 3D villains and, not being hampered by network latency, a faster frame rate. Fans of Interplay's Descent may enjoy Virgin's ZONE Magnet Interactive's MONSTER ISLAND Raiders. This game features similar 360-degree movement and network play, but any perspective they choose, even a first-person adds mission-based challenges to futuristic outLemmings view. The level puzzles will be in the lands known as zones. Argonaut's ALEN ALLY, pubsame vein as previous games, but will take on a lished in the U.S. by Philips, is fully rendered 3D new character. Our concern is that the simplicity of action in the style of Interplay's CYBERIA. ALIEN ALLY the original might be lost in the new 3D complexity. also features an interesting diVEHICULAR MANSLAUGHTER: This fall, the store mension as you try to decide shelves at your local software shelves may be an exwhether to trust the alien you aggerated version of L.A.'s freeways from a few encounter or not. summers back. Southern California's freeways beFrom the designers of last came notorious for freeway shootings during that year's action/adventure hit, Ecsummer. To gamers, it reminded us a lot of Steve STATICA, comes Psygnosis' URBAN Jackson's CAR WARS boardgame where you arm your Decay. It uses an enhanced vehicles and proceed to terminate everyone else's SVGA version of the ECSTATICA transportation with extreme prejudice. Origin Sysengine, and it looks fantastic. tems, publishers of AUTODUEL (the original computer Your character blasts his way version of CAR WARS), is thinking about an updated through a dark-future New York version of CAR WARS, and Apogee is considering a and a thin sci-fi storyline. monster truck game with weaponry. While you wait, Buckets of gore and quick-draw though, you can still be trading bullets and more machismo should have action potent missiles with your fellow drivers in games C 0 Psygnosis' URBAN DECAY In sifting through the upcoming autumn The CGW avalanche of games, we polled the entire ALLIED GENERAL (SSI): If there was anything questionable about the progenitor of this game, PANZER GENERAL, it was taking the perspective of the Nazi General in the title role. Nonetheless, the game offered terrific graphics, a unique role-playing aspect to its campaign game, solid play balance, exciting sound effects and e-mail play. ALLIED GENERAL promises all the play value and chrome of its predecessor with new units and a freedom-loving' perspective. staff on the upcoming games which we are most looking forward to playing. By having two rounds of voting and using the college football poll system, we came up with the following \"Top 10,\" presented in descending order. 36 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. AUGUST 1995 "


"with names like MAXIMUM ROADKILL, SCREAMER, DEAD streets, will originally appear on the Playstation. Lazenby, to perform in Fox Hunt, an interactive spy END, RAPID ASSAULT, DESTRUCTION DERBY, and TWISTED EA's calmer race game is ROAD & TRACK: THE NEED FOR thriller which uses streaming video to handle its METAL SPEED, a non-violent game where you drive exotic fast-moving action sequences. Psygnosis' DESTRUCTION DERBY, a multiplayer racsports cars like the Lamborghiing game where the object is to smash or be ni Diablo, Dodge Viper, Porsche smashed, is essentially the old Saturday night 911, and others in head-tospeedway event. The graphics look terrific, and the head modem play and solo gameplay will be bruising, especially with several competition. humans going bumper to bumper on a network. Automotive assault fans WIPE Our is another networkable combat/racing should also watch out for game from Psygnosis, but set in a future milieu. SCREAMER, a Ridge Racer-style Players will battle over 10 tracks using 8 different game from Virgin where you craft and 9 weapons. Wipeour will offer league play race through an urban environoptions for extended multiplayer competition. Also ment, and MAXIMUM ROADKILL in the multiplayer vein is ASSAULT RIGS, sometimes from Take 2, where you play a described as a filled-polygon version of SPECTRE. In cyclist of death out to kill your Assault Rigs, players pilot tanks within a maze and opponent. blast each other with a variety of projectile Finally, don't forget French LucasArts' REBEL ASSAULT 2 weapons. developer CRYO's 3D rendered racing game, DEAD In space operadom, Origin Systems is currently Sony will counter with TWISTED METAL, a vehicular End Published by Philips Media, this is a car chase hard at work shooting the cinematic footage that gladiatorial combat game designed by SingleTrak game to the death that suggests what a driving will provide segues during WinG COMMANDER IV. The Software. The game, which allows you to climb up test for James Bond ought to be like. So, there cerChristmas release will bring back the same starfrom the training arena to the killing fields of urban tainly ought to be plenty of screeching tires and studded cast to the familiar universe. The cinematSET SPATIU 123 SEPUS 2/2 catastrophic car crashes for acics are being shot on 35 millimeter film to slightly tion gamers before the end of improve the look on the PC and to take advantage the year. of the Sony Playstation's advanced color palette on VIRTUAL VIDEO: Two thrillers that version. It will also use more physical sets than and three space operas will Wing III in order to enhance the visual texture. point the way for action games At LucasArts, Vince Lee hopes these are the with full-motion video. Philips' droids you're looking for as he films REBEL ASSAULT II THUNDER IN PARADISE uses footage with full-motion video (FMV) sequences of actors in from the television show (an actual Star Wars costumes, including old Dark Helepisode entitled \"The M.A.J.O.R. met himself. The FMV sequences give the game a and the Minor\") to integrate inStar Wars movie look and help tie the game's 15 teractive movie segments with different levels together. In addition to flying Rebel arcade-style sequences. Meanfighters through elaborate levels, gamers will get to while, Capcom has hired a forshoot at real-looking Storm Troopers and buzz Electronic Arts' ROAD & TRACK: THE NEED FOR SPEED mer James Bond, George through a boggy terrain on speeder bikes. Best of CONQUEST OF THE NEW WORLD (Interplay): Promising near-endless variety, strategic planning with economic underpinning and tactical battle sequences which graphically put other \"miniatures-like\" battle scenes to shame, CoNQUEST OF THE NEW WORLD may well be a strategy gamer's dream game. Naturally, the proof is in the play-balancing, but we think this may well be the sleeper hit of the fall season. GET (MicroProse): What can we say? You asked for it. You got it. CivNet is the multiplayer version of Sio MEIER'S CIVILIZATION With capacity for both Play-By-Email (PBEM) and network play, this  approach to Meier's design will of fer new opportunities for diplomacy and double-cross. 4 QUAKE (id Software): Everyone is anxious to see whether Quare will offer the same seismic bang for the buck as its predecessor, Doom. If graphics are any indication, the gothic setting may well envelope gamers in a gaming environment that is even richer than Doom's. We're definitely impressed with the art and lighting effects we've seen, but unfortunately id hasn't released screen shots yet. AUGUST 1995. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 37 "


"Autumn Avalanche all, you'll be able to save the game after each level. Finally, in Digital Picture's futuristic action/adventure game, MAXIMUM SURGE, your 21st century protagonists will have to use both their blasters and their minds in order to survive. Yasmine Bleeth (of Baywatch fame) and Walter Koenig (Chekov in the original STAR TREK series) will co-star in the game. SPACE BLASTERS: In the early years of computer gaming, space games were a staple. So, it's not surprising that there were games like Atari's famous STAR RAIDERS and games based on science ficdefending them against outside aggressors. The BERSERKER game will feature Super VGA graphics and a detailed astronomical model. Players fly space combat missions against the mechanoid alien threat of Saberhagen's universe and fight hand-to-hand in Doom-like boarding sequences. The light-sourced and texture-mapped hi-res graphics look great, and Orbital Studios' ALIEN ALLIANCE should run quickly as well, especially with graphic accelerator cards. DER traditions, but it has a much more robust strucBethesda Softworks will soon unveil 10TH PLANET ture to it. Gamers will work their way up through the a networkable space shooter developed in conjuncranks of a space navy, starting with wingman and tion with Hollywood special effects working up to fleet commander. Each stage will house Centropolis (Stargate, Unigive the player more power to direct the war as they versal Soldier) that reverses a comsee fit. mon graphic trend. Instead of the Those who want to keep their futuristic battles ships' textures being more detailed on the ground may opt for Warner Interactive's at a distance and pixellating as you fast action tank-style \"combat simulator\" adapted close range, the ships' textures get from their coin-op hit, T-Meks. The game places you even more detailed as you close. Miinto an arena of baddies vying for the title. Modem crosoft's FURYS, a Windows 95 play and possibly network play will be supported. game where players duck and Another option, for those who enjoy Activision's dodge a horde of enemies while MECHWARRIOR II stand-alone, is the full set of netmaking attacks on ground installawork options that allow LAN players to square off tions with their futuristic aircraft, against each other. Ner-Mech, an add-on package uses the same graphic engine as for MWII with support for up to eight players, will be Apogee's TERMINAL VELOCITY. The two released early this fall. games are nearly identical, except that TERMINAL VEHEAVYWEIGHT FIGHTERS: Since the action genre was LOCITY will offer network play and will not be Winvirtually built upon fighting games, it's appropriate dows 95 compatible. In addition, Virgin and Orbital that there are plenty of new ones expected in the Studios will present a space game called ALIEN ALFall. Capcom is adapting their mega-hit, STREET LIANCE that could surprise a lot of gamers. It is a Fighter, for two new venues. SUPER STREET FIGHTER II is space combat game in the X-WING and Wing COMMANa new animated contest for the PC, and STREET C Bethesda Softworks' 10TH PLANET tion author Fred Saberhagen's Berserker. It is also not surprising that both are getting new looks from new publishers. Interactive Magic will pay homage to the Atari 2600 classic with STAR RANGERS, a traditional first-person space combat game where players will race around a collection of space stations, CAESAR IR (Impressions): The original CAESAR had plenty of gameplay to offer, but some gamers thought the graphics were less than inviting and that the \"SimRome\" economic model needed to be tied closer to milltary/historical considerations. Those objections are definitely met in CAESAR II. Each potential edifice is rendered in incredible detail and the game feels less like an empire 11649 on in a vacuum. A TEX-2000 (Ocean): TFX showed us that Ocean could build a simO ulation, as well as the action games for which they were previously wellknown. This latest product, based on the NATO Eurofighter 2000 takes it Over the top. The flight model and instrumentation is significantly more accurate than the earlier version of the game and the hi-res terrain steals the show, He Option SpeedB AD. Ceography O PIPIPI aty Four PESCI Security Q MI, 169 QUES LLLLL 38 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD  AUGUST 1995 "


"Unleash your Nightmare "


"HEART-THUMPING TERROR UNFOLDING IN SUSPENSE-FILLED CHAPTERS, COMBINING THE BEST OF CLASSIC HORROR AND MODERN PSYCHOLOGICAL THRILLERS. BLENDING THE TALENTS OF RENOWNED ADVENTURE GAME WRITER ROBERTA WILLIAMS AND THE MOST ADVANCED DIGITAL EFFECTS EVER, PHANTASMAGORIA CREATES AN EXPERIENCE SO STARTLINGLY REAL, YOU'LL LIVE THIS INTERACTIVE NIGHTMARE AS IF IT WERE YOUR VERY OWN. "


"ROBERTA WILLIAMS PIIANTASMAGORIA PRAY IT'S ONLY A NIGHTMARE PITANTASMAGORIA SIERRA SI ERRA Your Nightmare Awaits on VISIT YOUR LOCAL SOFTWARE DEALER. OR CALL 1-800-757-7707, Circle Reader Service #120 0 1995 Sierra On-Linc, Inc. Bellevue, WA 98007. All rights reserved, and in designato trademarks ol, or licensed to Sierra On-Line, Inc. 1 CDS "


"Autumn Avalanche COIS can see the whole table from a 3/4 view). The \"camera\" will zoom around the table and follow the ball FIGHT(a neat effect which certainly won't help your score), ER: THE Movie and there will be a \"dot-mation\" display on the is a Sony PSX scoreboard that will show bonus animation and proproduct that takes advide for bonus video game sequences. vantage of the machine's suVirgin is also entering the pinball decathlon with perior capacity for handling video. HYPER 3-D PINBALL, a beautiful looking game with six At the same time, GT will put the moves on the different tables and a choice of 2D or 3D perspecfighting game market with MORTAL KOMBAT 3, a faithtives for each. Epic Megagames will follow their pinful translation of the coin-op hit. The third game in the series will offer eight new characters, two new bosses, new backgrounds, and network/modem play. Another coin-op port is Warner Interactive's PRIMAL RAGE, the highly acclaimed head-to-head fighter that pits prehistoric creatures against one another. Epic Megagames will release the sequel to ONE MUST FALL, the fighting robot game that surprised the action game world last year. The sequel will offer more detailed robots, extra moves, a parallax scrolling background and five or six new 'bots. This game is Epic's intermediate step toward a full 3D fighting game to follow in 1996. PINBALL WIZARDRY: 21st Century made its name through a strong line of pinball games. The company's new PINBALL WORLD combines 20 thematically distinct pinball games into one, giant, contiguous pinball adventure. PINBALL WORLD features lots of arcade-style subgames and enough connected tables to give pinballers more than a few quarters worth of fun. 21st Century's PINBALL WORLD Empire Interactive has their own interesting take on PC pinball. PINBALL! is a 3-D pinball ball success with EXTREME PINBALL, a collection of four game played from the player's-eye perspective (you tables: Medieval Knights, Urban Chaos, Rock-Makers, and Monkey Mayhem. The tables will be of the familiar scrolling variety with a few extras including \"dot-mation\" animation at bottom of screen, and music videos playing on the table of Rock Makers. Look for EXTREME PINBALL to be released through Electronic Arts this fall. TRADITIONAL FARE: In a more traditional vein for action games, Activision's PITFALL HARRY sports lush graphics and surprisingly authentic gameplay. It looks just like the SNES version, a platform game remake of the old Atari 2600 classic, but is much longer and allows you to size the play window to add to the challenge if you become too expert. Acclaim, a fixture in action on the video game side, is promising a host of new titles, most being console-based ports. ALEN TRILOGY looked more complex than the usual sidescrolling action game and features graphics that put it up a notch. The company is also using their strength in licensing to unleash BATMAN FOREVER and JUDGE DREDD as standard platform games. Fans of Jazz JACKRABBIT, the cute sidescrolling action game from Epic Megagames, should be delighted to learn that a sequel is in the works. The next game will feature Jazz and a new character, Spaz, Jazz's whackedout brother. The character sprites will be 30% larger, and the animation, created by traditional animators, will be superb. Look for the sequel as a Windows 95 product this winter. Microsoft's RETURN OF ARCADE is a collection of much-loved coin-op arcade games from the 80s, including PAC MAN, DIG DUG, POLE POSITION and GALAXIAN. These games will all appear in Win 95, faithfully recreated in all their glory. Perhaps the most stunning action game, however, AMAZON TOP GUN (Spectrum HoloByte): The interactive movie wrapping that surrounds this entry level flight simulation is somewhat WING COMMANBER-ESque since these cinematic story segments set you up for each mission. Yet, the flight simulation itself is an attempt by the noted sim publisher to introduce everyman to the exciting joys of instant combat. DUNGEON KEEPER (Bullfrog): If there is one thing that Bullfrog has done well throughout its history, the developer has been success ful at getting gamers to look at situations from new perspectives. From the Legoland look of the original PoPULOUS to tie 30 volcanoes of MAGIC CARPET, lite minds at Bullfrog have challenged us with new ideas and visual approaches. Now, instead of touring 3-0 dun geons with halberd in hand gamers will find the armor on the other torso as they try to defend their dungeons from would-beheroes and heroines. Fascinating.. RSTALL CPUBO BE 00909 42 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. AUGUST 1995 "


"ZV NETWORKS THE WORLD'S MOST POWERFUL JOB IS OPEN. YOUR APPLICATION AWAITS. or decades, the A-IV Group has enjoyed unparalleled growth. But now, their C.E.O. has disappeared..and *\".. you are among the candidates to succeed him. To assess your executive potential, the A-IV Group has. devised a hyper-realistic economic simulation. You will be: challenged to buy and sell assets; build and manage transportation infrastructures; allocate resources among more. than 100 subsidiaries; and above all, maximize the profit. ** ability of your simulation. Via your modem or phone you can compete with other executive candidates to take over as C.E.O. So, manage your empire wisely — At A-IV, success equals succession. ARTDINK In Association With ON Your application is now available on PC CD-ROM. C.E.O. is Windows compliant and Sound BlasterTM compatible. For information or to place an order, call 800-443-3386. I'MOTION Circle Reade: Service #12. "


"Autumn Avalanche will be Virgin's HEART OF DARKNESS, a PRINCE OF PERSIA-style side-scrolling game with incredible graphics. You play the role of a young boy pulled into a nightmare world of his own imagination. The gameplay is similar to other side-scrolling titles, but the action and visuals are terribly imaginative. Add the best animation we've ever seen on a PC to the mix, and we may have an action game mega-hit on our hands. Keep your eye on this one late this year. STRATEGY AND PANIC: Looking Glass Technologies, the techno-wizards behind SYSTEM SHOCK and FLIGHT UNLIMITED, are applying their 3D skills to a game of tactical man-to-man combat, TERRA Nova. Players will personally control one member of a three-person squad, while giving \"wingman\" orders to the other two. Players can equip their squaddies with three types of battlesuits, determine their combat attitude, and lead them into combat on beautiful \"voxel\" terrain. Terra Nova will come with 40 scenarios plus a scenario builder. CRUSADER: NO REMORSE is the first game in a new line of action products from Origin. CRUSADER is a mission-based action game where players Origin Systems' CRUSADER: No REMORSE assume the role of a Silencer, an elite killer for a consortium of corporaWARRIOR: F-111X is a shooter that puts you in the tions, who breaks away from his day job in order to cockpit of a hybrid aircraft and sends you off to varijoin the Resistance. The ous global hotspots to solve one mission after anothmissions take place in er. AGILE WARRIOR: F-111X will appear first on Sony's a 3D world seen from PSX and then the PC. Another exciting concept is an overhead perspecBullfrog's upcoming DUNGEON KEEPER. Players assume tive, and the player the persona of an evil creature protecting his lair must run, crouch, from square-jawed, straight-laced good guys who jump, roll, and blast his want to steal your treasure almost as much as they way through waves of want to rid the world of your evil. Players hire creaevil. Ninety minutes of tures, create traps, determine treasure hoarding full motion video are sites, and place them strategically around their dunthrown into the mix for geon. You can jump to any creature and fight from a flavor. first-person view. Management of evil creatures will Virgin also has a also be key, as players must maintain creature loyalgame that blends stanty by playing off of greed or fear, i.e. you have to eidard arcade fare with ther bribe creatures whose loyalty is flagging or hold elements of strategy ritual sacrifices to keep them in line. Bullfrog is and adventure. Agile shooting for 32-player(!) net play on this one. C Virgin Interactive's HEART OF DARKNESS MAGIC: THE GATHERING (MicroProse): We are curious to see if the table game phenomena of the decade will translate well to the computer milieu. As observed in our June cover story, the computer game will have an adventure game wrapping which serves as a tutorial, as well as offer access to a broader on-line world of competition and reputation THE ELDER SCROLLS: DAGGERFALL (Bethesda): If DAGGERFALL's story even measures up to half the new role-playing aspects and significantly enhanced visual appeal, it will far eclipse its successful predecessor THE ELDER SCROLLS: ARENA. Character advantages/disadvantages, alchem ical laboratories, objectoriented possessions and customizable characters are just part of the new improved package. VER TOWE 15 uchstop UOL ur I .55 I Greiz GROSIR PUI to not uz You VII V orstandtary COL SCTipoct role ON That's the Top 10 from the CGW Editors. Now, it's your chance. Participate in our week-long. ZiffNet event on CompuServe, August 12-18, and vote for the games you are most anxious to play this fall. 44 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD  AUGUST 1995 "


"THE NASCAR. RACING SEASON HAS JUST BEEN EXTENDED. INTRODUCING THE NASCAR, TRACK PACK. SEVEN NEW TRACKS TO ADD TO YOUR ORIGINAL NASCAR RACING FOR MORE FUN AND EXCITEMENT! NASCAR WILL NASCAR Itu WE'VE HYPED NASCAR RACING JUST ABOUT AS MUCH AS WE COULD. NOW WE'LL SIT BACK AND LET THE EXPERTS HAVE THEIR SAY. TRACK PACK Chartere Se Dove Dresses Post Matar sp Home Ruth andere Speed Sam Posts ar todo COU PONT PAPY NASCAR PAPYRUS Track Pack requires NASCARRacing PC Gamer's Best E GAMER Sports Program of the Year Goal Computer Game Review's Golden Triad Award and Best Sports Program of 1994 CES Innovations Award for Outstanding Simulation Interactive Gaming's 1994 Game of the Year Award for Best Sports Program Interactive Gaming's Editor's Choice Award In Recognition of Outstanding Achievement in Game Design and Execution of Production COMPB Computer Gaming World's Best WINNER Simulation of 1995 SPA's Codie Award for Best Sports Program 1995 CHECK OUT THIS NEW EXPANSION KIT AND WITH THESE RACING VENUES. Charlotte Motor Speedway Dover Downs International Speedway Pocono Raceway North Carolina Motor Speedway CALL North Wilkesboro Speedway Sears Point Raceway Richmond International Raceway NASCAR TRACK PACK OFFERS SEVEN NEW CHALLENGES TO ROUND OUT YOUR FULL RACING SEASON. Available on PC CD ROM at your local retailer. Or call 1-800-836-1829 to order direct. CALL ABOUT OUR FREE FLOPPY FOR CD EXCHANGE PROGRAM eway PAPYRUS\" NASCAR Racing, officially licensed by Distributed by Virgin Interactive NASCAR, is the most realistic driving Entertainment, Inc. simulation available for your PC. Papyrus BBS# (617-576-7472), CompuServe (GO PAPYRUS), Internet Dealer inquiries Iftp.std.com, ftp papy.com, www.papy.com), AOL (keyword PAPYRUS) please call: (714) 833-8710 NASCAR is a registered trademark of the National Association for Stock Car Auto Racing, Inc. NASCAR Racing is officially licensed by NASCAR. Papyrus is a registered trademark of Papyrus Design Group Inc. Virgin is a trademark of Virgin Enterprises, LTD. DuPont Automotive Finishes trademarks used under license from Motorsport Traditions, DuPont, Jeff Cordon and Hendrick Motorsports. Sterling Martin name and likeness and KODAK, COLD and Trade Dress are trademarks licensed to Papyrus Design Group, Inc. by Eastman Kodak Company Maxwell House is a registered trademark under license from Advantage Management. Circle Reader Service #153 "


"Autumn Avalanche . Season of Adventure porter investigating the death of a friend. As Tim, spoof with SHAM SPADE, a satire with somewhat lower you begin to be visited by dark visions and end up production values than UNDER A KILLING MOON. experiencing a rich fictional world in the \"SierraWELCOME TO MY REAL WORLD: Real-world adventure style\" side view. There will also be FMV scenes sprinseems to be garnering more interest among advenkled throughout this game which is expected to ture game designers, Sierra's latest Police Quest feaimplement a workable branching story structure that tures SWAT team tactics and is a mixture of could lead to several different endings. puzzle-solving and small unit tactics. Again, former Vic Tokai taps into the supernatural, as well, with L.A. Police Chief Gates and former Cops producer SILVERLOAD, a point and click \"vampire western\" Tammy Dargan are designing the game with cooperwhere you visit a ghost town in the role of a superation from the L.A.P.D. natural bounty hunter. Another approach to the suActivision opted for \"spooks\" over \"cops\" in The pernatural detective is in Electronic Arts' PSYCHIC GREAT GAME, a high-tech spy adventure which the Detective. It's an FMV game where players take the company is developing in conjunction with ex-CIA role of a P.l. with the power to jump into other peobig cheese William Colby. The game was shot in ple's minds. Naturally, said P.I. must use that power 35mm film, and gameplay will involve point-of-view to solve a grisly murder. The game features visual navigation through photo-realistic environments, a effects that look almost pinched from MTV, but the gameplay Medieval fantasy, a perennial in the garden of may not meet the needs of expeadventure gaming, will still be a presence in the latrienced adventurers. ter part of 1995, but supernatural detectives, realThe most ambitious detective world thrillers, gothic horror, time travel, sci-fi project, however, has to be Ripscenarios and cartoon heroes seem to be the order of PER from Take 2, an FMV prothe season. duction with a $2.5 million SUPERNATURAL SHERLOCKS: Jane Jensen, the creator of budget. With Karen Allen, the schattenjager (supernatural hunter) GABRIEL Burgess Meredith and ChristoKNIGHT for Sierra, has written another terrific storypher Walken in the cast and a where you are not quite certain where the supernatsoundtrack by Blue Oyster Cult ural ends and the psychological begins. GABRIEL (Don't Fear The Ripper, indeed!), KNIGHT 2: THE BEAST WITHIN uses photographed backthis horror game seems to capSierra On-line's GABRIEL KNIGHT 2: THE BEAST WITHIN grounds with video-taped actors to convey the susture gothic and cyber at the pense when the schattenjager returns to his same time. strict, non-looping conversation system, and puzzles ancestral homeland, Germany. Another blend of suInterplay's NETRUNNER won't ship till early next that involve high-tech gadgets like spy satellites, pernatural and psychological occurs when 21st Cenyear, but it looks like sort of a cyberpunk Twin Peaks wire-tapping, and photo manipulation technology tury breaks out of the pinball mode and sets with a Robin Hood twist. Finally, though it isn't a suCARTOON Cut-Ups: Virgin's TOONSTRUCK features the SYNNERGIST in the near future. Tim Machin is a repernatural detective, GameTek opts for a gumshoe digitized video of Christopher Lloyd as a Saturday LITTLE SHOTS OF HORROR 0 othic horror fans will find Mary Shelley Walstonecraft's ghost hovering over the industry, as Interplay unleashes FRANKENSTEIN. Appropriately subtitled THROUGH THE EYES OF THE MONSTER, the game lets you view the 3D world without the benefit of memory or experiences (you are, after all, freshly resurrected from the dead). If the plot really turns on the ethical and moral choices which the designers are describing, FRANKENSTEIN should be a winner. In some ways we feel like Bullwinkle in the old Rocky cartoons («This time fer sure!\") when we write about the next two games: PHANTASMAGORIA and 11th Hour. Both were expected no later than last fall season; both have yet to ship as of press time. Roberta Williams' PHANTASMAGORIA features some new wrinkles in the Sierra graphic adventure interface and an eerie game atmosphere that vividly captures the Shirley Jackson house-possessed flavor of the story. Trilobyte's 11TH Hour is the sequel to THE 7TH Guest and offers much better video and a significantly better sense of story/suspense/pacing than its best-selling ancestor. Finally, we are extremely curious about THE DARK Eye, a graphically rich adventure game from Inscape, a new player in the gaming world. Animator Doug Beswick (Beetlejuice, Aliens, Gumby) has added his stop-frame animation talents to the 3-D rendered worlds of this poe-inspired macabre adventure. Adding further spice, William S. Burroughs contributes his voice and Thomas Dolby his musical talents. Interplay Productions' FRANKENSTEIN continued on page 48... 46 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. AUGUST 1995 "


"CAN YOUR PC TAKE YOU TO FULL THROTTLE? DIAMOND QUAD Multimedia Kit 7000 Power Get ready for the ultimate multimedia drive, mammoth 15 + 15 watt stereo experience. Fire up your PC and hang on speakers, and a killer Wavetable sound while we deliver some serious high-speed, card with true 16-bit, desk-shattering pulse-pounding, white knuckle performance. sound. All for a price that will blow you Introducing the Diamond Multimedia Power away. The Power Kit 7000 delivers high Kit 7000, packed with some of the best quality and performance. Add to that hardware and software available in a kit. 22 of the hottest CD-ROM titles and 150 With a screaming fast quad speed CD-ROM shareware games, and this baby will take you anywhere you want to go. As fast as Docte you want to get there. Plus, the Power Kit 7000 is easy-to-install, and 24-hour fax on demand and online support services are available. So you'll never be left in the dust. Contact your local dealer or call Diamond at 1-800-4-MULTIMEDIA today. Don't play it any other way. Quad-speed CD ROM drive  Wavetable 16-bit sound card + 15 + 15 watt stereo speakers Ergonomic joystick and microphone 22 Best-selling CD-ROM titles including Myst, Descent Destination Saturn, Rebel Assault. Comptons Interactive Encyclopedia 1995, Family Doctor The Internet for EverytrodyChinese Cooking for the Family + 150 shareware games Compare DIAMOND MULTIMEDIA 24-Hour Fax-On-Demand: 1-800-380-0030 Internet: http://www.diamondmm.com 01995 Diamond Multimedia Systems, Inc., 2880 Junction Avenue, San Jose, CA 95134-1922. All trademarks and registered trademarks are the property of their respective holders Retail software boxes shown are not included. Diamond reserves the right to change specifications without notice. COMPLA T NICO GI DEKTE the good guys! Brodite fry's FUTURE SHOP Circle Reader Service #87 "


"Autumn Avalanche morning cartoonist who is sucked into the world of his own creation. So, the player ends up interacting with a cartoon environment and cartoon characters represented by voice talent such as Dom DeLuise, Tim Curry and others. The basic story deals with a war between King Hugh and his \"Fluffy Fluffy Bun Buns\" and the evil King Nefarius. part \"software toy\" in the SimCity sense. If Egypt iswhat its immortal inhabitants require in order to ren't your nostalgic passion, Mindscape's AZRAEL'S TEAR turn them to Earth. Although George Lucas' Industrimay offer you a new challenge. It's a scientific whoal Light & Magic created several of the game's dunit where you compete against other teams of special effects, the animated characters look a bit archeologists in a race to grab ancient treasures in a dated in the style of an earlier Sierra game. beautifully-rendered neo-Aztec world. New player Magnet Interactive will offer a 3-D If you don't have time for a full-scale excavation, rendered space station with incredible visuals and though, there may be time for some mini-advenon-screen performances by Star Trek: The Next Genertures. INDIANA JONES AND HIS DESKTOP ADVENTURES from Luation's LeVar Burton in their BLUESTAR. BLUESTAR is the casArts is a WINDOWS program that creates varied, eponymous name of the story's space station where short games, each one playable in about an hour. players will be able to assume the identity of a dolThe player controls Indy as he battles treasure phin who is a computer programmer. hunters, Indians and the obligatory Nazis to rescue Finally, while not space-oriented, sci-fi themes precious artifacts of ancient Inwill permeate both Capstone's TexWAR and Virgin's dian tribes. BLADE RUNNER (probably not available until 1996). SPACE PATROL: Sequels will apTEKWAR is an action/adventure game set in William pear soon on 1995's list of Shatner's near-future Los Angeles. Players take the space operas for 1995. Accorole of an agent seeking to break up a ring of narcotlade's STAR CONTROL III is fastic-dealing gangsters. Although TERWAR uses firstnearing completion. Designed person, Doom-style technology, it won't be all by Legend Entertainment, but shoot-to-kill. Using strategy and stealth, the player not radically changing a sucwill be able to get through the game's missions with cessful formula, this sci-fi aca very low body count. BLADE RUNNER will be based on tion adventure will have all the the universe of the movie and will allow players to features we loved and then assume the role of a bounty hunter in 2019 who has some different perspectives for been hired to search out and destroy a terrorist space combat, animatronic group of sentient robots who have seized a space style aliens, and what has been shuttle. promised as a truly non-linear plot. Also, new player KNIGHT Moves: A recent graduate from the school of Vic Tokai is hard at work on the sequel to ALEN VIRUS, Sega Genesis game development, Scavenger (RED ALJEN VIRUS II: THE HIDDEN AGENDA. ZONE, SUBTERANNIA, X-MEN and BATMAN FOREVER) offers a LucasArts is finally preparing to release THE DIG, treat for PC owners. INTO THE SHADOWS is a medieval an imaginative adventure originally created by romp which takes place in a sophisticated 3-D Steven Spielberg for his short-lived Amazing Stories graphic environment. Players must find magic television series. The adventure follows a team of weapons, solve puzzles and eradicate a necrothree astronauts who stumble upon an alien artifact mancer's nasty minions in a rich, beautifully raythat launches them deep into space. On a desolate traced castle, while the viewer's perspective swivels planet, the player must guide the team to discover around like a movie camera on a boom. LucasArts' THE DIG R Trilobyte has taken their 3D rendered backgrounds, a la THE 7TH Guest and THE 11th Hour, and integrated them with Hanna Barbara-style Saturday morning cartoon characters for their upcoming CLAN DESTINY. The game is a humorous little romp where a U.S. family goes back to the Scottish homestead and discover it's haunted. Did someone say \"Scoobie Doo Meets 7TH GUEST?\" Even Germany's Blue Byte Software hired an animation studio to bring to life Chewy, a cross between Sesame Street's \"Cookie Monster and the shortlived sit-com alien \"ALF.\" The delightful cartoon protagonist goes crazy for outer space food. The flip side is the case for the baddies in Sanctuary Woods' ORION BURGER. They chase your character over dozens of worlds, while you try to convince them you're more than Purina Alien Chow in a cartoonish plot with better sound and animation than the typical Saturday morning fare. ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE COVENANT: Vic Tokai's THE Scrou. allows you to play either an Egyptologist or an occultist in this point and click adventure. Knowledge Adventure aimed their PYRAMID at a younger crowd, but it's a fascinating game which sets the clock back to 1908. From this point, you're transported back into time to build a Great Pyramid for the ancients. Think of it as part adventure/puzzle game, part educational game, and ...continued from page 46 White Wolf and GT Interactive will be teaming up in the release of VAMPIRE: THE MASQUERADE, an adventure game set in the gothic universe of White Wolf's hit people and paper roleplaying game. Players become a vampiric talk-radio DJ in a New York gone amuck, searching for the knowledge that leads to more power and survival. The game will feature traditional adventure-style gameplay along with some full-motion video footage and a branching story structure that will lead to multiple endings and, ideally, replayability. along with Sierra On-line's PHANTASMAGORIA 48 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD  AUGUST 1995 "


"Everybody's talking... \"America Online: Best Consumer Online Service.\" Information Industry Association/Online Access Magazine Hot Shot Award \"So easy, it's hard to believe you're online.\" PC Computing Magazine, September, 1994 \"America Online is a well-designed, easy-to-use service...\" PC Magazine Editors' Choice, February 21, 1995 PROGRAM Inline der you findes . FOR WINDOWS welche ASFTPOST ... dreas OK d Like To Get My Hands On A FREE Copy Of America Online ! Please rush my no risk, no obligation free start-up kit, free software and trial membership to: NAME ADDRESS CITY It's Easy. It's Fun. STATE HOME PHONE And It's Free For 10 Hours! Call 800-454-8800 Select Disk Type and Size: Windows : 3.5 Apple': Macintosh CD ROM: Macintosh Windows Other: *To ne America Online for Windo, mutne a 386 I higher, 4MB RAM, A VGA (256 colit itt ommended) mentor a maltese, a mundem and a wiking copy of Win 3.1. U of America Online requires a credit card or checking Act. Additional time on America Online is $295 (US Jollars) per beat Users utside the US anadhtonal e inmute surcharge at all times, including trual time. Plene me d ACCESS for further access information. Additional phone charges may apply. Your free trial must be wel within 30 days of int r-on. Lime free tri a l. Must be 18 year older America Online is a registered service mark of America Online, Inc. Other names are service marks or tridentiks at their respective owner 12936 (Detail On Back) "


"Access To The America Onlinethe #1 Choice Latest U.S. And World News When You Want It Over 2.5 million people have selected America Online for access to the world of online news and information, finance, entertainment, electronic mail, free software, shopping and more. We make it all so easy and funand now it's yours FREE! Just return the card below or call 1-800-454-8800 today! We'll send you a free start-up kit, free software and a trial membership, good for 10 hours of America Online. Unlimited E-mail Eve Accross The Interne \"America Online has raised the bar for commercial online services\" Up To Date Stock Quotes At Your Fingertips Windows Magazine 1995 Win 100 Awards Carpeting COMPUTING Internet Camer INTERNET CONNECTION RESOURCES COMPUTING TOFILMES CEUM It To che DA Online Computing tan CH OM CM Support From vec MNIA Menu Industry Experts MANTMENT MEMOEN SERVICE IN IN THE SPOTLIGart TARWARS NEWS STAND BERNANCE Entextuinment S& Education COMPUTING REFERENCE TAAVET ZUIVERNET MARKETPLACE SPORTS Skolnicio SKDSON   Easy Access To A DISCOVER ADL MEMBER SERVICES Multitude Of NO POSTAGE NECESSARY IF MAILED IN THE UNITED STATES Free Files, Software And More BUSINESS REPLY MAIL FIRST-CLASS MAIL PERMIT NO9096 VIENNA VA POSTAGE WILL BE PAID BY ADDRESSEE AMERICA Return The Carg Or Call 1-800-454-880 For Your Free 10-Hour Trial Today! 8619 Westwood Center Drive Vienna, VA 22182-9806 lulululululull....... il "


"Autumn Avalanche In a more familiar universe, Legend Entertainment will take advantage of the resources of their investor, Random House, in their upcoming SHANNARA. SHANNARA is a graphic adventure based on Terry Brooks' best-selling fantasy novels and which takes place during a time gap within the popular novels. So, it does not attempt to duplicate the action of the Legend Entertainment's SHANNARA lengthy book series (unlike Legend's successful DEATH GATE). SHANNARA will have stunning SVGA graphics, a simple point-n-click interface, and a rich story. Lori and Corey Cole, designers of the QUEST FOR GLORY series, are doing the design for SHANNARA, SO the puzzles and gameplay should be on the money. Time Lore: l-Motion continues in the cinematic 3D adventure tradition established by their ALONE IN THE DARK games in KNIGHT'S CHASE. Players take the role of a time traveler who must return to the Middle Ages to recover his kidnapped love. As the player adventures through a 3-D castle in search of his nemesis, Wolfram, and his love interest he must fight baddies and solve puzzles in the ALONE IN THE DARK mode. Another time travel game is Sanctuary Woods' BURIED IN TIME. The sequel to THE JOURNEYMAN PROJECT, BURIED IN TIME unveils an involved plot which has you trying to restore your good name after being framed for mucking about with history. The live actors are much better than in most games, and the puzzles actually relate to the storyline. The late Roger Zelazny's CHRONOS MASTER, designed for Capstone in conjunction with DreamForge, will feature pocket universes that will move players through many dimensions, having something of the effect of time travel. For more details, see the interview from a few weeks prior to the great writer's demise in this month's READ.ME section. Finally, in MILLENNIA from Take 2 you are expected to alter the timeline to benefit your race. Meanwhile, you buy and sell technology, negotiate with alien races and cavort around the galaxy, enjoying the spectacular graphics and sound. Combine the action-adventure gameplay of SysTEM SHOCK with graphic novel sensibilities and you've got Origin's CYBERMAGE: DARKLIGHT AWAKENING. Set in a game in dystopian future, the player must take on an evil which you join corporate entity while uncovering the secrets of his with one of the five band or her awakening psychic powers. The first-person, members of Queensryche to SVGA graphics are very explore some wild environments in a puzzle-driven LIND, 1 strong, and designer environment. The band likes to characterize PROMISED David Bradley (formerly LAND as a value-driven, eco-based game. of Sir Tech and the WizMicroProse doesn't have a celebrity license for ARDRY series) isn't known its NECROBIUS adventure, but it looks to us like 7TH for disappointment with Guest meets Timothy Leary on a psychedelic binge. regard to puzzles and This puzzle game is bizarre, even as the genre goes, gameplay but it's also gorgeous. THEME PARKS: Two new If you think it's time the fairer sex was given its adventures will rely upon own genre, you will be happy to hear that American amusement parks for a Laser Games is launching a GAMES FOR HER series. background. WarnerAcThe first offering is MacKenzie & Co., a game where tive's PANIC IN THE PARK is girls choose which hunk to take to the prom. It beats primarily puzzle-driven, the \"let's go to the mall\" mentality of THE BARBIE but the story unfolds with GAME, but we can't help wondering how the tone of full motion video sethis game will come across to young women who acquences by 30 different tually play games like Myst or TETRIS. actors, including the beautiful Erika Eleniak (Under Gamers who like the western genre have also felt Siege, A Pyromaniac's Love Story, and Beverly Hillbilshort-changed over the years. Now, Dust: A TALE OF THE lies). Eleniak stars in two roles, as good and evil WILD WEST shows Cyberflix' fascination with rickety twins with conflicting interests in their father's amusement park. To Save the park, the player guides the good twin in playing a variety of nostalgic carnival games: water gun races, bumble ball, the balloon dart toss, etc. The other amusing theme park adventure is THE RESIDENTS' BAD DAY ON THE MIDWAY, set in a 3D animated carnival that was birthed from a collaboration between The Residents and animator Jim Ludtke. OFF THE BEATEN PATH: If you like games based on other media, vou'll Capstone's CHRONOSMASTER have quite a variety this year. Viacom is developing a computer game adaptation of saloons, horses, six-guns and characters ranging Michael Crichton's novel (and movie) Congo. Sportfrom an annoying hick to sophisticated ladies at the ing a lush 3D environment, CONGO will be an advenbig house down the street. With some three dozen ture game modeled after the movie plot. digitized actors, we half expected James Arness to Musical groups Devo and Queensryche both have put in an appearance as Marshal Dillon. interactive adventures in development. For those For something really different, Knowledge Advenwho understand the ways of devolution, Inscape ture has Steven Spielberg's Movie MAKER, an intriguhas DEVO PRESENTS: ADVENTURES OF THE SMART PATROL, a ing title, casting the gamer as director and allowing surrealistic adventure mixing full motion video and him or her to film their own movie. Using pre-supanimation that pits The Smart Patrol, a musical plied full motion video, gamers place the cameras, group of counterculturites, against corporate evils. choose which angles to clip, and give sound effects The game is being created by Devo's Gerald Casale and style to the overall product. and Mark Mothersbaugh. Virgin has PROMISED LAND, a AUGUST 1995  COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 51 "


"lay with thousands of gamers on the Information Super Highway and lose yourself in the graphic adventures and traditional games offered on the Multi-Player Games Network. MPG-NET gives you something you just can't find on a floppy disk...another human mind. Whether you like fantasy role-playing, 3D action, war simulation or card games, MPG-NET offers games 24 hours a day, seven days a week with players from all over the globe. PLAY GAMES WORLDWIDE ON THE INFORMATION SUPER HIGHWAY Operation Market Garden Kingdom of Drakkar Warlords of the Apocalypse Fief Quest War Room Empire Builder 1200D EDIH-01:301307 MPG-Net Lobby ACCESS THROUGH INTERNET FOR ONLY $200 per hour "


"Now, MPG-NET goes all graphic!  Download files from our database No more text menus. No headaches and read the latest in gaming news, trying to log on. It's never been updates and stories from other easier to be on-line! members. It's as easy as visiting Here's what else you'll find: your hometown library!  Electronic Bulletin Boards filled  The Persona Creation Room-lets you with the latest adventure reports and generate a face to match your on-line personality! discussions by gamers from all over the world!  Conference Rooms-have real-time  Electronic Mail-send and receive conversations with people all over the world and see more than just their messages with all your friends and plan when to meet and play your words, you'll get a chance to see what they look like! favorite game! MPG-Net News More games than you've ever seen before! MPG-NET can be accessed with a local phone call from over 600 cities in the USA and 40 nations worldwide. All you need is a modem, a phone line and a computer to join the fun! Call our 800 number from 9am to 8pm Eastern time on weekdays to receive our free starter kit. MPG-NET-twenty four hours a day, seven days a week, bringing you games that will take you out of this world! Call now: 1-800-GET-GAME. 2MPG NET NEWS UCTED Mini on 2 Conference Table Electronic Database T ITU SDRESSER in und 31-01 ILLUM DE110 Conference Room Electronic Mail Persona Creation Room TA STUDELL Da 724OBOD Access Room le TANTALUS 1994 MPG-NET, Inc. Multi-player Games Network and MPG-NET are service marks of MPG-NET Inc. The Kingdom of Drakkar is a trademark of Drakkar Corp. Empire Builder is a trademark of Mayfair Games, Inc. Operation Market-Garden and Star Cruiser are trademarks of GDW Games, Inc. Fiefquest and Warlords of the Apocalypse are trademarks of the Dreamers Guild. All other brand and product names are trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective holders. MPG-NET\" Your Multi-Player Games Networks 1-800-GET-GAME Circle Reader Service #250 The Dreamers Guild "


"Autumn Avalanche R Role Playing comes out Of The Cold It looks to be a comeback year for traditional roleplaying games. As always, the fantasy genre completely dominates the landscape and, as one might expect, these large games have many titles on the vaporware vellum. DAYS OF FANTASY PAST: Bethesda's THE ELDER SCROLLS: DAGGERFALL looks better all the time, but the ambitious sequel to the Premier award-winning THE ELDER SCROLLS: ARENA seems to have a long way to go before the beautifully crafted product reaches the market. Whether Interplay's STONEKEEP will release this fall (after promises the two previous seasons) is a mystery, but even with the aging graphics, this looks to be a game this side of STONEKEEP is Domark's LORDS OF MIDrole-playing. This year, they will deliver REALMS OF NIGHT, a monster of a role-playing game that will ARKANIA: SHADOWS OVER Riva, the third game in the hardthrow players into an incredibly large, marvelously core Arkania role-playing series. The game-engine is detailed 3-D world where strife and intrigue are ramvery similar to that of the previous game, but with pant. By assuming the role of one of many different subtle improvements. Dungeon and outdoor environcharacters, it is possible to see the rich story unfold ments will be seen in an enhanced first-person 3D from many unique perspectives. Possible activities perspective, with the same isometric view in combat. include the raising of an army, full-scale battles seen from a strategic perspective, dragon flight across the fractal-generated landscape, the exploration of huge citadels, and more. LANDS OF LORE Il from Westwood Studios and Virgin Interactive has been at the top of gamers' wish lists for some time now. The project is proceeding steadily, but it will still be the very end of 95 before we expect to Sir-Tech Software's DRUID: DAEMONS OF THE MIND see the final product. This sequel to the highly acclaimed LANDS OF LORE contains some of SVGA cut-scenes, additional manual and automated the best graphics we've seen. Like the original LOL, combat options, two difficulty levels, and the same the sequel's gameplay will have a lighter touch, but rich character creation system are some of the feayou can expect lots of graphically oriented puzzles and tures to expect. a fair share of hack-n-slashing monster bashing. Players put off by the complexity of the Arkania Meanwhile, SSI'S THUNDERSCAPE is coming along games can look forward to DRUID: DAEMONS OF THE MIND, nicely with its steampunk background becoming fully a single character, isometric perspective role-playing fleshed out (see the related story in this month's game. This game might be everything ULTIMA 8 wantREAD.ME) and SSI continuing its trend back towarded to be. Gorgeous SVGA graphics combine with an story and characters. BRANDISH is a typical Koei prodelegant magic system, an invisible interface, and an uct: it looks as though it might have a reasonable excellent story to make this game simple, hot, and amount of play, but the puzzles are deep. straight out of a C-64 game. In fact, VIVE LA DIFFERENCE: Those looking for a different BRANDISH is obviously designed for kind of role-playing might find it in Sanctuary the SNES/Sega crowd-with graphWoods' Lion—the follow-up to last year's Wolf. Anics to match. Also, watch out for Alother approach might be the less interactive SAVAGE BION, Blue Byte's fantasy game with from The Discovery Channel. Cub-raising, human 3D point of view play, but two-diavoidance, and antelope chasing can give you inmensional overhead perspective sight into how this noble, endangered species lives. when inside rooms. Alens is an attempt by Mindscape to animate the DreamForge and New World are Dark Horse Comics view of Ridley Scott's universe joining forces to create ANVIL OF DAWN, not for the squeamish. In addition to the inevitable a single character adventure/rolebughunt, you find that there's something that even playing game targeted at newer the Aliens shy away from. I-Motion will give Cthulhu gamers. The game's presentation fans another reason to be squeamish with PRISONER OF mixes 7TH GUEST-style cinematic \"steps\" while outIce, the latest Lovecraft-inspired tale. This one feadoors, and quicker STONEKEEP-style steps indoors. The tures submarines, arctic wastes and the usual asgame mechanics feature a very simple character atsortment of multi-tentacled beings in more tribute system, a unique spell system where a chartraditional adventure game form. acter must \"write\" magic runes in the air, and if you want exotic adventure of a different kind, mechanical logic puzzles. Voice-acting for all characMicroProse has VIKINGS: PIRATES OF THE NORTH, cut from ters and an extensive help system round out a packthe Sid Meier's Pirates mold. It features exploration of age that is sure to hook new players into role-playing. 3D landscapes and economic development along Sir Tech, publishers of the WIZARDRY and REALMS OF with ample opportunities to loot and pillage. ARKANIA series, have always been known for fantasy Virgin Interactive's LANDS OF LORE II G real player. Speaking of real players, Interplay also has the much anticipated Dungeon Master II: SKULLKEEP. The long-awaited sequel has: an improved interface designed with tactical combat in mind; a new spell system using a combination of power and elements; an improved critter Al where monsters will howl to get help and use player character arrows against the party; and the expected mix of mages, thieves and steroid-slashers from the Hall of Champions. Perhaps, the most long-awaiting role-playing 54 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD AUGUST 1995 "


"Farida. Drui A new style of game. Coming of age this fall! SIR-TECH Circle Reader Service 261 "


"TARANTULA JAILBREAK KICK-OFF JACKPOT BLURAN KICK QFFAN 1009 FOR WINDOWS As the follow-up the international award winner Pinball Fantasies, Pinball Mania showcases a whole host of new features, music and graphics. Now available to run from Windows NEW! Full screen non-scrolling mode for skill shots CHOICE find your favorite from Tarantula, Kick-off, Jailbreak and Jackpot MULTIBALL needs a cool head and a quick hand TWENTY Two scrolling resolutions AS ACENTURYÉRVERT PENT, INC. 20. AX 415 WEBSTAR, NY 4580 (716 8721 FIRST CENTURY EN URTAINMENT Circle Reader Service #35 "


"Autumn Avalanche Simulated Journey Autumn is the time of falling leaves. This is particularly appropriate to simulation buffs, to whom a \"Falling Leaf\" is a World War I aerial maneuver. This autumn should provide plenty of opportunities for more sophisticated maneuvers as flight sim games will again dominate the genre. FLIGHT Deck: Two helicopter sims are preparing to engage in air-to-air combat during the coming months. Domark Software's upcoming Apache helicopter simulation will offer high-fidelity flight models and some interesting twists on the mission-based combat simulation. Not only must you fight and fly well in the 2-18 day campaigns set in Colombia, Bosnia, the Middle East, and Russia, but you must also manage your team of pilots, making combat assignments, while carefully tracking fatigue and supply levels. At the same time, Interactive Magic will introduce a mission-based helicopter sim called APACHE. Developed by DIGITAL INTEGRATION, best known for their realistic TORNADO sim, you'll have to plan out your missions in advance and see how well you worked your plan and how well you went with the flow. Early next year, Interactive Magic and Digital Integration will also take a shot at the fighter market with F-16 FIGHTING FALCON, a high-end simulation of modern jet combat. Digital Integration's F-16 FIGHTING FALCON will attempt to realistically simulate the Air Force's F. 16C, but it will also offer a simple arcade mode to the newbie. Gameplay will involve detailed mission planning and, on the multiplayer side, the sim will support eight players in two teams on a net or modem. Bob Carter of Thrustmaster fame has also gotten Harrier, Sutone on the F-16 market and is ready to fire a missile perCobra, and from his new company, Military Simulations, Inc. LAV-25 in combat scenarTheir FIGHTING FALCON: BACK TO BAGHDAD game will strapios against Cuban and North you into an F-16C and send you back into Iraq to take Korean forces. The sim will offer a well populated eleccare of business. Using actual terrain data of Iraq, detronic battlefield with naval support and infantry classified F-16 flight models, and real weapon mod movement, and will support graphic modes up to els, this sim promises not to let you go into combat 1024x768 (with certain accelerated graphics cards in\"with one arm tied behind your back.\" Hard-core encluding the new breed of 3D accelerators). Those who are looking to jump into a quick furball within moments will also want to look at Spectrum Iron HoloByte's TOP GUN: FIRE AT WILL. What DSC sets this sim apart Scout is that you not only strap into an F-14, 00015 but you actually become \"Maverick\" Mitchell from the ALT movie Top Gun. Military Simulations' FIGHTING FALCON: BACK TO BAGHDAD Simplified displays next generation thusiasts take note: a declassified model of the Fgraphics, and an easy interface will get you into the 16C's APG-68 radar will work on a separate heart of the action where you'll fly carrier operations in monochrome monitor! Cuba, Korea, and Libya. Screw up and you'll be flying Domark will also be following up on the success of cargo planes out of Hong Kong with the proverbial cartheir Macintosh air combat simulation, FLYING Nightgo. MARES, with a sequel for both the PC and the Mac. FLYOcean's TFX 2000 is a new air combat simulation, ING NIGHTMARES 2 will put players in the cockpits of the based upon the NATO Eurofighter 2000. In it, you'll fly 18 HILES TO HAVEOINT 1117 FUEL FLOW 11000 159 GE (I came, I saw, I looked great in a toga.) "


"Autumn VISIT AIR BASE LURA HEPORTS Avalanche TWICIEL I CONT UMATOTO IL PREV GO Vietnam Air Superiority Women De wietro A feiri Wie l icare a guided missiles, and the use of computers to identify and target enemy aircraft and missiles. The SE VIETNAM WAR VAR SUPERIORITY CD also includes more than hard-core peacekeeping 1,000 full-screen photos, technimissions in post coldcal data on more than 200 war northern Europe against a weapons systems, and war reRussian force. Highlights include flight and weapons ports explaining the role of airNOT models taken from de-classified British Aerospace craft in modern warfare. The data (the Eurofighter's manufacturer), crisp hi-resolunew reference is available now, tion terrain that uses information from military charts, and if it lives up to the stanand an eight player network option. dards of its respected predecesFinally, although not a true simulation, The Discovsor, it will be a valued addition mw . Agramu @ WINGS DTD ery Channel's second Wings release is aimed right at to any cockpit jockey's library. the flight helmets of sim enthusiasts. Wings: KOREA TO DIVE PLANES: Three very differThe Discovery Channel's WINGS: KOREA TO VIETNAM Vietnam picks up where TDC's earlier Wings Over EUROPE ent submarine products are currently under development. nology lets you experience SILENT STEEL in full-screen, Alliance Interactive and Interfull motion without an MPEG card (although the MPEG active Magic will team up for version should be noticeably crisper). Those new to WAR PATROL, a WWII submarine computer games can really show off their Pentiums to simulation set in the Pacific their friends with this one! Theatre. This serious simulation Germany's Blue Byte Software is working on a will offer SVGA graphics in Winnear-future submarine game that uses 3D modeling, RADAR SONAR STATUS PERISCOPETUS UNDERWATER dows, 40 missions, and the abilnice lighting effects and fractal generated landscapes SLOWITTER ity to command both American to convey the idea of the game world. Called THE DEEP. ISET COURSES IWDITORPEDOT CAFT TORPEDOS and Japanese subs. The modelthe game is mission-based and is expected to appeal CRASH DIVE LAY MINE ing seems sophisticated enough beyond the SUBMARINE 2020 CROWD. SCOPE DEPTH MEGUN ORDERS and the graphics so sharp that KART RACING: For those who find the traditional ForPERISCOPE HEIGHT LPICK TARGE V A RUN SILENT I ACES OF THE DEEP may finally have mula I and NASCAR styles of racing to be too strenusome competition. ous for simulation play, MicroProse will drop the Interactive Magic's WAR PATROL Tsunami's SILENT STEEL is esstarting flag on VIRTUAL KARTS during the fall season. sentially an interactive movie Seasonal play, which lets you move up in class as your left off, as an aviation reference for 1945 to 1975. Uswhich places you in command of a U.S. Navy Ohio ability improves, adds to the challenge of this SVGA ing 3-D renderings, animation, video sequences, muclass \"boomer,\" loaded to the teeth with nukes. game with tracks built around detailed digitized phosic and sound effects, KOREA TO VIETNAM traces the Whether you play it straight or decide to barbecue the tos. You'll also be able to compete against human dridevelopment of supersonic jets, precision air-launched planet, the maturing of software video playback techvers via the game's network support. FAST DIESEL DECK GUNDU TEMPUS FUGITA (Time flies, or my sundial is fast) "


"CARPE DIEM (Seize this game) Caesar II gives an award-winning game new lifeA great sim with a real game to it!  Eye-popping graphics  Streamlined interface  Extensive 3-D city-building Build a City... Start with a province in the early Roman Empire and build a capital city with exquisite, detailed structures. Then master your unruly province by exploiting its resources, opening trade routes, and raising armies. Rule wisely and promotion will soon follow... Build an Empire! Develop other provinces and take on their unique challenges. Move up the ranks and confront invading Carthaginians (with elephants!) and upstart Gauls. Your job is to keep the barbarians out, your cities thriving, and your citizens cheering For a future Emperor, it's all in a day's work! PORTREMPIRE CAESAR II BUILD A CITY...BUILD AN EMPIRE! Impressions YARETE IBM PC screenshots may vary Circle Reader Service W17 Impressions Software, Inc. 1995. Cambridge, MA 02142 "


"Autumn Avalanche Sporting Views P All of the major sports will have new digital venues by the end of year, as will some of the less visible ones. TRIPLE-PLAY ON BASEBALL: With TONY LA RUSSA 3 hitting the shelves, vou might think that the number of base ball games in development would drop, but Acclaim's FRAAK THOMAS \"Big Hurt\" BASEBALL should offer an interesting alternative for pure action gamers and Microleague's new Sports Illustrated Baseball will provide fans of the statistical program a Windowsbased game with much-improved rotoscoped graphics. Ironically, the folks at Stormfront are competing somewhat with themselves, since they developed MiCROSOFT BASEBALL for Win 95, using much of their expertise gleaned from producing the TONY LA RUSSA games. It has great graphics and a solid action mode, too. However, the most surprising approach to baseball may well be interplay's new VR Sports line. To imagine the first game in the series, try a baseball game where the 3D images are built off motion capture technology and where you can switch to any angle as easily as in a flight sim. It's more ALONE IN THE DARK baseball than TONY 3, but it's fast and very intriguing. FOOTBALL PLAYOFF: Two college games and a host of pro games are competing in computer coliseums come the fall. NCAA FOOTBALL from Mindscape is trying to tackle the FRONT PAGE SPORTS Crowd with a better play-calling system, bigger sprites, smoother animation and hi-res graphics. Meanwhile, Micro Sports is trying to jazz up the venerable stat-based games, ALLAMERICAN COLLEGE FOOTBALL & NFL PRO ASPORTS LEAGUE 75TH ANNIVERSARY, before the EA Sports' NHL Hockey 96 fall. The college game has held the field by itself for several years, but the pro game offrom Acclaim and EA of their respective NBA JAM and fers an additional appeal—the capacity to pit the NBA Live products. The former offers even better lookbest teams of all time against each other under whating two-on-two action and the latter is expected to ever NFL rules you wish. Could Joe Montana have improve upon its current limited Al. Those looking for completed 60% of his passes against secondaries ala little something different might try Virgin's CONVERSE lowed to bump-and-run? Would Fran Tarkenton's caHARDCORE Hoops, an action game where you can not reer have lasted longer with rules protecting only set difficulty, but engage in a little trash talk on quarterbacks? The college game is much the same, the side. except that gamers may either play a national title EA Sports isn't resting on its Stanley Cup laurels game after the bowls, or determine their own mythical from NHL Hockey, either. NHL HOCKEY '96 is going for national champion the old-fashioned way, with a poll broke with an entirely different look and feel. Several generated by the computer. different dynamic perspectives will be available, from Accolade's UNNECESSARY ROUGHNESS '96 looks like it right behind your player to a more standard view. Eiwill be considerably better than its previous incarnather way, the action comes off even faster than before. tion. Boasting better graphics, truer gameplay and Rumor also has it that MicroLeague is contemplating bonuses like career play, this game reads like a wina hockey game. We wonder, though, what happened to ner. We'll see how it plays. As for action, we know how SSl's hockey game. JOHN MADDEN FOOTBALL plays and we can't wait for ElecAlso on tap is FIFA: International Soccer, the 3DO tronic Arts to fulfill its promise DIGITAL PICTURES is way. That means gorgeous graphics and a great persticking with full motion video in QUARTERBACK ATTACK spective on the action in the EA Sports tradition. WITH MIKE Ditka. Players will see everything through the finally, bursting out of the gates this fall is a new eyes of the quarterback, from which they will direct all horse racing game called MICROLEAGUE HORSE RACING. We of the on-field action. hope it has some of the versatility of QUARTERPOLE withHoop DREAMS, FAST TRACKS AND ICING: In other sports, out those terrible interface problems. basketball should be well represented with updates FUTURE FRENZY Strategic Alliances Byte Software will publish THE ROMANS, a sequel to SSI's SERF CITY, which will use the same basic system, but feature some full motion video wrap and some extra features and options. Impressions' CAESAR II will use beautiful, near photographic building graphics and feature more balanced and streamlined gameplay than its progenitor. Meanwhile, MicroProse changes hemispheres with their Aztec: EMPIRE OF BLOOD game. It is a turn-based game of conquest with tactical battles where you play one of nine tribal leaders. Aztec will enable gamers to make military, diplomatic, economic and religious decisions that will decide the fate of their nascent empires. MYSTIC MAYHEM: Mindscape's WARHAMMER FANTASY BATLes is being developed in conjunction with Games mpire Interactive's RED GHOST is an action/strategy game that pits a futuristic Special Forces against a resurgent Stalinist Russia. Players can play the combat scenarlos strategically, or they can jump into individual ve hicles and fight it out in action mode. A similar product is Blue Byte's SHRIXOW OF THE EMPIRE, the third in the BATTLE Iste trilogy. The latest installment features, of course, new units, new story, digitized speech, and, for the first time, the ability to play a female protagoAs a wide-ranging category which encompasses resource management and combat in many forms, this year's strategy games will run the gamut from traditional games through historical, fantasy, and near future/space strategy games. Don't Know Much About History: Germany's Blue CE nist. BATTLES IN TIME is a four-player Wargame from QQP which is set in a utopian society that has forgotten 60 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. AUGUST 1995 "


"EVEN SPOCK WOULD BE NERVOUS. ABSOLUTE ZERO 00 BIRRSav DOMARK COMING SUMMER! DOMARK Ask for Absolute Zero at your local software retailer or call us direct at 1-800-695-GAME. Circle Reader Service #220 "


"Autumn Avalanche Workshop. publishers of the Warhammer 40,000 AD boardgame and miniatures game series. As the current game stands, it will consist of a linear plot line that flowers and loops (a la WING COMMANDER) according to your successes and failures in various tactical battles. More exciting than the campaign, however, is the capacity for creating your own scenarios to play in head-to-head mode. The how to wage war. With society threatened by an alien menace, players must travel back in time to relearn the art of warfare from the masters of epochs from prehistoric times to the present, preparing for the final climactic battle against the allen menace. In certain situations, old technology may be used anachronistically for the most impact. For example, dinosaurs work well against the aliens magnetic weapon. The unofficial sequel to DUNE 2Virgin's ComMAND & CONQUER Virgin Interactive's COMMAND & CONQUER Bullfrog Software's GENE WARS graphics look great and the Al concepts for both opponents and subordinate units seem solid. Much the same may be said for WARCRAFT II, which has more magic spells, increased economics (oil must be drilled for at sea), and even flying units and submarines (!) for up to seven players. WARLORDS fans might keep an eye out for WORLD OF WONDERS, a fantasy strategy game in the WARLORDS tradition that will be released as shareware. Cities, heroes, armies of fantasy creatures, campaigns—it's all here for fantasy strategists this winter. In a different kind of fantasy, Time-Warner's ATMOSFEAR is a roll-the-die (literally seen on the screen) and move game with gothic horror overtones. Up to six may contest the sadistic gatekeeper for keys to other mystical dimensions. Essentially, this is a VCR game with a dash o' creepy to go. TRADITION AND DESCENT: In addition to traditional board and parlor game conversions, many companies will introduce sequels and spin-offs to their most successful strategy games. Bullfrog Software will continue the line of \"Theme\" products begun with THEME PARK by challenging players to transform a lowly health clinic into a profitable hospital in THEME HOSPITAL. Fans of Sir Tech's recently released JAGGED ALLIANCE will be able to use their squad combat skills against other humans this fall. Sir Tech will release JAGGED ALLIANCE HEAD-TO-HEAD, a two-player modem and network version of the game. The package will include a new sector map plus a scenario editor, additional weapons and graphics. GENE WARS will keep Bullfrog's Populous legacy alive. Four races will vie for supremacy by bio-engineering deadlier and deadlier creatures in this \"god game\" that could be described as POPULOUS meets UNNATURAL SELECTION. Up to eight players can wage biowarfare on a network. CHESSMASTER 5000 from Mindscape builds on the CGW Hall of Fame design with better tutorials, chess problems and the best artificial opponents of any strategy game. Interplay's U.S. CHESS FEDERATION CHESS, however, may have the best e-mail and networking capacity, as well as the capacity for offering sanctioned ratings. Puzzle gamers should enjoy Capcom's TANGRAMS, a computer version of the traditional Chinese puzzles where gamers take different shapes and transform them into animals or objects. Also, Viacom will present one of the more intriguing puzzle games at the show. Zoop is a colorful game where you have to zap (or is it \"zoop\"?) amoebae-like shapes of the same color before they infringe upon your safe zone. Addicting is the code word here. It may not be the next Tetris, but it's pretty good. A family-oriented game hails from Blue Byte Software in Germany. DR. DRAGO'S MADCAP CHASE is a delightful game that is reminiscent of the television cartoon looks even better than its storied predecessor with its 3D rendered fighting vehicles and real-time warfare. We also liked the turn-based warfare in PAX IMPERIA II. Finally coming to IBM courtesy of Blizzard, the new version has a ton of ships, incredibly rendered in SVGA graphics. Of course, it's the number of strategic options that will keep would-be galactic emperors busy, diplomatic options, trade, council meetings and random political events. Pax Il allows up to 16 to compete via network play. THIS MEANS WAR! from MicroProse may sound like a Bugs Bunny-style wargame, but even this is reminiscent of H. G. Wells Limne Wars, in a silly space-age kind of way with elements of SimCity and Utopia thrown in. Of course, silly barely begins to describe Tom Wham's old Awul GREEN THINGS FROM OUTER SPACE, con verted to the silicon universe by QQP. The Znutar now have to defend even more ships with everything from friendly robots and zap guns to fire extinguishers there's even a campaign! Equally light-hearted is BADIES, a wacky strategy game from GameTek which suggests to us the idea of the Cabbage Patch Kids going to war G show Wacky Racers crossed with Milles BOURNES and MONOPOLY. The random events are hilarious and there are plenty of sabotage cards with which to victimize your friends. Finally, Berkeley Systems, previously known for the AFTER DARK screen savers, might have a sleeper on their hands with You Don't Know Jack, a hilarious pop culture quiz-show game with a hilarious emcee with an attitude and questions on subjects ranging from Scooby Doo to Human Sexuality. MicroProse's THIS MEANS WAR! 62 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. AUGUST 1995 "


"Spectrum HoloByte all Die Antal en wees Tension bullds on the bridge as another Red Alert appears imminent. OPEN ALLERENCES ALL RESONE With all the voices of the TV cast! Open hailing frequencies and prepare for the unexpected. STAN TRICE YULENT SHERE THE NEXT GENERATION \"A Final Unity\": With all the voices of the TV Cast! Alert your Away Team and pick the right combination of talent for each critical mission. «MAKE IT SO.\" Beam down to exotic worlds as the mystery of an ancient and highly advanced civilization slowly unfolds. Join Captain Picard\" and the crew in \"A Final Unity,' an interactive CD-ROM adventure filled with mystery and danger. Control the U.S.S. Enterprise\" as you encounter treacherous alien ships, visit strange new worlds, and travel from the outposts of Federation space and beyond into the uncharted dangers of a massive nebula. Also look for STAR TREK: THE NEXT GENERATION \"Future's Past\" on Super NES . The unmatched realism of \"A Final Unity\" is brought to life by characters who speak to you, rich cinematic sequences, Super VGA graphics, and CD-quality sound and music. Experience hours of entertaining exploration as you unravel secrets from the ancient past in this STAR TREK: THE NEXT GENERATION epic. Take your post and Engage! Available for IBM CD-ROM STAR TREK: THE NEXT GENERATION «A Final Unity.\" . Spectrum HoloByte . 2490 Mariner Square Loop, Alameda, CA 94501 Visit your local retailer or call 24 hours: 1-800-695-GAME (USA and Canada) Circle Reader Service #333 and 1995 Paramount Pictures. All Rights Reserved. STAR TREK: THE NEXT GENERATION is a Registered Trademark of Paramount Pictures. Spectrum HoloByte is an Authorized User. Spectrum HoloByte is a registered trademark of Spectrum HoloByte, Inc. Other trademarks are the property of their respective holders. "


"Autumn Avalanche Advance War! what is it cood For? tles akin to Spectrum HoloByte's FIELDS OF GLORY (developed by this same team). If you're tired of waiting, though, you could design your own Civil War battle scenarios with New World's EMPIRE II. Closing out this era is Norm Kroger's latest installment in his WARGAME CONSTRUCTION SET series from SSI. AGE OF Rifles will cover a wide variety of lesser-known battles and Kroger promises that this should reflect 19th century battle A cheron a chance field more than TANKS did for the SSI'S STEEL PANTHERS 20th century. TWENTIETH CENTURY SHOCKS: The most anticipated reand interface. This may well be KAMPFGRUPPE's closest lease in this era has to be ALLIED GENERAL, which puts spiritual descendent for the '90s. the award-winning engine through its paces with Atomic is finally updating UTAH BEACH as D-Day, but some high-powered US and Soviet hardware. You may it is the impending release of BEYOND SQUAD LEADER take the part of either a British, Russian or US generwhich the industry anxiously awaits. Can a historical al on the Eastern, D-Day or North African fronts in 30WWII game be done in real-time with good play balHistorical battles/campaigns which put you in plus scenarios. The campaigns have a nice twist: if ance and Al? If looks are any indication, maybe so, command have always had a place in the wargaming you win in North Africa, for instance, you would have but there are some horrendous design pitfalls to overhobby, whether prior to this century or more modern the choice to move on to France, or retire as a war come. combat. Games like GameTek's resurrected UNIVERSAL hero. More archival film clips, voice-overs (although On the most modern front, Stanley Associates is MILITARY SIMULATOR, now known as WAR COLLEGE, try to it's doubtful SSI will hire George C. Scott as Patton) just wrapping up 7TH FLEET (with improved CAP and handle all eras, but most wargames zero in on a parand SVGA explosions make this a must for any WWII detection routines) and a 5TH FLEET scenario disk for ticular time period. aficionado. Avalon Hill, as IntraCorp prepares to launch a deluxe ANCIENTS ABLAZE: Interplay may well offer the hit in In addition to SSI'S ALLIED GENERAL, new player edition of HARPOON II. this arena with their CONQUEST OF THE NEW WORLD. The TalonSoft will debut with Jim Rose's BATTLEGROUND ARtactical battles look like gloriously painted miniatures DENNEs, featuring multiple scenarios for the Battle of SOME MUST FALL upon a detailed terrain and the strategic decisionthe Bulge. If that's not enough Bastogne for you, SSG We know that some of the games in this aumaking has plenty of decision tumn avalanche will disappoint gamers. Yet, points. This one has lots of we can't ever remember such a jam-packed custom options and creates release schedule. We're particularly excited berandom map designs so that cause it looks like there are potentially more you don't have to play the same hits than misses. If we're right, this winter may game over and over. not seem as long or as cold for computer For those of us who revel in gamers. the C.S. Forester and Alexander Kent novels of Napoleonic sailing glory, Avalon Hill's WOODEN Find out more about this Fall's Ziff NET hot new games during SHIPS & IRON MEN is nearing Computer Gaming World's completion by Stanley Associspecial Fall Games Preview online discussion on ZiffNet in CompuServe. Join game developers and ates. WS&IM will have a comexecutives and their host, CGWEditor-in-Chief Johnny pletely different engine than Wilson, plus other CGW editors from Saturday, August an the developer's 5TH FLEET, and 12 through Friday, August 18. Plus, download demos will include all the data from and art from some of the games mentioned in the Fall Avalon Hill's WOODEN SHIPS & IRON MEN Preview. the board game, including variThe weeklong special event will be segmented as ous types of shot, tactics, morale and even boarding will counter with THE LAST BLITZKRIEG, offering the usual follows: Saturday: action, Sunday: adventure: Monday: Lands of Lore Il from Westwood and Virgin Interactive, parties. Keating Al magic. Both ARDENNES & BLITZKRIEG are strict Tuesday: Top Gun from Spectrum HoloByte, Wednesday: Transitioning from Napoleon to the U.S. Civil War, about modeling the traffic jams and fuel difficulties Mindscape's NCAA Football, Thursday: Interplay's ConEmpire Software, the British publisher, will release faced by the Germans in their desperate attack toquest of the New World, and Friday: Gary Grigsby's Steel Panthers. CIVIL WAR, a grand strategic campaign game of the wards Brussels. Gary Grigsby's STEEL PANTHERS clothes Type GO ZNT:GAMEWO to find out more details on the U.S. Civil War. The system is strategic as in Impresthe designer's talents for distilling the essence of tac event in the Computer Gaming World forum on ZiffNet. sions' BLUE & GRAY, but features miniatures level battics with the newfound SSI love for graphics, sound USS. CONSTITUTION FFLIATE 000 00 Corona B .VERY FAST O ELITE euront And Wind on the Sibd quarter Caree KTS TURULTUS 64 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. AUGUST 1995 "


"Toe on First there was DOOM. Now comes HERETIC! From the Publisher of DOOM I A SWORD & SORCERY BATTLEFEST SO AWESOME, IT'S UNBELIEVABLE! rom the publisher FEATURES I of the shareware Supports up to 4 megahit DOOM players via network, comes a virtual 2 by modem world of medieval Cooperate with your buddies or massacre fantasy. The them in a bloody advanced 3-D deathmatch! graphics are so State-of-the-art real and everything 3-D, 360° smooth moves with such scrolling in real smoothness time for the fastest, deadliest combat! you are there! In HERETIC, Walk, run, fly! Look all around, you'll cast even up and down! eldritch spells Choose from 7 from the Tomes weapons and a of Power. host of magical Wield fantastic artifacts to cast weapons such mystical spells. as the Firemace Order HERETIC and Hellstaff. today and become All to destroy a believer: the undead 1-800-ID GAMES and bestial ($40 plus $5 S&H) horrors that On CD-ROM or 3,5\" disks for your slaughtered IBM PC/ Compatible. your race. By the spirits of your Elders, the Heretic must have his Vengeance! Circle Reader Service #71 CREATED BY PUBLISHED BY F SOFTWARE RSAC ADVISORY VIOLENCE B  he Heretic and Raven are trademarks of Raven Software, Inc. DOOM and id are Trademarks olid Software, Inc. 1994 id Software, Inc. All rights reserved. SOFTWARE "


"It's time to JAM! SIMULATION SYSTEM SHOCK DEFENDER THE F-14 TOMCAT SIMULATION NO VAPOR in a box Just a SYSTEM that SHOCKS JAM PAK NO 4 SHAREWARE benderJust an F-14 FLEET DEFENDER 1994 AWARDS Computer Game Review Golden Triad Award INDY CAR RACING PC Gamer Award for Best Wargame PANZER GENERAL OZO CARBELA TEK PC Gamer Editor's Choice Award F-14 FLEET DEFENDER Software Publisher Association CODIE Award Best Sports Program INDY CAR RACING PANZER GENERAL INDYCAR RACING IGNO HYPE in your face ALUMAX Game Bytes Award of Distinction F-14 FLEET DEFENDER Game Bytes Best Sports Simulation INDY CAR Computer Game Review NO Military SIM of the Year PRIMADONNA dancer PANZER GENERAL just a buttPC Gamer Award kickin' Best PANZER Adventure Game SYSTEM SHOCK Compute Best Sports Game INDY CAR just a wild INDY CAR chase The JAM PAK 4 HOT Titles for One Cool Price CARBELA TEK 1210 San Mateo Dr. South San Francisco, CA 94080 Phone 415-873-6484 FAX 415-873-6486 Circle Reader Service #91 MADE IN USA 1995 CARBELA TEK, INC. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. CARDELA TEK AND THE CARBELA TEK LOGO ARE REGISTERED TRADEMARKS OF CARBELA TEK, INC. JAM PAK MISA REGISTERED TRADEMARK OF CARDELA TEK, INC. ANY OTHER COPYRIGHTS OR TRADEMARKS ARE THE PROPERTY OF THEIR RESPECTIVE COMPANIES, "


"ADVENTURE/RPG Conspiratorial Tones SOME TIME IN THE FUple, poking into corners, trying to determine SCORPIA LAUNCHES TURE, AFTER INTERif the note is true or false, as well as who sent STELLAR TRAVEL it, and why. became common, With 14 Kobayashi people on board, plus five INTO THE ORION the Kobayashi Corfrom Mogami-Hudson (they're doing minerporation set up realogical research, or so they say, can you trust search Station anyone around here?), there is no lack of susCONSPIRACY'S Cerberus on an asterpects, but motivation is obscure. Everyone oid to study a mysterious seemed either to like Danny or had nothing at black hole. Danny McCormack, all to do with him. At least, that is how it appears Dear SCI-FI WHODUNIT one of the technicians, went out to perform rouon the surface, but what might be lurking below tine maintenance on a probe and never came is another matter. back: the power on his ship suddenly failed and he was pulled into the hole. A tragic accident. OUTER SPACE INTERFACE His father, Devlin, is flown to Cerberus to atInteracting with the game through the mouse tend a memorial ceremony. Afterwards, as he interface is simple. The cursor (in the form of a broods over the death in his guest quarters, a crosshair) is moved around the screen, lighting note is pushed under Devlin's door. A note up various hot spots; clicking the mouse button claiming that Danny's demise was no accident, causes Devlin to give a description of the item. If but outright murder. he can do something with it, one or more action So begins THE ORION CONSPIRACY, a science icons appear in the bottom left corner. For exfiction mystery adventure game from Domark ample, clicking on a person usually brings up Software. As Devlin McCormack, you snoop two actions, one to look and one to talk. On ocaround the Cerberus Facility, talking to peocasion, a third option, \"give,\" will also appear. When dealing with objects, Devlin never uses anything unless it's appropriate to do so. Therefore, Remember the good old days? The you don't have DERM6930 days when gargoyles were gargoyles, to worry about men were men, and an adventurer had using up someto slay tens of thousands of baddies thing important just to earn his daily crust of bread? or handing off a Ti chi trebalo You can relive that bygone era with an critical item to upcoming Windows role-playing game the wrong percalled MORDOR. This shareware release son. Nothing is no graphic feast (it looks a lot like can be dropped, the Internet's NETHACK), but its got plenso nothing can ty of classic hack-n-slash fun, and dunbe lost, and Degeons with loads of traditional tricks vlin's inventory and traps, weapons, magic items, and other treasures. Hundreds of hours of space is apparently unlimited; traditional role-playing fun await those with active imaginations and a I never ran into a \"you're carhealthy bloodlust. For more information call TDA Help! at (800) 624-2101. rying too many items\" message, no matter how many by Scorpia SCRY SIGHT TIC AUGUST 1995  COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 67 "


"things he was hauling The midpoint is also where around with him. people start dropping like flies. The inventory and conThey get shot up, shot down, trols appear at the bottom blown up, blown apart, carved of the screen; they can be up and ripped to shreds. While brought up by pulling the none of that is actually too gory cursor there or hitting the (especially not for anyone who space bar. Using the space has played Doom, et al.), the bar automatically positions death toll mounts rapidly. I the cursor at the first box, kept expecting the ghost of which is handy. The cursor Agatha Christie to pop up, can be moved across the shouting, \"And Then There options manually, or by cyWhat is your job? Were None!\" It certainly felt cling through the choices What is your backgroundthat way, and indeed, not many using the right mouse butHow well did you know Danny? will be leaving Cerberus at ton, and then left-clicking What do you know about Mogami-Hudson? game's end. on the one you want. Im sorry Doctor, I have to go now. ORION CONSPIRACY does have Talking to people is its problems, although these WHERE'S MY ALIBI? ORION CONSPIRACY is a sci-fi whodunit where conversations with mainly a matter of clicking notenti potential suspects are key. The game features quality voice-acting throughout. are in the design rather than on them, then running the programming. Overall, the down the conversation topgame ran quite cleanly, except ics presented on the screen. There is a what dull. Since the action takes place in for a couple of sound problems. One was standard set of questions that appear only the Cerberus facility, most locations look with the voices, which seems to be specific once, plus some others that show up as well, just like each other, especially the to the Gravis sound card. Often, syllables the investigation progresses, based on corridors, of which there are many, and of words were echoed, such as \"It's set for what Devlin has learned so far. which you will be walking through plenty automautomatic control.\" This was irriIn several instances, asking about during the game. I recommend mapping tating, but in most cases did not interfere something will bring up an extended the place out so you don't become conmuch with understanding what was said. conversation. For example, Devlin may fused (you can't become lost) and so you The other was with the game forgetting ask a person what it's like to work on Cercan find your way to important areas the music volume settings. Often, the volberus, and the two of them will trade quickly. ume would become louder when switchcomments back and forth automatically, Everyone has a speaking voice, and ing levels via the elevator, and on without any prompting from the player. each (along with the character graphic) is occasion when leaving or entering some This gives a nice feeling of actually talkdistinct enough that you shouldn't have areas on the same level. ing to someone, as opposed to many othmuch trouble telling people apart. A The characters are somewhat depresser games where interaction is usually just good thing, since you have to talk to 15 ing. From the \"redneck security chief,\" to question-answer. Devlin's quasi-indepenpeople during the game. For those who the \"tough as nails, oversexed feminist,\" dence here is a good touch. may not have a supported sound card, to the \"namby-pamby, never grew up, Graphically, the game is good, if somesubtitles are available. whining mama's boy,\" they're all blatant stereotypes. Even Devlin fits into the THE ORION CONSPIRACY SPLIT PERSONALITY \"embittered middle-aged man who has Price: No SRP ORION CONSPIRACY can be thought of lost all\" mold. System as having two parts. The first section We don't expect great literature in a Requirements: deals mainly with looking into Danny's computer game, and complex personaliIBM compatible death, and is the more adventure-game ties for 15 or 16 people would be expect486-25MHz, 4MB RAM (8MB oriented portion. Midway, the story ing too much. Still, there was certainly recommended), ORION changes direction rather dramatically, as room here to develop at least a few of the SVGA graphics, CONSPIRACY Devlin's investigation crosses the path of characters beyond the superficial collec10 MB hard drive something else that has been going on, ATARE space, CD-ROM; tion of knee-jerk responses that make up supports most unsuspected by anyone. This segment is their personalities. major sound cards. more action-oriented; Devlin runs Protection: None around doing a lot of things, many of THE LANGUAGE BARRIER Designer: Andy Blazdell Publisher: Domark Software them not requiring much puzzle solving, ORION CONSPIRACY is presented as an San Mateo, CA and those are mostly obvious ones, such adult game. Typically, \"adult\" tends to (415) 513-8928 as figuring out where to go to obtain the mean (a) sex/nudity or (b) strong lanright item. guage or (c) both of them. In the case of 68 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. AUGUST 1995 "


"THE EPIC CONQUEST YOU YEARS IN THE MAKING! GHARAM MEDIA \"An adventure that combines detailed fief-management and long-range strategy with lots of bone-crunching, first-person action! William R. Trotter, PC Gamer SOFTWARE SORCERY PRESENTS CODoupFor A.D. 1086 BBS: 1-818-295-6730 E-mail: TWlinto@aol.com CompuServe 76024735 America Online :Keyword: TWI World Wide Web: http://www.pathfinder.com/twi .  1995 Time Warner Interactive Conqueror ADI 1086 is a trademark of software Sorcery. Circle Reader Service #314 TIME WARNER INTERACTIVE CD ROM "


"ORION CONSPIRACY, it's strong language, not merely used, but overused; the enchanges direction in mid-stream. Up to and plenty of it. Not simply mild explegineer alone is one of the most foulthat point, it was fairly intriguing, with tives such as an occasional \"hell\" or mouthed characters you will ever come some tantalizing clues, a few red herrings, \"damn,\" but words that many parents across in a computer game. He can and the feeling that the research station would probably rather not have their hardly open his mouth without uttering was more than it appeared. I was really children hear. at least one obscenity per sentence. The getting interested. Even mature gamers might not care other characters (Devlin included) Then, with what amounts to one to hear them, as these expressions are aren't quite that bad, but they certainly scene, it all becomes something else. aren't shy about The mystery suddenly turns into \"grade peppering their B\" SF movie fare. It's as though the deconversations signers became tired with the initial stowith «Torbidden ry and characters halfway through, so words.\" It is a sad they switched to a new line, killing off thing when dealmost everyone else in the process. signers think that This is ultimately unsatisfying, especialadding such lanly as there isn't much connection, plotguage to the wise, between the first and second product somehalves of the game. how makes it Overall, the ORION CONSPIRACY is one of more \"real\" or those ifly products: it starts with good inmore \"adult,\" tentions and good execution, then spirals Key when in fact it downward into mediocrity, and the addidoes neither. tion of too much \"adult\" language does What bothered nothing to improve the situation. Gamers me most about who are looking for a gripping SF advenANOTHER ONE BITES THE DUST At mid-game, ORION CONSPIRACY takes a strange turn, and people start dropping like flies at a Raid factory. this one, though, ture, or who dislike strong expletives, is how the game aren't likely to be happy with this one. The Serious Wargamer Knows His True Allies Tigers On The Prowl** Aide De Camp Point Of Attack MULATONS HPS Simulations P.O. Box 3245 Santa Clara, CA 95055 (408)554-8381 The WARGAMER'S Computer Company 70 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD AUGUST 1995 "


"CODE BITTA WORLD DOMINATION IN A BOX. AREAS POWER SUIT PROTO-TYPE & X-OUNT WELCOME TO THE new world order. A gritty, high-tech world where the art of electronic intelligence and covert surveillance reigns supreme. Where guerrilla strategies and savage combat are the norm. Build bases, muster forces and lacerate your enemies to the bone. All for the love of power. IN THE HYPER-REAL combat experience of Command & Conquer,\" you're thrust into the heat of an all-out race for global control. DOMINATE YOUR opponent through modem or network play. Will you, side with the humanistic GDI or bring the world to its knees with the Brotherhood of Nod? Decide fast. Your adversaries are without mercy. And so are you. COMMAND ICONDUER Westwood distributed exclusively by TEEN COMMAND & CONQUER is a trademark of Westwood Studios, Inc. 01995 Westwood Studios, Inc. All rights reserved. Virgin is a registered trademark of Virgin Enterprises, Ltd. AGES 13. Vomers Circle Reader Service #25 FERONT TO www.wesiveol.com and transmission "


"GAME HINTS Hints For The Asking Scorpia Dishes Up Answers For Questioning Gamers ell, the trend time at all. both games installed (i.e., the full World towards older . Return To Zork: Alof Xeen) in order to enter all places on games continmost everyone likes dogs, the Cloudside. Several dungeons are part ues. The letexcept perhaps those of the Darkside story, and it's only there ters coming in playing this game. They that you will obtain what you need to enare mostly about less recent can't seem to get any. ter. If you're playing Clouds as a standproducts, and even the litwhere with the killer alone game, you won't be able to get into tle rush of new games at poodle guarding the bedthose places (and of course, if you're the beginning of summer room. Well, I'll tell ya a seplaying DARKSIDE, there's certainly no hasn't changed that. Either cret: there's just no way past way!). the newer games are easier, or they don't the mutt. He does, however, have anoth Alone In The Dark 3: This adventure have much to interest CGW readers. Or er purpose besides keeping your nose out has a lot of nasty puzzles, where the soluit could be a little of both. It seems the of private places. Noisy little barker, isn't tions only come after a lot of trial and erbest we can do is hope the coming he? ror. One of these is in the jail, after you Christmas season will change that, beUltima VII—Serpent Isle: Some peomake it out of the cell: there is a pentacause the summer has never been noted ple are having a hard time in Moonshade gram in one corridor that is instant death as a time of major releases. after the banquet. Nothing much is hapif you cross it. The thing to do here is to Before getting to the mail, I'd like to pening, and they can't get anywhere with not be in too much of a hurry to exit the remind everyone again: Please Do Not Pothos, even though they know what he jail cell. Look around, and you'll find Send Money, even if you live outside the needs and have it in their inventory. The what you need. You still have to do someUS. It isn't necessary, and I'll only send it way around this impasse is to have a little thing with that item, however; just preback. Just enclose an SASE with your chat with Bucia again. After that, the tend it's the CD for the game and see questions (not required from foreign pace should pick up considerably. what ideas come to mind (hehe). countries). That's much more important. Lands of Lore: The giant slug guard Noctropolis: Some players have found Now we have that settled, let's get on to ing the mine entrance can be a giant that this game seems to come to a halt afthe good stuff. headache. One method of dealing with it ter reaching the butcher shop. There apDiscworld: Some gamers are having a is to beat on it, run out to heal up, beat pear to be no other leads, and nothing problem on the \"nightside\" (or last on the critter some more, run out, etc. much is happening otherwise. That's benight). They find an unexpected ham. This is time-consuming and a little tecause you missed something in the shop. mer in place of the more expected gate dious, but it does work. A much faster Don't just stand around like a side of pass. Even worse, the hammer doesn't and better method, however, is to use the chilled meat. There are moments when appear in the inventory. Well, of course it green skull from one of the locked tree being pushy can provide unexpected dedoesn't; Rincewind put it back in the stumps in the woods. If you have suffivelopments. safe. You'll just have to go ask someone cient magic power (the skull does eat up And that's it for this look into the mailabout that in the daytime. the points), you'll be able to kill the slug bag. In the meantime, if you need help Death Gate: Several adventurers are in one combat session. with an adventure game, you can reach seeing double, and it's giving them fits. Stone Prophet: Getting into the Royal me in the following ways: Namely, a double of themselves that just Burial Hall (that place in the desert with On Delphi: Stop by the GameSIG. won't get out of the way. Very annoying. the male statue and slab in the ground) On GEnie: Visit the Games RoundBesides, you can't reach the endgame, requires a couple of things. One of them Table (type: Scorpia). and that's worse than annoying. This is is hearing the ghost's song. The other is By US Mail (remember that SASE if really a simple matter. By keeping in an item you'll find under the Harvest you live in the US!): Scorpia, PO Box mind that the doppelganger always reTemple (big hint: the statue needs some 338, Gracie Station, New York, NY verses your motions, and running a carething to pull). When you have both, 10028. ful eye down the spell list, you should you'll be able to enter. Until next time, happy adventuring! have the traffic jam burned out in no Clouds/Darkside of Xeen: You need 72 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD AUGUST 1995 "


"Trust No One. THE n a future dominated by vast megacorporations and corrupt governments, a single citizen stands little chance of altering the course of human events. You're about to find out what happens when one tries. Presented with breathtaking graphics and special effects. THE ORION CONSPIRACY is a murder mystery that spins an intricate web of intrigue and deceit. In this graphic adventure, blind trust equals death. And friends morph suddenly into foes. Don't lose your head. 7-0117 100 hand-painted background scenes displayed in stunning SuperVGA. Full speech with subtitles. Co-quality music and spot FX throughout. Rendered, animated cut-scenes. Highly involved storyline. DISTRIBUTED BY On CD-ROM for IBM PC & Compatibles. ARK 1995 Domark Software, Lid. All rights reserved. HoloByte To order, visit your nearest software retailer, or call 1-800-695-GAME 1-800-895-GAME Circle Reader Service #210 "


"CHIPS & BITS INC. Har a tras Call 800-699-4263 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'l 802-767-3033 Source 10348 PO Box 234 Dept 10348 Rochester, VT 05767 NUTOS JOUSWITCH APACHE 'APACHE' is a landmark in multimedia entertainment, promising action, stunning visual effects and long lasting appeal. You are quickly pulled into the thick of downin the-dirt action without ever compromising authenticity or depth of game. play. CD $45 '11TH HOUR Sequel to 7th Guest except the stakes are higher, the puz zles more clever & the retum visit even more unsettling. Solve puzzles and investigate clues that take you through Stauf's haunted house with movie-like plot Mists, special effects & music sound track. CD $51 JOYSWITCH THE COMBAT HELICOPTER SIMULATION \"JOYSWITCH' Now you can jump from joystick to joystick game to game with the speed and ease of turning a switch. No more reaching behind your computer to swap joystick cables on the game port. Joyswitch does it all. $38 COMMAND FREE Collector's Edition CONOUER Senes INTERACTIVE ENTERTAINMENT Suitmen 'COMMAND AND CONQUER' In a real time world where every move could trigger a fast and violent countermove, you must choose whether to fight for a secure future for all mankind or a dicta torship run by a brutal few. Join the Brotherhood of Nod and bring the world to its knees. CD S48 Receive an episode of Interactive Entertainment CD ROM magazine FREE with any in stock software order. Offer subject to change or cancellation without notice. Valid from 7/1/95 to 8/31/95 or while supplies last. Quantities limited. 'STAR TREK TNG: A FINAL UNITY COLLECTOR'S EDITION' Along with the CD In this collector's editon, you will recieve a starship Enterprise LCD Pin, \"A Final Unity Collectors Box\" and an exclusive poster. CD $76 IBM HARDWARE IBM HARDWARE IBM ACTION IBM ADVENTURE IBM ADVENTURE IBM ADVENTURE $48 VIDEO HARDWARE Impression Lite VLB $299 Reel Magic Lite $275 SpeedStar Pro SEVLB$179 Speedstar Gme Kt PCI$169 Stealth 64 2 MB RAM $201 S42 CONTROLLERS Auto Cockpit $159 Batter Up: Vrtl Baseball $52 CH Game Card 3 Auto $25 CH Pro Pedals $75 CH Pro Throttle $89 CH Trackball Pro $85 CH Virtual Pilot Pro $75 Dolphin Vertual Helm $139 Flight Cockpit $219 Game Zapper $47 Gravis Eliminator G-crd $19 Gravis Phoenix Jystick $83 Joyswitch Logitech Wing Man Ext $45 Notebook Gameport $42 PC Virtual Golf Club $119 Spaceball Avenger $165 Thrustmaster DCS $110 Thrustmastr F16 TOS $110 Tmaster FC Sys (M2) $59 Tmaster Pro Play Golf $550 Tmaster Rudder Sys $99 Universal Cockpit $219 VFX 1 Virtual Reality $949 CD HARDWARE 4 Plex Quad Drive S429 Diamond 1000 Mm Kit $329 Diamond 4000 Mm Kit $379 Digital Edge 3x Int CD $699 Mitsumi Quad Speed $215 NEC 4XI Multispin Int $405 NEC 4XE M-spin Ext $489 Plextor 6 Plex 6x Int $529 Snyo Concord 3 4x Ex $325 Sanyo Concord 3 4x In$215 SB Omni CD (2X) Ext $369 SB Omni CD (4x) S412 SB Omni CD (2X) $207 SB Omni CD (3x) $329 Teac Super Quad Dry $220 1001 Nights of Doom $19 4X Frenzy $49 4X Frenzy CD $48 D!Zone 2 CD $24 Doom 2 Collectors CD $52 Doom 2: Hell on Earth $39 Doom Ware CD $25 Duke Nukem 3D $35 Heretic or CD $42 Hurl CD $26 Magic Carpet 1 or 2 CD 544 Maximum Roadkill CD $42 Quarantine CD $25 Rise of the Triad $34 Road Warrior CD $30 Skull Cracker CD $41 Space Hulk 2 CD System Shock CD $47 Tek War CD 546 Twisted Metal CD $42 Ultimate Doom CD S29 Warhammer 40K CD $44 $34 $44 $38 7th Guest 2:11th Hr CD $51 7th Guest CD $44 Adrenaline Factor CD $35 Alien Alliance CD $44 Alien Trilogy CD $46 Alien Virus CD $38 Aliens CD $44 Alone in the Dark 3 CD $42 Archangel CD $24 Ascendancy CD S44 Atmosfear CD $34 Beneath Steel Sky CD $33 Big Red Adventure CD $40 BioHazard Five CD $47 Bioforga CD $44 Black Diamond CD $44 Blackthorne or CD $29 Blake Stone or CD $29 Blind Date CD Bloodnet CD $41 Bloodwings S44 Blown Away WIN CD $39 Body Count or CD $29 BrainDead 13 CD $38 Buccaneers CD $48 Bureau 13 CD $33 Burn Cycle CD $39 Calia 2095 CD $47 Central Intelligence CD $25 Chaos Continuum CD $29 Chronomaster CD $47 Commander Blood CD $39 Companions of Xanth $32 Conspiracy CD $30 Corridor 7 or CD $29 Creation CD $52 Creature Shock CD Crossfire CD $44 Curse of Enchantia CD $23 Cyberia CD Cybermage CD Cyberwar CD Daedalus Encountr CD $47 Damnesia CD $36 Damocles or CD $36 Dark Forces CD $47 Dark Seed 2 $42 Darker CD $36 Day of the Tentacle CD $29 Death Gate CD Delcon O CD Depth Dwellers CD $29 Discworld or CD $35 Dracula Unleashed CD $39 Dreadnoughts Bismark $29 Dreamweb Dune CD $29 Dust CD $42 Ecstatica or CD $36 Entombed CD $37 Entomorph CD $44 Extractors CD $34 Fighting Fantasy CD $40 Flash Traffic CD $39 Flashback CD $35 Fortress of Dr. Radiaki $32 Frankenstein WIN CD $46 Fred Pharkas Pharm 2 $44 Freelancer 2120 Full Throttle CD $46 G-Nome or CD $43 Gabriel Knight $29 Gabriel Knight 2 CD S48 Gadget CD S45 Gateway 2 or CD Gender Wars CD $49 HardJack CD $48 Harvester CD Heart of Darkness CD $55 Hell CD $45 Hell Cab CD $38 Hellraiser CD $52 Heretic 2 CD $46 Heretic w/Extra Levels $46 Hired Guns $36 Hook $32 I Have No Mouth $44 Ice & Fire CD $48 In Extremus Inca 3 CD $39 Indestructibles CD $44 1 Jones Fate Atlantis CD $32 Into the Shadows $48 Jagged Alliance $46 Jewel of the Oracle CD $39 Johnny Mnemonic CD $41 Journeyman Project 2 $55 King's Quest 7 CD WIN $49 King's Ransom CD $33 Kingdom O' Magic CD $54 Knights Chase CD $42 L-Zone CD $40 Labyrinth of Time CD $24 Lands of Lore 2 $42 Last Dynasty CD $48 Laura Bow 2 $24 Lawn Mower Man 2 CD $49 Legend of Kyrandia 3 $39 Leisure Suit Larry Anth $47 Lion CD or WIN CD $39 Little Divil CD $39 Loadstar CD $49 Lost Eden CD $39 Lost Files of Sherlock 2 $44 Lost Mind of Dr Brain $36 Lst Treasure of Infocom $29 Lost in Town CD $44 Lunicus CD $42 Maabus CD $25 MacBeth: Game CD $35 IBM EDUCATION ack CD SPEAKERS Altec ACS 3 Spkr Sys $179 Altec ACS 150 Swir $109 Altec ACS 50 Spkrs $79 Audiophile SW 20A $139 Jazz J-306 Speakers $32 Jazz J-511 Speakers $58 Jazz J-702 Speakers 596 Koss HD 100 Speakers $63 Koss HD 40 Speakers $22 Koss HD 50 Speakers $32 Labtec CS-1000 Spkrs $59 Labtec CS-600 $24 Yamaha SBS 300 Spkr $88 AUDIO HARDWARE Adv Gravis U-snd Max $169 Sound Blster 16 MCD $172 Snd Blaster 16 Value $99 Snd Blaster 32 AWE $263 SB 32 AWE Value Ed. $219 SB Gmeblaster CD 16 5379 SB Discovery CD 16 $249 Snd Blaster Pro Value $74 Sound Blaster Value $57 Sound Galaxy BX2 w/S $29 Sound Galaxy NX2 w/S $49 Sound Man Wave $125 Vivid 3D Plus Sound $72 Vivid 3D Pro $105 Vivid 3D Sound $55 Algebraic Proposer $35 Annabel's Dream CD $35 Destination Mars $25 Dinosoft Multiply/Divide $12 EcoQuest VGA $19 Frantic Factory WIN $24 Island Of Dr. Brain $29 Multimedia: Vivaldi CD $24 Number Munchers $19 Pacific Theater $19 Quarky Quaysoo's Sci $29 Scooter's Magic Castle $32 Stckybear Word Problm $26 Stckybear Word Scrmble $26 Word Attack Plus! $28 $29 $48 $42 $45 CREW R951 1995 CHIPS & BITS, INC "


"OVERNIGHT SHIPPING in US $4 per order. Mail to Canada, PR HI, AK, APO, FPO S4 per order. Worldwide airmail $6 per item. Handling $2 per shipment Hardware orders may require additional shipping charges. All sales final. Call for details. Visa, MC and Discover accepted. Checks held 4 weeks. Monoy Orders under $200 same as cash. COD S8. Defectives replaced with same produci. Most items shipped same day. Shipping times may vary. Price/ availability may change. sa FREE GAME OFFER* See details below ARMORED COMBAT 'ACROSS THE RHINE' Control history's famous tanks and experience the fierce combat and tough decisions that gripped WWII tank commanders. Offers multiple command levels and 3D graphics. Blast your way through enemy units across war torn Europe. CD $47 \"CRYSTAL CALIBURN' A truly great pinball game is more than great graphics and spec tacular sounds, more than the latest arcade features like 3D ramps and three multi-bal play more than fast ball movement and precise flipper control it's one that keeps you coming back for more. $29 'THRUSTMASTER F-16 TQS You've got one of the best flight simu lators on the market and the software is more sophisticated than the best the mitary had just a few years ago, but you're still using your keyboard to flym? With the 'TQS\"youl be flying that bird from an F-16 Cockpit User configurable, thumb trackbalfore and aft throttle movement, dogfight switch and throttle tension adjustment wheel, as realistic as the real thing. $110 MICROPROSE OPINBALL Crystal Caliburn WOLAE NON SCENARIOS SPARKSCHOKOTOR ve VDO SOUDALPS WITSULT ROND DATABASE VH \"HARPOON II DELUXE' You are about to take command of the awesome power of the world's modern naval and air forces. This is more than just a game. It is an experience that will provide you with hundreds of hours of entertainment and challenging conflict. CD 542 \"LINKS PRO 386 CD' The most award winning golf game in software history has now been enhanced for the CD platform. From tee to green, Links 386 CD is unrivaled in recre ating a true golfing experience. Play at Hilton Head Island or Banff Springs Resort, Canada CD $19 *FREE GAME OFFER Spend the specified amount on any in stock software and choose a FREE IBM game from the corresponding list below. Request must be made at time of order. SPEND $60 Airborne Ranger 5.25, All IE up to Episode 9, Cohort 2 3.5, Conquered Kingdoms Scen 13.5. GNB Scon Disk 3.5. Gunship 5.25 Mercenaries 5.25, Pirates 5.25, SDI 5.25 SPEND $100 Bridge 7.0 3.5, DRAGON Force 3.5/5.25, Falcon 3.0 Mig 29 3.5. MacArthur's War 3.5, Megatraveller Zhodani 5.25. Return of the Phantom 3.5, Terminator 2029 3.5 SPEND $160 Alone in the Dark 3.5. Battles of Destiny 3.5, Links Pro 386 3.5. F15 Striko Eagle Il 3.5, Rules of Engagement 5.25, Silent Service 2 3.5. Simon the Sorcorer 3.5, Star Trek Judgement Rites 3.5. Ultima Underworld 2 3.5, Worlds at War 3.5/5.25 SPEND $200 Harpoon Coll CD. Falcon 3.0 3.5 Jutland CO, Links Pro 386 CD. V Victory: Market Garden 3.5 FREE INTERACTIVE ENTERTAINMENT WITH ANY IN STOCK SOFTWARE ORDER Offer subjoct to change or cancellation without notice. Valid from July 1st Aug 31st or while supplies last. MULTIMEDIA EDILK INKS 38 23 ACCESS IBM ADVENTURE IBM ADVENTURE IBM ARCADE IBM ARCADE IBM ROLEPLAYING IBM ROLEPLAYING $31 $23 $39 S40 S46 $35 Madness of Roland CD $29 Man Enough CD $34 Mission Critical CD $34 Monstrous City CD $44 Morph Man CD $25 Mortimer CD $42 Myst CD $48 Nasly Parts CD $42 Necrobius WIN CD Nibelrung Ring Cycle $39 Night Trap CD $48 Noctropolis CD $47 Nomad or CD $36 Odyssey CD $44 Operation Body Count $29 Out of this World 2 CD $45 Pagemaster CD $44 Pandorah Device CD $54 Panic In the Park CD $39 Phantasmagoria CD $54 Pitfall or CD $38 Police Quest 5 CD $48 Power Dome CD $48 Prince of Persia 2 $29 Prisoner of Ice CD $42 Psychotron CD $25 Quest for Fame CD $42 Quest for Glory 5 CD $44 Relentless CD $44 Return to Zork $39 Riddle of Master Lu CD $48 Rittwar Legacy $23 Ripper CD $49 Rivers of Dawn CD $46 Robocop 3 $32 Robot City CD $46 Scroll CD $38 Sea Legends CD $44 Secrets of Stargate CD $28 Sentient CD $37 Shadows WIN CD Shadows of Cairn CD $39 Silverload CD $38 Simon the Sorcerer 2 $37 Slaughterhouse 5 CD $46 Space Quest 6 CD $45 Space Ship Brainlock $49 Spaceship Warlock CD $29 Spawn or CD $42 Star Reach $36 Star Trek:TNG Collect $76 Star Trek: Jdge Rite CD$42 StereoWorld CD $39 System Shock $41 Terra Nova CD $48 Terror of the Deep The Dig $40 The Journeyman Projet $32 The Trial $44 Thief of Dreams Tong Nau CD $37 Touche $39 Trouble is my Biz CD $46 Under Killing Moon CD $44 Virtuoso CD Virus CD $37 Void Pirates CD Vortex CD Voyeur CD $46 Walker Wetlands CD $29 Witchaven CD $46 Wolf:Hunt or Be Hunted $39 Wolves of Moordeth CD$39 Woodruff & Schnibble $32 Wrath of the Gods CD $36 XS CD $48 Z CD $48 Zombie Dino CD $30 Zorro CD $42 3D Ultra Pinball CD $40 500 CC Race Bike $29 5th Dimension $19 Alien Breed $19 ALG Bundle CD $45 Breakthru WIN $35 Brutal CD Cannon Fodder CD Chaos Engine $19 Corpse Killer CD $48 Crime Patrol CD $25 Crystal Caliburn WIN $29 Crystal Skulls CD $40 Dragons Lair 2 CD $39 Dragon's Lair 3 $34 Drug Wars CD $25 Eight Ball Deluxe $29 FX Fighter CD $45 Fast Draw Showdown $35 First Wave $19 Glider 4.0 Gorg CD S19 Hammer Slammers CD $46 Hodj & Podj CD S40 Ishar 3 $33 Judge Dredd CD $40 Jump Raven CD $42 Jurassic Park CD $25 Lode Runner Network $40 Lode Runner WIN $29 Mad Dog McCree CD $35 Mad Dog McCree II CD $35 Magnaflux Runner $29 Mario Game Gallery Maximum Surge CD $47 Mega Man X or CD Metal & Lace $27 Mickey Mania 1 CD $37 Microcosm CD $36 Microsoft Arcade WIN $29 Mirage Thunder $39 Monty Python's Waste $48 Mortal Kombat 2 CD $44 Mortal Kombat 3 CD $47 Novastorm CD $35 Oxyd Magnum $36 Pinball Fantasies $29 Pinball Fantasy Dlx CD $29 Pinball Illusions or CD $29 Pinball Worlds or CD $35 Power Rangers CD $25 Prize Fighter CD S47 Raiden $29 Rebel Assault CD $38 Rebel Assault 2 CD $45 Revolution X CD $45 Rise of the Robots $45 Rocket Boy CD $49 Royal Flush Pinball CD $30 Savage Warriors or CD $44 Silver Ball 2 $19 Slam City CD $48 Soccer Kid CD S25 Space Ace CD $38 Space Ace 2 $34 Space Pirates CD $39 Striker $46 Striker CD $46 Super Bubsy CD Super Pushover CD S24 Supreme Warrior CD $48 Tetris Gold CD The Last Bounty Hnter $35 Thexder 2 CD $40 Time Pockets CD $46 Total Domination CD $39 Tubular Worlds $36 Ultimate Pinball CD $29 WWF Arcade CD $45 Who Shot Johnny Rock $24 $29 AD & D Collectors CD $35 Lord of the Rings CD $36 ADD Collector's Vol 3 $19 Lord of the Rings 2 CD $38 ADD Three Worlds CD $24 Lord of Rings 1 & 2 $19 Al-Qadim CD $39 Lords of Midnight CD $48 Alien Legacy $36 Menzoberranzan $42 Amberstar $16 Might and Magic 3 S24 Anvil ol Dawn CD $34 Might & Magic 4 or 5 ea $19 Arena Pirates Gold $19 Arena CD $45 Pools of Darkness S38 Berserker CD $48 Pools of Radiance $15 Betrayal at Antara CD 548 Ravenloft 2 CD Campaign Cartographers46 Ravenloft or CD $49 Cobra Mission $29 Rims of Arkania 3 CD $46 Curse of Azure Bonds $15 Red Crystal $19 CyClones $39 Return to Ringworld CD $19 Cyber Space CD $38 Riftwar Legacy CD $23 CyberJudas CD $32 Rings of Medusa Gold $18 Daemonsgate or CD $19 Rngs of Medusa Gld CD$23 Dark Sun 2 or CD $49 Robinson's Requiem CD $29 Dark Sun or CD $49 Rome: Pathway Power $29 Darklands $19 Shadow Caster CD $18 Death Knights of Krynn $15 Sherlock Holmes 1-3 ca$29 Devil's Gate CD $40 Skyrealm of Jorune CD $39 Disciples of Steel $34 Star Reach CD Dragon Lore CD $47 Star Trail $41 Druid: Daemon of Mind $46 Star Trail Speech Pack $18 Dungeon Master $19 Star Trek Deep Spce 9 S41 Dungeon Mstr 2 or CD $37 Star Trek TNG Unity CD $47 Elder Scrolls 2 CD $48 Stonekeep CD $44 Eye of Beholder 1-3 ea $19 Stronghold $19 Gateway Savage Front $16 Sword of China $42 Goldtree Dark Tower $15 Syndicate $37 Goldtree Engine S26 Syndicate Plus CD Hunters of Ralk CD $48 Thunderscape CD S40 Ishar 3 CD Treasure Savage Front $19 Kingdoms CD $40 Ultima 9 or CD S52 Knights of Xentar CD $38 Unlimited Adventures $19 Lands of Lore S34 Vampire: Masquerade 948 Legacy:Realm of Terror $39 Wizardry 7 Crusaders $19 Lord of the Rings 1 CE $14 World of Xeen CD $24 Circle Reader Service #50 $39 $43 $45 $32 $40 $24 $39 1995 CHIPS & BITS. INC. "


"CHIPS&BITS INC. Empresas para se te persoane INC. Call 800-699-4263 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'l 802-767-3033 Source 10348 PO Box 234 Dept 10348 Rochester, VT 05767 Muilmedia THE ULTIMA TE Cindres CD-ROM TIU LOST ADMIRAL The Admiral Revenge \"GREY WOLF' is commissioned for service, and you have been selected to captain the ship! Your mission is to patrol the Atlantic and accomplish the impossible. Stop the convoys, avoid the destroyers, frigates, depth charges, and the big guns from the battleships. CD $29 \"ULTIMATE DOOM' Prepare yourself for the ultimale DOOM. Now you can get the complete original megahit plus an all new episode that will blow you away: Thy Flesh Consumed. These nine never seen before expert levels will make the first 27 seem like a walk in the park! CD $32 THE LOST ADMH RAL 2 Dare to enter the waters once again, with The Admiral's Revenge. The predesigned maps are monumental. the randomly generated scenarios are tremendous and the campaigns round out a titanic gaming experience. CD $39 THE COMPLETE ORIGINAL MEGAHIT PLUS ALL-NEW EPISODE IV: THY FLESH CONSUMED Crey Wolf luntee of the \"crtli Atlanta FREE 500H SHIPPING! 'THRUSTMASTER XL ACTION CONTROLLER This joystick offers advanced functionality enjoyed by flight sim enthusiasts. Features three instant response buttons, action trigger, 4-way thumb switch. pistol grip & glow-in-the-dark buttons. $24 'ESPN SPORTS SHORTS' Stop working so seriously! Use hundreds of ESPN video and high resolution photos as slideshows, screenbreaks, wall papers or backdrops. Like SportsCenter on your PC, get footbal hockey, baseball, basketball, golf, auto racing and more. CD $12 Place an order for an out of stock software item and recieve FREE overnight shipping when product becomes available. Handling $2 per shipment. This 71 IBM SIMULATIONS IBM SIMULATIONS IBM SIMULATIONS IBM SIMULATIONS IBM SIMULATIONS IBM SPORTS $39 $49 $46 $39 1st Degree CD $44 1st Encounters $29 1st Encounters CD $29 A10 2: Silent Hunter CD$48 A320 Airbus $29 AH-64 B Longbow $54 Absolute Zero CD $48 Aces over Europe or CD $25 Aces of the Deep $44 Aces of the Deep 2 CD 548 Aces of Deep Mission $29 Aces of the Deep CD $48 Aces of the Pacific CD $39 Across Desert 1941 CD $48 Across the Rhine CD $47 Across Rhine Exp #1 $30 Air Combat Pacific 1942$24 Air Combat Pac 42 Gld $48 Air Combat Series CD $47 Air Havoc Ctrl WIN CD $39 Air Warrior 2 or CD $34 Air Warrior $35 Air Warrior CD $35 Airpower or CD Apache CD $45 Armored Fist $43 Armored Fist CD Army Air Corps: 1942 $48 Army Air Corps: 42 CD $48 Art of the Kill Battle of Britain 2 WIN $34 Battlecruiser 3000 $43 Battlecruiser 3000 CD $48 Big Red Racing CD $40 Chaos Control CD $39 Chopper Pack CD $38 Chopper Strike $48 Chopper Strike CD $52 Combat Air Patrol $29 Combat Air Patrol CD $25 Combat Classics 2 $19 Confirmed kill CD $44 Cyber Race CD $32 Cyberbykes or CD Cyclemania CD $34 D-Day: Op Overlord CD $39 Dark Ride CD Dawn Patrol $35 Dawn Patrol CD $41 Dawn Patrol 2 CD $42 Delta V or CD $25 Descent or CD $37 Descent 2.0 CD Destruction Derby CD $36 Dream Web CD $34 EarthSiege 2 CD $48 Evasive Action $28 F16 Fighting Falcon CD $44 F15 Strike Eagle 3 CD $48 F15 Strike Eagle 3 $34 FA18 Hornet CD $54 Falcon 3 Scen 3 FA18 $25 Falcon 4.0 CD $49 Falcon Gold CD $52 Fast Attack CD $48 Fighter Duel Pro 2 $33 Fighter Wing or CD $39 Fleet Defender F14 $42 Fleet Defender Gold CD$48 Fleet Delender Scen #1 $32 Flight Light or CD $19 Flight Sim Toolkit $19 Flight Sim Tkit Exp's ea$19 Flight Unlimited CD $48 Flying Aces CD $49 Flying Circus Flying Tigers CD $42 Great Naval Battles 2 $44 Great Naval Bitls 2 CD $39 Great Naval Battles CD $42 Great Naval Bitls Scen $16 Grey Wolf WIN CD $29 Gunship 2000 H.A.W.C. or CD $35 Hi-Octane CD $44 Indy Car Racing $30 Indy Car Racing 2.0 CD $40 Inferno or CD 544 Interactive Sailing CD 545 Iron Angel CD $44 Iron Assault CD $39 Jet Fighter 3 $41 Jet Pack CD $39 Jet Ski Rage CD $39 Jump Jet $22 Kawasaki Super Bikes $24 Lawn Mower Man CD $35 Lode Runner $36 M1 Tank Platoon 2 CD 548 M4: Sherman Tank Sim $34 Marine Fighters CD 525 Maximum Overkill Bun $40 Maximum Overkill MD 2$29 Max Overkill Multi-Plyer $48 Mech Commander CD $42 MechWarrior 2 or CD $45 Metal Lords CD $34 MetalTech: B-dromeCD $37 MetalTech: EarthSiege $45 MetalTech: E-Siege CD 547 MetalTech: ESiege Exp $29 MiG 29 Microsoft Flight Sim 5.0 $44 Msoft Flight Sim 5.1 CD $53 Msoft Flight Sim 6 CD $54 Msoft Flight Sim F Shop$36 Msoft F Sim F Shop CD $44 Msoft Space Sim 1.0 $44 Mig 29 Fulcrum $29 Mig 29 Gold CD Mule 2 $44 Nascar Racing $39 Nascar Racg Tracks CD $24 Pacific Strike $25 Phoenix Fighter CD $49 Power Boat Simulator 3 $46 Privateer $48 Privateor Special Ops 2 $22 Privateer Speech Pack $17 Rally Rapid Assault CD $28 Raven Project or CD $45 Reach for the Skies $19 Real Weather Pilot $14 Rd Baron A10 Tnk Killer$39 Red Baron w/Mission B $29 Red Ghost Red Ghost CD $42 Renegade CD $41 Retribution CD $32 Sail '95 $40 Sail Simulator $42 Sailing Simulator 3 $52 Sailing Sim 3 Est Coast $39 Sailing Sim 3 Wst Coast$39 Screamer CD $48 Sea Wolf CD $44 Seaworthy CD $18 Shuttle or CD $26 Silent Hunter CD $46 Silent Steel or CD $46 Sky Warriors CD $35 Slipstream 5000 CD $40 Space Clipper $42 Spectre VR CD $35 Star Base $42 Star Crusader or CD $27 Starlord Slim Slum $42 Strike Commander CD $18 Strike Comnder S Ops $22 Sub Battle Simulator 2 $39 Sub War 2050 $33 Sub War 2050 Plus CD $40 Super Tank Com CD $48 SuperKarts TFX or CD $36 Tank Com Network $46 Tank Girl CD $48 Task Force Admirals Pk $39 Terminal Velocity or CD 544 The Big One CD $26 Tio Fighter $39 Tio Fighter Collector CD$47 Top Gun CD $39 Tornado CD $26 Tower or CD $44 Train Engineer $29 Trophy Bass CD $48 U-Boat 2 $36 U-Boat WIN $34 Ultrabots or CD $18 Virtual Karts CD $40 Voice Commander Bun $18 War Patrol CD $42 Warhawk CD $42 Werewolf Vs. Comanche $48 Wing Commander 2 $26 Wing Commander 3 CD$53 Wng Commander 4 CD $54 Wing Comnder Armada S40 Wings of Glory CD $40 Wipe Out CD $37 Wolf Pack CD $28 World Circuit 2 or CD $42 World Circuit CD $39 X-Car Exprmntal Racng $44 X-Wing $39 X-Wing Collector's CD $46 Zone Raiders CD S48 3-Decathlon CD $42 APBA Baseball APBA Bsball Innovator $19 Barkley: Shut Up & Jam $42 Baseball for Windows $29 Blood Bowl CD $34 Brett Hull Hckey '95 CD $34 ESPN 2 Extreme Gmes $38 EuroGolf CD FIFA Internat'l Soccer $36 FIFA Intent'l Soccer '96 $40 Fairways to Heaven CD $29 Front Page Football Pro$29 Front Page FB Pro '95 $44 F Page FB Pro '95 CD $47 F Page FB Pro '96 CD $48 F Page Sports Baseball $44 FP Sports Baseball CD $47 FP Sports Base '96 CD$48 Golf's Greatest 18 CD $25 Gone Fishin' CD $42 Hardball 3 $34 Hardball 3 Collection $36 Hardball 3 Collectrs CD $19 Hardball 4 or CD Hardball 4 NLBPA Add $19 Internat'l Tennis Open $44 J Nicklaus Gld Bear Ed $34 Jack Nicklaus Golf CD $39 J Nicklaus Sgnature Ed $27 J Nicklaus Tour Collect $19 Jammit CD $19 Jordan In Flight CD $18 Links Pentium CD $49 Links Pro 386 CD $22 Links Pro 386 Golf $16 Links Pro Courses each $19 Live Action Football CD $22 ML Personal Pro Golf $19 Madden Football 96 CD$44 $45 1995 CHIPS & BISING "


"OVERNIGHT SHIPPING in US S4 por order. Mail to Canada, PR, HI. AK. APO, FPO $4 por order. Worldwide airmail $6 per item. Handling $2 per shipment Hardware orders may require additional shipping charges. All sales final. Call for details Visa, MC and Discover accepted. Checks held 4 weeks. Monoy Orders under $200 same as cash. COD SB. Defectives replaced with same product. Most items shipped same day, Shipping times may vary. Price/ availability may change, FREE GAME OFFER* See detalls below Sall POLICE QUEST Simulator 22 \"TOP GUN' Relive the awe-inspiring experience of the feature film \"Top Gun.\" Only this time, you are Maverick! All the thrills of this fast action dogfighting adventure story come to life in this fun interactive product. Experience all the sights, sounds and characters of the original movie. CD $39 'POLICE QUEST ANTHOLOGY' is one of the most suc cessful adventure game lines ever released for the PC. Called \"reality role playing', each game puts you on the front ines as a cop. This unique to CD coleo ton indudes the first 4 games plus a series of video interviews and action arcade games. CD 548 SAIL SIMULATOR' incorporates al aspects of saing and is ideal for the beginning yachtsman who will leam the principles of sailing and for the experienced yachtsman who can use advanced equipment such as auto pilot and GPS. Holst the sails or start the engine, and away you go! S40 FREE TIGE AVERE POSTER  'THE LOST VIKINGS' It's just another cool day of Nordic seafaring and pillaging when Erik the Swift, Baleog the Fierce and Olaf the Stout are suddenly sucked into an alien spaceship. And only you can help them find their way home. Hundreds of mind blowing puzzles and over 35 rip roaring levels. 'NO GREATER GLORY' The immensity of this war dawns on you, the bloodly battles and the conflicts over such issues as slavery, taxes, inflation and enlistment of negroes. The most complete reenactment of the war that divided a nation. $19 *FREE GAME OFFER Spond the specified amount on any in stock software and choose a FREE IBM game from the corresponding list below. Request must be made at time of order. SPEND $60 Airborne Ranger 5.25. All IE up to Episode 9. Cohort 2 3.5, Conquered Kingdoms Scon 1 3.5, GNB Scen Disk 3.5. Gunship 5.25, Marcenaries 5.25, Pirates 5.25, SDI 5.25 SPEND $100 Bridge 70 3.5, DRAGON Force 3.5/5.25. Falcon 3.0 Mig 29 3.5. MacArthur's War 3.5, Megatraveller Zhodani 5.25, Return of the Phantom 3.5, Terminator 2029 3.5 SPEND $160 Alone in the Dark 3.5, Battles of Destiny 3.5, Links Pro 386 3.5. F15 Strike Eagle Il 3.5, Rules of Engagement 5.25, Silent Service 2 3.5, Simon the Sorcerer 3.5, Star Trek Judgement Rites 3.5, Ultima Underworld 2 3.5, Worlds at War 3.5/5.25 SPEND $200 Harpoon Coll CD, Falcon 3.0 3.5 Jutland CD, Links Pro 386 CD, V Victory: Market Garden 3.5 FREE INTERACTIVE ENTERTAINMENT WITH ANY IN STOCK SOFTWARE ORDER Olfer subject to change or cancellation without notice. Valid from July 1st Aug 31st or whilo supplios last. THE LOST VIKINGS $9 IBM SPORTS IBM STRATEGY IBM STRATEGY IBM STRATEGY IBM STRATEGY IBM WAR $25 $40 $29 $37 Microsoft Baseball CD $51 Microsoft Golf 2.0 CD $45 Microsoft Golf CD $48 Msoft Golf for Windows $48 NBA Airborne '95 CD $42 NBA Jam or CD $44 NBA Live 95 CD $47 NFL '95 WIN $24 NFL Challnge Premium $59 NFL Coaches Club $29 NFL Coachs Club FB 2 $44 NFL Quarterbk Club '96 $45 NFL Super Bowl CD $39 NHL Hockey '95 CD $40 Nick Price Golf CD $45 PBA Bowling CD PGA Tour Golf 3 CD $47 PGA Tour Golf 486 CD $47 Picture Perfect Golf CD $42 Planet Soccer $29 Proleague FBI Com CD $38 QB Attack CD QuarterPole RBI Baseball '96 CD $36 Road to Final Four 2 $38 Road to Final 4: 2 CD $43 Rugby Wrld Cup '95 CD $40 Skins Game at Bighorn $37 Time Out Sports Bball $39 Tom Landry Football S24 Tony LaRussa Bsball 2 $37 Tony LaRussa Bsball 3 $48 Troy Aikman Ftball CD $49 Ultimate Ftball '95 CD $40 Unnecessary Roughnss $29 Unnecessary Rough '95$34 Winter Sports Winter Sports CD $28 World Hockey '95 $24 World Hockey 95 CD $24 $34 1830: RR & Robber Bar $34 18th Air Squadron $36 A Train A-Train w/Construction $29 Advnced Civilization CDS34 Ancient Art of War Sky $26 Archon Ultra $32 Arctic Baron Ares CD $42 Aztec CD $40 Baldies or CD $34 Battle Bugs Battle Isle 2200 CD $34 Battle of Chickamagua $38 Btle of Chickamagua CD$42 Battles in Time or CD 535 Black Beard or CD $34 Breach 3 or CD Buzz Aldrin Race Spce $26 C.E.O. CD $40 Carriers at War Cnst Kit $25 Castles 2 CD $48 Celtic Tales CD $34 Chessmaster 4000 Trbo$36 Civilization $44 Civilization Network CD 548 ClockWerx WIN CD $24 Colonization or CD $46 Colonization Gold CD $48 Command HQ 2 CD $24 Conquered Kingdoms 2 538 Conquerer CD $46 Conquest $36 Corporate Colonies CD $35 Crisis in the Kremlin $29 Crusader: No Remorse $46 Darklegions or CD $38 Dead Zone CD $52 Deadline CD $38 Detroit $39 Dominus Dune 2 $28 Dungeon Keeper CD $48 Empire 2 CD $34 Empire Builder CD $35 Empire Deluxe Mstr Ed $22 Exploration or CD $42 Fantasy Empires CD $42 Fantasy Fiefdom CD 548 Feudal $39 Flight Commander 2 CD $38 Front Lines or CD $39 Gazillionaire WIN CD $29 Genesia $35 Genghis Khan 2 Global Domination $24 Gold of the Americas $24 Grandest Fleet $29 Great Naval Bitles 3 CD$46 Hammer of the Gods $39 Hannibal $26 HercForce WIN CD $48 Hero's of Might & Magic $34 High Seas Trader or CD $39 Hollywood Mogul $38 Humans CD $22 Incredible Machine 2 $39 Jagged Alliance CD $46 Jutland CD $29 Kingdoms of France 34 Kingdoms of Germany $34 Kingmaker $34 Konquest CD L'Empereur $29 Legions WIN $34 Lemmings 3D CD $32 Liberty or Death $29 Little People CD $40 Machiavelli The Prince $38 Marco Polo or CD $42 Master of Magic or CD $39 Master of Orion $39 Master of Orion CD $40 Master of Xenos CD $40 Metal Marines Mster Ed S48 Metal Marines WIN $27 Millenium CD $42 Navy Strike $40 Navy Strike CD $40 Networks $42 New Horizons CD $34 Nobunaga's Ambition 2 $34 Northlands CD $39 Onslaught WIN $35 Operation Crusader CD $39 OrionBurger CD $39 Outpost WIN $38 PTO 2 CD Patrician or CD S36 Pax Imperia $39 Pax Imperia 2 CD $42 Perfect General 2 CD $38 Pizza Tycoon or CD $40 Power House WIN CD $39 Power WIN or CD $35 Project USA CD $29 Qwirks WIN CO Rags to Riches $36 Railroad Tycoon 2 Cisc $24 Reach for the Stars $24 Reunion CD $33 Robot Rascals $40 Romance 3 Kingdom 4 $39 Rules of Engagement 2 $29 Sabre Team $25 Second Conflict WIN $34 Sert City: Life is Feudal $37 Sid Meir's Civil War $58 Sim Ant CD $40 7th Fleet CD $39 Sim City 2000 $29 Aegis $46 Sim City CD $47 Aide de Camp $45 Sim Earth CD Battle of the Bulge $39 Sim Town or CD $33 Battleground: Ardennes $44 SimClassic Collection $44 Beyond Squad Leader S45 Simisle CD $35 Blitzkrieg or CD $39 Sim Tower or CD $33 Blue & The Grey CD $39 Simcity 2000 WIN CD $59 Carriers at War 1 or 2 $39 Space Miner $36 CincPac: Midway CD $39 Space Raiders CD $12 Civil War: 1861-64 CD $39 Spaceward Ho! 4 WIN $24 Command & Conquer $48 Star Control 3 CD $39 D-Day each $39 Starship Troopers $39 Dreadnoughts Deluxe $59 The Complete UMS $49 Fields of Glory $37 The Orion Conspiracy $40 Fifth Eskadra $29 The Rogarian Agenda $39 Fifth Fleet or CD $39 Theme Park or CD $39 Flight Commander 2 This Means War WIN S40 Gene Wars CD $47 Transport Tycoon orCD $48 Harpoon 3 CD $39 Ultimate Domain CD $36 High Command Unnatural Selection $29 Iron Cross 2 CD Victory or Defeat WIN $42 Last Blitzkrieg Vikings 2 $36 Man of War $36 Vikings WIN CD $40 Operation Crusader $36 Visions of Glory CD $35 Operation Europe $34 Walls of Rome $29 Operation Overlord $36 Warcraft 2 or CD $40 Panzer General CD $39 Warcraft or CD $39 Red Sky Morning $36 Warhammer Fantasy $44 Seventh Fleet $36 Warlords 2 $29 Sid Meir's Civil War CD $58 Warlords 2 Dlx CD $42 Stalingrad Campaign $36 When Two Worlds War $24 Steel Panthers CD $42 Wden Ships & Iron Men $34 Tac Ops WIN $40 Worlds of War CD $48 The Great War $39 X-Com 2 or CD Third Reich or CD $34 X-Com: Tactical CD $40 Tigers on the Prowl $42 X-Com or CD $38 USS Ticonderoga CD $34 Zeppelin CD $25 Victory at Sea $41 Zig-Zag WIN CD S29 Warpoint $36 Circle Reader Service #52 CGW 1954 & 3% $23 $39 Lost Admiral 2 CD $39 1995 CHIPS & BITS, INC "


"CHIPS&BITS INC. Ste ros France et Call 800-699-4263 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'l 802-767-3033 Source 10348 INC. PO Box 234 Dept 10348 Rochester, VT 05767 WARCRAFT BERFECT GENERI 7 CLASSIC GAMES \"WARCRAFT Enter the world of WarCraft, a mystical land where evil orcs and noble humans battle for survival. Destroy the orcish hordes or crush the weakling humans...the choice is yours. Includes an ingenious arsenal of weaponry and powerful magic. CD $39 'PERFECT GENERAL 2' is an unbeatable strategic and tactical experience with stunning graphics, intuitive interface, and the sharpest artificial intelligence ever. Feel the power as you command missions in the most exciting eras of world conflict. 5 levels of difficulty! CD 538 \"CASINO DE LUXE' is the best looking gaming collection in the market. also the only collection to combine the elegance of Monte Carlo and the fun of Las Vagas to bring you 7 classic games with you are there graphics, sound effects, speech and gambling strategies. CD $24 FREE THE BEGINNING OF THE END INTERACTIVE ENTERTAINMENT 'D-DAY:THE BEGINNING OF THE END' As Supreme Allied or Axis Commander you start with your side's actual resources and positions on June 6. 1944. Select the generals under your command, based on their actual capabilities. $39 'UNDER KILLING MOON Transports you to the virtual world of the feisty detective Tex Murphy New features allow you to save and splice scenes together. An amazing level of detail & freedom of movement make this game visually and aurally stunning. CD 544 Receive an episode of Interactive Entertainment CD ROM magazine FREE with any in stock software order. Offer subject to change or cancellation without notice. Valid from 7/1/95 to 8/31/95 or while supplies last. Quantities limited. Impressions IBM HINT BOOKS IBM HINT BOOKS IBM BUNDLES IBM BUNDLES IBM BUNDLES IBM BUDGET $16 SE $16 C $16 $16 7th Guest 2: 11th Hour $16 Aces Over Europe $16 Aces of the Deep $16 Across the Rhine Aegis $16 Air Combat Pacific $16 Alien Legacy Alone in the Dark 3 $16 Arena $16 Armored Fist $16 Bioforge $17 Bureau 13 $16 Castle of Dr Brain $10 Civilization $16 Colonization Cyberia $16 Cyclones $12 Dark Forces $16 Dark Sun or 2 $12 Descent $16 Doom 2 Survival Guide $12 Dungeon Master 2 Fleet Defender $16 Flights of 13 Mike $16 Fred Pharkas Pharm $10 Full Throttle $16 Harpoon 2 $19 Hell Indi Jones 4 $12 Inherit the Earth $12 Jagged Alliance $16 Jet Fighter 3 $16 Journeyman Project 2 516 King's Quest 7 $17 Laura Bow 2 S10 Legend of Kyrandia 3 $12 Lemmings Chronicles $16 Lode Runner $16 Lord of the Rings V2 $12 Machiovelli the Prince S16 Police Quest Anthology $48 Populous 2 & Prmonger$19 Power Hits: Battletech $19 BTech 182 Mechwarrior SSI's Fantasy Fest CD $39 Stalongrad, Fantasy Empires, Dungeon Hack, Ultimate Adventures Space Quest Anthology $48 Space Quest Bndle 1-4 $42 Star Control 1 & 2 CD $19 Strike Com / Privateer 543 Task Force 1942 w/ Red Storm Rising CD $35 The Victory Pack $39 V for Victory: Utah Beach, Velikiye Luki, Mrkt Garden Top 50 Games DOS CD $26 Top 50 Games WIN CD $26 Turning Point S29 Gettysburg. Spanish Armada, Waterloo Ultima Bundle 1-6 CD $29 Ultima Trilogy 2 $24 Wing Comnder 1 & 2 Dix $32 Wizardry Tril 1 or 2 ea$33 $1: Master of Magic $16 Master of Orion $16 Mechwarrior 2 $16 Menzoberranzan S12 MetalTech: EarthSiege $16 Microsoft Golf 2.0 $16 Microsoft Space Sim $16 Might & Magic 5 $16 Noctropolis S12 Outpost $16 Panzer General $16 Perfect General 2 $16 Phantasmagoria $16 Power Monger Privateer Playtester's $14 Quest for Glory 4 $10 Questbusters or 2 $18 Ravenloft or 2 $12 Realms of Arkania $16 Relentless W/CD $19 Relurn to Zork $10 Rise of the Triad w/CD $19 Sam and Max $12 Sea Woll $16 Shadow Caster $14 Shadow of the Comet $16 Sim City 2000 $16 Skyrealms of Jorune $12 Star Trail $16 Star Trek TNG $16 Star Trek: Judge Rites $12 Stonekeep $16 The Dig $16 Tie Fighter S16 Ultima 8 $16 Under A Killing Moon $16 Wing Commander 3 $19 Wing Cmmnder Armada$12 X-Com 2 $16 X-Wing $16 ADD Collector's Edit 2 $46 Death of Krynn, Death Queen of Krynn, Champ of Krynn & Champion of Krynn Hint Book Aces Collection CD $48 Aces over Europe, Aces over Pacific, Red Baron, Red Barron Tank Killer, A-10 Tnk Killer Air Combat Classics $19 Award Winning Wargme $38 Carrier Strike, Grigsby's Pacific War Clash of Steel Grigsby War in Russia Day of Tentacle/l Jones 4$44 Dynamix Bundle 1 $24 A-10 Tank Killer, Heart of China, Staller 7 Eye of Beholder Collect $49 Electronic Arts Top Ten $32 Chuck Yagers Combat, PCA Tour Goll Ultabots, Financial Workshop, Wing Com 2, Kasparov's Gambit. Ultima 7. Seal Team Indianapolis 500, Grand Slam Bridge 2 Five Foot Ten Pack V 1 $29 Kings Quest V. Stellar 7. Time Man of the Year, World Fact Book, Best of Media Clips, World Atlas, PC Kareaoke Classics, CD-ROM of CDROMs, PC Animation Festival, Doom: S-ware 1, $100 in Coupons Five Foot Ten Pack V 2 $29 Sherlock HolmesV1. Space Quest 4. Bat Ches, PC Karaoke, Rock Rap'n Roll, M-media, Jumpstart. Movie Select For MPC, Home Medical Advisor 3 Art & Letters War Birds. 2000 Fonts by Fantasia Fantasy Collection CD $19 Fleet Def w/ T-master $72 Jam Packed CD $55 Jungle & Desert Strike $34 King's Quest Anthology $54 Lost Treasure Infocom 2 $25 Lucas Classic Advntres $19 Indiana Jones FA, Secret of Monkey Island, Manaic Mansion Megafortress Mega-Pak$38 Megafortress, Mission 1. & Mfort Mission 3D Editor Merit CD Megapack CD $18 Mindscape 10 Pack CD $34 Tony LaRussa Baseball 2, NY Times Puzzle Master/ Crossword Creater Maxum Overkill w/Disk $39 Mystery Collection CD $19 Casino Master, Software Toolworks, World Atlas V4, Spftware T-works Presents 20th Century Almanack, Sports Cardshop. Great Naval Battles, Earth Invasion, Megaflux Runners, Chessmaster 3000 PGA T Goll/WT Tennis $19 Perfect General Trilogy $34 Cyber Strike Darklands Demon Blue Descent Shareware Doom Episode 1 Doom Heaven 2 CD $12 Doomsday Collect CD $12 Dragon Lord Dreadnoughts Bismark $18 Dyno-Quest ESPN Sports Shrts CD $12 EZ Sound Fighting for Rome Harrier Assault Heart of China Hearts Horde Jack Nicklaus Clip Art Just Sports CD Killing Cloud Lightspeed Line in the Sand Lost Vikings Magic Candle 3 Magic the Gatherg Demos: Matrix Cubed Mega Traveller:Zhodani $ Millenium NFL Video Football $1 On Target PT Boat Simulator Return of the Phantom $1 Rings of Medusa Rotox Silverball 2 Storm Across Europe $1 Tegel's Mercenaries S Tie Break Tennis Vaxine World Circuit uisin $16 IBM BUDGET $9 7th Guest 2: 11th Hour $6 Allied Forces $9 Alone in the Dark $12 Banzai Baseball Facts $6 Battle Command Challenge of 5 Realms $12 Champions of Krynn $12 Cohort 2 $12 Conqueror Multi Tank $6 Covert Action $12 $6 Msu s CGW 1955 1995 CHIPS & BITS. INC "


"OVERNIGHT SHIPPING in US $4 por order. Mail to Canada, PR, HI. AK, APO, FPO 84 per order. Worldwide airmail S6 per item. Handling $2 per shipmont Hardware orders may require additional shipping charges. All sales final. Call for details. Visa, MC and Discover accepted. Checks held 4 weeks. Money Orders under $200 same as cash. COD $8. Defectives replaced with same product. Most items shipped same day, Shipping times may vary. Price/ availability may change. como FREE GAME OFFER* See details below SPACE QUEST SPACE QUEST 6: THE SPINAL FRONTIER' Join farces with hundreds of your favorite outer space heroes, past and present. No video game.TV show or sci-fi movie is exempt from the relentless comic parody of the Space Quest 6 creators. CD 545 \"SILENT HUNTER Authentic W.W.11 film footage, cinematics, and narra. tion throughout the game will give the player a historical feel of what it was like to command a submarine during the war in the Pacific. Choose a variety of American submarines used in W.W.II. CD 546 THUNDERTHUNDEP SLAPE SCAPE' As the Darkfall spreads it's evi across their land, the Nocturnals it has engendered have grown bold. A vast army of the vile creatures have gathered under the command of Anthrax which threatens to overrun the whole of the Northlands and turn it into a festering den of evil. Already Anthrax has captured the Radiant Castle, a vital location which once guarded a strategic mountain pass. CD 540 FL FULES OF EG/Gelen THE FACERCANVAS 'RULES OF ENGAGEMENT In the late twenty fourth century, the Federated Worlds need a bigger and better space fleet than ever before. Exploration continues. Hostile aliens abound. Rebellion ferments. And the UDP worlds have just declared war! $12 'AIR COMBAT PACIFIC 1942 Strap yourself into the cockpit and experience the ultimate simulation of air combat over the South Pacific. Chase down Wildcats. Corsairs and Zeros, drop torpedoes and perform dive-bomb attacks. $19 *FREE GAME OFFER Spend the specified amount on any in stock software and choose a FREE IBM game from the corresponding list below. Request must be made at time of order. SPEND S60 Airborne Ranger 5.25. All IE up to Episode 9, Cohort 2 3.5, Conquered Kingdoms Scon 1 3.5, GNB Scon Disk 3.5, Gunship 525, Mercenanes 5.25, Piratos 5.25, SDI 5.25 SPEND S100 Bridge 7.0 3.5. DRAGON Force 3.5/5.25, Falcon 3.0 Mig 29 3.5, MacArthur's War 3.5, Megatraveller Zhodani 5.25, Return of the Phantom 3.5. Terminator 2029 3.5 SPEND $160 Alone in the Dark 3.5. Battles of Destiny 3.5. Links Pro 386 3.5, F15 Strike Eagle Ii 3.5, Rules of Engagement 5.25. Silent Service 2 3.5. Simon the Sorcerer 35, Star Trek Judgement Rites 3.5. Ultima Underworld 2 3.5, Worlds At War 3.5/5.25 SPEND $200 Harpoon Coll CD, Falcon 3.0 3.5 Jutland CD, Links Pro 386 CD, V Victory: Market Garden 3.5 FREE INTERACTIVE ENTERTAINMENT WITH ANY IN STOCK SOFTWARE ORDER Olfer subjoct to change or cancellation without notice. Valid from July 1st Aug 31st or while supplies Inst MICROPROSE 3DO GENESIS JAGUAR PLAYSTATION SUPER NINTENDO SATURN $399 $52 $58 $46 $54 $52 $46 $52 $54 $46 $49 $54 $52 $52 $38 $46 $38 $54 $52 3DO Sys Panasonic $399 7th Guest 2: 11th Hr $54 Alone in the Dark 2 $52 Blade Force $54 BrainDead 13 $52 Creature Shock $54 Cyberdillo $52 Daedalus Encounter $64 DefCom5 $52 Dirt Racer $54 Doom $52 FIFA Internati'l Soccer $52 Flight Stick Pro $69 GEX $52 Grandest Fleet $56 Hell $45 Icebreaker $52 Kingdom:Far Reaches $46 Myst $54 NHL Hockey 96 $52 NovaStorm S52 Panzer General $54 Perfect General $56 Psychic Detective $52 Quarantine Seal of the Pharaoh $39 Shanghaii:Triple Threat $52 Shootout at Old Tucson S54 Syndicate $54 Theme Park $52 Top Gun $54 Wing Commander 3 $54 $54 ATP Tennis $46 Bass Masters Classic $56 Beyond Oasis 568 Casper $59 Crime Patrol CD $49 Cutthroat Island S54 Disk World CD ESPN Baseball CD EarthWorm Jim 2 S64 Eternal Champions CD $46 Exo Squad $48 Fatal Fury Special CD $44 Hardball 95 $49 Kingdom CD S52 Lethal Enforcers 2 $26 Liberty or Death $56 Links Pro Golf CD $56 Madden Football 96 $58 Maximum Carnage 2 Minnesota Fats Pool $54 NBA Action 95 S54 New Horizons S62 NHL All Star Hockey $49 Phantasy Star 4 $82 Phantom 2040 $58 Poplul Mail CD $49 Primal Rage 559 Rally CD $54 Road Rash 3 S52 Rugby World Cup 95 $54 Shanghai 2 Shining Force 2 $66 Star Trek Deep Spce 9 $48 Streets of Rage 3 S56 Super Bike Challenge $49 Syndicate CD $54 Uncharted Waters $59 Vector Man $52 VR Troopers S52 WeaponLord $58 Jaguar CD System $149 Sony Playstation Sys $299 Jaguar Controller $19 PSX Controller $32 Jaguar Power Kit $149 PSX Memory Card $35 Alien Vs Predator $54 3D Baseball '95 $54 Blue Lightning CD $52 3-D Golt S45 Barkley Basketball CD $52 After Shock $54 Braindead 13 CD 52 Agile Warrior: F-111X $54 Club Drive $29 Assault Rings Creature Shock CD $52 Ball Blazer $58 Demolition Man CD Blazing Dragons $52 Doom $56 Creature Shock $54 Highlander CD $52 Cyber Sled $54 Hover Strike $52 Destruction Derby $52 Mortal Kombat 3 $59 Doom $59 Pinball Dreams $54 ESPN Extreme $52 RayMan $58 GEX $52 Rise of the Robots $59 Galaxy Fight Supercross 3D $56 Hyper 3-D Pinball $52 Syndicate $58 Jumping Flash $52 Troy Aikman Football $56 Krazy Ivan $54 Ultra Vortex $64 Minnesota Fats Pool $54 Valus Force $54 Myst S54 Varuna's Forces CD $56 Novastorm $54 PGA Tour 96 $52 MARS 32X Panzer General $54 Power Sports Soccer College Basketball $62 Primal Rage Cosmic Carnage $49 Ray Man $54 Doom $59 RazorWing S52 Kingdom:Far Reaches $59 Ridge Racer 556 Midnight Raiders CD $56 Road Rash $54 Mother Base $49 Shock Wave $54 Night Trap CD $59 Solar Eclipse RBI 95 CD $57 Space Ace $54 Rayman $58 Tekken $54 Slam City CD Toh Shin Den 59 Supreme Warrior CD $56 Top Gun:Fire at Will $54 VR Troppers $59 VR Hockey $56 Virtua Fighters $59WarHawk $52 Virtua Racing Deluxo $59 Wing Commander 3 $59 Aero Biz Supersonic $56 Saturn System Bass Masters Classic $59 3-D Soccer Batman Forever $66 3D Baseball 95 Brandish 2 S64 AD&D Fighters Breath of Fire 2 $64 Agile Warrior: F-111X Brett Hull Hockey 95 $39 Alien Trilogy Boogerman $58 Alone in the Dark Bust-A-Move $42 Batman Forever Casper $58 Blades of Rage Chrono Trigger $72 Blazing Dragons Congo $58 Bug! Cutthroat Island $62 Casper Dragon Warrior 5 $72 Clockwork Knight EarthBound $64 Cyber Sled EarthWorm Jim 2 $64 Daytona USA Final Fantasy 3 $66 Defcon 5 Horde $56 GEX Jeopardy CD $49 Ghen War Looney Tunes B-Ball $59 Gran Chaser Lord of Darkness $56 Horde Madden Football 96 $58 Legacy of Kain Mega Man 7 $59 Mortal Kombat 2 Mutant Chronicles $59 NBA Basketball NBA Jam Tourn Edith $64 Night Warriors NHL Hockey 95 $54 Off World Interceptor Ogre Battle $58 Panzer Dragoon PTO 2 $62 Pebble Beach Golf RBI 94 $54 Pinball Arena Road Runner 2 Primal Rage Romance 3 Kingdm 4 864 RayMan Secret of Evermore $66 Road Rash Seventh Saga 2 S62 Solar Eclipse Star Trek Deep Spce 9 $48 Space Ace Tetris & Dr. Mario $54 Supreme Warrior The Dragon $62 Total Eclipse The Mask $59 VR Hockey Warlock 59 Virtua Cop Super Bases Loaded 3 $62 Virtua Fighters 2 Tecmo Super Bowl 3 $59 Virtua Racing WWF Arcade $66 X MEN Circle Reader Service #51 $54 $52 $52 546 $52 $58 S48 $52 S54 $52 S52 $46 $54 $64 554 $54 $52 $52 $34 $54 $54 CDI $52 $52 $56 7th Guest Digital Vid $52 Bumn Cycle $46 Kingdom:Far Reaches $44 Merlin's Apprentice $44 Voyeur 2 $52 $54 $54 1905 CHUPS & BITS.INC one "


"REVIEW Hawg Heaven Burn Rubber (and Bridges) in LucasArts' FULL THROTTLE by Charles Ardai FULLTHROTTLE OUR NAME'S BEN AND YOU'RE A up an ambush down the road for the FULL THROTTLE BIKER: RIDE TO LIVE, LIVE TO RIDE. Polecats, the biker gang of which you are Price: $69.95 THEY SAY A MAN'S HOME IS HIS the leader. This gives you your first score System castle, but that's not exactly true Requirements: to settle. in your case. Your castle's your IBM compatible Then, on your way out of the Kickhog, your chopper, your wheels and 486DX/33 or stand, you run across a member of a rival your kingdom's the open road. Anyone better, 8MB biker gang and a bit of sabotage that RAM, 2x CDever took either of those away from you, ROM drive, leaves you spinning out across the desert what would you have left? mouse; supports most major sound cards. flats. You end up a pile of blood and Three choices: nothing; one hell of a RSAC Rating: Violence 2, Language 2 bruises, while your bike ends up a smokscore to settle; or FULL THROTTLE, the Designer: Tim Schafer ing, twisted heap of metal. Publisher: LucasArts latest from the folks at LucasArts who San Rafael, CA It's more or less at this point, ten minpreviously brought you such adventures (800) STARWAR utes and maybe 50 acts of violence into in comic mayhem as DAY OF THE TENTAthe game, that you realize the folks at CLE and SAM AND MAX HIT THE ROAD. you force your way into the bar and tussle LucasArts weren't kidding when they The answer, of course, is all of the with the bartender, you've got nothing named this baby FULL THROTTLE. above.\" When you wake up in a dumpster but the keys to your bike-that, and a behind a biker bar called the Kickstand vague recollection that just before the BEN AND THE ART OF MOafter FULL THROTTLE's opening segoons who beat you up tossed you in the TORCYCLE MAINTENANCE quence, you've literally got nothing to dumpster they were in real life, spinouts at 90 miles per your name. (You can click on discussing hour tend to do some lasting damage to your right mouse button setting a man's vehicle. In this case, however, to check your inventory neither Ben nor his bike turn out to have if you don't believe been fatally wounded in the crash. Both me.) Even after were found and have been nursed back to health by Mo, a local tomboy in greasy overalls who, true to the biker movie ethos this game strives to emulate, might best be described by the adjective \"spunky.\" The first thing Ben's got to do after coming out of his coma is to help fix his bike. The only piece that Mo wasn't able to replace on her own was the bike's forks, but to complete her repairs she also needs some gas and a welding torch. These three requirements, set forth as a kind of adventure game shopping list, give Ben his first quest. It's a little artificial, true, but at least designer Tim Schafer has made an attempt to work his puzzles into the storyline. It's much better than all 80 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD  AUGUST 1995 "


"those adventure games where the hero and at the gas tower, if you've brought a couldn't see the steak inside it. Later on, has to find the Red Orb, the Blue Orb, can and a hose, you should be able to get there's a crowbar hidden under a pillow, and the Green Orb... some-yes, that's right-gas. but you'll need better eyes than mine to The town of Melonweed, on the out Needless to say, there are obstacles at make it out. skirts of which Mo has her garage and each location. You've got to get rid of the Find all the incidental items and the chopshop, consists of three locations. It dog at the junkyard, for instance, and major items pretty much fall into your some nosy se hands. Then you can sit back and watch a curity guards series of fairly lengthy cut scenes that at the gas give Ben his second score to settle: the tower. None founder of Corley Motors (the company of these puzthat makes the Polecats' bikes) gets offed zles demand by his hulking assistant, Adrian Ripburga very comer, who wants to see Corley Motors move plex solution, into the yuppie minivan market. Meanthough. The while, Mo turns out to be Mo Corley, heir door to the to the Corley fortune and now the owner gas tower is of the company. Ripburger tries to kill locked, but her, too, and she wisely goes on the run. you find a It's up to Ben to find her and to foil Rip's lockpick lynefarious scheme. ing around in There's more, plenty more, before Ben HOW YOU BEN? Rendered in inimitable LucasArts style are the biker Ben, the the trailer. and Mo finally turn the tables. There's a soon-to-be-murdered Corley of Corley Motors, and Corley's ambitious aide, The trailer's demolition derby Ben has to win. There Ripburger. got a fridge are about a dozen high-speed fistfights inside which on wheels between Ben and enemy bikers who get in his way. There's a gorge to be jumped a la Evel Kneivel, a minefield to be crossed, and a shareholder's meeting to crash. There's also an action-packed finale which may remind you of the truck sequence in Raiders of the Lost Ark. And when it's all over there's a sort of grim coda in which Ben stays true to the biker Fuel line code and rides off into the sunset. NOT-SO-GENTLE BEN Except for the coda, there isn't a whole lot of quiet time in Fuli. THROTTLE. This is the main thing that sets this game apart from earlier works in the LucasArts oeuvre: the sheer amount (and type) of action it contains. It's a tough little mother of a game, and though the tone is IN YOUR FACE INTERFACE The flaming biker emblem/interface gives you your four basic commands: comical throughout, it's a heavy-metallook, taste/talk, punch and kick. and-leather-jackets kind of comedy that springs from a whole different well than doesn't take a genius to figure out that holds a nice bit of steak. Think a hungry either TENTACLE's cartoon buffoonery or the three items Ben has to find will be lodoggie might like it? SAM AND MAX's ironic hipster satire. cated, one apiece, at these three sites. The big-gest difficulty in all of this, acYou're always racing somewhere in Once you check out the sites it won't eventually, is that since the scenes are painted FULL THROTTLE, and as often as not take much to figure out which item can so dark, in thick layers of blues, blacks when you get where you're going you be found where. Next to the abandoned and purples, it can be hard to see some have to beat someone up or see to it that trailer, you can see that someone's weldof the items you need when you find he blows up, drives off a cliff, or both. ing in an underground cellar; at the them. The first time through, I couldn't Sometimes you don't even wait to get junkyard, a mean dog's patroling some see the refrigerator; then, when someone where you're going before getting into a piles of automobile and motorcycle parts; told me where it was and I opened it, I fight: bikers waylay you on the road, and AUGUST 1995 . COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 81 "


"while steering left and right with the exceeding anything you'd expect to see mouse, you've got to punch, flail, and in a piece of interactive fiction. To spice chainsaw your way to victory. What gives things up further, the designers have also these action sequences a unique flavor is made use of dramatic camera angles and not that the action itself is so much funcinematic eflects that heighten the exciteeven when you are in control of what's ment. You can tell that someone involved going on (and you aren't always), what in Full THROTTLE's creation has a good Ben. His Ben is Clint Eastwood cubed. I could listen to him all day. Mark Hamill, of Star Wars and WING COMMANDER III fame, contributes three fine voices here, including Ripburger's sinister snarl. Kath Soucie's Mo sounds sane and companionable, which is just what the part needs-a lesser actress would have taken her cue from the greasy overalls and veered off into caricature. And as for the game's bit parts, how wrong can you go when your voice talent includes LucasArts veterans like Nick Jameson and Denny Delk? EASY RIDER No, FULL THROTTLE is great to listen to and even better to look at. Ironically, its weakest point is its gameplay, and its gameplay isn't even all that weak, just somewhat less challenging and more obvious than it might have been. The puzzles are fine, but on the whole they are overshadowed by all of the game's extended movie and action sequences. ROAD WARRIORS There are a lot of action-oriented scenes in FuLL THROTTLE, like this mounted, mano On the bright side, this makes Full. a-mano, ass-kicking competition. THROTTLE an ideal starter game for someone new to interactive fiction or you have to do is pretty basic. It's the look grounding in what an action movie is who, for whatever reason, might be put of the scenes. supposed to look like—which is what off by more taxing gameplay. As for exAll the vehicles and some of the charyou'd expect from a company that has pert gamers, all they have to do is look at acters in FuLL. THROTTLE were modeled ties to George Lucas, but until this game FuLL. THROTTLE as a highly interactive inthree-dimensionally rather than as flat, it hasn't really been the case. teractive movie rather than as a perhaps cartoon-style drawings, and it has a real What has always been the case for Luoverly simple traditional adventure game, impact on how the game comes across. As casArts adventures is that their voice taland it all falls into place. the game's various semis and cycles and ent is impeccably cast, and it's never FULL THROTTLE offers an easy ride, but hovercrafts zoom around the screen, they been more true than here. Some of the the scenery's terrific, the story's exciting, have a solidity and a sense of motion far credit has to go to the writers, who have and even at its simplest the game's not a come up with pushover. All but the most demanding good banter gamers will find much here to enjoy. for the characters to exchange, as THE EDITORS SPEAK well as to other particiFULL THROTTLE pants in the game's creation, but to PROS LucasArts has the best writa large exers, artists, and voice talent in the tent the business, and they're all in top form here; extra points for tackling a game works whole new genre. because of CONS Experienced gamers may Roy Confind the game too short and the GRILLED MEAT The use of 3D vehicles and innovative puzzle design combine to rad's gravelmovie-to-gameplay ratio a bit high. create gaming scenes like you've never seen. ly, deadpan delivery as RATING*** 82 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. AUGUST 1995 "


"COREL A must for all movie lovers! MOVIE GUIDE The Ultimate Guide to the Movies CD HOVE  Easy-to-use video store interface Read descriptions and ratings of major motion pictures This multimedia movie expert gives you interactive access to the world's largest movie database on CD-ROM. You will enjoy hours and hours of entertainment exploring the glamorous world of movie stars, directors and behind-thescenes cast in the Corel All-Movie Guide. 90,000 movie and video listings  All facts are completely cross-referenced Test your movie knowledge in the Trivia Game or crossword puzzles Purchase movies and videos online ALLCOMPARE THE COREL VALUE! MOVIE GUIDE CINEMANIA '95 FEATURE FILMS 45,000 17,000 Assign your own movie rating VIDEOS AND TV MOVIES 45,000 2,500 INFORMATION ON CAST AND PERFORMERS For Windows and Macintosh 150,000 4,100 FOREIGN FILMS AND VIDEOS 12,000 6,400 Insight We ship FedEx standard overnight shipping 1-800-748-0619 Call 24-hours a day Or order via Internet! INFOPINSIGHTD COM MAKES RECOMMENDATIONS BASED ON YOUR MOVIE PREFERENCES YES NO VIDEOS AVAILABLE FOR ONLINE PURCHASE 15,000 NONE USS per apliva Neues and shippine COREL AMG COREL Note: Numbers have been rounded to the purust hundred All product names are trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective companies From anywhere within the United States or Canada Circle Reader Service #39 Callow for faced literature! 1-61LOR Document 1061 All Movie Guide "


"REVIEW Don't Let It Go To Your Head Take a Brain Dump From Sony Imagesoft's JOHNNY MNEMONIC by Charles Ardai OHNNY MNEMONIC IS NOT THE FIRST to save this bomb: following the publicafinishes to press one of six keys to either OF WILLIAM GIBSON'S STORIES TO BE tion of unanimously savage reviews, the turn Johnny left or right, maneuver him MADE INTO A COMPUTER GAME. YEARS movie died a quick and ignominious through various locations (there are six in ago, when much talk was circulating death. the game), or, when facing off against the about his seminal cyberpunk novel, What does this portend for the commurderous yakuza, make him throw a Neuromancer, being turned into a movie, puter game version? Nothing good. The punch or a kick. There's also a \"Use\" key, Interplay produced a NEUROMANCER adgame doesn't star Keanu Reeves, but which causes you to pick objects up and venture role-playing game. The movie that's more or less the best thing you can manipulate them, and a \"Download\" key never got made, the game only made it say about it. In Keanu's place is an actor which comes in handy when Johnny fias far as to gain a small cult following, named Christopher Gartin, who struts nally gets all the codes and the hardware and for a while people stopped talking around, bugs his eyes out, and delivers he needs to get rid of the package he's about how well suited William Gibson's lines like \"I've got to get this data out of carrying in his hotwired cranium. works were to the electronic media. my head, Ralfi!\" with more gusto than whichever action you choose causes a Flash forward: it's 1995, the Internet is talent. In the co-hero role of J-Bone, new video clip to play. If you choose wisehot and hip, any number of hackerplayed in the movie by rapper Ice-T, ly, the next clip to play shows Johnny themed films are in production (The Net, Isaac Hayes glowers and does his best to progressing one step closer to his goal. If Hackers, Strange Days), and, wouldn't you look the picture of urban menace. Jane, you choose poorly, Johnny bites the dust know it?, it's time Johnny's nervein one of several increasingly violent for William Gibson JOHNNY MNEMONIC damaged love inways. If don't choose at all, what happens to get trotted out Price: $69.95, terest, is played depends on the situation you're in at the again for another IBM CD-ROM JOHNNY MNEMONIC here by sitcom time. If things are calm, the video loops and Mac go at adaptation starlet Clare around for a second go, and then a third, System heaven. Requirements: Carey, who fills and then a fourth; you can cycle indeliOr hell, as the IBM compatible Jane's requisite nitely through the same video clip before case may be. 486-66MHz or tank top better making your move. If things are not better (Pentium \"Johnny Mnemonrecommended), than she fills the calm, you find that in this game as in life, ic,\" a short story 8MB RAM, SVGA role itself. you only get one shot at glory. He who from his Burning graphics, 2MB hard drive space, 2x CD The game is all hesitates is lost, as is he who presses the Chrome collection, ROM (3x recommended), Windows 3.1; done in full-moright button at the wrong time. supports Windows compatible sound cards. was recently novel tion video that unProtection: None ized by science fic Developer: Propoganda Code folds in front of LITTLE MNEMO IN tion author Terry Publisher: Sony Imagesoft you in non-interSLUMBERLAND Bisson, filmed by Santa Monica, CA active full-screen What is this data that Johnny's got in (800) 922-SONY artist-turned-direcchunks followed his head? I wouldn't want to give away tor Robert Longo, and turned into a CDby interactive segments that are distinany secrets, but...what the hell. It's the ROM computer game by the clever folks guished by being shown letterbox-style. cure for \"NAS,\" which stands for \"Nerve at Propaganda Code. The film starred When you're in full-screen mode, all you Attenuation Syndrome.\" There is no Keanu Reeves, fresh off his popular turn can do is watch as the actors go through question that you're supposed to think as the bus-rescuing police guy in Speed. their paces. When you're in letterbox «AIDS,\" just as there is no question that Alas, Keanu's popularity wasn't enough mode, you've got until a given video clip the ghetto-dwelling, anarchist \"LoTeks\" 84 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. AUGUST 1995 "


"TM PULAN THE MAYAN ADVENTURE The most thrilling reason to upgrade to Windows 95 Arriving in August ACTIVISION Swing by and win at http://www.activision.com 1995 Activision Inc. Pitfalls and Activision are registered trademarks of Activision, Inc. Pitfall: The Mayan Adventure is it trademark of Activision, Inc. Windows is a registered trademark of Microsoft Corporation. All rigluts reserved. Circle Reader Service 167 "


"grind with Ralfi. An attack by the that if you don't get your punches and yakuza gives Johnny and Jane the kicks just right at each stage in a given chance to escape-if you're fast. fight—and you won't, I promise you (Otherwise, it's a chance for them that-you're kicked back to an earlier to die.) The rest of the game is a point in the game and then forced to lot of running followed by a lot of fight your way through scenes you'd fighting, followed by a lot more thought you'd never have to see again. running, some of it in real space, The capper is that even if you make some in cyberspace. Also, a lot of the right move at the right time, it's anyemoting by overheated actors who one's guess what happens next. I don't look vaguely claustrophobic in the mean that the game is unpredictablegame's dark and confining sets that would be good. I mean that it's anyAlong the way there are someone's guess what actually happens, since REST YOUR SWEET CHIP ON MY SHOULDER Our synthetinominal puzzles to solve; mostly, the scenes go by so quickly, and are cally enhanced heroes limp through the subway after working out on one of Ralfi's thugs. these relate to finding the objects filmed so artfully, that it can be hard to you need first to enter cyberspace tell just who is doing what to whom. and then to accomplish your downSomeone's shooting; someone's beating load. These objects are scattered down a door; something's racing through around at random each time you a subway tunnel. Everything is dark and start a new game. The designers say hard to follow. Cinematically it's all very this random element gives the stylish and mysterious, but in terms of game \"infinite replayability.\" Nice gameplay, stylish only goes so far and try, but in my opinion the variamysterious is not necessarily a good tions just make things annoying. thing. Add in the endless video loops, The fighting has all the pecuwhich sometimes can be hard to exit, and liarities typical of games that limit you've got—what's the kindest way to put themselves to full-motion video, this?-a mess. what I like to refer to as \"DRAGON'S LAIR syndrome.\" At each stage in OUT OF MIND, OUT OF SIGHT SPIDER'S LAB Spider helps Jane get spliced out of those each fight, you get only one Eventually, if you struggle through uncomfortable genes. The video plays constantly, even when a letterboxed image gives the player an opportunichance at success: one punch, one enough scenes, you get to watch Johnny ty to make an action. kick, or one block, and you've got discharge his duties and save humanity. to push the right key at exactly the Don't bother. It's not worth it. The movie right time. Select and time your was bad enough, and there you only had of whom J-Bone is the leader are supmove right and you get rewarded with a to see each scene once. posed to suggest the oppressed denizens video clip showing your opponent falling JOHNNY MNEMONIC is yet another of inner cities today, or that the sadistic down. Click an instant too soon or too valiant but failed attempt to deliver on thugs who, on instructions from a Big late and you're dead. the promise of interactive movies. EvenCorporation, pursue Johnny to recover People running the game on slow matually someone will get it right, just as the corporation's intellectual property, chines (anything slower than a Pentium, eventually someone will probably proare meant to suggest Big Business and its basically) will find themselves at a real duce a good adaptation of a William Gibfascist lackeys. It's all a pretty crude caridisadvantage, since the system's various son story. But not this time. JOHNNY cature, unredeemed by any of Gibson's delays make timing a matter of pure MNEMONIC is, I hate to say it, thoroughly cleverness or freshness. guesswork. Even on a Pentium, players forgetable. There are some differences from the are forced to undertake much too much THE EDITORS SPEAK movie in terms of how the story is set up, trial and error, which is to say too much JOHNNY MNEMONIC but they're not substantial. Instead of error. In the manual, the designers write waking up in a hotel prior to receiving that you should \"wait a beat or two before RATING AW his clandestine upload, Johnny wakes up attacking,\" but there is a fine line bePROS Two hours of somewhat inalready in the custody of a pair of bodytween a beat and a beating, and I was teractive full-motion video, decent guards who work for Ralfi, the cybernever able to find the right rhythm. acting, artful set design and filming. sleaze who pimps out Johnny's medulla It wouldn't be so bad if the game had a CONS The story and the video are oblongata as a data storage device. normal \"save\" function which allowed both murky, and the controls will Within moments, Johnny finds himself you to save at any point, but it doesn't: leave you with the urge to hurl your with a third bodyguard, Jane; only she's you can only save the game at certain lo keyboard out a window. on his side since she, too, has an ax to cations and at certain times. This means 86 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. AUGUST 1995 "


"DARRERE. AFTER A TIME OF PEACE... COMES A TIME OF WAR. NOW IT'S UP TO YOU TO FIGHT MERCILESSLY, STRUGGLING TO SAVE A GALAXY OF PLANETS, IN THE ULTIMATE INTERGALACTIC WAR. First full-screen, fast action, interactive game for Windows ! (640x480x256 Video Mode) Windows'95 compatible Graphics rendered in 3D for heightened realism!  Literally hundreds of 3D animations!  Multi-channel sound effects! .Tons of strategic weaponry and resources at your disposal for fighting the enemy! aphics rendedeo Mode active gan Microforum Call 1-800-465-CDCDto order direct, or for the name of your nearest dealer! DISTRIBUTOR / DEALER INQUIRIES WELCOME! For more information about Microforum and our products, call us direct at (416)656-6406 or write: 1 Woodborough Ave. Toronto, Ontario, CANADA MOM 5A1,  Microforum Inc. All Rights Reserved. Circle Reader Service #80 "


"$77') THE AFFORDABLE4DIT GRAPHICS ACCELERATOR TO IMPROVE PO PERFORMANCE F-15E TALON 9EX VISION 330 COMPUTER Express 800-228-7449 WORLDWIDE SHIPPING $1497 NOW ORDER 24 HOURS ext.363 wurw.oregons Authentic replica of an F-15E Strike Eagle Fighter Jet flight stick. Twelve easy-access bullons, 4 program slots and much more. Hardware #39876 64-bit graphics accelerator. Improves PC performance, gives you higher resolutions, more colors, faster refresh rates and more. Hardware #39893 CUSTOMER SERVICE, CALL 508-443-6125 9am 5pm EST Th11 od to one Take your turn at the helm of an IACC racing yacht in the official simulator of the exciting 1995 America's Cup. IBM Win #39650 Realistic computer simulation of civil aviation on CD-ROMI Detailed scenery, day/night effects, and much more. IBM CD 137638 OPINBALL Crystal Caliburii Pinball with an attitudel Features expert flipper control, awesome sounds, 3D graphics, authentic speech, and more! IBM CD #36303 Fight to the death with some of the Universe's best fighters, including robots, insects and cyborgs. Arcade-style action. IBM CD #38987 CD ENTERTAINMENT CD ENTERTAINMENT CD ENTERTAINMENT CD ENTERTAINMENT 50 38 49 37357 Complete Basketball MPC 1.0............ 38673 Conquest of the New World..... 34659 Cowboy Casino 38483 Create Your Own Games..... 36884 Creature Shock... 34741 Crusader: No Remorse..... 35768 Cyberjudas....... 36913 CyberTarot..... 36477 Cyberio..... 39620 D Doy: America Invodos..... 34973 D Day: Operation Overlord 36749 Ecstatico...... 35361 Empire Deluxe Masters Edition 37985 Evasive Action Flight Sim.... 39146 Exploration ........... 39205 Extractors... 36731 FIFA International Soccer ... 38987 FX Fighter.... 34740 Falcon Gold.... 35944 Family Feud.... 39810 Fantasy Collection... 39169 Fast Attack 30 40 CALL 35 54 H  8 01-CFAX: 001-1-508-443-5645. XIX, CompuServeID: 70007, 1534 CH A DU F illi, 43009. RED-SEXL1. 26 32903 11th Hout.. ... 39741 5 Foot 10 Pok Volume 38127 Sth Fleet... 39618 7th Fleet... 29037 7th Guest............ 35878 AD&D Dark Sun: Wake Ravager. 34165 ADSD Ravenlaft: Strands Possos...... 38162 Absolute Mayom........ 36009 Absolute Zero............. 38907 Aces Collection.......... 36729 Across the Rhine: 1944..... 38164 Advanced Civilization... 39812 Adventure Collection.... 36757 Air Have Controller. 35806 Alien Legacy 34944 Alien logie: Jorun 39206 Alion Virus 39212 Alone in the Dark 34857 Ancient Civilization 39144 Apache ..... 37596 Arena Elder Scrolls 35869 Armored Fist... 38582 Atari 2600 Action Pack #1.. 39804 Atari 2600 Action Pack #2 .. 39730 Atmosfear... 37039 Award Winning War Games 39008 Baldies..... 39409 Baseball for Windows... 37199 Battle Chess Compilation 37205 Battle Cruiser 3000AD 36042 Balle Isle 2200... 34650 Battledrome...... 38854 Big 3..... 34638 BioForge Interactive Movie 38597 Blackbeard. 38209 Blackthorne...... 35593 Blood Bowl......... 39617 Bloodwings: Pumpkinhead's Revenge... 36939 Blown Away.... 39100 Brandish... 39019 Brent Hull Hockey 95. 39011 Brutal... 35948 Bureau 13...... 37517 Codillacs & Dinosaurs... 34279 Cannon Fodder 39147 Caveworld... 35442 Celebrity Pokor..... 39096 Celtic Tales: Balor Evil Eye 39395 Chaos Enging... 38011 Civilization Network 38651 ClockWorx....... 38568 Club Cybes lesque 36016 Colonization 39808 Comedy Collection 38602 Great Naval Barles Il...... 38524 Grey Wolf: North Atlantic...... 34009 Guilty. 35444 Hommer of the Gods.... 36998 HardBall IV 35696 Harpoon Classic 21557 Harpoon Il... 33905 Harvester... 35946 Holl. A Cyberpunk Thriller 37695 Herelic... 39989 Hi Oclone..... 36246 High Seos Trader... 39166 Hodi N' Podi 37003 Ice Hockey..... 35346 Incredible Machine 2 35721 Inferno... 37982 Inside the NCAA Basketball 33865 Iron Assault. 39353 Iron Cross 31162 Iron Helix. 37465 Isle of the Dead... 36047 Jack Nicklaus: Tour Collection 36388 Jagged Alliance... 37895 Jammil 34571 Jeopardy 37204 Jet Fighter III........ ......... 38600 Jewels of the Oracle............... 38730 Johnny Mnemonic................ 39568 Journeyman Project! 34702 King's Quest Anthology.......... 37202 Kingdom of the Far Reaches..... 39912 Last Bounty Hunter 38913 Last Dynasty... 33294 lawnmower Man 36831 legend of Kryandia III... 35328 Leisure Suit Larry Anthology ..... 36741 Lemmings Chronicles... 37754 Links 386 Pro....... 36459 Live Action Football 37291 Loadstar 35322 lade Runner 35711 lords of Midnight 37327 lords of the Realm 38858 Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes 31815 Lost in Time... 37939 MTV's Club Dead .. 38291 Maabus.... 37713 Machiavelli: The Prince ....... 35219 Mad Dog McCree II 35773 Maelstrom... 36853 Magic Carpet 39939 Magic Carpet Plus 34277 Magic Carpet Hidden Worlds 37926 Magic: The Gathering 31 31 39167 Daadlus Encounter 36302 Dark Forces 38448 Darkride 35738 Dawn Patrol 39718 Deadline 36044 Deathgate.. 39738 Demon Gate 38831 Depth Dwellers......... 38675 Descent 38296 Desert Strike................. 39220 Diggers 36746 Discworld 39685 Doom : Collectors Edition........ 39689 Doom ll: Exera levels................ 36320 Doom I: Hell on Earth............ 38909 Dr. Brain ... 35231 Dragon's Lair : Time Warp.......... 37702 Dungeon Master 2 36945 ESPN Baseball Tonight......... ... 35769 Fighter Wing... 35714 Fleet Defender: F 14 36591 Flight Commander II. 36696 Flight Sim: Europe #1 5.0 37980 Flight Sim: Japon Scenery 5.0 36692 Flight Sim: Las Vegas 5.0 36694 Flight Sim: Portland 5.0.. 36979 Flight Simulator 5.1... 36629 Flight Unlimited..... 39726 Frank Thomas' Baseball 35312 Front Page Sports Baseball 35315 Front Page Sports: Football 95 36392 Full Throtile... 32784 Gabriel Knight... 38196 Gadget 39938 Gene Wars 39837 Girlfriend Nikki 38540 Girlfriend Teri w/ Speech 37917 Go Digital... 23 26 38 "


"MECHWARRIOR 21 THE ULTIMATE SIT CENTURY COMUAT Esri NBA AIRBORNE 95 $45 THE COMPLETE ORIGINAL MEGAHIT PLUS ALL NEW EPISODE IV: THY FLESH CONSUMED ELTIC TRES BALORURE $32 SBER LE ACTIVISION Join one of six warrior clans and maneuver 31st Century weaponry as you battle against opposing clans. IBM CD #34155 Features the original megahit's 27 levels, plus an all-new episode: Thy Flesh Consumed. Nine new expert levels! IBM CD 540083 As Celtic leader in long-ago Ireland, you must defeat your people's Other World enemies, lead by Balor of the Evil Eyel IBM CD #39096 Choose from 81 of NBA's hottest players and get set for awesome, ultra-realistic, 2-on-2 full.court basketball action! IBM CD 540117 $494 ULTIMATE GAME COLLECTION Speur Desting IMATE GAME COLLECTOR STER WARLOCK , Fly over breathtaking scenery. Fifty aerial obstacle courses test your skills. Realistic flight environment, plus much more. IBM CD#36629 THE NEXT GENERATION \"A Final Unity\" A Star Trek experience like none before! Command this inspection tour and investigate the Starship Enterprise. IBM CDN34568 $600+ valuel Includes Ultima I-VI, Spear of Destiny, Spaceship Warlock, Jet Fighter II, Spectre VR Classic, Quantum Gate. IBM CD #39037 GAMETER Guide a group of fal, little bald men through life's trials in their quest for world domination! What a hair-raising game! IBM CD #39008 CD ENTERTAINMENT CD ENTERTAINMENT CD ENTERTAINMENT CD ENTERTAINMENT 26 40 46 43 42 32 2.32 .49 19 32 39940 Marine Fighters 37567 Master of Magic 39607 Maze 38677 Nech Commonder 34155 MechWarrior II.... 34865 Metaltech: Earth Siege..... 31659 Microsoft Golf..... 36049 Mission Critical '95....... 39148 Modern Air Combol... 38906 Mortal Kombat Il.. 38094 Ms. Metaverso..... .. 33204 Myst MPC.. . 39806 Mystery Collection... 35818 NASCAR Racing 39723 NBA JAM Tournament Edition .... 39725 NFL Quarterback Club 35863 NHL Hockey '95... 36755 National Lampoon Blind Date 39098 New Horizons..... 39971 No World Order.......... 35722 Nochepolis... 36482 Novostom 36364 Operation Body Count 38593 Operation Crusader... 36014 Orion Conspiracy 34173 Outpost 36280 PGA Tour Golf 486. 38549 Poc In Time... 37087 Pacific Air Wor: 1942 36481 Panzer General 39800 Paparazzi.. 39322 Perfect General II 36980 Peter GabrielXplora! 34085 Phantasmagoria 36941 Phoenix Fighter... 35005 Pinball Arcade 39687 Pocahontas.... 32791 Police Quest IV... 38113 Poolmester MPC.... 36244 Power House...... 39728 Primol Roge........ 38299 Pro League footboll 75th Anniv 38874 P Moster 39317 Pure Worgome.... .. 39290 Puzzle Power 39847 RBI95 36829 RELENTLESS: Twinsen's Adventure... 39734 Rapid Assault... 39298 Re Elect JFK.... 36385 Realms of Arkonio: Star Trail 32155 Rebel Assault.......... 38969 Retribution ............. 31705 Return to Zork...... 39569 Riddle of Master Lu........ 800-228-7449 36917 Rise of the Robots...... 38656 Top Gun ........ 38 37916 Wanderlust 36937 Rise of the Triad.... .. 39937 Top Ten ll Pak. 39103 WarPatrol 35238 Robinson's Requiem 36292 Total Distortion...... 36701 Warcraft Ores and Humans 33447 Rocket Boy..... ..... 36697 Tower Controller 34284 Werewolf... 38420 Rogarian Agenda... 37565 Transport Tycoon 39042 Wheel of Fortune.. 39970 Rugby World Cup 95. 37538 U.S.S. Ticonderogo 40 36291 Wing Commander 1/ ll Deluxe 38865 SSN 21: Sea Wolf............ 36278 US Navy Fighters 34276 Wing Commander ill........... 39814 Science Fiction Collection.... 15416 Ultima Vill: Pagon w/ Speech 35405 Wings of Glory 1917 1918... 30708 Scrabble Deluxe..... 39692 Ultimate Pinball 39737 Witch Haven............ ...... 39207 Scroll..... 32937 Under o Killing Moon.... 36296 Wolf Wildlife Survival ..................... 39881 Scoplane........ 36045 Unnecessory Roughness 95 32 38914 Woodruff & Schnibblo........... 38583 Shanghai Great Moments 38672 Virtual Pool........ 37 38244 World Cup Golf Dorado Beach....... 39208 Silverload.................... 35816 Virtual Vegas Volume 1, 39447 World Hockey '95..... 31518 SimAnt Enhanced 38661 Virtuoso 38344 X COMTerror From the Deep ............ 31479 SimCity Enhanced 37708 Vortex Quantum Gate II.. 40 36940 X Wing Collectors CD ROM 34086 SimEarth Enhanced.... 37 36707 Voyeut..... ... 35820 Zombie Dinos: Planet Zeltoid .......... 39031 SimTower 39724 W.W.F. Raw... 36366 Zorro.... . . .. .. 36575 Simtown 38627 Simon the Sorcerer... 38732 Skullcracket 38988 Slom City... 39699 Slipstream 5000........ 37025 Sorority House... . 35225 Space Ace... 39941 Space Hulk 35220 Space Pirates.... 39449 Space Quest VI 38507 Space Sirens. 37287 Spaceship Warlock... 34296 Spear of Destiny Super CD Pok 38129 Stalingrad..... 38208 Star Reach... 29366 Star Trek 25th Enhanced 37193 Star Trek Judgment Rites. 39732 Star Trek: Omnipedia... 34278 Star Trek: Star Fleet Academy 34350 Star Trek: TNG Tech Manual... 34568 Star Trek: TNG: A Final Unity.... 36893 Stonekeep... 38609 Strip Poker 37090 Subwar 2050 Plus......... 39006 Super Street Fighter 1 Turbo 39575 SuperKarts... 34425 Superhero: league of Hoboken 35872 System Shock. 39846 T Mek... .No surcharge is added to credit card orders..PO's, wire transfers, personal and cashiers checks ... .. 33743 TFX: Tactical Fighter ....... accepted. Some items are not returnable. Returns require authorization # and are subject to 15% 38456 Tank Commander. restocking fee. All items offered for sale are subject to availability. We are not responsible for typograph 39735 TokWar.. ical errors. Shipping and handling charges apply. Worldwide shipping! 33320 Tetris Gold Compilation... All prices are subject to change without notice. VISA COMO 38595 Third Reich...... 39783 Thunderscape. 39736 Time Pockets 38876 Tony la Russa Baseball 3.. Circle Reader Service #300 44 CUSTOMER SERVICE, CALL 508-443-6125 9am 5pm EST NOW ORDER 24 HOURS ext.363 Complete on-line catalog with over 5000 software and hardware titles. O Prodigy Computer Express CompuServe GO Express Internet info@cexpress.com AOL Computer Express www:http//express.com:2700 O World Computer Express 35 31 All erfors Shipping and tored for sale are subturns require authoriors, personal and coshi COMPUTER Express 31 Union Ave. Sudbury, MA 01776 Info: 5084436125 Fax: 5084435645 34 "


"Dungeon MULTIMEDIA COMPUTER Docom Express 800-228-7449 WORLDWIDE SHIPPING TEST The Master of Dungeon games returns! Command a party of warriors through the most realistic role playing world ever. IBM CD 137702 Test your IQ. Features full-motion movies, interviews, music, more. Prints, explains scores. Based on a validated IQ test. IBM CD #39065 NOW ORDER 24 HOURS ext.363 CUSTOMER SERVICE, CALL 508-443-6125 9am 5pm EST PENTHOUSE ACTIVIDCH |_$69 paparazzi! ULTIMATE HOME RESOURCE US Atlas/certos ULTIMATE HOME BESOURCE paparazzi! Cardshop S2A MULTIMEDIA ACTicion Expose scandal for fun and profit as 6 tabloid photographer in Tinseltown! Take your best shot and see what develops! IBM CD #39800 When the CEO of a multimillion-dollar company disappears, you're in line for the world's most powerful job. IBM CD #40108 $300+ value! Encyclopedia of Life, US Atlas 3, Family Dr. 2. Card Shot Lite, Prof. Multimedia, Interactive World History. IBM CD 439775 VIRTUAL PHOTO SHOO Virtual Photo Shoot-Vol. 4. Penthouse Pets star in a private photo session where you, as photographer, call the shots. IBM CD 540115 3.5\" ENTERTAINMENT 3.5\" ENTERTAINMENT 3.5\" ENTERTAINMENT 3.5\" ENTERTAINMENT 30  30 35 25 34162 Dark legions 34765 Dawn Patrol 37076 Descent 38295 Desert Strike 39219 Digg 34307 Disciples of Steel... 36747 Discworld 33894 Doom Knee Deep in the Dead 39690 Doom il: Extra Levels 35719 Doom Hell on Earth..... 32978 Dungeon Moster 2. 39915 Dynasty League Baseball 39914 Entertainment Digest WINDOWS 35288 FIFA International Soccer......... 34272 Falcon 4.0.. .. 33664 Falcon: FA 18 Hornet. .. 36832 Fighter Wing.... .... 21 CALL 42 3.5\" ENTERTAINMENT 37040 1830: Railroads & Robber Barons.............34 35976 1st Encounter 36454 5th Floet........ .. .. 39619 5th Fleet Scenario Module .............. 35877 AD&D Dark Sun: Wake Ravager........... 40 36068 AD&D Mencoberranzon. 34164 AD&D Ravenloit: Strahds Posses............. 46 34302 Advanced Civilization...... 35 37304 Aide De Camp..... ... 37489 Alien 3... 34695 Alien Legacy... .... 34 33809 Alone in the Dark II..... 36 32011 Arcado 33341 Arena Elder Scrolls.. 33708 Armored Fist... 43 39913 Alfaport WINDOWS.. 38608 Atari 2600 Action Pack #1 WINDOWS..... 39805 Atari 2600 Action Pack #2 WINDOWS.... 36959 Award Winning War Games 33637 Axis the Gamecheoter.... 39007 Baldies... 36027 Bare Bugs. 33857 Bone Cruiser 3000AD...... 34448 Barledrome........... 21151 Battles of Napoleon..... 38662 Beat the House 11575 Beyond Squad Leader..... 36485 Blackbeard... 36654 Blood Bowl ... 33738 Breach 3 35715 BreakThrul WINDOWS 33941 Brett Hull '95.......... 39010 Brutal... 27743 Carrier Strike ......... 33047 Casino Lite: Omaha Hold'em 37676 Casino Lite: Texas Hold'em.... 34074 Celtic Tales: Balor Evil Eyo..... 39394 Chaos Engine........ 32522 ChessMaster 4000 Turbo WINDOWS.........32 26806 Civilization .......... 36251 Classics Pinball........... 38649 ClockWorx WINDOWS..... 37445 Collegiate Pennsylvania Stalo WIN 37435 Collegiate U of Florida WINDOWS 37439 Collegiate U. of Michigan WINDOWS...... 37434 Collegiate UCLA WINDOWS 35717 Colonization........ .. 32930 Comanche & Mission Disk 1.... 22035 Corridor 7.............. 36303 Crystal Caliburn WINDOWS 36087 Cyclones. 33602 D Day: Operation Overlord 34028 D Day: The Beginning of End ORDER YOUR CATALOG NOW! Includes $10 Rebate! 35314 Front Page Sports: Football 95...... 35313 Front Page Sports: Football Upgrd 95. 28 32130 Gabriel Knight...... 38607 Gettysburg: Turning Point. 34001 Girlfriend Lisa.. . 34436 Girlfriend Teri................ ..26 36461 Glider 4.0 WINDOWS......... 37764 Goal '94... 37081 Goldtree Engine ... 26 28300 Golf WINDOWS........... ..... ... 43 34826 Goll Courses: Banff Springs WINDOW.......23 34827 Gall Courses: Mauna Kea WINDOWS......23 34828 Golf Courses: Pinehurst WINDOWS......... 36790 Good to Firm... 33704 Great Navol Bottles ll... ....... 39086 Greyhound 2. 34008 Guilty 32527 Hond of Fole... 32594 HordBall Il Diomond Collection 34006 Hordboll IV... 38076 HordBoll IV MIPBA Addon 32122 Harpoon .... 39453 Harpoon Battleset #3 37696 Heretic 34761 Heroes of Might & Magic 36245 High Seca Truder... 27109 Hollywood Mogul WINDOWS 38601 Hudson City......... 37466 Ice Hockey 35349 Incredible Toons WINDOWS.... 31471 IndyCar Racing... 35105 IndyCar: Circuits Expansion Pack 35106 IndyCar Indianapolis Speedway... 36393 Iron Cross... 37703 Ishor 3: 7 Gates of Infinity..... 39090 It's a Fair Bet... 28696 Jack Nicklaus Signature Tour 1 30628 Jack Nicklaus Signature Tour 2 31480 Jogged Alliance.. . 36389 Jagged Alliance Addon.... 34166 Jeopardy Deluxe... .. 37203 Jet Fighter III... 33741 Jurassic Park... . 34303 Kingmaker ............ 36972 Klik n' Play WINDOWS 35210 Knights of Xonar Upgrade NR18 37527 Legions WINDOWS 32785 Leisure Suit Larry ........... 30372 Lemmings II....... 27660 Links 386 Pro... 31444 Links: Bellrey Course SVGA 36148 Links Bighorn Course SVGA 34306 links: Castle Pines Course SVGA 39648 Links: Devil's Isle Course SVGA 32478 links: Firestone Course SVGA 31507 Links: Innisbrook Course SVGA.. 32479 Links: Pebble Beach Course SVGA. 30798 links: Pinehurst Country SVGA 39068 Links Praire Dunes SVGA... 35319 lode Runner... 34029 Lords of the Realm . 33501 M4 Sherman Tank WINDOWS 35741 Master of Magic 31433 Master of Orion.... 31594 Metal & lace PG13.... 33223 Metal & Lace Upgrode Disk NRIB 37302 Metal Marines.... ... 34698 Metaltech: Earth Sloge................ 37023 Metaltech: Earth Slogo Speech Pack... 38905 Mortal Kombat ....... 36997 NASCAR Racing SVGA 33215 NCM: Road to the Final Four ......... 35937 NFL '95 WINDOWS 37092 Navy Strike 39097 New Horizons.... 37763 One Nil 39101 Onslaught 34451 Operation Crusader WINDOWS 33340 Outpost 38548 Pae In Time 33087 Pacific Air War: 1942 35739 Pacific Air War 1942 Scenario..... 36480 Panzer General 31956 Pax Imperia... 33735 Perfect General Il 32948 Perfect General Trilogy 25088 Pinball Fantasi 30098 Pirotel Gold... 37083 Pizzo Tycoon WINDOWS 36057 Planet Soccer 37305 Point of Attack.. 32079 Police Quest IV... 38118 Poolmaster WINDOWS.... 30630 Prince of Persia li 34655 Pro League Baseball..... 35935 Quarantine.. 32863 Quest for Glory IV. 34596 Raiden 36384 Realms of Aikania: Star Trail 36386 Realms of Arkania: Star Trail Addon 35355 Red Baron 31630 Return to Zork 36598 Reunion 33938 Rise of the Robots WINDOWS 36936 Rise of the Triod 35236 Robinson's Requiem. 33206 SSN 21: Sea Wolf..... 35590 Sobre Team... 28 32880 Fleet Delonder: F 14.................................46 35744 Floot Defender: F 14 Scenario........ 36589 Flight Commander 32632 Flight Light 37558 Flight Sim: Caribbean Scenery 5.0. 36695 Flight Sim: Europe #1 5.0.... 37557 Flight Sim: Japan Scanery 5.0. 32901 Flight Sim: Las Vegas 5.0..... 31728 Flight Sim: New York Scenery. 31657 Flight Sim: Paris Scenery...... 36693 Flight Sim: Portland 5.0.. 31273 Flight Simulator ...... 30373 Freddy Pharkas............. 36247 Front Lines.......... 34894 Front Page Sports: Baseball .. "


"INFINITY MACHINE ABSOLUTE ZERO ABSOLUTE $38 Microsoft Windows 95 Upgrade Alien beings threaten your mining colony. You must convert mining equipment into weapons and blow the invaders away, IBM CD #36009 8 flight sims: ATAC, F. 14, Flight Academy Heroes of the 357, Jetfighter II, MIG-29, Megafortress, Wing Commander. IBM CD 639105 THE ULTIMATE.CAME CHEATING UTILITY The ultimate game-cheating utility! Search for known values, unknown variables and more. 4GW and network compatible. DOS #39740 Windows'95 has an easier to use interface, and plug and play technology. Be sure to reserve your copy today! IBM CD 540000 ENDALL CONNECTE Double Your RAM With Just One Click BRUTAL Rabbit ART LITERATURE THE MOVIES $100 $10 ESCO $40 $200 $200 $300 $301 RAM DOUBLER At Home $400 Match wits with friends or computer in a realistic video game version of the TV game show. Features host Alex Trebek. IBM CD#34571 RAM works more efficiently. Ends insufficient memory messages! Keep your entire suite of Windows applications open! IBM CD840114 The world's greatest martial artists return to Brutal Island to compete in a tournoment to determine the world's champion. IBM CD#39011 Ages 3-6 learn reading, counting and more, while visiting Rags, Rosie & Roly Rabbit. Includes 4 hardcover books. 3.5\" ENTERTAINMENT 3.5\" ENTERTAINMENT KIDS/HOME/FAMILY MACINTOSH 21 53 MACINTOSH KIDS/HOME/FAMILY 800-228-7449 39650 Sail '95 WINDOWS 32979 Som & Max Hit the Rood...... 31731 Scenery Collection USA West 5.0 30 34656 Sert City... 34 35316 Serious Soccer 34289 Shadow of the Comet 2. ..CALL 35287 Shanghai il WINDOWS.. 25 24033 Shiloh.... ...12 26824 SimAnt Classic.... 31457 SimCity 2000.............. 33915 SimCity 2000 Great Disasters......... 38245 SimCity 2000 Urban Renewal kit 31410 SimCity Classic................. 37042 SimClassic Collection.... 24473 SimEarth Classic.... 31454 SimFarm... 25115 SimHealth...... . ..... 29724 Simile Classic 37593 SimTower WINDOWS 32882 Simon the Sorcerer 22085 Solitaire Antics WINDOWS 37228 Solitaire Deluxe WINDOWS... 31656 Space Simulator ......... 33342 Spectre VR 36483 Stalingrad 35723 Star Crusader.... 35940 Star Crusader Mission & Speech 33245 Star Reach 26706 Star Trek 25th Anniversary 31772 Star Trek: Judgment Rites. 35614 Strip Poker Pro #12 Data Disk 31886 Strip Poker Professional 30 33331 Subwar 2050.... 37091 Subwar 2050 Scenario 39005 Super Street Fighter Il Turbo 26041 Super Tetris... 39688 SuperKarts........ 34383 Superhero League of Hoboken 33858 System Shock 34305 TFX: Tactical Fighter.. 32154 The Dig 33332 Third Reich 32152 Tie Fighter... 38236 Tio Fighter: Defenders... 29906 Tigers on the Prowl 26142 Train Engineer WINDOWS 37084 Transport Tycoon WINDOWS 38961 Transport Tycoon Scenario... 37588 True Lies. 36452 U Boat WINDOWS 32879 Ultima Vill: Pogon... 39691 Ultimate Pinball 35821 Universal Never lock for Games........... 36041 Unnecessary Roughness '95......................32 36708 Wareraft: Orcs and Humans 36017 SAT I Studyware CD......... 36011 Absolute Zero CD.... 31521 Warlords ...... 32960 SAT NEW Personal Trainer 2.0...... 33864 Alone in the Dark......... 32510 Wheel of Fortune Deluxe WINDOWS 36803 Sports II. Swimsuit CD ..... 26 39398 Alone in the Dark II CD... 27287 Wing Commander Deluxe. 38678 Stacker Multimedia 4.0 WINDOWS... 39145 Apache CD 36271 Wolf: Hunt of Be Hunted ....... 37887 Star Trek: TNG Screen Saver WINDOWS......30 36912 Ate of Doom CD......... 34590 Wolipoch.... 34170 Star Wars Screen Saver WINDOWS 39802 Alari 2600 Action Pack #1.. 39727 World Hockey '95... .... 36412 Treasure Pack 1 CD ....... 36588 Beyond Squad leader CD 38343 X COM: Terror From the Deep 36594 Triple PlayPlus! Spanish CD... 38615 Braindead 13 CD... 38 35215 X COM: UFO Defense... .. 21493 WinFax Pro 4.0 WINDOWS 80 36789 Casino Moster w/Kit CD 28941 X Wing ......... .. 35647 Windows 95 4.0.... 36376 Casino Tournament of Champions CD... 32034 X Wing: B Wing Tour of Duly.... 35648 Windows 95 Upgrade 4.0.... 78 29214 Civilization.. 30899 X Wing: Imperial Pursuit... ..... 34081 Windows Upgrade 3.11... 38569 Club Cyberlesque CD ...... 34181 Zig Zag WINDOWS.... . ..... 33004 Crystal Calibur. 39173 Crystal Crazy 1.0......... 39640 Dark Forces CD... 39686 Doom Il. Hell on Earth....... 33603 11th Hour CD .... ......53 38910 Dr. Brain II CD............... .. .... 35923 After Dark 3.0 WIN... 35924 After Dark MPC 3.0 CD 38270 BOB CD 36987 Beavis & Butthead Screen Saver CD 36627 Cartoon History of Universe CD. 37767 Cookworks: On the Menu 1.0 CD 33036 Creative Writer WIN 33549 Design Your Own londscope WIN 17177 Dr. T's Sing Along Kids CD.... 36174 EasyKeys CD.... . 36760 Emperor's Now Clothes CD..... 36855 Encarla MPC Encyclopediu '95 CD.. 39553 Guinness CD of Records 1995............ 39065 IQ Test Multimedia...... . 37775 Internet Membership Kit 1.0 WINDOWS... 35615 Lion King Print Studio WIN.. 35281 MS DOS Upgrade 6.22....... 37662 Managing Your Money 95 2.0 WIN 33528 Mayo Clinic Family Health CD. 34986 Mayo Clinic Pharmaris CD... 36519 Moyo Clinic Sports Health CD 39614 Medical House Coll CD 37123 Melomorf 3 D.......... 37156 Monty Python's Complete Waste CD 38207 Ne Cruiser Plus.......... .. 36828 Oregon Trail II CD... 36968 Page Master CD... 36538 People vs. OJ Simpson CD 34999 Piono Course 1 w/ Midi Coblo... accepted. Somo items are not returnable. Returns require authorization # and are subject to 15% 36030 Print Shop Deluxe WIN. 31527 Publisher 2.0 WIN.... 36843 Quicken 4.0 CD. 36840 Quicken 4.0 WIN .... 36838 Quicken 8.0 DOS... 36841 Quicken Deluxe 4.0 CD.... 36842 Quicken Deluxe 4.0 WIN 39744 Rom Doubler WINDOWS 1.0 Circle Reader Service #301 350 MS DOSur Money CD 44 CUSTOMER SERVICE, CALL 508-443-6125 9am 5pm EST NOW ORDER 24 HOURS ext.363 Complete on-line catalog with over 5000 software and hardware titles. Prodigy Computer Expresso CompuServe GO Express Internet info@cexpress.com AOL Computer Express www :http//cexpress.com:2700 O World Computer Express .No surcharge is added to credit card orders..PO's, wire transfers, personal and cashiers checks restocking loo. All items offered for sale are subject to availability. We are not responsible for typograph ical errors. Shipping and handling charges apply. Worldwide shipping! All prices are subject to change without notice. COMPUTER Express 31 Union Ave. Sudbury, MA 01776 Info: 5084436125 Fox 5084435645 84 "


"DYNWARE P w Jigsaw-It! Electronie COMPUTER Express o WORLDWIDE SHIPPING MARCO POLOT erside . More than 100 p Murat 800-228-7449 In the Middle Ages, adventure awaits! Embark on trade missions while following in the footsteps of Marco Polo IBM CD340107 Customizable electronic puzzle game with over 100 puzzles. Create puzzles from photos or graphics. Hours of fun. IBM CD#40111 NOW ORDER 24 HOURS ext.363 CUSTOMER SERVICE, CALL 508-443-6125 9am 5pm EST BARNSTORMING RIVER RAID II MEGAMANU IRTUA TAROT THITE WORLDS Advanced\"Dungeon Cragon ACTIVISION'S ATARI 2600 CHALET D O RPRENFE The most Anternette Suissiry ayadlubie! An Inter c ulty to ING DR. FOR WINDOWS KEYSTONE KAPSSS.AMPE LASERBLAST GELFRIEND Teri RANO CD IBM CD-ROM $26 for Windows IDI NA DOKI Rediscover 15 Atari 2600 video games on Windows: Barnstorm, Keystone Kapers, Enduro, and other favorites! IBM CD#39804 Get answers to personal questions and take a look at future possibilities! Based on the ancient, mystic art of the Tarol. IBM CD#36451 Three Advanced Dungeons and Dragons role playing games: AD&D Dark Sun, AD&D Ravenloft, and AD&D Al Qadim. IBM CD840113 Converse with a girlfriend living in an apartment in your PCI Your girlfriend moves and responds to anything you say IBM CD#38540 MACINTOSH STORAGE DEVICES JOYSTICKS/MICE MEMORY/CPU UPGRADES 265 38556 Lightning 730MB 11MS IDE...... 38557 Lightning 730MB 1 IMS SCSI MAC... 37824 ST 31200A INT IGB Hard Disk 38970 ST 3391A INT 341MB Hard Disk... 37823 ST 5660A INT 545MB Hard Disk...... 38180 Trekker 350MB EXT Tope Backup 38181 Trekker 700MB EXI Iopo Bock.. 36656 Wingman Extreme Joystick ........ 36055 Wingman Joystick 33052 Y Cable for 2 Joysticks... 34228 BJ 10SX Bubble Jet Printer 599 226 45 PRINTERS 395 36149 4X9 Simms 70ns (4 Simms... CA!! 36176 72 Pin4MB Module 6 Ons CALL 36177 72 Pin BMB Module Ons CALL 36555 72 Pin 16MB Module 60ns.. 31738 Cyrix Cx486DRX2 33/66 386DX 33 CALL 34409 Cyrix CX486SRX2 25/50 386SX 25 CALL 35134 Overdrive 486DX 50 CPU...... CALL 30884 Overdrive 486DX 50 CPU WO/OD ..CALL 31505 Overdrive 486DX 66 CPU WO/OD CALL 35502 Overdrive 486DX 66 FOR SX/DX33 CALL 36727 Overdrive 486DX4 100 CPU ......... CALL 36728 Overdrive 486DX4 100 CPU WO/OD...... CALL 36725 Overdrive 486DX4 75 CPU ............. CALL 36726 Overdrive 486DX4 75 CPU WO/OD......... CALL 38604 Overdrive PENT 63............ CALL 379 JOYSTICKS/MICE 422 700 224 ...89 559 39 36658 BJC 4000 Bubble Jet Printer 37912 Brother HL 630 Laser Printer 37976 Brother HL 660 laser Printer 37978 Brother P Touch Label Printer 35800 Epson Stylus Color InkJet 38 190 HP Deskjet 320... 38192 HP Desk Writer 320 MAC 38544 HP LaserJet 4L... 38543 HP OfficeJet....... 30754 KX P2023 24 Pin 240cps Norrow... 34119 KX P3124 24 pin 320cps Norrow 2778B KX P44004PPM Laser Printer... 38744 KX PJ250 Inkjet 300dpi... 313 313 536 193 SCANNERS 481 194 25 33702 Dragon's Lair CD. 37227 Dungeon Master 2 38664 Dungeon Master 2 CD 33534 Empire Deluxe........ 38210 Gadget CD........ 39172 Glider Pro 1.0... 38522 Go Digital Volume 1 CD..... 35698 Harpoon Classic CD... 25497 Harpoon il... 35351 Incredible Toons... 38731 Johnny Mnemonic CD..... 36298 Journeyman Project Turbo CD. 37022 King's Quest VII CD 38966 Zone CD 33353 lawnmower Man CD 33398 Leisure Suit Larry VI..... 35257 Links Pro w/ Harbortown Course 35321 lode Runner 39448 Marathon Gomenet...... 39013 Master of Orion CD.... 38570 Ms. Molaverse CD........ 32296 Myst CD... 36756 National Lampoon Blind Dale CD 39102 Onslaught................. 38394 Operation Crusader....... 33824 PGA Tour Golf 35331 Phantasmagoria CD..... 39729 Primal Rage CD...... 35135 Prince of Persia II 34581 Rebel Assault CD..... 36935 Shadows of Cairn CD 32616 SimCity 2000... 35754 SimTower 35755 SimTown CD......... 22090 Solitaire Antics... . 38596 Stalingrad CD.... . 36B30 Star Trek: 25th Enhanced CD... 34351 Star Trek: TNG Tech Manval CD..... 38875 Super Wing Commander CD... 36080 Top Ten Mac Pack CD...... 38174 Virtual Vegas Volume 1 CD .... 37195 Voyeur CD..... 38480 Wanderlust CD..... 39104 WarPatrol CD .... 38234 Warlords .. .. 37192 Wolfenstein 3 D....... MONITORS 165 966 463 326 37035 Aero Mouse.... 37034 Aero Pen.... 37036 AeroDual 3D Mouse and Pon)...... 38163 Cyber Maxx VR Headgear Display... 39877 F 15 Eagle Tactical Stick...... 39874 F 15 Hawk Tactical Stick 39875 F 15 Raptor Tactical Stick..... 39876 F 15 Talon Tactical Stick 29442 FX2000 Pistol Grip......... 33226 Flight Stand 16439 Flight Stick... 31417 Flight Stick Pro IBM 27914 Flight Stick Pro MAC... 31148 G Force Flight Yoke......... 37753 Game Zopper. 24017 GomeCard Ill Automatie......... 24018 GameCard III MCA Automatie 38124 GameGun. 29404 Gravis Analog Pro Joystick... 28366 Gravis Eliminator Card 39627 Gravis Firebird PC Controller.... 27815 Gravis Gomepad IBM..... 30003 Gravis MouseStick II MAC. 38108 Gravis NHL Hockey '95 Pack 35133 Gravis Phoenix Control System 37715 Jetstick... 36886 Joyswitch..... 36562 Noturol keyboard.. 35458 PC Golf System ......... 36876 Pro Pedols... 30825 Thrustmaster ACM Game Cord 35104 Thrustmaster F 16 FICS 38027 Thrustmaster FCS MKII IBM... 33344 Thrustmaster Formula TI.. 29522 Thrustmaster Pro FCS 29863 Thrustmaster Rudder Pedals IBM. 33804 Thrustmaster Rudder Pedals MAC 38156 Thrustmaster TQS for FICS 33780 Thrustmaster WCS Markl MAC...... 31258 Thrustmaster WCS Markll IBM... 38950 Trackball PRO... 38462 Virtual Pilot Pro 29434 Virtual Pilot Yoke ............. 379 709 783 1096 1463 304 450 1066 267 812 2489 S22 33597 Epson Action Scanning PC... 39110 HP ScanJet 3P Scanner 39111 HP ScanJet 3P Scanner... 38342 HP ScanJet ICX Scanner.... 39109 HP ScanJet ICX Scanner.... 36436 Scon Magic Color 24Bit Handheld 38758 SconMaker 351 Slide Scanner 38752 ScanMaker Il Color Flatbed 33906 ScanMaker IIG Grey Flatbed 35052 SconMaker IHR Color Flatbed 35050 ScanMaker Ill Color Flatbed... 35498 ScanMaker ISP Color Flatbed. 38755 ScanMaker IISPX Color Flatbed 38754 Scan Moker FIXE Color Florbed 28975 ScanMon 256 ....... 32389 ScanMon 32 31238 ScanMon Color... 33371 ScanMon EosyTouch 34812 ScanMon Powerpoge 400 DPI 889 .889 91 331 35553 Alphascan 15 15' Monitor ..... 35554 Alphascon 178 179 Manito.. 35556 Alphoscon 17E 17\" Monitor.... 35555 Alphascon IC 20\" Monitor.. 35557 Alphoscon LE 20\" Monitor ............ 35552 Alphascan Plus 14\" Monitor... 38151 Diamond Pro 15F5 15' Monitor ....... 38153 Diamond Pro 17\" Monitor... 37863 HL4860 14\" SVGA Color Monitor ...... 37864 HL5860 159 SVGA Color Monitor 37866 HL7682 17 SVGA Color Monitor 37861 HN4838P 14\" SVGA Color Monitor 38390 MultiSync 2V 14\" Monitor..... 32896 MultiSync 3FGE 15' Monitor... 38388 MultiSync lens: 2V.. . 38386 MultiSync Lens: XE15 or XP15.. 38070 MultiSync XE15 15' Monitor 38072 MultiSync XP15 15' Monitor ... 35059 SyncMaster 14GL 14 28MM 35060 SyncMaster 1SGL 15' 28MM... 35061 SyncMaster 17GL 17 28MM.. 34223 SyncMaster 2E 14\" SVGA 39MM. 34222 SyncMaster 3E 14\" SVGA 28MM. 183 746 224 331 604 400 SOUND CARDS 579 699 318 40B 832 231 101 232 STORAGE DEVICES 37755 Aztech Sound Galaxy BXHI....... 35277 Aztech WaveRider 32 Wovetable........ 30823 Daytona PCMCIA SoundCord 16bit.... 39030 Gravis UtoSound Ace.......... 26292 Gravis UlhoSound Mox.......... 33725 Gravis Ultrasound Midi Adapter........ 33240 Movi Woveloble Synth. Upgrade..... 36498 Monte Carlo Gome Cord.... ...... 34189 Multisound Monterey 16 bit............. 36771 Multisound Tohiti 16 bit............... 31059 Port Able Sound Plus..... 32312 ReolMagic Multimedia Playback............ MEMORY/CPU UPGRADES 338 38178 Jumbo 350MB INT Tope Back Up .............162 38179 Jumbo 700MB INT Tape Beck Up .................237 38554 Lightning 540MB 11MS IDE...... 38555 Lightning 540MB 11MS SCSI MAC.............226 36147 1X3 Simms 70ns (4 Simms)... 36136 1X9 Simms 70ns (4 Simma) ..CALL .....CALL 60 373 "


"ake and sell games like this yourselfl Sugests Tascaudatar his ENCO Your Portazy $46 PIE 3D GAME CREATION SYSTEM from Pie in the Sky Software NO Programuring NEW CyberJudas VERSION 3.0 SACKWAREN 30 MAPLINX STIFIWAK THE TAME $40 The Power to Visualize Data Paint Program Level Editor Map customer/prospect locations! Uses 5-digit ZIP codes from database, contact manager, or spreadsheet records. IBM CD#40135 As President of Earth's most powerful nation, you must bewarel One of your advisors wants to destroy you! IBM CD835768 Make 3D action games without programming! Sell them, and pay no fees! Create 3D worlds with castle mozes, etc. DOS #40106 You're a troubleshooter in the near future, falsely accused of a crime and impris. oned in a cryogenic coma. IBM CD#39735 LORDS MIDNIGHT Microsoft ULTIMATE FAMILY GAMES $46 DOS Herosoft ULTIMAIL FAMILY GAMES $1122 DIMARK Battle Boroth's evil minions indoors and outdoors. Four methods of travel, 3D texture mapped backgrounds, and more. IBM CD #35711 TQS for FLCS by Thrustmaster. Trim controls, 3 programmable switches and a mini trackball. Program through the FLCS. Hardware 438156 Comoglan on Windows 95 Packed with features that compliment Windows'95. Customize your desktop and get fast, easy access to the Internet. IBM CD#40018 $300+ value! Includes Lemmings 2 Pack, Dinosaur Safari, Cyberrace, Multimedia Crosswords, It's All Relative and more! IBM CD#39214 SOUND CARDS CD DRIVES & UPGRADES MODEMS/FAXES MODEMS/FAXES ....423 131 235 50 265 CALL ...CALL 136 ..172 38352 Roelmagic SCSI MPEG w/ Zork......... 35366 Rio Soundcard.. 32031 Roland RAP 10 Audio Producer 28019 Roland SCC 1B GS Sound Card 35480 Roland SCD 10 DB Sound Canvas..... 35628 Roland SCD 15 DB Sound Canvas... 32530 Sound Blaster 16 MCD 32531 Sound Blaster 16 SCSI 2. 32532 Sound Blaster 16 SCSI 2 ASP 34807 Sound Blaster 16 Volue Edition 37027 Sound Blaster AWE32 Volue Ed. 34661 Sound Blaster Pro Volue Ed. 3.4660 Sound Blaster Volue Edition... 33751 SoundMon Wove.... .. 36587 Tropez 16 bit Sound Card..... 36580 Video Bloster R1300 16 Bit..... 30931 WaveBlaster Daughter Board.... 37031 Digital Schoolhouse INT CDROM 39271 Discovery CD 16 4X INT CDROM 30216 Discovery CD16 INT CDROM 21560 Game Blaster CD 16. 36267 legend Executive INT Multimedia ka...... 36826 legend INT Kit w/6 Titles..... 38060 MultiSpin 2v Deluxe INT CDROM........ 38062 MultiSpin 2V1 INT CDROM... 38059 MultiSpin 3XP Plus Portable..... 34923 MultiSpin AXE EXT CDROM........... 38058 MultiSpin 4XI INT CDROM......... 38065 MullSpin 4XI INT CDROM Kit.......... 39975 MultiSpin 6XI INT CDROM........ 39565 Multimedia Home 4X ............ 37028 Multimedia Office INT CD ROM...... 37026 OmniCD 4X... 31809 OmniCD Upgrade Kit Internal..... 34133 Reelmogic CD ROM K... 39272 Sound Blaster Value CD INI........ 38588 TEAC 4X INT CD ROM Kit 38586 TEAC 4X INT Multimedia Kit... 38737 Toshiba EXT QuadSpeed Kit 38710 Toshiba INT QuadSpeed Kit 31921 ACE 14.4 INT S/R Fox W/Voice...............166 38276 Cardinal MVP1 44E 14.4EXT F/M.... M .63 38277 Cardinal MVP1 441F 14.4INT F/M...... 38275 Cardinal MVP144WIN 19.2INT F/M... ..50 38278 Cardinal MVP2881 28.BINT F/M.... .139 38280 Cardinal MVP288XF 28.8EXT F/M..............161 33712 Connection 14.4 Int. Fax/Modem.... .........77 37974 Connection Pro 19.2INT 14.4Fax...............90 31908 Practical PM144HC II INT Fax/Modem .........89 31896 Practical PM144MT II EXT Fax/Modem ........ 107 35195 Practical PM288HC II INT Fax/Modem ......... 197 37837 Practical PM288MTV 34 EXT Fax/Modem 215 36266 Scout 28.8 VFCI Vfast fax/Modem..............129 32317 Suprafex Modem 14.4 EXT MACINTOSH......178 26938 SupraFax Modem 14.4 EXT V 32BIS 178 32314 SupraFox Modem 14.4 INT V 32B15 177 214 339 270 391 302 238 300 .179 402 503 402 479 485 407 534 415 179 646 188 209 256 675 464 38528 SupraFaxModem 28.8 v.34EXT..... 38527 SupraFaxModem 28.8 v.34EXT MAC.. 38529 SupraFax Modem 28,8 v.34INT 39269 TDK DF1414 PCMCIA 14.4 F/M. 39267 TDK DF2814 PCMCIA 28.8 F/M... 31236 WorldPort 14.4 PCMCIA F/M... 27993 Sportster 14.4 Ext Fax/Modem... 29176 Sportster 14.4 Ext MAC & FAX 28367 Sportster 14.4 INT Fax/Modem 37599 Sportster 14.4 PCMCIA 37599 Sportster 28.8 PCMCIA 37600 Sportster 28.8 V.34 Ext 37453 Sportster 28.8 V 34 Int 37455 Sportster 28.6 V 34 Ext MAC 40036 Sportster VI 28.8 Ext 40035 Sportster VI 28.8 Int.. 355 247 229 260 260 200 .338 148 248 SPEAKERS 800-228-7449 VIDEO CARDS 120 35543 ACS 52 Shielded Speckers.......... .86 39264 ACS 250 Subwoofer ................ .....100 28122 ACS 300.1 Speakers w/Subwoofer 200 36504 Jazz 511 Speakers.................... 36500 Jazz ) 590 Speakers......... 36501 Jarr J 702 Speakers... 36503 Jazz J 818 Speakers....... 165 30730 Koss HD 6 MPC Speakers.. 38255 Koss HD 100 Speakers 36173 Koss HD SO Speakers......... 32220 Labtec CS 900 Speakers........ 32228 Labtec CS 1000 Speakers..... 30475 Parinar 570 Speakers....... 246 30474 Pariner 622 Speakers w/ Subwoofer 33649 Powered Speaker YSTMIOH (Pair) 37714 Powered Subwoofer YSTMSWIO....... ..137 32101 Roland MA 12CP Powerd Speakers....... .215 38308 Vivid3D. 37712 Vivid3D Plus 38455 Vivid3D Pro ......... 126 37007 3DO Blaster... 190 66 206 CUSTOMER SERVICE, CALL 508-443-6125 9am 5pm EST NOW ORDER 24 HOURS ext.363 Complete on-line catalog with over 5000 software and hardware titles. Prodigy Computer Express CompuServe GO Express o Internet info@cexpress.com AOL. Computer Express www http//cexpress.com:2700 O World Computer Express 57 28570 Boco Super VGA 59 36035 Boca VL Bus SuperX IMB Accul. 106 36036 Boca VL Bus SuperX 2MB Accel.. 38290 Diamond Speedstar Gome Kit ISA 142 38599 Diamond Speedstar Gome Kit PCI. 144 38598 Diamond Speedstar Gome Kit VIB 168 38288 Diamond Stealth Game Kit PCI.. 38289 Diamond Stealth Game Ki VLB.. 177 38132 Diamond Stealth 64 DRAM 2MB PCI 38133 Diamond Stealth64 DRAM 2MB VLE 206 35691 Diamond Stealth 64 VRAM 4MB PCI 458 35692 Diamond Stealth64 VRAM 4MB VIB. 458 37157 Grophics Xpression IMB ISA 142 36226 Grophics Xpression IMB VLB. 37182 Graphics Xpression 2MB ISA. 189 38319 Graphics Xpression 2MB VIB 189 39905 Imagine 128 1280 4MB PCI 829 38286 Kelvin MPEG SVGA IMB VIB, .No surcharge is added to credit card orders..PO's, wire transfers, personal and cashiers checks 38287 Kelvin MPEG SVGA 2MB VLB 39280 Realmogic Rove IMB Win Accel... accepted. Some items are not returnable. Returns require authorization # and are subject to 15% 406 39281 Realmogic Rove 2MB Win Accel restocking fee. All items offered for sale are subject to availability. We are not responsible for typograph34615 ReelMagic lite 236 ical errors. Shipping and handling charges apply. Worldwide shipping! 39894 9FX Vision 330 IMB VB All prices are subject to change without notice. 39894 9FX Vision 330 2MB VIB COMPUTER Express 39900 9FX Vision 531 2MB VIB 39902 9FX Vision 771 2MB VIB 39904 9FX Vision 771 4MB VIB Circle Reader Service #302 376 CD DRIVES & UPGRADES 319 489 587 35857 4PLEX Quod speed Ext w/Controler .............552 35855 4PLEX Quod speed INT w/Controler.............395 39574 6PLEX Sixspeed INT w/chil..... 39265 AMC2000 Portable Multi Media................445 38051 Aztech Stellar Double MM Kit....... ....196 35734 Aztech Voyager INT Multi Media Kit ..............256 37759 Diamond S000 INT 250Ms CD Kit...........438 133 177 31 Union Ave. Sudbury, MA 01776 Info: 5084436125 Fox 5084435645 "


"Actual screen of a GCS game.\" \"This could be YOUR game! heck out the tall ceilings, crates you can Ujump on, and the lighting effects! This is not a dumb toy, this is a real system for making REAL GAMES! D ictured below is the layout editor complete with pulldown menus and icons. Building your levels is accomplished with simple drag-n-drop operations using your mouse. Make 3D action games with NO programming! Sell them for $$$ No Royalties or Fees! SALTELE KEEPERINT W use the above paint program to make your own U artwork or import GIF, PCX, or .BMP images. hen you're done with your levels, one click makes VV your game in a seperate directory on your hard drive which has your distributable game.  256 color smooth scrolling 3D graphics.  Can use our graphics, or import from any source.  Full featured artwork painting program included. . Use our .WAV sound effects, or record your own. 1. Easy to use mouse-driven level editor. Your games can have up to 39 levels. + Page manual, and demo levels included. Your finished games stand alone, no GCS reqld. \"PIE 3D Game Creation System\" Rated 81% 'Excellent' by PC GAMER magazine. 'A very nice 3D engine' Electronic Entertainment ple in the sky But don't take OUR word for it. D Examine the screen pictures, or download our demo to see for yourself Our customer satisfaction rate is so high that despite brisk sales we are currently averaging less than one tinit returned per month! So for us the no-hassle full refund policy has cost us almost nothing! Order to day, we will BOTH be happy! NOT IN STORES Game CMS SYSTOURCOLOMERS DOSTULEV Dut yourself and your friends in your game. Just use your hand scanner, and in a few minutes you can meet yourself in a virtual world! pie in the sky software $69.95 ORDER NOW! 1-800-228-7449 COMPUTER Express Developers of 3D entertainment software http://www.psky.com (WWW on Prodigy, AOL) Get a DEMO from the following sources: BBS (716)425-2962, or internet FTP itp.psky.com Or you can access the Web page above via Prodigy or AOL. We can also be reached via email al pie@transit.nysernet. Or send S6.00 for domo on 3,5 Visit Computer Express Online at http://coxpress.com:2700/ Circle Reader Service #119 "


"REVIEW The King's Kartoons Interplay Founds A Line Of Light Animated Adventures With KINGDOM: THE FAR REACHES CESAR by Allen L. Greenberg HERE IS AS MUCH CHARM TO THE of deposed kings, ACE laser disc arcade PROPER TELLING OF A STORY AS and heir to a great games. Once each film THERE IS TO THE STORY ITSELF. deal of magic. That clip concludes, it is Such is the case with KINGDOM: magic now resides your turn to make a THE FAR REACHES, BOOK ONE, the within five hidden decision. Often, these first in a series of animated adventure relics while the kingare life and death congames from Interplay. It is the familiar dom is dominated frontations so that story of an evil wizard whose power can by Torlok, an evil should you make the only be overcome by the recovery of cerwizard who is not particularly anxious to wrong decision your life will be forfeit. tain magic items which were manufacrelinquish authority. Under the guidance However, where the solution to the artured and hidden long ago for just such a and generosity of the Obi-Wan-like wizard cade games often seemed random or purpose. Now it's your job to find them Daelon, you begin the quest to recover even meaningless, KINGDOM presents a and defeat the evil rulers. those hidden objects and put Torlok out series of events which are logically conThe story unfolds as a series of brief of business. This episode of KINGDOM folnected. These are puzzles with solutions movies, the quality of which may not rival lows Lathan's recovery of the objects, but leading back to earlier parts of the story, Disney, yet is as good as anything on Satleaves Torlok's defeat for future offerthus making the game something far urday morning television. Characters ings. However, lest we be deprived of a more than a lesson in hamster-like trainsuch as the hero, a princess (with the victorious conclusion, Lathan must also ing. nightclub-worthy name of «Grace Deremove the current king from office and You have up to three lives to finish the light\"), good and evil wizards plus varirescue Princess Grace (Delight). Many of game, although there are ways of restorous the supporting casting yourself to full capacity. With certain supernatural KINGDOM: THE FAR REACHES are easily recognized important exceptions, you may take all creatures are all Price: $69.95 as part-timers from the time you desire to make your deciimbued with a System KINGDOM The Lord Of The Rings. sion. In some instances, however, an classical quality Requirements: These include a hour-glass appears which indicates that IBM compatible which, if they 386SX or better, friendly and helpful you have only a few seconds to make the would not exVGA graphics race of wood-elves, right move. actly impress CD-ROM mouse; mischievous yet coopFor the most part, the story moves J.R.R. Tolkien, supports Sound erative fairies, water along at an undemanding pace. Yet, like Blaster and Pro might at least Audio-Spectrum nymphs, a mountaina traffic-free road trip which suddenly make him sound cards. dwelling wizard-lord, comes to an abrupt halt at a clogged insmile. The voic Protection: None and an amicable tersection, the story's endgame suddenly es for these Developer: Virtual Image Productions huntsman in the imposes an almost impossible time-rePublisher: Interplay Productions character are Irvine, CA woods. There are also striction on the last few tasks. Unfortuprovided by ac (800) 969-GAME a group of frightened nately, it leaves one with the impression tors who have villagers and an evil that the designers were suddenly desperclearly done this type work before, and spirit known only as «The Plague Magiate to increase the game's difficulty by they play their roles to the hilt. The backcian\" whose purpose in (so-called) life is several notches at the last moment. ground music, a combination of renaisto follow Lathan and bring about his The movies are a delight to watch, and sance and romantic, also fits in perfectly death. the colorful animation is quite smooth, with the story's action and events. The presentation of the mini-movies is even when viewed on a 33Mhz processor. You are Lathan, descendant of a race similar to the DRAGON'S LAIR and SPACE The text is spoken clearly and refuses to AUGUST 1995. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 95 "


"have seen it before. For traveling purposes, one icon switches the action scene to a map of available destinations, the names of which appear as you pass the cursor over each one. Travel to distant areas of the kingdom is also magically possible, but only when you are well-rested and have not been damaged. Along the bottom of the screen is your A PLAGUE ON THEE! The \"Plague Magician\" folavailable inventory. The program will al\"I DIDN'T DO IT!\" Well, maybe you did. You can't lows Lathan, ready and able to shorten his life. low you to use only certain of your items expect the guards to take kindly to attempted in a particular situation, while the others assasination, can you? be buried under the program's abundant remain hidden. These are embedded in a sound-track. Unfortunately, there is no tree branch which, like instant fruit, apbarrier there, making someone happy text display, and the hearing-impaired pear when their use should at least be someplace else, the charm of these charwill therefore be unable to play the game. considered. An open hint, to be sure, but acters, their setting and their music, easiThe program allows only one game to be not always an unwelcome one. ly makes up for the generic quality of saved in progress at a time and it is a good KINGDOM may be played at either a betheir adventure. idea to save after each success. Unfortuginner or an advanced level, and the two THE EDITORS SPEAK nately, this makes trial-and-error a very versions are sufficiently different so that KINGDOM awkward means of solving each puzzle. completion of the former should make The program features a highly intumost players anxious to try the latter. RATING itive, mouse-guided interface. The majorThe novice version simply omits several PROS Lush sound and graphics, ity of the screen is taken up by the action tasks, and provides the hero with a less charming characterizations. scene, with a small group of icons along deadly path. Although much of the game CONS Generic story and a sudden the side. You may replay the previous requires that you run simple crrands, crush of events at endgame. movie if you wish, or cut it short if you finding one item here in order to get by a Plant Trees for America TREES around your home can increase its value up to 15% of more, The trees yon plant removeCO2 from the air.product orygon and give songhilds a home Trees provide many other benefit 10 Free Trees A WINDBREAK com lower heatma bills 10-20% NUT TREES can be incorponatal mto windbreaks or serve as shade thees. 1 BACKYAPP ORCHARD Re: you ghow you own pruut. NASALALTERNA Many FLOWERING TREES also product bood har wildlibe Ten Colorado blue spruces, or I other conifers selected to grow in your area, will be given to each person who joins The National Arbor Day Foundation. Your trees will be shipped postpaid at the right time for planting in your area, February through May in the spring or October through mid December in the fall. The six to twelve inch trees are guaranteed to grow, or they will be replaced free. To become a member and to receive your free trees, send a $10 membership contribution to Ten Blue Spruces, National Arbor Day Foundation, 100 Arbor Avenue, Nebraska City, NE 68410. Join today, and plant your Trees for America! SHADE TREES plauded exst and westo yowl home can cut coolma cost 15-55% STREET TREES shade the concretand help cool the entire neighborhood. A The National Arbor Day Foundation "


"Announcing Columbia House CD-ROM Direct. Everything from games to reference to «real-world» entertainment. Great New Selec Selection ections To Choose from! Take 2 CD-ROMs for $995each. ? Plus 1 more at great savings! (See details below.) 7th Guest King's Quest VII: Interact. Game 5004700 The Princeless Bride DOS 386/33 mb Arcade-Style 5024401 SKYQU:) MACILCI 4mb WIN3852 amb MAC LCITI Mac Pak: Beginning System 7 & 7.5, Intro to Claris Works, and Audio Guide to Quicken Computer Tutor. 5032404 COM MACLc4mb The Bible Reference 5031703 WIN 3864mb Productivity Pak: Tutorial for Windows 3.1, Works 3.0, and Quicken Computer Tutor. 5032206 4mbM Leonardo Historical Ret 5020003 WIN 386 amb Astronomica Astronomy 5033600 WIN 4864mbM MAC LCIM 4 mb WIN 386/33 4mb MAC cu 4mb Front Page Sports Football 95 Sports Game 5024708 DOS 386 4mb M Instant Internet Access Internet Guide 5031000 WIN 3864mbM   KINDERGARTEN Myst Interact. Game 5004304 WIN 386/33h Jammit: PC Propad Included Sports Game5034301 MAC LCI 4mb Vitsie Visits the Ocean Children's Ed. 5033204 WIN 486 amb M WIN 386:254mbMIK MAC MACM 4mbM How To Select CD-ROMs For Your System. WIN386 JK SYSTEM CPU RAM PERIPH. The Random House Kid's Encyclopedia Children's Ed. '5027909 MAC LCI 4mb WIN 486 4mb AAA Trip Planner Travel 5011606 WIN 3864mb MP Wings Over Europe Historical 5029301 WIN 4864mbM MAC LC 5mb Compton's Encyclopedia of American History Children's Ed. 5033006 WIN 4864mb MP Police Quest: Open Season Advent. Game 5002803 DOS 386 4mbM Me and My World Picture Dictionary Children's Ed. 5029509 WIN 486 4mb MH MAC LCT amb Microsoft Bookshelf Gen. Reference 5009402 Jumpstart Kindergarten Children's Ed. 5027701 DOS 386mb M_ The Pagemaster Advent. Game 5027008 WINI-85 imb WIN 486 4mb Metaltech Earth Siege Arcade-Style 5029202 DOS 386/334mb MTV Me, Myself and I Children's Ed. 5032800 WIN 396/25 Amb MH MAC LC14mb1 Lode Runner Arcade-Style 5030002 WIN 486 Amb ML MAC LCI Cool Crafts Children's Ed. 5025309 WIN 386/25 ... 4mbM MAC LCI Safari Animal Rel. 5025507 WIN 486 4mb SYSTEM Button indicates the available operating environment(s) for a given selection: DOS (for PC). Windows (for PC). Macintosh CPU Button indicates the minimum processor required. If a title is available in PC and Macintosh formats, the top half of this button represents PC system requirements and the bottom half represents Macintosh system requiremenis. Note: Ser.=Series, Class.Classic, Pent=Pentium. For Mac LC series includes LC 475, Performa 475, Quadra, Centris, Powerbook 180C, IIFX or better. RAM Button indicates the minimum amount of RAM required PERIPHERALS Button indicates required peripherals. M=mouse. Jjoystick, K=keyboard, P=printer Dr. Ruth's Encyclopedia of Sex Home/Personal 5027602 WIN. 486. Amb MH Shanghai Great Moments Strategy Game 5031802 WIN 486/338mb M Doom 11 Arcade-Style 5021506 Compton's Interactive Encyclopedia DOS 36/334mbMK MACILCI 4mb The Complete Bartenders Guide Gen. Interest 5034103 WIN 386 mb MAC Class Front Page Sports Baseball Sports Game 5007406 DOS 3864mb STK COLUMBW For all titles, the minimum system requirements recommended (unless otherwise indicated) are: Hardware: SVGA monitor (256 colors), sound card, 40MB hard drive, double speed CD-ROM drive. Operating System DOS 5.0. Windows 3.1, Macintosh System 7.0. Compton's Encyclopedia '95 Reference 5009006 An Interactive Journey with Sharks Animal Ref. 5023403 HOUSE WIN3864mb WIN 386 amb CD-ROM DIRECT MAC LCII A whole new way to get the most exciting CD-ROM games, reference, edutainment and more all at great prices! Just write in the numbers of the 2 CD-ROMs you want for $9.95 each plus shipping and handling. In exchange, you agree to buy 4 more CD-ROMs in the next 2 years, at our regular prices (currently as low as $39.95, plus shipping and handling) and you may cancel membership at any time after doing so. What's more, you can get one more CD-ROM right now for the low price of $19.95 and have less to buy later (see com plete details in coupon). Free CD-ROM magazine sent approximately every 4-6 weeks (up to 13 times a year) reviewing our Featured Selection plus scores of alternate choices, including many lower priced CD-ROMs. And you may also receive Special Selection mailings up to four times a year. (That's up to 17 buying opportu. nities a year!) Buy only what you want! If you want the Featured Selection, do nothing it will be sent automatically. If you'd prefer an alternative selection, or none at all, just mail the response card always provided by the date specified. You'll always have 14 days to decide; if not, you may return the selection at our expense. Money-Saving Bonus Plan. If you continue your membership after fulfilling your obligation, you'll be eligible for our generous bonus plan. It enables you to enjoy great savings on the CD-ROMs you want for as long as you decide to remain a member! 10-Day Risk-Free Trial. We'll send details of how Columbia House CD-ROM Direct works along with your introductory package. If you're not satisfied, return everything within 10 days at our expense for a full refund and no further obligation Act now. membership in CD-ROM Direct may be limited For faster service. use your credit card and call us toll-free 24 hours a day. . ..IT... DOMI : Dept. ROD, 3109 Canterbury Court. O d la rouse LD-NUM Direct Bloomington, IN 47404-1498 Yes, please enroll me under the terms outlined in this advertisement. As a member, I need buy just 4 more CD-ROMs at your regular prices within the next 2 years Send my CD-ROM selections for: (check one only) PC (1) Macintosh (3) Write in the selection #'s below Send me these 2 CD-ROMs for just $9.95 each plus $1.75 each shipping/handling (total $23.40) Buy your first selection now and have less to buy later! Also send my first selection for $19.95 plus $1.75 shipping/ handling which I'm adding to my $23.40 payment (total $45 10). I then need buy only 3 more (instead of 4) in 2 years Please check how paying: My check is enclosed. (BYM/BYQ) L Charge my introductory CD-ROMs and future CD-ROM Direct purchases to: (BYN/BYR) MasterCard Diners Club AMEX VISA Discover Account Number Exp. Dato Signature My main CD-ROM Interest is: (check one) (Note: You are always free to choose from any category) Entertainment Education Edutainment Productivity (includes children's titles) Name Phone ) Address_ Apt. 1-800-792-1000 City State Zip Important! Did you remember to choose PC or Mac? Will your selections run on your system? Note: Columbia House reserves the right to request additional information, to limit membership or reject any application, or to cancel any membership. Offer limited to residents of the contiguous United States. Residents of Alaska, Hawaii, Puerto Rico, U.S. territories. APO and FPO addresses please wnte for separate offer. Applicable sales tax added to all orders. 180 1995, The Columbia House Company Dept. ROD "


"REVIEW P.C. Hovercraft SLIPSTREAM 5000 Turbo-Boosts To The Finish by Paul C. Schuytema HIS MAY SOUND STRANGE, BUT FOR SLIPSTREAM 5000 lets you join the AIN'T THAT CANYON GRAND YEARS I HAVE HAD THIS INCREDIBLE Slipstream world circuit, which in the Once the countdown starts, you're off LONGING TO PLAY A GREAT SCIENCE future has replaced Formula One racon the high-speed joystick thrashing of fiction hovercraft racing simulaing. A slipstream racer is a high-speed your life as you attempt to control your tor. Odd, I know, but I've been maximum speed of over 400 mph) ship at 350+ mph through the environknown to lock on to wacky concepts now hovercraft that relies on anti-gravity for ment of your choosing, be it canyon, and again—I can't help it. The thought lift and a turbocharged power plant for pyramid or jungle. SLIPSTREAM 5000 has of hovering alone makes me drool, not to forward thrust. really hit upon an amazing adrenaline mention high speed racing while hoverThe game has a lighthearted comicpumping balance. You'll need full 120% ing. Last year, I jumped at the opportubook tone to it, from the renderings of concentration and the hand of a surnity to review CYBERRACE, CyberDreams' the pilots and their silly names (like geon if you want to keep your slipvoxel-graphics racing sim, hoping that it Ted \"Malibu\" Beech, surfer dude, or streamer under control. I quickly was my dream game. It wasn't even close. Rysho, the Tokyo bike gang leader) to discovered that if I took my eyes off the But back in Januthe off-the-cuff screen for even an instant (like to switch ary, I caught a SLIPSTREAM 5000 television comweapons), I found myself getting up glimpse of SlipPrice: $59.99 mentary during close and personal with Pleistocene sedSTREAM 5000. At that System the championshipimentary rock. point it was still in Requirements: races. But the huThe graphics, which feature masterfuldevelopment, but its IBM compatible mor really doesn't ly rendered texture maps, provide an 486-33 (Pentium potential grabbed add much to the ample sense of reality on almost every recommended), 4 me. I knew then and MB of RAM (8 game, which is course. One case where things don't work there that, when it MB recommend ultimately about out so well, though, is the Amazon. Here was finished, it ed), 8 MB hard action. the jungle textures are so mottled that drive space, CD would be mine. Ten courses vie drivers will have a hard time picking up ROM; supports Well, SLIPSTREAM AdLib, Roland, Sound Blaster and comfor your hoverthe visual cues they'll need to successfully 5000 is out now, and patible sound cards. craft's attention in navigate the course. I've logged hun# of Players: 1-8 (modem and network) the single race Racing is the heart and soul of SLIPProtection: None dreds of miles in my mode, but initially, STREAM 5000, and Gremlin has done an Developer: Software Refinery/Gremlin hovercraft. Has my Interactive you'll only be able excellent job creating a nicely balanced thirst for hovering Publisher: U.S. Gold to select from the play environment. Generally, you lly your speed been San Francisco, CA Grand Canyon ship llat out, decelerating only in the (415) 693-0297 quenched? and Chicago tightest of corners. The sensation of SLIPSTREAM 5000, courses. Perform speed is incredible, and the banking effrom Software Refinery, part of Gremlin sufficiently well (that is, place in the top fects look great. So what if the designers Interactive and published by U.S. Gold three), and you'll unlock more tracks took a few liberties with the flight (whew!), is one good high speed, blastersAlthough you're able to choose your physics-George Lucas, who modeled out-the-yazoo hovercraft racing simulapersona and his or her slipstream racer, the flight of the X-Wing after a WWII tor. Make no mistake-this is a gorgeous each hovercraft performs identically, at fighter rather than a real gravity-defying game, capturing high speed races in varileast until you start adding on extra goodspacecraft, did the same thing. The botous locales around the globe. It's only ies later in the championship season. tom line is entertainment, and when you drawback is a lack of depth. mix in the turbo boosters and the in5000 SLIDESH 98 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. AUGUST 1995 "


"SEL UPOS ENGINE DAMAGE WEAPON: RICUM OTURBO CONTROL flight combat, you've got the foundation tained enough damage that your top place they finish in. At the end of ten for a hell of a game on your hands. speed isn't what it should be, or your joyraces, the driver with the most points wins stick will appear to be mired in rice pudthe spifly gold Slipstream 5000 trophy. THE 400 MPH POWER-UP ding. As a drawback, on nearly every In addition to racing for the champiThe presence of power-ups throughout course the magic tunnel of regeneration onship, you're also racing for dollars. Cash a race is one of the best design aspects of will slow you SLIPSTREAM 5000. Scattered about the down, maybe race course, they come in several flavors: even causing turbo recharger, booster (a free and inyou to drop stant acceleration boost), engine/control back a few repairs, cash (only in the championship places. races), or my favorite little nasty, the The compeblood red \"reverse control\" power-up tition, I've got which will reverse your controls for a few to admit, is seconds, sending you crashing into a wall pretty still, and at exceptional velocities. unlike some SLIPSTREAM 5000 also handles combat other \"real nicely-it really provides an extra dimenworld\" racing BLASTER sion of gameplay. The blaster, basically a sims (where low-power laser, is the default weapon, you feel that and although you can upgrade to a better you never RUSH HOUR Sliding around at 390 mph blasting foes in your path will make travweapon, it can carry you all the way to a have a chance el-weary commuters smile. championship, provided you move like to make up Speed Racer. Hitting your opponents any ground), with blasters damages them only slightly, you can really cook on these courses. But plays an important role during the chambut it does slow them down a bit. One of beware: no matter how slick you are, you pionship season; each $50 power-up my favorite tactics is to come up behind a almost always have some anti-grav hotgrabbed during a race and each contest competitor, take an inside line through a shot dogging your tail. won puts extra money in your pocket, and Of course, ultimately into your car. Unfortunately, ENS NO the usual cockthe payouts are pretty paltry, even for a pit and chase first place finish. Thankfully, you don't views monitor need that many add-ons to win races—you the action, but just need to drive like a bat out of hell and there is also a have a good turbocharger. TV view that Racing the circuit is a ton of fun, and switches camera I've got to say that my wrist often felt like a angles on the string of wet spaghetti after driving more fly, as well as a than two races in one sitting. But I must fully customizconfess that I was disappointed with the able exterior fanfare I received when I captured the ITMARO view. Obviously, coveted trophy of champions: there wasn't the latter two any. After driving that hard, that well, I SLIDIN' ALONG IN MY HOVERMOBILE SLIPSTREAM races take place in a variety of views are best expected something a little better than locales, including the Grand Canyon. reserved for renothing; I sure think I earned it. plays. I had mixed feelings GET YOUR HOVERCRAFTS big turn, lay in half a dozen shots on his about SLIPSTREAM's replay feature: I could SLIPSTREAM 5000 also offers multiplayor her hull, and then blast past. For those replay a race in its entirety, but couldn't er play in two formats. The first, whereby hell-bent on destruction, it is possible to fast forward through it to see my brilliant two racers compete on a split screen on completely annihilate your opponents, finish. And there was no way for me to the same machine, is fun once or twice, but you'll need to purchase some of the save my best races. but the screen is just too small and the more exotic weapons to do this. graphics too slow. Each course has a \"pit row\" or tunnel RACING FOR THE GOLD Network play is a another story. The that provides access to an energy field Just like our modern-day racing chamhead-to-head racing is great; although which fully repairs your racer. This is impionships, each racer earns points during the action doesn't move as fast, racing portant because at times you'll have susthe Slipstream season depending on what against your friends is a lot less preENGINE DAMAGE WEAPON > BLASTER CONTROL DAMAGE AUGUST 1995. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 99 "


"dictable and consequently more enjoythe fantastic feel of whipping through a to seeing. As one CGW editor told me, able. I would recommend at least a 486canyon at 400 miles per hour, and the \"After four or five hours, I had sucked 66 if you want to get four players racing graphics are well done indeed. It capthe marrow out of it.\" For me, the time simultaneously. Move up to Pentiums tures the feel of \"near future anti-grav was considerably longer, but in the long and you'll be able to invite more friends. hovercraft racing\" to a \"T.\" run I had the same reaction. Sure, SLIPBut it is not without its flaws. I would STREAM 5000 is a barrel o' fun, but for TO THE MARROW like to be able to qualify for races. I'd how many hours? Do gamers really OF THE BEAST like a little more uniqueness in the perwant to drop their hard-earned money All in all, SLIPSTREAM 5000 is a riot to formance of the various racers, and the on a game that they'll master in a week, play. This action racer really captures ability to tweak them a bit more. And even if it is a week of high-speed fun? I there's the already guess that just depends on how badly mentioned chamyou've been yearning for a good 3D scipionship reward, fi hovercraft simulator. You already or lack thereof. I know my answer. $ know that these are minor quibbles, THE EDITORS SPEAK but they'd still make the game SLIPSTREAM 5000 SUPER SEEKER better. But I don't think PROS The races are exciting and viBOMBER that's the heart of CANCEL sually breathtaking, communicating a the matter. I'm great sense of speed. Loads of fun. concerned that this CONS There's not much depth to game just won't WEAPONS 'R US Depending on your race performance, you'll have the the whole package, and there are few opportunity to upgrade your ship with turbo boosters, targetting systems provide as deep a rewards for racing well. and 11 different weapons. gaming experience as gamers are used DISRUPTER FRAG SUPER FRAG SEEKER RELER SCRAMBLER HYPER MEURO RATING 50EER MINI MINIES Games Too Expensive? NOT ANYMORE! Introducing Triad Wargame System Partial Used CD ROM Listing. TWS Lite $49.00 (no scripting) +S&H est 7th Guest.. Aces of the Deep Aegis. Alone in the Dark 3 ... Armoured Fist......... Atari 2600 Action Pack...... Bloodnet ... Brett Hull Hockey 95........ Corridor 7....... Cyberia Cyclones.......... Dark Sun 2. Day of the Tentacle ....... Eight Ball Deluxe......... Flash Traffic.............. Fortress of Dr Radiaki.... Freakshow... Frontpage Football Pro Gabriel Knight Iron Helix Jack Nicklaus Tour ..... ...... Jutland ......... Legend of Kyrandia 3.............$.25 Loderunner. 25 Michael Jordan In Flight Nascar Racing ........ Outpost............ Rebel Assult...... Royal Flush Pinball...... Seawoll ................. Secret Weapons Luftwaffe Star Control Collection .... Stellar 7. Syndicate Plus The Horde ... Trump Castle 2............. Unnecessary Roughness 95.. Wheel of Fortune.... Wings of Glory ........................ World Hockey 95.... X-Wing (Disk). Zephyr ........ Zork Anthology........... Woll ......... . TWS is the wargame system you have been waiting for! You have control of the 3 BR battlefield and individual unit behavior using dozens of programmable parameters. Features inos  Unit scripting language allows modification of individual aspects of unit behavior while using default behavior for other forces Design your own units or construct forces and scenarios from units provided with the system. Combine multiple unit types, scenarios and historical periods. Up to 32 forces or \"sides\" . Objectives, supply units, intelligence options available. User defined victory conditions. Define your own unit markers  Add sounds to individual weapon attacks. Fanfares and graphics identify forces. Dozens of info functions allow you to \"sce\" the battlefield from a unit's perspective in decision making scripts  Module editor, maps, Strategy/Tactics module available  Example WWII tank battle included Use the Combined Triad Campaign System/TWS construction set to create individual characters and soldiers $128+S&H System Requirements IBM/Comp with Window 3.1 Minimum 5 megs hard drive space 4 megs of RAM. VISA MASTER CARD ORDERS (800) 784-1420 . For info (904) 494-3165 OR SEND CHECK/MONEY ORDER FOR $79.00 + $5.00 S & HTO Nawu Triad Institute PO Box 11246 Pensacola, FL 32524-1246 Circle Reader Service #76 Orders Bare 1-800-638-1123 All other calls: Bones 304-562-1609 We have thousands of titles! Software Call for free used software listing. Ask for latest ADULT CD listing. 3060 East Rt 60 Hurricane, WV 25526 Circle Reader Service #45 100 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. AUGUST 1995 "


"The best just got better. Bloodier. Tougher. Deadlier. THE ULTIMATE THE COMPLETE ORIGINAL MEGAHIT PLUS ALL-NEW EPISODE IV: THY FLESH CONSUMED On CD-ROM and 3.5 Disks for IBM PC & Compatibles Plus: FIVE FREE HOURS LOFTWARE Gaming Network! of DOOM ON DWANGO's Multiplayer You thought you'd survived DOOM the greatest computer action game of all time. Wrong. You still have to face THE ULTIMATE DOOM. All three original episodes plus a fourth that's so deadly, it will grind you up and spit you out! Now at a software store near you. 101 BA Distributed by GT Interactive Software. This program contains copyrighted material from DOOM DOOM 01003 software. Alt er HEUTIMATE DOOM0199911d Software. Alho perved. DOOM, the DOOM loro, The DOOM likeness and id are trademarks of id softwarc. GT a trademark of Grerard goftware CopOWANGO draugarduraderoniko interactive Visual Systems Corp. "


"000 LP DB5 non "


"ARE HERE... -Garden. Da Vinci studio 06-01-18h 1500 AD 2000 AD 2500 AD ou emerge again into the sights and sounds of another time. Somewhere in the shadows of seven incredible worlds of the past and future hides the secret of a conspirator bent on framing you, agents of the Temporal Security Agency, for the most unforgivable of crimes altering history. Prepare for an adventure so real you'll forget you're playing a game. Prepare to be... THE JOURNEYMUL PROJECTE BURIED IN TIMG HE EPIC TIME TRAVEL ADUENTURE Breathtaking full-motion 3D animation. A richly-detailed story An incredible soundtrack. Seamlessly-integrated live-action video Circle Reader Service W363 What Available as a 3 CD-ROM set for Mac & PG SANCTUARY UDIOS For more information call 1-800-943-3664 WOODS  Presto studios, Inc. All rights reserved. The Journeyman Project is a registered trademark and Buried In Time is a trademark of Presto Studios, Inc. Sanctuary Woods is a registered trademark and the Sanctuary Woods tree logo is a trademark of Sanctuary Woods Multimedia. "


"REVIEW First Encounters Of The Worst Kind Game Tek Tries To Create A Universe, But Ends Up With A Fistful Of Bugs by Jason Kapalka SIT MY IMAGINATION OR DO COMPUTER THE GALAXY IS YOURS der to get better ships, more money and GAMES APPEAR TO BE GETTING SHORTER FIRST ENCOUNTERS, like its predecesmore respect. Cut-throat bounty hunter AND SMALLER? THE SPRAWLING, sors, is an open-ended game of space or honest trader-it doesn't matter. Both hundred-hour role-playing epics of trading, exploration and combat set in an approaches have their repercussions, and yore have given way to \"interactive environment almost too vast to comprethankfully the game doesn't force you movies\" that exhaust their potential in a hend: the Milky Way galaxy, modeled into any particular role. few evenings. Games with the scope of down to the individual buildings, bridges. The galaxy's political balance, defined CIVILIZATION and SimCrry have been sucrivers and mountains on each planet orby three blandly-titled galactic superpowceeded by exercises in micro-managebiting each sun in each of several thouers (Empire, Federation, Alliance) is now ment like COLONIZATION and SIM TOWER. sand star systems. As in ELITE and in constant flux. Five separate newspaFRONTIER, there is no way to \"win\" per se. pers now give you the skinny on the latest gue, has passed. Sure, there are some goals, but they're skirmishes and intrigues, along with variBut the free-form epic has a certain loose, ambiguous ones any space aceous human interest stories, classified ads grandiose charm, would want: a and scientific tidbits. Dozens of opportudoesn't it? The FIRST ENCOUNTERS huge fortune, a nities for profit are contained between idea is appealing: a Price: No SRP really big ship the lines of these stories. If a plague completely immer System (usually with a rebreaks out in the Soholia system, for exsive artificial world Requirements: IBM ally big gun), a ample, traders will find they can charge where you're compatible 486/33 combat rating of the Soholians exorbitant prices for shipMHz or better forced into no par (486/50 MHz with \"Elite,\" higher ments of medicine. When civil war enticular role or situ Local Bus recommilitary rank with gulls a contested system, the ation, a world mended), 5 MB in the Federation mercenary-minded can undertake misRAM, 10 MB free where you forge disk space, CDand the Empire, sions to assassinate rebel leaders or, failyour own crises, triROM; supports Advanced Gravis, Sound or just space drifting that, get contracts on pilots who umphs and fail Blaster and 100% compatible sound ing. FIRST ENsuccessfully perform such hits. ures. One where cards. COUNTERS does As a result, FIRST ENCOUNTERS' universe Protection: None you can play hero Developer: Frontier Developments add a plot of sorts, feels more alive than either of the previor villain or both as Publisher: Gametek involving the alien ous games: events march on independent you see fit, shaping (800) 426-3835 Thargoids from of your own agenda, but your actions alter and being shaped the first game, but the course of those events. But while this by a constantly changing milieu? Only a it's relatively unobtrusive and you're free is the deepest change in the engine, it's few products have even dared to stab at to ignore it if you like. not the most obvious. Most players will this awesome ideal: Sid Meier's PIRATES immediately notice the improved texturewas one, CGW Hall-of-Famer STARFLIGHT ROCKET MAN mapped polygon graphics. While not on another. And then there are the most You start the game with a small onepar with high-end sims, the graphics are ambitious attempts of all, David Braben's man fighter and via trading, smuggling, quite spifly and incredibly detailed. And ELITE, its sequel FRONTIER, and now the bounty hunting, piracy, assassinations, you have the freedom to check out any third installment in the series, FIRST mining, courier and military duty, try to planet, base, ship or star from any angle ENCOUNTERS. upgrade your ship and reputation in oror distance. Those who liked the idea of 104 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. AUGUST 1995 "


"Wirceave) DARE TO ENTER. THE SPELL IS CAST This HALLOWEEN! Witchaven Poster Offer! For Details Visit Capstone's Web Site on the Internet SVGA graphics and a 3D-rendered cinematic introduction for a heart-pounding experience. Powerful \"Build\" Engine exclusively licensed from 3D Realms gives players freedom of movement, flight and control like no other first person game. Network play for up to 16 and Head-to-Head Modem play. Fight with hand-to-hand Gothic weapons, spells and props in this huge multi-layered playing field. IBM CD-ROM Capstone er. PINNACL ENTERTAINMENT SOFTWARE Visit Capstone Online: America Online (Keyword: Capstone, Software Creations BBS (508)365-9352: CompuServe: Game Pub A+ Forum; Web Page: http://www.gate.net/-intracor/ To Order Call: (305) 373-7700(800) INTRACO  BBS (305) 374-6872 Software  1995 IntraCorp, Inc. All rights reserved. Artwork  1994 Ken Kelly 80 engine licensed from 3D REALMS ENTERTAINMENT. Witonen, Capstone and The Pinnacle of Entertainment Software trademarks oraCorp, Inc. OTC Reader Service #325 INTRACORP "


"uh Pitypowa Fort Richards Shipyard Microsoft's SPACE SIMULATOR but thought but it works. Bobbing and dodgit could have used a little more Star Wars ing through a forest of laser in it will love FIRST ENCOUNTERS' astrolances, trying to get a bead on an nomically accurate universe and realistic elusive pirate fighter while jamspace-flight model. Even gamers like myming or outrunning missiles, is as self, who'd rather just turn on the autopitense and exciting as any flight lot and snooze till they reach the next combat game on the market. port, will be awed by some of the \"naturZeenews al\" spectacles. I was blown away when I THE ATMOSPHERE witnessed a beautiful daybreak over the THICKENS icy blue surface of Turner's World framed On paper, First ENCOUNTERS RIDE 'EM, SPACE COWBOY Although the flight controls by a baleful ringed gas giant hanging in looks like it has achieved the Holy have been made a little easier, novices will still find FIRST the sky beyond. Grail of near-infinite replayability. ENCOUNTERS' space combat a little perplexing. On paper, this game looks like a sure-shot. However, far from split-second timing and cunning pay less being the last game you'll ever than moving a hold full of tomatoes to need to buy, it's almost the last the star next door. Mining, piracy and game you'll ever want to. How, you bounty hunting, theoretically all possible ask, could the publisher take careers, are particularly difficult and unsomething that looks so goodremunerative. Practically every star syslike a classic in the making—and tem is filled with pirates, so that the screw it up so badly? player has to blast past more than half a The recipe is simple. For dozen space rogues on each and every BI-SU starters, the designers hired eight visit. And the climactic Thargoid misPLANETFALL Entering planetary orbit without your autopiprogrammers, seven writers, five sions, the \"story\" at the heart of the lot is a risky proposition. artists, two dozen video-clip actors game, are thoroughly tedious. and no play-testers. For the fact ridic Guggested Respuntes that the North American release OH HEAVENS! Hang up of First ENCOUNTERS is playable It really is a crying shame. Peeking out at all we have a legion of unpaid from under all these grotesqueries is the beta-testers to thank: the entire game Braben and Co. were aiming for, game-playing population of the and it's a gem-perhaps the closest anyUK, who were sucker-punched by one has yet come to that mythical, epic an initial release version so brutaldream of an entire simulated universe. It's ly, unplayably buggy that doing still possible First ENCOUNTERS could something as simple as looking at achieve that dream, but it'll take a mighty 02-25 1525 i na99 at 12 Mars could crash your computer, fix-up effort from Gametek, who so far has corrupt your save files, and dial been more interested in denying and raTRES CHIC! A space cop displays the elegant clothing up two hundred dollars worth of tionalizing these errors than in repairing styles of the 33rd Century. bills to a phone-sex line in the them. In its present state, this game is not Dominican Republic. completely unplayable, but it is definitely Although a few new toys make navigaEven with the improved\" version ununfinishable and unenjoyable. If ever you tion and piloting easier, if you've never leashed on the US, there are so many were to heed the advice, «Wait for the played FRONTIER or ELITE the learning bugs, glitches and twitches of so many flapatch,\" do it with this half-cooked game. curve is a pretty steep hill. Not the sheer vors that it's frankly impossible to count cliff of, say, FALCON 3.0, but you still them all. Suffice it to say that I discovered THE EDITORS SPEAK wouldn't want to park your car on it. a new bug practically every time I played. FIRST ENCOUNTER There are now nearly 50 ships you can fly Next, some cryptic and unbelievably bad in or light against, each with significantly design decisions were made. Decisions so RATING RATING ** * different flight characteristics. Furtherbad, in fact, that the quote, \"it's not a bug more, the physics of space combat have it's a feature,\" is particularly applicable. PROS Almost the greatest openbeen fudged slightly in favor of playabili And finally, the designers seriously ended space trading/exploration/ ty; you'll no longer go flailing past your threw the game balance out of whack. combat game ever. Almost. opponent at three-quarters the speed of Boring, relatively safe trade routes are CONS The biggest complement of light. It's still quirky and it feels nothing the most profitable in the game; tough bugs, glitches, twitches, and design at all like most other space-combat sims, assassination jobs that require patience, oversights since OUTPOST. 0 9128423 106 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. AUGUST 1995 "


"A Great Tale has Just Begun... Available on CHROME For IBM PC CELTIC GALES BALORE EVILEGES w PANGAUS EviLEJE T ong ago, in the days when Ireland was far removed from the mainland civilizations of Europe, the early Celtic tribes were locked in a bitter war with the Other World. The tribes of Eire were joined as one people, the Tuatha de Dannan. Their Other World enemies, who lurked off the islands shores were known as the Fomors, their powerful leader, Balor of the Evil Eye. When you enter Celtic Tales, you enter the turbulent struggle to save the tribes of Eire from Balor's evil. Tired and broken, your people have little left to give to the struggle. Regarded as an intruder, your task is to rebuild the land, strengthen the tribes and become High Ruler of Eire. Then with your trusting champions, you must seek out the magical Runes, some of which are locked in Balor's grasp. Once in your possession, the Runes will empower your Bards and Druids with the magic needed to force the Fomor's back to the Other World! BATTLE ENEMIES OF THE OTHER WORLD TO BECOME MIGE RULER Play 1 of 8 mythical characters from the tales, including the war goddess Medb and Lugh the god of Light Experiment with Rune magic, procure new Runes & cxpand your magical powers A Recruit Bards, Druids and Warriors to assist you in your quest N Direct your champions to develop the provinces you control Align the tribes to your direction in a quest to become High Ruler Take part in Tribal Council to learn of Balor's movements as well as the status of your champions and tribes Carry out cattle raids on neighboring provinces and use them as barter for valuable items MYSTICAL ARMOR PROTECTS YOU FROM N With its RPG style game play, you must collect the Runes BALOR'S EVIL before battling Balor All commands are animated throughout your turn N 1-4 players with two exciting scenarios Available for IBM PC. KOEI games are available in retail outlets nationwide! If you can't find the KOEI product you are looking for, call us at 415/348-0500 (9AM to 5PM PST). KOEI Corporation, 1350 Bayshore Hwy, Ste. 540, Burlingame, CA 94010 Online Support offered on Celtic Tales: Balor of the Evil Eyn is a trademark of Koel Corporation, IBM is a trademark of International Business Machines Corporation. Composer: CO VIDPUB. Sect. 4 Celic Tales: Balor of the Evil Eye has not yet been rated by the ESAB COXSULT THE TRIBAL COUNCIL ON WAR SITUATEGY KOEI PG Compatible "


"REVIEW Tough As Timex Spectrum HoloByte's CLOCKWERX Dishes Out A Lickin' And Keeps On Tickin' by Arinn Dembo CA WEEK ROUTE ALWAYS APPRECIATE A LITTLE COSMIC \"goal dot,\" a shining beacon of safety on IRONY. SURELY WE ALL REMEMBER the other side of the playing field. Time ALEXEY PAJITNOV-ONE OF THE is of essence; if the timer runs out, you'll industry's few celebrity designers, a self-destruct and will have to start over at man whose name holds rank with the beginning of the level. Furthermore, that of the nefarious Rubik. It was Pajitif you do make it in time you'll get extra nov who, in the mid-80's, unleashed points based on the number of seconds TETRIS on the unsuspecting world. In an lelt. On the other hand, you'll be temptage of ergonomics and maximum proed to dawdle a bit and pick up the \"bonus ductivity, TETRIS was one of the most popdots» which are scattered in a variety of DON'T MOCK THE CLOCK CLOCKwerx gets frenetic ular and addictive time-wasters ever homicidal locations around the board. fast, but unlike games like Tetris, it doesn't get devised. People sat goggle-eyed in front There are, of course, some hazards to fast frenetically. of the screen and navigation: spikes, CLOCKWERX played it for hours at bombs and doors that you can set a limit, any interval from 5 to a time until their Price: $26.95 can suddenly crush 55 minutes, to the duration of the game. corneas turned to 3.5\" floppy and you; oil globs which, At the end of the time allotted, the game CD-ROM corn chips. TETRIS System once activated, will will pause and ask if you'd like to continbecame the bane of Requirements: pursue you across the ue (the idea, of course, is that you say every corporate IBM compatible screen; and enemy\"no\"). Anyone who has ever looked up 486/33 MHz or bean-counter and efclock hands that don't from a game of TETRIS into the eyes of a better, Windows ficiency expert, every 3.1 or better, CD-ROM, Windowssignal before they disgruntled supervisor will realize that concerned parent compatible sound card turn. Touching any of CLOCKWERX is the perfect oflice companand retentive boss Protection: Documentation Check these will destroy your ion, ideal for a 15-minute coffee break. anyone, in short, Publisher: Spectrum HoloByte clock hand and force As action puzzle games go, this one is a Alameda, CA who would prefer to (800) 879-PLAY you to start over. The cut above average. It requires both analyopen a vein rather key to avoiding them sis and hand-eye coordination, but avoids than see someone wasting time. is timing. Dodging past an enemy clock the trap that the majority of arcade That's why I find it ironic that in 1995, hand, for example, requires the same games fall into-it actually gets harder, Alexey Pajitnov has endorsed sense of the moment as skipping rope on rather than just faster. I recommend it CLOCKWERX. I say \"endorsed\" because, the playground-you have to jump in for anyone frivolous enough to keep a despite the fact that his name and face and jump out at precisely the right interGames menu in WINDOWS, and for anyare all over this product, Pajitnov seems val to make it. one who needs a little diversion...without to have had no involvement whatsoever CLOCKWERX has a number of features wanting to lose track of time. in its design, programming or concepthat make it a joy both to load and to THE EDITORS SPEAK tion. CLOCKWERX, by Spectrum play. It installs completely from CDHoloByte, is a new action puzzle game. ROM or floppy disk, doesn't require outCLOCKWERX The playing piece is a clock hand which rageous power from your system, and RATING flips, revolves, bounces and swings across uses its copy protection only once per ina field of anchoring dots. And the fact stallation. It plays from WINDOWS without PROS Smarter than most arcade games, faster than most puzzle that the game is based on the mechanism a hitch, although you might need to shut games, and you can limit the durawhich marks the passage of time is quite down the larger applications and any tion of play. appropriate, considering how much time other apps which want to access your CONS Gets hard fast. Doesn't like to I happily wasted playing it. sound card. And it offers a \"time limit\" have any other big applications open The object of the game is to guide your feature which I can't recall seeing in othin WINDOWS. clock hand through a gauntlet to the er games of this type: before you begin, 108 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. AUGUST 1995 "


"HOW ABOUT A BIG 'MECH WITH AN ORDER TO FRY? MECHWARRIOR2 315T CENTURY COMBAT F E EL.THE BURN MITTE PROD DUCT EXPLODING THIS SUMMER ON CD-ROM heat up the highway and win @ http://www.activision.com ETECH F959 E959 ACTIVISION MechWarrior. BattleTech and 'Mech are registered trademarks of FASA CORPORATION Activision is a registered trademark of Activision, Inc. Circle Reader Service #68 "


"REVIEW The Fences Stormfront Studios Goes For The Long Ball With Tony LA RUSSA 3 by Jim Gindin WADERA OSTON RED SOX FANS REMEMBER TONY LA RUSSA 3. Here is a game that TONY LA RUSSA II WELL THE AUTUMN OF 1986, has a lot of talent, especially in the realm Price: $69.95, THOUGH THEY'D CERTAINLY LIKE of graphics, but it also suffers from some CD-ROM only to forget it. Their team had design weaknesses. Those weakness are, System taken the American League in keeping with our analogy, in the areas Requirements: pennant, and they were confident going of pitching and fielding. It's still a fine, IBM compatible 386-40MHz into the Series. They had every reason fine game, but, like the '86 Sox, is just a (486 recomto-they had an excellent team with talfew critical outs away from being a World TONY LA BUSE mended), 4 MB ent in crucial areas, especially at the bat. Series Champ. RAM (8 MB RAM But when the cleats hit the clay, two key recommended), SVGA graphics, 6 components-pitching and fieldingA BEAUTIFUL DAY MB hard drive space, CD-ROM; supports broke down, and the Sox were refused FOR A BALLGAME Sound Blaster and compatible sound cards the crown. Is it cruel to Sox fans to revive On the visual front, it's clear that Protection: None the images of Bill Buckner's booted \"rouStormfront paid attention to details. Developer: Stormfront Studios Publisher: Electronic Arts tine\" ground ball and the wild pitches Unlike other simulations, when your San Mateo, CA that immediately followed? outfielder sprints into the gap to make (800) 245-4525 Perhaps so, but it is done for a reason. a play, he gets a little smaller because There is an that is how he would look from your PITCHER, PITCHER analogy here box seat behind home plate. The runLA RUSSA 3 excels as an action game, between the ner sliding into second kicks up a little largely due to its luscious graphics. But a *86 Red dirt. Players have realistic shadows cast gorgeous pitcher-batter screen and sharp Sox and by a definite light source instead of the animations are counterbalanced by a Stormfront conventional little gray circles most othcouple of significant flaws in the pitching Studios' latest er games use. And the 28 major league and fielding models. baseball stadiums, rendered in AutoCAD, are My biggest beef lies with the way pitchsimply gorgeous. ing has been implemented. Like most All of this combines to make TONY LA games, you select a pitch from a menu of RUSSA 3 look more like a real baseball four and then select a location. But, ungame than anything previously produced. like real baseball (and HARDBALL IV, HARDBALL IV, released early this year, is whose pitching model is great), you can also easy to look at, and even features redirect a pitch in midair as it approachbetter artwork in some places. But it es the plate. While some might argue is a cartoon-like environment with that this feature enhances the action, I the feel, dimension, and game can't for the life of me figure out how. My play of a company softball suspended disbelief is ruined completely game. With its outfields when I can throw an inside slider that drawn to scale and its realisbreaks back outside at the last minute. tic motion-captured player Unfortunately, the pitching problems animations, LA RUSSA 3 don't end on the mound. From the batlooks and feels like the ter's box, all pitches look so similar that genuine article. it's hard to determine what type of pitch is approaching until it gets within a few feet of the plate. This excludes knuckleballs, which wave back and forth in a simulation, 110 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. AUGUST 1995 "


"rather picturesque, but ludicrous manold pitcher Charlie Hough, who didn't BYE, BYE, ner. One other discrepancy I noticed is have a stolen base in 25 seasons, swipe MR. AI that every once in a while, the pitching second ahead of a pretty good throw. But During the course of a season, the AI simply falls apart. A few times, I've wit still, this game's statistical engine is miles will, in general, make the proper roster nessed opposing pitchers walk more than ahead of HARDBALL. IV, FRONT PAGE assignments, replace injured players and 30 batters in a game, failing to hit the SPORTS BASEBALL and most of the other distribute playing time in a realistic fashstrike zone even once until the bases were baseball sims currently on the market. ion. But during the game, despite the loaded. There is one big problem however, alwealth of La Russa advice available just a After hardwood meets tightly wound beit not a game-tilting one. This flaw is module away, Mr. Computer Manager leather, it's time to move your fielder into not a result of broken down algorithms can't make even simple decisions properposition to make the play. The standard or stilted probabilities. Instead it seems ly. I like the idea of creating managerial \"colored circle of catch» is your guide; to be the results of several rules misinprofiles by assigning percentage points to maneuver your fielder to the A PT about a dozen game situations, center of the circle to make but it just doesn't work out the the play, but beware the way it should. This results in wind, which in some ballnot-so-smart managerial deciparks can really move the sions like pinch-hitting for a ball. Although fielding lelu Cecil Fielder at the end of a much more comfortable than game with your team down by a pitching did, I was still a little few runs. frustrated by a couple of things. Instead of throwing VOICE-OVER the ball to the base, your men Instead of hiring just one fain the field throw to the basemous announcer to do the playman, regardless of his locaby-play, Stormfront decided to tion. So your shortstop makes hire three: Mel Allen, Lon Sima nice play in the hole and mons and Hank Greenwald. fires quickly to first just in Sadly, this is a metaphor for the time. But the first baseman GRASS ROOTS MOVEMENT TONY LARUSSA lll's graphics are the most attractive rest of the game-more is not never made it over the bag; to date, with real shadows, AutoCAD-rendered stadiums and nicely modnecessarily better. Each anconsequently he catches the eled fielding. nouncer reads the same script, ball completely out of posiwhich is limited, repetitive and tion. End result: base hit. often out of synch with the on-screen acterpretations. The game charges errors tion. Even HARDBALL. IV, which only uses A GAME OF when it shouldn't (like when a fielder about 21 MB and one announcer, has NUMBERS makes a throwing error that doesn't remore variety, and at least Al Michaels Statistically speaking, La Russa 3 is, for sult in an advanced base) and none mentions the players by name. LA the most part, excellent. Hands down, it when it should. beats most other games on the market And forget about (certainly the action-based crowd) and counting earned even comes close to matching the perforruns properly. Furmance of the statistically solid STRAT-Othermore, very MATIC. While ESPN BASEBALL TONIGHT, simple rules, like Stormfront's other baseball project, awarding a single lacked depth, TONY LARUSSA has plenty rather than a douof numbers for the star-based junkie. ble when the batter Plus, (FRONT PAGE SPORTS: BASEBALL fans advances to second take note) playing through an entire seaon a throw and the son only takes a couple of minutes on a infield fly rule are high-end machine, and not much longer overlooked entirethan that on a slower system. ly. Problems like BALLS That's not to say that a few catethese make me OUTS gories-stolen bases, putouts and erwonder if the derors-could use a little fine tuning. It's signers completely DELIVERANCE The pitcher-batter screen is excellent, with two separate also a tad too easy for a batter to bat.400 understand how to views, but realistic ball players will want to avoid tossing triple curve or hit 65 home runs. I even saw 46-yearscore a game. sliders down the plate. STRIKES INNING AUGUST 1995. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 111 "


"THE ULTIMATE CHEATING EXPERIENCE GAME WIZARD 10-2 R 112.2 L 23.2 3R2R 73.2 2.60 6.11 5.62 Now Morvin Free Lance Painter Kovin Rkz Dovid Nied Greg V Harris ILONG SELET (Mike Horko Armando R oto Curt LERO GRR 130.0 6.65 DEZ Casa Huweeg DU TIPERA V-L END Wine Blair Slave Red HIKO HUE DO PELLOT Russa's announcers do AIN GUA SHESON MANAGER UTILITIRSIN HELHAY not. I got really tired Kotacion d Ballpen COLORADO of hearing, \"at bat, the speedy outfielder. STARTERS He's hitting 298 against right-handers,\" before every pitch to Barry Bonds. But this is more of a problem with voice play-by-play in general. Thankfully, the narration can be 1 DUIPERAWBVBD END CLOSER Bruce Ruffin turned off POUISE RESTORE GM CHALLENGE BY THE NUMBERS TONY LA RUSSA III's statistics are accurate and easy In TONY LARUSSA 3's to get into. defense, it does extend the genre a bit with two unique modules. A fantasy draft Major Leaguer has a career that lasts 17THE MOST ADVANCED module allows you to pool together a 22 years. Still, though, the ingenuity of GAME CHEATING SOFTWARE group of players and conduct a draft, and this module can not be denied. EVER CREATED FOR IBM AND the \"GM Challenge\" module allows you COMPATIBLE COMPUTERS to take a team years into the future by BOX SCORE The only software capable of cheating calling up minor leaguers and making LA RUSSA 3 represents a monumental in almost any program, including full other forward-thinking roster decisions. programming effort. It resembles basesupport for popular DOS extender It even rates your performance as a GM ball more than any other game on the based games over time. market, and pushes the envelope in a few >Become INVULNERABLE, Both of these are wonderful ideas, but areas, which should be applauded. HowINVINCIBLE or UNBEATABLE! they are incompletely executed. The AI ever there are a number of niggling flaws Finish games that you have not been able to complete previously in the fantasy draft module, which has which, when combined have a marked ef>Never run out of LIVES, MONEY, been around since TONY LA RUSSA 2, is fect on the game and allow HARDBALL. IV HEALTH or AMMO again! disappointing; the computer is complete to retain its arcade action penant. AlEnhanced search engine that is capable ly dwarfed by human intelligence. With though it is unfortunate that Stormfront of finding almost anything imaginable no preparation whatsoever, I drafted a can't figure out how to effectively connect >Speed-up or slow-down game for team from the number 26 position and La Russa's managing ideas to the comoptimal playability took it to an unheard of 117-45 season. puter Al, no problem in the game is se> Supports SUPER VGA and most The GM Challenge is more complex. vere enough to fatally frustrate gamers. popular sound cards > Create personal cheat files You choose teams and set scouting prefThis is the best graphical baseball strateView hints or solutions within games erences by position. Each year, new playgy game out there, and if Stormfront can > Save & load most games at any point ers arrive in your minor league system, fix some of the flaws (which incidentally during play and based on scouting reports, you deplague most other games on the market) >Shell to DOS within any game cide whether to let them join your 40TONY LA RUSSA 3 will be a classic. & >Built-in screen saver and much more! man roster, languish in the minors, or be CHEAT DEATH FOR ONLY given the first bus out of town. This is a great concept, one that I've been waiting THE EDITORS SPEAK for someone to properly implement for Please include $10.00 for shipping & handling TONY LA RUSSA BASEBALL 3 years. It is simple in scope, easy to keep GAMEWIZARD track of, and fun to play. Unfortunately RATING To order please make cheque or money order payable to: (this word seems to be frequently popPROS A complete baseball simulaEnhanced Software Design Inc. ping up), the design is a bit strange. PlayP.O. Box 92241 tion with beautiful graphics and bet2900 Warden Ave., Scarborough, ON ers don't really develop in your minor ter-than-average statistical accuracy. Canada MIW 3Y9 league system; they just stick around until Allow 4-6 weeks for delivery. Distributor inquiries welcome CONS Weak pitching model and deLimited Shareware version thru BBS: (416) 497-8337 you move them up to The Show or cut fensive quirks. Does not run very well Game Wizard is currently used worldwide them. One other small problem with the on minimum configuration. to cheat in almost any game in existancel | GM Challenge is that practically every Circle Reader Service #265 112 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. AUGUST 1995 $390.5. RATING "


"ACTIVISION CLASSICS BARNSTORMING RIVER RAID II MEGAMANIA ACTIVISION . ACTIVELOX The Sequel That's Already A Classic. ACTIVISION'S ATARI 2600 ACIMA FOR WINDOWS Just when you thought it was safe to go back onto your PC...Activision spawns Action Pack 2! Witness the return of fifteen more pulse-pounding video games from the dawn of gaming now in Windows! It's Part Two of Activison's Atari 2600 video game collection back with the same riveting graphics and gripping sound effects of the originals. Activision's Atari 2600 Action Pack 2 more addictive fun than you remember! Available on PC CD-ROM and 3.5\" disks. Coming soon for Macintosh! Check out what's new for the nineties at http://www.activision.com , KEYSTONE KAPERS ACTIV STAMPE ACIMBIOK LASERBLAST ATABI 2600 ACTION TO ) IBM CD-ROM for Windows\" HERA CD RON 15 Games for your PC Activision is a registered trademark of Activision, Inc. Atari 2600 is a trademark of Atari Inc. Windows is a trademark of the Microsoft Corporation. 1995 Activision, Inc. All rights reserved. Circle Reader Service #33 ACTIVISION "


"PUMPS 1 GALLON A MINUTE. -left sul clavian artery left | linariary ariety superior vena cava Ascending aorta left atrium right atrium left coronary artery small cardiac vem great cardiae vein right coronary artery inferior vena cava descending aorta FIG. 34.The Human Heart. "


"PUMPS 25 GALLONS A MINUTE. FADE TO BLACK IL FADE LO BLACKS ll li T PLAY T PLAYS Y D. ELECTRONIC ARTS Put your pulse in overdrive. Fade To Black is the adrenaline-pumping sequel to Flashback from Delphine. It's a mind-bending combination of fluid, life-like animation and complete control over seemingly unlimited character movements. Along the way, multiple camera angles mirror every heart-stopping turn. Even the sound and music score won't give you a moment's peace. Until you rest in eternal peace. Delphine Software http://www.ea.com/eastudio.html FOR PC-CD Delphine Software International its lega. Fade la Black and Flashback are trademarie Delphine Software International Electronic Arts i repatered trademark Electrone Arts Call-200-79-3777 freeformation on gate ratings Circle Reader Service #64 CINTERNATIONAL "


"REVIEW On Cue CHALK Interplay's VIRTUAL POOL Is The New King Of The Billiard Green by Paul C. Schuytema VIRTUAL OR ME, POOL IS ONE OF THOSE OCshoot, you use your mouse just like a the mouse, hold down the \"S\" key (for CASIONAL JOYS OF LIFE. I'M AWFUL cue: a little back and forth jiggling ac\"shoot\"), and slide your mouse forward AT THE GAME-NO POOL TABLE tion to prepare for the shot, then a quick to take the shot. Total learning time for graced the basement of my slide forward and-crack!—you send the a basic shot: about three and a half secchildhood home-but I'm still cue ball on its course. I can't overemphaonds. Of course, you can get as Minnesoof the opinion that one of the best things size the brilliance of this simple interta Fats as you want with your shots. Since in life is to pull on a frosty mug, shoot face. Sliding your mouse doesn't provide Virtual Pool's 3D engine not only the breeze, and shoot some lame-o 8all the tactile feel of a real cue, but it models the position of the ball, but the Ball with a buddy. does provide the same basic range of rotation as well, you can raise up the butt motion. All of this adds up to extreme of your cue, move the strike point off Virtual Pool believability and playability which, center, and execute a flawless masse shot Price: No SRP when combined with the dead-on (yes, it's as hard to do in VIRTUAL POOL System sound effects (you've got to hear it to POOL Requirements: as it is in real pool). IBM compatible believe it), will almost totally suspend There is one problem with the mouse 386 or better, your disbelief. Only a green, ell-oninterface. I found it increasingly frustrat2 MB RAM, VGA slate mouse pad could make the expeing using the mouse for a power shot, graphics, 2 MB rience any more convincing like a break shot. When I really needed hard drive space, CD-ROM; supVIRTUAL POOL is a complete multito whack the cue ball, I would just end ports Sound media package, but the meat of the up spinning the mouse ball and getting Blaster and comgame is the 3D pool engine. The pool some very odd results. I tried both a patible sound cards. table is modeled in real-time 3D at rescheap-o mouse and a hefty Microsoft # of Players: 1-2 (modem and network) Protection: None olutions up to 1024 Developer: Celeris x 768, depending Publisher: Interplay Productions on your video card. Irvine, CA The table is the only (800) 969-GAME object in the virtual world, which is good; As a kid, I had that quirky little pool it would have been game, the one advertised by Don Adams very easy for Celeris (of Get Smart fame); I think it was called the designers) to toss \"Pivot Pool.\" On my Atari 800, I also rein a useless and anmember having a pretty decent pool noying background game cartridge. Both were fun, but they scene. By using the really weren't pool-they were games mouse you can rotate based on pool. And that is the difference and zoom anywhere Games FOULlawsect ball not hit first Replay Rate 1/2 between any other computer pool sim on the table, from a Player 2 3q  Due Firsle 10 Match Goal and Interplay's VIRTUAL Pool-everydistant, bird's eye thing else roughly approximates pool; view of the whole EYE OF NEWTON VIRTUAL Pool has a tracking option to he VIRTUAL POOL is pool. slate bed to a myopic right angle on tough shots, like this bank. close-up of the nineNO SMOKING ALLOWED ball's ochre stripe. mouse, but both suffered the same powThe first thing you notice in VIRTUAL Shooting, as previously mentioned, is er shot problem. POOL is its elegant shooting interface. To simple as can be: just aim your stick with View 116 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD AUGUST 1995 "


"INTERACTIVE ENTERTAINMENT I The #1 Entertainment CD MAG \"More interactive and multimedia than any other CD magazine...Users get to see how a game looks on their screens a vast improvement over screen shots on paper...Just might make me forget about those other gaming magazines.\" NEW MEDIA MAGAZINE   \"This monthly CD-ROM magazine should quickly become a gamer's best friend. Even After Hours can't give you more in the way of multimedia game reviews, previews, tips and hints, bug fixes, and patches than this disk can.\" \"Interactive Entertainment is a great idea a CD magazine packed with Siskel-and-Ebertstyle reviews of computer games... If you're uncomfortable with the idea of paying for computer games sight unseen, you'll probably consider Interactive Entertainment a must-buy.\" Heart of Darkness Preview Free. Bastles of the S. Pacific Peter Molyneux Interview AOL 10 Free Hours! PC MAGAZINE MAGAZINE COMPUTER SHOPPER IMPERPA er en ekste. Ta heart of Dark Free: Battles o V Peter Molyneux A AOL10 Free He BONUS A FREE GAME WITH MOST EPISODES!! Available at Better Software Stores and Newsstands for $9.95 per Episode B. Dalton Babbages Barnes and Noble Best Buy Bookstop. Borders Computer City CompUSA Egghead Electronics Boutique Hastings Movie Gallery Software Etc. Tower and many more! SUBSCRIBE AND SAVE 34% ONE YEAR 12 EPISODES $79 CALL 1-800-562-3624 TODAY Source 97506 Fax (610) 532-9001 Local phone (610) 532-4700 Interactive Entertainment, PO Box 636, Holmes, PA 19043 All prices and payments are in US dollars. Vermont residents add 5% sales tax.  1995 Interactive Publishing, Inc. Circle Reader Service #111 "


"THE DEFINING MOMENT could want. All the standard games are some neat footage of \"Machine Gun\" The defining moment of my experiavailable: 9-ball, 8-ball, rotation and Lou Batera (in one clip he runs a table in ence with VIRTUAL POOL was in my first straight pool. You can hotseat, each takunder 90 seconds, hence the name) in game. I had an across-the-table shot to ing turns on the same system, or you can action. I would have like these clips sink the seven ball, which was nesting hook up over network or modem. much better if, after each demonstrated deep in the corner-an easy, easy shot Strangely enough, in this day and age of shot, I was given a chance to do the same for anyone who has played even a modnetwork gaming, I found hotseating the thing. icum of pool. But as for myself, well, I most ellective and the most fun-pool's can sink this shot about five percent of a social game after all. MIS-CUES the time. I just don't have the steady VIRTUAL Pool also comes with a multiDespite it's sparkling nature, I do have hand needed to send the cue ball along media reference section. There is a nice a few problems with VIRTUAL POOL. For the proper path. So I tried the shot and I humorous animated history of pool, and starters, the music is just awful. With the missed, just like I would on a real table. I didn't mind the small video presentagame shipping on CD-ROM, and no real Any simulation that can accurately modtion window. I actually learned quite a need for iMuse type compose-on-the-fly el my short-comings has my respect. bit. Some decent tutorials, using the VIRmusic, there is no reason for such For the casual pool gamer, or those TUAL POOL engine, are also included, but abysmal FM renditions of The Entertainer who just want to mess around, you can they are non-interactive. It's as if the deand other \"pool hall classics.\" It just just play slop, or you can rack the balls in signers simply did a video capture of gives me a headache. any game formation you want (8-Ball, 9. someone playing around in the sim porOne glaring annoying error exists in Ball, etc.). In this practice mode, you tion of the game and then compressed it the \"call your pocket\" games. You don't have at your fingertips a plethora of into a PC movie format. And there's also actually call your shot; VIRTUAL POOL ashelpful little goodies. The Tracking option can show all of the ball path vectors What A Masse! for any shot you care to make, an indispensable aid when you are first learning The masse shot is easily the trickiest in all of how to nail a bank shot. You can also pool. In fact, many pool halls ban the shot, undo your last shot, or replay a particu because beginners will more than likely miss the larly exciting shot (this is available within cue ball entirely, and slam the cue into the felt, a game too) at varying speeds; in super tearing a nice six-inch gash. Fortunately, VIRTUAL slow motion, I finally understood how Pool isn't so picky, and the simulation, while reputting english on the ball really works. alistic, doesn't model tom felt. Pool is one of those great games, like A masse shot is a controlled curve, giving an exdarts, in which you can have just as much pert player an open shot in even the most tricky fun screwing around by yourself tuning of situations. In games such as 9-Ball, when up your game as you can with some you must hit the lowest ball first no matter friendly competition. VIRTUAL POOL's what, it can mean the difference between a computer opponents range in skill level championship trophy and a box of off-brand from drunk and blind to Willie Mosconi. mac and cheese. My only quibble with the computer op The secret to making your ball curve is to put an ponents is that their names are hideously incredible amount of spin, or english, on the cue, stupid (Mrs. Offen? Come on!) and to ball. To do this, you must raise up the butt of the make matters worse, you can't edit their cue, so that you are shooting down at it. You names. The AI isn't bad, and there is no want to strike a glancing blow, so you have to way I'm even close to besting \"Dead-Eye adjust the strike point in VIRTUAL Pool. You probaDan\", but it appears to be based on some bly need a cue angle of at least 70 degrees. In ACCELERATED MASSE The top screen shows the sort of scaling of shot ability, rather than masse shots, the balls curve to the side that you path the correctly performed masse shot will pool ability. Even the lamest of the lame are striking. That means in our example, since take: skirting around the 4 and 11 balls to sink computer players always go for open we want a right curve, we want to strike the ball the eight ball. In the bottom screen we observe combination shots, showing tactical skill on the right side. Because of the odd way a spin the lie a little closer, just before the shot. Notice and knowledge far beyond their shoot ning ball moves, you also need to strike towards the strike point (the blue dot) is to the right and ing ability. the front of your ball, instead of behind, as comfront of the ball. Also note that the angle of the cue to the table is a hefty 75 degrees. Of course, it's always more fun to play mon sense might dictate. You have to hit a against a flesh and blood opponent, to masse shot very hard to get the right spin, but heckle and be heckled while trouncing only practice can tell you how to precisely aim or getting trounced. Thankfully VIRTUAL your shot. Good luck! Pool has more options than anyone 118 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD  AUGUST 1995 "


"HE'S QUT TO PROVE HE'S INNOCENT OF MURDER, AND HE'LL KILL ANYONE THAT GETS IN THE WAY. Full Throttle scorches the screen like an exhaust pipe on an exposed leg. You're Ben deserted, left for dead and framed for murder. You'll do anything to clear your name. Like running big rigs off the road at 100 mph. And if a few butt-ugly bikers get the crap kicked out of them in the process, hey, that's life. It's big bad bikes, big bad gangs in a big bad world. It's Full Throttle. Where the courtroom is the street, and the judge is a tire iron. Available now for IBM PC CD-ROM. Coming soon for Mac CD-ROM. FULLTHROTLE LUCAS Ars Full Throttle and  LucasArts Entertainment Company, All Rights Reserved. Used Under Authorization, The Lucasfits logo is a registered trademark of Lucaslris Entertainment company. Circle Reader Service 166 "


"sumes it knows which pocket you're terplay chose to use such a complex real game (for those of us with a several looking for. This works just fine about video setup system as opposed to a simthousand dollar computer in our base90% of the time, but I encountered more ple universal VESA driver like UniVBE.I ment, rather then a several thousand than a few situations where the sim's asspent the first 15 minutes after the initial dollar pool table). I did test out this hysumptions were dead wrong. Worse yet, installation trying out numerous cryptic pothesis. Before I began \"working\" on you'll end up with a foul if you sink the drivers, none of which precisely matched this review, I went down to the local pub shot you would call. my video card. I finally did manage to for a brew and a game. As expected, I I also found myself wondering why Infind a high resolution driver that worked was awful. After a week of hard play with with my card, but it VIRTUAL POOL, I tried my luck again on was needless frustrathe felt and slate. I was by no means pertion-a universal fect-I still couldn't even make a decent VESA driver would imitation of a masse shot-but I did have taken up a lot manage a run of six bags in a row, which less time and is a lot is unheard of for yours truly. Ah, the valmore user-friendly. ues of virtual education. THE EDITORS SPEAK EIGHT BALL IN VIRTUAL POOL THE CORNER POCKET RATING RATING SA Limitations aside, PROS Fluid, intuitive simulation of VIRTUAL. Pool is an billiards with an excellent control inStraight Pool Points Games Fouls elegant product that terface. Great 3D representation of a Replay Rate 1/2 1 Line Up Shot has the unique ability Due Angle 1° pool table and ball movement. liga! to be both an excitCONS Insipid music, non-interactive DOWN AND DIRTY You can also get up close and personal with the balls to ing game in its own multimedia tutorials, and minor check angles or the placement of the cue tip on the cue ball. right and a truly usegameplay problems. ful tutorial for the O fat Player 2 1150 $30 THE DEFINITIVE WARGAME COLLECTION S30 CD-ROM SSG IMPRESSIONS SSI CD-ROM American Civil War I Wargame Construction Set II: TANKSI American Civil War II * Battles of Napoleon American Civil War III Sword of Aragon Reach for the Stars D-Day Gold of the Americas Conquest of Japan Panzer Battles Global Domination Warlords When Two Worlds War Includes many additional scenario files. Wargame Construction Set II: Tanks! has won Strategy Plus 1994 Wargame of the Yearl and is rated W9 in CGW's Top Wargames. It has an easy to use editor to build your own battles with 1300 platoon-sized units from 1918-1990s. Novastar and Norm Koger continue to support new versions of the game (v. 1.27) with many new rules such as variable end game, variable weather, defensive fire, automatic dismounting in combat, and we have developed a Modem Database with 350 units/150 nations! Over 200 additional scenarios can be added. See below. Wargame Construction Set II: TANKS! Scenario Disks Disk 1: Eastern Front Disk 7: Sicily Disk 13: 1973 Israeli Disk 2: France 1940 Disk 8: Bastogne Disk 14: North Africa Disk 3: Utah/Omaha Disk 9: North Africa Disk 15: Vietnam Disk 4: Gold/Juno/Sword Disk 10: Remagen Disk 16: Modern Korea Disk 5: St. Vith/KG Peiper Disk 11: France 1944 Disk 19: Korea 1950's Disk 6: Desert Storm Disk 12: 1973 Israeli Disk 21: Modern Ist US Arm. TANKS! Scenarios: $15 cach Modern TANKSI Database Scenarios: $25 each SSI's Classic IBM Wargames For Only $15!! Battles of Napoleon Gettysburg B-24 Second Front Battle of Antictam Kampfgruppe Shiloh Western Front Conflict: Middle East Mech Brigade Warship Star Command Wargame Construction Set Sons of Liberty Rebel Charge Red Lightning Stomm Across Europe Stellar Crusade $10 Carrier Strike $39 Panzer General S10 Great War $42 Tigers on Prowl $10 War in Russia S10 Clash of Steel $10 Pacific War $42 Stalingrad Battles of Napoleon Scenario Disks: 1-6 S10 each, ARW S25, 8-9 S15 cach $10 Mo' Slo (This will slow your computer processor down to play old games.) Add $4.50 Shipping. CA add 7.25% tax. Novastar Game Co. Hours: 8:00 am to 5:00 pm PST MT P O Box 1813, Rocklin CA 95677 Accept Visa, M/C, Checks, Money Orders (916) 624-7113 Circle Reader Service #219 R & G  GAMES PO Box 5008 Glendale Hts, IL 60139 We Buy & Sell New and Used Game Software & Hint Books. Call 1-800-525-GAME Get CASH for your games or get an additional 10% in credit, good for future game purchases at great prices on used games like these...and many more Dragon Lore CD $33 Dark Legions Bureau 13 CD $29 Aces of the Deep Civilization Dracula Unleashed CD Great Naval Battles 2 V-Victry Markt Garden King's Quest 7 Doom 11 Under a Killing Moon $39 Tie Fighter Ultimate Football CD Wing Commander III Metaltech Earth Siege $33 Cyberia System Shock $28 X-wing Privateer $25 Quest for Glory 4 Outpost $24 Betrayal at Krondor Dark Sun II Creature Shock We Accept Visa, MC, Cashier Check & Money Order Shipping $5 UPS, $9 Overnight os must be virus free games will be checked. All games must be in original box with all Instructional materials and original disks. NO COPIES accepted. All games must be sent with account number in order for your check or credit to be processed. Any unacceptable games will be sent back at your expense. Any detective games can be exchanged for same title only when accompanied by receipt within 2 weeks of purchase 233232 $33 120 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. AUGUST 1995 Circle Reader Service #307 "


"WWA BETRIP TO CANCUN Enter the IQ contest +Enter the Contest You're smart if you enter our contest and subscribe to *Interactive Quarterly\", the hot new magazine that gives you the inside track on Adult CD-ROM software. 10 features stories on the incredible lifestyles and creative breakthroughs of the stars and star-makers of Adult CD-ROMs plus product reviews to guide you in your search for interactive pleasure and perfection. Free CD Rom, page 53 SEYMORE BUTTS AND SHANE, REVEALED SBSCRIBE! war als    REVIEWS OO DIOITAL IA Pre obelete & BUYER'S YES! Start my subscription to Interactive Quarterly for $9.95 & send my FREE Adult CD sampler: (check one) New Machine Pixis Interactive Arcus Digital Playground A one-year subscription includes your choice of a FREE Adult CD-ROM sambler all for only $9.95! Name Phone (area code) Mailing address Zip And all new subscribers are automatically entered in our contest... YOU MAY WIN ONE OF THESE FANTASTIC PRIZES: I First Prize: A Vacation For Two at a Luxury Resort in Cancun* 50 Second Prizes: IQ T-shirts 100 Third Prizes: IQ Mouse Pads * Airfare not included. City State Payment enclosed: check or money order (allow 14 days to clear) MC Visa Exp. Date Discover Signature ( certify 1 am 21 years of age or older) (Date of Birth) Mail to: IQ, CGW0795, 551 Valley Road, Suite 373, Montclair, NJ 07043, fax: 201-783-3686 or E Mail at: IQMAG@aol.com. OFFICIAL CONTEST RULES: Every subscription purchased by December 15, 1995 is automatically entered into the contest. You may also enter by sending in a postcard the words \"Interactive Quarterly along with your name, age, date of birth, and address, and mail to: 1Q Contest CGW0795, 551 Valley Road, Montclair, NJ 07043, postmarked by December 15, 1995. Only one entry per household. No mechanical reproductions. . You must be 21 years of age or older to enter this contest. Winners will be selected in random drawings and notified by mail. A list of the prize winners may be obtained by sending a self-addressed, stamped envelope to the above address. . Odds of winning depend on the number of entries received. Void where prohibited by law. Circle Reader Service #213 INTERACTIVE QUARTERLY AMERICA'S PREMIERE ADULT CD-ROM MAGAZINE "


"REVIEW REVIEW | Ghouls Of The Gridiron BLOOD BOWI, The Brawl-Ball Boardgame, Blitzes Its Way To The PC by Martin E. Cirulis ONG AGO, WHEN TSR INC. WAS STILL about the kick through the crossbars; player can move per turn; Strength, which CONSIDERED A BENEVOLENT ENTITY touchdowns are worth a single point and dictates how well a monster dumps and AND DRAGON MAGAZINE WAS MORE there are no field goals in sight. Even so, maims other players; Agility, which govfun to read, an odd little game was there are still plenty of forward passes to erns the realms of throwing, receiving and Idiscovered amidst the monthly be thrown, dropped and intercepted, and dodging; and finally Armor Value, which pages of Tolkien worship/exploitation. It the \"blitz\" is still in effect. indicates the durability and thus the life exinvolved a field, a ball and a bunch of While BLOOD BOWL is actually a mishpectancy of your players. While four stats monsters who could barely decide bemash of the two major pigskin disciplines, do not do much to set species apart, there tween killing each other and scoring a the computer game does embrace the senare a number of special skills and physical touchdown. A few years later, the fledgling sibilities of more \"serious\" sports sims. abilities that flesh things out a little. Games Workshop group from jolly old Variable weather conditions such as rain A coach's turn consists of selecting a England took the idea and combined it and snow come into play with the expectcreature with the mouse and moving it with a very basic version of their Warhamed effects on gameplay. And in a nice across the field. Each player has a zone-ofmer fantasy combat systouch, stadicontrol (ZOC) that extends into the eight tem to produce Blood Blood Bowl ums have dif squares surrounding it; it is in this area Bowl (BB). Now, ten odd Price: $59.99 ferent field that the player can interact with other sods years and three major System surfaces, alunlucky enough to be sharing the field Requirements: incarnations later, the lowing the with him. Offensive contact generally IBM compatible boardgame has made 486SX or better, game to be takes the form of blocking, which takes up that nigh-inevitable leap 4 MB RAM, VGA played on not a player's full turn; this means that there to the computer screen graphics, 6 MB only tradimust be an opponent in your player's hard drive space, with the help of Mitional grass ZOC at the beginning of the turn in order 2X CD-ROM; supcroLeague and Subway ports all major but exceedto throw a block. Blocks can result in any Software. sound cards, ingly painful or all of the following outcomes, based on modem support stone and ana comparison of strengths and a simulated # of Players: 1-2 (modem) THE GORIEST Protection: None noyingly slipdie roll: you could push your opponent YARD Developer: Subway Software pery ice. The back a square; knock your enemy down or BLOOD Bowl bills it Publisher: MicroLeague Interactive game play itget knocked down yourself; hurt or kill self as \"The Game of Lancaster, PA self is like a the other player or get your own player Fantasy Football,\" and (717) 872-9959 traditional hurt or killed; or nothing at all could hapwhile it is certainly rooted deeply in the sports game, but played on a turn-based pen. If a player is not lucky enough to realm of fantasy-the teams consist of schedule wherein you control each playstart off face-to-whatever with the enemy, Dwarves, Elves, and the like-the termer's moves in sequence. a move-and-then-block maneuver called a \"Football\" is used somewhat liberally. \"Blitz\" may be performed with the same When you get right down to it, BLOOD THE HUNCHBACKS OF NOTRE grab bag of results. This is an extremely Bowl is more like monster-rugby than DAME handy maneuver for exploiting a hole Bo's sport. Coaches move their players And speaking of players, what a motley made by your front line, but a team is alacross a 15 x 25 grid unhindered by any crew they are. Unfortunately, the variety is lowed only one blitz per turn, so you must notion akin to downs, yardage or plays. All more cosmetic than real. Players are rated plan the attack carefully. that counts is getting the ball into the opin only four categories: Movement AlIf the player is fortunate enough to position's end-zone. And don't worry lowance, which rates how many squares a have the ball, he has the option at any 122 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD  AUGUST 1995 "


"Deploy. Destroy. Enjoy! ommand a single squad or an entire battalion as any Allied or Axis nation and get ready to rumble! Game play is fun, easy and gorgeous! Explosive SVGA graphics and intense animation help you feel the destruction as buildings burn and tanks explode! All this plus digitized photos of over 200 tanks make STEEL PANTHERS as exciting to watch as it is to play. Add digitized sound effects and this WW II blockbuster will have you running for cover! To Order: Visit your retailer or call 1-800-601-PLAY with Visa/MasterCard (North America only, please). On PC DOS CD-ROM for IBM and Compatibles Screens shown: 256-color SVGA. RG las BOR SIETE PEG SRL BE ARNS A MINDSCAPE COMPANY STEEL PANTHERS is a trademark of Strategic Simulations, Inc.  Strategic Simulations, Inc. All rights reserved. Circle Reader.Serlca #104 "


"LUNISTI RITTER VON PRUM 35 LINCHRN HOME REAVERSE time of either handing the ball off to a subject matter is, BLOOD Bowi. is basically everything by hand, but the glory of comfriendly player in his ZOC or passing the a sports game and it really should have puters is that they can handle all the teball multiple hexes in any direction to anbenefited from the vast amount of work dious aspects of detail while leaving you to other player. Passing and receiving are that has gone into developing that genre. enjoy all the good parts. I would like to pursuits best left to the highly agile, but Instead, we get strange omissions and difhave seen an older version of the any player is capable of doing the job and ficulties that were ironed out of most footboardgame computerized. ball sims years ago. For example, Other things detracting from a good valuable gameplay information is game include: the haphazard treatment of poorly presented or even omitted in league play (there are only 8 teams to some cases. When a player is blown spread over 64 conference and division off the field by an injury, there is no slots); computer teams whose statistics beinformation on the screen other than lie their success, like players rushing for a quick graphic of blood squirting 500 yards and passing for another couple out of a prone figure. To find out the of hundred on the losing side of a 1-0 particulars of who got whacked and game; and a rulebook straight out of the CCD LYCE how badly, you have to interrupt the Vague-Guys School of Manual Writing. Low 22 action and check your roster. The teams themselves are also hopelessly Visual information is also lacking. unbalanced, with the Halfling and Skaven The prime example is that there is (giant mutant rat) teams being completely THAT'S THE WAY THE HEAD BOUNCES The ultimate goal only a single icon for each character outclassed. in of Blood Bowl is to score, kill, and maim, not neceson a team. If I'm playing as the huAlthough MicroLeague failed to ship sarily in that order. man team, all my players look idenmodem play with BLOOD BOWL, they've altical on the field, even the free agent ready released a multiplayer patch. sometimes a lowly lineman will be the one Minotaur I purchased the game before. Gamers who found the \"Sorry, we fooled to make that perfect pass that gets you out you» note inside of the box can of trouble and into the end-zone. find this patch in various places In theory, once you have moved and on-line. abused all the players under your command, you then hit the end-turn button POST-MORTEM and hand things over to the other player. In the end, what it comes Unfortunately, there is another way to end down to is history. Those of us your turn, one which is almost completely who have been Blood Bowl fans out of your control. Certain failed maneuthrough the years will find ourvers, like dropping the ball, missing a selves enjoying the computerpass, or getting tackled end your turn auICCO EYE 8 VESITOR ized version, with its clever tomatically and turn things over to the 42 morsels of eye-candy and dediother player. For some reason, the tookom END 2 cation to the boardgame. Of clever-for-their-own-good kids at Games course we'll be griping all the Workshop decided that the game had a ORCS VS. HUMANS The on-field action resembles rugby a lot way. Newcomers, especially tendency to last a bit long, and introduced more than it does football. sport sim fans looking for a litthis \"feature\" as a mechanism to speed tle diversion from their usual things up in the latest edition of the You'd think they could have come up with fare, will probably get a big kick out of boardgame. Most computer gamers will different icons for different types of playtheir first few games, but ultimately they'll wish they had left it out of the computer ers on a single team. It would be nice if I become frustrated with Blood Bowl's version, or at the very least made the rule could tell at a glance if I am about to try a clumsy mechanics and gameplay. optional block against a fragile skeleton or a masTHE EDITORS SPEAK sive mummy. At the gameplay level, BLOOD BOWL is NAYSAYERS AND BLOOD BOWL CHEERLEADERS hampered largely by the incarnation of While Blood Bowl is a faithful rendithe boardgame it emulates. The newest tion of the boardgame and retains much version may be the one on game store PROS Great subject matter and easy play will draw players into the stadiof the wacky nihilistic post-punk humor shelves, but it also is the least play-tested, um. that Games Workshop products are so faand obviously bad ideas like the involunCONS Poor choices in design and mous for, it still has some fundamental tary turn end should not have been inflictpresentation may have some screamflaws in presentation and gameplay. ed on computer gamers. Quick and ing for blood by the fourth quarter. Regardless of how non-standard the simple might be good when you're doing HRR DEMENCUTTER 86 LINCMAN PEAVERS 50 REATING   124 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. AUGUST 1995 "


"HARPOON II DELUXE The Next Generation is Launched! The shock wave is just beginning. Announcing the most advanced naval battle simulation ever! Empowered to let you re-write history. Used in training by the Naval Academy, HARPOON II DELUXE puts you in the command center action like never before. TWA 750 45 CAP4 350 15 450 Q 310 MULTI-ME ENLIST NOW! \"Scenario Editor Contest\" Become a Wargame Designer! Create your own Original Scenario & have it published by Three-Sixty. For contest rules & regs visit Three-Sixty's Web Page on the Internet or AOL. ON CD-ROM MEDIA EDITIO PITION PRIESTERN PICTORIA PERA OO. Actual video clips of weapon launches and explosions. TON PZU Altitude, depth, and weather information. APOO  2 additional battlesets, for 30 new, startlingly realistic scenarios.  All-new Scenario Editor. You design the encounter. Over 100 full-motion video and sound clips for unbelievable realism.  Detect, track and engage all forces.  Realistic weather modeling.  Military-style vector maps.  Vast database with tech specs and pictures of hundreds of ships, subs and aircraft.  Lifelike communications models recreate electronic warfare.  Compatible with Cold War and Westpac Battle Sets. Add an incredible array of features like toolbar control buttons, easy user interface, and you have the most realistic battle game ever. Jeden Formation editor defines threat axis and patrol zones. Hundreds of database specs, photos and drawings of military hardware. Software and Artwork 1995 IntraCorp, Inc. All rights reserved. Harpoon II and Three Sixty are trademarks of IntraCorp, Inc. Harpoon is a registered trademark of GDW.Inc. Battlesel and Stall Assistant are renistered trademarks of ACSI. All other trademarks and copyrights acknowledged. INTRACORP Visit Three-Sixty Online: America Online (Keyword: Three-Sixty): Software Creations BBS (508) 365-9352; CompuServe: GamePub A+ Forum: Web Page: http://www.gate.net/-intracor/ To Order Call: (305) 373-7700 (800) INTRACO  BBS (305) 374-6872 Circle Reader Service #53 "


"INC. BOARDGAMES & RPGS THE NEW REPUBLIC GLO  DARK FORCE RISING \"STAR WARS THE NEW REPUBLIC: DARK FORCE RISING SOURCE BOOK'Grand Admiral Thrawn's plan to restore the Empire to absolute power proceeds with horrifying efficiency. Only the bravery and skill of princess Leia, Han Solo and Luke Skywalker can stop him from delivering a kiling stroke to the New Republic. $15 TALISMAN *TALISMAN: DUNGEON OF DOOM Beneath the ancient ruins lies the dark and terror ha un ied realm of the dread Lord of Darkness. This fierce ENTRALE and noble ruler will help any adventurer that can defeat him, but to reach him the adventurer must first brave the perils and natural dangers below the Eagle King's palace. $25 \"BATTLETECH A Dark age has befall en mankind. Where the United Star League once reigned, five successor states now battle for control. The Succession Wars are fought over water, ancient machines, and spare parts factonies. Control of these elements will lead to final victory and the domination of known space. $19 59 GURPS Axis Allies Player's Handbook Dungeons & Dragons 'GURPS BASIC SET the Generic Universal Roleplaying System, is the most flexible roleplaying system ever created. With just this Basic Set, you can adventure in any world you can imagine. Rules are Induded for al types of weapons from clubs to lasers... for wizards and magic with more than 100 spells... for psionic powers. $16 ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS PLAYER'S HANDBOOK' Everything the player needs is here to create a mighty hero or crafty wizard, unique aspects of the elves, dwarves and halflings and all the weapons, armor, magical spells, and rules for thrilling battles against supematural monsters! $19 BASIC SET TENNAR AXIS & ALLIES' Decide the late of a nation and the destiny of the world. The Balkans have fallen. Pearl Harbor has been attacked. Wake Island is in Japanese hands and Rommel has the British on the run! STEVE JACKSON GAMES BOARDGAMES BOARDGAMES BOARDGAMES BOARDGAMES BOARDGAMES BOARDGAMES $25 $37 S29 ANCIENT 4 Bttles of Ancient Wrld $21 Alexander at Tyre $18 Ancient Empires $29 Ancients $25 Barbarians $33 Hannibal $35 Imperator $21 Peloponnesian War $29 SPOR: Bat Roman Rep $33 Siege of Jerusalem $27 AMERICAN REVOLUTION Give Me Liberty $25 Rebels & Redcoats 2 $25 War of 1812 $22 CIVIL WAR Across Five Aprils 2 $25 Blue & Gray $25 Bobby Lee: A.C.W. Civil War $19 Embrace Angry Wind $24 Gettysburg $15 Guns of Cedar Creek $32 Lee Takes Command $22 Lee Vs. Grant $16 Roads to Gettysburg $24 Stonewall in the Valley S29 Thunder at Crossroad S27 ECONOMICS Global Survival $34 Stocks & Bonds $19 The Stock Market Gme $19 LEISURE / FAMILY Acquire $19 Alibi $12 Auction $14 Dinosaurs of Lost Wrid $15 Hexagony Legends of Robin Hood $11 Organized Crime Quest for the ideal Mate $15 Restaurant $25 Road to the Whitehouse $25 T.V. Wars $12 The Brickyard $20 Wild Space $34 FANTASY Advanced Heroquest $42 Battle Masters $42 Dragon Dice $10 Dragon Lords $29 Dragon Masters $16 Dungeon $16 ElfQuest $20 Hero Quest $29 Iron Dragon $25 Magic Realm $23 Magic Gathering Starter $8 Magic: Ice Age Starter $8 Man O' War $42 Sindbad $33 Talisman (3rd Ed) $44 The Hobbit Adventure $29 Titan $23 Vampire: Starter Deck $9 Warhammer Fantasy $48 Warhammer Quest $47 MODERN 6th Fleet $23 Across the Suez $13 Aegean Strike $19 Attack Sub $19 Back to Iraq $18 Battlefield Europe $22 Central America $23 Crisis: Korea 1995 $29 Firepower $23 Flashpoint: Golan $29 Flight Leader $21 Gull Strike $29 Harpoon S25 Harpoon, Naval Review $14 IDF (Israeli Def Force) $29 Light Division $24 Main Battle Tank $24 Modern Naval Battles 3 $19 Nato Phantom Leader $25 Phase Line Smash $25 Stand & Die $50 Tac Air $19 Team Yankee $20 MEDIEVAL Age of Chivalry 2 $27 Black Prince $25 Henry V $28 Ironsides $28 The Crusades II $28 NAPOLEONIC Austerlitz $30 Battles for Empires $32 Battles of Waterloo $33 Borodino $29 Empires at War $24 Empires in Arms $27 L'Armee du Nord $33 La Bataille d'aurstaedt $30 La Bataille de Ligny $39 La Bataille de Wavre $25 Napoleon at Austerlitz $20 Napoleon on the Danube $19 Napoleon's Battles 2 $14 Napoleons Italian Camp $22 Napole's Leipzig Cmp $25 Napoln Peninsula Cmp S22 Napain Russian Camp $22 Napoleons Later Bitles $25 The Napoleonic Wars $31 War & Peace $23 Wellington's Victory $16 Wooden Shps & Iron Mn $19 RAILROAD 1830: RR & Rob Baron $20 1856 $37 1870 $38 Australian Rails $21 British Rails $21 Empire Builder $25 Eurorails $25 Express (Card Game) $11 Nippon Rails $21 North American Rails $21 Rail Baron $19 SPORTS Football Strategy $12 Statis Pro Basketball $24 Statis Pro Grt Tm Bsbil $19 World Cup Ftball $38 SCIENCE FICTION Alpha Omega BATTSC Objctive Raids$13 Battletech 3rd Edition $19 Battle Tech Blueprints S10 Battle Tech Compendm S13 Bitle Tech Compnd CD S33 Battle Teech Tech Hbk $10 Bitietech/Citytech Blood Berets $29 Blood Bowl $45 Blood BowlDeath Zone $29 Cosmic Encounter $29 Fedration & Empire Dix $38 Fury of the Clansmen $29 Gateway to the Stars $22 Hacker $16 Hacker 2 $16 Illuminati:Nw Wild Order $10 Imperiurn, 2nd Edition $20 Merchant of Venus S25 On the Edge Booster On the Edge Starter $8 Rage Booster Pack $3 Rage Starter Deck Roadkill $19 Silent Death $42 Silent Death:Rulebook $15 Space Marine $49 Space Marine/Armies $25 Space Marine/Battlos $21 Spce Marines/Titan Leg $25 Space Marines Warlords $25 Spce Marine/Renegades $25 Star Fleet Battles $25 Star Fleet Bat Tactic Man$13 Star Trek TNG Booster $3 Star Trek TNG Starter $9 Star Wars Booster Pack $3 Star Wars Starter Deck $9 Starforce Terra $19 Stellar Conquest $19 Warhammer 40K $47 WHenr 40K/Codex Eldar $16 WHmr 40K/Codex-Orks $16 WHmr 40K/Tyranid Attck $39 STRATEGY Advanced Civilization $25 Blackbeard $27 Britannia $19 Civilization $29 Civilization Module $8 Colonial Diplomacy $42 Deluxe Diplomacy $42 Diplomacy $19 Enemy in Sight $12 Feudal $18 Florida $25 Guerilla $19 History of the World S27 Kingmaker $19 Kremlin $16 Kremlin Mod./Revolution $8 Maharaja $23 New World $19 Pax Britannica $18 Republic of Rome Supremacy 3rd Edition $42 Supremacy Mega Map $25 Supremacy Res Dck 2 $13 The New Acquire $25 Viceroys S25 We the People $29 VIETNAM / KOREA Frozen Chosin $25 Platoon $16 The Korean War $18 Vietnam WAR GENERAL Alamo $15 Blood & Iron $25 Campgn of Fred Great $24 Kolin:Fred's 1st Defeat $34 Lion of the North $29 WORLD WAR 1 Aces High $24 Aces High America Aces $24 Aces of Aces Pwrhouse $19 Knights of the Air S19 Landships Lawrence of Arabia $20 Richtofen's War $19 WORLD WAR 2 1944: The 2nd Front $32 A Line in the Sand Advnced Squad Leader $38 Advanced Third Reich $38 Afrika $21 Afrika Korps $12 Ambush $27 Ardennes $27 Axis & Allies $29 B-17 $18 Battle of the Bulge $16 Bloody Kasserine $15 Breakout: Normandy $23 Britain Stands Alone $25 Campaign to Stalingrad $29 D-Day $16 Danger Zone $25 Days of Decision II $42 Fire in the East $58 Flat Top Hitler's War $15 Last Blitzkrieg Luftwaffe Midway Naval War $12 Operation Crusader $29 Over the Reich $30 Pacific War $37 Panzer Leader Run Silent, Run Deep $28 Russian Front $21 Second Front $83 Sink the Bismarck Squad Leader $23 Third Reich $19 Thunder at Cassino $19 Turning Point Stalingrad $19 Up Front $19 Victory in Europe $16 Victory in Normandy Victory in the Pacific S17 War at Sea $12 Western Front S44 World War 2 $33 World in Flames $49 $25 $23 $19 $23 $18 $23 $11 $15 $13 "


"Call 800-699-4263 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'l 802-767-3033 Source 10349 PO Box 234 Dept 10349 Rochester, VT 05767 OVERNIGHT SHIPPING in US $4 per order. Mail to Canada, PR, HI, AK, APO, FPO $4 per order, Worldwide airmail $6 per item. Handling $2 per shipment. Hardware orders may requin ping charges. Call for details. Visa, MC and Discover accepted. CHECKS HELD 4 WEEKS. MONEY ORDERS UNDER S200 SAME AS CASH. COD $8. Defectives replaced with same product. Most items shipped same day. Shipping times may vary. Price/ availability may change. All sales final. 'CALL OF @ CALL Of CTHULHO CTHULHU is a History World 652 DUNGEON MASTER Guide Dungeons & Dragons Panathalieleza la fit World of lanes roleplaying game based on the works of H.P. Lovecraft, in which ordinary peo ple are confronted by the terrifying beings and forces of the Cthulhu Mythos. Players portray investigators of things unknown and unspeakable Except for dice, everything needed for play in included in this book. $16 'ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS DUNGEON MASTER GUIDE' All the information you need to create and run thrilling, swords and sorcery adventures is clearly laid out in the Dungeon Master Guide. Learn all there is to know about magical spells, hundreds of magical devices and treasures. S16 \"HISTORY OF THE WORLD' traces the progress of mankind from the dawn of civilization to the threshold on the modem era. Each player commands 7 empires, vies with amies and fleets, and builds monuments, $27 Warhammer Questo BRITANNIA' is a new multiplayer game about the 1000 year history of the birth of Britain. Play begins with the Roman invasion of 43 AD, and ends with the last great invasions by Norwegians and Normans in 1066. Each of the sixteen game turns represents about 85 years. Each player controls several nations. S19 \"MAGIC THE GATHERING STARTER DECK is the first in the DECKMASTER series of collectable trading card games from Wizards of the Coast. Featuring more than 300 different cards, 60 in each deck, this is a fantasy game of epic proportions. Some cards are fairly common, some uncommon, and some rare. S8 DURANTE a. The Gathering WARHAMMER QUEST' You take the part of heroic wamiors as they explore the caves and tunnels vanquishing terrifying monsters and avoiding deadly traps in their quest for treasure and glory. S47 RPG: FANTASY RPG: FANTASY RPG: FANTASY RPG: HORROR RPG: HORROR RPG: SCI-FI ARS MAGICA Ars Magica 3rd Edition $19 Black Death Deadly Legacy $10 Festival of the Damned $10 Maleficium S15 Mid Smmer Nght Dream $10 Trial By Fire GURPS HORROR Creatures of the Night $14 CthulhuPunk S16 GURPS Horror $14 Mage:The Ascension $16 Vampire Companion $16 Vampire: Masquerade $16 Werewolf: Apocalypse $16 GURPS SCI-FI Aliens $14 Atomic Horror $14 Callahan's Xtime Saloon $14 Cyberpunk Adventures $14 Cyberpunk $14 Cyberworld (Reprint) $14 For love of Mother-Not $8 Lensmen $14 Robots $14 Time Travel (Reprint) $14 Time Travel Adventures $14 War Against the Chtorr $14 S7 Monstrous Compendium Al-Qadir Creatures $10 Compendm Annual '94 $15 Dark Sunt $11 Fiend Folio Creatures $10 Greyhawk Creatures S9 Kara-Tur Creatures S15 Mystara Monstrous Cmp S15 Outer Planes Creatures $11 Planescape Monstrous $15 Ravenloft Appendix 3 $15 Ravenloft Creatures $10 Spelljammer Creatures 1 $9 Planescape Campaign Setting $25 Planes of Chaos Boxed $25 Planescape Accessories In the Cage:Gde to Sigil $13 Planescape Adventures Deva Spark Eternal Boundary Fires of Dis $9 In the Abyss $9 Well of Worlds $13 Ravenloft Castle Forlorn $16 Island of Terror $10 Ravenloft Camp Setting $25 Ravenlolt Setting $16 $13 MAGE Ascention's Right Hand S13 Book of Madness $13 Book of Shadows $15 Chantry Book $15 Chaos Factor Digital Web $13 Mage $19 Sons of Ether $10 Storyteller's Screen $8 Technocracy: Iteration X $10 Verbena ADD 2ND EDITION RULES Dungeon Masters Gde $16 Monster Manual $19 Players Handbook S19 Audio Adventures First Quest S22 Hail the Heroes $12 Karameikos Night of the Vampire $12 Red Steel Campgn Exp $22 Track of the Vampire $13 Track of the Werewolf $13 Dark Sun Accessory Complet Gladiator $13 Dark Sun Boxed Set $17 Dune Trader $10 Slave Tribes $10 Terrors of the Desert $12 Valley of Dust & Fire $10 Dark Sun Sourcebook City by the Sill Sea S19 Citystate of Tyr $10 Dragon Kings Hrdbound $16 Elves of Athas $10 Ivory Triangle Camp Exp $16 Will and the Way $12 FR Boxed Set City of Splendors $19 Elminster's Ecologies $19 Great Khan Game S11 Horde $15 Maztica FRealm Settng $16 Menzoberranzan $22 Ruins of Myth Drannor $16 Ruins of Undermnth $19 Ruins of Undermntn 2 $19 FR Sourcebook Aurora;s Whole Catalog S8 Code of the Harpers $13 Dalelands Draconomicon $13 Drow of the Underdark $13 Elves of Evermeet $13 Gde to Forgotten Rims $13 Pirates of Fallen Stars $13 Volo's Guides each S9 S9 GURPS Bestiary $14 Bunnies & Burrows $14 China $14 Cliffhangers $11 Deathwish $7 Espionage $14 GURPS Fantasy, 2nd $15 GURPS Rulebook, 3rd $16 Hig-Tech 2nd Edition $14 Magic Items 2 $14 Martial Arts Adventures S14 Martial Arts S13 Operation Endgame S14 Psionics $14 Supporting Cast $14 Timeline $14 Ultra-Tech, 2nd Edition $14 Update, 2nd 3rd Edition $5 Vehicles S16 GURPS Fantasy Camelot S14 Conan S14 Fantasy Adventures Fantasy GM Pack Grimoire (Reprint) $14 Magic, 2nd Edition $14 GURPS Times Aztecs $14 Imperial Rome S14 Robin Hood S14 Scarlet Pimpernel $11 Vikings CALL OF CTHULHU 1990's Handbook $11 Advnt in Arkham Cntry $14 Arkham Unveiled $16 Blood Brothers 2 $15 Blood Brothers $15 Cairo Guidebook $10 Call of Cthulhu, 5th $16 Creatures of Dreamind $13 Dire Documents $7 Encyclopedia Cthulhiana S9 Investigator Compnion 2 $10 Keeper's Compendium $11 Keeper's Screen, 5th $12 London Guidebook $10 Miskatonic University $10 Myst of Sepent Mound $14 Sacraments of Evil $14 Secret Societies Strange Aeons $11 Taint of Madness $16 Ye Book of Monstres $10 Call of Cthulhu Adventure Cthulhu Casebook S15 Curse of Cthulhu S15 Dark Designs 1890 $14 Dreamlands 2nd Edit $13 Escape frm Innsmouth $16 Fatal Experiments $14 Fearful Passages $14 Great Old Ones $13 Horror on Orient Exprss S29 King of Chicago S10 Mansions of Madness S14 Return to Dunwich $14 Tles of Miskatonic Valley $14 Thing at threshold 20 $13 C of Cthulhu License Item Devil's Children Dwellers in the Shadow S14 End of the World $13 Grimlock Isle $13 In the Time of Lovecraft $7 Lurking Fears $13 Walker in the Wastes $15 Whispers in the Dark $12 VAMPIRE Storyteller's Handbook S15 Storyteller's Screen $10 Vampire, 2nd Edition $19 Vampire Players Guide $18 Vampire Adventure Blood Nativity $5 Dirty Secrets of Blk Hnd $13 Elysium: Elder War $13 Hunters Hunted $10 STAR WARS Star Wars Hardcover $19 Star Wars Sourcebook $18 Star Wars Adventures Battle for Golden Sun $10 Black Ice $10 Crisis on Cloud City $10 Death in the Undercity $10 Domain of Evil S10 Jedi's Honor S12 Mission to Lianna $10 Otherspace 2: Invasion $10 Planet in the Mist $10 Riders of Maelstrom $10 Scavenger Hunt $10 Scoundrel's Luck $12 Strike Force: Shintipole $10 Star Wars Sourcebooks Classic Campaigns S13 Dark Empires S19 Dark Force Rising Miniatures Companion $13 Miniatures Rules, 2nd $15 Rebel Alliance $18 The Jedi $19 Wanted by Cracken $13 Star Wars Supplement Creatures of Galaxy S13 Deathstar Companion $13 Fantastic Technology $13 Gamemaster's Screen $10 Planets of the Galaxy 3 $13 CASTLE FALKENSTEIN Cstle Falkenstein S25 Castle Falkenstein St $19 Comme Il Faut $12 S8 $15 DICE POLY MEGATUBES Opaque Set Assorted $3 Pearlescent Set Assort S6 Transparent Set Assort S5 Twinkle Set Assorted S6 WEREWOLF GM Screen $10 Werewolf, 2nd Edition $19 Werewolf Adventure Rite of Passage $10 Under a Blood Rd Moon $10 Valkenburg Foundation $10 Ways of the Woll $10 $14 INDIANA JONES 1 Jones & Gldn Vampire $16 1 Jones & Rising Sun $15 Indiana Jones $25 Raiders of Lost Ark S-bk $19 WARHAMMER FANTASY The Enemy Within V. 1 $11 Warhammer Fantasy, $19 WRAITH Character's Kit Storyteller's Screen Wraith $10 $10 $19 AllaAAAAAnn "


"BAO Publishing Presents the Complete PC Aviation Experience. BAO Publishing, developers of Microsoft Flight SimulatorTM presents the ultimate flight simulation experience with BAO's Europe 1, Las Vegas Scenery, Flight Simulator Flight Shop and Tower, the most realistic ATC simulation available. Feel the tension mount and the sweat start) as you direct heavy traffic from the tower at Chicago's O'Hare airport; take a chance and play the odds in Vegas as you complete a fly-by of the casinos and surrounding desert; proudly step back and admire your latest plane design with custom colors and graphics all ready for her maiden customized flight adventure or fly the Alps and discover Europe from the air. All this and more is possible with BAO. File your flight plan today and start your adventure. \"A sure bet for computer pilots who demand realistic scenery\" -Greg Harris, Editor of Full Throttle LAS VEGAS EUROPEI Challenge your skills with a fly-by of Hoover Dam and other famous Las Vegas landmarks. Europe 1 includes over 100 airports with taxiways, moving objects, unique buildings and approach lights. Las Vegas Scenery offers you startling, realistic, 3D-level detail of Las Vegas and the surrounding desert. The scenery combines actual satellite images with special aerial and ground-base photography to faithfully recreate more than 4,000 square miles of the Nevada landscape. Tour scenic Lake Mead, the famous Vegas \"Strip\" or catch a stunning view of Hoover Dam, one of the man-made wonders of the world. You set the itinerary. Europe I lets you explore from the air the scenic countries of Germany, Austria, Switzerland and the Netherlands. You'll discover beautiful cities like Berlin, Munich, Vienna, Geneva and Amsterdam. All major roads, waterways, lakes, cities, the Alps and landmarks are realistically recreated including all IFR/VFR airports. Experience Europe from your own cockpit. \"Best of Show\" at C.E.S. --Awarded by Game Bytes Magazine FLIGHT SHOP TOWER An easy-to-use (windows-based) aircraft factory lets you design your own plane. You'll calmly choreograph the movement of incoming and outgoing air traffic high above Chicago's O'Hare airport. Flight Simulator Flight Shop puts the tools in your hands. You build, customize and paint BAO your own planes and a flight dynamics editor allows you to specify the flying characteristics. Share your designs with other flight enthusiasts through BBS's such as CompuServe. Create your own flight plan and send it to the built-in Flight Service Station (FSS) and then hop in your flight simulator airplane for an ATC controlled flight. With Tower the responsibility is all yours! As BAD a tower controller, thousands of passengers will rely on your ability to make split-second decisions. You'll handle realistic aircraft takeoffs, landings and ground movements through a 360 degree panable window view. Based on FAA and Transport Canada's professional training simulation software, Tower puts you in the middle of all the action. Circle Reader Service #293 BAO. See your local retailer or call: (217) 356-0188 for more information Developers of Microsoft Flight Simulator 1994 Bruce Artwick Orxanization, LM. Microsoft is a registered trademark of Microsoft Corporation. Flight Simulator is a registered trademark of Bruce A. Artwick. Europe I wis designed for RAO by Alting Software under license, and producel by the Bruce Arhwick Organization, Lud. Tower is a trademark of Aviation Simulations, Inc., a joint wnture of Wesson International, Inc. and Bruce Artwick Organization, Ltd. CompuSene is a registered trademark of CompuServe, Inc. BAO is a trademark of Bruce Artwick Organization, L. All rights reserved. Printed in the U.S.A. "


"SIMULATION The Red Baron Lives! ROGEYSA BAR & GRILL THE MAJORITY HoloByte's FALCON 3.0, Sublogic's ATP and SOFTWARE OF SIMULATIONS Dynamix's RED BARON. ARE FLASHES IN These classic simulations remain fun, but they the pan, can be frustrating once you've gotten accustomed PATCHES AND they're hot for to the bells and whistles of newer simulations. a few months. Many don't support alternate input devices, while but soon others don't run well on fast machines, and some HACKING UTILITIES they're gone just suffer from a limited number of missions or and forgotten. gameplay options. As PCs get faster and more capable, new sims I l nostalgia strikes, don't let these setbacks GIVE NEW LIFE TO come along that look, sound, and act more like keep you away from the cockpits of your favorite real vehicles. Few of us take the time to rememold flight simulators. Thanks to the efforts of ber, much less replay, older sims. Sure, you occasome code-savvy flight sim fans, there are addOLD SIMS sionally find folks still playing CHUCK YEAGER's ons galore in the freeware and shareware arenas Air COMBAT, SECRET WEAPONS OF THE LUFTWAFFE, that can bring old sims up to speed. and F-15 STRIKE EAGLE III, but when was the last time you heard someone mention flying around BARON DOWN in BLUE MAX, SOLO FLIGHT, or even PACIFIC Take, for example, RED BARON. Released in the STRIKE? dark ages of 1990, this sim from Damon Slye's On a very rare occasion, though, a simulation team at Dynamix featured a revolutionary flight comes along that's so good that it stays available model complete with realistic spins and energy on store shelves not for weeks or months, but for bleed. Amazingly, RED BARON is still selling today years. Ahead of their times, these sims pack so as part of CD-ROM bundles with other Dynamix much realism and play value that they're able to flight sims. stay competitive with their younger counterparts. In the five years since RED BARON's release, This short list includes sims such as Spectrum only Origin's WINGS OF GLORY has challenged it for the title of best World War I sim. But RED BARON does have some problems on today's PCs. It runs too fast This month in simulation news... on Pentium systems, which Spectrum HoloByte's FALCON 4, the next sim in the popular air combat series, not only affects realism and will probably be slightly delayed by personnel changes on the project's developgameplay, but also screws up ment team. Spectrum recently laid off several key managers in the group, and the program's Al calculawill be restructuring the team. In other personnel news, Frank Savage, the lead programmer of Origin's WING tions. Also, its support of enCOMMANDER 3, has moved on to a new interactive division of FASA, the company hanced control devices isn't that made its name with the BATTLETECH line of games. Will Savage be using his up to par with modern sims; experience with space simulations to create new BATTLETECH projects? Papyrus Software, creators of INDYCAR and NASCAR RACING, are working on a rudder support isn't propornew, enhanced version of INDYCAR. INDYCAR RACING 2.0 will essentially bring the tional, and exura buttons and original game up to the graphic and realism levels of NASCAR. SVGA graphics, view hats are ignored on new sound effects, more realistic handling, and the ability to connect to Papyrus' non-programmable devices. new multiplayer online service will be key features. And while we're on-line, Domark has finally launched CONFIRMED KILL, the multiProgrammers have poked player WWII combat game, on the Internet. For more information on how to get around in RED BARON'S proconnected call Domark tech support at (415) 513-8929. gram and data files over the years and found workarounds by Denny Atkin ON THE RADAR AUGUST 1995 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 129 "


"XBaron SETUP UTILITY Hat/throttle Option Throttle That Hudder Detions Rotax Holl Button Options Joystick X Care Jousticky tunso LOGA Backa DIX 1hr 002 Tor th sta Thr un to accou SOS Flukter Cal for these limitations. Checking Commovement has no effect (great if your joygrammed for a variety of functions, includpuServe's flight sim forum (FSForum) I stick doesn't center precisely), and adjusting setting various views, «blipping» the found dozens of patches, TSRs, and misjoystick sensitivity by altering the response engine power, and unjamming the guns. sion files designed to bring RED BARON up curves for each axis. X BARON 1.46 also supports the Thrustto par. While we wait for RED BARON II, RED BARON does support an analog master-style view hat, but not the one on these enhancements can make the golden throttle and rudder pedals, but only in a the CH Flightstick Pro. oldie fly like a factory-fresh sim. After apvery limited fashion. The inputs work as if Once XBARON is set up by patching the plication of a few of these patches, about they're coming from the keyboard-movRED BARON executable and running XBthe only thing missing from RED BARON is ing the throttle jumps the setting by 10 SETUP, it's completely transparent. The SVGA graphics. percent, and hitting the rudder pedals freeware program works on both the original floppy version of the THE X FILE SETUP UTILITY program, as well as the The simplest way to bring RED BARON DacO Version 1.40 Version 1.40 slightly enhanced CDup to speed is with Bob Church's XBARON ROM update. patch. The most recent version as of this writing, XBARON 1.46, addresses nearly all CASTING A HEX of RED BARON's problems on fast maXBARON makes some 12 Us chines. Most significant is the Frame Rate changes to RED BARON Limiter, which keeps screen updates from But he Look W 120 to make it smoother taking place so fast that the program doesrunning and easier to n't operate properly. RED BARON does control, but it doesn't alflight model calculations between screen ter the gameplay. If you updates, and if those updates take place Het/Throttle || SAUE COMO EXIT TO POR want to dive into RED too quickly, then the program doesn't BARON'S guts and teng Bo Churah have time to complete its calculations, Copyright  1995 All Rights Reserved change how it works, making aircraft control dillicult and causJoe Scoleri's RB-HEX 3 SNOOPY VS BARON X Bob Church's XBARON utility makes RED BARON ing computer-controlled enemies to fly playable on today's machines through such features as a frame rate limis the package for you. strangely. XBARON limits the frame rate so iter and an advanced joystick configuration utility (pictured). It includes a hex editor that your Sopwith Camel won't speed over and a full explanation the landscape HTUURIT TILITestur of the various values in RED BARON's data like an F-15. AIRCO JUNKER files so that you can go in and change alNLBA_02 MORANE The screen upBLBR 03 NIEU11 most any value in the simulation. You can NIEU28 dates still look AVIATIK alter aircraft performance, gun field of BE2 PFALZ silky smooth, BRISTOL fire, service ceiling, wing strength, and a CAMEL though. RUMPLER host of other values. If you don't feel one FE2 SES The Frame -FOK07 SIEMENS of the planes really performs like the real FOKD8 Rate Limiter FOKDR1 SOPPUP thing, change the performance. You can also works in even use the patches to alter an existing SO DE ENTRU IHO ES UTIGEN EJ K HALBO2 SPAD..7 RED BARON'S HANDLEY CD RBMB Data aircrali so it simulates another fighter not VCR mode Elevator Medium Red Upper Wing Medium Blue Fuselage Dark Red included in RED BARON. One warning: Yellow Lower Wing Off-White Cowling Tan and fixes a ARROWS . move cursor . -. change color ESC plane ALT-0  exit Hex editing is a bit dangerous. If you alter problem that's the wrong value, you can cause the proplagued all the THE ART OF FLYING Devise your own aircraft color schemes with Joe Scoleri's RB COLOR gram to malfunction or even crash. But Dynamix flight utility. the program is pretty casy to use, and if simulators. If you follow the detailed instructions you you record a mission on a Pentium 90 and makes the rudder dellect 100 percent. should have no problems. display it on a 486/33, the tape doesn't XBARON patches the throttle to work as a Along with the editor, RB-Hex includes play back properly. If both systems are true proportional throttle, making for a number of prebuilt patches. You can use running an XBARON-patched version of smooth engine adjustments. It also supthese to lessen the likelihood of mid-air RED BARON, though, everything plays back ports proportional rudder response, so collisions, make wing strength more realisat the proper speed. XBARON also adds you can kick the rudder over a little or a tic on some of the fighters, turn some sinnew functions for manually accelerating or lot. You can even set up a partial ailerongle-gun planes into twin-gunners, and decelerating tape playback. rudder linkage so the plane will realisticaladjust some improper performance valXBARON also adds one of the most flexily roll a little when the rudder pedals are ues. My favorite additions, though, are the ble joystick configuration screens I've ever clepressed. Blitz Machine lighter and Blitz Bomber, seen. You can set a dead zone where stick Up to four joystick buttons can be proultra-powerful and completely unrealistic ALBA_05 NIEUPORT RE8 ROLAND -SNIPEFOKO3 SOPIRI SPAD 13 Rudder 130 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. AUGUST 1995 "


"HE'S THE VILLAIN ... DW. BRADLEY'S DARKLIGHT AWAKENING ... YOU'RE THE HERO ATTACK WITH HAND-TO-HAND WEAPONS, RANGED WEAPONS AND SUPER POWERS CAN YOU SURVIVE WHEN THE BAD GUYS DON'T STAY ON THE PAGE? STEP INTO THE ADVENTURE AND LIVE THE COMIC BOOK. FIND THE ALLIES WHO CAN TEACH YOU TO USE YOUR NEW FOUND POWERS FLY AIR CARS AND DRIVE TANKS EXPLORE TEMPLES, LABS, SLUMS, CITIES, FORESTS, BATTLEFIELDS, AND MORE LENCS LIBERTY'S RAS IMMERSE YOURSELF IN A FUTURISTIC SVGA WORLD DO ARMOR EERIDED POMER 1 HUND 100% dege EDEN READ THE CYBERMAGE COMIC BOOK FROM THE EDEN MATRIX PRESS. PRESS FIRST ISSUE INCLUDED WITH THE GAME! CHECK OUT THE DEMO AT OUR WORLD WIDE WEB SITE. HTTP://WWW.EA.COM/ORIGIN.HTML ORIGIN SYSTEMS IS AN ELECTRONIC ARTS COMPANY. 12940 RESEARCH BLVD. AUSTIN, TX 78750-3235 1995, ORIGIN SYSTEMS, INC. CYBERMAGE AND DARKLIGHT AWAKENING ARE TRADEMARKS OF ORIGIN SYSTEMS, INC. ORIGINIS A REGISTERED TRADEMARK OF ORIGIN SYSTEMS, INC. ELECTRONIC ARTS IS A REGISTERED TRADEMARK OF ELECTRONIC ARTS. Circle Reader Service #99 BRIGIN "


"RED BARON PATCH ROSTER planes thrown in just for fun. The Blitz izations in the MissioN BUILDER. History Machine is a blast to fly when you want to buffs can use Graham von Cree's mow down everything in your path (imagRICHTH patch to change RED BARON LO ine flying an A-10 in the first World War). reflect that Richtofen flew a Halberstadt in Like XBARON, RB-HEX is freeware. January, 1917 when his Albatros was damaged, and a Pfalz in February, 1918 when A PLANE OF A DIFFERENT airframe failured grounded Fokker Dr.Is. COLOR Once you've fine-tuned the sim, check Also from Joe Scoleri comes RB COLOR, out the dozens of custom missions for the a neat little utility that lets you customize RED BARON MISSION BUILDER available onaircraft color schemes. If you've always line. Some of these reenact historical batwanted to fly a Sopwith Snipe with yellow tles, while others simply create challenging wings and a blue fuselage, now you can. tactical scenarios. You might want to duplicate a particular ace's color scheme, or perhaps change UPDATES ABOUND both enemy and allied aircraft to the same RED BARON's not the only sim with unofcolor scheme to make combat even more ficial patches. Break out your modem or challenging. The unregistered version browse your local PD/shareware library only lets you fly color-altered Sopwith and you'll find fixes and enhancements for Snipes and Fokker D.VIIs, but the $10 full FALCON 3.0, SECRET WEAPONS OF THE program lets you alter the paint job on LUFIWAFFE, ACES OVER EUROPE, and a host any fighter. of other sims. Even recent sims have alThere are a host of other patches availready been enhanced by enthusiastic proable. You can turn a Sopwith Camel into grammers-there's a patch floating the later Sopwith Dolphin, use ACE-CONaround the Internet that lets you fly any of TROL to revive dead pilots and edit your the planes in EA's U.S. NAVY FIGHTERS. pilot roster, and even fix improper pluralHappy hunting! The filenames listed here are listed as they appear in CompuServe's FSForum. You should also be able to find them on most online services with similar names. XB146.ZIP XBaron 1.46 RBHEX3.ZIP RB-Hex 3 RBCEDIT.ZIP RBColor 1.3 DOLPHN.ZIP Patch Sopwith Camel to perform as a Sopwith Dolphin ACRB.ZIP Ace-Control, for reviving dead pilots and editing rosters RBUNIT.ZIP GIF maps showing ground unit and landmark placement in RED BARON RBCD.ZIP View hat and extra button TSRs for the View hat and extra hu CD-ROM version of RED BARON RBSTIK.ZIP View hat and extra button TSRs for the floppy release RBMBP.ZIP Fixes pluralization errors in the Mission Builder RBCONFZIP Official Dynamix patch to fix problems with saving configuration information RICHTH.ZIP Alters the planes Richthofen flew during 1917 and 1918 FK-DZE.ZIP Turns the Fokker D.VII into the D.VIIF with a 185 hp BMW engine MBPTCH.ZIP Enables new aircraft and aces from the Mission Builder in Career Mode RBEDIT.ZIP Lets you edit pilot status MI THUNDERSEAT \"A DOUBLE MUST-HAVE. Anyone who plays computer games will want this AMAZING CHAIR!\" Marc Spiwak POPULAR ELECTRONICS \"I could actually FEEL the punch of the afterburner!\" Ed Dille, ELECTRONIC GAMES Feedback System Used in Real F-16 Simulators Now Available to the Public \"VIRTUAL UTOPIA!» Marc Dultz, STRATEGY PLUS HOW IT WORKS A 100 watt subwoofer built into the base generates low frequency sound that resonates through the wave chamber hidden inside the chair. Thus you not only hear but FEEL your simulation. Paired with your amplifier, the ThunderSeat makes your favorite flight sim as realistic as it can be without a motion simulator! OPTIONAL SIDE CONSOLES put your favorite joystick controls and mouse at a convenient position. Add a keyboard holder and you have the perfect setup for both flight simulation and office work. Shake Rattle and Roll for as little as $159.95! For a FREE CATALOGUE CALL 1.800  8-THUNDER Whether its the rumble of your NASCAR or recoil of your Chain Gun, the ThunderSeat lets you blast off to a new level of realism. ThunderSeat Technologies 6330 Arizona Circle  Los Angeles, CA 90045 310 410-0022 FAX: 310 410-1569 132 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. AUGUST 1995 "


"Actual screen shots used FLY! This is it. Real planes. Real maneuvers. Real scenery. Real flight. For BM-PC and PC Compatibles with CD-ROM FUICHE A Looking Glass Technologies Production UNLIMITED Circle Reader Service #73 Doruled by Viren Interactive Available in major retail outlets or order direct ( 60-7455 Entertainment Inc i c Con Un looking Class and the distinctive logos are trademarks of looking Glass Texnologies Inc All rights reserved INTERACTIVE 2005 oking Class "


"PREVIEW The Danger Zone Spectrum HoloByte's Top Gun Targets A New Squadron Of Mavericks by Mike Weksler SNEAK PREVIEW Game Still In Development T THE ONSET OF THE VIETNAM WAR, U.S. FIGHTER AIRCRAFT WERE recognized ARMED WITH AIR-TO-AIR MISSILES as being just as important as capable of shooting down targets the newfangled missiles. outside of a pilot's visual range. As more pilots engaged in dogU.S. military tacticians assumed that with fights, and as U.S. air losses mountthe new long-distance capability of these ed, the Navy recognized the need missiles, the days of close-in dogfighting to teach the fine art of dogfighting were long gone. So confident were these to a new generation of fighter pitacticians that the earliest F-4 Phantoms lots. It was out of this need that a weren't even equipped with guns. new type of air combat training LIGHTS, CAMERA, COMBAT Top Gun actor James Tolkan Pilots of these F-4s found themselves in program was born, a program recreates his role as your hard-edged, take no b.s. an odd situation. The restrictive rules of called Top Gun. squadron commander. engagement required them to visually When Spectrum Holo Byte set identify targets prior to attack. However, out to design yet another modern air F-14 Tomcat sim, the design team did two once a fighter was close enough to visual combat simulation, they recognized a simthings. First, they took a hot genre for air ly identify a MiG, he was often too closeilar need to train new pilots. The software combat and made it approachable for the to use his missiles, yet close enough to shelves are stocked full of complex, realisnovice, without insulting the experienced engage with guns. When U.S. air losses tic simulations with manuals as thick as player. Then, to ensure they captured the grew at an alarming rate, guns were bricks, all of which are daunting to the essence of the popular film for a strong quickly returned to the Phantoms, and newcomer to flight. So, like the Navy did \"tie-in,\" Spectrum HoloByte procured the \"old fashioned\" dogfighting skills were more than 20 years ago, Spectrum set out talents of actor James Tolkan to reprise to design a new his role of Hondo: the bald, tough-talktype of air coming, cigar-chomping, commanding offibat training procer. Why no Tom Cruise? Simple-when gram, a simyou sit down to fly in TOP GUN, you are ulation designed Maverick. RSTALL to teach new pilots the fine art \"HEY, COUGAR, YOU SEEN of modern air ANY CARRIERS AROUND warfare. The HERE?\" new sim is Top The Top Gun action takes place in GUN: FIRE AT three hot-spot theaters: Cuba, Korca, and WILL, based Libya, with approximately 40 missions upon the midfor you to show your stull. Throughout 80s film, Top the game, a subplot will pit you against a Gun. By retainnefarious antagonist who is behind most ing the slightly of the \"fires\" your carrier is assigned to Marsue Cam reckless, seat-ofstomp out. the-pants flavor There are both cinematic and static NEED A LIGHT? You don't want to be on the receiving end of \"Maverick's\" Ffrom the movie (i.e., map view) briefings and debriefings 14 Tomcat. Notice the pop-up windows with the \"God's-eye\" radar on the left and a missile camera view on the right, depicting the action as seen from and combining with over 20 actors to keep the level of inanother enemy aircraft. it with a detailed terest and llash appeal high, and cineUTD I STALL 100 GUN 2 TE SW COCK METAI 134 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. AUGUST 1995 "


"LAUHCH INFA RADAR ECM IFF BRAKE SU FLAT 15.02.09 00:2509 GARRAIT SHCOO SLIP O-ED-J\"-O 33333 LOV ATTACI SIC HOTEL C KORK matic CNN-style news briefs to keep you HEADS UP informed of the world situation. The inIn air combat dividual missions are the core of the terms, «pilot workRSTALL game, and they deal primarily with the Fload\" relers to the STALL 14's mission: fleet defense. That includes task-load that a pilot GEREE flying lots of BARCAP (Barrier Combat must manage in orAUTO Air Patrol) missions, where you protect der to accomplish his your carrier from all airborne threats. mission. Managing HOOR There are also TARCAP (Target Combat various radar, HUD Air Patrol) missions, where you escort (Heads Up Display), strike aircraft to their target and keep the communication and MiGs off their back. weapon systems all Individual missions are designed to contribute to this keep the action level high with enough workload. Most \"real\"CALL THE BALL!\" Harrowing carrier landings are all in a day's work MIGS, Bear Bombers, enemy shipping, istic simulations, like for Maverick. Top Gun has several cockpit views, but this one gives you SAM (surface-to-air missiles), and antiMicroProse's F-14 a good field of view to get your bird back on the ship in one piece. aircraft guns to keep you mighty busy. To FLEET DEFENDER and handle the various threats, you'll be packSpectrum HoloByte's FALCON 3.0, try to quences and digitally recorded radio ing some serious heat, from short range simulate all of these systems, creating a chatter help keep you suspended in the Sidewinder heat-seeking missiles, longer moderately realistic workload for the Top Gun universe. In the high-resolution range Sparrow radar-guided missiles, and player to manage. Of course, the Top mode, the graphics are nothing less than very long range Phoenix missiles that can Gun designers want to reduce the pilot state-of-the-art, like U.S. NAVY FIGHTERS, reach targets over 100 miles away. workload in order to ease new pilots into but with excellent terrain and well-renthe genre. But, unlike previous dered 3D objects. \"simplified\" simulations that Even more compelling, however, is the completely eliminate such aggressive multiplayer support in Tor things as radar and various GUN. For network play, up to 16 players HUD modes, ToP GUN will inwill be able to fly simultaneously, break clude all of the instruments and off into smaller groups, and yes, even enradar equipment—they'll just be ter or leave a battle without restarting the simplified. There will be some game. Modem play should also be incorform of targeting radar, detailed porated. While our beta copy of the game HUD modes, and a threat warnran okay on a hot-rodded 486DX4-100, it ing receiver, enhanced to proreally took the full-dress Pentium 90 to KLADU: 282 Amat: 03929NIN 08:15:17 GAME SPEED: XI vide a \"God's-eye view\" of the run the game in 640x480 without a hitch.     pment z surrounding threats. Additionally, there is a suite of analog RETURN TO BASE DETAILS, DETAILS In addition to outstanding terrain, the gauges and displays which disWith its emphasis on cinematics and 3D objects are amazingly realistic. On this F-14, the wings tinguish the product as a seriinstant action, it looks like TOP GUN may swing according to your airspeed, and you can even see the control surfaces move! ous, albeit less complex appeal to action fans who enjoy games simulation. Additionally, there like STRIKE COMMANDER and WING COMare innovative pop-up target camera winMANDER III. Additionally, it looks like it As with both WING COMMANDER III and dows, reminiscent of MicroProse's will be ideal for those who want to experiSTRIKE COMMANDER, you are given naviF-117A STEALTH FIGHTER. ence jet combat but have been put off by gation waypoints via in-flight maps, and the notorious complexity of other sims. you may encounter hostiles at any point \"TALK TO ME GOOSE!\" With adjustable difficulty levels for both along the way. In our pre-release version, TOP GUN appears to be designed less the flight models and the enemy Al, it there is also a \"complete mission\" option to simulate the actual F-14 Tomcat than might even lure a few seasoned cockpit This is a handy feature that lets you skip the experience of strapping into \"Maverjockeys into its targeting range, but that's to the next mission or re-do the current ick's\" F-14 from the TOP GUN movie. The uncertain. What is certain is this: with its one if you find yourself in over your game's rock soundtrack (including a depotential for instant gratification, only head. Top GUN won't have robust mission cent re-recorded version of Kenny Logone aircraft to master, and the chance to planning like U.S. NAVY FIGHTERS, but gins' hit title song) is digitally recorded play the high-flying hotshot, TOP GUN you will have several instant action sceonto the CD, so you can enjoy genuine will, like its namesake, train a whole new narios with which to practice carrier land music regardless of your installed sound generation of gamers for simulated jet ing skills or dogfighting techniques. card. Additionally, the cinematic secombat. AUGUST 1995. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 135 "


"REVIEW Reinventing The Wheel Extreme's COMPETITION DRIVING SYSTEM Takes The Checkered Flag Of Driving Controls by Gordon Goble Price: Y ASSOCIATION WITH COMPUTER something torn from WORLD CIRCUIT personal GAMING WORLD USUALLY PUTS ME a Formula 1 racer, track records. CDS designIN THE FORTUITOUS POSITION OF the steering unit eaer Andy Cers maintains testing some of the most advanced, solures a comfortable, that much of the precise, phisticated controllers on the market. thick, 11-inch customsolid control offered This suits me just fine. Being an admitted made steel wheel by his product comes PC racing addict, I'm always searching for wrapped in black suede. from the ball bearing susthe best wheeled devices, and have played Mounted to the wheel pended hub and shaft, not with quite a few. So it stands to reason are four thumb switches to mention some really hot that my forays into the world of «The Big (two for each thumb) potentiometers. Three\" (NASCAR, INDYCAR RACING and that, if the system is The pedal unit, much WORLD CIRCUIT) are performed with used with a dual joystick like the CDS wheel, should steering wheel and pedals, right? port, can be set for four also be recognized as the Wrong different game functop of its class. The unit Until last week, the steering devices I've tions. Although the but $439.00 for complete sysremained quite immobile tried have been shelved time and time tons are a little small, I tem (wheel and pedals), during testing (which in it$299.00 (wheel), $179.00 again. I say this not as an aflront to their had no problem reachself advances pedal tech(pedals) manufacturers, but simply because nothing them, even in the Manufacturer: Extreme nology), largely due to its ing I have tried has matched the simple hairiest of corners. The Competition Controls 12-pound weight and nonprecision of the CH FLIGHTSTICK. But my CDS wheel offers 180 Minneapolis, MN stick rubber feet. Essentialdriving environment recently experienced degrees of motion, but (612) 824-6733 ly a big black metal wedge a radical, almost revolutionary, alteration. never turns so far as to with two metal pedals proExtreme Competition Controls had make hitting the buttons inconvenient. truding from it, the CDS pedal unit is anjust delivered their COMPETITION DRIVING The wheel action was quiet and the gled to work best in an environment SYSTEM, and after quickly freeing the graduated resistance near the edge of the where you can really stretch your legs CDS from its cardboard constraints, the throw effectively mimicked real life. out. I stomped all over these babies and, unit was ready for some serious testing. Throw stops were solid and unwavering, aside from an almost imperceptible sproSo was 1. I took it from the grueling the centering notchless and smooth. The ing sound that crept up and then quickly NASCAR circuit, where a steady hand is base, a cool-looking angled steel cylinder disappeared, the pedals came through key, to the infinitely more responsive with an adjustable rear foot, weighs a with flying colors. It's probably important world of INDYCAR RACING, and finally to good solid 14 pounds. You won't need a to note that these are not driving/rudder the reflex-mad, lock-to-lock tracks of clamping device with this baby! pedals; they're purposely built for driWORLD CIRCUIT. And when the dust setBut look and feel aside, what ultimatelyving, with a two-inch throw and a heavier tled and the sinoke cleared, my new cockmade me a believer was taking my CDSbrake than accelerator. pit had set records, carved the controlled INDYCAR to the skinny oval at Aspiring Extremists should be warned uncarveable corner, and opened my eyes Nazareth; even my beloved FLIGHTSTICK of the COMPETITION DRIVING SYSTEM'S to a new level of realism. Without a has trouble handling this track's frightenhefty price tag. It's not cheap. Thankfuldoubt, Extreme's peddle and wheel coming corners. To my amazement, within ly, for those of us on a budget, cach unit bo is the best driving system I have ever minutes I was not only keeping on the can be purchased separately. The manutried. My FLIGHTSTICK has been sulking track and off the walls, but holding an infacturer offers a two year warranty on the in the corner ever since. side line as well! Even with opponent mechanical components and one on the The complete CDS features two disstrength set at 100%, it didn't take me very electrical. tinct components: the steering and pedal long to nimbly move through the pack If you've got the dough then drive, units. Both are amazing, but the wheel from a last place starting position into the don't walk, to get the CDS. This is what assembly really steals the show. Like lead. Soon I was setting both INDYCAR and you've been waiting for. 6 136 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. AUGUST 1995 "


"APACHE 34 33N. TITTIMUI THE COMBAT HELICOPTER SIMULATION 252 TA r =16 WO 0.BKM 0.0 War may be hell. But not from where you're sitting. It's 100% pure adrenaline, white knuckle, non-stop, in-your-face action with Apache. From the company committed to providing the Den 1-29 most gut-wrenching CD-ROM games. Interactive Magic. It will hurt you into the middle of unbelievable 3-D graphics. It's equipped with an ineredible arsenal of weapons. FASTEN YOUR SEATBELTS, THE RIDE MAY GET A LITTLE BUMPY. And the explosions are so realistic, you'll be thankful it's just a game. So pick up Apache, the ultimate combat helicopter simulation for your PC. And strap yourself in. APACHE The Combat Helicopter Simulation INTERACTIVE MAGIC From Digital Integration  1995 Interactive Magic Circle Reader Service #14 919 461-09 4 8. "


"SANGELS Bred for ultra-low level strike missions, the Harrier revolutionized the gritty business of ground attack. JUMP JETS: Explore the highly realistic VTOL flight models of the AV-8B Harrier II, FRS.MK 2 Sea Harrier, and the Yak-141 Freestyle. Capable of Vertical Take Off and Landings, this unique aircraft can go anywhere and destroy anything. Explore VTOL technology in the expansion disk to the ground-breaking U.S. Navy Fighters SPOOL UP: Launch your Harriers off the deck of the Navy's new amphibious assault ship U.S.S. Wasp. ISLAND HOPPING: 35 all new missions as you seek to retake Japan's Kuril Islands Irom elite Russian air and sea forces. 019.6 Blectronic Arts. All rights reserved. Air Combat Series, Marine Fighters, and U.S. Navy Fighters are trademarks of Electronic Arts. OPEN UP: Deal out destruction witti AC-130E Spectres, SNAKEYE bombs. 30mm guns and rapid fire rocket pods. DOWN IN THE WEEDS: View a fully texture-mapped environment based on actual satellite and aerial photography, Computer for barnet FIGHTERS THRUST LASTER Critical Acclaim for U.S. Navy Fighters Computer Gaming World: **** ***** PC Gamer. 91% Rating 3) CONTRO ( CRYPATIBLE U.S. NAVY FIGHTERS EXPANSION DISK ELECTRONIC ARTS Circle Reader Service #139 REQUIRES U.S. NAVY FIGHTERS "


"STRATEGY/WARGAMES The New World Order At SSI which upWHEN THE CAMPAIGNING SEASON BROADSIDES our Reader's Top 100 Poll in seven WILL PANZER IS LESS THAN FAVORABLE, years. While SSI is busy porting the WARGAMERS TEND TO HUNKER original PANZER GENERAL to Winin the bunker and replay their fadows, 3DO, and Sony PlayStation GENERAL'S vorites, until newer challenges arformats, there will also be sequel rive and allow us to go on the products. offensive. Wondering which upGRIPESHOT Of course, the ALLIED GENERAL is CHILDREN coming wargames may actually alexpected to lead the pack. This low us to resume our offensive game is being designed for a simultaCONQUER THE forays against the evil empires of artificial and auneous Windows, Power PC, and Macintosh release thentic opponents, I donned my Forward Observer in September, and will feature several minor (but garb and headed for SSI, to see if their battle plan important) improvements over PANZER GENERAL. WARGAMING was sound. Infiltrating the SSI War Room, I found Notably, the play-by-email (PBEM) saved games that their major offensive thrusts will emphasize will be compressed and encrypted, a record of the playability and multi-player play on a variety of opponent's turn will be available, and some imWORLD? gaming fronts. provements in the Al will be noticeable. New units are expected to include motorcycle troops, Russian PANZER SPAWN Guards, and British Commonwealth units. The base of operations for SSI's attack on the ALLIED GENERAL, will present the campaigns in market is the well-received PANZER GENERAL, the WWII Europe from the Allied perspective. So, first wargame there will be several campaigns included, each feato hit #1 in turing a varying number of stand-alone scenarios. The Russian campaign alone features some 17 scenarios. The first scenario in each cam* Multiplayer war and strategy game enthusiasts will want to check paign (say, Finland from the into CRIS, a service that features a variety of modem-playable gaming Russian campaign) is a tutorial opponents from around the world. The rub is the savings on long-disscenario, with a smooth learntance phone charges. Users with telnet access to the Internet pay only ing curve much like Poland in the original PANZER GENERAL $10/month, and those without it pay $30/month for local dial-in acOverall, ALLIED GENERAL'S cess. Gaming time is unlimited from there. Recent tournaments inscenarios will feature larger clude GLOBAL CONQUEST, DOOM, DESCENT, COMMAND HQ, EMPIRE DELUXE, maps and fewer pieces per WARCRAFT, PERFECT GENERAL II, and many others. For information on CRIS, side-creating greater possibilcall them at 1-800-745-CRIS (in the USA) or email them at custities for maneuver. Also, the avserv@cris.com. erage scenario length will be * SSI'S DEFINITIVE WARGAME COLLECTION is a welcome bit of wargame shorter, with a ceiling of 24 nostalgia. Titles include: SSI'S BATTLES OF NAPOLEON (with 26 extra sce turns and an average of 12 narios), THE SWORD OF ARAGON, and WARGAME CONSTRUCTION KIT II: TANKS! turns per scenario, even late in (with 40 extra scenarios); SSG's DECISIVE BATTLES OF THE AMERICAN CIVIL the campaigns. This has the advantage of making both play via (continued on page 140) e-mail and modem play more by Alan Emrich AUGUST 1995  COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 139 "


"G-2 (continued from page 139) stead of tanks there will be knights and can be grouped together to ease the issutrolls, instead of airplanes there will be ing of commands. Terrain sets include WAR (all three volumes, with 27 extra sce balloons and dragons. Even powerful but desert, jungle, steppe, etc. and-get this narios from their Run 5 magazine), REACH brittle mechanical contraptions can be -STEEL. PANTHERS is towing the line with FOR THE STARS, GOLD OF THE AMERICAS, sent to battle, along with summoned and SSI's new battle plan by including both WARLORDS, and PANZER BATTLES (with 37 extra conventionally mustered forces. modem and e-mail play (granted, moscenarios, also from Run 5 magazine); and Although FANTASY GENERAL is still in its dem play could be tedious with the I Impressions' WHEN TWO WORLDS WAR, GLOBAL carly stages, the world (with art by Dave go/you go turn system, but gamers will Jensen) will be made up of about a halfhave the choice). DOMINATION, CONQUEST OF JAPAN, and D-DAY. dozen continents, each with distinctive Not to be outdone by PANZER GENERAL, Whew! That should keep us busy for a terrain characteristics (volcanoes, ice, STEEL PANTHERS will feature six different while reliving our glory days! etc.). Each continent represents a camcampaigns linked from among its 30 to * SSG is being mysterious about WARpaign of several scenarios and, of course, 40 scenarios, in addition to randomly LORDS || DELUXE. We have discovered, how the world is yours to conquer in the name generated battles. Finally, some shocking ever, that gamers will gain the ability to of freedom, goodness, and Elven pie. news for Grigsby grognards — the intermake new terrain tile sets. So, in addition With the success of SSG's WARLORDS se face is almost completely mouse-driven! to custom units and shields (from the WAR ries, can the heroes, items, spells, sumAlso joining in formation is WARGAME LORDS II CONSTRUCTION KIT), players can fight moned units, and \"metal tech\" CONSTRUCTION KIT III: THE AGE OF RIon terrain limited only by their imagination. monstrosities of FANTASY GENERAL find FLES. Norm Koger's (STELLAR CRUSADE, There will be no ascend/descend function their niche among us? Probably... RED LIGHTNING and TANKS!) latest covers anymore, but walls (and any other terrain the era between the Mexican-American WHATEVER HAPPENED TO ...? war (1847) and the Russo-Japanese war element) may be flagged as impassable. On other fronts, Gary Grigsby (KAMPF(1905), where the range and accuracy of GRUPPE, WAR IN RUSSIA, PANZER STRIKE, rifled firepower made cavalry charges oband PACIFIC WAR) has not faded away like solete. Battles from the Sudan, the Boxer terms of time and money. the old soldier that he is. Instead, his Rebellion, the Zulu and Boer Wars, the ALLIED GENERAL is also slated to have STEEL PANTHERS is due out in early fall Crimean War (go Light Brigade!), the some kind of scenario editor (using the and looks like a miniatures micro armor Wars of German Unification and, of existing game maps). There was even talk battle on the computer. The SVGA course, the American Civil War, are all in the War Room of providing some geographics and sound surpass anything that featured. RIFLES features PBEM and, if morphic map boards for players to create Grigsby's legions of fans are used to, and things work out right, modem play at two their own custom scenarios with. These the CD-ROM holds a gigabyte of comdifferent, 15-minute-per-turn scales: regimaps would come in flavors such as Westpressed video footage to add to the ments maneuvering among 200 yard ern Front, Desert, and Russian Front. miniatures like feel. Grognards will be hexes, or brigades maneuvering on 400 While not decided upon, old PanzerBlitz comforted to know that the Tables of Oryard hexes. players would probably give a month's ganization & Equipment cover all EuroThe reserves of the SSI battleplan are rations for that little feature. pean and Asiatic major powers, along provided by boardgame publisher GMT The role-playing element of the with most of the minor nations-over and their GREAT BATTLES OF ALEXANDER. game's engine has been expanded in Al230 unit types in all. Units represent inConverting the award-winning boardLIED GENERAL, as well. While the fate of fantry squads and single vehicles, which game to a WINDOWS 95 environment is the world is not in your hands as it was taking longer than expected, so this playing the Germans in PANZER GENERAL product is likely to be bivouacked until (you can't lose the whole war for the Al'96. When complete, it should have molies), you can gain more personal rewards dem and network support for head-toin ALLIED GENERAL. Finally, there will be head and multiplayer play. The less duplication and overlap between the miniatures look gives the appropriate scenarios in ALLIED GENERAL and PANZER feel and the extensive online help also GENERAL than you might expect. Except lists the many statistics of units (morale, for the Allies' Operation Jupiter (their training and combat effectiveness) which planned pre-emptive invasion of Norway so enriched the boardgame. Of course, in 1940), players will see all new maps while you are waiting for the computer and many previously explored battles version, GMT has just released a deluxe DEAR MR. FANTASY Wargamers expecting Civil from a whole new perspective. version of the boardgame, available at War General will have to wait, because the next Not to let a good engine idle, the secgame in the series after ALLIED GENERAL will be your local wargame-savvy hobby store. ond PANZER GENERAL sequel will be, brace FANTASY GENERAL, akin to WARLORDS II from SSG. (Or contact GMT directly at 800-523yourselves, FANTASY GENERAL. Yes, in6111.) 140 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD AUGUST 1995 "


"s WAN You've played Mortal Kombat, Street Fighter and Primal Rage, but nothing matches the spectacular game play and visual power of Battle Beast,\" the ultimate fight game from 7th Level. BEAST Master more than 100 fight moves. Discover hidden bonus rooms and secret weapons. Marvel at feature film quality audio and animation. There is no game out there like this one. See for yourself. On August 19, 10,00O FREE COPIES ROMs will be in your face, only at participating stores* Or Preview a demo today. 100,000 FREE INTERACTIVE DEMOS of one awesome Battle Beast fight scene are available now at local retailers. For more information: Download Battle Beast Promos on AOL or CompuServe @ SEVENTH; Browse the Web to see what's next from 7th Level; or call 1-800-884-8863 ext. 106 and order Battle Beast today. software ETC Babbage's COMPUTERS where will you be AUGUST 197 COMPES 7th LEVEL. So each store for det herstels 07th Level, Inc Battle Beast is a trademark of 7th Level, Inc. All other products are trademarks and/or registered trademarks of their respective owners. Circle Reader Service #168 "


"PREVIEW Designing Warfare EMPIRE II Lets You Rewrite History—One Battle At A Time by Terry Lee Coleman SNEAK PREVIEW Game Still In Development HE GAME OF EMPIRE HAS A LONG For instance, the game supports 12 AND DISTINGUISHED CAREER WITH different terrain types, plus varying COMPUTER GAMERS. THE ORIGINAL neuver and fiweather effects. You could use a combiEMPIRE, a strategic world con nesse, it also requires that the nation of arctic terrain, broken ground quest game programmed on a players get down and dirty to achieve and snow to simulate the confusion mainframe computer in the 70s by Waltheir victory conditions. The victory Napoleon faced at Eylau. If you've ever ter Bright, was adapted by Mark Baldconditions, like those in EMPIRE wondered why the English longbow was win in the 80s for PCs. Its simplicity DELUXE, are generally concerned with the dominant weapon of the Hundred and depth earned it many honors from the occupation of strategic points, such Years War, simply have the French gamers and the gaming press, and was as towns. But whereas the world of EMknights advance over narrow, muddy one of the founding members of CGW's PIRE DELUXE was spread over entire conterrain into the archers' teeth. Hall of Fame. tinents, Empire II is confined to a single \"The editor itself is a paintbrush of After the success of EMPIRE, Baldwin battlefield at a time. This doesn't limit sorts: hills, forests, rivers and towns are partnered with fellow designer Bob the replayability of the game, however. but a brush stroke away, and the editor Rakosky to create EMPIRE DELUXE, a Built into the game system are models is fairly intuitive and easy to use. The deeper game with better graphics that for every conceivable weapon from terrain details are subtle enough to difsacrificed none of the original game's rocks and javelins to jet bombers and ferentiate fordable creeks from rivers charm or playability. Many strategy/ flying saucers. Thus, any battle in (or suitable for Civil War gunboat navigawargamers considered Empire DELUXE out) of history may be re-created using tion, so there's little worry about each the simplest, most elegant wargame the handy terrain and unit editor, scenario you create being too similar. around. So what's in store for the third game in the trilogy? Well, if you susBUILD YOUR pect that EMPIRE II will just be EMPIRE OWN GAME DELUXE with a facelift, guess again. Construction kits for wargames are SCALING DOWN & DIRTY nothing new. Norm EMPIRE II is not a strategic game, but Koger's TANKS! has \"grand tactical,\" similar to SSI's BATspawned a cottage TLES OF NAPOLEON, or the board game industry of sorts with Napoleon's Last Baliles. At this scale, dozens of new scethose old wargaming standards, Zones narios. But as much of Control, are still applicable, although as I admire what they only slow movement rather than David Landrey and stop it outright. Unlike most wargames, Novastar games normal combat occurs in the same have done with old space rather than between adjacent SSI games, I can't units. Certain units are rated for ranged get too excited about fire, and if their technology is sufficient, their TANKS! scenarthey can target a particular unit instead SPARTAN VACATION I designed this map for a Persian-Greek War sceios. Most are simply of just a given location (see accompanynario with the EMPIRE Il editor. Notice how the gap in the northern mountoo unbalanced to be tains allows the Spartans to make their famous stand at Thermopylae, ing chart). protecting the Greek city-states to the south. interesting from a While the scale allows for some magaming standpoint, 142 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. AUGUST 1995 "


"Prinery Cane Hap LIM DDD 12 WOOOO suits inton ORDER aplies Friendly for 118th Infantru m and the game engine itself when playing over a network. Sequenstill needs serious adjusttial play is, of course, still the best for ement (although Koger has mail battles, as well as conflict where issued an unofficial patchone side is employing a static defense. see The Patch File, pg. What all this framework does is al202). SSG's WARLORDS CONlow you to mix and match as you deSTRUCTION SET is much betsign scenarios. While hardly complex, ter, but has to overcome the the system is quite capable of showing stigma (for historicallythe difference between, say, the minded gamers) of the game system being designed first for a fantasy game. What EMPIRE Il brings to the table is a better mix of realism and playability. posThe morale rules are particularly well edly know done, without the excesses of TANKS! when to march HM When a unit reaches a certain loss around enemy threshold, there is a probability that the units and when unit will become demoralized, which into stop and fight, creases as it takes greater casualties (but but at the curnot, as in TANKS!, affecting other units rent stage of defar removed). Conversely, a previously velopment this demoralized unit may recover its will to ability is unclear. fight, modified by the leadership factors in any case, you present. The line-of-sight rules are easy may still issue hat rules are pasy m s till issue fx-25 1 to understand and have the right feel orders anew each UNDER THE MICROSCOPE EMPIRE II has five different zoom levels. The medifor a game at this scale. Supply is eleturn for every an view (zoom 3) lets us see the whole battlefield, and looks a bit like gantly handled by a combination of unit, from pursuEMPIRE DELUXE. But the SVGA graphics are clean and clear even at maximum magnification. supply sources and supply units (a Civil ing enemy units War scenario would have Sutler's wagto assaults on ons, for example). When out of supply, their positions. One reason this all armies of Napoleon and Frederick the units may not use indirect fire, their works so well is that normal combat is a Great. If you tire of playing Luetzen, it zones of control disappear, and their function of movement, which keeps the also lets you pit wizards versus bug-eyed ability to attack and defend is severely action fluid. aliens with zap guns. The historian who hampered. wants exacting detail is advised to return The turn sequence is similarly ONE GOOD TURN to PACIFIC WAR, as EMPIRE II is really straightforward and effective. Each In what I hope is a trend, turns in Emonly good for the \"big picture.\" player's turn is divided into a planning PRE II may be either the old-fashioned of course, Mssrs. Rakosky and Baldphase, when orders are given, and an sequential kind, or they can be parallel, win will provide many scenarios from all execution phase, when the orders are where both sides issue orders, then eras of history in the finished product to carried out. With a \"Move To\" order, movement and combat ensue simultanekeep the interest of both veteran and ocfor example, a unit could be given a ously for both sides. The latter does a casional wargamers. Nonetheless, I susdestination several turns' march away. great job of simulating the uncertainty pect that many amateur game designers As the Al improves, your unit will supof the battlefield, and is particularly fun are itching to try their hand at forging Gettysburg, Roarke's Drit, or some othUnit Type Normal Combat Ranged Combat Target Specific Unit er battle they've always been fascinated Roman Legion Short Sword Javelin with. You never really know until the Mob Club Rock No shrink wrap's on the box, but odds are, Civil War Infantry Bayonet, Musket Musket Volley Baldwin and Rakosky have another hit WWII Bomber Machine Gun Bomb on their hands. And if EMPIRE II, with its Jet Plane Cannon Missile Yes do-your-own-wargame feature, actually Flying Saucer Laser Death Ray Yes has more replay value than even EMPIRE DELUXE, why, what a wonderful problem This chart shows some of the weapon types available for scenarios in EMPRE II. Note that as the technology improves, so does the ability to target specific units in combat. to have! No EEET NO AUGUST 1995. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 143 "


"REVIEW Perfect General II Breaks Out Gouriral (200 Southey Vabank 30 Glen Kerr 200 Treading New Ground Or Virtual Retread? by Patrick C. Miller high-resolution hex maps; relies on an sive. Colorful SVGA graphics include a \"Never mind what Clausewitz easy-to-learn turn-based system that's zoom-in mode, and when viewed up thought, what do you think?\" ideal for those just breaking into war and close, the units recall PG2's origin as a -Erwin Rommel strategy games; and, if you can accept tabletop miniatures wargame. Heavy PG2's sometimes tongue-in-cheek aptanks project ominous rumblings, arONG BEFORE HE BECAME LEGENDARY proach to wargaming with its weird little mored cars purr as they swiftly scoot AS THE DESERT Fox, ERWIN ROMMEL video clips of \"generals» giving pre-battle along and infantry units cry \"Medic!\" or TAUGHT THE BASIC CONCEPTS OF advice, even veteran wargamers can find \"I'm hit!\" as they're eliminated from play. warfare to military academy cadets, plenty to enjoy. The new toys include armored cars, suIHis ability to sketch battlefield per-heavy Elephant tanks and machinemaps and troop maneuvers riveted his NEW AND IMPROVED? gun infantry that may fire while on the students' attention on his lectures. Rom. Upon opening the box, PG2 initially move. Some scenarios include aircraft mel believed that knowing the principles appears to be the original game with that are useful for taking out those pesky of warfare developed by legendary Prussglitzier graphics and more scintillating artillery units tucked securely behind enian general Karl von Clausewitz in the sounds. After several hours of playing emy lines or for interdicting your oppoearly 1800s was of various types of nent's transportation routes. Since units Perfect General II little value to his scenarios, howevmoving along rail lines can cover long students if they didPrice: $64.95 er, it becomes distances in a single turn, railroads are Requirements: IBM n't understand how clear that QQP's great for moving your troops quickly to compatible 386 to apply them to the DX33 or better, 4 efforts extend be the front or deep into your opponent's command decisions MB RAM, CD-ROM yond a mere territory. they would one day drive, SVGA graphfacelift. The most There are four campaigns based on ics, mouse; supports have to make on the impressive aspect World War II that string together a series Sound Blaster combattlefield. patible sound cards. of PG2 is its 98 of scenarios. The campaigns include isRommel might # of Players: 1-2 (modem and hotseat) new scenarios, the land hopping in the Pacific, Kursk on the have been amused Protection: CD-ROM vast majority of Eastern Front, the Battle of the Bulge, at some of the liberDesigners: Bruce Williams and Andrew which are fun and and North Africa. You'll want the variety, Visscher ties that THE PERPublisher: QQP, Inc. interesting to play. because while the Al is improved from FECT GENERAL II Flemington, NJ If you haven't the original game, it's still nothing to get takes with history, (908) 788-2799 played the original excited about, even when set to the highbut he probably version of this est level of difficulty. would have appreciated the game's abiligame, you're in for a treat; and if you ty to show some basic principles of warhave, you'll find yourself rediscovering ADVANCE TO CONTACT fare in a manner that's both entertaining the joy of dropping a well-placed heavy PG2 is only available on CD. While this and interesting. QQP's long-awaited seartillery barrage squarely on top of an may initially upset some gamers, I susquel to THE PERFECT GENERAL (originally enemy heavy tank group. pect many without CD-ROM technology released in 1991) is played on vibrant, The new bells and whistles are impreswill finally see a need to upgrade. Even if 144 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD  AUGUST 1995 "


"IF LOOKS COULD KILLS Before the introduction of the Suncom F-15E Strike Fighter Series, the only way to get your hands on an authentic, realistic flightstick was to either join the Air Force or buy a $44 million dollar F-15 fighter jet. The F-15E Strike Fighter Series looks and feels so much like the real thing, you'll be able to \"live\" the experience. The top of the line EAGLE features 12 programmable fire buttons, an audio box and head-phones for privacy play, a microphone input for Voice Recognition Command Programs, a CD-ROM Interactive Tutorial, the full version of AV-8B Harrier Assault from Domark and support software with 35 preprogrammed templates for today's most popular simulation programs. Or pilot the TALON, RAPTOR or HAWK versions of the F-15E. All four share the same realistic look, but each has something different to offer. TECHNOLOGIES 6400 W. Gross Point Rd., Niles, IL 60714 708/647-4040 Suncom COMPUTER CETTA To order call 1-800-228-7449, or visit one of the retailers listed below: Radio Shack COMPUCENTRE Molody beatsthen ME Fred Mayer COMPET Office DEPOT CANADA COMPUSA WIZ Fred Mayer BEST SB To Exterior Code THE COMPUTER SUPERSTORE.. olectronice boutique Circle Reader Service #173 "


"DOO ET The Neutral  BOOK you elect to install the majority of the have no trouble diving right game to your hard drive (some 40 into PG2. There is no tutorimegabytes), you'll still need the CD to al, so new players should conplay the game. So, you might as well go sider selecting a small with the quick install of 4 MB. PG2 inscenario and playing at the cludes two full-color guides containing easiest level of difficulty until maps and brief descriptions of the scethey learn the basics. Fortunarios, as well as a poster of the scenario nately, the learning curve ismaps used in campaign games. The n't that steep and the manual adequately covers the basic meinterface is fairly intuitive chanics of the game, but QQP's terminolwith its mouse-driven pointogy and organization are, as usual, and click commands and somewhat confusing pull-down menus. Each scenario consists of a map, backThe scenarios are designed STAY OUT OF MY SANDBOX This close-up shot gives a good look at the detail of PG2's graphics. Notice the detail of the craters ground on the situation portrayed, the to be played \"balanced,\" and burning buildings, as well as the tanks. turn length of the game, the number of meaning in QQP's parlance points available for purchasing initial that you fight forces, information the battle twice: once as veteran and a rookie commander. Maon reinforcethe attacker and once neuver is more difficult to master, but ments, and other as the defender, learning to take advantage of cover and pertinent facts. arriving at an avconcealment and knowing how and when One side is desigerage score to mass forces at the critical point are vinated as the atand skill rattal skills. tacker (red) and ing for the Without the ability to play against a the other side is the two battles. human opponent, PG2 would qualify as defender (blue). This is impormerely an above-average game. The These designations tant, because some two-player head-to-head capability realcan be misleading, as scenarios are purposelyly makes this game shine, however, in some scenarios the heavily stacked in one Even a reasonably-skilled human oppo\"defender\" can win side's favor, the idea nent will provide far more challenge only by attacking. Both being that players than the computer opponent set on its sides use their points to must attempt to minhighest level of difficulty. Two-player purchase infantry, tanks, imize their losses and games can be set up either through a arullery and aircraft, maximize their victories to gain a higher modem connection, a direct serial link which they deploy to desoverall score than their opponents. You between two computers (a null modem ignated areas on the map. Once that's do, however, have the option of playing connection) or by playing the game in a done, the battle begins. cach scenario indiScora: to 9225 J ZEL The turn sequence consists of plotting vidually as either Choone FIRE Carpet for Light Toniki artillery and air strikes, conducting arthe attacker or the tillery fire and air attacks, and engaging defender. in movement between two direct lire Fire and maneuphases. At the end of each turn, the comver are the keys to puter determines a score based on the success. With the number of victory-point hexes each side exception of maoccupies. At game's end, the computer chine gun-armed TER calculates the final score, determines units, all units can Light Tank whether the victory conditions have been fire only once per Danage: OX met and then assigns the players a militurn. Learning to Hit Dan. : 3 tary rank based on their battlefield peranticipate the most formances, ranging from First Lieutenant opportune time to E Engineer Range: 800 to Perfect General. This information is fire (and resisting Prob Hit: 20% sential Danage: recorded in a data base that charts your the urge to shoot performance over the last 25 games. just because you WINTER BLUNDERLAND It may not be realistic, but the German forces can) usually marks have every bit as much to contend with at Bastogne as did their historical RECON IN FORCE the difference becounterparts-a good, tense scenario. Those adept at playing the original will tween a seasoned The Neutral Dilernma Orders Gone Display Dir. Fire out 146 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. AUGUST 1995 "


"TWIN PEAKS REALME SVAR PRATI BIRTECH PI ot TOER Dell LON K . CHALANCE BEST ROLE-PLAYING GAME OF THE YEAR! A fontosy Role Playing Simulation   BIRTECH SIR-TECH SIR-TECH JAGGED ALLIANCE NEW HEIGHTS IN MULTIMEDIA \"Although it is truly a genre-busting product, it does fit into one category: Must-buy!\" RATING Jeff James, Computer Gaming World STAR TRAIL NEW HEIGHTS IN PRODUCT QUALITY PC Gamer \"Best Role-Playing Game of 1994\" CD-ROM Today \"Best in Entertainment: Fantasy Role-Playing Game of 1994\" Computer Gaming World Finalist, \"1995 Premier Awards\" Strategy Plus Magazine \"Best Multi-Character CRPG of 1994\" PC GAMER EDITORS ...and many more International Awards CHOICE FINAL VERDICT: 89% \"HIGHS: An utterly engrossing experience.\" PC Gamer PC GAMER EDIT015 \"Superb turn-based mercenary action and great role-playing, all in one package. If you like strategy, you'll love this game.\" VALUE: ***** Electronic Entertainment For the dealer nearest you call: 1-800-447-1230. Ask for operator 23. Available on CD-ROM. SIR-TECH P.O. Box 245, Ogdensburg, NY 13669 Tel: (315) 393-6633 Fax: (315) 393-1525 Realms of Arkania and Jagged Alliance are registered trademarks of Sir-toch Software, Inc. Realms of Arkania is manufactured and distributed under license by Sir-tech from Attic Entertainment Software, Fantasy Productions and Schmidt Spiel + Freizeit GmbH. Other trademarked names are the property of their individual owners. Circle Reader Service #163 "


"709 favorite by proGENERAL II, like its progenitor, is a fine viding a larger, example of how to have a fun, easy-tomore diverse play game with historical flavor (if not exgroup of sceacting realism). Dramatic changes to this narios. Even so, successful formula risked turning the the novelty will game into something it was never intendeventually weared to be. PERFECT GENERAL II manages to oll, and a sceillustrate the fundamental principles of mario editor is warfare while it entertains and makes you currently in the think. While Rommel might have quibworks to help bled about the particulars of the former, extend the he would certainly have been pleased by game's longthe latter. BURNED MY BRIDGES BEHIND ME After capturing the city. the Red attacker term playability. THE EDITORS SPEAK begins to systematically torch the avenues of approach and to set up artillery More troubling for defense of \"Water Central.\" is the lack of at PERFECT GENERAL 2 tention to de. RATINGZ \"hotseat\" fashion with two players shartail. Both the manual and the on-screen ing the same computer. For those with scenario descriptions have numerous erPROS Excellent graphics and Internet access, PG2 can be played via rors, and there are annoying bugs in sevsound, stimulating head-to-head the 'Net using a program called Intereral scenarios. Although video clips of play, nice campaigns and a wide net Head-to-Head Daemon (IHHD), pseudo-generals give advice concerning variety of well-designed, fun-to-play scenarios. available at the cactus.org FTP site specific scenarios, these tips run randomCONS Lack of a scenario editor, (pub/IHHD/dialer1.6.4.shar). ly, limiting their usefulness. mediocre AI and irritating documenStill, those disappointed that PG2 isn't tation errors. FRIENDLY FIRE more stridently historical are missing the QQP has injected new life into an old point. Despite its nagging flaws, PERFECT SYMANTEC, Norton NORTON UT LES Ausralt. Installation Disk M 720K Dikte They're exactly the same, but somebody just paid $100,000 for the one on the right. Use illegally copied software and you're committing a federal crime with fines of up to $100,000. Help your organization comply with the law by ordering our Software Management Guide. For just $80, you'll receive SPAudit for DOS and Macintosh;\" comprehensive auditing software, a video and procedures to help keep your software legal. And your record clean. Keep your software legal. To order, call the Software Publishers Association at 1-800-388-7478, or include credit card information or a check and send or FAX this coupon to: SPA Management Guide, P.O.Box 79237, Baltimore, MD 21279-0237, FAX (202)223-8756. Name Company Title Title Address City State Phone Ext Please send me ___ copies at $80 each. Total $_ _ (DC residents add 6% sales tax) Check enclosed American Express OVISA MasterCard Card Number Exp. Date Signature of Cardholder Name of Cardholder Don't copy that floppy Symantec and The Norton Utilities are trademarks of Symantec Corporation. 148 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD AUGUST 1995 "


"THE MOST CELEBRATED STRATEGY GAME IN HISTORY GOES ON-LINE. INTRODUCING SID MEIER'S CIVNET\" CIWE EXPERIENCE SID MEIER'S Build An Empire To Stand e Test Of Time OFROE CIVILIZATION HAS COME TO THE INTERNET Experience the best-selling Sid Meier's Civilization as a multiplayer Windows game! With Sid Meier's CIVNETM play on-line via the Internet, over a local network or go head-to-head by modem. Build the Pyramids and the Great Wall. Conquer Earth or an undiscovered planet. Play history's greatest leaders and your friends in any combination, up to seven players at once! Broadcast messages simultaneously to your opponents. Become allies with some. Taunt others. You decide. Because once you get your hands on Sid Meier's CIVNET\". Civilization will never be the same. MICROPROSE For IBM-PC & Compatibles on CD-ROM. 1-800-879-PLAY. http://www.microprose.com Circle Reader Service #298  MicroProse Software, Inc. All rights reserved. "


"REVIEW s War REVIEW Civil War Redux THE ROAD FROM SUMTER TO APPOMATTOX II Issues A Call For Ninety Hour Volunteers by Josh Bruce HERE NEVER SEEMS TO BE A SHORTThe Road Prom naval units are lotillas. The detail is cerAGE OF WARGAMES COVERING THE Sumter to Appomattox 1 tainly there, and designer Frank Hunter CONFLICTS OF THE 20TH CENTURY, Price: $49.95 has revamped the interface to make the but for whatever reason, Civil War System immense amounts of data more readily games are becoming increasingly Requirements: The Road available to the player. hard to find. SSI's GETTYSBURG: THE From Sumter IBM-compatible 386 or better To Appomattox TURNING POINT is still the definitive Civil MARCHING THROUGH GEORGIA processor, 3MB The Action Call War, IMSIIS War battle simulation nine years after its reRAM, VGA/SVGA The movement system is vaguely remilease. Strategic-level Civil War games, such graphics, 8 MB niscent of SSG's BATTLEFRONT series. Inas No GREATER GLORY (SSI) and Avalon hard drive space, stead of giving specific paths for units to mouse. Hill's Civil WAR, were dismissed almost as Protection: None take across the map, objectives are selectsoon as they hit the market, the former for Designer: Frank Hunter ed for all units and the computer uses AI its overly ambitious scope (often more po Publisher: Adanac Command Systems routines to execute both sides' commands litical than military) and the latter for its Vancouver, BC, Canada simultaneously. Despite some unfortunate abominable graphic presentation and im[May be ordered through HPS Simulations (408) 554-83811 bugs (such as the entire Army of the Pobecilic Al. Even Impressions' best-selling tomac getting stuck behind the ChesaTHE BLUE AND THE GREY looked, at times, FROM SUMTER TO APPOMATTOX II. Like its peake Bay), play is generally tense, as as out of place as a new Union general facpredecessor, SUMTER II is a massive stratearmies grope toward one another trying to ing Lee across the Potomac, due to its gic-level Civil War game. The game strives gain the advantage. This is an excellent alpoor AI and interface weakness. to be comprehensive: the map stretches ternative to the \"I move/You move\" school However, for those who long to don the from Philadelphia to Mexico City at a scale of wargame design, particularly since the epaulets of Jackson and Sheridan, new of only 14 miles per hex. Each game turn sheer magnitude of SUMTER II makes a hope has arrived in the form of THE ROAD is one week, land units are brigades and real-time simulation impossible. When your forces encounter enemy Washington Yes 29 1863 troops while trudging across the map, combat occurs and can be resolved in Hanapolis one of three different ways: inputting Indsburg your own results; using the quick resStavaton un olution system; or entering a tactical Charlottesville, Richmond battlefield. The tactical map is remiSupply Distance Sennessee niscent of THE BLUE AND THE GREY, as the computer generates a random Petersburg battlefield and the brigades are scaltered across it at a scale of 400 meters per grid point. Unfortunately, the AI is so inept at the tactical level that a FOG OF WAR If you can see the Union units, the Peninsular campaign is a bit of a bore. With the hidden units option on, Bragg's 1862 march through Tennessee and Kentucky offers plenty of feint, maneuver and tension for lot of the drama is lost simply because both sides. it is so easy to win the battles. Thankfully, the game supports modem play I USA DOSEN Strost CSA pres Elga BIDERAMEXTRA Sabosrd  HISSIssippi Caribbean Vandiinia KA "


"WIRD WAR '11 extinct. Except for a handful who beat the game. The few. The proud. The totally weird. Now, you must stop these demented dictators from THIS MEANS Looking for fun and excitement? Try This Means War! The year is 10 AG (After Game). A decade after the hideously addictive Snark Hunter made computer gamers its helpless prey. The strategy building game for Following a series of riots, explosions people who like to blow things up! and bad hair days, mankind was nearly MICROPROSE For IBM-PC & Compatibles on CD-ROM. 1-800-879-PLAY. Circle Reader Service #382 images. Because if they succeed in War, things could get pretty ugly. http://www.microprose.com  MicroProse Software, Inc. All rights roserved. "


"ztca Staunton Pole DUCA versus other human generals. niuses and incompetents on both sides. ability. Yet, it allows for such gems as Lee's Brigades are rated individually for manSUNTER II goes to great lengths to model amazing defeat of Hooker at Chancelpower, number of guns, morale, training the affect these often charismatic men had lorsville, or Grant's bulldog-like determiand commander, and they may be orgaon their forces. Over one hundred different nation to subdue Vicksburg at any cost. nized into corps or armies. A lot of the flaleaders are represented in the game, each The leaders all seem to have the correct vor comes from the armaments of the rated for aggressiveness, combat ability, feel: Hood picks a lot of fights but loses individual units, which vary most of them; McClellan doesfrom simple caplocks to n't move or fight well but is a Springfield, Spencer or Sharps taille 13lchoyond great inspiration to his troops; rifles for both infantry and and Lee is superb in every cavalry. Artillery units are simarea. Simply put, SUMTER II ilarly armed with Napoleons, has the best leader modeling Whitworths and the deadly of any Civil War game yet relong-range Parrot guns. Creatleased for the computer. Name Rank Init Tact RIY AST Pro ing your own Iron Brigades is Location SUMTER II takes a similarly y-Richmond a treat, and watching them in grand view of the «economic action on the tactical battleH Hu Averalr Exc war,\" and does an excellent job creen Exc Exc field—where the differences in Poor Free of showing how the superior weapons, training and morale eliok nouse to continue manpower and resources of levels really take effect—is so the Union translated into vicSTONEWALL, I NEED YOU IN TEXAS You may peruse the abilities of potential army interesting that it almost leaders, or, more realistically, leave their attributes hidden and promote based tory both on and off the field. makes up for the lame comon their game performance. Each state is individually rated puter opponent. for how much manpower, supplies and armaments it proWE ATTACK AT DAWN initiative and inspiration. It is the latter duces. A key to the game is striking a Of course, armies require leaders, and quality which will cause purists' heads to balance between men in the factory versus the Civil War had a wide diversity of geturn, because it isn't an easily quantifiable those in the army. If volunteers aren't anginia 3 AveraRUG AUS AUS Poor Rug Gd Poor Aus Exo Ops-Fredraksha Ons Shoes ackson 2777777 AveraAvg Exe COUPS-Fredrcksbr Corys-Shreveport BOE OM EARTH IS URTH. MAN IS GRUB. 152 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD  AUGUST 1995 "


"enough, how many men should we craft, the game, as they did in No GREATER GLOand which type of unit should each state Ry, but serve to enrich the gameplay, and produce? While the strength of the Northadd a nice mix of historical \"what-if\" twists. ern economy allows the Union player more latitude with his economic decisions, BUT DO WE FIGHT ON GOOD the Southern economy is extremely limitGROUND? ed, with half its production comprised of Unfortunately, the incredible depth of cotton. However, the cotton can be traded gameplay is not matched by either the in Europe for munitions if a blockade rungraphics or sound support the latter bener can make it there and back again. ing non-existent. Admittedly, for most Hence, the blockade and naval war bewargamers, \"the play's the thing.\" Still, recome paramount, since even the best-laid cent games such as PANZER GENERAL have plans depend on that shipment of Springshown that appropriate music, sound effields arriving in time for the battle. lects and graphics do enhance the experiPolitical events also play a vital role in ence. As popular as the American Civil SUMTER II, and range from the French inWar is (even among non-wargamers), it's a vasion of Mexico to conflict between the shame that SUMTER II's inadequate sound Union and Great Britain. Random events and visuals might keep it from being may allow you to bargain with Mexico, givplayed. ing up part of Texas for Mexican intervenAs it stands, this is the only strategic-levtion; or perhaps the French might be el Civil War game worth playing. While willing to offer aid for concessions in New SUMTER II shares some of the deficiences Orleans. Unlike many wargames, where of its competition—why can't a strategic conflict seems to take place within a vacuCivil War game have decent AI?-the um, the political tensions of the mid-19th overall depth of the design allows it to rise century world are a large part of SUMTER above its shortcomings. Miniatures enthuII. Even so, the politics do not dominate siasts will enjoy playing out large battles such as Shiloh or Antietam, then simply inputting the results into SUMTER II, and even hardcore gamers will find themselves pulled in by the number of strategic, political and economic options available. Frank Hunter continues to refine his design, and it shows in a much more focused and enjoyable game than the original ROAD FROM SUMIER TO APPOMATTOX. This isn't the definitive Civil War game, but it is a worthy effort. And besides, if we wait for Sid Meier to finish his War Between The States game, it might be the next century before we stand atop Lookout Mountain. THE EDITORS SPEAK THE ROAD FROM SUMTER TO APPMATTOX RATING PROS Lots of depth. Leadership, logistic, economic, and political factors are well-integrated. CONS The dated graphics, lack of sound support, and weak computer opponent rob from the firepower of this otherwise well-designed musket. OBW-OSKOO. THE GODS ARE ANGRY RAGE IS HOME RAGE (PRIMAL RAGE.COMING TO YOUR HOUSE AUGUST 25, 1995.) Sega Genesis Segam Game Gear Super NEST Nintendo Game Boy PC-CD ROM Prima Page\" 20.1+Atan Garos Corporation Licensed to Tird Warner Bronctio. Inc. All rights to stred Soca, Grosis. Xan satu atahadharks of Saga Le so. La Al Rights Reserved Stande Lomam.ort System Ninne. Varaa 159 Trademarks of Hinda Archicale Al Rights Reserved AUGUST 1995. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 153 "


"proudly presents MITP://WWW.VIRTUALVEGAS.COM NS DOUBLE DISC CD-ROM FOR WINDOWS ! Rocket through this amazing category-defying adventure as you judge the meetaverse's Eirst intergalactic tales con Matching wits with the most exotic, intrig...g core testants in the metaverse, you be led through full-motion 3-D rendered worlds for over twenty hours of hyper-interactive laughter! FREE INTERNET ACCES ON LINE CONTEST! Free internet connectivity and on-line time are included with this incredible 2-disc set. bog onto http://www.Virtual Vegas.co. and experience the first annual Ms. Metaverse on-line contest! Free CD-Roms, Las Vegas Vacations or even $10,006 can be yours... Find out how by logging on! COMPUTER ONLY $39. CALL TOLL FREE TO ORDER! 1.800.228.7449 Check Out Computer Express Online At http://cexpress.com:27007 Circle Reader Service #59 "


"STRATEGY Anti-Alien Tactics Fire Teams And Formations In X-COM: TERROR FROM THE DEEP by Jeff James This collection of tips, tactics and advice for MicroProse's X-COM: TERROR FROM THE DEEP has been excerpted with permission from the book Totally Unauthorized X-COM: Terror From the Deep by Jeff James and BradyGAMES Publishing. N ORDER TO MAKE MANAGING YOUR two soldiers then take turns covering in formation tend to spot and fire upon TROOPERS A BIT EASIER, IT MAY BE USEeach other, making sure that any eneenemies as a unit, making a formation a FUL FOR YOU TO ADOPT THE TWIN mies don't sneak up on them. Granted, dense concentration of firepower which principles of fire teams and formaattempting to make your way through a you can use to blast through the enemy. tions. These principles are loosely large battlefield crawling with aliens with One soldier may see an alien but not based upon the tactics and strategies emjust two troopers would be utter lunacy. have enough time units to fire at it. Howployed by real-world infantry commanIdeally, you should enter the battlefield ever, the two soldiers next to him in forders. If you've ever seen combat footage with around 8 to 12 soldiers. Take less mation may be able to fire and hit the of an elite infantry team in action, you'll than that, and you risk not having alien. see that they deploy and move into the enough firepower for the mission. You 3. Defense. A formation also imparts extra defensive value to your troopers. Instead of moving through doors to open Instead of hunting for aliens with only them, simply stand in front of the door, move the one set of eyeballs, working in a formation gives you many more vantage points cursor one space beyond, then right click. The with which to spot the enemy. Most fordoor will open, costing the aquanaut who opened mations also have a trooper dedicated to the door no TU points at all! guarding the rear of the formation, ensuring that you won't be surprised by aliens sneaking up on you from behind. combat area with precision and in a parcan — and should take more soldiers 4. Movement. When you put your solticular formation. You won't see elite in some missions, but I've found that diers together in a formation, it becomes teams of Navy SEALs or Army Rangers having too many soldiers means that much easier to move your soldiers as a casually streaming onto the battlefield in they're often getting in cach other's way. group. Far too often I've been tempted rag-tag fashion. Likewise, your X-COM 1. Formations. Once you've divvied to send a solitary soldier off on a wild troopers should be deployed and moved up your troopers into about the battlefield with some overall self-supporting fire tactical plan. teams, you can next think about giving those FIRE TEAMS fire teams a formation Fire teams are important because they (see sidebar, \"Marching allow soldiers to give each other support, In Formation\"). Orgaboth in terms of spotting and firing upon nizing your soldiers into any enemy soldiers they encounter. At formations gives you the most basic level, a fire team can conthree primary benefits: OD OD OCD @ sist of two soldiers. While one soldier concentration of fireFOO 0000 moves forward, the other covers his adpower, improved defenvance from a concealed position. Once sive strength and ease of the first soldier has reached his objective, movement. TERMINEX 2050 If you look closely in the cracks, you can sometimes peer into the next room and exterminate a few alien bugs. the second soldier moves forward. These 2. Firepower. Soldiers Christel Mederow/HW LOREX AUGUST 1995 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 155 "


"Marching In Formation goose chase to hunt for a wounded alien, the Geoscape screen indefinitely. Use only to see him end up another casualty. this tip to your advantage by keeping If your soldiers aren't in formation, it bethe terror site active longer than norcomes far too easy to overlook a solitary mal, allowing you to enter combat at a trooper standing where he shouldn't be. time of your own choosing — in the During most combat missions, your aquanauts may be able to spot aliens in other rooms by looking directly into the corner of a wall or submarine. A harmless program glitch, this \"feature\" sometimes allows you to spot aliens hidden in rooms and subs that you normally might not see. TWO-MAN | The smallest formation available, it isn't a formation per se, but simply two soldiers covering each other as they advance. Regardless of the terrain, mission type or any other factors, you should always move your squaddies in groups of at least 2 soldiers. Advantages: The easiest to set-up and maintain, it is by far the best formation type for close-quarters fighting, where large numbers of soldiers can lend mutual support by covering passageways and other avenues of alien approach while other soldiers advance. Disadvantages: Whereas formations with three or more soldiers have a substantial reserve of firepower to draw upon, the soldiers in a two-man formation are woefully outgunned. Since the two soldiers can only watch two directions, the chance of an ambush is increased. A formation provides a visual device daytime. Terror missions fought at which prevents you from overlooking innight are very difficult, and you should dividual soldiers. avoid them if at all possible. 2. Save the civilians. Keep an eye out TERROR SITE TIPS AND for the civvies — they have the botherTACTICS some tendency to position themselves 1. Attack Only in the Daytime. Usright between your soldiers and the ing the tip described earlier in this aliens during a firefight. Aliens tend to chapter, you can use your interceptors ignore civilians that are unconscious, so and transports to keep a terror site on carry around a Thermal Tazer or a TherIVIAI TEUVERS COMVONLY PERFORMED, VITEITEW VnGIVIANT EXTREVE, Barrel Roll Attack. Offset Head-on Pass. The Immelman. A Low Speed Yoyo. Barrel Roll. Rollaway. 156 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. AUGUST 1995 "


"One soldier may spot an alien, but the other soldier usually won't be facing the same direction to lend any fire support. mal Shok Launcher to zap all the civilland terror site missions, the Displacians you find into the land of nod. The er/Sonic SWS platform can be an inaliens will ignore them, and you'll be givvaluable asset. Unlike the Coelacanth en credit for saving them at the end of tanks, the Displacer can fly, allowing it the mission. to scout above, behind and around any 3. Easy on the explosives. High exterrain or structures in the area. The plosives such as sonic pulsers and HE Displacer also has more TUs than most ammunition have the tendency to damsoldiers, allowing it to cover vast age creatures and objects with a certain amount of terrain and find civilianrange. Chucking a sonic pulser at a Deep killing aliens quickly. However, any One may quickly end his viability as a leSWS platform is a liability in a ship tergitimate threat to your forces, but it will ror site, as they are simply too large to also blow the half-dozen civilians standfit through most of the doorways and ing next to him to bits as well. You get a passageways on any ship. The moral? big negative point bonus for killing civilAlways try to take at least one Displacians yourself, so use grenades and other er/Sonic on every port and island terror area effect weapons only when you're site mission you go on. Leave them besure there are no civilians nearby. hind on ship terror site missions! 4. Speed is the key. While you're busy hunting down the aliens, the aliens are MOLECULAR CONTROL busy hunting down the civilians. AlCOMBAT: DEFENSIVE though you should still move your solSTRATEGIES diers with care, a bit more haste is Whenever an alien attempts to affect recommended. If you wait too long to one of your aquanauts with molecular hunt down all the aliens in the area, you control, the screen will center on the afwon't have any civilians left to protect. fected soldier and you'll see a yellow-flash 5. Take to the Skies. In port and isbriefly appear on the solider. If the alien DIAMOND A four-pointed star, with one trooper facing each compass position. Normally, your point man would face towards the direction of your advance, while the troopers occupying the left and right positions would look forward, angled slightly to the left and right, respectively. Finally, the trooper in the rear position would face towards the rear. Advantages: Since a soldier is covering each compass point, the diamond formation is ideal for a defensive posture. This formation is usually adopted when establishing a perimeter around a landing craft, defending a fixed location and/or escorting a wounded soldier to a safe location. Disadvantages: Since each soldier is usually facing a different direction, this formation is of little use in an offensive BESKOO ELB MATTEUVERS COMMOTILY PERFORMED WITH OTHER JOYSTICKS. Wing Man Extreme conforms to all required joy stick standards. Warriors of the cyber skies rejoice: project Wing Man Extreme is complete, the joystick has been perfected. Never has guidance control been so fluid, trigger action so responsive, view control so easy. Wing Man Extreme can be the difference between the thrill of victory and the ejection seat of defeat: a solid professional in a field of puny lightweights. Wingman Extreme is waiting at your dealer, or to get product information by fax, call 1 800 245 0000 and request document #7014. LOGITECH 1 TEW VIITCMAIT EXTREVE. THE JOYSTICK WITH ATTITUDE! EGGHEAD SOFTWARE WAL-MART SOFTVWEET inmac BEST AUGUST 1995. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD Circle Reader Service #82 CORSE 157 "


"Sonic pulsers are not destroyed by the explosion of another Sonic Pulser. Try this strategy: give one soldier nine sonic pulsers. Have him prime each grenade to \"O\" then have him stuff each primed grenade into his backpack. After all the grenades are primed, charge him towards the nearest concentration of aliens. The he'll fall to the ground, spilling out the grenades. End the turn. You'll see the first grenade explode, followed by the second, the third, and so on! Since the sonic pulsers aren't destroved by the explosions, each grenade in the backpack will explode in turn, doing mas ge to everything in the area. Since a sonic pulser does 120 points of damage this quickly adds up to over 1000(!) points of damage to anything nearby. 10 Triscere OOO attack was successful, you'll see a screen shooting the molecular controlled soldier MOLECULAR CONTROL appear which may state something like to keep your other soldiers from harm. COMBAT: OFFENSIVE «Bernard Revenu is under molecular conUnlike aquanauts, SWS platforms are STRATEGIES trol\" or \"Bernard Revenu has gone totally immune to alien molecular control Once you have molecular control capaberserk.\" If a solider is repeatedly conattempts. This can be particularly imporbility, you should attempt to capture live trolled or panicked by alien molecular tant if you're facing large number of aliens. Using a Molecular Control Reader control attacks, chances are that to identify aliens as you spot them, you the soldier has a low molecular should be able to locate a high-ranking control Strength rating. Sack alien officer, such as a commander or the soldier at the first available navigator. Once you've determined the opportunity. identity of the alien, use a molecular conPerhaps nothing is worse trol Disrupter to control the alien and than having your best soldier move it close to you. Have the alien move controlled by the aliens and towards a team of aquanauts equipped used against you. How do you REDDEL deal with molecular-controlled EGO Mooimaa role. Soldiers are also grouped more aquanauts? If a soldier is at the closely together than in any other formareceiving end of a large numtion, making them especially susceptible ber of molecular control atREPTILIUS IRRITATUM EST A molecular-controlled Triscene to area effect weapons such as grenades, tacks, you should have him makes for a great gate-crasher at any alien party. torpedo launchers and other powerful drop his weapons at the first weapons. available opportunity. If a soldier realiens which are proficient in molecular mains under molecular control, you control combat. In these cases, an extra ECHELON should try to stun him with a Thermal SWS platform or two — especially the This formation places your soldiers in a Tazer or Thermal Shok Bomb. Finally, as Displacer/Sonic — can mean the differstaggered line, with each soldier posia last resort, you may have to resort to ence between victory and defeat. tioned successively to the right or left of If you're facing molecular the frontmost unit in a diagonal line. The If you don't have enough control-savvy aliens without echelon formation is ideal if you expect to soldiers to tackle a terror site, molecular control attacks of your own, the best strategy is face an enemy presence either to the you have yet another option. Load an aggressive one. The faster front and/or one of your flanks. When usyour transport with one soldier and you kill the aliens, the less time ing this formation, it is a good idea to posend the transport to the terror site. they'll have to conduct molecu sition a map edge or obstacle to the flank As soon as the transport touches lar control attacks on your sol opposite the echeloned flank. For examdown and the combat begins, abort diers. The more aliens you kill, ple, a team of aquanauts in echelon right the mission. You'll still lose a few the lower their morale will beformation should have either the map come, increasing the chances hundred points, but nowhere near edge, impassable terrain or a secured that they will panic and flee. area of the battlescape to their left. as many as you would have lost if Killing aliens also bolsters the Advantages: This formation has very you ignored the terror site entirely morale of your own troopers, good firepower and spotting ability to the by not sending a transport. The making them less likely to panfront and to the echeloned flank. Using same strategy can also work for aric, freeze or go berserk. the suggestions outlined above, this can tifact site missions. be a very effective formation when em158 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD AUGUST 1995 "


"After hearing his favorite games on a Sound Blaster, Vincent regretted the ear thing. Sound BLASTER AWE32 Inferior sound cards can drive you to some crazy ends. Sound effects built into this year's DLOSTEN hottest new games might seem muffled and flat. Like you're only getting half the experience. But a Sound Blaster\" sound card can spare you that insanity. You get real 16-bit, CD-quality sound that brings games to life. You hear ships explode, swords clash, tires Squeal. That's why Sound Blaster is the PC sound standard. Soun So only buy genuine Sound Blaster cards. And look for the Sound Blaster Compatibility Logo on software and multimedia kits as well. That way, your software will sound exactly like it should. And you won't feel a tinge of regret. There are six different Sound Blaster sound cards to satisfy the most discerning ear. CREATIVE To find the one that's best for you, call 1-800-998-5227 Ext. 114. multimedia is create 1995 Creative Technology Ltd. Sound Blaster and the Creative, multimedia is Creative, and Sound Blaster Compatibility Logos are trademarks of Creative Technology Ltd. International inquiries: Creative Technology Ltd.. Singapore. TEL: 65-773.0233 FAX: 65-773.0353. All rights reserved. "


"FIGHTING FALCON BACK TO BAGHDAD WHAT MAKES A 'SH*T HOT\" PILOT? Matching wits with the deadliest opponents in the world and winning Now, you can hone your skills with the same accuracy as the military. \"Fighting Falcon Back to Baghdad\" is created directly from «Red Flag' and \"Top Gun\" flight simulators used in Air Force Pilot training. Fighting Falcon is the most realistic and accurate flight model on the market complete with satellite photos from the U.S. Department of Defense, precise geographic data and 40 missions packed with Air to Ground attacks, Fighting Falcon will provide you with the most advanced combat simulation you have ever experienced... Are you ready for the challenge? Night missions High resolution texturemapped graphics The most accurate weapons modeling in a combat simulator BAT TRAIN CAEW CO FAAC coiPORATED SPOT IMAGE CORPORATION TACTICAL AIRC JING SYSTEM w Do RGK STH A L P LIMITED RenderWare NAS FALLON MILITARY SIMULATIONS INC 5910 N.E. 82nd Avenue, Vancouver WA. 98662 PHONE (360)254-2000 FAX (360)254-1746 World Wide Web: HTTP://www.military-sim.com "


"Aliens do not need to maintain line of sight (LOS) in order to conduct molecular control attacks. So no matter how well your soldiers are hidden, a molecular control-capable alien will be able to find them! \"**** (OUT OF FOUR) JUST AS THE STAR WARS SAGA SET: NEW SCI-FI MOVIE STANDARDS, : DARK FORCES SETS A HIGH MARK...\" USA TODAY RE \"IMPRESSIVE!\" DARTH VADER with Thermal Tazers and Thermal Shock Launchers. Wait one turn for the alien to revert back to normal, then stun it. In some missions — particularly twostage missions like artifact sites and alien colonies running out of ammunition can be a real problem. The answer to this ammunition shortage may be closer than you think. Instead of killing aliens outright, you can molecular control them. Once controlled, simply have the alien throw his weapon to you. After you've picked up the alien's weapon and unLUCAS eri Dit forum D 1994 Lacustin Lid and Lucas Enteralment Company All rights reserved. Und und authoritation Star Wars is a registered trademark and Dal Forces is a trade of Lucasfilm Lid. The Lucasas logo is a registered trademark of LucasArts Entertainment Company Circle Reader Service #3 ployed along map edges and next to large structures. Disadvantages: This formation can be hard to control, and soldiers in this formation have poor line of sight and firepower to the rear and on the non-echeloned flank. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD Computer Game Magazin ZD! IN-LINE In this formation, all of your troopers walk abreast in a ragged line. The point man should walk slightly ahead of the rest of the unit, with heavy weapons personnel placed on the extreme ends of the formation. Advantages: This formation provides the most powerful forward field of fire available. Since all your troopers are basically facing the same direction, you can lay down a withering barrage of fire towards anything that crosses your path. Since your soldiers are walking next to one another, the chances for friendly fire casualties are all but eliminated. This formation works well as a moving screen, serving to shield less heavily-armored soldiers following to the rear from enemy Sports Camo All-Stars AVECM oder WIE DER e ou PLAY to win. SUBSCRIBE Frem to save. Here's the move that'll blow'em away: Call 1-800-827-4450 And grab the rock-bottom rate other gamers would virtually die for! AUGUST 1995  COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 161 "


"Welcome to Sky View. An amusement park looming with mystery, bizarre employees, and challenging midway games and puzzles. You'll encounter state-of-the-art animation, photo-realistic 3-D environments and full screen video performances by over 30 characters. With increasing skill levels and more than 200 outcomes, it's hard to experience this amusement park the same way twice. For a cinematic-quality adventure like no other Panic in the Park is definitely your ticket. Solve the mystery or the parais history SOLVE THE MYSTERY OR THE PARKS HISTOR IRAS5560 DANICIN LTHE DARK : [EIKAEL O A 3 disc, interactive udventure for Windows and Mac\" CD ROM Call 1-800-MY-DEALER. IMAGINATION PILOTS WarnerActive Contact us at HTTP://www.warneractive.com Distributed by WEA Visual Entertainment  Warner Musk Group. WARNERACTIVE Panic in the Park  Warner Music Pots, Inc, Windows is registered trademark of Microsoft Corporation. Macintosh is a trademark of Apple Computer Inc., Circle Reader Service #201 "


"FORES Don't use molecular control on civilians! Once they've been controlled, they switch to the alien side, moving alongside their alien attackers. Since these traitorous civilians count as aliens for the purposes of finishing the mission, you'll have to stun or kill them to proceed. \"10 RATING... DARK FORCES IS . THE GAME THAT DOOM II SHOULD HAVE BEEN... A MUST-OWN.\" COMPUTER PLAYER \"CONSUME YOU IT WILL!\" loaded the ammunition, you can then dispatch the alien at your leisure. Some aliens are so tough and deadly that they make invaluable additions to your X-COM squad when they have been molecularly-controlled. Lobster men can be particularly tough against other aliens, as their tough exoskeletons prevent them from taking most damage. Bio-Drones are also useful, but their bothersome tendenLUCAS Dark Forces gume 1994 Lucasfilm Lid and LucasArts Entertainment Company. All rights reserved. Used under authoritation Star Wars is a registered adamark and Dark Force trademark of Lucasfilm Lid. The LucasArts logo is a registered trademark of Lucesans Entertainment Company Circle Reader Service #2 MOVING MOVING LEDIG DVD -RUD MOLNO2 MOVING? 3.381 fire. This formation works best when you're facing a large concentration of aliens grouped together in one map location. This formation works best with a large number of soldiers, especially when sweeping across vast expanses of terrain. Disadvantages: Line of sight and firepower to the left, right and rear of this formation is very poor, making this a poor formation for use in combat areas where aliens may be attacking from a variety of compass points. This formation also requires a goodly amount of soldiers to work to its full potential, so this formation may not be an option in all cases. Please write to: Computer Gaming World, P.O. Box 57167, Boulder, CO 80322 7167 Include your mailing label from a recent issue or call 1-800-827-4450 for faster service. Please allow up to 60 days for change of address to take place. WEDGE One of the more popular formations, the wedge configuration is a good all-around "


"LOSE BLOOD NOW! ASK ME HOW This fast-paced splatter-packed CDROM movie-based interactive adventure features real movie clips (from the movie Pumpkinhead II: Bloodwings), real movie music, and real movie stars, such as Pumpkinhead himself, smiling above, and Roger Clinton, the President's more successful brother! You'll get everything but real blood on your computer. This game is sure to get your blood pumping! SOLEIL MOON FRYE PREMIERS THIS SUMMER FOR YOUR PC CD-ROM ROGER CLINTON STEVE KANALY ANDY ROBINSON AMI DOLENZ PUMPKINHEAD'S RE MOTION PICTURE CORPORATION OF AMERICA TERREZPE Circle Reader Service #62 E h LOCOWGSPH EDSVEGA GARRAIOA WAONG MOTONG TURE CORPORATION DE AMERICA ALL BOOTS RESERVED AN AFFILIATEO LAREL OF ELECTRONIC ARTS "


"\"IS IT AS GOOD AS DOOM? ACTUALLY, IN ALMOST EVERY WAY, IT'S BETTER.\" COMPUTER GAMING WORLD cy to explode when fired upon can endanger other members of your squad. For that reason Bio-Drones make excellent \"Kamikaze\" troopers — simply charge one towards the largest group of aliens and hope they destroy it. The undisputed favorite of most TFTD commanders is the Triscene. Blessed with a thick hide, a powerful sonic cannon and gobs of health and stamina points, this massive monstrosity (it occupies four squares on the battlescape) can be used much like an SWS platform, absorbing and meting out vast amounts of punishment. While it's true that X-COM: TERROR FROM THE DEEP is more dillicult than the original X-Com, these tips should go a long way toward helping you once again overcome the insidious alien threat. Good luck, and keep those fields of fire open! To order Totally Unauthorized X-COM: Terror From The Deep, contact Brady GAMES Publishing at: 201 West 103rd Street, Indianapolis, IN 46290. Or call (800) 428-5331.6 \"FEARLESS AND INVENTIVE!\" — JABBA THE HUTT. . A FIRST PERSON, ORIGINAL STAR WARS CD-ROM EXPERIENCE. Dark Forces game  1994 Lucasfilm Ltd. and LucasArts Entertainment Company. All rights reserved. Used under authorization. Star Wars is a registered trademark and Dark Forces is a trademark of Lucasfilm Ltd, The LucasArts logo is a registered trademark of LucasArts Entertainment Company CHECK OUT THE DARK FORCES DEMO ON THE LUCASARTS BBS AT (415) 257-3070 OD 01 FCO 020 000 2.000. 0 0 CALL TO SUBSCRIBE TODAY! MISS THE NEXT COMPUTER LIFE! ComputerLife I INTERNET combat posture. Soldiers are arranged in the shape of an inverted \"V\". This formation will be used more often than most, as it is well-suited for many different types of combat situations. Advantages: The vee-wedge provides good, overlapping fields of fire to the front, left and right. This formation can project firepower best to its front and both flanks, with poor firepower to the rear. The wedge formation is arguably the most effective formation for most combat missions. Disadvantages: The wedge can be difficult to control at times, and soldiers arranged in wedge formation are somewhat more susceptible to area effect weapons such as Sonic Pulsers and Disrupter Pulse Bombs. Every month COMPUTER LIFE is packed with answers, clear-cut information, practical tips and how-to's everything you need to wring more power and pleasure from your machine. To stay on top of it all you've got to subscribe to it. So call today. It's a better deal at a better price FREE software, too when you subscribe to COMPUTER LIFE! Rumi Fasti Get Seart FREE BONUS SOFTWARE WHEN YOU CALL! CALL 1-800-926-1578 All you DD is call to subscribe. DONT miss the FREE software! AUGUST 1995  COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 165 "


"REVIEW Medieval Mayhem RAW Entertainment Traces The RISE OF THE WEST Provence + s by Terry Lee Coleman Social State 1 El Provence 1135 AMES F. DUNNIGAN IS AS CLOSE TO A Byzantines are generally more effective at MYTHIC FIGURE AS BOARD WARGAMING warding off enemies with the olive branch Round 1/15 COULD PRODUCE. THE DESIGNER OF than the sword. over 100 games, he is better known This version retains the boardgame A YEAR IN PROVENCE Empire management is a delthese days for his best-selling books concept of playing \"cards\" to perform opicate balance in RISE OF THE West. Taxing the popuand his TV analysis of the Gulf War. Still, erations, except that the number of operalace to raid enemies can result in revolts at home. anyone who has played board wargames tions now varies with the size of the recalls Dunnigan, and his former compaempire and initiative of the leader insassinations, raid enemy lands, and suffer ny SPI, that boardgaming giant which volved. To attempt conquest of an area, from corruption, heresy, and famine. You gave rise to the quaintly awkward phrase for instance, one must first raise an army may even be excommunicated or die heir\"An Historical Simulation.\" with Administration, then attack with Mililess, and watch helplessly as your charisEmpires of the Middle Ages was unique tary. Assuming the attack is successful, Admatic 9-9-9 leader is replaced by a 2-1-2 among Dunnigan's designs, because it ministration will again be necessary to get puppet. Special \"holding cards\" increase took chances with RISE OF THE WEST the newly-won province your chances (military advance) or damscale and focus-even out of a state of unrest. In age that of your neighbor's (subversion). Price: $34.95 using cards in a 1980 order to get victory points The computer opponents are strong, System Requirements: IBM wargame!-and large386 or better, VGA graphics, for a province, you must and enjoy trading cards or (almost gleely succeeded. Empires 2MB hard drive space, have a diplomatic tie fully, it seems) playing nasty cards on huis out of print now Windows 3.1, mouse and/or a claim to an area, man players. It's hard to accuse them of Protection: None (worth $100-200 at showing that your \"nationcheating, either, when none of the info, not Designer: Greg Goheen game auctions), but Original Boardgame Design: al will\" is recognized even the cards, is hidden from any player. the game has been re James F. Dunnigan throughout the lands. It is It's a shame network play isn't provided, vived in computer Publisher: RAW Entertainment even possible to take adbut there are work-arounds for those who Houston, TX form as RISE OF THE joining lands diplomaticalwish to play over lunch in the office. (713) 286-2386 WEST, its rules looply, if all the conditions are Ultimately, RISE OF THE WEST is a real holes nicely sewn up, and its game sysright. In order to win, you must get the player's game, simple to learn and difficult tems adapted for Windows. The most out of your strengths and weaknessto master. It covers a neglected period of unassuming graphic palette will hardly es-the heart of any good strategy game. history with good scenarios, a great camthrill any gamer exposed to the SVGA Before expanding your empire, you paign game and more than a little charm. lushness of PANZER GENERAL, and there must weigh several factors, such as reliIt even goes beyond the boardgame by inare no digitized explosions or clashing of gion, mineral/gold wealth, even language cluding a scenario editor, that new emswords to impress you with the sounds of differences between your lands and those pires may rise and fall on your computer the era. What the game does offer, howevyou covet. Fortunately, you may access all screen until the next millennium. Dunnier, is a broad yet elegant look at the forces of this information through pull-down gan himself would no doubt be proud.  of change in medieval Europe. menus, a huge advantage over looking THE EDITORS SPEAK As the head of an empire, you are rated them up in a thick manual. Similarly, the RISE OF THE WEST for administrative, diplomatic and military chance of success for each endeavor is prowess, where the abilities are either: I clearly marked in the operations window, RATING (incredibly inept); 2 or 3 (various states of relieving players from the tedium of solvPROS The best game on the subject, mediocrity); 5 (good); or 9 (incredible). Ating the complex formulas involved. with good AI and challenging scenarios. the beginning of each scenario, the leader Even though the computer does the The editor gives unlimited replay value. of each empire has values based on his dirty work, the flavor of the boardgame is CONS Gamers needing sexy graphics, historical abilities. Thus, Charlemagne is everywhere evident. Players fight civil sound, and panzers might want to stay in excellent across the board, while the wars, engage in trade, parley, attempt as the modern era. 166 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD AUGUST 1995 "


"You've just arrived in a bustling city... a strange, wonderful, dangerous place. Full of unpredictable people. People you've never met, strangers. Enter the cityscape. Move through public places. Go to a nightclub, café, restaurant, movie or the theater. Explore the limits of emotion and discover startling things about them and yourself. YOUR WORLD JUST BECAME STRANGER STRANGER An interactive game that never plays the same way twice. BEST STORY, Kated **** \"The game never plays the same twice.\" Electronic Entertainment Hated ** Mature audiences will find themselves captivated...\" Computer Gaming World Be *** \"...a multimedia tour de force...cool, totally cool...\" Nautilus CD TON EO CARROUSB ulang alist-New Media TB COR \"A realistic look into other people's lives.\" —American Way MATURE  An interactive social experience  Interact with 18 characters  Explore 23 different locations . 100's of variations for endless interactivity  First CD-ROM to employ Virtual Intimacy Available on CD-ROM for the Macintosh and Multimedia IBM PC & Compatibles. For more information or to order call toll-free: M AGE$17. 1-800-237-6675 CG1 Dealer inquiries welcome. Circle Reader Service #49 Gazelle Technologies, Inc. ANIMATICS Multimedia Corporation STEREO HEADPHONES FREE "


"VALERY MC Pick BROKE of the Month 49 MORE BUTTS SEYMORE B 49 49 Space Sirens Part 2 WISSION The Worldwide CONTROL You must be over 21 to order Adut Tiles. Adult Pidures Tokyo Glamour Girls! Adult Palate Vol. 2 All Night Long Amateur Vodels Amateur Vodels 2 Arnerican Girls 2 Asian Ladies Asian Ladies 2 Endless Beach Babes Girlfriends 1 Girls of J. Stephen Hicks Girls of Spice Girls of Vivid Girls of Vivid 2 High Volume Nudes Vellon IVan 1 Playbody Screen Saver Select A Pel Select A Pel 2 Sizzle Screen Saver Tabloid Beauties Tokyo Glamour Girls 39 2899889999999999999 SUICITATE STARO Aduk Interadive 10 VIRTUA VIBRATIONS Supo Pixis Adult Sampler Platinum Six Pack Poker Party Privale Prison Samurai Pervert Scissors N Slones See Some, 3 Some Space Sirens Space Sirens 2: Ajia Spy Club Siripper P.I. Texas Table Dance Tokyo Nightlife TW Vampire's Kiss Virgins Virgins 2 Lingerie Interactive 79 Virtual Poloshod 2 Maddam's Family 49 Virtual Poloshodl 3 Max, Naughty Dog 49 Virtual Photoshod 4 Free CD and Special Insider Prices on INTERACTIVE ENTERTAINMENT QUARTERLY Games Game Shopper,\" Your Order Your Subscription Now! Quarterly Window on Only $9.95 for an entire year. the World of Interactive Se Mail to: Game Shopper, 7 Oak Place, CGW0895, Montclair, NJ 07042 Entertainment. YES! I want to order Game Shopper Game Shopper covers the for only $9.95! creative stars and studios of the exploding new multimedia entertainment industry plus reviews, reviews, reviews. *All subscribers get reduced prices on Card many titles Signature Game Shopper AN ADULT INTERACTIVICO BOM SAMPLER 701 Sexual Postions 1 or 2 Adult Movie Almanac Adventures Seymore Butts Adventures Seymore 2 Adventures of Snatchman Club Cyberlesque Cyoer Strip Blackjack Cyoer Strip Poker Dirty Debutantes Dirty Deos2 Asian Edition Doors of Passion Dream Machine Eledinic Swing 39 Fantasy Chamber 24 Girlfriend Teri 24 Hot SIIS 24 Hot Wire 24 Interactive Sex Therapy 228885998988399989 262 Bet Your Sweet Body Boyfriend 1 Busty Babes 3 Busty Babes 4 Elite American Vodels 1 Elite American Vodels 2 Elite European Vodels 1 Elite European Vodels 2 Nime Address State Birthdate Age WSSION Money Saving na $5 OFF Coupon Vlen In Motion Morphing Babes Nasty Paris NeuroDancer New Vlachine Sampler Nightwatch 2 PeepShow Interactive ANY PURCHASE OVER $99. Offer valid through September 195. One coupon per customer, one coupon per order. If ordering by phone, refer to coupon CGW0895. 59 Virtual Sex 39 Virtual Valerie 2 49 Virtual Vixens 34 Virtually Yours 10 Virtually Yours 2 49 Where in World Dick Jane 49 Winner Take All 86868 800-999-7995 "


"She Virtual DIRECTOR AN INTERACUVE ADVIT OAME TABLOID BEAUTIESE STAYBACTIVE UNCENSORED 39 1000000 24 TO CANCUN! SLATE TAKET y content on to 39 Enter the \"The World's Firs! Adult Magazine on CD-ROM!\" IO HIGH SOCETY THE INTERACTIVE STRIP POKER GAME Featuring Lathy Willets \"America's Favorite Nymphomaniac Parents MANOLO Lentice Alence A FAKTOR YOU Fu Pay Yours Hot Wire Contest DUR NEW T CD-ROM IS SO THEY WON'T LET US HOW T TO . MG  The MONCAIDS OF MINTON FULL MOTION VIDEOS INTRARE INTERACTIVE ACTONI Ajar Venus CD-ROM Experts You're smart if you enter our contes and subscribe to Interactive Quarterly, the hot new magazine that gives you the inside track on Adult CD-ROM software. IQ features stories on the Incredible lifestyles and creative breakthroughs of the stars and star-makers of Adult CD-ROMs plus product reviews to guide you in your search for interactive pleasure and perfection. VIRTUAL VIXENS WANDÉRAUSTA INTERACTIVE QUARTERLY AMERICA'S PREMIERE ADULT CD-ROM MAGAZINE Blonde Justice Box Hunt Cafe Flesh Candy Snacker College Girls Darker Side of Shayla Daydreams Deception Defending Your Sex Life DyniaStud Elements of Desire Forever Future Kink Ginger Lynn: The Movie Hidden Obsessions John Wayne Bobbill Justine 286892893888389 A one-year subscription includes your choice of a FREE Adult CD-ROM sampler, all for only $9.95! Aduk Movies VIRTIATIVA And all new subscribers are automatically entered in our contest... YOU MAY WIN ONE OF THESE FANTASTIC PRIZES: | First Prize: A Vacation For Two at a Luxury Resort in Cancun* 50 Second Prizes: IQT-shirts 100 Third Prizes: IQ Mouse Pads Airfare not included. Seymore's Six Pack Sharon Starlet Streets of New York Super Models Go Wild SuperStars Jap. Porn Taboo 12 The Dinner Party Traci I Love You Urclsuicioji Collection VagaBlonde Virtual Vibration Sampler Wild Innocence WPINK TV A Pussy Called Wanda 2 AdultStars Super Blondes Adult Superstars 1 Adventures of Vikki Finn Always Artierican Built Amorous Asian Girls Arcus 2001 Babes Illustrated 2 Best of Inferno Best of Vividi Beverly Hills 90269 Bike Bang Blondage  SUBSCRIBE! AN ICTION Aduk 6 Pack YES! Start my subscription to Interactive Quarterly for $9.95 & send my FREE Adult CD sampler: (check one) New Machine Pixis Interactive Arcus Digital Playground SIX pack Name Phone Girlfriend Wer Anders i n MAIN Mailing address City State Payment enclosed: check or money order (allow 14 days to clear) MCO Visa Discover TAN Lady in Spain Legends of Porn II Lethal Passion Vodel Wife Mystique of the Orient 2 Nighl Creatures Night Trios 2 Other Side Chelsea Passion Files Private Video Viao. #1 Put it in Cere Racquel Released Raunch Rise of Roman Empress Sex and Money Sex Over 40 They Includes: Insatiable  Digital Dancing Legends Pern 2  Legend 4 . Taste of Erotica . Biker Babes Exp. Date TIT Exp Date Signature hus Mall tor 19, CGWOBD5, 551 Valley Road, Suite 373. Montclair, NJ 07043, fax: 201.783-1686 or E Maill att IQMAGAol.com. Phone (201) 783-3600  Fax (201) 783-3686 FAXBACK Line (201) 783-3374 Send Orders To: Mission Control, 7 Oak Place, CGW0895, Montclair, NJ 07042 MC, Visa, Discover, Checks & Money Orders. Checks held 14 days. Please Include Phone #. Shipping $7 OVERNIGHT (most areas) Int'l Shipping $25. E-Mail MissionCd@aol.com Circle Reader Service #331 OFFICIAL CONTEST RULES: Erely subscriptive purchased by December 15. 1995 is automatically entered into the contest. You may also enter by sending in a postcard the words Interactive Quarterly along with your Rame, age, date of birth, and address, and mail to: 10 Contest CGW0895, 551 Valley Road, Maasdair, NJ 07043. postmarked by December 1S. 1995.  Only one entry per household. No echanical reproductions. . lou must be 21 year el age or older to enter this COL . Winners will be selected a randon drawings and notified by mail. A lot of the price winners muy be obtained by sending a kelladrand, stamped envelope to the above address  Odds of winning depend on the number of entres received. Yold where proibited by law "


"GAMER'S EDGE Hints: The Universal Gaming Language Jason Strautman's UNIVERSAL HINT SYSTEM Speaks To The Adventure Gamer In Need by Jeff James Jeff James dmmmmmm   FOREST HOUSE SPECIAL PASSAGE l' you've played many adventure UHS hint file. The FL UHS Reader C:JUHSIZORK1.UHS games, you've undoubtedly come UHS reader is share Elle Windows Options Help Zorki The Great Underground Empire across a puzzle, trap or other ware, and is available tenacious conundrum that simply for a wide range of Map of the Forest refuses your best attempts to solve computer platforms it. After repeated unsuccessful atand operating systems, tempts to bypass the obstacle, you including DOS, Winthrow up your hands in frustration, redows, Macintosh and move the game from your hard disk, and Amiga. Once you have toss it into the dusty recesses of your softthe UHS reader, you ware library, never to be played again. can find and download THE FOREST If you're determined to see your way the appropriate UHS through to the bitter conclusion of the hint files. There are game, you can take a trip to your local over 100 UHS hint files GET THE PICTURE? The Windows version of UHS supports image files. software shop and spend $20 for a clue available, ranging from like this crude but effective map of a crude but effective game—the book, or you can dial up the game pubclassic adventure games original lisher's 900 hint line-usually at a buck a like the first ZORK to minute-for yet another pricey solution new titles like Myst and ALONE IN THE particular topic, you're given a very vague to your gaming dilemma. Thankfully, DARK 3. hint about how to solve the puzzle. If you there is a far less expensive-and more After you've loaded the correct hint file still can't figure it out, another mouseeffective-solution to your adventure into the UHS reader, you're presented click will reveal even more information. with a list of subThis process continues until you get File Windows Uptions Help Beneath a Steel Sky jects. For example, enough information to solve the clue on the UHS hint file your own or until the program gives you for Myst lists eight the correct answer. This allows you to taiinitial topics, inlor the hints to meet your need for help, cluding «Finding ranging from a gentle nudge in the right the books,\" \"Chandirection to smacking you over the head melwood,\" \"Mewith the answer. chanical age\" and In addition to providing text solutions \"Stoneship age.\" to adventure game puzzles, graphic imFor information ages—whether maps or screenshots-are about any of the supported in the latest revisions of the Rit-x Exit 13 Open Print Windows 200mg Next Window topics listed, you UHS hint system. If you want the ultimate TIERS ON MY WINDOW The Universal Hint System has a tiered hint structure, use your mouse or cheating tool, Strautman also offers a terallowing you to get as much or as little help as you want. cursor keys to seminate and stay resident (TSR) version of lect the one that UHS that runs in the background while gaming difficulties: Jason Strautman's interests you. If you select \"Channelwood\" you're playing the game. When you get UNIVERSAL HINT SYSTEM (UHS). in our Myst example, you're taken to anstuck, simply press the ALT key plus the The UHS is a software system consistother window which offers a short list of \"?\" key to activate UHS and get the clues ing of two parts: the UHS reader and the puzzle topics. After you've clicked on a you need. The latest shareware revision About this UHS File Recycling Plant (Starting Out) Top under roundhu Mid How do I avoid the creature in the subway? LIN Can I survive the crumbling tunnel past the second subway stop? Gro I can't open the metal door near the lant veins und How can I get past the android? How can I get through the heavily locked door? How do I open the door with the two hand sensors? lo  1 ree Kcn? How do I shut down LINC? How do I get into the door in the wall? How do I keep from being absorbed by LINCO 170 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. AUGUST 1995 "


"NEWCH pronuers VIRTUEL PILOT IPFE Fly higher with VIRTUAL PILOT PROTM! Taking the best features of the award-winning VIRTUAL PILOT plus added viewing capabilities and fire buttons, it is ideal for advanced flight simulation and driving games. For those who take their game playing seriously! For IBM PC-compatible computers. PRO PEDALSTM are the only rudders which feature both forward and back rudder motion for flying and a pivot movement accelerator and brake control for driving games. Compatible with CH Products' entire IBM PC-compatible line. Jump into the cockpit and experience your most intense flight ever with FLIGHTSTICK PRO for 3D0\"the first 3D0 analog joystick. A thrill to use with 3DO software from companies like Crystal Dynamics, Domark, and Dynamix! TRACKBALL PROTM is a great alternative to the traditional mouse. It also serves as a professional pointing device for desktop publishing, CAD/CAM, and games. Available for both IBM PC-compatible and Macintosh computers. Take total control of your aircraft without ever removing your hand from the stick! features a FLIGHTSTICK PRO for Macintosh programmable trigger, three fire buttons, and a programmable eight-way switch. It attaches to the ADB port found on Mac SE or later models and requires 6.0.7 software or higher. the best! OBUCTS Macintosh is a registered trademark of Apple Computer, Inc. Circle Reader Service #5 Dark Cantar nun. Wir A02002. Dhann 610 500 519. CAY: 610.509 524 "


"GAMER'S EDGE Cheat of the Month Club (version 95a) of UHS locks out several features, so you'd be well-advised to register the shareware version as soon as possible. The registered version is available for a small fee of $10, and is highly recommended. To register the shareware version of the Universal Hint System Reader for MSDOS or Windows, Version 3.00, Revision 95a, send $10 US to Jason Strautman, P.O. Box 391481, Cambridge, MA 021390015. The shareware version of the UHS can be found on most commercial on-line services, including America Online and CompuServe. It can also be found on the Internet at the following FTP sites: <ftp.gmd.de>or <wuarchive.wustl.edu> Terminal Velocity Psst! Hey, kid... Having trouble beatin' Apogee's TERMINAL VELOCITY? That's cuz you're playing fair. For a quarter, I can give you a list of cheat codes that will put you back on top. What, no money? OK. I'll trade you for a PANZER GENERAL unit editor... Type these codes at any time during play. Note that several of these cheats will work only with the registered version of the game. 3DREALM Prints \"Smokin'!\" on the screen and give you rapid-fire. MANIACS Refuel the afterburner. TRFRAME Adds a frames-per-second counter in the corner of the screen. TRIFIRO Renders you invincible. TRIFIR1 Instant plasma assault cannon (P.A.C.) and full ammo. TRIFIR2 Instant ion burst gun (1.0.1.) and full ammo, TRIFIR3 Instant rapid-targeting laser (R.T.L.) and full ammo. TRIFIR4 Instant manual-aimed missiles (M.A.M.) and full ammo. TRIFIR5 Instant seek and destroy missile (S.A.D.) and full ammo. TRIFIR6 Instant shock wave torpedo and (S.W.T.) and full ammo. TRIFIR8 Gives you full afterburners. TRIFIR9 Renders you invisible. TRIGODS Also renders you invisible. TRINEXT Jump to the next stage in the current level, or to the first stage of the next level. TRISHLD Restore full shields. TRSCOPE Adds a sound oscilloscope to the screen. (Why?) XCOMUTIL 1.2 The X-COM and Terror FROM THE DEEP Game Editor by Scott Jones Although dozens of cheat and hacking utilities exist for X-COM: TERROR FROM THE DEEP, ew can accomplish what Scott Jones' XCOMUTIL 1.2 can. This utility allows you to fiddle with certain parts of X-COM and TERROR FROM THE DEEP that are normally off-limits to other editors. Using XCOMUTIL with TFTD, you can RED ZONE WA FOR THE SERIOUS GAMER ACTION/ADVENTURE 7th Guest 11th Hour /CD 51.00 Alone In The Dark 2 CD 40.00 Bioforge 45.00 Deathgale CD 34.00 34.00 Discworld /CD 36.00 Dragonsphere /CD 32.00 Ecstatica/CD 36.00 King's Quest 7 DOS/MAC.. . 49.00 Magic Carpet .... 43.00 Relentless Twixens Adventure ........ 44.00 Star Trek Tng Final /CD............... 56.00 Star Trek Tng /CD 77.00 System Shock 46.00 Under A Killing Moon /CD. 56.00 Under A Killing Moon Sample CD 6.00 Zorro /CD Windows 36.00 WAR GAMES 1942 Pacific Air Wor/C0 48.00 1942 Pac. Air War Scenario ......... 32.00 Armored Fist DOS/MAC 46.00 Bottledrome.. 43.00 Flight Commander 2... 42.00 Front Lines.... 39.00 Panzer General .... 40.00 ROLE PLAYING Dungeon Master 2 36.00 Elder Scrolls Arena 40.00 40.00 Pirates Gold /MAC CD.................. 48.00 Ravenloft Strada Possession ......... 50.00 Super Heros/Hoboken /MAC CD...... 36.00 SIMULATION Aces Of The Deep.... 45.00 Falcon Gold DOS/MAC 52.00 F-14 Fleet Defender Gold /CD 50.00 Gone Fishing /CD. 40.00 Nascar Racing 42.00 Privateer Special Ops ....... 25.00 Strike Commander /co 25.00 U.S. Navy Fighters /CD ...... 47.00 Wing Commander 3 CD......... 54.00 Wings Of Glory................. 45.00 Yeagers Air Combot /MAC 40.00 SPORTS NHL Hockey 95 40.00 PGA Tour Golf 486 48.00 PGA Tour Goll2/MAC 45.00 STRATEGY Iron Assaull /CD 40.00 Jogged Alliance /CD 47.00 Lords Of The Realm /CD .. 38.00 Master Of Magic /CD 39.00 Master Of Orion /CD... 40.00 Oh Nol More Lemings /MAC 38.00 Sim Tower /MAC 3.5 CO.......... 34.00 X Com Ulo Defense 41.00 X Com Terror EDUCATION Little Turtle, The IMAC... Putt Putt & Fatty Bears IMAC 22.00 Three Little Pigs Windows ............ 15.00 Tortoise And The Hore Windows ... 15.00 change the firing accuracy of all the aliens you encounter to an absurdly high level, or you can replace their pistols with disrupter pulse launchers to make the game more challenging. Using the wide range of command-line options, you can make entire levels visible, rearrange your troopers in the Leviathan transport, and perform dozens of other functions. XCOMUTIL works with both the original X-COM and the sequel. It is available in versions for DOS and OS/2, and it can be found on CompuServe, America Online and ZiflNet. Internet users can find this utility at <wuarcrhive.wustl.edu> in <pub/msdos_uploads/xcom> and <pub/msdos_uploads/xcom>, Jeff James, CGW columnist and Associate Editor of The Electronic Roadhouse, can be reached at 74774.1635@compuserve.com. 38.00 ......... Zir net To locate these files on-line, tune in to the CGW headquarters on ZillNet. Files featured here can be downloaded from ZiffNet on CompuServe. On CompuServe, go to Computer Gaming World's own forum (GO GAMEWORLD), and search in the Gamer's Edge file library, library 16. CREDIT CARD ORDERS, CALL: m.: 1-800-823-3017 QUESTIONS: 1-941-923-1998  FAX ORDERS: 1-941-925-7614 We accept Visa, Master Card, Discover. Make Checks Payable To Roberts Enterprises All Checks Held For ten Days Florida Residents Add 6% Sales Tax Returns Require Authorization # And Are Subject to 15% Rostocking Fee Price And Availability Subject To Chango Without Notice Shipping And Handling: UPS Ground $5 2 Day And Overnight Available Red Zone 4023 Sawyer Rd., Suite 103. Sarasota, FL 34233 172 Circle Reader Service #346 "


"MODEM Play Very Strong Artificial Intelligence Superb SVGA Graphics with Astounding Combat Animations Many Pre-Designed Maps Random Map Generator Engrossing Campaigns Improved Player History of your Combat Endeavors Complete Player Ranking System Land Units to take Inland Cities Random Events A 3rd Player Interloper for that Extra Challenge Flagships with Special Abilities THE LOST ADMIRAL The Admiral's Revenge Dare to enter the and the campaigns round out a titanic gaming experience. Your progress is waters once again in tracked all along the way with full player history tracking. The Lost Admiral II: The Admiral's Revenge. Stealthily, maneuver your submarines through enemy lines to prepare for The multi-award the all out attack on your adversary. Run a tight ship, but it still will winning game not be easy to conquer the world ...this time it's not just is back and personal ...it's a matter of life or death, enhanced in this second incarnation of the classic. This time, combat a third computer controlled interloper (optional) see the combat in SVGA graphics and play against a human adversary over MODEM, Uilize the land troops as well as your naval fleet to combat the improved Al and try to regain your name. The pre-designed maps are monumental, the randomly generated scenarios are tremendous BUANTUM EU R ONS, INC. A Subsidiary of American Laser Gumus. Inc Technical Information: 495 Highway 202, Flemingios, i JJ 08822, (90%) 788-2799 Sales Information: 4801 Lincoln Rd., Albuquerque, NM 87109, (505) 880-1718 Circle Reader Service #24 "


"HEX, BUGS & ROCK 'N ROLL Calculus Unlimited A Look Into The Mathematical Mind of Seamus Blackley, Designer Of FLIGHT UNLIMITED by Paul Schuytema ACK IN HIGH SCHOOL, WHEN a real airplane.\" To do I WAS STRUGGLING THROUGH that, Blackley and the THE TRIGONOMETRIC nightFLIGHT UNLIMITED team mare that was pre-calc, one had to dive head-first into of my best friends said, \"Hey, the Navier-Stokes equajust wait until calculus. Then tions, which, according to the math gets fun!\" He was Blackley, are \"horrible, serious. So I waited, and anxiously trotted complicated partial differto my first calc class my freshman year in ential equations that modcollege only to be met by an entire semester el the way a fluid behaves of mind-numbing confusion. There was when it moves around a nothing fun about calculus at all! solid object. That reaction has dominated my \"math psyche\" until I recently had the opportuOF TABLES nity to chat with Seamus Blackley, direcAND NEWTONS tor of Looking Glass Technology's As far as Blackley can FLIGHT UNLIMITED aerobatic flight simulatell, FLIGHT UNLIMITED IS tor. Blackley is passionate about math, the first consumer flight simulator to utiMicrosoft's FLIGHT SIMULATOR 5 as an exand over the course of our conversation, lizes \"computational fluid dynamics\" to ample. While he is quick to acknowledge he actually helped me to slough some of model the way in which the air flows that the Microsoft sim is technically very my hatred for differential calculus. around an airplane. Prior to FLIGHT UNtight, it just doesn't impart that exhilarating LIMITED, most flight sims used a table-based feeling that a real pilot feels when banking CALCU WHO? approach to modeling flight. Essentially, tight over Miegs Filed. Blackley explained Calculus, for those of you who were these sims replicated the real world by acthat everybody, pilot or not, has an intuitive sleeping off hang-overs that semester, is the cessing massive tables of real-world data, sense of force and movement. We all expemathematics of change. While algebra will gathered either from real flight (in a plane rience it every time we hop into our car for let you find the values of x and y, calculus loaded to the gills with sensors) or from a late summer Slurpee run. We all know will give you some solid information about wind tunnel tests. how a car should behave, how it leans when how x changes through time, if x repreThis approach can lead to a very accuwe go around a corner, how our control insents something like the velocity of an airrate sim, but only within the bounds of the puts diller depending on our speed (it's plane as it launches into the air from a aircraft's table-data. It is impossible to exeonly a quick lick of the wheel to avoid flatdusty Arizona runway. Calculus is all about cute complicated aerobatic maneuvers in tening a possum at 80 mph, but a huge limits, about the minimum and maximum most sims because the data for those mayank at 20 mph). possible values for a variable. Since calculus neuvers just isn't there. deals with variables that are constantly in a Some of the more advanced PC sims, A MATHEMATICAL ODYSSEY state of flux, calculus applies very well to such as CONFIRMED KILL, utilize a \"NewtonWhen Blackley came aboard Looking the more dynamic things in our world, such ian\" approach. These sims calculate the Glass, they were already gearing up to do a as a bullet shot out of a gun, a spaceship on force vectors acting upon a plane using esflight sim. Looking Glass wanted Blackley the way to Mars, or a Sukoi aircraft snapsentially college-level physics equations to give FLIGHT UNLIMITED something sperolling 50 feet above a rocky plateau. (very algebra-intensive), and from these cial, and as he thought about the problem, The latter example is what FLIGHT UNvectors, the sim can calculate the change in he realized that he wanted to create that LIMITED is all about. When Blackley set out a plane's position. true \"feeling\" of flight that he felt was abto design this flight simulation, he wanted Neither of these approaches do a perfect sent from every other sim he had flown. the armchair pilot to get that \"yummy, visjob of translating the flight experience into (Blackley is also a real pilot; the German ceral, fluid feeling that you get when flying the computer, Blackley claims. He points to carbon-fiber sailplane in the game is mod174 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. AUGUST 1995 "


"Yeah! Check out the INN Web Site at http://www.imaginationnet.com There's more where that came from rookie! you THINK YOU'LL JUST RAM IT INTO THE END ZONE, ONLY THAT MICROBIOLOGIST FROM FRESNO STUFFS THE PLAY SCREAMING \"NOT TODAY, TOUGH Guy!!! ALEBORBA This isn't just another football game. This time it's personal. PLAYERS Join thousands of other members on the ImagiNation Network (INN), where you'll play against each other rather than mindless microchips. Match wits against another \"coach\" using real NFL players and actual 94-95 stats. Make strategic player substitutions and see the action from up to nine viewing angles. Dang! Who's No wonder Front Page Sports: Football has been named the Premier Sports Game of the Year by FRONT PAGE SPORTS Computer Gaming World for the last three years. So check it out. It's ONLINE easy. Just call us at 1-800-IMAGIN-1, ext. 961 to get your free INN software. But Front Page Sports: Football Online isn't the only game you'll receive. You'll also get classic card, board, fantasy role-playing, sports action, flight simulation, and \"edutainment\" games. Come on, hot shot. Are you INN or out? that new quarterback? IMAGINATION!  Imagination Network. All Rights Reserved. Front Page Sports is a trademark of Sierra On-Line, Inc. Offer valid to new members only. Offer expires 3/31/96. Circle Reader Service #18 "


"HEX, BUGS & ROCK 'N ROLL GIN eled directly from the sailplane he has out es. So we are left with a low pressure reexclaim 'I can't believe this! then I know on Cape Cod.) gion above the plane, and this creates a that I've hit it pretty close.\" Blackley decided not to take the table\"force imbalance\" that pushes the plane based approach because he felt that he wasinto the air. OF BANDS AND BOUNDARIES n't up to the task of dealing with such While this explanation may seem a litBlackley explained that \"boundaries massive quantities of numerical data. \"I'm tle complicated, in truth, it trivializes the drive dynamics\" in our world. He used the not smart enough,\" he joked. More imporwhole process. So many more things are example of a rock group trying to put totantly, he wanted whatever flight model apgoing on as the air moves across the surgether a killer album, but their basement proach he took to enable his plane to do a face of an airplane: the propeller creates studio doesn't even have one tenth the knife-edge spin, just like he'd seen at airturbulence and a torque imbalance; the equipment of Michael Jackson's all-digital shows. air eddies and curls as it comes off the Sony studio. They're just recording on a So Blackley emcheap Tascam 4-track, but those limitabarked on a mathetions, those constraints, push the band's matical odyssey to creativity and energy, and more often than create the most realnot (if they have the talent, of course), they istic flight sim ever to come up with something much better and appear on a PC. visceral (i.e., with more soul) then a megaBlackley, through his buck-studio recording. numerical sorcery, It's those boundaries, those limitations, was able to create a which cause interesting and exciting things flight model that uses to happen. In FLIGHT UNLIMITED, those differential equations boundaries are the surface of the airplane, to determine the reand the \"interesting things» are the turbuaction of the air, lence and changes in air pressure around moving as a lluid, its surface. over the surface of an object (any object: IT'S FLYING, FLYING I TELL YOU! SIGHTS UNLIMITED FLIGHT UNLIMITED's German model sailplane, modeled after from an airplane to a Blackley's first step in the development Blackley's own sailplane, soars over the beautiful Alaskan landscape. lawn chair). From process was to plow through his real-time that, he is able to use physics model, creating a math system that the data to then figure out where and how back of the wing; the air \"sticks\" to the used some sophisticated concepts of \"group a plane is moving in the sky. Basically, the surface of the airplane, causing drag; and theory\" to take the three-dimensional airair is modeled instead of the airplane. bumps in the plane's shape, such as the bow data and transform it, to \"warp it,\" into \"In FLIGHT UNLIMITED,\" said Blackley, pilot's canopy, cause turbulence in the a more \"math friendly\" space. He then per\"flying straight and level is fun, because an moving air. All of this adds up to one hell forms his modified Navier-Stokes integraairplane isn't perfect-all sorts of stuff is goof a mathematical nightmare, but all of Lions, and then transforms the data back ing on.\" those little blips in turbulence and presinto a three dimensional model. Using the complicated Navier-Stokes sure are calculated by the Navier-Stokes \"That's the most efficient way to use CPU equations as a foundation, Blackley was equations. time,\" explained Blackley, who estimated able to create a mathematical approximaBlackley's goal was to approximate these that his transformations of the data sped up tion of them which works in real time on equations, to make them \"feel\" right. He the math-intensive calculations by a factor a PC. The Navier-Stokes equations are didn't care if he was 20% off in the results, of 100, with almost no loss in precision. used to determine the velocity and densias long as they worked correctly, worked Once he had the physics equations in ty of an active fluid. When a plane is in consistently, and the sim felt right. place and running in real time, he created flight, some interesting changes occur in The FLIGHT UNLIMITED system is intellia model of a lat plate (using a handful of the air moving around the plane. Of gent enough to know where to look for wireframe programs to check movement course, lift is of primary concern for a \"something interesting» happening in the and to visualize the airflow), and tweaked flight simulator. Lift is created when the mathematical simulation of the airflow. the equations until the flat plate fluttered air pressure above a plane's wing is signifEssentially, the program must compute down to carth just as it should. Then he icantly less than below the wing. This lathe air pressures over the entire surface of built a wing, and finally added a fuselage. vorable condition is created by the shape the airplane, and convert those pressures Next, Blackley built a \"really bad airof a wing, or its airfoil, which makes the into a series of force distributions, which plane.\" He was studying \"pinhead books\" air move at a higher velocity over the top are then used to calculate where and how which offered him formulas and counter of the wing than the air moving under the plane is moving. formulas, but it wasn't until he picked up a neath. According to Bernoulli's Theorem, \"When I have a Sukoi pilot come up and book on actual aircraft design that he beair pressure decreases as velocity increashug me at trade show,\" said Blackley, \"and gan to understand why his plane wasn't 176 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. AUGUST 1995 "


"SE N T U RE ! SEYMORE BUTTON THE CREAT WHITE NORTH JUST COTA WHOLE LOT WARMER! RACT IN PURSUIT PLEASURE his Spectacular ADULT CD ROM for PC & MAC Double CD-ROM set picks up where the Interactive Adventures of Seymore Butts Adult CD-ROM left off! Seymore wants to hook up with his new flame Brianna, but she's left for Canada. If he doesn't scrape up the money for a flight, he'll lose her forever! CD-ROM SET What's a voyeur in love to do? Welcome to Canada Help Seymore start a dating service, hooking up his friends with the most beautiful women in L.A., while you watch! Make the right moves, and Seymore gets to mount his Mounty, but screw up and he's yodeling the blues! Limited Offer! Only $49.95 for the first 1000 orders! (Regularly $69.95.) First 1000 orders also receive Mission Control's 32 page Adult Catalog Must be 21 to order. Call toll-free to order (800)999-7995 G VEN BUTT-ER THAN THE FIRST ONE! NEW INTEROTICA MISS ON Tel (201) 783-3600  FAX (201) 783-3686. e-mail MissionCD@aol.com Send orders to: Mission Control: 7 Oak Place. CGW0895. Montclair N 07042  VISA, MC, Discover, Checks and Money Orders. Checks held 14 days. Please include phone #. Shipping $7 OVERNIGHT (most areas), Int'l Shipping $25 (most countries). Must be 21 to order. CHINE CONTROL LISHING Circle Reader Servitit 1321 "


"HEX, BUGS & ROCK 'N ROLL working quite right—the tail was stalling and the center of gravity was all off. \"Fligirr UNLIMITED runs just on the geometry of the shape,\" explained Blackley \"Toss in the shape of a lawn chair, and it will fall, tumbling to earth, just like a lawn chair would. When you apply ailerons in the game, the only thing that happens is that you change the geometry of the wing. Everything else derives from that.\" Once he had confidence in his physics model, Blackley spent about three days entering the THE EVIDENCE, MR. SHAPIRO Dr. Ascher H. Shapiro, professor of point-by-point geometry for the engineering at MIT in 1960, illustrates how the shape of an airfoil Extra 300 stunt plane. The plane generates lift. Air flows over the top of the airfoil faster than the was \"rocket powered\" since he bottom reducin ed since he bottom, reducing the air pressure above the airfoil and thus genstill hadn't worked out the comerating lift. plicated forces involved in a propeller and its component torque A CALL TO SERGEY and turbulence. Once in his «virtual air,\" he Blackley worked with Mike Goulian, a put the Extra through its paces. member of the U.S. Aerobatic Team and \"It snap-rolled like a mother#$%&^!\", 1990 U.S. National Aerobatic Champion, recalled Blackley with genuine enthusiasm. to nail down the performance of the various stunt planes in the game. When they were testing the Sukoi, they just couldn't get it to break into a controlled spin properly. Blackley was anxious, unsure if he would have to go back and wrestle with his math yet again. Before tearing apart the code, Goulian put in a call to a friend, a Russian pilot named Sergey, who said, in his broken English, \"only half aileron.\" They took the advice and attempted the stunt once more, and it worked perfectly. The ailerons on the Russian-built Sukoi were so big that they were just pushing the wing too hard. The physics weren't wrong-instead, the pilots just weren't taking the idiosyncrasies of the plane into account. \"You get everything for free,\" reflected Blackley, \"once you get the air's fluid dynamics right.\" For Blackley, and the rest of the crew at Looking Glass, the FLIGHT UNLIMITED experience is all about exploiting your hind brain-it provides a real visceral experience of flying.\" \"I don't really understand it,\" confessed Blackley, «but thank God it's right.\" @ GY SOFTWARE 0 Finnti O F IXATION the first INTERACTIVE STILLS CD-ROM database allows viewing by YOUR grade, category, description date viewed Instantly view only pictures you have not yhel seen or show off your favorites to a friend. You will thrill to over 1000 original pictures in 1024x768x256 Super VGA We concentrate on the oral side of love but we include XXX pictures in every hol colegory. Order CD A-Price $59 GOOD NEWS. YOUR NEW CAR? We Crashed It. PLAN 69 FROM OUTER SPACE Interactive science fiction sex extravaganza! 2 movies in play the XXX science fiction sex movie or play our enhanced movie with scenes from the original Plan 9 From Outer Space See Belo Lugosi and Vampire in the sex movie they never mode you can also create unlimited GIFs from movie. Order CD B-Price $59 STA Now You Can Have Your Own Girlfriend ... a sensuous woman living in your computer! GIRLFRIEND is the first VIRTUAL WOMAN. You can watch her, talk to her, ask her questions and relate with her. Over 100 octual VGA photographs allow you to see your girlfriend as you ask her to wear diffrent outfits and guide her into different sexual activities. As a true artificial intelligence program, GIRLFRIEND starts with a 3000 word vocabulary and actually GROWS the more you use it. She will remember your name, your birthday and your likes and dislikes. GIRLFRIEND comes with the base software and GIRLFRIEND LISA. Additional gik will be diLF IRIE Gelaranla odded. This program requires 7-10MB of free space. On DISK: FREE Second GIRLFRIEND Just Added. SG3 GIRLFRIEND -Reg. Price $129. Special Introductory Price $69. SG7 GIRLFRIEND TERI 300+ Pictures Price $79 SG9 SoundBlaster VOICE KITI Price $29 NEW! SG20 GIRLFRIEND TERI CD-ROM Price $59 includes FREE VOICE KIT SeXXcapades\"-The GAME The First Adult Game with TRUE SOUND and 256 Color VGA Graphics The game everyone has been waiting for. For that evening you won't forget with a loved one or group of very dose friends. Fulfill your sexual desires. Find out how your partner would really like to make love. Over 80 Color VGA Scenes Real Voices Guide the Action Foreplay Option Play with 2-8 Close Friends. Now supports SoundBlastercards! On Disk Order SG-1 Price: $79 or $69 with purchase of any other product. VGA and hard disk required shipped on high density disks. ON CD-ROM: SeXXcapades ... the Movie See incredible uses of a mouse and a joystick in an amateur movie of a group of friends playing our SeXXcopodes game. Order CD 5 Price $59. CD-ROM BUNDLE ANY 3 CD-ROMS $149. $19 CD-ROM BLOWOUT CALL FOR TITLES. ALSO: TOP SHAREWARE GAMES ONLY $1.50 PER DISK FREE CATALOG INCLUDING WINDOWS, BUSINESS, UTILITIES, EDUCATION, GRAPHICS ADD SAS/ H 3 .5 Or FOREIGN ORDERS ADD S2/DISKIN PA ADD TAX MUST STATE AGE OVER 21 YEARS. VISA/MC Orders Only: 800-462-7399 Ext. 600UM / 24 HRS / 7 DAYS FAX (215) 997-2571. Or CK/MO to:SeXXy Software, P.O.Box 220., Dept. 600UM, Hatfield, PA 19440 Right be with mat of Amma dig was Win! To Re l atore from one to the stan, en lun w cach whak pronalinis wohl Station to air lu anul ALS 800 and all that stuff that makes is van sale, cum with une valln ern www wwe to make the bot a You can en have the reus favel to you while you're at the balaute 393 kuke Rem, the phe cal free that without your m obile conth Thi in t asapaille en els the Natal. Tralle Safety Maintain STARS ESA *NEW* CAR * ASSESSMENT PROGRAM Circle Reader Service #291 "


"Niss OK CALL TOLL FREE TO ORDER! 1.800.999.7995 CONTROL Or 1.201.783.3600. Fax 1.201.783.3686. EMail MissionCD@aol.com. Send Orders To: Mission Control, 70ak Place, CGW0895, Montclair, NJ 07042. Visa, MC, Discover, Checks & Money Orders. Checks Held 14 days. Please Include Phone Number. Shipping $7 Overnight (Most Areas). Int'l Shipping $25 (Most Countries). INTROTKI MORE BUT HTERA  IN DURSUST SE PLEASURES MADULT.CD ROM PC & MAC F INTERACTIVE GDSROMADULT ENTERTAINMENT CD-ROM SET Welcome to Canada CD-ROM SET VEN BUTT-ER THAN THE FIRST ONE! SEYMORE BUTTS 2 $59 Help Seymore start a dating service, hooking up his friends with the most beautiful women in LA, while you watch! Make the right moves and Seymore gets to mount his mounty, but screw up and he's yodeling the blues! DIRTY DEBUTANTES INTERACTIVE 2: ASIAN INVASION $49 Help Captain Ed Powers as he comes out firing against luscious Asian vixens...with his pants down! Interactivity. hard core action and Asian beauties make this a collector's choice. Adult 6 Packs MORE'S SEX DA. BOLTEDROV adul six BUTANTS pack paans SA SIN terone SEEDITORS Mac a Windows SEYMORE'S SIX PACK $49 All the classics, including: Seymore and Shane: On the Loose, also Playing with Fire Do Ireland, and Meet Kathy Willets The Naughty Nymph\" *2 disc set ADULT SIX PACK $49 Six sizzling erotic titles all for one low price! Featuring Digital Dancing, Legend 4. Biker Babes, Legends of Porn 2, Insatiable, and A Taste of Erotica. DIRTY DEBUTANTES INTERACTIVE 1$39 Neophyte nymphomaniacs save themselves for their 15 minutes of infamy, and The Nasty Brothers are there to film their daring debuts. ADULT SIX PACK VOLUME 2 $49 This sextuplet contains Night Trips 2, Asian Palate, Legends of Porn, A Taste of Erotica, Lovers Trance and a Special Bonus Selection!  OTERIC MACHINE NCHIWAIN It's Time 10 Lay Down The Low BEST ADULT CD-ROM FOR 1994 -AVN COMING THIS SUMMER... NET EROTIQUE The future of sex is Net Erotique, the online service full of mystery and possibility, where your deepest desires come true. In this first volume of Net Erotique Interotica brings to you four of Europe's most dazzling beauties to interact with. Each has her own personality and challenges. It's up to you to charm them. seduce them... whatever your heart desires. Log in and explore the possibilities that Net Erotique can bring. The online future is here today with Interotica's Net Erotique! ALSO LOOK FOR NIGHTWATCH III AND DREAM MACHINE 2! DREAM MACHINE $49 The virtual Sexual Experience that adapts to your deepest fantasies. NIGHTWATCH II $49 Join a beautiful security guard at the world's most erotic and luxurious hotel! FREE Adult CD Sampler With A One Year Subscription To Interactive Quarterly Magazine, Your Guide To Adult CDs! The Hottest News, Views, Reviews. Go Behind The Scenes! Incredible Savings At ONLY $9.95 For An Entire YEAR! Call, Write, Fax Or EMail To IQMAG@aol.com. You Must Be At Least 18 Years Of Age To Order New Machine PublishingCircle Reader Service #322 "


"UNDER THE HOOD A Lean, Mean Gaming Machine ROKAYAK What Do You Need For A Good Gaming System? by Mike Weksler NE OF THE MOST COMMON Since we're going to be talking about your biggest decision is to figure out how QUESTIONS I HEAR ASKED IN components, it will help if you have a bafast you really want to go and how much COMPUTER STORES IS, \"SHOULD sic understanding of their functions and you want to spend. There are CPU upI buy a new computer or uptheir overall level of importance to your grades, but the only one that gave us siggrade the one I own?\" This is upgrading strategy-particularly as it renificant results is the Intel DX4-100. It usually followed by, \"If I uplates to computer gaming: really enhanced a 486/66 computer, and grade it, what component we did not have problems with it like we should I buy first?\" Unfortunately, there ARE YOU A MACHINE had with other upgrade chips. are as many answers to these questions as OR A MOUSE? RAM is the only computer add-on that there are different types of users. First, let me distinguish between two remains scarce, so it hasn't come down in A good rule of thumb for determining kinds of gamers. There are gamers who price like other components. It's expenhow your machine stacks up can be found like action/simulation games, and there is sive, and you gotta pay to play. You in the new MPC level 3 specification for everyone else. Action/sim gamers require should consider 8MB to be a minimum multimedia computers (see chart, next powerful computers to continuously upfor action games and simulations, and page). The new Multimedia PC Council date all the graphics in their virtual 16MB for Windows gaming. You can stay level 3 specifications outline the minimum world. I find it amazing that the computwith 4MB of RAM for DOS games, but it criteria for a state-of-the-art multimedia ers they need would otherwise be suited limits the kinds of games you can enjoy. PC. I'd consider the level 3 spec to be a for running company-wide networks! Some games now require you to have up good minimum to shoot for if you're for the rest of you, well, it would be to 7MB of free extended memory! RAM shopping for a new gaming computer, be hard to justify a 120MHz Pentium for gives your PC the ability to store huge cause game developers are great at pushplaying games like Myst and CIVILIZAworlds for flight simulations or lots of ing the envelope of computer TION when the DOS version of Civ still textures for games like DOOM. performance. runs well on a 386! Let's start with the CPU (Central YOU NEED SPEED SHORT CIRCUITS Processor Unit, like a 486-33MHz). It's Keeping the frame rate high for in1995 will be the year that you the crankcase of your multimedia engine. tense action games and simulations is learned, in true Orwellian fashion, that the number which immediately follows This is where the horsepower is generatvery important to your gaming experi16 is 32. That's because Creative Labs ed, but that engine is only as good as the ence. Slow frame rate can usually be has begun shipping its new Sound other components. If you have a 90 MHz traced to an outdated video card—espeBlaster 32. This latest generation Pentium running with only 4MB of RAM, cially when you're dealing with WINDOWS. sound card is equipped with 16-bit a lame CD-ROM drive, a slow hard drive, When you shop for a new video card, be Sound Blaster digital audio (for sound and a poor video card, you're not getting careful. Many video cards will tout their effects) and a General MIDI wavetable the most out of your CPU. On the other high-end WINDOWS benchmarks on the synthesizer (for music). As an entry-lev hand, if you take a 486-based machine packaging and advertisements, but good el wavetable synthesis sound card, you and augment it with the MPC level 3 Windows performance does not mean can upgrade the quality of synthesis by components, it can really scream! good DOS performance-they're two adding a daughtercard like the Roland If you do decide to go with a Pentium, separate issues. So check out the DOS SOUND CANVAS DB-10 or a Creative consider this: with 133MHz Pentiums benchmarks before you buy. One red flag Lab's WAVE BLASTER II. Price: $169.99. just announced, 150MHZ Pentiums for video cards is that 3D acceleration For more information, call (800) around the corner and the P6 (Intel's cards are around the corner. If you're an 998-5227. next-generation CPU) slated for this fall, action/sim gamer, you should save up 180 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD AUGUST 1995 "


"\"THIS is cool\" -Computer Gaming World 50 incredible levels to lay a path of destruction through 5/5 Rating Computer Gaming World—February 1995 94% Rating, Golden Triad Award Winner Computer Game Review—February 1995 Winner—1994 Best Breakthrough Game Electronic Entertainment—March 1995 Best Software Developer: Bullfrog Computer Player— January 1995 «The graphics are stunning, the sounds are amazing, the play is fast and furious.» PC Gamer-February 1995 Concen 24 powerful spells like volcanos and lightning storms DATA DISK MAGIC Carpet COMING SOON! Hidden Worlds 8 player network compatible DATA DISK 25 Intense New Levels MaGO HERE PRODUCTIONS LTD Stunning 3D fractal landscapes that morph in real time ELECTRONIC ARTS ANIMATED VIOLENCE Magic Carpet. Bullfrog and the Bullfrog logo are trademarks of Bulifrog Productions, Ltd. Electronic Arts and the Electronic Arts logo are trademarks of Electronic Arts Circle Reader Service #334 "


"UNDER THE HOOD 4MB Integrated Drive Electronics) drives are This chart highlights the difference between specifications for the less expensive and perform like champs. older MPC 2 and new MPC 3 computers as of June, 1995 When it comes to the CD-ROM MPC Level 2 MPC Level 3 drive, you should probably buy a quad Minimum Requirements Minimum Requirements speed if you're into games that use a lot RAM 8MB of full motion video, or games that reCPU 25MHz 486 SX 75MHz Pentium quire high performance all around (again, action games or simulations). Hard Drive 160MB 540GB CD-ROM Drive Double Speed (300KB/second) Quad Speed (600KB/second) access time of 250ms average seek time 400ms LISTEN TO THIS After addressing performance and Audio 16 bit digital sound 16 bit digital sound storage considerations, upgrading your and Wavetable synthesis sound hardware is one of the best ways to Video Playback NA MPEG (Software or Hardware) enhance your gaming experience. If with OM-1 compliance you're going to get a sound card, spend Input/Output Ports MIDI, joystick, serial, parallel MIDI, joystick, serial, parallel the money and get one of the new 16-bit System Software Windows 3.0 plus multimedia ext. Windows 3.11 sound cards that supports General MIDI and has wavetable synthesis. Wavetable Source: Multimedia PC Working Group, Software Publishers Association synthesis provides music that sounds like Complete specifications are available at http://www.spa.org and from the Multimedia real musical instruments, while General PC Working Group: (202) 452-1600x330 or mpcinfo@spa.org. MIDI ensures compatibility with a popular wavetable standard. some cash, because you're going to want hard drive to speed up access time and exIf a game includes audio tracks on the one of the killer 3D video cards that will ecution. How do you know when it's time CD (such as LucasArts' FULL THROTTLE), be out by Christmas. to purchase a hard drive instead of anothyou can hear real music playing out of Also, if you're still on an ISA bus mother more glamorous component? If you are your speakers instead of synthesized muerboard, it's time to upgrade to a local constantly shuflling data from your drive sic. So be sure to hook up the audio cable bus motherboard like VLB (for your 486) to a stack of floppies and tapes, then it's from your CD drive to your sound card. or PCI (for a Pentium). These technologtime to think about a new hard drive. Last but not least, I'd heartily recomical marvels provide more bandwidth for Whether you decide to go SCSI or mend you have a modem. With this one the video data, and will speed up video EIDE, a good interface card from the device, you'll be jacked into the world. performance. computer to the hard drive can make a Spend the money and get a fast onehuge difference in performance. SCSI is V.34 28.8 bits per second and you won't HARD DRIVING convenient if you have several other SCSI be sorry. You'll be able to really get into Even though most games ship on CDperipherals; otherwise, if you just want a some last on-line gaming as a result, ROM, they still copy many files to your big fat hard drive, the EIDE (Enhanced THE PARTS DEPT. Matrox Millenium Delivers Screaming Windows And DOS Speeds SREVOLUTIO GRAPHICS IL by Loyd Case igh-end games require high-perprocessor to handle the rest. The only SION also didn't formance systems. The problem hitch is that the game you want to play have features conis, even a 120 mhz Pentium won't has to be written for the card to take adsidered essential by let you play NASCAR RACING or vantage of the 3D acceleration. game developers, US NAVY FIGHTERS in high resolution Until recently, the only graphics card such as texture mapping in with all the options on at a smooth frame that had built-in 3D acceleration at an hardware. rate. Can't do it. That's why companies affordable price was the IMPRESSION line Because of these issues, Matrox devellike Diamond, Creative Labs and Mafrom Matrox. Unfortunately, the DOS oped the MILLENNIUM. The MILLENIUM trox are working on 3D graphics accelerperformance of the Matrox cards was features a new 32-bit VGA core, which ators, so their card can crank out the abysmal (and we're being charitable), so offers screaming DOS performance. Magraphics computations and free your it was ill-suited for games. The IMPREStrox also added support for texture map182 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. AUGUST 1995 "


"OTHER CD-ROM MAGAZINES STEP IT'S TIME TO GO DIGITAL! DIGITAL Go Digital Interactive Go Digital is a quarterly CD-ROM that picks up where television and magazines leave off. Each issue features interactive stories with over 70 minutes of QuickTime video that'll take you on a fast paced, joy ride to the cutting edge of entertainment and culture. Go Digital brings you: In-Depth Features Up Close Interviews Interactive Video Pictorials With The Most Beautiful Women In The World Preview Go Digital Online at http://www.GoDigital.com HYBRID TECHTOLOGI MUSC QuickTime a QO CD18 Mature Audiences Only Volum Christine nerACE PU VOLUME: Meet the van1111rlis of digital musicals the Internet changes the face of Rock 'n' Roll. INBLOOM: Get interactive with sultry Christine Fox, and see why she's this issue's Go Digital Wildflower. FEATURES: Dive headfirst THE INTERACTIVIST: into the world of Rave Defenders of the 'Net Culcureas Go Digital takes How the EFF and CPSR are you to the middle fighting for your online of the action rights ONLY $14.95! CALL 1.800.57CD-ROM For Single Issue Orders or Subscriptions For inquires, write: Go Digital 1223 Wilshire Blvd., Box E, Santa Monica, CA 90403. Circle Reader Service #188 ELECTROMEDIA "


"UNDER THE HOOD matrox Decta ping, though it's not fully accelerated. game we had problems with. Other rate benchmarks and was just a bit faster (Texture mapping is a technique that apSVGA games we tested included U.S. using Ziff Lab's PC Bench 9.0 and Winplies a bitmap to a polygon to make it NAVY FIGHTERS, PANZER GENERAL, SIM bench 95—which makes the MILLENNIUM look realistic.) Basically, texture bitmaps CITY 2000, FLIGHT SIMULATOR 5.0A and faster in WINDOWS than any other card are now stored in video memory on the THE GRANDEST with similar DOS performance. MILLENNIUM itself. FLEET. The only What about game support? As a The MILLENIUM has some other nice glitch was in US NAVY demonstration vehifeatures, too. Matrox uses a new kind of FIGHTERS: the opencle, MATROX will be video memory, WRAM («Window\" ing menu would not shipping to MilRAM). WRAM is as fast as VRAM (a kind \"paint\" properly, but LENNIUM buyers an of memory used in high-end graphics moving the mouse optimized version adapters), but almost as cheap as DRAM. cursor to the top of of the NASCAR There are also connectors for an MPEG the screen fixed the RACING CD-ROM. card for fast, high-quality MPEG video. problem. This release won't The MILLENNIUM, like any new hardThe MILLENNIUM IS support the full 3D ware, isn't fully supported yet. For examone fast card, too. The MILLENNIUM tied features, but will take advantage of Maple, we couldn't get FLIGHT UNLIMITED to the DIAMOND STEALTH 64 on Steve Wigtrox's superior 2D acceleration, which run at all. However, this was the only gington's FLIGHT SIMULATOR 5.0a frame should still enhance performance. Of course, the MILLENNIUM will fully support the WINDOWS 95 platform, including Chipset Cygspeed PCBench 9.0 3D-DDI and DCI drivers. (frames/sec) Video (Graphics) All in all, we'd say the MILLENNIUM is a Stealth 64 VRAM S3 Vision 964 35.1 4023 winner, if you've got the bucks. Price: Matrox Millenium MGA 2064W 6078 $379 for the 2 MB version. For more information, call (800) 361-1408. Tested on a 100 MHz P54C with Intel Zappa Motherboard (Triton Clupset) 32 MB RAM.5.3 GB Disk, Adaptec 2940A PCI SCSI Controller. Winbench 95 run on Windows to Workgroups 3.11. QEMM 7.5 memory manager was also utilized. Card 38.3 VERTRONIX INC. Presents the Best Values in ENTERTAINMENT! ADULT 837 230 Plaza Professional Bldg., El Cerrito CA 94530, 9-6 M-Sat. (PST) (510) 527-4699 (Info) (510) 527-4690 (fax orders) 1-800-478-0217 (orders only) Visa, MC. Checks, MOS, CODs HARDWARE IBM GAMES CD Pentium PCI MM Systems NEW TITLES! Spaceward Ho... $30 Fifth Fleet $41 Outpost $19 HOT ADULT TITLES!!! w/8mb Ram, 540mb HD. 5 SSI Games: Drk Leg. UM Star Trek TNG $44 Flash Traffic $32 Panzer General 821 Adv. of Snatchman ......839 14\" SVGA, 1.44FDD. Domain, Serf Citu, CM 3000 Super SF 2 Turbo........832 Fleet Defender Gold 847 Perfect General 2 S34 Amature All Star ...... 820 $44 The Scroll Fortress Radaki.... 829 Ravenloft Strand $18 Asian Palate ... $24 & Archonill All for..... 830 Mouse, 2X CD-Drive, Tony L. Russa Base 3 $46 FPS Football Pro 95. 845 Rebel Assault $24 Busty Babes 2 ..$28 & SB 16 Snd. Crd Top Gun... $41 Front Lines $36 8 Flgt Sim Games: WC.F14 Relentless $43 Depraved Fantasies2829 75 Mhz/256kb Cache S1770 $27 Gamemaker $30 Renegade 843 Dirty Debutantes ..... 835 90 Mhz/256kb Cache 82026 Mig29, WCAcad & More 833 wukung X-Com: Terr Fr. Deep. 837 Gazillionaire 827 Rise of Robots $23 Dirty Bab's Excel Adu. 825 100 Mhz/256kb Cache $2166 Goldtree Engine 7 Games! Quant.Gate. Spec BEST VALUESI 825 Rise of Triad 828 Dream Machine CDR DRIV'S BLOWOUT! 843 1830 Rail & Rob 833 Grandest Fleet .827 Road to Final 4 838 Eruption. LCS-7260 2X S 95 VRJFU.SpearDost. Warlock Aces of the Deep 848 Great Naval Bat 2...... 825 Sabre Team.... $35 Extreme Gail..... $18 Mitsumi guad $194 $31 Ultima 1-VII All for Aces of the Pacific $21 Great Naval Bat 3 S22 Sam & Max Hit Rd. S28 FAO Gold lor2or3 ... ..$27 Pioneer 4.4 Fast!... 8199 11th Hour... $50 Aces Over Europe $40 Hardball 4 538 Shadow Comet 637 Forbidden Pleasures. $30 Plextor Quad S400 1944 Across Rhine... 847 Across the Rhine..... S51 Harpoon Classic 817 Shadores Cairn 839 Hot Pics! S23 Sony 2X IDE 8120 $41 AD&D Collector 3........ $20 Absolute Zero Hell .818 Shanghai Great Morn S44 Lace & Lingerie... S9 Toshiba Quad S201 Adv. Civilization 834 Alr Havoc. $37 High Seas Trader S37 Space Hulk 826 Luscious Lips. $20 SB Discovery Kit S260 844 Alice $43 Apache S28 Hurl. SSNSeawolf 819 Madam's Family 830 SB Game Blaster $390 Brain Dead 13 837 Alien Logic Indiana Jones Fate All $24 Stalingrad 3.5. $40 Nasty Nurses. SOUND CARDS $18 Breach 3 835 Alone in the Dark3 $44 Indy Car Racing $28 Star Crusader $38 Naughty Pussies $18 Grauis Ultra SIOO $19 Atari 2600 Act. Pak Buried in Time .825 Iron Assault $37 Star Trail $40 Neurodancer Gravis Ultra Max... $42 S164 Battledrome S40 Ishar 3 825 834 Star Trek Tech 841 New Wave Hookers 2 Roband SCD 15 DB 819 Chaos Engine SCall Command&Conquer. 845 Beneath Steel Sky $25 Jagged Alliance 845 Strike Commander $19 Night Watch 2 837 SB 16 MCD... S 86 Cyberjudas Betrayal at Krond S24 Jewels of Oracle S40 Super Hero Hoboken S34 Orient XXXpress. SB 16 MCD/ASP. S25 $170 Deadlius Encounter 846 BioForge. $42 Jump Raven.. $40 SuperKarts 846 Pussy Galore.... S18 SB 16 SCSI 2 $170 Deadline... $38 Blood Bowl Jutland $28 Syndicate Plus 819 Red Hot.. $15 SB 16 VALUE E S100 Dungeon Master II... 937 Blown Away S21 King's 97 The Big 3 829 Samurai Pervert. S40 SB AWE 32... ... 8260 816 Brutal... $35 King Maker 3.5 Flight Unlimited 830 Theme Park 839 Seymour Butts 2 SB AWE 32 V.E.. 845 SIG1 Full Throttle $43 Bureau 13. 825 Knights Xertar.. 836 Transport Tycoon. .849 Songbird. TB Tropez $20 8206 842 Campaign Harvester 827 Kyrandia 3. $39 Ultima 8 $42 Space Siren.... Memory/Motherboards 842 848 Casino Heretic 834 Legions. $34 Ultima VII Comp 833 Strip Poker Intern. 4MB 72Pin 70ns SIMM SCall $25 Johnny Mnemonic...... 840 Colonization 846 Lords of Midnight $47 Under Killing Mn S19 Swimsuit & Lingerie S 8MB 72Pin 70ns SIMM SCall 9 Corridor 7 Journeyman Proj 2. ..826 828 Maabus $32 US Navy Fighters 846 T & A to Max 16MB 72Pin 70ns. 817 SCall Kingdom Far Reaches $13 824 Magic Carpet S41 USS Ticondaroga 834 Taste of Erotic Samp. 88 466 motherboard... SCall Last Bounty Hunt $28 Cyclones $26 Master of Magic.. .$37 Virtual Cop S22 Tokyo Nightlife Pentium motherboard sCall ... 837 Lords of the Realm......842 Dark Forces $43 Master of Orion..........838 Virtuoso... $39 Traci I Love You .... MISC. Lost in Town.. Call Dark Legions. ...... Call 825 Metal & Lace.... ...$33 Voyeur... $45 Vampire Kiss... 836 S 97 Grauis Phoenix Machiavelll Prince......$37 $37 Darksun Wuke.. S22 Metaltech: Earthsiege..$46 War Craft 839 Virtual Valerie 2 $40 Logitech Wingman 25 Magic the Gathering...839 Descent 2.0 835 Monty Python..... ...854 WC Armada 842 Virtual Vixens. Wingman Extreme..... $ 42 MechWarrior 2 $45 Diggers 827 Mortal Kombat II......843 Wing Commd. II..... 851 Wander Lust 830 Dla. Stealth VRAM. S278 Nascar Track Pack.... 830 Doom 2. $40 Myst..... $45 Wings of Glory ...... $43 and manny more... Dia Stealth DRAM $168 Phantasmagoria 849 Dragons Lair 828 Nascar Racing... $27 Wizardry Trilogy 2...... Realmile Lite... $35 We have thousands of S290 Ravenloft 2: Str Proph 846 Dragon Lore 825 NBA Line 95 $45 Wolf 836 USR Sport 14.4 INT... S 90 S33 Nerves of Steel Riddles of Master Lu... $45 Ecstatica 828 Xcom UFO Der Games and Adult Titles $39 USR Sport 14.4 EXT S101 536 Empire Deluxe Silverioad S27 Noctropolis 832 in stock! Call for other 845 Zorro USR Sport 28.8 INT S229 Slipstream 5000 ....... 844 Extractors $34 Operation Europe... S36 titles! We build systems USR Sport 28.8 EXT S246 $50 Operation Crusade.... $39 BEST 29.8 134 INT Space Quest VI.......... 842 F-14 Fleet $160 pcs to your configuration! FREE SHIPPING! AND CD on all orders over $100 (contin. US) Overnight. 2-day, or other shipping call! CA residents add sales tax. Not responsible for typographical errors. Returns not accepted w/o prior approval. Refund on unopened or damaged items only. Price and availability subj. to change w/o notice. Please call for catalog and adult Titles (510) 527-4699 184 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD AUGUST 1995 "


"IS THIS YOUR GREATEST FLIGHT EXPERIENCE? Then it's time to test-fly INTERACT Game Accessories. With these full-featured flight controllers, you'll develop the skills to complete even the toughest missions... grip with built-in hand rests for both right and left-handed pilots, four fire buttons, 4-way view, throttle control, calibration software, \"smart\" auto-fire, and sturdy metal base will equip you for all phases of your mission. PC FLIGHT FORCE — Take to the skies with this ergonomic flight stick. Comfortable grip and hand rests, rapid fire PC FLIGHT FORCE control, solid metal base, and two highly-responsive fire buttons prove to be a deadly force against enemy fighters. FLIGHT FORCE WCS Add this Weapons Control System to any joystick to put innumerable functions at your command. The take-off & landing throttle function and programmable keys give you access to all of your cockpit controls. PC FLIGHT FORCE PRO — Join the ranks of the flying elite with this advanced flight stick. The contoured For IBM-PC/Compatibles FLIGHT FORCE WCS (Coming Soon) PC FLIGHT FORCE PRO THE BEST NEVER REST! INTERAGE GAME PRODUCTS STD Entertainment (USA), Inc. 110 Lakefront Drive. Hunt Valley, MD 21030 410-785-5661 . 1995 STD Entertainment (USA), Inc. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. ENTERTAINMENT Circle Reader Service #275 Kreat 2100 STD "


"1-800-983-4321 SPECTRUM ELECTRONICS $199 25 34 1839 &&88 40 29 19 23 49222222229829944 19 Hei &9&&& 19 15 4320   bB1BBBHHH 15 29 24 17 43 B-24 Na3a P.O. BOX 6295 OPEN: 6AM-11PM PST EVERYDAY SALINAS, CA AIR SHIPPING $4 93912-6295 OR UPS GRND SHIPPING $2 CALL FOR CURRENT PRICES AND (ENTIRE SOFTWARE ORDER) PRODUCTS PLUS $2 HANDLING SOFTWARE ORDERS OVER S125 RECEIVE GUARANTEED LOW PRICES ON ADULT SOFTWARE(CALL & FIND OUT) FREE AIR SHIPPING!! SPECIALS Award Winning Waspame(CD3.5) 39 Full Throdeco Perfect General 1CD) Umar a King Maco Descent Aegis CD B-17 Flying Fortress 3.5) FX Fighter CD) Perfect General 1 Bunde(35) US Navy Fighters CD) Doom 1:Battle Book Carter Strike(352 Baldes C 3.5) GadgeCD) Perfect General 2CD) USS Ticondroga CD Doom 2 Battle Book Batle Bugs (CD)3.5) Gazilionare (CD) Clash of Steel3.5 29 PGA Tour Gof(CDL Vel of Darkness 3.5) 15 Dracula Unleashed Balle Isle 2200CD) Gerfre(3.5525) 19/15 OplonesCD25 Phantasmagoria(Cb) Virtual PoolCD) Dragon Lore Day of the Tentace/C03,5 Beneath a Steel Sky CD) Genghis Khan 23:5) Prbal Arcade(CD) V for Vidory 1.23,or 4CC) Dungeon Master 2 Gobins 3CD 3.5) Best of Microprose(CD 19/16 Pirbal Fantases(CD3.5) Voyeur CD Dominus 46 Empre Deluxe Betrayal at Kronor (CO/3.5) Gold of the Americas(3.5) Prates Gold/CD23.5) Wals d Rome(35) F-14 Fleet Delender Dragsthere 025 Big 3CD) Gone Fishi CD) Dream WebC035 Pizza Tycoon(CD35) Warcraft|CD/3.5) Falcon 30 Borge (CD) Grandest FleetCD3.5) Fint Simulator Tookt(0035 34 Point d'Altack(35) Wargame Const Set 2 :TANKS(35) 39 Front Page Basebal or Footal Blackthome CD 35) Gunship 2000(3.5) PowerhouseCD) Gabriel Knight Geat War 1914-1885 Warlords 23.5) Black Beard CD 3.5) Hammer of the Gods CD) Primal Rage CD) Warlords 2Scenaro Br(35) Hapoon 2 Harbon Classic Collection CDI Blake Stone Pintstre(CD3.5) Hardbal 3 Coledon CD) Princed Persa 235) Inkana Jones Fete Atlants. CX5 WaxWorks(525) Blood BOWICD) Hardbal 4/CD3.5) Privater Strike Com CD) When Two Wants War(3.5) Heretic King's Ques15/00251 BloodnetC035) Harpoon 2 CD35) Pro League Basebal35) Wing Commander 1 DACO Hilstar Body Bows(3.5 Harvester (CD) Psychotron-WIN/CD) Panzer Gener 135 W. Commander 182 DL CD) Jagped Allance Body CountCD) Her to the Thitre(3.5) Pure Wargame CD Proel Assaut CD Wing Commander 3.CD Kngs Quest 7 Heroes Vight & MariaCD). Bandsad 13Cb) Quartum Gate CD) Sam & Mar Hi the Room 0039 Lands of Lore Wing Comm Amede(CD3.5) Beach 3CD 3.5) High Command 3.5 OuaterPole CD Wnos a Glay(CD) Te Fighter 3.5 40 Lend d Kyana 13 Brett Hul Hodey 95CD) Hoh Seas Teder CD3.5) Quarantine/CD/ CALL Legends of Valout Wichhaven(CD) Wan Russa 35 Bufrog Corplaton Pack CD) Horde CD35) Quest for Gery 235 Incredble Machine 20035) Wizardy 4(35) Bureau 13//3.5) Quest for Goy 335 Machiaveli the Prince EA CLASSICS Indy Car Rading CD35) Cannon Fodder(Cb) Quest by Glory 4CD3.5) Wizardy Thogy 23.5) Martian Dreams Indianapols Motor Speed 35) WoN(CO/3.5) Caries at War(35) Master of Magic Raiden(CD) 16 Wof 30 Mania(CD) Master of Orion Chuck Yeager's Ar Combat CD) Carriers at War Coris. K03.5) Indy Car Circuts(3.5) Railroad Tycoon (35) Lost Fis d Sherlock Holmes (CD) Iron Assaut Mech Force (CO) Wof 3D Spear of Destiny(CD) Carriers at War 2(3.5) Raroad Tycoon D(35) Mght & Magic World Xeen PGA Gol Moru Tour Tennis CD) Wotenstein Missions to 235) 19 Myst Castles 2CD) Iron Cross/CD3.5) Reach for the Stars(35) Populous 2Powermonger(CD) Woodrut & Sabble CD) Iron Hea(CD) Celtic Tacs Babor Evi Eye(CD) Noctropols R. Arkana Blade of Destry(3.5) Privateer (CD) Outpost Chalenge of the 5 Realns 3.5) World Hockey 95(CD) shar 3CD3.5) R. Arkana Star TradC0x35) SEAL Team CD) Pacic Strike Playtester Chaos Control (CD) Isle of the Deas CD3.5) Wran of the Gods(CO) Relentless:Twinsen's Adv.(CO) 43 Shadowcaster (CD) Panzer General Jagod Alance CD) Chaos Engine CD Renagade Jacobs StarCD) X-Com 10D/35 Space HukCOS Peded General 2 Jam Pak 4 bp carties(CD) Civization 35) X-Com 2 Terror DeepCD3.5) Return of the Phantom CD) 24 SSN 21 Seawol CD) Jefighter 30039 42 45/25 CIVNET(Cb) X-Wing(CD/3.5) Populous 1 & 2 Strike Commander (CD) Return to RingworldCD) Jewels of the Oracle CD) Cul Warco) Reunion CD) Powermonger X-Wing 1:Imperial Persut(3.5) 19 Syndicale Plus/CD 19 Colonization (CDG 5) 46/43 Johnny Mneumonic (CD) X-Wng 2B-Wing(35) Utma 1-5CD Rise of the Robots (CD35) Princed Persa 1 & 2 Privateer Playtester's 40 Comanche w Missions CD) Jump Raven CD) Rised the Triad ob/35) Utrabots CD35) Zephyr (CD) 35/30 Juand CD) Wing Commander Academy CD) Command & Conquer (CD) Read from Sunter-Appomatox/3.5) 33 Zeppeln CD) Prophecy of the Shadow Command H0(35) Kingdom Far Reaches (CD) 46 Wing Commander 2 Dede CD) Robinson's Requiem CD35) Zorro 34/30 Quest for Gby 14 ) Commander Boodco) Knoraler(35) Romance 3 Kingdoms 33.5 39 R Arkana Boda Destiny IBM USED CD'S ONLY) SSI CLASSICS Krgs Quest 1600) Companions d XantCD35) Rules d Engagement 235 32 R Ariana:Star Tral Conqueror 1046 AD CCD Kog's Quest 7CD Sabre Toam CD 35) 35/30 Rebel Assaut Bated Antetem Conspiracy/CD 15 KK & PlayCD35 in Gues:CD) Sam & Max Hit the Road CD35) 19 Ratum to Zork 15 Bardes of Napoleon Corrida 70035) Krights of Xertar CD/35 Secret Merkey Island 1(CD35) 25/20 Abes of the Paciaco) Savage Eroire Confict Mode East Crsature Shockico) AD&D Dark Sun 1 Lards of Lore 1CD35 2CD 15 Shadow of Cam CD) Shadow of the Comet Getysburg Turning Point Crtical Path(CD) 15 Legend d Kyada CDM35) Shadow Sorcerer Shadow of the Comet CD) ADXD Menzooeranzani) Get Naval Battes 1 add-ons 10ea Crystal Calbum (3.5) Legend d Karda CD35) Sherlock Himes Cons. Det 1-3CD) 19 AD&D.Ravenlof(CD) SmCty 2000 Cybera(CD)  Legard  Kirara 3CD) SSN-21 Seawor Betrayal at Kondor CD) Sid'Als Increcble Toons CD/35) 4037 Mech Bngade 15 Cyber Judas CD) Legends of Valour(35) Sege(35) Dark Legions(CD) Star Crusade No Greater Glory 18 CyberWarCD) Legions(3.5) Smanticb3,5) 40/19 Day of the Tentacle(CD) Star Trek 251 Rebel Charge af Chickamauga 15 CycleManiaCD) Lesure Sut Larry 1-6CD) SmCty 2000 Bonus CD Gabriel Knight(CD) Star Trek Judgement Rtes D'Generation3.5) Red Lightning Leisure Sut Laty 6CD35) SmEarthCD3.5) 13ea 40/19 Gobins 12 or 3(CD) Starfight for 2 Second Front D-Day.Operation Overlord(CD) Lemmings 1 & 200) SmTower(CD 3.5) Great Naval Battles 2CD) Stoneksep Shich: Grant's Trai Daedalus Encouter(CD) Links 366 Pro(C0/35 Sari CCD). Great Naval Battles 3.c) Strike Commander Sons of Lberty Daemonsgate (CD135) Links 386 Course Disks Hel(CD) Sipstream 5000/CD) Summoning Star Command Lode Runner CD/3.5) Dark Forces (CD) Space Ad CD) Indiana Jones: Atlantis(CD) System Shock Stelar Crusade Dawn Patrol CD 3.5) 3932 LO.T.R. & Two Towers(3.5) Kings Quest 7(CD) Some Quest 1-5.CD) Te Fighter Deathgate(Cb) Stom Across Europe Lords of Midnight CD Lecure Sut Lamy 6 CD) Te Forter Defender Empire Space Ques! 6CD) Decsive Bits OM War 120 33.5) 25 Lors d the Realm (C35) Wargame Construction Set Utima 5 Lord of the Rings CD) Defend the Alamo(35) Spaceward Hb 40D35) Warship Lost Eden CD) Nascar Racha CD) Utirra 7 Part 1/sma Underworld 1 SSI Strategy Collection CD) Defintive Wargame Colection CD) Westem Front Lost Treasures Infocom Outpost(CD) Utma 8 40 Lost Vikings/35 SSI Fantasy Fed CD) Deta VCD35) Panzer General CD) Utima Avatar Adventures(456) Stingrad CD35) SCENARIO DISKS Lucas Arts Adv. Pack 35) DescenC035) Polce Quest 4CD) Star Control 1 & 2,00 Disciples of Stee3.5) Utire Underworld 1 of 2 Lunicus(CD) Rebel Assau CD) Star Crusader(CD 35 Under a King Moon 3228 DiscworldCD3.5) Baties di Napolion-16 55 Maabus CD Retum to Zork CD Bates of Napoleon-1-8 Vel of Darness 15ea Dom 1.002.5 Star Fight 1 of 23.5) 10 ea Machiaveli the ProCD) SmCty Enhanced CD) Warcraft Wargame Chs Se Tanis 1-22 15 6a Doom 20035) Mad Dog 1 o 2CD) Star Legions(35) SmCty 2003CD) Wing Commander Amada Doom Companion(CD) S.T: Jugement Rees003.5) 4535 Magc Cande 3CD) Wng Commander 1 & 2 IBM NEW Star Crusader(CD) Doom ManiaCD) Star Trek OmipediaCD) Magic Carpet CD). WoFCO) Star TrekTech Manual CD) Wing Commander 3 Doonday Collection CD Magic Carpet Home Works.CD) XCOM ico 11th Hour(CD) Wngs of Glory 55 Star Trek TNG(CD) Dracula Unleashed CD) Marco Pob CD) 1639CD/3.5) Wizardry 6 Bane Cosmic Forge Dragon's Lar 1 (CD) Master of MagicC039 Star Trek 25th(CD3.5) 39/30 HINT BOOKS 1942 Pacte Ar War CD 3.5) Wizardry 7. Crusaders Dark Dragon Lore(CD) Master of Orion C035) Street Fighter 2(3.5) X-COM 11th Hour 1944 Across the Ahine(CD) Dune 2(3.5) Street Fightex 2 CD PackCD) Mech Wamic 200) 22 51/10 PAK V tor 2CD) 1942 Pactic Ar War X-WING Dungeon Master 2 CD35) Subwar 2050[CD3.5) MegaDoom 1(CD) 600 Levels 36/32 ADULT 7th Guest 5TH Fleet/CO3.5 EA Smulaton Pak CD) MegaDoor 200) CALL Summer/Winter Chalinge (CD) Absolute Zero(CD) AD&DAI Qaqim EA Sports Pak CD) works w/ Doom 12 or Herenc Summoning(3.5) 11 AD&D Champions Krynn Super Hero League/CD3.5) A-Vision 1.2, Aces Coledors Ecoon CD) 3(CD) Metal Marines (35) EA Top 10 Pak 1 or 2CD) AD&D Curse Aaire Bonds 11 Aces of the Deep/C035) Buble Butts CD) 46143 Ecstatca|CD3.5) Super Street Fght 2 TutoCD3.5) 32 35 Metal & Lace(35) 12 Celeonty Nudes (CD) ADSD Gold Box Games(35) AD&D Dark Sun 1 of 2 Empie Deluxe(35) 12ea Metatech Earth Seige(CD:35) 46/43 SVGA Harrier (CD3.5) AD&D.Eye Beholda 1 of 2 AD&D. 9 Game Colecion(CD) Club Citerlesque CD) 35 Enpre DX Master Ed (CD) M&M Clouds of Xeen 3.5) Syndicate(3.5) 20 AD&DEye of the Beholder 3 12 ADSD.Colectors Ed 25.25) berstrip Poker or Blackjack CD) System Shock/CD3.5) 18 ESPN: NBA 95 Aitome(CD3.5)42/36 MSM Darkside of Xeen 35) AD&D Colectors Ed 310035) Dream Machine (CD) 18 M&M.World of Xeen(CD) ESPN Sunday Night FootalCD) 42 AD&D Gateway Svg Frontier Tank Commander(CD) ADSD Menzoberanzan AD&D Dungeon Hack3.5) 12 16 GO Digtal CD Magazne 71(CD) Evasive Acon(35) Mortal Kombat 1(3.5 19 Task Force 1942(35) ADSD.Eye Beholder 1.2. & 3(35) 11 16 Mortal Kombat 2 CD 3.5) Terminator 2029 DCD) AD&D Pools of Darkness Hosen Obsessions(CD) Exploration (CD) AD&D Menzoberanzan[CD35 47/39 11 F-14 Fleet Defender CD/35) Hot Slots CD) Terminal Vebaty(CD) ADSD Pools d Radence MTV Oub Dead CD) 47/43 AD&D Ravenot Stone Prophet CD) 45 AD&D Ravenloh 1 of 2 F-117A Theme Park(CD35) MCD). 12 Steath Fighter35) House of Dreams CD) AD&D.Three Words CD Falcon 3.035) NASCARCO3.5 Third Reich (CD135) AD&D Secret Silver Blades 11 Maximum Moments 1 2100) AD&D Unimed Adv.3.5) NASCAR Teck Packco) Falcon 30 Tomado(CD) Thunderscape(CD) CALL 11 AD&D: Treasure Savage Frontier Neurodancer(CD) Aegis Guardan dhe Feet Navy Suke CD 15 Te Fighte135) New Wave Hookers 1 Advanced Cvization CD 3.5 20D) Falcon Gold CD) Ado De Camp(3.5) NBA Jam CD) Felds of Glory(3.5) Alen LogicJorune Te Fighter Defender Empire(35) 19 12 Nightwatch 2CD) As Havoc Controler CD) FIFA SoccerC035) NBA Live 5CD) Tigers on the Pow(3.5) 42 Alone in the Dark 1 & 2 15 Penthouse Irderte 1,23 or 4CD) Alen Breed35 Abne in the Dark 3 Fighter Wing CD/3.5) NCAA Road Fnal 412003.5) 36 TOP.Map Bulder or Campaig(3.514 15 Seymore Buts 1 Of 2CD) 39/36 FashbackCD) Alen Legacy/Cb3.5) Nerves of Slee CD 3.5 Amored Fist 15 Sassors & Stones (CD) Tomado Operation Desert SumCD125 Alen LogcCD) Flash Traffic (CD) NHL Hockey 35 Tony La Russa BB 3CD) Bads Tale 12 or 3 12ea Space Srens 1 2CD) Alone in the Dark 1CD/3.5) 47/28 Fight Commander 2CD3.5) NHL Hockey 95.00) Tower Concler CD 35 Betrayal at Kronder 15 Vampie's KesCD 40/34 Alone in the Dark 2 CD3.5) 16 Night Owl 13,14 of 15CO) Flight Unimed CD) Vitual Vans(CD) Bidloge Transport Tycoon (CD35) Alone in the Dark 3CD) Formula 1/3.5) Noctropolis (CD) Transport Tycoon Scenard(35) 23 Blackthorne 15 Vrtual Valerie 2CD) Arbush at Sarno CD 3.5) Fortress D. Radiak (CD/3.5) Nomad CD 35 Visma 7 Complete(CD) Buck Rogers.Countdown 11 Vitualy Yous 2CD) Apache Gunship(CD) Front Page Basebali 94CD/3.5) 46/43 Nova Storm CD 11 Buck Rogers Matric Cubed Uldma 7.Sepent Isle(35) Wanderlust/CD) Archon Uitra(35) Front Page Football Pro(35) Operation Crusader(CD3.5) Unime & Pagan(3.5) Civilization CALL FOR MORE TITLES) Arena DaggaitalCD/3.5) 45/39 Front Page Footbal 95(CD 3.5) 46443 Operation Europe CD3.5) 34 Uma 8. Pagan w/Speech (CD) 32 Colonization Arena Elder Sols CD 3.5) 45/39 Frontiers 1st Encounters(CD13.5) Oron Conspirasico) Uima Underworld 1 & 2/CD) Cyberia WE ALSO SELL: Armored Fis(CD/3.5) 3633 Frontier. Eite 2(CO35) Outpost/CD3.5) Cyclones Utimate Domain CD3.5) 12 JAGUAR 3DO COROWSHUSDEM Macro Atat 2600 Pack #1 of 2CD3.5) 24 Frontines/CD3.5) Parzer GeneralCD35) 39/22 Ultimate Footal. CD Darkseed 10 San Giacome .com Prices subject to change. Defectives covered by manufactures warranty. Returns are subject to 20% restocking fee.(CALL FOR RMA#). Returns taken at our discreation. All shipping charges are not refundable. PAYMENT: Money orders.checks(ordershipped when check clears), Visa, Mastercard, COD'S SHUPPING! AT SA order. Priority Mail $4/order, UPS Ground $2/order-for software(call for hardware). Handling $2 per order, COD'S $10 total per order. International orders.camcor charges. FPO & APO $6 total per order. CA residents add 7.25% sales tax. Most orders placed by 2pm PST ship same day. Shipping times not guaranteed. Most items listed are in stock. If you don't see what you need please call us at 800-983.4321 or 408-751-6975 Fax 408-7857-5565 Circle Reader Service #333 58988883582&8*9** 16 55 3 8%E & 19 @ 40 138893 SO803 nec 34 18 2999 282ARRER 46 12 47 46 43 16 46 ***878888 38 25 39 VISA Car "


"THATS RIGHT CRAVE HAS THE HOTTEST NEW ADULTS ONLY CD ROMS TITLES TO SATISFY YOUR CRAVING. Wear it! Crave it! Division: Rockabilia, Inc. Play it! FREE CATALOG CALL TODAY! 612-942-9920 NEW RELEASES MOTION $35.29 000000 $43.29 FEE $43.28 $35.23 $26.29 HOT SLOTS THE FUTURE...YOU'VE SET YOUR COORDINATES FOR THE HAGAR SYSTEM. BE AWARE THAT ADMIRAL JAMES HAS CREATED THE ULTIMATE MACHINE, PREPARE FOR LAUNCH.JOIN THIS HOLOSAUST. 10555 $39.29 ADULT INTERACTIVE #10735 BROTHEL INTERACTIVE PC $25.29 #10748 CELEBRITY POKER #10893 CLUB CYBERLESQUE $35.29 #10888 DARK TUNNELS $30.29 #10889 DEVA X $49.29 #10741 DIGITAL DANCING $27.29 #10777 DREAM GIRLS PC $21.29 #10743 DREAM MACHINE $41.29 #10778 FANTASIES $32.29 #10779 GIRLFRIEND NIKKI DOS $43.29 #10846 GIRLFRIEND TRACY DOS #10732 GIRL FRIEND TERI DOS $43.29 #10781 LOVE SLAVES $42.29 #10772 LEASURE SUIT LARRY COL. EDT. $63.29 #10572 MIND TEAZZER $28.29 110782 NEURODANCER #10742 NIGHTWATCH 2 #10780 NIGHTWATCH. #10844 PASSION FILES 110783 PARADISE CLUB $30.29 #10543 PENTHOUSE INTER.1 #10544 PENTHOUSE INTER 2 $48.29 #10560 PENTHOUSE INTER 3 $50.29 010565 PLEASURE ZONES #10886 POKER PARTY $48.29 #10785 PORN MANIA #10775 RACQUEL IN THE WILD 010734 SEYMORE BUTTS 2 INTER $41.29 #10299 SEYMORE BUTTS PC $41:29 810733 SEYMORE BUTTS MAC $41.29 #10787 SX THERAPY 4329 810740 SPACE SIRENS $39.29 #10890 STRIP POTA $36.29 10812 STRIP POKER PRO PC $39.29 #10813 STAJE POKER PRO MAC $39.29 #10744 SORORITY HOUSE PC $34.29 10891 SUFER GIALS $39.29 10845 TRACY I LOVE YOU $26.29 010788 VAMPIRES KISS INTER $48.29 010789 VIBTUAL VALERIE 2 $38:29 110739 VIRTUAL VIXENS #10790 WANDERLUST $39.29 #10887 #10896 #10630 #10541 #10569 #10549 #10578 #10556 #10774 #10540 #10895 #10555 #10548 #10848 010542 10842 210854 010897 #10559 #10562 $10551 110851 010561 10545 #10849 10806 010852 610894 10567 #10853 #10576 10768 #10593 #10565 010558 710769 #10147 #10552 #10834 1855G 10298 ALL THAT SX. $28.29 BABE PATROL WIN $30.29 BLONDE JUSTICE $24.29 BLIND SPOT $24.29 BUSTING OUT $28.29 BEST OF VIVID $24.29 CHEATING $24.29 COVEN $24.29 DIRTY LOOKS $35.29 GIRLS/GIRLS $24.29 HOT DOG GIRLS OF FLORIDA $30.29 HOT SLOTS $39.29 IMMORTAL DESIRE $24.29 INTAMATE JOURNEY $24.29 ICE WOMAN MPEG $24.29 ICE WOMAN $24.29 LEGEND/ KAMA SUTRA $28.29 LUSCIOUS LADIES WIN $30.29 LOVE BITES $24.29 MASK $24.29 MYSTIQUE/ORIENT $24.29 MYSTIQUE/DRIEHT 2 $24.29 NAKED REUNION $24.29 NAUGHTY BUT NICE 329.29 NEW LOVERS $24.29 NIGHT. THIPS 2 PC $26.29 PARLOR GAMES $24.29 PENETRATION WIN $30.29 RACQUEL RELEASED $24.29 SAFE SX $24.29 SUPER MODELS $28.29 SUPERMODEL $26.29 SX. $24.29 STEAMY WINDOWS $24,20 SWAP 11 $24.29 SUITE 18 $24.29 SHAME MPEG $27.29 WINNER TAKES ALL $32.29 VOICES IN MY BED $28.29 181 SX: POSITIONS $24.29 101 SX. POSITIONS 2 $24.29 #10796 #10884 #10883 #10773 #10771 #10800 610710 #10791 010757 #10736 #10765 10792 #10811 10838 (10902 210880 810795 010753 110547 010557 #10799 10754 010878 810885 #10879 810793 #10784 10903 #10757 010770 810751 $48.29 28.29 lurre adult tours ylitis! OTHERS ACTS OF CONFESSION PC $28.29 ADULT SUPERSTARS $30.29 A. ROM $30.29 BLONDE BOMBSHELLS STILLS $27.29 BIKER BABES $34.29 BIG TOWN PC CAFE FLESH $22.29 CAMP DOUBLE D PC $34.29 CELEBRITY NUDE STILLS PC $30.29 DREAM GIRLS PC $25.29 EXTREME SX. ENDANGERED $34.29 ENDLESS BEACH BABES $24.29 EROTIC FANTASIES PC $28.29 FILM CLUB SEYCHELLES $35.29 FUTURE KINK $30.29 GIRLS OF D-XTC PC $28.29 GIRLS OF RISQUE STILLS PC $28.29 GIRLS OF VIVID $24.29 GIRLS OF VIVID 2 $24.29 MARRIED WOMAN PC $28.29 MORE NORTHERN DELIGHT STILLS PC $28.29 NASTY PARTS $45.29 ORIENTAL ACTION $30.29 OUTRAGEOUS ORGIES $30.29 PLANET X PC $25.29 PRIVATE DANCER STILLS $28.29 PRIVATE VIDEO V.2 POISON $26.29 PUT IT IN GERE $28.29 PINK PASSION STILLS PC $26.29 RACQUEL IN THE WILD SEE SOME 3 SOME $35.29 SX. OBSESSION PC SX. DEPUTANTES STILLS PC $32.29 SEXY WOMAN ON CO STILLS PC $19.29 STRIPER NURSES $26.29 SINFULLY YOURS $28.29 SIZZLE PC $28.29 SUPER BLONDES $30.29 SUPER CYBER SEX $30.29 SX. & MONEY ANDREW BLAKE'S $24.29 SUPER S. WARE STILLS DOS $26.29 SWEET CHEEKS STILLS PC TEXAS TABLE DANCE $38.29 TREASURE CHEST TOTAL FANTASY TRANZ, 1400 STILLS PC UNDERGROUND ADULT-STILLS PC $28.29 UP & COMING EXECUTVE PC $28.29 VEGABLONDE $26.29 WAX PC $26.29 WOMEN OF MOSCOW $30.29 Mult $35.29 $35.29 GALFRIEND pari $28.29 $32.29 300GIRLFRIEND TERI, TRULEY INTERACTIVE NEVER THE SAME. LOOKING FOR A RESPONSIVE PARTNER? ACT OUT YOUR WILDEST FANTASIES WITH THE WORLD'S FIRST VIRTUAL WOMAN. 10732 $43.29 $30.29 $30,29 $30:29 $32 29 530.29 $32.29 $32.29 $28.29 DESIGNER BODIES #10862 210570 #10860 10861 10658  10866 #10856 010859 #10857 010872 010867 810863 #10865 #10869 #10864 #10858 CDI ADULT DIGITAL MOVIES AMERICAN BLONDE MPEG $26.29 BLONDE JUSTICE MPEG $26.21 BAD GIRLS/LOCKDOWN 1 MPEG $26.29 CHANNEL BLONDE MPEG $26.29 CHEATING MPEG $26.29 THE COVEN MPEG $26.29 ICE WOMAN MPEG $26.29 IMMORTAL DESIRES MPEG $26.29 INTIMATE JOURNEY $26.29 MASK $26.29 NEW LOVERS MPEG $26.29 NAKED REUNION PAALOR GAMES MPEG $28.29 SX, MPEG $26.29 SHAME MPEG $26.20 SUITE 18 MPEG $26.29 STEAMY WINDOWS MPEG $28,29 10786 010794 #10843 #10737 810876 10808 10798 010881 010882 10745 010870 610755 10809 010803 #10837 P10752 010756 10797 #10764 10802 #10901 #10563 110568 #10571 810736 #10801 10847 #10738 10749 210809 10874 210875 #10077 10574 10835 AMERICAN BLONDE BLIND SPOT BLONDAGE BLONDE JUSTICE CHEATING THE COVEM LOVES BITES IMMORTAL DESIRES INTIMATE JOURNEY MASK NAKED REUNION NEURODANCER SUPER MODELS GO WILD VOICES IN MY BED 536.29 $24.29 $27.29 CD-ROM $30.29 $30.29 $30.29 $35.29 $30.29 $30.29 $30.29 PENTHOUSE SCISSORS N STONES DESIGNER BODIES, D GIRLS IN ONE, AND IF YOU CAN DISOVER WHAT SHE LIKES TO WEAR, OU'LL SEE AND HEAR MORE! 10841 $35.29 SEND ORDERS TO: CRAVE Dept. 503 PO. BX 26370 St.Louis Park, Mn.55426 TO RECEIVE A FREE CATALOG CALL 1-612-942-9920, OR A FREE ROCK N' ROLL CATALOG WITH OVER 25,000 ITEMS. CALL 1-612-942-7895 CRAVE ORDER FORM PLEASE PRINT CLEARLY! NAME D.O.B. ADDRESS CITY STATE ZIP____ VIVAROR POXIS ORDER NO. DESCRIPTION PHOTO SHOOT SIZE PRICE PENTHOUSE V.3 WITH THE VIRTUAL PHOTO SHOOT YOU CAN SCISSORS N STONES HAVE ONE OF THE MOST ENVIED JOBS IN ENGAGE IN AN ALL OR NOTHING, HEAD THE WORLD.PENTHOUSE TO HEAD COMPETITION OF HIGH MAGAZINE PHOTOGRAPHERI STAKES. FORTUNATELY, THE STAKES P. PETS STAR IN A PRIVATE PHOTO SESSIONARE NOT FOR MONEY BUT RATHER FOR WHERE YOU CALL THE SHOTS! FEATURES ARTICLES OF CLOTHING. FEATURES HIGH QUALITY FULL-MOTION VIDEO ACTION, INCLUDE REALISTIC 3D GRAPHICS AND CUSTOM SOUNDTRACK AND THE MOST ANIMATION, AND FULL MOTION VIDEO S & H$ BEAUTIFUL MODELS IN THE WORLD. STRIP SEQUENCES. TOTALS #10560 $50.29 #10747 MAC $42.29 MIRAGE #10746 PC $25.29 CASH, CHECK & MONEY ORDER ADD $4.00 S&H. OUR MISSION IS TO LOCATE THE MISSORDERS OVER 21bs add $8.00. CREDIT CARD NG IN ACTION AND HELP FIND YOUR ORDERS ADD $5.00 POSTAGE. C.O.D. ORDERS ADD BRING THEIR ANGRY AGGRESSORS IN STOCK CD ROMS UPS 2ND DAY ATR SERVICE MOST ORDERS $8.00 U.S. ONLYI. CANADA & FOREIGN COUN. SACK FOR JUSTICE, DEAD OR ALIVELIN CAN INCLUDE 4 CDS FOR ONLY $6.00 SHIPPING.MC. VISA ACCEPT. E CHECKS HELD 4 WEEKS MONEY ORDERS UNDER $200 SAME AS CASH.C.O.D.S $8.00 U.S. TRIES ADD $8.00 POSTAGE, UPS 2nd DAY AIR THIS ILLUSIONARY BADLAND OF ONLY. ALL ORDERS SHIPPED ASAP. ALLOW 4-6 WEEKS ON OUT OF STOCK ITEMS PARCEL POST 3lbs ADD $10.00 ORDERS FROM 3-10lbs ADD ORDERS UP TO 1lbs ADD $6.00. ORDERS 1lbs TO MIRAGE, THE REAL ENEMUIS YOUR ORDERS 54.00 SHIPPING 0.2lbs. 2lbs 10lbs $8.00 SHIPPING. ORDERS OVER 10LBS MUST CALL FOR C MAGINATION YOU WILL VISION SEVER PRICE PRINES SUBJECT TO CHANGE NOT RESPONSIBLE FOR TYPOGRAPHICAL ERRORS. MN O COS OWED The MIIST CALL RL HALLUCINATIONS(MIRAGES) ALONG BE PRICES ON ORDERS SUBJECT TO CHANGE THE WAY AS WELL AS ENCOUNTER REAL RESIDENIS ADD 6.5% SALES TAX. NOT ALL ITEMS ARE IN STOCK CALL FOR DETAISATI SAT THE WAX AS WELL AS ENCOUNTER REAL FINAL DEFECTIVES REPLACED WITH SAME ITEM, WHEN ORDERING CATALOG PLEASE ASK FOR MASTER CARD VISA ACCEPTED! ATTACKS! THE ADULT ISSUE. FOR A CATALOG WHICH INCLUDES VIDEO GAME PRODUCTS SUCH AS GAMES, 10776 O ACCESSORIES GAME SYSTEMS AND T-SHIRTS ASK FOR A CRAVE CATALOG FREE CATALOG CALL 1-612-942-9920 Circle Reader Service #32 "


"15 OVER 2017 12 22 HINT BOOKS CALL HYPERSPEED INCA 10 INCA 2 INDY JONES LAST CRUSADE 14 IRON CROSS ISLE OF DEAD JACK NICKLAUS & AD-ONS CALL JEOPARDY 12 JETFIGHTER 20 KING'S QUEST 5-VGA KING'S QUEST 6-VGA KOSHAN CONSPIRACY 10 LEGACY REALM OF TERROR 15 LEGEND OF KYRANDIA LEGENDS OF VALOR LEISURE SUIT LARRY 1 LEISURE SUIT LARRY 2 13 LEISURE SUIT LARRY 3 15 LEISURE SUIT LARRY 5 LEISURE SUIT LARRY 6 LHX ATTACK CHOPPER LINKS & PRO COURSE DISKS CALL LINKS 386 PRO LORD OF THE RINGS 1 9 LOST ADMIRAL LOST TREAS INFOCOM 2 19 LUCAS ARTS CLASSIC BNDL 14 PACIFIC ISLANDS PACIFIC STRIKE PACIFIC WAR PALADIN 2 PANZER GENERAL PERFECT GENERAL POLICE QUEST 1 -VGA POLICE QUEST 3 -VGA POLICE QUEST 4 POOLS OF DARKNESS POPULOUS 2 POWER HITS: MOVIES PRIVATEER PRIVATEER SPEECH PAC PRO LEAGUE BASEBALL 9418 PROTOSTAR QUARANTINE QUEST FOR GLORY 4 QUEST FOR GLORY SERIES CALL RAILROAD TYCOON RALLY RAVENLOFT REALMS OF ARKANIA 15 RED BARON VGA RED CRYSTAL RED LIGHTNING RED STORM RISING RETURN TO ZORK SPECTRE \"SPELLCASTING 101,201, or 301 CALL SPELLCRAFT:ASPECT VALOR 7 STAR CRUSADER STAR LEGIONS STAR TREK 25TH ANNIV STAR TREK JOGMNT AD ON STAR TREK: JUDGEMENT STELLAR 7 STORM ACROSS EUROPE STORMOVIK STREET FIGHTER 2 STRIKE ACES STRIKE COMMANDER STRIKE SQUAD STRONGHOLD STUNT ISLAND SUBWAR 2050 SUMMONING SUPER HERO LEAGUE SYSTEM SHOCK TAKE-A-BREAK PINBALL TERMINATOR TERMINATOR 2 CHESS TERMINATOR 2029 TERMINATOR: RAMPAGE USED IBM GAMES COMPLETE & VIRUS FREE: WITH THE ORIGINAL BOX, DOCUMENTATION AND DISKS 29 CURSE OF AZURE BONDS 11 CYBER EMPIRES D-DAY BEGINNING OF END 22 D-GENERATION DAEMONSGATE DAGGER OF AMMON RA 12 DARK QUEEN OF KRYNN 15 DARK SUN 22 DARKSEED DEATH KNIGHTS OF KRYNN 14 DEJA VU 182 DUAL PAC-WIN 12 DISCOVERY STEPS COLUMB 11 DOOM-REGISTERED VER. 28 DOOM 2 -REGISTERED VER. 29 CD REBEL ASSAULT CD-RETN TO RINGWRLD 24 CD-RETURN TO ZORK CO RISE OF THE ROBOTS 29 CD-SAM & MAX CD SHADOW OF THE COMET 23 CD-SPACE SHUTTLE CD STAR CRUSADER CD STAR TRAIL CD STAR TREK 25TH ANN. 29 CD STELLAR 7 CD-SUBWAR 2050 CD-TEX 25 CD TORNADO OP. DESERT 19 14 15 TEX GAMER'S GOLD WE PAY CASH FOR USED GAMES WE'RE BUYING! We want your current used games 1-800-377-8578 In Canada, call 605-339-2060 col for authorization before shipping or FAX list for current quotes to 605-334-8766 include your refurn oddress & FAX 09.) WE NEED GAMES, IBM GAMES Got Something To Sell? Follow these Easy Steps 1. Prepare a list of the games you are selling. Call, fax, or mail your list to GAMER'S GOLD. 2. GAMER'S GOLD will quote the current buying prices & issue an authorization number for your shipment, Games will not be accepted without an authorization no Price quotes are good for 14 days. 3. Pack games in box. Write authorization no. dearly on outside of box. Mail to GAMER'S OOLD. Sove your authorization no. We can't answer questions about your shipment without your number HINT BOOKS AVAILABLE $4 and UP WE SELL USED GAMES THEATRE OF DEATH THEME PARK TIE FIGHTER TONY LARUSSA GAMES CALL TORNADO TREASURES SAVAGE FRON. 7 TUNNELS & TROLLS TWILIGHT 2000-VGA ULTIMA 5 ULTIMA 6 ULTIMA 7 ULTIMA 7 FORGE OF VIRTUE 10 ULTIMA 7.5 SERPENT ISLE 15 ULTIMA 8: PAGAN ULTIMA UNDERWORLD 1 16 ULTIMATE DOMAIN ULTRABOTS UNLIMITED ADVENTURES 18 V FOR VICTORY GAMES CALL VETTE WAR IN MIDDLE EARTH 6 WARLORDS 2 WESTERN FRONT WHEN TWO WORLDS WAR 17 WING COMMAND ACADEMY 15 WING COMMANDER 1 WING COMMANDER 2 WING COMMANDER ARMADA 25 WIZARDRY 5 WIZARDAY 7 WOLFPACK WORLD CIRCUIT RACING WORLD CLASS SOCCER WORLD WAR 2: BATTLES 13 WW2 AIR FORCE COMNDR 10 X-WING X-WING AD-ONS (EACH) YEAGER'S AIR COMBAT MERS Game Tille Price AD&D GAMES CALL ADV OF WILLY BEAMISH-VGA 12 AIR BUCKS AL-QUADIM GENIE'S CURSE 19 ALIEN BREED ALIEN LEGACY ALONE IN THE DARK AMBUSH AT SORINOR APBA BASEBALL ARENA ELDER SCROLLS ARMADA 2525 ARMORED FIST ATAC B17 FLYING FORTRESS BATTLE BUGS BATTLEHAWKS 1942 RETRAYAL AT KRONDOR BLOODNET BLOODSTONE BLUE AND GREY BLUE FORCE NEXT OF KIN BUCK ROGERS 1 -COUNTON 5 BUZZ ALDRIN RACE SPACE CAESAR CAMPAIGN 2 CARRIER STRIKE CASTLES CASTLES 2 CD. HELL GAB WINDOWS CD 7TH GUEST CD AEGIS GUARDIAN FLT CD ALIEN LOGIC CD ARMORED FIST CD.CRITICAL PATH CD-CYBERIA CD DAGGER OF AMMON RA CD-DARK FORCES CD DARK LEGIONS GD. DARK SUN 2 CD-DAWN PATROL CD DEATH GATE CD-DRACULA UNLEASHED CD-DRAGON LORE CD-DRAGON'S LAIR CD-DRAGONSPHERE CD-DUNGEON HACK CO. ELECTR.ARTS: TOP 10 19 CD. FANTASY EMPIRES 25 CD FIGHTER WING CD FRONT PAGE FB '95 CD GABRIEL KNIGHT CD GREAT NAVAL BATTLE 2 25 CDHELL: CYBERPUNK CD HORDE CD INCA 2 CD INDY JONES FATE CD INFERNO CD INHERIT THE EARTH CD IRON HELIX CD-JOURNEYMAN PROJECT 17 CD JUMP RAVEN CD JURASSIC PARK CD KING'S QUEST 6 15 CD KING'S QUEST 7 CD LANDS OF LORE CD. LAWNMOWER MAN CD LEISURE SUIT LARRY 6 24 CD MAD DOG MCCREE CD MAD DOG MCCREE 2 22 CD MAN ENOUGH CD MEGA RACE CD MENZOBERRANZAN CD MIGHT AND MAG.WRLD 29 CD MYST CD OUTPOST CD POLICE QUEST 4 CD PRIVATEER CD PSYCHOTRON CD-QUANTUM GATE CD RAVENLOFT All games are tested & IBM disks virus checked gomes are in original box with original documentation Call for current title availibility WE ACCEPT ONLY VISA/MasterCard/Discover Money Orders/Cashiers Check\"Call for the traibility before sending M.O.\" Most items shipped same day. S5 UPS/S9 2nd Day Air col for information on Conodion shipments GAMER'S GOLD 1008 W. 41st Street Sioux Falls South Dakota 4. If you would like to use your money or credit to purchase games, include a \"wish list of titles you are interested in 5. Your check will usually be mailed within 10-14 working days of receiving your games. Some wish list game credits may take slightly longer to kill. Gomes will be checked for viruses & completeness. Gomes must be complete with all disks, printed materials, & in original box. Incompleto games will be returned at your expense.  57105 16 12 M-1 TANK PLATOON MAELSTROM MAGIC CANDLE 2 MARIO ANDRETTI RACING MASTER OF MAGIC 29 CD ULTIMATE FOOTBALL 26 CD. UNDER A KILLING MOON 34 CD WARCRAFT CD WHO SHOT JOHNNY 12 CD-WING COMM. ARMADA 25 CD-WING COMMAND 2 DLX 19 CD WINTER OLYMPIC GAME 19 CD X-COM 25 CD ZEPHYR CD ROMS MANY MORE! CALL CHALLENGE OF 5 REALMS 10 CHAMPIONS OF KRYNN 30 TO GET OUR NEW UPDATED PRICE SHEET Call 800-377-8578 In Canada, coll 605-339-2060 We'll mail or FAX our latest price sheet with all our curreal titles! REX NEBULAR RISE OF THE DRAGON-VGA 10 ROBINSON'S REQUIEM ROCKETEER 12 ROME: PATHWAY TO POWER 10 SAM & MAX:HIT THE ROAD 25 SECRET WEAP OF LUFTWA 12 SHADOW CASTER 10 SHADOW OF YSERBIUS SHADOW PRESIDENT SILENT SERVICE 2 SILVERBALL SIM CITY 2000 SIM CITY 2000:GREAT DIS 8 SIM CITY GAMES ETC CALL SIMON THE SORCERER 13 SPACE QUEST 4-VGA 12 SPACE QUEST 5-VGA SPACE SIMULATOR SPEAR OF DESTINY 17 SPEAR OF DESTINY MISS 1 SPECIAL FORCES 24 3. DRACULA-BRAM STOKER'S 11 DRAGON'S LAIR 3 DREAMWEB DUNGEON HACK DYNAMIX SAMPLE PACK ELVIRA 2 EMPIRE DELUXE EMPIRE SOCCER 94 EYE OF THE BEHOLDER EYE OF THE BEHOLDER 2 12 EYE OF THE BEHOLDER 3 17 FALCON 3.0 FALCON AD-ONS CALL FANTASY EMPIRES FLIGHT SIM 4 & AD-ONS CALL FRONT PAGE FOOTBALL 11 FRONT PAGE FOOTBALL PRO 18 FRONTIER ELITE 2 GABRIEL KNIGHT 17 GAMES NOT LISTED? CALL GATEWAY 2. HOMEWORLD 15 GOBLINS QUEST 3 GRANDEST FLEET GREENS GOLF HAND OF FATE HANNIBAL HARDBALL 3 HARPOON HARPOON 2 HARPOON AD-ONS HARRIER ASSAULT HARRIER SUPER-VGA 17 HEAVEN & EARTH 12 HEIRS TO THE THRONE HEROES OF THE LANCE HEXX HIGH COMMAND Prices & availability subject to change. Call Toll Free for current titles and those not listed-we've got lots more! All Used Games are complete & virus free with original box, documentation & disks. System compatibility is not yuaranteed. All sales are final-defective games replaced with same title. Free shipping (Regular Ground) in the continental USA on orders over $150. FREE GAME OFFER On orders over $75 Choose from list below  Rex Nebular  Power Monger  Jordan Vs. Bird  When Two Worlds War  Realms  Dagger of Amon Ro 14 19 16 MASTER OF ORION MATRIX CUBED MAXIMUM OVERKILL 22 MEGAFORTRESS METALTECH EARTHSIEGE MICROLEAGUE SPORTS CALL MICROSOFT ARCADE-WIN 12 MIG 29 25 MIGHT & MAGIC 4 -CLOUDS 14 MIGHT & MAGIC 5-DARKSIDE 15 MONKEY ISLAND -VGA 16 MONKEY ISLAND 2 MORTAL KOMBAT NFL COACHES CLUB NHL HOCKEY(4MB RAM REO) 19 NO GREATER GLORY NOMAD OPERATION COMBAT 2 OUT OF THIS WORLD CHAOS CONTINUUM CIRCUITS EDGE COASTER COHORT 2 COLONIZATION COMPANION OF XANTH CONAN CONFLICT KOREA CONQUEST OF JAPAN CONQUEST OF LONGBOW CONTINUUM CORRIDOR 7 COUNTDOWN CALL weBuy SELL 9 10 Circle Reader Service #241 "


"NATIONAL AMERICAN EI PRESS mes 1-800-COROM-13 CGW 0895 Fax orders: 214-488-2109 (US, Canada and Mexico only) Phone: 214-241-0724 VISA Mastercard DUCOVEK COD Mon-Thur 9am-9pm Fri-Sat 9am-6pm Sun 12-6pm CST We offer the only NO RISK return policy. If not completely satisfied with your purchase, exchange it for something else! Download our Catalog with our entire selection and descriptions. BBS 214-241-4754. CD-R O M We offer the only NO RISK return policy. VEILIT NASCAR PANZER GENE SPECIAL COLECIAL SPECIAL Volume 1 SPECIAL SPECIAL SPECIAL SLO a $19 $ $12 OVER 600 MB $13 Made in USA Panzer General Hot Pix 1 The Seventh Guest 5.19 19 243.222222 Call PAPYRUS THE RAUNCHIEST STILLS EVER! Nascar Racing Get ONE of the above specials with the purchase of 2 additional new titles at our regular low prices or First-time Buyers can get 10% off all Titles. Not valid with other specials. PC BUSINESS (NEW) PC ADULT (NEW) PC ADULT (NEW) C GAMES (NEW) PC GAMES (NEW) PC REFERENCE (NEW) Instant Internet Access 535 APL Adult Pic. Lib. 1 S19 My Private Collection II Descent Star Trek 29th Annis Ane Heritage Talking Dict Home & Office Legal Guide S10 APL Adult Pic. Lib. Night Watch Doom 11 Star Trek Technical Manual Audchan Birds Phone Dise Residential 96 S35 Adult Reference Library Photo Gallery Dragons La LFO X-Com Complete Bookshop PhoneDisc Business Winte: 535 All Beauties Pixs Adult Sampler Gabriel Knight L'S Tchter Dictionaries and Language Select Phone 1995 5179 Amateur Models Pleasure Zones Gone Fishing 5.39 Ender A Killing Moon Encyclopedia of Science Asian Fantasy Girls Seymore Butts Interactie II Hell WarCraft 539 Family Tree Male PC FILH (NEW) Asian Ladies S. Space Sites Incredible Machine 11 S 39 Ming Commander S. Forbidden Subiect Bugs Bunny Cartoon S 10 Asian Palette Swimsuit and Lingerie Indiana Jones V.Com: Ter From the Deep S2 Gatting TV Commercials 1950s 1960 S12 Asian Pearls Swimsuits to the Mix Journeyman Project Tuto Wing Gorenment News Three Stooges Barlows Arrats There Boys B King Questo S 19 Zor Anthology Great Literature Plus Blonde Justice Tokyo Nightlife Lege 3 | Kavida Hacker Chitonicles: PC RELIGION (NEW) Bodacious Beauties Ttacillane You Legend of Kandall PC CHILDREN (NEW) Haldeman Diario Bible Complete Multimedia S 35 California Beauties Treasures of Spice Sampler 59 Leisure Suit Larry Alladin Disnes $ 29 How things Work Bible Library $25 Danish Fantasies Vampire Kiss Lode Runner SU Arthur's Teacher Trouble S14 JFK Assasination Bables and Religion S11 Dirty Debutantes Virtual Director Mad Dog Macice Arthur Birthday Suprise S3 Learn to Speak Spanish Dead Sea Scrolls S5 Dirty Dao Virtual Vixents Mad Dog Macter 519 Dames Bear Goes to School s1: Leonatda the Insenter Logos Bible Software Coll. S35 Dream Machine World of Pin Up Magic Cup Berenstvin Bears S13 Library of the Futute. 519 Multimedia Family Bible S 19 EB Imaging Metaltech Eatthiese SJU Carmen Sandia World S19 MS Bookshelf Call FAO Gold 1 PC GAMES (NEW) Monts Pathon 53 Cool School $ 29 MS Eneatta 95 PC GRAPHICS (NEW) FAO Gold 10 Pack Series I . $39 Destur To Singalong Sih Menarch Notes 3000 True Type Fonts 524 FAO Gold 3 101 of the Best Games So SASCAR Racing Gus Gues Cobertown $13 Multimedia World History $19 Clip Art Warehouse S 10 Fantasy Lifestyles 101 of the Best Games S19 Outpost Just Grandma and Me S 19 Vational Geographic Mammals 19 Clipart Heaven 11 S 22 Flame 1.1 As Over Europe Panzer General Kids Zoo Lindersca American S3 North American Indian Color Clips 3000 S33 Forbidden Pleasures Nces of the Pacific Pinball Arcade Learning Fun for Kids 513 Oceans Below Font Elegance SI Foxes 533 Aegis Guardian of Fleet Police Quest Lion King S3 Out Salar System Fonts Platinum SI Garworld! 5.39 Bletavalt Krunder 539 Rarenlutt. NS Magis Schools Solar S Parenting 519 GIFs Galore 519 Girls in Vivid Bio Forge Rebel Assault Math Blaster Project Guttenberg Kodak Photo CD S15 Hidden Obsessions Quicktime 525 Can Master Multimedia Return To Zork Mathematics Library SIS ORZ Ham Radio inter 5 Mother of ClipArt SI High Society Hot Wire S.36 Dark FORCES Rise of the Robes Pitt Putt Join the Parade SIS Reishit Print Shop Ensemble 575 Hot Pics Dark Legion Rise of the Triad Reader Rabbit1 Delunc 539 Simple House Publishers Platinum SI Hot Pix! SO Dark Sun Shattered Land Senth Guest Rich Scan How thing Work Triple Plan Spanish Hottest Fantasies $39 Dark Sun. Wake of Ravager. 521 Sim City 59 Totes and the Hare 3 US Air Force Aircraft PC MULTIMEDIA (NEW) Madams Family St Day of the Tentacle Sim City Enhanced SW Tuneland S US Acraft Canis Beethovens Fifth S 19 US Marine Auscat S12 Encyclopedia of Sound II S 10 MPC Wizard 3.0 51: PC SHAREWARE (NEW) Multimedia Pak S 36 C Source Code Walnut Crush S 19 Multimedia Mania $10 We Buy/Sell and Trade Used CD'S. Call us for a Quote. CUsers Group Multimedia Platinum CICA. Diss24 Jazz Multimedia History S 19 TIH GULST 515 FAO GOLD LINKS SAM AXIMAX CICA: DIN Se: 129 Learn to Play Guitar 5 29 AMATEUR MODELS SI TORBIDDES SCHECTS SI LOON! MONKEY ISLAND DOOM Accessory Pack 510 MIDI Music Shop Professioni 522 BATTLECHESS SO HARD CORE SIAD DOG SEX AND MONEY Doom Fever 11 Midi Master Collection S10 BLUE FORCE SO HELL MANENOUGH SHERLOCK HOLNIES Daam II Explosion Sound Mod Vol. 1 $_35 BODY COUNT 510 HELLCAR SIASTIS SIMCITY 20 Education Master + Sound Sensations SID BROTHEL HIDDEN OBSESSIONS MASTER OF MAGIC SOL THERN BE M TIES Five Foot Ten Pack BUSTY BABES HIGH VOLUME NUDES S30 VIEGRACE STYR REICH Free BSD Unix 2:01 PC HEALTH (NEW) CASTLES II SIC HOW THINGS WORK SI NIICROCOSM SN STAR TREK TECH MINIS20 Games Platinum ADAM Inside Story 5.19 CELEBRITY NUDES INGAN S SIPC WIZARD THE HORDE Hobbes OS 2 Ready to Run 19 Family Doctor ver 3 S 19 CORRIDOR INTERNET TOOLS VIS BOOKSHELL 03 THL PSYCHOTROS 12 Internet Access Home Medical Adviser P:O S15 CRITICAL PATH SIDIRON HELIN VIS WORD BOOKSHELL 51 TOOL WORKS REF LIB 512 Intentct Into Home Remedies SIS D ZONE SID MIS PUBLISHER MYST TRIPLE PLAY FRENCH Just for kids Mayo Clinic Family Health SIS DARKSEED SEYMORE BETIS HI HOCKEY 95 5. TU ROTAN Linux CD Set Intolagic Mayo Clinic Plumacist 523 DIGITAL DREASIS JFK ASSASINATION VIGHTOWLI 51: ULTIMA VII Linux Plug n Play Creek 5 Mayo Clinic Sports Health S 16 DOOMS JOXES THE FASTIANE SHE THESICAL THERAPY 512 LLTIMATE FOOTBALL SI Sicht Owl15 Ultimate Human Body 5.17 DR.GON LORE JCRRASIC PARK Sin PLEASURE ZONES 525 CNDER A KILLING NOONS 3 Night Out Pack DRAGONS LAIR PC TRAVEL (NEW) KINGOLESTE OLANTUNGATE SS Overload Trio VANUIRES KISS Discect ELEMENTS OF DESIRE 3 KINGS OLEST SORELENTLESS S WANDERLUST Simtel Walnut Creek MAA Trip Planner S 19 ERIC THE LSREADY 515 DAGGER OF AMON RINGWORLI) S WING CONSTANDER I SIL Sathare Vault Sapphite Global Explorer FAMILY DOCTOR WORLDS BEST BREASTS ST Techno Tools London Multimedia Tout All Used CD's are Fully Guaranteed! Top 100 Games S19 Map Go 5.39 Sorry, Due to the overwhelming popularity of our used CD's, our prices and titles are subject to change. Ltilities Platinum 513 Street Atlas USA 2.0 Cool Windows Games: 513 L'S Atlas 4.0 Win Platinum >12 519 513 Check this out! CD's as low as $2.00 each! S12 Price and availability are subject to change. US orders. $5 Shipping for entire order $10 UPS 2-day, $18 UPS overnight. Call for shipping cost to Canada and Mexico. No other international orders. OVER 1400 TITLES IN STOCK! OVER 1000 NEW CD-ROM TITLES UNDER $30! WE WILL MEET OR BEAT ANY PRICE IN THIS PUBLICATION! National CD-ROM 800-237-6613  11005 Indian Trail Suite 101-A Dallas, Texas 75229 Circle Reader Service #306 "


"IBM INTERACTIVE VALERIE TOLL FREE ORDER SOBOM  THE GAMES PLEA SURE ZONES Unlock the secrets of the Pleasure Zones. The hot. test girls of Vivid are wait Ceasure ing for your special touch, including the gorgeous Racquel Darrian, Janine, Kelly O'Dell and more. Caress these luscious stars just right and you'll be up all night! CD $33 \"VIRTUAL VALERIE 2 The queen of cybersex is back! Virtual Valerie 2 is the ultimate in cyberotica and the embodiment of every redblooded techno phile's deepest desires! Sophisticated 3D modeling, tantalizing animation, erotic sound effects, and a sizzling music score combine to create a mind blowing sex. travaganza! CD $42 $37 $39    la der Kad 'SCISSORS SCISSORS STONES 'N STONES Step inside the depths of an interactive erotic arena inhabited by beautiful women who engage in an all or nothing head-tohead competition of high stakes. Fortunately, the stakes are not for money but rather for articles of clothing. Features include realIstic 3D graphics and animation, and full motion video strip sequences. CD $29 DREAM MACHINE Travel through a 3D rendered virtual world where your only limitation is your Imagination and your libido. This full motion video, has the most beautiful women in adult film. Interact with your seductive escort, telling her what your tastes are, and she will guide you through your ultimate fantasy world! CD $49 $49 ORDERREE 800-699-42632 Adv of Seymore Butts $54 Adv of Seymore Butts 2 $49 CD Brothel $28 Cheap & Dirty $19 Club Cyberlesque $38 Come Play With Me $36 Cyber Strip Black Jack $49 Cyber Strip Poker $49 Cyber-Peep Interactive $19 Daily Teasers $32 Dark Tunnels S29 Desktop Mistress $49 Desktop Voyeur V.1 $49 Deva X $49 Digital Dancing $32 Dirty Debutantes 2 $39 Dream Girl $20 Dream Machine 1 or 2 $49 Electric Swing $39 Encyclopedia of Sex $49 Fantasies Interactive $35 Fox Pack Girlfriend Maria Girlfriend Nikki $49 Girlfriend Suzie $44 Girlfriend Teri $46 Girlfriend Speech Pack $19 Hot Slots IA Adult Sampler WIN $12 l-active Sexual Therapy $54 Internat'l Strip Poker $22 Intimate Journey $24 Ladies Clb Poker Night S26 Love Slaves $39 Lust Connection $39 Maddams Family $39 Max Midnight Stranger $45 Mind Teazzer 1 or 2 Mirage Mustang Interactive $42 Neurodancer $39 Neuropak $54 Nick Steele P.I. $59 Nightwatch 1 or 2 $39 Nightwatch Interactive 3$49 Paradise Club $39 Party Time $19 Penetration $24 Penthouse 2 $49 Penthouse 1,3,5 each $59 Pleasure Zones $33 Poker Party S45 Porn Mania $49 Private Prison $44 Room For Rent S42 Scissors N' Stones $29 Secrets Interactive $35 See Some 3 Some $39 Sex Therapy Interctive $59 Sexy Slot Machine $24 Sorority House $34 Space Sirens 1 or 2 $49 Spy Club $49 Strip Poker Pro $29 Strip Pot MPEG $36 Texas Table Dance $39 Vampire's Kiss Velvet Dreams Virtual Director $49 Virtual Sex Shoot $44 Virtual Strip Tease $25 Virtual Valerie 2 $42 Virtual Vibrations Virtual Vixens Virtually Yours 1 or 2 $49 Wanderlust $44 Winner Takes All $39 $32 $49 NEURODANCER SPACE SIRENS 2 TUBREY INTO TIE NEURONE NEURODANCER Navigate through the Neuro-Net by hacking into the forbidden worlds of dark mysteries, danger, and sensuality. Use computer and VidFone to obtain credits to interect with the erotic NeuroDancers who traverse the computer networks in search of willing view ers. CD $45 SPACE SIRENS 2: MEGABABES FROM AJIA You've encountered the Space Sirens and lived to tell the tale. Now face the new challenge, a deadlier form of alien. Amazing graphics, pulsating sound and gor. geous women. Also Touch and Feel User Interface. CD $49 INTERIA IBM MOTION IBM MOTION IBM MOTION IBM MOTION $29 $39 $39 $25 Adults Only PO Box 234, Dept. 10350 Rochester, VT 05767 $8 $32 $39 All Night Long All That Sex $24 Amateur Models 3 $25 American Blond $24 American Swinger 1or 2$26 Animation Temptress $28 Ashlyn Geres Realities 2 $24 Asian Heat $24 Asian Invasion $19 Asian Ladies V1 $39 Baby's Got Butt Bachelor Party 1 or 2 $24 Bost of Blonds $26 Best of Vivid Betrayal $27 Beyond Explicit $28 Bikini Beach $44 Blind Spot $24 Blond Justice $25 Bobbit Uncut $32 Bonnie & Clyde $26 Breast Wishes $22 Bubble Butts $24 Busen Extra V.1 or 2 $28 Busting Out $39 Busty Babes 3 $38 Butt Of Course $26 Rom Collectables $26 California Calendar $29 Camp Double D $29 Candy Snacker $24 Candy Stripers $29 Cat and Mouse $39 Centerfolds & Covergirl $24 Channel Blonds $26 Collectables $24 Curse of the Catwoman $24 Dangerous Blondes $29 Danish Girls Exlusive 1 $25 Danish Girls Only V. 1 $25 Debby Does Dallas $38 Deep Throat Girls 1or 2 $29 Desert Passion $25 Digital Seduction $34 Dinner Party $39 Dirty Debutantes Dirty Duo $22 Dirty Laundry $35 Dirty Little Cartoons V2 $36 Doors of Passion 1or 2 $27 Dripping With Desire 532 Dungeon of Dominance $36 Eight is Never Enough $24 Electrosex $26 Elements of Desire $39 Endangered $29 Erotic Dreams for 2 $32 Erotic Film Sensations 2 $22 Extreme Sex $24 Fantasies 2 $26 Fantasy $24 Film Club Seychelles Forever $26 Ginger Unlimited $25 Girlfriends V. 1 $24 Girls Doin' Girls 1 or 2 $26 Girls Games $32 Girls Gone Bad $26 Girls Will Be Boys 3 Girls of Pleasure $26 Girls on CD 1 or 2 $25 Girls on Sunset Strip $34 Girls with Girls Graduation From F.U. $39 Group Therapy Hidden Agenda Hidden Obsessions Hot Lovers Hot Shorts $26 Hot Stuff $36 House of Dreams $24 House of Pain $24 Indiscretion Insatiable $24 Junkyard Dykes $24 Kama Sutra $38 Kelly Eighteen $24 L.A. Strippers $34 Ladies Club Pool Night $25 Legend 4 $25 Legends of Pom 1 or 2 $25 Lethal Passion $26 $24 $36 $32 IBM MOTION Source 10350 101 Sex Positions 2 $24 A Woman's Touch $26 Adult Movie Almanac $59 Adult Superstars $26 Advnturs of Snatchman $39 MUST BE AN ADULT TO ORDER COW 2954 $24 1995 CHIPS & BITS, INC. "


"IBIS STILLS 'A TASTE OF EROTICA' The VLACHONE sampler of all samplers! This 01 L1OTICA includes interactive demos. movie clips and photos of over 30 different EROT SAMPLER titles from New Machine Publishing. Seymore Bulls, Nightwatch, Hidden Obsession to name a few of the best adult titles ever produced for CD Rom. This is the ultimate try before you buy experience! CD $8 \"   LADIES CLUB: THE POOL GAME The Ladies club, where T POL GAME El Plan passion is 2. Me the passodlas word for Busibile member MADA ship. Five woman share their most intimate secrets and their mutual lust for pleasure and control. Five women, five men, countless possibilities! This is a multimedia movie for Windows and Macintosh users. CD $25 Spore $22 $24 'MIND TEAZZER Il You've finished with the first set and now you're ready for more! Mind Teazzer II has a plethora of brand new puzzling sexcapades to challenge you. After you complete the puzzles you are rewarded with your Vivid girl of choice who will show you her favorite film clips.CD $32 MIND TEAZZER II 101 Sex Positions 3D Darling 3D Dream Girls Adult Palate 2 All Beauties Amateur Allstars $26 Amateur Models $22 American Girls 2 $29 Asian Palate V. 2 $36 Babe Watch 3D $26 Biker Babes $29 Blond Bombshells $29 Bodacious Beauties $34 Celebrity Nudes S25 Erotic Fantasies Erotic Giant European Erotica Exotic Poses V. 1 Extreme Delight $28 Femme Fatale $33 Garo Collection Girls of J Steven Hicks S34 Girls of Risque $26 Girls of Vivid V. 1 $29 Heavenly Bodies 2 or 3 $39 High Volume Nudes $28 Hooter Heavens $36 Hot Girls S24 Hot Pix $24 International Beauties $24 Lady in Spain $29 Leather & Lace $29 More Northern Delights $34 Northern Delights $32 Nova Collection 1 or 2 $26 Oral Fixation Overexposed $39 Public Fantasies Select A Pet $29 Sensuous Girls in 3-D Sexiest Women on 2 $24 Shaved Pink $27 Sizzle Southern Beauties $34 Stripping Hot Girls $24 Super Smutware $26 Sweet Cheeks $26 Sweet Dreams $29 Tabloid Beauties $28 Women of Moscow $34 Women of Venus $22 \"VAM. PIRE'S KISS Journey through the corridors of the vampire's ancient virtual 3D castie Astounding interactive graphics allow you to Search for the secret passageway that leads to the vampire's private chamber. Your actions determine the outcome, but beware of things that go bump in the night! CD S44 ADULTS ONLY IN $32 $29 $29 $26 Call WARU THE the interactive Adventures of INTERACTI V E TOMS . ADVENTURES OF SEYMORE BUTTS Follow the adventures of Seymore Butts and aa his camera and help him meet and mate with the girl of his dreams. This full length interactive quicktime adventure features over 90 minutes of digital video with freshest talent in adult entertainment. CD $54 800-699-4263 CDI ADULT International 802-767-3033 $32 Fax 802-767-3382 'DREAM GIRL' Your dream girl asks you ques. tions and depending on your response you advance further in the game and get to know her better, MUCH BETTERI CD $28 Source 10350 IBM MOTION IBM MOTION IBM MOTION BM MOTION American Blond Bad Girls:Lockdown Channel Blonde Cheating Dirty Looks Endlessly Ice Woman Intimate Journey Mask Naked Reunion Parlor Games Sex Shame Suite 18 Super Model The Coven S32 $29 $32 $32 $32 $32 $32 $32 S32 $32 $32 $29 $32 $32 Adults Only PO Box 234, Dept. 10350 Rochester, VT 05767 $25 $24 S33 $33 $26 $29 $26 $28 $24 $25 $29 $24 $26 3DO ADULT Lip Stick Lesbians $26 Loads of Fun $32 Love Bites $26 Main Street USA $26 Mask $25 Matihari $28 Menage A Trois $26 Mind Shadows Model Wife $24 Model's Memoirs $22 Mom on the Make $26 Murphy's Brown $24 My First Time $24 Mystique of the Orient 2 $24 Naked Edge $26 Naked Reunion $24 Nasty Neighbor Girls $29 Nasty Nurses Naughty But Nice $29 New Lovers $24 New Machine Six Pack $42 New Wave Hookers 10r2 $25 Night Creatures $26 Night Trips 2 Nova Collection V3 Novel Desires One Nine Hundred Only the Very Best Orient XXXPress Oriental Action Oriental Treatment 3 Outrageous Orgies Parlor Games Pleasing Your Lover Pleasure Dome Poison Project X Put it in Gere Racquelle Released Rain Women Raunch Red Hot Rimfire Pacific Video Secrets 2 Seductions Sex Sex Foot Slut Pack $59 Sex Games $32 Sexlandia $36 Sexual Instinct $32 Sexual Obsession $29 Shame $24 Sharon Starlet Sindy Does it All $29 Sinful Girls $32 Sinfully Yours $29 Sleepwalker $42 Sorority Sluts $29 Spring Break Girls $32 Star Bangers 1-4 each $26 Starware Gift Pack $59 Steamy Windows $25 Stocking Stuffers $33 Strap On Palace $34 Super Cybersex $26 Super Models Go Wild $39 Superstars of Porn $24 Swingers Worldwide 1 $34 Take Me Hard $32 3 3 3 The Coven $25 The Fisherman's Wife $38 The Last Girl Scout $26 The Private Collection $48 Topless Dancer $29 Touch Me, Feel Me Toy's Not Boys $29 Ultimate Teasers Urotsukidoji $24 Virgins V. 1 or 2 $39 Voice in my Bed $24 W Pink TV $25 Wager of Love $25 Wanda 2 $24 Weekend at Ernies Welcome to my Face Wet Dreams 2 $26 Wet Nurses $39 Wicked Whispers $29 Wide Open Spaces $34 Wild Innocence Woman to Woman $26 Women of Beverly Hills $39 MUST BE AN ADULT TO ORDER Ovornight Shipping in US $4 per order. Mail to Canada. PR. HI. AK. APO, FPO $4 per order. Worldwide air mail $6 per item. Handling S2 per shipment. Hardware orders may require additional Shipping charges. Restrictions apply. Cannol quarantee customs cloarance. Order al own risk. Call for details 3 $26 S24 Love Bit $38 $38 $15 Blond Justice Endlessly Hot Roxx Immortal Desire Intimate Journey $32 Love Bites S32 Neurodancer $39 Passion Files $36 Sex $32 Super Models Go Wild $32 The Coven $32 Voices in My Bed $32 Winner Takes All $32 $32 $26 $26 $24 $25 Visa, MC and Discover accepled, Checks hold 4 woeks. Money Orders samo as cash. COD $8. Dalectives replaced with samo product. Most itoms shipped same day. Shipping timos may vary. Prico/availability may change. All sales linal. COW SA 1995 CHIPS & BITS, INC. "


"TM SPACESIRENS 2 MEGA B A B ES FROM AUTA CONT xia999@aol.com $59.95 LIMITED TIME OFFER Ist 500 Callers Who Order Space Sirens 2 Receive $10 Off the regular price of $69.95 and a FREE PIXIS Sampler 3 CD-ROM (A $9.95 Value). CALL TOLL FREE TO ORDER 800.999.7990 TEL: 201.783.3600 FAX: 201.783.368 Send Orders To: Mission Control, 7 Oak Place IQ 0695-PIX Montclair, NJ 07042. MC. Visa. Discover. Checks & Money Orders. Shipping $7 OVERNIGHT (most areas) Must be 21. To Order. AN INTERACTIVE GAME ON CD-ROM PIXIS Presents A DIGITAL BOY PRODUCTION XIA AKINA AND MISCHA WRITTEN BY TETSUO DIRECTED BY RYU SHINOBI PRODUCTION MANAGER ROBERT BOE VISUAL SPECIAL EFFECTS BY D. LO GRAPHIC DESIGN BY LEON WAS COSTUME DESIGN F. GADO LEAD PROGRAMMER ANTHONY GOMEZ (18+ MATURE AUDIENCES PRODUCED BY MARK MEDIA. MUSIC BY TASC A PIXIS RELEASE D -I-X-I-5 CONTROL   !! t | MIDDING Couplet 1995 PIXIS. Doddler Inuities Gull: 714.669.1818 Fax./14.573.1210 Orline Address: prisintebuol.com. Circle Reader Service #74 ENERAL [ TOUCH the FUTURE ] "


"THE MARKETPLACE Call your Account Representative, Marci Yamaguchi, at (415) 357-4920 for information on how you can advertise your game, product or service in the economical MARKETPLACE section. COOTBALLPOO OR WINDOWS COMPUTER GAMING WORLD Finally! Run your own football pool in an easy to use, Windows program!  Preprogrammed pro season schedule!  Download weekly line and game results!  Best bet and elimination pools included!  Season bonus pool!  Team standings and your pool players' stats, generated on a weekly pick sheet! Introductory offer of $45.00 plus shipping and handling Visa/MasterCard Accepted Call 1.800.552.7489 For beginners and experienced players! 145,000 Volume Game Buyers Each Buying an Average of 18 Games a Year Circle Reader Service #78 Thanks for sticking WITH US. LAST1:25. Put the power of this audience to work for you. Call Marci Yamaguchi for advertising information (415) 357-4920 Faster Seals EASTER SEALS '95 1994 National Easter Seal Society AUGUST 1995 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 193 "


"ADVERTISER INDEX FREE FREE R.S. # COMPANY PRODUCT PAGE R.S. # COMPANY PRODUCT PAGE 161 163 165 197 49-50 151 * E 20-21 160 121 168-169 177 179 192 52-53 189 100 32-33 120 193 131 Cover 4 80838 * BOSS BOSSES Crave 35 21st Century Entertainment, Inc. Pinball Fantasies Deluxe 168 7th Level, Inc. Battle Beast Activision Pitfall: Windows 95 Activision Mechwamor 2 Activision Atari Action Pack 2 113 Advanced Gravis Firebird and Ace Cover 3 America Online, Inc. Test.-Glacier BAO Las Vegas Bare Bones Software Buy and Sell Pre-Owned Software! Capstone Software Witch Haven Capstone Software Harpoon II Deluxe Carbela Tek The Jam Pack 5 CH Products New From CH Products 171 50-52 Chips & Bits Mail Order Products 74-79 111 Chips & Bits Interactive Entertainment 117 200 Chips & Bits Board Games and Role-Playing Games 126-127 362 Chips & Bits Mail Order Adult Software 190-191 Columbia House CD-ROM Direct 300-302 Computer Express Mail Order Products 88-93 Computer Express 3D Game Creation System Computer Express Ms. Metaverse Corel Corporation Marilyn Corel Corporation Movie Guide Mail Order Adult CD-Roms Creative Labs Van Gogh Sound Blaster AWE 32 Diamond Multimedia Systems Stealth 64 Domark Software Absolute Zero 210 Domark Software Orion Conspiracy Educorp Midnight Stranger Electromedia Productions, Inc. go DIGITAL Electronic Arts Fade To Black 114-115 Electronic Arts Marine Fighters Electronic Arts Pumpkin Head Electronic Arts Magic Carpet empire Interactive Entertainment The Civil War Enhanced Software Design, Inc. Game Wizard Epic MegaGames, Inc. One Must Fall 2097 Falcon Northwest Falcon MACH V FormGen, Inc. Terminal Velocity Gamer's Gold Mail Order Products GT Interactive Software Ultimate Doom GTE Entertainment FX-FIGHTER Cover 2 HPS Simulations Tigers on the Prowl I*Motion, Inc. CEO id SOFTWARE Heretic ImagiNation Network ImagiNation Network Impressions Software, Inc. Caesar II Impressions Software, Inc. Caesar || Impressions Software, Inc. Caesar II Interactive Magic Apache Celtic Tales Logitech Ejector Seat 156-157 Looking Glass Technologies Flight Unlimited Segu 173 LucasArts Entertainment Co. FULL THROTTLE LucasArts Entertainment Co. DARK FORCES: Darth Vader LucasArts Entertainment Co. DARK FORCES: Yoda LucasArts Entertainment Co. DARK FORCES: Jabba the Hut Megatech Software Knights of Xentar Microforum Dagger's Rage MicroProse CivNet MicroProse This Means WAR! Microsoft Corporation FAA Military Simulations, Inc. Fighting Falcons Mission Control Interactive Quarterly Mission Control Mail Order Products Mission Control Seymour Butts Mission Control Collage of Products Mission Control Space Sirens MPG-Net Multi-Player Games Network National CD-ROM Mail Order Products Nawu Triad Institute Triad Wargame System New World Computing Heroes of Might and Magic Novastar Game Company Wargames Office Pools, Inc. Football Pool 95 For Windows ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Cybermage ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Crusader Papyrus NASCAR Racing & NASCAR Track Pack QQP subsidiary of ALG, Inc. Lost Admiral R&G Games Used Game Software Reveal Computer Products Family of Products Roberts Enterprises RED ZONE S Software Mail Order Software Sanctuary Woods Buried in Time Sierra On-Line, Inc. Space Quest 6 Sierra On-Line, Inc. Phantasmagoria Sit-Tech Druids Sir-Tech Jagged Alliance Spectrum Electronics Mail Order Products Spectrum HoloByte Star Trek STD Entertainment INTERACT PC Game Accessories Strategic Simulations, Inc. Steel Panthers Suncom Technologies If Looks Could Kill... Take 2 Interactive Software Millennia Talonsoft Battleground: Ardennes The Avalon Hill Game Company D-Day ThunderSeat Technologies Thunder Seat Time Wamer Electronic Publishing Mod Modus operandi Time Warner Interactive Primal Rage Time Warner Interactive Group Conqueror TRIMARK Interactive The Hive Venus Interactive Cinema Intimate Possibilities Vertronix, Inc. Mail Order Products Virgin Interactive Entertainment Command & Conquer WamerActive Panic in the Park 172 178 102-103 39-41 147 wmWHBww 10-11 132 152-153 KOEI 133 * Please see advertisement for contact information 194 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. AUGUST 1995 "


"FOR QUICKER RESPONSE FAX TO (609) 829-0692 NO POSTAGE NECESSARY IF MAILED IN THE UNITED STATES Free Product Information BUSINESS REPLY MAIL FIRST CLASS MAIL PERMIT NO. 433 RIVERTON, NJ POSTAGE WILL BE PAID BY ADDRESSEE COMPUTER GAMING WORLD P.O. BOX 10126 RIVERTON, NJ 08076-8626 MILLILLLLLLLLLL -----------------. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD FREE PRODUCT INFORMATION IT'S AS EASY AS 1,2,3 1. Fill in your name and address and check off 2. Circle the numbers on the card that correspond to 3. The literature will be mailed to you from your answers to the seven research questions the ads or articles you'd like more information about the advertiser free of charge CIRCLE FOR FREE INFORMATION Void after November 30, 1995 001 002 003 004 005 006 007 008 009 010 011 012 013 014 015 016 017 018 019 020 021 022 023 024 025 026 027 028 029 030 031 032 033 034 035 036 037 038 039 040 041 042 043 044 045 046 047 048 049 050 051 052 053 054 055 056 057 058 059 060 061 062 063 064 065 066 067 068 069 070 071 072 073 074 075 076 077 078 079 080 081 082 083 084 085 086 087 088 089 090 091 092 093 094 095 096 097 098 099 100 101 102 103 104 105 106 107 108 109 110 111 112 113 114 115 116 117 118 119 120 121 122 123 124 125 126 127 128 129 130 131 132 133 134 135 136 137 138 139 140 141 142 143 144 145 146 147 148 149 150 151 152 153 154 155 156 157 158 159 160 161 162 163 164 165 166 167 168 169 170 171 172 173 174 175 176 177 178 179 180 181 182 183 184 185 186 187 188 189 190 191 192 193 194 195 196 197 198 199 200 201 202 203 204 205 206 207 208 209 210 211 212 213 214 215 216 217 218 219 220 221 222 223 224 225 226 227 228 229 230 231 232 233 234 235 236 237 238 239 240 241 242 243 244 245 246 247 248 249 250 251 252 253 254 255 256 257 258 259 260 261 262 263 264 265 266 267 268 269 270 271 272 273 274 275 276 277 278 279 280 281 282 283 284 285 286 287 288 289 290 291 292 293 294 295 296 297 298 299 300 301 302 303 304 305 306 307 308 309 310 311 312 313 314 315 316 317 318 319 320 321 322 323 324 325 326 327 328 329 330 331 332 333 334 335 336 337 338 339 340 341 342 343 344 345 346 347 348 349 350 351 352 353 354 355 356 357 358 359 360 361 362 363 364 365 366 367 368 369 370 371 372 373 374 375 376 377 378 379 380 381 382 383 384 385 386 387 388 389 390 391 392 393 394 395 396 397 398 399 400 1. What is the highest level of education that 5. How olten do you usually buy computer games? Name CGW 8/95-4 you completed? Check one only Check one only) 01. Some high school or less 01. Once a week 02. Graduated High School 02. Once every two to three weeks LLLLLLLLLLL 03. Some College or Technical school 03. Once a month Title Telephone 04 Graduated College 04 Once every two to three months 05. Post Graduate School 05. Once every four to six months 06. Once a year L LLLLLLLLLLLLLLL 2. Computer currently owned is: Check all that apply 6. Where are you most likely to purchase yames? Company Name 01. IBM compatible (Intel standard) Check all that app 02. Macintosh 01. Independent computer store 04 Computer store chain 03. Amiga 02. Consumer electronic store 05. Direct from vendor 04 Dedicated game machine 03 Mass merchandising store 06. Mail order Address 05. None 7. What is you and others in household) lawrite type 3. It Intel, what lovel? Check one only ol game? Check one in each column) 01. Power PC Yourself Other Other 2 02. Pentium (586) 01. Strategy State 03 486 02. War Military 04 386 03. Role Playing 05. C1 286 04. Brain Teasers 05. Card 4. Do you own (or plan to buy in next 6 months) Please send me a one-year (12-issue) subscription to Computer Gaming World for $27.94 (U.S. price); 06. Sport a CD-ROM? (Checkoneonly all other countries add $16.00 for additional postage. 07. Action/Arcade 01. Own 08. Educational 02. Plan to buy (6 months) In a Hurry? Fax This Card To: 609-829-0692 09. Adventure City Zip "


"COMPUTER FREE PRODUCT INFORMATION GAMING WORLD 1. Fill in your name and address and check off IT'S AS EASY AS 1,2,3 2. Circle the numbers on the card that correspond to 3. The literature will be mailed to you from your answers to the seven research questions the ads of articles you'd like more information about the advertiser free of charge CIRCLE FOR FREE INFORMATION Vold after November 30, 1995 001 002 003 004 005 006 007 008 009 010 011 012 013 014 015 016 017 018 019 020 021 022 023 024 025 026 027 028 029 030 031 032 033 034 035 036 037 038 039 040 041 042 043 044 045 046 047 048 049 050 051 052 053 054 055 056 057 058 059 060 061 062 063 064 065 066 067 068 069 070 071 072 073 074 075 076 077 078 079 080 081 082 083 084 085 086 087 088 089 090 091 092 093 094 095 096 097 098 099 100 101 102 103 104 105 106 107 108 109 110 111 112 113 114 115 116 117 118 119 120 121 122 123 124 125 126 127 128 129 130 131 132 133 134 135 136 137 138 139 140 141 142 143 144 145 146 147 148 149 150 151 152 153 154 155 156 157 158 159 160 161 162 163 164 165 166 167 168 169 170 171 172 173 174 175 176 177 178 179 180 181 182 183 184 185 186 187 188 189 190 191 192 193 194 195 196 197 198 199 200 201 202 203 204 205 206 207 208 209 210 211 212 213 214 215 216 217 218 219 220 221 222 223 224 225 226 227 228 229 230 231 232 233 234 235 236 237 238 239 240 241 242 243 244 245 246 247 248 249 250 251 252 253 254 255 256 257 258 259 260 261 262 263 264 265 266 267 268 269 270 271 272 273 274 275 276 277 278 279 280 281 282 283 284 285 286 287 288 289 290 291 292 293 294 295 296 297 298 299 300 301 302 303 304 305 306 307 308 309 310 311 312 313 314 315 316 317 318 319 320 321 322 323 324 325 326 327 328 329 330 331 332 333 334 335 336 337 338 339 340 341 342 343 344 345 346 347 348 349 350 351 352 353 354 355 356 357 358 359 360 361 362 363 364 365 366 367 368 369 370 371 372 373 374 375 376 377 378 379 380 381 382 383 384 385 386 387 388 389 390 391 392 393 394 395 396 397 398 399 400 1. What is the highest level of education that 5. How often do you usually buy computer games? Name CGW 8/95-4 you completed? Check one only Check one only 01. Some high school or less 01. Once a week 02. Graduated High School 02 Once every two to three weeks 03. Some College or Technical school 03. Once a month Title Telephone 04. Graduated College 04. Once every two to three months 05. Post Graduate school 05 Once every four to six months 06. Once a year LLLLLLLLLLLLLL 2. Computer currently owned is Check all that apply 6. Where are you most likely to purchare games? Company Name 01. IBM compatible (Intel standard) Check all that apply) 02. Macintosh 01. Independent computer store 04. Computer store chain 03. Amiga 02. Consumer electronic store 05. Direct from vendor 04. Dedicated game machine 03. Mass merchandising store 06. Mail order Address 05. None 7. What is your and others in household) favorite type 3. II Intel, what level? (Check one only) ol game? Check one in each column) 01. Power PC Yourself Other 1 Other 2 State 01. Strategy 02. Zip Pentium (586) 03 486 02. War/Military 04. 386 03. Role Playing LIIIIIIIIIIII 05.0286 04. Brain Teasers 05. Card Please send me a one-year (12-issue) subscription to Computer Gaming World for $27.94 (U.S. price): 4. Do you own (or plan to buy in next 6 months) 06. Sport a CD-ROM? Check one only all other countries add $16.00 for additional postage 07. Action/Arcade 01. Own 08. Educational 02. Plan to buy (6 months) in a hurry? Fax This Card To: 609-829-0692 09. Adventure City 1 TFOR QUICKER RESPONSE FAX TO (609) 829-0692 NO POSTAGE NECESSARY IF MAILED IN THE UNITED STATES Free Product Information BUSINESS REPLY MAIL FIRST CLASS MAIL PERMIT NO. 433 RIVERTON, NJ POSTAGE WILL BE PAID BY ADDRESSEE COMPUTER GAMING WORLD P.O. BOX 10126 RIVERTON, NJ 08076-8626 III..LLLLLLLLLL "


"Whe KNIGHTS of . I IN A IP for centuries, war has raged among the demons and fairies, devastating this mystical land. Twin brothers, born to mortals, are separated at birth, chosen for the ultimate battle that will decide the fate of heaven and earth. They later meet, never knowing their true relation-or their own dark destiny. Fated to duel your twin to the death, you must fight to stay alive and rescue lovely, innocent maidens from the clutches of menacing foes. And perhaps, become ruler of all. WOW Enter a world of Demons and Damsels f you Dare. So the challenge is on! An incomparable role playing fantasy game for your PC, with stunning, hand sculpted graphics throughout, numerous scripts and a thrilling plot. But be warned -with its voluptuous women and intense action, Knights of Xentar is for mature audiences only. And not for the faint hearted. Available now at your nearest dealer or call 1-800-258MEGA. Or write Megatech P.O.Box 11333, Torrance, CA 90510. Visa., Mastercard and checks accepted tregoire 386 33 or faster machine (486 recommended), ma RAM isk Mouse recommended. Operating Sys. SDC bekend 3.1 Graphics compatible with VGA. und support Sound Sound Blaster Pro, Pro Audio Specirut Adlib gols, and Speed Mayer For y free desio, colour 24 S 310-539-7739. (8N1) NR 13 MEGA TECH WARNING!!! HOT RECOMMENDED FOR PLAYERS UNDER 13 Circle Reader Service #86 "


"20,000 MEN LAY STREWN ON THE BATTLEFIELD... ENEMY GUNS RIPPING INTO YOUR FLANK.. CAVALRY ADVANCING TOWARDS YOUR CAPITAL... DECIDING THE FATE OF A NATION WAS NEVER GOING TO BE EAST The Civil War tema comunitarian ALL BUILD. RECRUIT ARMIES, BUIL FLEETS, SET UP BLOCKADES, IMPROVE RAILWAYS AND CONSTI FORTIFICATIONS. lela DATABASE ACCESS TO ALL THE INFORMATION YOU WIL EVER NEED, GENERAL WEAPONS AND WHAT REALLY HAPPENED. E 1999 LA BORBJERNE DE 103 MANEUVER USE THE DETAILED CAMPAIGN MAP OF THE USA TO MOVE YOUR ARMIES BY LAND, SEA, RAIL AND RIVER. COMMAND APPOINT, PROMOTE AL SACK HISTORICAL GENERALS. DECIDE AR STRENGTHS AND FORMATIONS, PUT YOU STRATEGY INTO ACTIO FIGE MOVE AND FIGHTINDIVIDUAL ARTILLERY, U CAVALRY AND INFANTRY UNITSON A 3D TEXTURE MAPPEDECOURAUD STENDED BATTLEFIELDS. THE TEAM THAT BROUGHT YOU THE AWARD WINNING FIELDS ON GLORY PUSHES THE ENVELOPE OF STRATEGY AND SIMULATION TECHNOLOGY ONCE MORE WITH THE CIVIL WAR. THE CIVIL WAR ALLOWS YOU TO PLAN AND FIGHT EVERY MAJOR BATTLE AND CAMPAIGN OF THE WAR. LEAD NORTH OR SOUTH IN ONE OR TWO PLAYER MODES OVER SERIAL LINK, MODEM OR NETWORK; THROUGH FOUR \"BLOODY\" YEARS THAT SHAPED THE WORLDS MOST POWERFUL NATION. EVERYTHING IS IN REAL TIME, THE CLOCK IS RUNNING... CIVIL WAR, THE DEFINITIVE GAME OF STRATEGY, LEADERSHIP AND TERRITORIAL ADVANTAGE. PC CD-ROM VAGGER DITERACTIVITTOLO LIMITE empire interactive. 13220 Wisteria Drive Bay N-2. Germantown, MD 20874. Voice: (301) 916 9302  Fax: (301) 916 0437 INTER A CTIV empire "


"MAIO =SCORE Hall of Fame Welcome to the Cooperstown of Computer Games. Here, raised upon pedestals, you'll find the games that broke the records, established the benchmarks, and held gamers in delighted trances for hours untold. HIGHLIGHTS MULE PIRATES! ELECTRONIC ARTS, 1983 MICROPROSE, 1987 KATES! When Trip Hawkins asked Dan Bunten to Perhaps the truest measure of Sid Meier's create a CARTELS & CUTTHROATS clone, he greatness is the wide range of gamers to decided to throw out the template and which his designs appeal. Nowhere is this start afresh. Fortunately for gamers, this more evident than in PIRATES!, a game resulted in a seminal design still unique a which has a bit of everything: resource mandozen years after its initial release. Up to four humans would agement, desperate swordfights, dodging cannonades from enattempt to explore and exploit the resources of distant planemy shores, damsels in distress, hidden treasure, and scalawags ets with the help of robotic \"mules.\" With no bombs, guns or seemingly everywhere, waiting to follow you to fame and forrocket ships anywhere evident, M.U.L.E. became a strategy tune. Especially on the higher levels, the life of a buccaneer classic. Surprisingly, gamers were enraptured by manipulattakes on a keen edge of excitement and danger, as you attempt ing supply & demand and balancing production & storageto appease colonial governors and scurvy crewmates alike. Both especially when competing against other players. Aided by a the tactical and action-oriented combat sequences do a fine job funny yet elegant interface, M.U.L.E. was the landmark work of immersing you in the action, as you juggle men, material, for multi-player \"hotseat\" gaming. We can only speculate on and morale to achieve your ends. Whether you call this a rolehow immensely popular the game would be today if replaying, adventure, strategy or even an action game, PIRATES! is vamped for network and modem play. simply the most successful hybrid game in gaming history. CIVILIZATION (MicroProse, 1991) FALCON 3.0 (Spectrum HoloByte, 1991) GUNSHIP (MicroProse, 1989) HARPOON (Three-Sixty Pacific, 1989) KING'S QUEST V (Sierra On-Line, 1990) LEMMINGS (Psygnosis, 1991) LINKS 386 PRO (Access Software, 1992) M-1 TANK PLATOON (MicroProse, 1989) RAILROAD TYCOON (MicroProse, 1990) RED BARON (Dynamix, 1990) THEIR FINEST HOUR (LucasArts, 1989) THE SECRET OF MONKEY ISLAND (LucasArts, 1990) ULTIMA VI (Origin Systems, 1990) ULTIMA UNDERWORLD (Origin Systems, 1992) WING COMMANDER I & II (Origin Systems, 1990-91) WOLFENSTEIN 3-D (id Software, 1992) INDUCTEES PRIOR TO 1988 BATTLE CHESS (Interplay Productions, 1988) CHESSMASTER (The Software Toolworks, 1986) DUNGEON MASTER (FTL Software, 1987) EARL WEAVER BASEBALL (Electronic Arts, 1986) EMPIRE (Interstel, 1978) F-19 STEALTH FIGHTER (MicroProse, 1988) GETTYSBURG: THE TURNING POINT (SSI, 1986) KAMPFGRUPPE (Strategic Simulations, 1985) MECH BRIGADE (Strategic Simulations, 1985) MIGHT & MAGIC (New World Computing, 1986) M.U.L.E. (Electronic Arts, 1983) PIRATES (MicroProse, 1987) SIMCITY (Maxis, 1987) STARFLIGHT (Electronic Arts, 1986) THE BARD'S TALE (Electronic Arts, 1985) ULTIMA III (Origin Systems, 1983) ULTIMA IV (Origin Systems, 1985) WAR IN RUSSIA (Strategic Simulations, 1984) WASTELAND (Interplay Productions, 1986) WIZARDAY (Sir-Tech Software, 1981) ZORK (Infocom, 1981) AUGUST 1995. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 199 "


"THE TOP ADVENTURE GAMES SCORE TOP 100 GAMES READER POLL #131 GAME COMPANY ODGE  TIPE SCORE 9.87 9.42 9.30 9.25 9.12 9.12 SSI WG 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Day of the Tentacle Gabriel Knight Sam & Max Hit The Road The Seventh Guest Under A Killing Moon Relentless Ecstatica Freddy Pharkas Frontier Pharmacist Alone in the Dark Legend of Kyrandia 3 DOO LucasArts Sierra LucasArts Virgin Access Electronic Arts Psygnosis Sierra 1Motion Virgin AC 9.09 8.96 8.95 8.94 SCORE 10.66 10.55 10.37 10.36 10.29 10.24 10.21 10.21 10.01 9.97 9.95 9.87 9.83 9.75 GAME 1 55225.7252593 TOP ROLE PLAYING GAMES COMPANT SCORE Betrayal at Kronder Dynamix 9.44 Ravenloft: Stone Prophet SSI 9.40 Might & Magic: Darkside of Xeen New World Computing 9.37 Lands of Lore Virgin 9.25 Might & Magic: Clouds of Xeen New World Computing 9.11 Ultima VII: Part Two Serpent Isle Origin 9.08 Wolf Sanctuary Woods 8.88 Arena: The Elder Scrolls Bethesda 8.83 Veil of Darkness 8.74 Menzoherranzan SSI 8.26 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 9.73 Origin MicroProse Sir-Tech LucasArts id Software MicroProse Electronic Arts LucasArts Papyrus SSG LucasArts id Software Sierra MicroProse Electronic Arts MicroProse Dynamix Blizzard Electronic Arts LucasArts Avalon Hill Maxis Three-Sixty Pacific Origin Electronic Arts Dynamix Dynamix visitayai Rromcor SSI CAME *1 Panzer General *2 Wing Commander 3 *3 X-COM 4 Jagged Alliance 5 TIE Fighter 6 DOOM 7 Master of Orion NBA Live '95 9 Dark Forces *10 NASCAR Racing 11 Warlords II *12 Day of the Tentacle 13 DOOM II 14 Front Page Sports Football 95 15 X-COM: Terror from the Deep 16 Magic Carpet 17 Master of Magic 18 Front Page Sports Football Pro 19 Warcraft 20 US Navy Fighters 21 X-Wing 22 Stalingrad 23 Sim City 2000 V for Victory: Market Garden 25 Wings of Glory 26 NHL Hockey 27 Aces of the Deep *28 Betrayal at Kronder War in Russia 30 Indy Car Racing 31 Gabriel Knight 32 Ravenloft: Stone Prophet 33 Might & Magic: Darkside of Xeen 34 Carriers at War Construction Kit 35 Operation Crusader 36 Sam & Max Hit The Road System Shock 38 Lands of Lore The Seventh Guest Fleel Defender 41 Heretic 42 Flight Commander 2 43 V for Victory: Gold Juno Sword 44 Privateer 45 Relentless Under A Killing Moon 47 Might & Magic: Clouds of Xeen 48 PGA Tour Golf 486 Ecstatica 50 The Grandest Fleet 9.71 9.67 9.64 9.63 9.62 9.60 9.59 9.58 9.58 9.56 SCORE 9.97 9.49 9.62 Sot SSI TOP SIMULATION GAMES GAME COMPANY NASCAR Racing Papyrus US Navy Fighters Electronic Arts Wings of Glory Origin Aces of the Deep Dynamix Indy Car Racing Papyrus Fleet Defender MicroProse Hornet Spectrum HoloByte Aces Over Europe Dynamix MiG-29 Spectrum HoloByte 1942 Pacific Air War MicroProse 1 NASPB 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 PAPYRUS 9 10 Papyrus Sierra 9.56 9.48 9.43 9.25 8.96 8.66 8.64 8.39 SS 9.48 9.44 9.44 9.43 9.42 9.40 9.37 9.35 9.32 9.30 9.30 9.25 9.25 9.25 9.24 9.21 9.18 TOP STRATEGY GAMES GAME COMPANY X-COM MicroProse Jagged Alliance Sir-Tech Master of Orion MicroProse Warlords II SSG X-COM: Terror from the Deep MicroProse Master of Magic MicroProse Warcraft Blizzard Sim City 2000 Maxis Merchant Prince QQP The Grandesi Fleet Weeeeeee New World Computing SSG Avalon Hill LucasArts Origin Virgin Virgin MicroProse id Software Avalon Hill Three-Sixty Pacific Origin Electronic Arts Access New World Computing Electronic Arts Psygnosis QQP 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 9.16 SCORE 10.37 10.36 10.21 9.95 9.73 9.67 9.63 9.58 9.08 9.08 RP 9.12 9.12 9.11 9.09 9.09 9.08 MICROPROSE a QOP "


"QQP ST WG 9.18 9.00 COMPANY SSG SSI 599222 TOP WARGAMES Merchant Prince ST 9.08 Ultima VII: Part Two Serpent Isle Origin RP 9.08 SAME COMPACT SCORE Electronic Arts 1 ST.AC 9.07 53 Syndicate 10.66 Panzer General SSI 54 Interplay AC Descent Avalon Hill 9.02 2 9.59 Stalingrad Three-Sixty Pacific 9.58 Incredible Machine 2 3 55 Sierra 9.01 V for Victory: Market Garden 56 Tanks SSI 9.00 4 War in Russia 9.44 SSI Tim Wisseman ST VGA Planets 5 9.00 Carriers at War Construction Kit 9.35 SSG . Avalon Hill 58 Tigers on the Prowl HPS Simulations 6 8.97 Operation Crusader 9.32 Spectrum HoloByte 59 Hornet SI 9.21 7 8.96 Avalon Hill Flight Commander 2 Clash of Steel SSI 8.96 8 Three-Sixty Pacific V for Victory: Gold Juno Sword Freddy Pharkas Frontier Pharmacist Sierra 8.96 9 Tanks SSI HPS Simulations 62 Alone in the Dark 8.97 I-Motion 10 8.95 Tigers on the Prowl 63 Legend of Kyrandia 3 Virgin 8.94 Transport Tycoon MicroPrase 8.94 65 Wolf Sanctuary Woods 8.88 TOP ACTION GAMES 66 Incredible Toons Dynamix 8.86 SCORE 67 Arena: The Elder Scrolls Bethesda 8.83 1 Wing Commander 3 Origin 10.55 68 Empire Deluxe New World Computing ST 8.82 2 TIE Fighter LucasArts wing some andar 10.29 Carriers at War II 8.82 3 DOOM id Software 10.24 70 Serf City SSI 8.80 4 Dark Forces LucasArts 10.01 71 Harpoon II Three-Sixty Pacific 8.78 5 DOOM II id Software 9.83 Tony La Russa Baseball II 8.78 6 Magic Carpet Electronic Arts 9.71 73 Myst Broderbund 8.77 7 X-Wing LucasArts 9.60 74 Front Page Sports Baseball Dynamix 8.76 8 System Shock Origin 9.30 75 Genghis Khan II Koei 8.74 9 Heretic id Software 9.24 Veil of Darkness SSI 8.74 10 Privateer Origin 9.16 Dracula Unleashed Viacom Viacom 8.74 78 Aces Over Europe Dynamix 8.66 79 Hardhall IV Accolade 8.64 TOP SPORTS GAMES MiG-29 Spectrum HoloByte 8.64 SCORE King's Quest VII 8.64 1 NBA Live '95 Electronic Arts 10.21 82 Superheroes of Hoboken Legend 2 Front Page Sports Football 95 Sierra 9.75 83 Mortal Kombat II Acclaim 8.61 3 Front Page Sports Football Pro Dynamix 9.64 84 Space Quest V: Mutation Sierra 8.60 NHL Hockey Electronic Arts 9.49 85 Hand Of Fate Westwood Studios AD 8.56 5 PGA Tour Golf 486 Electronic Arts 9.09 SG Great Naval Battles 3 SSI 8.55 Tony La Russa Baseball II SSI 8.78 87 Kasparov's Gambit Electronic Arts ST 8.54 Front Page Sports Baseball Dynamix 8.76 88 Rules of Engagement 2 Impressions 8.52 B Hardball IV Accolade 8.64 89 Lords of the Realm Impressions 8.51 9 Jordan In Flight Electronic Arts 7.85 90 The Horde Crystal Dynamics 8.50 10 Microsoft Goll 2.0 Microsoft Death Gate Legend 8.50 92 Star Trek: Judgment Riles Interplay 8.49 Prince of Persia 2 Broderbund 8.49 94 The Lost Vikings Interplay 8.46 95 Sid n' Al's Incredible Toons Dynamix 8.45 SSI 96 Dark Legions You've read our take on the latest games, now here's a chance to see what your fellow 8.43 97 Bioforge Origin gamers think. The CGW Top 100 is a monthly tally of game ratings provided by our 98 Sim City CD-ROM Interplay 8.40 readers via the CGW Poll ballot found in each issue. Approximately 50 games are rat 99 1942 Pacific Air War MicroProse 8.39 ed each month, and the results are added to the aggregate results from past months. 1100 Flashback SSI AC 8.38 This historical database serves as a terrific reference for what you, the gamers, feel are Games an unnumbered lines have scores equal to the line above. *= Top game of type. Dark Teal = New Game, the best plays in gaming. AD = Adventure, RP = Role Playing, SI = Simulation, ST = Strategy, WG = Wargame, AC = Action, SP = Sports The Computer Gaming World Pol A MONTHLY SURVEY OF THE READERS OF COMPUTER GAMING WORLD COMPANY Sierra 8.62 S LIVES &%22258 7.43 Vote! 225 "


"-SCORE PATCHES 1830 Update: The game will now run with 2,700 KB of EMS and will no longer lock up when trying to buy a train from the bank when the bank has no trains. 5/11/95 Tigars on the Prowl V1.23 Update: Fixes all reported problems with versions 1.2x and adds a few new options that can be selected to speed up gameplay (at a little loss in accuracy). 5/14/59 1942: Pacific Air War V1.5b AI Update: Provides AI enhancements. For use with Version 1.4 or later. 5/24/95 Computer game programs have grown so massive and the number of hardware configurations has become so huge that incompatibilities and glitches are frustratingly common. Software fixes, or \"patches,\" for buggy programs have become a necessary evil until we reach the golden age of standardized platforms and bug-free programs. These patches can usually be downloaded from the major onZITNET line networks (CompuServe, Genie, ZiffNet), but can also be | obtained from individual software publisher's own BBSs or direct from the publisher with proof of purchase. Red indicates new files. World of Xsen for Macintosh V1.1 Update: Fixes many problems some customers have run into and adds a Power PC native mode. 6/2/95 Legions Windows Update: Allows LEGIONS WINDOWS to run under WINDOWS NT X-COM: Terror Fram tha Desp V2.0 Update: Numerous tweaks and fixes. 6/3/95 problem with later scenarios. 3/29/95 Links: The Challenge of Golf Update: Fixes lockups with Soundblaster 16 cards. 3/22/95 Master of Magic V1.31 Update: Latest upgrade with numerous fixes, new features, and major AI enhancements. Updates all versions. 3/07/95 Alien Logic V1.1 Update: and adds support for mulFixes several problems, tiple sockets during including the \"Cleash netgames, hooks for General *Null Jig Tokens* SPACEBALL Controller, and Crash,\" as well as adding alternate joystick reading command line switches for methods. 3/24/95 many sound boards. 5/2/95 F-14 Fleet Defender V2.0 Update: Updates the flight Big 3 for Windows Update: sim to version 2.0. 5/24/95 Updates Big 3 to the latest version and fixes prob FrontLines V1.02: Includes lems in the retreat func modem play as well as sevtion, defender retreating eral other enhancements function, control array eleand bug fixes. 4/2/95 ment errors, and several other problems. 4/6/95 Great Naval Battles III V1.1 Update: Fixes reported Blood Bowl Modem Patch bugs, provides some V1.1: Adds modem play gameplay enhancements. and fixes a number of 5/13/95 known quirks. 6/7/95 Harpoon Classic for Windows Cyboria Sava Gama Palch: V1.55a: Corrects several Corrects problems with reported GPF errors. the game not saving mile6/6/95 stones after the conference room. 6/6/95 High Seas Trader Sound Update: Should fix any Daedalus Encounter V1.1: soundcard related crashes. Fixes most of the sound 4/4/95 card-related crash problems with lower-end sound Jagged Alliance V1.10: cards. Several other new Fixes a few problems, bug fixes are also includ including keyboard locked. 5/15/95 out and offers several enhancements to the Descent V1.2 Update: interface, Al and gameIncludes several bug fixes play. 4/14/95 Pacific Air War Gold CDROM Update: Corrects a problem if your copy of the game has a volume label of PAW_1942 instead of 1942_PAW, where the game will not run from a minimum installation. 3/16/95 Publisher BBS Numbers Many of these patches are available directly from the publishers' bulletin board systems. Call with your modem parity settings at N-8-1. Accolade (408) 296-8800 Apogee (508) 368-7036 Bethesda (301) 990-7552 Blizzard (714) 556-4602 Broderbund (415) 883-5889 Capstone (305) 374-6872 Creative Labs (405) 742-6660 Id Software (508) 368-4137 Impressions (617) 225-2042. InterPlay (714) 252-2822 LucasArts (415) 257-3070 Maxis (510) 254-3869 MicroProse (410) 785-1841 Microsoft (206) 936-6735 NovaLogic (818) 774-9528 Origin (512) 328-8402 Papyrus (617) 576-7472 Sierra Online (206) 644-0122 Spectrum HoloByte (510) 5228909 SSI (408) 739-6137 or (408) 739-6623 Virgin Interactive (714) 8333305 Stane Prophet V1.1 Update: Fixes reported problems. 5/23/95 Tank Commander V1.1 Update: Fixes reported problems on faster PCs with serial/modem data loss. Also fixes a few other minor quirks. 5/19/95 202 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. AUGUST 1995 "


"CENSORED OUR NEW Intimate Possibilities CD-ROM IS SO HOT THEY WON'T LET US SHOW IT TO YOU. Play Intimate Possibilities and participate in our 35 hot, intimate encounters! There are literally thousands of possible storylines with the exclusive company of 4 eager female hardbodies exposing 15 erotic tropical locations in this 2 1/2 hour VR CinemaTM interactive experience. We broke all the rules and defied most laws of physics in creating the most talked about game of 1995. Macintosh and Windows Hybrid CD-ROM VENUS INTERACITDE CINEMA 1-800-714-7349 Free! The making of Intimate Possibilities bloopers video fope is absolutely free with every order. The hilarious, behind the scenes adivities, foul-ups, bloops and blunders have been top secret and unavailable to the public...until now! 2-Disc SET Quicktime and the Quicktime Logo are trademarks of Apple Computer, Inc. used under license. "


"WHAT'S THE DEAL? \"What's the Deal With... Playtesting?\" by Martin E. Cirulis ONG AGO IN THE AGE OF TABLEing a red-light district next door as to ever be \"unollicial.\" Who the heck is TOP GAMES, WHEN HUMANS HAD abandon their shelters.\" more official than the designer? The kids TO CALCULATE GAME RESULTS As you may have noticed, dumb rules down at SimTex also deserve a nod for themselves instead of getting a are pretty easy to spot and they usually the spasm of updates that follow the remachine to do it, new game occur in SF strategy games, though lease of a MASTER OF ... game; a lot of it designs went through a period CRPG's have their own version of the is bug-fixes, but they do try to tweak out Icalled playtesting. A bunch of \"What were they thinking?\" syndrome. the faults in their AI routines, which imfolks, usually hapless buddies of the deThough I can't prove it, I'm pretty sure proves their games markedly. Forget the signer, played game after game trying to the cause is some business weasel with the overworked, underpaid people on help see how the rules meshed and whether attitude of, \"It's all made up anyway, the lines—this is the kind of support gamers anything unforeseen and unbalanced geeks'll never notice. Now stop wasting really remember. (Of course, those of us had slipped into the design. Now, in to time and money and get this puppy out without the access or inclination to the day's gleaming world of silicon and CD's, the door and on the shelves by the end of online world rarely see this side of the inthe word \"playtesting\" has come to mean dustry, except on those chilly days in Hell something completely different, and this when a company is conscientious enough little mutation in definition is making a to send registered users the upgrades lot of great games into just good ones. they deserve.) If you ask most computer game Designers need the time to get a companies about playtesting-and game right, and maybe we are a little to we're talking mostly about strategic and blame for the time pressure. It's no tactical games they will assure you shocker that every time a hot (read as: that countless hours have gone into really huge and complicated) game making sure the game is bug-free. falls behind schedule, we, the buying Unfortunately, that isn't the quespublic, begin to snivel and demand tion. Bug-free is nice, but when you our new game NOW! with lower lip all play-test a boardgame, you aren't checka'tremble—and all it takes is a few pieces ing for dice that won't stop rolling or this quarter!\" Of course, we do notice, of impatient e-mail to justify some Suit's counters that explode, and while the and games that could have been cool suf\"Get it out the door!\" agenda. Lord computer part of a game is very cool, fer early deaths, and some designer's knows, nobody hates waiting more than somebody has got to start making sure good idea is wasted because publishers this boy, but as the years go by I think it's the actual game is up to speed when that are in such a hurry that they've forgotten safe to say that I'll gladly wait an extra master CD is burned in. that the rules as well as the program have few months for a new toy if it's not only It's not to say that nobody is paying at to be \"bug-free.\" bug-free, but bad-idea-free as well. tention. I'm sure there's always a clever Of course, all is not cynicism and failed One rant isn't going to change anykid around trying to point out stuff like games. There are still designers who take thing, I know, but perhaps a few of those this. When Impressions put out WHEN the time to make a game right, even if memos that go back and forth so furiousTwo WORLDS WAR, there must have been they don't always get the chance before it ly between testing and programming somebody asking if they really wanted to hits the shelves. Witness the endless could have a few bits about the game ithave transports fly as well as fighters. tweaking by the designers of games like self instead of just the code. I'm thinking And, surely, a lone voice on Sierra's OUTTANKS! or WAR IN THE PACIFIC. These that Game Designers have to be a lot like POST team must have cried out, «I don't guys are still pouring time into their Writers: we both want each new baby to think the last 400 humans in the Unigames, not just getting rid of bugs but be The Next Big Thing. Maybe someverse, clinging to life under the surface of adding new rules or balancing others in body should start giving those designers a hellish, radiation-blasted alien world, unofficial upgrades—as if an update of a the time and resources to get things would get so bent out of shape about havgame by the guy who created it could right, and do their ideas justice. 204 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD AUGUST 1995 "


"MORE BANGS! FOR YOUR BUCK Gravis UltraSound ACE\" (Audio Card Enhancer) \"... low price, and solid performance\" ***** -Multimedia World, May '95 ULTRASOUND A CE BANGS like you've never heard before with Ultrasound ACE's CD-quality sound. Ultrasound ACE is an add-in card that upgrades any FM or Sound Blaster card to stereo wavetable sound. For a price that's hard to beat, you get dynamic music and digital sound effects with most current games and total compatibility with every game and application you already own. kwaretable att-la card that brings professional music and cahanted digital effects to any Soad Blaster er compatible EU sound card GRAVIS only $99.95* Gravis Firebird Programmable Flight & Game Controller \"Overall 90%\" -Computer Game Review, May '95 More BANGS, bombs, and bullets with the Firebird's 17 programmable buttons. Ready-to-play settings included for today's hot games. More control than you've ever had before without touching your keyboard. Firebird works with every PC game that supports a joystick. only $69.95* Call Now to Order! 1-800-679-0024 Purchase BOTH Firebird and Ultrasound ACE, and we'll throw in a game* that's making a BIG BANG at the top of the charts—your choice of Descent\" Destination Saturn, DOOM II\", or US Navy Fighters\". GRAVIS. PLAY TO WIN * Applies only to purchases direct form Gravis. Retail policy and price may vary. All brands or products names are trademarks owned by their respective companies Circle Reader Service #113 Advanced Gravis Computer Technology Ltd. 1790 Midway Lane, Bellingham, WA, USA 98226 "


"READY, AIM, CRUSADER: NO REMORSE NON-STOP ACTION FROM A DIFFERENT PERSPECTIVE Huge mission areas all rendered in SVGA Visible damage from every round fired Live-action video for character interaction Walk, run, jump, roll, crouch, and ambush LIVE TRANSMISSION COMFREQ 98.50 MHZ Reaves,Crple 3136111426 RESISTNET oL Check out the demo at http://www.ea.com/origin.html ORIGIN Systems is an Electronle Arte Company. 12940 Research Blvd. . Austin, TX 787503235 1995, ORIGINS ROM . Crusader: No Romero lo atrodamuth of ORIGINS Oynarogstore trademark of OR GN rume n t afgeperk of Art ORIGIN "

