"MORE THAN 100 GAMES RATED INSIDE COMPUTER GAMING WORLD The Premier Computer Game Magazi May 1993 / Numbe CGW GOES TO WAR EA's SEAL Team Also in this issue: Ringworld SVGA Air Warrior Legends of Valour Ultima Underworld II Conquered Kingdoms $3.95 USA $4.95 Canadian 05 Telegaming issue 12907412158 "


"Surar of Destiny Wolfenstein 3D Graphic Adventure MENTRE FLOOR 8 SCORE 4400 LIVES 3 3 HEALTII AMMO 36% FLOOR 5 SCORE LIVES 2900 3 HEALTH AMMO 17% 83 FLOOR 9 SCORE 2800 LIVES 3 23 HEALTH AMMO 80% 93 Virtual Reality! Spear of Destiny brings virtual reality to the PC, hurling you into an intense battle between good and evil in which only you can save the world! A breathtaking musical soundtrack sets the mood, while, amazing first person\" visual perspective and spectacular digital stereo sound effects give an experience like no other game you've ever played! Features! spectacular VGA virtual reality system breathtaking musical soundtrack for Adlib, Sound Blaster digitized stereo sound effects for Sound Blaster, Sound Source over 20 complete floors to cover 4 levels of play difficulty special extra challenges for advanced game players saves multiple games in process What the Reviewers Say! \"the player is 'there' like no game I've ever played...\" the sound and the visual action, is frighteningly realistic...\" \"I can't remember a game making such effective use of perspective and sound and thereby evoking such intense physiological responses from its players.\" Game by id Software. Published by FormGen Corporation, Box 279, North Andover, MA, USA, 01845-0279 (800)263-2390 (416)857-4141 Fax: (416)857-4531 Circle Reader Service #58 "


"_W:ZaRDRY! A Fantasy Role-Playing Simulation by D.W. Bradley CRUSADERS of the DARK SAVANT APLIN Corey PERUM DELIAI  T ESTLE DIRK MIUNO LONIHA PALES ELOR DE TIANG LOE AMS Welcome to the sequel to Bane of the Cosmic Forge and the only game that could possibly follow its lead. It's everything Bane was...and more. 256 Colors Outdoor Campaigns Full Musical Score & Sound Effects  Auto Mapping, True Point & Click Mouse Interface. Unprecedented depth of story SIR-TECH Ogdensburg Business Center, Suite 2E Ogdensburg, New York 13669 To order or for a dealer nearest you call 1-800-447-1230 Circle Reader Service #97 "


"FEATURES COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEAL Team: It's About Time Johnny L. Wilson takes the point on this gritty 3-D infantry combat simulation Willy B. (CD) Good Charles Ardai hears voices in his head as he reviews the Adventures of Willy Beamish-CD Not Gambling with Chips Intel's super PentiumTM microchip raises the gaming stakes by Johnny \"Cache 22\" Wilson & Where Were You in Populous 2? For good or evil, Allen L. Greenberg plays the god of pixel people in this divine review in It Slices! It Dices! It's Bill's Tomato Game The incredible writing machine, Chuck Miller, takes a saucy look at this puzzle game marinara se Ultima Underworld II: The Guardian's Styx & Stones Douglas Seacat takes a 3-D scroll through Origin's latest offering Legends of Valour Arrives from Overseas The legendary Chuck Miller tells the tale of SSI's new import SEAL Team pg. 8 rep Completing the Circle on Ringworld When Tsunami closes in on a Larry Niven universe, adventure gamers will want to be 'round by Charles Ardai Telecommuting to the Cyburbs A special section connecting our readers to the worlds of on-line gaming 'Mech War and Kick 'Bots GEnie's latest rock 'em, sock'em romp is a monster 'Mech mash supreme by David \"Heat Seeker\" Wilson Ringworld Pg. 54 i A Gamer's Guide to Private BBS Games A trip through the dark world of private BBSs as compiled by William J. Shefski Getting More MPGs from On-Line Role-Playing Drakkar adds interactive human players to the computer fantasy role-playing genre by Jasper Sylvester 74 The Shadow of Yserbius pg. 78 Educating Gamers on the Internet A survey of fun and games on the world's largest computer network by John J. Brassil 78 84 Shining Light Upon The Shadow of Yserbius Samuel \"The Barbarian\" Baker travels to TSN's Medievaland and joins a real role-playing party The Net Results A survey of on-line entertainment Polishing the Gemstone Behind the scenes of Genie's interactive fantasy role-playing classic by Jay Kee La LoD panese EXCELLELOHSRV RANK SEROCANT SIECIAL SKILLS EXPLOSIVES EXPERT. DK SHARK COBRA SNIPING. TIGER EAGLE Special Forces pg. 122 ARCANT 90 "


"TM Tools The Creepers are on the move. It's the annual trek to the Butterfly Bowls. But, with over 70 levels of factories, caverns, and forests to cross and with the worst sense of direction in the entire animal kingdom, getting them all there is going to take some doing! 0 Energy 2000 Tool SER Energy 3600 Toot Creepers Features:  Over 70 puzzle levels.  256 colors (PC). Crazy Creeper animations.  Difficulty rating from easy to brutal. Full soundcard support with 16 funky soundtracks. The Creeper-cam with multiple playfield views. TASARIM Energy Dr The mean green creeping machine Look for Creepers crawling in your favorite software store, or call: (800) 438-7794 Psygnosis 29 Saint Mary's Court, Brookline, MA 02146 (617) 731-3553 Circle Reader Service #82 "


"COMPUTER WARGAMING WORLD COMPUTER GAMING WORLD Publisher Russell Sipe Editor Johnny Wilson On-Line Editor Alan Emrich Managing Editor Ken Brown Assistant Editor Chris Lombardi Art Director Susan Zurawik Graphic Artist Jack Rodrigues Marketing Manager Diane Miller M.I.S. Manager Gene Allen Assistant M.I.S. Manager Mike Weksler Ad Manager Jim Messing Circulation Kathy Garcia Contributing Editor (Adventure Games) Scorpia Contributing Editor (Wargames) Evan Brooks Ad Director Jay Eisenberg 94 An Inter-Network Wargame Rivalry Strategists from Prodigy and CompuServe clash over Microplay's Command HQ 96 Another Page in the Hundred Years War A refresher course on the history of Genie's on-line diplomatic/military game by David \"Papal Assassin' Wilson 98 Air Warrior Konami Connects! Adding SVGA graphics and a stand alone version really flies with this Genie on-line classic by Douglas Fick 102 Mastering the Padlock View Tom Basham offers a new perspective on Falcon 3.0 106 I Came, I Saw, I Conquered Kingdoms Strategy tips from Master Randall Black, The \"Black\" Prince of Conquered Kingdoms 108 Game for Hire: Tegel's Mercenaries Mindcraft \"breaches\" on the waters of tactical sci-fi combat by Paul \"Shoot'em Up\" Schuytema 112 Mental Meditations Over Dune II A warrior's guide to Virgin's world of Arrakis: Dune il by Jeff \"Harkonnen Unto Me\" James 114 Getting Vertical with AV8B Harrier Paul Rigby proves that he can land on the Domark from this cockpit review 118 A Miniatures-Like Feel Makes Good Impressions A philosophy lesson from Impressions' Ed Grabowski on animating figures on the battlefield 122 What's So Special About Special Forces? Jeff James offers a briefing to CGW readers 124 Reach for the Skies Paul \"Bomber\" Rigby explains in this review what happens when your Reach exceeds your grasp 130 PBEM Computer EastFront A replay that puts new chips on some old blocks by Michael \"Stalin' for Time\" Peck Computer Gaming World (ISSN 0744-6667) is published monthly by Golden Empire Publications, Inc. 130 Chaparral Ct. Suite 260, Anaheim Hills, CA 92808. Second-class Postage paid at Erlanger, KY 41011 and additional mailing offices. Permit #672-910. Contents are copyrighted by Golden Empire Publications, 1993. Postmaster: Send address changes to Computer Gaming World. P.O. Box 601, Mt. Morris. IL 61054-8052 The subscription rate for twelve issues (one year) is $28.00. Canadian and foreign surface subscriptions add $11.00. Foreign air subscriptions are $78,00 per year. All payments must be in U.S. dollars, made by check drawn upon a U.S. bank, Visa, MasterCard, or money order. Printed in the U.S.A. Psalms 9:1-2 CompuServe (76703,622) America On-Line: CGW Prodigy: EXPT40B GEnic: CGW Subscription Dept. 1 (800) 827-4450 Telephone: (714) 283-3000 Fax: (714) 283-3444 Foreign Subscribers: (815) 734-1113 For advertising information only, call: JE Publishers' Representative Company 3415 S. Sepulveda Blvd., Suite 520 Los Angeles, CA 90034 (310) 572-7272 For newsstand circulation, call: Kemco Publishers Services (603) 924-0224 DEPARTMENTS 10 CGW Stock Watch 132 Taking a Peek (Intel Intelligence) 141 CGW Hall of Fame 26 Scorpia's Tale (Eric the Unready) 142 CGW Poll: Top 100 Games 32 Scorpia's View (Magic Candle III) 144 What's Hot! 46 The Best of the Rest (Shareware) 145 The Patch File 50 Over There: European 146 Editorial Steam Rising Software Report from the SPA 120 Ad Index "


"OP THE MOST HIGHLY RATED GAME IN FOOTBALL. FOOTBALL EXIT DURASILITYS SZERREY He Tears POSTUR ALL-TIMERS Hodonos have a future in this league. For John Madden, «Football's JOHN a game of ratings and matchups That's why John Madden Football\" II captures all the subtle nuances, all the personality of the game itself. You'd expect that with up to 8 ratings per player, 35 players per NAN team, 28 pro caliber teams, plus an All-Madden squad. What you might not expect is how far inside football you get. Design your own plays. Or choose Strategy is the name of the game. Il you dominate the one-on-one matchups, you'll from Madden's new playbook packed with over 80 offensive and 100 defensive plays. Your game plan has to take into account every facet of the game: injuries, penalties, and, of course, the plan of the guy pacing the far sideline. The challenge to tackle is making the right call, the right one-on-one matchups. Every down. On both sides of the ball. Kind of like chess with shoulder pads. EASN delivers every dimension of football: Of course, the action's brought to you by the highest rated sports network: EASN.M 3-D field view and 256-color VGA support. Providing stunning 3-D field perspectives. Instant replays. Stats at any time. 1. S. And play-by-play analysis and help from Madden himself. It's no wonder John Madden Football earned such positive ratings. OMNI, for example, called the original \"Computer Sports Game of the playbopkYear.» And this version's even more intense. Visit your local EA dealer or call (800) 245-4525 anytime to order. Then see how you rate 18 in Madden's league. ELECTRONIC ARTS Hao 40 50 40 by Robin Astonickend Joh Moldes Ist and 10, a nernal situation. I'd go with a normal rush package and zone coverage. Take a look at play 59 in my SOCREFE FRIDEXW 3W Madden dissects the action like a surgeon with in-depth analysis on every play. Circle Reader Service #55 Available for IBM and compatibles for $19.95. Ad Lit. Tandy ON San Blaster Cevox Speech Thingupported. John Muiden Football and EASY are trademarks of Electronic Arts. Ad labis a testered trademark of Malab Inc. Sound Blaster and CMS are trademarks of Creative Lats. Como Speech Thing is a trademark of Cowok Inc EAN AdLib SOUND NEW PLAYER JCHN MADDEN DIFIDENTIAL "


"çmeak preview TIME TAKE PROD NO. SCENE DATE DIRECTOR PRODUCED BY Dancing with NA SEALS Simulation Therapy With Electronic Arts' SEAL Team by Johnny L. Wilson mission where the team returns and the prohe be affected by the sight of fallen polygonSneak Previews are not designed to be reviews. gram only shows the survivors getting off the filled comrades behind him and other team They are feature articles based on \"works in boat or out of the helicopter? Would there be members rushing medical aid to said comprogress\" that CGW's editors have deemed worglory or revulsion as he adjusted his weapon rade? Would he recognize that the simulation thy of early coverage. These articles are not intended to provide the final word on a product, to full automatic and fired, just as a black makes it easy for gamers to distinguish besince we expect to publish appropriate review pajama-clad VC started standing and raising tween the black pajamas of \"Charlic and the coverage when the game is finished. his hands in surrender? Would he nervously blue pajamas of civilians? Would he place any peer at the screen, occasionally jumping, as a importance upon the fact that VC guerrillas n acquaintance of mine has a son who white butterfly crossed the screen or a blue always surrender (in my playing experience) happens to be the same age as my bird flew out of the bushes or would those bird flew out of the bushes or would those legitimately to the player's team rather than legitimate daughter. Both offspring are in their feints of nature be brushed aside as an annoypulling any diabolical tricks like being prelast year of high school. That makes me senance, a waste of programming energy? I think wired with explosives? sitive to any stories about adolescents who are they are a great touch. How Realistic Is It? venturing into adulthood. What got my atWould he pay any attention to the elaborate tention, though, was the fact that my friend, insertion and extraction scenes where the Electronic Arts' SEAL Team is a first-person a Vietnam veteran, had a son who desperately SEAL team must wade out into the water to SEAL team must wade out into the water to simulation of small unit action in the jungles si wanted to enlist in the service (special forces, reach their objective or be picked up by their of Vietnam. It is graphically impressive in in particular) and get involved in a \"hot one.\" support boat? Would he realize that the onit presents a more detailed environment than I told this gentleman that my daughter was screen bull session that precedes each mission many games which use polygon-filled grapha \"peacenik\" like her father, and I had hoped was talking about just such bodies of water ics, and because it uses cinematic techniques that all of her generation had learned the when one of these stalwart commandoes to enhance the mission briefing and debriefpainful lessons of war. I had hoped that their their spoke of wearing pantyhose in order to be able ing, as well as the insertion of the team into generation would be, as corny as it sounds, to remove lecches easier? Would he realize that and extraction of the team from the action. spared the casualties that our generation had his air-conditioned house was nothing like the his air-conditioned her The polygon-filled figures seem more realistic faced. He responded that he couldn't get get her bumid un hor, humid jungles being depicted in beautithan those in Wolfenstein 3-D and the action through to his son. His son's favorite film is Is fully-rendered terrain on the screen? Would fer feels smooth and convincing. The Green Berets (starring John The interface is fascinating beWayne) and the young man Practice Mission cause it uses the mouse in a fascinatwatches it regularly, firmly believing analog of movement. When one ing that the glory depicted in the wishes the team to move forward, film is the glory of war. My friend Khim Ish the mouse must be pushed forward tried to get his son to watch more Mission: in deliberate steps. When one wishes realistic presentations of the VietRescue to go faster, more such mouse steps nam Conflict, citing Apocalypse TRUCCIANG are required. To slow, one reverses Now and Platoon in particular. The 10 the procedure by simulating mouse upshor is that I am extremely proud JIMH LOND/ 210 steps backward. To stop, one conof my daughter's direction in life. 105 2006 tinues pulling the mouse back. To My friend is rather disappointed in Feb back up, one continues the reverse his son. mouse steps. To turn left, one clicks I wonder what the reaction of this the left mouse button. To turn right, Aplan biora young man would be to Electronic 1969 one clicks the right mouse button. minn Arts' SEAL Team. Would he be Such an interface adds to the veriaffected at all by the moving cineNILO: \"An F-4 Wild Weasel pilot aiding similitude of the experience, particumatic sequences at the end of each the B-52 bombing north of Saigon went down.\" larly when combined with the Next Ba Tur  DONG TAM0 20 5001 IMH LOHLEY MOE BINH HUY Page 8 Computer Gaming World "


"BUBIN Miceinn Briefing Next SEAL BUI Succion Next Patrol Order IT: Patrol Druc 1 Exit Tay Khanh Village, An Thanh, RS8z Time: 10:21 1 Feb 1966 First Objective: Ambush Second Objective: Patrol Insertion Team: Boat Support Unit Extraction Team: Boat Support Unit Fire Support Unit: Seawolf Helicopter Break Contact Unit: Seawolf Helicopter Weather: Humid, 80 degrees. Tide: N/A Terrain: Farmland Enemy strength is heavy. * Marching Order non Shavilz: \"Yeah, and don't make a rookie The primary objective is to ambush the UC patrol near the clearing. capacity to move upright, lumber in a crouch, or crawl in a prone position (performed with a press of the 1, 2 and 3 keys respectively) and the graphic views to support such perspectives. In many ways, SEAL Team is extremely realistic the missions follow a logical progression, and the team has adequate resources to accomplish them in contrast to the chaos faced by the grunts in the jungle). Some missions only require intelligence gathering and return, while others require the player to use demolition skills or set up an ambush. The weapons have accurate rates of fire and ranges, the role of the support boats and aircraft seems reasonable, and the objectives are based on actual mission data from the Vietnam era. Verisimilitude breaks down somewhat (as in most simulations) when one considers how much damage the gamer's character can take before being killed. On one mission, my unit was shelled by a mortar attack as soon as we stepped out of the river. Although one of the team members was wounded, this had very little impact on our ability to carry out our mission. After another ambush, one of the team members was forced to carry the other member and this did slow us somewhat. Yet, I think we would all have been wasted in a real ambush. Of course, being too realistic can kill a game. Further, although the game has extremely attractive graphics, current machine speeds do not allow programmers the ability to really make the jungle as dense as it truly is, and travelling through the underbrush and swampy rice paddies seemed significantly easier than I would have expected it to be in real life. Again, a simulation should not be so TO realistic that it is no longer interesting to play, each recruit who had graduated from SEAL but I would have liked to see some game training and carefully nurtured him through feature that indicated something more of the the campaign. In my initial campaign, he won unfriendly terrain. In many ways, the simulaa lot of purple hearts and was often extracted tion is too pretty. Many gamers, however, will from unsuccessful missions by the skin of his prefer the less inhibited movement system teeth. chosen by the designers than the sluggish reYet, every time my character returned to strictions I might have imposed on the sim. basc, I felt a sense of accomplishment even Finally, though the simulation accurately if we botched the mission. Somehow, it was a conveys some of the problem of civilian casumore personal issue than when I brought alties which was faced by personnel during the planes and submarines home in other simulaVietnam Conflict, the gamer certainly has it tions. Somehow, it was more important to me significantly easier than the veterans did. The than winning medals, even though there are program not only color-codes civilians (blue) plenty of medals to be won in SEAL Team. I also think that the skill-based nature of the character selection adds something to this personalization, as do the atmosphere-serting conversations between team members prior to each mission. The deaths of my brother SEAL members on various missions and the cinematic segues between an extraction and the mission debriefing certainly brought the message home. Further, I will never forget the time I switched my weapon from semi-automatic to automatic fire and pulled the trigger (by hitting the ENTER key), only to watch a VC stand to surrender just before my burst sliced through him. Im sure it wouldn't dissuade my friend's son and VC (black), but the targeting diamond from enlisting in special forces, but it sure designates (at least in the pre-release version might open his eyes to what's in store. we examined) whether that potential target is Technologically, SEAL Team is an outa civilian or Charlie. As anyone who has studstanding advance. It offers all the bells and ied the history of the Vietnam Conflict is whistles of a vehicle simulation with a clever aware, it wasn't always easy to tell the \"good interface and a design that makes interface and a design that makes gamers reguys\" from the \"bad guys.\" One thing is cerally care about the results. It is a showcase tain, I am glad that the design team took the product graphically with a tremendous time to put non-combatants in the game. I amount of game play. Give the design team a really hate games where one can shoot everymedal. They deserve it. CGW one and everything with impunity. Fortunately, SEAL Team has more character than such games. Mission Accomplished werp Whatever my quibbles about verisimilitude, I must confess that SEAL Team has the poten ** tial to be a phenomenal game. I was against the war in Vietnam and avoided it with all my resources, yet I found myself drawn into the humanity of the game. For me, the goal of the game was to survive. I selected my player character from a selection of files describing st. CHRIS Canon Casem MATCH May 1993 Page 9 "


"CGW STUCI WATCH A monthly look at the Computer Entertainment Stock Market 120 8 Intel Corporation NASDAQ Symbol INTC One week per bar. 8 Stock Price per Share 8 want to them MAF who wa BIELE W 8 They only 8 o 1990 1991 1992 Intel Processors Drive Profits And Computers Apparently, computer gamers aren't the only ones who think processing power is important. There seems to be a real hunger for faster, more powerful processors in the marketplace, and Intel Corporation (NASDAQ: INTC) has the earnings to prove it. On February 10, 1993, Intel announced earnings per share of $4.97 for 1992. This was approximately a 27% increase over the earnings of the previous year ($3.92 per share, representing a 23% increase over the previous year). In addition, the company paid its initial quarterly dividend in December of 1992 ($.10 per share). In an interesting move which occurred at press time, the company announced its intent to offer a 2-for-1 stock split on their common stock. As the chart shows, Intel has had a tremendous run over the last year, from around the $46 per share mark to its press time quote of $116. In order to provide more affordable shares for the average investor, the company's directors have elected to offer the split which would, in effect, halve the price per share (while doubling the number of shares held by existing shareholders). As readers who peruse the story on the PentiumTM processor (see the following pages) should realize, Intel is expecting to play a big role in the lives of gamers. At press time, the Pentium processor had not been officially announced and Standard & Poors (providers of the most followed rankings on Wall Street) had already estimated 1993 income at $6 per share. Whether the new technology will have significant impact on these earnings estimates or not will remain to be seen. In the meantime, cutting-edge technology, strong demand for existing processors, and sound management make Intel a stock to watch over the long haul. Ironically, Intel's success is a mixed bag for computer gamers. Their continually improving processors make new and improved games possible, but the proliferation of advanced machines creates an accelerating pattern of obsolescence (meaning gamers have to upgrade more often) and provides a templation for some game developers to try too much (resulting in \"buggy\" products). In the long run, the introduction of new processors should create a better gaming atmosphere. cow Page 10 Computer Gaming World "


"ALL FLIGHT SIMS ARE NOT CREATED EQUAL. Some Are More Real Than Others THE ALLIES MOST DEADLY STRIKE FIGHTER TORNADO Realworld graphics. Incredibly detailed mission planning Fly missions with up to five other Tornados. DUN Spectrum Halobyte INCLUDES 2-PLAYER MODEM VERSION Digital Integration You've played the latest flight sim games, now brace yourself for the real thing. When it comes to first-class authenticity, down-and-dirty realism, and a target-rich environment, nobody comes close to Tornado. Pilot the Gulf War's most gutsy strike aircraft at breakneck speeds over three explosive combat areas loaded with realworld details delivered at a high frame rate buildings, structures, roads, power lines, trees and much, much more. From tanks to TV towers to rivers and railways, Tornado's unsurpassed 3-D world is so authentic, you can see the mesh of fence surrounding a communication tower. At sea level, there is no faster fighter jet than a Tornado. Hugging the earth at a heart-stopping speed, the Tornado is an extremely difficult target. Meanwhile, it can FALCON deliver nearly 10 tons of the latest \"smart\" and submunition weaponry with pinpoint accuracy in any weather, day or night. And it's not just you against the enemy. Up to five other Tornados help you corner your adversary in high-speed synchronized attacks that determine the outcome of your missions and the success or failure of the campaign. Tornado even delivers the most sophisticated mission planning ever seen on a home computer. A satellite overview of the airfield and the surrounding areas lets you set and analyze your flight plan and profile. And the most intricate fighter mission planning system ever devised lets you set the autopilot parameters and check your waypoint flight times and fuel consumption. Tornado. Realism that'll blow you away. Digital Integration Tornado, from the company that brought you the award-winning Falcon 3.0. Ms Spartan Hd Distributed by Spectrum HoloByte Spectrum HoloByte, Inc. 2490 Mariner Square Loop. Alameda, CA 94501 For Visa/MasterCard orders call 24 hours a day, 7 days a week: 1-800-695-GAME (Orders Only) For technical questions call: 1-510-522-1164 (M-F: 9am-5pm PST) Digital Integration is a trademark of Digital Integration Ltd. Spectrum HoloByte is a registered trademark of Spectrum HoloByte, Inc. Circle Reader Service #102 "


"LINGUA Become the Worldis Greatest Conqueror! TETTENTION FILTELL TETET TEREDE Produto ind Plunge into a medieval world to conquer Cascatia, an untamed *land of conquest & glory. Invade castles, fly over mountains, and use the forest to your advantage as you battle across the Cascatian Realm, to become the reigning king. Just about the best strategy and tactics game you will ever play. Circle Reader Service #83 NINE BEAUTIFUL SCENARIOS. A RANDOM MAP GENERATOR. UTILIZE BASIC HUMAN UNITS, THE FANTASY UNITS OR BOTH. 21 LEVELS OF PLAY (STRONG AI). MODEM PLAY.  COMPLETE GAME SCORING HISTORY. RICH IN STRATEGY AND TACTICS. SEVERAL FULL CAMPAIGN CONQUESTS. The \"Conquered Kingdoms\" computer game is IBM PC and soon to be Amiga compatible. It can be obtained through your favorite retailer or ordered direct by calling: 1-908-788-2799  Q.Q.P. All rights reserved. IBM is a trademark of International Business Machines. Amiga is a trademark of Commordore. "


"BATTLES LESTINY OND Several dudes holistie gaming Conquer the world in \"Battles of Destiny.\" Seek out and destroy up to three opponents in this state of the art global conquest simulation. It's simple to play, but only a true master will reign in «Battles of Destiny.\" Challenging Artifical Intelligence (9 levels of difficulty) Air, ground and naval combat  22 different units to construct Modem play Over 20 beautiful worlds to conquer Complete player history  Dynamic scoring system Campaign play The \"Battles of Destiny\" computer game is IBM PC. It can be obtained through your favorite retailer or ordered direct by calling: 1-908-788-2799  1992 Q.Q.P. All rights reserved. IBM is a trademark of International Business Machines. Circle Reader Service #33 "


"Devreund CD-ROM Become CD-ROM, My Beamish Boy! Dynamix' The Adventures of Willy Beamish HUMPFORD SLUDGE WORKS by Charles Ardai ADVENTURES Y. T Taving just reviewed Sierra's CD-ROM edition of Space Quest a whiny toddler.) Sitting at a dinner table with these three harpies is IV (issue #105), a first-rate enhancement of a solid original, I like dying and waking up in Sartre's No Exit. T a m particularly disappointed to see what sister company DyDid Michael Zibelman, who struggles along bravely in the role of namix has done to The Adventures of Willy Beamish. Well-chosen voices Willy, never ask politely whether the game might not be that much and strong readings made Space Quest IV smarter, faster and funnier. better if he screamed \"Yahooey!\" a little less often? Did no one play the Willy Beamish, on the other hand, is practically ruined by a cast of voice game before it went out to the stores to see whether anyone could stand actors who climb all over each other to give their characters the ugliest to listen to it? voices this side of Saturday Night Live's \"Pat.\" In the process, they We'll never know. Somehow the game made it to the light of day trample the storyline, louse up the jokes, and generally make a hash of wearing all its flaws like so much Spring finery. what started out as a pretty good game. That no one stepped in somewhere along the One wonders how this happened. Did CD Diway with a reality check \"Time out, guys, are rector Scott Wallin deliberately instruct his actors we doing this right?\" — is remarkable. It seems, to read their lines as slowly as they do? The pernevertheless, to be the case. formances seem to be paced and pitched at the comprehension level of a four-year old, with lots Slick Willy of strained pauses between words and actors Naryo speaking in condescending baby-talk intonations. Willy Beamish is an attempt to present a kid'seye view of being a kid. The game consists of a Did Voice Casting Director Sher Alltucker series of dirty-hands-and-skinned-knees adven(who, in a fit of inspiration, cast herself as both the tures in suburbia starring a precocious (but not villain and the heroine of the story) think it was geeky), cute (but not cloying), mischievous (but clever to have the singularly untalented Roxy not rotten), tousle-headed, videogame-adRagozzino supply the voices for all of Willy's dicted, chore-avoiding moppet. female relatives? In the most ill-advised triplecast since NBC's showing of the Summer Olympics TITLE: The Adventures of Willy Beamish CD-ROM SYSTEM: IBM with CD-ROM last year, Ragozzino gives readings as Willy's $69.95 mom, big sister, and little sister that are as subtle Talks! PROTECTION: None DESIGNERS: Jeri Tunnell, Meryl & Tony Perutz as a kick in the pants and as enjoyable to hear as a Sierra/Dynamix car alarm at three in the morning. (Mom is a Coarsegold, CA whiny yuppie, Tiffany a whiny valley girl, Brianna (800) 326-6654 Dynamix Willy PRICE: PUBLISHER: Page 14 Computer Gaming World "


"Join Electronics Boutique As We Celebrate The MicroProse 10tAnniversary. ...And Don't Forget Your Present. In Games We Trust! MicroProse 10th Anniversary $10 Rebate Coupon This coupon is good towards your next purchase of any MicroProse game in stock at any Electronics Boutique (game must be priced $19.99 or over)! ELBO Just present this coupon to your Electronics Boutique salesperson at time of purchase. Coupon valid through 6/30/93 MICROPROSE $10 $10 Not valid on special orders, price match items or with any other offer. Original coupons only. CGW-593 MICROPROSE the electronics boutique ENTERTAINMENT SOFTWARE  1993 MicroProse Software, Inc. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. Circle Reader Service #71 "


"Unn older gamers. Sometimes the game doesn't play fair, by having objects show up without warning in places they weren't before (so the fact that a cabinet is empty at one time is no reason to assume that it will be empty at another); but this resembles real life, especially for a child living in his parents' house, so I think it is acceptable. GENCE Willy is a good kid but he's no angel. He lives in a fantasy world out of a 1950's sitcom (everyone seems to be white and upper-middleclass), but his world is not untouched by evil: his father loses his job; the town is at the mercy of a nasty, rich woman named Leona; and the plumbers go on strike, leaving the town faucers full of brown glop. Lots of the comedy is sepia-toned and sweetly nostalgic, but not all — there are also moments of satire that could come out of the pages of Mad, Spy, or National Lampoon. In short, Willy Beamish offers a mix: things that a nine-year-old player will enjoy, things a nineteen-year-old might, and things that only a person even older than that will appreciate, such as an encounter with a street gang that saunters down the street snapping its fingers a la West Side Story. This mix worked fine in the original because the player was free to read the game's text at his or her own pace and to take away from it as much as he or she understood. Alas, in deciding on a set of voices to use for the game, Dynamix also had to decide on a single tone for the game to have. They could have chosen subtle, quick, ironic readings, but they were probably concerned abour alienating younger gamers. Or they might have done a straightforward, child-oriented reading; while that would have sacrificed a lot of the game's humor it would, at least, have been bearable. Instead, Dynamix went for something in between, and the result comes across as, at once, insulting to children and inconsiderate of adults, whose skin it will make crawl. JEEP The game's graphics and animation are neither better nor worse in the CD-ROM version, though there is slightly more of the latter, including a new opening sequence. Willy's features still devolve occasionally into a two-dots-and-a-squiggle smiley face, but none of the other characters suffer from this odd malady, perhaps because they have less screen time. The animation is not breathtaking, but it is funny, abundant and well-executed. One of the original game's more peculiar quirks that has survived into the new edition is the characters' emphatic sexuality. Between the huge-breasted school nurse, an impossibly well-endowed volleyball player, Willy's tank-topped mom, and teenaged Tiffany who (at one point) leaps out of her bath to towel-whip Willy, a person might wonder whether he is playing a Steve Meretzky game rather than a game intended for young people. This is not a bad thing per se, but it is odd for a game about a pre-adolescent hero to have such an adolescent sensibility. It's all of a piece, though. The smirking, adolescent sexiness goes hand in hand with the self-indulgent, immature performances of the actors, which are no better than what one might expect from a high school drama club. The only mature performance in the game comes from Andrew DeRycke as Willy's beleaguered dad, and given the company he keeps, it's no wonder that the guy is beleaguered. There is little in the world more cruel to the ear than the sound of presumably normal adults gurgling in thick-tongued googly-woogly voices. The worst offender here is the Narrator (played by Ed Ragozzino, further proof that in the Ragozzinos Dynamix has turned up a family whose calling ought to be mime). The Narrator manages to put exactly the wrong emphasis on every word he speaks, mis-read jokes so that they are no longer funny, and affect a voice that makes Pee-Wee Herman sound like Sir Ralph Richardson all at the same time. Oh, Frabjous Day Of course, not everything about the CD-ROM edition is terrible. There is the game's story, for instance, which hasn't changed a whir from the original. Willy's main goal is still to help his per frog, Horny, win a frog jumping contest so that he (Willy) will have enough money to go to the Nintari videogame championships. Along the way he still has to contend with the school bully, boring teachers, a sinister babysitter, his deceased but talkative grandfather, a family of Japanese tourists, and any number of other fun, oddball characters. Gameplay, too, is the same as before: rather than a complex interface, the player just moves a cursor around the screen, clicking on hotspots to get information about, or to interact with, parts of the environment. Most puzzles demand only simple interactions (\"Use item X at spot Y\"), but they do require enough thought to be challenging even to Willy Beamish deserved, and Dynamix could have done, much better, This is a game best played with the voices turned off. Given that it is a CD-ROM game, that's saying a mouthful. cow Page 10 Computer Gaming World "


"CACHE ROM C&T 286 IPX DRIVERS UMB 386MAX OUALITAS BLUEMAX 486SX BUFFERS MODEMS EGA BIOS FAX BOARDS It's one thing to be shot down in the middle of a game, but without adequate memory you'll never get off the ground. 29 PREPARE TO ABANDON SHIP BLUEMAX 386 486SX EGA DRIVERS 486 C&T 286 DOS 5.0 HMA WINDOWS VGA MOUSE DPMI BIOS HIGH DOS TSRS NETWORKS XMS INITIALIZE RAM MEMORY TSRS MOUSE XMS HIGH DOSEGA INITIALIZE HMA WINDOWS 640K NETWORKS 386SX PAGEFRAME CACHE LIM EMS DPMI CD ROMS UMB 386MAX RAM Insufficient Memory WARNING OO00017 o get today's hottest computer games up and running, Best of all, it does it more easily and reliably than your computer needs increasingly vast amounts any other way. Just type \"maximize\" and 386MAX does the of conventional memorythe first 640K of memory rest, automatically analyzing your system and configuring found on nearly every PC compatible system. The same it for maximum memory and optimum performance. memory your mouse, CD-ROM and other peripherals Which is why we call it The Intelligent Memory Manager. compete for, as well. And why BYTE Magazine said \"it's so easy to Adding memory chips won't help. And NOLAR use and offers such significant benefits that it running DOS 5 usually isn't enough. should be part of every system.\" What you need is 386MAX. It's the highly So, if you want to play today's most advanced memory management software challenging games, but you don't want to run that recovers wasted memory on your out of memory, run out and get 386MAX. Or system, so it can make more memory availcall 1-800-676-0386 to order. At just $99.95, able to games and other it's by far the best flight programs that need it. insurance money can buy. QURAN The Intelligent Memory Manager RAM PAGEFRAME BIOS MEMORY VGA MOUSE TSRS HIGH DOS EGA INITIALIZE DPMI MODEMS 640K FAX BOARD 386SX MOLD 1993 Qualitas. Qualitas, 7101 Wisconsin Avenue, Suite 1386, Bethesda, MD 20814. All company and product names are trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective owners. System Requirements: Any 386, 386SX, 486 or 486SX PC or PS/2, min. 256K of extended memory, DOS 3.0 or higher, and hard disk drive. (386MAX also supports 286 machines with Shadow RAM, or any PC HIST BUY with EMS 4.0 hardware with 256K memory. Feature availability and memory recovery may vary on these systems.) Circle Reader Service #85 "


"jnside the mdustru intel. pentium @@INTEL '92 Gentlemen, Start Your Simulations! How the Pentium\" Processor Will \"Hot Rod» Gamers' Computers by Johnny L. Wilson ture in itself adds a 25% performance boost over the highest rated 486. The screen shot provided with this article illustrates the way the Pentium processor optimizes its processing. Earlier processors funneled all data, whether required as part of the program instructions or as data for a given calculation, through the same bus. As illustrated on the color-coded screen shot, the Pentium uses a bus for both sides of its \"brain\" and the branch prediction further speeds the process. Today's games cat up processor time with the same kind of ravenous zeal for feeding shown by the title character in Spiel1 berg's Jaws. At the same time that computer pilots are looking for more sophisticated shading techniques with no degradation of performance, even the cfficiency of the fastest 486-based processors is topping out. At a time when new genres are moving to the 3-D environment with increasing speed, the processing power of existing machines is being tested to its limit. So, it is very likely that gamers are wondering what the next generation of microprocessors will do for them. Will it help them handle memory more efficiently? Will it speed up frame rates? Will it speed up floating point calculations so that sophisticated shading techniques won't cripple the frame rate? The good news is that the Pentium processor will most definitely speed both floating point and integer calculations. Obviously, this means that the calculations required for dynamic 3-D environments can be completed very quickly and the visual effect will be faster. How did Intel manage to speed up the processing power in this next generation of computer chips? First of all, the secret is to be found in its superscalar structure and use of branch prediction. The superscalar structure means that the CPU has been redesigned to function almost like two Intel 486 processors. It has a true 32-bit CPU and bus, plus separate 8K caches for data and code for double access the former with a 256 bit bus and the latter with a 32 bit bus). Further, the new design features built-in multiply, add and divide features. Most chips use a proliferation of add functions to multiply such that each addition function requires a clock cycle. With the true multiply function, Pentium-based computers will only use one clock cycle to multiply any two numbers. Branch predicrion means that the computer predicts which direction the program will go next. When it's right, it speeds processing. When it is wrong, the program simply backs up to the last known stage, but neither affects the answer to the calculation nor adds to the processing time over what the nonpredicting chip would have used. This fcaHow Fast Is The Pentium\" Processor? for those who want to know exactly how much faster this new generation of chips is likely to be, consider the following. Not only will the Pentium-based computers run at 66 MHz and process 112 MIPS (million instructions per second) compared to 54 MIPS at 50 MHz for 486 DX2 machines, but they will utilize optimization tools which Intel has worked out with compiler publishers. These are software solutions that allow programmers (and hence, gamers) to get more performance out of the chip. Interestingly enough, the optimizers are so useful thar code compiled using the new compiler options will run significantly faster, even on a standard 486 (the new code will not affect 386 owners either positively or adversely). This means that the Pentium processor runs more than twice as fast as today's fastest PC processor. In addition, the company plans to upgrade their technology in order to surpass the 200 MIPS mark by the mid-1990s. Consider also how fast the new chip performs in comparison with industry standards. A non-profit organization called the Systems Performance Evaluation Cooperative (SPEC) has developed a standard group of benchmark programs to measure the performance of computing systems with actual applications. SPCint92 is a numerical rating based on performing the same calculations using six real-world applications in: circuit theory, LISP interpretation, logic design, text compression, spreadsheet calculations and software development. SPECP92 is a numerical rating based on 14 real-world New Camalicrcnblogy Demo E M Typical D Dr CPUNTOS Flosung CLOCK 113 COCK 36 Pastiny Point Pipe DataCache Page 18 Computer Gaming World "


"heimdustry. Pipelined Floating Point Unit (FPU)  Completely Redesigned From Intel486 CPU and Fully compatible  Floating point intensive applications run 5X to 10x faster than on Inte1486DX-33MHz 33MHZ 86 Pncessor SPECI2. 8.5  66MHZ Pentium Pocessor SPEC1p92 58.6  Dedicated hardware logic for Multiply. Add, and Divide application benchmarks which require floating point calculations. A SPECp 92 number of \"1\" would be roughly equivalent to the performance of a standard VAX 780 mainframe performing the same benchmarks. For comparison, consider that an Intel486 processor running at 33 MHz performs at 8.5 SPECfp92 and the new Pentium processor performs at 58.6 SPECfp92. Comparative SPEC performances are presented in chart form on these pages. Note, however, that the best performer on the SPECint92 chart runs at 133 MHz compared to the Pentium processor's 66 MHz; the Pentium pulling less power and creating less heat. Intel's marketing department insists that the Pentium processor will be the first chip to provide performance for under $1.00 per SPEC point. In a similar fashion, Intel uses a group of benchmarks for internal testing. The goal is to significantly improve performance on these benchmarks over previous processors. Using the same battery of applications, the new processor (at 66 MHz) was 14 times faster than the Intel386SX (at 25 MHz) and almost twice as fast as the Intel486DX-2 (at 66 MHz). Tremendous performance boost for applications like Final Analysis  Engineering Simulation 3D Modeling Spreadsheets pabrik Figisu Higher Perfomance For Scientific Modeling, CAD, And More Own Cache SPEC92 Performance What Won't The Pentium Processor Do? Unfortunately, the new chip design won't do anything about memory problems that chain gamers to the 640K barricr. It won't handle those memory management problems that seem to be driving gamers up the wall. Apparently, many of those problems are a result of 16-bit compiler code being written in such a way that part of the program uses DOS and the rest of it uses the processor's protected mode. It is possible that new 32-bit compilers like the one from Watcom and those expected from Microsoft and Borland (among others) will solve much of the problem, but the chip cannot fix this. Intel's Director of Engineering (for microprocessor design), Avtar Saini, explains that designing the architecture so that it ignores the arbitrary 640K low memory limitation would make future chips incompatible with existing chips. The Pentium processor's architecture has been designed so that gamers should still be able to use software purchased for older machines (286 up) with Pentium-based machines. Apha2101133 28 399 25 % a MIPS 14000 SO Suporte PA250 ASOODS PAZIOSO inDX200 SC006340 SPECint92 SPECp92 Higher integer Performance VS. Alternatives Workstation Class Foating Point Performance Source SPSC Nasleter, December 1992 Por Intel CPU Corpotion I Just Want To Upgrade Alert consumers will remember that many Intel486-based computcrs have spaces for expansion. By next year, there will be an Overdrive chip for these upgradeable Intel-based computers that will enable computer owners to gain something of the benefits of Pentium-based processing. The override chip will not make a computer quite as fast as the true Pentium-based computers, but it is expected to boost 486 DX2 performance by at least 50 percent. In staying true to the architecture, it's nice to know that Intel hasn't forgotten its loyal customer base. Further, the Pentium-based computers will also feature the built-in slot for an Overdrive chip that should allow Pentium processor owners to get a P6 (the next generation of processors) style of performance upgrade. COMPTM Index Summary Inte/386 Inte/486* Pentium Processors What's It To Me? Intel's introduction of the Pentium processor means that an affordable rival to RISC-based workstations is in the offing. The high SPEC ratings mean that gamers will be able to count on faster frame rates, even on programs that use advanced shading techniques. In summary, the upside and downside of the new processor are two sides of the same coin. With new processing power, we can expect games that push the limits of the new technology. This will antiquate the older generation of computers (forcing gamers to buy new machines) while simultaneously giving rise to a new generation of games that we simply have to have. That's a mixed blessing for all of us. CGW Penburn Processor 66 Pantium Processor 60 Into486 OX2.66 Into 486DX.50 Into14860X2.50 Intel486DX-33 Int1486SX-33 Inte:4B6DX-25 Intel465X 25 Into1486SX 20 Inta386DX-33 Into1386SX-25 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 May 1993 Page 19 "


"beynews E Do You Know The Way To Mt. Olympus! 1 Electronic Arts Points the way to Populous 2 by Allen L. Greenberg C tory. Without mana, a god is finished as is the game. As in the original game, victory entitles the player to a password to the next world and plaver to a each succeeding world is more difficult to conquer. More advanced worlds feature more aggressive populations, as well as more hostile H E PANTHEON IS LOOKING stone-age civilization with one of ancient FOR A FEW GOOD GODS!\" Greece, POP2 has increased the number of I reads a sign leading to the Mount worlds to conquer and provided a number of Olympus Recruiting Center. Considering other innovations. As in the first Populous, the that the benefits of a career as a god — implayer looks down on a three dimensional mortality and omnipotence — are among the landscape, home to his or her worshipers. most attractive in the known universe, one Smooth, flat ground, provided by the benefiwould easily expect the line of applicants to cent player, allows the race to settle large extend all the way to Asgard. estates with healthy families. Left alone, the However, these aspiring deities must first people would be content to take their time face a series of daunting trials in order to be and produce only the heartiest of settlers and sure that they indeed have what it takes to be warriors. Unfortunately, time is not a gift all-powerful. A thousand worlds must first be which the player may bestow liberally. In conquered by a cadet godling before he or she order to compete with the rival population, it will be given a place among the other gods of will be necessary to shake things up-breakOlympus. Those 1000 ing up households to increase worlds, along with their the number of settlements. populations and an assortThe goal is to strike a careful ment of miracles with which balance between the quality they may be influenced, have and quantity of these housebeen neatly packaged in Popuholds. lous 2 (POP2), Bullfrog's seWith this population comes quel to its famous first opus. \"mana\" — a measure of the The original Populous player's strength. As healthy placed the player in comworshipers increase, so does mand of a race of primitive the mana which, in turn, acts tribesmen who were at war as fuel for miracle-working, with a similar population; the THIALS OF THE OLYMPIAN CONS Miracles may either benefit or latter under the control of an damage a population, deevil god. Armed only with a pending on where and on pocket full of miracles, playwhom they are performed. It ers easily become intoxicated Populous 2 is this strength, in combinawith the experience of leading SYSTEMS: Amiga, IBM tion with a healthy army of $59.95 armies of righteous followers PROTECTION: None worshipers, which will deterDEVELOPER: Bullirog to victory. mine which god will earn vicDISTRIBUTER: Electronic Arts In addition to replacing the San Mateo, CA terrain. Of course, a keener adversary is also in control of the rival population. A different variety of miracles also becomes available to both the player and the evil god. Once the player has reached these more advanced miracles, they may then be used in \"custom designed\" worlds which the player is able to creare. Put On A Holy Face TITLE: PRICE: Adding a role-playing aspect to POP2, players now assemble a personality for the god they wish to represent. Following classic Greek style, in which a book may always be told by its cover, this personality is clearly reflected in the god's face. (Continued on page 24) Page 20 Computer Gaming World "


"Wolfenstein 30 Hottest Shareware Game \"...more like an interactive movie than an arcade game.\" Shareware Update \"Almost single-handedly justifying the existence of shareware.. Video Games & Computer Entertainment \"The first game technologically capable of...immersing the player in a threatening environment.\" Computer Gaming World Imprisoned in a Nazi Fortress In an act of desperation you overpower your cell guard. Standing over his fallen body, you frantically grab for his gun. Deep in the belly of a Nazi dungeon, you must escape or die trying. AMARADE 962 1911 Her 3300 34 Experience a 256-color, smooth scrolling virtual reality Hear professionally composed music with an AdLibr, Sound Blastert, or compatible Four levels of game play make it enjoyable for the novice to the experienced player Battle with knives, pistols, and machine guns Easy to start playing, and instantly absorbing 19253 5600 3 Call Toll Free 1-800-GAME123 For the cost of shipping and handling, only $4.00, you'll receive Episode One, Escape from Wolfenstein. Or download Episode One and pay no shipping and handling. Call the Software Creations BBS and check out our FREE Apogee file section. BBS Phone Lines are:  (508) 365-2359:2400 BAUD  (508) 368-7036:2400-9600  (508) 368-4137:2400-14.4K Episodes two through six are sold separately and can be purchased by calling Apogee's toll-free number, shown above. APOGEE P.O. Box 476389 Garland, TX 75047 SOFTWARE Not Recommended for Younger Viewers Due to Realistic Depictions of Violence Wolfenstein 3-D requires an IBM or 100% compatible computer with 640K RAM, a VGA graphics card, and a hard disk drive. Extended memory (XMS), expanded memory (EMS), joystick, and mouse are optional. IBM is a registered trademark of International Business Machines, Inc. Sound Blaster is a registered trademark of Creative Labs, Inc. AdLib is a registered trademark of AdLib, Inc. Circle Reader Service #42 "


": THE VERY BEST IN STRATEGIC STARSHIP COMBAT Impressions are delighted to announce an Omnitrend production Rules of Engagement 2! The original became an instant success -\"one of the top 6 games of 1991\" (Newsweek), \"involving, well-planned, entertaining, highest levels of intelligence and excitement\" (Computer Game Review). Now, the sequel surpasses even the original's excellence! Rules of Engagement 2 is a real-time, strategic space combat game. The player commands a fleet of starships engaging enemy ships in campaigns composed of multiple combat missions. The attention to realism and detail (Omnitrend's hallmark) and the sheer size of the game are phenomenal, and are made accessible by the unique easy to use control system. Rules of Engagement 2 is the latest Interlocking Game System moduleand can link with Breach 2 or Breach 3 (coming this fall). e Exciting animated sequences featuring 3D rendered spaceships relate the storyline at strategic points within campaigns. Players can create their own tree-structured campaigns with the world's first campaign-builder and can even include their own PC Animate Plus animation files! COHRCU IN SE PRVO TACE ic 2 ------HVHMI W STAT TACDEF CHOICH SOLD ARR E TINERE  Rules of Engagement 2 features an a still from an animated squence outstanding interface. Game screens consist of four QuadPanels, color coded to distinguish different control systems. The central control bar coordinates all activity between panels. Users can select which of the 28 QuadPanels appear on the main screen and can even save several configurations for use in different situations. Ex RAY En LB 701 live . . U CMS sample configuration of QuadPanels SAVE THE TEC T Rules of Engagement 2 offers a significant advance in artificial intelligence within computer gaming. Each starship captain has a substantial dossier complete with many personality traits which affect how he, she or it reacts to orders and situations which arise. KOMAST CORDINI XIMET LOSTEPE PE CORK O FVAL PSYCHOLOGIEAL FOFILE 11 INGENUITY TEAVEY 2016 LESBISHIP DIPLOMACY E COYALIV STAMINS RUMILITY TE R ETEMPERAMENT 121162 cta LFEINS TONVICTION CONVICEMI SACCHI DSCK DIRECTORY 203-1 a starship captain's dossier   . EKSYNY CASURIN OFLECI  Rules of Engagement 2 offers immense replay value, allowing the player to design and construct both friendly and hostile spacecraft and their captains, specify the physical and mental capabilities of the enemy forces -and design solar systems in which the battles will take place! 2325 BELES /20 og MSEN 898 0800 outfitting a ship in dry dock Committed to Excellence in Strategy Entertainment Impressions Software. Inc. 7 Melrose Drive, Farmington, CT 06032 Circle Reader Service #62 "


"RULES OF ENGAGEZAENT : OMNITREND Impressions INTERLOCKING GAME SYSTEM "


"Deview . different \"super heroes\" into of both the enemy and game-play. which a population leader The graphics and animation continue to may now be transformed, so reflect Bullfrog's attention to character and that he or she may proceed detail. The individual members of each popuindependently in a berserk lation are now given gender and occupationrampage directed at the enspecific characteristics. There are many emy. All 29 special effects, UE, noteworthy animation effects, including however, are not available at lightning bolts which attack their targets with the same time each world savage precision, while other victims are carplaces only a handful at the ried away in a Wizard of Oz-style tornado. god's disposal. Note that the Many of the warriors and transformed heros two gods do not necessarily have chosen to do battle with a minimum of have access to the same magic clothing, and are easily some of the most virile at the same time, and the characters ever to appear in a computer strat210 player may not be aware of egy game. (Continued from page 20) the evil god's abilities until POP2's origins on the Amiga computer are Players choose this face by sifting through a they are used in combat. immediately obvious. Game-play without a variety of mix-n-match foreheads, cyes and POP2's main screen contains the same basic mouse is impossible, although keyboard commouths. A more aggressive or monstrous face information as that used in lopulous. Behind mands may be used as a will result in more challenging battles, while a while a close-up view of the play-area is a map of the a mouse, IBM owners will not enjoy the same serene or contemplative expression leads to a entire world. Also included is a more strategically demanding game. In genpopulation indicator, cleverly eral, the nastier the god's face, the more diffidisguised as a colosseum. Players may switch to an alternate closecult the game. up view which does not include The number of miracles, or \"Divine Interthe colosseum, but does display vention Effects,\" are now so great that they a larger area of land in greater have been broken into six categories, much detail. Lining both screens are like spells in a fantasy/role-playing game. Each icons representing the various effect is now categorized as one which relates miracle categories which, if seto people, vegetation, earth, air, fire or water. lected, give the player access to There are a total of 29 different divine effects, other sets of icons representing each with its own price tag. With enough specific effects. mana, players will be able to shake up their The game may be played using UK worlds with such spells as \"Tidal Wave\" or either hi or lo-resolution. Hi? \"Lay Plague.\" In addition, there are now six resolution produces a wonderfluidness of motion as those who have access ECOSPODELELELSESSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSS fully detailed display, but to the game on an Amiga. The most noticeG YOUR OPPONENT_IS_ERIMETHEUS slows down game-play quite able loss may well be the game's sounds, very ESSSS la bit. Players with extremely few of which will be heard on machines fast, capable computers, equipped with a Sound Blaster-compatible however, may find themboard. Sadly, none of the game's famous selves searching for ways to breathing, heartbeat and ethereal chorus — all slow down their processing of which make the Amiga seem to pulse in speed. A faster computer life-like rhythm appear in the IBM version. 5 TITAN_OF AFTERTHOUGHT 5 WHO IS BOTH VERY SLOW makes for a far nastier oppoAND SLEEPY nent who will build his Oracle By Icon GEPE METHEUS AND HIS BROTHER PROMETHEUS WERE ASSIGNED BY population and cast his atZEUS TO BESTOU GIFTS TO MAN tacks at lightning speed. The game features a \"Help\" function, so EPIMETHEUS FAILED TO GIVE S PROTECTION FROM THE ELEMENTS. Mercifully, the game allows that an on-line explanation of each of its many 2PROCEEDI icons is available at any time during play. Any the player to adjust the speed number of games in progress may be saved, ARISTOTARIISISAARI although only one god may occupy the disk at a time. Two players may play against each ZZZZZZZZ other using two computers. These may be connected either by modem or a network system. \"Powerful programs of growth and adventure\" Playing the role of an army general may be THE MAGIC MIRROR ... a toolbox for your mind. E. Kinnie, fun. Pretending to be a king or emperor can PhD., Clinical Psychologist. $39.95. easily become addicting. Godhood, however, MAGIC MIRROR II ... experiences for your mind. $39.95. has again proved to be a wonderfully intoxiMERLIN... an apprenticeship. $29.95. caring experience in this strategy exercise from MasterCard/Visa Bullfrog. Amiga owners in particular should I CHING... ancient Chinese wisdom and prophecy. $29.95. 1-800-545-6172 not miss out on this opportunity to apply to (after 5 p.m.) THE MAGIC MOUNTAIN ... a journey into another reality, the Pantheon. The benefits of belonging to Not for children. Male and female versions. $39.95. IBM/Compatibles humanity, thus far, consist mainly of expendBlue Valley, 29 Shepard St., Walton, NY 13856 ability and blind servitude. Why pass up omnipotence? cow LZZZZZZZZI Circle Reader Service #44 Page 24 Computer Gaming World G anbal SSSSSSSS SSSSSSSS SSSSSS alalalalalalalala SSSSSSSSSS "


"WHEN TWO VORLD WAR nu NOOEL POUCETt nk Tech Speed Lond: I S10 Sex OZ 10 Face!HI TAL Fire Power: 17 A Torget:IvS TAI M7 Rader Transport: PEDEDEEDE --UNSUB DDDD DDDDD nenesia Power :25 RU STATS: in service In Production: Kri Losses: Command your entire planet's military resources in an effort to conquer a hostile neighbouring planet. You control a state of the art workstation from which advanced software tools enable you to design new craft, research new technologies, build new installations & craft, set up highly sophisticated missions and watch the progress of this strategic interplanetary conflict. DODE DUILD JDELIGHT SYSTEN IND Design your own spacecraft (or tanks, submarines, jet,...)! Send out units on missions to explore the unknown enemy planet and wipe out its military capability! Battles take place in space & on surface of both planets m. Random planet generator for great replay value Designed as a 2 player game! Impressions Committed to customer satisfaction in strategy entertainment! Circle Reader Service #64 "


"Warning: Although \"The Scorpion's Tale\" takes place in a warm and comfortable tavern of the mind, complete with a nice, cozy fire of vibrant images, our resident storyteller conjures up illuminating hints about games. If our readers eschew hints, let them beware! Scorpia Prepares Gamers for Eric The Unready T That? Is it springtime already? Seems it was autumn just the much encouragement to keep on with his duties as a knight. Right other day. Time certainly seems to be passing faster than there, you know she's worth rescuing (and being rescued is the prime ever. Gotta find a way to turn the clock back. Back to those occupation of young, beautiful princesses the world over). thrilling days of yesteryear, when knights were bold and went on Being conscientious, Lorealle (the princess) allows herself to be quests joust for fun! kidnapped in short order. Naturally, our boy is assigned to go out Of course, that's not quite how it is with Eric the Unready, knight and get her. There is a time limit involved; the king is scheduled to errant. Very errant. Perhaps he should have been named Eric the die in a week, and the princess by his side at the time is the one who Catastrophe or Eric the Jinx. Not that he deliberately does anything inherits. Naturally, we all want Lorealle the Beautiful rather than wrong; it's just that he tends to leave a trail of havoc and destruction Grizelda the Hefty to be the lucky lady. So let's get a move on, Eric. in his wake, without hardly trying. The first item of business is getting new armor (the old suir being Having already left quite such a wake as the game begins, our hero in offal shape). This is really the game's copy protection, and you is assigned a task suited to his abilities: visit a farmyard and kiss a need the armor diagram from the manual or Eric ain't rescuing farmer's daughter who has been turned into a pig. This is a mere anybody anytime soon. Of course, armor takes awhile to make, so bagatelle for Eric, and really so casy a sequence it hardly bears our boy gets a cloak to wear while he waits. Hey wow, there's a magic mention. Especially, since he has to go down a privy to get the job bean in the pocket! Just what he's always wanted. done (phew!). Anyway, now Eric can bounce around the area and see what's what. In fact, much of this game isn't too Thar tower looks interesting. No door, tough, but it certainly is funny. The Help Picture though, and no ladder in sight. Hmmm, main things to remember are (a) grab [ | Map wonder how Jack, err, Eric can get up everything that isn't nailed down and there. (b) always pick up and read the day's newspaper. This is a magical paper. It Once at the window, Eric meets Bud has not only that day's news, but the the Mighty Wizard, something of a footnews from previous days, too. You ball fanatic. What mighty quest does don't want to miss the ad for Cleric's Bud have on tap? He wants a root beer Gossip Weekly (hch)! More imporfloat, and tosses a coin to our hero to buy tantly, a couple of issues have clues for You stunble out of the privy, dragging the one. Ah, the glories of knighthood! some of the puzzles. So, look over the No need to rush; there's time to look paper from time to time. around, and possibly do a little favor for Okay, so Eric has kissed the pig, and the guy in the Ice Cream Shoppe. And gets a lift back to the castle from the Eric's been wanting to hear that Epic of king's daughter. No snob, she! Not The pig bats her eyelashes, puckers her Baldur, right? Right? (Hey, Eric, you got only does she allow the filth-covered hear a problem with your hearing or someknight into her carriage, she gives him thing?) YONory Up Down In Our Burn Drop Enter Exanine Cat Civa Kiss Look Open Pull Put Road armour Barn Coupectate door farnar Farnyard helnet Fornyard of a cow noon unpaper pig Tort-Labo work slip pig along with you. I've done it, you announce to the farnur. \"Here's your pig. If you'll Just sign the work slip then I'll be on ny way.\" The farner renains expressionless. \"You're not done yet, lad,\" he says. \"That's still ny only daughter, and you've got to kiss her to renove the enchantent. But renenber no tongues!\" Talk tu Throu Undo Hait the ecoveca l'Again lips, and wiggles her haunches suggestively. 121 Page 26 Computer Gaming World "


"Breach 3 At least it gets him up the stairs, where he hears enough to know that nefarious plors are afoot! (Like we're all surprised by this). So, before long, Bud has Eric pull Bananacalibur from the stone, to prove he's the one marked by destiny (or at least by designer Bob Bates) to rescue Lorealle. Eric has to pick up five magic items that will get him past The Black Gate (this thing shows up everywhere, doesn't it?), and he's only got a week, so let's go do it! The pitchfork is the first item on the shopping list, and Eric begins his search in the Enchanted Forest. That is, he will, just as soon as he gets past the nasty-looking tree. Looks dry, doesn't it? Anyhow, Eric waltzes past and finds himself in a clearing with branches. Of course they're meant to be moved (hey, there's a lot of obvious stuff in this game; keep that in mind). Underneath is a trap door that leads to ... well, shades of the original Zork! Which is exactly what it is, white house, mailbox, and all. Okay, not really all, but the house is there and so is the mailbox, which contains a winner's sweepstakes notification. A pity Eric is human and not a dwarf, eh? Onward he goes to explore the rest of the GUE, or what's left of it, which isn't much. A couple of Dwarven shops and that's about it. At least Fran (yes, DO talk to him) is helpful. Getting back to the white house (no relation to the one on Pennsylvania Ave), Eric should have no trouble finding a way in, or doing what's necessary. Like I said, it's all obvious. Remember, though, a six foot man doesn't look like a three foot dwarf, unless he's willing to be humble. Coming this Fall! The best-selling science fiction squad level combat game is back and better than ever! Breach 3 will feature state of the art graphics, music and sound effects in addition to the great interface, proper mission builder, plentiful challenging missions and unbeatable playability that you've come to expect! \"Don't be daft. I think you're a perfectly good knight who's just had a run of bad luck. You keep trying, that's the main thing. If I ever got in trouble. I'd much rather be rescued by you than by one of those stuck-up prima donnas who come preening around the castle. So Eric collects the prize, a day at the fun park, which is built before his very eyes! Wow! That's service. Let's check this out. There's a game of Concentration off to one side, just like the one on TV (or used to be on TV; not owning one of those insidious devices, I can't be sure). And yep, Eric has to win to get that magic slingshot! Then, maybe a ride on that neato Ferrous wheel (well, it is made of iron) is order. After all, how else is Eric gonna reach the pitchfork in the branches of the upside-down tree? Speaking of down, the only way down is to jump (after taking the proper precautions, naturally). The rest follows pretty automatically, and it's time to move on for the crescent wrench. So, Eric is now outside a tavern. This is a good time to open up the book, if he hasn't already. Then, he can go inside and try to capture the attention of Bruce the Waiter. When Eric finally gets a look at the menu, what to order should, by now, have been made pretty obvious. Then, it's time for a stroll to the castle. Well, they aren't rolling out the red carpet there, so Eric is just gonna have to find another way in. Try something dangerous (hey, that's what Restore is all about, heh), but check out the bush first. In hardly any time at all, our boy has made it to the rear entrance where he is confronted by, oh no! Killer Turtles!! Good thing he has something to take care of these tortoises. However, he's got nothing to cut the chain holding the door key. The only sci-fi squad level combat game with Interlocking Game System compatibility and the Omnitrend name to ensure quality!!! OMNITREND SOFTWARE Circle Reader Service #64 May 1993 Page 27 "


" 8 Talle prome part Ericgeh a hole in around ser Sorry, Eric, that's one item you can't get into your hot little hands. And hey, let's not forget that poor guy, crr, god, in the cave. It's a But hey, there's always a way around these little difficulties. Visit the special day for him, after all. No one else has remembered it, but stable. Visit the parapet. In no time at all, the problem should melt knights are always thoughtful and courteous and all that stuff. away like wax in a hot flame. Especially when they've read bulletin boards. Then, Eric gets to play Wheel of Torture! Actually, this is more like So now, Eric's read the right book, has all the stuff (he did deliver Jeopardy, and our hero will have to guess at most of the answers. a second note to Morty, I hope), and, after making a complere fool Fortunately, while the categories change, the questions don't, so of himself yet again (seems to come naturally to him), the crowbar is sooner or later, Eric should be able to win the wrench. Ah, easy stuff! his! Only one more item to get!! Now it's off to the fair, to get the Our hero finds himself in a swamp. raw steak (yes, that's one of the five Oddly familiar music plays in the backitems). This one's a bit more comground. Yes, it's time for ... Swamp plicated. Things to do: listen to the Trek!!! I have to say, being a fan of the rules. Play a game or two. Talk to original show, this section was my pereveryone. Visit the Pavilion of Tosonal favorite, and I had a hard time morrow (for some reason, the words getting through it, mainly because of \"babel fish\" come to mind); Eric hysteria. Some baaaaad jokes here, and may incommode himself here. lots of other fun stuff. So, I'm not going Make a fool of yourself, in more to say anything about the \"Swamp ways than one. See all three shows at Trek\" parts; it's better if you come to it the amphitheatre. Get cozy with Lily unprepared. (sorry to say, Eric won't be getting All Eric needs to do here is make a too cozy with her, since he'll never rum drink. That's really simple, as all Then did our goodly knight gaze upon the face of his be finishing up that second errand opponent, and it befell that he forgot the words of the that's necessary is visiting the various ... besides, what would Lorealle challenge he must utter in order that the contest might islands by raft, grabbing everything, think?) and try a couple of other comm and reading the sign on the Lilliputian things, which will be obvious when lever carefully. This section is one of the our hero has gotten this far along. easiest, and more for fun than anything else. When all that's been done, Eric is prepared to take on the dragon Finally, with all the items collected, Eric arrives at the dreaded Black that guards the Raw Steak, as well as the semiprecious ring. Since he Gate. Yay! And about time, too, because Lorealle is about to be listened to the dragon story, he knows exactly what to do, and in married off to a real beast, and we don't want that to happen (don't hardly any time at all, it's off to Godland for the crowbar. forget the candygram!). So, using the magical thingies one by one, Of course, he has to get there first, and getting there means proving Eric opens the gate..to be promptly captured by the wicked witch he's a virgin. Eric did read up on this, I hope. Obtaining the first item (who bears a startling resemblance to a certain other wicked witch). isn't hard, provided Eric makes a display of himself. The second one Before you can even say \"Oz!\", Eric is up in a tower room and the is tricky, but newspapers are just so helpful in this game (by the way, hourglass sands are running out pretty quickly. Nothing like a little you may want to save and try all the bells, just for fun!). tension to liven things up a bit. After passing the test, and stopping Eric, being much brighter than any kid from Kansas (with or briefly to ogle the ladies in the Salon, without dog), does the obvious thing, Eric marches on into the Sanctuary, which gives him a little extra time to where the sacrifices are performed. snoop around and find a way out. Of course, no one's gonna do that Erare What self-respecting domain of evil while he's standing around. RememUp Down In Hut doesn't have a secret passage someber Precious (yes, that ring). Rememwhere? ber what happened when someone Meanwhile, down below, the wedwore it? What do you think might ding guests have all arrived, and the happen if someone wears a semi-preceremony will be taking place soon. cious? Better move fast, Eric. But not too After a short wait, a virgin is fast. There's a little matter of proper dumped into the room as the next timing here (always read labels!) if sacrifice. Eric will have to calm her Lorealle is to be rescued from a fate down before anything else. Then he worse than death (much worse). can take her place, so to speak. Heroic All right! Everything comes off, the actions just come naturally to Agaln pockets the coin and says. nan vale into a place crashes down, the wicked witch knights. gets a bang out of it all, and Eric and In fact, there's no sacrifice involved, just a quick trip up to the top his beloved fly off to the castle! Will they be in time? Will Lorealle of the mountain where all the gods live. A little exploring is in order, inherit ... or is it already too late? Play the game and find out! and Eric should talk to any the gods around. That will make getting Whew! That's enough adventuring (easy though it may be) for now. into the palace much easier. In the meantime, if you need help with an adventure game, you can After performing his little errand, our boy can wander about freely, reach me in the following ways: noting in passing all the interesting items tacked on the bulletin board, as well as the \"hard-working repairgod. He'll fix the broken On Delphi: Stop by the GameSIG (under the Groups and Clubs nectar machine just as soon as he gets around to it. Funny how you menu). On GEnie: Visit the Games Round Table (type: Scorpia to can help him with that. reach the Games RT). By US Mail (enclose a self-addressed, stamped The library can be difficult, as any book chosen only lasts ten cnvelope if you live in the United States): Scorpia, PO Box 338, minutes. Maybe they think Eric took a speed-reading course. Well, Gracie Station, New York, NY 10028. he didn't, but there's always speedwriting. Until next time, happy adventuring! C6W Help Picture Inventory Look a11 card no Poop to Ponce Tort-Ear Burn Duy Drop Enter Exanine Get Civo Look Upon Pull Put Road Taku Talk to Throu Village Square SW 9121a Url lago Squaru This is the village squaru. The courtyard lies to the north, the Union Hall to the vast. the village groen to the south, and the arnoury to Chu Mout. While you wury in the Union Hall. a crowd was gathering in the village square. You olbou your way to the front of the throng and learn that they have cone to see Ponce, the nost fanous bard in all of Torun. Despite his fane. his prices are reasonable, as evidenced by the sign at his side. Soneone tosses the bard a copper ponny. He Undo Hait Huar Ask +1MORE Page 28 Computer Gaming World "


"New! TRISTAN Pinball Available for IBM PC and Macintosh color, \"Best Simulation\" Finalist 1991 computers. -Software Publishers Association \"(TRISTAN) should be a big winner.\" -John Sculley \"You can easily forget you are playing on a computer -Miami Herald 1000 \"TRISTAN puts a new tilt on old fashion pinball.\" -MacWEEK \"Superbly lives up to its billing as solid state pinball.\" -MACWORLD Enjoy the Excitement of Real Pinball! Authentic Ball Action  Wild Pinball Devices Fabulous Sound  TILT and much more... Solid State PINBALL To Order: Contact your favorite retailer or call (613) 967-7900. A448 1000 COIYRIGHT EA TRISTANE MANX415200 Compatible with Windows 3.x, Sound BlasterTM, Adlib SoundTM, and 256 color VGA. SOFTWARE CORPORATION Circle Reader Service #41 Amtex Software Corporation  206 George Street  Belleyinle, Ontario Canada K8N 3H4  voice (613) 967-7900  fax (613) 967-7902 "


"e pevneun TEU Playing a Game of us Ketchup Psygnosis Takes Up Gardening with Bill's Tomato Game by Chuck Miller The sun is brightly shining, the morning air is fresh and crisp, and bounce straight up and down. This, however, will not solve any the ACME delivery van is on its way to market with a truckload puzzles. To progress through the levels composed of blocks, barricades, I of juicy, ripe tomatoes. Just the start of an average day... or is conveyors, spikes, spinning wheels and many other obstacles, one must it? Well, maybe not all that run of the mill, if one happens to be a employ the unique tools at Terry's disposal to construct a path of tomato. escape. These implements include the Frumulous Fan (which comes Terry and Tracy, our two red and round friends, have decided that in two varicties — one facing left and one facing right), Tomato they want more out of life than to be the main ingredients in a favorite Trampoline, Jeremy Jack-in-the-Box and the Blocking Box. condiment. Besides, they are in love and cannot bear the thought of being separated from each other (or stewed together for that matter). Implements of Construction So, with escape the only chance to avoid any further strain on their The most useful item, the Frumulous Fan, is employed to blow Terry relationship, Terry and Tracy become vegetables on the run. across the screen and past obstacles. Placement and number of fans Unfortunately, in their hurry to avoid puree, Tracy is tomaronapped affect Terry's travel horizontally and diagonally. The Tomato Tramby an evil squirrel and dragged up out of sight poline allows the player to bounce Terry over on a nearby vine. Not to stand idly by while his obstacles. Too high a bounce, however, results in sweetheart is carted away, Terry sets off in pura small red pile of tomato pulp. Jeremy Jack-insuit, one branch at a time, in an attempt to either the-Box allows Terry to gain additional height rescue her or become tomato sauce in the procduring his travels across the screen, while the ess. Blocking Box provides a flat surface for rolling upon or as a directional deflector. No Time for Hanging Around Though all items are not available on each level, Bill's Tomato Game is Psygnosis' latest release those used must be placed precisely if Terry is to for the Amiga. Though exhibiting some arcade clear all obstacles and safely reach the conveyor belt leanings, it is primarily a puzzle-based game that transports him to the next level. Each level is featuring 100 levels of conundrums that vary in also timed, allowing three minures to solve the difficulty from extremely easy to frustratingly conundrum before the countdown timer reaches difficult. While some are arduous enough to stay zero. As such, there is little room for error. one's progress for a significant spell, nonc are so difficult as to cause the player to put the game The Hunts is On away in disgust. Usually, when progress is Once the player understands the use of each tool, thwarted for an extended period, the answer is to it is time to begin the attempted rescue. From the simply try a different approach. Radio Screen (the initial screen presented upon Springing into Action loading the game), the player progresses to the vine and world one, level one. Ten worlds, composed of ten levels each, The first puzzle is quite simple. Place three TITLE: Bill's Tomato Game comprise the play environment for Bill's ToSYSTEM: Amiga (512K) fans, then bounce Terry off a drum and onto a mato Game. The player, as Terry Tomato, conveyor. Level two is just as easy. The third begins at the vine where Tracy was snatched PROTECTION Diskand Manual based (Number Entry) DESIGNER: Bill Pullan level, however, begins to add some challenge by away. From here, one must guide Terry up the PUBLISHER: Psygnosis Ltd. providing several trampolines, plus a toy that vine until he enters the first available world. Brookline, MA (617) 731-3553 pops open and squashes Terry unless he bounces When each ten-level section is completed, the offit at just the right moment. From here on out, next world appears. difficulty increases and one's mind is really put Once one enters a world, the puzzles begin. Terry appears on the left oeft to the to the test. Fail too often and it's tomato sauce. side of the screen (normally, though, he can appear on the right side, As in most games of this nature, a code word is provided upon too) upon a springboard. All one can do at this point is direct Terry to completion of cach level. Thus, when the player runs out of tomatoes And, ZAKAJA AMIGA PRICE: $49.99 Page 30 Computer Gaming World "


"Deuneun or has used all available lives, he or she can restart the game from the last completed level. You Say Tomato, I Say Tomto Psygnosis fans who have found pleasure in helping hapless lemmings find their way to safery will enjoy aiding Terry in the attempt to rescue his true love, Tracy. Although not quite as addictive as Lemmings or Ob No! More Lemmings, Bill's Tomato Game is still capable of capturing one's attention for hours on end. Except for several puzzles, difficulty builds well on a scale of increasing complexity. Playing time should extend for several weeks until one is able to master all 100 levels and rescue the damsel (or is that vegetable) in distress. Those itching for joystick action, however, should avoid this offering as there is actually nothing to shoot. In fact, joysticks are not even supported. All input is accomplished with the use of either the mouse or keyboard in this game of logic and timing. Plump, Juicy and Delicious Graphics are a mix of high and low resolution images. Hires 16-color art is employed for the Radio and High ho and High Score Screens, while each level of puzzles makes use of 32-color low resolution images. Overall, visual quality is very high, providing an attractive environment. Audio accompaniment is also of high caliber. Background music and digitized sounds effectively enhance game atmosphere and can be toggled on and off if desired. There should be no need to turn them off, though, as the catchy tunes and realistic sound effects add immensely to the game without becoming monotonous even after extended play. In the Basket Unfortunately, Bill's Tomato Game employs disk-based copy protection (as well as manual-based) and cannot be installed to a hard drive. Psygnosis promised almost a year ago that they would be moving away from disk-based protection and making provision for hard drive installation. So far, they have not made good on this promise. Still, the game loads quickly and, with IMB of RAM or more, there is little disk access during play. The documentation is comprised of Psygnosis familiar four-language manual (English, French, German and Italian), its contents sufficient for instructional purposes and quite humorous. Also included is a handy \"bookmark» which acts as a quick reminder of mouse controls and item descriptions. How About a Game of Squash? Bill's Tomato Game is one of Psygnosis best Amiga offerings of late and is much more original and enjoyable than any of their other releases during the past six months. It is the most entertaining and addictive Amiga title I have played in a long time. Puzzle difficulty and variety is balanced, and evidently a great deal of care and thought has gone into its creation. Amiga owners who have been longing for an excellent means of challenging their mental powers now have a valid reason to visit their local computer store. Bill's Tomato Game is more enjoyable than soup de jour or a fresh garden salad, and has fewer calories. In fact, spending time with Terry Tomato is guaranteed to get the juices flowing and paste a smile on your face. Cow LORDS OF DESTINY Discover the pbm game sweeping the nation! Embark on a fantastic journey in the incredible world of play-by-mail gaming with a game specially the game of galactic empire building, designed to be easy legendary beings, and cataclysmic battles! to learn but impossible to master! Lords of Destiny is a 100 % computermoderated play-by-mail game where INTO many players compete in a galaxy packed with features like: THE many different ship types; economic and military tech levels planetary defense shields composed of individual ground units MAELSTROM ancient artifacts with special powers known only to the owner hundreds of named characters with abilities such as exploring, Players begin each game spying, researching, governing, diplomacy, psionics, combat, ... with one general and four special locations to utilize such as black holes, secret societies, captains, each leading a training academies, worm holes, and the 7 wonders of the galaxy company loyal to you. Your neutral empires ranging from primitive cave men to advanced quest is to amass enough elder races, possessing their own forces, characters, and artifacts power to proclaim your general the king of the land. Along the way you must Turns are only $3.75, no \"double\" turns or hidden fees ever persuade powerful beings and monsters to join your cause Games last about 27 turns; with 7, 14, or 21 day turns and fight many battles. Perhaps you will even be powerful Basic version available which provides an easy-to-learn game enough to attract an immortal! Gate in powerful emonic AND MORE! monsters to aid your attack or summon awesome angelic A detailed combat system with free battle reports; updated galactic maps beings to help your defense. You determine which regions included with every turn; and customized fill-in-the-blank order sheets to concentrate your recruiting efforts; each region has population, factorics, industrial complexes, crew types, plundering, different natives who may join your cause. Do you dare alliances, power plays, long-range scanners, multi-class characters... enter the mystical whirlpools and journey to the unknown? NO OBLIGATION! NO OBLIGATION SPECIAL! Mention this ad and receive free RULES, SETUP, 2 TURNS: ALL FREE! rules and setup! There is no obligation to continue playing if not satisfied. Turns are only $3.25 with never any extra, hidden costs. Maelstrom Games; PO Box 5461; Oxnard, CA 93031 Maelstrom Games; PO Box 5461; Oxnard, CA 93031 FREE RULES! FREE SETUP! STRM May 1993 Circle Reader Service #70 Page 31 "


"Scorpion's View Scorpia Orckiller Lights Mindcraft's Magic Candle III Scorpia is an experienced and respected adventure game expert. CGW is pleased to provide this forum for her distinctive and often controversial perspective. SN059 ERCHEFFER BOCO00C Garz RE use Rega Lagic ouit the city. yet. It behind the wa 115 to ima snagic sont agic Candle III brings to get out of the forest as quickly as possible once Garz has lis back to the town of bereast\" been accepted into the party. Tclermain on the is ELENCH Once out of the woods, you have some time to reconland of Oshcrun, a place familTenpie sider the party's composition. Several old friends, namely iar to anyone who played Magic Tuff, Sakar and Rimfiztrik (Fiz), are waiting eagerly to Candle II. This time around, go adventuring with you again. Since there can be only Telermain is the starting point B0110 35 six in the party, and you do need Garz in the group for for an expedition to Solia, the awhile, you'll have to make some decisions on who stays collective name for the islands to Notes and who leaves. Garz, by the way, is rather like a Hireling: the south, about which little is aik while you don't have to pay him, he won't share or trade known. Uhisper we're not really, in sheatne with anyone else. with anyone else. The problem is a mysterious After settling on the party members, and doing some blight that has already engulfed the shopping, it's time to set sail for Kabelo, the Orc capital much of the islands and is even now spreading onto Oshcrun. It is the city. The king is not exactly thrilled over your appearance (it was his party's job to find a means of stopping and/or destroying the blight calling me \"Scorpia Orckiller» that gave me the clue), but for the sake before it takes over everywhere, bringing an end to all life. of his son, he'll at least talk to you. As with the previous game, there are many Companions and HireWhat he wants is for you to recover the royal sceptre from the goblins lings along the way, eager to join the party and help save the world. who live on an island a little Companions are full-fledged members of the group, willing to share further south. Relations beand trade with others, as well as to be assigned to train or work. tween the two races are a bit Hirelings are in it for the money; what they have is theirs, and they strained at the moment, so Carole. will not share or trade with anyone else. They also want to be in on the King expects you to do his the action, and can't be assigned to train or carn money at a shop. dirty work for him. When you arrive in Serivu, In addition, there are three special Companions that you choose from the goblin city, you come a pool of eight at the start of the game. What makes them different is into a situation that is both a that they come with some extra points that you can put into their poor piece of game design attributes and/or skills as you desire. This allows you to customize and a poor piece of programthem, at least to a certain extent. In all other regards, they are the same ming. The very moment the as any other Companion. party walks into the mayor's Your own character, the \"Lukas\" hero, comes with his or her own set room, Garz pipes up with a of attributes and skills, depending on the profession you choose at the request to be assigned to stay beginning of the game. You can also transfer your character in from as a hostage for the sceptre Magic Candle II. Unfortunately, I was not able to find my MC Il save before you have said a word MINECRAFT disk, and I cannot say what happens to your character when it is to the mayor. brought over. Worse, if you don't assign Garz to The Magic Candle III After the three Companions have been chosen and customized, the stay immediately when he asks it, you PRICE: PROTECTION: None game proper begins with the party in the middle of a small, blightcan't finish this part of the game. DESIGNER: James Thomas stricken forest outside of Telermain. Here you meet Garz, an Orc Should you talk to the mayor first, PUBLISHER: Mindcraft prince who offers to join the group. This is the true purpose of being he'll mention the sceptre and the gobTorrance, CA (310) 320-5215 in the woods, as there is nothing else of interest here, and it is best to lin charter (which the Orcs are holdTITLE: SYSTEM: IBM $59.95 Page 32 Computer Gaming World "


"12 22755 XOTILL Barz 5% undeep 1 29 OK ing), but that's all. Nothing about trading the items, nothing about up the cash supply quickly. Add in armor and spellbooks, and the wanting a hostage, etc. If you then assign Garz to stay, and talk to the money practically melts before your eyes. mayor again, nothing changes. Nor does the Orc king realize that Garz This is all the more serious as the first dungeon in the game, the is gone from the party should you return to Kabelo. The action just Tower of Qaldiur, is crawling with Fermigons, both in the rooms and isn't noticed at all by the program. lurking in ambush in the corridors. One or two hits from these things Therefore, you must assign Garz to stay as soon as m can put down anyone in the group. he requests it. Then the mayor, when you talk to him, Walk into an ambush with six or will babble on about accepting Garz and hand over seven Fermigons, and it's time to the sceptre. This you can take back to Kabelo and Voiipian restore the game. Even knowing exchange for the charter, which you then bring to the 90 de about them ahead of time doesn't mayor, who releases Garz. Vianor sakar help much if you don't have enough USilva Not only was this poorly thought out, but it is a protective herbs to go around, and pointless exercise. You simply bring one item here Qaldiur has six levels to get and take another there. Nothing special is required cont through, with other creatures bebeyond having Garz in the party. Neither the goblins sides, which are just as nasty. nor the Orcs give you anything for returning their Rightron tasur to 111ght Wi 11 conquer So, you are pretty much forced respective items. The entire sceptre/charter sequence into money-grubbing at the begindoes little to further the storyline. While it does serve Este renerma in to Pheron. ning. Instead of getting right on to introduce Garz, and you do need an Orc in the group at the end, with the quest, you stick people in shops to earn coins and sit the rest something better than this could surely have been devised. of the group in front of Ketrop to hunt for food. Every so often, you Past this, the game falls back into the familiar Magic Candle mode. duck into the village to sell most of it, then hunt for more. The party visits the various towns and islands, talks to people, picks This is boring. It is also ridiculous. Here we have a party of heroes up information, gathers crucial items, rampages through dungeons and our to save the world, but they can't get on with the job because they towers, and finally performs the necessary ritual to cleanse the land. have to make some money first — and this with the blight always on Little has changed in the game mechanics since MC II, but there have the move. been some improvements. The Keeping money in short supply and the prices of notepad is now a much more sep 185TOV DE crear 0 D important herbs high, was deliberate on Mindcraft's refined utility. The pad is saved part as a way of making the game \"more challenging\". when the game is saved, so nothWhat they overlooked is the fact that anyone can make ing is lost. You can call up the BRAND 91 99 og the game as challenging as they wish by simply purchasnotes anytime and scroll through ing fewer herbs in the first place. The previous two them, from either the top or botgames had that flexibility; Magic Candle III allows you rom, and even search for individnone, thereby making the game unnecessarily difficult. ual words. Also, there is an MS Press 0-9 to xchange speed If the entire party dies or your character dies and is not option to delere notes and anWin or arly other W key to resume resurrected, the game ends. Ends, mind you. A screen is other that lets you add in notes Ses command. displayed saying how the great hero failed and how the of your own. Continued from Danebit.-83bear world was destroyed, followed by a drop to DOS. Not before is the ability to set the a menu for restoring the game — a drop to DOSdetail level of the auto-notes, forcing you to reboot. By now, you'd have thought game designers from taking down virtually everything to only the most vital informawould know enough to avoid this! tion. Dungeon design was not well-coordinated. The earlier dungeons Party movement is also better. There were many complaints about were generally much harder than the last one. True, by the time I having to always change the formation when moving through tight reached the endgame, the party had finally accumulated a reasonable spors and narrow passageways in the previous games. Now the party supply of herbs, all the spellbooks, and a few suits of methreal, as well members automatically change their positions temporarily, making it as having wakened all the gods, so it was a pretty tough group. easier to maneuver in most of the difficult areas. Still, you would expect that six levThey don't always rearrange themselves perfectly, Nov 12 227 450 els of caves, followed by ten levels of however, and from time to time you may need to tower, would be a difficult proposichange the party leader to get the group moving 15 tion, when in fact the whole thing again. NOK 5929 turned out to be pretty much a The blight is a different and interesting menace. Vinor 43 95 gakar 59 83 romp. Most of the critters encounIt is something you can actually see on the move, tered were relatively low-level monwhich produces a certain amount of urgency. As you sters, and even the supposedly re-visit areas over time, the spread of the blight use Attack Magic all-powerful blight lords proved to grows. Oshcrun is relatively clear of it at the start of Drauz be no challenge at all. The \"big conthe game, but by early spring, the blight is almost Pass frontation\" in the final room was on Telermain's doorstep. If nothing else, it is defiamazingly easy. nitely an incentive not to waste too much time. Overall, in spite of the neat blight For all thar, MC III is a game with problems. The idea, Magic Candle III is a dull game. I had a hard time getting into it, biggest one is lack of money at the start. You don't have much, and and slogged on mainly to get it over with. We've all been here before even with Tuffin the group to do the trading, prices are high, especially and there isn't anything really new or exciting. The game is unnecesfor the magical herbs and mushrooms. sarily lengthened by the constant need for money, and, overall, one is As an example, nift, the invulnerability herb, costs 120 coins for six left with the feeling of doing things by rote rather than going on a (that's with Tuff and his 75 trading skill doing the buying). Gonshi, grand adventure. It is all very depressing and rather a shame, as the first the speed-up mushroom, is 105 coins for twelve. These are two things Magic Candle held much promise for the future promise that has everyone in the party needs, and even a small supply for six people eats yet to be realized. Cow Volipian Head Whispers May 1993 Page 33 "


"Deview The Gilded Cage Wi lithe Avator ver Baba na Underwond? by Doug Sencat Underworld Libyrinth of Worlds Iltima Underworld II: Labyrinth of Worlds, is the second of Origins' and Looking Glass Technologies' 3-D dungeon games. With the success of their first \"you are there\" environment in Underworld I, the folks at Origin have gone on to a more ambitious plot within the same environment. Surprise, surprise, the Avatar is needed again. The rubes in Britannia can't seem to do anything for themselves. So, they are once again a potential targer for destruction. Fortunately, they have the Avatar to save them, on his supposed ninth quest for them. This time, the Guardian of Black Gate fame has reappeared (as I'm sure most players of that game certainly expected). This enigmatic red-faced nemesis has decided to stop Lord British's interference in his works directly, by sealing off Castle British entirely from the ourside world. He has surrounded the castle in Blackrock, a substance impervious to magical and physical manipulation. The imprisonment will isolate both the heroes of Britannia and the Avatar himself, while the Guardian wreaks havoc outside, converting followers, inciting warfare, and in general doing nasty, evil things. There is hope. The Avatar must descend into the centuries-old dungeons of the castle in search of clues about the Guardian's sources of power. Before long, this search takes the Avatar on a multiple-world quest of exploration to eight centers of the Guardian's strength, each of which must be nullified to save Britannia, and the Multiverse, from the Guardian's manipulation. The Rudiments of Disbelief Character creation is a short and simple process, since this is a solo-adventure. The player can choose among eight classes (Mage, Fighrer, Ranger, Shepherd, Bard, Druid, WHERIAIN TITLE: SYSTEM: PRICE: PROTECTION: DESIGNERS: PUBLISHER: Ultima Underworld e Labyrinth of Worlds IBM 386 or 486 with 2 MB RAM $79.95 None Looking Glass Technologies Origin Systems Austin, TX A Looking Glass Technologies Design Page 34 Computer Gaming World "


"CHIPS & BITS inc. FREE GAME WITH YOUR $75 ORDER* PO Box 234 Rochester, VT 05767 Fax 802—767-3382 Int'I 802—767—3033 Call 800-753-4263 Shipping to US PRAK, HI, APO & FPO SA per order. Air Mall to Canada $6 per order. Handling $1 pershipment. 2 Business Day Alr US SB per order; PR, HIS121st Item +$2 ea.add?, AK$19181 Item +$2 ea. add'l. Handling si per shipment, Europe, S. America Air Mall $191st Item+S6 ea. add'l. Asia, Australia, Africa, Air Mall S251st Item +S6 ea. add. Handling $i per shipment. IBM HARDWARE IBM ADVENTURE IBM ADVENTURE wo $28 $32 $4 COMMANDE $75 A Chris Roberts Game 'STRIKE COMMANDER' is a flight simulator of uncomprising quality and realism, interwoven with a grippingcinematic story. This release marks the completion of 2 years of intense software develop ment using Origin's Realspace graphics system. Fly over extremely detailed enemy territory to deliver your cargo. $52 $9 $24 $38 $9 $9 $38 S32 3 Button Dexxa Mouse Acoustic Research P22 Acoustic Research P42 $159 Acoustic Research P570 $319 Acoustic Research P622 $239 AdLib Sound Card $59 AdLib Visual Composer Adlib Gold Sound Card S169 Adlib Programmer's Man $27 Adlib Surround Sound $64 Adlib Telephone Module $64 Advncd Gravis Ultrasound $139 Champ Joystick $19 Flight Stick Joystick $36 Game Card 3 Automatic $39 Labtec 105 Powered Speakr $24 Maxx Control Yoke $59 Maxx Rudder Pedals Flight $39 Media Concept Sound Board $79 PC Symphony Sound Board $37 Pro Audio Spectrum 16 S179 Pro Audio Spectrurn Plus $149 Quickshot 123 Joystick $12 Rudder Pedals Driving $39 Sony E414 Headphones $15 Sony SRS7 Speakers $15 Sony SRS9 Speakers $20 Sound Blaster 16 $239 Snd Blaster CD ROM Upgd $339 Snd Bistr Multimedia Startr $399 Snd Bistr Multimedia Upgrd $199 Sound Blaster PRO Basic $139 Sound Blaster PRO $169 Sound Blaster Sound Card $99 Sound Machine $99 Thrustmastr Flight Control $69 Thrustmastr Flight Ctrl Pro $119 Thrustmastr Rudder Contrl $119 Thrustmastr Weapons Cntrl $89 Thunder Board for WIN $109 Video Blaster $349 $29 BREN e BOONDI. $12 Rex Nebular Cos Gen Ben $39 Rex Nebular Master Edition $52 Riftwar Legacy VGA $39 Ringworld $36 Rise of the Dragon VGA $34 Risky Woods S24 Robocop 3 $32 Rocketeer $32 Rome: Pathway to Power S38 SDI Screen Antics WIN $24 Search for the King Secret Monkey Island 2 Secret Monkey Island VGA Sex Olympics $19 Sex Vixens from Space $12 Shadowgate WIN $34 Shogun $12 Sierra Adventure Bundle 1 $39 Space Quest 1 VGA $16 Space Quest 4 VGA $36 Space Quest 5 VGA $39 Space Quest Bundle $36 Spellcasting 101 $19 Spellcasting 201 $36 Spellcasting 301 Spring Brk $34 Star Trek 25th Anniversary S36 Star Trek 5 Star Trek: Next Generation $46 Stellar 7 $21 Teenage Mutnt Ninja Turtles $25 Terminator 2029 $42 The Prophecy $36 The Train $6 Theme Park Mystery $15 Time Quest $12 Transylvania 3 $15 Troika Trolls Uninvited Universe 1-3 Each Walker $32 War in Middle Earth $12 Warriors of Legend $19 Weird Dreams $9 Where America's Past CSD $37 Where Europe Carmen SD $29 Where in Time Carmen SD $32 Where in USA Carmen SD $29 Where in USA Carmen Dlx $45 Where in World Carmen SD $32 Where World Carmen Dlx $52 Wonderland $16 $32 'RED BARON takes you back to this bygone era where you'll experience the look and feel of aerial warfare in WWI. Engage in close range dogfights, goballoonbusting, take on Zeppelins, escort bombers, and go head-tohead with famous aces. Geta FREE 'Red Baron Mission Builder' when you purchase 'Red Baron'. $36 Inca $15 Diehard Dog Eat Dog Dominus $39 Don't Go Alone Duck Tales $15 Earthrise $9 East vs West Berlin 1948 S9 Elf $24 Epic S32 Eric the Unready $38 Felony $3 Flashback $33 Floor 13 $15 Free DC Future Wars Galleons of Glory $24 Gama Force $6 Gambit Gateway Godfather Gold Rush $15 GrailQuest $21 HUMANS $21 Harley Davidson $9 Heart of China VGA $19 Heaven and Earth $32 Heimdall $17 Hired Guns $32 Hook Hostage $6 Hound of Shadow $17 $42 Indy Jones 4 Fate Atlantis $36 Indy Jones Grix Adv VGA $27 Inspector Gadget $34 Jack the Ripper $38 KGB $17 King's Quest 5 VGA S36 King's Quest 6 VGA $45 King's Ransom Kristal L.A. Law $34 Laffer Utilities WIN $24 Lane Mastadon S6 Laura Bow 2 $36 Leather Goddesses S12 Leather Goddesses 2 Legacy: Realm Of Terror $41 Legend of Faerghail S34 Legend of Kyrandia Leisure Suit Larry 1 VGA $15 Leisure Suit Larry 2 $15 Leisure Suit Larry 5 VGA $34 Leisure Suit Larry Bundle 1 $39 Loom $19 Lords of the Rising Sun $34 Lost Files Sherlock Holmes S44 Lost Treasures of Infocom $42 Lost Treasures of Infocom 2 $29 Lost in LA $37 Magnetic Scrolls Bundle $21 Manhole $29 Manhunter New York $28 Manhunter San Francisco $15 Maniac Mansion $18 Martian Memorandum $34 Max Pac $26 Mean Streets $37 Metal Mutant $32 Moebius $28 Murder Club $28 Murder by the Dozen $15 Nebulas Out of this World Plan 9 from Outer Space $31 Police Quest 1 VGA S24 Police Quest 2 $15 Police Quest 3 VGA $36 Power Hits: Movies $19 Prince of Persia $25 Return to Zork Red S6 $34 Baron IBM ADVENTURE Wall Ater Actuel Wild Turlace! yarmx* IBM STRATEGY $32 Advent Willie Beamish VGA $24 Advent Willy Beamish 2 VGA S39 Advt Willie Beamish VGA $24 All Dogs go to Heaven $17 Alone in the Dark $36 Altered Destiny $34 Amazon $39 An American Tail $26 Attack Pack $42 B.A.T. $19 Blue Force: Next of Kin $45 Cadaver $27 Castle Wolfstein $37 Chamber Sci-Mutant Prstss $25 Coaster $32 Code Name Iceman 2 VGA $39 Codename Iceman $15 Colonel's Bequest $15 Conquest Robin Hood VGA $36 Conquests of Camelot $15 Conspiracy Deadlock Files $34 Countdown $37 Covert Action $12 Crime Does Not Pay $29 Crime Wave $37 Cruise for a Corpse $32 Cybercon 3 $29 Dark Half $12 Dark Heart of Uukrul $34 Dark Side $28 Dark Sun Grey Isle Exp Pak $34 David Wolf Secret Agent $15 Day of the Tentacle $39 Deja Vu 1&2 WIN $28 Deja Vu 2 Lost in LV $6 Demon's Gate $29 \"LINKS 386 PRO offers SUPER VGA graphics and advanced features designed for your 386 or 486. New features include computer opponent, save game option that allows your friends to play against you in an existing game, pre-recorded games from worthy opponents, and many gamemodes, $39 9 LINKS (386 A Train A Train Construction Set Air Force Commander Airbucks $36 Ancient Art War Sea $29 Ancient Art of War Ancient Art of War Sky Are We There Yet Armada 2525 Ashes of Empire Balance of Power 1990 Bandit Kings Ancient China Battle Isle Battle Isle Scenario Disk Battles of Destiny $38 Bermuda Square $21 Big Business $12 Breach 2 $19 Breach 2 Scenario Disk $15 Buzz Aldrin Race into Space $42 Caesar $36 Carrier Command $9 Castles $18 Castles 2 $36 MAY CGW 1 $32 $22 $36 ACCESS $32 Visa & MC Accepted. CODs S6. Checks Held 4 Weeks. Money Orders Treated as Cash. Most items Shipped Same Day. Shipping times not guaranteed. Check compatibility before you buy. Defectivos replaced with same product. Oller, price & availability subject to change. All Sales Final. SEELAST PAGE FOR DETAILS Circle Reader Service #48 $38 "


"Deview Paladin, Tinker) and then, can customize the the player is advised to organize his posses The Elements of Pleasure class by choice of skills. While each class has sions carefully. Keeping several sacks and its own benefits and advantages, the game can backpacks is recommended, enabling a diviThere has obviously been a great amount of be completed with any of them, and the skillssion of similar items. Also, the player should effort and time spent on this game. The 3-D effort choice can allow a character to adopt a needed stockpile certain heavy things (such as gold) movement, while perfected earlier, is just as quality of another class. (For example, a in an easy to reach location. impressive. This technique gives the player a fighter can still cast spells if he takes time to Skills are handled automatically, with a few strong sense of «being there. The screen bobs learn how, and a Paladin could repair items if notable exceptions (such as Repairing, Pickup and down as one walks, and footsteps can he wished). be heard as one moves. When the Avatar falls ing Locks and Tracking). A player skilled with While there have been graphic improve the sword will hit more often; an acrobatic into a river or pool of water, he sinks down, ments from Underworld I, the game's features character will jump better and take less damand is caught by the current as the screen sways back and forth enough to give one and gameplay are very similar. Those who age from falls. The game allows even unskilled motion-sickness. mastered the 3-D environment of the first will characters to perform actions involving those find an easy transition into this new storyline. skills, though with slightly less success. Even Newcomers will need time to adjust to the a character with no swimming skill won't EBK mouse interface, which is less than intuitive immediately drown. MXD KM For example, the way the game handles leftM agic is handled via runes and each spell is MINK and right buttons for different functions is an a two or three rune combination. In order to FREE acquired skill. Fortunately, there are keyboard NINNI cast any particular spell, the Avatar must be at equivalents to many of the functions. a high enough level, have enough Mana (castAUTO ing juice), and have the necessary runes. The rune aspect means that even a high-level charXSARAN acter won't be able to cast a lower level spell if ISSA he lacks the proper runes. An important process of the game is adding to one's rune-bag This aspect of the game is further heightthrough exploration. ened by the many small derails included by Combat is simple whip out a weapon, the designers. For example, the Avatar will find a foc, and strike them. The combat become woozy and dizzy if he drinks too RUNCIS graphics are well done, with three types of much. He can even pass out from such excess. SO melee weapons (Maces, Blades and Axes), Strange mushrooms will cause vision to disUOI three strike types (Overhead bash, sidewise tort, and the screen shakes when damage is It will also take time to adjust to the enviswipe or jab) each of which has advantages taken. When the player sleeps, occasionally he ronment. The ability to move freely through against certain focs and missile weapons. Durdreams, and a night's sleep in a bed is better ing battle, foes move about, and the player than in a bedroll. Further, sleeping without 3-D space can make movement frustrating. Gerring stuck on corners, whirling about too must keep moving to keep from getting ateating beforehand can result in a restless night. tacked from behind or overwhelmed by mul Before long, the player can become comrapidly in place, walking too close to an object to see it, and missing a corridor by not turning pletely immersed in the fantasy world. tiple foes. fast enough are some of the more common The graphics are well-executed. Animation neophyte mistakes. In time, however, it is Zevel 6 is smooth, though slow on a lower-end compossible to familiarize yourself with the Avaputer, and the monsters and people have a tar's body, just as one would a new car. The good range of possible movements. Rats leap game provides a well-written tutorial which up at one's face, imps crackle with magical assists in the transition, as well as giving some energy. Even death-throes are portrayed, as demons explode in colorful balls of power, or important game information. snow-cats flip over backward before dying in Similar to all such 3-D dungeon games, a pool of blood. items are handled by placing them in either The spellcasting also deserves a note of the inventory or upon the body itself. Most items have descriptions detailing their current praise. While not extremely complex or sophisticated, the spells are varied, giving a good condition, which can crode over time and usc. Lest the reader think this Ultima is merely a balance of utilitarian, movement, informaItems which have been subject to frequent hack-and-slash, however, it should be stated abuse will eventually break or be destroyed, chat role-playing is a strong element here. rional, combat and defensive measures. Further, they are entertaining to cast. The Deadly though a proficient character can repair items Conversation is just as important, if not more, Seeker spell deserves special mention. This than having a good sword arm or spell book. to full cffectiveness. spell is the Fantasy version of the Heat Seeking One nice feature of the game is the fact that There are many characters to interact with, be Missile. When cast, this spell causes a smokeitems (except weapons) don't need to be \"in it in the castle, the dungeons, or the other trailing missile to launch out and track down hand\" to be used. For example, a wand within worlds. The plot is rich with details and charany nearby foe, even around doorways! It is a backpack can be activated simply by opening acters, and much is gained from trying a not only diverting, but very viscerally satisfythe backpack, and then left-clicking on the peaceful approach. wand. This is welcome since moving items can T hroughout all of this, the Guardian conConvenient for users with slow computers be a tedious process. If the player wishes to tinues to expand his multi-world empire, con(such as myself. the graphic detail can be move the wand from his backpack to a sack, scantly taunting the Avatar in dream messages. reduced, which greatly speeds play. Users may he has to move the wand out of the backpack Lord British and the other inhabitants of as find it useful, even on a fast system, to use (assuming he left an empty spot in his primary tle British have to deal with their own probdifferent modes of detail at various points in inventory), close the backpack, pick up the lems, be it possible traitors, lack of water, or the game. Specifically, reducing the detail can wand, and then put it into the sack. Since the Guardian himself, who offers bribes and speed movement considerably when one is there are many necessary items in the game, power to subvert the good. returning to the castle after a long trek. 100 ing. Page 36 Computer Gaming World "


"CHIPS & BITS inc. FREE GAME WITH YOUR $75 ORDER* POBOX 234 Rochester, VT 05767 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'l 802-767-3033 Call 800-753-4263 Shipping to US PR,AK, HI, APO & FPO $4 per order. Air Mall to Canada $6 por order. Handling $1 per shipmont. 2 Business Day Alr US $6 por order; PR, HIS121st Item +$2 ea. addT; AK $19 1st Itom + S2 ea. add'l. Handling S1 pershipment, Europe, S. America Air Mall $19 1st item+$6ea.add'l. Asia, Australia, Africa, Air Mail $25 1st item + $6ea. add. Handling $1 per shipment, IBM STRATEGY IBM STRATEGY IBM TRADITIONAL $34 $38 $34 $34 $21 $19 S32 $34 $27 $18 $23 $34 $12 $39 \"ULTRABOTS'is a futuristic first person & stategic robot battle game. Choose from 3 different ultrabot models and launch aglobal campaign to repel the massive alien invasion, one battle at a time. Features ray traced, 3D modeled animation, digitized explosions & special effects, and dozens of orders you can give to your troops. $39 * Second Conflict WIN Seven Cities Gold 2 Shadow President ShadowGate WIN Siege Siege Expansion Disk Sim Ant Sim Ant WIN Simcity Simcity Graphic Set 1 Simcity Graphic Set 2 Simcity WIN Simearth Simearth 2000 Simfarm Simlife Spaceward Ho! Spaceward Ho! WIN Special Forces Spoils of War Star Control Star Control 2 Star Legions Starfleet 1 Starfleet 2 Strategic Forces Sword of Aragon Task Force 1942 Tegel's Mercenaries Theatre of War Theatre of War Set 1 Traders Unnatural Selection Utopia Vikings Fields of Conquest Visions of Aftermath Warlords Warlords 2 When Two Worlds War Worlds at War $25 $42 S41 $41 $38 $38 $39 $34 $29 $36 S38 $17 $38 S19 $28 $39 $44 $17 $21    NO   $19  $32 $29 $37 $24 $24   'CAPITALIST PIG' lets you take charge of your own company from the first shipment to the first billion. As the CEO you must balance marketing, public relations, manufacturing, and management. Features actual 20th century economic statistics, hiring & firing employees, advertising, office expansion, and disasters. $45 $42 $9 Castles Northern Campaigns $19 Centurion Defender Rome Civilization $39 Civilization Master Edition 545 Command HQ $19 Conquered Kingdoms Conquest of Japan $36 Crisis in the Kremlin Dark Seed Dark Star Defender of the Crown Diplomacy Discovery Stp Columbus $34 Dragon Force $19 Dragon Lord $12 Dune $24 Dune 2 $44 El Fish $41 Empire Deluxe $40 Fighting for Rome $12 Final Conflict $17 Fireteam 2200 $24 Fireteam 2200 Constrctn Kit Fort Apache Gemfire Genghis Khan Global Conquest Global Effect Gold of the Americas Imperium Inindo Koshan Conspiracy L'Empereur Lemmings 2 Lemmings Datadisk Liberty or Death Lost Admiral Lost Admiral Enhanced Lost Admiral Scenario Disk Lost Patrol Maelstrom $38 Medieval Lords $14 Mega Lo Mania $31 Mercenaries $38 Merchant Colony Microcosm $32 Millenium $20 Monarch $38 MoonBase $24 New World Order Nobunaga's Ambition $37 Nobunaga's Ambition 2 Nuclear War $9 Objection Objection Enhanced Operation Combat $12 Pacific Theater Ops $42 Paladin 2 $34 Perfect General $29 Perfect General 2 $44 Perfect General Scen Disk Perfect General Scen 2 $23 Populous $17 Populous 2 $38 Populous Promised Lands Powermonger $34 Powermonger World War 1 $21 PushOver $32 QOP Bundle $49 Railroad Tycoon $34 Rampart $17 Reach for the Stars S24 Realms $17 Red Zone $32 Renegade Legion Interceptor $12 Riders of Rohan $19 Robo Sport WIN $34 Romance 3 Kingdoms $42 Romance 3 Kingdoms 2 $42 Rules of Engagement $19 Rules of Engagement 2 $38 $42 $19 S9 RIFIR Demon Blue $10 Dr Floyds Desktop Toys Dr Thorp's Blackjack $32 Dr Thorp's mini Blackjack $10 Dr Wong Jacks & Video Pokr $10 Edward O'Thorpe Black Jack S9 Electric Jigsaw FS-Pro $21 Faces Tetris 3 $15 Family Crossword Puzzles $28 Femme Fatale $26 Femme Fatale Data Disk 1 $18 Femme Fatale Data Disk 2 $18 Femme Fatale Data Disk 3 $18 Floor 13 $15 GO Master Ver 5 WIN $39 Gambit (chess) $38 Game-Maker $68 Games People Play $21 Go Master Ver 5 $39 Go Master Dix Ver 5 $99 Go Master Dix Ver 5 WIN $109 Go Master Junior Ver 5 $19 Go Master Junior Ver 5 WIN $19 Go Master Tool Kit $39 Go Master Tool Kit WIN $79 Grand Slam Bridge $11 Grand Slam Bridge 2 $32 Grandmaster Chess $32 Hollywood Squares $15 Home Alone 2 $26 Home Casino Spectacular $15 Hong Kong Mah Jong Pro $32 House of Cards $12 Hoyle's Book Games V1 $21 Hoyle's Book Games V2 $19 Hoyle's Book Games V3 $29 Hoyle's Book Games V4 $29 Ishido $17 Jeopardy $9 Jeopardy 2 Jeopardy 25th Aniversary $15 Jigsaw Pinups $24 Laffer Utilities WIN Lexicross Lotto Gold $29 Mental Blocks Monopoly Deluxe $29 Monopoly Deluxe WIN Oligopoly Omar Sharif Bridge WIN Omar Sharif on Bridge $37 On Target $10 Penthouse Jigsaw XXX Pictionary $12 Planet of Lust $12 Pool Shark $15 Price is Right Prime Time Hits Prime Time Hits 2 Punisher $9 Puzzle Gallery 1 $12 Puzznic $25 Rack'em S12 Risk $21 Risk WIN S26 Rodeo Games $10 Sargon 5 $13 Scrabble $24 Scrabble Deluxe $26 Scrabble Deluxe WIN $26 Scruples $28 Sesame Street S12 Shanghaii 2 Sharkey's 3D Pool $12 Shogi Master $34 Sierra Family Fun Pak $29 Solitaire Royale $19 Solitaire WIN $32 Solitaires Journey $34 Solitaires Journey $36 MAY CGW 2 IBM TRADITIONAL $17 $21 $24 $10 $12 $12 S15 $10 $38 S34 $29 $32 $37 $34 $24 $49 $36 $32 $19 $29 $12 $19 Uredom The most EXCITING SEA BATTLES ever fouglio $15 $24 $15 $15 $10 3D Pinball 3 in 1 Players's Pack Acquire Amarillo Slim's Poker Amarillo Slims 7 Card Stud Armada Villa Crespo CB Backgammon WIN Battle Chess 4000 SVGA Battle Chess 4000 VGA Battle Chess Battle Chess WIN Blackjack Blackjack WIN Bridge 7 Bridgemaster Caesars Palace Caesars Palace WIN Casino Craps Casino Game Pak WIN Casinos of the World Ceasars Palace Centerfold Squares Checkmate Checkmate WIN Chess Net WIN Chess X Colossus ChessMeister 5 Billion & 1 Chessmaster 3000 Chessmaster 3000 WIN Classic 5 Classic 5 WIN Clue Clue Master Detective Combination Lock Cribage Gin King Crossword Creator Dealer's Choice DREADNOUGHTS accurately models the looks, specifications and tactics of fighting fleets during the great age of the battleship. Includes 7 scenarios such as; Coronel (1914). Falklands (1914). Jutland (1916) and Dogger Bank (1915). Features a menu interface for entering commands, external 3D view, & hidden movement. 542 $32 S14 $29 $15 $21 $36 $36 $12 S48 $29 $34 $32 $32 $12 $15 $29 $10 Visa & MC Accepted. CODs $6. Checks Hold 4 Weeks. Money Orders Treated as Cash. Most Items Shipped Same Day. Shipping times not guaranteed. Check compatibility before you buy. Defectives replaced with same product. Offer, price & availability subject to change. All Sales Final SEELAST PAGE FOR DETAILS Circle Reader Service #48 $19 $12 $29 "


"DUBIND words are a little crude, they give the feeling that one's choices matter. Following both of these problems comes the feeling that the world is non-dynamic. The Avatar often feels like the only active person in the multiverse, which reduces the game's involving atmosphere. Ar times it feels like the Avatar is the only capable individual in the entire universe. Lord British wanders around doing nothing, and all the Avatar's companions complain that they wish they could help, but won't. The few times assistance is given by other people, it feels contrived. Granted, the player should take the active role, but the game would have seemed much more rich and involved if other people were doing things independently of the Avatar's actions, especially as time passes. Instead, the NPCs are reduced to information sources and training posts. LHYSICILOR Hell, Bene, let us resume the questioning I snad askinge cost thou come from? What country do mo HISTORIE MX FA You get no response The incantation failed. IR TARPINTATIANA While it isn't much changed from before. While the 3-D movement is one of the the auto-mapping still deserves a mention. game's strongest points, it's also a pain. Even Folks like Doug Church, Dr. Cat, Dorian when the player is used to the game, corners Hart. Mark Leblanc and Tim Stellmach are can catch the Avatar or a passage can be diffito be praised for including such a good system cult to enter from a certain angle. There needs of mapping to go with such a rich gameworld. to be some computer assistance here, which The maps are clear, easily noted and become wouldn't destroy the illusion of being there. one of the primary tools of the Avatar's quest. As it is, the situation is comparable to walking into a doorway but getting stuck by catching a la one's shoulder on the door frame. Some of this should be automatic. It's fine and good to have the Avatar's body take up 3-dimensional space, but they've made it awkward. Another small but very irritating problem is the game's inability to put things down where the player wants. Dropping an item in some places can be highly frustrating, as the compurer will refuse unless it thinks there is room. Serbian those ung mountain answer these ques Unfortunately, this is true even if the player Further, the emphasis upon nonviolent so picked up the item from the same spot. At lutions has become a hallmark for later Ultima times, the game will throw an item when the games. Fortunately, it is a tradition well-kept Avatar attempts to drop it. I almost pulled my in Ultima Underworld II: Labyrinth of Worlds. hair out when I was trying to recharge a While there will be plenty of combat for the light-sphere but instead threw it against the sword-thirsty, the story takes on full signifiwall and broke it. cance through interaction with NPCs. SpeakThe arbitrary nature of events in the game ing with the various denizens of the Eight is a more serious matter, however. While Worlds gives one a definire sense of being in much thought has gone into the plot, it is rigid a different place, with different philosophies and largely linear. Small problems, such as and ideas. Further, the full extent of the opening doors, are given multiple solutions, Guardian's power and evil is put forward but the story line itself must continue along a clearly through meeting the people he has very set route with little choice for deviation oppressed. This sort of background and interaction gives the player the motivation necesMost seriously, this linearity often doesn't sary to continue onward in this huge game. follow logically. For example, there was a point in the game where a \"listener imp\" had The Elements of Disappointment to be killed. However, following the advice of the manual, I instead continued deeper into Unfortunately, Labyrinth is far from a perthe game, moving forward, thinking I could come back and find the imp when I wanted. fect game. Some of the problems are larger When I opened the gateway to the next world, than expected for an Ultima product. First, it wouldn't open, simply because the imp was the small stuff. As good as the auto-mapping napping still alive, even though he had nothing to do is, there is one thing which should have been with the gateways themselves. Further, the fixed immediately: secret doors appear on the imp had to be slain before opening the gatemap whether a person has actually found them or not. This was a problem in the first way, or it wouldn't work at all. game and remains unfixed here. On a similar On a similar note, time in the castle isn't as note, there are some inconsistencies with the important as what actions the player does. mapping. Even though a \"water shortage\" problem occurs in the castle, it won't get worse no matter For example, most of the time the auto-map is extraordinarily accurate. Even when going how much actual time passes. The only thing through certain teleportation devices, the map which exacerbates the situation is going on to other worlds, which makes no sense whatsocan often tell exactly where the new location ever, except as a machination to continue the is, and map accordingly. One can even map linear, non-changing plot of the game. while swimming in a strong current or fighting nasty monsters. However, there are times Further, the game's handling of NPCs is when the map won't operate. In the Ethereal poor. While there are many people to speak Void, nothing can be mapped accurately, with, the conversation options are limited and which might make sense if not for the previous similarly linear. The choices are usually obviunerring accuracy. Further, in such a place the ous, and there is little true choice about what compass won't work either. Thus, the player to say. Sometimes a particular conversation goes from having a completely accurate sense topic will be possible, and other times not. of place to none whatsoever. Even a tempoThis can be frustrating since the player can't rary, \"arbitrary\" compass might have been initiate topics himself. Only a few people nice, or a map which was speculative if nothallow key-words (as was used as far back as ing else. These opposite extremes can really Ultima IV) which would have given the game throw one off. a much freer conversation scope. While keySkills within the game were largely disillusioning. While they had a definite affect upon the character's actions, few of them were useful or important. Most of the skills just help in nonessential situations, or can be obviated entirely. Despite not having the «swimming\" proficiency, my character could swim well enough to get everywhere necessary. Those few skills which seem to have some potential can be easily replicated by spell casting ability. I was rather depressed, using a \"Tinker\" character, to find that the \"Open\" spell was much better than picking locks, and there exists a spell which repairs armor better than any tinker. The only real skills which seem to be necessary are Mana, Casting and Combat Knowledge. One reason for these problems is that the designers wanted the game to be solvable by any profession — another contrivance. If a Mage is just as good as a Tinker at every puzzle, why does it matter which you are? Indeed, if a Tinker can get through the Academy Final Test of Magic (one of the puzzles in the game), isn't something wrong? The player can only find so many conveniently placed wands (in case he wasn't a spell caster) before it seems entirely phony. Many times, the game seems much more frustrating than enjoyable, due to the elements listed above, and due to the nature of the puzzles. There were a few convoluted mazes in the game which made me want to toss my computer out the window. Including mazes in the game can extend the play-duraPage 38 Computer Gaming World "


"CHIPS & BITS inc. FREE GAME WITH YOUR $75 ORDER* TUDOX204 Rochester, VT 05767 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'l 802—767-3033 Call 800-753-4263 Shipping to US,PRAK, HI, APO & FPO S4 perorder. Alr Mall to Canada $6 per order. Handling $1 pershipment. 2 Business Day Air US $6 per order; PR, HI $121st Item + $2 ea, add\"I; AK 5191stitom +S2 ca.add'l. Handling 81 per shipment. Europe, S. America Air Mail $191st Item +S6oa.add'l Asia, Australia, Africa, Air Mall $251st item +S6 ea. add. Handling $1 per shipment, IBM TRADITIONAL IBM WARGAMES IBM SPORTS MOTO S31 $29 ch $39 'THE7THGUEST is a terrifyingly real virtual environment lurking on a CD ROM. Henry Staufwas a maker ofamazingpuzzles. His greatest creation is the strange mansion in which you now find your self. Features video clips with live actors, bizarre games & puzzles, 22 fully rendered rooms to explore and many ghastly discoveries. $49 S25 $27 Sorry $12 Space Vegetables $10 Spot $12 Stratego $31 Strip Poker 3 Strip Poker 3 DD 1-6 Each $19 Super Jeopardy $27 Super Tetris Swap $29 Tactical Wizard Terminator Chess Tetris Tetris Classic Trump Castle 2 Trump Castle 2 Data Disk 1 S6 Trump Castle 2 Data Disk 2 S6 Trump Castle 3 $34 Turn-n-Burn $10 Vegas Entertnmnt Pak WIN $20 Vegas Games Pak WIN $19 Video Poker AlaCarte $34 Video Poker Villa Crespo $12 Video Poker WIN $19 Video Poker by Masque $19 Virtual Reality Studio 2 $64 Wayne's World $26 Welitris $15 Wheel of Fortune 2 $9 Wheel of Fortune 3 S9 Wheel of Fortune Gold $15 Word Tris $27 World Champion Backgmmn $24 World Champion Cribbage $24 $12 $21 S32 $28 $26 2293 SELFISH 'EL FISH'isanew type of creativity software. You can breed fish by picking any 2 and letting the computer analyze them to create possible offspring. Compose aquascapes from the many supplied backgrounds. Select a soundtrack, grow &place plants, add and arrange rocks, shells, and other animated objects AN for your tank. $41 IBM WARGAMES Gettysburg: Turning Point Golan Front Grand Fleet $36 Grey Seas, Grey Skies $36 Halls of Montezuma $24 Harpoon $25 Harpoon Battle Set 2 or 3 $19 Harpoon Battle Set 4 Harpoon Challenger Pak SE $49 Harpoon Designer Series $17 Harpoon Designer Series 2 $25 Harpoon Scenario Editor High Command $45 In Harms Way $36 Kampfgruppe $59 Kriegsmarine $36 Kursk Campaign $36 Line in the Sand $24 Long Lance $39 MacArthur's War Main Battle Tank C Germany $36 Main Battle Tank Middle East $36 Main Battle Tank N Germany $36 Malta Storm $36 Man of War $36 Mare Nostrum Marianas Turkey Shoot Midway $19 Moscow Campaign $36 Northern Fleet S36 Operation Overlord $36 Pacific Storm Midway Cpgn $36 Pacific Storm Solomon Cpgn $36 Panzer Battles Patriot $44 Patriot Battle Set 2 $24 Patriot Scenario Editor $27 Patton Strikes Back $12 Prelude to Jutland $26 Red Lightning $12 Return to Falklands S28 Rising Sun $26 Rommel Battles For N Africa $24 Rommel at El Alamein Rommel at Gazala $36 Rorke's Drift $34 Second Front S21 Seventh Fleet $36 Stalingrad Campaign $36 Storm Across Europe $12 Third Reich $27 To The Rhine S36 Typhoon of Steel $12 UMS 2 $19 UMS 2 Civil War S24 UMS 2 Desert Storm Scen $24 UMS 2 Planet Editor $19 Under Fire S12 V Victory: Utah Beach $44 V Victory: Velikiye Luki V for Victory: Market Garden $44 Victory at Sea Vulcan $34 War in the Falklands $26 Warship that changed Histry $26 Waterloo $19 Western Front $36 White Death $19 APBA Baseball General Man S29 APBA Baseball Statmstr 2.0 $29 APBA Baseball Wizard 2.0 $29 APBA Basketball S34 APBA Bowling $14 APBA College Basketball $32 APBA Football $34 APBA Micro Manager $32 ATP Tennis Action Sports Soccer All American College Ftbil $36 All Star Sports Pak $15 American Gladiators $21 Basketball Challenge $28 Bball Challenge 1987 Teams $13 Bball Challenge 1988 Teams $13 Bball Challenge 1989 Teams $17 Bball Challenge 1990 Teams S17 Bo Jackson Baseball $32 Carl Lewis Challenge Cycles Grand Prix Daily Double Horse Racing $19 David Robinson NBA Action $44 Days of Thunder $24 Face Off $9 Front Page Football $39 Future Sports Grand Prix Circuit Greens Hardball 3 Hardball 3 Players Disk Hardball 3 Stadium Disk Harlem Globetrotters Hat Trick S9 Hole In One Mini Golf Delux $12 Indianapolis 500 $17 International Sports Chlinge $29 Jack Nicklaus Unlimited Golf $27 Jack Nicklaus Greatest 18 S27 Jack Nicklaus CD 1-5 Ea $15 Jack Nicklaus Clip Art $12 Jack Nicklaus Signature Ed S42 Jack Nicklaus SE Course 1 $17 Jack Nicklaus SE Clip Art $24 Joe Montana Joe Montana Football $31 John Elway Quarterback $6 Lance Haffner Baseball $36 LH Base 20's Series $16 LH Base 30's Series $16 LH Base 40's Series $16 LH Base 50's Series LH Base 60's Series $16 LH Base 70's Series S16 LH Base 80's Series $16 LH Baseball League Leaders $16 Lance Haffner Boxing LH Boxing Contenders $16 Lance Haffner College BBall $36 LH Col Bball Utilities $16 LH Pro Basketball $36 LH Pro Basketball Utilities $16 Lance Haffner Football LH Football 60's Teams $16 LH Football 70's Teams S16 LH Football 80's Series LH Football 1989 Teams LH Football 1990 Teams LH Football Utilities $16 Lance Hafner Hockey Lakers vs Celtics $17 Links S29 Links Courses 1 Bountiful $17 Links Courses 2 Firestone $17 Links Courses 3 Bay Hill Links Courses 4 Pinehurst $17 Links Courses 5 Dorado $17 Links Courses 6 Barton Crk $17 Links Courses 7 Troon North $17 Links Pro 386 Golf $35 Links Pro CD 1 Mauna S20 Links Pro CD 2 Pinehurst $20 MAY CGW 3 S36 $36 33 34 $16 $42 KANS OF E Action North Atlantic $26 Action Stations $38 Action Stations Scenario 1 $14 Action off River Platte $26 Air Raid Pearl Harbour $26 Ambush American Civil War V1-3 Ea $22 Banzai $12 Battle Stations $26 Battle Tank Barbarossa Battle Tank Kursk Battle of Austerlitz Battle of the Atlantic Battles of Napoleon Battleship Bismark Blitzkrieg Ardennes Blood & Iron $52 Blue and the Grey Borodino Napoleon Invades $30 Bravo Romeo Delta $29 CW No Greater Glory Campaign Carrier Strike $39 Carrier Strike Exp Pak $19 Carriers at War $34 Carriers at War Exp Pak $37 Charge of the Light Brigade $34 Conflict Conflict in Vietnam $9 Conflict: Middle East Conflict:Korea Decision at Gettysburg Dreadnoughts Dreadnoughts Bismark S29 Dreadnoughts Ironclads Dreadnoughts Deluxe $89 Fall Gelb $36 Fifth Eskadra $36 Fire Brigade $34 Fleet Commander $39 Fleet Med $36 Frontline $34 Gary Grigsby Pacific War $46 German Raider Atlantis $26 $21 $39 GUARDIA $36 'AMAZON' recaptures the fun and excitement of the 1950's drive-in movies. Travel to unexplored regions of the Amazon, fight 10 foot ants, and find emeralds stolen by Cortez. Amazing cinematic effects such as multiple camera angles flashbacks zooms, pans, and fades. Features full digitized voices & sound effects. $39 $15 $16 S16 $14 $16 % IBM SPORTS $29 4D Boxing $17 4th & Inches $4 4th & Inches Team Const $10 ABC Monday Night FB $37 ABC Monday Night FB WV $34 ABC Wide World Boxing $32 APBA Base TD 1908-89 Ea. S21 APBA Base TD 1990-91 Ea. $19 APBA Baseball S24 Visa & MC Accepted. CODs $6. Checks Held 4 Weeks. Money Orders Treatodas Cash. MostItems Shipped Same Day. Shipping times not guaranteed. Check compatibility before you buy. Defectives replaced with same product. Offer price & availability subject to change. All Sales Final. \"SEE LAST PAGE FOR DETAILS Circle Reader Service #48 "


"Deview to start from scratch. Ultima has abused the Avatar long enough. If they want to keep him, they should at least give him some sense of power and grandeur. If they want a first level character, have it be another follower of the Virtues, a new novice who will rise and save the world in the Avatar's name. I know it'll be hard for Origin to let that plot-gimmick go, but I think it's long past due. tion of the game with little effort. Few players the bulk of the puzzles. Having a dynamic enjoy wandering through repetitive passages game environment would have been the perfor hours on end, however. Granted, the game fect compliment to the \"you are there\" feeling is titled «Labyrinth of Worlds» but I don't of the game, and would have provided a comthink this needed to be taken literally. plete and total gaming environment. Further, the sheer scope of the game can be On a different note, the basic plot has some daunting. If the player feels stuck somewhere, problems. Why is it that every 3-D fantasy he or she has practically miles of dungeon to game has to take place entirely underground check for one earlier mistake. This can be in dungeons? I became increasingly claustroparticularly annoying if the solution to the phobic as world after world went by, never problem is something as small as examining a seeing the outside! Perhaps this was intended particular wall or device more carefully. to keep the sense of being imprisoned, in Some of these problems could have been which case it served its function well, but it solved elegantly by the programmers with would be nice to see a \"you are there\" game more NPC involvement. It would have been which took the player's character outside! nice if the members of the castle could provide more support. For example, if the player has HOJA been wandering around for hours getting absolutely nowhere, one of the NPCs could provide a clue, which could become more explicit if the player still doesn't make progress. This would be perfectly feasible since the entire population of the castle is supposedly working on the dilemma, together with FEBIH the Avatar. This could ease frustration, while also making the NPCs seem more involved and alive. Further, the NPCs could, at infreFinally, why is it that the Avatar, savior of quent intervals, descend into the Labyrinth Britannia eight times over, enters the game as themselves, perhaps to solve a class-specific a first level character? This constant restarting puzzle. In the instance above, it would have of the Avatar is ridiculous. The game does give been much more exciting and interesting had the Avatar's name a heroic legacy, but the Nystul (the court wizard) assisted in the Acadplayer feels none of that power when required emy Final, then allowed the Avatar to solve SHO The Final Analysis Despite the problems, Ultima Underworld II: Labyrinth of Worlds is a relatively highquality game. However, I can recommend it only with reservations. Hard-core Ultima players will definitely want to play the game to continue the Avatar's exploits. Further, those who love 3-D dungeons will find much enjoyment. Still, those who purchase the game should be aware that they are in for a long and grueling quest, which will task their patience. While testing their stamina is a good test of the Avatar, it won't suit all gamers. Further, the game is in many ways a gilded cage: it looks very nice, and is in many ways comfortable, but it is still a cage. The contrived plot and setting have the player imprisoned, forced to follow a certain set path to freedom. By the time I finally saw daylight again, emerging from the Labyrinth, I must admit that it wasn't exultation i felt, but sheer relief. Frankly, I don't want to go back to that prison again. CGW med CACTUS L'LEAGUE ROF ES SO IF IT WAS ANY CLOSER, YOU'D BE ON THE GOURT. OOO FROM THE DEVELOPERS CE APBA PROFESSIONAL BASKETBALL NOT AN ARCADE GAME IT'S THE MOST STATISTICALLY ACCURATE BASKETBALL SIMULATION EVER CREATED You can create teams with any of the real-life players you want! Or play games with the players on their real-life teams. It's up to you! Complete AutoSchedule Module, Statistics Module, Records Module and more! Perfect for fantasy leagues, but you don't need to be a basketball expert to have a ball. VERSION 3.0 NOW AVAILABLE USE YOUR VISA OR MASTERCARD CALL 1-800-336-9444 TODAY AND BE ON OUR COURT TOMORROW! CACTUS DEVELOPMENT COMPANY, INC.\" WE TAKE FUN SERIOUSLY For IBIA PC/XT/A1/386/486s and comparoles. To purchase with check or money ordet, send 549.95 plus $4.00 shipping and honding to Cottus Development Company, Inc., 7113 Burnet Road, Suite 214, Austo, feres 78757 Copyright 1993 Cactus Development Company, Inc. Customer Support (512)453-2244, Fox (51214533757. BS. 1512)4533155. APBA Professional Basketball is o trodemark of the APBA Game Company, Inc., Lancaster, Pensylvania CACTUS LEAGUE PROFESSIONAL BASKETBALL is frademark of Cottus Development Company, hat Page 40 Circle Reader Service #45 Computer Gaming World "


"J CHIPS & BITS inc. FREE GAME WITH YOUR $75 ORDER* PODOX 234 Rochester, VT 05767 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'l 802-767—3033 Call 800-753-4263 Shipping to US.PR.AK,HI, APO & FPO $4 per order. Air Mail to Canada S6 por order. Handling si pershipment, 2 Business Day Air US $6 perorder:PR, HI$121stItem +$2 ea, add\"I; AK S19 1st Item + $2 ea, add'l. Handling 51 per shipment. Europe, S. America Alr Mall $191st Item S6 ca. add'l. Asia, Australia, Africa, Air Mall S251st item +S6 ea.add'l. Handling $1 per shipment. IBM SPORTS IBM ROLE PLAYING IBM ROLE PLAYING $9 $17 $17 $12 \"JUMP JET' is a state of the art flight simulator based on the most unique aircraft in the world today. Features up to 6 sorties per day, fatigue factor in combat, digitized views of weapons and the ability to hover, fly backward and land vertically. S39 $9 $39 $39 Links Pro Course Disk 3 S20 Links Pro Course Disk 4 $20 Links Pro Course Disk 5 $20 Low Blow $12 MUDS Madden Football Madden Football 2 $32 Madden Player Stats 90 Magic Johnson Fast Break $6 Magic Johnson MVP $15 Mario Andretti Racing Michael Jordan Flight Sim $38 ML Baseball All Star $17 Microleague Baseball GM $24 ML Baseball Manager's Ch S19 ML Baseball Franchise Disks $20 ML 1980s World Series $17 Microleague Basbll 4 USAT $31 ML Baseball 4 USAT FM $25 ML Baseball 4 USAT GM Microleague Basketball $28 ML Basketball All Stars $34 Micro League Football Dix ML Football 2 ML Personal Pro Golf $28 Microsoft Golf for Windows $39 Mike Ditka Power Football $32 NFL Challenge $60 NFL Chilnge TD 1984-90 Ea $15 NFL Challenge 91 Teams $22 NFL Chall Col Alumni Teams $22 NFL Chall Game Situation Ed $20 NFL Challenge All Star Team $22 NFL Chalinge Dream Teams $20 NFL Chlinge Greatest Teams $22 NFL Challenge Premium Ed $59 NFL Challenge Roster Editor $20 NFL Football $31 NFL Pro League Football 92 $24 NFL Proleague Football $19 NFL Video Football $39 Nascar Challenge $31 Over the Net PGA Tour Golf $32 PGA Tour Golf Course 1 $17 PGA Tour Golf Ltd Ed $45 PGA Tour Golf WIN $38 Playmaker Football Power Hits: Sports $19 Pro League Baseball $18 Pro Tennis Tour 2 $32 ProFootball Analyst 92 Ed $19 Road to the Final Four $37 Serve & Volley $12 Shufflemania Skate or Die $15 Sport of Kings Sporting Triangle $12 Summer Challenge $34 Super Car Pak TKO $4 Team Suzuki $15 Tennis Cup $32 The Games Winter Chalinge $34 Tie Break Tennis $12 Tom Landry Football S24 Tony LaRussa Baseball $16 Tony LaRussa Fantasy Mngr $15 Tony La R Classic Stadiums $15 Tony La R Basbil Team Disk $12 Tony LaRussa AL Stadiums $15 Tony LaRussa NL Stadiums $15 Tony La Russa Baseball 2 $36 Wayne Gretzky Hockey 3 $39 Wayne Gretzky League $26 Weaver Baseball 2.0 $14 Weaver 2.0 commemorative $41 Weaver Commissnr Disk 2 S16 Wilson Pro Staff Golf $23 World Circuit $34 World Class Soccer $28 'CARRIERS AT WAR' brings to life six crucial carrier battles of WWII: Pearl Harbor. Coral Sea, Midway. Eastern Shores, Santa Cruz, and Great Marianas Turkey Shoot. Seek out and destroy enemy carriers, fleets, air forces. Features hundreds of individually modeled ships and aircraft from that period. $37 $15 2400 AD $12 ADD Starter Kit $35 ADD Collector's Edition 2 S45 Autoduel $26 Bard's Tale 1 Char Editor $16 Bard's Tale 2 $19 Bard's Tale 2 Char Editor $16 Bard's Tale 3 $32 Bard's Tale 3 Char Editor $16 Bard's Tale Construction $19 Battletech $12 Battletech 2 $31 Black Crypt $32 Bloodwych $15 Buck Rogers Countdown Captain Blood $9 Captive $30 Celtic Legends $32 Challenge of 5 Realms $44 Champions $37 Champions of Krynn $21 Champions Krynn Char Edtr $16 Cobra Mission $49 Conan $16 Corporation $19 Curse of the Azure Bonds $15 Curse Azure Bonds Char Ed $16 Cyber Empire S32 Cyber Space $39 Cybergenic Ranger $6 Dark Queen Krynn Char Ed $16 Dark Queen of Krynn $32 Dark Sun $37 Darklands $39 Darklands Master Edition $51 Darkspyre $32 Daughter of Serpents S32 Death Knights of Krynn $21 Death Knights Krynn Char Ed$16 Dragon Strike Dragon Wars $12 Dragon Wars Char Edit Dragons of Flame Drakkhen $37 Drakkhen Char Edit Dungeon Master $34 Dusk of the Gods $24 Elvira 2 Jaws of Cerberus $19 Elvira Mistress Dark $29 Escape From Hell $17 Escape from Hell Char Edit $16 Eye of the Beholder 1 $19 Eye of the Beholder 2 S38 Eye of Beholder 2 Char Edit S16 Eye of the Beholder 3 $39 Eye of Beholder 3 Char Edit S16 Eye of the Horus S28 Fire King $19 Flames of Freedom MWII $28 Fountain of Dreams Fountain of Dreams Char Ed $16 Four Crystals of Trazere $24 Gateway Savage Frontier $32 Gods Hard Nova $17 Hard Nova Char Edit $16 Heaven and Earth $32 Hero's Quest Hero's Qst 2:Trial Fire $21 Hero's Quest 1 VGA Hero's Quest 3 VGAEGA $42 Hero's Quest 3 VGAEGA HD $36 Heroes of the Lance $12 Hillsfar $15 Immortal $17 Joan of Arc $12 Keys to Marimon $12 Keys to Marimon Char Edit $16 King's Bounty Knights of Legend $30 Knights of Legend Char Edit $16 $16 $9 CARRIER Legacy of the Necromancer Legend $31 Legend of Valor $39 Lord of the Rings V1 $32 Lord of Rings V1 Char Edit $16 Lord of the Rings V2 $37 Lord of Rings V2 Char Edit $16 Loremaster $39 Lure of the Temptress $37 $45 Magic Candle 1 $12 Magic Candle 1 Char Editor $16 Magic Candle 2 S21 Magic Candle 2 Char Editor $16 Magic Candle 3 $38 Martian Dreams $37 Martian Dreams Char Edit $16 Matrix Cubed S32 Mechwarrior $19 Mega Traveller:Zhodani MegaTrvilr:Zhodani Char Ed $16 Mega Traveller 2 $19 Mega Traveller 2 Char Edit $16 Mega Traveller 3 $39 Midwinter $12 Might & Magic 1 $12 Might & Magic 1 Char Edit S16 Might & Magic 2 $12 Might & Magic 2 Char Edit $16 Might & Magic 3 S34 Might & Magic 3 Char Edit $16 Might & Magic 4 Clouds Xeen$34 Might & Magic 4 Char Editor $16 Might & Magic 5 D Side Xeen $42 Mines of Titan $12 Mission: Impossible $19 Murder $29 Obitus $27 Paladin:Scrolls Talmouth Dk S16 Pirates $6 Pirates Gold S42 Planet's Edge $34 Planet's Edge Char Ed $15 Pool of Radiance $15 Pool of Radiance Char Editor $16 Pools of Darkness $38 Prophecy 1 $12 Protostar $45 Questron 2 $12 Ragnarok $34 Rings of Medusa $24 Savage Empire $34 Savage Empire Char Editor $16 Sea Rogue $29 Secret Silver Blades S15 Secret Silver Blads Char Edit $16 Sentinel Worlds Sentinel Worlds Char Edit S16 Shadow Sorcerer $9 Shadowlands $29 Shadows of Mordor Sleeping Gods Lie Sorcerian $15 Space 1889 Space 1889 Char Edit $16 Space Hulk Space Inc $34 Space Rogue $30 Space Rogue Char Edit $16 Spacewrecked $19 Spellcraft: Aspect of Valor $38 SpellJammr:Pirates Rlm Spc $38 Spellbound $39 Spirit of Excalibur $16 Star Saga 2 Starflight 1 Starflight 2 $17 Summoning $38 Sword of the Samurai $12 Tales Magic: Prophecy Shdw $29 Tales Magic: Pr Sh Char Ed $16 MAY CGW 4 $9 S16 $26   GENERAL $12 $9 GREATEST CENILIRY $37 $15 'GREATBATTLES OF THE 20TH CENTURY'brings 20 new scenarios for the Perfect Generalgame. Includes 1967 & 1973 Suez conflicts, Kursk, The Moscow Push, Stalingrad, Malta, Long BinhInferno, Crete, Falklands, Inchon, Operation Sea Lion, Pusan Per Saigon, Bataan, Fulda, Dnepr Br. Guderian Forward, & more. $23 $38 $24 @op. $17 $15 Visa & MC Accepted. CODs $6. Checks Held 4 Weeks. Money Orders Treated as Cash. Most Items Shipped Same Day. Shipping times not guaranteed. Check compatibility before you buy. Defectives replaced with same product. Offer price & availability subject to change. All Sales Final. *SEE LAST PAGE FOR DETAILS Circle Reader Service #48 "


"So. Deuneun | Is Wisdom the Greater Part of Valour? SSI Introduces U.S. Gamers to Legends of Valour by Chuck Miller Fitteldorf, a massive city, teems with activity. Busy streets From Generation to Generation abound with local merchants, travelers and potentially, felI low adventurers. Of course, the local inns and taverns attract Character generation in Legends of Valour is a simple and painless their usual clientele. So, be ready at a moment's notice to become the procedure. While races are limited to human, dwarf or elf, a great focal point of a friendly brawl. Also be prepared to spot a bargain and degree of customization is provided for altering the appearance of one's don't hesitate to accept an errand or two in order to earn a few extra on-screen persona through a type of character portrait construction set. groats. However, remember that legends are not made of mundane When facial features are to the player's liking, the process moves on to toil. There is a mission to fulfill — find a missing cousin named Sven. selecting armor, goods and weapons. Up to eight characters can be His last letter reached his family quite some time ago and, undercreated, though only one is employed during play. standably, they are worried about Sven's condition. Thus, the immeThe downside is that only eight save positions are available. In diate goal is to try and discover where he is and what has befallen him. addition, the player can only save his or her progress at specific Beyond that, the game hasn't offered so much as an idea of what locations, namely inns, taverns and hostels. This unfortunate carryadventures lie in store. Though, ultimately there is the prospect of of over from early RPGs means that one must locate an appropriate place slaying an evil demon and restoring a king to power. to save their progress on a regular basis or face the inevitable Restoreand-Replay Syndrome, one which quickly robs the game of its pleasure. Stuck in the Mitteldorf with You A Knight on the Town Legends of Valour, a 3-D fantasy role-playing game similar in many regards to Origin's Ultima Underworld, claims to rewrite the standard Legends of Valour takes place, as mentioned, in the town of Mitteldorf in 3-D adventures by offering the hottest, smoothest 3-D scrolling and its dungeons beneath. Basically an immense above-ground maze, ever seen in an underworld, or any world!\" A few minutes with Legends Mitteldorf offers well over 100 locations to visit, from taverns and of Valour substantiates the assertion concerning its extremely smooth shops to guilds and temples. Many dwellings have second story accom3-D scrolling graphics. Its claim of rewriting the modations, too. In all, a great majority of early standard in 3-D adventures, however, must be game play revolves around identifying and inveschallenged. tigating the numerous establishments in this Seldom do I begin a review focusing on the thriving city. To aid in this procedure, a copy of Ye Olde Mitteldorf Town Map is provided for negative aspects of a game. I felt it appropriate to do so, though, in this case. SSI has long been the player, listing the major locations but requirrespected for the quality of their games and their ing one to place them on the map. In addition, a commitment to meeting customers' needs. I am rather primitive automapping feature is available which identifies one's general location in the city convinced this has not changed. Nonetheless, I am concerned. Legends of Valour is SSI's second or dungeons below. out-of-house product released since December, Unfortunately, the player will probably also the first being Pirates of Realmspace. Unfortuhave the opportunity to kill some time in one of nately, Legends of Valour (like Realmspace, which several prisons. In fact, it is extremely casy to get appeared to be a last ditch effort to market one arrested in Mitteldorf. About a dozen specific final Gold Box-style product) has placed SSI in crimes are listed. However, the whole process danger of soiling their reputation by publishing appears to be unrelated to actually committing a games of an inferior nature while making grancrime. For example, while standing in the street, diose claims about them. I know these words I was arrested for \"assaulting an officer\" and was seem harsh, but SSI's long-standing reputation promptly dumped in prison, fined and released for quality is not evidenced in their two latest the next day a much poorer individual. Is there SEL role-playing titles. no justice in Mitteldorf? One should not assume from these Tourist Distractions statements that Legends of Valour has no Legends of Valour value. Game design is good, play is some SYSTEM: IBM, 386 or greater, 640K RAM; Mouse recommended In addition to the random nature of crimi$59.95 what enjoyable and the game system GRAPHICS: nal arrests in Legends of Valour, there are holds great promise for the future. HowAd Lib, Roland and Sound Blaster/Pro several other major distractions with which PROTECTION: Documentation Look-up ever, implementation of and weaknesses DESIGNERS: Dimension Creative Designs, Ltd to contend. Acquiring one's daily susteinherent in this fantasy role-playing adStrategic Simulations, Inc. nance is more of a battle than most of the venture cause it to come up short in (408) 737-6800 violent encounters. The need to eat, drink overall atmosphere and playability. and sleep is emphasized so greatly that it is Legends Halour BUCHE TITLE: PRICE: VGA SOUND: PUBLISHER: Sunnyvale, CA Page 42 Computer Gaming World "


"CHIPS & BITS inc. FREE GAME WITH YOUR $75 ORDER* PODOX254 Rochester, VT 05767 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'l 802-767-3033 Call 800-753-4263 Shipping to US.PR.AK, HI,APO & FPO $4 per order. Air Mall to Canada $6 per order. Handling $1 per shipment. 2 Business Day Alr US $6 perorder; PR, HI$121st item +$2 ea. add\"I; AK $1918t item +$2 ea.add'l. Handling $1 per shipment. Europe, S. America Alr Mall $191st Item +$6ea. add'l. Asla Australia, Africa, Air Mall $251stitom +36 ca.add'l. Handling $1 per shipment. IBM ROLE PLAYING IBM EDUCATIONAL IBM CD ROM 56 ICEBERG $35 SORO Tangled Tales $21 Terran Envoy $12 Third Courier Times of Lore $28 Treasures Savage Frontier $32 Treasure Svg Frntr Char Ed $15 Trilogy $15 Tunnels & Trolls $12 Tunnels & Trolls Char Editor $16 Twilight 2000 VGA $24 Twilight 2001 $39 Ultima 4 $35 Ultima 4 Char Editor $16 Ultima 5 Ultima 5 Char Editor $16 Ultima 6 False Prophet $21 Ultima 6 Char Editor $16 Ultima 7 Black Gate $52 Ultima 7 Char Ed $16 Ultima 7 Forge of Virtue $21 Ultima 7.5 Serpent Isle $52 Ultima Trilogy $39 Ultima Trilogy 2 $52 Ultima Uworld Stygian Abyss $52 Ultima Uworld St Ab Char Ed $15 Ultima Uworld 2 Labyrinth $52 Uncharted Waters $42 Unlimited Adventures $32 Veil of Darkness $42 Vengeance of Excalibur $16 War of the Lance Wasteland Char Editor $16 Waxworks $34 Wizardry Trilogy $32 Wizardry (1-3) Char Editor $16 Wizardry 4 $19 Wizardry 4 Char Editor Wizardry 5 $26 Wizardry 5 Char Editor $16 Wizardry Cosmic Forge $34 Wizardry Cosmic F Char Edit $16 Wizardry 7 Crusaders $39 Wizadry 7 Crusader Char Edit $16 'WORLD CIRCUIT' allows you to compete against 25 drivers on all 16 of the premiere Grand Prix racetracks. Features realistic car handling, authentic cockpitinstruments, adjustable mirrors, and the ability to tune car design for each track. $34 ** S9 $10 $16 In'BATTLES OF DESTINY' you must seek outand destroy up to 3 opponents in order to conquer the world. Features modem play, air, ground and naval combat, challeng ing artificial intelligence, 22 different units to construct, more than 20 worlds to conquer, campaign style play, and a complete player history. $38 $10 $10 Never Ending Story 2 Crayon $9 Omar Sharif Bridge Orbits: Voyage Solar System S39 Putt Putt Joins the Parade $42 Peanuts $31 Rodney's Funscreen S46 Phonics Plus S25 Secret Monkey Island Secret Monkey Island $39 Picture Perfect $32 Secret Weap Luftwaffe $48 Print Shop Deluxe $39 Sherlock Holmes Consul Det $44 Print Shop Deluxe Bus Grph $29 Sherlock Holmes Consul Det $44 Putt Putts Fun Pak Shuttle $24 Quarky Quaysoo's Turbo Sci $29 Software Toolwrks Refernce $80 Read 'n Roll $36 Space Quest 4 $39 Read 'n Roll Data Disk $12 Space Quest 4 WIN Read & Rhyme $31 Spirit of Excaliber Reader Rabbit 1: Early Read $37 Star Child Reader Rabbit 2 $37 Star Trek 25 Anv Reader Rabbit's Ready Lttrs $37 Stellar 7 WIN Robot Writer Plus Talking Classic Tales Rodney's Funscreen Talking Jungle Safari Scooter's Magic Castle S32 Team Yankee 2 Speedreader WIN $30 Ultima Bundle Spell it Plus S31 Velveteen Rabbit Childrens $58 Spell-a-Saurus $27 Where in the World Deluxe S66 Spelling $31 White Horse Child $32 Spelling Wiz $22 Wing Commander 1 Deluxe $59 Stickybear Reading $24 Wing Commandr/Ultima 6 $59 Stickybear Reading Comp $30 Wing C/Ultima Underworld Stickybear Reading Tutor $31 Wolf Pack Stickybear Spellgrabber Wrath of the Demon Stickybear Spelling Tutor $32 Story Sketcher $42 Super Solvers Midnight Resc $30 Super Solvers Spellbound $31 IBM HINT BOOKS Super Spellicopter $21 Twisty History VGA $29 688 Attack Sub $10 Wacky Funster $18 A-Train $16 Weekly Rdr Reading Comp $31 Advent Willie Beamish $10 Altered Destiny Bard's Tale 1 IBM CD ROM Bard's Tale 2 Bard's Tale 3 12 Roads to Gettsyburg WIN $48 Bargon Attack 7th Guest $56 Black Cauldron A Christmas Carol $18 Blue Force: Next of Kin Advent Willie Beamish Buck Rogers Countdown $10 Adventures of Brad Stallion S39 Castle of Dr Brain Aesop's Multimedia Fables $30 Champions of Krynn $10 Annabel Dream Ancnt Egypt $52 Civilization S16 Barney Bear Goes to School S23 Codename Iceman Barney Bear Goes to Space $23 Colonel's Bequest Battle Chess WIN & DOS $46 Conquests Robin Hood Buzz Aldrin Race Space Conquests of Camelot California Travel $12 Countdown Campaign Curse of the Azure Bonds $10 Capstone Game Collection Dark Queen of Krynn $10 Chessmaster 3000 $46 Darklands $14 Conan S21 Darkspyre Conquests Robin Hood WIN $42 Death Knights of Krynn Cyber Space $38 Dragon Wars Don Quixote $32 Dragons of Flame Dune $35 Drakkhen El Grito Del Jaquar WIN $46 Dungeon Master Fascination WIN $39 Dynamix Great War Planes $16 Fatty Bears Birthdy Surprise $38 EcoQuest Search For Cetus $10 Gofer's Winkel Advent WIN $35 Elvira 2 Jaws of Cerberus Guy Spy Elvira Mistress Dark $10 Impressionist Sources WIN $69Eye of the Beholder $10 Indy Jones Fate Altantis $52 Eye of the Beholder 2 Interactive Storytime Vol 1 $30 Eye of the Beholder 3 Interactive Storytime Vol 2 $30 Fascination Interactive Storytime Vol 3 $30 Free DC $10 Jack and the Beanstalk $34 Gateway Savage Frontier $10 Jones In The Fast Lane WIN S42 Global Conquest Strat w/disk S21 Jungle Book WIN Gobliiins $10 King's Quest 5 WIN Gold Rush $10 King's Ransom S38 Gunship 2000 $16 Legend of Kyrandia $49 Hard Nova $10 Library of Art: Renaissance $60 Harpoon Loom $48 Heart of China Lost Treasures of Intocom $46 Hero's Quest Lost Treasures Infocom 2 946 Heros Qst 2:Trial Fire $10 Mantis Experimental Fgir $45 Heros Quest 3 $10 Multi Media: Vaildi WIN $34 Hillstar MAY CGW 5 $10 $10 IBM EDUCATIONAL his $59 564 CARRIERS AT WAR 519 $10 S10 $10 $10 Ace Detective $30 Ace Explorer: Sequencing $36 Ace Inquirer S40 Ace Reporter $36 Ace Reporter Deluxe $48 Auto Map AutoWorks $49 Body Works $49 Boom Box Castle of Dr Brain VGA $29 Cleo is a Dragon $30 Comic Book Maker $32 Cuckoo Zoo $32 Eagle Eye Mysteries $32 EcoQuest 2 Lost Sort Rain $34 EcoQuest VGA $32 Evelyn Wood Dyn Reader $24 Fatty Bear's Birthdy Surprise $32 Fay's Word Rally $32 Incredible Machine VGA $29 Island Of Dr. Brain VGA $29 Jones Fast Lane Kidworks Kidwriter Gold Land of The Unicorn 539 Mario Teaches Typing $24 Marvin the Moose Vol 1 $30 Marvin the Moose Vol 2 $30 M Beacon Teaches Typing $26 M Beacon Teaches Typ WIN $29 Milliken Storyteller Vol 1 $30 Milliken Storyteller Vol2 $30 Mixed Up Faery Tale VGA $29 Mixed-Up Mother Goose $29 HERS 'THE CARRIERS AT WAR CONSTRUCTION KIT provides an infinitely flexible tool for creating a particular battle or an original scenario. Build ships and planes, organize squadrons, draft maps, position air bases and adjust the artificial intelligence used by the computer. 3 new scenariosincluded; Wake Island, Guadalcanal, & Tarawa. S37 $12 CONSTRUCTION KIT $34 S16  Visa & MC Accepted. CODs $6. Checks Held 4 Weeks.Money Orders Treated as Cash. Most Items Shipped Same Day. Shipping times not guaranteed. Check compatibility before you buy. Delectivos replaced with same product. Offer.price & availability subject to change. All Sales Final. SEE LAST PAGE FOR DETAILS Circle Reader Service #48 "


"world. Still, when approaching an object, texture and detail remain amazingly intact, more so than the competition. Clearly, smooth 3-D graphic scrolling is Valour's key selling point, enhanced by the overall quality of its 256-color VGA graphics. However, next to graphics in caliber is the game's documentation. Both creative and entertaining, the manual is written with just the right amount of information and humor, making the experience of pouring through its pages an enjoyable one. 152 EN WS   overly distracting to play. I died from lack of food and poor health so often just when the game was getting interesting that I soon tired of the whole process. Fantasy adventures should remove one from the distractions of real life, not impose an overdose of these minute distractions upon them. Another distraction to the flow of the game concerns interaction with the NPCs encountered. More often than nor, conversing with the local inhabitants is a reperitive process of issuing \"Whar is\" and Where is\" questions which result predominantly in the same pithy answers (though insults do show greater variation). A general lack of atmosphere also prevails in Valour, the primary culprit being the background music and sound effects, or rather their dearth. Sound effects are sparse and music is almost entirely lacking Is There Any Value to Valour? By now, one must be wondering if Legends of Valour has any value to offer. In spite of all its failings, yes, it does. The interface, though a triflc cluttered, is well designed and offers good mouse and keyboard support. Smooth scrolling 3-D graphics, as claimed, are exceptional and provide the player with a well detailed window on the world of Mitteldorf. The size of the display window is adjustable (reducing its size makes play acceptable on slower systems), though, even at its largest size the view provided is about 50 percent smaller than that of Ultima UnderThe Stuff of Which Legends are Made? As already stated, Legends of Valoursuffers from a significant number of weaknesses. Its restrictions on game saves, numerous distractions, general lack of atmosphere, and absence of sufficient audio enhancements all contribute to an overall lack of enjoyment and staying power. While the graphics are as good as claimed, they cannot make up for the game's numerous deficiencies. I have high hopes for SSI's upcoming releases: Dark Sun, Eye of the Beholder III and Veil of Darkness. All portend to be excellent products. As far as Legends of Valour is concerned, though, I believe the wise choice would be to leave the task of discovering what legends are made of to some other adventurer. Cow MAMBOZAR CAPE COD CONNECTION 24 HR ORDERING (only) 1-800-729-6733 SUPPORT/INFO 10-5 EST Mon-Sat 1-508-457-0738 PREMIUM TEMPLATES Do you enjoy \"flying\" the super-sophisticated PC flight simulators available today? Is \"keyboard confusion your worst enemy-you know, frantically hunting keys to switch views, activate defenses, launch weapons, etc., Inot to mention flying the plane)just to survive the mission? KEYBOARD COMMANDER CORPS & flight simulator keyboard templates can end that overload and let you concentrate on flyin' and shootin'. Our high-quality, color templates turn any AT101 Enh keyboard into a realistic control panel for your favorite sim and our standardized, color-coded layout flattens the learning curve from one sim to anotherN O Forget \"Keyboard Confusion\", just remember to... Watcher NE Now Available!!!: Strike Eagle III, Gunship 2000 Maximum Overkill, X-Wing Available in fine stores! IBM SIMULATION Wing Cmdr 2..... $49 Pacific War ........ $46 Elvira 2.............. $41 A-Train........... $41 Sp Ops 1 or 2.... $27 Patriot .............. $44 Eric the Unrdy... $36 Aces/Pacific...... $46 WW II: 1946..... $24 Populous 2........ $39 Eye Beh. II........ $39 AF Command.... $36 Powermonger.... $32 Forge Virtue....... S17 Air Warrior ......... $54 IBM STRATEGY Railroad Tyc...... $19 Gemfire............ 530 ATP.............. $36 A Line/Sand ...... S24 Reach Stars 3.... $24 KO VI................. S46 B-17 Flying F.... $41 Am. Civ.War 1.... $24 Shadow Pres..... $41 Koshan Consp.. $32 Commanche...... $44 Am. Civ.War 2.... $24 Spaceward Ho.. S36 Leg. Kyrandia.... $36 F-117A............... $46 Am. Civ.War3..... $24 Spec. Forces..... $30 Leg of Valour.... $39 F15 III............... $52 Bat. Chess 4000 $36 Star Legions...... $39 LostFiles S.H..... $44 Falcon 3.0......... $45 Bat ol Destiny... $36 The Lost Adm.... $36 Lost Tres Infoc. 941 OpFlying Tiger .. $24 Campaign.......... $36 V For Vict 1........ $44 Mag. Candie 3.... $39 Fireteam 2200... $29 Carrier Strike..... $41 V For Vict 2........ S44 M&Mag. Xeen.... $42 Gr.Naval Bat's... $44 Carriers/War...... $41 Warlords ............ $29 Paladin 2........ S36 Gr N Bat Ships .. $31 Castles 2............ $36 Western Front.... $36 Rex Nebular ...... $41 Gunship 2000.... $41 Civilization........ $41 Ringworld.......... S36 Gunship Scen... S24 Cong. Kingd...... $36 IBM Role Playing Spellcast, 301.... $36 Harrier Assit....... $36 Conq. of Jap ..... $36 Amazon............ $41 Spellcraft ........... $39 MogaFort Chal.. $39 Disc. Columb.... $36 Ashes of Emp.... $46 Spellamer....... $39 MIG 29.. .. $30 Floor 13............ 516 Bane Cosmic F. $36 UIL. Underw 2.... $49 Red Baron......... $41 Harp. Dosig....... $32 Cobra Mission... S46 Ult. VII.............. $49 R Baron Miss..... $19 Patriot............... 544 Crus. Drk Sav.... $41 Resc Air 911 ...... $17 High Comman... $45 Cyber Empires.. S32 WE CARRY ALL Sec Weap Luf.... $41 KGB............... $19 Darklands.......... $41 NEW TITLES Plano disks oa... $19 L'Empereur ....... $36 Dragons Lair 3.. $36 AND ALSO Sim Lile............ $42 LA Law.............. $3G Dune 2............... $36 BOARDGAMES Task Force 42... $41 Monopoly Del.... $36 Dungeon M. ...... $30 CCC HAS REPLICA SPORTS HATS, JERSEYS & JACKETS Falcon 3.0/3.01 Aces of the Pacific Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe Jetfighter 1&11 B-17 Flying Fortress CY Air Combat A-10 Tank Killer 1.5 F-15 Strike Eagle II F-117A Nighthawk Megafortress A.T.P. Flight Simulator 4.0 * High-quality , 3-D graphics * Standardized format *Logical, color-coded layout * Affixes to keyboard + Fits all AT101 Enh. keyboards *Sturdy, laminated stock Ta Hurry! Get 'em at Introductory Prices!!! $11.95 Please Print Check Enclosed Money Order enclosed. Any 2 $21.50 Master Gehe! Any 3 $30.00 4 or more $9.25 cach IN a me Country S&M add $3.00 or C.O.D. add $6.00...CALL City KCC. Inc.. Dept C State/Province Zip/Postal Code 4839 SW 148 Ave., #402 Davie, FL 33330 Items (Discounts per order only: Allow 2.4 Weeks) DEALERS WELCOME 11-800-262-6066 Circle Reader Service #67 Page 44 Address We hope you enjoy our NEW more economical format. All remains the same, however except we have discontinued the Membership Option (we will honor current members until their expiration dalo). CCC has opened a retail store at: 630 Main Street, Falmouth, MA 02540. Come by and browse, Mail should be mailed to: 21 Pleasant View Ave., Falmouth, MA 02540. UPS shipments within Cont. U.S. are $4.50 per order. Overseas rates are based on package weight. Defective software replaced with same only. We also carry most available titles. Circle Reader Service #46 Computer Gaming World "


"CHIPS & BIT Sinc. FREE GAME WITH YOUR $75 ORDER* POBOX 234 Rochester, VT 05767 Fax 802—767-3382 Int'l 802—767—3033 Call 800-753-4263 Shipping to US.PR.AK.HI, APO & FPO S4 per order. Air Mall to Canada $6 por order. Handling 51 per shipment. 2 Business Day Air US $6 per order:PR, HI$121st Item + $2 ea, add'l; AK $191st Item +$2 ea. add'l. Handling $1 per shipment. Europe, S. America Air Mall $191st Item + $6ea.add'l. Asia, Australia, Africa, Air Mall S25 1st item +$6 ea. addl. Handling $1 per shipment. IBM HINT BOOKS IBM HINT BOOKS IBM ARCADE $9 Boy de Wet Grind $10 oooooo \"CONQUERED KINGDOMS' allows you to invade castles and fly over mountains as you battle for control of the world. Features nine scenarios, a random map generator, human and fantasy combat troops, 21 levels of difficulty, modem play, several full campaign conquests, and complete game scoring history. $38        $10 $32 $6 $9 S17 $9 Immortal $10 Indy Jones 4 Fate Atlantis $10 Indy Jones Grfx Adv $10 Island Of Dr Brain $10 Jetfighter 2.0 Keef the Thief King's Quest 1 King's Quest 2 King's Quest 3 King's Quest 4 King's Quest 5 King's Quest 6 Knights of Legend Laura Bow 2 Leisure Suit Larry 1 Leisure Suit Larry 2 $10 Leisure Suit Larry 3 Leisure Suit Larry 5 $10 Lemmings $21 Loom $10 Lord of the Rings V1 $10 Lord of the Rings V2 Lost Files Sherlock Holmes $10 Lost in LA $10 LucasArts Adventure Book S16 LucasArts Air Combat Stratg $16 Magic Candle 1 $10 Magic Candle 2 $10 Magic Candle 3 $10 Manhunter New York $10 Manhunter San Francisco $10 Maniac Mansion $10 Martian Dreams $13 Matrix Cubed $10 Mean Streets $10 Might & Magic 1 $10 Might & Magic 1&2 $16 Might & Magic 2 $12 Might & Magic 3 $16 Might & Magic4 Clouds Xeen $16 Might & Magic 5 $16 Off Book Leisure Suit Larry $12 Off Book of Ultima 2nd Editn $15 Off Gde Roger Wilco's Sp Ad S12 Off Guide of King's Quest $10 Off Book of Police Quest $12 Patriot S16 Phantasy Star 3 $14 Planet's Edge $16 Police Quest 1 $10 Police Quest 2 $10 Police Quest 3 $10 Pool of Radiance $10 Pools of Darkness $12 Populous 1 & 2 Offi Strat Bk $16 Powermonger $10 Powermonger Strategy $16 Quest for Clues 2 $21 Quest for Clues 3 Quest for Clues 4 Quest for Clues 5 RUNS Issue #1-#19 Book Railroad Tycoon $10 Railroad Tycoon Off Gde $10 Rex Nebular Cos Gen Ben $14 Rise of the Dragon $10 Savage Empire $10 Search for the King $10 Secret Monkey Island $10 Secret Monkey Island 2 $10 Secret Silver Blades $10 Sentinel Worlds 1 $10 Shadow Sorcerer $10 Simcity/Simearth Book S20 Simearth $16 Simlife Official Strategy $16 Space Quest 1 $10 Space Quest 2 $10 Space Quest 3 $10 Space Quest 4 $10 Spellcasting 101: Official Bk $10 'COBRA MISSION' is an adventure role playing game for adults. Put your master detective skills to work against the unrelenting, psychotic General Haiser in order to save a bevy of voluptuous ladies from a life of slavery. Features 190 different high resolution Japanese comic style graphics, and 155 real sounds. S49 $27 Spellcasting 201 $10 E-Motion $15 Star Trek 25th Aniv $10 Eagle's Rider $29 Starflight 1 $10 Fast Track $25 Starflight 2 $10 Finale Strategy Plus Issue 4 Book $8 Fire & Forget $19 Strategy Plus Issue 10 Book $8 Flintstones Strategy Plus Issue 11 Book $8 Freakin Funk Fuzzballs Strategy Plus Issue 12 Book $5 Galactic Conqueror Strategy Plus Issue 13 Book $5 Galactic Empire Strategy Plus Issue 16-18 Ea $5 Galaxian Strategy Plus Issue 26-29 Ea $5 Gauntlet Strike Commandr Official Bk S16 Gauntlet 2 Stunt Island $16 Ghost & Goblins Summoning S16 Gobliiins VGA Super Mario World Secrets $9 Gold of the Aztecs Tales Magic:Prophecy Shdw $12 Grave Yardage Time Quest $10 Gremlins 2 Treasures Savage Frontier $10 Guy Spy $27 Tunnels & Trolls $16 Hacker 2 $6 TurboGrafx 16 Secrets $10 Hard Drivin' 2 $38 Twisty History Hint book $10 Hare Raising Havoc Ultima 4 $10 Harmony Ultima 5 Heavy Metal $35 Ultima 6 $10 Highway Patrol 2 527 Ultima 7 S12 Home Alone $27 Ultima 7 & Underworld Book S16 Hyperspeed $34 Ultima Avatar Adventures $16 Indy Jones Action Game Ultima U Stygian Abyss S12 Infestation $31 Ultima Undrwrld Worlds Labr $12 Jetsons $15 V for Victory $16 Killing Cloud $19 Wasteland King Graham Board Games Wizardry Cosmic Forge $12. Knight Force $29 Wizardry 7 $12 Laffer Utilities $21 Yeager Air Combat Handbk $16 Larry's Casino Zak McKracken $10 Laser Squad S32 Laura Bow Parlor Games Loopz IBM ARCADE $24 Monty Python Ms PacMan Airborne Ranger Mystical Aliens Ate My Babysitter Never Ending Story 2 Amazing Spiderman Never Mind Arachnaphobia $28 Night Breed $15 Aracnaphobia/Sound Source S32 Ninja Gaiden 2 $12 Armor Alley $15 Ninja Rabbits $10 Artura Nova 9 VGA $21 Atomino S29 Obliterator $6 Back to the Future 2 $27 Off Shore Warrior Back to the Future 3 $15 Oil's Well Bar Games Out Run Bargon Attack VGA $24 Pac Man Bart Simpson's House Wrdn $31 Paper Boy 2 Batman Caped Crusader $28 Pick'n Pile Batman the Movie $24 Pipe Dream Battle Storm $32 Pit Fighter $22 Bill & Ted's Excellent Adv $19 Power Drome Blockbuster Power Hits: Battletech Blockout $28 Power Hits: Sci Fi Brain Blaster $28 Predator 2 Budokan $17 Prehistorik Cadaver Psychic War Cogito Windows $38 Punisher Colorado S6 Quix Combat Classics $29 Rampage Continuum Robin Hood Skill Chance Cool Croc Twins $24 Robocop $28 Crackdown $17 Roger Wilco Space Games Crazy Cars $25 Rollerbabes $25 D Generation $28 Rotox $20 Dark Century S27 S.C. Out $38 Day of the Viper $19 Savage S19 Dick Tracy S27 Sierra Arcade Bundle 1 $24 Dig Dug Silpheed $21 Double Dragon 2 $15 Simpsons:The Arcade Game $31 Double Dragon 3 $12 Sliders $27 Dr Doom's Revenge Space Ace $32 Dragon's Lair $22 Space Ace 2 Dragon's Lair 2 Time Warp $34 Space Wars Dragon's Lair 3 Speedball 2 $25 Dragon's L Esc Singe's Cast $34 Star Blade S24 Dragons Breath S27 Stellar 7 $21 MAY CGW 6 $9 $25 Rules Chat SOUD MACHINE A COMPLETE PO SOUND KIT $5 $21       $27 'SOUND MACHINE'brings to gether 2 of the most popular computer add-ons in one inexpensive package. Features a genuine sound blaster chipset, digitized voice input/output, full duplex MIDI interface, built in 4W amp, volume control, a pair of 3\" magnetically sheilded speakers, and a Quickshot joystick. $99 $28 S29 $9 $9 $34 S37 $34 ccepted.CODs $6.Checks Held 4 Weeks. Money Orders Treatedas Cash. Most Items Shipped Same Day. Shipping times not guaranteed. Check compatibility before you buy. Defectives replaced with same product. Offer price & availability subject to change. All Sales Final. SEELAST PAGE FOR DETAILS Circle Reader Service #48 "


"BEST AVIZE AVIS ^KE REST MEN E AIZS of the The world of shareware by Chuck Miller I rolfenstein 3D from id Software is one of the best known by at a rapid pace, may cause some players to experience excessive shareware games of recent years. It shattered the popular eyestrain, headaches and even motion sickness after extended play. V conception of shareware games as low quality productions Limiting the amount of time spinning through labyrinths to shorter with its smooth scrolling, 256-color VGA graphics and its high sessions will prevent most of these problems from arising. However, caliber music and sound effects. there are some gamers who cannot stomach such rapid motion Most gamers, however, are unfamiliar with another title by id on-screen. A game as addictive as The Catacomb Abyss, though, is hard Software that was actually Wolfenstein 3D's predecessor, The Cata to pull oneself away from. comb Abyss. Abyss was developed by id Software for Softdisk PublishThe shareware version of The Catacomb Abyss is available on the ing before the release of Wolfenstein 3D (while id was still a part of Software Creations BBS at (508) 365-2359 and (508) 368-4137, and the Softdisk development team). In this installment of \"Best of the is available from the Download Superstore on the PRODIGY ServRest,\" we will examine The Catacomb Abyss, in addition to a similar ice. Those who do not have access to a modem, can order Abyss direct release from Ken Silverman at Advanced Systems, Ken's Labyrinth. from Softdisk for $5.00. A Brush with Death in the Catacomb The registration fee of $14.95 purchases an on-line hint book that includes maps of each level, object locations and several helpful Cheat Though Softdisk Publishing is best known for their Gamer's Edge Keys. Sending in a registration fee of $29.95 entitles the player to all monthly disk subscription service, The Catacomb Abyss (IBMPC RT three Catacomb 3-D Adventures including the sequels The Catacomb #31173] is a shareware release. The story is of the traditional searchArmageddon and The Catacomb Apocalypse. For the investment, this out-and-destroy-the-evil-minion variety, with the player assuming bundle is a very good value. An MS-DOS compatible computer with the role of a great wizard. Play begins at surface level, with action 640K RAM and an EGA or better graphics card is required. Mouse drawing the player into the depths of the labyrinth below. Puzzles and joystick are supported as are Ad Lib and Sound Blaster sound consist primarily of finding the keys necessary to unlock doors leading boards. For more information, contact: to successive levels of the underground maze. Other objects must also be collected in order for the player to survive and succeed in this quest. Softdisk Publishing Zappers and Xterminators allow the player to fire powerful weapons 606 Common Street at enemies, and Curing Potions keep the player alive, while magical Shreveport, LA 71101 items such as special gems help the player identify the number and (800) 831-2694 (US and Canada) (318) 221-8718 (International) position of opponents. Combat is very basic. The player must destroy all enemies encounAn A-MAZE-ing Adventure tered (there are no friendly NPCs in this game). Three weapons are available: Magic Missiles, a single shot spell; Zappers, a continuous Once again, the fate of Earth befalls the player's character. The stream of magic missiles; and Xterminators, a circular dispersion of scientific community on the planet Zogar has been searching for a magic missiles. While some creatures can be disposed of with several race which is able to survive under extreme adversity. Thus far, they missiles, many require a constant barrage to stop them in their tracks. have met with no success. Now, the player's character must prove his/her worth by surviving a unique labyrinth populated with all sorts Graphics and sound effects are miniof creatures and traps that will test one's mal by today's standards. Only 16physical and mental faculties to the urcolor EGA graphics are supported, most. Should the protagonist fail, the though the game can be played with Earth will be blown to bits. any EGA or better graphics card inKen's Labyrinth (IBMPCRT #31470), stalled. Graphic detail is good, but like The Catacomb Abyss, employs 3-D modest, while sound effects are limited technologies to provide the player with to simple explosions, thuds and the smooth scrolling graphics in a first-perlike. Music is nonexistent. Still, the son perspective adventure. Like Abyss, game is very enjoyable despite the austhe labyrinth walls pass by quickly and terity of its presentation. smoothly. However, graphics in Ken's COMBY The only other norable problem in ABYCH Labyrinth are of much higher quality at Abyss (which holds true for all 3-D 1992 256-color VGA. Detail is very high. KOTDISK ING 100% 2 5 smooth scrolling products) is that the TESCOMMES HEUP Another area in which Ken's Labyrinth game's smooth scrolling, which so Asking for trouble in The Catacomb Abyss differs from Abyss is in its audio accomreadily allows dungeon walls to speed paniment. Though sound effects are Page 46 Computer Gaming World "


"CHIPS & BITS inc. FREE GAME WITH YOUR $75 ORDER* PO BOX 234 Rochester, VT 05767 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'1802-767-3033 Call 800-753-4263 Shipping to US PRAK, HI APO & FPO S4 per order. Air Mail to Canada $6 por order. Handling $1 per shipment. 2 Business Day Air US S6 per order:PR, HIS121st item +$2 ea.addEAK $1915 item+$2 ea, ada. Handling $1 per shipment, Europe, S. America Air Mail $191st Item +$6 ea. add'l. Asia, Australia, Africa, Air Mall $251st Item +$6 ea, add'l. Handling $1 per shipment. IBM ARCADE The Modern Version Of The Award Winning Classic IBM SIMULATION IBM SIMULATION $15 $15 $44 $24 $25 $42 'EMPIRE DELUXE' is an addictive wargame of expansion and conquest. Features 1-6 human or computer players, a scenario editor, Super VGA graphics, play by modem or network, multiple scenarios, terrain effects, & produc tion specialities. New units include armor, bomber and airbase formations. $35 $24 $15 $25 $24 Stormlord Street Fighting Man Street Football Super Off Road $12 Super PacMan $19 Super Space Invaders Superman $28 Swamp Gas Windows $38 Take-a-Break Crosswrd WIN $29 Take-A-Break Pinball WIN $29 Take-A-Break Pool WIN $29 Taking of Beverly Hills Teenage MNT Manht Missn $31 Teenage Mutant N Turtle Ad $32 Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtle $25 Tengen's Arcade Hits $12 Terminator $34 Terrorpods Tetris Classic WIN $26 The Light Corridor $29 The Tinies $29 Thexder 1 $15 Thexder 2:Fire Hawk $15 Treasure Trap $10 Tristan Pinball $34 Troika S3 Turbo Outrun $17 Vaxine Viking Child Volfied Wild Streets Wild Wheels $32 Wrath of the Demon X-Men $9 X-Men 2 $25 Xenocide $6 Xiphos $34 Zoom $22 $15 COMPUTIN $12 D IPUTER-AIDED DESIGN TO EMAKER   CREATE YOUR OWN.COMPUTER GANES $29 EXPLORE MAZES Scenery Collection Set A $37 Scenery Collection Set B $34 Scenery Collin California $37 Scenery Collin Great Britain $34 Scenery Disk 11 $22 Scenery Enhancement Editor $21 Scenery: Hawaii $16 Scenery: Tahiti $16 Seal Team $42 Search for the Titanic $27 Secret Weap Luftwaffe $44 Secret Weapons Exp 2 P80 $21 Secret Weapons Exp DO335 $21 Secret Weapons Exp He 162 $21 Shuttle $26 Silent Service 2 $19 Sky Chase Snd, Grphcs & Arcrft Upgrad $27 Stormovik Strike Aces $19 Strike Commander $52 Strike Commandr Speech Pk S24 Stunt Driver $15 Stunt Island 536 Stunts S15 Syndicate $48 Tank $34 Task Force 1942 $39 Task Force Admirals Pack $52 Team Yankee $29 Team Yankee 2 $27 Test Drive 2 $30 Test Drive 2 Muscle Cars S10 Test Drive 2: The Collection $29 Test Drive 2:CA Challenge $15 Test Drive 2:Euro Challenge $15 Test Drive 2:Supercars $15 Test Drive 3 $29 Test Drive 3:Road & Car $15 Their FH Battlehawks Bundle $44 Thunderhawk S21 Thunderstrike $27 Top Gun Danger Zone $31 Tornado $52 Tracon $34 Tracon WIN S28 Tracon 2 Tracon 2 WIN $34 Ultrabots Sanction Earth $39 Vette $15 Voice Commander F117A Voice Commander F15SE3 S18 Western Europe Disk $22 Wing Commander $39 WC Secret Mission $21 WC Secret Mission 2 HD $21 Wing Commander 1 Deluxe Wing Commander 2 $52 WC 2 Operation 1 $24 WC 2 Operation 2 $24 WC 2 Speach Mod $15 WC 2 Speech Mod $15 Wolfpack $15 World Circut Champnship Ed $45 X-Wing $40 Yeager's Air Combat $21 'GAME MAKER allows you to create 256 color VGA adventure and arcade games without programming. Characters, monsters, and parts of a sceen can all be animated. Characters can gain or lose lives, score, hit points and 20 other attributes. Includes several full games, many scenes, monsters & backgrounds for you to use. 568 DESIGN WORLDS F15 Strike Eagle 2 $19 F15 Strike Eagle 2 Scen $17 F15 Strike Eagle 3 F15 Strike Eagle 3 Aces Pak $49 F19 Stealth Fighter F22 Advanced Tactical Fghtr $39 F29 Retaliator $32 F40 Pursuit Simulator Falcon 3.0 Falcon 3 Scen1 Fighting Tgr $24 Falcon AT $19 Fire & Forget 2 $30 Flight Planner $24 Flight Simulator 4.0 $42 Flight of the Intruder Fly the Grand Canyon $45 Grand Canyon Scenery $16 Great Naval Battles $44 Great NB America in Atlantic $21 Great NB Super Ships Atlant $19 Great NB Scenario Builder S28 Gun Boat $33 Gunship Gunship 2000 VGA S37 Gunship 2000 Scenario Disk $24 Harrier Assault S38 Harrier Combat Simulator $6 Hawaiian Odyssey S22 Heatwave S25 Heroes of the 357th $17 HoverForce $31 Hunt for Red October $19 Infiltrator 2 $28 Instrument Pilot Scenry East $59 Instrument Pilot Scenry West $59 Iron Helix $52 Japan Scenery Disk $22 Jet Fighter 2.0 $39 Jet Fighter 2 Mission Disk $19 Jump Jet S39 Jump Jet Aces Pack $52 Knights of the Sky S29 LHX Attack Chopper $17 Land Sea Air Trilogy S12 Land Sea Air Trilogy 2 $29 Life and Death $19 Life and Death 2 S24 Lightspeed $9 Mantis Experimental Fighter $39 Mantis Exp Speech Pak S19 Maximum Overkill $46 Maximum Overkill Missn Dk1 $28 Maximum Overkill Missn Dk2 $28 MegaFortress $12 Megafortress Mega-Pak $38 Megafortress Miss Disk 1 $26 Megafortress Miss Disk 2 $26 Miami Enforcer S39 Mig 29 Fulcrum $32 New Facilities Locator $18 Orbits $37 Pacific Islands 2 $30 Power Boat Simulator $39 Power Politics WIN $34 Privateer $52 Rags to Riches $36 Rapcon $29 Reach for the Skies $31 Red Baron $36 Red Baron Missn Disk Buildr $24 Red Storm Rising $12 Road & Track Grand Prix Un $37 Sailing Instrctr Pack CGA S199 Sailing Instrctr Pack VGA $239 Sailing Simulator CGA $39 Sailing Simulator VGA $42 Sail Sim E Coast Voygs CGA S34 Sail Sim E Coast Voygs VGA $39 Sail Sim W Cst Voygs CGA S34 Sail Sim W Cst Voygs VGA $39 San Francisco Scen Disk S22 IBM SIMULATION 256 COLOR VGA ONSTERS PLAN MOVEMENT $34 529 GRATIS CLATS MONSTERS IMPORT GRAPHICS $42 S18 $29 688 Attack Sub $19 ATP Flight Simulator S29 A.T.A.C. A10 Avenger 1993 $46 A10 Tank Killer 1.5 Enhancd $34 AH-64 Helicopter $46 Aces of the Pacific $42 Aces Pacific Mission Disk 1 Aces Over Europe Aces Europe Mission Disk 1 $27 Aces Europe Mission Disk 2 $27 Air Duel $38 Air Warrior SVGA $35 Aircraft Scenery Design $35 AirportFacilities Dir $12 Allied Forces $12 Armour Geddon Armoured Fist $38 Assignment Miami $37 B17 Flying Fortress $39 Battle Command $12 Birds of Prey $32 Blue Angels $15 Blue Max Aces Great War $9 Campaign: Strategic Flight S S37 Car and Driver $38 Cardinal of the Kremlin $12 Carrier Command $12 Combat Classics $29 Conqueror Multi Tank Crash Course Das Boot Submarine Design Your Own Railroad $29 Dynamix Bundle 1 $34 Elite Plus $19 Eye of the Storm Fit Sim $29 F117A Stealth Fighter VGA $42 F14 Tomcat $19 F15 Strike Eagle S7 MAXX COBRA FLIGHTSTICK brings together the thrill of a joystick and the versatility of the keyboard. Features molded casing for left or right handers, 7 button pistol grip joystick, 25 programmable functions, exact auto-centering, and true circular directional control. Game port not necessary. $ 54 MACINTOSH GAMES S12 $9 $36 4th & Inches S12 4th & Inches Team Const Battle Chess $29 Checkmate Dragon's Lair 2 $34 Dragon's Lair COLOR $34 Dragon's Lair Esc Singe $34 Dragon's Lair $34 Falcon COLOR $46 Go Master Dix Ver 5 $109 Hardball 2 $31 MAY CGW 7 Visa & MC Accepted. CODs 86. Checks Held 4 Weeks.Money Orders Treated as Cash. Most Items Shipped Same Day. Shipping times not guaranteed. Check compatibility before you buy. Defectives replaced with same product. Offer price & availability subject to change. All Sales Final. SEE LAST PAGE FOR DETAILS Circle Reader Service #48 "


"Chareware clearer, the outstanding background music really stands our. In fact, continues to prove that computer entertainment does not necessarily each of the 27 levels in the labyrinth offers an original soundtrack. have to offer the best in graphics and sound to provide one with an At times, Ken's Labyrinth almost seems to be a parody of its enjoyable playing experience. Nor does one have to part with $40 to competition, placing signs on the walls $60 to acquire a worthwhile game. Sharethat read \"WALK THROUGH THIS ware offers a viable source of entertainWALL» and by depicting food that ment, especially for the gamer on a looks suspiciously like that of Wolfenbudget. So, until next we meet, great gamstein 3D. Nevertheless, the game has ing to one and all! much to its own merit. Games reviewed in this column are A registration fee of $15 provides the available through numerous distributors player with Board Pack 1 that adds an of shareware and public domain software, additional 10 levels to the game, plus a as well as on many national and private Bonus level. A second Board Pack is also telecommunication services ( GEnic available for $15 adding another 10 levRound Table locations and file numbers els and a Boss level. Both can be had for appear in brackets when available). If aca registration fee of $25. cess to these services is not available, it is possible, in most cases, to write or call the To play Ken's Labyrinth, one need game developer for an evaluation copy. only possess an MS-DOS compatible Ken's Labyrinth Remember, shareware games should be with 965K of RAM (210K convenregistered with the author. tional memory, plus XMS or EMS memory) and a VGA graphics card. A 386-based system is recommended. Support for a mouse and Ad Lib compatible sound cards is Send Us Your Best provided. Those desirous of venturing into Ken's Labyrinth should send their registration fees to: Those who have authored a shareware or public domain game and would like to have it considered for review in this column, please send Advanced Systems two complete copies (preferably on 3.5\" disks) with documentation 50 Cindyann Drive and a cover letter to: East Greenwich, RI 02818 Best of the Rest Attn: Ken Silverman Computer Gaming World 130 Chaparral Court, Suite 260 Out of the Depths Anaheim Hills, CA 92808. This concludes our look at shareware games for another issue and CGW LOOKING FOR A SPORTS TITLE? CALL FOR CURRENT PRICING AND SAME DAY SHIPPING RTS GAMER'S GOLD WE PAY CASH FOR USED IBM GAMES THE PLAYBOOK OF SPORTS-RELATED SOFTWARE If you're a computer sports fan, you want to know what software is available, how similar titles compare, and you want the latest releases of attractive prices. That's why our complete Playbook describes dozens of strategic simulations, awesome action games, and specialized utilities from little known sources. We want to be your source for hi-tech sports. The Playbook is free with all phone and mail orders. T Or simply send $1.00 for your copy today! BASEBALL BASKETBALL BOWLING ACTION EDUCATION CALENDARS $) FISHING CARD COLLECTING FLIGHT GAMES HANDICAPPING FOOTBALL GOLF HOCKEY SIMULATORS HORSERACING STATISTICS MOTORSPORTS OLYMPICS SAILING 800 747-0908 617 576-6700 SKIING Menton VSA 1675 Moss Ave  Cambridge MA 02139 TENNIS TAKE YOUR BRAIN OUT TO THE BALLGAME also Nintendo, Super Nintendo, and Sega Genesis We want your current used games* 1-800-377-8578 call for authorization before shipping WE SELL USED GAMES IBM, Nintendo, Super Nintendo, Sega Genesis All games are tested & IBM disks virus checked Call for current title availi CEREBEL WE ACCEPT VISA/MasterCard Most items shipped same day. S5 UPS/S7 2nd Day Air \"Gomes must be complete with all disks & printed materials and in the original box. Incomplete games will be relurned of your expense. GAMER'S GOLD 1008 W. 41st Street Sioux Falls South Dakota 57105 Circle Reader Service #47 Circle Reader Service #81 Page 48 Computer Gaming World "


"CHIPS & BIT Sinc. FREE GAME WITH YOUR $75 ORDER* PO BOX 234 Rochester, VT 05767 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'l 802-767-3033 Call 800-753-4263 Shipping to US,PRAK, HI,APO & FPO S4 per order. Alr Mall to Canada $6 per order. Handling $1 per shipment, 2 Business Day Air US SG perorder:PR.HI$121stitem +$2 ea, addT; AK $19 1st Item +$2 ea. add'l. Handling $1 per shipment, Europe, S. America Air Mall S19 1st item+S6 ea. add'l. Asia, Australia, Africa, Air Mall $25 1st Item +$6 ea. add'l. Handling $1 per shipment. MACINTOSH GAMES AMIGA GAMES AMIGA GAMES $34 $34 CE COUAT'SKUULATOR $15 $32 $28 $32 $28 $34 $24 $15 RE Blud Lilla Thunderstrike Time Machine Total Eclipse Trump Castle 2 Turrican UMS 2 Untouchables War in Middle Earth Warhead Warlock Wild Wheels World Class Leader Board Xenophobe Yeager's AFT 2.0 Zone Warrior $19 \"X WING' presents the epic space battles of Star Wars with advanced graphics, sound, and space combat technology. Pilot X-wing, Y-wing, & A-wing fighters against TIE fighters, Star Destroyers, and finally the Death Star. Features instant replay, over 50 missions, a companion book, & digitized movie sound effects. $40 Harpoon $39 Harpoon Battle Set 2 $22 Harpoon Battle Set 4 $27 Harpoon Scenario Editor $27 Ishido $34 Jack Nicklaus CD 1-5 Each Lemmings $29 Lexicross $32 Life and Death $32 Might & Magic 3 $38 Monopoly $29 Out of This World COLOR $36 PGA Tour Golf Course 1 $17 PGA Tour Golf $38 Pick'n Pile $28 Secrt Monkey Island COLOR $38 Simcity Terrain Editor $15 Space Ace 2 $34 Space Ace $34 Starflight 1 $38 Starflight 2 $38 Test Drive 2 $27 Test Drive 2:CA Challenge S15 Test Drive 2:Supercars $15 V Victory 2 Russian Front Vette $33 Welltris $24 Where In Europe is Carmen $30 Yeager's AFT $32 $34 $25 $32 S26 $25 $26 $26 *FREE GAME OFFER $17 $31 Spend the specified amount on any in stock software and choose a free game from the corresponding list below. Offer subject to change or cancellation without notice. Valid only while supplies last. $32 $34 $44 SPEND $75 VITORY   AR AMIGA GAMES \"V FOR VICTORY MARKET GARDEN' takes the series to Southern Holland on September 17th, 1944. Features a full scrolling map of the Eindhoven Arnhem area, over 500 military units, 9 types of combat, detailed weather effects, assume either Alliedor Germancommand, extensive campaign analysis, & historical variants. S44 Artura Blockbusters Colorado Felony Gunship Mean 18 Famous Courses 2 Obliterator Third Courier TKO Trump Castle DD1 Trump Castle DD2 $24 Globulus $22 Godfather $12 Gravity $34 Greens $34 Gun Boat $33 Hard Nova HardBall $33 Harpoon Battle Set 2 Harpoon Battle Set 3 Hawaiian Odyssey $22 Heatwave $28 Heavy Metal $35 Heros Qst 2:Trial Fire $34 Hostage $31 HoverForce $31 Indy Jones Grix Adv $24 Ishido $36 Jack Nicklaus Clip Art Jack Nicklaus CD 1-5 Each $15 Jack Nicklaus Greatest 18 $27 Jack Nicklaus Unlimited Golf $39 Joan of Arc Journey $34 Keys to Maramon Khalaan Knights of the Crystalion Koshan Conspiracy $32 Legend of the Lost $34 License to Kill $28 Loopz $34 Lost Patrol $34 M1 Tank Platoon $34 Magic Fly $28 Matrix Marauders $28 Mean 18 Golf $30 MegaFortress Miss Disk 2 $27 Might & Magic 2 $38 Millenium $24 Moebius $41 Murder $29 Never Mind $26 Night Breed S14 Night Shift $19 Nitro $32 Omega S34 Operation Combat $15 Operation Spruance S34 Plague $28 Populous 2 Challenge Amiga $24 Populous World Editor S16 Powermonger World War 1 Projectyle $28 Quix RVF Honda $30 Red Storm Rising $29 Rick Dangerous $25 Rings of Medusa $34 Road Rash $32 Robocop 2 $34 Rommel at El Alamein $36 Search for the King $37 Secret Monkey Island $38 Shadowlands $20 Shark Attack Ultimate Golf $28 Ski or Die $32 Space Ace 2 $34 Space Quest 3 $34 Spacewrecked $31 Star Control $34 Starflight 1 $32 Stellar 7 $21 Stratego $32 Street Rod 2 Strike Fleet $26 Stryx $25 Super Space Invaders $24 Superman $28 Targhan $28 Tengen's Arcade Hits $25 Terran Envoy $27 Test Drive 2 $30 SPEND $100 Altered Destiny $37 Amazing Spiderman $25 Amnios $29 Anarchy Arthur Quest for Excalibur $34 Artura $34 Atomino $29 Bard's Tale 3 $32 Batman Caped Crusader 328 Batman the Movie $31 Battle Chess 2 Chinese $29 Battle Command S26 Battle Master $38 Blockout $28 Blue Max Aces Great War $34 Breach 1 Scenario Disk $16 Bride of the Robot $28 Budokan $26 Cardinal of the Kremlin $32 Chamber Sci-Mutant Prstss $31 Chase HQ $28 Checkmate $36 Chronoquest 2 $34 Clue Master Detective $28 Codename Iceman $15 Conqueror $34 Crackdown $20 Cribage Gin King $28 Cybercon 3 Dark Castle Dark Side $28 Darkman Das Boot Submarine $34 Day of the Viper $33 Death Bringer $28 Dragons of Flame $12 Dreadnoughts Ironclads $29 Duck Tales $31 East vs West Berlin 1948 $27 Elf F29 Retaliator $34 Faery Tale Adventure Falcon Miss2 Op Cntrstrike $19 Fast Break S17 Federation $34 Fire Power $17 Flames of Freedom MWII $29 Fleet Med $36 S25 Airborne Ranger Backgammon by George Big Business Blue Max Edward O'Thorpe Black Jack Future Wars Harrier Combat Simulator Magic Johnson Fast Break Operation Combat Pirates Punisher SC Out SDI Sound Star Tie Break Tennis The Tinies Troika Under Fire $29 S31 'CAESAR' starts you as the governor of a province of the Roman Empire where you must build cities & rule wisely. For tify your cities with walls and towersbut should your defenses fail, you can lead legions to crush the hostile barbarian tribes. Features an in depth economic model and more than 20 buildings to construct. $36 SPEND $200 ROME WASNT BUILT IN A DAY HOW LONG WILL IT TAKE YOLZ Impressions $32 $27 $31 Bridge 7.0 Cardinal of the Kremlin Chess Net Covert Action Dark Half Dusk of the Gods Free DC Megafortress Megatraveller 1: Zodani Patton Strikes Back Railroad Tycoon Sentinel Worlds Shadow Sorcerer Storm Across Europe Trump Castle 2 MAY CGW 8 Visa & MC Accepted. CODs $6. Checks Held 4 Wooks. Money Orders Treated as Cash. Most Items Shipped Same Day. Shipping times not guaranteed. Check compatibility before you buy. Defectives replaced with same product. Offer price & availability subject to change. All Sales Final. Circle Reader Service #48 "


" .. PIN weens Over There | The Comet Cometh Bike ku VU by Robin Matthews Bul 314 Ibericum This should be a very busy column this month, since software is This is the detailed background to Shadow of the Comet and may appearing from almost every direction. The French Franc may explain why Infogrammes did not want to risk combining such a rich be tied to the Deurchsmark, but the Sofrware maison Chez storyline with the new AITD engine. Shadow is a full blown graphic Infogrammes is one of the most original and prolific ensembles adventure, using a development of the techniques used in their well around. Their innovative title Alone in the Dark (AITD) was initially received Eternam. Gamers control John T. Carter around the 100 or pencilled in as a genuine horror/thriller adventure in an agreement so screens that make up Isthmuth and will be faced with a series of with the estate of the late Howard Phillips Lovecraft. puzzles and quests that must be solved by interaction with the 40 or That project, however, became a technical crusade in its own right, so NPCs. with its dynamic and haunting movement system becoming the main thrust of the software. It was decided to postpone the genuine H.P. Each time one of these characters is encountered or one's on-screen Lovecraft project and to concentrate on the radical design of AITD. personna enters a screen that has particular importance to the game (opening a lock, using items, unleashing incredibly powerful superHaving successfully completed AITD, the company has now renatural forces or omnipotent super beings), a fully animated sequence turned to the drawing board, and its designers are hard at work on the is presented. With NPCs this is normally a full close up of the NPC, original game storyboard — provisionally entitled, Shadow of the with others full screen animation. Comet. The plot starts some 76 years ago with the visit of Lord Boleskine, an eccentric British scientist, to a small fishing port in New The interface appears simple to use, harking back to the halcyon days England, called Isthmuth. of adventures and limired to basic commands such as: talk, ger, take, use and look. This normally would result in the game being lincar or Upon gazing up at the night sky, he notices that the stars are arranged limited, but in Shadow of the Comet, Infogrammes hopes that the in a different fashion in a specific place. Then, during the passing over graphics and storyline are so impressive that the interface merges into of Halley's Comer, he experiences a strange and peculiar phenomenon the game, rather than being the most important feature. that sends him quite bonkers and totally doodle alley. Two years later, he dies locked up in an asylum in London. Since that time his works, A general information bar can be displayed or suppressed and an sketches and writings have faded into obscurity. «Info\" command gives access to Carter's diary which has a summary of the important stages of the adventure as well as conversations and Scroll forward to the year 1910. A young British Astronomer, John happenings. This form of aide memoire is being used more and more T. Carter becomes interested in Lord Boleskine and decides to invesin recent games and is a welcome feature. tigate the last few years of the mad scientist's lifc. Carrer travels to Ischmuth and is The graphics are about the best seen in warmly welcomed by its inhabitants, in320 x 200 mode, with locations being cluding Dr West and the local Public Reseparately drawn for day and night scenes, cords Official, Tobias Juggs. and utilizing sprite animations, vectorial full-screen graphics and close-up techCarter discovers that all is not well in niques. Movement is as sweet and rapid as Isthmuth. Why, for example, is the in Eternam, but without some of the Whatley name treated with such fear? What quirks. Shadow of the Comet looks very promising, is due for release on MS-DOS is this strange religious cult? What are these platforms later in the year and will support strange ceremonies being held in the forest? VGA/MCGA graphics only, as well as all What is the strange old Indian Sorcerer major sound cards. Miskaquamus trying to do? Who are the ancient Gods who reigned over the Earth The last few years have been the era of thousands of years ago? What is the Necrothe big game. Games like Ultima Undernomicon? Shadow of the Comet world, Ultima VII and the very dark 04:15 Page 50 Computer Gaming World "


"ININDOA KOE KOEI INANDO TIM WAY OF THE NINJA Ninja in Training! It's going to take more than a couple of jumping jacks to prepare for this adventure! After all, no one ever said being a ninja was easy. Learn how to deliver killer blows with your trusty sword and send a barrage of throwing stars at your enemies. Explore dungeon mazes and battle giant rats, toxic worms and super leeches that call these caves homel Snoop on your enemies as you explore the countryside, but watch out for bushwhackers eager to steal your gold. If you train hard and master the ninja arts you may live long enough to exact revenge on the warlord that killed your family. One final word of advice: \"Quiet ninjas live longer.\" Lineup Music L19 Chris DES 9 : | 0 DE Zip off to new adventures Race through dungeon mazes Strike back at fire dragons SUPER NINTENDO AEROBIZ has Landed for SNES! ELEIRETETE KOEI Available for the SNES system. Koei Games are available for all systems in retail outlets nationwide! If you can't find the KOEI product you are looking for, call us at (415) 348-0500 (9am to 5pm PST). KOEI Corporation, 1350 Bayshore Highway, Suite 540, Burlingame, CA 94010 andr o Nostando Entertain Bet Seos seus cercando cons t ant and other Circle Reader Service #103 Os CEO, create a global airline network. II Establish hubs, buy planes and build hotels. Be aggressive. Airlines are your business! "


"_  Darklands. As a departure, the redifferent and, with the tactical and mainder of this month's \"Overpuzzle aspects is far more than an There\" looks at some lighter arcade game with some frills bolted software that may, or may not, end on. It is currently available now on up travelling across the pond. Amiga, ST and IBM. One of the big European software Zool is another superior puzhouses that does not figure too often zle/platform type, worthy of a short in the \"Over There\" column is the mention purely because of the reUK's Ocean Software. Based in cent hype about consoles. Zool, curManchester, Ocean is well known rently available on the Amiga, but in Europe for several things -some shortly to be produced on the IBM, home grown superior shoot-emis considered (by those who profess up's, various film tie-ins and imto know) to be all that Sonic Hedgeporting some classy US software. hog — the animal that launched a Their own software development thousand consoles — should have boys have gone berserk over the last been! That is a big compliment for few months with a series of new this graphically superb addictive releases. These include: Elf, Wizkid, joystick waggler. \"Over There\" will Zool, WWF European Rampage Shadow of the Comet keep you posted on the IBM PC Tour, Cool World Robocop 3 and version, but when the console exshortly, Lethal Weapon. plosion subsides, it may be this type of product that will draw those Elf is a good looking adventure game with a heavy dose of the users to proper machines, and real software. scrolling platform game. Gamers control Cornelius the Elf and travel World Wrestling Federation: European Rampage Tour is Ocean's through some wonderfully sculptured back drops, casting spells and follow-up to the original WWF product. It is a wrestling simulator disposing of an indeterminate collection of goblins, gooks and castle that allows gamers to pit their favorite WWF Superstars, such as Hulk guards. With lots of good puzzles, the system has some quirks, but Hogan and The Ultimate Warrior, against their European countergenerally works well. parts, such as Natural Disasters and the Nasty Boys. Graphics are purely average and the controls are all right, but let me put my cards Wizkidis Ocean's follow up to a UK classic called Wizball. This was on the table, this is definitely not my sort of game. an early piece of very odd programming involving bouncing a ball around a platform type environment. Wizkid is almost equally as In fact, it wouldn't even appear in this column other than it allows weird, but far more playable. Set in a strange adventure world, there me to ask US sports fans everywhere to kindly keep the «heroes\" of the are links back to Wizball, since Wizball and Wizard have been kidWWF well and truly locked up in the USA, in their cages, or their napped and imprisoned by the evil Zark. So has the family cat, Nifta, television sets or whatever. If this is available on import in the US it who is locked up in Turtle Jail. Okay, most of the newcomers to this will be a fitting revenge! bizarre game universe are now skipping this article and moving off down the page. Hopefully, they will hang on for a minute, because The two other US inspired products from Ocean are Lethal Weapon there is much more to come and, with a plot this convoluted, the game and Robocop 3. The first is almost a straight platform tie-in with the must make up for it! Mel Gibson/Danny Glover smash film. Early screenshots look good and the company really knows how to produce Wizkid consists of two phases with addithis type of title as a winner. tional bonus levels thrown in. Phase 1 involves controlling the Wizkid as he bounces Robocop 3 is, however, much more than a around the screens. As he bounces about, one mere shoor-em-up film tie-in. One of Ocean's not only destroys the minions of the chief big early hirs was the UK distribution of the old nasty, but also earns some hard cash in a very Data East four color CGA Robocop. They did unusual way! As the character knocks out the nor handle the later EGA versions, but have baddies, a musical note is created and floars now produced, in-house, this excellent prodacross the screen. If the Wizkid can grab this, uct. Robocop 3 is based on a film yet to be released, but the basic backdrop of the plot is of some musical notes are written to a musical OCP, the company that built Robocop, being stave. If one collects enough notes to make a tune, this invokes a most welcome rainstorm taken over by a Japanese conglomerate. Crime of money. Naturally, the Wizkid must is still rife in town, with Splatter punks and quickly collect said funds or the entire exercise Shadow of the Comet official vigilante groups declaring war on each is worthless. other. Robocop 3 puts the player in charge of old tin legs and can be played Still reading? Now, the Wizkid can take the money to the shop and on one of two levels, Arcade or Movie. The Arcade game consists of use it to purchase lots of very strange odds and ends thar function as five different me five different modules, the Adventure game is more of a graphic useful tools in the next portions of the game. Once all the screens have adventure, weaving the type of challenges found in the arcade games been cleared of Zark's minions, one of Nifta's kittens appears and the into one story line. The separate games within this mode involve either player can then move into the second part of the game. Each kieren having the player on patrol and driving a Police Turbo Cruiser, needs to be rescued, which is achieved by solving various logic-type cleaning up drug gangs and rescuing hostages, testing out the new puzzles. gyropack, or going head-to-head with another cyborg. All the action is seen through Robocop's perspective, but there are also a series of The graphics are very good, sound support is OK, and the interface selectable fixed and floating camera angles. is involved, but once learned is pretty good. Wizkid is an original and unusual game. It is European in flavour, very European; in fact it could That's the story of what's available on this side of the Ocean. We'll even be French. This will not be everyone's pint of beer, but it is try to have even more surprises, next issue. Cow Page 52 Computer Gaming World "


"If you've ever said, «Give me the chance, and I'll create the greatest fantasy game of all.» Advanced Dungeons Dragons   AUNLIMITED ADVENTURES FANTASY FANTASY CONSTRUCTION KIT STOP FANTASIZING AND DO IT! This is your chance to break the chains and create your own AD&D adventure scenarios in the incredible FORGOTTEN REALMS world. Your tools: More than 200 classic art images from AD&D Gold Box games of the past. Digitized illustrations from the pen-and-paper AD&D game. And original art drawn especially for your creation. Your only limitation is the size of your hard drive. You'll build maps with the easy-to-use grid screen and link them with teleporters, doorways and stairwells. You'll choose from the massive bank of 112 monsters and multiple non-player characters. You'll design the dungeons of your dreams and test them as you go with a point-andclick interface that makes errors gone forever at the touch of a button! The 3-D views are drawn directly from popular SSI titles. The strategic overhead-view phased combat scenarios feature easy-to-use commands. And you can back it all up for later play on your or a friend's machine. Test your mettle by playing the precreated scenario \"The Heirs to Skull Crag\", with its four huge areas, a killer plot and four separate quests to solve. If you choose, you can even modify this ready-to-go adventure To make a long story short, if you've discovered just about every other AD&D adventure limits your imagination, you'll find UNLIMITED ADVENTURES, in a word, fantastic! BUILD THE BEST DUNGEON AND WIN A TRIP TO THE ULTIMATE FANTASY SHOW! Detalls Inside box. PLEASE SELECT A HALL AND OBSTRUCTIONIN BRILS  F o8 BOOR -OBERT BALL: HOPEN OPISHO HALL CODESERT HALLI LATERTE IBM (286 or greater) MACINTOSH TO ORDER: Visit your retailer or call 1-800-245-4525 (in USA & Canada) with VISA/MC. CE HALL 100 FREE MOVEMENT HOPE  SELECT LCFT PLACE RICHTUADOR SRL PAGE   MONSTERS ENCOUNTERED 1-17 TIPS E US SPIDETH REU DOUX ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, AD&D FORGOTTEN REALMS and the TSR logo are trademarks owned by and used under license from TSR inc.  TSR. Inc. 1993 Strategic Simulations, Inc. All rights reserved. DEHOLDER JCTURES THPORT UNSPOIRS NOK PREU HET CANCEL SCREENS SHOWN: 18M 256-COLOR VGA. "


"Devlet Return To Known Space unami's Ringworld: Revenge of the Patriar by Charles Ardai arry Niven's Ringworld is enormous. Not the novel, which weighs in at a tidy L 342 pages, but the Ringworld itself, the huge alien artifact which gives Niven's bestknown work its title. At one point, Niven likens the Ringworld to 50 feet of Christmas ribbon circling a candle. Only, in place of the ile, imagine a sun — and suddenly one is dealing with a Christmas ribbon that has three million times the surface area of the Earth. The size of the thing is one of the crucial points of the book, and it is inevitably the one that suffers in the computer game adaptation from Tsunami. There are only so many screens of the Ringworld wall that one can scroll past before getting bored. «How could Speaker stand it?\" Niven writes. \"Hour after hour of driving... beneath the belly of proach the extreme foreground), and the game is relentlessly faithful to Niven's conceptions; but this is all beside the point. The point is that the game resembles a cartoon. One does have to solve puzzles to unlock\" each section of the game, so the player does have something to do, but Niven fans should not come to the game expecting to have a chance to roam free on their beloved Ringworld. What they should expect, instead, is a single, new tale of Show the Ringworld, with them participating minimally in the telling. Chmeee For Wu and Wu For Chmeee The story picks up shortly after the end of the novel and, in fact, maps itself to the novel quite well. In place of jaded adventurer Louis Wu we get jaded mercenary Quinn, a friend of Louis Wu's. In place of the nameless Kzin, Speaker-To-Animals, we get Speaker's son, Seeker-Of-Vengeance. In place of sassy, sexy Tecla Brown we get sassy, sexy Miranda Rees. In place of insane Puppeteer Nessus running the mission for his own purposes we get a different Puppeteer, also \"Hindmost\" (that is, pulling the strings), though this one only appears in holographic form. In short, we get a new (but not very) band of four adventurers out to reclaim Slaver technology from the backward Ringworlders. LINGWORLI this...artifact.\" So Tsunami gives us three and lets it go at that. With so much room, the Ringworld is home to an unimaginably huge number of alien cultures; Tsunami shows us five, and shows them to us briefly. There is probably no way of getting around this limitation short of nutring the game a couple of CDs and spending a decade or two writing it. Still, Tsunami has to face the fact that it has chosen to adapt an essentially impossible-to-adapt work. One could create a comprehensive simulation of War and Peace's Russia before one could exhaust the slightest fraction of the Ringworld's surface. Readers might wonder why I mention this at all — surely Niven himself didn't exhaust the possibilities of his creation in his novel, and no one gets on his case about it. Yet, as I keep stressing in my reviews, there is a difference between a novel and an interactive game. A novel, like a film, is an author-directed journey through however immense a landscape. A game, on the other hand, is supposed to be a player-directed journey. In a game, the entire landscape, or as much of it as possible, must be accessible. Not here. In Ringworld: Revenge of the Patriarch, Tsunami has taken the opposite tack, shuttling the player through a storyline so rigidly constructed that one might as well be in the hands of an intrusive, Dickensian author who says explicitly, «Now, Dear Reader, I shall take you to see the colony of the Canyon People...\" Never before has there been a game so movie-like in its construction. There are great strerches of action during which the player literally does nothing. The last several minutes of the story contains several events in which the player could participare, bur he is never given the chance to do so. Even when the player's input is requested it is often irrelevant (i.c., all of the player's choices produce the same outcome), or else it sets in motion an animated sequence over which the player has no control. The animated sequences are well done (though the graphics sometimes become embarrassingly rough when the characters apRevenge of the Patriarchi Ladan MS-005 3.5\" VGA TITLE: SYSTEM: GRAPHICS: SOUND SUPPORT: Ringworld: Revenge of the Patriarch IBM VGA Ad Lib, Pro Audio Spectrum, Roland, Sound Blaster $59.95 PRICE: PROTECTION: DESIGNERS: PUBLISHER: Documentation Look-up John Jarrett Chris Hoyt. Robert E. Heitman Tsunami Coarsegold, CA (209) 683-8266 The two humans and the Kzin go off to the Ringworld under the Puppeteer's coercion, hoping to track down the missing Louis Wu and Speaker-To-Animals, as well as to restore the honor of the Chmcee family. (SpeakerPage 54 Compuer Gaming World "


"Deview There Ain't No Justice headed, ostritch-like Puppeteers to the ferocious, feline Kzin, first cousins to Wing ComThe player puts the characters through their mander's Kilrathi. If the aliens Quinn meets paces using a pop-up interface of command in the flesh aren't sufficient to glut the appeicons which appears wherever one clicks the tites of hardcore Niven fans, Quinn's lander right mouse button. The icons include no (transparent, bubble-shaped, just as Niven surprises: one can Talk, Walk, Look, wrote) contains a computer terminal which Use/Touch, access one's Inventory, or access can access a sort of Encyclopedia Nivenica the disk. This interface works well, and I like which includes text about the inhabitants and not having to go to the top of the screen to do history of Known Space plus pictures of aleverything most all alien races. There are some quirks in the gameplay, The spaceships in the game are not entirely however, which make the game occasionally To-Animals has been branded a traitor for satisfying (the super-duper hyperdrive vessels unbearable. One of the worst is in the Flesh cooperating with the humans and the game look like the nacelles of the Starship EnterEaters' cavern, where a helpful alien instructs opens with an raid on his home. There is also prise), the human beings could be drawn berQuinn to push on a stone pillar. The first some business about the new hyperdrive ships ter (Miranda looks distractingly like a young problem is that there are many stones and that the humans and the Kzin are building Barbra Streisand), and the animation is jerkier and about a Kzinti plot to destroy the Puppermany pillars, pushing on any of which but the than one would like. However, the aliens, the right one produces no result. The bigger probeer Fleet of Worlds...all in all, enough plot for props (flycycles, pressure suits, sleep plates, lem is that if one pushes on the right pillar in several novels, or at least one very big one. autodoc) and the Ringworld itself all look just As noted above, though, the game is not very anywhere but exactly the right location, there the way fans would expect them to. is also no result. big. Most of the issues the game raises Unfortunately, I suspect that it will simply go unresolved. What became be exactly those players who love the of Wu and Chmeee? Will the order of game for its recreation of Niven's execution against Seeker be lifted? world who will hate it for its negligent What will become of the artifacts storytelling. They are the ones who will found on the Ringworld? Were the really want to find out what happens Puppeteers ever in danger? If not, why next, and they are the ones who will be not? the most disappointed when they disThese questions and more like them cover that the answer is nothing.\" are just dropped unanswered at the ...Niven To Fold Em game's close. There is an explosive climax and a rousing chorus of the As with most adaptations from littheme music, and then there's the erature, this game is obviously a labor DOS prompt, blinking merrily and of love, created by people with an afleaving the gamer without so much as fection for Niven's universe but too a promise of a «Part Two.\" little story-telling talent to do it justice. Within individual sequences, the Science fiction fanzines are full of stoplayer is asked to solve puzzles (and, ries like this one, the work of fans who What ends up happening is that one pushes try to write new adventures of Tarzan, Dr. at one point, to go through a mercifully opthe right pillar, secs no result, and writes that rh Who, Captain Kirk or whomever. Such storional action sequence) in order to find highpillar off as the wrong onc. Hours later, afterries are almost always sub-professional, at least tech items that are in the hands of some very trying to push everything on the screen, one in terms of technical skill. Writing is tougher low-tech aliens. One stasis box is held by the may return to the right pillar and accidentally than it seems. superstitious, drunken Canyon People, and hit the right spot or, then again, might not. Ringworld: Revenge of the Patriarch is a disQuinn has to sleep with the daughter of the Less annoying, but only slightly, is a scene appointment in exactly this way. It looks and Chief to get it. Another is in the cavern of the where one has to touch exactly the right book sounds good but is very poorly written. RingFlesh Eaters, where Quinn and Secker get on a crowded bookshelf. world, the game, is to Ringworld, the novel, captured and almost caten. Still another is at Movement is another source of annoyance. what the Ghostbusters, Back To The Future, the bottom of the ocean and its acquisition, One clicks on the spot where Quinn should and James Bond, Jr. cartoons are to the movies strangely, takes place offscreen. The last, longgo and, as often as not, he promptly goes that inspired them: more colorful, perhaps, est, and best sequence has Quinn infiltrating bur flatter, dumber, smaller, and in every way a Kzinti castle on the Ringworld to steal onto portions of the screen where one cannot see him at all and stays there while one clicks lesser. CGW Slaver helmet. Then, finally, there's a trip wildly to get him to reappear. back to the Canyon People for an encounter with one more alien and that's it — that's the You Gotta Niven To Hold 'Em... whole game. There is one area in which the game is Along the way, buddy-buddy relationships S unequivocally successful, and that is in conbuild up among our three heroes. We know juring up Niven's creatures and environthis because they start the game snarling atments. This, presumably, is what most gamers each other and, bit by bit, snarling gives way who buy Ringworld are paying to see, so it may to amiable sniping. The banter is on the level be that other players will be happier with the of a Saturday morning cartoon, and the simgame than I was. plistic, one-dimensional relationships make The aliens Quinn encounters are drawn methe original novel, somewhat pulpy itself, look ticulously and always in keeping with Niven's like a Henry James psychodrama. descriptions from the book, from the twoMay 1993 Page55 "


"52 LANDS FLORE THE THRONE OF CHAOS The Dark Army encroaches. King Richard falls. And Scotia beckons you, laughing... In her mad quest for power, Scotia has ravaged the kingdom. She seeks the throne, yet it eludes her. She's getting desperate. She's getting mean. Motor Doom Lightning Ice Hall KE ADA CAN YOU STOP HER? DO YOU DARE? "


"FEATURING da Compass and Automapper Included Adventure through ancient keeps and living forests. Unearth hidden ruins and haunted caves. Make Friends and Influence People Cooperate with the helpful, sidestep the treacherous and destroy the dangerous. a Quick and Easy Combat and Spell Casting an Indulge in a Land of Sensory Delights Over 20 megabytes of compressed art and special effects. Actually hear the clash of steel! Feel the blows of terrors who slip beneath your guard! LANDS OF LORE THE THRONE OF CHAOS Westwoog AN INSPIRED FANTASY RPG EXPERIENCE FROM THE DEVELOPMENT TEAM THAT CREATED EYE OF THE BEHOLDER I AND II. Westwood Distributed Exclusively by Available for your IBM PC. Eye of the Beholder I and II are trademarks of TSR, Inc. GAMES The Eye of the Beholder games, TSR, Inc. and SSI are not connected or related in any way to the Lands of Lore game, Virgin Games Inc or Westwood Studios, Inc. Lands of Lore is a trademark of Westwood Studios, Inc.  1993 Westwood Studios, Inc. All rights reserved. Virgin is a registered trademark of Virgin Enterprises, Ltd. Circle Reader Service #118 "


"Blow It Out Your Ear. Pump up the volume with Sound Blaster ! The sound card from Creative Labs. Experience the full power of 11-voice synthesized music and 8-bit sampled sound effects. Don't just hear it... let it blow you away! The scream of your F-15's engine as you elude enemy fire... the crisp crack of your bat when you hit a homerun off the screen...the echoing ring of sword against sword during your next fantasy adventure. No wonder Sound Blaster is the world's #1 seller. And why it's the sound card that more gaming software developers write for under DOS or Windows 3.1. To find out more about Sound Blaster, the only sound card that's 100% Sound Blaster compatible, visit your local computer retailer or call Creative Labs at 1-800-998-LABS. Get the full blown sound capability you've always wanted for your PC-for only $149. With Sound Blaster from Creative Labs. Because... SOUND if you don't have BLASTER Sound Blaster, you're really blowing it! SKRYD RIRRIER BLAST UW KRVDE SOUND BLASTER CREATIVE SB-40 Sound Blaster is a trademark of Creative Labs, Inc. Windows is a trademark of Microsoft Corporation. 1992 Creative Labs, Inc. All rights reserved. International inquiries: Creative Technology. Lid, Singapore Tel 65 773 0233 Fax 657730353 WINTXOMS CREATIVE LABS, INC. Circle Reader Service #52 "


"Telecommuting to the Cyburbs ach workday evening, millions of workers flee urban areas all over the world in order to reach their comfortable suburban homes. There is something important within the human condition that makes everyone want to have a place where they are not only comfortable, but feel a sense of identity, importance and inclusion. Ilustration by Henk Dawson For many computer gamers, the commute to more comfortable surroundings is both faster and further than ever before. Instead of commuting to and from the suburbs, they compute to and from the cyburbs. What are these cyburbs? They are communities of online gamers where one's neighbor may be geographically located a full continent away. They are both real and imaginary locations where gamers can find a sense of identity (or another identity), importance and inclusion. They are cultures and sub-cultures with their own social dynamics of language, ritual and politics. According to a recent CGW poll, almost 40 percent of our readership is connected to one on-line service or another. So, it is very likely that many are already effecting their own great escapes, and others will be interested in what it means to do so. With this in mind, we have created a survey of on-line games and a host of special features for this month's theme section. This is our on-line world and welcome to it. May 1993 Page 59 "


"Teleqarmning * Cyber Rockets Through Fiber Optics Gknie's CyberStrike Makes Gigantor Strides in S Multi-player, On-line Gaming by David M. Wilson Nirst kills are sweet. After half an hour of madly dashing about the team's start point. A two-minute shield protects the player until he dropping energy relay towers, picking up expansion modules, gets oriented or decides to start offensive actions before the two-minute I jumping over buildings with a single bound and getting blown grace period is completed. up, I finally had the turkey in my sights. He had drifted a bit too far Driving these two-legged vehicles is not very difficult if one rememfrom his energy towers, and I took the opportunity to open fire, blast bers several things. First, the vehicles don't stop on a dime. They after blast pummeling him. He tried to run, but jammed himself in continue forward for a moment or two after slamming on the brakes between the corners of two adjoining buildings. So, I moved in for the due to their momentum. This forces one to try stopping a bit ahead kill, savoring the sweetness of revenge (after all, he'd killed me two or of the actual spor desired. Second, the display will show a player who three times already that day). His air support dropped an energy tower, jams against a building or other object which leg is jammed. Pay so I turned and blasted it, lowering his available energy. Swiveling back attention to the display and it is easy to work free. Also, jumping will to face him, I finally had the pleasure of watching him blow up and sometimes free a jammed Cyberpod, as will a rocket module. received the message, «Earned kill recorded!\" The Play Team Driving Miss Cyber (Game Play and Interface) (Game Concept) There are four teams in each game: red, CyberStrike is a fast-paced multi-player green, black and blue. Four players can action game where players drive Cyberplay on each team. Each unit has a dispods — robotic, two-legged vehicles. tinctive stripe on its side so that it can be The goal of the game is simply to estabdistinguished from other units on a team. lish control of a city. This is done by A player can attempt to \"lone wolf\" a bit, establishing fortifications and power but play is more effective and satisfying centers as well as fighting off enemy when one is working as part of a team. teams. The game is well-balanced so that if other The primary focus of the game is players on a team quit, and one player is power. This power is provided through IN left by himself, he still has a good chance relay towers. Players have to rely on these of standing off the other teams. towers. They must call their air support There are also «neutrals» in the city. planes to drop towers ar strategic points There are tower munchers which attack and climinate the enemies' towers. I 19 R aimaal towers without demonstrating any color found myself occasionally straying too preferences and sentinels which sit on CyberStrike far from one of my team's towers. At such times, SYSTEMS: IBM strategic points and fire upon any approaching my energy level would drop rapidly, and a PRICE: Genie Value Service ($6 per hour team. Fortunately, these neutrals serve as an teammate would radio me, \"Get closer to the non-prime time usage) SYSTEM automatic balancing factor. If one player sudtowers, Butcher.\" The result of running out of REQUIREMENTS: VGA 386-20 MHz or faster, 2 MB denly finds his buddies have logged off, the energy is instant destruction. Fortunately, playmemory, and modem (2400 recommende DESIGNER: David Whatley tower munchers will pick on the towers of the ers who are killed are instantly assigned a new PUBLISHER: Simutronics opposing teams who outnumber him until Cyberpod (devoid of any modifications that AVAILABILITY: some degree of balance is restored. 1-800-638-9636 had been made before being destroyed) back at One of the goals David Whatley had in deStrategic Hop : Red: 5 22 Bluet462 Green: 9 192 Black: 3 122 Disputed: 1 12 Heutralt 37 572 MP Value 17/8 x4 TITLE: GEnie Page 60 Computer Gaming World "


"als vival). Each module enhances the player's ability by increasing firepower, movement, speed or vision. The catch is that the player is limited on what kinds of modules he can carry. Each module bay is assigned a level, and only modules of that level or lower may be installed. As the player earns points, the level of the bays advances and the player can add modules on a higher level. Experienced players will assist the \"newbie\" in knowing what modules he needs for cach individual city. One of the goals David Whatley had in designing this game was creating a multi-player universe that was easy to learn but difficult to master. CyberStrike excels in its simplicity. The keyboard controls are easily mastered and the game mechanics uncomplicated. The only necessary option I find missing is a timer display that shows how long the player has been on-line. At $6 per hour there will be some real surprises at the end of the month. Of course, once I got in, my friend and I played for nearly twelve straight hours. I do understand the meaning of the term \"game-lock.\" Although I spent the majority of my time for this review in ALPHA, the training city, and, as a result, was able to move about and survive pretty well in the beginner-level cities, I was usually instantly annihilated in the upper levels when Whatley jacked me into higher levels just to get a feel for the game. The depth of the upper level cities is utterly amazing. I was really impressed with the graphic portrayal of fog. You can't get more real than this. The fog was the most believable effect that I saw, but I was dumbfounded at its ability to portray reality. The storms were well done, but I discovered it rains inside the tunnels just as hard as it does outside them (hopefully, that's just a beta-version quirk). One of the basic necessities of the upper levels is an Infrared module, which enhances images in dark or fog. According to Whatley, there are over 50 modules which a player can pick up when another player is destroyed (those little suckers go everywhere) or purchase with points (earned for each second of sur$ Attenpting to pick up Module. * Installed Rapid Fire noduic! * Attenpting to pick Up Module. & Attenpting to pick up Module. # Installed High Jump nodule! * Attenpting to pick up Module. * Attcnpting to pick up Module. 2 Installed High Speed nodule! warcloud MOS just wasted by B-hon. The Killing Yields (Conclusion) I noted from the multi-player games bulletin board that I was not the only person who had problems getting into the game. My modem was not working properly with the software. The thing that some people are having to do, from terminal mode within the software, is to give their modem a direct command, 2988830888 \"AT&CI\" to wake their modem up. Then, the software is generally ready to call and connect, if the comm ports are set up properly. Simutronics cheerfully assists anyone having trouble getting 2 iallallallall into the game (not just reviewers). Leave E-mail and they will assist you, I guarantee it's worth it. CyberStrike is addictive, action-filled and downright fun. The violence is bloodless (since everyone immediately gets carried back to their bases and receives new Cyberpods), but the challenge is exhilarating. Since it is played against real people instead of artificial intelligence, it varies every time it is played. And it will be played a lot! CW 5 The ULTIMATE Play-By-Mail Offer FLAGSHIP magazine, with Ark Royal Games, C2 Simulations, Capitol Consulting. Deltax Gaming, Flying Buffalo Inc, Flying Dutchman Games, Graaf Simulations, Inner Dimensions, Rolling Thunder Games Inc and Twin Engine Gaming, is proud to make what may be the most exciting offer in PBM history. For $19.99, we'll give you: (a) A 4-issue trial subscription to FLAGSHIP, PBM's leading international magazine, with 56 pages each issue packed with news, reviews, and uncensored player comments. Every issue includes a sheet of discount coupons worth many times the cost of the magazine. (b) A coupon entitling you to $20 value of rules and/or turns in any of these games: Against All Odds, Adventurer Kings, Cluster, Continental Rails, Domination, El Mythico, Feudal Lords, New Order, Quest of the Great Jewels, Shadow Lords, Sirius Command, Space Combat, Space 101, StarGlobe, Starquest, Subterrania, Victory!, World Emperor II and Warriors & Wizards. You choose where you want to use the coupon: to help you, we will include an impartial description of each of them! The only condition is that you should not have played with that particular gamemaster before. Last but not least, if you are disappointed with the first FLAGSHIP, let us know within one month and we'll refund you the entire $19.99 by return. No handling fee, no requirement to return anything yes, you can still use the coupon. To try it, send $19.99 to FLAGSHIP, CGW special offer, PO Box 6105WSS, Gainsville GA 30504 Circle Reader Service #57 "


"After One of the Most Tony La Russa Decided Announcing Tony LaRussa BASEBATLI It's a whole new ballgame! How do you improve on the «1992 Sports Game of the Year\"? The same way that Tony La Russa improves on a pennant-winning team. You study your players, from their clutch hitting to their personalities in the clubhouse. And you check out the competition, up and down the league. We did all that. And discovered since La Russa I, a lot has happened in the world of baseball. We've used that knowledge to create a game that will continue to master the category. Because we don't know how to do it any other way. We called upon the same team to create La Russa II. Three-time American League Manager of the Year, Tony La Russa and a game designer with over 20 years of baseball experience. Together they redesigned this game from the ground up. The result is the most complete baseball experience ever, with the best action, the best graphics and the best stats. If you choose to enter the dugout and be the manager, you're totally responsible for your actions. Which roster is going to work? Is that rotation due for an overhaul? Is it time to bring your secret weapon out of the dugout yet? ALLO STRIKE 2 PINNING 1 WAHILPISHO STATI SEASON POMIROMINAZINES All Screens shown are IBM 256-color VGA. "


"Successful Seasons Ever, to Start All Over Again. PAYERS FANTASY DRAFT Jant La Russt -BASERATI Yde E66 WHEN IT COMES TO THE GRAPHICS, WE'RE PLAYING HARDBALL AGAINST THE COMPETITION. We're talking the largest action playing field visualized with 256-color VGA graphics. You'll have no excuse for not crushing a homer every time since your batting perspective is straight from the catcher's eye. You'll play on the most detailed field of its kind, from the dirt in the base path to the mow lines on the grass. And you'll see instant replays on the largest, most detailed replay screen ever. announcer, Ron Barr. True-to-life digitized sound effects include everything from the calls of umpires to the crack of the bat. 134 CATEGORIES TO MAKE YOU A BETTER PLAYER. Only La Russa II gives you the most accurate baseball statistics in every one of them. You'll man your team, with or without Tony's advice, from over 2,000 legendary players and 54 classic teams or anyone on the current roster. To help in your draft, you can display and print out leaders in 134 stat categories. And stats are tracked throughout the season for every player in every game. Each and every pitcher is rated for four pitches including fastballs, curves, change-ups and more. LA RUSSA II EXPANSION DISKS: THINK OF THEM AS THE WORLD SERIES THAT NEVER ENDS. MLBPA PLAYERS puts the 1992 season in your hands. Over 950 PLAYERS: superstars including Barry Bonds, Dennis Eckersley, Nolan Ryan, Rickey Henderson, Tom Clavine, Cal Ripken, Jr., they're all here with big full color portraits. AL/NL STADIUMS gives you all current 28 major league stadiums, from the winds of San Francisco to the ivy of Chicago even the new parks open for the '93 season Colorado and Florida. The detail is incredible, right down to the Green Monster at Fenway. But these aren't just pretty pictures: prevailing winds, altitude, temperature and humidity all affect the flight of the ball see how Babe Ruth hits the ball at milehigh Denver! FANTASY DRAFT is the most powerful, full-featured fantasy draft league disk ever. Now you can pool all available players and conduct a real-life draft session with 2-32 teams, and any combination of divisions and leagues. THE SEASON BEGINS NOW Fact is, Tony La Russa won't put his name on anything less than the best. If you're looking for true baseball action, the name of the game is TONY LA RUSSA BASEBALL II. MAKE YOUR BEST PLAYS EVER. In La Russa II, players pivot at second while turning a double play, slide head and feet first, jump, dive, even toss underhand to the first baseman all with onetouch button action. Each play is covered by Emmy award-winning, nationally-syndicated Most baseball Rames prxtend they're in the majors. This one really puls you there. -Tumy La Russe Emmy Awardwinning announcer Ron Burr calls the action! Tony LaRusso BASEBALLI Available for IBM TO ORDER BY VISA/MC: call 1-800-245-4525 (in USA & Canada). Tony La Russa's name and likeness are used under license from Sports Advisors Group 1993 Strategic Simulations, Inc. All rights reserved. SPEL Take yourself out to the real thing from flagpole to flagpole, foul line to foul line. "


"i en mense Teleqamming Mining the BBS On-line Games A survey of gems to be found on private bulletin board systems 5/ by William J. Shefski The geology of the Bulletin Board System (BBS) scene anywhere is ever-shifting. Private boards come and go, and so do the games I they carry to attract and amuse their faithful callers. Just as distributors of commercial games show little mercy towards an unsuccessful game, the cruel dictates of available hard-drive space cannot tolerate the presence of an on-line game which fails to attract players. The evolutionary pressures of the BBS world are strong, and only the fittest seem to survive. This article covers some of the games suitable for use on local bulletin bulletin board systems. Even CGW readers who do not operate their own BBS may want to look for the same or similar games on local boards in their areas. To offer some guidance in this maze of on-line games, I have rated the games on a three point system. The highest number represents games which are so interesting that a gamer could fill his/her whole rime rarion with it, if the BBS ser-up would allow it. The medium rating suggests games which are amusing enough to keep a player coming back often, but not necessarily losing any sleep if they missed a session here and there. The lowest rated games are probably best avoided. Nearly without exception, these on-line games generate a bulletin that can be posted somewhere on the board. Some keep track of the high scores for the month, week, day and/or all-time. This is an important aspect, maintaining high caller interest through the gamers' desire for cyber-glory. (Please note: Because of the shifting nature of the BBS scene, the telephone numbers and addresses listed here may have been changed by the time this issue reaches the stands. No guarantees as to the currency of the boards they may or may not reach is possible.) generate stats. This is a perfect use of the computing power of the host machine. This game and sports games like this generate a high degree of user interest. Sooner or later the big sports game companies will realize the potential of this forum and the deficiencies of Crunch will be apparent. For now, it's just about all that's out there. DRAW POKER: (INS Software BBS, 304-733-4148) This is one of a series of well-executed card games implemented by the prolific Rusty Johnson. Most of the others are solitaire, but Draw Poker is one step above that. It's five card draw one-on-one versus the computer. GET OIL IN KUWAIT: (Gordon Wheat & Andrew Brown, Amoeba Ware, Nuclear Amoeba BBS, 410-4791828) Although Saddam makes no appearance in this game, it is an interesting arcade-type puzzler. The gamer must pump the black gold from pockets of various shapes and sizes under the sands. Then, the oil must be removed before one's drilling rigs are destroyed by gas pockets and dynamite blasts. GLOBAL WAR: (Joel Bergen, ProVision BBS, 206-3536966) With a bit more than a passing resemblance to Risk, Global War provides a widespread and active door. The map is a bit different than the one in the boardgame classic, as are some of the minor rules. Many games can be played at once and there are provisions for team games. The computer resolves all combat and there is an interesting allowance made for missed calling days (i.e. Armies awarded at the beginning of one's turn are multiplied by the number of days missed.) Also available is a terminal emulation program called GWTERM which can, when running in the caller's computer, use the machine's graphics capabilitics. Not only do the maps refresh almost instantly, they are much more attractive. It also allows the use of a mouse, a unique feature in an on-liner. KANNONS & KATAPULTS: (Alan Davenport, Al's Cabin BBS, 717-686-3037) An entire game of K OK can be played during any logon. Player and computer are king or queen of an all-text kingdom, taking turns managing or defending kingdom and castle with cannon, catapult (oddly, more powerful than the cannon), soldiers and assassins. Beware, the computer fights back fairly well. LABYRINTH: (Randy Hunt and Mark Goodwin, The Lighthouse BBS, 207-942-6575) Gamers looking for an interesting quest simply must wander through this 160-room text adventure game. 2 LADDERS: (Al Lawrence, Sunrise Software, Sunrise-80 BBS, 404-256-9525) This is a rather simple dice-rolling game where the possible rolls on two dice are ladders which have to be climbed in order to win. 1 BBS BOWL: (James Fair, The Fishing Hole BBS, 615-6465550) This game features bowling on an unforgiving lane. Indeed, a real bowler might say it was over-oiled. Still, this features an attractive screen and it is likely that the smart-alecky commentary will bring the player back to try again. It has an increasingly more common \"hold-back\" enhancement for the registered version make-up days. This allows the caller to play their daily limit of games from days they missed during the month. BUGS! (Rick Salinas, Dark Side of the Moon BBS, 209225-6824) This arcade game invites players to take on the role of exterminator and slaughter the crawlers. Gruesome ... and snooze-some. CRUNCH LEAGUE FOOTBALL: (Stephen David, Crunchware, Temple of Nine BBS, 703-820-6824) Allows the board to moderate a full blown football league with divisions, stars and a Super Bowl game. Users can draft fictional players who Page 64 Computer Gaming World "


"There's Sound... «vroom, vroom\" ...And There's SoundMan. GUARANTEED COMPATIBLE or your money back LOGITECH SoundMan 16 delivers sound so real, 85% of the time people can't tell the difference from live sound. That's because it's packed with the absolute latest in sound board technology: up to 16-bit/44KHz record/playback, Yamaha OPL-3 stereo synthesis 20-voice chip, 100% Sound Blaster» and Ad Lib compatibility, and more. SoundMan brings you the highest CD quality sound available, for all your games and applications, in Windows and DOS. From Logitech, the peripherals leader. At your dealer, or call LOGITECH 1-800-732-3026. 11/ Trademarks belong to their vespective owners. The Senseware Company Circle Reader Service #104 SOUND SoundMan\" 16. Get Real. "


"Telemainino and places them. Spaces open up by matching pip cards that add to a total of 10. No room for a face card? It's \"Game Over!\" Scored in the manner of duplicate bridge tournaments (as are many of the efforts from this company) where everyone plays the same hands. Thus, users are measured against each other using the same challenges. MAHJONGG PYRAMID: (Mike Wilson, Secret Service BBS, 304-429-6838) Unfortunately, Mahjongg Pyramid is no more than a variation on regular pyramid solitaire with uninteresting tiles used instead of cards. MAT MANIA: (Hack, Spiko and Doctor Z, the Cutting 977 Edge BBS, 203-233-8993) This is an all-text game where the player names, trains and manages a wrestler. Matches can be picked at random by the computer, or one can choose a grudge march against a particular baddie (or goodie). The wrestlers, computerand human-controlled, are ranked according to whom they have beaten. The text of the action scrolls by, and one's wrestler finds himself in and out of hammerlocks, pounding his opponent with Brain Busters, and climbing the turnbuckles. Training allows improvement of attributes and even the invention of a trademark «rasslin' move. There could be no better testament to how surprisingly entertaining the game is than when, while tolerantly looking over his shoulder while he played, a certain non-computer-game-interested spouse of a certain reviewer couldn't contain herself. \"Go for the pin! Go for the pin!\" she urged. It is truly an impressive little game. MONTE CARLO SOLITAIRE: (Al Lawrence, Sunrise-80 BBS, 404-256-9525) Players try to match up card pairs on a square grid. Then, they consolidate. Frankly, there are better ways to waste one's valuable recreational time. MC RACE: (Motor City Software) Drag racing is the theme of this texr-based game where one is required to maintain and race a rod. The excitement level probably depends on how aroused one gets by the real ones. 88 ON THE EDGE: (JNS Software BBS, 304-733-4148) 177 Rusty Johnson has provided an intriguing solitaire effort in this game which is built on a 4X4 grid of open spaces. Face cards are placed around the edge and, of course, the gamer turns over cards POST TIME RACING: (Parole Software, The Parole Board BBS, 919-965-4696) If one is enough of a horse racing fan to thrill to the sight of three \"horses\" — represented by what appear to be hair pins — stutter across the screen, this game could be a good bet. Otherwise, one might be better off watching text phosphor burn into the monitor than trying to pick the winners in this one. 1 PUZZLE: (Rusty Johnson, JNS Software BBS, 304-7334148) Consider this game to be an electronic version of one of those party favors where squares with numbers are moved around until the numbers are in order. Between the host board's computer, the home computer and the phone system in between, enough energy is burned in one play of this game to buy a six-pack of Cracker Jacks, in which the same game will likely be found as a prize. SCRABBLE: (Christopher Hall, P.O. Box 26025, Austin TX, 78755-0025) Anyone looking for an excellent electronic rendition of the word game by which all others are judged\" will do well to check out this version. The host board houses the dictionary, adds up the points and keeps track of all the moves in up to 20 games at a time. The \"challenge\" rule is not invoked, but a player has only three chances to input a valid word or the turn is lost. Oddly, some proper names are acceptable in this version. That would take some getting used to for the Scrabble purist, but it's well worth it. Could there be any better glory than being listed as the leader in the Scrabble bulletin of one's local BBS? We think not. COMPUTER COMPUTER TRACK TENNIS SPORTS GAMES IBM.APPLE IL C-64 THE MOST REALISTIC STRATEGY/SIMULATION COMPUTER GAMES ON THE MARKET TODAY! IBM  APPLE II  C-64 THE MOST REALISTIC STRATEGY/SIMULATION COMPUTER GAMES ON THE MARKET TODAY! WORLD CLASS-TRACK & FIELD (IBM, C-64) Includes 600 athletes from over 40 countries complete in 20 events. Sprinters rated for starts, mid-race, finish, ability to run curve and consistency. Distance runners rated for endurance, consistency and can be run at 5 different paces. Field competitors rated for their performance in safe, normal and super efforts. FULL COUNT BASEBALL You manage all 26 most recent teams and 52 great past teams  45 man roster. Stats compiler. Complete boxscore to screen/printer  Input your own teams, draft or trade players. Wind/Weather Option. You choose starting line-up, batting order, bunt for a hit, steal, DH option and much, much more! BASKETBALL THE PRO GAME You're the coach and you choose line-ups, shot selection, style of play and much more. Stats compiler . Full team and individual player stats kept for up to an 82 game schedule. All players rated by actual statistics and tendencies  25 current teams and over 190 great teams from the past included! BREAK POINT-PRO TENNIS (IBM, C-64) Play singles or doubles matches with over 200 of the top men and women players from present to the past. Every player individually rated for service, forehand, backhand, groundstrokes, service returns, volleys power, quickness and consistency Rate your own players..even rate yourself and your friends. Statistics available anytime during the match. ORDER TODAY! Mail check or money order for $39.95 each for Apple II and C-64 or $49.95 for IBM. You may call in and order with VISA or Master Card Please add $3.00 for shipping and handling. For more information, call or write for a free brochure. ORDER TODAY! Mail check or money order for $39.95 each for Apple II and C-64 or $49.95 for IBM. You may call in and order with VISA or Master Card. Please add $3.00 for shipping and handling. For more information, call or write for a free brochure. LANCE HAFENER GAMES P.O. BOX 100594  NASHVILLE, TN 37224 615/366-8088 LANCE HAFFNER GAMES P.O. BOX 100594. NASHVILLE, TN 37224 615/366-8088 Circle Reader Service #70 Page 66 Computer Gaming World "


"GREED IS GOOD. RAGS TO RICHES that could easily be dubbed \" im Besitzer TM Welcome to the business simulation game that could easily be dubbed «Sim Business». It's a fast-paced program that lets you become the He who ends up with the most toys wins. master of your entrepreneurial destiny as you It can all be yours--the cars, yachts, planes climb the slippery Wall Street ladder to and other big boy toys that will make you the financial success--the higher you get, the higher righteous king of conspicuous consumption. But the stakes. it does take some savvy moves, a few dirty So go ahead, get bullish on greed-tricks, and, oh yeah, a little hard work. it feels good! ao PU Interplay Productions, Inc. 17922 Fitch Avenue Irvine, CA 92714 (714) 553-6678 1993 Interplay Productions, Inc. All rights reserved. Rags to Riches is a trademark of Interplay Productions, Inc. To order RAGS TO RICHESTM, call 1-800-969-4263, or see your local retailer Circle Reader Service #66 "


"Jelenama SINK 'EM: (Jim Wilcox, IHS Software, P.O. Box 5103, Macon, GA, 31208) This Battleship look-alike allows \"fleets\" of 10 players plus the computer to shoot five shots a day at each other. 108 STACK 'EM: () & W Software 9426 N. China Pink Way, Crystal River FL, 34428) Anyone who can spell Tetris knows the score. 27 SUPER SLOTS: () & W Software 9426 N. China Pink way, Crystal River FL, 34428) Who could dislike a game that starts out with \"The House will stake you to $500,000$? This is a five-spot slot that spins cherries and lemons, bells and bars (not pictures, the words.) The progressive jackpot starts at $100,000,000. Addicrs might play all day, if the sysop would let them. 7 THE PIT: (James R. Berry, Midas Touch Software, MTS BBS, 806-797-2239) A tolerably interesting fantasy-themed work, this game might easily be labeled, «Let's Pound Each Other.\" This one at least tries to go beyond the text readout of how many hit points have been lost by letting the player's character maneuver around the arena with the number pad. There is nothing that will excite the hard core electronic dungeon diver, but it's a hair above the rest of the Pound'em Pack. 179 TRADE WARS: (Chris Sherrick & John Morris, The Aban1 doned Land BBS, 702-746-1364 & 65) For many players cruising the boards, there is no other on-liner than Trade Wars. Many versions are circulating and they are, apparently, highly configurable. Except for the core concepts and basic mechanics, no two boards seem to carry the same exact game. The basic format is that the galaxy has 1000 sectors to explore. The trader can build up his or her wealth moving commodities and building a fighting force. At higher levels there are planets to acquire and even terraforming. Keep an eye out for the computer enemy and, of course, for fellow users. The beginning player has a long apprenticeship, but the persistent can build a large and complex empire. This game will be around for a while, in one form or another. TRIPLE YAHTZEE: (Al Lawrence, Sunrise Software, Sunrise-80 BBS, 404-256-9525) The enduring poker-dice game has seen many a programming exercise. This is Yahtzee times three, where one can place one's dice roll in any of the three consecutive games. It could conceivably serve as a twoor three-player game, all at the same calling computer. \"TRIVIA TIC TAC TOE: (Mike Wilson, Secrer Service BBS, 304-429-6838) There are a lot of trivia doors circulating. This one does a bit more than just add up how many a player answered correctly. The gamer places an \"O\" in the square if an answer is correct. If not, X gets the spot. 88 VIDEO POKER: (Worldwide Programming, The Lighthouse BBS, 209-252-7968) Just like it sounds, Video Poker is a pleasantly-rendered Jacks-or-Better coin-eater. The computer keeps track of how many pairs, two-pairs, three-of-kinds, etc. the player scores. Then, it generates a bulletin with the records in each. As much action as any casino (or the corner bar), and one isn't likely to lose the rent money — unless calling long distance. Il WHEEL OF FORTUNE: (Michael Goetz, The Speak Easy BBS, 407-291-4626) Vanna in ANSI? (No. But it had to be said, didn't it?) \"The Famous Wheel\" is not present in its familiar form. The numbers spin more like the \"Showcase Spin\" prop on \"The Price is Right\" but the word puzzle game is the same. For the solitary player. CGW OUT TIME Out Time Days is a Play-By-Mail game of life on a strange world. Emphasizing role playing and inter-player communication, OTD is a game for those who like to join with other players around the world in figuring out puzzles, creating working economies, exploring large sections of worlds. undertaking or tracking criminal activities, or fielding capable armies. The worlds explored are living, vibrant locales that will change through your character's actions. With the ability to journey in many eras (you'll start in a medieval-like location), you'll enjoy adapting to new sets of abilities and restaints or you can focus on a single place and become well established. OTD is a combination Science Fiction-Fantasy game. It is 99% computer moderated to ensure fairness, and 1% GM moderated to allow for creativity. A maximum of I turn per week is allowed. Cost per turn is $5.00. The game is open-ended with each new character playing a vital role. A special startup is available if you mention this ad. Receive a rule book, startup turn and 5 turns for just $5.00 ($20.00 outside U.S. and Canada), a $35.00 value! Dependable, weekly, error-free turns since 1984 MID Wanna try a tactical space game and pay only $20 for the entire game? Then ask for information on Space Combat. To sign up or for more information write to: Twin Engine Gaming, 3254 Maple Leaf Ct., San Jose, CA 95121 Circle Reader Service #98 "


"(  Get the most MPG from your DRAKKAR Role-Playing on the Multi-Player Games Network B Verena by Jasper Sylvester I'm glad my parents didn't name me, «Mork.» Imagine being known tale, there are riches aplenty and experiences galore to challenge noviceas Mork from Nork. It's bad enough being from a town that to intermediate-level adventurers. When they get too strong for Nork's everyone knows something nice about. \"Oh, yeah! I got my training underground, they can also try their hand at the monsters outside of as a Mentalist in Nork.\" \"Nork? Explored my first dungeon in Nork.\" Maeling, Frore or the Volcano City. None of those cities is as light and «Hey, do they still have the Steel Flower Tavern?» I get tired of hearing cheerful as our fair environs, but there is certainly more action in their about it. vicinities. It's not that there's nothing to do in Nork. It's just that everybody seems to be doing it. There's just no sense of having been the first to D is for Destiny have done something. Let me explain. Drakkar used to be one great Once they get here, it's almost as if they are driven by forces far landmass. Then, the Empress decided to release a bit too much of her beyond our world. It is like their destiny guides them a move, two psionic power and now, of the four habitable cities, only Nork is not moves or maybe three moves at a time. I often get the feeling that an island in a sea of inhospitable terrain. All four cities are still an island in a sea of inhospitable terrain. All four cities are still someone is pointing a little arrow where they are supposed to go and connected, though, by virtue of a clicking some magical artifact to system of one-way portals, and it Eile Edit Settings Options Macros List Cartography get them to move along, as though seems like everybody who wants to P O Yogu niveren they give up to three orders and be somebody comes through here. wait for my friends and neighbors We get 'em all. From cities, woodto carry them out. Sometimes, I lands, forests, mountains and caveven get the feeling that these erns they come. As outcasts, they forces even script out common accome. Male and female, they come. tions in advance and invoke a speWe must have a magnet for mercecial magic called «Macros\" to get naries. No matter whether they are my fellow adventurers to act even high in Strength, Intelligence, Wismore quickly. dom, Agility, Willpower or ConstiSometimes, I imagine that I am tution, they come. Whether they one of those forces that control have a lot of Luck or a great deal of adventurers. I look down on our Charisma, they come. town from above and click a hero I guess that makes sense. We have or heroine through their paces. I a Brotherhood of Fighters where a use the \" symbol to put words in person can become proficient in my hero's or heroine's mouth. I tell weapon skills; a Brotherhood of my adventurer(ess) when to attack Mentalists where individuals can discover psionic disciplines; a Broththar orc, rockman or goblin by clicking my rodent-sized artifact or erhood of Healers where one can learn to focus psionics for healing; a running my fingers over a rune-covered tablet that clicks as I caress it. Martial Arts dojo where one can learn the traditional arts of hand-toI negotiate with shopkeepers by commanding my vicarious personage hand combat; a Thieves Guild where one can discover the more to place their loot on the counter and have it appraised. Sometimes, I streetwise and slippery of disciplines; and even a Barbarian trainer imagine that other beings are trying to communicate with me through outside of town. We even have the perfect training ground, right below their representatives in our world. our city R is for Rockman The dungeon, as we call it, used to be the dormitory of the Elite Guard. When the Empress' mental powers went awry, so did the I'm not sure it would be easy to control my heroes in combat, though. guard. In fact, they may be the source of the monsters that would-be Since it seems like everyone is getting up to three orders in advance, it adventurers fight below the gravel roads of our fair city Whatever the looks like some of our unique monsters (Rockmen, Sanquin and Yeti) sustand get wounds This is atu tavern boasting cheap the and greatly inflated prices. To the west is Dr. The reads \"Enter at You are a tavern. Au newby wory that has all that fate wou offer avaits! You are w o n a large ravelrend in the town square Attack Shoot IN May 1993 Page 69 "


"ant Settings options Macros List Cartography File Edit Settings mutant M Options Macros List Cartography A mutant Wel Cryoregom M egre WP You are stann open yound would be able to K is for Karma get into hand-to101 hand combat One of the best things about this place is that it's possible to come with our heroes MW back from the dead. Even a controlling force can't always bring his/her before we, as the servants back to life, but in Drakkar, one always has a chance. I think controlling force the mantra is something like \"Restore,\" and then the Healers use their even saw them. karma to bring the heroes back to life. I think that's good. If a Then, we would controlling force is going to invest his/her time in guiding an advenjust have to keep turer across the terrain (and under it) of Drakkar, they ought to be able giving the same to get another chance when things go awry. scripted order over and over A is for Assets again till we quit I also like the fact that any adventurer who doesn't use psionics can getting messages go to the Steel Flower Tavern and put some of his/her loot in a locker. that our hero was This means that scrolls and gems don't have to be sold right away and getting hit. Hero and hobgoblin could even pass each other in the same that adventurers don't have to get burdened by carrying a lot of weight maneuver. It would sure make it hard to maximize an adventurer's use around. It also acts sort of like insurance. Should an adventurer die and of missile weapons. It would almost make it advisable to wait until the not be restored to life, his/her heir can get the goodies out of the locker. monsters attacked one's surrogare before attacking, The loot on the person disappears, but the treasure in the locker stays One thing's for sure, I would make certain my surrogates learned to there. search corpses. Some of the best treasure is found after a nice little dungeon scrap. In my imagination, I see little clouds of gleaming gold streaming out from under the piles of ordinary weapons, armor and bodies whenever there is treasure. I'd even make sure that they had a pouch, a bag and belt for holding gems, bottles, scrolls, weapons and gold coins. I'd even make them read the scrolls in the dungeon, if there Rito E wasn't an immediate fight at hand. That way, they could dump 'em if they weren't useful and save 'em if they were. A is for Action I'm sure I'd love watching the action from my god-like perch high above the denizens of our dungeon and citizens of our city, but I wonder if I would know more about why all this fighting's going on if I were a controlling force. After all, the dungeon dwellers seem to leave us alone if we stay out of 7 the dungeon. Is it just our 20 greed that keeps us going down in the dungeon? Is it the Shoot only way we can gain status? Sure the scrolls occasionally R is for Results give us a hint as to where to Yes, if I had the chance to be a controlling force, I think I'd like to find more dangerous and pocontrol a person on Drakkar. I might have to appeal to other forces in tentially more rewarding dunorder to open the gateway to reach Drakkar. The Kingdom of Drakkar geons or nudge us toward exists on a plane called the Multi-Player Games Network. One must hunting a red dragon in order expend something like six gold coins per hour ($6.00) to maintain a to harvest the scales, but why presence on that plane. For those who cannot reach that plane directly, are we here? Where is our mothere are portals known as tivation? People who come to SprintNet and Compuserve Nork can find armor lying all over the roads of our town. Where does Information Service through it all come from? The dungeons are full of treasure. Where do these which one can reach that Vio creatures get it? We seem to be here as someone's playthings. Shouldn't plane for a few additional there be more? coins. If I could remake Drakkar, K is for Keebler I would give its citizens more of a reason for living. I would I guess the best reason we're here is to get to know each other. It's interweave a plot through its kind of nice meeting lots of new people. Take those forest dwellers that history. I would rework the were hanging out in the Last Chance Tavern, for instance. They called monsters so that they are visthemselves the Keebler elves and said they looked like some merchantsible at all times. Yer, who am in a different town that sold cookies. I didn't understand them, but I to speak? I have yet to kill a they did look like cute little elves and I would buy cookies from them. Yeti and am yet to wed a wife. Still, I have told you of our city and I They were all sixth level fighters and were looking forward to hope to see you here. Even if your parents name you Mork. reaching the 13th level. If they could get enough 13th level fighters [Translation: The Kingdom of Drakkar is a multi-player graphic together, they can charter the powers that be in Nork to grant them a role-playing game on the Multi-Player Games Network (1-800-438charter as a Guild. It's hard to imagine a Guild of Keeblers, but that's 4263). Gamers use a combination of an icon-driven and a command-line why they're in Nork. They're trying to make a name for themselves driven interface to react with the world Ed.] CGW and their guild-to-be. I like that. Maybe I'll join. You are standarte top of starcade. You westwing new an open door You are the water From the southeast when the twof From the northwest you the two bow being trung From the northeast y ear the langof. tav tem strung You are www .burbus decorated feast hall, dotted with four sol ou tubles G al ating m e I (antagram Page 70 Computer Gaming World "


"This Is The Only Hardware You Need To Shop The World's Ultimate Games Superstore. JUMO Or Shop Us On: PRODIGY, CompuServe, GEnie, Delphi, LA On-line, America On-line and many more! Space Quest V SPACE QUEST V Roger Wilco, the universe's favorite janitor, has bamboo zled his way through the StarCon Space Academy and taken command of his own starship As he stumbles his way through space, Roger must deal with such minor inconveniences as a stone cold killer androidness out for blood, an acid-piddling SERBA baby face hugger, and a horde of mutants rampaging through the galaxy in a Stolen Spaceship. It's up to Roger to save the universe from the mutant menace, thwart his nemesis Captain Quirk, and woo the woman of his dream or he'll be Gone with the trash. (For IBM DOS) El-Fish El-Fish is your perfect opportunity to generate an exciting, life-like electronic aquarium. El Fish employs the latest graphics render ing technology that helps you create realistic look. ing, fully-animated images that look and swim as if they were real fish huge ging coral reefs in the Caribbean. Make your own colorful aquarium filled with unusual objects. shells, castles mermaids...and populated by colorful and dazzling, seemingly three dimensional fish (For IBM DOS) Jump Jet No other flight Sim ulation provides the combination of unique challenge and dramatic action that is found in Jump Jet Missions replicate those typical of sorties assigned to Harrier aircraft frequent short, fast paced ground attack and close air support Imagine engaging in a dogfight with an aircraft that we can stop and hover in midair, fly sideways and even backward. (For IBM DOS) $36 Publisher: Sierra Publisher: Maxis Publisher: Microprose $48 AYNE Also Available SOFTWARE Databases CAD/Graphics Communication Tax Preparation Accounting/FAX Home Productivity Desktop Publishing Languages/Utilities Operating Environments Spreadsheets/Integrated Wayne's World It's Wayne's World Computer Game Party Time. Excellent! Join Wayne and Garth and help them save their show from going off the air. All they need in $50,000. A most excellent PizzaThon will do the trick it all goes as planned DO0000, the Decent Organization of Dedicated Obscenity. will brainwash Aurora and babe-nap Cassandra, Saving everyone will be easy... NOT! Are you worthy? Party on! (For IBM DOS) SoundMan 16 Quality Sound Board The richest 16-bit stereo sound available! Gives you the best sound quality possible on your computer. An excellent choice for playing all your favorite games. 100% Sound Blaster and Ad Lib compatibility. Use to record, edit and play back sound in DOS and Windows Even use music, voice and sound to add life to word processing, multimedia, spreadsheet, and other Windows 3.1 business applications FREE ACCOLADE GAME WITH PURCHASE CALL FOR DETAILS! Orders accepted on our toll free number Mon-Sat 8.30 to 5.30 EST Visa, MasterCard, and Discovercard accepted. All credit card orders processed within 24 hours. Continental US shipments: UPS Ground S5, Airbome Overnight $7. Corp. Gov't. Educ. APO.FPO. International orders accepted No sales tax except for Mass add 5% Personal checks will delay shipment 5 business days. Products covered by manufacturer's guarantee Defective software replaced immediately. No CODs. Item availability and price subject to change without notice. 15 restocking fee for non-defective returns CD ROM/MULTIMEDIA Hardware & Accessories Printers Monitors Modems Scanners Mice/Joysticks Storage Devices $185 Publisher: Capstone Publisher: Logitech VISA 800-228-7449 Mastercard COMPUTER Dress Fax: 508-443-5645 Voice: 508-443-6125 11H 00-15 Mc Song2 ce Pano Teaching Sistem The World's Ultimate Games Superstore Time Has American Hory When the USA Deluxe Win San CD Stories of Murder Mystery CD Space IV CD S T CD Shume CDmeda History Star Trek Vote de lo Vul Resity Studio Raro Tycoon Case Reach for the Shes Special Forces Stre nder Start stand Tu Castel Uma Underworld that Wacky Funster Wheel of Fortune wanna White Win Wote Spearof Destiny X-Wing Might Mage Omar Sulton de Out of this World Price of Persia Tycoon Serato Deluxe Seco ysund Shanghai Smart SE MACLCMC Wurtis Wholt Fortune wan White MULTIMEDIA Co-Reches CD's Bedste CD-Sustranda & Me CD Lost Tree Intecom CD S ocy House CD Sports strated CD Wetterstange HOME PRODUCTIVITY A Wess ByCris Cock Windows Betty Croce Lose Weight Watow Betty Croc Bus & Gas DOS B y Crochet Boys & Girls Window Betty Crocker un Cooking City Streets Electronic Guide 15 HARDWARE Sound B 16 ASP Sound Baster Den Sound Blaster Pro Deluxe Speaker Par H04 Speakers Shaded CS-150 Speakers de SS-700 S hes Amplified 140 42 AMIGA HARDWARE Boom Bux Gas Gamepad Uit Expert EDUCATION SOFTWARE Api cs for Windows 30 HOME PRODUCTIVITY Design Your Own Homes Design Your Own Landscape Design Your Owne Arche Bodyworks IBM PC RECREATION SOFTWARE 30 Pub Restasit Altherr Home Assault Burse Des 4000 Championship Pool for Windows Comance Data Disk Comanche m it Emon Det En the Umety F-15 Se Eagle Freddy Pus Front Page Sports Foot Great Battlestarion Hard Big League Parks Hot-One Mini Golf Deluxe Home Monet Hayes Book of Gartes Casio Humans INCA Jas Stay Upgrade Legacy Resimler LORS Links Ko Ads-on Court Links 386 Pro Links Muna Kea Add On Cour Loks Bay Club Course Links Bount Courses Links Pinthurst Country Club Carmen Sand Companion Castle of Dr. B VGA Cherry Works College Edge Pack Dinosaur Add Decovery Pack Espent Maps Expert Care Duters Eoge 2000 for Wadows Laper Home Design What Exit Reumer Expert Design Personal Pedro Personal Physician Tarot tumedator Windows Tautation UTILITY SOFTWARE Eneo Burn See M Sound FX for Windon Origa FX SC Save Quick Gold Razzie Dalt EDUCATION SOFTWARE Alan Constructions A Tran Case of Dr. Fetalo Wonist Math Blaster Plus RECREATION SOFTWARE In Conduction Set A Train A for Commander le Search Olhaton Du Zodian EDUCATION SOFTWARE Taon MULTIMEDIA MACINTOSH OSWIADE Here are only a few of the 3,000 products we've delivered to our satisfied customers. Just call 1-800-228-7449 to start saving time and money with Computer Express. Computer Express 31 Union Ave. Sudbury, MA 01776 Circle Reader Service #49 "


"A New Dimension Tim Tyler a.k.a. 'Tyre\" Toronto, Canada \"Merlin, I'll cast a cure spell on you.\" Ed Avis a.k.a. \"Merlin\" Camden, NJ 'Tyre! Help! I'm wounded.\" DRAKKER STAR CRUISER CRUISER G alle . deler de Twear. do..liisii da open world Chat and play games with people from around the world without ever leaving your home. MPG-NET gives you something you can't find on floppy disk; on-line realtime contact with the most puzzling and challenging entity of all time. Another human mind. Play pulse-pounding, intriguing, forever challenging games with stunning graphics and vibrant sound. Games that are constantly improving so they won't get stale. Form strategies, share secrets and solve puzzles with up to 100 folks from around the world, twenty-four hours a day. In addition to our games we have Bulletin Boards so you can write public messages to other players, and Electronic Mail to send private messages. We also have Chat Rooms in which you can shoot the breeze LIVE with people from around the world. All you need is a modem, a phone line, and a computer; IBM-PC compatible, Macintosh, or Amiga. ome visit a land where dragons roam free, rodents grow to unusual size, and adventurers are the endangered species. Team up with players from around the world. Together, explore mysterious lands, armed only with your enchanted weapons, psionic spells, and wits. You'll find untold riches and glory while solving intriguing puzzles, and destroying the mightiest of beasts. MPG-NET brings you the ultimate in fantasy role-playing. The year is 2300 A.D. We've discovered stardrive and colonized hundreds of new solar systems. In the process, however, we pissed off some very nasty aliens. To say they hate us is an understatement. They'll do anything to eliminate us from space. No compromises. This is all-out interstellar war. We need your help! Based on GDW's classic space combat game, MPG-NET brings you the on-line version of Star Cruiser a 3D, multi-player campaign of splitsecond action. 1992 MPG Net, Inc. Multi-Player Games Network and MPG-Net are service marks of MPG Net, Inc. The Kingdom of Drakkar is a trademark of Drakkar Corp. Computer network versions of Empire Builder, Star Cruiser. Operation Market-Garden, and the Kingdom of Drakkar are designed and developed by Tantalus Inc. All other brand and product names are trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective holders "


"in Entertainment ...Your Multi-Player Games Network. = Brad Elk a.k.a. \"Sauer\" Louisville, KY \"If you need some help, just page me.\" Lori Zini a.k.a. \"Diana\" Waco, TX \"What tore you up, Merlin?\" OPERATION IM EMPIRE MARKET-GARDEN ASEAN MPG-NET is accessible from over 600 cities in the United States and over 80 cities internationally. It costs less than you think: $4.00 per hour in the continental US and $3.00 per hour in the N. Y city area. These costs are all inclusive. There are no hidden communication fees. Dial toll free 800-GET-GAME and we'll send you your account number, password, start-up kit, and 5 free hours right away. For more information call 800-245-0317 Three elite Allied paratroop divisions drop into enemy territory. Their mission, to seize the bridges leading up to the Rhine the last obstacle of Allied advancement into the heart of Germany. They almost succeed. Scattered remnants of Axis forces already defeated in France must guard the Rhine the first-line of defense for the Third Reich. They almost lose. MPG-NET brings you the on-line version of Operation Market-Garden, GDW's classic two-player war game, based on the biggest airborne operation in history. DS. RO Combining two great American loves: Railroads and Money! Now you can capture the entrepreneurial spirit of America and build your own railroad empire. The wheels of progress are you and up to five other players from around the world, locked in a power struggle of epic proportions. It takes planning and ambition to build a railroad empire. And only the best will endure. Experience MPGNET's on-line version of Mayfair Games award-winning, classic board game. MPG-NET Your Multi-Payer Games Networks 800-GET-GAME 800-438-4263 Circle Reader Service 877 "


"LULL TIE HEAT\" Corel/ Edward Jones ISLANDS IN THE INTERNET A Navigational Chart for Gamers on the Internet by John J. Brassil The 10th anniversary issue of this magaTo give some sort of idea of the scope of zine contained a brief review of the his interest, let's take a look at the Usenet newstory of computer games. As observed in groups which deal with gaming on the three that article, the very first computer games major home computer types. A Usenet newswere developed by computer scientists (a.k.a. group is very similar to the discussion areas nerds) who wanted to play with their new toys found on the major on-line services such as after they were finished working on them. Compuserve, Genie, America On-Line, and Now, these mainframe computers are conthe like. Readers post articles which can be nected to one another by the thousands in a read by anyone who subscribes to the group network of mind-boggling complexity. Toss and replies can be made via follow-up E-mail in the govenment and commercial hosts and or posting to the group. One of the newsgroup it totals about one million hosts attached to hierarchies is the «rec\" area, which deals with the Internet worldwide! (An article in the recreational topics. There are about 70 differInternet Society Neuis estimates 992,000 in ent areas under the «rec\" group (the number June of 1992.) changes as new groups are added and deleted Since that first game of Spacewar was played the Internet is a very dynamic environat MIT in the 1960s, there have always been ment!) One of these areas is rec.games, which games wherever there have been computers. in turn, has 29 of its own subgroups, ranging Things have progressed far beyond the days of from rec.games.abstract to rec.games.xtank. Star Trek on display terminals and the original in between are newgroups relating to backGreat Underground Empire (i.e. Zork). It is gammon, the game of Go, Empire, fantasy now possible to play computer games, talk role-playing games, board games, Diplomacy e-playing games, board games. Diplomacy and even design com(more about that later), and even coin-op puter games (in a fashion) on the Internet. arcade games. An area of special note is the rec.games.mud newsgroup. \"MUD» is an acronym for \"multi-user dungeon.\" Here, players get together in an electronic dungeon and interact in «real time!\" There are several Internet hosts which provide these on-line dungeons, engendering several different styles of \"muds.\" Needless to say, these types of adventures don't support the fancy graphics and sound support of commercial software, but there is the thrill of actually designing and defining the universe you inhabit! \"There are also newsgroups under the comp.sys hierarchy which deal with the commercial, shareware and freeware games available for home computers. In the latest weekly reporting period, the comp.sys.ibm.pc.games newsgroup had 1,252 articles (1,864,624 bytes), comp.sys.mac.games had 440 articles (1.139,452 bytes), and comp.sys.amiga. games had 363 (536,494 bytes) articles posted. That's over 2.5 MBs posted in one Page 74 Computer Gaming World "


"Lowest deliverd prices with great customer service. 800-448-6658 DISK-COUNT SOFTWARE 119 41 & NE 31 888 29 38 37 32 22888 A5 25 19 31 31 47 39 61 29 45 CAR 79 24 DARBA PAR 8840 MASTERCARD, VISA, DISCOVER, AND AMERICAN EXPRESS ACCEPTED WITH NO SURCHARGE. SHIPPING IS ONLY $4.00 PER ORDER, PRODUCT INFO&OTHER BUSINESS: NOTPERITEM 908-396-8880 4D Boxing 20 Dr. Quandry 31 | Laffer Utility 22 Phonics Plus 25 Studyware LSAT 30 Illustrated Shakesper27 Fontmonger 92 Sound Cards A Train Dragon's Lair Leather God Phb 2 42 Pinball Studyware for SAT 30 Intl Bus & Econ Atlas 39 Geoworks Pro Construction Set 22 Dragon's Lair 2 Legend Pitfighter Stunt Island 37 Intro to Game Fren 79 Grammatik 5 57 Ad Lib Sound Card 65 A320 Airbus 52 DragonLr:Sing Cst 37 Legend of Kyrandia 35 Plan 9 Outer Space 179 Summer Challenge 34 Intro to Games Span79 Hijaak DOS or Win 129 Ad Lib Gold 1000 ABC Wide Wild Box 30 Duck Tale:Qst Gld 15 Legion's of Krella 37 139 Planets Edge Summoning 38 Jones in Fast Lane 37 Info Select 87 ATI Stereo FIX ABPA Baseball 25 Duerk BaseB. Encyl 20 Leisur Suit Lar Bndl 39 Playroom w/ Sound 31 Super Tetris Kings Quest 5 42 Language Assistant VGA StreoFIX 1MB 369 Aces of the Pacific Dune 39 Leisur Suit Larry5 37 Police Quest 3 Take a break X-Word 29 Languages of World 99 Covox Snd Mster II 145 Fr. Gr. Heb.Ital Span 42 Mission Disk Dungeon Master 29 Lemmings Pools of Darkness Pool 29 Learn to Speak Span 69 Gravis Ultra Sound 129 Laplink 4 Pro Action Stations Dusk of the Gods 38 Oh No More Addon 22 Populous 2 Tank (new version) 37 Library of Future 99 Lotus Works 99 Media Vision Addon Disk 22-45 14 Dynamix Bundle Lemm. Oh No More 31 Task Force 1942 Power Hits Sports Loom 139 39 Microsoft Ock Basic 65 Audio Port AD&D Collect Ed 2 44 Earl Weaver 2. Sci-Fi L'Empereur Team Yankee M-1 Tank Platoon 62 Microsoft Quick C COPC 999 AD&D Starter Kit 44 Commisioner Dsk 12 Lexicross Battletech-Mech 32 Tengens Arcade Hit 25 MacMillian Child. Dict.49 MS DOS 5.0 Pro Audio Spec+ 139 Adv Willy Beamish 37 Play & Mgr. Disk 12 Liberty or Death Powermonger 32 Terminator Manhole 49 MS DOS 5.0 Upgrd 62 M.M. Upgrade Kit 765 Air Bucks 36 Earthquest Life and Death 2 Principles of Biology 25 Terminator 2 Magazine Rack Norton Desktop v2. 95 Pro Audio Spec 16 198 Air Force Command 36 Eco Phantoms 31 Links Principle of Calculus 25 Tetris Classic 28 Marketing Master 39 Norton Dsktp DOS 115 Pro 16 Multimedia AlgeBlaster Plus 30 Eco-Quest 1 Links 386 Pro Principle ofChemsty 25 Theatre of War Mavis Beacon Norton Utilities 111 Upgrade Kit Algebra Made Easy 25 Elvira 2:Jaws Course Diskea 16 Print Shop Deluxe 45 Thunderhawk MIG 29/MIG 29M 62 One Write Acct. 100 Thunderboard Amarillo Slim DICK 32 Entr Pak Win (ea) 28 3 or more (ea) 15 Graphic Coll. (ea) 30 Time Riders America35 Mixed Up Mother Gse37 Pacioli 2000 v2.0 oli 20400020 31 Thunder & Lightng 229 31 American Gladiators 25 Eye of Beholder Loney Tune Prnt Ply 19 Print Shop, New 36 Time Treks MSDOS Archives 35 PC Animate Plus 115 Sound Blaster Ancient Art War Sky 35 Eye of Beholder 2 38 Lord of Rings 2 37 Graphics (ea) 22 Tom Landry Football 30 Presidnt:It Start Geo105 PC Anywhere 4 115 Snd Blast Pro MCA 259 Animation Studio 69 EZ Cosmos Lost Admiral 35 Print Sp Companion 31 Tony LaRussa Base. 17 Prince Persia/Nam 6565 PC Kwik Powerpak 72 Sound Blaster Pro 189 Are We There Yet? 18 F-14 Tomcat Lost File Sherick H 41 LaRussa addon Privateer 15 Railroad Tycoon 62 PC Paintbrush 5 + 99 SB Multimedia Kit 560 Armada 2525 F 15 III 44 Lost Treas Infocom 42 Pro League Baseball 35 Tracon 2 Red Strm/Carr Cmd 62 PC Tools 103 SB MM Starter Kit 459 Armourgeddon 29 F 15 || Master Edit. 49 Lost Treasures 2 29 Quest for Glory 1 Tracon Windows 37 Reference Library 80 Peachtree Basic 75 SB CDROM Intrnl 360 .... 35 F117a Stealth Fighter41 Magic Candle 2 38 Quest for Glory 3 Treasure Cove 35 Shakespeare PFS: First Choice 75 SB CDROM Extrl 429 Automap 49 Facts in Action Main St Creatvity Kit 17 Ragnarok Treasure Math Storm35 Sherlock Holme Cnslt42 PFS: First Publisher 75 Sun Moon.Star w/ Sony Automap Windows 48 Falcon 3.0 Manhole 31 Railroad Tycoon Treasure Mountain 31 Sleeping Beauty 37 PFS:Prospect 75 CD, SB Pro, S/W 599 Automap Europe Oper Fight Tiger 25 Mantis Rampart Treasure Savg Frntr 32 So Much Software 59 PFS:Publisher Wind 75 Roland SCC-1GS 375 B-17 Flying Fortres 39 Family Tree Maker 42 Mario Teaches Type 25 Random Hs Encycl Treehouse 35 Sophisticat Santa Fe 45 PFS: Window Works 75 Sound Canvas 559 Back to Future 3 25 Far Side Calendr Martian Memorndm 32 Reader Rabbit Tristan Pinball Space Quest 4 37 PFS:Write w/Grmtk 69 Roland MA-12C ea 105 Backqamn By Geo 26 Farm Creativity Kit 17 Marvin Moose 1/2 31 Reader Rabbit 2 Trump Castle 2 31 Spirit of Excalibur 37 Presention Task Frc119 SPEAKERS Shielded28 Bane Cosmic Forge 36 Femme Fatale Math Blaster Mystry 29 Read 'n Roll VGA 31 Trump Castle 2 Delx 42 Siat Pack Print Shop 36 w/ 3 band Equilizer 45 Barbie Design F.F. Data Disk Math Blaster Plus 29 Red Baron 39 Twilight 2000 37 Stellar 7 Procomm Plus 2.0 69 Altec Lansing 200 219 Barbie Fashion Fighting for Rome Math Blaster Wind Mission Disk Ultima 7 Strange Bedfellows 39 Procomm/Window 82 ACS 300 w/Subwof 299 Barbie Adventure 25 Final Conflict 29 Math Rabbit Realms Forge of Virtue 17 Street Atlas 79 Pyro Screen Saver 35 MIDI Interface Bart Simpson Hous 30 Flames of Freedom 31 Math Zone Rex Nebular Ultima 7 P12 45 Time Mag Almanac 129 QEMM Battlechess (allver) 30 Flight of Intruder Midiator 101 Serial 95 Matrix Cubed 32 Riders of Rohan 31 Ultima Trilogy 1 Time Table History 69 37 Q DOS 3 46 Flight Simul A.T.P. Battlechess 2 37 PC Midi Card Mavis Beacon Type 32 Risk for Windows Ultima Trilogy 2 47 Time Table Science 59 Quicken 6.0/Win Flight Simul(M.S.) Battlechess 400 MOX-32 179 41 39 Mavis Beacon Wind 38 Risky Woods Ultima Underworld Quicken Quick Book 84 47 Ultima 1-6 ArctuScen Dsgn 28 Battle Isle MPU-IPC 135 McGee at Fun Fair 25 Road & Track Pres Ultrabots 37 Sitback DOS or Win 59 Ultimate Basketball Battles of Napoleon 31 California Mean Streets 19 Road to Final Four U.S. or World Atlas 49 U.S.Atlas Stacker Cakewalk Apprentic145 31 Battlestorm Flight Planner 25 37 Medieval Lords The Miracle Robosports Wind 30 325 Vintage Aloha Utopia Stacker 16 Bit Card 179 Berenst Bear Cnt 19 FS Pro Mega Fortress Romance 3 King 2 39 V for Victory #1/#2 44 Wild Places Superstor 79 MIDI Software Berensin Bear Color 25 Great Britian 37 Mission Disk 27 Rorkes Drift 34 Wing Comm & Miss Vegas Games Wind. 19 TurboCadd v2.0 79 Ballade Berensin Bear Lettr 25 Hawaii 19 Mega Traveller 1/2 37 Rules Engagement 37 Vengeance Excalibur30 Wing Com/Ultima 6 45 Word Perfct5.1/Win249 Band in a Box 69 Berlitz Interpreter 37 Instant Facit Loc. 26 Mega Man 3 S 17 Rule Engagment 2 38 Warlords Wing Comm 2 Windows 3.1 92 Cadenza Bicycle Poker Instrumnt Pilot Scen Mental Math Games 35 Scrabble Deluxe Wyn Gretzky Hcky 235 WC/Ulti. Undrwld 49 Winfax Pro Bill Elliott NASCAR 30 East/West U.S. 59 Merchant Colony 31 Scrabble Dix Win 38 Western Front World Atlas Scenery Set A Birds of Prey 37 Mice & Trackball Cakewalk Pro MetroGnome Music 31 Sea Roque What's My Angle 30 World View Blitzkrieg Scenery Set B 37 Michael Jordon Flight42 Second Front Where Crm San Diego Wrath of Demon 32 Appoint MousePen 70 Cakewalk Window Bloodwych Scenery Enhn Ed 25 25 Drummer Mickey ABC's. Secret Monkey Is. 2 38 in America's Past 36 Adults Only Must be 21 Microsoft Mouse Encore Bo Jackson BaseB Sound & Graphic 25 Color or 1-2-3's 25 Sort Weapon Luftwf 42 in Europe 30 Animation Fantasy Mouseman Serial 695 65 Bodyworks Tahiti 19 o Piano Works Mickey's Crossword 19 Dornier 335 20 in Time FAO Set Trackman Serial 19 Play it by Ear Bridgemaster Western Europe 19 Mickey Jigsaw Pzl 31 P-38 Mission Dsk 20 in USA PC Pix Vol 1 or 2 65 Modems & Fax Master Tracks Pro 249 Bug Bunny WrkShp 31 Floor 13 Mickey ABC Combo 37 P-80 Shoot Star 20 in USA Deluxe 45 Private Collection 65 MaxFax 9624 Fx/Md 99 Music Printer Plus 419 Buzz Aldrin Fly Grand Canyon Mickey Word Advent 25 Heinkel 162 20 in World Deluxe 49 Priv. Pictures 1 or 2 65 Maxlite 9624PC 169 Follow the Reader Captain Comic 2 189 Music Time 29 Micro Cookbook 31 Sesame St.Lmn Clas 31 Wild Wheels Storm 1 or 2 Maxlite 96/96 375 29 Four Crystal Trazer 32 349 Musicator Carl Lewis Chaling 29 Microleagu 4 BaseB 39 Sesame St. Publish 25 Wing Comm 1 Dixe 49 Visual Fantasy Free DC Maxlite 14.4/14,4 Carrier Strike 419 Quick Score Deluxe 99 Microleague FB Dix 42 Sesame St.Vol.1 17 Wing Commander 2 49 Volcano Practical Peripherals Recording Studio 75 Front Page Sports Carriers at War 35 Microsoft Golf 39 Sesame St Vol. 2 17 Special Oper Disk 25 Caddies 7.95ea. 3/$ 19 Casino Pack 1 PM 2400 Internal 129 Rhythm Ace Gateway Midnight Rescue 30 Seven Cities of Gold 38 Speech Disk Global Conquest PM 2400 External 175 Songwright 5 Castles Might and Magic 3/4 38 Utilities Shadow Prophecy 30 Wizardry Trilogy Gobblins Northern Campgn 19 Sportster 2400 Ext. 149 Trax for Windows Millennium 2200 25 Shanghai II 386 Max Word Muncher Godfather Castle 2 Milliken Storyteller Sportster 2400 Int. 129 32 Shuttle 36 Adobe Type Mgr 59 Wordtris Joysticks Gods Castle of Dr. Brain Sportstr 14.4v.42bis 309 30 Mike Ditka Ultimt FB 37 Sierra Starter Bndl 39 After Dark for Wind World Circuit 67 CH Flightstick Cathy Daily Planner 43 Gold of the Aztec Zoom External 31 Mixed-Up Fairy Tale 30 Silent Service 2 Writer Rabbit All Type 65 CH Game Card 3 Zoom Internal Ching Ancient Emp 30 Gold Sheet Pro FB 37 Mixed-Up Mother Gs 30 Sim Ant Autodesk Explorer 119 Your Prsnl Train SAT30 CH Mach 3 Challenge 5 Realms 35 Grand Slam Brdge 231 Monopoly Deluxe 34 Sim City Zoo Keeper 36 Bannermania Eliminator Game Cd 26 Champions Great Naval Battles 44 Moonbase 25 Sim City Graphic Zug's Spelling Adv Calendar Creator + 55 22 Microtek 60 829 Gravis Joystick 35 35 Champions of Krynn 20 Greens Muncher Bundle 30 SimCit Windows Adv of Eco Island 22 Carbon Copy Microtek 60OZ 1359 Gravis PC GamePad21 Chemistry Works 38 Gunship 2000 Murder Sim Earth Dinosaur World 22 Central Pt AntiVirus 84 Scanman 32 160 Kraft KC3 Joystick 18 Chessmaster 3000 32 Scenario Disk 24 Mutanoid Math Chlg 31 Simpson Adventure 31 Race Thru Space 22 Choas Scanman 256 265 Kraft Thunderstick 28 Chessmstr 3000 Win 38 Guy Spy NFL Challenge Prem59 Snap Dragon Colorix Hardball 3 Children Writ & Publ 39 CD ROM 69 Skins & Pads Maxx Flight Yoke NFL Print Pro 17 Snoopy Game Club 29 Copy II PC 39 Chip'n Dale Data Disk 15 Maxx Pedal NFL Pro League FB 35 Solitaires Journey Corel Draw V3.0 3D Cnstrct/Casti Mst 62 379 Dust Covers 32 Civilization Hare Raising Havoc 29 Nigel's World 31 Space Ace 2:Bort Aloha Hawaii Data Ease Personal 68 Grounded Wrist Straps 9 Mouse Yoke Civilization MPE Harpoon 47 Ninja Turtle Arcade 25 Atlas Pack 15 Quickshot Aviator 5 32 Space Quest Bundi 39 59 Desqview 2.4 Keyboard Skins Headline Harry Classic 5 Ninja Turtle: Adventr 31 Amer Bus. Phnbk. 39 Space Quest 4 Desgview 386 Quickshot GameCd 14 125 Stabc Pads Coaster Heimdall Nobunagas Ambition 37 Space Quest 5 Quickshot Intruder 5 30 Amer Hert Pict Dict 75 39 DOS Fax Large-System 150 Comic Book Creator 17 Heros of 357th No Greater Glory 12 Quickshot Warrior 18 42 Speedball 2 Audubon Mammals 37 Dvork on Typing 31 Wrist Pads Conan: Cimmerian Hole in One Golf 30 Thrustmaster Fight 69 Autodesk Explorer 119 Omar Sharif Bridge 37 Speedreader Express Publisher 99 Stax (Dust Repelent) 5 Thrustmaster Pro Conflict: Middle East 32 Hong Kong Mahjong 32 Operation Neptune 35 30 109 Spell.a.saurus Barney Bear School 26 Facelift 59 Stax Complete Cleaning Weapons Control Conflict Korea Hoyle Bk Game 1/2 22 Obits 29 79 Spellbound 31 Batik Designs 45 Far Side Calendar 49 30 System 15 Thrustmaster Pedal 109 Conquest Longbow 39 Hoyle Bk Game 3 Oregon Trail Spellcasting 301 Battlechess Humans Conquest of Japan 35 Hours: M F Beethoven Ninth AM to BPM Origin FX Sat 10AM to 3 PM 59 Spell Craft 37 Indiana Jones 4 Crime Wave Spell-it Plus Store Hours: X-F 9 AM to 6PM Once Upon Time Bible Library Sat 10AM to 3 PM Crisis in the Kremlin 39 Island of Dr. Brain Out of This World SpellJammer Store: 1060 Randolph Ave. Raliway N.J. 07065 Bookshelf Crossword Magic 32 Jack Nicklaus Signt 42 Outnumbered Spirit of Excalibur Britanica Family Chc 75 Cruise for a Corpse 33 J. Nick. Crse 3,4,5 14 Overlord Spoils of War Britannica Family Dr 59 TERMS AND CONDITIONS Daffy Duck P.I. 15 J. Nicklaus Clip Art 17 Pacific Islands Sports Adventure 47 Business Master Dagger of Amon Ra 39 Jetfighter 2 Sprout! 39 Paladin 2 Master Card, Visa merican Express Carmen World Dixe 65 Discove: Accepted. No Adv. Mission Disk 19 Dark Half Star Control 2 Paperboy 2 Cautious Condor Surcha:ge on Credit Cards. By mail: P.O, Box 3. Carteret. N.J. Dark Queen Krynn Jobhunt Patriot Star Trek 25th Aniv. 37 CD Game Pack 07005. All Sales Are Final. NO REFUNDS! Exchange or defective 55 Darklands 39 John Madden 2 PC Globe 39 Stickybr Math Tutor 30 CIA World Fact 39 merchandise with the same item only. No exceptions. All Darkseed 39 Jump Jet PC USA Stickbr Pre-School 30 Compton Encycpd 409 Products are new. We do not guarantee compatability. Shipping Dark Sun 50 Kid Pix PC Study Bible Stickbr Read Tutor 30 charges: 45 contiguous states. $4 per order. Alaska, Hawaii. Conquest Longbow 37 Death Knight Krynn Kid Pix Companion 25 Penthouse Jigsaw Stickybr Spell Tutor 30 Corel Draw Upgd and Puerto Rico S:0 ist pc.. $! ea. add. APO/FPO and P.O. Boxes 149 Dlx Paint Animation 85 Kid Works Perfect General Strip Poker 3 36 $6 ist pc. Si ea. add. Canada SB ist pc. $! ea. add. Heaviet 32 Electronic Cookbook 75 Dix Paint II Enhncd 85 Kings Quest Bundle 39 Strip Poker Data (ea) 17 items extra. Foreign orciers call for shipping charges. Font Master Data Disk . . Design Yr Own Hm 39 Kings Quest 1 VGA 37 Strike Commander 45 PGA Tour Golf Residents and sales Food Analyst taxCall for current price and Design Your Railrd 35 King's Quest 5 Game Collection availability. GOVERMENT AND SCHOOL. P.O.S WELCOMED. PGA Golf Windows 38 Storybook Weaver 34 45 Does not Railroad Robbery 19 King's Quest 6 Course Disk Studyware for ACT 30 Game Master 39 include closeouts,l.quidations. Ot 11m quantities and Designasaurus II 23 Knowledge Advent 47 PGA Golf Complete 49 Studyware GMAT 30 Golden Immortal product must be shipping for your protection, we will only 28 Disney Entertain Pk 47 Konami NFL FootB 3.0 Studyware GRE 30 Gunship/Midwinter 62 chip to the additoss the credit card company has on file. 74 Cakewalk 29 38 99 30 15 888 37 32 35 15 61 5889 25 30 AN889 38 34 17 35 19 25 4848 45 w2286 42 42 19 Circle Reader Service #54 "


"Telegaming week without even considering the statistics \"Doc\" O'Neill, who checks uploaded files forchive.wustl.edu). There is a daily influx of for the Atari ST! viruses and to make sure the software is not programs into the \"MSDOS_UPLOADS\" I read the ibm.pc.games group regularly, copyrighted material. In fact, uploading copycopyrighted mate directory, and the latest demos and other new and the topics there range from benchmark righted material to any Internet host is a big software are often posted there first. I recently ing of video frame rate to the lack of sleep no-no. A large repository for user-created downloaded a demo of the Lemmings 2 game caused by playing Sid Meier's Civilization. Harpoon scenarios was shut down by the adwhich was enough to revive Lemmmingmania The hottest topics right now are discussions ministration at Kansas State University due to for an all too short while. of strategy (and cries for help!) in Ultima complaints from Three-Sixty about one There was a promise to say something fur. Underworld II and Star Control II. copyrighted program which had been ther about Diplomacy on the Internet, and The MS-DOS games archive is located on a uploaded by an irresponsible user. while space prohibits me from going into too computer at Lowell University in MassachuIn addition, there are big MS-DOS game much detail, suffice it to say that e-mail is lors setts. (The internet address is frp.ulowell.edu.) repositories at the University of Michigan (arquicker than postal play, and computer adjuAll the shareware titles from dicators (programs known to Apogee and Epic are available, the Diplomacy faithful as \"the as well as demos of many popuIt is now possible to play computer games, Judge\") are available on hosts lar commercial titles. There is in the U.S., Australia, and also a directory of nothing but talk about computer games, and even design South Africa to handle most of text adventures and a large dithe bookkeeping chores. Now rectory of miscellaneous games computer games (in a fashion) on the Internet. if only someone would write which run the gamut from a an SVGA front end for the primitive Space Invaders clone — judge outpur! to the impressive «shoot 'em up» Galactix, chive.msdos.edu) and Oakland University Well, that's a whirlwind tour of Internet which rivals many current commercial offer[oak.oakland.edu), among others, and a sugaming. We docked at a few of the major ports ings. Directories for patches and utilites can perb collection of Windows software at the of call, but there are many bayous and backalso be found here, and there is even a comUniversity of Indiana [ftp.cica.indiana.edu). waters to be explored, and the good news is prehensive archive of the electronic magazine There is even an archive at the University of that there will soon be easy access to all of Gamebyles, which features reviews (including lowa which is devoted to game solutions, them. The growth of the Internet ensures that screenshots!) of new and existing products. hints and walkthroughs! One of the largest this vast ocean of data, discussion and diverFiles are compressed with PKZIP, although general archive sites (probably the busiest as sions will soon be lapping at everyone's lapseveral other compression formats are also well) is the famous \"wuarchive\" at Washingtop, if it isn't soaking their shoes already. (So used. The archive is maintained by Brian ton University in St. Louis. (wuarthat's why my socks are so wet!) Cow OOP's Strategies of the Month Vol. 20 A monthly column to improve the quality of play SOLITAIRE'S JOURNEY. Many games, like Klondike the \"standard» solitaire, can't be won every game, but you will have to play with some level of skill in order to get your average above the standard averages that have been set-up. It may take some practice at the game. CONOUERED KINGDOMS: . Using a well mixed force is quite essential. It is important to support one type of unit with another that can eliminate their nemeses. This type of a combination can devastate your opponents onslaught. This mix is also vital when teleporting with a wizard. A wizard with only archers being teleported into an area in which you have not explored could quickly be eradicated by a few catapults. A great challenge: Try not utilizing any dragons on map 5. This is a challenge that should only be tried after using all the unit types several times. BATTLES OF DESTINY Artillery is a very important unit type that| can wreak havoc upon anyone's front lines. They are by no means the most powerful unit, but they can punch holes in that «unbeatable\" defense that some speak of. If you have not tried all three methods of starting, you may want to try some of the others. It is almost like playing a completely different game. The strategies you will need to employ change significantly if you are playing for a set amount of time or an unlimited game. Quantum Quality Productions 1046 River Avenue, Flemington, N. J. 08822 (908) 788-2799 Circle Reader Service #84 Page 76 Jacking into the Internet Getting access to an Internet account isn't as easy as picking up a phone and subscribing, as with the commercial networks. Most users of the Internet have accounts through their association with an organization with Internet/Usenet access; usually a large company with government connections or a university. Some universities do offer accounts to private individuals for a fee, but most restrict access to members of the school. The only other way for one to get access is through a private bulletin board system (BBS) that is an official Usenet/Internet site. Many private BBSs have access to a limited number of Usenet news groups and offer limited e-mail capability. Finding such a board is a matter of poking around the BBSs in your area. Phone numbers and information can usually be found in local computer weekly magazines and at local user-group meetings. There are several good sources of information on the Internet/Usenet. A nice overview of worldwide networks is John Quarterman's The Matrix, Computer Networks and Conferencing Systems Worldwide published by Digital Press, 12 Crosby Drive, Bedford, MA 01730 (800) 343-8321. Quarterman also publishes a monthly newsletter, Matrix News, which covers the Internet, among others. Contact Matrix Information and Directory Services, 701 Brazos, Suite 500, Austin, TX 78701, (512) 320-9031. Other general sources include Boardwarch Magazine, 5970 S. Vivian St., Littleton, CO 80127, (303) 973-4222, and Online Access, which can be found on most computer publication newsstands. CGW Computer Gaming World "


"hed. De2 Bruce AB The Bad... And The Butt-Ugly. A DO In the Old West, you couldn't tell the bad guys from the good guys by how ugly they were (you had to rely on the color of their hats). But in Freddy Pharkas, Frontier Pharmacist, even a scrawny, sissified, one-eared Pharmacist can be a good guy. Al Lowe, creator of Leisure Suit Larry, spins a yarn of schoolmarms and chorus girls with hearts o'gold, cowboys and Indians, and varmints and heroes. It's the brand-new, age-old tale of Freddy Pharkas, a gunslinger who gave it all up for his love of pharmacology. Together with his faithful Indian companion, Srini Bagdnish, Freddy sets out to save bucolic, boring Coarsegold from a fate worse than Hollywood adaptation. So don't just groan at all those old horse-opera clichés. Be one. Strap on your spurs for a saga that skewers every Western under the sun. Mosey on down to your software store and ask for Freddy Pharkas, Frontier Pharmacist, And smile when you say that. 23:3DD22 PEARES FRONTIER PHARAOST. SIERRA See your local retailer or call 1-800-326-6654. Circle Reader Service 189 "


"Into the Volcano of Death A Trip Into the Fiery Environs of TSN's Yserbius by Samuel (V'ger) Baker II IBM # PLAYERS: winion was a lovely port, ruled by a king. for a future version. I quickly turned off the All races were welcome and times were TITLE: The Shadow of Yserbius sounds from my PC speaker. SYSTEM: happy. Then trouble arrived in the form Unlimited tour in one party) of Arnakkian Slowfoot, a wizard thar the king PRICE: $12.95/month for 30 hours on Your Presence is Requested invited to live in a castle on the island. ArnakThe Sierra Network, plus $4.00/month for access to Medieval Land. The first order of business in playing Yserkian didn't play nice and one night, whether by DESIGNER: Joe Ybarn intent or misadventure, evoked a volcanic erupbius is creating one or more characters. There PUBLISHER/HOST; The Sierra Network Coarsegold, CA are six classes, cight races, and two alignments tion. The volcano (named Yserbius) buried his (800) SIERRAT (harmony and chaos). The classes are thief, digs in lava. Now the place is only open to the knight, barbarian, ranger, cleric and wizard. more adventurous tourist trade. That's where we come in. The seven races are elves, dwarves, humans, trolls, orcs, gnomes, The Shadow of Yserbius is The Sierra Network's entry into multigremlins and halflings. To create a character, one chooses a class and player roleplaying on the computer. Each person can run one character a race. Then one can choose the artwork that will represent the at a time and be joined by up to three other friends to hack, slash and character or design the character in detail and leave the art work until puzzle their way through the depths of the volcano in which the action later. The faces are very believable, but it would be nice to have a greater takes place. selection of expressions and hairstyles. The player may freely jump back The game presents a 3-D you-are-there perspective a la Dungeon and forth in the creation process, but once one leaves a section, the Master or Ultima Underworld. There are 11 areas in Yserbius, each points one has spent from that pool are set. One allocates points from identical except for name, and they serve to separate the players into separate pools to stats, spells and skills. The stats that one may raise are communities of 50 to 80. One may have as many as six characters in strength (the better to womp on you my dear), defense, (the harder to the stables ready for play and simply select the desired character before be womped on), agility which helps one elude spell effects, and entering one of these areas. initiative which determines who womps when. Three other stats During movement, the screen is split into three sections. The upper (dexterity, hit points and mana points) increase naturally as one left window shows what the party sees. Underneath this is a small text advances in level. window where dialogue from the players and game messages appear. There are three groups of spells: attack, defense and utility, which The right side of the text window has a scrollbar that may be used to modify attributes, heal or provide information. There are 24 spells. review past messages. In the middle of this bar is a lock that, when When allocating points for spells, one should take care not to pump clicked upon, freezes the text window so that an important message up the level of a spell too much before one can see how much that spell can be studied. will cost to cast per level. There are 12 levels for each spell, and one The right-hand side of the screen shows the portraits of players in can only cast the level that one has paid their dues to. That may mean the party. Each of the portraits may be examined to gain further that a spell may be ineffective at low levels, or it may mean that one information about oneself and one's fellows. A large area in the middle cannot afford to cast it at higher levels until one has gained several more may be used to show player information, a map of the level the party experience levels. is on, or the names of players who are on the The 24 skills are divided into groups by map. The bottom part shows icons for player character class. Each class has four skills which inventory, spells, skills and game options WEST | are defaults for that class. Then, some skills such as saving the player's position. 2013 from other classes will be acquired as one rises All of the artwork is static. Though the look in levels, and others may be acquired as the of the underground is pleasant, but not specreward for completing quests. Some skills are tacular, the still shots of the monsters are very active all the time, such as weapon skills, beautifully drawn, with few exceptions. The AISEE. others must be invoked during movement or same pictures are used for monsters of the combat. For the starting player, the emphasis same category. For example, the picture that here should be on weapon skills at first, beSupposedly the wizard's castle is buried t Female Human represents the sabertooth also represents icel Level 16 Ranger cause hacking will be the primary means of Harmony lions, manticores (ycch!) and others of the cat volcano active. disposing of monsters for the first few levels. etterpting to Join inzabella family. For now, no sound boards are sup e r to Join There are only 27 places to carry items. Six ported, but Soundblaster support is promised rabella All of them for items worn, one place where items G B009 | Gi TCSCULS LIIC SAUCILOOLI deep in the bowels of this mountain. It SU ICPICSCHIS ICC lis his anguished spicit that keeps the 10 SOU S h ow Folloin Grizabella Page 78 Computer Gaming World "


"ONUN A C-E S EUROPE OVER EUROPE WANTS YOU! ACES OVER EUROPE CONTINUES THE GUT-WRENCHING, AIRBORNE EXCITEMENT of Dynamix's Aces of the Pacific, Computer Game Review's Simulation of the Year. The latest Great War Planes masterpiece transports you hallway around the world to relive the heroism of WW2 European air combat. Strap on a P-47 and lead explosive ground support missions. Strafe an enemy radar installation, then pull up and escape through a Aak-filled sky. Destroy bridges and V-I rocket sites in the Lightnings and Thunderbolts of the 9th Air Force. Painstaking historical accuracy and cutting-edge 3Space technology make Aces Over Europe the pinnacle of WW2 flight simulation. * Fly for Great Britain, Germany or the U.S. and battle famous aces like Adolf Galland, Wally McLeod, and Johnny Johnson. Pilot 25 classic warbirds including the P-51D Mustang, the Focke-Wulf 190D, and the Messerschmitt 262. Unmatched graphic detail includes squadron markings, instrument-perfect cockpits, and historically authentic camouflage. * Launch ground attacks on targets such as the German Panzer IV, and the Duck amphibious truck, . Dawn She SIMULATION Dynamix VISIT YOUR LOCAL SOFTWARE RETAILER OR CALL (800) 326-6654 TO ORDER. Circle Reader Service #90 "


"Talonauw 11976034 YOU WIN THE BATTLE! You found 25 gold pieces and earned 12 experience points! YOU See: Heal Potion YOU see: Heal Potion You are restored to full health! exchanged between players appear, and 20 in two bags. This is not nearly enough to carry all the quest items one will acquire, special items that can cast spells, and potions to restore health points and mana. If it were not for the mana trick (explained later), players would be popping back and forth to the store after every other fight, a rather large nuisance and a process which I believe would quickly degrade the performance of the game. The Reception Upon entering the field of play, the first you encounter i Snake 1 Snake. A Battle Begins! things one will see are the three structures that control a player's life. There is the Tavern where one may read posts from players and easily determine who is there. One may also converse with anyone in this area by clicking on their name and typing a message. Next, is the castle-like structure called the Guild Hall that serves as a training hall, general store and pawnshop. Before doing anything else, one should enter the keep and purchase equipment. Lastly, there is the volcano itself with a top and bottom entrance. The bottom entrance is for people who have saved their position and need to step out to the store to get a cup of mana or such like. One may teleport out and re-enter here without having to slog all the way back down on foot. Combat works as a series of rounds, and each member of the party arty gers to act once every round. Each round one may hack with a weapon, pon, cast a spell, use a skill or use something in one's pack. When all the party has been polled, their actions results and those of the monsters are shown in the small text window below the picture of the monsters. At this point, the player may be dead. A beginning player should expect to die a lot. However, in most cases, someone else in the party will be able to cast a resuscitate spell and bring the player back to life. 116175 Refresh yourself in the fountains nearbu. but do not take long! Bands of travelers rest here before exploring the Wind Laburinths. You encounter twee s c hoose Your Action Bitte begins This spell will even work in combat, which is nice as one has to survive in order to collect the goodies. If all of the party dies, one is sent back to the opening screen and may enter again at the top entrance. After a while, most fighting will become routine. All members in the party will cast death darts and most of the monsters will die. Those that are left will eventually succumb. Fortunately, most fights may be fled from. Since fighting takes more time than fleeing, Choose Your Action this is welcome for those in a hurry to comK plete a quest before leaving. Except for location-triggered encounters, the number of opposing monsters is nicely tailored to the number of people in the party. Quest for Story This is not the case for quest encounters. Quests are the staple dier of adventurers in the volcano. The rewards for completing them are quite generous. In some cases, skills or stats are boosted or weapons are gained, rather than experience. Even at the highest levels, the later quests were quite exciting. I found my palms sweaty on several occasions, especially during the Quest of the Four Parapets. The final battle took about a half hour and was nip and ruck for a party of ninereench ro thirty-fifth level players. I was a level 19 wizard ar the time. I did not die during the fight, but was occasionally down to under ten hit points. About 20 minutes into the fight, I had no mana points and was using items to cast spells. I had one charge left in a Stalf of Life when Arnakkian finally expired. In the Enlikil quest, I was at level 25 and with a level 35 barbarian and a level 84 cleric. Several times during the running fights I was dead and these two players were down to 5,000 or fewer hit points. Since many high level monsters can deliver blows of multiple thousands of hit points we might well have all died. Most quests can be completed in one or two hours and may be resumed at a later time if necessary. A couple of the quests require the participation of another party. I thought this was a nice touch, and it was not hard to find another party that would cooperate. Party Time There is a social life growing under the volcano. This is assisted by the case with which one may communicate while there. Just typing and hitting return sends a message to the party. One may speak to anyone in an area by typing their name followed by a colon. Messages may be sent to everyEntering The Battle one on the same level by vereneous clicking on the map button with the mouse. There are many guilds of players that hold organized events, and most of the guilds have staked out areas as «their» territory, where members of that guild may be found most of the time. A high majority of the people there are friendly, helpful and quite generous of their time. As a new player, I never had any trouble finding older\" players TURN YOUR DESKTOP INTO A COCKPIT! HOME BASE HONTROL Holds keyboard in upright position STAND Supports: Clamps up lo 2 inches  Thrustmaster CH Flightstick  Gravis . Most control-type joystick You are restored TO FULL Destin (Unnamedrene. I forgot to tupe it in Leeches. 6 Phantasms. A tt begins You are able to flee. Clamps firmly to any desk, supporting the joystick out over your lap to more accurately refled the positioning of a real control stick. It also Turns your keyboard into a cockpit control panel allowing you to easily access the keys without toking your eyes off the odion. ADD MORE REALISM TO YOUR SIMS! * IT'S THE ONLY WAY TO FLY! Send check or money order for $28.95 plus $4.00 (CAN $7.00) for shipping and handling to: COD ORDERS CALL (503) 686-1809 $4.50 COD charge + shp/handling Dealer inquiries welcome HOME BASE PRODUCTS 3025 Timberline Dr. Eugene, OR 97405 Circle Reader Service #106 Computer Gaming World "


"LEGENDS O FANTASY LITERATURE PRAISE A LEGENDARY NEW GAME   ANDRE NORTON Author of Witchwork RAYMOND E.FEIST Author of The King's  ROGER ZELAZNY Author of The Prince of Chaos \"A rousing and engaging game where the wellhoned edge cuts wellBetrayal at Krondor.\" \"The idea of combining your game with a book seems to me to be enriching and I most heartily endorse it.\" \"I feel great pride and satisfaction that this beautiful piece of puter fiction was based upon my work.\" RAYMOND E. FEISE RIFTWAR LEGACY --10.00 g XPERIENCE the cinematic intensity of Betrayal at Krondor, a revolutionary fantasy role-playing game based on the New York Times best-selling Riftwar Legacy books by Raymond E. Feist. Betrayal at Krondor launches all-new legends of Midkemia, a breathtaking mystical land. Elegant story-telling and revolutionary 3Space visuals immerse you in the most realistic, detailed fantasy ever created. Betravais ENDURE savage enemy combat. Opponents nor only act but think using revolutionary artificial intelligence. SEE the wonders of Midkemia for the first time as over 2,500 frames of rotoscoped animation, exquisite hand-painted back. grounds and Dynamix's 3Space technology combine to create a \"virtual\" fantasy. WIELD more than sixty unusual spells that unleash superhuman magical powers. rondo Dynamix HE I do not knos unnt fires burn in hic mind, but the CHOKO likeman PSS HP Narab VHS Galled on his clan to surround us) Efrough theg can be little threat to us here. The rix: Hill cruch thou hopelessly Dynamw Visit your local software retailer or call (800) 326-6654 to order. Circle Reader Service #91 "


"Malo Unna B009 (Unnamed) ok, In zack medford, and thanks madonna. The River of Eternitu taps your life energy Only the bravest adventurers explore to go out with. Older players will frequently and there is not much to spend it on. On adopt a newbie and protect them, letting weekends the system can be sluggish as it them accumulate levels quickly and teaching reaches saturation. Also, crashes will happen them the short cuts to fame and fortune. as the network drops users it can no longer While leading on quests, I had frequent ocsupport. Since TSN relies on Telenet to carry casion to ask other explorers where to take an ir across the country, Telenet's problems are item or the order in which to do things. I also theirs. Over New Years Day, Telenet always received a response that was friendly crashed, bringing down c. 10,000 users of and helpful. TSN. In the time since, things are still a little Here, as elsewhere on TSN, romance you are restored to put heatin! flaky around the edges. Periods of group blooms. Many players go around in pairs and crashes have occurred, but things appear to be Airt while playing. I must admit I was not settling down. immune to this aspect myself. Women can the life-devouring River of Eternity for A new revision of Yserbius is coming that expect quite a bit of attention under the hidden passages. wall will fix some of the bugs in the game. During volcano, given a friendly nature. Most of the time, everyone conducts my play, I found no bugs that affected the players in an adverse manner. themselves within bounds. Of course, in any large group of people. There are several bugs that may be taken advantage of by the players, there will be a few laggards who have not fully understood good however. One in particular gives players 15,000 experience points for manners. One has only to complain by hitting the complaint button repeatedly entering and leaving a room without fighting the monsters that appears on the TSN menu and action will be taken. there. This has produced players with levels in the hundreds who have There are also guild wars where more organized conflict takes place. been playing only a few days. As part of the map and party section of the menu, it is possible to challenge other parties. Challenges of this nature produce nothing of Journey's End value, no experience for killing other players, and no items (unless one has the pickpocket skill). Some people still do it though. A way out for The game can be entertaining, but what made this an experience to this has been provided, however; one may simply \"mute\" oneself and be savored are the many good people with which I ventured forth. not be liable to being challenged. One may also mute oneself against There is no substitute for the companionship of others and Yserbius being joined so that one will not be joined by others while waiting for gives one all the tools one would wish for the interaction that is the a friend. core of this game. I now have a number of people whom I consider good friends, and I will be playing long after this article is submitted. Brickbats of Outrageous Fortune Most of the people I met were thoroughly addicted to Yserbius and to The great majority of my experience with Yserbius has been positive. TSN in general. Those who possess the money would be well served As always, though, there are a few flies struggling in the ointment. After to try out TSN and Yserbius. Those who choose to journey there, be the first ten levels or so, money ceases to matter. I have millions now sure and look for V'ger (or Vger elsewhere) and say hi. Cow THE NEXT EMPIRE R PLAY BY MAIL PRINTOUTS LIKE THIS EVERY TURN! ...the only game that sends you fabulously detailed maps like this one, showing your fleet's sensor views every turn ...along with clear, complete stats on each starship you design, build, and maneuver Individually using up to 21 different onboard systems...plus status reports on starbases, probes and asterolds you controll The Next Empire Is a completely computer-moderated game, over 6 years In the making. Each universe is a unique, complex gaming environment populated with 21 allen players Itching to blow the hulls off anyone who gets in their way! FREE SET-UP AND RULES!  $7.50 per turn; no hidden fees or double turns Recently voted #1 PBM game in a nationwide player magazine survey!  fast game (two weeks per turn) or slow game (three weeks per turn)  clear, concise rules; our complexity comes from your gaming freedom  FREE SET-UP AND RULES! Reality Simulations, Inc. P.O. Box 22400 Tempe, AZ 85285-2400 (602) 967-7979 Computer Gaming World Page 82 Circle Reader Service #86 "


"More Mind-Munching Madness from the Creators of Gobliiins. Here's what they're saying about Gobliiins: \"... you will want to snatch this one up. Its intelligent design and cute good looks will hook you right from the start.\" -Game Players Magazine \"... a delightful mix of adventure and puzzle gaming that will leave your gray matter positively fried.» -Video Games and Computer Entertainment \"If you like the ultimate in brain teasers this game will meet your needs.» -The Newark Advocate S... graphics are hand-drawn, 256-color works of art ... Highly recommened.\" -Questbusters \"There is plenty of good fun here for the graphic adventurer.. -Computer Gaming World .. as puzzling as a Rubics Cube with a bad attitud The Newark Advocate GOBLINS WILT You control two new bilarious imps... ...and face off with really weire ...as you unravel brain-bending puzzles.. Circle Reader Service #92 PICK IT UP AT YOUR LOCAL SOFTWARE DEALER, OR CALL 1-800-326-6654 7am-7pm (PST) Monday-Friday / Outside U.S. Call 209-683-4468 8am-5pm (PST) Monday-Friday Part nt the Sierra Family "


"Telegaming HOT LEAD AND PHONE LINES A Survey of On-Line Games Bridge (The Sierra Network): In today's busy world, it is more and more difficult to get bridge partners together for a few hands. This highly trafficked service makes it easy to find both a regular bridge partner and an impromptu rubber. It is regularly frequented by players ranging in skills from beginners to grand masters. Chess (CompuServe, The Sierra Network, USA Today): Many networks have chess sections for PBEM games. Compuserve boasts a forum for postal play, real-time chess and simultaneous chess (four players simultaneously play two games each). The Sierra Network has plenty of face-to-face action and USA Today features a chess ladder (where players compete to reach the top). All three systems can boast an active and ardent group of chess-players with a broad range of expertise. British Legends (CompuServe): This is your typical text-based multi-player role-playing game with an emphasis on magic. The imagination v2. TY Thile artificial computer opponents and role-playing partners are a convenient and often rewarding aspect of computer gaming, we feel that the best opponent/partner is a human one. At CGW, we believe very strongly that multi-player gaming in virtual, tele-communicated environments is the future of the hobby. No matter how sophisticated the artificial intelligence algorithms become, or how user-friendly the interface, the computer will never be able to march the perverse gaming brilliance of the SI human mind. And besides, the computer doesn't care much if you gloat. Battle Tech on Genie This listing of games is designed to give readers an overview of the multi-player expeBackgammon (The Sierra Nerwork): riences available on several commercial onGamers who long for the good old days of line services. We hope that these brief gaming around the hearth or the kitchen table descriptions might prompt some of those may be more inclined to find opponents for gamers who have never had the pleasure of traditional strategy games on The Sierra Nethuman-to-human gaming to reach out and work. Included in TSN's extensive list of coftouch\" fellow hobbyists. You might make a fee-table games is this classic. You'll have no friend or two, and you'll certainly have a good trouble finding players to role the old doutime. bling-cube with. Baseball Manager (Prodigy): Would-be baseball general managers should enjoy this new spin on the rotisserie/fantasy style of baseball. Gamers prioritize actual major league players for the draft, and rosters are controlled by the amount of money «paid\" to the players drafted. Then, would-be managers set lineups and line-up contingencies for head-tohead play. Rather than the weekly results one would get from a fantasy league, the on-line game uses a pool of statistics to figure out daily scores. $100.00 per season, plus monthly fee. Air Warrior on Genie BattleTech (Genie): With a role-playing When games are not part of the basic service fee, we will list the extra hourly/monthly costs of the various Houses of the BattleTech uniseparately. verse, or serve as maverick mercenaries, this version of BattleTech has possibilities that Air Warrior (GEnie): Kesmai's classic game even the Virtual Entertainment BattleTech of multi-player air combat, covering the era Centers don't have. The ability to participate, from WW1 through Korea, was one of the first through the miracle of Kesmai's graphic ne games to use a graphic front-end. The front-end, in on-going campaigns from the latest version, SVGA Air Warrior, is reviewed comfort of one's own home is both addicting in this issue. Word has it that the Air Warrior and satisfying. Fans of Activision's Mech Warsection of GEnie is the hangout for air-combat rior will not want to miss this next generation jocks. $6.00/hr. of the classic simulation. $6.00/hr. 91 200 BUS The Sierra Network Main Menu points needed to become a Wizard. As Wizard, the player is granted special powers, the most potent of which is the gift of invisibility. The unseen pamer can then slink about the on-line world wreaking mischievous havoc on unsuspecting underlings. $6.00/hr. CEO (Prodigy): The basic monthly rate on Prodigy allows gamers to become the Chicf Executive Officer of the company of their choice and compete with other Prodigy subPage 84 Computer Gaming World "


"PICK-UP THE PHONE AND PICK TWO GAMES FREE! Sierra Discovery Series PRE READING SKILLS A-C-E-S Boop LPHABEN SPACE QUEST V RCIPIC (We Talk! FRONT PAGE SPC The Rede ina's 1. LONI TOMonROM SIERRA 1-800-877-1995 ROBERTA WILLIASIS SIERRA Choose any Two Sierra Games when you switch to Sprint directory assistance, customer service, even instant credit for wrong numbers. And we do it 24 hours a day! Sprint long-distance service just became more valuable up to $159.95 more! Now, when you switch your home long-distance service to Sprint, you can select any Sierra game, free! And after enjoying six months of highquality long-distance, you'll receive a second Sierra game or one month of free long-distance service.* Only Sprint can offer you a nationwide 100% digital, fiber optic network that provides the long-distance quality and reliability you need. Experience for yourself Sprint's \"fiber optic\" clarity that makes both your longdistance calls and PC data transmissions crystal clear and error free. But unsurpassed call and data clarity is just one of the many benefits you will enjoy as a Sprint customer... calls each month to whomever they talk to the most, including international calls-even if the called person is with a competitive long-distance carrier. The Most will also provide automatic 20 percent discounts on all calls to Sprint's millions of customers, anytime and anywhere. When the most frequently called number in a given month is a Sprint customer, Sprint will combine both discounts for an effective overall savings of 36 percent on calls to that number.** No Risk Guarantee Your satisfaction is guaranteed: we'll pick up the cost of switching your long distance to Sprint, and will even pay to switch you back if you are not completely satisfied. (Some restrictions apply.) So why not sign up for Sprint and receive the clarity, savings and service you want while getting two Sierra games you enjoy? Save on Long Distance When You're away from home too! Sprint's FONCARDS travel card lets you continue to take advantage of clear calling and savings even when you're away from home. Plus the FONCARD is free, with cards available to every member of your family. Sprint SIERRA \"The Mostm\" A Unique Calling Plan Sprint offers an unprecedented longdistance calling plan called \"The Mostsm\" available now for all customers. The Most will save Sprint customers 20 percent on already low rates on their The Service You Deserve At Sprint, we make no compromises when it comes to dependable, personal service we do it all; operator services, Circle Reader Service #93 * Offer valid only in the U.S. and for new Sprint customers. Not valid for FONCARD only orders Certain restrictions apply. Free month is up to $25 usage on 4th month invoice. To qualify for a second game or free month of long-distance the customer must bill $20 per month in 3 of the first 6 months. ** THE MOST discounts apply to intra-state calls only where authorized. "


"Telegamang STEM MARXEINONE OUTSIDE M 1994 acon Box LAST YR THIS YR CHANCE PRICE ($ s 2 020 20 RDUERTM BOTSD 150 ALDAB SPRICE ADUERT MKT SHARE PROD COST DBS SLR 2 D OMESLUIS MILLON WUE CAN B E HYP PRODUCTION ONEXIA AND HINTS DEOCALE Planets! Starbases! Battles . Four ships aulall your command REBEL SPACE Look Nox Menu Xerum Pall Tools Help EXIF CEO on Prodigy scribers within thar industry. Players manage their companies through on-line reports and budgetary expenditures and constraints, while they attempt to outpace the competition in both efficiency and profits. Cribbage (The Sierra Nerwork): The classic game is always accessible on The Sierra Network. All one needs to do is examine the interests of those on-line, find a prospective opponent, and invite them to the game. Best of all, it automatically keeps track of the Cribbage scoring system so that it is impossible to forget (or stcal points for) unspotted points. points. CyberStrike (GEnie): Simutronics new shoot-'em-up is described in the review on page 60 of this issue. The intense action, communicated through the graphic frontend, makes this an addictive on-line pastime. $6.00/hr. Diplomacy (Genie): Although play-by-EFederation II (GEnie): Gamers become inmail Diplomacy (the Avalon Hill game of dealtergalactic traders in this text-based space making, back-stabbing and resource grabbing trading game. The spirit of community in pre-WWI Europe) exists on almost every among regular gamers is extremely high, and network, Diplomacy games have been fullyplayers who are promoted to the highest levels automated on GEnie. Not only can one find get to design planets upon which all traders ready opponents for the standard game, but may adventure. It is also billed as an «adult\" there are several game variants, including gaming environment where risqué forms of \"Gunboat Diplomacy\" (no negotiating), and textual interaction are less of an exception several other options, as well. $6.00/hr. than a rule. $6.00/hr. Empire Builder (MPG Net): The strategy Galaxy II (National Videotex): AUSI has game of railroad building/operating that used a similar interface to that in their on-line spawned an entire line of railroad games (BritDiplomacy game (Genie) to facilitate this ish Rails, Eurorails, Japan Rails) is now undermap-based space conquest game. Gamers get going beta testing on-line. The game runs to establish both the history of their people (in under Windows and sports a sharp looking terms of passivity and aggressiveness) as well graphic front-end of the map used in the as the current stance of said empire with reboardgame. The entire interface is point-andgard to aggression. Then, gamers make ecoclick and includes an «auto-move\" feature that should speed up play in comparison to the nomic and military choices that determine To Call Favaro Cilles Map Loads Cards boardgame version. $6.00/hr. Fantasy Sports (CompuServe, GEnie, NVtel, USA Today): Almost every major on G line network has fantasy leagues where players draft major league stars and total up the stats of their actual performances. NVtel features draft leagues where teams play head-to-head over the course of a week. CompuServe has . draft leagues where players compete against 200 Millio n en the rest of the league during every week of the season. GEnie and USA Today offer head-toBI head fantasy leagues, but one must draft the Empire Builder on the MPG Net team afresh each week. $6.00/hr. TELE How to STOP playing The 1. Bowling ball falls down ramps. 6. Dynamite explodes. pushing pail off ledge. Puzzle Game of the Year Computer Game Review 8. Bullet bursts balloon. 4. Light shines through the magnifying glass, lighting rocket. 12. Bowling ball tips see-saw, pulling string 5. Rocket lights fuse, exploding dynamite. 7. Pail pulls string, shooting gun. a 3. String pulls switch, turning on light bulb. 9. Bucket falls is on hamster cage, making hamster run. Offer Number 370. Expires 12/31/93 "


"P iet eting Options Macros ut Cartography TXO TO JOS SITE here tour with traut, and there is small at deny You see two rings is still worth playing. The game consists of two the holes are wacky and often fiendishly desegments: the Basic Game, consisting of sevvised, providing many opportunities for playeral \"lands\" for beginner and intermediate ers to playfully jibe one another's shots. players, and an Advanced Game for veterans. Beware: the course seems to have a law of New lands and challenges are added all the physics all its own! time. It is now available on U.S. Videotex, as Modem-to-Modem (CompuServe): Comwell as CompuServe. $6.00/hr. puServe provides this forum (GO MTM) for Kingdom of Drakkar (MPG Net): Imagine gamers who want to connect with other a multi-player fantasy game where everything gamers in modem-to-modem games like is graphically portrayed. That's Kingdom of Kniebts of the Sky, Falcon 3.0, The Perfect Drakkar. See the brief review on Pg. 69. General, Command HQ and more. The new $6.00/hr. Empire Deluxe, in particular, was designed to Legends of Future Past (Digital Dreams work through this forum (but only for twoNetwork): This virtual environment is a textplayer, head-to-head competition). $6.00/hr. based role-playing game which uses live Game N everwinter Nights (America On-line): Masters to keep the action moving and the This is the ever expanding AD&D Forgotten \"cyburban\" populace working together. It is a Realms universe custom designed for netrich, dynamic, and lovingly supervised world work, real time, multi-human player action. of the imagination. One can play a number of races with different skills, join special guilds Based on the highly successful SSI \"Gold Gold Green SterroLand UZ and secret societies with secret agendas, and Moondawg! the system sponsors special «major quests\" once a week where the whole populace of the realm may get involved in a large scale adventure. There have even been \"wars\" on the system, where an entire city was called to arms to fight off an army of baddies. Like most of these games, this one is extremely addicting perhaps even more so. $6.00/hr. Miniature Golf (The Sierra Network): TSN provides a colorful playground in which one to four players can putter around and have Mini Goli on TSN a few laughs. Like their real-life counterparts, Marigott HOLE PAR STROKE 13 Kingdom of Drakkar on the MPG Net how much of the game's universe they can conquer. $6.00/hr. Gemstone (GEnie): Simutronics highly recommended text-based game of multiplayer, fantasy role-playing. The game uses Iron Crown Enterprise's RoleMaster rules. See the update that introduces the new graphic front-end on pg. 90 of this issue. $6.00/hr. Hundred Years War (GEnie): Jim Dunnigan's extremely detailed game of medieval politics, economics and warfare is now available on-line. The game can be played strictly by E-mail or it can be played as interactively as one desires. See the update on pg. 96 of this issue. Island of Kesmai (CompuServe, NVtel): This classic text-based fantasy game has stood the rest of time. It was one of the first commercially available multi-player CRPGs and AIM INSIDE TOX Botions Incredible Machine\" (in 14 easy steps). 12. Balloon turns on motor switch. 13. Motor starts fan, pushing tennis ball off ledge. 14. Tennis ball trips see-saw, sending bowling ball crashing onto your computer. THE INCREDIBLE 11. Scissors cut al balloon string THE INCREDIBLE. 2. Jack-in-the-box pops up, hitting scissors. Non-Stop Fun (because you just can't stop) Getting people to play The Incredible Machine isn't hard. Getting them to stop is! Combine ingenuity and obsession in this incredible work shop for your computer. Try solving over 85 puzzles by creating convoluted contraptions (like the one in this picture), using pulleys, bowling balls, hamsters, monkeys, candles, balloons, and a whole assortment of bizarre machine parts. The Incredible Machine features timed play, and a free form mode that lets you stretch your inventive mind to the limit. Pick it up at a software dealer ncar you. For A Free Demo Call: SIERRA 1-800-326-6654 While supplies last Circle Reader Sanico #114 "


"Sierra Nerwork offers \"face-to-face\" competition for Larry Bucks in Larryland under a dealer's choice system. $6.00/hr. (USA Today), +$4.00/mo. for all of Larry Land (TSN). Rebel Space (Prodigy): Space marauders with a megalomaniacal bent will find many worlds to subdue in this turn-based play-byE-mail game. Players can side with a universal cause as cither Militarist, Environmentalist, or Scientists, or play the maverick as an individuRogue. The game is very simple, and thus recommended for the newcomer to SATIS one wants to delve into their dungeon! Although there is an extra $4.00/mo. fee to play in the MedievaLand section of TSN, the legions of eager Yserbius players find it well worth it. Each player becomes a single character from one of six different classes and can run through the ever expanding maze levels solo or in parties with up to three others. Using an interface reminiscent of other popular, first person perspective role-playing games, Yserbius has become a way of life for a very socially interactive crowd. See the article on pg. 72. Sniper! (CompuServe): Roughly based on the SPI boardgame, this is a two-player game of small unit maneuver. Originally a game where players commanded ASCII characters to move through ASCII terrain, the game now features a graphic interface with full-color characters and terrain. As players are successful, they move through the ranks of the online elite. $6.00/hr. Star Cruiser (MPG-Net): Wing Commander on-linc? Almost. While the action is a bit slower than Origin's space-combat action Operation Market Garden on the MPG Net es Sniper on CompuServe Box» series of computer role-playing games, Neverwinter Nights stays faithful to the universe and game system where parties of several players can roam together on quests. With a time limit element added to the tactical combat system and the ability to page other players anywhere on-line, the system seems well thought-out. Fans of the Gold Box series know what to expect as far as the mechanics of the system go, and the human element makes it that much better. $6.00/hr. + $14.95 for the graphic front end (which can be downloaded). Operation Market Garden (MPG-Net): Board wargamers take note. Based upon Game Designer Workshop's classic board wargame, this rwo-player game based upon the famous airborne operation of late WWII, is the only game currently available of its kind. With hexes and counters and the traditional board wargaming symbology, this game is the game for the grognard who can't seem to find opponents. $4.00/hr. Paintball (The Sierra Network): This game features an overhead view of two teams maneuvering over a variety of terrain features. The goal is essentially, «Capture the Flag,\" but both sides have \"paintball» weapons with which to blast each other for additional points. The interface and the graphics are fluid and elegant, but the TSN sound support (splat.) gives getting hit by «enemy\" paintballs a whole new dimension. Poker (The Sierra Network, USA Today): USA Today has a poker ladder for those who wish to play poker by E-mail or compete for high scores in their video poker section. The PBEM games. The player plots four moves for his four ships and decides what sorts of modules should be built on each ship. Daily, weekly, and bi-weekly turn games are available. Red Baron (The Sierra Network): Based on the award winning Dynamix computer game (recently inducted into the CGW Hall of Fame), the on-line version of Red Baron adds the human opponent element that can never be matched by any artificial intelligence. Complete with a scoring system and weekly 0043 0043 DETOGGUHTET calo FASO FLEET COMITAND ESTES COURSE FOR STARSHIP : 1     Next Back Menu. Xehef Juma Path ...Touls KA ESTE Rebel Space on Prodigy Star Cruiser on the MPG Net game, and the graphics are less detailed in many ways, Star Cruiser is still a hor multiplayer shoot 'em up. The future holds many exciting things for this system. Within the next few months, a trade option will be added so that players can improve the technology of their ships. In addition, MPG-Net has plans to add a role-playing segment based upon the 2300 AD people-and-paper RPG universe. $4.00/hr. The following are voice contact numbers for the services mentioned in this article: America On-Line: (800) 827-6364 Compuserve Information Service: (800) 848-8990 Digital Dreams Network: (800) 274-2814 GEnie: (800) 638-9636 Multi-Player Games Network: (800) GET-GAME National Videotex (NVtel): (800) 336-9096 Prodigy: (800) 822-6922 x566 The Sierra Network: (800) SIERRAI USA Today Sports Network: (800) 826-9688 CGW devastating wound causing 283 damage + and killing ! YOU WIN THE BATTLE! You found 31 gold pieces and earned 12 AT USO Hapon on experience points! COOL You encounter 1 Coelus. 1 Snake. Abatte Bests! top rankings, each game can be played by 2-4 joystick hot shots. The person calling the game can designate player's airplanes, starring altitudes, weather conditions and more, so that each battle will be particularly interesting. Although some problems were found in earlier versions of the game, at press time TSN was about to release a major revision of their on-line Red Baron product which was supposed to address many of these problems. Shadow of Yserbius (The Sierra Network): When TSN does on-line role-playing, everyShadow of Yserbius on TSN Page 88 Computer Gaming World "


"QUEST WITH REAL PEOPLE IN REAL TIME IN AN EPIC THAT'S AS REAL AS A FANTASY CAN GET! INVENTORY ITEMS AZEK KILOGORJE GSORIDAHA Hettrait Hightoner W Loco Lodi Luxanna MoonDano o rmes BiokadeHUSIC riarkon Puret Quinde 2 Sarillonil MALU Muan Lulb Barbarian Sir Barthsir orady chvos Welcome to the Tainion Tavern POSTS SORT SHOH SORT OPTIONS WPLACES 2018 6804 CLOSE asRisk Casts stast on AD Cousong 200 Baskisks attack no causing 519 tanticore casts Lightning on MAD nanticore attacks HD causing 152 1a0age You seer Orange Lockpich rou see Green Lockpick COU seeRefresh Scroll You see! Sovereign scroll You see rune Prism Choose Your Action Create your face and personality, modifying your skills, attributes, and character class. Then head out... ...And meet adventurers from all over the country. Form parties and battle monsters with might and magic. Save your stats and inventory at the end of each session. Your character grows every time you play. all itching to take on the dangers that wait in the dark corners of these dungeons. Host a Fantasy Role-Playing Convention in your computer. Welcome to the dungeons of Shadow of Yserbius, the new multiplayer fantasy role-playing epic on The Sierra Network. Join real people in real time as you search for the secrets of a kingdom, buried by an ancient curse. Everyone you meet, friend or foe, could be a real-live person. High-Risk Quest, No-Risk Offer If you're 18 or older and have a PC and a modem, you can try Shadow of Yserbius FREE! Access to TSN is a local phone call from most of the continental U.S. Call today for a free trial membership kit and get started on the greatest adventure of all. At 57 an hour, Shadow of Yserbius lets you play with adventurers from all over, all night, every night! |(And all weekend, too!) An Epic Too Big for One Player. Meet thousands of other adventurers and form parties of up to four. Team up with a Wizard from Wisconsin, a Knight from New Jersey, or a Cleric from Colorado. Talk to Elves, Trolls, Orcs, Dwarfs, Gnomes, and even a few humans from all over America, Try it FREE! Call: | 1-800-SIERRA-1 The Sierra Network PART OF THE SIERRA FAMILY \"Price based on basic 30 hour evening and weekend package of $12.95 + $4 monthly access to Medieva Land. Offer # 273 Circle Reader Service #95 "


"Teleoaiming GD Gemstone Gets A GUI Makeover The New Graphic User-Interface For GEnie's Multi-player Role-playing Environment by Jay Kee o the people who design them, and to many of the people who But characters are not the only element controlled by people. Simuplay them, on-line multi-player games (MPGs) may represent tronics employs the largest staff of designers, programmers and writers the first real glimpse of Virtual Reality. Current VR hardware of any on-line game currently available: six full-time GMs, five assisrelies on clumsy attachments to produce simple graphics that fail to tants, two part-timers and a World Coordinator — enough to run a deliver an illusion of reality. But MPGs like Simutronics's GemStone small country. They can create, modify or even upgrade the game III minus the hardware, helmer and gloves — have managed to environment in real-time, without shutting it down. Which means create that illusion by focusing on the one sense that needs no bio-methat new features can be added, special events can be introduced, and chanical enhancement: imagination. surprises can be sprung at any time, with all of it coordinated and A fantasy role-playing game based on I.C.E.'s Rolemasterand Shadow controlled on-line. A recent enhancement to the GemStone system that World paper-and-pencil systems, GemStone III has achieved tremenfactors role-playing ability into scoring and character advancement, dous success without any graphics support whatsoever. Relying on a could not be done without the participation of human controllers. As text-only interface, it has been the number one entertainment product Simutronics CEO David Whatley points out, it gives GemStone a on GEnie since its release over three years ago. Its success and populegitimate claim to being the first true fantasy role-playing game. larity is to some degree, a testimony to the quality of design and for the players, it's like being an active participant in both the writing originality of scripting. But good writing and clever programming alone won't keep people coming back time and again to play a game core gramining and creation of a fantasy adventure. The only difference is that this story always starts in the middle, and never ends. at $6.00 an hour (off-prime rates). There's something more, something seductively different. The Front-End, Top To Bottom Power To The People So why mess with success? Why introduce a front-end graphics That something — the one thing that sets GemStone apart from interface, when the text-based game has been such a hit? The answer, simply, is \"Why not?\" Simutronics didn't replace the text-based interconventional computer RPGs — is that all the characters a player face with this new graphic front-end; they merely added to it, enhancencounters within the game are controlled by other people; not algogoing what was already there. The result is a slick terminal program with rithms in a program. In GemStone, up to 60 people at a time can be VEM on-line together, each playing their own character, pursuing their own e VGA graphics, animacion, digital sound and a macro editor that makes playing the game a lot casier. goals, contributing their own perspective to an ongoing drama. Almost any kind of interaction that can be experienced in real life can be found Although the GemStone front-end is still in the Beta stage (currently in the game: talking, partying, fighting, making friends, making version 1.6), it's fully-functional and surprisingly bug-free. Unfortuenemies, even getting married. nately, it's only available for IBM compatibles at the moment, but Page 90 Computer Gaming World "


"RSSSSSHHHLIEP heats loam Hots Mean amb les out to dean. wa MARATO NEPAL SPACE SPACE QUEST V QUEST yule Well-oiled adversaries are out to waste our favorite cosmic custodian. The Next Mutation Seite Sear O RT az Meet bodacious babes in the far reaches of space. Al SIERRA SIERRA Take on interstellar pukoids and nasty phlegm throwers (yeccch)! He's a legend that's sweeping the galaxy... Roger Wilco, the universe's favorite janitor, has taken the helm of his own starship. And that's the good news! Join Roger and an intergalactic gaggle of misfit shipmates in the most hilarious adventure on this (or any other planet. Find out why Game Players magazine calls the Space Quest series \"a prime example of why Sierra is at the top of the computer gaming world.\" Pick it up at your local software dealer, or call: 1(800) 326-6654 He's out to clean up the universe, and it ain't a pretty job! SIERRA Circle Reader Service #115 "


"Telejainning O Nona WOUDE 50% Hakurias steps down from the ledge. Hakurlas pats your familiar. Jorg Just arrived. Jorg ask, \"Who's familiar?\" Makurios I don't know.\" Simutronics confirms they are considering the possibility of producing display. Finally, a \"scroll-back» feature permits rapid scanning of the a Mac version. review buffer with the arrow or page-up/down keys. Players can save The program is located on GEnie at page 930, in the GemStone the entire buffer to disk with a single keystroke, or toggle a \"ChronSoftware Libraries, file #68. Download time will run about an hour icles\" option to record and save selected portions. Since the front-end with XModem at 2400 baud, but the package contains everything a works as a terminal program, it can be used in any area, roundtable or player needs, eliminating the necessity of downloading any other files. bulletin board on GEnie. It can even be used on any other on-line Installation is simple: just type \"GS3FEB16\", and hit center>. The service; a nice plus, and worth the download all by itself. self-extracting archive will unpack and write all the files to disk. At the top-left of the main screen, a display panel with icons and bar-graphs gives the player a visual reference to their character's status From The Top and health. A tiny human figure reflects certain activities, such as The first thing that needs to be made clear is that the GemStone hiding, kneeling, sitting or lying down. And a compass rose displays front-end is not a stand-alone program. Although a player can change all visible exits. settings and use the macro editor off-line, the graphics displays, One of the big advantages of the front-end is that players can move animations and sound effects only work on-line or in the Gem Stone around without typing in directional commands. All they have to do area. The other point is that players do not need to have the front-end is press a directional key on the numeric keypad and their character to play the game. will automatically go in that direction. Having a compass on-screen at That said, let's take a look at what the front-end has and what it does. all times makes getting around in the GemStone universe much simpler. The first thing a player sees when running the program is a logo Next to this panel, in the upper right corner, is a small section used animation. But once the front-end for graphics displays. Although loads, all that's left is a black screen S drake falchion small, these images are beautifully and a cursor. It almost looks like done, depicting idyllic forest setthe system's hung up, but there's ZOM tings, spooky graveyards or rustic nothing wrong; it's just the default shops. Some scenes, like the forest off-line display. Hopefully, future or the armoury, are accompanied by versions will bring up something digitized sound effects; others are more interesting animated There are no mouse-activated The only problem is that there menus, even though mouse supjust aren't enough of them. Only a port is included, so getting around few areas have graphics and even is handled through the keyboard. fewer have sound effects. None of Not a problem for someone raised the player characters can be seen, on DOS, but a minor nuisance for only a couple of the NPCs are dethose of us used to mouse-controlpicred, and (other than the Gnoll) led environments. Of the several none of the monsters are pictured. Alt-key combinations that access Of course, this is still a Beta verall the principle options, the most sion and Simutronics promises that important is Alt-H. It brings up a BILE future versions will include monhelp screen that displays all funcsters and characters, plus extra tions supported by the program and the key combinations that activate scenes, animations and even musical scores. On the plus side, players them. This panel can be called up at any time, on-line or off, so players will not be required to download the whole program all over again don't need to memorize anything (just as long as they don't forger every time there's an upgrade, just individual resource files that one Alt-H). can easily add to the main program. Configuring the front-end is simple, once you know where to look. The Settings screen can be accessed from anywhere in the program by One of the most impressive features of the GemStone front-end has pressing Alt-s. It brings up a panel that allows the player to set nothing to do with graphics. It's the built-in macro editor. Although everything from screen display and terminal preferences, to baud rate the front-end's macro language is small, the editor has almost unlimand network delay. As straight-forward as it is, first-time users will ited possibilities, allowing players to build macros to handle everything probably want to familiarize themselves with the rest of the program from log-on to combat. Accessed by pressing Alt-K, the editor comes before playing around with it. up in a windows-style panel with individual slots for each of the 12 function keys. The slots can be selected by the mouse or keyboard, and Down The Middle macros of up to 512 characters can be entered into each one. Each function key can be assigned to any one of four combinations: Normal, The main screen, or Terminal, is automatically called up when the Alt, Curl or Shift. And these in turn can be assigned to any one of nine player enters GemStone or can be accessed by pressing Alt-T. It's control-keys, providing a possible total of 432 macros! divided into three sections, with the upper third of the screen devoted to graphics displays and the lower two-thirds dedicated to the main text display The Bottom Line The text display is the central part of the system. It performs the same There really isn't anything out there at the moment to use as a functions as any terminal program, but with a few interesting wrinkles. First, a separate command line, or Chat arca, at the bottom of the benchmark when evaluating the GemStone front-end. It has to stand screen permits commands and communications to be entered indeor fall on its own merit, but has to be viewed within the context of the pendent of the main text display. It will handle paragraph-length game it was designed to enhance. Within that framework, Simutronics entries, eliminating the need to chop things up into short statements; has has done an admirable job. It adds to the enjoyment of the game maintain an easily accessed command-line history; and repeat the last without getting in the way, and makes it easier to play. two commands given simply by hitting CTRL or ALT-enter. For the price of the download roughly $6.00 — it's well worth Next, a split-screen feature lets players control and monitor a Familhaving. New users can contact GEnie by modem at 1-800-638-8369. iar (a cat, wolf, hawk or falcon), while maintaining the main text CGW Elouer Dragonsfany Forest) Vou pause to all your eyes to adjust to the further dinning of the light as VOU HOVO deeper into the trees. The cake surrounding you LOOM Jarger. and are interspersed with Hindak trees. Further blocking the rays of the sun. Obvious paths: north. south, hest. Flower Dragonsfang. Forest You release the scents of various herbs growing on the forest floor with DIHAU S gleich the breeze to create an over-changing but Obvious paths north, northeast, southwest. >teil familiar to 90 north You concentrate on commanding your familiar.. You are currently parruing with 100% of your offensive bonus. You Tub crystal amulet. Your mind suddenly feels busy with thoughts. Power Points: 25 Rewalning: 25 Spar Page 92 Computer Gaming World "


"Stop playing with yourself. Try interactive on-line games with a money back guarantee. With interactive games, you're not playing with yourself or against a computer ... you're head to head with a living, thinking human being who's playing for keeps. And NVN brings you the best interactive value, with the most popular on-line games at lower rates. Travel to the Island of Kesmai\" in a role-playing, multi-player game that will stretch the limits of your imagination ... create your own character in the fantasy world of Aradath and fight off magical spells and fierce martial arts warriors ... or manipulate space and time in your quest to conquer a planet in Galaxy II, the ultimate test of your strategic and logistic skills. * So quit playing with yourself. How to register Membership is just $5.95 a To register on-line, set your comm software to 1200, 2400 or month> AND YOU HAVE A 9600 bps, N-8-1, and full duplex. Dial 1-800-336-9092. When MONEY-BACK GUARANTEE. connected enter CG93RR and press <RETURN> Then enter Plus, our premium on-line name, address and Visa, MasterCard, Discover Card or American Express number: Your Starter Kit will be mailed charges are only $6/hr nonright away. prime time, and $9/hr during For more information, call 1-800-336-9096. prime time! Risk-free. Satisfaction guaranteed. NATIONAL VIDEOTEX Membership fee refunds are limited to $555 and do not apply to connect changes for Premium services or connect and sureluurges for Premium I'lus services. Maditional charges due to use of Premium Services. Offer applies to first time Members One per Membership per household. Subscription fee is $5.95 per month. Prices and service content are subject to change National Videotex is a service mark of National Videotex Network Corp. All others are for identification p a y and belong to their respective companies or organizations indicales Premium Service Circle Reader Service #99 "


"COMPUTER WARGAMING WORLD «I Came, I Played, I Conquered» Network Wars: CompuServe vs. Prodigy in CHQ by Alan Emrich COMMAND A Fool Paced Game Of Strategie Global Conquest By Dan Bunten Art by Rodger MacGowan; Copyright 1993 RBM Graphics WARGAMING WORLD In this issue ... Hundred Years War Update ......... 96 Air Warrior adds SVGA. 98 Falcon 3.0 strategy . . 102 Conquered Kingdoms strategy ........ 106 Tegel's Mercenaries review ......... 108 Dune Il strategy ... 112 AV8B Harrier review. 114 Impressions designers' notes . .. . .. .. . 118 Special Forces review 122 Reach for the Skies sneak preview .... 124 PBEM East Front replay ......... 130 efore we move to the lead story, let me bring up one item of new business. An interesting product has just landed on my desk which, I'm sad to say, I have not had adequate time to thoroughly examine. Howcver, Aide de Camp from HPS Simulations looks like a product that I've long dreamed about. It is a \"design your own play-by-email kit\" for board wargames. In other words, I could pull virtually any Avalon Hill, GDW, SPI, 3W or other board wargame off my shelf and, using this program, put it \"on disk\" for casy electronic transfer of my moves and combat. It takes some time to create the maps and counters (they are graphically represented, not just lists of hex numbers and unit IDs), but it is a product I've longed to see. Designer Scott Hamilton said he created it for his own personal use and has now marketed it. I can't wait to spend some time with Aide de Camp. Battle of the Network Wargamers Last issue, in the preface to the Empire Deluxe tournament announcement, I hypothesized, \"Wouldn't it be great to get the Command HQ players on CompuServe to play the ones on Prodigy?\" Well, the truth is that they actually have been. This issue, I'd like to report on it. Command HQ is a rousing, real-time game designed for wargamers connected by modem. The map represents the entire globe, and units represents armies, fleets and air forces in a grand strategic scale. Each group of CHQ players had a leader emerge to parlay the ground rules for the competition. Representing CompuServe was Bob (76170,1537) while the legions from Prodigy selected «The General\" Robert E. Lee, Jr [BSWW20A) (and, yes, that's his real name). They agreed to set up four teams of five players each. Each player would play two games against each opponent from the same team, for a total of ten games per player with each player initiating one phone call against each opponent (to keep the phone bills reasonable). They agreed that all games would be the \"????\" scenario, where each player begins with a capital on a world where the cities and resources have been placed randomly. Due to the possibility of beginning with an obviously unbalanced start, \"restart\" rules were created, agreed upon and enforced to assure fairness for individual games played. Interestingly, both network teams had their own ideas about what the restart rules should be, so each devised their own set and whoever was the caller determined which set of rules would be used for that match. The Call of Destiny Both networks generated a lot of messages about this tournament. Mostly it was the players recalling their tales of games won and lost. Some of the stories were very amusing (so much so that many bystanders would stop in to read them on-line). The Prodigy Players got off to an early lead over the CompuServe Comm-rades, but shortly after the halfway mark, CompuServe had pulled up very close in the win/loss column. This inspired Prodigy leader R.E. Lee to post the following address to his troops: \"Team Prodigy, Fhall in! AttecehhhnnnSHUN! Har Ease. \"Men, I don't need to tell you the importance of our mission. The very fate of the free world lies on our shoulders, not to mention the braggin rights for all the CHQ players on our Prodigy ladder, which you represent. «We have been chosen to perform a sacred duty for God, country and the Prodigy Information Service and in this effort we must not fail! I know it's rough out there on Page 94 Computer Gaming World "


"elegaining CHQ Tourney Update Feb 28 CompuServe/Prodigy CHQ Tournament Team A Results Devon Ralph Robert Leo Lee Robert Moore D. PA1 PA2 PA3 PA4 PA5 Tot 1-1 1-1 CA1 CA2 CA3 1-1 Bob P Dave Browne Joe Bolnick MAK Paul McClellan 1-1 1-1 2-0 1-1 2-0 2-0 2-0 7-3 2-0 5-5 0-2 4-6 1-1 7-3 2-0 5-3 TOT= 30-20 0-2 0-2 1-1 0-2 CA4 2-0 2-0 2-0 CA5 1-1 Team B Results Larry L. Mark Davis Jeff Miller Jason D. Kevin A. PB1 PB2PB3 PB4 PB5 Tot 1-1 2-0 1-1 2-0 Chris Hartman Kevin Holcomb Peter Harty Skulker Steve Kershaw CB1 CB2 CB3 CB4 CB5 0-2 1-1 1-1 0-2 2-0 2-0 2-0 2-0 1-1 1-1 7-3 0-2 4-6 2-0 9-1 2-0 0-2 4-6 20 9 -1 TOT= 33-17 2-0 2-0 2-0 Team C Results the CHQ battlefield, but no matter how rough it gets, we must persevere. Did we give up when the Germans bombed Pearl Harbor? (Germans? Well, he's on a roll. -Ed No! Did Norman Schwartskopf give up before capturing Saddam Hussein? Well, that's a bad example... \"The point is we cannot afford to fail. They are depending on us back home! We are CHQ soldiers, not heroes. A hero is someone who dies in cyberspace defending their information service. Our job is to make 'heroes out of the enemy. The only thing we have to fear is fear itself -and a quick Cap Kill. \"You know the rules of engagement. Take no prisoners! You know how the dock scan technique works use it! You know how to outflank your enemy do it! You know the importance of defending your capritol from a surprise attack — defend it! You know the average airspeed of an unladened swallow in the scenario... African or European? -Ed. \"We are at a critical juncture. The battle is halfway over and there is still no clear victor in sight. We cannot lose sight of our goal. Of the 200 games to be played on the CHQ battlefield, we must claim victory in 101 of them or die trying. Now, go forth, secure in the knowledge that truth, liberty and flat monthly rates are on your side. We shall not ler their hourly usage charges bankrupt our society. We must defend our honor against the Evil Compunist Empire. God is on our side. (I know. She told me.) \"That is all. Team Prodigy, AtteehhnnnSHUN! Dhis-missed!\" C'mon folks, where else in wargaming can you read such wonderful stuff? Another Prodigy player, D. Dawson (PMRR89A] wrote that he discovered a new disease: CHQitis. He listed symptoms as including a reduced ability to type due to hasty messaging back and forth during a real time game (sighting a sample sentence as «Nivce glame, yu relly suurpised m wit tat clap atach!!!\"), strained relations with members of the opposite sex, dreams involving little blue and red squares, and the use of the phrase \"warmongering enemy\" in everyday conversation. There Were Only Winners This was one of those cross-cyberspace rivalries where every player was certainly a winner. We all know that there is a kindred spirt among fellow wargamers, and in this tournament it lived and laughed aloud. Unfortunately, when I had to write this article, two games remained unfinished (and the suspense is excruciating!). The score stood ar Prodigy 100, CompuServe 98. However, CompuServe had more winning \"reams\" than Prodigy did, so as far as this observer is concerned, both networks can claim a legitimare victory. Let me end this month's column with a roster of the matches. Perhaps next time, you'll be on-line and enjoying this kind of wargaming camaraderie. CGW Mark Dave W. Barry Stuart Tim M. Tim K. C PC1 PC2 PC3 PC4 PC5 Tot 1-1 0-2 0-2 0-2 William Louis Bob Brennan Dave Willis Leonard Coyle Marc Dultz CC1 CC2 CC3 CC4 CC5 0-2 2-0 0-2 0-2 2-0 2-0 2-0 1-1 2-0 2-0 2-0 0-2 1-1 2-0 5-5 6-4 1-7 0-2 11 5-5 1-1 2-0 2-0 TOT= 26-22 Team D Results Doug Tim D. Jon H. Joe Seidel Joel Stanford PD1 PD3 PD4 PD5 Tot CD1 Daniel Black Emil Polito Marshall Lott Mike Elliott Rob MacArthur CD2 CD3 CD4 CD5 2-0 0-2 0-2 0-2 0-2 PD2 2-0 0-2 0-2 0-2 1-1 2-0 0-2 0-2 0-2 0-2 0-2 0-2 0-2 0-2 0-2 2-0 8-2 0-2 0-10 0-2 0-10 0-2 0-10 0-2 TOT= 9-41 1-9 Tournament Summary: CIS-Prodigy Team results (head-to-head) Team A Team B Team C Team D 30-20 CServe Team A declared victorious over Prodigy Team A 33-17 CServe Team B declared victorious over Prodigy Team B 26-22 CServe Team C declared victorious over Prodigy Team C 9-41 Prodigy Team D declared victorious over CServe Team D Total 98-100 May 1993 Page 95 "


"eleganning A Missive from the Army the continuing Evolution of genie's A Hundred Years Warl. by David M. Wilson fthe reaction to Computer Gaming World's joy out of the game for those whose main alds, but especially commend Barbara Byro preview of GEnie's Hundred Years War is purpose for playing the game is leading armies and Bob Kasten for their good work Lany indication, lots of people are fascinated in military encounters. by the intrigue, politics, warfare and social One problem that continues to plague Also in our preview, Johnny Wilson sugHYW is that of players abusing dual accounts. climbing available in this on-line gaming exgested that the French should elect their king Many players have access to more than one perience. Beta testing is now complete and the from the more experienced players. A King GEnie account and can register to play as Hundred Years War (HYW) is now on in and a Crown Prince are elected for each side many characters as they have accounts. While earnest. Here is the latest on this feudalistic at the beginning of each game. If the king this is a minor problem, when an abuse occurs virtual society passes away, the Crown Prince becomes king it generally angers many. A player who angers HYW offers one a chance to assume the The Crown Prince and King spend the reanother player may have to deal with this character of a French, English or \"other\" (anymainder of the game swapping positions cach player in as many as three personas (yes this thing besides French or English) noble and time the king dies. In this manner, more than really happens). A player who has two posiparticipate in such \"noble endeavors as diploone player actually gets to play the part of the macy, social climbing, economic manageking (and hence, to share the burden of extra favorite persona, without regard for borders. ment and warfare as conducted under the decision-making). In some cases, the player with double accounts ever-binding rules of chivalry. Another new feature is jousting. The joustwill have a player who is privy to both the A relatively new feature allows for a player ing routine is similar to the dueling routines, English Private Court and the French Private character to switch (one time only) berween with a few simple commands that allow the Court, eliminating the possibility of having husband and wife. Thus, if a husband is killed, player to spur and rein his charger, adjust his military secrets and reducing the level of susa wife may remarry and switch to the husband. shield, and aim his lance. Each successive win pended disbelief. The disadvantage of being a woman is that a aids the player by raising his tournament rarThe HYW staff wants the players to police woman is not permitted to command an ing. I was unable to really get the hang of the game. If they don't like what another army. Not to worry, even if one chooses to jousting. While it is a near feature and broadplay a female character, an NPC under her ens the appeal of the game somewhat, its main player is doing, they are expected to team up and exact justice in 14th century style. While control may be appointed as commander of attraction is that it provides, like the interactheir stand is understandable in some ways, a her army, eliminating any real disadvantage ortive court, another place to hang out and act like a 14th century knight. simple statement from the HYW staff that inconvenience to the player, such behavior is not exactly chivalrous would The HYW staff obviously paid attention to Brawling in the Interactive Court (IC), by stop most players having double accounts the earlier article, since they have changed the way, can get really wild. Players can throw from abusing them. some aspects of the game in keeping with our chairs at one another, bash each other with Also in our preview (#100), Ken St. Andre suggestions. The economic structure of the pewter mugs, knee each other in the groin, or made a point about how much time the game game was changed, and free flow of cash was simply punch each other out. Brawling is limited by doubling all army costs. By dou statistically-based, but getting whipped in a takes to play. Though there is some dispute bling the amount of army costs, the designers brawl doesn't affect the player's health outside about this, I think it is fair to suggest that the have effectively brought a slower pace to the the IC. The Interactive Court provides a place average player will have to play about 30 game. Now, one must conserve resources for for the players to brawl or just sit and talk minutes to an hour per day to keep up with the game. So, the HYWstaff has responded by a reasonable amount of time in order to build about anything under the sun. up enough to recruit an army. While the HYW provides heralds, who are usually on opening a \"slow\" game for players who only change serves the positive function of keeping duty each night to assist the player. The Herwant to play a couple of times per week. players from being overrun in a single season, alds will explain menus and options, suggest In summary, a word of warning is required. it also forces a lot of nobles relegated to relaStrategy, assist the king in communicating Players who like to remain aloof from their tively minor positions to either become lack with his loyal (or disloyal) followers or maybe games may want to stay away from HYW, cys to wealthier nobles or to drop out. While just listen to a player vent-off anger about since those who are involved often become so the change has helped bring a historicity to the what another player has done to him. I have immersed in the game that they frequently game, it has also effectively taken some of the had extensive interviews with all of the herhave to be reminded, \"It's only a game!\" CGW Page 96 Computer Gaming World "


"We've just extended your flight plan. ELECTRON Spectrum HoloByte PAKISTAN TINDIA JAPAN Spektrum labe KOREA INCLUDES 2 PLAY Now Falcon 3.0 takes you places you've never flown before. Operation: Fighting Tiger takes you on action-packed missions in three new Asian campaigns. Fly your F-16 to Korea, to the Pakistan/India border, to Japan and the disputed Kurile Islands, where you can also fly FALCON FALCON30 OPERATION FIGITTINGGIR the advanced FSX. The incredible scope of Falcon 3.0 delivers everything from Instant Action arcade excitement to plotting your own Red Flag training missions to engaging in a dramatically different campaign every time you play. The flight models and terrain are real. The radar and weapons are real. The enemies, missions and campaigns nothing less than spinetingling. Joining forces with the most sophisticated flight simulation of all time, Operation: Fighting Tiger broadens your horizons as never before. And makes the wild blue yonder a whole lot wilder. Spectrum HoloByte PM Spectrum Sxxfreunde Operation: Fighting Tiger requires Falcon 3.0 For Visa/MasterCard orders call 24 hours a day, 7 days a week: 1-800-695-GAME (Orders Only). For technical questions and availability call: 1-510-522-1164 (M-F: 9am-5pm PST) Spectrum HoloByte, Inc. 2490 Mariner Square Loop, Alameda, CA 94501 Operation: Fighting Tiger and Falcon 30 are trademarks and Falcon and Spectrum HoloByte are registered trademarks of Spectrum HoloByte, Inc. Circle Reader Service #106 "


"a   al Arena for Aerial Gladiators 2936 SVGA Air Warrior 11* 111.936 1.936 . Photo courtesy of McDonnell Douglas by Doug Fick Typically, each theatre of play (European or Pacific) rorates every third week. Within each three week block there are jer nights for the Korean war fans and WWI nights for the von Richthofens. When the player joins the AW arena for the first time, any one of the three countries can be selected. These are generically labeled as A, B, and C, and form a # # # That happens when a simulation learning tool to discover the ins and outs of combines the most accurate aircraft cach aircraft and develop some basic tactics to performance models ever seen with be tried on-line. The best part about single real, human aviation nuts from around the user mode is the ability to play in real time and country? The result is the most intense and toggle on additional realism modes not availrealistic flight simulation yet designed for netable to the on-line version. work play. Due to the huge amount of data being Air Warrior (AW) is the GEnie network's processed on-line, the game plays at half speed aviation program that covers air combat from and such nuances as buffering and spins aren't World War I through Korea. The program is taken into account. Half speed may sound like an on-line game that allows people from all moving through Jell-o, but isn't really that over the country to plug into the GEnie netnoticeable once involved in a huge furball. In work and fly for any one of three nations. The fact, at first I had a hard time seeing any environment is big. On a typical evening, 30 difference in game play berween the on-line or more aircraft might be involved in the version and the stand alone game. The benefit on-going dogfights. to running at this speed is very smooth game While the boxed program sold by Konami play. There is some jittering (warping) when allows single-user play against the computer, near other aircraft because the network is trythe real thrust of the game is to get people into ing to calculate exact positions for two or more the multi-player Air Warrior arena. In single planes in close proximity, but it's not too bad. user mode, any of the aircraft can be selected The program has aircraft that run the gamut and up to four other computer controlled from fabric-covered Spads to jet-propelled Sapilots take part. The computer-controlled airbres, but the real emphasis is on World War craft can be either allied with, or opposed to 11 fighters. World War II aircraft included are the gamer. Single-user play provides a good the Spitfire Mk IX, A6M5a Zero, A-26 InKESHAI AIR WARRIOR vader, P-51D Mustang, P-38J Lightning, FW-190A, KI-84 Frank, Bf 109 and F4U-1 Corsair. From the Korean conflict, the MiG15 and F-86 Sabre jet are included. Every detail of aircraft performance is perfectly nailed. Each aircraft's strengths and weakness are faithfully reproduced to the nth degree. In on sa fact, while I was on the network, the P-38 had been temporarily removed from the game in order to tweak the climb performance model. Such attention to detail shows a serious ongoth ing commitment from the game's designers and bodes well for GEnie members. # # Here # KOLARIZIKISMAI TITLE: SVGA Air Warrior SYSTEM: IBM with 640K, SVGA and modem PRICE: $59.95 PROTECTION: None DESIGNERS: kesmai Corporation DISTRIBUTOR: Konami Corporation Wood Grove, IL ON-LINE SERVICE: Genie Rockville, MD Gran PE ORI Page 98 Computer Gaming World "


"SOUND GALAXY IT WAS AS IF YOU WERE IN THERE! Forget about a primitive game session where gunning down a jet fighter or running away from a fire breathing dragon creates a dumb effect. And you reacted because you see it coming. If not, it's a game over for you. EASE OF INSTALLATION All configuration settings are via software without the hassle of setting jumpers. CD-QUALITY SOUND Sound Galaxy NX PRO Extra change all that See and Do by giving you a whole new generation of sound technology that promises you superb CD-quality sound that match the best amplifiers and full stereo capability. SUPPORT MORE SOUND STANDARDS Let yourself go ga-ga over the full sound support for AdLib, Sound Blaster Pro, Covox Speech Thing and Disney Sound Source. And you find yourself hacking away the jungle of games and entertainment software available under both DOS and Windows environment. VALUE FOR MONEY Topping it all are the bundled software such as Monologue for Windows, Voyetra Audio Station & WINDATIM OLE, just to name a few, so that you can edit audio, animate and create stunning graphics on screen. And not forgetting the free speakers that allow you to blast yourself to glory as you see your scores chalking up. So step into the world of imagination with Sound Galaxy NX PRO Extra. MORE CD-ROM INTERFACE Besides the built in AT-BUS CD-ROM interface support for Mitsumi and Panasonic drives, the NX PRO Extra can also support the Sony AT-BUS CD-ROM drive simply by plugging the SG adaptor to the Mitsumi interface. It can be further upgraded to more powerful SCSI CD-ROM drives. See Us At I WINDOWS WORLD'93 The Official Conterence and Exposition for Windows Computing May 24-27, 1993 Georgia World Congress Center Atlanta, Georgia USA Hall F Booth no. M6314 Call us : 1-800-886 8859 Circle Reader Service #43 A V S GROUP 8.4 Office: AZTECH LABS, INC. 46707 Fremont Boulevard Fremont, CA 94538. U.S.A. Tel: (510) 623-8988 Fax : (510) 623-8989 Head One AZTECH SYSTEMS PTE LTD 31 Ubi Road 1. AVS Building, Singapore 1440. Tel : (65) 741 7211 Fax (65) 741 8678/9 Tix : RS36560 AZTECH All trade names & marks are registered trademarks of respective company. Specifications subject to change without prior notice. "


"Teleganning Photo courtesy of McDonnell Douglas one's own country. Sometimes the battle might be miles away and trying to claw for altitude while covering territory at only 75 knots (150 knots typical climb speed divided by two for the network half speed) can eat up a lot of time. In addition, to receive full credit for any kills scored, the player has to fly all the way home and land. In fact, the program won't let the player exit unless they land or bail out/get shot down. At times, I found myself hanging around the fight long after fuel and ammo dictated a withdrawal, just to avoid the long flight home. Ar 10 cents a minute, all this droning can add up. I would have liked to occasionally see the option of airborne start points. Something like five thousand feet of altitude within friendly airspace and not so close to enemy aircraft that it would provide an unfair advantage would be nice. Also, if I decide to egress the fight and get well clear of any enemy triangle with common edges. Once a nation there be cliques or a holier than thou attitude aircraft, let me exit with full credit. This is selected, any one of the aircraft available in among the seasoned players? The answer is would make the game much more combatthat theatre can be picked. This makes for «No!\" From the first moment on, I felt right some interesting gaggles as traditional allies at home and welcome among the group. Peosquare off against one another. Normally, two ple went out of their way to help me and other thirds of the combatants in Europe are Spitnewcomers learn the nuances of the program. fires, as they are excellent all-around performThere is even an Air Warrior Training Acadcrs which most players prefer over all others. emy to help neophyte pilots get their feet wet. My personal favorite was the trusty Mustang. This sense of camaraderie impressed me more I had to pick my fights with care, though, as than anything else in th the agile Spit could rip me up in a turning While the rose smells sweet, there are a few fight (learned through painful first-hand ex thorns. The game is not cheap to play. The perience), but given some altitude and four or basic GEnie subscription is $4.95 a month five fast passes busting through the fight at and the AWaccess cost is $6.00 per hour. That high speed brought death and destruction to can add up in a hurry if one isn't careful about the scurvy dogs of B and C nations (tee hee). watching the clock. oriented and reduce droning considerably. As anyone can tell from my sudden burst of I'm not saying Kesmai should totally replace enthusiasm, this program emphasizes proper the airfield starts, just have an occasional employment of aircraft type. The flight modquick combat night. eling is so well done, and the human adversaries so much better than any computer could Amazingly, with just a little work, the single-user version of the game would blow away hope to be, that it forces the player to wisely any of the competition (hint, hint). Upgrade choose and use whatever aircraft they select, the graphics, write a dozen or so types of or they are likely to die repeatedly until the missions, give it a career flavor and it would correct tactics are learned. find space on my hard drive in an instant. When I first jumped into the AW community, I was a little apprehensive. I wondered For the record, though, the multi-player game is great and highly recommended for how new players would be received. Would any serious aviation enthusiasts. The combination of tough adversaries and realistic perCOMPUTER WARGAMES Graphically, the Super VGA graphic rendi formance makes Air Warrior a winner. CGW Historically Accurate...Easy To Use tion of the cockpit and instruments is very For IBMT PC and Compatibles well done, but views outside the players aircraft are fairly spartan. To run the network at BIG THREE la GRANDE a smooth speed, other aircraft and land detail (V 2.01) ARMEE is skimpy. Aircraft appear as tiny dors until WWII Strategy Game Napoleon's Campaigns very close, then expand into small grey polySeven Scenarios, Map Seven Scenarios, Map World-Renown New Release gon renditions of the plane. Even at very close Hard Drive Required Challenging Intense range the aircraft are shown an eighth the size 00 European Theatre Austerlitz to Waterloo an actual aircraft at that distance would appear $25 Each. Send check or money order to: to be. It felt like shooting a BB gun at ants SDJ Enterprises, Inc. crawling up a wall from across the room. Department C (314) 966-5602 1551 Fawn Valley Dr. One other item that annoyed me was that Evenings Only St. Louis, MO 63131 every sortie starts from the ground within Specify 3.5\" or 5.25\" disk 002 Circle Reader Service #87 Page 100 Computer Gaming World "


"CGW 4-93 Top Ti Titles at the Lowest Prices Since 1982 omnut Ability 800-554-9925 FAX: (414) 357-7814 TECH INFO: (414) 357-8181 HRS (CST): M-F 8am-8pm, Sat 11am-5pm P.O. Box 17882, Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53217 Call Us On Our US/Canadian Toll Free Number! Consumer Electronics IBM f SOUND CARDS CREATIVE SOUND BLASTER 16 CALL! CREATIVELADS. INC.  16-Bit Stereo Sampling & Playback for Voice Channel  Enhanced 4-Operator, 20-Voice Stereo FM Music Synthesizer . MIDI & CD-ROM Interfaces  Windows 3.1, SB & SB Pro Compatible TA Break Pool 29.95 Tales of Magic Proph Shadow Task Force 1942 39.95 Tegels Mercenares 3795 Terminator 2029 39.93 Tetris Classic/Windows 29.95 The Prophecy 24.95 Theatre of War 17.95 Tom Landry Football 29.95 Tony Latussa Baseballll... 36.95 Traders 2996 Treasures of the Savage Frontier ... 31.95 Tristan 29.95 49.95 Torge of Virtute Data Disk 20.95 Ultima VII Pail 2 4795 Ultima interworld Il 49.95 Ultimate Cards 24.95 Urahats 37.95 Uncharted Waters Uninvited for Windows 31.95 Unlimited Adventures 37.95 VAVCory Market 42.95 V for Victory, Utah Beach $2.95 V for Victory i Velike Lu Veil of Darkness 37.95 Wayne Gretzke 3 3495 Wailord 29.95 Warriors of Legend Wax Works 3.1.95 Ween: The Prophecy 395 Where. Carmen San Diego. Each ......... 29.95 Where Carmen Past 2995 Where. Carmen USA Deluxe...... ......44.95 Where. Carmen World Deluxe 44.45 White Deth 29.95 Wing Commander II 4995 Speech Accessory Pack 15.95 Special Operations 1 or 2 2095 Wing Commander Deluxe ... 4995 Wiadry. Crusaders Dark Savant 39.95 World Science Arcade 3495 World Tennis 31.95 World Tour Tennis 31.95 World Circat Grand Prue 34.95 Yeager SA Comba! 2090 XWing 39.95 MEDIA M VISION OPC PRO AUDIO Multimedia IC $185 . 16 Bit / MIDI Interface True 16 Bit Stereo Sound  Advanced 20 Voice Stereo Synthesizer Joystick, Amplifier, Software Call for List! Dune 29 95 all-Jaws of Cerberus 39.95 Eye of the Beholder till 37.95 Eye of the Storm 29.95 F-18 29.95 Fables & Fiends Legend of Kyranda 3: 95 Fighter Pro 34.95 Final Conflict 3305 Gateway to the Savage Frontier 31.05 Great Naval Battles 42.95 Harpoon 37.95 Battleset 44 2505 Hapon Designers Series Battleset .31.95 Harpoon Signature Edition Heimdall 24.95 Indy Jones 4 Fale of Atlantis International Sports Challenge.... 30.95 Jack Nicklaus Unlimited 3495 Legend of Kyrandia 3: 95 Lemmings 1 0:2 28.95/3495 Light Ouest 31.95 29.95 Firestone Bountiful Course Disks Lord of the Rings 2 or 3 345 Lords of Time 2995 Lost Treasures of Infocom Madden Footbal 31 95 Mega Fortress 37.95 Mission Disk 1 of 2 Mercenaries 37.95 Megaraveller 2 34.95 Mg-29.... Wahl & Manic lll... 3195 Napoleon 1........ 29 95 Navy Seals 25.95 No Greater Glory 39.95 Oh No! More Lemmings stand alone 29.95 Oh No! More Lemm, add on... 21.95 Out of this world 4595 PGA Tour Gold 31.95 Golf Tournament Course disk 17.95 Perfect General... 34.95 WWII Scenano Disk 19.95 Pinball Dreams 24.95 Pinball Fantasy 2495 Pit-Fighter 21.95 Pian 9 from Space 2995 Pools of Darkness 37.95 Populous 11 3735 The Challenge scenario disk 20.95 Powermonger 31 95 Prehistoric... 29.95 Prophecy of the Shadow ........ 37.95 Red Zone 29.95 Rood Rasti. 31.95 Secret of Monkey Island I or il 3495 Shadow of the Beast Il or lll Shadowlands 29.95 Shandon Bridge 2995 Shuttle 2995 San Ant 3495 Sim City 2995 Sim Earth 29.95 Solitaires Journey 3495 Space Hulk 31.95 Sta: Controlli 3: 95 Star Trek 25th Anniversary 3495 Strip Poker 3 29.95 Tales of Magic Prophecy Shadow 37.95 Terra Envoy 2896 The Challenge. 2095 The Light Cortidor 2995 Tom Landry Football Twighlight 2000 Nimi IV or V.............. 37.95 Utopia Viking Field of Conquest....... ... Warriors of Legends 19.95 Where in the..Carmen sacht.......... 29.95 World Circuit 34 95 34.95 AMIGA 2005 MODEMS Inspector Gadget 3495 International Sports Challenge 2995 Island of Dr. Brain 29 95 J. Nicklaus Sign Golf 39.95 J. Nickbus Sign Tour 2 1795 Jet Fighter Adventuell 39.95 John Madden Footh12 31.95 Jump Jet 39.95 Jump Jet Ace Pack KGB King's Quest 5 Enhanced 39 95 Kings Quest 6... 44.95 La Russa Baseballll... Laser Squad 24.95 Legacy, The 39.95 Legacy Realm of Terror Legends of Valour 3795 Leisure Suit Larry 39.95 Lemmings Oh No! More Legs (add-am 21.95 Lemmings!! 3495 Liberty of Death Line in the Sand Links 386 Pro.... 19.95 Lord of the Rings It Two Towers 34.95 Lost Fles of Sherlock Holmes 42.96 Lost Treasures of Intocom 39.95 Lost Vikings Lun Command... Lure of the Temptress 2995 Magic Candelt 2005 Magic Candle III 37.95 Mantis / Speech Pack 3995/1995 Math Rabbit Enhanced 2995 Mario Missing 3495 Mega Lo Mania 29.95 Mecatories CALL Megatraveler llor lll 3495/39 95 Michael Jordan in Fight 37.95 Microleague Football Il 32.95 Might & Magic 11 34.95 Monopoly Deluxe for Win 34.95 Moraits Magical Music Machine 2095 MS Golf for Windows 42.95 Multimedia Music Vivaldi 35 Mystery at the Museum 34.95 TH SE1-19 2995 NFL Pro League Football 44.95 NFL Video Pro Football 44.95 No Greater Glory 30.95 Nursery Rhymes wcassette Omar Sharif on Bridge Windows 29.05/29.95 Origin TX: Screen Savet 2545 Out of this world... 34.95 PGA Tour Golf for Windows 20.95 Course Disk for Windows 17.95 Pacific Theater of Operations 39.95 Pacific War 14.95 Paladin ? 34.95 Patriot 12.95 Pathway to Power 29.95 Peppers Adventure in Time 29.95 Perfect General Pinball for Windows 2995 Pirates of Gold Edito 39.95 Pirals of God 2005 Populous Il 37 95 Power Politics 29.95 Powermonger WWI.. . 2095 PrintShop Deluxe 14.95 Graphics Libraries Business 29.95 Graphic late Sample 29.05 Privateer.. . 47.95 Pro League Baseball 34.95 Quarky Turbo Science 29.95 Oct for Glory 3 39.95 Ratinthe Pacific 2495 Rags to Riches 3495 17.95 Raimo! Arkana 34.95 Rex Rebula: 39 95 Ring World 3495 Ring World. Patriarch's Revenge pretium 34 95 Risky Woods 2395 Road & Track Grand Prix Unlimit 3495 Robocop 3-0 3195 RoboSport.. . 24.95 Rock and Bach Studio 3895 RomeSir Farm 34.95 Rules of Engagement 20.95 SCOUT 34.95 Seal Team 37.95 Secret Weapons/Luftwaffe 39.95 Expansion Disk 1.2.3 or 4 1995 Shadow President 39.95 Shadowgate for Windows 3195 Shadowlands 29.95 Shant on Bridge for DOS Windows 2995 Sid Meier's Bundle 29.95 Siege Expansion Dak 20 95,20 95 Sim Art DOS/Windows 34 95/34 95 Sim City DOS/Windows 29 95/34.95 Sim Earth / Windows 2995 29.95 Sim Farm 3495 Sim Lite 3995 Solitaires Journey 34 95 Sound Graphics, Aircraft 24.95 Space Hulk 37.95 Space Inc. 3495 Space QuN5 39 95 Spaceward HO! 34.95 Soccial Forces 29.95 Spectre Supreme 39.95 Spell Craft ... 34.95 Spellcasting 301 Spelljammer Pirates of Realice 3795 Star Control !! Star Legion 37.95 Star Trek The 25th Anniversary Star Trek Screen Savers for Win 32.95 Strice Commer 4795 Strip Poket datasks 29.95/15.95 Stunts and 34.95 Summer Challenge 3495 Summoning 37.95 ZOOM A Line in the Sand 24.95 Aces of the Pacific 39.95 WWII 1946 add on disk... 19.95 Aces Over Europe 4495 AD&D Collector's Edition il 420 AD&D Dark S Shared lands 47.95 AD&D Starter Kit. ADI&D Unlimited Aventures....... 31.95 ADIBOVADIJUNIOR VOL 1 34.95 Adventures of Pinocchio 45 95 Air Bucks 34.95 Air Support 29.05 Air Traffic Controller 34.95 Air Warrior Aircraft & Adventure Factory 24 95 Rescue Air 911. Fight 685 of 701.c3 17.95 Alone in the Dark Amon 39.95 Ambush 37.95 Ancient Art of War in the Skies 34.95 Armored Fist 37.95 Assets of Valor 59.95 ATAC 3495 ATP Tennis 31 95 B-17 Flying Fortress............. 39.95 Bad Blood Bards Tale Ill... 31.95 Batman Returns Battles of Destiny BattleChess 4000/Super VGA 295/3495 Battlefield 2000 Beat the House 2995 Betrayal at Kronder 39 95 Big Leagueba park diskhathall II 1796 Birds of Prey 3195 Black Crypt 3195 Bodyustrated 44.95 Butz Aldria's Race into Space Campaign 34.95 Car & Driver 3795 Carl Lewis Challenge 29.95 Carrer Strike South Pacific 39.95 Expansion Ser 20 95 Carriers of War Castles Toril 24.95 3195 Ceaser Challenge of the Five Reilins.............. Champions ...... Civization 4495 Classic Adventures 34.95 Clouds of Xcen 39.95' Cobra Mission.. 44.95 Comanche: Maxinuin Overall 42.95 Mission Disk 1 or 12 25.95/25.95 Canted Kingdom 3495 Conquest of Japan Contraction Zack 2495 Creepers 29.95 Crusaders of the Dark Savant 41.95 Curse of Amon Ra 3995 Cyber Empires 31 95 Daemonsgate VGA 34.95 Dagger of Amanta 39 95 Dark Queen of Kym... 31.95 Darklands 39.95 Darklands APE Dark Hall 3495 Dark Sun. 47.95 Davohter ol Serpentis Deja Vu lor ll. Winiews 31.95 Dinasaut Adventure 2995 Discovery Columbus 34.95 Dominant Species 2995 Dragons Lair 3. 34.95 Dragonlance Collector's Edition 4295 Dune Il 3495 Eagle's lider 29.95 Eagle Eye Mysteries 31.95 Ecoquest 11 2396 Eight Bait Deluxe 39.95 El-Fit Electronic Aquarium 23495 Era il 39.95 Empire Deluxe 34.95 Eric the Unteady 3495 Exodus 24.95 Eye of the Beholder 2 of 3. 37.95/37 95 F-15 #2 Classic premium F-15 Strike Eagle Il or lll...........3495/49.95 F-15 Strike Eagle Ill Limted Edition.. .52.95 Fables & Fiends: Legend of Kyrandia.... Falcon 3.0 ... 44.95 Disk 1 Operation Fighting Tiger... 24.95 Family Entertainment Pack..... 2995 Firal Condict 29.95 Flight Assignment All Force 39.95 Flight Simulator 4,0.... 39.95 Pilots Power Tools 2495 Four Crystals of Trazete 29.95 Frederick Pohrs Gateway 3495 Freddy Prakas 39 95 Front Pace Foot 39.95 FX Screen Saver 25.95 Cambit 37 05 Gary Grisby's Pacific War 44.95 Gemate 29.95 Global Effect 17.95 Grand Slam Bridge il 31.95 Great Plaval Battles 42.95 Scenano Buldeexpans. disks a 25.95/20.95 Hard Ball Il or lll ....... 29.95/34.95 Player Data Disk for HB III 17.95 Harpoon .. CALL Harpoon Designers Series 17.95 Harpoon Signature Edition 47.95 Marrier issult 34 95 Heaven & Earth 2995 Heroes of the 357th... 17.95 Hoytes 1 Casti 29.95 Humans 24.95 INCA Increditie Machine 29.95 Indy Jones & Fale of Atlantis 29.95 31.95 31 95 39.95 3895 30.95 3695 ATrain Agony............... Air Force Commander Air Support Hards Tale Construction Birds of Prey Back Crypt Buzz Aldrins Race Into Space Campaign Carmen San Diego Each Carmen San Diego. Amenta Castles Campons Castles Col War Conquest of Japan V.32 bis Internal/External ........................ $199/$205 V.32 bis Send/Receive 14.400 Int. V.32 bis Send/Receive 14,400 Ext. .................. S245 34.95 37.95 3495 29.95 39.95 31.95 29.95 74 95 39 95 Supra Corporation Supra Fax Modem V.32 bis, Internal with Fax Software, DOS/Windows ...... $199 / $199 SupraFaxModem V.32 bis, Ext. alone............... $279 with Fax Software, DOS/Win ............. S299 / $299 Couders of the Dark Sunt Cyber Empires Cytron Daemonsgate Dark Soed Death Knights of Krynn Delux Music Il. Deluxe Paint IV (While supplies fast) Demoniak Desert Strike Discovery Columbus Dragons Lait 3 7795 97.95 3095 31.95 34.95 3: 95 Call For More Titles! JOYSTICKSS 800-554-9925 $75 ............... ........19 Advanced Gravis: Analog Joystick S32 Eliminator Game Card ................. $30 PC MouseStick..... ................... CH Products: Virtual Pilot/Virtual Pilot Pro ................... $69 / $89 Flight Stick ................$39 Hi Speed Adaptor ............ Gamecard 3-Auto / Gamecard 3-PS/2 ....... $30 / $49 MACH 3 Joystick $29 Maximum: MAXX Flight Yoke ......... MAXX Pedal Kraft: Kraft KC3... Kraft Trackball w/Foot Controler .............. Kraft Thunderstick Thrustmaster: Flight Control ........... $75 Weapons Control $75 Thrustmater Pro  One of Wisconsin's Top 10 of Software Available. Women Owned Businesses.  All Products Sold  Corporate, Government & Carry Manufacturers' School POS Welcome Full Warranties & Documentation. VISA Cord  APO, FPO HI. AK No Surcharge Puerto Rico & Canadian on Credit Cards orders welcome: 6%.  Most Orders Shipped Min. $6. International within 48 I lours, Orders Shipped First Class  Software Shipping only Mail Insured: $5 per order, not per tille. 15%-Min. SIS. If mail cost Hardware: 5% Min. $5. exceeds calculated amount.  C.O.D orders welcome. you'll be billed additional with only a $5.00 Charge. Call for Free Catalog  We Ship Latest Version & Items Not Listed Prices fluctuate beyond our control & may change for better or worse Detective returns must have a Retum Autationumber. Call our 1-NO tobtain Retum Authorization or your retum will not be accepted. Shipping & handling are e fundable. All sales ate final. All returns are subject to a restocking fee H ............$119 Circle Reader Service #51 "


"i strategy Bandit Aspect Angle (Torget to attacker) Falcon 3.0 Getting The Enemy In Sight Via The Padlock View by Tom \"KC\" Basham Tom Basham is the co-author of Falcon 3: The Comcraft. If the box overlays the small HUD symbol, the targer is directly plete Handbook, published by The Waite Group. in front of you. If the box is at either edge of the window, the target is Cu-27s and Mig-29s devouring your F-16? MiG-19s turning directly behind you. If the box is at the upper edge of the window, you unbelievable circles around your mighty Falcon fighter? Tired of would have to look directly through the top of your canopy to see it. hearing your wingman scream, \"Atoll, Atoll!\" as your missile lock Steer your aircraft by watching the targeting box. Don't worry too warning light flashes in panic? Sick of Bitchin' Betty casually announcmuch about your flight attirude, airspeed, or altitude, as long as you ing \"Warning\" as your jet tumbles out of control? Then this article is don't stall or go below 4,000 feer AGL. Instead, focus on your target for you. Air-to-air combat in any version of Falcon 3.0 is extremely and steer your jer relative to it, not relative to the ground. Practice difficult, especially for those who are game enough to use maximum maneuvering the F-16 such that the targeting box moves to cover the difficulty settings. To survive, you must have an edge: the HUD symbol. padlock view. Now comes the third Becoming proficient with the padlock view should be phase of padlocking, your top priority. While it may be disorienting at first, it learning to use the lower, allows you the ability to maintain visual lock on the adverfull-width window. This sary while operating your flight controls, just as though you window shows you exwere swiveling your head in a real aircraft. Combat pilots actly what you see as you live by a motto: Lose sight, lose the fight! In a dogfight, the look at the target. The pilot never takes his eyes of his target until it is dead. Padlock upper middle window view allows you to do exactly this. shows you how your neck is turned, the lower fullGaining proficiency with the padlock view is a three-step width window shows you process. You must begin by learning to fly your F-16 from what you see with your within padlock. Try creating a Red Flag mission with no neck turned that way. adversary aircraft anywhere near you. Then, just fly in padlock mode, using the mini-HUD in the upper rightAlthough this is one of hand corner and the data block in the upper left-hand the most important comcorner to control your aircraft. Don't necessarily try any ponents of padlock precision, Blue Angels style maneuvers, just get the feel for basic flight. mode, it is also one of the most confusing. Often, your viewing angle Ignore the other windows in padlock and focus solely on the two in through the lower window is different than that of the normal«front the upper corners. These will tell you your bank, pitch, speed, and view,\" simulating a pilot leaning forward and looking below the altitude everything you need to keep from colliding with the aircraft. The HUD may be in the lower window, but the bandit is well ground. below your nose. This often causes disorientation among Falcon 3.0 pilots. The key is in how you use the lower window. Do not use it to Once you can reasonably control your aircraft, add another aircraft employ weapons, but solely to watch your opponent's movements. to your Red Flag mission that starts near you. I'referably, use an allied Watch how his wings bank and make a counter-maneuver before he aircraft in a separate flight, and forces you to overshoot. Watch his nose; if he's give it many waypoints so that it above you but pointed down, then shallow your will maneuver. Lock this target climb, roll inverted and dive after him as he passes in the padlock mode and begin the second step of learning padbelow you. By watching his movements in this window, you can predict where he's heading and lock: use the upper middle winmake preemptive moves to beat him there, gaining a tight position on his six o'clock! The upper middle window is a 360 degree, wrap-around view. Once you're on his six, the fight isn't over. You In the center is your HUD and, still have to \"saddle up\" or get into a position where =-11.0 on either edge rests the left and you can fire weapons with a high probability for right edges of your head rest. The success. Because of the shifting view angle through red rectangle, or targeting box, the lower full-length window, it is often difficult to shows the position of the padcmploy heat-seeking missiles or guns while in padlocked target relative to your airlock mode. In these final moments of combat, when dow. Page 102 Computer Gaming World "


"Go where no cowboy, has gone before. No two games are exactly alike.. Full network modem.compatability.. Here th lo lo SPACEWARD HOI the longuest Game other SE 11° | diel) el bolo lor. 1....bili Design your own ships, create your own galaxy, personalize your opponents. Enjoyable \"point and click\" interface makes playing a snap. Explore, colonize, and conquer in a galaxy of your own design, Up to 20 human and or computer players each game. Full Windows support with menu driven commands. Rustle up some stars and get ready for action. ww A minute to learn, an hour to kick butt. Spaceward Hol is a space strategy Tiame for the conquest of the universe. Players start\": out with a rather low level of technology and income with which to build ships, explore, and colonize planets, and eventually take over the universe, Spaceward Ho! is an adventure lasting many hours and days, and is never the same game twice. Due to the multiplayer compatability you and your frierros can go head to head, against the computer, or BOTH Steve Ilaga hes S 21AS Muscarem Round em up and head em out. It's time for a showdown /2 Culory She 1 NEW WORLD COMPUTING VALABLE AT YOUR LOCAL SOFTWARE RETAILER OR DIRECT FROM NEW WORLD AT LOUU.249.00 YO (OR 1.818.999,0607 OUTSIDE U.S. P.O.BOX4302 HOLLYWOOD CALIFORNIA 90078-4302 PUBLE 1992 NEW WORLD COMPUTING INC SPACEWARD HOT SATRADEMRK OF DELTA TAO UNDER LICENSE TO NEW WORLD COMPUTINO. NEW WORLD COMPUTING IS A REGISTERED TRADEMIOKOFIEW WORLD COMPUTING INC, IBM SCREERS SHOWS, ACTUAL SCREENS WAY VARY. Circle Reader Service #78 "


"Aito Ztrategy you are firmly planted on the bandit's six, it's time to exit padlock mode. For the final stages of combat, try using the forward-up view, accessed by pressing the \"3\" key followed by the \"Scroll Lock\" key. This will place your HUD at the lower edge of your screen and allow you to see more of the sky directly in ance front of you. By using padlock view, you should now SPEED 0491 have your bandit in view, slightly above your HUD and in the middle of your screen. Increase your turn rate, either by pulling more Gs or executing a series of Yo-yo turns, trading small units of speed for small bites of altitude, to pull your target directly into your HUD. Watch your speed closely; if you stall, the bandit will pull away and ruin your shot. If your speed goes too high, you'll overshoot and the bandit will reverse onto your tail, putting you on the defense! Once you've pulled the bandit in the HUD, it's time to fire. If the bandit is less than 1.5 miles away, firing a missile has little effect. Rarely will a missile hit at this range, although the launch of a missile may frighten your opponent into making a reckless move. Your best bet is to switch to your 20mm cannon. Use short, controlled bursts of gunfire while watching the gunsight \"funnel\" on your HUD. Maneuver so that the wing tips of your target touch both edges of any point within the funnel and open fire. If the target fills the gap between the lines at any point on the funnel, you should score a hit. Be warned, however, gunfire hits cause unpredictable damage it may take several hits to down the target, so use your ammunition sparingly. The Padlock view also works for defensive maneuvers. Using the above procedure, you can quickly locate bandits at your six o'clock position, and maneuver to force them in front of you. More importantly, perhaps, is the ability to padlock incoming missiles. Introduced in version 3.0d, the padlock view will lock onto any missiles headed your way. This is an excellent tool in evading missiles. To avoid an inbound missile, switch to padlock. Usually, padlock will immediately lock onto the nearest incoming missile, although sometimes you may have to press the \"t\" key to cycle through several targets before locating the missile. Look at the upper left hand window and identify the missile type. Knowing whether the missile is radar or infrared guided is extremely important. If the missile is radar guided, use whatever amount of throttle you need to maintain a corner velocity of 380 to 400 knots. If, however, the missile is a hear-seeker, you should reduce throttle and reduce your heat signature. Begin firing chaff or flares depending on the missile type. Since enemies may fire both missile types at you simultaneously, it is advisable to always fire chaff and Nares in unison. Now that you have the missile padlocked, turn in any direction you choose to gain a 90 degree flight path offset from the missile (i.c., your heading is 90 degrees different from that of the missile). That means, turn your F-16 until the red targeting box in the upper middle window is positioned halfway between the HUD symbol and either edge. Maintain enough turn to keep the red box in this position. Don't turn too tight or you will turn head-on into the missile. If you have an ECM pod, turn it on now, regardless of the type of the incoming missile—your enemies launch a different missile with a different guidance type while you're preoccupied with the first. At this point, the missile should appear as a white dot in the lower window. As it approaches it will get larger and begin to look like a missile. At some point you will be able to see the exhaust plume behind the missile and, shortly thereafter, the missile will impact. To evade the missile, you must execute a perfecrly-timed, high-G break in the direction of your turn, just before the missile hits. Timing of the turn is both critical and extremely difficult to judge. Just as the missile changes from a small white dot to a recognizable shape, you want to execute your break turn. Pull the stick all the way back to the limit and dump chaff and flares like there's no tomorrow (if you don't succeed, there may not be). If you're successful, the missile will buzz harmlessly past you in the lower padlock window in dramatic fashion. If you fail, Berry will quickly notify you of such! Proper timing of the break turn is much more of an art than a science, but the above guidelines in conjunction with practice should provide satisfactory results against both surface-to-air and air-to-air missiles. Through the padlock view, your improved defensive ability in conjunction with your greater offensive skills will make your F-16 the most feared weapon in the simulated sky! Cow TARGET SAUER Becoming a Fighting Falcon 3.0 On-Line by Victor «Duke\" Zaveduk One of the most popular modem games being played in Compuserve's MTM-Lobby is Falcon 3.0 from Spectrum HoloByte. Falcon puts gamers in the cockpit of an F-16 fighter jet with some of the most realistic flight modeling this side of a multi-million dollar military simulator. Modem play takes ultimate advantage of the simulation by pitting one human player against another in a classic one-on-one dogfight, The game is so popular that an ongoing competition ladder has formed. Over 70 players have signed up since the competition began last October. This means that, at any given moment, nearly 50 active players are competing in a continuing struggle to determine the top \"Ace\" among CompuServe members. While there are a couple of active or ex-military pilots competing, most of the players are armchair fighter jocks. Put them behind the controls of Falcon 3.0 and their adrenaline starts pumping, and the experience becomes as exhilirating and exhausting as \"real\" aerial combat. The MTM-Lobby often resembles a fighter jock hangout with a large number of Falcon pilors looking for \"friendly\" matches to keep their competitive edge finely honed. Anyone interested in joining the competition ladder should contact Victor \"Duke\" Zaveduk at 76711,27 in the MODEMGAMES Forum or just drop by the MTMLobby for a little \"friendly\" competition. Just make sure to have that helmet strapped on and that parachute packed. CGW Page 104 Computer Gaming World "


"\"...no other game, no matter how graphically advanced, captures the true essence of roleplaying like this one.\" (Compter Game Review, Oct. 1992) \"...a remarkably rich playground for modem-owning role-players.\" (Compter Gaming World, Aug. 1992) Do you own a modem? Then live out your favorite roleplaying fantasies in the finest multiplayer interactive fiction game ever Legends of future NICOLE LEE92 past Every day, the intrepid, the romantic, the imaginative and the adventurous meet as player characters in the Shattered Realms, a virtual fantasy world created from shared imagination on the Digital Dreams Network Explore the dark reaches beneath the Teeth of Shartais or enjoy a casual stroll with friends through the a enchanted Grymwood Forest. Become a champion of justice, or a force for darkness. Delve into political intrigue or play the lone wolf on a personal quest, Share adventures and make friends with people calling from across the country. Skilled authors create special quests nightly that allow you to become part of an ongoing plot within a never ending tale. Call 800-937-7644 to join the adventure (1200/2400 bps, 8N1, full duplex) or 800-274-2814 for more information ivoice As low as $3.00 per hour all day every day Visa MasterCard  American Express Circle Reader Service #65 Legends of Future Past\" is available only on the Digital Dreams Network, a service of Inner Circle Technologies, Inc. Other features include forums containing thousands of files and featuring discussions on a wide range of topics from science fiction to PC computing. Other entertainment products, teleconferencing, nationwide matchmaking and news serviceas are also available. "


":Strategy A For Want Of A Hint A Kingdom Was Lost is Strategy Tips For QQP's Conquered Kingdoms by Randall Black T Tith a rich armory full of pieces and a vast playing area, Conquered Kingdoms (CK) from QQP has the feel of chess on steroids. Only by careful placement and a mastery of the strengths and weaknesses of the 16 kinds of units can the player consistently beat CK s strong artificial intelligence (AI). Winning the objectives 15 squares away. Beware: a wizard-borne army can be quickly decimated if it rematerializes in the midst of enemy forces. Clusters Bomb! (Avoiding Diminishing Returns) \"The early battles, usually taking place among clustered forces, are the most treacherous. The Al excels at maximizing damage in a cluster fuss, and a review of the casualty report often reveals huge losses during these early battles among bunched forces. Preserving one's units can hinge on the ability to avoid large, uncontrolled battles. Remember the strategy made famous by brave Sir Robin and his fellow HolyGrailsmen: run awaaay! When forces are bunched up, a single fireball can ruin your whole day. Goad fully loaded wizards into fireballing early by baiting them with a couple of units before approaching with larger numbers. Although touted for their ability to kill kings, a pair of spies are another creat way to take out a 9x wizard. Dragons, too, punish clustered forces by hitting both units in a square. Spread our units to a square when these fearsome beasts are present. Knight HG 22 tot C5 Itt Arcler ESC3 5 10 Catapult 1 2 tai KUGLA Garsolue Truth tantly, not losing — the campaign game penalizes each loss so that success breeds success as bonus pieces and gold pile up for use on the next map. The far flung scale of the playing surface rewards speedy acquisition of key objectives (castles, resources and cities, and transforms the first few turns into a foot race for the goods. The choice of starting cities is crucial to victory. However tempting it may be to occupy cities based on victory points alone, prudence demands starting at some low point cities for their strategic positions. Occupation of castles should be top priority, and the winning player sets up fast units such as cavalry to move in as soon as possible. Once occupied, castles are vastly more difficult to take. With even a single ore difficult to take. With even a single friendly unit inside its walls, a castle can be reinforced with cheap-butdeadly units like catapults and archers that can snipe with impunity from the protected keep. Manage to take all the castles, and the enemy can't reinforce, even with a mountain of gold. The only source of replacement units, resources, are as important as cities for ultimate victory. The proximity of these sinews of war gold, coal and wood -should exert a strong influence on the choice of starting cities before the initial mad dash begins. If possible, keep balanced supplies of wood and coal to maximize their purchasing power. Cities should be occupied as soon as possible, but usually require wellplanned garrisoning with strong forces to hold them over the long haul. An early sprint to a city by a single fast unit is often rewarded by a crushing attack, especially at the high value cities which act like magnets for enemy units. Units purchased during the initial set-up should reflect the need for speed. Except on maps with lots of obstacles (mountains, oceans and rivers), cavalry are ideal starting units and should account for up to half of the initial budget. Spies are a must, at least one in each starting city, not only for vital intelligence but also for high-speed travel to resources and uncontested cities. Wizards may seem like powerful fighters, but they are most valuable for their speed, teleporting themselves and adjacent units to Paying Scale (Dragons and Gargoyles) Dragons may seem expensive, but they constitute an extremely desirable offensive unit. For 20 gold pieces one gets a fast, all-terrain unit that can attack at a distance, often from the safety of mountains and seas. Notice how much the AI likes dragons. In clustered battles ar close quarters they can dish out up to 16 points of damage per round of combat. Once most of their impressive 32 points of damage are depleted, severely weakened dragons can move off to make excellent sentries for cities and resources. A badly crippled dragon can destroy wave after wave of small units blundering into range of its city, and dragons don't frighten easily. A poor man's dragon, the gargoyle, is good for crossing bad terrain to tap resources and attack out-of-the-way cities. Without ranged firing, however, gargoyles have to mix it up during combat and eventually get whittled away. At nearly half the price of a dragon, these escapees from Notre Dame are best left for spreading out over inaccessible terrain or attacking archers. A Wiz at Some Things (Overpriced Units) When starting in the lap of the enemy, a wizard or two can be a good Page 106 Computer Gaming World "


"anticipate. Knowing where enemy units will be next turn is often more important than where they are now. One should set up ranged units (archers, catapults and dragons) just within striking distance of squares where the enemy COME! units will be after they move. This allows for a double barrage; first, at the end of the Al's turn, and then again on the player's turn. By simply mixing it up with enemy units, one will only trade hit points. By taking advantage of action at a distance and picking the right fights, the player's units can exact a toll (or troll) without getting a scratch. F insurance policy but their best roles are those of long-range transports or keep sitters, not pitched battle fighters. Limit purchases of these exotic luxuries to the demands of specific missions. Certain units hardly seem worth buying, except in very special circumstances. Phantoms are valuable for \"scaring\" in clustered fights, but given their low speed, exorbitant cost of 15 gold pieces, and the fact that one should be avoiding those massed attacks anyway, they are of dubious value. At a cost of seven, land bound and remarkably vulnerable ogres aren't much of a bargain, even though they can attack at a range of one and inflict damage without making contact. Glorified lancers, trolls can heal (if they live), but they cost as much as three-and-a-half regular lancers. Instead of a troll, one should try buying a squad consisting of a swordsman, a lancer and an archer for the same price. Take along an officer and they can heal as well. Arch-enemies (The Archer Ploy) One of the most effective and satisfying ploys in CK is loading boats with archers. Cruising out of reach of many land units, and hard to kill even with the most powerful units, archers in boats are a terror to coastal cities and make an excellent counter to dragons. When things get hot, their high speed can get them away from trouble (spelled g-a-r-g-o-y-l-e-s). Perhaps, the most important key to success in CK is the ability to 1 Mixmaster (Strategic Overview) Much of CK's charm lies in the scissors/rock/paper interaction of the units. Even the lowly Rog can be incredibly deadly when a weakened Al begins to spit out droves of cheap lancers. Yet, a single lancer on a bridge can stop a massive cavalry charge. A knight can walk right into a cascle held only by archers. Every unit has an Achilles Heel that can be exploited. Becoming too reliant on a few favorites can give the AI an opening. The right tool for the job is the right strategy for Conquered Kingdoms. CGW FCS (Joystick) What Do PC Jet Jockeys Want? Hair-Raising Sorties Death Defying Maneuvers Heroics Victory Realism HOTASTM And... ThrustMaster Controls WCS\" (Throttle) Used in conjunction with your joystick RCS (Rudder Pedals) 10150 S.W. Nimbus Ave. STE. E7 Tigard, OR 97223 Phone (503)639-3200 Fax (503)620-8094 Circle Reader Service #103 May 1993 Page 107 "


" ). Tegel's Mercenaries a) from Mindcraft by Paul C. Schuytema TEGEL'S Pies AT STRECHTEN TSA FLAMEGRI The time is solar year 2198 and the human race still hasn't learned or as complex as weaving through a maze-like building to destroy from its hisrory. \"Destroy or be destroyed!\" is the motro of the various communications centers. I Consortium and a growing number of corporations. Enter the While the general premise of the game is attractive, the execution is mercenaries. Napalm and lasers for hire, these go-getters are the anything but flawless. Once on the planet, the view is reminiscent of backbone of order throughout a multitude of worlds. Still, mercenaries the skewed 3-D which works so well on the new Ultima series. The are a volatile, egocentric lot and they need a lot of discipline; they need player controls a cursor with a mouse, and selecting a mercenary will a leader. bring up an opaque window which lists the various orders the player Their leader is the B.O.S.S., the Base Operations Squad Sergeant. may selecr. Some orders, like those controlling movement orders, then The B.O.S.S. maintains control of a handful of hand-picked mercerequire a mouse click on the location to which the player would like naries through a real-time Tactical Imaging and Synthesizing Fabricathe mercenary to move. tor, which gives the sergeant a bird's eye view of the entire operation The interface is poorly executed and the display flickers in blocky and a channel of communications to each of the mercenaries. sections or freezes altogether while trying to hand out orders. The mercenaries themselves seem to be a bit spaced out (perhaps the oxygen latest science fiction game mix of their suits is a bit oft), from Mindcraft, follows because a simple movement the ongoing adventures of order through a door can be a group of mercenaries an exercise in futility. The INERLENARIES bankrolled by the gruft, mercenary may simply keep FELLES LES enigmatic and very rich bumping into the wall until TRADING POOLET LAUNCHER. general Tegel. The player the player reorders the PERSONAL ESTORY has just washed out of the movement, and the merceOfficer's Training Acadnaries seem to have amazing emy and is a little slim on trouble walking around prospects. Enter the good anything lying on the floor general and an opportu(like a body of a fellow mernity to make a fast and bloody buck by commanding a crew of cenary). mercenaries and, before the player can think through the options, the \"The mercenaries can first mission begins. either be toggled to an agTegel's Mercenaries is a squad-level game of combat and command gressive or passive posture, where one's progress is registered by an accumulation of credits for each attacking any enemy on scenario successfully completed. A scenario begins with a short briefing sight or needing directorMINDCRAFT from general Tegel, leaning over his desk and staring out of very beady ders. Unfortunately, the cyes. The general explains the mission goals in general terms and how combat in Tegel's Mercenarthe mission fits into the overarching plans of the Consortium. Then, ies is the most frustrating aspect of the game. It is very the player must select and recruit up to six mercenaries per mission Tegel's Mercenaries difficult to tell if a being is SYSTEM: from a stable of 20. The mercenaries vary in skill, weaponry, species IBM GRAPHICS: VGA an enemy or only a bystand SOUND SUPPORT: and sense of just compensation — some are available dire cheap, while Adlib, Sound Blaster er (there are no friends). PRICE: $59.95 others want a hefty sum for the risks they may take. PROTECTION: None The only litmus test is to DESIGNERS: Robert Bonifacio & Dan Burke After assembling the crew, a drop ship brings the squad into the thick wait and see if the entity PUBLISHER: Mindcrant Torrence, CA of the sortie and it is up to the player to issue the orders necessary to fires on the mercenary. A (800) 525-4933 complete the mission, whether it is as simple as protecting a diplomat to nie BUTTONI TITLE: Page 108 Computer Gaming World "


"FLIKIYE LUKI  MAR ARKET GARDEN TH BEACy. FOR VICTORY RDEN UTAH BEACH V VELIKIYE LUKI ARKET GARDEN TTLESE FOR VICTORY FOR VICTORY FOR VIETORY WKA... WARGAMING WITHOUT COMPROMISE Strategy Plus Game of the Year V FOR VICTORY: UTAH BEACH THREE-SIXTY PACIFIC 2105 S. BASCOM AVENUE CAMPBELL, CA 95008  408-879-9144 AVAILABLE AT BABBAGES, COMPUTER CITY, COMP USA, EGGHEAD SOFTWARE, THREE-SIXTY DIRECT SALES: 800-653-1360 IN THE U.S. 800-697-2360 IN CANADA ELECTRONICS BOUTIQUE, WALDENSOFTWARE AND OTHER FINE SOFTWARE RETAILERS. Circle Reader Service #40 "


"D hin)    A  A5 AuHEH-    ASUHISHOUH DURDURDUEREBRAL MADOD3MODDOPPS more functional approach is to simply kill cvery thing in sight. Nor terribly realLL istic, but it is a touch safer. AD LIKE TOMATTACKRASTS When the mercenaries are set to initiate attacks themselves, AT they seem to de liberately turn their backs from LEET CLICK TO TARGET THIS OBJECT the foe and fire off in random directions. It appears to take direct attack and target orders to get the squad to accomplish anything at all. Generally, the missions are a combination of retrieval and combat, with completion requiring the elimination of one or two specific entities, and perhaps the retrieval of a data disk. At times, doors will be locked, and a card key is necessary, which generally means finding another entity, killing it, and searching the body. Combat, as I mentioned earlier, is best handled by a direct order. When an entity appears to be hostile, order every squad member in the area to specifically atrack the enemy. Grenades seem to work the best, and they appear to be the only weapon which makes the foes stagger back from the hit. This, at least psychologically, is far more satisfying ore satisfying than the less efficient weapons. Since mercs are a precious and unmodifiable commodity, a tactic to generally ensure success in a mission is to save the game immediately when the mercs are deployed. Then, scroll around the map and figure out what points need to be hit, accessed or interacted with. Bring up the file screen and reload the mission, this time armed with concrete information. When the mission is complete, the player is paid in credits, with fees deducted for needless casualties (an odd stipulation since it's hard to tell a needless casualty during the run) and squad members killed. General Tegel will immediately issue orders for another mission, and recruiting may begin again. Since there is only a stock stable of mercenaries, it is very possible for the game to end due to a lack of warm bodies for hire. One problem with the credit system is that mercenaries aren't all that expensive to hire and there is no provision for purchasing new weapons. The only way to get new weaponry is to find it or pull it from a warm corpse. Having the option to re-equip the mercs would make the logistical aspect of the game much more appealing The overarching mission of the game is to find and kill the Kkistik queen who controls a race of aggressive insectoid creatures. Each misHVER 12/13/92 20:12 sion assigned from from general Tegel moves towards this end, generally by analyzing the data captured from the mercenaries' previous mission. Beyond the standard missions, Tegel's Mercenaries sports a custom mission builder. The player can load any of the blank scenario maps and create a custom mission. Mission goals may be set, and enemies are placed, with the designer able to control such things as armor THE ULTIMATE ROLE-PLAYING AID Introducing The Ultimate Character Editor. This exciting new product features full mouse and keyboard support, online context sensitive help and a complete windowing system (does not require MS Windows to run). This editor allows you to edit most of the games listed below (including all of the Might and Magics, all of the Ultimas, all of the SSI games, all of the Bard's Tales, and more). The price for this editor is $59.95. So, for the price of 3 editors, you will be getting approximately 30 editors. Upgrades will be available to handle new games as they are released for only $9.95.  CHARACTER EDITORS $19.95 each Might and Magic (1, 2, 3 or 4). Drakkhen, Pool of Radiance, Hard Nova, Bard's Tale (1, 2 or 3). Wasteland. Dragon Wars, Space Rogue. Wizardry (Edits 1-3). Wizardry 4, Wizardry 5, Bane ol Cosmic Forge, Crusaders of the Dark Savant. Treasurers of the Savage Frontier Sentinel Worlds I Knights of Legend, Secret of the Silver Blades, Curse of the Azure Bonds, Champions of Krynn, Space 1889, Keys to Maramon, MegaTraveller (1 or 2), Keef the Thief, Darklands, Escape from Hell. Ultima (3. 4. 5. 6 or 7), Dark Heart of Uukrul, Savage Empire. Tunnels and Trolls, Lord of the Rings (1 or 2). Countdown to Doomsday, Martian Dreams, Eye of the Beholder (1 or 2), Death Knights of Krynn, Fountain of Dreams, Magic Candle (1 or 2). Pools of Darkness, Ultima Underworld, Twilight 2000, Planet's Edge. Dark Queen of Krynn, and Prophecy of the Shadow SIDELINE SOFTWARE DISCOUNT TITLES ORDERS 1-800-888-9273 Your European PC Connection NEW TITLES TYPE $ Robocop 3 Arcade Adventure 38 Reach for the Skies Flight Sim. Curse of the Enchantress RPG WWF, T2, The Simpsons: all Arcade Strategy Street Fighter 2 Arcade Sabre Team Arcade Strategy Sleepwalker Arcade Strategy Ishar: Legend of the Fortress RPG Shadow Worlds RPG Strategy Amberstar RPG History Line 1914-1918 Strategy Sim. A 320 Airbus Flight Sim. Daemonsgate RPG Space Crusade RPG Strategy Tornado Flight Simulator Flight Sim. Wizkid Arcade Strategy World Wrestle Federation 2 Simulation  DISCOUNT TITLES 4-0 Sports Boxing 18.95 Advanced Destroyer Sim 16,95 Arkanoid 2 16.95 Armor Alley 16.95 Austerlitz 16.95 Backgammon PC 14.95 Bard's Tale 3 18.95 BAT 14.95 Battlechess Batlletech 2 16.95 Bloodwych Centurion 18.95 Colorado 14.95 Collussus Bridge 4 16.95 Conan the Cimmron 18.95 Conflict: Europe 14.95 Defender of the Crown 16.95 Deluxe Strip Poker 16.95 Die Hard 2 16.95 Drakkhan 18.95 Elvira 2 18.95 F16 Falcon 19.95 Fire Team 2200 16.95 Flight of the Intruder 18.95 Floor 13 18.95 Fool's Errand 16.95 Greg Norman Golf 18.95 Heart of China 18.95 Hero's Quest 18.95 Hills Street Blues 18.95 Hoverforce 14.95 Imperium 18.95 Jack Nicholas Greatest 18 16.95 Killing Cloud 16.95 King of Chicago 14.95 Mig 29 Fulcrum 18.95 Monty Python 16.95 Panza Kick Boxing 18.95 Paperboy 2 16.95 Pil Fighter 18.95 RBI Baseball 2 Realms 18.95 Rocket Ranger 16.95 Sands ol Fire 13.95 Shanghai 2 Sherman M-4 14.95 Shadowlands 18.95 Sleeping Gods Lie 16.95 Special Forces 26.95 Spell Casting 101 Spot 16.95 Star Saga Two 14.95 Stunt Car Racer 16.95 Super Oll Road 16.95 Super Space Invaders 16.95 Three Stooges T.V. Sports Baseball 21.95 T.V. Sports Basketball 14.95 T.V. Sports Boxing 1 8.95 T.V. Sports Football 14.95 Trump Casino 2 18.95 Winter Super Sports 92 16.95 Wolfpack 18.95 World Class Leaderboard 14.95 1 40 EUROMAGS HINT BOOKS $9.95 each Might and Magic 1, Knights of Legend, Curse of the Azure Bonds, Champions of Krynn, Legacy of Ancients, Dark Heart of Uukrul, Wizardry (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, Bane or Crusaders). Eye of the Beholder 2 Might and Magic 3 (12.95). Get the latest news on the best PC tilles from Europe! These high gloss, full color magazines also feature a demo-packed playable cover disk with each issue! PC Format, PC Review, PC Zone, or PC Plus only $10 each. IBM listed. Apple, C64 and Amiga versions also available. Please add $4.00 for shipping and handling Open from 9AM 9PM every day for your convenience. SHIPPING (UPS Ground) For up to 3 pieces, by payment: Mastercard & Visa $5.00.C.O.D. (Cash Only) S10.00 Next day & second day air available! Call for prices on special shipping. Shipping times not guaranteed. Price & Availability subject to change! No refunds or exchanges. Defective products exchanged with same item. Products warrantied through Sideline. VISA GOSSELIN COMPUTER CONSULTANTS CONSULTANTS MasterCard P.O. Box 1083  Brighton, MI 48116. (313) 229-2453 FAX ORDERS CALL (305) 491-6134 Need Info? Call (305) 491.9519 Dealer Inquiries Invited! 840 N.W.57th Court, Ft. Lauderdale, FL 33309 Circle Reader Service #60 Circle Reader Service #50 Page 110 Computer Gaming World "


"Deuneu :HALH  strength and the actions of the entities. The mission builder is a very helpful tool which enables the player to learn the logic behind Tegel's missions, and it is a good idea, once the player has some familiarity with the game, to go in and build a mission. When returning to Tegel's scenarios, the player is armed with a wealth of information which makes the whole system a lot clearer. Building the missions is a trial and error affair, since the interface is as clunky and as inconsistent as it is in the game. At one point a menu will pop up which warrants a mouse selection, at another time, the player HITUNES HAS DIED!!! cycles through choices with the left mouse button, and in yet another instance, the player must type in the requested information from the keyboard. To make things even more inconsistent, these parsers seem to pop up everywhere: at the top of the screen, on another menu screen, or in an almost invisible message box. The manual provides a slight and abbreviated tutorial, but nowhere does the manual even mention how to use the custom rools. It took me several attempts before I found the «Custom Game\" menu selection when starting the game to be able to access my scenarios. The graphics are probably the strongest point of Tegel's Mercenaries. The artists chose a cartoonish look which seems to work very well. There is very little dithering, and the colors are all vibrant, making the screens stand out exceptionally well. When in the scenario mode, the entire screen is filled with the overhead view, and menus are accessed by clicking on a squad member or one of two unobtrusive buttons. Clicking on the red button brings up the file save and exit menu, while the green button brings up a somewhat muddled, but helpful, overhead map of the entire scenario. Sound is generally well handled, with a refreshing sparseness to the musical scores. Digital sounds are provided, but the version I reviewed was missing one of the needed drivers. The only problem with the game sounds is that they don't really help the player assess the mission any better. Sometimes a weapon makes a sound, other times not, and the threats seem to be uncomfortably quiet, making the player pay extra attention to all of his squad members to find the little blue puffs of combat smoke. All in all, Tegel's Mercenaries is a pretty game with a handful of good ideas. The problem is, not many of those ideas are very well executed. Control is clunky, inconsistent, and downright frustrating at times. The logistics aspect is downplayed to a fault, and the successful completion of the scenarios is accomplished more through rote than through any intuitive and creative decision making. Hopefully, future editions will clean up the game and add the depth needed to keep a player's attention. Until then, the twenty-second century is a hit or miss proposition. CGW NEW! The WARGAMER'S N FROM R'S Computer Company POINT OF SIMULATIONS bin ATTACK AIDE DE CAMP Authentic weapons capabilities with Take ANY board authentic combat wargame and play it results. on your PC. Unmatched detail Play-by mail or down to individual modem. rounds resolution. Save floor space and Over 100 weapons playing time. from 11 nations. Set in the volatile Middle East, Point of Attack operates on Create colorful maps, up to 30,000 hexes, by using the a platoon-section level. Create custom engagements, or drawing editor to design terrain and units. Multiple explore one of the five scenarios. Features night combat, user-defined zoom levels. Permanently save game set-ups adjustable weather conditions, morale and other intangible as well as turns including movement and combat for later factors, advanced artillery, and lots more. review/replay. Compatible with all game systems, theaters, scales and eras. Design your own game. The most realistic PC tactical combat simulation Imagination is your only limit. available! Requires a hard disk. VGA display, and at least 600K of RAM. Requires an EGA display and at least 512K of RAM. Mouse optional. (Board games must be purchased separately.) IBM only $54.95 IBM only $79.95 Mail checks/money orders to: Available only by mail. VISA/MASTERCARD CALL (408)554-8381 Please add $4.00 shipping and handling. HPS Simulations, P.O. Box 3245 CA residents add state sales tax. Santa Clara, CA 95055-3245 Please specify disk spec when ordering Circle Reader Service #61 May 1993 Page 111 "


"strategy Arrakaholics Anonymous A Twelve Step Guide to a Happier, Healthier Harkonnen by Jeff James 016 V y hile Virgin Game's first computer gaming foray into the harvester at a line of enemy troops and proceed to squash them into world of Frank Herbert's Dune books was well-received by jelly. Tanks (of all varieties) also work well at clearing out thickets of many gamers, others wished the first Dune game was a little infantry, with the added benefit of being more heavily armored and mcatier. With the introduction of Dune II, Virgin Games and develsporting weapons to defend themselves. oper Westwood Studios have created a game that, among other things, contains more strategy muscle than its predecessor. 3. Lay the foundations of success. In Dune II, gamers can choose one of three houses to champion their \"The victorious commander in Dune II is not just one who can lead conquest of the planet Arrakis: House Atreides, House Harkonnen or a brilliant attack or manage troop production and spice refinement, House Ordos. While the goal of each house is the same (supreme but one who can plan ahead, literally, from the foundation up. Players rulership of the planet), each house approaches its goal with a slightly of SimCity will certainly have the prerequisites necessary for building different set of tactics. Regardless of whether gamers choose the guile a military-industrial complex that is functional and efficient. When of House Ordos, the overt military might of House Harkonnen or the the scenario begins, take a moment to survey the landscape and balanced military doctrine of House Atreides, winning at Dune Il can visualize the optimal military base within the specific confines of the be an arduous task at best. scenario. Plan to leave a nice, breezy thoroughfare through the middle To aid aspiring conquerors in their conquest of Arrakis, the following of the complex so that units can quickly get to defensive positions on strategy tips and guidelines (gained at the expense of thousands of any side of the base. Also, try to place Spice Refineries and their simulated Atreides, Harkonnen and Ordos soldiers) should provide attendant Harvester docking-bays such that they are easily accessible invaluable insight into the maniacal aggressiveand closest to the majority of Spice Fields. ness of a computer-controlled opponent. AlIMENAJ IN OPTIONS Credits 2326 Leave room for defensive structures at the though computers may have a \"head for busiedges of the base. Ofren, the hasty comness\" with regards to playing Dune II (after all, mander will build an important structure at their tiny electronic brains are fashioned out of the very edge of the sand, leaving no room for sand), a healthy dose of useful human behaviors those essential Rocker Launchers. (i.e. deception, trickery, chicanery, etc.) combined with the steps outlined below will help 4. Blatant, in-your-face deception gamers along the sandy path to victory. is the best policy. 1. Speed is life (and victory). Directing large-scale assaults right at the center of an enemy base is usually a recipe for From building structures to attacking the enignominious defeat. The enemy will usually emy, speed is invaluable. Building structures as (especially in the last few battles) pour out fast as possible is the key to survival in many of units en masse to meet any threat. Then, they the scenarios, where a fast-moving foe could easily overwhelm slowly will systematically proceed to grind any attacking force into Sand prepared defenses. Build initial structures as quickly as possible in the Worm patties. Taking a less direct (i.e. sneaky and deceitful) approach following order: windtrap, outpost, light factory, windtrap, and refinis the best path towards victory. First, fully explore the area around an ery. This will work well in most scenarios. Building at least two enemy base. When a large section of rock is discovered next to the refineries at the start of the scenario helps keep spice, the lifcblood of flanks of that base, sending units to gather at that point in anticipation any military campaign on Arrakis, flowing in adequate quantities. of a massed assault is a good idea. A good production strategy is to Finally, when an opportunity presents itself, players would be wise to create two units for the defense of the player's own base, then one for capitalize on it as quickly as possible. attacking the enemy base. Once a force of about 7-10 vehicles has been assembled at the rendezvous, they should be sent to attack the flanks 2. When in doubt, run them over. of the enemy. This strategy may take some practice; assembling units too close to the enemy base will cause them to be attacked before the Although often overlooked in the combat role, the spice harvester force is large enough, while gathering forces too far away gives Sand can be a very effective weapon against infantry and troopers. No need Worms ample opportunity to munch on them as they stream across for fancy weapons to do the job; simply point the anterior end of the great distances of open desert. Arraca MOVE TAETAENT bunad Page 112 Computer Gaming World "


"CONST, YARD DMG A3773 30% DONE OLASIO 01 5. Accentuate the deadly, MENTAT THIOPTIONS1 Predits OPTIONS Credits | 1220 11221 called a missile tank). Rocket launchers have eliminate the ineffectual. greater range than almost every other unit in I Insufficient power. Windtrap is needed. the game, making them well-suited to disLearn the strengths of each house. Each mantling enemy gun and rocket turrets from demands different tactics to emerge successa safe distance. A prudent commander will ful. For House Ordos, maximize the speed often use rocket launchers in conjunction advantage of raider trikes and other speedy with tactic #4, performing a sneak flank acunits by performing slashing hit and run tack with long-ranged weapons of destrucraids. House Harkonnen? Try to concention. trate the superior firepower of this house's units on selected targets, then proceed to 10. Turrets, turrets and divide the enemy into small, casily elimimore turrets! nated groups. For House Atreides, a mixture of the aforementioned doctrines is essential: Although bashing an opponent into smithuse firepower on the Ordos, while emphasizing a more stealthy apereens with waves of fast moving tanks is proach when dealing with the Harkonnen. every commander's dream, a more pragmatic approach must also take the defense of a player's home base into account. Chief among the 6. Ride the rocks. defensive weapons are gun and rocket turrets. Inexpensive, easy to produce and deadly accurate, a well-designed defensive wall of rocket If one thing is constant in Dune II, it is that Sand Worms are always turrets can effortlessly slice an attacking enemy force into shreds. Avoid on the lookout for a meal on the cheap. Also, since the favorite snack using defensive walls; they are almost useless in the last few battles, of any rapacious Sand Worm always seems to be the most expensive easily falling under the heavier guns of powerful units. of military units, keeping those units out of the gullet of an ornery Sand Worm is a top priority. Since Sand Worms can't travel through 11. Deal with the (Death) Hand you're dealt. rock, gamers would be advised to plot lengthy unit movements so they travel across as much rock as possible. Wheeled and tracked vehicles In the last few scenarios in Dune II, each House may build a palace. seem to attract an inordinate amount of attention from Sand Worms, In addition to being a well-fortified defensive structure, a palace gives so a wise commander would keep those units on rock at all times, even its owner a powerful offensive weapon. In the case of House Atreides, when guarding a stationary position. Troopers and infantry, while powerful Fremen troopers can be summoned to fight the enemies of occasionally getting munched, are usually much safer guarding on the Atreides. The palace Credits (121767 open sand than any other units. When in doubt, however, keep all of used by House Ordos (All-Purpose Carryall grants the ability to create your units stationed on rocks (unless the strategic value of placing them Cost: 800 on open sand is more valuable than losing a unit or two). a saboteur, a stealthy unit which can heavily damage 7. Become one with the Shai-Hulud. enemy structures. Finally, the palaces used both by Although Sand Worms are extremely difficult to kill, they can be the Harkonnen and the forced to alter their course. Pirched battles on open sand always seem Emperor himself grant the to attract a great deal of attention from sandworms. In situations such ability to launch the Death as this, wise commanders will expend just cnough firepower on a Hand missile, possibly the BULLD THISN troublesome worm to have it change course away from his units and most powerful offensive IRESUME GAME towards those of his enemy. weapon in the game. Developing an effective strategy against these 8. Follow the leader. special weapons is crucial for victory. Using this tactic, players can lure enemy forces away from their base As the most powerful special weapon, the Death Hand deserves and into pre-defined \"kill zones\" around their bases. To begin with a the special at special attention. The best way to deal with the deadly Death Hand defensive cul-de-sac (lined with turrets and potent offensive units, such missile is to simply save the game often. Although inaccurate, a Death as tanks and trooper squads) should be created in front of a player's Hand can destroy several structures with one strike. In addition to base. Next, a half-dozen or restoring your game, creating another construction yard on a section DENTAT OPTIONS Credits (1990 so trikes or quads should of rock a considerable distance from most structures will serve to be created and then, sent minimize the effect of the Death Hand. to attack the enemy base. When the attacking units 12. Getting Your Fix arrive at the enemy base, they should be directed to The original release of Dune Il crept out with a few bugs (not engage as many enemy including our Sand Worm friends). If playing with the original version, units as possible. After one may occasionally notice that 1) the Frigate that is supposed to fighting for a brief period service the Starport may never show up when called, 2) a Harvester of time, the attacking units V should then be ordered to may dock in a Spice Refinery and decide that it is not going to leave, retreat to the \"kill-zone\" next to the player's base. Many of the engaged 3) Team Movement does not exactly work as described in the manual. enemy units will happily follow the retreating units, allowing them to According to Virgin, these problems and more have been corrected in be cut apart when they arrive within the confines of the \"kill zone.\" an update that is currently available. Call the customer support line Used in conjunction with tactic #4, a player could use this tactic to given in the game manual for more information. draw off a substantial number of enemy units from their base before a Although the tactics listed here should prove successful, many more surprise flank attack is performed. tactics and strategies for Dune Il can be devised by either altering the 9. Rockets galore. ones presented here, or by experimenting. Indeed, a Dune II commander with an active mind and a willingness to experiment can make For attacking enemy bases, nothing beats the rocket launcher (also the best of any situation. Cw REFIPIFY ARPNIN HOLOS451 MAX: 1000 May 1993 Page 113 "


"deuneu Hawker's Descendant Domark's AV8B Harrier Assault by Paul Rigby BGES IS N250 ja ja JOD DICCO olano Tuo I AGM65 FLR GO CHE NO It has taken until the aircraft has become well and truly combat a dead stop from high speed and hover is well-presented, as is the proven in the recent Gulf War for a seemingly worthwhile flight famous VIFFing technique first seen in the Falklands campaign. simulation of the latest version of the Harrier family to appear on The one dubious element of the flight a floppy disk. Now, two new simulations model is the rudder interpretation. Releasing have appeared almost simultaneously. the rudder control forces the Harrier to Harrier jump Jet from Microprose and bounce back onto (or near) its original oriDomark's AV8B Harrier Assault (HA). The entation. It appears that Simis (designers of premise to the latter simulation is that Indothe flight model) attempted to copy the nesia has invaded East Timor and has occueffect of high inertia resulting from strong pied it since 1975. Now, hard-line factions air-flow acting upon the airframe. The idea in the Indonesian army are oppressing the being that any movement away from the indigenous island population rather heavily, central axis will be resisted by the air-flow and their continual poor treatment of said which, in turn, will attempt to bring it back population, as well as frantic appeals from NED to the original position. If this was the intenthe legal government in exile, have pushed tion, the effect doesn't quite come off. the United Nations into action. The sound support doesn't quite come off, The only detachment in the area is the BO8 Onninn either. The engine noise tends to stutter on players's own amphibious force of US Matake-off, and this is more than a little unnerving. Fortunately, the rines. It is not, however, a full-strength Marine Expeditionary Brigade. Only the Tarawa assault ship is able to launch the limited number of graphic appeal is more fulfilling. There is an excellent haze effect which AVSB Harriers. Limited Harrier replacements are available from the obscures distant features and the day/night transitions are nicely portrayed. The blackout effect and the jolt which other assault ships along with a variety of helicopters plus special force troops and the marines themselves occurs when one is hit are also very well done. (who are cquipped with LVTP-7 assault vehicles). No reinforcements are available, so the player must utilize Hunter/Killer (Limited Options) what he has to complere the campaign. Obviously, the game comes complete with a readyWeapon systems are numerous and include: LGBs, made campaign and plenty of pre-generated missions Mavericks, Iron Bombs and Rocket Pods. Laserwhich allow the player to experience some first person guided ordnance is illuminated via special force simulator action via the AVÔB flight model. It is really troops. The whole subject of laser guidance opens up IER ASSAULT a blend of two genres: flight simulation and wargame. a can of worms in the game, though. For example, Indeed, it may well be the first successful integration A STRATEGIC FLIGHT SIMULATION laser-guiding a Harrier via special forces is all well and of such a system. That is, both genre types do (just) good, but what about Harriers illuminating targets, via laser, for each other? The option is a well used one stand alone as games in their own right. and was amply demonstrated by the RAF's own BucCome Fly With Me (Flight Model) caneers, who illuminated targets for their Tornado colleagues. Modern Close Air Support (CAS) aircraft, The flight model, which can be explored with the DOMARK including the AV8B, should have the option, but it is use of the growingly popular Thrustmaster controls, is not available in HA. Harriers can easily be sent on one of the best available. It doesn't top Falcon 3.0, but reconnaissance missions in the game to acquire tardoes present the feeling that multiple tons of metal are AV8B Harrier Assault SYSTEM: Aniga, IBM gets, so it is not as if a hunter/killer option is out of being thrown around the sky. This illusion is both the question on theoretical grounds. enhanced by the flight model's inertia effects that PROTECTION: None DEVELOPER: hang on every movement of the Harrier and other Indeed, even if the idea of hunter/killer packs could PUBLISHER: unique Harrier skills which are well-depicted. For c/o Accolade be mooted, the notion would be doomed in HA San Jose, CA cxample, the Harrier's capacity to gradually come to because wingmen are not available. This also means that Harriers must fly missions on their own with no HARR TITLE: PRICE: $59.99 Simis Domark Page 114 Computer Gaming World "


"Amesema AT SORINORIM SATU LAGI 1175 Danki 1,450 Strategic Ambush Simulation from the Makers of Siege! orinor's forests are dark and gloomy and full of dangers. But you took Clan Sernevan's money, and it's up to you to protect their princess on her journey. You peer over the shoulder of a wary swordsman into a clearing. As you're deciding whether it's safe to enter, you hear a branch snap on the trail behind! Orcs flood into the clearing! Boulders fly from the trees! Ambush at Sorinor!  Play a mercenary captain in a world of intrigue! Accept missions galore from the six Clan chiefs to make money and enemies! DOPASTOG feree 20.000000 Food ove Command dozens of troop types hiding invisibly or charging in the open! Beware of traps, and set your own!  Design your own missions and create your own maps! MINDCRAFT 2291 205th Street, Suite 201, Torrance, CA 90501 Actual IBM VGA screen photos. Circle Reader Service #73 "


"Deview Combat Air Patrol (CAP) options to cover each other's \"six.\" This is a dangerous situation and one which led me into severe trouble on many occasions. This trouble leads to the subject of air threats. I found the opposition too severe especially for the supposed quality of the enemy I was facing. This situation was made more aggravating by the limited information received by the attendant AWACS (who offer air threat bearing, but not range), plus the poor performance of the AIM-OM Sidewinders which had a lower than expected performance. Dont Rain on my Campaign (Campaign Construction) If the player does not wish to follow the game's campaign he can design one of his own. Using the campaign manager, TAWADS, one can allocate waypoints for Harriers (attack and reconnaissance), helicopters (attacks, reconnaissance and troop insertion) and troops (via landing craft). The fleet, itself, can be allocated waypoints along the coast of the island. However, even though TAWADS utilizes mouse commands and a menu tree, the system is long-winded and tiring to use. The command system cries out for global commands to speed up campaign orders and tactical decisions. The frequent slow screen updates that blank the screen also help to irritate, especially during the heat of the action. Eccentricities also occur when using TAWADS. For example, in the Wargame view, Harriers become invincible apart from the odd loss over a target (presumably from SAM attack). Also, helicopters are similarly impregnable. I never lost one chopper during the whole campaign. The Harrier situation is a temptation to cheat, however. If one's Harrier is under attack from an enemy aircraft during the simulation mode, merely switching to wargame/campaign mode defuses the threat. Domark has admitted that the game switches to a simplificd wargame set of rules. This one point is typical of the generally poor Al routines in the game. Another difficulty presented via TAWADS is the lack of air threat representation on the map; the only air threat seen is the infrequent supply C-130. One final criticism is the no-win situation. Winning the game is, apparently, triggered upon achieving 70% occupation of the island. I managed to occupy 89% of the island without seeing a \"win screen.\" This is a bug, it appears. On the positive side, though, the real-time action seen on the TAWADS map is made more atmospheric when one realizes that all of the movements are actually happening in 3D. It brings the normally staid 2D map to life. In addition, the map can be zoomed almost indefinitely and the presentation is commendable via the hires screen. Amiga owners have their own problems, I'm afraid. This version does not include night missions. Domark alleges that the lack of RAM in most Amigas is to blame. However, when one considers that night missions merely warrant a simple palette change and that Domark recommends a 68020 Amiga to play the game and most 68020 Amiga owners have 2 MB+ of RAM), this seems unlikely. PAPER MAYHEM ELE GUN OG 10° 775 64 OG 100 250 \"The Informative PBM Magazine\" Do your know what PBM (Play-By-Mail) gaming is? If you don't, we can help you explore the world of PBM gaming. Paper Mayhem has been leading the way for over 9 years by informing people about PBM gaming. Articles, reviews, biographies and more fill each issue. Not to mention the ratings of PBM games and companies that our readers participate in. Paper Mayhem has been improving with the ever expanding hobby of PBM gaming since 1983. Each bimonthly issue brings you the latest on PBM news. So why delay and miss out on all the fun? Read Paper Mayhem and take advantage of PBM gaming. Send subscriptions to: PAPER MAYHEM Dept CG 1518 Adams Street Ottawa, IL 61350-4770 US Subscriptions: Single issue $5.00 1 year $24.00 2 year $42.00 CM Tertio 17717 ODLOOS 015 SODDIDDID collado SOOTDIDIOID. I GUN FLR EO CHF 40 mit 1900 Inminat End of Strafing Run (Conclusion) Even worse is the fact that it is so obvious that the whole thing hasn't been properly tested, just rushed out of the door. Even limited playtesting would have prevented many of the problems occurring in HA. Domark deserves to be strafed with cannon fire for this simple lack of thought. However, despite the criticisms HA is worth a look. There are enough innovations and hooks in the game to warrant spending some time on HA. Doubly so when an update is promised which will tackle many of the problems described. CGW FOREIGN SUBSCRIPTIONS: 1 year Canada $31.00; 1 year to Europe $51.00: 1 year to Australia $57.00. All Subscriptions to PAPER MAYHEM are to be paid in US funds and drawn from US banks. Foreign subscriptions are asked to use Intemational Money Order in US funds. Circle Reader Service #80 Page 116 Computer Gaming World "


"The magic Candle II 19:024 A Gate 18:38 Lukas 1 S  Kark43 89 R Lukasa V Notes Talk Pass LoOk kecan Magic Camp Formatnl Whisper Sheathe Draw Cont I'First hou USL return the POHL center to Urkabel.\" ep31:30 2011 Herrington Lukas 3T 3570K) BT. SK Recais magic Notes Talk Camp Formatnl Whisper Sheathe Sep 3 H20 L Overcast 0739 XH051 Library TUKAS ST 40 OK 1:037 Barka 21 43 OR The Librarian says: That is your subject of interest sir ? he ancient Solian lands have new arrivals: weapons and magic—and, most of all, their wits—to Monsters of the Blight! survive and defeat the Blight! The Blight is consuming the ancestral homes of Delightful 256-color graphics, glorious music and the elves and humans, halflings, goblins and orcs. digitized sound effects, and a compelling story with It's up to you and your chosen heroes to slay the fascinating characters make The Magic Candle III Blight's monsters and solve its mysteries! your key to many hours of enjoyment. With The Magic Candle III, Mindcraft continues its tradition of excellence in fantasy role-playing. Your party will have characters handcrafted by MINDCRAFT you, marching side by side with the friends old and 2291 205th Street, Suite 201, Torrance, CA 90501 new your hero meets along the way. They will need (Actual screens may vary.) Circle Reader Service #74 "


"pame nesigm It's A Small, Small, Real-Time World Crossing Computer Gaming with Miniatures Design Notes from Impressions' Ed Grabowski czasu WODOVINS los dos azt az egese on the fall of 1989, I first decided to create a computer system whereby I could fight some of the great heroic battles of yesteryear. I had spent a large part of my youth in painting, literally, thousands of miniature soldiers and attaching them to cardboard bases for ease of movement and for reconstruction of the battlefield whenever my sister wreaked mass destruction equivalent to an act of God). In spite of the obvious gratification carned from this pursuit, I always felt thar the \"turn-based\" rules could never recreare the incredible mental challenge of simultaneously commanded thousands of troops. Instead of taking the sensible approach and creating said computer program in my spare time, I decided to leave my career as a systems analyst, working in Management Information Systems which utilized large water-cooled IBM mainframes, and go for it! My original game was Rorke's Drift, and it has been followed by a series of games based upon new historical subjects and full of refinements. Conquest of Japan local Al and the orders set by the player.); carry out the move and decide on the animation pose required. Three frames of animation are used for each soldier's walk, but 24 total frames are required to reflect the eight different directions in which he can walk; detectif said soldier has collided with a fellow soldier and work out how they can move around each other to allow both soldiers' orders to be fulfilled; detect collision with the enemy; if firing, automatically seek out the most suitable target and attack it; resolve any missile firing; and finally, draw the soldier on the screen! Of course, the most difficult part of this algorithm is that it all has to be done in as short a cime as possible — ideally, five times per second. To further complicate matters, gamers need to be able to scroll around the battlefield while all this is happening, so the computer must also detect and keep track of mouse clicks and key presses. High Road or Low Road? The next decision I had to make was whether to use a \"high level\" language like C or a faster \"low level\" assembly language. I solved this by electing to use a mixture of the two. First, I would write the routine in C. Then, once I had it working, I would often rewrite it in assembler in order to speed it up. So, with a game that was both playable and working reasonably well on a 20 MHz MSDOS machine, I suddenly discovered what a difference a higher clock speed can make. The game played entirely too fast on a 33 MHz machine. The computer executed its battle plans so quickly that I was being outmaneuvered before I knew it. There I was, busy gerring my men in formation for an assault on the enemy's left, when the rascally computer had already attacked and routed most of my right with his cavalry. So, I would have to turn and try to rally my right while the computer nonchalantly charged my center. In short, I was being out-fought, not because I was being out-thought, but because everything was happening too quickly. I Aiming High So, what did I really want to accomplish. The basic aim was to recreate the same resplendent battle formations one could command on the table-top, but allow gamers to command these units in «real-time with artificial intelligence controlling each soldier. I didn't want to lose one bit of the visual splendor of the armies, and I desired to animate the troops as well. This meant that, while the battle is taking place, the machine would have to perform the following calculations for each soldier depicted on the screen: work out the AI for each soldier. (Which means deciding if a soldier should stay put or move, as well as reload or fire, depending on his own An epic simulation of Samurai conquest pressions Page 118 Computer Gaming World "


"I TEGEL'S ERCEINPRIES General Tegel has plans for some covert operations. Not things he could order someone to do... but things he could pay someone to do. And, as it happens, you—and your colleagues-can be bought. DE CHE DIETO ET FAZETET COT STILE 45 OPATIA SOLDER FORSE GRORO  . 2R3 Egg 10 NEBULOUS COFFUCTS 105 CASSPED OPERATIONS LOLET PRISON TESTOSTER POL Mindcraft presents: Tegel's Mercenaries . . . an intriguing concept in futuristic strategy gaming. You lead a squad of interplanetary mercenaries picked from twenty of the most notorious men, women and aliens this side of the Magellanic Clouds.  Belk Otem, with his Delaser rifle and cybereye  \"Smokey\" Okrara, the green-skinned, two-trunked chlorophant \"Bombshell\" Divan, \"Tunes\" Krakowski, and 16 more! Start with a \"diplomatic\" mission to the ice planet of Nueva Nevada, then go wherever the general sends you next. Just remember the most important thing: you're in it for the money! When you are through with Tegel's tours of duty, strike out on your own! Use the Scenario Kit & Working Interface Developer to build missions to challenge the most hardened mercenaries. A new level of excitement, from the makers of the award-winning Magic Candle and Siegel MINDCRAFT 2291 205th Street, Suite 201, Torrance, CA 90501 (Actual screens may vary.) Circle Reader Service #75 "


"Lame neshon Advertisers List COHORT 101 UPRESSIONS 75 FROM THE PRODUCERS OF RORKES DRIFT didn't have time to react. Therefore, I was forced to introduce an option which may increasingly appear with new generations of faster machines — a speed reduction option. With this toggle in place, the game player can ser how fast the men move on the screen. This, of course, provides time to see what's happening and respond appropriately. Looking Good When designing this system, I wanted to select a viewpoint which would give an impression (pun intended) of a three-dimensional battlefield. I rejected a straight overhead view because I wanted the player to see as much of the uniforms as possible. After all, miniatures players spend days researching and painting the clothing and armor of a given period. I decided that my design shouldn't offer any less. I chose, therefore, the isomerric 3-D view which is used in some arcade action games. Naturally, this solution had its attendant problems, the biggest being that once a piece moves behind a tree or building, it can become remporarily hidden. My solution was to give the player the option of viewing the conflict from the opposing player's viewpoint. To do so meant having to draw the scenery graphics from two viewpoints. I didn't have to worry about the soldiers, since all of their angles were already drawn, but I did have to do this for the scenery. The Loyal Opposition In the discussion to this point, I have neglected to speak of another major programming conundrum, the Al. Getting the computer to control an army is a never-ending task. The more we work on the Al, the more changes we come up with. Right now, I work on a general rather than specific approach. Amtex Software Apogee Software Aztech Systems Blue Valley Software Cactus Development Cape Cod Connection Cerebel Info, Arts Chips & Bits 35, 37, 39, 41, 43, 45, 47,49 Computer Express Compsult 110 Computability Creative Labs 58 Digispeech 133 Disk-Count Software Electronic Arts Flagship Magazine Formgen GEnie Gosselin Computer 110 HPS Simulations Home Base Products Impressions 22-23, 25, 27 Inner Circle Software 105 Intcrplay Keyboard Commander Koei 51 Konami 127 Lance Haffner Games 66 Liberty International Logitech Maelstrom Games MicroProse Software 15 Mindcraft Software 115, 117, 119 Mission Control 135 MPG Ner 72-73 New World Computing Origin Systems Paper Mayhem Power Players Psygnosis QQP 12-13, 76 Qualitas Reality Simulations SDJ Entrprises 100 Sideline Software 123 Sierra On-Line 77, 79, 81, 83, 85, 86-87, 89, 91, 121 Simulations Canada 123 Sir-Tech Strategic Simulations 53, 62-63, 147 Spectrum HoloByte 11.97 Three-Sixty Pacific 109 Thrustmaster Twin Engine Gaming U.S. Videotel 93 Viking Software 128-129 Virgin Games 56-57 Zeros & Ones 139 125 PC 3.5 to that individual unit's perspective. Keeping in mind what overall strategy has already been factored into the process, the AI decides what the unit is most likely to do. Naturally, however, the whole affair boils down to whether the individual soldiers are going to follow orders or not. The AI performs the same calculations on an even smaller scale for each soldier depicred on the screen. If the evaluation shows the soldier to be too weak or his morale to be too low, he simply will not obey the commands from the higher levels. These general calculations are then supplemented by algorithms for fighting units with unique skills, such as artillery and cavalry. This keeps units from performing atypical attacks such as artillery units charging cavalry (The Charge of the Lugubrious Brigade?). 137 65 103 148 Historical Notes Hopefully, this article has given some insight into the way my miniatures wargaming system originated and evolved. After Blue Gray, we hope to create fantasy, W.W.Il and space games which utilize the system. Cow space games w 116 48 quest of Japan and the upcoming Blue Grav) where the size and composition of both armies and the terrain can be different in any battle, and the terrain can be different in any barthe using general Al routines is mandatory. If I were only simulating a particular conflict, I could use pre-programmed attack/defense movements. So, I rework the general Al for the period (tactics, weapons and unit types) and geography (basic terrain advantages and disadvantages) in which the game takes place. My routines work by looking at the army's composition, position and morale. Ir evaluates these points at three levels: Overall, Unit and Individual Soldier. First, it examines the overall strength of the army against the opposition, measured both numerically (number of men) and positionally (what type of terrain is held). If the Al algorithms controlling the player's units perceive that he has numerical superiority and terrain advantage, it shifts to attack mode. Next, the routine examines each unit and follows the same procedure by zooming down 107 ROME WASNT BUILT IN A DAY HOW LONG WILL IT TAKE YOU? Impressions Page 120 Computer Gaming World "


"Play the best and we'll send you $8.00 (See details below.) FRONT PAGE SPORTS WICKPUNTS Fo01 MIKE HATAMATA Football TOM LA No matter what computer football game you've played (or even if you haven't played any), you'll find nothing compares to the total pro-football experience of Front Page Sports Football. From drafting teams to forming leagues to designing plays and running the action, only Front Page Sports Football has it all. And now you can get $8.00 just for treating yourself to the the best. Here's how: 1. Buy a copy of Front Page Sports\" Football from your local retailer. 2. Fill our the coupon below and send it and your original purchase receipt to us. 3. We'll send you a check for $8.00. 4. Enjoy the best computer football season you've ever had. PlayMaker KONAMI\" OMX * OU WANTORIA REALISMI, YOU'D MANR TO SUIT UPON SUNDAY AETERNOO. MONSIEURS TENNIS Dyppmix BVB \"... the best animation I've seen in a football game... The action is fluid and easy to control... There is no better football game on the market!\" -Computer Game Review \"In play creation and editing, Front Page Sports Football can't be touched...the game that brings everything to the field...\" -PC Games Magazine \"...one of the most visually stunning and realistic simulations of the sport... It is a rare example of a football game that will appeal to everyone, from the casual arcade player to the die-hard rotisserie league fanatic.\" -Video Games & Computer Entertainment Yes! Send me a check for $8.00. Here's my coupon and my original sales receipt for Front Page Sports Football. Name Address Excellence in Sports Simulation. City 1 State Daytime Phone Terms & Conditions: 1.) This offer is valid only for Front Page Sports\" Football games purchased between Feb. 15, 1993, and June 30, 1993. 2.) This offer not valid with any other coupons or promotions. 3.) One rebate per household. 4.) This offer expires July 10, 1993. 5). Mail this coupon and your original Front Page Sports Football sales receipt as proof of purchase to: Football Rebate Offer, Sierra On-Line, P.O. Box 485. Coarsegold, CA 93614. Offer #368 Dynamix PART OF THE SIERRA FAMILY Circle Reader Service #116 "


"SODeureu FORGESS Come to the Green Beret, My Friend Special Forces from MicroProse TITLE: IBM PRICE: by Jeff James N or years, strategy gamers have used traditional pen-and-paper assassinating the leader of engames to simulate the actions of squad-level infantry units. emy forces. Players who wish MICROPROSE 1 Boardgames such as Avalon Hill's Squad Leader allowed armto create and name their own chair infantry commanders to tackle the problems a real-world infantry soldiers are out of luck; leader might have to. From destroying ammo dumps to securing small gamers can only select troopSpecial Forces SYSTEMS: Amiga, IBM villages, small infantry squads have traditionally served as a deft and ers from the included, pre REVIEWED ON: deadly arm of a country's armed forces. generated eight man roster. $49.95 DESIGNERS: Like most other board-gaming products (such as TSR's Advanced Sleepless Knights Game Design Four soldiers can be used in a PUBLISHER: MicroProse Dungeons Dragons), several attempts have been made at bringing the mission and cach can be Hunt Valley, MD visceral appeal of squad-level infantry combat to the computer screen. equipped with a variety of hi(410) 771-0440 Micro Prose's Airborne Ranger took the \"lone woll' approach, allowing tech weapons. A variety of gamers to assume the persona of a single American paratrooper. Other pistols, rifles, grenades and rocker launchers are included. Explosive games, with Interstel's D.R.A.G.O.N. Force as a prime example, took charges and LDs round out the included armaments, ensuring that a broader approach, giving gamers a crack at commanding an entire nearly every obstacle a player faces can be overcome by the vigorous squad of grunts. As the latest attempt at simulating small-scale infantry application of copious amounts of firepower. Once the player's team action, MicroProse has released Special Forces (SForces). is briefed, assigned and loaded with weaponry, the war zone may be While MicroProse has positioned SForces as the sequel to Airborne entered. Ranger, the two products have almost nothing in common. While Airborne Ranger was originally developed here in the states by MicroInto The Breach Prose U.S.A. for the venerable Commodore 64 and IBM-compatible Upon arrival into the war zone, the game shifts to an overhead view computers, SForces was developed in England by Sleepless Knights of the currently selected team leader and his surroundings. Two levels and published on the Amiga by MicroProse U.K. I had hoped that the of magnification are supported, including a scaled terrain map which transatlantic connection between the U.S.A. and U.K. branches of displays the entire warzone at once. Once the four troopers are on the Micro Prose would result in a product with a global outlook on the ground, the player has a number of formation and movement options units the player could command. Instead of with which to order them about the counoffering specific, individualized units, Mitryside. By pressing the F-keys on the keycroProse has unfortunately attempted to board, gamers can direct soldiers under their cover all the bases with an amorphous, overly command to operare in one of three different generalized unit of soldiers. Although the unit formations: individually, in pairs, or in product packaging subtly alludes to such team support mode (where all soldiers work renowned units as the U.K.'s SAS, the Soviet in a triangular formation around the team Union's Spetsnatz, and America's anti-terleader). Soldiers can be moved directly by rorist Delta Force, they are nowhere to be pressing the appropriate soldier's function found in the game itself. Other elite military key (FI F4) and steering them to their units such as the Navy SEALS, USMC Maobjectives with a keyboard or joystick. For rinc recon, US Army Rangers and others are more strategically minded players, movenowhere to be found. Giving gamers the ment can be set at the scaled terrain map level chance to choose from the world's most elite by establishing waypoints. special forces would have been a welcome When traipsing through enemy territory, program feature. soldiers can cither move in stealth mode (shooting at enemies only when necessary) or sniping mode (shooting everything that comes Boot Camp Basics close). For heavily defended objectives, I discovered that the stealth mode worked best; for less armed objectives, the sniping mode seemed The game begins with the roster screen, where players have the to be the superior choice. Regardless of which mode is chosen, the four opportunity to give a custom name to their unit. After choosing one grunts that the player controls seem to possess an incredible amount of four difficulty sercings, the player is presented with a file cabinet holding all 16 missions included in SForces. These 16 missions are of stamina. Even at the most difficult play settings, these soldiers seem divided into four geographical regions: arctic, tropical, temperate and to absorb an unearthly amount of damage, taking several rounds of fire desert. The missions in each zone pit the player against unnamed from a machine-gun pillbox at close range. Although the inherent terrorist groups, militaristic drug lords or a maniacal despot patterned invincibility of the soldiers can be argued for the sake of playability, heavily after Saddam Hussein. Missions can be chosen at random or gamers looking for a more accurate representation of damage received played in order, allowing gamers to enjoy a quick game or to invest during combat will be disappointed. In many instances, SForces plays more time in a lengthy campaign. The objectives in each mission range more like a version of the arcade blast-fest Ikari Warriors than a detailed from planting laser target designators (LTDs) next to scud missiles to wargame of small-scale infantry actions. i unit for Page 122 Computer Gaming World "


"Cview while changing weapons is as easy as selecting the appropriate character and using the \"+\" and \".\" keys to scroll through that character's available weaponry. Graphics, though nor excessively detailed, are crisp and bright and bright, making the flora and geographical features of the battlefield easily distinguishable. Sound is limited to firing weapons and exploding ordnance, although a fittingly somber military melody is played whenever a mission is completed. The 88-page instruction manual is somewhat of a disappointment coming from MicroProse, which has historically produced some of the most well-written game documentation in the industry. While I had hoped that the manual might devote a dozen or so pages profiling the elite military units of several countries, backed by a brief history of the accomplishments of special forces used throughout history, it did neither. Purple Hearts And Promotions Once the objective for the current scenario is accomplished (retrieving a valuable object, assassinating the enemy leader, et al), the player the player must shepherd units back to \"pickup zones.\" Once the team arrives at one of the designated retrieval points, a helicopter can be called in to pluck the players from the warzone. Even here, SForces leans more towards the arcade end of the computer gaming spectrum. Even if the pickup zone is surrounded by dozens of enemy soldiers, gun emplacements and other enemy units, the player's chopper happily zooms into almost certain death, slowly picks up the team, and vanishes from the combat scene without even a single shot being fired in its direction. If any soldiers end up being captured by the enemy, the player has the opportunity to fly back into the warzone and retrieve the missing soldiers. If any soldiers are killed in action, that soldier is permanently removed from the cight-man roster. After playing through the majority of the scenarios at a respectable level of difficulty, this loss of soldiers can be crippling. Once lost, a soldier is not replaced; players may find themselves braving the last scenario or two with less than a complete lere squad of four soldiers. Once the mission has been accomplished, each ch of the soldiers that participated in the mission are given the opportunity to be promoted or decorated. This process is entirely in the hands of the player, allowing gamers to reward favorite soldiers with a greater allotment of rewards. Once the 16 included scenarios are completed, the game ends and the player's squad is retired from active duty. Players can attempt those same scenarios at a higher difficulty level with a new squad, although the scenarios themselves will remain largely unchanged. One can only hope that MicroProse will release additional mission diskertes (or a scenario builder) to give the game playing appeal after the included scenarios are accomplished. The playing interface is the strongest feature of SForces. Although mouse support is nor included in the actual combat portion of the game, moving soldiers about by way of joystick or keyboard is clean and straightforward. Switching between soldiers can be done quickly, Mission Incomplete I had hoped that MicroProse U.K. would have heaped the same amou amount of lavish detail upon SForces that other U.K. designed MicroProse products hi Prose products have exhibited (with B-17 Flying Fortress being a prime example). Unfortunately, SForces ends up being a rather unexciting and easily forgettable entertainment product. With the game playing emphasis resting more upon arcade action than shrewd tactical maneuvering, SForces appears to be aimed squarely at male computer gamers in their early teens. Yet, even if SForces was classified as a true \"shoot em' up,\" it fails miserably to compete with more focused arcade offerings. In summation, SForces is a product which unsuccessfully attempts to straddle the barbed wire between arcade action and derailed, realistic infantry combat. Gamers looking for a vague, oversimplified introductory simulation of small-scale infantry operations might see something to admire in this game. Unfortunately, more serious minded gamers looking for a detailed, factually correct simulation of squad-level infantry actions should count SForces as missing in action. CGW HAVE YOU EVER WONDERED WHY THOSE OTHER \"SIMULATIONS\" ARE SO UNREAL? PERHAPS, WHILE DOING MORE PICTURES, THEY FORGOT ABOUT RESEARCH, TESTING & DESIGN. SIDELINE SOFTWARE DISCOUNT TITLES ORDFEES 1-800-888-9273 Your European PC Connection NEW TITLES TYPE $ Arcade Adventure 18.95 WE DIDNT . SIMULATIONS CANADA. FOR SERIOUS WARGAMING Robocop 3 Reach for the Skies Curse of the Enchantress WWF, T2, The Simpsons: all Street Fighter 2 Sabre Team Sleepwalker Ishar: Legend of the Fortress Shadow Worlds Amberstar History Line 1914-1918 A 320 Airbus Daemonsgate Space Crusade Tornado Flight Simulator Wizkid World Wrestle Federation 2 A DDARA Flight Sim. RPG Arcade Strategy Arcade Arcade Strategy Arcade Strategy RPG RPGStrategy RPG Strategy Sim. Flight Sim RPG RPGStrategy Flight Sim. Arcade Strategy Simulation NAVAL COMBAT: ***New*RED SKY AT MORNING, Global Naval Strategic Combat In The Modern Era. *T*New\"TTMAN OF WAR, Grand Tactical Naval Combat Under Sail, 1765 1815. THE MIDWAY CAMPAIGN, Operations In The Central Pacific, 1912. THE SOLOMONS CAMPAIGN, Operations In The South Pacific, 1942-1943. FLEET MED, Tactical Naval Combat In The Med, 1939-1943. MALTA STORM, The Battle For The Mediterranean, 1941-1942. KRIEGSMARINE, Tactical Naval Combat In The Atlantic, 1939-1944. NORTHERN FLEET, Modern Naval Operations In The Atlantic Ocean. GRAND FLEET, Tactical Naval Combat In The North Sea, 1906-1920. IN HARM'S WAY, Tactical Naval Combat In The Pacific, 1943-1944. LONG LANCE, Tactical Naval Combat In The Pacific, 1942. SEVENTH FLEET, Modern Naval Operations in the Pacific Ocean. FIFTH ESKADRA, Modern Naval Operations In The Mediterranean Sea. GREY SEAS, GREY SKIES, Tactical Modern Naval Combat. DISCOUNT TITLES 4.D Sports Boxing 1 8.95 Advanced Destroyer Sim 16.95 Arkanoid 2 16.95 Armor Alley 16.95 Austerlitz 16.95 Backgammon PC 14.95 Bard's Tale 3 BAT 14.95 Battlechess 18.95 Batlletech 2 16.95 Bloodwych 16.95 Centurion 18.95 Colorado 14.95 Colluissus Bridge 4 16.95 Conan the Cimmaron 18.95 Conflict: Europe 14.95 Delender of the Crown 16.95 Deluxe Strip Poker 16.95 Die Hard 2 16.95 Drakkhan 18.95 Elvira 2 18.95 F16 Falcon 19.95 Fire Team 2200 16.95 Flight of the Intruder 15.95 Floor 13 18.95 Fool's Errand 16.95 Gren Norman Golf 18.95 Heart of China 18.95 Hero's Ques! 18.95 Hills Street Blues 18.95 Hoverforce 14.95 Imperium 18.95 Jack Nicholas Greatest 18 16.95 Killing Cloud 16.95 King of Chicago 14.95 Mig 29 Fulcrum 18.95 Monty Python 16.95 Panza Kick Boxing 18.95 Paperboy 2 16.95 Pit Fighter 18.95 RBI Baseball 2 14.95 Realms 18.95 Rocket Ranger 16.95 Sands of Fire 13.95 Shanghai 2 19.95 Sherman 4 14.95 Shadowlands 18.95 Sleeping Gods Lie Special Forces 26.95 Spell Casting 101 18.95 Spot 16.95 Star Saga TWO 14.95 Slunl Car Racer 16.95 Super Oil Road 16.95 Super Space Invaders 16.95 Three Siooges 16.95 T.V. Sporls Baseball 21.95 T.V. Sports Basketball 14.95 T.V. Sports Boxing 18.95 T.V. Sports Football 14.95 Trump Casino 2 18.95 Winter Super Sports '92 16.95 Wolfpack 1895 World Class Leaderboard 14.95 SD EUROMAGS Get the latest news on the best PC titles from Europe! These high gloss, full color magazines also feature a demo-packed playable cover disk with each issue! PC Format, PC Review, PC Zone, or PC Plus only $10 each. 16.95 SHIPPING (UPS Ground) For up to 3 pieces, by payment: Mastercard & Visa $5.00.C.O.D. (Cash Only) $10.00 Next day & second day air available! Call for prices on special shipping. Shipping times not guaranteed. Price & Availability subject to change! No refunds or exchanges. Defective products exchanged with same item. Products warrantied through Sideline. ORDERING INFORMATION, PLEASE READ CAREFULLY: All games are $60.00 each for Americans, $80.00 each for Canadians (GST Included), and $65.00 each for purchasers outside North America. We will let cheques clear before shipping (6 weeks!), so, money orders are preferred. PLEASE be sure to tell us which computer you own. Purchasers from outside of Canada should send payment in U.S. funds.\" Nova Scotia residents must add an extra 10% of the total for Provincial tax. SIMULATIONS CANADA, P.O. Box 452, Bridgewater, NS, Canada, B4V 2X6. Circle Reader Service #96 FAX ORDERS CALL (305) 491-6134 Need Info? Call (305) 491.9519 Dealer Inquiries Invited! 840 N.W.57th Court, Ft. Lauderdale, FL 33309 Circle Reader Service #88 Page 123 "


"TIME TAKE PROD NO. SCENE çmeak preveu Better Late? DATE DIRECTOR PRODUCED BY A Sneak Preview of Virgin's Reach for the Skies by Paul Rigby any moons ago, two flight simulations appeared to be on the scenes from WW2, plus digitized noises (e.g., Churchill's voice, sirens, brink of release to commemorate and celebrate the Battle of etc.), one will observe that Reach for the Skies employs an attractive Britain. The product from LucasArts, Battle of Britain: Their feature regarding the campaign. That is, it splits the operation into four Finest Hour, became a huge success. The Mirrorsoft game, Reach for phases; they are the German airforce's attempt to lure the RAF out into the Skies, a polygon-based simulation produced by Rowan Software, the Channel; the German attack on the radar installations; the attack never materialized. Due to more tweaks than one could shake a stick on RAF airfields; and the attack on industrial and civilian targets, better at, Reach for the Skies has undergone a variety of changes. After the known as \"The Blitz.\" death of publishing magnate, Robert Maxwell, which caused great disruption to his Mirror Corporation and its subsidiaries like MirrorRAF Command soft, the product was picked up by Virgin Games and is now finally being published in the U.S. As the British commander, one is supplied with intelligence about the known German threats for each particular day. These are highFrom Either Side of the Channel lighted on a strategic map. The player will be told what direction the \"bandits\" are flying in, what type of bombers they are, their specd, and The game focuses upon 70 crucial days of the Battle of Britain, the size of their force. Only one wave of German bombers will ever bevinning on Lune 10th, 1940. Depending on the difficulry level appear at a time, although secondary fighter squadrons may be poachselected, play begins with the player as either a pilot (active in combating after the bombers have swept by. Once a force is on the way, forces or practicing in a training mode) or a controller (where a selection of can be scrambled from any of England's ten Fighter Command targets is offered and one's set of responses is issued). The player can The player can airfields. The number of aircraft for an attack can be selected, as can airfields. The number of aircraft for an attack can be selected, as can control either British or German forces. In theory, the course of history their heading. Each airfield only holds one type of allied aircraft, either can be changed by applying different tactics (as the German side) or Spitfire or Hurricane. just failing to cope with German onslaught (as the British side). From the H.Q. to the Cockpit After running through the introductory demo that features digitized During flight, the player can control up to four aircraft per British squadron (or eight for the Germans). At any time, as in Flight of the Intruder (another Rowan Software production), the RAF player can transfer to the cockpit of any allied aircraft. Similarly, as in Flight of the Intruder, wingmen are available. They will watch each other's six\" bur, unfortunately, no orders can be given to one's fellow pilots. The player's wingman will follow his actions while the other aircraft will take events as they come. Radio messages in textual form (and digitized via a sound card) from the radar stations and other aircraft will appear on the top of the screen as the intercept progresses. For the Germans one can fly Me 109s, Me 110s and Stukas (plus the rear gunner). It is a shame that the heavier bombers (i.e.: Helli, Do17, Ju88) cannot be piloted. One can only be a tail or forward gunner. Rowan has been quoted as stating that flying the heavy bomber is an unexciting job; that they merely flew to the target, dropped their bombs and flew back again. Try telling the actual Helll pilots that their mission was never exciting! The decision not to allow the player to fly the heavy MODO Page 124 Computer Gaming World "


"THIS OPPONENT IS PROGRAMMED TO BE CHALLENGING. this one wants to rip your lungs out. If you think you're good at games, then let's have some people are terrific, and even the prices are competitive. So real fun. When you're online with GEnie Multi-Player put some new life into your joystick, and sign on. We'll see Games, you're playing real people, in real time. Some of just how good you are. C Sign up now: 1. Set your modem the best players around the world. Splash a bandit in Air for half duplex (local echo) at 300, 1200 or 2400 baud. Warrior, and you've just taken out eight other guys, who'll 2. Dial toll free 1-800-638-8369. Upon connection, enter be back gunning for you. Blast a MechWarrior in Multiplayer HHH 3. At the U# = prompt, enter XTX99327,BLAST Battle Tech, and who knows? Could be that jerk from the then press RETURN 4. Have a major credit card or your coast. Could be a mercenary who's looking for a few good checking account number ready. For more information friends. With GEnie, the possibilities are endless, the in the U.S. or Canada, call 1-800-638-9636. IS ODO GEnie. GEnie multi-player games Kesnog 100% ORGANIC OPPONENTS AIR WARRIOR MULTIPLAYER BATTLETECH STELLAR EMPEROR MUKESM41corporation Air Warrior is a registered trademark and Stellar Emperor is a trademark of Kesmal Corporation. Multiplayer BattleTech is a trademark and MechWarrior and BattleTech are registered trademarks of FASA Corporation. Circle Reader Service #59 "


"piew STRASLLS TO SOUL TOUT 268 CG bombers is a poor one. It should have been up to Rowan to provide that excitement and leave it to the players to decide. Readers may be pleased to know that Rowan has implemented a workable rudder into the program, controlled by either the keyboard or separate pedals (even two joysticks are supported). However, Rowan failed to include auto-centering for keyboard users. Manual centering is a trial and is completely unnecessary. Cockpits for the British side are generic. On the German side there are three different gunner positions and a one-off cockpit for the Stuka. A generic cockpit is given to both the Me109 and Mel10. Esprit de Flying Corps Unfortunately, there are no medals awarded only points. A player flying for the British, if he does well on a particular mission, receives a visit from the King. Why the King would spare time to visit a pilot just because he had a good day and not toss him a DFC (Distinguished Flying Cross) through the post instead, is beyond me. I firmly believe that the awarding of medals and promotions is more satisfying. Postmission reports could have been better structured, too. As it is, they are rather woolly and, possibly, confusing to some players. It is good to see that morale plays a big part in the campaign. It is based, or scored, upon averave morale of the whole airfield rather than upon individual pilots. Although, if a pilot arrives from an airfield of low morale to an airfield of high morals, the average morale of that airfield will be reduced. If an airfield is garnering a lot of kills, morale will go up improving their overall skill. If they are losing pilots regularly, morale will fall. There is a slight morale loss for damaged aircraft too. Left to recuperate, airfields with low morale will improve in morale, but only very slowly Where do Airplanes Come From? There are four aircraft factories producing one aircraft each, every four days. From these, airfields can be re-stocked. Aircraft also can be repaired at home bases. However, if an airfield is damaged, aircraft repair is slowed. If factories are damaged, they will stop producing aircraft until fully repaired. If the British force drops down below 50% then Britain is proclaimed lost. What's in the Sights Two welcome cosmeric features are gouraud shading and light sourcing, highlighted by the addition of a 256-color VGA palette. Imagine observing a 3-D rendition of a Spitfire from the external viewpoint. Then, roll the aircraft. The effect of lightsourcing means that, as the wing's upper surfaces roll over to face the ground, the color of the upper wings progressively darken. Well, they turn away from the sun don't they? Conversely, lower surfaces lighten. It is an extremely nice effect to see. Sound can be driven by both Roland LAPC-1 and SoundBlaster simultaneously (via a mixer of some sort) providing satisfactory noises, but never anything special. The basic flight model for Reach for the Skies is a generic form that obeys the fundamental laws of aeronautics. Rolls and loops are well implemented, as are stalls. Progressively tipping a wing on a lazy roll will result in a loss of height and a possible stall which is easily recovered from. Height is realistically lost while flying straight and level with the throttle pulled to minimum. Checking the Specs There are supposed to be overlaid patches that specify the characMWYROZATGE E LES AG S NEG teristics of each individual aircraft. However, I couldn't find any. For example, even though the Spitfire Mark 1 carried eight guns, only two are simulated; its historical straight-and-level speed of 360 MPH can never be reached (speed tops out at 300 MPH); and high speed diving enforces no problem on the Spitfire where, in reality, it almost locked the ailerons, allowing only a little movement in the rolling axis, if any. Further, negative G or bunting never initiates the Merlin Ill engine modeled in the game to cut out as it did in real life (a significant feature and one of the very real disadvantages compared to the Me109 which never suffered from this complaint — resulting in challenging dogfights for RAF pilots). Flighrs can be recorded using a range of different orders, angles and so on, with the game's VCR utility. Recordings are portable and recorded files can be extremely long since the game uses expanded memory to store the information. However, options are limited and will never scale the heights observed in Red Baron, for example. One odd but handy utility is a DOS file that tidies extraneous files on the hard disk, depending upon what one wishes to dispose of. This is, indeed, a thoughtful gesture. A Real \"No Brainer\" Until this point in the review, one might weigh the pros and cons and decide thar Reach for the Skies is a pretty good simulation. Alas, I have yet to speak of the game's artificial intelligence. Actually, it has have yet to spe none to speak of -or very little, at best. For all of its technical and cosmetic excellence, RFTS is too easy. The enemy is no where near aggressive enough. While playing the RAF, I was never aware that I was under the cosh, while playing the RAI, I was never av a struggling nation keeping the mighty Luftwaffe at bay. Playing the RAF in RFTS is like shooting ducks at a penny arcade. Bombers can be easily brought down from any angle one wishes to fire from. The German escorts are poor and almost Gandhi-like in their aggressiveness. Another thing: German bombers hardly ever hit their targets. After dozens of missions flown in all phases of the campaign, flying as the RAF, I experienced one targer hir — one! I often repelled entire waves of German bombers plus their escorts with a single Spitfire. Playing the Germans is not much better. Again, another duck-shoot. Spitfires sit on a bomber's six, just waiting to be shot down (they always are, too). Fellow German bomber pilots/bombardiers are, again, very poor and hardly ever hit their targets, making the player very frustrated and itching to get into the cockpit which, of course, they can't. Thus, for this extremely important reason, Reach for the Skies cannot be recommended as a viable flight simulation. This is a shame because the game has a lot going for it. It is far more simulation-oriented than Lucasfilm's Their Finest Hour. However, it hardly contains a single percent of that game's challenge and gameplay. CGW Page 126 Computer Gaming World "


"es Slow Screen Redraw Needn't Be Par For The Course... O DO You know what we're talking about... those other golf simulations that seem to take forever to draw the screen. Well, Wilson ProStaff Golf puts an end to all that waiting with fast-action screen redraws! So what does this get you? Faster game play and less frustration, for one thing. Need we say more? O.K., since you asked, we should also mention the wide variety of side-game options -things like Shoot Out, Stroke Play, Match Play and Best Ball. You get a whopping ten options in all to customize your round... simply pick and choose to create your own personal playing style. Wilson ProStaff Golf is an ideal game for golfers of all levels, from beginner to expert. Making a shot is quick and easy just select a club and adjust your stance, take aim, then choose your power level and ball spin and watch it fly! An undulating grid shows every curve and contour of the fairways and greens, for greater accuracy as you plan your shot. Finally, one game brings it all together to give golfers what they've been looking for a challenging course, intuitive controls and realistic game play. So don't get teed off at the competition, go with a real winner... Wilson ProStaff Golf. Wilson ProStait Featuring Fast-Action Screen Re-Draw ProStall KONAMI NOVOTRE Wilson and ProStaff are registered trademarks of Wilson Sporting Goods Co. Konami is a registered trademark of Konami Co., Ltd. 1992 Konami. All rights reserved. designed & developed by KONAMI  INTERNATIONAL ETT\" HOLE Circle Reader Service #107 "


"VIKING ) SOFTWARE, INC. Adventure/Role-Playing Past IBM Mac IBM Mac REALMS OF A IRKANIA 39 . Pools of Darkness Prophecy of the Shadow Quest for Glory! (VGA) Quest for Glory II Quest for Glory III Ragnarok Realms Realms of Arkania Red Crystal Return to Zork Ultima VI Ultima VII Forge of Virtue Ultima VII Part 2 Ultima Trilogy Ultima Trilogy 2 Ultima Underworld Ultima Underworld 2 Uncharted Waters Warriors of Legend Wizardry Trilogy Wizardry 4 Wizardry 5 Wizardry 6 (Bane) Wizardry 7 (Crusaders) IBM Mac Wing Commander 19 . Secret Mission 1 & 11 19 ca. . Wing Commander Deluxe 49 . Wing Commander II Special Operations I 19 Special Operations 2 19 . Specch Pack Wing Commander III mgs X-Wing  SENDANGDONSSsan Hint Books 12 38 A.Train Offical Scrat. Guide AD&D Clue Books Avatar Adventures Bard's Tale III Chaos Strikes Back Chuck Yeaper Handbook Civilization Clouds of Xeen Dagger of Amon Ra Darklands Dungeon Master Realms of Arkania Sir-Tech breaks off from the Wizardry line & brings another great role playing adventure. Utilizes excellent graphics and sound. Very hot item! IBM $37 burkness Lemmings. Wicompanion disk 15 Lord of the Rings Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes Lucasfilm Air Combat Lucas Arts Adv. Game Book Harpoon Bartlebook Heaven & Earth Strat. Guide Magic Candle 2 Martian Dreams Might & Magic Official Guide Might & Magic Ill Patriot Official Strat Guide Planet's Edge Pools of Darkness Powermonger Official Strat. 12 Populous 1 & 11 Off Strat Bock 12 Quest for Clues: Book of Orbs II Quest for Clues: Man of Swords 11 Quest for Clues 3 & 4 164 Railroad Tycoon Ragnarok Strat. Guide Rex Nebular Ringworld Run 5 Magazine 1-17 Secret of Monkey Island I & II 10 ea. Sherlock Holmes Sierra Hint Books Sim Earth: Official Strat. Guide 12 Sim Life: Official Strat. Guide 12 Star Control 2 Starflight I & II Star Trek 25th Anniversary 10 Strike Commander Guide Stunt Island Guide Summoning Ultima: Official Book Ultima II-VI Ultima VII Ultima VII Part 2 Ultima VII & Underworld 11 Ultima Underworld I & II 10 ez V for Victory #1 Battle Book 12 Veil of Darkness Wing Commander I & Il Guide 12 Wizardry 6 (Bane) Wizardry 7: Hint Book . . . Sadzornos WING) IBM Mac AD&D Starter Kit 31 . AD&D Collector's Edition 39 . AD&D Collector's Edit.2 43 . AD&D. Unlimited Advent. 37 5/93 Bards Tale III Bards Tale Constr. Set 32 Betrayal at Krondor Black Crypt Castles Northern Camp. 19 Castles II Challenge of Five Realms Champions of Krynn Conquests of the Longbow 42 Curse of the Azure Bonds 1537 Darklands Art Disk w HB Darklands MPE 33 Dark Queen of Krynn 3137 Darkside of Xeen 42 Dark Sun: Shattered Lands 4/93 11193 Grey Isles Camp. 4793 Daughter of Serpents 32 Death Knights of Krynn 19 Dragonlance Collec. Ed. 43 Eric the Unready Eye of the Beholder Eye of the Beholder 2 Eye of the Beholder 3 42 Four Crystals of Trazere 34 Gateway Savage Frontier 31 Gemfire Gryphon Master of Havlar 11/93 Heimdall Inca Inindo King's Quest IV King's Quest V (VGA) King's Quest VI King's Ransom Legacy Legacy of Necromancer TBA Legend of Kyrandia 37 Legends of Drakla 7/93 Legends of Valor Lord of the Rings Lord of the Rings 2 Lost Vikings IQ . Lure of Temptress Magic Candie 2 Magie Candle 3 Martian Dreams Might & Magic 1811 . 32 Might & Magic 3937 Might & Magic IV M&M Clouds of Xeen 42 . Merchant Colony 32 . Pirates Gold Pool of Radiance 37 tal IBM Mac 9 E Veil of Darkness This gothic nightmare is not for the faint hearted. Plunge into a maze of vampires, werewolves and zombies accompanied with chilling graphics and sound FIX IBM $37 3125 10 31 HBHD Present Alone in the Dark Amazon Batman Returns Blue Force: Next of Kin Spring Carmen San Diego: Past Carmen San Diego: Europe 34 Carmen San Diego: Time 34 Carmen San Diego: USA 34 Carmen San Diego: World 34 Carmen San Diego: Deluxe 49 Carmen San Diego. Amer. Past 38 Castle of Dr. Brain Champions Classic Adv. Pak (LucasArts) 37 Dagger of Amon Ra Di Vu 15 || Eco Quest 2 Elvin Elvira 2 Freddy Pharkas Heart of China Indy Jones/Last Crusade 34 Indy Jones/Fate of Atlantis 39 Leisure Suit Larry Trilogy 53 Leisure Suit Larry! Leisure Suit Larry 5 Lost Files Sherlock Holmes 42 Lost Treasures of Infocom 42 Lost Treasures of Infocom ll 37 The Manhole Maniae Mansion 2 Out of this World Police Questi Police Quest 2 Police Quest 3 Rocketeer w/Sound Source Savage Empire Sea Rogue Seal Team Spelleasting 301 Strike Commander Speech Pack Uninvited (Windows) Veil of Darkness Waxworks Willy Beamish Wolfenstein/Spear Des 32 37 . 37 37 . 42 37 Hardware 1537 HHHH Savage Empire Secret of Monkey Island Secret of Monkey Island 2 Secret of the Silver Blades Shadowgate Shadowgate (Windows) Shadowlands Shadow Sorcerer Spellcraf: Spoils of War The Summoning Tales of Magic Treasures Savage Frontier Ultima IV Ultima V Future Armour Geddon Bad Blood Battletech Powerhits Buck Rogers Buck Rogers 2 Breach 2 Cyberspace Dune Dune X-Wing Pilot X-wing. A-wing, or Ywing against the Imperial Empire. Includes combat training, tours of duty, promotions, decorations, replay camera. Digitized music and dialogue from the movie. Must have! IBM $42 H Epis Adlib APS 2001 Cobra Joystick CH-Flightstick CH.Virtual Plot Flight Yoke 2000 Gravis Eliminator Gamecard 29 Gravis Joystick Gravis Pro Gravis Ultrasound Pilot Control Stand 21 Pro Audio Spectrum-16 210 Pro Audio Spectrum Plus 145 SoundBlaster ASP 16 235 SoundBlaster Pro 180 SoundBlaster Pro Basic 150 SoundBlaster Microchannel 269 Thunderboard Thrust Master flight stick 69 Thrust Master Pro 114 Thrust Master Rudder Pedal 109 Thrust Master Throttle 79 Thrust Master TSR's 38 . GACY LM OR Dungeon Master Seralls 12 Elvira 1 & 11 1 0 ea. Empire Deluxe Strat. Guide 2 Eye of the Beholder 2 F1s Strike Eagle Ill Guide 12 Falcon Air Combat Falcon 3 Strategic Guide Global Conquest Guide widisk 15 Great War Planes Gunship 2000 Strategy Guide Jetfighter II. Surat. Guide Legend of Kyranda Legends of Valor Ami . . March Specials IBM .. A Line in the Sand Champions of Krynn Centurion Death Knights of Krynn Eye of the Beholder F-16 Combat Pilot Int. Sports Challenge Links/Bountiful Course Disk MBT. Cen. Germany Overrun Secret of Monkey Island I Sim City Add-ons 1 & 2 Space Quest IV Starflight I & II Stratego Test Drive II: Supercars Treasures of Savage Frontier Ultima VI Wing Commander !  ... Elite Plus Flashback Free D.C Gateway Hard Nova 16 Jonny Crash Fall Leather Goddesses Phobos 2 46 Legions of Krella/Star Legions 37 \"M\" 6/93 Mantis Speech Pack Martian Memorandum Mechwarrior 2 Megatraveller! Megatraveller 2 Nova 9 Out of this World Planet's Edge Powerhits: Sci-Fi Privateer Protostar: War on Frontier Rex Nebular MPE Ringworld. Revenge Patri. Rise of the Dragon (VGA) Space Hulks Space Quest 1-11 Space Quest ! Space Quest IV Space Quest V Spellammer Star Control 2 StarFlight 1&11 16 ca. 37 ca Sur Trek 25th Anniversary Star Trek Next Generation 30 Strike Commander Speech Pack Terminator 2029 Twilight 2000 Ultrabots Legacy You've just inherited a home from your evil ancestors. Explore over 400 rooms of terror in a desperate struggle to stay alive. Excellent graphics and sound FIX IBM $34 Latest and Greatest Battles of Destiny Conquered Kingdoms Dune II F-15 ITI Front Page Sports: Football Mercenaries Pacific War Star Control II Ultima Underworld II V for Victory Series "


"For information and release dates To place orders in U.S. and Canada 1-(800) 852-6187 Fax 1-(404) 840-7925 2890 Lake Colony Drive, Suite 12, Norcross, GA 30071 Please have credit card ready! Open Saturdays 10-5 for your convenience. SAME DAY SHIPPING on items in stock Hours: Mon-Fri 10am-10pm EST (6am-7pm PST). UPS Rates: Ground: $5.00 3-day Air: $6.00 2-Day Air: 7.00 AK & HI: 12.50 COD Add: 5.00 Overseas: Avail. Mail Rates: AK & HI: 6.00 Canada: 6.00 Overseas: Avail. Prices are subject to change so please call first! PHONE: (404) 840-7906 24 HR. FAX: (404) 840-7925 Strategy IBM Mac 22 TEGR-VICTORY IBM Mac 42 42 Red Storm Rising Classic Shadow President Shuttle Special Forces Utopia %HB 32 . Simlife SimLife (Windows) Solitaire (Windows) Solitaires Journey Spoils of War Stunt Island Super Tetris Super Tetris (Windows) Tristan Sci-Fi Pre-WWII IBM Mac Ambush 4193 Ancient Art of War Skies 37 Blue and the Grey 593 Caesar Centurion Civil War Vol. 1, 2 or 3 27 Cohort 2 Conquered Kingdoms Conquest of Japan Discovery of Columbus Genghis Khan Gettysburg Gold of the Americas L'Empereur Liberty or Death Merchant Colony No Greater Glory Nobunaga's Ambition 2 Paladin il Prelude to Jutland P.T.O. Rampart Red Baron (VGA) Mission Builder Romance of 3 Kingdoms 42 . Romance of 3 Kingdoms 2 42 B Utopia Virtual Reality Studio 2 Wacky Funsters Ween: The Prophecy Worderis HEBHDDDHHHHH 41 18 1093 Sports Empire Deluxe This is the modern version of the award-winning EMPIRE. Now with Super VGA, digitized sound FIX, network & modem capability, scenario editor, and more. A must! IBM $37 Battlefield 2000 Breach 2 Cyber Empires Fireteam 2200 Global Effect Imperium Mantis Speech Pack Meclamander Mercenaries Mercenaries2 Reach for the Stars Robosport (Windows) Rules of Engagement Rules of Engagement 2 Second Conflict (Windows) Space Inc Spaceward HO! (Windows) Spaceward HO! (DOS) Spectre Star Legions Star Legions 2 Theatre of War SVGA When Two Worlds War 6/93 28 38 V for Victory: Market Garden The most popular WWII series in gaming software adds another proud product. Simulates Allied airborne invasion of Germany in 1944. SVGA graphics required IBM/Mac $43 % 28 37 4-D B All-Amer. College Ftbl 92 Andretti's Racing Challenge ATP Tennis Bill Elliot Nascar Car and Driver 16 37 16 31 32 IBM Mac Complete PGA Tour Golf 31 . Earl Weaver Baseball . 31 Earl Weaver Baseball 11 16 . Front Pg Sports: Football 42 . Front Pg Sports: Baseball 3/93 . Front Pz Sports: Bsktball 93 . Games: Summer Challenge 35 Games: Winter Challenge 35 Grand Prix 37 Grand Slam Bridge II Hardball 3 MLBPA Player Disk 15 Stadium Disk Hockey League Sim 11 Indy 500 Jack Nicklaus Sig. Ed. Golf Course Disk #2 John Madden Football 11 Jordan Flight Links Links 386 Pro Mauna Kea Crse. Disk MicroLeague Baseball NCAA College Football 92 37 NFL Challenge NFL Video Pro Football 47 PGA Tour Golf PGA Tourn. Crse. Dsk 15 PGA Tour Golf (Windows) 37 PGA Tourn. Crse. Disk 15 Pool Shark Pro League Baseball Power Hits: Sports Tony LaRussa Ult. Baseball 19 Add-On Disks Tony LaRussa 2 92 Stats Disk ALINL Stadiums Fantasy Draft Wayne Gretzky Hockey2 36 Hockey League Sim. 28 Wayne Gretzky Hockey 3 37 Wilson Pro Golf World Circuit 31 . 32 4793 34 6/93 37 . . . Siege Dogs of War Warlords Enhanced Warlords 11 Waterloo 19 19 6/93 37 8/93 . . 37 . World War II IBM Mac V for Victory. Mkt Garden 43 43 V for Victory Casserine Pass 20 V for VictoryStalingrad 30 30 Victory at Sca Warlords Western Front WW II: Battles of Pacific 5893 1993 Steve Fawn General 25 A Train Modern 5932 Construction Set Air Bucks Are We There Yet? Battles of Destiny Battle Chess Battle Chess (Windows) 32 BattleChess 4000 (VGA) 32 . BattleChess 4000 (SVGA) 37 . Buzz Aldrin's Race to Space 42 Caesar's Palace Caesar's Palace (Windows) 18 . Chessmaster 3000 Chessmaster 3000 (Windows) 43 . Civilization Civilization Master Edition 4542 Classic 5 Classic 5 (Windows) Club Racquetball Command HQ Classic Design Your Train Warlords Enhanced This classic wargame has been on top of CGW's Reader Poll for 2 years. Addictive medieval strategy game with 1-8 human/computer players. A+ rating IBM $19 38 n.BBBBBB Keyboard Overlays A-10 Tank Killer AT.P. Aces of the Pacific 8-17 Flying Fortress C. Yeager Air Combat F-15 Strike Eagle II F-117A Nighthawk Falcon 3.0/3.0.1 Flight Simulator 4.0 Jerfighter I and II Megafortress Secret Weapons Luftwaffe 10  21 IBM Mac Design Your RR Design Your Landscape Dominant Specics Dominion Eco Quest 2 El-Fish Empire Deluxe Erle The Unready Facetris lll Flight Sim 40 Sound and Graphics Global Conquest Gobling Grandest Admiral Grand Slam Bridge 1 Heaven and Earth Hong Kong Mahjong Hong Kong Mahjong Pro Hoyles Classic Incredible Machine Ishida Lemmings More Lemmings & Game More Lemmings Lemmings 2 Lexi-Cross Life & Death II Lost Admiral Lost Admiral Enhanced 12/93 Monopoly Monopoly Deluxe DOS/Win 37 Origin FIX Screen Saver 25 Perfect General 38 WWII Scenario Disk 22 Great Battles 20th Cen 25 Perfect General Enhanced 8/93 Pinball: Windows 32 Pool Shark Populous 16 Populatus ? World Editor 3/93 Powermonger 31 WWI Scenario Disk 3/93 Power Politics Power Hits: Movies RR. Tycoon Classic Reach for the Skies Risk Risk (Windows) Surgon V Scrabble Deluxe (Windows) Sharif On Bridge Sharif On Bridge (Windows) Shuttle SimAnt 3.0 39 42 CD-ROM 19 CARRIERS AT WAR Aces of the Pacific WWII: 1946 RAF in the Pacific Aces Over Europe Campaign Disk! Action North Atlantic Action Stations v3.2 Data Disk Air Raid Pearl Harbor Air Warrior B-17 Flying Fortress Banzai Battlecank Barbarossa Bismarck Campaign Carriers at War 4235 Const. Kit 37 30 Carrier Strike 42 Expansion Disk #1 Clash of Steel 4/932 Fleet Commander 6/93 Fleet Med German Raiders Atlantie 26 Grand Fleet Great Naval Battles Super Ships/Atlantic Scenario Builder America/Atlantic 19 High Command High Cmd, Enhan. SVGA 5/93 In Harm's Way Malta Storm Marianas Turkey Shoot MBT Central Germany 39 . MBT Kursk New World Order 2/93 Packie Theater Op Pacific War Panzer Bardes Patton Strikes Back 17 19 Reach for the Skies River Plate Rommel North Africa Second Front Secret Weapons Luftwaffe DO-335 plane disk HE 162 P.38 P-80 Seventh Fleet Silent Service 2 Silent Service 2 Classic Task Force 1942 Their Finest Hour/Buhuks. 44 . Third Reich V for Victory, Utah Beach 43 37 V for Victory Velikiye Luki 43 43 42 42 39 47 47 47 47 7th Fleet ATP A 10 Warthog A Line in the Sand ATAC Air Force Commander Allied Forces Comanche: Max. Overkill Expansion Disk 1 Expansion Disk 2 Conflict: Korea Conflict: Middle East Crisis in the Kremlin F-117A Nighthawk (VGA) F-15 Il Classic F.15 111 F-15 III Voice Commander 18 F-19 Voice Commander 18 Falcon 3.0 Operation Fighting Tiger 25 Falcon MC Flight Sim 4.0 Flight Planner Sound & Graphics Rescue 911 Scenery Design Global Effect Gunship 2000 Campaign Disk Halls of Montezuma Harpoon vl3 Battleset 2 or 3 Battleset 4 Harpoon Designer Series 32 Harpoon Scenario Editor Harpoon Challenger Pak SE 49 Harpoon il Harner Assault Jet Fighter 2 Add on disk F2 wladd on disk Jump let Jump let \"Ace Pack KGB MI Tank Platoon MacArthurs War Megafortress Mission Disk 1 of 2 Megafortress Megapack Pacific Islands 11 Patriot 26 37  37 5193 UCZENIE Carriers at War Construction Kit This kit allows modification of existing CAW scenarios or the creation of new scenarios. New scenarios includeWake Island, Guadalcanal, and Tarawa. IBM/Mac $37 12 Roads to Gettysburg The 7th Guest Amazing Universe Battle Chess Battle Chess Enhanced Blade Buzz Aldrin's Race Space Campaign Case of Cautious Condor Challenge of five Realms Chessmaster 3000 Conquest of the Longbow Creepy Casde Cyberspace Dapper of Amon Ra Dark Sun Destination-Mars Dune Eco Quest Great Naval Battles Gunship/Midwinter Guy Spy Iron Helix Jones in the Fast Lane King's Ransom King's Quest V The Legend of Kyrandia Loom Lost Treasures Infocom I Lost Treasures Infocom II M-I Tank Platoon Magnetic Scrolls Maniac Mansion 2 Mantis Manhole Enhanced Murder Makes Strange Deadfellows North American Indians Pacific Islands Pacific Islands Prince of Persia The Secret of Monkey Island 47 Secret Weapons of Lutowate Sharif on Bridge Sherlock Holmes Cons. Det. I 43 Sherlock Holmes Cons. Det. Il 43 Shuttle Spaceship Warlock Space Quest IV Star Trek 25th Anniv. Edition Toal Baseball Total Distortion Ultima VI Bundle Uluma Undwld/Wing Co. 47 Victor and Yondo Where World Carmen Deluxe 52 Wily Beamish Wing Commander + Secret Missions 1 & 2 Wing Commander II Deluxe 47 Wing Commander/Ultima VI 57 Wolfpack 3/93 SimCity SimCity (Windows) SimCity Supreme SimCity Supreme II SimCity 2000 SimEarth SimEarth (Windows) SimFarm 47 47 37 57 . Circle Reader Service #118 "


"EASTWARD HO! A Replay of Columbia Games' EastFront C-CHOUC by Michael Peck German player: Paul Saunders Soviet player: Michael Peck PIEVIOUS S CI, WC WCHCHGame Display Preferences Setups OKH: 0 Adlust Lening The following article is a replay of Computer East Front by Columbuilt a strong line in the north to hold the vital production centers. An bia Games Inc. Computer East Front is a faithful translation of infantry screen was left in the south with reserves in the cities behind I the popular board game of the Russo-German war. The article the front. describes the opening terms of the Summer 1942 scenario, when the Germans grasped their last opportunity to defeat the Soviet behemoth. Turn 1 (First half of June 1942) The scenario was played using the game's electronic mail feature. The great drama along the Don unfolded as the Soviet defenders in the south melted under waves of dust-covered panzers. Voroshilov fell, Situation and Deployment and the gap between the Don and Doners rivers was threaded. The The Germans stared into the jaws of a strategic dilemma as they gazed Germans struck in groups of four panzer corps — the maximum across the immensity of the endless Russian steppes. With the Russians allowed by stacking. Although not bringing along infantry maximized still groggy from their drubbing the striking power, it also meant the expenEastFront: Winter 1942 Scenario previous summer, the Wehrmacht sive armor absorbed all the losses. still dominated the battlefield. Yet, Nov II 1942 Weather: Snow Select a unit placement The Germans had ordered one HQ to it was too weak to seize all of its East Front German Setup hex or adjust unit size blitz, which gave a second movement and strategic objectives. The Germans combat phase, though at the cost of dehad a good shot at taking Moscow, Size pleting the HQ. German armor and inLeningrad or the Caucasian oil fantry pour through the ruptured line to fields, but not all three. Moscow and 50 Mol penetrate as far as the outskirts of StalinLeningrad were right on the front grad. Two German infantry corps also lines, but surrounded by dense for29 Inf 39 Panz tried to seize Rostov, but suffered heavy ests and rivers. So, the Germans 9893 losses in the built-up terrain. The Soviets opted to thrust across the open DI SF SF D1 DF DF moved swiftly to plug their shattered line. southern steps between Moscow and Because using HQs is expensive, they Rostov. To ease the way, they used 50 Mot only activated the STAVKA HQ, which the game's limited intelligence fea32 had an unlimited command range. But ture, which hides the strength and D1 SF DF with a six-unit limit, STAVKA couldn't type of enemy units not in combat, both maneuver units in the south and pull as well as the ability to reallocate Available Unit reinforcements down from the north. So, steps among units before a scenario the Soviets used local forces to form a begins. Each of the corps in front of Leningrad and Moscow were hasty line along the Don and in front of the open terrain near depleted to their minimum one step, and their strength points were Stalingrad. Even a precious HQ, locked in combat with a panzer corps, used to bring the armor and infantry in the south to full strength. The was left behind to shore up the line. As a small consolation, two southern armor was also dispersed so as not to tip off the Soviets. The German mech corps out of supply range of a friendly German rail hex German plan was to kill Soviet units and get victory points) and then suffered attrition. execute a hook on Moscow from the south. Turn 2 (Second half of June) For their part, the Soviet dilemma was no less acure and a lot more frightening. The front was huge and their units and HQs were weaker The Germans chose not to blitz this turn. Blitz commands deplete than their German counterparts. Seeing what appeared to be strong an HQ's strength, and with two turns to go before replacement time, stacks around Moscow (and not knowing their strength) the Soviets HQ's must be rationed. Yet, the Wehrmacht still created big headaches South Vitebsk Page 130 Computer Gaming World "


"Damian lalu German Selup DoDB DI LODOU 48 Panz 38 Inl 7 Int 12 Int for the Red Giant when an isolated panzer corps used strategic moveFirst, think long and carefully before activating HQs and, especially, ment to move into empty Stalingrad. Meanwhile, three infantry corps blitzing with them. Blitzing consumes two steps in a single turn and, piled onto the fortress of Sevastapol while the panzer battering ram with two turns a month and only one step replaced at the beginning again slammed the Soviet line between of each month, players can easily find EastFront: Winter 1942 Scenario Rostov and Voroshilov. The Sevastapol Game Display Preferences Setups themselves with a pile of useless HQs. and Rostov defenders inflicted heavy Weather: Snow Nov II 1942 Tocadius on The Soviets must be particularly careEnst Front losses upon the attackers, but again the OKH: O ttien vw planemen hex ful; once their two-step HQs blitz, Soviet line was ruptured. they are complerely depleted. The Fortunately, no blitz gave the Soviets three-step German HOs have a time to again reform their line. But Marslightly easier time. One good rechshal Zhukov cursed as the swastikas flew nique is to cluster two or three HQs over Stalingrad. With units only able to together and blitz on alternate turns. move two and three hexes normally, rail Nonetheless, with only four or five 29 O3 movement is vital, and a hostile StalinHQs on each side, only select porDI DF DF D1 SF SF grad blocked rail transit between Mostions of the front will be in command. cow and the Caucuses. This time, the That's why the STAVKA and OKW Soviets activated STAVKA and the local high command HQ's are so valuable; HBN2 southern HQs to take advantage of a they can command units anywhere D1 SF SF DI SF SF fragmented German line. With supply on the map. One should also rememrestricted to two hexes from a friendly ber that units can make unsupported rail hex, supply effects are harsh, particuattacks. Although their offensive larly since cutting supply lines depletes enemy units at the end of the power is halved in such a case, it is a way to get units into a hex in friendly turn. Soviet armor managed to cut German supply and rail preparation for a later attack. lines, and seven German mech corps lost a step apiece at the end of the Next, decide where to concentrate. East Front is an artritional game, Soviet turn. Still, after one month the Germans have managed to open and units tend to die slowly unless hit by strong forces. Particularly in a bulge between the Caucuses and Voronezh south of Moscow. cities and forests, where the defender takes one-half or one-third normal losses, dislodging a strong force is nearly impossible. It is easier Turn 3 (Beginning of July) to try and isolate those points and let supply attrition do the work. During production, the Germans and Soviets both gave priority to Remember that four corps may stack in a hex, but only two may cross augmenting their HOs first. Without them. combat units are essena single hexside in a single movement phase, so plan on striking the tially paralyzed. The Germans used their remaining resources to enemy line from multiple hexsides. Only one unit may cross an augment panzer forces. The Soviets concentrated on rebuilding deenemy-controlled river line at a time, so use less expensive infantry to stroved cadres. Though more expensive than augmenting on-map force the bridgehead — and take the losses — and then, move the forces, STAVKA wanted as many maneuver units as possible in the armor across south. The new cadres were placed in the Caucuses and on the rail lines Though the computer chooses losses, it will always take from the on the eastern edge of the map. strongest piece first. This puts players in a dilemma since striking with In July the Germans begin with attacks at two crossing sites over the pure armor doubles offensive power, but lets armor ger shot up. The Don south of Voronezh. One was repulsed, but the other established Germans must be especially watchful because their replacements are a bridgehead. In the North, the Germans finally stirred with a bloody twice as costly as each Soviet step. Also, players must decide whether and unsuccessful assault into the fortress to allocate replacements to existing EastFront: Historical Scenarlo of Leningrad. The Soviets responded by Gome Display Dicterences Setups units or return destroyed cadres to the forming a line south of Moscow. In a map. German replacements are more Jun 11941 Weather: Dry Select new deploymentbex East Front sneaky move, a lone rank corps locked German Selup OKH: 0 expensive but their cadres are cheaper Amy Group North in battle cast of Rostov disengaged and compared to their Soviet counterEnd Phase moved to cut the German railhead in 20 parts. Nonetheless, cadres start weak the south. The Germans watched with and only one step can be added to dismay as a panzer corps in Stalingrad them per month, so losing a cadre and two infantry corps in Rostov died means that corps won't be full 41 Panz for lack of supply, while several other 1 Int strength for three or four months. units suffered attrition. Dismay turned BE O 3 || EH 2 A viral factor is supply. Despite the to confusion as they realized it shouldn't DI DF DF DI SF SF glitch, the computer version still demhave been happening. In the board onstrates the danger of ourrunning game, units locked in battle or out of 26 Inf 28 Int supply lines and of a narrow thrust. A supply exert no zones of control, so two-hex range is short, and rail lines some of their corps should be able to DI SF SF DI SF SF can be easily blocked by zones of contrace a line along the Don. A computer trol. A hard-pressed defender can try glitch seems to be the only explanation. Nom / h to maneuver along the attacker's At this point the game is called, with the Germans well ahead on flanks and cut his supply lines. What points. Although the Soviets will be stronger by winter, they have lost is devastating is that enemy units suffer attrition at the end of the too many cadres and a precious HQ. In hindsight, the Red Army friendly turn, so they don't have time to re-establish supply. should have been stronger in the south. But the Germans needed to Finally, both the computer and the boardgame fiendishly use hidden be more careful of their supply lines, and probably should have tried combat values to turn any game into a tense game of bluff and feint. more to husband their armor. Probe the enemy line to see how strong he really is and use fast mech units to suddenly descend on an outnumbered defender. Enjoy the Tips feeling of surprising an opponent, and don't be surprised when that Since Computer East Front is a faithful translation of the board game stack of weak infantry turns into an armored unit that completely turns (except for tracing supply lines), many of the same cautions apply. the tables. CGW Danzig Cancel SE 616 EEEEE Vilna EE IEEDID SEES LE Warsaw May 1993 Page 131 "


"  Access Software, Inc. 4910 West Amelia Earhart Dr. S. Lake City, UT 84116 (800) 800-4880 ANNE KUR BET Erial SEVINC Street Glend Blata Trenal secol Tep Seerei Dol lo Mauna Kea Links Championship Course was poor, or a coach should be fired, or a draft was ineptly run. Regardless of the situation, the armchair GM can usually do better. Now they can prove it with this update of Bethesda's original hockey league simulator. The new version sports an improved interface and menuing system, better negotiation artificial intelligence, and a horde of other gamer-suggested enhancements. The program is fully compatible with Wayne Gretzky Hockey III, so one can draft a team, organize its schedule, hire or fire its coach, and then play each game of the season with either Wayne Gretzky or with a quick simulation mode. It's an excellent simulation of franchise sports from the executive's box. IBM ($44.95). Circle Reader Service #3. BOBBALL, Inc. 1523 Felton Road South Euclid, OH 44121 MAUNA KEA LINKS CHAMPIONSHIP COURSE: Aloha the very versatile Hawaiian word meaning \"hello,\" \"good-bye,\" and \"the pig is burning\" — can also replace \"Fore!\" in the vocabulary of the golfer, at least if the golfer is in Mauna Kea. Access' excellent golf system does a beautiful job of depicting this paradisiacal tropic landscape, with graceful palms, rich azure seas, and coarse volcanic rock. The new course can be used with any of the three Access-developed programs; Links, Links 386 Pro, and Microsoft Golf. Hang loose but watch the hook left. IBM ($29.95). Circle Reader Service #1. Activision 11440 San Vincente Blvd. Los Angeles, CA 90049 (310) 207-4500 Dinky Rocks Loo Rodney's Funscreen OUR Play Games Maura Play Upcoming Games GERE WE LOME Buat Pray Nonton Whalers MAPIE LES * I me Fenus 2 cane Payra tione San AS Blah S Show pcoming Eames Sabri Nordiques LGA | ai Islanders Red Wings Bruns NC Save Rostera Canadens Sharks Last Cam Report Or  PICK GEME FOR COMPUTER PLAY Pr'RGS F10 key to cancer Lase stats sayen Sau Coala tals Hockey League Simulator II ENVIOSTATS TKT Line 3 el 118. Call 1 Lot Angeles Lakers 9) V-L 53-77 CH3 W-L 39-32 (A) W-L 24-45 Avy Score 101.397.6 05.7-164.2 Pts Dili Total Pts 3.7 158.9 5.0 203. SEASON TOTALS Player     Gi fc   3 CH FC 21147 368 89 23.6 RODNEY'S FUNSCREEN: \"Provides five essential games,\" reads the package designed to parody the typical children's cereal box. «Sold by fun not by volume,\" warns the side panel, and fun it may be for its preschool audience, though there's plenty of volume in the copious sound cffects and narration from Rodney. The five games included are very simple and are designed to introduce very young kids to the computer and its mysteries. At Dinky's House, kids will try to find which shade-drawn window Dinky is hiding behind. Kids can also go inside the house and click on the various rooms to see what Dinky does in his daily life. (See screen shot.) There is a primitive paint program that allows kids to draw silly accessories on provided faces. Other games include the typical Concentration adaptation, a monster counting exercise, and a cute diversion that introduces kids to the alphabet. All told, a great tasting, mentally nutritious bowl of goodies for the young ones, though it may get soggy in milk. IBM, Mac ($49.95), IBM CD-ROM, Tandy VIS ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #2. Bethesda Softworks 1370 Piccard Drive Rockville, MD 20850 (301) 926-8300 6. Ferkies 143 4162 100 4103 148 4245 149 1376 140 5827 B-BALL PRO BASKETBALL FOR THE COMPUTER: Originally created as a tool for NBA teams to analyze team and player performance, this text based statistics program is now being marketed to the general gaming public. The package comes with team statistics for all teams from 1973-93. Players can coach single games or statistically generate an entire season of games and stats. A prediction\" module allows rotisserie league gamers to play their rotisserie team against other reams in the league to predict statistical outcomes. The statistics generated are incredibly detailed, including league leaders, single game highs and lows for teams and individuals, and top league performances. Though it is not the most user-friendly program, it seems like a must-have tool for rotisserie players and stat freaks. IBM ($29.95). Circle Reader Service #4. Broderbund Software PO Box 6121 Novato, CA 94948-6121 (800) 521-6263 ARTHUR'S TEACHER TROUBLE: The person has probably not yet been born who would dislike one of Broderbund's \"Living Books.\" Following up on their delightful Just Grandma and Me, Arthur's Teacher Trouble is even better. The story is of one Arthur, your average third grader suffering the afflictions of grammar school: a tough teacher, a pestering younger sister, a landslide of homework, and a school-wide spelling contest next week. Each word of the story's text is highlighted as the story is read aloud, allowing kids to follow along and improve their reading skills. In addition, every scene is a point-n-click toy box full of highly amusing animations and sounds. The package also includes a story-book that early grade-schoolers can enjoy when 5691228 41.2 5191141 15.5 5251350 5.7 6041271 (7.2 B391988 12. 2 017 1868 (3.5 3461115 43. 8485 918 58.7 9141791 51.0 6931562 53.1 786 17.3 372786 17,3 651 13.8 352 543 42.5 5331649 50.8 5261911 52.0 76988 0.2 031651 59.6 309543 10.1 301 613 9.1 8. Threstl Hested 596$ 858 A. Gre 149 4231 149 2578 148 1739 45B B. COOP mus. 1437W 11667 16.7 $200. MINENT 140-31713 4575 125 457 5297 47 5 377 105 10 27 B-Ball Pro Basketball for the Computer HOCKEY LEAGUE SIMULATOR II: Criticizing the general manager of one's favorite team seems to be the sports fanatic's pastime of choice. Either a trade Arthur's Teacher Trouble Page 132 Computer Gaming World "


"We're playing serious games. IR T ra MON Close the door. Plug it in. Turn on the computer. And brace yourself for all the outrageous 16 bit CD quality sound you can handle. Whether you're behind enemy lines or slamming one out of the park, PORTABLE Sound sends you on a sensory collision course. The most war torn battlefields come alive. Fantasies scream into reality. And, the grunts and groans of the gridiron are enough to bruise even the toughest soul. Whatever your pleasure, you won't E W find more real sound. PORT-ABLE Sound is based on advanced Digital Signal Processing technology, so you'll enjoy the greatest compression capability with the highest quality sounds. Here's something else that will make your pulse race. With PORT-ABLE Sound you have all the right connections including an \"Audio-in' for direct recording from a CD or tape player and a \"Line-out\" for powered external stereo speakers. To make things even cooler, PORT-ABLE Sound comes with an external speaker cable for Outrageous sounds when you plug it into the hottest speakers you can find. Or take it to a friends house. It's totally portable. So get ready. There's nothing to do except buy PORT-ABLE Sound and plug it in. Plug in your speakers. And play. But, just one word of caution. Once you're plugged into PORT-ABLE Sound, you can kiss the day good-bye. PLUS. FREE SOFTWARE INCLUDING: Lotus Sound for A S Windows 3.1 a utility employing OLE (Object Linking and Embedding technology). WinReader for Windows 3.1, Digispeech's DOSTalk and DOSReader text-to-speech applications. Show & Tell For Kids for Windows an easy to use Multimedia Authoring program. PORTABLE Sound Features: Stereo or Mono playback 16 or 8 bits per channel, (sampling rates: 11.025KHz, 22.050KHz and 44.1 KHz). Synthesized music, 9 melodic or 7 melodic and 4 percussive voices. Completely integrated solution. Supports DVI audio compression and all Windows 3.1 programs incorporating the Multimedia standard sound interfaces (WAVE, MIDI). Sound Blaster/Adlib compatible. DC powered. Smart printer parallel port pass through.  An external speaker cable with a telephone type connector. MINIMUM SYSTEM REQUIREMENT: For DOS PORTABLE Sound applications, an IBM PC or compatible with 8086 CPU, 640KB RAM running MS-DOS 3.3 or greater. For Windows 3.1 or Sound Blaster/ AdLib applications, an IBM PC or compatible with 80386 CPU and 2 MB RAM. Package includes software on 3.5 High Density diskettes. PORT-ABL Found IBM Digispeech inc. THE SOUND SOLUTION Corporate Office: 2464 Embarcadero Way, Palo Alto, CA 94303 Sales Office: 550 Main Street, Suite J. Placerville, CA 95667 Telephone: (415) 494-8086 FAX: (415) 494-8114 Telephone: (916) 621-1787 FAX: (916) 621-2093 Circle Reader Service #53 String Quarte lu Muor. Opis idi. THINGURA T WWW "


"a leek 15 they can't get Mom or Dad off the computer. Macintosh CD-ROM, IBM CDROM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #5. Capstone 7200 Corporate Center Dr. Suite 500 Miami, FL 33126 (800) 468-7226 83 86 82 85 2010 2011 81 84 D la Trump Castle 3 beyin Y duto had 245 Miy. L ILLY FEW der TRUMP CASTLE 3: This latest incarnation of the Trump Castle casino games offers several interesting new features. In addition to SVGA graphics and sound, more casino games have been added, including a good selection of slot machines and an adequate range of poker games (which, ironically, are illegal in New Jersey, site of the real Trump Castle). Even keno and baccarat have been added to the roster. Gambling buddies can even play together using the two-player modem option or the one-to-four-player network option. IBM ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #6. Ebook clo Electronic Arts San Mateo, CA (800) 245-4525 SimCity, the player's city does not operate in a bubble; the economic model is based upon the performance of the player's city, the province in which it is located, and the Empire as a whole. If the player is successful as urban planner/military leader, he or she may be promoted to governor of another province, and, ultimately, to Caesar. IBM ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #8. In Time Corp. PO Box 1873 Brookline, MA 02146 (617) 232-3264 JIGSAW PUZZLE: Is it just us? Or does jigsaw puzzling seem like one of those activities that need not be computerized, like backpacking or crochet? Well, for those who might find it appealing, there is Jigsaw Puzzle from In Time which offers 15 VGA puzzles and «six hundred game variations\" (which they arrive at by generating all possible permutations of puzzles and the 40 different ways that they can be cut). Players can either take their time and relax while solving a puzzle, or they can race against the clock. In Expert and Master modes, if one doesn't place pieces fast enough, the computer will start removing the correctly positioned pieces and place them back in the unplaced pile (the compurerized equivalent of a young child or the household car). While it is a decently made piece of software, we still see little advantage of the computer version over the real thing, except perhaps that one won't get that cardboard dust in the cracks of the coffee table, and it would be very difficult, short of a power outage, to lose a piece. IBM ($34.95). Circle Reader Service #9. Interplay 17922 Fitch Avenue, CA 92714 (714) 553-6678 Twelve Roads to Gettysburg Yousing BAG EIA E IT GT 6239 Caesar Help Sed more telles Place TWELVE ROADS TO GETTYSBURG: \"If I had something like this when I was in high school...\" seems to be the favored response to this excellent multimedia documentary of a seminal period in the American Civil War. While it couldn't touch the acclaimed Civil War PBS special on its detail and breadth of scope, this CD-ROM has one advantage over the television documentary — it's interactive. Players watch animated battles from a bird's-eye view as the narrator calls the dance for the blue and red units as they illustrate the progression of the battle. Period engravings add extra flavor to the narration, while hypertext \"hot spots» allow the user to access descriptions of the personalities and places that played crucial roles in the battle. Frankly, all previous CD-ROM releases from Ebook have failed to meet our expectations; this product makes amends. A must for CD-owning history buffs. IBM with CD-ROM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #7. Impressions 7 Melrose Drive Farmington, CT 06032 (203) 676-9002 Jigsaw Puzzle OUT OF THIS WORLD: While this game is actually a conversion of the earlier Amiga, IBM, and cartridge product, we thought we'd take the opportunity to introduce a new division of Interplay Productions. MacPlay is a group of \"MacHead\" programmers whose purpose in life is to bring more quality products to the hard drives of Macintosh gamers. Their first release, Out of this World, is an adaptation of Delphine Software's excellent polygon-graphic action game. Gamers take the role of Lester Chaykin, the young, Coke-pounding, particle physics prodigy, who finds himself in the middle of one of those everyday laboratory accidents that open doors to another space-time plane. The alternate reality in which he finds himself is rife with nasty foot-long leeches, bloodthirsty beasts, and a race of enslaving aliens. Escaping these horrors requires solving a series of actionoriented puzzles interspersed with cineCAESAR: As previewed in CGW#103, Caesar can glibly be described as \"SimCity with columns,\" but it is much more. While one must build up provincial capital cities by placing the necessary urban features a la SimCity, one must also protect it from roving barbarians. The various urban elements include water supplies, troop barracks, roads, plazas, walls, forums, temples and many others. Unlike Out of this World Page 134 Computer Gaming World "


"CD ROM HEADQUARTERS MISSLON Specialists in International Sales Competitive Pricing. Same Day shipping International Order Line (201) 677-1400 Fax (201) 677-9484 22 GAMES Alone in the Dark .......... Amazon A-Train A-Train Construction Set......... Mantis:Experimental Fighter ......43 Megatraveller 3................. Mercenaries................... Might/Magic Clouds of Xeen .....43 Monopoly Deluxe............... Oh No! More Lemmings! (Add)...22 Where in USA is Carmen...........32 Where in USA Carmen Deluxe....47 Where in World is Carmen VGA..47 Wing 2 Special Operations 1.....27 Wing 2 Special Operations 2.... 27 Wing Commander 2. Wing Commander 2 Speech Pak 21 Wing Commander Deluxe......... .52 WARGAMES PRODUCTIVITY AutoMap... AutoWorks........ BodyWorks ........ 47 Chemistry Works ............ Family Doctor....... ... Game Master........ Gifts Galore... Golf Guide ....... Grammy Awards ............. Grolier's Encycopedia ..........99 Guinness Disc of Records .....39 .40 ...52 SPORTS 4D Boxing Bill Elliot's Nascar Challenge.....32 Car & Driver ............................ Front Page: Sports Football .......43 Hardball 3..............................37 Hardball 3: Park Disk ............Call Jack Nicklaus:Signature Ed.......43 Jack Nicklaus Tour Disk 1or 2...20 Jordan In Flight.....................39 John Madden Football 2..........33 Links 386 PRO.........................42 Links: Mauna Kea Course Disk..20 Links: Course Disks ........ MicroLeague Baseball 4......... NCAA:Road to Final Four 2.....CALL NFL Pro League Football ....... Air Dual Strike back and surprise your opponent with the APS 2001 Cobra, the only fully programmable, microprocessor controlled, optical joystick that works through the keyboard port. Experience the ultimate in performance without paying for costly gamecards or separate control devices. APS 2001 by Maxximum $69. YOU MUST BE 21+ TO ORDER! Ecstasy contains over 560 megs, over 330 Adult Animations, 2600+ Hi-Res SVGA pictures, 470 erotIc stories. Animation Fantasies: Vol. 1, Vol. 2 or Vol. 3 contain over 100 Adult Animations each. Busty Babes includes over 4,200+ files featuring over 800 film stars! NAL...... Air Force Commander ... Ancient Art of War in Skles. AL.A.C. A.T.P. Flight Commander. Aces of the Pacific. Ancient Art of War......... B-17 Flying Fortress... Campaign ........... Carrier Strike ....... Carriers at War................ Canilers War Constuction Set..37 Command HQ Classic... 22 Order All 3 and Save. One for $69.Two for $130. or 3 for $120. TASY NFL Full Motion Video...... PGA Tour Golf World Circuit Racing...... Tom Landry Football World Tour Tonnis.......... Wayne Gretzky Hockey 3.........37 Guy Spy... .40 Expert Office Design .............14 Expert Pet Car........... Expert Dos Tutor ............... Floor Plan Plus... Mavis Beacon 2 Windows .........37 PrintShop Deluxe for Windows...47 SOUNDCARDS SOUND PAGE Barbie's Glamorous Quest........27 Bard's Tale Construction Set ....34 Bard's Tale Ill.............. .........31 Bart Simpson Arcade Game......32 Bart Simpson:House Weirdness 32 Batman Returns.......................43 Battle Chess 4000 SVGA..........37 Beat the House....................32 Black Crypt... .. .........33 Bridge 7.0......................... Buzz Aldrin's Race Into Space..43 Caesar...... ..........................37 Car & Driver......................40 Castles 2: Siege & Conquest ....37 Challenge of the 5 Realms........42 Civilization Cobra Mission ........ Creepers Crisis in the Kremlin Crusaders of the Dark Savant...42 Out of this world........... .....37 Paladin II......................... Populous 2..... ...... ... Powerhits: Battletech ......... Putt Putt Joins the Parade........ Quest for Glory 3................43 Railroad Tycoon Classic........ RoboSport for Windows...... Rome....... ... Rules of Engagement 2....... Scrabble Deluxe................. Shadow of the Sorcerer ..... ShadowLands ............. Shadow President ... ...... Sharif on Bridge ............ Sharif on Bridge for Windows.... Sim Ant............... Sim Life....... Sim City................. Sim City for Windows...............37 Not a Clonel Genuine Soundblaster chipset means 100% SoundBlaster compatability. Includes High Performance Speakers, An Ergonomically Designed Joystick & Gameport. Software includes Voxkit Voice Utilities, Talking Parrot. FM Intelligent Organ, Jukebox for Windows 3.1 & Castle Wolfenstein. By Bondwell............$99. Ad Lib Gold 1000 Ad Lib Music Card ............47 Pro Audio Spectrum 16....... 199 SoundBlaster.... .......... ..99 Sound Blaster Pro ........ Sound Blaster Pro Basic....... .139 Sound Blaster 16 UltraSound Card..... 139 JOYSTICKS Hockey League Simulator 2.......37 EDUCATIONAL Virtual Pllot Virtual Pilot puts firepower right under your thumbs, gives you advanced aileron and elevator trim controls and extra throttle control for high-powered games. It's as close to reality as you can get without leaving your computer. by CH Products ...$69. Commanche: Maximum Overkill.47 Commanche: Mission Disk 1....28 F15 Strike Eagle 2 Classic .......22 F15 Strike Eagle 3.... ......47 Falcon 3.0..........................47 Great Naval Battles:1939.43....47 Global Conquest..............37 Harpoon.. . Harpoon BattleSet #2 or 3.......21 Harpoon Battle Set #4.......... Harpoon Challenger Pak...........46 Harpoon Scenario Editor ........ Jump Jet .................... Line in the Sand......... Lost Admiral ..... .......... Patriot........ . Pirates Gold.. . P.T.O....... ................. Silent Service 2 Classic .........22 Task Force 1942.......... V for Victory X-Wing........... ..... .69 Ham Call. Jets & Props KGB/CIA Factbook. Legend of Kyrandia.. Lion Share............. Loom.. Lost Treasures of infocom 2..47 Lost Treasures of Infocom.....47 Mantis Experimental Fighter..49 Mayo Family Health Book ......42 Mixed Up Mother Goose........30 Monster Disk (2 Disk Set).....49 Mother Earth. Omar Shanff On Bridge.. Our Solar System PowerPack Gold Publishers Paradise. Publish-It 2.0.. Readers Library. Refernece Library.. Secret of Monkey Island.... Secret Weapons of Luftwaffe.29 Shareware Overload Shareware Studio. Sherlock Holmes Detective Sleeping Beauty. Software Jukebox.. Space Shuttle Simulator Star Trek ....... Super CD................. Talking Classic Tales. Talking Schoolhouse.. Too Many Typefaces.. Toolworks Refernce Library....39 US Atlas with AutoMap......... US/World Atlas............. US History ................... U.S. Presidents......... U.S.A. Wars: Civil War......... Where in World Carmen ...... Windoware...................... Windowmaster ............. Windows 1993........... Wing Commander 2 Deluxe...52 Wing Commander/Ultima 6...39 World Atlas (MPC)...............34 ADULT CD ROM Algeblaster Plus... Grammar Gremlins Kid Pux... Kid Works 2....... Mario Teaches Typing Math Blaster Plus..... Math Blaster Plus Windows..... Oregon Trail Deluxe.. Read & Roll VGA.. Reader Rabbit 2... Reading Adventures in Oz.. Reading & Me......... Storybook Weaver .. Spell It Plus Talking.. Super Munchers... What's My Angle ..... Word Munchers... Zookeeper.......... 28 Analog Plus............ ..... BeeShu Colored Joystick.........9 Flight Stick by CH Products ....42 G FORCE Yoke.......... Gravis PRO Joystick for PC ..... Gameport Auto CH Products......34 Gameport (MicroChannl) by CH 48 Flight Control Weapons Control Thrustmaster Game Card..........35 FX 2000 Mach 1. Mach Ill by CH Products .. Mouse Wheel... Mouse Yoke PC Gamepad by Gravis.. Quickshot Aviator 5 Quickshot Intruder 5 Virtual Pilot. CD ROM 42 CALL 15 32 Cyber Empires...... . .33 The Dagger of Amon Ra....... Daemonsgate....................... Darklands DarkSun:The Shattered Lands..47 Daughter of Serpents......... 33 Design Your Own Railroad..... Dragon's Lair 3. Dune 2....... Eco Quest 2 Empire Deluxe... Eric the Unready Eye of the Beholder lll ...... Global Effect. Grand Slam Bridge 2....... GODS Guy Spy .. Heaven and Earth. Home Alone 2.. Hong Kong Mahjong Pro. Hoyles Book of Games 3... The Humans... Indiana Jones 4:Fate of Atlantis 40 Inspector Gadget Island of Dr. Brain.. King's Quest 5.. King's Quest 6... Leather Goddesses Phobas 2...43 Legend of Kyrandia Leisure Larry 5.... Sim City Graphic:Ancient Cities...24 Sim City Graphic:Future Cities ...24 Sim Earth .............................41 Sim Earth for Windows..............43 Solitaire for Windows........ Space Ace 2: Borf's Revenge ....37 Space Quest 5................. Spaceward Hol............. Spear of Destiny............... Speedball 2...................... Spellcasting 301............ Spellcraft:Aspects of Valor.. Star Control 2........ Star Trek 25th Anniversary. Strike Commander..... Strike Command Speech Pak...22 Strip Poker 3... Stunt Island Super Jeopardy ..... Super Space Invaders..... Super Tetris Terminator 2029 Tracon for Windows ......... Tracon 2:Air Traffic Controller.. Turtles:Arcade Game..... Turtles:Manhattan Missions... Ultima 7: The Black Gate .... Ultima 7's Forge of Virtue... Ultima 7: Serpent Isle........ Ultima Underworld............. Weapons Control A hands on throttle with seven Independent controls Including radar mode, weapons bent controls including agar mode, Weapons select, waypoint select and counter measures.... ....$89. Flight Control The best joystick for Flight Simulators. Compatible with all fight simulator packages as 2 button Joystick.............. $69. Flight Control Pro...... Rudder Pedals........ $115. ACM Expansion Game Card ....... $35. $115. 7th Guest.............. Adventures of Willy Beamish 29 American Bus. Phonebook ....39 American Heritage Dictionary.64 Animals in Motion ................37 Animals (MPC).....................34 Barney Bear Goes to School..29 Barney Bear Goes to Space...29 Basics Electronic Cookbook.49 Battle Chess (Enhanced).......29 BattleChess................... Beauty & the Beast ............39 Bible Library..... ..... Bibles and Religion.............29 Britanica Family Choice...... Business Master..... CD Powerbox ...... ChessMaster 3000 (MPC).. CIA World Fact Book 2 ....... .47 9380&ang Animation Fantasy 1.2 or 3.69 Asian Ladies... Busty Babes............. Erotic Encounters .......... Esctacy Hot Pix ............. Hot Pix 2.3 or 4.... Island Girls ...... Local Girls Lovely Ladies................. Moving Fantasies...... My Private Collection 1 or 2...44 *8*8*999 Ulrabots skillfully blends a futuristic robot theme with fully interactive, simulation-style cockpits and military bat. tle tactics. Astonishing 3-D ray-traced graphics, digitized special effects, and a stunning soundtrack make Ultrabots a spectacular audio visual experience! Call us and use your MC, Visa or Discover 800-999-7995 International 201-677-1400 Fax 201-677-9484 Methods of Payment: We accept Visa, MC, Discover Card & Money orders. Personal checks allow 14 days to clear. School, State & City purchase orders accepted. Please send $2.00 for our Mission Control Communique 24 Page catalogue (free with order) Shipping: UPS Ground ($5 minimum) / UPS Blue ($7minimum) APO & FPO ( $7 minimum) Overseas minimum $30 shipping (please fax orders) Send money orders or checks to: THEY'RE BACK!II WITH NEW SKILLS, FOR A NEW WORLD. 12 brand new tribes of Lemmings, each with their own skills. skiers, surfers bongo players, snake-charmers, & more puzzling problems with hilarious animation enhanced sound support by Psygnosis..........$32. ULTRABOTS By Electronic Arts ..........$39. 69 52 69 Lemmings 2............................32 Life & Death II:The Brain..........27 Lord of the Rings II: TWO Towers 37 Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes...47 Lost Treasures of Infocom ........43 Lost Treasures of Infocom 2 .....37 The Lost Tribe........... ...2 Magic Candle 3......... ...........40 Clip Art Galore...... Colossal Cookbook...... Compton's Encyclopedia. Conan the Cimmerian.... DeathStar Arcade Battles. Deluxe Scrabble. Desert Storm.. Dictionaries & Languages Dune.. Education Master Electronic Library..... Encyclopedia of Clip Art........ Ultima Underworld 2........ Ultima Trilogy 2....... Ultrabots... Virtual Reality Studio 2.0.. Vell of Darkness............ Waxworks... Wheel of Fortune w/ Vanna.......27 Where in Time is Carmen 32 .69 Private Pictures I..................69 Smutware............ 29 So Much Stareware........ .69 Storm l, ll or Ill.............. Triple X Exteme .............. Visual Fantasies......... Volcano... Women of Venus..... Women in Motion .. Virtual Valerie ..... Visual Fantasies... Over 21 ONLY for Adult CD Rom! MISSION CONTROL, 551 Valley Road Suite 211 Dept. CGW593, Upper Montclair, NJ07043 Overseas & Military Orders given special attention! Circle Reader Service #76 "


"   matic sequences. The Mac conversion is a faithful one, and if its quality is any indication of MacPlay's potential, Mac gamers can look forward to an increased selection of quality games in the coming months. Mac. Circle Reader Service #10. Keyboard Commander Corp. 4839 SW 148 Ave., Suite 402 Davie, FL 33330 (800) 262-6066 PUS tional hazards of game designers and air traffic controllers. Now gamers can experience the nail-biting drama of directing dozens of aircraft under dangerous conditions. Air Traffic Controller is a revised version of Wesson International's acclaimed simulation, Tracon. The new version allows gamers to direct pilots in six heavily trafficked metropolitan airports, the player-controller vectoring departing and arriving traffic under normal and emergency conditions. The revision adds new weather and pilot models, and spoken word communications from the pilots and controllers with most major sound cards. Ardent enthusiasts can even hook up by modem or null link with four friends flying aircraft in Microsoft's Flight Simulator, who can then be ordered around by the master controller. IBM (runs under DOS and Windows), Mac ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #13. F-3.01 Keyboard Template WHITE Treni F-3.01 KEYBOARD TEMPLATE: The situation is probably familiar to most flight sim jocks: while madly searching for that vital key on the keyboard, one's tail gets peppered by machine gun fire from a Mig. During that slow parachute ride to the ground, one has just enough time to go back to the manual and find the key that could have saved the mission. An equally frequent problem with complex sims is the re-learning curve necessary when jumping between, say, Falcon 3.0 and F-15 Strike Eagle II. Keyboard Commander's series of keyboard templates are designed to reduce this confusion and increase one's gaming pleasure. The remplates are printed on card-stock and fit nicely over most keyboards, and have color-coded icons for quick access (i.e. flight controls in blue, navigation commands in peach). Templates are available for most complex sims including, but not limited to Falcon, Aces of the Pacific, S.W.O.T.L, Chuck Yeager, A-10, and Megafortress. IBM Enhanced Keyboard ($11.95). Circle Reader Service #11. LucasArts Games PO Box 10307 San Rafael, CA 94912 (415) 721-3300 X-Wing *** Ale Trull Controller Uc Bedrempe De Simulation ar Window RESCUE AIR 911: A few issue back we \"peeked\" Mallard's Aircraft and Adventure Factory, a program which allows creative sim-fanatics to create their own Flight Simulator scenarios. If one hasn't the time or the talent to create their own, Mallard has provided a few ready-made scenarios with digitized audio voices. Rescue Air 911 takes pilots through eight rescue scenarios varying from fires to auto wrecks on the interstate. Two other adventures are currently available as well. Flight Adventures Nos. 685 and 701 include short-hop flights under both VFR and IFR flight rules. A great way for \"real\" pilots to pracrice for their VFR/IFR certifications. IBM ($24.95 each). Circle Reader Service #14. Moon Valley Software 706 East Bell Road, Suite 112 Phoenix, AZ 85022 (602) 375-9502 ATC FREUD SID Rescue Air 911 X-WING: Stepping into their Star Wars universe, LucasArts has put together a package that is aimed to impress the many dedicated fans of Wing Commander. With considerable panache, X-Wing starts the player on a safe, slow learning curve as he joins the Rebel Alliance as a new recruit. Training missions and \"historic\" simulations will bring pilots up to speed as they acquire the feel for their X-Wing, Y-Wing and A-Wing craft. The three campaign games included (and more are promised in future expansion disks) each progressively develop the Rebel cause and place an important role on the player's shoulders. For space combat simulator buffs, X-Wing is an absolute must. IBM ($69.95). Circle Reader Service #12. Mallard Software, Inc. 3207 Justin Road Flower Mound, TX 75028 (800) WEB-FEET E Select Icon From:ICONDOIT.EXEST 12 *02 *10C 193 2009 ICON MAKE IT DO IT HEAR IT: Some people seem compelled to assert their individuality. Personalized license plates, bumper stickers, «shocking» fashion choices, pink trim on their houses. These same people may enjoy these three packages that allow one to add a touch of the human to his or her Windows environment. In addition to screen-savers and Windows wallpaper, Icon Do It offers 200 designer icons and 50 custom cursors to replace the drab ones that come as factory equipment on the PC. Icon Hear It adds 200 more icons, 50 more cursors, and 50 animated icons, in addition to 100 sound effects that one can link to any application. Icon Make It hands the creative power to the individual, allowing one to create their own animated icons, mix and dub their own sounds, and put it all together into an iconic movie of sorts. Creative types and office practical jokers will have a blast. IBM with Windows (Do It Dames KJENO S Prey Icons: 4 of 4 Next D Vse Other Restore Originals Selected Icon Icon Do-It Icon Do It ATC: Ulcers, neuralgia, arteriosclerosis, nervous break downs all the occupaPage 136 Computer Gaming World "


"You stumbled back to your office after a long day of detective work. But before you can get cozy with a whiskey bottle, there's a message waiting on the phone machine. Cobra CO Mission \"This is a life and death emergency!! Young ladies have been disappearing left and right, and now, Donna is missing!! We need your help!! Please come quickly!!! Donna's rescue is only the beginning of this sizzling adventure. There's dozens more tantalizing women held against their will. Free them from the evil clutches of General Kaiser, Cobra's psychotic master criminal you screaming in ecstasy. overlord, and they will thank you in ways that will leave BOND WAS HOT STUFF. You'll be dazzled by the quality of the full screen emotionally to them! It's AWESOME!! ANIMATION graphics and find yourself reacting physically and SO WAS ARNIE NOW IT'S YOUR TURN. To purchase your copy of Cobra Mission, visit your favorite software retailer. Or call 800-258-MEGA CA residents add 8.25% sales tax $79.95 (suggested retail) plus $5.00 shipping and handling and use your VISA or Mastercard. Or send check or money order to MEGATECH, P.O. BOX 11333, TORRANCE, CA 90501 System requirements: 286 or faster machine with 640K RAM; hard disk with min. 8 megabytes of available space required, mouse recommended. Graphics compatible with EGA, MCGA and VGA (VGA highly recommended). Sound support: Sound Blaster Pro, Adlib Gold CALL 800258 MEGA MEGATECH RATED R (This program is voluntarily rated due to the partially violent and adult nature of the graphic imagery) This program is intended for mature audiences only!! No sales to minor under 18 and where prohibited by law. Circle Reader Service #69 "


"Taking a deek $29.95, Hear It $49.95, Make It $69.95). Circle Reader Service #15. Ocean of America 1855 O'Toole Avenue, Suite D-102 San Jose, CA 95131 (408) 954-0201 properties to deal with. G.I.'s antics are as cute as any lemming, and the puzzles are devious enough to provide gamers many hours of delicious frustration. Amiga, IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #17. Psygnosis 29 St. Mary's Court Brookline, MA 02146 (617) 731-3553 Espana The Games '92 IRATESOURRE ESPANA THE GAMES '92: The last straggling competitor in the Olympic games rush of 1992 has finally limped across the finish line. Despite their poor sense of timing, Ocean has put together a decent collection of Olympic contests. With over 30 events, Espana offers the most variety we've seen in this sort of game, including rarities like the steeplechase (both the 800m and 1500m varieties), judo, wrestling, boxing, and several less popular swimming styles. Like Psygnosis' Carl Lewis program, Espana allows the player to train athletes before the events, designing training programs that will maximize their stamina and skill without causing burn-out. Beyond all this, Espana is the same joystick breaking, keyboard pounding diversion that blistered our hands on the Atari 2600 and will continue to blister our hands in 1996, 2000, 2004, ... Amiga, IBM ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #16. Oeno Hook CREEPERS: There seems to be a regular phenomena in computer gaming. A company puts a new sort of product on the market with limited expectations of success, and then finds, to their surprise, that the product is a major hit. Then they try to recreate the phenomena with successor products that employ the new idea in another way. Without exception, the successors don't enjoy the same sort of success. Witness SimCity, and now Lemmings. Creepers, like Psygnosis' recent Bill's Tomato, is undeniably a Lemmings \"metoo.\" It has cute but stupid creatures (in this case, inchworms) that require the guiding hand of the gamer through multiple levels of puzzles. It has a menu bar at the bottom of the screen that provides access to a number of tools necessary for the task in this case, the tools are fans, ramps, girders, and fly swatters). It even borrows the cute \"paws\" command from Lemmings. Unfortunately, the inchworms aren't half as endearing as the lemmings, the puzzle screens are cluttered and confused, and the game is simply lesser in many ways. Puzzle gamers may want to wait for the eventual return of our original furry friends in Lemmings 2. IBM ($49.99). Circle Reader Service #18. Sierra On-line Coarsegold, CA (209) 683-4468 EX ELTEN Push-Over Tools HOOK: Based upon the flashy Spielberg film, Ocean's Hook is the tale of Peter Pan's quest to recover his children from the nasty hook-fisted pirate of the title. It is a typical graphic adventure which flirts with mediocrity. It's a point-and-click adventure with a five-icon command system, and it has more than its share of typical graphic adventure problems (we haven't seen so many \"Why-would-you-want-tolook-at-thats» and «You-can-do-that-heres\" in quite a while). It has a colorful serting and a decent story, but fans of recent Sierra and LucasArts adventures will probably feel as if they've taken a flight back to graphic adventure neverever-again-land. Amiga, IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #17. PUSH-OVER: Once beyond the contrived fictional set-up, one finds PushOver to be a rather nice puzzle game with a lovable protagonist, G.I. Ant. With an acknowledging nod to Psygnosis' Lemmings, Push-Over is composed of multiple levels of puzzles set in nine different graphical serrings. On each level is a configuration of dominoes which must be toppled over by G.I. Ant. G.I. only has one «push» in him per level, so the dominoes must be arranged such thar they all fall in one continuous reaction. To ensure a complete domino effect, G.I. must lug dominoes around the screen and place them in the proper sequence. To make things especially interesting, there are eight special domino types with special Energy 4600 Creepers SPACE QUESTS THE NEXT MUTATION SCORES SPACE QUEST V-THE NEXT MUTATION: The Space Quest series is nothing but garbage, and will always be nothing but garbage — at least as long as Roger Wilco, janitorial prodigy, is involved. In his latest mis-adventure, Roger has faked his way through the Space Academy and has taken control of his own ship a garbage scow. Mounted proudly upon his reeking steed, Roger rides out to save the universe from your everyday nefarious race of mutants. In the process he will: die many horrible deaths; encounter a grab-bag of very silly though deadly aliens (a baby-faced hugger with unusually acidic, uh, liquid waste product); and meet the woman from the holodeck in Space Quest IV. It's all very twisted and juvenile and pant-loads of fun — just the sort of thing the editors of CGW enjoy, though they'll never admit it. IBM ($69.95). Circle Reader Service #19. Space Quest V The Next Mutation Page 138 Computer Gaming World "


"ZERO'S & ONE'S MAY SPECIAL BUY ANY GAME-PAY GROUND, WE SHIP 2-DAY AIR!* BUY 3 OR MORE GAMES-GET FREE 2-DAY AIR!* *(CONTINENTAL US) ORDER LINE: (800) 788-2193 MON-FRI 8-6, SAT 9-4 PDT 149.95 41.95 CREATIVE LABS CO Rom Kit 349.95 MM Upgrade Ext 589.95 MM Upgrade Int-Edutainment w/SB Pro, speakers, microphone, 7 CDR software 469,95 MM Starter 439.95 Snd Blstr Pro Dix Snd Bistr 16 Bit 239.95 Video Blaster 349.95 Wave Blaster tbe MEDIA VISION Fusion 16 MM GE 499.95 PAS MM KGt Int. 769.95 PAS 16 MM Kit Int. 959.95 PAS 16 BitSnd Crd 189.95 Pro Movie Spectrum 287.95 OTHER CDR DRIVES Pana521A for SBPro 258.95 Texel DM3024 Int. 419.95 Tosh 3401 200ms 495.95 VIDEO BOARDS Al Tech Pro PC/TV Plus 323.95 Al Tech Pro VGA/TV Plus 636.95 Video Surge 615.95 ATI Ultra Graphics 1mb 489.95 Computer Eyes Real Time 434.95 PC Tele-vision 265.95 Telovoyog VGA-TV 229.95 Magni VGA Producer Pro 1574.95 WIN TV 439.95 CH PRODUCTS Flight Stick 41.95 Game Card 3 Auto 29.95 Mach III Joystick 29.95 Virtual Pilot-Yoke 63.95 GRAVIS W990001 35.95 FLIGHT SIM/WAR GAMES (continued): CD ROM SOFTWARE Omar Sharif Bridge 29.95 26.95 A Line in Sand Amazons Guard Eden 24.95 29.95 .85 Aesop's Fables MPC Origin FX Scrn Svr Aces of Pacific 44.95 Ambush 42.95 Amanda Stories 35.95 299.95 Playmation (Animatr) 27.95 Aircraft & Scen. Design Aspocts of Valour 35.95 Animals MM Encyclopedia 47.95 29.95 Power Politics Air Force Comander 35.95 Bart Simpson Weirdness 45.95 Arthur Teach Trouble 41.95 Print Shop Deluxe Air Warrior SVGA 35.95 Batman Returns 19.95 Atlas US Pres. MPC 24.95 Right Paint 63.95 Ancient Art War in Skies 35.95 Caesar 35.95 Autodesk MM Explr 127.95 RoboSport 34.95 Armored Fist 42.95 Castle of Dr Brain 29.95 Battlechegg MPC 47.95 Scrabble Deluxe 29.95 ATAC 34.95 35,95 Beethoven 9th MM 54.95 34.95 Sim Ant 36.95 ATP Civilization 38.95 Berlitz:French, German. 42.95 Sim Earth B-17 Flying Fortress 41.95 Dagger of Amon Ra 41.95 Italian Spanish ea 119.95 Spocoward Ho! 35.95 Birds of Prey 31.95 Design your Railroad 34.95 California Travel IMPC 32.95 Star Trek Scrn Svr 44.95 Carriers at War Discovery.Columbus 35.95 Carmen SD World Dix 62.95 Super Totris 29.95 Carrier Strike 34.95 Dragon's Lair III 35.95 Composer's Queat MPC 54.95 Take Brook Crossword 22.95 Comenche 43.95 Dune 11 35.95 Desert Strm w/Coalit 29.95 True Type Fonts:Eurosft 19.95 Conquest of Japan 35.95 EcoQuest Rainfrst 29.95 Distant Suns (Astron) 83.95 EDUCATION Conquered Kingdoms 35.95 Eric the Unready 35.95 Don Quixote MPC 27.95 Ancient Empires 29.95 Empira Deluxe 35.95 Incredible Machine 29.95 Encarta MM Encycl 264.95 Berenstain Bears Letters 24.95 F15 Strike Eagle III 47.95 Island Dr Brain 29.95 Fontmaster 24.95 Carmen San Diego cell Falcon 3.0 44.95 LA Law, The Game 34.95 Game Room (Sharewr) 29.95 Dinosauer Adventure 32.95 Global Effect 19.95 Lucas Classic Advent 35.95 Goferwinkel Comic Book 32.95 GRE Studyware 29.95 Great Naval Battles 43.95 Magic Candle III 37.95 Golf Guido:CAHI & Links 32.95 Kid Cuts 34.95 Heroes of 357th 31.95 Mario is Missing! 34.95 Grammy Awards 37.95 Lost Tribes (Sociol) 24.95 JetFighter II 39.95 Might & Magic IV 41.95 Inspector Gadget 34.95 Mickey's ABC's 19.95 Jump Jet 38.95 Paladin 11 35.95 Jazz MM History 84.95 Mutanoid Word Ch(7+) 29.95 Mallard Add Ons call Planet's Edge 36.95 Just Grandman & Me 38.95 Mystery at Museums 34.95 Mercenaries 37.95 Populous II 37.95 Kings's Quest V MPC 41.95 Oregon Trail Dix 35,95 MS Flight Sim 4.0 37.95 Rex Nebular Lost Treas Inforcom Il 36.95 Playroom 29.95 Pacific War Grigsby 47.95 Siege 22.95 Macmillan Child. Dictionary 39.95 Rock & Bach Studio 34.95 Patriot 44.35 Sim Ant 35.95 Mantis w/Speech 47.95 Science Adventure 47.95 Red Baron 39.95 Sim Ufe 41.95 Monarch Notes 61.95 Time Treks 35.95 Secret Weapons 42.95 Space Quest V 41.95 MS Cinemania 54.95 Treogure Math Cove 35.95 Strike Commander 47.95 Spear of Destiny 35.95 MS Musical Instrum. 54.95 Treasure Math Storm 35.95 Task Force 1942 41.95 Spelljammer 36.95 MS Video for Win. 127.95 True Type Font Pk #2 45.95 Theater of War 19.95 Star Control II 35.95 Night Owel 7 (Shareware) 42.95 Turbo Science 29.95 V for Victory 43.95 Star Legions 35.95 Phoenix 3.0 (Shareware) 42.95 Wild Science Arcade 34.95 SPORTS Star Trek 25th Anniv 35.95 Play w/Lang-Eng. Germ,Fren, Zoo Keeper 35.95 Car & Driver 33.95 37.95 Stunt Island Japan or Span ea 42.95 ART/MUSIC/PRINT Terminator 2029 41.95 Front Page Sports-Football 41.95 Putt Putt Joins Prade 44.95 Aladdin Print Kit 14.95 Ultima VII Part 2 29.95 47.95 Rodney's Funscreen 39.95 Band in a Box 84.95 Ultime Underworld II 47.95 Gretzky 3 35.95 S Holmes Consult III 46.95 Barbio PC Fashion & Color 19,95 Veil of Darkness 29.95 36.95 Hockey Sim 2 Space Adventure 61.95 Batman Clip Art (Konami) 19.95 Wing Commander II 47.95 Hole/One Mini Gif Dbx 24.95 12 Roads Gettysburg 46.95 Beauty & Beast Print 14.95 41.95 J Nicholas Sig Golf Wiz VII-Crusader Souvent 41.95 Uit Underwld/WC II 56.95 Boom Box (Dr T) 35.95 Jordan in Flight 41.95 41.95 Willy Beamish Enhanced 41.95 Comic Book Creator 19.95 Links 386 Pro 41.95 BOARD/CARD/ CASINO Wing Commnder II Dbc 56.95 Disney Animation Studio 77.95 Mauna Kea Add On 19.95 Battle Chess 4000 35.95 WINDOWS Delux Paint Animation 84.95 Pinehurst Add On 19.95 Beat the House Alphabet Blocks (3-6) 29.95 Delux Paint II 85.95 NFL (Konami) 29.95 Bridge Master 29.95 Auto Map 57.95 Expert Animator 11.95 NFL Pro Ftbl 1992 34.95 Femme Fatale Blackjack (Mosque) 29.95 Expert Color & Paint 11.95 NFL Video Football 44.95 Grand Slam Bridge 2 31.95 Chessmaster 3000 34.95 Fractile Paint Plus 77.95 RoadTrack Grnd Prx 34.95 Heaven & Earth Distant Suns (Antron) 47.95 Music Mentor w/Rec, Sass. 77.95 Road to Final Four 35.95 Hong Kong Mejong 31.95 Intermission Scrn Sur 29.95 Music Time 162.95 Summer Challenge 32.95 Monopoly Deluxe 35.95 Kid Pix 34.95 Musicator GS (Windows) 197.95 World Circuit 35,95 Omar Sharif Bridge 29.95 Mavis Beacon Typing 35.95 NFL Clip Art (Konarni) 19,95 GAMES Strip Poker 3 29.95 Entertainment Pack es 27.95 Print Shop Deluxe 45.95 A-Train 41.95 Super Jeopardy 24.95 Monopoly Deluxe 34.95 Tempra Pro Imaging Tool 299.95 Tristan Pinball Air Bucks 35.95 29.95 Microsoft Golf 42.95 Virtual Reality Studio 2.0 54.95 Vegas Video Poker 14.95 ADD:Eye Bhdlr 3 MS Sound Bits es 27.95 Vista Pro 54.95 Alone in the Dark 35.95 Wheel Fortune/Vanna 23.95 True Type Font Pk #2 45.95 Vista Pro Flight Director 41.95 Game Pad 24.95 X-Wing Eliminator Game Cd 29.95 Joystick Analog Pro 39.95 Ultra 16 Bit Sound Card 139.95 THRUSTMASTER Weapons Control 72.95 Flight Control 69.95 Flight Control Pro 99.95 Rudder Control 99.95 Game Card 26.95 29.95 24.95 R inoLIM WE ALSO CARRY: VESA LOCAL BUS UPGRADES DRIVES 14.4 FAX/MODEMS MEMORY MICE/ROLLERMICE HINT BOOKS 49.95 ZERO'S & ONE'S 6472-B Windy Rd Las Vegas, NV 89119 FAX 702-897-1571 INFO/TECH SUPPORT 702-897-2797 ALL ITEMS ARE IBM COMPATIBLE Prices and nvnlloblllty subject to change. All sales final. We do not guarantoo compatability. All softwaru la factory fruch and unopened. We are not responsible for manufacturer's defecto. SHIPPING ONTINENTAL USA: GROUND 1st game $5; additional games add $1 och 2-DAY AIR-CONTINENTAL USA: $6 1st game, additional games add $1 back COD available only in USA add $6. All prices are USA DOLLARS Circle Reader Service #101 "


"Takma a neek STAR WAR DES quick generation of fabulous fractal images, but allows one to program his or her own forinula. In addition to generating the images in two dimensions, it also has the ability to \"stretch\" an image through three-dimensions. Very neat stuff! It supports a huge variety of video cards and screen resolutions, and generates the most beautiful fractals we've yer seen on a personal computer. The companion book of fers a nice introduction to fractal geometry and clearly covers the specifics of the program and all its wonders. Highly recommended for the beginning fractal buff. IBM DOS & Windows ($34.95). Circle Reader Service #22. Visual Clips Star Wars Sound Source Unlimited 2985 E. Hillcrest Drive #A Westlake Village, CA 91362 (805) 494-9996 VISUAL CLIPS STAR WARS: The quest to personalize our computing environments continues. Screen savers, animated icons, sound packages, oak cases for CPU chassis, large fuzzy dice hanging from our screens why not video footage to accompany system events? With this package for 68020+ Macs, your computer can now greet you with a scene from the alien cantina, turn your system beep into a wookie's cry or an android's prattle, cject your disks with a disgusted remark from Lord Vader, or empty your trash can with the violent destruction of Alderaan 2. Once past the arduous installation procedure (probably designed by Vader himself), one will have a large library of video clips to impress friends and irritate neighbors. Look for collections from Empire and Jedi to follow shortly. Mac ($89.95). Circle Reader Service #20. Strategic Simulations, Inc. 675 Almanor Ave. Suite 201 Sunnyvale, CA 94086-2901 (408) 737-6800 VEIL OF DARKNESS: Fans of Event Horizon's adventure The Summoning may find love at first byre in their new tale, Veil of Darkness. Ser in an isolated community in the Romanian highlands, this 3-D isometric adventure pits the solitary adventurer against an ancient vampire and his possessed minions. Event Horizon has really spruced up their graphics in this one, offering extraordinarily rich visuals and strong cinematic cut-screens. Though the game mechanics may be a bit over simplified for some, the story is artfully told and the setting refreshingly different (no Orcs!). Packaged on three disks, it won't suck much hard drive blood, though ir may suck away your late night hours. IBM ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #21. Waite Group Press 200 Tamal Plaza, Suite 101 Corte Madera, CA 94925 (800) 368-9369 Veil of Darkness THE IMAGE LAB: Along with Fractal Creations came an intriguing collection of shareware programs packaged with a companion book, The Image Lab. The book offers both a general introduction to the fascinating and complex world of computer graphics, and a step-by-step tutorial of the software. Among the collection of programs is PICLAB, a shareware image processing/enhancing tool that does color reduction, image sharpening, contrast adjustments, and the addition, subtraction, and overlaying of images. CSHOW allows its user to display any image regardless of one's screen resolution. IMPROCES is a Super VGA paint program that does special effects, mirroring, Hipping, color reducing, etc. IMAGE ALCHEMY is a handy tool that converts any graphic format to any other. Bur the most interesting program is POV-Ray, or Persistence of Vision Ray Tracer, which generates incredible ray traced images like the one on this page. These programs are not as easy to use as the fractal program mentioned above (one will have to invest some time with the book and program) but the diligent user will be rewarded with a set of very powerful creative tools. IBM ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #23. Walt Disney Computer Software, Inc. 500 Buena Vista Street Burbank, CA 91521-6385 Fractal Creations The Image Lab BUDAPEST A Main Menu What would you like to make? FRACTAL CREATIONS: After running our article on fractals in the February issue, we were bombarded with e-mail suggesting that we check out this book/software from the Waire Group. We'd like to thank you all, because the book and its program FRACTINT turned out to be quite a find. Developed by a group of programmers on the CompuServe network, FRACTINT is a fractal creation program that not only includes dozens upon dozens of formula for the Creeting Card Poster Invitation Place Mat Cutout Banner Calendar Letterhead Setup Quit ALADDIN PRINT KIT: Forty-six images from the Disney hit Aladdin are awaiting a master who can rub the magic mouse and allow them to serve his or her desk-top publishing desires. Abu, Aladdin, Genie, Jasmine, Rahjah, and even that bad guy whats-his-name are all here, along with 18 borders and several fonts. Suggested uses include the creation of letter-head, posters, placemats, signs and greeting cards, though budding publishing Sultans can certainly do as they wish. IBM ($19.95). Circle Reader Service #24. CGW Aladdin Print Kit Page 140 Computer Gaming World "


"COMPUTER GAMING WORLD HALL OF FAME The games in Computer Gaming World's Hall of Fame have been highly rated by our readers over time. They have been rated for their impact on the computer gaming hobby during their peak period of influence and acceptance by our readership. Note that the dates listed for each game are the copyright dates and may precede the actual release dates. Specific formats listed are those which CGW has in its possession. This month. we welcome a much loved game to these hallowed halls. The Newest Member to the CCW Hall of Fame Red Baron (Dynamix, 1990) Amiga, IBM, Mac Bambi The Bard's Tale (Electronic Arts, 1985) Many formats Chessmaster (Software Toolworks, 1986) Many formats Dungeon Master (FTL Software, 1987) Amiga, Atari ST, IBM Earl Weaver Baseball (Electronic Arts, 1986) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh Empire (Interstel, 1978) Amiga, Atari ST, Commodore 64, IBM F-19 Stealth Fighter (MicroProse, 1988) IBM Gettysburg: The Turning Point (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1986) Amiga, Apple, C-64, IBM Gunship (MicroProse, 1989) Amiga, C-64, IBM Harpoon (Three-Sixty Pacific, 1989) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh Kampfgruppe (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1985) Many formats King's Quest V (Sierra, 1990) Amiga, IBM M-1 Tank Platoon (MicroProse, 1989) Amiga, IBM Mech Brigade (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1985) Many formats Might & Magic (New World Computing, 1986) Apple, C-64, IBM, Mac M.U.L.E. (Electronic Arts, 1983) Atari 8-bit, C-64 Pirates (MicroProse, 1987) Many formats Railroad Tycoon (Micro Prose, 1990) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh Red Baron (Dynamix, 1990) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh SimCity (Maxis, 1987) Many formats Starflight (Electronic Arts, 1986) Amiga, C-64, IBM, Sega Their Finest Hour (LucasArts, 1989) Amiga, Atari ST, IBM Ultima III (Origin, 1983) Apple, Atari ST, C-64, IBM Ultima IV (Origin, 1985) Amiga, Apple, Atari ST, IBM Ultima VI (Origin, 1990) Amiga, IBM War in Russia (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1984) Apple Wasteland (Interplay, 1986) Apple, C64, IBM Wing Commander (Origin, 1991) IBM, Sega Wizardry (Sir-Tech Software, 1981) Many formats Zork (Infocom, 1981) Many formats Red Baron may well be Damon Slye's masterpiece. Damon is the designer/programmer who has been pushing the edge of 3-Space since his first vectored graphics game of space-age tank combat, the original Stellar 7 on the 8-bit computers. At Dynamix, Damon moved the company through the Skyfox and Airfox series of 3-D action games (published by EA) and on toward their current success with A-10 Tank Killer, Red Baron and Aces of the Pacific. Red Baron not only features terrific graphics that dress up the traditional polygon-filled look with occasional bit-maps and shading, but offers campaign play from both sides, the largest selection of aircraft in a WWI air combat simulation, and a multitude of quick-combat missions. It is a rich, satisfying simulation that not only held a prominent position in the top ten of CGW's Top 100 for more than a year, but still stands as the high watermark of realistic air combat for many gamers. May 1993 Page 141 "


"Kingd Reader Poll #104 Top Adventure Games GAME COMPANY King's Quest VI: Heir Today... Sierra Star Control II Accolade Indiana Jones: Fate of Atlantis LucasArts Monkey Island 2: Le Chuck LucasArts Les Manly in: Lost in L.A. Accolade The Secret of Monkey Island LucasArts Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes Electonic Arts 8 Quest for Glory III Sierra Sherlock Holmes CD ICOM 10 Amazon Access CON ACNCOMPUTER GAMING WORLD SCORE 10.40 10.12 10.02 10.00 9.73 9.72 9.71 9.66 9.55 9.34 Top 100 Games Pumict Compute: Gaulloraine Type WG,ST SP ST RP Untimated Top Role Playing Games AD AC ST WG ADAC AD AD Wh SSI GAME COMPANY SCORE Ultima Underworld Origin 10.45 Wizardry VII: Crusaders of Savant Sir-Tech 9.60 Eye of the Beholder 11 9.56 Might & Magic III New World Computing 9.45 Might & Magic: Clouds of Xeen 9.43 Ultima VII Origin 9.39 Eye of the Beholder SSI 9.10 Bane of the Cosmic Forge Sir-Tech 9.05 Ultima V Origin Elvira Accolade 8.82 MOON Score 10.76 10.75 10.75 10.45 10.43 10.40 10.31 10.26 10.20 10.12 10.02 10.00 9.85 9.80 9.77 9.75 9.73 9.72 9.71 9.66 9.63 9.63 ST Batas pendedahalelelalte plant 9.00 AC SI WG AD AD AD AD,RP SI WG RP 10 9.60 SP Game Company 1 Conquered Kingdoms QQP 2 Links 386 Pro Access Civilization MicroProse 4 Ultima Underworld Origin 5 Front Page Sports Football Dynamix 6 King's Quest VI: Heir Today... Sierra 7 Wing Commander II Origin 8 Solitaire's Journey QQP 9 V for Victory: Velikiye Luki Three-Sixty 10 Star Control II Accolade 11 Indiana Jones: Fate of Atlantis LucasArts 12 Monkey Island 2: Le Chuck's Revenge LucasArts 13 Hong Kong Mahjong Pro Electonic Arts 14 Wolfenstein 3-D Id Software 15 Comanche: Maximum Overkill NovaLogic 16 The Perfect General QQP 17 Les Manly in: Lost in L.A. Accolade 18 The Secret of Monkey Island LucasArts 19 Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes Electonic Arts 20 Quest for Glory III Sierra 21 Falcon 3.0 Spectrum HoloByte V for Victory: Utah Beach Three-Sixty Pacific 23 Wizardry VII: Crusaders of Savant Sir-Tech 24 Hardball III Accolade 25 Eye of the Beholder 11 SSI 26 Sherlock Holmes CD ICOM 27 Great Naval Battles SSI 28 Stunt Island Disney Aces of the Pacific Dynamix 30 Links Access Warlords SSG 32 Might & Magic III New World Computing 33 Might & Magic: Clouds of Xeen New World 34 Ultima VII Origin 35 Battles of Destiny QQP 36 Amazon Access 37 Pacific War SSI Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe LucasArts 39 Dune II Virgin Chessmaster 3000 Software Toolworks 41 High Command Colorado Comp. 42 Jack Nicklaus Signature Golf Accolade 43 Lemmings Psygnosis 44 Second Front 45 Spellcasting 301: Spring Break Legend 46 Carriers At War SSG 47 Tetris Classic Spectrum HoloByte 48 The Castle of Dr. Brain Sierra 49 Eye of the Beholder SSI 50 The Dagger of Amon Ra Sierra RP AD WG,ST Top Simulation Games GAME COMPANY Comanche: Maximum Overkill NovaLogic Falcon 3.0 Spectrum HoloByte Aces of the Pacific Dynamix Stunt Island Disney Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe LucasArts Gunship 2000 Microprose Chuck Yeager's Air Combat Electronic Arts Red Storm Rising MicroProse Silent Service il MicroProse 10 F-117A MicroProse DO OU AWN SCORE 9.77 9.63 9.53 9.53 9.33 9.06 9.06 9.04 9.58 9.56 9.55 9.54 9.53 9.53 9.47 9.47 9.03 9.45 8.92 SI SP WGST RP RP RP WG,ST AD WG SI ST ST r WG Top Strategy Games GAME COMPANY Civilization MicroProse Solitaire's Journey QOP Hong Kong Mahjong Pro Electonic Arts Chessmaster 3000 Software Toolworks Dune Il Virgin The Lost Admiral QQP Mech Warrior Activision Populous II Electronic Arts Hoyle Book of Games, Vol. 3 Sierra 10 Siege Mindcraft . 9.43 9.39 9.36 9.34 9.33 9.33 9.32 9.32 9.29 9.27 9.21 9.17 9.16 9.15 9.14 9.11 9.10 9.09 SCORE 10.75 10.26 9.85 9.32 9.32 9.05 8.94 8.90 8.78 8.77 SSI SP AC WG AD WG AC AD RP AD O, "


"WG INSON Top Wargames 9.09 9.06 9.06 9.05 9.05 9.04 9.04 9.03 9.02 9.01 COMPANY QQP Three-Sixty QQP Three-Sixty Pacific SI DAWN GAME Conquered Kingdoms V for Victory: Velikiye Luki The Perfect General V for Victory: Utah Beach Great Naval Balties Warlords Battles of Destiny Pacific War High Command Second Front SSI SCORE 10.76 10.20 9.75 9.63 9.54 9.47 9.36 9.33 9.29 9.17 9.00 SSG QQP SSI Colorado Comp. SSI AD,RP AD RP AD WG AD ST,SI SI 9 10 AC ST AD con DDER RIDER Top Action Games GAME Wing Commander II Wolfenstein 3-D Lemmings Tetris Classic Oh, No! More Lemmings Terminator 2029 Out of this World Conan the Cimmerian Speedball 2 10 Ancient Art of War in the Skies Ivo AWN COMPANY Origin Id Software Psygnosis Spectrum HoloByte Psygnosis Bethesda Interplay Virgin Konami MicroProse SCORE 10.31 9.80 9.21 9.14 8.92 8.85 8.51 8.10 7.92 Free Conflict: Korea 52 Chuck Yeager's Air Combat Gunship 2000 54 Bane of the Cosmic Forge The Lost Admiral 56 Red Storm Rising Conquests of the Longbow 58 Silent Service Il 59 Quest for Glory II 60 Police Quest 3 61 Ultima V 62 Space Quest IV Western Front 64 The Adventures of Willy Beamish 65 Mech Warrior 66 F-117A Oh, No! More Lemmings 68 Populous II 69 Rise of the Dragon Martian Memorandum 71 Terminator 2029 72 Indianapolis 500 73 Elvira 74 Command HQ 75 Rex Nebular Gateway to the Savage Frontier 77 Hoyle Book of Games, Vol. 3 78 Siege 79 The Summoning 80 Heart of China 81 Castles 2: Siege and Conquest Battles of Napoleon Battlechess Gateway 85 Starflight II 86 F-15 Strike Eagle II 87 Action Stations Pools of Darkness 89 Typhoon of Steel 90 Armada 2525 91 Tony LaRussa's Ultimate Baseball 92 Buck Rogers Legend of Kyrandia Carrier Strike 95 4-D Boxing 96 Megafortress 97 NFL Pro League Football 98 Out of this World 99 The Games:Winter Challenge Martain Dreams SSI Electronic Arts Microprose Sir-Tech QQP MicroProse Sierra MicroProse Sierra Sierra Origin Sierra SSI Dynamix Activision MicroProse Psygnosis Electronic Arts Dynamix Access Bethesda Electronic Arts Accolade MicroPlay MicroProse SSI Sierra Mindcraft SSI Dynamix Interplay SSI Interplay Legend Electronic Arts MicroProse RAW Entertainment SSI SSI Interstel SSI SSI Virgin SSI Electronic Arts Three-Sixty Pacific Micro Sports Interplay Accolade Origin AD AC SP RP WG,ST AD RP ST 8.98 8.98 8.96 8.94 8.92 8.92 8.90 8.89 8.89 8.85 8.83 8.82 8.81 8.79 8.79 8.78 8.77 8.76 8.75 8.72 8.72 8.72 8.72 8.71 8.69 8.68 8.68 8.67 8.63 8.60 ST 7.32 RP AD ST WG ST AD RP Top Sports Games SI WG RP voor A WNGAME COMPANY Links 386 Pro Access Front Page Sports Football Dynamix Hardball 1!! Accolade Links Access Jack Nicklaus Signature Golf Accolade Indianapolis 500 Electronic Arts Tony LaRussa's Ultimate Baseball SSI 4-D Boxing Electronic Arts NFL Pro League Football Micro Sports The Games: Winter Challenge Accolade SCORE 10.75 10.43 9.58 9.47 9.27 8.83 8.60 8.56 8.54 8.50 WG ST SP RP AD WG 8.57 SP 8 9 10 SI,ST SP AC SP RP 8.57 8.57 8.56 8.55 8.54 8.51 8.50 8.50 Poll is based on reader survey cards in each issue of CGW and published two issues subsequent. Data on more than 100 games is archived and top ten lists may contain games which scored below the Top 100 cutoff. Games on unnumbered lines have scores equal to the line above. AD=Adventure, RP-Role Playing, SI=Simulation, ST=Strategy. WG=Wargame, AC=Action, SP=Sports The Computer Gaming World Poll A monthly survey of the readers of Computer Gaming World Magazine. "


"what's not PC Research Hits List of Top-Selling Software What You ve Been Playing Lately The Feedback Forum of Reader Response January, 1993 Rank -infiones Every month our mailbox fills to capacity with hundreds of Reader Input Cards from our many loyal and outspoken readers. Over the years we've found these cards to be an invaluable source of feedback. Within 10 days of the release of our latest issue we can expect to see dozens of cards begin pouring in with comments, suggestions, encouragements, tirades and many good laughs, in addition to the data for our Top 100 game poll. Through your efforts, we know which articles were hits, which flopped, how many tyypos an grammatical errors we've let slip through -in addition to the many wellarticulated opinions on anything and everything related to gaming This column is set aside to give our readers a voice, and to display the results of our \"Playing Lately?\" field on the Reader Input Card. Thanks for taking the time to fill them out-and keep 'em coming! PC Games (MS-DOS) Title and Source F-15 Strike Eagle III (MicroProse) Ultima Underworld Il (Origin) Front Page Sports: Football (Sierra On-Line) Comanche: Maximum Overkill (Nova Logic) Wing Commander (Origin) Kings Quest VI (Sierra On-Line) Sim City (Maxis) Microsoft Flight Simulator (Microsoft) Falcon 3.0 (Spectrum HoloByte) Links 386 Pro (Access) Civilization (MicroProse) Silent Service II (MicroProse) F-15 III Aces Pack (MicroProse) Police Quest (Sierra On-Line) Links Mauna Kea (Access) Aces of the Pacific (Sierra On-Line) Hardball III (Accolade) Monopoly (Virgin Games) Star Control II (Accolade) Beat the House (Konami) 13. 14. 15. cimri ONO Playing Lately? Results For CGW #104, March 1993: Conquered Kingdoms (QQP) Ultima Underworld Il (Origin) Civilization (MicroProse) Front Page Sports Football (Dynamix) Wizardry VII: Crusaders of the Dark Savant (Sir-Tech Dune II (Virgin) V For Victory: Velikiye Luki (Three-Sixty) Star Control 2 (Accolade) F-15 Strike Eagle III (MicroProse) Gary Grigsby's Pacific War (SSI) 17. 18. 20. Rank Amiga Games Title and Source 688 Attack Sub (Electronic Arts) AD&D Gateway to Savage Frontier (Strategic Simulations) Realms (Virgin Games) AD&D Eye of the Beholder (Strategic Simulations) Operation Combat (Merit) est Mandates from the People \"The depth and realism of Shadow President are so good that sometimes I think I can understand why the world is so screwed up. This game is a classic!\" J. Tusk, Des Plaines, IL \"I never enjoyed a football game like I do with Front Page Sports Football. Just outstanding. A touchdown for sports fans.\" Kirk Williamson, Mosinee, WI \"Sex is great but Front Page Sports Football is better because you don't need a helmet!\" M. Crudder, Hobbs, NM \"In your Star Control 2 review you mention a modem option. I have been unable to locate such a feature. Am I missing something?\" Chris Haswell, Austin, TX Ed: No, the editors are. Star Control 2 does not have a modem option. Sorry. Those responsible for the sacking have been sacked (again). \"All auto racing simulations need to use the algorithms from World Circuit. It is as close to being in the cockpit as there is. Well done! Anonymous Enthusiast, Waco, TX Rank Macintosh Games Title and Source Civilization (MicroProse) Prince of Persia (Broderbund) Sim City Supreme (Maxis) Microsoft Flight Simulator (Microsoft) Award Winners: KO V & Red Baron (Sierra On-Line) cinto Rank cimitero CD-ROM Products Title and Source MPC Wizard (Aris Entertainment) Cinemania (Microsoft) Wing Commander/Secret Missions I & II (Origin) Battle Chess (Interplay) Street Atlas U.S.A. (Delome) World View (Aris Entertainment) Mantis (MicroProse) Where in the World is Carmen Sandiego (Broderbund) Lost Treasures of Infocom (Activision) Adventures of Willy Beamish (Sierra On-Line) \"Playing lately? As in late night, every night and every morning before work and lunch time also. My wife is in the process of making a SirTech voodoo doll. Bill Sasscer, Chesapeake, VA \"Travel agents should keep copies of Underworld and Underworld II stocked with their brochures of other exotic destinations. As someone who travels extensively, I prize new opportunities for adventure and discovery. The Underworld games have given me a wonderful way to visit yet another vacation spot and at a very reasonable fare.\" Brian Schutt, North Lauderdale, FL TEd: Uh huh. Try telling your Significant Other that you're taking him/her on a two-week vacation to Britannia. We don't think you'll get far, no matter how lovely the Gargoyles are in Spring. 10. This list is based on units sold by Software Etc. Babbages, Waldensoftware and Electronics Boutique, For more information, please contact PC Research at (703) 435-1025, Page 144 Computer Gaming World "


"The Patch File Tomputer game programs have grown so massive and the poly-cement problems. 11/13/92 number of possible configurations has become so huge that *Shadow President Update Version 1.0b: This version will run in ca. 30k Jincompatibilities and glitches seem to be breeding at an less memory than the previous version. It also includes minor adjustments exponential rate. Consumers and publishers are both frustrated at to the internal processing. 2/12/93 the need for adding parches into \"buggy\" programs, but they seem *SimLife Upgrade V2: Fixes minor problems in Maxis A-life simulator. to be an interim solution that is going to be with the hobby for a 2/10/93 while (presumably, until a standard platform configuration is *Solitaire's Journey Patch V1.03: This is a patch for those having probagreed upon). So, until the golden age of standardized platforms lems with saved Tournament games and those having mouse troubles. 2/12/93 and bug-free programs, Computer Gaming World will publish a regular list of the latest updates of which we are aware. Spelljammer Update V1.1: Latest version of the game. 11/21/92 These patches can usually be downloaded from either Star Control 2 V1.1: Fixes several small problems. 12/11/92 Compuserve or GEnie, but can also be obtained from individual Star Legions Update: Fixes some machine-specific lock-ups, problems with software publisher's own BBSs and direct from the publisher, with phasers firing out of the FOV, changes to mission ratings, fixes to award proof of purchase. We continue to urge publishers to keep us sequence. 1/15/93 updated on the latest versions/parches to their games. Stunt Island Update: Fixes a minor bug in the Install program that was causing some system lockups after the hardware autodetect scquence. (* indicates new files.) 11/27/92 Air Force Commander Slowdown Patch: Makes the game playable on *Task Force 1942 Update: Corrects the waypoint problem, among others. high-powered machines. 11/24/92 2/15/93 Amazon Raft Bug Fix: Fixes the problem getting the raft out of the box in *TL's Ultimate Baseball V1.1: Upgrades SSI's baseball simulation to the the airplane. 12/12/92 latest version. 1/29/93 B-17 Flying Fortress Version 2 Update: Adds many new features and Tom Landry Football V. 1.02 Update: Corrects problems with modem tweaks some of the existing ones. 11/17/92 play, excessive penalties, Sound Blaster problems, and improved animation Batman Returns Update: Latest version of Konami's Bat-venturc. 1/24/93 choreography. 12/03/92 *Civilization Version 1.0.8 (Macintosh): Latest and greatest version of the Twilight 2000 Colonel Upgrade (VGA only): Adds extra sounds and reigning king of strategy. 2/23/93 graphics, and adds a new ending to the game. 2/2/93 Darkseed Version 1.5 Updare: Latest version of CyberDreams' adventure. *Ultima VII Version 3.4: Lord British fixes some minor leaks in the roof 1/20/93 of Castle Britannia. Updates from Version 3.0 to 3.4. 2/17/93 F-15 Strike Eagle III Install Update: For those having trouble with the *Ultima Underworld II Patch: Fixes the \"strike\" problem, local bus diffiinstall program. 12/23/92 culties, and a few others. 2/24/93 F-15 Strike Eagle Help Info Text: Text file containing known problems Wayne Gretzky Hockey 3 Version 1.10: Fixes many bugs, including the and suggestions for those having problems with the sim. 1/08/93 Canadien. VOC file, the computer scoring problem, CH FlightStick prob*F-117A Stealth Fighter V.04: Update to MicroProse's jet simulator. lem, penalties, referees, coach's clipboard and others. 11/24/92 1/29/93 *Front Page Sports Football: A new version is available which improves The PRODIGY Weekly Top Ten upon the original release in many ways. 2/15/93 Full Count Baseball V5.1 Upgrade: Expands play-by-play and offers a new screen layout. For owners of V5.0 only. 12/06/92 Computer Gaming World is Prodigy's on-line games expert. Look for Greens Version 02 Update: Addresses the problems reported with scoring, us in their Game Center, a forum where users read articles posted on line by CGW and exchange messages on the bulletin boards (we can Sound Blasters, etc. 11/22192 be reached there at EXPT40B). The Prodigy Game Poll is run by *Great Naval Battles/North Atlantic Update: Updates all GNBNA files to Prodigy based on a list of games provided by CGW and is updated version 1.2. 2/23/93 weekly. Nore that it is not a cumulative rating over time (like the \"Gunship 2000 Islands and Ice Patch Version .085: Corrects keyboard CGW Top 100 Poll). Instead, the Prodigy Game Poll is a weekly Jockout problems some gamers are having. 2/11/93 \"snapshot of game popularity with gamers rating their favorites on a Hockey League Simulator 2 Update V1.11: New version for the IBM. 1 10 scale. the highest total point earners make their Top 10. We 2/3/93 provide this data to our readers as another barometer of \"what's hor\" Island of Dr. Brain Update: Fixes \"Ooops 10\" error, music room puzzle, in computer gaming. and several other problems. 12/23/92 Jack Nicklaus Signature Edition Rev 1.5: Fixes the Mini-Moss effect caused by several objects being placed after a hill crest. 12/16/92 Links 386 Pro Update Version 1.08: Allows game to run under OS/2 and TOP TEN RANKED GAMES other DPMI operating systems and software. 11/14/92 Weed: February 19 10 February *Magic Candle III Version 1.16: Fixes problems with Sound Blaster support, mirror of honesty/candlewick problems, difficulties with tranferred BATTE SCORE TITLE PANISCHE TITLE characters from MC2, and other minor glitches. 2/17/93 288. Wolteister-3. NFL Pro League Football '92 V1.1: Contains many upgrades, fixes, and 2334 C a tron 7 1453 Mine land? additional schedules. 1/26/93 2223 KITOS Ouest 1 Pacific War V1.06: Fixes the bombardment bug, the West Coast defense 2122 no contender 2 1 337 Underung bug, the missing unit bug, etc. An unofficial\" upgrade from Gary Grigsby 1771 Falcon 32 not supported by SSI. 1/24/93 Power Politics Update: Fixes all known bugs. 12/11/92 COMPANY NEWS: Now faster, easier Quest For Glory III «B» Patch: Corrects all known game play errors. access to the information you need 12/03/92 STOCKS BONDS MARKETS INDUSTRIES LOOK Rex Nebular Update 8.49 (IBM/VGA): Corrects the chicken-bomb and Menu X-ref Jump Path Copy Tools Help Exit GAMEPELE May 1993 Page 145 "


"gdtoral Awards — Thy Name Is Controversy AKNE State of the Industry: Last issue, we touched Maxis continued their winning streak with rate highly among CGW readers. on the issue of awards. We observed that A-Train being selected as Best Strategy ProIn the Sports category, golf games from appending a superlative like \"Best\" to any gram. CGW readers didn't seem to gravitate Access have won the award for several years in product is tantamount to painting a bull's-eye toward A-Train, having trouble with an ecoa row. This year, the competition from Miupon it. This virtually allows any would-be nomic model that seemed foreign to U.S. croProse's World Circuit, Dynamix Front critic to come along and castigate the flawed business practices. It is very likely that they Page Sports: Football, Accolade's Jack Nicklaus selection process, alleged political influences would have selected Dynamix The Incredible Golf: Signature Edition, Accolade's Al and supposed ignorance of the voters. Awards Machine or Virgin's Dune II: The Building of Michaels Announces Hardball III and newselected by members of the press represent the a Dynasty as the winner in this category, since comer Merit Software's Tom Landry Strategy elitist perceptions of jaded critics who are out the buzz has been more favorable for the latter Football seemed to offer the stiffest test ver. of touch; those chosen by working members two products. Note, however, that SPA winLinks 386 Pro continued the domination of of an industry represent unenlightthe category for Access. Upon beened selections from those who are ing congratulated for their victory, so focused upon their own prodcompany representatives said, ucts that they do not know the \"Wait till you see the technology in products of others; and those seour next generation product!\" lected by the public are mere It may well be, however, that the popularity contests because the Action/Arcade category brought \"great unwashed\" cannot possibly understand the subtle nuances of the biggest surprise. In an awards process where politics often seems each new innovation. to rule, the underdog managed to The Software Publishers Assowin. Wolfenstein 3-D, id Software's ciation probably didn't help their first-person 3-D action game (pubcase with the selection of the new lished by Apogee Software) took nickname for their annual \"Excelthe prize. To our knowledge, it is lence in Software\" awards. Believthe first time that a shareware game ing that a gala black tie dinner and has taken honors in the SPA voting. dance, complete with celebrity Further, id Software is probably MC and multi-media fanfare, did the smallest software house to win not sufficiently emulate the ceresuch honors. The entire operation monies surrounding the Oscars, is six employees (two programmers, Emmys, Tonys and Grammys, the two artists, one creative director SPA nicknamed them the and one business person). \"Codies\" (one wag immediately As noted earlier, no awards procmaligned them as the \"Cooties\"). ess is so removed from CGW Publisher Russell Sipe presents Critics Choice award for Stunt Nevertheless, there were only a potential Island to Disney Software's Kirk Green. flaws that it does not engender couple of surprises and plenty of some debate and dissatisfaction. the criticism typical of any system One SPA award that has consisof award selection. ners in the strategy category have rarely rently reduced the amount of controversy has SimLife was selected as Best Simulation. In squared with gamers' tastes. been the Critics Choice Awards. These awards a sense, this seems a reasonable choice. It does One close observer of the SPA awards are selected by a panel of judges who cover an admirable job in simulating biological systems and it has the abbreviation \"Sim\" in its pointed out the obvious fallacy of the Best their respective fields all year long. This year, title. Yet, one wonders if it is truly a simulation Fantasy Role-Playing/Adventure category. The Critics Choice Award for Best Consumer in the tradition of first-person perspective, The observer commented that any organizaProduct went to Walt Disney Software's 3-D Stunt Island. The winning margin seemed to polygon-filled graphic games which tion that could combine the two genres had a be the game's unique capacity for filming, simulate vessels and vehicles. Maxis has ruled fundamental misunderstanding of both genthis category for four years, but even Maxis' res. A graphic adventure from a new player editing and saving to disk a custom \"film\" of president, Jeff Braun, seems uncomfortable won the honors in this category. Cyber one's play session. After several years, the Critwith their dominance in the category. He dreams' DarkSeed, an intense graphic experiics Choice seems to be the one award that wishes there was a \"software toy\" category soence built around the fantasy art of H.R. most often rewards design innovation. that \"so many of the other worthy products\" Giger (designer of the original Alien creature). Yes, awards can be controversial. Without would be able to win \"without us having to Again, the game offers a certain aesthetic qualawards, though, what would we have to talk lose.\" ity which appealed to the voters, but does not about? Cow Page 146 Computer Gaming World "


"Advanced Dungeons & Dragons COMPUTER KODUCT Dungeons pragons FOR THOSE WHO WOULD GIVE ANYTHING FOR A THIRD EYE. THE GRAND FINALE OF THE MEANEST 3-D GRAPHIC ADVENTURE SERIES EVER! If you thought it would be impossible to top the first two \"Eye of the Beholder\" adventures, you're in for a deadly surprise in EYE OF THE BEHOLDER III: ASSAULT ON MYTH DRANNOR. Behold Eye III, with the hottest graphics, a devilishly deep plot, and more cinematics than ever. This time you're transported to the ruined city of Myth Drannor in the FORGOTTEN REALMS The streamlined world, where you must interface with the new wrest an artifact of divine ALL ATTACK button power from the dread gives you the smoother lich Acwellan. A massive moves you'll need to monster bestiary awaits your journey through Eye III is an assault on the forest, mausoleum, your senses, with three temple, and guilds. times more cinematic The never-ending comintermissions and five plexity with more fully-scored music character action, pieces. Plus the plots and ability to import your subplots favorite characters requires from Eye II, along you to with weapons, think on treasure and your feet experience levels. or perish. The way the developers of Eye III see it, if you're going to go out, you might as well go out in style. Who knows, 40-100 hours later, you might just see the light at the end of Eye III. Then again, you might not. SIL Acvanced Dungeons Dragons LE BOUCRUM Hong SEL IBM CLUE BOOK AVAILABLE! ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, FORGOTTEN REALMS, and the TSA logo are trademarks owned by and used under license from TSR Inc 1993 TSA Inc 1993 Strategic Simulations, Ino All rights reserved. TO ORDER: Visit your retailer, or call 1-800-245-4525 with Visa/MasterCard orders (USA and Canada only). 2 TRAIL TO DETENUTO TIE TORTL DE 5171 41 ACATTACK HCUTTACK CAME URNE IBM 256-color VGA displays "


"Ultima L Computer Gaming World's Underworld he Thrilling Sequel to Computer Gaming World's Role-Playing Game of the Year! It's not just a dungeon game anymore! Labyrinth OF Worlds ou ses a pack EN You 366 a hostile reaper. Vou see a hostile de reper You see a homing dari UNDERWORLD The Stygian Abyss was hailed as the first in a new generation of fantasy adventures. UNDERWORLD II Labyrinth of Worlds delivers a new, sharply realistic look. With smoother animation, more detailed creatures and a spacious view window, it's the most realistic gaming environment on a PC. The world of Underworld Il is more varied and engaging than ever before. We've added new terrain features (like shifting floors, water currents and thin ice), new spells (like Shockwave and Portal), new and nastier traps and puzzles, and new creatures (we'll let you discover these for yourself...) Underworld Il takes you beyond the traditional dungeon environment. Deep in the earth, the Guardian's magic has cracked the walls of reality, opening the way to eight new worlds beyond Britannia: a city buried in ice, a floating castle, an ancient tomb and more... From the halls of Lord British's castle, it's time to carry the battle forward and into the LABYRINTH OF WORLD... You see a black potion Vou see a potion Actual screens may vary. ORIGIN Available at a software retailer near you or call 1-800-245-4525 for MC/Visa/Discover orders. We create worlds. An Electronic Arts Company A Looking Glass Technologies\" Design P.O. BOX 161750  AUSTIN, TX 78716 Origin, Ultima and We create worlds are registered trademarks of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Underworld, The Stygian Abyss and Labyrinth of Worlds are trademarks of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. A Looking Gloss Technologies is a trademark of A Looking Glass Technologies Design, Electronic Arts is a registered trademark of Electronic Arts. Circle Reader Service #79 "

