I

December 1986

Number 33

FEATURES
Leather Goddesses of Phobos
Scorpion's Tale Gives Playing Tips

The Year In Review
A Look at Computer Gaining in 1986

Gettysburg: The Turning Point
A Review

The Shard of Spring
A Review

Designer Profile
An Interview With Chris Crawford

DragonFire II
A Review

14
Scorpia
20
Charles Ardai
28
Ed Curtis
38
Scorpia
46
Frank Boosman
54
James Trunzo

DEPARTMENTS
Taking A Peek

4

Screen Photos and Brief Comments

Industry News

10

Atari Playfield

18
Gregg Williams

Hacker II

Strategically Speaking

33

Game Playing Tips

Commodore Key
Information for the C-64 Gamer

The Learning Game
Educational Software

Amiga Preferences
Information for the Amiga Gamer

Sports Scoreboard
10th Frame, Radio Baseball

Game Ratings

36
Roy Wagner
42
Bob Proctor
44
Roy Wagner
52
Rick Teverbaugh
56

TAKING A PEEK

Activision, Inc.
P.O. Box 7286
Mountain View, CA 94039
(415) 960-0410
HOWARD THE DUCK: Adventure on
Volcano Island: Activision hopes that
the arcade adventure fares better than
the movie. Although this is primarily
an arcade game, it does have a story
line (not the movie version, either) and
different objectives for each of the four
difficulty levels in the game. Howard
must avoid obstacles like the infamous
puddles of goo (was David Letterman
on the design team?) and the dreaded
yellow Mutant Mounds. If mutants
emerge from the mounds before the
little guy can stomp the mounds
closed, the player gets to test out
Howard's title as Master of Quack Fu.
At the Expert level, Howard must
successfully parachute into the Dark
Overlord's volcano base, avoid the
hazards and destroy the sinister
alien(well, there had to be at least one
tip of the hat to the movie). Apple, C64/128. Circle Reader Service Card
#1.

TRANSFORMERS: Battle to Save the
Earth: The despicable Decepticons are
attempting to drain all of the earth's
energy by adapting nine strategic locations to their diabolical ends. The
game has a similar appearance and feel
to Epyx's G. I. Joe game in that the
player assigns characters from the
animated television show to deploy at
various "hot spots" on the map and
defeat the villains by means of an arcade style contest. The introduction
sequence is very interesting because
the overview of the game is given by
means of cartoon show graphics and a
digitized voice-over which explains the
mission (should you decide to accept
it!). Those who enjoy the television
series should enjoy the opportunity to
control their favorite Autobots from
the show. C-64/128. Circle Reader
Service Card #2.
SHANGHAI: Derived from the ancient
oriental game of Mah Jongg, this is a
computer puzzle program designed to
be played solitaire. The game consists
of 144 tiles with seven suits printed on

them. The tiles are stacked in a five
level dragon-shaped pyramid. Tiles
must be removed in pairs and each tile
can be matched by three other tiles.
The object is to remove all of the tiles.
Because the tiles are randomly shuffled
prior to play, each game is different. If
you're not sure you'll like it, the company is offering a trial disk by writing
at the above address and enclosing
$3.00 for shipping and handling. Apple, Amiga, Atari ST, C-64/128, IBM
PC and PCjr, Macintosh, and Tandy
1000. Circle Reader Service Card #3.
Aegis Development
2210 Wilshire Blvd. #277
Santa Monica, CA 90403
(213) 392-9972
ARAZOK'S TOMB: In this graphic
adventure game, the player takes on
the identity of an ace reporter,
searching for his lost love in the woods
of New Galloway, Scotland. Of course,
the exotic location is simply an excuse
to lure you into the ruins of an ancient
Druid temple. Since there is a super-

natural gateway in the temple, this
isn't simply an "explore the dungeon"
adventure. The adventure is enhanced
with digitized speech. The program is
intended to be an experiment in terror,
so a Parental Guidance warning is
printed on the packaging. Macintosh.
Circle Reader Service Card #4.
Analytical Profiles, Inc.
P. 0. Box 12635
Pittsburgh, PA 15241
(412) 833-9664
A. P. PARTYMAKER: Computers
have long been recognized for having
the capacity to collate data, analyze it,
and present a summary of the information in an easily digestible form.
This program is an attempt to accomplish this with personality data and
facilitate social intercourse with the
various interactive responses. With its
capacity for providing a Sensual
Forecast, Biorhythms, Personal Analysis, and prediction of how the subject
will be in the next week, the program
should be a real conversational catalyst. The program seems inconsistent
at times, however. IBM. Circle Reader
Service Card #5.
Avalon Hill Microcomputer Games
4517 Hartford Road
Baltimore, MD 21214
DR. RUTH'S COMPUTER GAME OF
GOOD SEX: This is a fast moving quiz

game for one to seven players. The
game, based on Avalon Hill's successful
board game, consists of true-false
questions with four possible answers
and multiple choice questions. There
are also bonus questions based on actual queries to Dr. Westheimer. Points
are scored for each correct and incorrect answer based on the time left on
the clock. Apple, C-64/128, and IBM.
[For the humorous, but adult-oriented
"Taking A Peek" on this game, send a
self addressed stamped envelope to
CGW. Mark the envelope "Good Sex
Review". The review will come in an
unmarked plain envelope.] Circle
Reader Service Card #6.
Broderbund Software, Inc.
17 Paul Drive
San Rafael, CA 94903-2101
(415) 479-1700
AIRHEART: This is an arcade adventure designed by the author of
Choplifter. The story-line involves
awakening the heir to a lost kingdom
from suspended animation and enabling him to reclaim his kingdom
from his father's enemies. In order to
awaken the prince, the hero (who is to
be named Airheart if he emerges victorious) must guide his weathered jet
sled through an ingenious series of
robot defenses (placed there to protect
the Prince and prove the hero's wor-

thiness). If the hero can obtain, in
turn, the sword, goblet and harp from
the ancient king's treasure, the Spirit
Guardians will allow the hero to fight
the final battle and liberate the Prince
from his protective narcolepsy. Apple
IIe/IIc (128K and joystick req.). Circle
Reader Service Card #7.
Data East USA, Inc.
470 Needles Dr.
San Jose, CA 95112
(408) 286-7074
TAG-TEAM WRESTLING: If you
liked the game when it was a coin-operated arcade hit, you'll probably like
the home computer version. The
graphics are fluid and printed commentary is displayed on the screen like
speech or thought balloons in the
comic strips. The same body slams,
drop kicks, back-breakers, flying head
butts and pins from the arcade version
are present in this home edition. C64/128. Circle Reader Service Card
#8.
Electronic Arts
1820 Gateway Drive
San Mateo, CA 94404
(415) 571-7171
ROBOT RASCALS: With this release,
Dan Bunten demonstrates his remarkable creativity with multi-player
games and answers the perennial
question, "What should we play when
my friends come over?" RR is a two to
four player game which is half card
game and half computer game. Each
game comes with two decks of cards:
one is an attractive multi-colored deck
of Item Cards and the other is black
and white line art on yellow Luck
Cards. Each player selects a robot
character to search the computer environment for the items pictured on
the cards in their hand. In addition to
the strategic scavenger hunt taking
place on screen, the players experience
a fast-moving card game (refereed by
the program, of course) which contains
lots of card swapping (a la Pit, Old
Maid, Authors, or Uno to name some
of the classics). The robot caricatures
are delightful and the graphics are up
to EA's usual high standards. Apple
and C-64/128. Circle Reader Service
Card #9.
Epyx
P. 0. Box 8020
Redwood City, CA 94063
(415) 366-0606
CHAMPIONSHIP WRESTLING: For
every Saturday morning wrestling afficionado, here's an arcade game which
has all your favorite moves. You can
use headlocks, flying drop kicks, spin
kicks, airplane spins, turnbuckle
punches, turnbuckle kicks, pile drivers,
body slams, atomic drops, and suplexes, as well as standard punches
and kicks. One or two players can take
their choice of the following genteel
personae: K. C. Colossus, Purple Hays,
Colonel Rooski, Prince Vicious (wasn't
he a punk rock star?), Zantoklaw, Zeke
Weasel, The Berserker or Howling
Manslayer. C-64/128. Circle Reader
Service Card #10.

DESTROYER: You are placed in
command of a Fletcher Class Naval
Destroyer in this simulation. The
graphic presentation is impressive
since the program uses 10 separate
screens with changing visual displays
related to the status of the game. For
instance, the Sonar and Radar displays
are separate screens which must be
checked regularly for status updates.
Both look like authentic screens. The
Bridge display is also remarkably realistic. The game plays very fast in a
real time mode. C-64/128. Circle
Reader Service Card #11.
THE MOVIE MONSTER GAME: If
you've ever wanted to direct your own
"B" horror movie, this game will give
you your chance. The arcade action
isn't as exciting as Mail Order Monsters, but the animated screens are at
least as good as Saturday morning
television. Players can choose from six
different monsters (Godzilla, Mr.
Meringue, Sphectra, The Glog,
Tarantus or Mechatron), six different
world-class cities with distinctive
landmarks (Tokyo, New York, London,
San Francisco, Paris or Moscow), and
five different missions (destroy landmark, escape, lunch, search or go
berserk). C-64/128. Circle Reader Service Card #12.
SUPER CYCLE: Racing games have
always been one of the standard products of the arcade. From Grand Prix,
Pole Position and Turbo onward,
they've gotten faster and more challenging. SUPER CYCLE is the motorcycle version of the genre. It looks,
plays, and sounds like the coin-op
version. If you're spending your
children's inheritance at the video
arcade, you might want to pick this
one up. C-64/128. Circle Reader Service Card #13.
Firebird Licencees, Inc.
74 North Central Avenue
Ramsey, New Jersey 07446
STARGLIDER: Air-to-air and
air-to-ground combat are simulated in this
recent offering from over the Atlantic.
The documentation contains a 34 page
novella to establish the fiction behind
the game, as well as short fictional
supplements for each additional level
of difficulty. The documentation also
contains a polished instruction booklet
entitled, Airborne Ground Attack Vehicle Flight Operations Manual. Each

attack vehicle is equipped with high
energy single-pulse beam lasers and
TV guided missiles in order to defeat
the invading Ergon air and ground
forces. The graphics are effective and
begin to make use of the ST's capabilities in this area. Atari ST. Circle
Reader Service Card #14.
Mindscape, Inc.
3444 Dundee Road
Northbrook, IL 60062
(312) 480-7667
COMIC WORKS: Imagine a MacPaint(tm) type program with a library
of comic art, page layout with capacity
for text and graphics to be mixed anywhere on the screen/page, customized
panels and voice balloons. You've just
imagined CW. This program isn't a
game, but if any of our Mac owners are
comics buffs, this three disk program is
a jewel. It should be useful for creating
your own comics (a la Shatter, a professional book created on the Mac and
published by 'First Comics') or editing
a professional looking fan 'zine. Macintosh. Circle Reader Service Card
#15.
HIGH ROLLER: Three dimensional
graphics and multiple levels of difficulty highlight this flight simulation.
Screens offer a cockpit view from your
Harrier and enable you to engage in
both air-to-air and air-to-ground
combat. Fans of Top Gun and Iron
Eagle won't want to miss this opportunity to do their own barrel roll attacks, scissors, and immelmanns.
However, since the Harrier has the capability for vertical take-offs and vertical landings, there are even more intricate maneuvers available in this
flight simulator. C-64/128. Circle
Reader Service Card #16.
INDOOR SPORTS: This game is to
bowling, air hockey, ping pong and
darts what World Games is to track
and field. The game has interesting
graphics and can be played by either
one or two players. Even if the players
are relatively proficient in playing
these sports, positioning the on-screen
player and using the joystick effectively is challenging. The program
keeps track of high scores and victories
so that even those who play solitaire
can attempt to best their scores in the
future. C-64/128. Circle Reader Service Card #17.

SUB MISSION: This game is an adventure/strategy built around a flimsy
fiction. It seems that Sigourny Slye
and Peter Frey (whoever they are) are
missing in action after participating in
a series of submarine maneuvers with
the obsessive Warlord of another
planet. In order to save Sigourny and
Peter, the player must engage in
sub-to-sub warfare and try to be the first
to find and harpoon the "deep mine."
After defeating the Warlord, the
player must evaluate enough clues to
find the escape route. The game comes
with a cassette tape which provides the
fictional introduction and a tutorial for
playing the game. Apple II and IBM
PC and PCjr. Circle Reader Service
Card #17.
Oowhile Software
5227 Shady Oaks Lane
Friendswood, TX 77546-3019
TRODART: The name of this simulation stands for TROop Deployment
and Reconnaissance Terminal. It's a
real-time war game played on two separate IBM PC compatible computers
over a 300 baud modem. Moves are
made simultaneously and so there can
be multiple battles and marches during
a given period of the game. The object
of the game is to capture the enemy
base while defending the home base. A
secondary objective is to occupy as
much territory as possible because new
recruits are calculated according to the
number of quadrants controlled. The
second objective is important because
the game has a time limit. In the event
time runs out before one side or another captures the enemy base, the
side with the largest army wins. IBM.
Circle Reader Service Card #18
PBI Software
1111 Triton Drive, 2nd Floor
Foster City, CA 94404
(415) 349-8765
STRATEGIC CONQUEST: A
wargame of global domination. Your
mission is to explore and conquer an
unknown world. You control an army,
navy and air force against the computer. By using strategy and tactics
you capture cities, from which you can
produce and deploy even more forces.
Your choices of weapons to build include aircraft carriers, bombers, submarines, armies, etc. There is an eco-

Continued on pg. 50

INDUSTRY NEWS

BRODERBUND WINS LANDMARK DECISION
ON COPYRIGHT INFRINGEMENT!

On October 13, 1986, Broderbund
Software, Inc. announced that the United
States District Court had ruled in their favor with regard to a suit against Unison
World, Inc. over copyright infringement.
Unison had marketed a program under the
name, "Printmaster," which was visually
and functionally similar to Broderbund's
popular "Print Shop" software. Both programs can be used to create customized
greeting cards, signs, banners, and posters.
The court ruled that audio-visual displays
or "user interface" of a non-video-game
computer program can be copyrighted under the Federal Copyright Act. This indicates that programmers could commit
copyright infringement if they copy the
look, sequence, and structure of a previously existing program. The decision is expected to have significant future impact on
software development. A delighted Douglas Carlston, President of Broderbund,
commented that, "This ruling promotes
initiative, creativity and incentive to develop new expressions, the very purpose of
copyright laws." The victorious executive
continued his observations by noting that,
"From now on, software pirates will have
to think twice before deciding to exploit
the creativity of a competitor by simply
duplicating the screens of an already successful program."

PRINT SHOP SETS RECORD AND OFFERS
UPGRADE

"Print Shop" was the software of
choice when students at Thurston Middle
School in Laguna Beach, CA printed a
banner that stretched 1.7 miles. It took
the 420 students, aged 11 to 14, and 12
teachers two weeks to complete the banner. The school used the banner to publicize its relationship with Great American
First Savings Bank in providing job forums for career education. The school has
received a resolution of approval from the
mayor of Laguna Beach and is attempting
to qualify for the Guinness Book of World
Records.
"Print Shop" is also available in an
updated version which allows Apple users
to print in color, as well as preview and
save designs. The upgraded version is
available for Apple II+/IIe/IIc (with at
least 64K memory) and may be operated
with joystick or KoalaPad. "Print Shop"
owners can mail their original "Print
Shop" disk and $20.00 to Broderbund
Customer Service to receive an updated
version. Suggested retail price on the new
version is $49.95.
GARDE' ENTERS COMPUTER GAMING
FIELD WITH NEW SYSTEM!

Garde' Games of Distinction is proud
to enter the computer game market with
its first release, Blue Powder & Gray

Smoke. Ralph Bosson is the designer of
this game with open structure and three
different scenarios. The game doesn't depend on game turns, but functions by
means of a modified real time command
structure. The player can continuously
issue orders to his units or simply give orders for the entire game and depend on
computer subordinates to follow through
on them. The game can be played on a
solitaire or multiplayer basis. Bill Harrington edited the rulebooks and Mike
LePage (formerly of Sweet Micro Systems)
assisted in development.
THE CASE OF THE MISSING HORSE RACE
PROGRAM!

Tazumi Software International, developers of Horse Racing Classic (first reviewed in CGW 2.4 and mentioned in the
Letters column of CGW 28), reports that
copies of the program are still available
and may be obtained by writing to Tazumi
Software International, Inc.
Second Floor, 6625 Fraser Street
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada
V5X 3T6
or calling (604) 324-5115 and asking
for Martin Wirick (regular business hours
only).
Continued on pg. 12

INDUSTRY NEWS (con.)
SIMULATIONS CANADA ANNOUNCES SHIFT
IN EMPHASIS

Steve Newberg, President of Simulations Canada, states that his company will
no longer be designing board games. Noting that more can be done with computer
games, the Sim Can executive states that
all future publications will be computer
games and will emphasize the distinctive
design capabilities of a computer rather
than making the usual transition from
board game to computer-assisted board
game. In a recent interview, Newberg announced the following schedule of future
releases:
Winter, 1986: Rommel—Battles for
Tobruk; Spring, 1987: To the Rhine
(Overlord continued); Summer, 1087: Long
Lance (WW II tactical naval); Fall 1987:
Jutland, Rommel at El Alamein, In Harm's
Way (Naval, 1943).
ACCESS SOFTWARE RELEASES TOURNAMENT DISKS!

In September, Access Software released
Tournament Disk #1, a supplementary
disk to expand their popular Leader Board
game. The new disk adds four entirely new
18 hole golf courses on the Atari ST disk
(only two new courses on the Commodore
64/128 disk) and a higher degree of difficulty on both disks. Also included on the
new disks are provisions for computerized
scoring and handicapping. Disks for both
systems have a suggested retail price of
$19.95.

SOFTWARE COMPANIES MOVE TO NEW
QUARTERS!

Krentek Software has relocated in
McAllen, TX after a recent move from
Kansas City ,KS. Krentek may be reached
at: 4601 N. 9th St., McAllen, TX 78504,
(512) 687-1284.
Epyx Computer Software has a new
location. The company may be reached at:
P. 0. Box 8020, Redwood City, CA 94063,
(415)366-0606
The new street address is 600 Galveston Drive in Redwood City.

COMPUSERVE OFFERS NEW GAMES AND
FEATURES!

Compuserve subscribers may now
subscribe to Computer Gaming World and
other favorite magazines by means of EBSCO Magazine Entree. EBSCO Magazine
Entree offers an opportunity to subscribe
on-line to magazines that appeal to every
interest: sports, art, news, finance, crafts,
entertainment, and others. CIS subscribers
can access EBSCO by typing GO ME in
the Electronic Mall.
An "Air Traffic Controller" game is
also available on Compuserve. The simulation requires the player to guide jet aircraft safely through his/her sector of
airspace or to an airport within his/her
sector. ATC has several levels of difficulty
and may be played solitaire or against
other players (up to four additional).
Scoring is based on successfully guiding
jets through the sector. Points depend

upon amounts of fuel left, difficulty level,
and amount of mistakes. Highest scorers
are inducted into a "Hall of Fame."
Another recent game on CIS is Island
of Kesmai. Kesmai was a small, fictitious
island located at the western tip of the
Archipelago of Mu where a group of persecuted magicians were banished. The
mages attempted to experiment with black
arts and create peculiar creatures in order
to wreak revenge on Mu. The mages were
hoist by their own petard when the dragon
they summoned went berserk and killed
them. Are you able to succeed where they
failed? Play this multi-player fantasy and
find out.
Subscribers to CIS are invited to join
one of the many multi-player games of
galactic conflict (MegaWars III), trivia
quizzes (You Guessed It!), casino games
(Multi-Player Blackjack), or play by
electronic mail games. To subscribe to
Compuserve, call 1-800-848-8990.

COMPUTER GAMING
WORLD HAS MOVED: Our
NEW Editorial Address is:
515 S. Harbor Blvd. Suite C,
Anaheim, CA 92805. Note
we are moving from Suite A
to Suite C. The mailing
address remains: PO Box
4566, Anaheim, CA 92803

.

SCORPION'S TALE

LEATHER
GODDESSES
of PHOBOS
by Scorpia
Brrrr! It's cold outside. Snow, sleet, icy winds:
all that good stuff that comes around this time of
year, freezing your fingers and chilling your bones.
I love it. You, however, are looking a bit blue
around the lips. Don't panic! I have just the thing
to warm you up... what could be hotter on a cold
winter's night than a little sex? (grin).
Actually, LGOP is pretty tame, even in lewd
mode. Oh, there's a little making out here and
there, but this is basically a fun game, a spoof of
all the derring-do sci-fi adventure stories of the
'30's, with a little touch of spice. And if you are in
any way disturbed by the sexual motif, you can always play it at the 'tame' level, which will turn
LGOP into a pretty straight-forward adventure.
So it's 1936, and you're sitting in Joe's Bar, a
grubby dive located somewhere in Upper Sandusky,
Ohio. At least the beer is a nickel a mug. With
prices like that, you can tell this isn't premium
stuff. Your bladder is telling you something, too,
and you'd better answer that call of nature soon.
After all, the game has to know if you're male or
female.
It isn't long afterwards that green tentacles come
out of the air and hustle you off to a cozy cell on
Phobos. You've been kidnapped by the dreaded
Leather Goddesses, to be a subject in their neverending experiments to find a way of subjugating
Earth and turning it into their personal pleasure
grounds. Why, that is A FATE WORSE THAN
DEATH!!! <shudder>
Well, we (or at least you) can't let that happen!

On the other hand, as you stand there in your
tight-but-comfy brass bikini (for the ladies) or
brass loincloth (for the gentlemen), the prospects
are not heartening. But hey, this is the 1930's, and
the good guys (and gals) always win!
Renewed by that thought, you leave your cell
(psst, it's not locked), and soon find a trusty companion: Tiffany (if you're female) or Trent (if
you're male). There is really no difference between
them in the game; they both do and say pretty
much the same thing. So I'll just refer to them as T
from now on.
T will eventually hand you a matchbook, saying
that if you can find the objects listed, they can be
assembled into a Super-Duper Anti-LGOP Attack
Machine. Wow! Just the thing! So you and T begin
your zany journey, collecting some pretty bizarre
items (a household blender, a rubber hose, a mouse,
and a 1933 Ford headlight, among others), and
having some pretty bizarre experiences, too.
Stepping through mysterious little black holes
that seem to be everywhere, you flit among Mars,
Venus, and Cleveland (Cleveland?) in your search
for the parts to the machine. The interesting thing
is that, generally, you can do the game in almost
any order, since the black holes take you back and
forth between locations. You can run around Mars
for awhile, and then visit Venus, or go to Venus
first: the game is fairly non-linear.
However, since you do have to make two trips

to Venus, why don't we start from there? (Actually,
if you know what you're doing and plan in advance, you can do all of Venus in one visit) The
first thing you notice on arrival is the stalking
Venus Fly-Trap.
Much larger than the common Terran variety,
also much hungrier, and it moves... in YOUR direction. Ooops. What's a person to do? Well, there
are two ways of dealing with the Flytrap. The easy
way is to figure out the hidden message on the
scrap of paper found in T's cell. You can get past
the ambulatory vegetation right away with that.
Otherwise, you'll have to come back later with a
couple of things from Cleveland to help you out (I
liked this way better, myself).
During your wanderings around and through the
jungle, you'll come to the house of the Mad Scientist. But check out the back door first, where all
the door-to-door salesmen are hanging out. One
smart trade here will get you something very important. Then you can knock on the door and take
part in yet another weird experiment. I mean,
haven't you always wanted to be a gorilla?
No? Then you'd better do something about that.
What you need is a little extra oomph, a quick
pick-me-up. That's better (don't forget the hose!).
Once you're free again, it's off to delightful, wonderful, rubble-strewn, sandy, Mars! Home of ruined castles, harems, catacombs, ugly frogs, and
terrible dock jokes.
But don't be in a hurry to go barging off in the
Royal Barge just yet; look around a bit first. For
instance, there's that cute little marsmouse running
around (where else) Hickory and Dickory Dock.
And the frog: the ugliest, noisiest, smelliest, most
repulsive thing you've ever seen. Kissing the frog is
like getting a babel fish: hard work, but worth it
(kinda) in the end. However, it will be awhile before you're ready for that.
And let us not overlook King Mitre, whose
touch turns everything into 45-degree angles
(including, alas, his daughter). Hint: don't shake
hands with him. If you got past the Fly Trap earlier, you can help him right now, otherwise, wait
until you're back from Cleveland (and Venus).
Speaking of Cleveland, it seems to be a pretty
small place in 1936. At least the part you visit. A
lawn of sorts, a teensy-weensy house, and a garden

are about all you'll see. Oh, and the car, of course,
that you notice when you look out the bedroom
window. The 1933 Ford, which is just too far below to jump to. There's a sheet on the bed, but it's
a bit too short (leave it to Steve Meretzky to shortsheet a bed!). However, you have everything you
need right there in the room. In fact, the sheet is
all you need.
Once you have the headlight, you can investigate
the garden. Maybe you noticed that there didn't
seem to be any of those ubiquitous black holes
around? And there's another item here you may
want, in case the Fly Trap is still running loose in
the Venusian jungles. The object is mentioned, but
it's not obvious. Read carefully.
Back on Venus (and with the Fly Trap disposed
of) you'll find (if you didn't before) another black
hole and a jar. Pay attention to the label on the jar.
Then step through the hole, and you'll be in the
hold of one of the LGOP attack ships. A grenade
comes from nowhere! BOOM! Pieces of T are
splattered all over the walls (nope, you can't avoid
this, sorry).
After a moment of silence in memory of your
brave companion, you remember that there is still
the menace of the LGOP to consider, so you get on
with the job. In time you make your way to the
Main Hatch, and once outside the ship, you find
Thorbala (if you're female) or Thorblast (if you're
male), the nasty assassin who threw the grenade!
He/she has a prisoner (either male or female,
depending on your own sex), who gets tied to the
hull of a small space yacht when you appear. Now
it's just between you and the assassin... and the
bug-eyed monster who suddenly showed up, and is
making for the helpless person bound to the yacht.
Time is precious!! Will you defeat Thorbala/Thorblast in time to save the prisoner? Just
remember this: the good guys (and gals!) always
win... and they never kill an unarmed opponent.
With the rescue completed (and another machine
part in your hot little hand), it's time to return to
the ship (and a pleasant surprise) and then find
your way back to Mars. You're about to take a delightful cruise down the Martian canals.
One of the charming sights you'll be seeing on
this voyage is a dead alien and a secret message
(get out your decoder rings!). Actually, if you read

the comic book (a must!), you should have little
trouble figuring out what it says. Then it's on your
way again, perhaps with a quick look in at the Exit
Shop (where the proprietor, alas, doesn't have
change for a ten... sounds like a New York cabbie
to me), and finally, MY Kinda Dock! where you
will visit the forbidden harem of the Sultaness (or
Sultan, as the case may be... by the way, did you
ever notice that you can reach the barge controls
while standing outside? Something to keep in
mind).
Well, you get to visit the harem if you know the
answer to the riddle. Trust me, folks: the answer is
right there in front of you. Honest. Just look at
your screen. It is so painfully obvious, you might
miss it. Try not to.
Whew! Ok, you don't get eaten by tigers, but
instead spend a delightful hour (if you want to)
with one of the harem's 8000+ inmates. Which one
is a matter of careful choice. Because only that
particular husband (or wife) is the one who will
show you the secret entrance to the catacombs.
Now the fun begins. Take out the map that
came with the game... you'll never get through
without it (and also re-read that comic book!).
You'll have to slosh your way through the murky
waters and dim passages until you've visited all
those little square boxes on the map (going up and
down at times between the two levels, too). Watch
out for those crabs! Not to mention beetles and alligators.
There are two ways out (once you have everything you need): a ladder up to the Laundry Room,
and a black hole that transports you back to the
Royal Barge. I'd recommend the ladder for now,
and the hole afterwards (less sloshing around down
there, y'know). Besides, you also need that clothes-

pin.
So, now that you've (ahem) played at the palace,
it's time to frolic in the snow at the Icy Dock.
Hmm, just like winter here at the South Pole of
Mars, and what would a South Pole be without
penguins? And there they are, quite a few of them,
in fact, plus one who's waving a sign in your face.
It's a good idea to read that sign.
Once past the penguins, you come to the robot
gypsy camp. Alas, no sooner have they greeted you,
then tragedy strikes... a meteoroid flashes down
from the skies and vaporizes both of them. Now
the poor little baby robot in the tent is an orphan
(awwwwww).
Well, you can't just leave the poor little, err,
thing all alone. By great good luck, however, there
is (guess what?) an orphanage near by (there must
be some divine hand behind all this, it couldn't be
just mere coincidence). Still, you don't want to
simply walk up to the door and knock; you might
get a rude greeting. You're going to have to be a
bit devious here. But remember, it's all in a good
cause (not to mention, you don't have the facilities

for taking care of the baby yourself, anyway).
Hey, get on move on! Time's a-wasting and you
still have a frog to kiss, among other things, so
head on to the black hole (they really ARE everywhere!). Back in the warmer climes of Mars again,
you're ready for the big moment. You have (or
should have) everything you need to kiss the ugly
amphibian. So, prepare yourself, get ready, and...
smooch.....
(sigh!) The Prince(ess) is obviously the love 'em
and leave 'em type, but at least you have something
to remember him/her by. And now, checking your
inventory, you ought to have all the components
for the machine. There is only one thing more to
pick up, so float on down the canal to the Exit
Shop, for that final black hole.
Where does it lead to, you may ask? To the very
private boudoir of the Leather Goddesses themselves, that's where. But don't bother looking, because you're suddenly ejected out into the main
plaza. And you're not alone (gulp!).
In fact, the entire attack force of the LGOP is
after you! The fleet is swooping down from over-

head! Robotic monsters of every description are
stomping, chomping, and bulldozing their way right
to you!! And the soldiers are setting up a (gasp!)
Death Ray!!!
They're all closing in! Will T complete the AntiLGOP machine in time? Will it work?? Will Earth
be saved from the menace of these fiends? Will SirTech ever release Wizardry IV? (Umm, scratch that
last one)
Whew! That was quite a jaunt, eh? I sure do
hope you managed to save the world from a fate
worse than death. In the meantime, if you need
help with an adventure game, you can reach me in
the following ways:
On Delphi: Visit the GameSIG (from the Groups
and Clubs menu) On GEnie: Stop in at the Games
Roundtable (type Scorpia to reach the RT) On the
Source: Send SMail to ST1030. By U.S. Mail
(enclose a self-addressed, stamped envelope if you
live in the United States): Scorpia, PO Box 338,
Gracie Station, New York, NY 10028.
Until next time, happy adventuring! ■
Copyright 1986 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

Atari Playfield

by Gregg Williams
Hacker II
You may remember Hacker, a game
from Activision that promised you the illicit thrill of being a computer systemcracker (sorry, I come from the old school,
where "hacker" is a term of honor). It
didn't deliver on that claim, really—the
game was mostly about spying, not computer cracking—but it was a fairly interesting game. Steve Cartwright, the author
of Hacker, has designed a sequel, called
Hacker H: the Doomsday Papers." It's still
more about spying than about system
cracking, but the initial phase of the game
is clever in the way it gives you the feeling
of computer cracking. The game's design
and implementation are stunning—whether
or not you'll enjoy it, though, depends on
how much patience and resistance to
frustration you have.
It begins innocently: you see a blank
screen and hear the Touch-Tones of a
number being dialed, then a few rings, an
answer, and the scrabbling sound of computers talking to each other over a modem.
You type in a logon name and find that
you are in a telecommunications service
called "Actisource." Before the main menu
finishes, though, the transmission is interrupted, and you see a message from the
CIA, who has contacted you because you
are "the world's greatest hacker." They ask
you to accept a mission of the utmost importance: to steal the plans for a Russian
project called the Doomsday Papers,

thereby thwarting a Russian attempt at
world domination.
But, of course, there's more to it than
that. The papers are in a guarded vault in
a Russian military installation, with the
pieces of the vault's combination in four
locked filing cabinets, only one of which
you have the key for. The CIA has smuggled three small robots, called Mobile Remote Units (MRUs), which you can control
using your computer and a piece of software called an MFSM (Multi-Function
Switching Matrix) Emulator.
Here's where the flavor of system
cracking comes through the strongest (and
far more faithfully than in Hacker). The

game comes with no instructions, just
what you get on-screen and a manual
called the Multi-Function Switching Matrix Operator's Manual, Volume I, which is
the exact image of your average, indecipherable electronic equipment manual.
This manual is beautiful because it's so
true to real life—you end up wading
through 20 pages of diagrams and unenlightening technical prose because you're
pretty certain that something in the manual explains the cryptic buttons on the
MFSM: "SELCT," "BYP," TGS," and
others.

put in a lot of real work to make it happen. The game progresses in stages. First,
you must learn how to use the MFSM (the
manual holds valuable clues and facts).
Second, you must, through the process of
killing (literally) hundreds of MRUs, map
the installation. Third, you must get to
the filing cabinets and get the combination
from them. Fourth, you must (somehow)
get to the vault, open it, get the papers,
and deliver them to a U.S. agent waiting
at the front door of the building. I'm currently in step three, with no hope of getting through it—this game requires splitsecond timing, the ability to think "under
the gun" and keep track of several things
simultaneously, and the cleverness to solve
several fiendish puzzles designed into the
game. I have none of these abilities to any
great degree, and I recommend getting another person to help you.
As I said before, Hacker II is breathtaking in both design and implementation,
but it is not a casual game. Still, if you
have the perseverance to finish this game,
I bet it'll give you a lot of gaming per dollar spent.
In Brief

The MFSM (the hardware device that
fills your screen) is stunningly realistic on
the Atari ST. You see four video monitors
and a panel of buttons. The monitors are
currently filled with static, and when you
get an image on one of the screens, it
"rolls" like a TV image out of adjustment.
As it turns out, you can fill the screen with
a variety of images, each of which tells you
something important about the building
you're in. (I'm being vague here to keep
from spoiling the learning curve this game
puts you through.)
Prepare to lose this game dozens if not
hundreds of times before you win it. Several things are against you. First, you have
no layout of the installation. Second, the
corridors and rooms in the installation
contain 40 closed-circuit TV cameras,
which are periodically activated in a set
sequence. Third, a guard roams the corridors. Fourth, you cannot pause or save the
game. Finally (and most importantly), if
either the guard or an activated camera
sees you, a security machine called an
Eliminator kills your MRU within ten seconds—no exceptions.
Think of this game as an assault on
Mount Everest—you're going to have to
really want it, and you're going to have to

Everyone has different ideas of what
makes a good game. Activision placed a
game called Shanghai next to Hacker II as
one of its two top games of the season, but
when I saw it, I couldn't believe they had
wasted their resources on putting it out.
Shanghai is no more than a form of Solitaire in which you're given a randomized
configuration of cards and you repeatedly
remove identical pairs of cards (revealing
cards underneath) trying to clear the
board—that's it: take two cards, discard,
take two cards, discard ..... ! If this is the
industry's idea of what the public wants,
we're in real trouble. The perceptive
reader will infer that I do not think this is
a game worth buying. [Ed. Note: For other
opinions on Shanghai see "Year in Review"
and "Macintosh Window" in this issue.]
In the August, 1986 issue of CGW
(issue #30), I very favorably reviewed
MicroProse's Silent Service, an impressively realistic game of World War II submarine combat. MicroProse has now
translated Silent Service to the Atari 520
ST, and it's even better—the graphics and
sound effects are sharper, the game moves
between different functions faster, and the
disk contains a new mission scenario.
That's all for now. Until next month,
remember: one man's program bug is another man's product feature.

Year in
Review
by Charles Ardai

Computer gaming has changed a great deal since
that first day Pac-Man was featured on the six o'
clock news. So, for that matter, have computer
garners. The slick, dark-eyed marathon Defender
player of old has gone the way of the slick, darkeyed kid who could solve Rubik's Cube in under
thirty seconds. Today's games are complex, intricate
and creative. Today's computers have capabilities
that would have sent garners from the Atari VCS
era into shock. But to what end, progress?
Like the mythic snake that swallowed its own
tail, we have pirated ourselves into near-death,
hurting most those companies whose products we
deem best. Four short years ago, we were on top of
the world; two years ago, our world collapsed.
Those companies that survived the shakeout kept
producing games, but interest in the field diminished just as quickly as technology shot ahead. One
by one, computer magazines folded, companies
bankrupted, and stores closed.
A comparison to Rocky 111 comes to mind (God
help me): Sylvester Stallone being beaten to within
an inch of his life because of his short-sightedness,
and losing everything that he had fought so hard to
achieve. The film had a happy ending, though.
Rocky came back to reach new heights (still newer
ones remain to be seen, no doubt, as the number of
sequels increases, but that's another story). Can the
comparison be maintained?
An open door looms before you: Above a round
handle is a sign which reads, "Software Village." At
the top of the stairs, you can just make out what

seems to be a computer store.

>GO TO THE STORE
Cautiously, you enter the brightly-lit store. A
counter at one end stands unmanned. Sounds emerge
from an alcove in the back where a bored salesman
toys with a flight simulator. The walls of the store
are sparsely covered with colorful game boxes. All
the titles are familiar, the same ones you have been
seeing for months.

>ASK BORED SALESMAN "WHAT ' S NEW?"
Not much," the salesman replies with a mournful
yawn. "I got a new Print Shop file in the other day,
but that's about it.
"As the year comes to a close, it is tempting to
look back on the past twelve months nostalgically.
This has not always been possible in recent years.
1985, for instance, was so bleak as to make an article like this senseless. The past year, however,
hasn't been half bad. Not only were there many

technical advances, but you could almost feel the
old energy returning. Perhaps the strangest manifestation of this revival spirit came when Atari decided that the time was ripe to re-release the VCS
and to release, for the first time, the years-old
7800 Video Game System. Why would anyone buy
these obsolete relics? After all, the graphics are
bad, the gameplay is mindless and in any case,
anyone who would want a videogame probably already has one somewhere in the back of his closet.
For goodness sakes, the other day I saw a VCS
selling for fifteen dollars at a yard sale.
But the energy... that's what counts. And the

energy is back. Either that or Atari decided to
empty its warehouses.
Some people may find it hard to accept this idea
(no, not the idea about the warehouses...). "How can
you say the energy is back," they would ask, "when
games are released at the rate of two or three every
month?"
There were, it is true, fewer new products released in 1986 than during computer gaming's heyday. But while the flow of new games is less than
in past years, those games that were released in
1986 were better than ninety percent of the software released in previous years.
Certain fields disappeared, or very nearly did.
Pure arcade games are now almost impossible to
find. At the same time, certain other fields were
blessed with many successes and improvements.
1986 saw the renaissance of the strategy-adventure
game, for instance. What dedicated gamer will soon
forget the opening to the long-awaited Ultima IV?
Who could ignore the peerless interactive sophistication of Infocom's new games, especially Ballyhoo?
Does it really matter that only three companies—Activision, Epyx and Infocom—now make up
the majority of the software market or even that
it's really been two companies since Activision
bought Infocom? Not so long as those three (two)
keep writing games that are as good as the ones
they gave us this year.
Epyx's games are a bit of an oddity: successful,
entertaining arcade-style contests in an adventure
game age. Why would the same people who play
SSI's gritty war simulations enjoy the "Push-Pull"
action of, say, World Games? Who knows? Nevertheless, they do. Aaron Lloyd of Crazy Eddie's
computer sales force says, "World Games was one
of our top sellers. That and all adventure games."
I have to admit having a weakness for Epyx's
games myself. After a few hours of delving through
the stygian depths of Spellbreaker, I enjoy a brief
foray into the world of Championship Wrestling or
Supercycle. In all fairness, these are not simple arcade games. Epyx not only released the excellent
naval simulation, Destroyer, but distributes other
games which require strategy, thought and precision
timing.
It's good to know that there is still a source for
good games in which the emphasis is on graphics
and action. It's even better to know that there is
still a market for such games. Epyx's success indicates that both of these statements are true. Fur-

ther, the past year has seen a comfortable, steady
release of uniformly fine material. Who could ask
for more?
Activision is another enigma. Their games are all
graphically superb, but they have a tremendous
range of overall quality. The vacuous Countdown to
Shutdown was no less beautiful than the infinitely
superior Fast Tracks. Yet, the former is unplayable
while the latter is everything but. The imported
Rocky Horror Show has evocative scenery, but no
play value. Shanghai is probably the best game of
the year [Ed. Note: For other opinions on Shanghai
see "Macintosh Window" and "Atari Playfield" in
this issue.], but The Eidolon is one of the worst.

Yet, they all come from the same company.
Unbelievable!
One can always count on an Activision program
being attractive, polished and pleasant. It may not
always be interesting to play. In the past year,
slightly more than half of Activision's software was
genuinely excellent. That's a good enough track
record for anyone, but to waste fractal graphics and
the talents of Lucasfilm Games on The Eidolon?!
As far as track records go, no one can beat Infocom. Infocom released four games this year (not
counting the Enchanter Gift Pack) and all have
been excellent. Quantum leaps in adventure game
technology allowed Infocom to deliver consistently
good software along with witty, engrossing stories.
Even this company's packaging has improved and
considering the goodies they put in with such classics as Infidel and Planetfall, that's saying a
mouthful.
Continued on pg. 24

Continued from pg. 21

Guide to the Galaxy. Infocom has refined interactive fiction to a fine art, devising sequences that
simulate artificial intelligence to an extent undreamt of even in Hitchhiker's. Of the four, Ballyhoo is a personal favorite, but all are recommended.
1986 has, indeed, been a vintage year for those
Great Underground Emperors from Cambridge.
The salesman looks up from his computer and
eyes you warily. "The year in review?" he asks. "You
know, Ardai, people will be mighty sore if you don't
mention Electronic Arts."

>MENTION ELECTRONIC ARTS
The salesman shakes his head sadly. "Not to
me!" he lectures angrily, "To them!" He jabs a cruel
thumb at the readers to punctuate his statement.

>SAY "I'LL DO MY BEST"
--Infocom's 1986 releases were Ballyhoo, Trinity,
Moonmist, and Leather Goddesses of Phobos. Each
is better than the other three combined and if you
think that's a paradox, you haven't spent enough
time feeding tea to the door in The Hitchhiker's

No "Year in Review" would be complete without
a mention of the phenomenal work done by the
many other companies striving to rebuild the computer gaming world. Electronic Arts has done some
of the finest work ever seen on any computer and
has been instrumental in getting the Amiga past a
very shaky start. This year saw many new games
from EA, including one of its most popular ever,
The Bard's Tale and its sequel (The Bard's Tale H).
One new EA offering stands out among the 1986
roster: Amnesia. This text adventure is a brilliant,
witty and intriguing story set in an amazingly detailed rendition of New York City. As a writer, I
find myself tempted to give all the credit for its
success to Thomas M. Disch, but it would be foolish to ignore EA's crucial involvement. Without EA
and their computer technology, Amnesia would be
a book. Think about it.
EA kept tossing surprises our way with many
different sorts of games, though this really
shouldn't be surprising since EA gets the games it
markets from many varied sources. Even in their
own software, however, new dimensions have
emerged.
Starflight finally came out and turned out to be
the best space exploration game in years. Kyle
Freeman's Dark Lord seems to be a bit of a throwback to the Wizard and the Princess school of adventure gaming, but Freeman has done it as well as
it ever has been done. Further, everything EA has
produced for the Amiga is exceptional.
Clearly, 1986 has been a good year for computer
games. New innovations kept surfacing throughout
the year and changing the way we look at our
software. For instance, this was the year we introduced the third dimension to computer chess. Since

the three-quarter perspective first made its way
onto store shelves, everyone has been jumping on
the bandwagon. Be honest, though, wasn't it exciting the first time you saw it?
Other trends also became clear as the year progressed. One was Macintoshization, doing everything possible to make other computers resemble
the Mac. This involved windows (The Kobayashi
Alternative) and pull-down menus (Borrowed
Time--the most fast-paced cinematic graphic adventure available), as well as icon-driven systems
and mice for all computer systems. Strangely, while
this was happening, the Mac's own popularity went
into a tailspin.
But with all these innovations, one mustn't allow
the tried-and-true to get lost in the shuffle. It's
easy to see the glitter and forget about the substance. New styles and new games may have gotten
the headlines in 1986, but most of the time we
were playing old favorites.
War games, for instance, have been around for
almost as long as the home computer has. They are
still around, of course, and they captured a great
part of our attention over the course of the year.
Companies like Avalon Hill, SSI, Microprose, SSG,
and Datasoft all created unique scenarios. Settings
may have changed (Road Warrior-type settings
were especially popular, as were fantasy environments), but basically, the field has remained the
same as ever.
So, what has really changed over the past twelve
months? War games are the same, except for the
scenarios and a few improvements to combat systems. Epyx's biggest hit was yet another "Games"
game. Infocom has a new batch of text adventures,

including a science fiction comedy by Steve
Meretzky and a game for novices by Stu Galley and
Jim Lawrence (shades of Planetfall and Seastalker).
Electronic Arts is rehashing Wizardry (though
Bard's Tale is admittedly an admirable twist on the
theme). Television commercials featuring a video
game cartridge that looks like Dig Dug have been
appearing with alarming regularity. Rubik has unveiled a new toy. Stallone is working on Rambo , III.
Is it true that there is nothing new under the
sun? Maybe, but it might also mean that before any
company is willing to take the chance of releasing
something really new on an unprepared public, the
world of computer gaming will have to be more
firmly entrenched than it is now. A lot of people
lost a lot of money the last time the market
"crashed." It only makes sense for them to test the
waters before the possibility of making the same
mistake twice becomes reality. Of course, you and I
know that the computer gaming world will never
die, don't we? Still, we can't blame the developers
for being careful.
What's coming? Next year will be even better

than this one was. Games are already being prepared which will knock your socks off. I've seen
some pre-release material and it all looks great.
"And after that?" you ask, "what happens a few
years ahead?" Think holograms, voice-recognition,
movie-quality animation, and laser disk adventure
games. All of these are in the cards since several
companies have them in various stages of development. Atari, for instance, developed a rudimentary
holographic system years ago. Think what could be
done today!
In retrospect, 1986 was a fine year, but 1987 can
be better. Show your support by buying lots of
games (and check with us each issue to see which
games are worth buying!). Oh, one other thing, pick
up a copy of Mastertronic's Zzzz. This won't make
1987 any better, but Zzzz is gobs of fun and may
be the sleeper hit of the year.

man prepares to leave.

Through the store's great plate glass window, you
can see the last rays of the sun disappearing over
the horizon. Dusk lies heavily upon the land, but
soon will come the light of a new day. The sales-

"You're welcome," he says and vanishes in a puff
of smoke. You walk home with a feeling of optimism in your heart. Tomorrow, after all, is another
day.

>HIDE BEHIND THE COUNTER
There's no room.

>HIDE BEHIND THE SALESMAN
Playing with the salesman is not notably useful.
The salesman holds the door open for you.

>LEAVE STORE
As you leave the store, the salesman locks up behind you. You walk down the stairs together. You
are on Lexington Avenue in Manhattan. It is almost
dark. A man selling knives on the street corner leers
at you as you pass him.

>SALESMAN, WILL THINGS GET BETTER?
He nods. "I think so," he says, "and they're not so
bad the way they are now. I've got sonic new games
coming in next week that are supposed to be really
great. We'll see."

>SALESMAN, THANK YOU

by Ed Curtis

Gettysburg:
The Turning Point
System: Apple, Atari, C-64
# Players: 1-2
$59.95
Price:
Designers: David Landrey
Chuck Kroegel
Publisher: Strategic Simulations
Mountain View, CA

Name:

The year 1986 has seen the release of many interesting new computer games. It has also seen renewed interest in the subject of the American Civil
War, with the release of several new titles and the
promise of major projects yet to be released (such
as Strategic Studies Group's upcoming The Road to
Appomatox and Garde's Blue Powder & Grey
Smoke). As should be expected, SSI was one of the
first to offer a new Civil War game with the release
of Antietam. Possessing a new gaming system which
was essentially a compromise between "board game"
like movement/combat and "miniatures" like movement/combat, Antietam proved to be a very successful design which provided a good balance between realism (accuracy of historical simulation)
and playability. SST's new system captured much of
the flavor of brigade level combat during the Civil
War. Not content with success, SSI has followed the
popular Antietam with Gettysburg: The Turning
Point (GTP) and incorporated into it a series of
rule refinements which much improve the already

superior game rules to be found in its predecessor.
Historically, Gettysburg remains one of the most
difficult of all battles to successfully simulate in an
interesting game format. The difficulty, however,
does not lie in an area which many would suspect,
but in the fact that this climactic three day battle is
just too well known. Combined with this
widespread knowledge is another fact that can potentially ruin the battle of Gettysburg as a worthwhile subject of gaming interests. This is the fact
that the battle was a massive meeting engagement
and that the battle happened as it did because neither side was certain until the battle was well underway as to just where their opponents main
forces were to be found and just when those
%#$&&%$ reinforcements would arrive. This factor
was especially critical for the Confederates under
the usually decisive Gen. Lee.
Plagued by uncertainties and aware that a major
defeat in his exposed position could mean exposing
the entire eastern portion of the Confederacy to the
Union forces, Lee committed his forces against the
Union forces available on the first day in a manner
uncharacteristically cautious and thus lost his
greatest opportunity to destroy the advancing elements of the Army of the Potomac in detail. Not,
however, so handicapped by lack of knowledge, the
recreator not only knows how badly the initial
Union forces are overpowered both quantitatively
and qualitatively, but also the widely separated
sources of the piecemeal Union reinforcements and
their times of arrival.
Fighting the battle under these circumstances

with historic setups and calling it the "Battle of
Gettysburg" is at best a farce. Even starting on the
second day leaves one with something to be desired
if one is actually trying to refight the battle, as the
exposed Union left flank is very well known to any
but the least knowledgeable of budding Union
commanders. Thus, the most important events of
the second day will be negated by swift and massive reinforcements of the exposed flank. This
leaves one with the option of a historically accurate
recreation of the third day of battle; a day before
which most of the most important questions about
the battle had already been answered. By that time,
neither side was to suffer an overwhelming defeat
or to gain an overwhelming victory unless handed
such by the other side. In short, given foreknowledge of the actual happenings of the battle, it is
impossible to recreate the battle we know as the
Battle of Gettysburg within a game format without
the active collaboration of both sides.
Well, having thus apparently eliminated much of
the value of the game which is the subject of my
review, why continue? The reason to continue is
that SSI has, by a simple device, not only removed
my objections, but has produced a very superior
game and simulation of one of the most critical
confrontations between the armies of the North and
South. In the initial setup phase, one of the options
presented allows the random variance of each divisions arrival by plus or minus four turns. The uncertainty of what forces you face, from where they
are coming, and the lack of knowledge about just
when your expected reinforcements will arrive very

successfully captures the strategic and grand-tactical feelings in a game who's gaming system already
does one of the best jobs at capturing the feeling of
tactical brigade level combat currently available.
What you, the gamer, therefore gets is an endless
number of different "Battles of Gettysburg,"with
none of them an exact historical recreation of the
one which took place, but with each an accurate
simulation of what could have taken place given an
over anxious commander here or a broken axle
there—all within the framework of a smoothly
flowing thoroughly enjoyable game.
On the negative side of GTP's rules and execution are several minor complaints, without which
no review is complete. One of these is the fact that
during movement, any unit over which another unit
has moved disappears until accessed by cycling
through your units. Unless you pay particular attention to the location of such invisible units, it can
prove quite a bother.
Potentially the greatest of the problems lies in
the artificial intelligence. While it fights reasonably
well (too well, sometimes!), it tends to overreact to
the threat represented by isolated cavalry brigades
in its rear areas by throwing disproportionate
quantities of units at them. At the same time,
however, it is prone to exposing lone artillery units
to destruction by these same roaming cavalry units
(I was able to destroy 75 Confederate guns on the
first day with nothing but my two cavalry
brigades). The computer also seems rather indifferent to Union held victory hexes. Wide ranging
Continued on pg. 32

Continued from pg. 29
cavalry units captured all of the northern edge
victory squares on the first day but southern reinforcements just moved through said hexes with
seeming indifference.
GTP has too many good features for them all to
be singled out within any review of less than double the normal length. We could start with the high
quality of the helpful map sheet, or with the very
easy flow of play which allows someone with little
experience of the games method of play to master
it within a very short period and to understand just
why the things that are happening, are happening
(no small feat). The graphics used in the game
could also be praised for ways in which they
clearly display the information needed for decision
making such as terrain, unit composition, and much
more. Just let it be said that if I had found ten
times as much wrong with the program as I did, it
would still be in the positive column when weighed
against its merits.
A few tips to players not emphasized in the rule
book might include such things as the injunction to
always keep your divisions together. They should
be committed and withdrawn as one. Also, while

the Union commander can give himself a bit of relief by drawing off Confederate forces with his
cavalry units, be careful as the Confederates will
put such force into this that you are open to being
surrounded if not very careful. A final thought
would be that a fatigued unit which should not
fight can lend its ZOC to further destroy a units
destined to retreat or rout as each ZOC moved
through while routing causes staggering casualties
and large quantities of men to be captured. A final
suggestion would be for Confederate commanders
to be very aware of the position of his superior
commanders, as their presence or lack thereof can
prove the difference in a given battle and represents a definite advantage of his side which should
be exploited fully.
There is little question in my mind that GTP is
one of the most enjoyable "conflict simulations"
(read--war games) that it has been my pleasure to
play in a very long time. After years of interest in
the factors leading up to, and the conduct of the
American Civil War, it is a very welcome addition
to the growing number of games on this subject
and possibly the best currently available. ■

STRATEGICALLY SPEAKING

Strategically Speaking covers strategy game tips, including tips
on wargames, sports games, economic and other simulations, as
well as classic style games.
DISCLAIMER: The tips printed in SS are those of the authors.
We try to avoid printing tips that don't work, but we cannot
playtest all, or even most of them. So, let the player beware.
We pay $5.00 for each SS tip printed. Tips can be mailed to
Strategically Speaking c/o CGW, PO Box 4566, Anaheim, CA
92803-4566.
Try to keep under 250 words if possible.
GETTYSBURG - THE TURNING POINT
LEVEL 1 CAMPAIGN
(Strategic Simulations)
The best way to defeat General Lee is to allow the maximum
variable in reinforcement arrivals, hidden units, and the least
amount of ammo. This creates the true uncertainties that
abounded at Gettysburg.
The first day will make or break the Union player. Place the
cavalry demi-brigades in column immediately and send them
around the board to occupy objective hexes. Most will be retaken
by the computer, but occasionally some will be overlooked and
1,000 points could make a difference. Leave the cavalry artillery
outside of rebel artillery range to keep an eye on Heth's division.
In spite of cavalry action, Heth will not advance until Pender
comes up.
Your I Corps should not try to occupy MacPherson's Ridge
due to time/space limitations. They should build a strong line
along Seminary Ridge curving towards Penn College. When the
fragile XI Corps arrives, they should defend the Benner's Hill sector. The cavalry brigades should retire to the hills with Gamble on
Culp's and Devin on Cemetery. The artillery should also be sent to
these positions as their retention is the key to victory. When the
XI Corps routs, they will retreat to Wolf's Hill which they should
be able to hold the second and third days. The I Corps will execute a fighting withdrawal to the hills. The main rebel effort often
comes against Culp's Hill and the issue will often be in doubt, but
retention is vital.
During the second and third days, the computer does not try
the flanking maneuver that led to the battles of the Round Tops.
Instead, it concentrates artillery and infantry on the hills and attempts to bludgeon through. Casualties will be high but failure is
likely. If losses among the artillery units become too high, try
Wellington's tactic of reverse slope deployment behind the crest.
Confederate units reaching the top of the hills will be surprised by
Napoleons at range one. With the exception of tactical counterattacks, no Union effort should be made in this area. If you desire to
be offensive, send the XII Corps on a limited attack to recapture
the rebel objective hex on the Hanover Road.
The third day will see more of the same rebel tactics. If the
opening arises, try sending Buford around Lee's west flank behind
Herr Ridge to pick up some points by ambushing stragglers and
artillery units. Like the historical strategy, the computer wants to
bash you head on and won't stay on the defensive for long. His
charges against the hills will cause some anxious moments, but
caution will be rewarded.
Charles Jehlen
Port Arthur, TX
SILENT SERVICE
(Microprose)
When your submarine is at a shallow depth and destroyers are
attacking, set your speed at four and use full left or right rudder to
turn inside of the destroyer. Keep doing this while diving until you
rest on the bottom or dive below temporary boundary. Once under

the boundary, set speed at one or two and head for the convoy.
This should be enough to throw the destroyers off. If you are resting on the bottom and are depth-charged, it's a good idea to jettison debris. When damaged and unable to recover from a dive,
blow your emergency ballast to give yourself more of a chance to
fight it out on the surface. Try to run away from the destroyer. He
will pursue you and give you a zero degree deflection shot. Set the
gun at -75 yards on the first shot. Usually 2-3 hits will take care
of the destroyer. The destroyer usually waits until it is within
2,500 yards before opening fire. At night, if the convoy has only
one escort, try closing to 1,000 yards and picking him off with your
gun. If you succeed, you'll have the entire convoy at your mercy.
Steve Hagarty
Los Angeles, CA
In the 'Wahoo vs. Convoy' convoy actions scenario, there is
much opportunity for obtaining a great score and ranking. First,
take all reality factors except for Angle on the Bow, unless you are
an expert. Set the difficulty factor as high as you want, since it
seems to make little difference in convoy actions. As soon as you
are underway, submerge and steam NW at full power. Don't
worry about the ships at this point. Check the navigation map for
the general location of the destroyer that is coming in and set your
course to intercept (generally NW). As soon as he comes into view
on the attack plot map, cut all engines and monitor his progress
through the periscope. He isn't expecting you to be there, so he
isn't being very cautious. As soon as he comes into range, fire a
torpedo salvo. One hit is all you need, but missing could prove
hazardous to your health. As soon as the destroyer is gone, you
can chase the other ships down and shoot them at your leisure.
This is good for 21,000 tons and displacement of one or two of the
'real' subs.
Dan Stephens
Minneiska, MN
STAR FLEET I
(Interstel Corporation)
To get extremely high ratings, try the following. When you go
to rescue a starbase, try to disable, rather than destroy the enemy
vessels (often the starbase will help you in this). Then, when all
are disabled, tow each in turn to the starbase, but do not dock.
Don't forget to transport your marines and capture prisoners, also.
Deliver any Zaldron vessel last. If you are low in energy, dock with
the last vessel. With this procedure, you get credit for saving the
starbase, delivering vessels, delivering prisoners, and extra credit
for any Zaldrons (which will more than make up for any extra time
spent, although you must be careful on short missions). I routinely
get over 120% this way. Be careful, however, of scores over 150%.
The program was messed up on the Atari version and you may
have to adjust the maintenance section as a result.
Robert Destro
Cinnaminson, NJ
COMPUTER QUARTERBACK
(Strategic Simulations, Inc.)
Optimize your team by finding that incremental $1000 that
increases individual player class performance level by one percent.
Since player contracts usually include bonus clauses of various minuscule amounts, seemingly trivial rewards will get that additional
performance on the gridiron, over and above the contract amount.
Any funds paid over that incremental amount are wasted.

Wasted funds saved may be paid to the sensitive skill positions
such as the ends, backs or the kickers. Funds saved from the more
expensive classes, the lines and defensive backs, can go to improve
the performance of the skill positions. It can be surprising how
much of a pay cut some players will stand before their performance
percentage degrades, as well.
Don't neglect your special team. It is part of your defensive
game and provides a good deal of bang for the buck, being comparable in cost to the offensive back positions.
Patrick Richard Treacy
Tallahassee, FL

U.S.A.A.F.
(Strategic Simulations, Inc.)
When playing the American player in U.S.A.A.F., you can
launch airfield strikes against coastal airfields close to England and
have them go undetected until ten minutes before the strike 95%
of the time by setting their altitude at 1,000 feet. Sometimes, these
raids will not be sighted until they are on top of the target itself.
Fighters, because of superior speed, can often execute a raid on a
field which is two squares into enemy territory before the Germans
can react to the threat. When playing against a human opponent,
these techniques are usually even more effective since they won't
have the computer's quick reflexes and will be inclined to react
when they shouldn't and fail to react when they should.
Targets in North-East Europe will be largely unopposed when
the American player launches raids with
cloud cover in North-Central Europe greater than or equal to
about 65%. There is seldom a need to cover these raids on the way
out because the Germans won't have enough time to react and
catch them before they duck into the clouds. Be sure, however,
that the raid is provided with some cover on the return flight or

the Germans will give them a bath when they peek out of the
clouds. The same technique can be used against Munich, Linz, and
Vienna with a suitable offset point. These techniques are particularly effective against aircraft factories in the early portion of the
game when the Germans have much less production to spare.
Craig E. Deaton
Yuma, AZ
BREAKTHROUGH IN THE ARDENNES
(Strategic Simulations, Inc.)
In order to win, you must move quickly in order to get your
forces across the Our River at the earliest possible moment. In order to accomplish this, attack the established bridgeheads at hexes
13,23 and 16,24. Begin by attacking the American 112/28 INF
regiment in hex 13,24 with the 560 VG division, 156/116 PZGR
regiment. Set the 156th and 60th PZGR regiments to advance
after the attack. In the combat phase, the American unit will retreat back across the river with the Panzergrenadiers following. In
the second combat phase, set the 16/116 PZGR regiment in travel
mode and bring it to the hex with the PZGR's and set it to attack
the American unit and advance after combat also. The American
unit will retreat again with the Panzer regiment following. This
establishes one bridgehead. For the other bridgehead, attack the
American 424/106 INF regiment in hex 16,25 with the 164/62 VG
regiments in 16,26 which will also force a retreat across the river.
In the second phase, move the 183/62 VG regiment into the forest
hex above and set it to attack across the bridge and advance after
combat. After the American retreat, you have your second bridgehead. With the bridge built at hex 9,23 at the beginning of the
second turn, you are now ready to start advancing the units in
that area of the map. Please note that I used this method while
playing the easiest play setting on the game and found that the
attack on the unit defending hex 16,24 will not produce a retreat
when playing the historical level of difficulty. However, the computer does move the unit on its turn and with luck (assuming the
unit can't blow the bridge), it is possible to force a retreat in turn
two with the three 62 VG units attacking.
By getting German units moving in turn two, you can capture
Bastogne before it is occupied, even though you probably won't
keep it for the whole game. Speaking of Bastogne, I have found
that you cannot expect to take it and hold it and expect to win
the game.
Alton W. Bunn Jr.
Hampton, VA
MECH BRIGADE
(Strategic Simulations, Inc.)
When playing either an offensive or defensive role, remember
the importance of your ATGM (Anti-Tank Guided Missiles). Try
not to fire these missiles past a range of 1,000 yards (you'll miss!).
When choosing targets with ATGM's, do not select targets in
woods areas because the thick foliage causes the missiles to be less
effective.
In target selection, try to eliminate units with only one or two
tanks in them. These are company command units. Taking out
these units disorganizes the rest of the company while decreasing
their accuracy.
Try to place infantry units stacked upon each other. Place
these units at places enemy armor is sure to pass through (e.g.
bridges, villages). When enemy units attack, they usually try to
destroy one or two units at a time. With stacked infantry, this allows other units in the same area to function with improved accuracy and more firepower. Set the range of the infantry units to 0 in
order to allow maximum accuracy for their LAW (Light AntiTank Weapon) missiles.
Paul Ringuetto
West Newbury, MA

Commodore Key

by Roy Wagner

WHERE IS (S)HE?
I like to see educational games that are
not obvious educational games. Just such
a game is WHERE IN THE WORLD IS
CARMEN SANDIEGO? from Broderbund.
Billed as a mystery exploration game, this
game hides its educational value behind
the guise of searching around the world for
the thief of various stolen objects.
There are ten possible suspects (five of
each sex). One of the possible suspects is
Carmen Sandiego. You must identify the
thief using clues pertaining to their sex,
hobby, hair, features, and auto. Using
the INTERPOL Crime Computer and
these characteristics, you are able to obtain a warrant to arrest the thief. But you
must catch them as they travel from one
country to another.
In each country, you can investigate
up to three local locations for clues, but
you must watch your time since you have
less than a week to capture the thief.
These locations can provide you with clues
to the identity of the thief or to the next
country to which they are going.
Clues about other countries refer to
the units of currency used, points of interest, or color on that nation's flag. To
help you determine the correct country,
the game provides you with a copy of the
WORLD ALMANAC which will often need
to be referenced. You are also provided
with list of flight connections that limit
the number of possible countries.
Each game is different. Your goal is to
solve enough cases to advance you through
the detective ranks to reach the top at
which point you may retire and have your
name added the Hall of Fame. Your current rank and number of cases solved is
maintained on the Acme Detective Roster. Fortunately and favorably for an educational game, you are not punished for
cases you don't solve, but rewarded for
your successful solutions.
This game can be played using a joystick or from the keyboard. The graphics
are nice and the manual is well written
with a dossier on each thief. The game is
good for schools or played as family activity. Everyone is sure to learn something.
WHERE AM I?
Another game of travel, this time
through time and space, is TASS TIMES
IN TONETOWN from Activision (by Interplay who also did MINDSHADOW).
This is a graphic adventure that takes you
from the present to another reality. It
starts in G ramps house and Gramps is not
there. You eventually discover one of his

inventions and it transports you to Tonetown.
This is no ordinary town, at least not
One that you have ever been to. The language spoken is a cross between Valley
talk and the future. Upon arriving you had
better get yourself "tass" with a glitter
dyecut and jumpsuit with hooplet, otherwise you will be certain to be spotted for a
tourist and returned to a reality you can
recognize.
In Tonetown, Gramps is quite well
accepted and has recently disappeared. It
is up to you to help find him. You are sure
to be on the receiving end of a lot of interesting conversation and will discover
many new objects. Ennio, the legendary
dog reporter, will be your doggy-guide.
Most of your adventuring can be done
with a joystick and the many icons that
are displayed. Objects that you wish to
know more about can be pointed to for a
description. The keyboard can also be used
as necessary or even for all actions. If not
needed the graphic scenes can be hidden
away. The graphics are not much of a
problem because they are displayed
quickly.
This game is a relatively easy adventure with the added twist of the reality in
which it is played. Get tass, stay tone-ly
and find Gramps.
CHECKMATE
I have always enjoyed the game of
chess. I remember the first chess game for
a "home" computer was MICROCHESS for
a 2K KIM and even though it only used 4
LEDs for display, it played a good game of
chess. A version with graphics was later
done for the 8K Commodore PET. This
version stayed around for a long time even
though SARGON II and III came out for
the Apple.
Even when the C64 appeared, SARGON took a long time to be released. A
favorite of mine that came out for the C64
before SARGON was CHESS and HOW
ABOUT A NICE GAME OF CHESS? from
Odesta. These offered nearly every conceivable option and had excellent manuals
and keyboard controls. Even when SARGON finally did get released for the C64,
the conversion was done very poorly, so I
still favored those from Odesta.
Another recent chess program was
PAUL WHITEHEAD TEACHES CHESS
from Enlightenment. This program is more
of a chess tutor than player, but does
contain a very good coffeehouse computer
opponent.
The newest program, CHESSMASTER
2000 from Software Country, is by far the

best one for the home computer. The
Chess Federation unofficially gives
CHESSMASTER a rating of over 2000
points (SARGON III is rated 1850). It is a
tough opponent for most human players.
See AMIGA PREFERENCES for details since it contains nearly all the features of the Amiga version, including a
three dimensional display. Exceptions
missing are use of joystick/mouse for options (C64 version has easy to use CTRL
key selections) and movement and the option to analyze a game after it is played.
NEW YEAR WISH
Game software probably loses more
sales to SOFTWARE PIRATES (legally
known as thieves) than any other commodity. I have no objection with a distributor trying to protect its product except
when it starts seriously interfering with
the honest people who pay for the product.
Honest customers should not be inconvenienced by requirement of removing any
cables or fast load cartridges, just because
these are the means that thieves are
stealing their product. People paying good
(often high) prices for their software
should not have it abnormally abuse their
hardware to protect the distributors from
thieves.
There is software that uses the printer
(NEWSROOM and GEOS) that does not
work because of a "transparent" printer
interface (GRAPPLER) in the cartridge
slot. These companies DO NOT EVEN
offer versions for these customers, but
rather expects one to buy a new interface.
There are a lot of good methods of
protection that don't cause such inconveniences to the honest customers. My wish
for the New Year is that software distributors start thinking more of their customers with transparent protection, good
documentation and reasonably priced upgrades. Let's hope that 1987 is the year of
the CUSTOMER.

by Scorpia
Shard of Spring
Name:
System:
Apple, C-64
# Players: One
Price:
$40.00
Designers: Craig Roth
David Stark
Publisher: Strategic Simulations
Mountain View, CA

Ymros. Island of eternal springtime, blessed with
perfect weather through the magic of a green crystal called The Shard of Spring. But now the Shard
lies in the hands of Siriadne, the evil dragon-enchantress, who threatens to destroy the crystal, unless the people of Ymros meet her harsh demands.
Each year her demands grow greater while the people grow poorer; soon there will come a time when
Ymros will be unable to pay the ever-increasing
tribute, and the island will become a wasteland of
ice and desolation. Only the death of Siriadne and
the return of the Shard can prevent the destruction
of the island. Heroes must go forth and retrieve the
Shard, or Ymros is doomed...
And so, you're off again on another quest. Need
I say that tough times are in store for you as you
ramble about the land, in search of the Shard?
Fortunately, you can go out well prepared for the
rigors of fighting the multitudes of monsters that
await you (and there are certainly plenty of those!).
It begins in the Character Utilities section,
where you create your characters and form them
into parties. You can have up to five in one group,
and I heartily recommend the full complement,
because it's a rough world out there.
Only two character classes are available: Warriors
and Wizards, but you do get to choose from five
races: Human, Troll, Dwarf, Elf, and Gnome. Each
has certain advantages and disadvantages: Trolls are
strong, but quite slow and not very bright; Elves
are fast and smart, but not especially hardy.
Dwarves and Trolls may only be fighters; Elves and
Gnomes are restricted to Wizards. Humans, lucky
creatures, can be either.
Take your time when creating characters. While
the process can be tedious, it is worthwhile putting
in the effort to get characters with the best possible
stats for their professions. Keep the manual handy,
and refer to it often, especially the tables in the
back of the book. They tell you pretty much what
you can expect your characters to be able to do.
Later on, as the characters increase in level,
their stats will also increase, but on a random basis,
and you have no control over how many or which

ones will be raised. Therefore, you really need to
start with the best attributes you can manage.
Each class has a number of special skills they
can learn; how many is based on intelligence. Some
of these skills are more useful than others. For
Warriors, you want Armored Skin, Berserking, Dark
Vision (only one needs to have this), and a weapon
skill, preferably sword. The other skills available to
Warriors are not really very useful in the game.
Keep in mind that the non-Human races come
with some of these skills already as a bonus.
Dwarves, for instance, have skills in Axe and
Berserking, while Trolls have Armored Skin. Overall, Dwarves and Humans make better Warriors
than Trolls, whose slow speed can become a drawback rather quickly, and their low intelligence
makes it hard for them to learn skills.
Wizards can learn five different spell types, as
well as some other interesting skills. All Wizards
should have Fire Runes, which are the most useful
in the game. Wind Runes and Spirit Runes are also
good to have; the other two you can pick up later,
as your Wizards intelligence increases. Note that
Gnomes already come with Spirit RUnes known.
Elves come with Item Lore and Weapon Lore,
which enables them to identify items found after
combat, which is very important. All Wizards
should have Priesthood skill to destroy undead
creatures, and Monster Lore is quite helpful, as it
tells you the strengths of the monsters you are up
against.
One thing to remember is that the Skill rating is
for combat only; it has absolutely nothing at all to
do with spell-casting. So there is no need to worry
about Wizards having a low Skill score, because you
don't want your Wizards up front in combat anyway.
The Character Utilities section does have one
drawback: once your character has been created and
saved, there is no way for you to look at it again
from this area. Therefore, when creating characters,
especially Wizards, keep a piece of paper handy to
write down each character's abilities and skills. This
will aid you greatly when forming a party, and
ensure that everyone in it has the skills you want.
You can have up to 25 characters on the disk, in
any of five parties, but any character can only be
in one party at a time.
Once you've gathered a party, you can send
them out on the quest. All parties start just outside
a small town called Green Hamlet. It's wise to get
in there right away and buy some equipment. All
gold is automatically pooled, so there is no need to

transfer money between characters. Each one simply chooses what to purchase, and the gold is deducted from the pool. Food supplies are treated in
the same way.
When first starting out, equip your fighters as
best you can, and don't worry if your Wizards don't
have armor or weapons. All they can wear is robes,
which has little protective value, and you'll be
keeping the mages as far back from combat as you
can, anyway. The Warriors will usually be bearing
the brunt of the damage, and they need the best
protection you can afford.
Do try to keep some money for healing. A
night's sleep in the countryside restores very little
in the way of hitpoints (only one, in fact), and a
night's stay at an inn not much more. While spells
are available for healing, it's better to save spell
points for combat. Thus the preferred way to get
your people restored is to pay for healing services.
As you roam around the countryside, you will
notice that the scene changes according to the time
of day or night. In the early morning, much of the
area is still dark, and you can't see very far. As the
day progresses, there is more light, and you can see
further, until the sun starts to set again. You must
sleep once a night, and the program will not let you
continue if you have been up too long, placing you
automatically in camp mode.
Graphics are vaguely reminiscent of Ultima, but
are not the same. A single icon represents the entire
party as they travel across grasslands, through
forests and swamps, and over mountains. When
combat occurs (as it frequently will), the scene
changes to a close-up of the immediate area, with
each member of your party, as well as each monster, represented by a separate figure.
Who goes first is a matter of speed. It could be
one of your characters, or it could be a monster.
Turns proceed from the fastest to the slowest, so
the action will alternate between your characters
and their foes, and thus has a great impact on your
battle strategy.
Generally, the first thing you want to do is get
your Wizards as far away from the monsters as
possible, since they usually have the worst armor
and fewest hitpoints. Move them in a direct line (if
possible) away from the enemy, but remember to
save some movement points for spells, if needed.
One of your mages should use Monster Lore (which
takes no movement points) to determine the
strength of your opponents, and which ones are the
strongest.
However, if there are any spellcasters among the

monsters, always go for those first; they are by far
the most dangerous. One or two spells from the
enemy can really damage your attack possibilities,
not to mention kill your characters!
Hand-to-hand combat is a matter of maneuvering your characters close enough to the monster to
hit at it. Sometimes, often many times, you won't
be able to do this on the first round. In that case,
don't get too close... make the opponent come to
you, thus wasting, movement points (striking costs
movement points, too). This will not always work,
as each monster has a pre-determined target, and
may not go where you expect it to; several may
gang up on a single character. Ouch! On the other
hand, with some clever movement on your part,
you can lead one or more monsters on a merry
chase around the area, keeping them out of combat
while the rest of your party beats on the remaining
monsters.
Fortunately, you can retreat your characters off
the field of battle. One at a time, of course, and
you can't bring them back in once they're gone.
The drawback to this is each character must leave
the battleground at exactly the same spot. You can't
just move everyone off to the left side, you have to
move them all to the same exit on the left side (or
right side, or whatever). The good news is that the
monsters won't follow you if you all run away. The
bad news is that the monsters themselves never run,
no matter how badly they're doing. You either kill
them all or retreat.
Gaining levels is hard at first, because experience alone will not do much for you. You have to
find the Warrior Guilds and the Wizard Guilds,
where training is available that will bring you up to
the next level, provided you have acquired the
necessary points. Not every town has one of these
guilds, so it takes some searching before you can
begin to advance. The training itself, however, is
free.
Most towns have a tavern, where you can buy
food and pick up some helpful information. Always

visit the tavern to pick up what gossip you can.
You only have to do this once, since the information in each tavern never varies, but write down
what you find out, as some of it is crucial to finishing the game.
It's also a good idea to note down what facilities
each town has, such as armories, inns, healers,
magic supplies, and so forth, as well as prices. Not
every town has every type of shop, and if you need
healing in a hurry, you want to know where you
can get it. The same is true for equipment: you
want the best available at the lowest prices.
One problem with equipment is you can buy it,
but you can't sell it. The only thing you can do
with unwanted items is drop them (or pass them
along to some other member of the party who can
use them). Since the number of objects a character
can carry is limited, only keep what you really
need, and get rid of everything else.
Magical items and potions can be bought if you
have enough money, or found (sometimes) after a
successful combat. The trick is figuring out what
the thing does after you have it. Potions are always
used on characters; they heal, increase speed, add

to armor protection, unpoison, and so forth. Wands,
rods, rings, and staves, however, have varying effects, some beneficial, some baneful.
A few can be figured out (a ring of chains, for
instance), but for the most part, you will need to
experiment. Even the Identify abilities only tell you
what an item is, not what it does. The safest thing
to do is wait for combat with relatively weak monsters (like kobolds) and try the item out on one of
them, to see what happens. Never try an unknown
item on your own party; you may well end up
slicing your best fighter into instant sushi.
However, don't think that you can always depend on these things. Magical goodies can be
helpful, but they have a distressing tendency to
break and become useless just when you need them
most, not to mention, they don't always work, either. Sometimes an item will break after just one
use. This is randomly determined each time you use
the item, and there is no telling when it will happen. It keeps things interesting.
Also, keep in mind that a Wizard can use Identify only once per day, regardless of what is being
identified. For example, if a Wizard has just identified a potion, that's it... he won't be able to identify another thing, potion or not, until the next
day.
Eventually, you'll be feeling strong enough to go
poking around in the dungeons. There are several
of them scattered around the countryside, and
you'll have to enter all of them, as each has something of importance necessary to completing the
game. The one in the forest is the easiest of the
bunch, so start with that, but not right away. I'd
recommend going up a level or two first.
Dungeons are dark places, but if at least one
member of the party has Dark Vision, you won't
need a torch (which is good for one use only).
You'll be able to see and get around pretty well.
However, a lantern is a good thing to have, since it
lights up more area, giving you a better view of the
immediate vicinity.
Be aware that many of the dungeons have secret
doors and secret passages. If you haven't found
what you're looking for, then probably you have
missed one of them, that will lead you to what you
want. While relatively small in size, dungeons can
be tricky places.
The trickiest (and meanest) of all is Ralith, the
abode of Siriadne (who, despite the box cover, is a
dragon, not a human). Take your time in this place,
because it is a very hard one to get through. The
wandering monsters in particular are powerful, and

will cause you much trouble. Don't be afraid to run
if you find your group is over-matched. Remember
that wandering monsters are random encounters,
and may not be there the next time you come by.
However, you do have to wipe out all the fixed
monsters, and you can't do this in one sitting
(unless your group happens to be very powerful
and very lucky).
Go as far as you can, then teleport out, heal up,
restore spell points, and return. Since the dungeon
status is saved to disk, you won't have to fight the
same monsters in the same rooms over and over
again, although the random ones will be popping up
every so often. The best thing you can bring with
you here are Elven gems. These restore spell points,
and you will be using a LOT of spells in this place.
Frequent saving of your position also comes in
handy (but will have no effect on the status of the
dungeon itself, which is stored separately).
Of course, it's going to be awhile before you're
ready for that encounter. I don't recommend attempting Ralith with less than eighth level characters. Your party will need to be high in spell points
and hit points, and these come only with advancement.
That brings up one of the sore points in the
game. It isn't too hard to get up several levels
quickly, but after that, advancement drags tremendously. Check out the level guide in the back of
the manual, and you'll see that you need a lot of
points to move up after about 8th-9th level. What
makes it so difficult is the fact that high-level
monsters do not come with high-level experience
points.
The two hardest places in Shard are Islanda and
Ralith, where you start running into the heavyduty critters. However, even so, the average number of points you'll get per encounter is only in the
150-200 range. When your characters need 30,000
points to get to the next level, that makes for a
heckuva lot of encounters, and a lot of tedious
fighting. Polishing off Siriadne and her friends is
worth about 10,000 points, but that comes at the
end of the quest, when you need the points least of
all.
Still, a well-developed party of characters in the
mid-range should be able to get through the final
castle and obtain the Shard. I did it once with 10th
level characters, and then with 8th level characters,
so it is definitely possible (the second time is a bit
easier, since you've been through it and know everything that has to be done, as well as what monsters you have to face).

The graphics, while not spectacular, are good,
even in monochrome. The monster icons (which
come with both a front view and a side view) are
well-done, and animate a bit in combat: the rattlesnake strikes out, the evil fighter thrusts his
sword, the mountain giant pounds on you with his
fist, and so on, adding a nice touch to the game.
Sound effects in the game are fairly limited,
mostly strange noises in battle or when you bump
into a solid object, such as a wall. Fortunately, you
can turn these off, although you'll have to wait until your first combat to do this.
Shard comes on one double-sided disk. You can
make a copy of the back side to play from (the
utility for doing this is included on the master
disk). You can also use this utility to make a backup of the playing disk, in case of disaster (of one
kind or another). Read the manual carefully before
starting to play, especially the hints section and tables at the back of the book. You'll get off to a
better start that way.
Bottom line: Overall, a good romp of the
hack-and-slash type.
Copyright 1986 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

THE LEARNING GAME

1986 In Review
By Bob Proctor
Here we go again. This column is a
"1986 In Review Plus Recommended
Games For Late Christmas Shoppers"
special. My chance to sit back and throw
brickbats and kudos at the educational
software industry.
The award for Best Value of the Year
goes to Microzine from Scholastic Software. Each volume is a disk with four educational programs (Apple II only). It is
published 7 times a year and shows up in
the mail; you either send the disk back or
buy it for $30. Microzine has been around
for a while but Scholastic has improved it;
they are putting their best games out on
these disks, not rejects that they couldn't
sell any other way.
Uptime is a brand new "disk magazine"
for Apple II users. This one is monthly and
even cheaper—as little as $7 for a disk of
10 or more programs! However, you don't
have an option to reject the disk. There
are only a few educational games per disk
and they are not nearly as professional as
those in Microzine.
Sunburst Communications is one of the
more remarkable stories in the software
biz. They are one of a handful of companies that get by publishing ONLY educational software. They stand out in this select group because they continue to publish many new titles while everyone else is
content to sell established products.
When I started writing this column a
few years back, I stressed the importance
of motivation and said the best educational software motivated by being fun. I
still believe this, but a few years of testing
software on the neighborhood kids have
made me modify my position slightly. The
interest and participation of a concerned
"mentor" can be an equally powerful motivator and the only effective one in some
cases.
To this end, Sunburst programs come
with a large 3-ring binder of documentation that contains the usual
stuff—how to boot the disk and play the
game—but also tells a parent or teacher
how to interact with the student(s). In
some cases, this section is extensive and
includes worksheets or maps which can be
copied. You pay a little more for this, all
Sunburst titles sell for $59.
While I do not believe that microcomputers will replace our school system (as
was suggested recently by a famous futurist who writes for several computer publications), I do agree that there are deficiencies in the system and that a computer
at home can be an excellent supplement if
parents get involved. What is all too common here in California is that the school
has a computer or two but the staff lacks
the time or the knowledge to use them. It's
too bad because research is accumulating
to show that teaching the use of computers

helps the student in other areas as well.
Here is where Sunburst is coming to
the rescue. They have filled in their product line to where they now offer a wellrounded curriculum on computing. Their
Type To Learn program teaches keyboard
skills for grades 3 to 8 (but see below for a
better program for older people). Their
Magic Slate word processor can be used to
do assignments at all levels but also has
lessons on language for grades 2-3. Their
Bank Street School Filer is similar, a data
base program with supplemental lessons
and sample data about the USA.
Of course, they still have all of the
games on problem solving skills in both
language and math. The best new one is
called The Royal Rules. This is similar to
The King's Rule but with the important
addition that you can now make up your
own rules for someone else to guess. A
"rule" is something that 3 numbers, like
(2,4,6), have in common. You can test
other sets of numbers, like (14,16,18), and
find out if they also fit the rule (yes it
does). Then you try to state the rule—in
this case you'd say "3 consecutive ascending even numbers" and be wrong! It's simpler than that, it's just "3 even numbers".
If we had tested (10,8,6) and (4,16,12) we
would have discovered that. The lesson
here is not only "Don't jump to conclusions" but how to formulate and test ideas
in a scientific manner. It's fun!
There have been half a dozen
"educational word processors" released this
year. This qualifies as some kind of trend
but it's mostly hype, just a way to get you
to buy a ho-hum WP program. Two that

are worth considering, besides Magic Slate,
are Writer Rabbit from The Learning
Company ($40, aimed at the very young,
ages 7-8) and Homeworker from Davidson
($90, but also includes outliner, calculator
and other tools suitable for a high school
student). Both programs are for Apple II.
1986 was a poor year for start-ups.
The only new educational software company that I am aware of is Learning Well.
They have three new games called Safety
First, Health Watch and Drug Alert!; all
unusual because of the topics. Unfortunately, these are pretty dull games. Drug
Alert! is the worst; it's an adventure game
where you must answer questions about
drug use and abuse to "escape" from a
squalid building full of addicts and pushers. But it only takes 20 minutes to finish
and it's the same every time. There is a
data base on drugs which is more interesting than the game but access is slow
and there is no incentive to use it once you
know the answers to the 4 questions in the
game. The other two titles consist of three
games each. Health Watch, the best, has a
game on choosing a balanced diet, one on
dental hygiene, and one on exercise. It
would help someone in the third grade understand some concepts in these areas but
it's not going to generate any repeat play.
The Improving the Breed Award goes
to Type! from Broderbund. This combines
the best features of all of the touch typing
programs that came before it: instruction
on fingering, excellent diagnostics, drills on
real English including your own customized text. Type! is available for the
Apple II, the IBM PC and (soon) for the
C64.
The Game of the Year is Where, in the
World is Carmen Sandiego? also from
Broderbund. This game actually came out
last year but too late to be mentioned in
this column. Rather than describe it here
now, I'll talk about the sequel, Where in
the USA is Carmen Sandiego? in the next
column.

AMIGA PREFERENCES

by Roy Wagner
TWO UNDER PAR
Two excellent golf simulations are
available for the Amiga. Both are based on
very popular prior versions for other computers and their conversions to the Amiga
have been well done.
LEADERBOARD first appeared for
the C64 as an excellent new game with
digitized sounds, great graphics and very
realistic play. The version on the Amiga
improves on everything about the game.
One to four can play at three levels
with various player affects: Pro (Wind and
Hook/Slice), Amateur (Hook/Slice) and
Novice. All players use the same tee location. From 18 to 72 holes can be played on
your choice of four fictional courses. You
could even choose to play the same course
four times.
You have a choice of 3 woods, 9 irons,
a pitching wedge and putter. Before going
on the course you can practice. You hit
the ball using the left mouse button and a
small gauge on the right side of the screen.
Holding the button down starts the shot as
a percentage of power bar goes up on the
gauge. You set the power when and where
you release the button. You must release
the button before the top of the gauge.
Then you must set the snap by pressing
the button at a mark on the gauge that
indicates contact with the ball. Snapping
too early will cause a hook, too late a slice.
As complicated as it may sound, with
some practice at the driving range, it becomes quite natural. Unfortunately there is
no chance to practice putting.
Once on the course, you MUST select
the proper club. The manual contains a
nice chart showing the average distances
for each type of club. You aim your shot
using a little "cursor" that is in front of the
player using the right mouse button. An
overview of the hole with distances is
available at anytime. Once you reach the
green, you are automatically provided with
a putter and a much large gauge on the
left side of the screen. Each mark on the
gauge represents eight feet of hitting
power.
The putting green has a marker on it
that indicates the slope of the green from
where you are standing. This slope is very
critical in making your shot and the affect
of the break of the green is very nicely
simulated.
Other things that you must deal with
are water hazards (far less than the C64
version), sand traps, rough, and out of
bounds. Club selection must be adjusted
for the various conditions. The bounce
that the ball takes varies with the terrain

and club used but seems rather consistent
each time.
The game has an autodemo mode, does
not have a save option, does not save the
top scores, and only scores for Stroke play.
The graphics are excellent and very
quickly displayed. A single player game
can be played very quickly. Some of the
holes are quite tough.
MEAN 18 first appeared for the IBMpc and has been very popular for that
machine. But the Amiga version is much
better. The game can be icon selected or
run executed directly. It does not require a
cold start and can be multi-tasked with
other programs if you have sufficient
memory. The game disk can be copied and
is only required to start the game (key
disk).
One to four can play at two levels with
various player affects: Experienced and
Novice (Caddy selects best club and you
are given the aim for the next shot). You
have your choice of Pro or Regular tee location. You have your choice of four
courses: Pebble Beach, Augusta, St. Andrews and a fictional Bushmill. You can
even create your own course using an outstanding course architect program.
You have a choice of 3 woods, 8 irons,
a sand & pitching wedge and putter. Before going on the course you can practice.
You hit the ball using the left mouse button and a large gauge on the left side of
the screen. Pressing the button starts the
shot as a percentage of power bar goes up
on the gauge. You set the power when and
where you press the button again. You
must release the button before the top of
the gauge. Then you must set the snap by
pressing the button at a mark on the
gauge that indicates contact with the ball.
Snapping too early will cause a hook, too
late a slice.
Unlike LEADERBOARD, MEAN 18
give you an opportunity to practice
putting. On the putting green which contains all varieties of slopes and breaks, you
can select the position of the hole and your
ball.

Once on the course, if you are selecting
your clubs, the manual contains a nice
chart showing a fixed distance for each
type of club. You aim your shot using arrows to turn your player left or right (the
scenery scrolls by as you do this) using the
left mouse button. An overview of the hole
is available at anytime. Also shown is each
player's shots. Once you reach the green,
you are automatically provided with a
putter. Each mark on the gauge now represents eight feet of hitting power.
The putting green has a markers on it
that indicates the slope of the green from
where you are standing. This slope is very
critical in making your shot and the affect
of the break is noticeable.
Other things that you must deal with
are water hazards sand traps, rough, and
out of bounds. Club selection must be adjusted for the various conditions. The
bounce that the ball takes varies with the
terrain and club used, is variable, and very
realistic. The trees can sometime appear
quite immense.
A game can be saved after any hole,
the Top 10 scores are saved for each
course, a score card can be printed. You
can play either Stroke, Match or Best
Hole. The graphics and sounds are excellent. There is an annoying BELL between
each play and some excessive mouse
movements for some options. The holes
from the various known courses are very
well represented.
IN CONCLUSION: These are both
outstanding golf games. Each has its own
merits. I wish I could just merge the two
into one fantastic game. LEADERBOARD
has wind effects, an excellent putting
green with distances measured in yards,
feet and inches. I find it ironic that this
game does NOT have a permanent leader
board of top scorers.
Overall, I find that MEAN 18 has more
that makes it a better game; "real"
courses, a practice putting green, a caddy
option to select the proper clubs, a SAVE
game option, and a "vanity" board for the
top scores on each course. I have come to
expect these last two options in all games.
Another big plus for MEAN 18 is the optional program that lets you create/modify
any course.
CHECKMATE
CHESSMASTER 2000 from Software
Country is the first chess program to be
released for the Amiga. It comes after a
long history of chess programs for the
home computer (see Commodore Key).
Each new chess program is generally a significant improvement over its predecessor
with more options and stronger play algo-

rithms. This one is definitely no exception.
This program is loaded with nearly every
conceivable option and 100 historic games
from 1620 to 1986). These include two
between Kasparov and Karpov (1985) and
wins against SARGON III (1986). SARGON III was the top rated home computer
chess program with 1850 points unofficially from the Chess Federation. CHESSMASTER 2000 is rated unofficially at over
2000 points.
The display on the Amiga is outstanding. The board and pieces can be
displayed in two or three dimensions and
as a wood or metal chess set. When moving pieces, you can use the mouse to "pick
up" the piece and move it, or enter algebraic/abbreviated algebraic notation from
the keyboard. The board can be rotated 90
degrees in either direction. A display of
board coordinates and a clock can be
switched on and off. With the Amiga version, you can change the colors of the
pieces and/or board. Many of the options
that are changed for your preferences can
be saved to be used each time that you
load the program.
CHESSMASTER will only let you
move to legal squares. With "teaching"
mode on, the legal squares are highlighted
for each piece you choose to move.
Castling and En Passant moves are recognized and handled automatically. Pawn
Promotion will let you choose the piece
that you want.
You can begin a new game at anytime
with your opponent being either another
human or Chessmaster. Chessmaster will
even play against itself. There are 12 levels
of play (20 in the C64 version). These levels vary the amount of time that Chessmaster takes determining the next move. If
you don't care to wait, you can force
Chessmaster to move. A beginner can select Easy Mode, which turns off Chessmaster's ability to think ahead while it
waits for you to move and Newcomer
Style, for the easiest game.
There are three styles of play: Normal
(mixes best and random moves), Best
(always makes best move), and Coffeehouse (more random moves). Chessmaster
has a library of 71,000 opening moves and
tactics which can be turned off so that it
will not be used against your play. You
can take back a move by either player, replay a move, and change sides. You can
easily setup a position to play out a classic
strategy or solve a chess problem. These
setups or partial/completed games can be
saved to disk, loaded and erased with a
menu option.
There are several things that can be
displayed while the game is being played.
These include: pieces captured, moves so

far, Chessmaster's "thinking", score and
line of play predicted by Chessmaster, and
a suggestion as to what might be your best
move. The sound options can also be
changed from "voice" to music to bell to
silence. These sounds vary for different
types of moves. (C64 version only has one
type of sound.)
And then there are some further
"extras". Chessmaster will analyze a game
after it has be played, showing the best
move with score and line of play and saving the analysis to disk in a file that can
be printed. It will print moves so far or
print each move as it is made. Finally you
can save many of the settings that you
have made or reset them all back to the
"factory" settings.
Overall this is a well rounded chess
program with its extensive opening move
library, mid-game use of classical and
modern strategies, and uses the finest new
computer end game algorithms. Its library
of 100 classic games can be used to learn
from the play of masters. The graphics are
exceptional and with the mouse game play
is easy. This program is highly recommended. For more information see the
feature review of Chessmaster 2000 in the
November 1986 issue of CGW (#32).
LEFT ME COLD
Polarware has released three interactive computer novels for the Amiga: 00TOPOS (Sci-Fi), TRANSYLVANIA and
CRIMSON CROWN (Fantasy-Horror).
Crimson Crown has slow graphics that are
sometimes good but often poor. Fortunately the graphics can be turned off when
not wanted. The interface is predominately
keyboard with only N-S-E-W movement,
LIST, SAVE, LOAD, NEW, and QUIT
mouse selected. It does not use menus and
must be booted with a cold start.
Polarware states in their newsletter
that they have an "assault on prices" with
lower prices. These prices are $17.95 for
the Apple and C64 version, $19.95 for the
Macintosh, Atari ST, and IBM version and
$29.95 for the Amiga. YES YOU READ
THAT RIGHT, $29.95 for the Amiga version! WHY???

I called them on this to confirm what I
had read and they said that they had to
price it at that price because of their high
development costs for the Amiga conversion. And that the Amiga was so hard to
work with. I have talked to a lot of other
programmers from several other companies
and they have all said how easy it is to
write for the Amiga. Obviously Polarware
is using programmers who know very little
about the Amiga or are trying to force
coding conventions from other computers
onto the Amiga. I know that I could write
a better looking program for the Amiga
using AmigaBasic, and it would be faster.
If you want an outstanding graphic
adventure, I suggest you spend $15.00
more and buy PAWN from Firebird Software. This illustrated text fantasy adventure shows how well something can be
done for the Amiga when one KNOWS the
machine. (I hope to have a detailed review
of this program in the next issue.) Others
worth considering are MINDSHADOW
and TASS TIMES IN TONETOWN for
the Amiga from Activision.

DESIGNER PROFILE

CHRIS CRAWFORD
In CGW #32 we began a series of Designer Profiles when
we interviewed Alan Miller of Accolade and Brian Moriarty
of Infocom. In this issue we have the first half of Frank
Boosman's fascinating interview with computer game pundit
Chris Crawford. The interview will conclude in CGW #34.

In Silicon Valley, a part of the world where
computer stores are the size of supermarkets, Chris
Crawford is refreshingly different. His directions
led me up a twisting, winding road, out of the city
and up into the hills. Chris's house looks like any
other country home: there's a big yard with ducks,

geese, goats, cats, dogs, and a multitude of other
farm animals. The ducks and geese have their own
private pond. Looking at his house or at Chris
himself—in his work shirt and floppy hat, no
less—one would never guess that he's one of the
world's premier computer game designers. But as
the saying goes, appearances can be deceiving, and
that's rarely truer than with Chris.
In this two-part interview, Chris talks about his
philosophy of game design, his successes and failures, his ideas on future game design, and more.
CGW: Chris, for the benefit of the people who
will be reading this interview but who might not
have read the book,the articles in Computer Gaming World, or seen you in the American Express
commercial...
Chris: (laughs)
CGW: ...tell us a little bit about how you got
your start in the business.
Chris: Let's see... I was a wargamer; that was my
hobby for a long time. 1 ran into a fellow in 1974
at the University of Missouri Columbia Computer
Center who was working on a computerized version
of the Avalon Hill game Blitzkrieg and I thought
he was crazy, but I was curious about the possibilities and a year later I attempted to tackle the
problem. I thought about it for a few months before I decided that it really could be solved, al-

though I wasn't going to try Blitzkrieg. But I did
put together a game in FORTRAN on an IBM 1130
and it first ran in 1976 and it was the forerunner
of what became Tanktics. The next step was for me
to buy my own computer. I bought an KIM-1, put
together by MOS Technologies. I did a game on
that machine and then the Commodore PET came
out. I bought one, did Tanktics on the PET and
sold it myself because there were no software publishers in those days. First copies sold December 30,
1978. I sold about 150 copies of Tanktics. Then I
did another game called Legionnaire, nowhere near
like the later version, which I sold about 100 copies
of. Tanktics I sold for fifteen bucks, that including
a map board and counters... Legionnaire I sold for
ten dollars—software prices were lower in those
days. Then I joined Atari. For Atari I did Energy
Czar, Scram, Eastern Front 1941 and a book called
De Re Atari. While I was at Atari, I did new editions of Tanktics and Legionnaire for Avalon Hill.
I did Excalibur and a game called Gossip. I did a
book called The Art of Computer Game Design.
After being laid off from Atari I did Balance of
Power as a freelancer. I have just finished Patton
Versus Rommel for Electronic Arts. So that's what
I've done.
CGW: Why computer game design instead of
anything else?
Chris: My goals have changed over time. Initially, I got into computer games as a hobby. War
games were my hobby, I wanted to play better war
games, but the cardboard war games had many
problems. The traditional war games didn't do some
of the things I wanted them to, I felt computers
could solve a lot of the problems, so I pursued it as
a hobby until 1979. Until then I was a teacher. And
I greatly enjoyed being a teacher. So, I taught for
money and programmed for fun. In 1979 I made
the startling discovery that is it far more lucrative
and enjoyable to teach for fun and program for
money. So, I reversed things and got a job at Atari
programming computer games. This I pursued at
Atari for a number of years, but I wanted to advance the state of the art. In the very beginning
there was this drive to make the greatest, best, most
wonderful computer games possible. By 1982 when
Alan Kay hired me to form the games research
group for his new corporate research group at
Atari, that modified slightly. I decided that my new
goal was to pursue computer games as an art form.
That really doesn't represent a major change.
Whereas earlier I simply wanted to do the greatest
and most glorious games, now I wanted to do games
just as an art form. That's just a variation on the

first goal. I have pursued that goal ever since, although not with any success.
CGW: There are some people who view Chris
Crawford games as they view French films. Oh,
sure, critics like them, they're probably interesting,
there have probably been one or two that had some
unique qualities to them, but they're inaccessible
and on the whole, they'd much rather go see a Star
Wars movie, or the computer game equivalent—they'd much rather play a game of Choplifter.
How do you feel about that?
Chris: In many ways, I'll agree with it. That's
another way of saying, "Crawford's games aren't
fun." And there is some merit in that. I don't strive
so much for simple-minded fun. I'm not interested
in achieving that. That difference here is more not
in what I achieve, but what I am striving for. That
is, do you want a game that will give you a few
quick laughs or do you want a game that will
punch you in the stomach or really affect you?
Perhaps a better analogy would be you can
watch Laverne and Shirley on television and go
"Har, har, har... look, she got the pie in the face,"
or you can go see a movie like Apocalypse Now
that will devastate you. Or any really great movie
that touches you deeply. None of my games are
great, none of my games have touched people
deeply, but that's what I am learning how to do. I
feel confident that someday the threads that I am
now weaving will be woven together, possibly not
by me, possibly by someone more talented into a
game that can affect people as deeply as Kramer
vs. Kramer, Out of Africa, or Apocalypse Now or
any other really great movie. But none of my games
yet can fairly be compared with a good movie.
Even if we discount the technological and artistic
maturity of the movies... you go back to the early

movies, none of my games can hold a candle to any
of Charlie Chaplin's works. I don't even think I've
reached D.W. Griffith's level yet. I hope that
maybe someday I will. I believe that maybe someday I might. If I didn't think that possible, I would
get out of the business.
CGW: Which game designers do you have a lot
of respect for?
Chris: Dan Bunten, he's damn good. Jon Freeman... that's about it. One of the surprising things
about the games biz is that there are so few proven
performers. I think there are only three people in
the world who have proven their ability to do more
than one great game. On the other hand, you've got
quite a few people who've done one great game...
CGW: Who are those three "proven" people?
Chris: Dan Bunten, Jon Freeman and Chris
Crawford. You look at Jon Freeman, he has done
Archon; he was very closely involved with Temple
of Apshai and Crush, Crumble and Chomp. Here's
a man who's put out a number of very good games.
Now Jon has worked with other people and so it's
unfair, maybe I should say Freefall—Jon Freeman
and Anne Westfall. Anne deserves credit with Jon.
CGW: You talk at times about the futility of
group projects. In fact, you talk in your book about
how you violated your own standards when you did
Excalibur as a team project.
Chris: Yes.
CGW: If for some reason, you, Jon Freeman,
Anne Westfall and Dan Bunten came together, what
would you think would come out of that?
Chris: if we tried to do a joint project? An
enormous cat-fight, because we have different
styles. The first question we'd ask is, "What kind of
game are we doing?" And I'd step forward and say,
"We're doing a Chris Crawford game," and Jon
would say, "No, we're doing a Jon Freeman game,"
and Dan would say, "We're doing a Dan Bunten
game," and it wouldn't work. That's not bad, I
mean, it's sort of like saying, "Let's get Ludwig von
Beethoven to sit down with Johann Strauss and
John Lennon and the three of them sort of make
music together. What are they going to get? Cacophony!
CGW: I don't know. What did they get when
John Lennon and Paul McCartney wrote together?
Chris: Oh, those two were much more similar
composers. Born and bred in the same tradition.
CGW: Paul McCartney and Stevie Wonder?
Chris: Yes, they can do that, but I don't see it
happening in games.
CGW: You've talked about games and designers
that you like and respect. What about games or

genres of games that you don't like? Are there
successful games that you've looked at and said,
"I'm glad I didn't write that?"
Chris: OK, yeah. I'll list virtually everything in
the industry here. Let me start out with text adventures. Text adventures are, in Redmond Simonsen's wonderful phrase, "nothing more than refrigerator lights." An adventure game is about as interesting as a refrigerator light. You open the refrigerator door, the light turns on. You close the
refrigerator door, the light turns off. That's the
extent of the interaction. The classic problem in
any adventure is, how do I get past "X"? And the

way that it is solved is that you back off and you
go everywhere you can and pick up everything you
can and you explore every ridiculous, absurd, possible permutation of objects and actions until you
discover that you can get past the troll by reading
the book and boring him so much that he falls
asleep, then you can sneak past. That is a real case,
by the way. And that is the very essence of all adventures. Random strategies. Just get in there and
try all sorts of absurd things until you come up
with one that works. You know, it's no challenge,
it's no interaction, it's no test of your personality or
your problem solving abilities or anything like that.
It's just random nonsense. So, I don't think much
of adventures. Skill and action games occupy the
number two position on my list, because skill and
action games do not challenge any aspect of a human being. If you ask the question, "What separates
us from the animals?," well, it's certainly not skill
and action games. I suspect that a cat, if you could
rig up a joystick to a cat and convince the cat to go
through the silliness of playing Space Invaders, the
cat could probably get a much higher score than

most human beings. A cat's reflexes are much better than a human being's. So, if you do well at a
skill and action game, what does that mean? Well,
you're just as good as a cat? Big deal! A good game
should challenge what is human about us. It should
present a challenge that only you can solve through
your own special personality. Skill and action games
don't do that. Then there are the hack and slash
games. Go down into a dungeon, chop up lots of
monsters and gather lots of treasure. These have
some potential, but they do get awfully boring after
you've slashed your 3000th monster. There's not
much in the way of interaction in them. You encounter the monster and there really isn't any
choice about what to do. It's not as if you say,
"Well, with this monster I'm going to do bladdy,
bladdy, blah." It's all pretty much the same thing.
OK, see the monster? Kill the monster! Or run
from the monster. A few games give you one of
two other options, but, again, there really isn't
much interaction with the monster. No cleverness,
no subtlety, no strategy, no ploys. It's just straight
run, kill or be killed. Again, no interaction... not
much game. So, right there I've pretty much enclosed much of what we call computer games.
CGW: How do you see games evolving? What do
you think computer games will be like in five
years, in ten years, in one hundred years?
Chris: The fundamental forces that will govern
the evolution of computer games will really be two
forces in dynamic tension. The first force is what I
will call the techno-cratic. The second force I will
call the artistic. the techno-cratic force is the attempt by primarily technical people to present
technical achievements as developments in game
design. The caricature of this position is the fellow
that says, "Wowie, zowie, with this new computer,
with this new graphics board and sounds, why
when you play our game and you shoot the bad
guy, the blood that flows out from the hole in his
body will be brilliant red. And he'll gasp and
scream the most bloodcurdling scream you can possibly imagine. Explosions will reverberate in your
home and your whole house will shake. We'll even
give you the smell of death with our special olfactory board!" Essentially no artistic development at
all; let's just take what we've got right now and do
it bigger and better than ever before.
CGW: And yet something must be said for technical developments. Certainly Star Wars wouldn't
have been half as good twenty or thirty years earlier.
Chris: Yes and no. Certainly technical developments don't hurt, in fact certainly technical devel-

opments do help. Our problem right now is that of,
let's see... a man in Antarctica, all alone with 33
tons of every imaginable food and drink that he
could want and not a stitch of clothing. That is, our
technical development has come a long way, you
can still have more, it's always nice to have more...

hey, we don't have Gelato here... why not have
that? Or I'd sure like some Kentucky Fried
Chicken to go along with these 33 tons of other
food; it give me more choice. But, our artistic development is so abysmal that talk of further technical improvements now turns me off. I definitely
want to have a half a megabyte of RAM and a
68000, that is, I turn my nose up at a Commodore
64 or an Apple //. Those machines are so gutless. I
don't feel I can do an interesting game on them, so,
yes, I demand at least 20 tons of food!
CGW: You don't think that you can do an interesting game on a Commodore 64?
Chris: No.
CGW: In your book, The Art of Computer Game
Design, four years ago you said...
Chris: I said if I had to choose between the
technical and the artistic, if I had to choose between no artistic development and no technical development, I'd go for no technical development.
And I also said that I could be perfectly happy
with an Atari 800 for at least five more years. Well,
first, five years have passed. Second, we're not
talking about an Atari 800... we're talking about a
Commodore 64 or an Apple //.

CGW: As long as we are talking a little bit about
hardware, why the Mac and what has been your
experience with it?
Chris: I will say that in the Mac's case part of
my preference is the historical factor. The Mac was
the first 68000 system to come out. I have always
emphasized the importance of processing power. I
was getting a little tired of what a one- or twomegahertz 6502 could do; it's pretty limited. The
68000 can really crunch hard. When Mac came out,
there was really nothing that could come remotely
close to the Mac in the terms of just raw horsepower. And so I knew that this was the machine
that I wanted. That was the first reason. The second
reason that I wanted that machine was that it had a
pre-defined user interface. That's terribly important because whenever a user sits down to play a
game he has to talk to the computer through a language. With the Atari, I had to invent a completely
new language every time I did a game.
CGW: You've talked about the advantages of the
Mac and yet you've been known to rail against the
Mac at times for the low sales of games. And I've
heard that from other people.
Chris: This is a problem with all the 68000 systems. None of them are supporting heavy games
sales. In fact, different publishers put different
twists on it. But, it seems right now that it's close
to an even horse race. That is, if you have a game
in your hand ready to go and you can instantly
have it on an Atari, Mac or Amiga, the odds are
that it will sell roughly the same amount of units
on each machine, though most people will agree
that the Atari will sell a bit less than the other two.
There is some question about the long-term buyer.
That is, one thing we notice with Mac is that it
seems to keep selling month in, month out, where
as the Atari purchasers seem to be all first-time
purchasers.
CGW: So, are you happier now about Balance of
Power sales than you were a few months ago?
Chris: Well, yeah, in that there have been more
sales in the last few months. It's not the sales curve
going up or going down. It just seems to be plugging along steadily. Actually, what will make Balance of Power sell will be the translations. My
guess now is that the Mac version will never pay
for itself, by itself. Considering the amount of time
I put into it, the amount of money I spent on
equipment, Balance of Power, if there were only a
Mac version will have been a failure financially for
me. [Ed. Note: The IBM version of Balance of
Power has now been released which pleases Chris'
bankbook no doubt.]

PEEK (con.)
nomic side to the game with production rates. 15 levels of difficulty. The
computer generates a new world for
each game so every play will be different. Excellent use of Mac graphics
and pull-down menus. Macintosh.
Circle Reader Service Card #19.
Solar Systems Software
8105 Shelter Creek
San Bruno, CA 94066
(415) 952-2375
TEMPLATES OF DOOM: Having a
little trouble mastering those formulas
on your Lotus 1-2-3 spreadsheet?
How'd you like to have a humorous
tutorial which would enable you to
play an adventure game and master
those formulae at the same time? If so,
this program is for you. The player
assumes the alter ego of a swashbuckling hero and must pit his knowledge
of the Lotus system against the computer in order to succeed. Fortunately,
the program has a help menu to assist
those who haven't yet mastered the
formulae. IBM. Circle Reader Service
Card #20.
Strategic Simulations, Inc.
1046 N. Rengstorff Ave.
Mountain View, CA 94043
(415) 964-1353
GEMSTONE HEALER: This is the sequel to the popular Gemstone Warrior
fantasy adventure. The warrior has

already restored the gemstone to its
rightful place, but the Gemstone has
lost its powers because the pieces have
been damaged. Now, the warrior must
return to the Demon's Lair, locate the
Healing Tools and heal each part of
the gemstone in order to fuse the
pieces into a working Gemstone. Those
familiar with the previous adventure
will recognize the command structure
and visual presentation of this new release. Amiga, Apple, Atari
400/800/1200 and ST, C-64/128, IBM,
and Macintosh. Circle Reader Service
Card #21.
WARSHIP: Gary Grigsby's new game
is supposed to be to WWII naval combat what Mech Brigade is to WWII
armored conflict. It's a tactical level
simulation with Grigsby's usual flair
for historical detail. The Ship Data in
the documentation is visually splendid,
as well as tremendously useful in
playing the game (unlike some earlier
naval simulations by other companies).
As usual, the documentation is jampacked with detailed charts and
statistics. The game includes two scenarios on Guadalcanal, one on Empress Augusta Bay, and one on San
Bernardino. You can also design your
own scenarios. Apple and C-64/128.
Atari version available soon. Circle
Reader Service Card #22.

SPORTS SCOREBOARD

by Rick Teverbaugh
There are two new and exciting programs that I am pleased to discuss in this
issue. The first game is the much anticipated Tenth Frame from Access. The second game is Radio Baseball from Electronic Arts. The coverage on RB addresses
some reader complaints about the lack of
IBM programs in this column. Until lately
I had only occasional access to an IBM.
That has all changed now as a Tandy 1000
now sits comfortably in my office beside
the Apple, Commodore and Atari ST machines.
Speaking of the Atari, I am excited
about this new machine and what it means
for sports gaming. Versatility and graphics
are the ST's high points. The increased
memory means that the programmers can
do more to enhance realism and at the
same time still have the room to give
gamers many options for self expression
like creating your own teams, race courses,
golf courses, etc. Then there are the
graphics capabilities. All sports are visually stimulating in one way or another.
The Atari has the capability of making
you feel a part of the action instead of
merely being a spectator.

But enough about hardware. On to the
sports pages! It's hard to believe but true
that there hasn't been a quality bowling
game on the market since Intellivision's
bowling cartridge. Now Access has done
something about that. I've been looking
forward to this release since June when I
saw a running demo of the game at the
Consumer Electronics Show.
Tenth Frame is just as good inside as

it looks on the outside. It is possible for up
to eight bowlers to play a separate series of
games or in a league.
The program is currently only available for the C64/128 systems, but the people at Access say an Atari ST version is on
the way.
The game system is quite similar to
Access' Leader Board golf game. In the
lower right-hand corner of the screen
there's a graph with bars moving up and
down each side. Pushing the joystick button will set the kegler in motion toward
the foul line. At that point, the bar on the
left-hand side of the graph begins to climb
(slowly at first, but rapidly gaining in
momentum). The timing of when to release
the button will be the determining factor
in how much force is used in rolling the
ball down towards the pins.
Once the strength is set, the bar on the
right-hand side of the graph begins its
descent. The timing of the second push of
the button is critical is setting how much
curve will be used on the shot. While in
golf a straight shot is most advantageous,
in bowling you'll likely never break 200
without a hook.
As with real bowling, consistency is the
byword here. The key to high scores is
finding the right combination. That includes the spot the bowler stands to being
his approach, the point on the alley to
which the shot is aimed, the strength of
the delivery and the amount of hook used.
Find the proper combination of all four,
then hit that combination more often than
not and you'll be well on your way to becoming the Earl Anthony of computer
bowling.
Up to five games can be rolled at one
time and the scores can be printed out after each game. Joystick is mandatory. It is
used to position the bowler and to move
the aiming arrow as well as putting the
shot in motion. Tenth Frame is on my top
10 sports games list of all-time and I think
it will be on yours also.
Just when it seems that everybody
who can produce a baseball game has already done so, another one pops up. The
final two to hit my doorstep have been
Sublogic's Pure Stat Baseball, a game too
bad to even waste space with here, and
Radio Baseball.
Radio Baseball is somewhat similar to
Random House's APBA Baseball in a couple of areas. First, there are no graphics to
speak of. The presentation in Radio Baseball isn't quite as verbose as that of
APBA, but it is generally as effective. A
second similarity is the lack of a utility to

create your own players. This seems
greedy to me. Why should I pay EA to
rate all my teams when my baseball
knowledge is likely just as good or better
than their's? On top of that, it means they
control what teams I get to use instead of
me choosing.
But enough of that. Radio Baseball
does have quite a few redeeming qualities.
The display is pleasant. The screen is divided into three parts. The upper lefthand corner is used to display the
linescore, tell what pitcher is on the
mound, what batter is up and what runners are on base. The upper right-hand
corner gives the complete lineup for each
team and not just who's on deck. Since it
is necessary to warm up pitchers before
you can bring them in, it helps to be reminded, sometimes an inning ahead of
time, where the pitcher is in the batting
order. If you're playing the wimpy American League designated hitter version it
won't matter. The lower half of the screen
is for the play-by-play. That also where
you'll make your strategy decisions and
type in the names of your substitutes.
Radio Baseball doesn't give you as
many offensive and defensive options as
some games. There isn't any chance of
bunting for a base hit, you can't merely
bring the corners of the infield in without
also bringing them in at second and short
and you can't pitch around a hitter.
Another similarity to APBA is the disk
access. There are probably three or four
disk accesses per hitter.
Radio Baseball does have options to
compile stats from a game and to draft
players from an already created disk to
form your own teams.
The game has two good computer
managers. You'll go against Abner in hu-

man vs. computer matchups or you can
have Alexander, the second computer
manager, take on Abner and just wait on
the results. There's even an ultra-fast
mode for gamers who want the computer
to play out some games just to have the
results and the statistics. It's a great idea
for season replays.
There aren't many teams included on
the disk that comes with the game. You'll
get four all-star teams; the Pre-War National League Heroes, the Pre-War American League Legends, the Post-War National League Greats and the Post-War
American League Stars. Then there are
eight other teams; 1927 Yankees, 1934
Browns, 1948 Indians, 1953 Yankees, 1955
Dodgers, 1960 Pirates, 1967 Cardinals and
1968 Tigers.
I can also complain about the lack of
information on the player roster screens. It
is necessary, in order to do a good job of
managing, to keep a constant check on the
lineup cards for each team. That's the only
place you'll find how the players bat, run
and throw.
Overall, I enjoyed Radio Baseball and
think it's a worthy entry into the baseball
field. With a couple of changes, it could be
all-star material.
Quickly there are a few other games
I'd like to mention before my space runs
out this time. GBA Championship Basketball from Gamestar is now available for
the ST. Not only are the graphics greatly
improved, but the joystick control seems a
bit more stable. There are also coaches to
worriedly pace the area in front of the
benches. All the other aspects of this
Commodore entry have remained intact.
All ST cage fans will want a copy.
Also, Lance Haffner has his football
game ready for the ST. While it's true that
his game can't take advantage of the superior graphics of the machine, it can and
does make good use of the ST's speed. Instead of 30 minutes for a full game, you
can easily whip one off in 20 minutes, especially playing against the computer. His
baseball game is nearly finished and early
play-test versions indicate it will be equal
to his outings on football and basketball.
He's also at work trying to bring hockey,
tennis and boxing to the same all-text
format. I'll keep you updated on his
progress.
In future column s I hope to give you
reviews of Baseball Fanatic and World
Tour Golf for the IBM. as well as Indoor
Games, Equestrian Showjumper, Beach
Blanket Volleyball and Thai Boxing for
the Commodore.

DRAGONFIRE II
by James V. Trunzo

The continued popularity of role-playing games
has drawn the attention of more than one computer
game company. Many respected software houses
have released products that allow you to explore
dungeons, journey across entire countries and grow
in stature as your experience mounts. Products like
The Bard's Tale from Electronic Arts, Phantasie
from SSI and Ultima IV from Origin Systems have
advanced computer fantasy gaming from a very
humble beginning to a much more sophisticated
level, one that in many ways closely approximates
true role-playing.
However, even the best of the computer fantasy
games must, by the very nature of the product, fall
short of the actual role-playing experience. A computer cannot cover all the possibilities that exist in
an open-ended role-playing scenario whose success
depends on the interaction of a group of players
and a dungeon master (or referee). Only a wellprepared human referee can be flexible enough to
handle the virtually endless number of options at
which players can arrive. Nevertheless, that doesn't
rule out the use of the computer as a tool for those
who will accept nothing less than a true role-playing experience. For those adventurers who fall into
that hard-core category comes a product sure to
ease the burden of any dungeon master and speed
up play for the entire group: Dragonfire II (DF2)!
DF2 is not a computerized adventure game; it
isn't a game at all. Rather, it is an exceptionally
capable dungeon master's aid that will allow the
user to quickly and accurately generate characters
(player or NPC) or monsters, conduct combat, make
dice rolls and do just about anything else that a
dungeon master (DM) could want. While similar
programs exist on the market, none have come
close to exhibiting the flexibility or thoroughness of
DF2. There are any number of features in DF2 that
make this aid a standout among programs of its
type.
To begin with, DF2 makes use of an intuitive
user-interface by employing pull-down windows

which contain a variety of choices when working
with a particular command. For example, dropping
the window for the GET command (listed at the
top of the screen along with the other major menu
items) would allow you to select from one of five
options: You could call into the Work Area randomized monsters, new characters, previously organized parties, individual monsters or individual
characters. Once characters and/or monsters are
called up to the screen, they may be examined,
modified, or placed into combat against one another.
Because both monsters and characters can be
generated so quickly and because they can be modified with such little effort, DM's or referees no
longer need to spend tedious hours creating nonplaying characters or large pools of monster types
prior to actual play. If an encounter indicates that
five orcs suddenly appear, the referee can simply
hit a few keystrokes and GET five orcs. Furthermore, each orc can be unique in the number of Hit
Points it has as well as in what equipment it is
carrying due to the unique randomizing system
available in DF2. Understand what this means: no
longer will you, as the dungeon master, have to
settle (due to lack of time) for five orcs, all with 8
Hit Points, carrying swords. Each orc can be given
a randomly generated weapon and have its Hit
Points vary within whatever boundaries you so
choose.
Additionally, consider the flexibility inherent in
using a computerized program with the capabilities
of DF2: let's say that a party has just about completed a session and had a relatively easy time of it,
in spite of the DM's best laid plans. Normally,
there would be little that could be done about the
situation—at least not on the spur of the moment
and without considerable time involved. With DF2,
the DM could decide that while leaving the dungeon, the party encounters a Hill Troll. No Hill
Trolls stored on the disk? No problem. Simply se-

lect OPTIONS from the main menu, select CREATE, TEMPLATE, MONSTERS from sub-menus
and you're in business. You'll be presented with a
list of characteristics pertaining to monsters and
after supplying information to the list (5D6 Hit
Points, 2d2+2 AC, etc.), you'll be ready to randomly generate a Hill Troll or 10 Hill Trolls.
For those dungeon masters who wish to do everything prior to actual play, you can randomly
create specific PARTIES of monsters, either all of
one type or mixed, and save them to disk under a
special file name for example, ROOM10. Then
when the adventurers enter Room 10 of your dungeon, use the GET command first and choose
PARTIES, select ROOM1O from the files shown
and you're ready for action. The possibilities are
many and varied, limited only by the user's needs
and imagination.
While the creation of characters and monsters
are of prime concern to DM's, of no less importance are the use of special Tables - trap tables,
magic tables, treasure tables, and on and on. DF2
allows you to create as many tables as you wish,
regardless of type or size. All you need to do is select TABLES from the OPTION list. You are then
prompted fo r the type of table you wish to create
(encounter, magic, weapon, saving, treasure, etc),
the die role that will be used to make a random
selection and the name of table itself. You can even
access subtables from within a table. For example,
a treasure table could contain an entry that on a
roll of 12 would generate another roll to be applied
to a subtable entitled MAGIC ITEMS. The computer handles all such mechanics in no time at all.
Again, the type and number of tables is limited
only by disk space. You can create specialized tables that are keyed to certain monster types, character levels, dungeon levels, terrain type - whatever
you wish.
As previously mentioned, DF2 can handle all
combat that occurs during a playing session. The
respective groups are placed on screen in the area
designated as the Workspace. Next, select the BATTLE option from the main menu at the top of the
screen. Designate an attacker and a defender by
highlighting the respective characters and monsters
on the screen and the program will automatically
determine if an attack has hit and what damage has
been done. Once combat has been completed, victims may be searched by highlighting one of the
dead and using the EXPAND command. By taking
possessions from one character and placing them in
thee possession field of another, the transfer is
made. All combat results (hits, damage, etc.) can be

modified or canceled if and when the need arises.
This is important once magic enters the picture.
Because of the tremendous scope of magic, its
awesome number and types of spells and effects,
DF2 does not attempt to handle it, although all
spells known by a character can be listed with him
and spell tables can be created. The casting of
spells and their effects, however, must be handled
by the players and the referee. The fact that damage can be modified during combat allows for integration in most cases. For example, assume a magic
user casts a group damage spell that causes the loss
of 5 HP to each member of the enemy force. Simply modify the current Hit Points of each of the
enemies prior to any other attacks. A cleric casts a
spell of protection over his party, and the spell absorbs the first three points worth of damage scored
against a character. Again, no problem. After
damage has landed, do not accept the damage
rolled. Take it and modify it by three and adjust
the character's Hit Points accordingly.
DF2 offers further value when one considers the
possible uses of the program beyond what has already been discussed. The fact that any characters,
monsters, parties, tables, or templates can be
printed means that a computer needn't be available
during play if it isn't possible to have one present.
It is much quicker to generate large groups of nonplaying characters or specialized tables using DF2
ad then printing them out than trying to do the
same thing by hand. Hours of dice rolling can be
saved by just using a template, putting in the various types of dice you wish to roll and allowing the
computer to do the rest. All you need to do is print
the results.
Finally, tying in with the comment made above
about extra value, DF2 can be used with other
role-playing games besides fantasy adventures. The
program allows you to change field names and
customize your templates (using data disks of
course, in order to keep the original program intact). This means that Traveller players could
change the character fields into such things as Education and Social Standings, input the correct die
roll numbers (I d8) and generate its own characters.
Encounter tables could randomly generate mutant
types instead of orcs or skeletons. Similarly, Boot
Hill fanatics could do away with such fields as Armor Class and ESP ability, replacing them with
Gun Accuracy and Speed. DF2 offers its users a
chance to escape from the laborious task of bookkeeping and get on with the more rewarding and
exciting job of being creative and innovative in the
design of the adventure itself. ■

Due to the move that we have just made to larger offices we have had to temporarily suspend compilation of RID
data. Therefore we will include the results of RID #32 in our January issue. There will not be a RID #33. Below
are the ratings as they appeared in our last issue. Although the number of responses is small, Chessmaster 2000
leads the strategy game category. Ultima IV continues to lead the Adventure/Action game category.

