Jan-Feb 1986

Number 25

FEATURES
Under Fire !
Infantry Combat from Avalon Hill

Ultima IV
Review and Playing Tips

The Year In Review
Adventure Games in 1985

Silent Service
Review

Kampfgruppe
A Replay

The Gates of Moscow
Review

Heart of Africa
Review

11
William H. Harrington
12
Scorpia
16
Scorpia
20
Rick Teverbaugh
24
M. Evan Brooks
35
Lew Fisher
37
Stewart McKames

DEPARTMENTS
Taking A Peek

4

Screen Photos and Brief Comments

Editorial
Commodore Key
Information for Commodore Gamers

Atari Playfield
Information for Atari Gamers

6
19
Roy Wagner
32
Gregg Williams

Reader Input Device

41

Game Ratings

48

100 Games Rated

Accolade, Inc.
20863 Stevens Creek Blvd.
Cupertino, CA 95014
HARDBALL: One or two player game
featuring 3-dimensional field perspectives. Excellent graphics. Primarily a
pitcher vs batter game. Joystick only. C64 ($29.95), Apple ($34.95). Circle #2
LAW OF THE WEST: An interactive
recreation of a western saga featuring
approximately a dozen unique characters, each of which have a multitude of
possible conversational outcomes. Four
different street scenes illustrate the town
of Gold Gulch. Clever, animated graphics and humorous dialogue. One player.
C-64 ($29.95), Apple ($34.95) Circle #3
Avalon Hill Game Co.
4517 Harford Road
Baltimore, MD 21214
800-638-9292

Broderbund
17 Paul Drive
San Rafael, CA 94903
415-479-1170

Electronic Arts
2755 Campus Drive
San Mateo, CA 94403
415-572-ARTS

FANTAVISION: A special effects generator that allows users to create studio
quality animated sequences. Animation
sequences can be saved to self-booting
data disks, up to 64 frames per sequence.
Apple 64K. ($49.95).
Circle #6
PRINT SHOP COMPANION: Provides
Print Shop users with 12 new fonts, 50
new borders and special editing features.
Sixteen new drawing tools plus mouse
control. Permits the capture of graphic
files from other graphic programs. If you
like Print Shop, you will love Print Shop
Companion. Apple 64K. ($39.95).
Circle #7

GRYPHON: Fantasy arcade adventure
game. Six levels, three screens featuring
"multi-plane" graphics which allow
movement in front of, behind, and between structures, plants, etc. C-64/128
($19.95). Circle #4

ESSEX: Second in the electronic novel
series (MIND WHEEL was first). The
story takes place aboard an intergalactic
spaceship on a search-and-rescue mission. Rated as very challenging. Many
popular machines. ($44.95).
Circle #8

BLACK THUNDER: Automotive, arcade
adventure game with race cars and battle action. Futuristic setting, split-screen
action, software speech. 14 levels, 32
screens. C-64/128. ($19.95). Circle #5

BRIMSTONE: Third in the series.
Follows the adventures of Sir Gawain,
Knight of King Arthur's Round Table.
Rated not as difficult as ESSEX. Many
popular machines. ($44.95). Circle #9

MOVIE MAKER: Improved version with
three animated movies by Gahan Wilson
and a large selection of new art. Users
can draw their own frames, let the computer animate them, and even add a
sound track. Apple, C-64/128. ($39.95 &
$32.95).
Circle #10
EPYX
1043 Kiel Ct.
Sunnyvale, CA
THE EIDOLON: Adventure role-playing
game with fractal graphics for three dimensional action. The player travels into
a magical dimension by means of a time
machine, with the task of deciphering
the messages of the strange beings found
there. From Lucasfilm Games. C-64/128,
Atari 64K. ($39.95).
Circle #11
KORONIS RIFT: First person strategy
and adventure game as the player pilots
a Surface Rover through the Rifts of
Planet Koronis in 2249 AD. Put together
the right weapons to destroy the genetic
clones. From Lucasfilm Games. C64/128, Atari. ($39.95).
Circle #12

THE WORLD'S GREATEST
FOOTBALL GAME: Hybrid strategy/arcade game. You can use a
"playbook" to design your own plays and
then test them out arcade style. The
depth of variety in the playbook is truly
remarkable. Slow motion replay. There
are three window views: open field, overhead and one-on-one. Some of you may
recall "Starship Commander" which
came out for the Apple a few years ago.
This game was designed by the same
group (NEXA Corp.) and, like Starship
Commander exhibits some of the best
Apple graphics around. One or two
players. Apple 64K.
Circle #13
JET COMBAT SIMULATOR: Realistic
flight and combat simulation of the F-15
Eagle. Take-offs, landings and dogfights.
Heads up display, practice and combat
modes, four levels of difficulty. One
player. C-64.
Circle #14

Firebird
PO Box 49
Ramsey, NJ 07446
201-934-7373
ELITE: Interstellar game with 3 -D
Vector graphics. Trade and combat in
the cosmos. 2000 planets in eight galaxies. Britain's 1985 Adventure Game of
the Year. It looks impressive. C-64/128,
Apple. ($29.95 & $34.95).
Circle #15
Hayden Software
600 Suffolk Street
Lowell, MA 01854
617-937-0200
THE HOLY GRAIL: Text adventure
game. You are a knight on a quest for
the Holy Grail. Full sentence parser and
real-time simulation. Apple, IBM.
($49.95).
Circle #16

Continued on pg. 15

COMPUTER
GAMING
WORLD
has moved!
Our new editorial
address is:
515 S. HARBOR BLVD.
SUITE A
ANAHEIM, CA
92805

Our mailing address
remains:
P.O. BOX 4566
ANAHEIM, CA
92803-4566

CHANGES
With this issue CGW begins its sixth year of
publication. A lot of water has gone under the
bridge since 1981. Through the trials and
tribulations that have brought down even some of
the goliaths of the computer magazine industry,
CGW has continued to grow (slowly, steadily, but
surely).
With the start of our sixth year, we continue our
never-ceasing task of making CGW better. Many of
you have asked (some have even begged) that we
go monthly. Well, although not quite monthly,
CGW will be increasing frequency to nine times per
year. You can think of CGW as a monthly with
minor hiccups in February, July, and October.
Except for those three months you will see a new
issue of CGW each month.
We have always felt that CGW was the most
timely and in-depth source of information about
computer games. The new publication schedule can
only serve to improve this situation.
You probably have also noted a change in our
issue numbering scheme. We have done away with
the old Vol./No. format in favor of a whole
number system. So rather than 6.1, this issue is
Number 25.
All subscriptions have been converted to this
new numbering system and subscribers can check
their mailing label to see which is their final issue.

Subscribers will still receive the number of issues
for which they have paid (in most cases six or
twelve) although those subscriptions will take less
than a year (or less than two years) to fulfill. The
subscription card in this issue details the new
subscription rate for nine and 18 issues.
As you may have noticed elsewhere in this issue,
CGW has moved to larger quarters. Our new
editorial office address is 515 S. Harbor Blvd., Suite
A, Anaheim, CA 92805 (just down the street from
Disneyland). Please continue to use our P.O. Box
for all correspondence, orders, etc. (P.O. Box 4566,
Anaheim, CA 92803-4566).
Beginning with our last issue (5.5) CGW is being
printed in Erlanger, KY and is mailed from
Cincinnati, OH. This means that East Coast
subscribers will get their issues much faster and
West Coast subscribers will get theirs only slightly
later than before.
CORRECTION
In 5.5, M. Evan Brooks reviewed the Command
Series from Microprose. In the biographical blib
that followed the article we erroneously reported
that Mr. Brooks attended the Army War College.
Although he has completed Command & General
Staff College, he has neither attended nor
completed the Army War College.

by William Harrington
UNDER FIRE! (UF!) is Ralph "T.A.C." Bosson's
sophisticated, highly playable game of tactical
World War II combat. UF! is also a sophisticated
Wargame Construction Set that enables the creative
wargamer to design his own scenarios and battle
fields from the desert killing ground of the
Kasserine Pass in North Africa to the desperate
street battles amid the frozen rubble of Stalingrad,
anywhere your imagination and your Apple II can
take you. UF! is also a gaming "system." Its "open
architecture" is designed to expand and grow with
new maps, scenarios, units and advanced capabilities to keep UF! on the cutting edge of computer
war gaming in months and even years to come!
"OK YOU GUYS, LISTEN UP"
Just as in actual combat it's the little things that
can make all the difference. For example, how the
UF! rule book starts you right off learning the
gaming system by playing a few turns of a sample
scenario from the game! Now you don't have to
feel guilty about booting the disk before you read
the manual. In addition to the rules themselves, the
game manuals include statistics on weaponry, and
interview with the author and even a glossary of GI
"slang".
"SMOKE 'EM IF YA GOT 'EM"
UF! is currently available for Apple II plus, IIe
or IIc computer systems with at least 64K of RAM.
You'll need a self-centering joystick on the II Plus,
optional on the IIe, to enter commands. The system
supports the Mockingboard(tm) sound effect generator for even greater realism.
The "Original Units and Scenario" disk includes
WWII infantry, armor, self propelled artillery and
motorized units from the United States, Germany
and the Soviet Union. Up to 32 units may be engaged at any time. In the future Avalon Hill will
provide "Extended Units Disks" to expand the units
types, nationalities, and weaponry currently available in the game. Game set up begins with the
computer automatically selecting the "Order of Battle" or, optionally players may elect to "Purchase"
their own units. Even the game scale may be adjusted from 12 to 72 meters per position to support
a simple squad level firefight to a full blown armored battle. In addition players may elect a limited supply option to more accurately reflect the
choices commanders must make with never enough
men or material.
Terrain in UF! is multi-level and includes
woods, depressions, rough, stone walls, hedges,
buildings, hills, open country, water and roads.
Bosson has even included the choice of season to

further add to the realism. In winter frozen rivers
may be crossed while defoliated trees no longer
provide adequate cover. In spring the flooded rivers
turn treacherous. Yes you can even lose a vehicle in
the river if you're not careful! Some terrain types
may even be demolished including roads, bridges,
buildings and stone walls. Create a road block and
even blow a bride or two. (Hum - might make an
interesting commando scenario out of that!)
"KILROY WAS HERE!"
Your weapons include rifles, assorted machine
guns, bazookas, panzerfausts, flamethrowers, mortars, artillery and even the occasional satchel
charge. Vehicle types include a wide range of
tanks, self propelled guns, tank destroyers and assorted trucks and supply vehicles. Infantry squad
types include standard infantry, mountain troops,
engineers and even paratroops.
One very innovative concept is the deliberate
lack of "Victory" conditions. In UF! victory is
whatever the player or players decide it is. Victory
belongs to who ever is left to claim it. Each scenario includes a "mission" or objective, such as a
meeting engagement, attempted breakout or dogged
defense. How well that objective was carried out is
for the players to decide. Victory or defeat in UF!
can be just as certain or as dubious as battle so often is amid the confusion and uncertainty of combat.
Entirely menu driven, the game's options are
selected with a flick of the joystick or a single
keystroke. Gone is the traditional Hex grid. The
UF! map employs an invisible background grid to
regulate movement with approximately 3,000
available positions! Use the keyboard or simply
point your joystick in the proper direction, hit the
fire button and watch as your units "Move Out".The
hi-res color maps portray multi-level terrain, assorted buildings and motorized, armored and infantry units, all in three-dimensional overhead
perspective. In addition UF includes a "Zoom" feature that allows the player to select one of three
different views, a Situation Map that provides an
overall panorama, a Strategic Map that offers a
1/12 view of the Situation Map and finally a Tactical Map that provides an even closer view! UF!

Continued on pg. 46

Quest of the Avatar

by Scorpia
You sit in the old gypsy woman's wagon, your
head swimming from the heavy incense, your hands
tightly clutching a small silver ankh. On the table
before you lie two cards, one representing the
virtue of Valor, the other representing the virtue of
Justice. As though from a distance, the gypsy's
voice floats across to you, saying: "Consider this:
Thou halt been sent to secure a needed treaty with
a distant lord. Thy host is agreeable to the proposal,
but insults thy country at dinner. Dost thou: a)
Valiantly bear the slurs or b) Justly rise and demand an apology?".
For long moments you sit, considering your
answer. This is the last of seven such questions, and
you aren't really sure yet what's going on here. But
you have the feeling that whatever it is, it's very
important. So you make your final choice, and you
hear the gypsy again: "Thy path has been chosen".
Before you can ask a question of your own, everything turns dark, and when you can see again, you
find yourself in a different land, as a different
person...
So begins Ultima IV - Quest of the Avatar. You,
an ordinary person, are called upon to make the
long and arduous journey that will culminate in
your becoming an Avatar, a perfect mortal. There
is no central evil to defeat here; no Mondain, no
Minax, no Exodus awaits you. Rather, this is a
quest where you seek to perfect your inner being,
to become enlightened in the eight virtues of Compassion, Valor, Honor, Justice, Humility, Sacrifice,
Spirituality, and Honesty.

Which is not to say there's no evil in the world!
Monsters abound, and you will do much fighting
before your quest is over. But while combat is important, the focus of the game remains your character's development in the eight attributes. And believe me, the game is watching your every action. It
knows when you lie, cheat, or steal, and you will
be penalized accordingly. Thieves do not become
Avatars. Nor do cowards or liars. You will have to
walk the straight and narrow path to get through
this one.
Fortunately, you don't have to do it alone. As
you proceed on your journey, you will find others
who will join you, until you have eight altogether
in your party, one from each of the major professions: Shepherd, Tinker, Bard, Druid, Fighter,
Ranger, Paladin, and Mage. You will start out in
one of these professions yourself. Which one is determined by your answers to the seven questions
that the gypsy woman asks you at the beginning of
the game. Thus your character is determined by
your own personal ethics, rather than simply
choosing a character at will.

You begin, alone, outside your home town
(which varies according to profession) with some
food, money, armor, and a weapon. You will not
necessarily be level one; the closer your answers are
to the 'ideal' of the profession, the higher your

starting level will be. For instance, my Fighter began at level three, and my Mage at level two.
Check your stats at the beginning so you know
what you are and what you have with with you.
Now the quest begins in earnest. You will have
to visit all the towns and villages, as well as dungeons and other places, usually many times. It is
imperative to talk to everyone you meet (and don't
forget those little out of the way places behind
buildings!). There is an amazing amount of information you must acquire about stones, runes,
mantras, shrines, spells, magical items, and other
things, and it will take you quite some time to do
that. Make a list for each town and village of the
people you meet there and what they have to say.
Often, a person in one town will refer you to
someone in another town, but they don't always tell
you which one. It's important to know where everyone is so you can get them quickly.
Frequent visits to the castle of Lord British are
also necessary. Lord British can be very helpful to
you in several ways, among them, raising your level
when you have enough experience (this goes for all
members of the party), and healing your party of
injuries. Hawkwind, who resides in the castle, will
tell you how you are doing in regard to your attributes, and how far along you are towards enlightenment in the eight virtues. Talk to him often.
It's a big world out there, so be prepared for a
lot of travelling. There are several ways of getting
around. You can walk, ride horses, sail a ship, go
through the moon gates, or (when you learn how)
cast moon gate spells of your own. In the beginning, of course, you'll have to hoof it or use the
gates. Careful reading of the manual, and equally
careful study of the beautiful map that comes with
the game, will help you to use the gates most efficiently. Some places can only be reached via moon
gates, so it helps to know where you're going.
Unfortunately, as you travel the land, you will
be bothered by all manner of rude pests, such as
orcs, skeletons, rogues, trolls, lava lizards, daemons,
dragons, balrogs, and so on. You'll find a few nasty
types in the oceans, too. At these times, you'll just
have to fight it out. Luckily for you, this time, the
monsters are scaled to your party and experience,
so you needn't worry that your level two Druid will
be up against hordes of orcs or several dragons.
You have a much better chance of surviving an
encounter now, and you can, if necessary, run away
(and the monsters won't follow you if you run from
combat).
As in the previous Ultima, the screen switches

to a close-up of the combat area, and you direct
each member of the party individually. Members
can move, fight, cast spells, or (if they are severely
wounded) be moved off the screen and away from
the fighting (you can't bring them back in again, so
be careful here!). Fighting ends when all the monsters are killed or have fled, or when everyone in
your party is dead or you've run away. Experience
is given only for direct kills by an individual party
member. Wounding doesn't count. You may or may
not get a chest of gold (and only gold) to open, and
as you might guess, they are usually trapped. Treat
them with care.
The best way to handle combat is to get distance
weapons (slings and bows) as soon as you can. Every profession can use a sling, and most can use a
bow. You want to get them monsters before they
get too close to you! Just remember to position your
party members properly; they can only shoot along
straight lines, but monsters can use the diagonals.
One problem with combat is that you usually
end up getting hurt. Fortunately, there are several
ways of healing up. First, you can visit Lord
British, but he may not be close by. If you have
someone in the party who can cast healing spells,
you can be restored in that fashion. You can stop
off at a healing booth in almost any town, but
those are rather expensive. You can also try camping in the outdoors, which will heal in juries (except
poison), however you could also be ambushed while
you sleep (not fun!). The best way to heal up is to
go to almost any town and spend a night in the inn.
They are relatively safe, and usually fairly cheap.
Sooner or later, you'll be visiting the dungeons.
Before you do this, I suggest stocking up on magical mapping gems, as they will make your life
much easier down there. In the depths you will
find much the same types of monsters as above
ground, and most of the time, you can see them
coming (avoiding them, however, is another mat-

ter). The dungeons are divided into corridors,
where you may or may not come across monsters,
and rooms, which are almost always full of them,
and in rooms you will be in combat mode automatically. Make sure you know which way you're
going, because after you leave a room, all the
monsters are regenerated...and you really don't want
to fight them twice, do you? (I didn't think so!)
One thing to watch out for in the dungeons
(especially the Abyss) is hidden doors. These don't
show up on your gems; you have to find them for
yourself, by stepping on a certain part of the floor,
or touching a certain part of a wall. Often, this is
the only way to reach the altar rooms, so it's best
not to overlook them. This is one reason why the
gems are so important. If the map shows you that a
room should lead somewhere, but you don't see a
door in the room leading there, it's a pretty sure
bet that a hidden door is the answer.
And finally, the Abyss. You have all the stones,
you've become a partial Avatar in the eight virtues,
you have all the magical items you need. Now
you're ready for the last stage of the quest, to penetrate to the lowest level of the Abyss, to reach the
Chamber of the Codex, and to read the Codex, thus
proving yourself to be a true Avatar.
Well folks, the Abyss ain't a fun place. It is
mean. It is cruel. It is unforgiving. It is eight levels
of nasty monsters, sneaky traps, and cleverly concealed secret doors. It will take you a long time to
get through this one, and you have to do it all in
one sitting, because you cannot save in the dungeons. So you better be very well prepared before
you attempt it.

You can't have enough reagents (which you need
to cast spells). Mix up batches of spells beforehand,
and buy more reagents before you go in. You will
be casting a lot of spells as you go through the
Abyss, and you don't want to run out of reagents
when you're near your goal (or at any other time,
for that matter). Bring lots of gems with you, and
map out each level as you reach it. Correct mapping is crucial down there; one wrong turn, and
you will find yourself going in circles, fighting the
same monsters over and over again.
Keep in mind, however, that you aren't here to
fight; your goal is to get down to the Codex Chamber as quickly as possible. Fight only when you
have to, and run through rooms wherever you can.
Often it is not necessary to kill eery monster in a
room to get by; take out the really dangerous ones
and keep going. Of course, there will be times
when you have to wipe out the entire nest of nas-

ties, since you can't search for secret doors with
monsters pounding on you (you could try, but I
don't recommend it), and you can't move very well
when the monsters are blocking your way. Otherwise, though, the watchword is: keep moving!
So, here you are (what's left of you) at the
Codex door. Is it over? Not quite. Now, you have
to prove you're an Avatar... as though everything
you've been through wasn't enough! You have to
answer twelve questions before you can read the
Codex... and you had better be right the first time
you answer each one. This is especially true for the
early Apple versions. If you give a wrong answer,
or make a typo, you will be kicked out of the
Abyss entirely, and you will have to go through it
all over again, the whole eight levels (scream). Lord
British is making a change to this for future versions (which may be out by the time you read this),
and you'll get a second chance if you blow it the
first time. However, just to be on the safe side (if
there is such a thing), take your time, and answer
each question carefully... very carefully!
If any fault can be found in this incredible
game, it would be in the fact that experience is
gained only from combat, and in the later stages of
the adventure, this tends to become a little tedious.
Since the major theme of the game is the development of your character's virtues, it might have been
a good idea to allow experience to be granted for
accomplishing certain tasks, as well as vanquishing
monsters, at least insofar as the major character
(you) is concerned. Still, this is a relatively minor
quibble, since there are ways to avoid excessive
fighting with the moon gate spell, and the game
design and execution overall simply dwarfs petty
complaints.
So, as you can see, there is a lot to this one.
Fortunately, everything you need to know can be
found in the two manuals - The History of Brittania and The Book of Magic Spells - or by talking
to the various characters in the game. All the information is available; you just have to dig it out.
So expect to be spending quite some time with this
epic... it's a major undertaking!
The game comes on two double-sided disks,
along with the two manuals, command card, and
beautiful (and useful) cloth map. Single or dual
drives are supported; two drives are recommended.
A minimum of 64K is required to run the program.
Bottom line: What are you waiting for? This will
be a classic... go get it!!
Copyright (c) 1985 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

PEEK (Con.)
INCA: Text adventure in the TimeQuest
series. You are on an adventure to find
the treasures of the Incas. Contains a
manuscript which provides clues and
tips. Apple, IBM. ($49.95). Circle #24
COMPUTER NOVEL
CONSTRUCTION SET: A toolkit for
users who want to design their own text
adventures. The Mac version uses windows and a mouse to speed up design.
Part of the TimeQuest series. Mac,
Apple, IBM. ($49.95).
Circle #25
Simon & Schuster
Simon & Schuster Bldg.
1230 Avenue of the Americas
New York, NY 10020
212-245-6400
STAR TREK: THE KOBAYASHI
ALTERNATIVE: Interactive text adventure game. As Captain Kirk your job
is to recover a missing Federation ship.
Success depends on balancing force with
diplomacy. Window techniques provide
multiple channels of information to the
player, along with a "personality
database" for each Star Trek character.
C-64, Apple, IBM. ($39.95). Circle #26
Simpletec, Inc.
1852 Century Place, #130
Atlanta, GA 30345
404-320-9252
SHUTTLE DESIGNER: Created by
NASA aerospace engineers in Huntsville,
AL. Teaches basic rocket development
theory as you experiment with various
designs and then watch a graphic simulation of take off and orbit. A sophisticated package. Apple, IBM. ($39.95)
Circle #27
Strategic Games Publications
227 Sinclair Avenue
Staten Island, NY 10312
SKARN'S KEEP: Standard text adventure. Meet a wizard. Go on a quest. Find
a ring. Make a fortune. Yawn. C-64.
Circle #28

Year In

column last issue), for the novice player,
and Spellbreaker, just arriving in the
stores as I write this (need you ask? Naturally it will be in a future column!).
Spellbreaker is the final chapter in the
Enchanter trilogy, and is designed for the
experienced adventurer.
Sierra/Online published King's Quest
II - Romancing The Throne, the sequel to
their popular King's Quest adventure. This
time around, King Graham is looking for a
wife, and naturally his quest will not be an
easy one. Neat graphics and some tricky
puzzles should keep you on the hunt for
awhile. For the intermediate adventurer.
Synapse/Broderbund released two
more titles in their "Electronic Novel" series: Brimstone and Essex. Both are similar

Review
Step right in! Don't mind the confusion; we haven't quite finished cleaning up
after all the holiday celebrations (who put
those canapes in the disk drive???), but we
did manage to keep your favorite chair free
and clear. So just settle in by the fireplace,
try not to stare at Fred's shrunken-head
garland (we simply couldn't persuade him
not to hang it up), and we'll take a look
back at adventure gaming in 1985.
For much of the year, it was pretty dry
as far as adventures were concerned; few
games of note were published, and it
wasn't until late summer into fall that
things began to pep up a bit. Then four
major games came out, practically on each
others heels: Electronic Arts' The Bard's
Tale (reviewed last issue); Lord British's
long-awaited Ultima IV (reviewed this issue), Simon and Schuster's Star Trek adventure The Kobayashi Alternative
(review next issue), and Infocom's groundbreaking A Mind Forever Voyaging (in a

future issue).
These four games in themselves provide a hefty feast for the starved adventurer, and guarantee many hours of play-

ing pleasure and frustration. And for those
who might prefer "lighter eating", a fairly
decent selection of games in the novice to
experienced range were also available.
Penguin Software came out with two
games in the novice-to-intermediate level,
RingQuest (a followup to The Quest, and
much better), and Crimson Crown (a followup to Transylvania). While neither of
these will give the very experienced player
much trouble, the graphics (as might be
expected from Penguin) are quite good,
and the games are suitable for anyone who
feels in the mood for some light adventuring.
Bantam Books published an interesting, and quite different, graphic adventure,
I, Damiano. It takes place in medieval
Italy, and the emphasis is more on the
good and evil actions of the main character, Damiano (that's you), rather than on
problem-solving per se. Still there are
many tricky situations in the game that
require careful thought (and occasionally
fast action). While it's not to everyone's
taste, if you're looking for something a little bit different, you might want to check
this one out.
Infocom, of course, was not idle. Aside
from Mind, two new games came from
their stable: Wishbringer (discussed in my

to Mindwheel in design and packaging,
including a hard-bound book from which
you enter a randomly-chosen word in order to play the game (and which seems to
be its only function in Brimstone). In
Brimstone, you take the part of a knight of
the Round Table, Sir Gawain, and embark
on a mysterious dream-adventure. In Essex, you command a spaceship sent on a
search and rescue mission to save the
galaxy from destruction. Both are intermediate and up level, and would be more
fun to play if it were not for the excessive
disk access (a problem that also plagued
Mindwheel), which becomes annoying,
even exasperating, after awhile. Wear a
good pair of earmuffs when you play these
games.
A new company, Angelsoft/Mindscape,
has arrived on the scene with several intriguing adventures, billed as "interactive
fiction", including The Mist, Voodoo Island, and Forbidden Castle. The Mist is
based on the Stephen King book of the
same name. A mysterious white fog engulfs
a Maine resort town, trapping several people (yourself included) inside a supermarket. Going outside is dangerous, for within
the mist are all manner of grotesque monsters, most of them giant insects. It's up to
you to do something about it, before the
mist spreads even further. In Voodoo Island, you are shipwrecked and washed up
on the beach of a small island. It is not, as
you might have guessed, your typical
tourist resort. A very un-nice place to

visit, and you sure don't want to live there
(kinda) as a zombie, so you best not stay
too long. Too bad there doesn't seem to be
any boats around. Forbidden Castle takes
you to a strange and mysterious fortress,
populated by equally strange and mysterious characters. What's going on? Well,
you'll just have to pay a visit to the place
and find out for yourself; just make sure
you keep clear of the ogre. All of these are
intermediate and up level.
The big question of 1985 was (and still
is) "What about Wizardry IV, The Return
of Werdna?". Good question. I wish I had
the answer. I've heard estimates ranging
from "soon" to "next fall at the earliest".
Sir-Tech sent me a catalogue of their
products, and Werdna was listed there,
along with a price. However, I wouldn't
send any money off for it just yet; this has
been one of the most-delayed games in
adventure history (surpassing even the
year-long wait for Ultima IV), and the
date of its release is still up in the air.
Better to hang on to your money, and wait
for it to start showing up in the stores.
While you're waiting, Bard's Tale and Ultima IV should help to keep you occupied... very occupied!
One interesting thing to note is that
most of the above games are all-text. For
awhile, there had been a big move towards
graphic adventures, and everyone was
rushing to put pretty pictures in their
games. Now it seems as though the pendulum is swinging back the other way, to
text-only, perhaps due, in part, to the
phenomenal success of Infocom. Will this
trend continue? Perhaps. But the introduction of the Atari ST and the Commodore Amiga, with their superb (and I
mean superb!) graphics, may once again
turn the tide back to graphics. 1986 is going to be a very interesting year!
Well, I see by the invisible clock on the
wall that it's just about closing time here
at the Tale. Next issue, we return to our
usual format, but I did want to bring to
your attention some games you might have
missed. Come by again next time, when I
just might (can't promise!) have Spellbreaker for you!
The new year has brought some
changes to my life as well. I am no longer
associated with CompuServe, and you can
no longer reach me there. However, I am
available on the following systems:
DELPHI: Visit the GameSig, found
under the Groups and Clubs menu. Just
type GR GAM from the MAIN> menu to
get there.
GENIE: Drop into the Games
RoundTable. Type: SCORPIA (how about
that!) to reach the Games RT.
Source: Send SMAIL to ST1030.
And, of course, there's good (?) old US
Mail:
Scorpia
P.O. Box 338
Gracie Station
New York, NY 10028
Remember if you are writing from the
United States, to enclose a stamped, selfaddressed envelope.
Until next time, happy adventuring!!
Copyright (c) 1986 by Scorpia, all
rights reserved.

THE COMMODORE KEY

Roy Wagner
IT'S REAL AND IT'S HERE
The AMIGA from Commodore has
arrived and it is everything and more than
you have read and heard. You have to see
and hear it yourself to know why everyone
is so excited. The colors are dazzling and
the sound is great (four voices in stereo!).
Technical documentation and software
are in short supply, but by the time you
read this, only two months after its
release, the first titles in what should be a
tidal wave of new software will be arriving.
Everyone is amazed at the realism of
JET (a jet simulator) from subLOGIC.
Electronic Arts has several titles, some old
and some new for the Amiga. Infocom will
have all of its titles available. Next issue
we will review some of the new titles.
NOT WHAT IT SEEMS
Originally, the term "hacker" referred
to an inquisitive person who learned all
they could about a computer or a piece of
software. The negative connotations of the
illegal use of a computer came later. Based
on the popular use of this word,
Activision has released the game
HACKER. It is not all it may seem to
imply by its name. I expected a TEXT
"adventure" of trying to get into a
computer system to determine for what
criminal purpose it is being used. It turns
out to be more of a graphic adventure,
including use of a joystick.
The main purpose is to figure out what
you need to do in certain situations and
then repeat that action several times to a
successful conclusion. The game is a real
challenge (some read that frustrating). A
clue sheet is available from Activision and
they even have an 800 number "Hacker
Help Hotline". As they say "Be Patient, be
Attentive, be a Hero".
PLAY IT AGAIN
Just under twenty years ago, on large
mainframe systems, programs started to
appear that were less "work" and more

"fun and games". These were to evolve
into the games we now know. Some of
these early games can certainly be
considered classics.
GOLDEN OLDIES (Volume 1) from
Software Country contains four true
classics. They have personally contacted
the ORIGINAL programmers and obtained
rights to the original code and concepts for
these games. They are now paying them
royalties (justly deserved) where none
were before. The games found their way
into the "public domain" and as such lost
much of their original content.
Included is the certified authentic
version of the ORIGINAL ADVENTURE
(Colossal Cave) by Will Crowther and Don
Woods. This game, in concept, lead to
ZORK and all that followed it. There is
ELIZA, whose parser carries on a Rogerian
therapy session with you. It represents a
very early demonstration of Artificial
Intelligence before the term was even
popular. The game of LIFE represents
computer simulation with profound effects
from a few simple rules. Finally we have
PONG, the first home video game that led
the way to home computing, which
brought us to where we are today.
These games are pure and simple, yet
still fun to play and enjoy. A new release
for the C64 will include use of a joystick.
The Amiga version will soon be released
and will add some new features.

The only complaint J have with the
game is the lack of a save game feature for
the War Patrol scenarios. Otherwise, the
game is so realistic that when you need to
go real deep to avoid some nasty depth
charges, you might actually feel the need
to swallow and pop your ears. My sub is
getting ready to pull out of the base right
now. Happy sailing. C-64, Apple /One
player /Written by Sid Meier /$39.95
/Microprose, Hunt Valley, MD

SILENT
SERVICE
by Rick Teverbaugh

Silent Service (SS) isn't the first submarine simulation. But it is easily the best
for its simplicity of use and execution.
Sid Meier, who also did the highlysuccessful F-15 Strike Eagle, designed SS
with careful consideration to both the requirements for quick tactical thinking and
the patience necessary to command a slow
stalking submarine. Successful pre-battle
planning is necessary to give your vessel
the greatest opportunity to wrecking
havoc upon the enemy, while your grasp of
the fast changing situation once combat
has begun will mean the difference between a frustrated escort and a sunk submarine.
In preparing the game, he not only
talked with current and former submarine
commanders, but he actually examined
World War II submarines. That could account for the tremendously realistic feel of
the game, even while it is played at the
easiest of levels.

There are three different types of scenarios. There is the Torpedo/Gun Practice, where you duck shoot at four old
cargo ships. The purpose of this "scenario"
is to help the beginner find his way around
the ship and to figure out how the offensive weaponry functions.
The second group of scenarios simulate
actual situations where a sub would attack
a convoy. This requires some defensive
maneuvering and in some cases out-andout retreat in addition to the offensive
scenarios. There are six such scenarios included.
Finally there are the six War Patrols.
In this arrangement, you'll begin at a
submarine base at Midway, Brisbane or
Freemantle and seek out the enemy. You
then do as much damage as possible and
return safely to the base.
There are four selectable skill levels.
The Midshipman gives the beginner a
challenging, but not overwhelming taste of
the game. Lieutenant is a bit harder.
Commander is set to be historically accurate and Captain is intended only for
someone with his sea legs well set under
him.
There are seven "Reality Levels". Re-

Coming Next Issue:
SILENT SERVICE Designer's
Notes by Sid Meier

ality Levels toggle such options as limited
visibility, convoy zig-zags, dud torpedoes,
port repairs only, expert destroyers, convoy search and angle-on-bow input. Not
only does the game get more difficult the
more of these options that are switched on,
but the game also gets that much more realistic.
Depending on how many of these options are selected and on the difficulty
level picked, the computer will assign and
overall difficulty factor. How much tonnage you sink during a game will be mixed
with this difficulty ranking to determine
your ranking in the "Submariner's Hall of
Fare."
One of the most interesting features of
SS is the multiple screen setup, with each
screen constantly being updated with new
information all the time. The first stop is
the Conning Tower. From there the other
screen can be accessed. The tower contains
the attack periscope, the map, gauges and
the controls of the sub.
Getting from the tower to any of these
other screens can be accomplished by use
of joystick or keyboard. Once the keys are
memorized I found the keyboard a much
more efficient choice.
The first stop from the tower should be
the bridge. From the bridge you can sight
the enemy and go into the attack mode
with torpedoes or deck guns. There are 15
different gauges available, giving information like depth, number of torpedoes, fuel,
water temperature, compass, throttle and
clock. There is a quartermaster's log that
keeps track of your progress. There are
two different sets of maps, one for use in
all scenarios and the other for War Patrol
outings only. From the tower you can also
get damage reports.
Much of the damage you do and much
that is done to your ship, is brought to life
through the use of sounds. For instance,
you'll hear a splash when the depth
charges are dropped and a pinging sound
when a destroyers sonar picks you up.
One minute of real time takes about 15
seconds with the game, but if you desire a
quicker timetable, that option is also
available. The program will automatically
slow down when conflict arises.

A NARRATIVE REPLAY
by M. Evan Brooks

INTRODUCTION
This article will provide a narrative account of
replay of the "Attack Toward Kiev" scenario from
Kampfgruppe. This is a computer-controlled
Russian assault of thirty turns. The action is
reported from the German vantage point. Although
the terrain is constant, visibility is variable; in the
situation herein, visibility was limited to 9.

The following "Action Report" [submitted by
Hauptmann Otto von Kelgen, senior officer
surviving] delineates game events with each
paragraph corresponding to the particular game
turn.
[1] Herr Colonel Meyer has established our
positions in the woodline. In order to minimize
reaction times, all units have prepared supplemental
fallback positions (thereby eliminating any delay)
on an as-needed basis. The attached armor units
have been called up for a reinforcing role;
however, knowing of their positions and the poor
road access, we assume that the armor will not
arrive for at least twenty (20) minutes. All infantry

and machine gun units are to open fire at 400 m.;
this will fix the enemy in the open, and hopefully
delay his entrance into the protective cover of the
woods. In general, the Soviets advanced over the
entire front; one of our platoons opened fire in the
center, but its long-ranged sniping proved
ineffectual. The net effect was to draw down
massive Soviet artillery fire upon the hapless
platoon; luckily, its effect was minimal. Soviet
artillery plastered the woodline, but again, without
effect.
[2] Long-range fires along the entire front begin.
Effects on both sides are minimal, with a SU-85
being destroyed, but simultaneously, we lose two
HMGs and an SG-IIIG. However, Soviet armor
penetrates the southern sector of the front,
bypassing our hedgehog positions.
[3] Artillery priorities are shifted to maximize
coverage in the center. Heavy artillery destroys
most of an SU-85 platoon, with infantry
panzerfausts completing the job. In the north, a
HMG suppresses a Soviet mortar unit, and in fact
destroys an 82mm tube. But the bulk of the
fighting occurs in the center; Soviet armor
penetrated to the crossroads (GC4511), but close
assaults by infantry tank-killer teams armed with
panzerfausts destroy nine T-34/76C tanks at no
cost to our units. Based upon G2 estimates, we have
destroyed at least 20% of Soviet armor at little cost
to ourselves.
[4] The Soviets pressed their assault. Primary
targets were our HMGs, and the massive volume of
Soviet fire began to have its effect. Four HMGs
were destroyed, and Soviet armor did overrun and
annihilate one of our infantry platoons (14). But our
artillery destroyed 2K Vs (north center), with our
infantry destroying the rest of the tank platoon in
close assaults. Again, the northern HMGs
suppressed the enemy mortars and destroyed
another tube.

[5] Soviet assaults in the center begin to pay off.
While the northern offensive is stalled, with Soviet
troops being pinned down by fire in the open, in
the center and south, our defensive positions begin
to crumble and collapse. Soviet armor spearheads
the assaults, and while they are rendered hors de
combat, their prioritization of combat assaults on
HMG and AT positions will have a cumulative

effect. Three gun positions are destroyed, as well as
a covering infantry platoon (G2). Soviet infantry
losses are minimal, but they absorb the losses of 4
T-34s and 3 SU-85s.
[6] Due to the collapse in the south, HQ and
HMG elements are given the order to withdraw.

Soviet armor has in effect destroyed the southern
sector; Herr Colonel is concerned about the
possibility of a drive towards Kiev by these
breakthrough elements. Two more infantry platoons
are destroyed, but their sacrifice has destroyed
another two T-34s. Soviet artillery fires are
concentrated on gun positions, while our fires
concentrate on choke points.
[7] Withdrawal of the HQ elements in the south
was too late. Soviet forces have overrun the HQ
and its transport (FO-F1). But the south is a decoy;
if Soviet forces can be lured there, the terrain itself
will win our battle for us. But the collapse of the

center would be catastrophic. Given the importance
of the center and its current state, orders to
northern infantry units are sent which call for
massive reinforcements to the center. As to our
armor: it is moving as rapidly as possible to achieve
a linkup with the beleaguered infantry, but the
time element is critical.
[8] Our northern HMG finally destroyed that
82mm mortar unit. But this action was isolated.
Remnants of Soviet armor continue to eliminate our
gun positions. The sheer weight of Soviet forces
may compel their victory without our armor
reinforcements.
[9] SMGs are being hunted down and destroyed
by Soviet armor in the center and south. The only
bright spot is that the Soviet breakthrough in the
south has been used to reinforce the assault in the
center. Although this is critical for the center, it
does mass Soviet forces. We do not know if we
could stop the Soviets if their breakthrough
elements had proceeded independently.
[10] We begin to take large number of infantry
casualties. Our infantry in the south has ceased to
exist, and the platoon covering the crossroads has
been destroyed. The Soviet breakthrough may be
imminent!
[11] Our forces have dug in, and are stopping
the Soviet advance. Although the remnants of an
infantry platoon are destroyed in the south, our
heavy artillery in the center destroys two SU-85s,
while the infantry close-assaults and destroys three
T-34s.

[12] Soviet armor has seized the town (GC4512)
covering the crossroads. Another platoon is overrun
(H4), but two T-34 tanks are killed by close
assaults and artillery, and five KV-ICs are overrun
by infantry panzerfaust attacks. Although the south
defensive barrier is destroyed, the critical action is
in the town. Only here can the Soviets achieve their
breakthrough to recapture Kiev. German armor is
attempting to reinforce, but it is still out of
supporting range.
[13] The battle for the town continues to rage.
Infantry reinforcements stripped from the north
execute close assaults. Heavy casualties are
incurred in urban fighting (2 platoons being
destroyed: D2,E2), but German artillery destroys
the command element of the tank company (BO).
Yet, the Russians retain control of the town and the
crossroads.
[14] Major Soviet infantry assaults result in the
virtual destruction of two platoons. But, as Soviet
armor begins its advance down the road towards
Kiev, they suffer serious casualties (four T-34s and
four KVs). Most of the armor losses are incurred
by panzerfaust attacks; in addition to the armor
losses, a Russian infantry platoon is overrun by our
forces.
[15] Our armor has arrived, and is shifting into
covering positions. Although the command element
of the PZ-IVh is destroyed by Soviet fires (KO),
the remaining Soviet armor is virtually annihilated,
with losses of seven T-34s, one KV and five SU85s. Soviet infantry forces are still hunting down
HMG positions, but most of our gun positions have
now been destroyed.

[16] Our PZ-IVhs advance into the woodline
west of the town/crossroads, where they overrun
four Russian KVs. Our forces incur little damage,
but the Soviets begin to reel from the cumulative
losses.
[17] Soviet forces are virtually silent as our
forces root out isolated snipers. Casualties are light,

but Russian control of the key terrain means that a
close assault will be required soon.
[18] A Tiger tank and two HMGs are destroyed
(northwest) in their attempt to recapture the town.
[19] German armor suffers increasingly from
Russian fires from the town, losing three Tigers
and three Pz-IVhs. However, the Soviet CP
(command post) has been destroyed by infantry and
artillery fires, thereby sowing confusion in Russian
ranks (and contributing immeasurably to Soviet
delays in execution of orders).
[20] The CP has had to relocate in order to avoid
Russian fires. In addition, Soviet infantry coupled
with heavy artillery destroy a PZ-IVh platoon. Both
sides incur heavy infantry losses (Russian: platoon+;
German: two companies).

[21] German armor moves to bypass the Soviet
defenses in the town and assault from the north.
But simultaneously, Russian forces move into the
north woods and meet the German thrust. Heavy
casualties are taken by both sides, but the town is
recaptured, although held tenuously by our forces.
[22] Remnants of the Tiger tanks are destroyed,
but Soviet losses are becoming to heavy to sustain
the offensive.
[23] The northern sector finally collapses. Held
static for so long, the weight of Soviet troops has
now decimated the defensive forces. The Soviet
forces pour through in an attempt to reinforce the
center and carry on the assault.
[24] Due to the bloodbath in the center, Soviet
forces pull-back in order to consolidate for a final
push. German reaction forces are stretched to the
limit.
[25] Soviet forces, having completed their
consolidation, attempt to retake the town.
[26] The town changes hands once again, as a
German tank platoon is destroyed in the rubble.
[27] German infantry forces (final reserves) are
committed to the woods southwest of the town.
Although overrun by Russian forces, they destroy
the remnants of the Russian offensive. The cost is
high, the battalion CP is overrun with heavy
casualties.

[28] The town is captured by German infantry
forces as Soviet forces no longer retain the strength
of cohesion to offer a strong defense.
[29] The battle begins to die down, as losses on
both sides have rendered further assaults moot.
[30] German forces have consolidated their hold
on the town, and control the central crossroads. The
Soviets have been decisively defeated.

POSTSCRIPT
Historical: Historically, the German forces were
at 40% effective strength after the defense of the
Dnepr River. The weather was sunny and mild for
late autumn; the terrain consisting of heavily
wooded terrain (deciduous and coniferous timber).
At 0600 a Russian artillery barrage commenced for
90 minutes. Reminiscent of World War I, the
intensity of this bombardment shattered the
defenders. The Russian infantry preceded the

armor and requested the tanks to assist in a
breakthrough at the crossroads. Gun positions were
bypassed, being left for the third wave; this posed
little risk due to their dislocation during the
bombardment. By 1000 Russian forces had secured
the hilltop; in four hours, Russian forces had
pushed the Germans back five miles.
As pointed out in German Small Unit Actions in
World War II, if the German commander had
withdrawn his troops from the woodline, they
would have survived the artillery barrage, moved
forward once it lifted, and been ready to repulse
the attack.

The Game: One cannot point to sophistication on
either side. The Russians, committed to an assault,
managed to pull off a replica of a World War I
"over-the-top" and "damn the torpedoes" assault. On
the other hand, German response was awkward and
uncoordinated. A decisive victory by the German
forces was achieved (4406-1648, 2.67). But the most
surprising game aspect of this scenario is the very
poor Russian set-up. Pity the Soviet commander.
His troops are scattered and out of command
control. Even more important, an examination of
battlefield strength and ratio analysis would deter
even the most foolhardy commander from an open
assault, e.g. infantry 1.3:1; armor 2:1; SPG 1.5:1;
guns/mortars .9:1 Usually a ration of at least 3:1 is
the minimum necessary for a successful assault.
Given the ineffectiveness of Russian artillery here
(as opposed to historical), any assault is suicidal -as this replay so amply illustrates.

(sorry) on all 46 screens before she can free
her father from his prison on the last
screen. In addition to mushrooms (fairly
rare) and keys (incredibly common), you
have water squares that Alexandra can
swim in, elevators, trapdoors, and
Bungeling guards (the mice).

Atari Playfield

The game often feels more like an
Infocom puzzle than it does the fast
thinking-on-the-run strategy of Lode
Runner. The Bungeling guards either
patrol a set path (in which case timing is
everything) or they follow you relentlessly
(and, unlike in Lode Runner, there's not
much you can do to outsmart them). The
playing field is multilevel, and much of the
game hinges on two constraints: one,
Alexandra can only jump up or down a
certain distance each time; and, two, you
have to get all the keys to finish a level,
and often they're hidden by the 3-D
geometry or isolated by the playing field
topography. You spend most of the time
figuring out how to get Alexandra to do
something you need her to do. It's an
interesting game if you like to solve
puzzles--but I will not believe that
Bungeling guards wear brown fedoras!
THE FIRST FEW 520ST GAMES

GREGG WILLIAMS

I've seen three ST games, and most of
them suffer from the let's-get-it-out-first-and-they'll-buy-anything syndrome; I
hope that, by the time you read this, there
will be more--and better--games out.

I can't tell you how pleased I am to be
the new Atari columnist for CGW. I've
had at least one Atari since, well, forever. ]
feel it is still technologically the most
sophisticated 8-bit computer around, and
for the money these days, it's unbeatable.
(I say this as a past and current Apple II
owner. For the record, I also own two
Atari 800s, an Atari 400, and an Amiga,
have a Macintosh on my desk, and can get
to an Atari 520ST--with both monitors-down the hall at work.) [Ed. Note: Gregg
is a technical editor for Byte Magazine.]
Even though games don't come out for the
Atari first anymore, when they do, they're
worth waiting for. And the 520ST also
impresses me the more I work with it.
SON OF....
Aren't game sequels fun? I'll let you
guess on this one. I ran across a fairly
interesting game that struck me as odd in
a disturbing, subliminal way, until I made
a certain connection. I don't know--it may
not be true, but I'll let you draw your own
conclusions. The game is vaguely
reminiscent of Atari's coin-op Crystal
Caverns, but it features a small blond girl
picking up keys. There's a cat that, if
caught, awards you with an extra life.
Occasionally, you find mushrooms that,
when eaten, cause the girl to grow twice as
large (and look like a girl drawn by Sir

John Tenniel). The girl's nemeses are one
or more dark figures that, as best I can tell
given the Atari's resolution, look like
brown cartoon mice wearing fedoras.
Does all this remind you of something?
Maybe not, but it reminded me a whole lot
of Alice in Wonderland. (Tenniel did the
illustrations that everyone thinks of when
they imagine Alice, and the mice figures
might represent the Dormouse.) You might
say I'm stretching the point a bit too far,
so let me add this. How likely is it that a
game with girls, mice, cats, and magic
mushrooms should be called "Lode
Runner's Rescue"? It's a nice game but,
frankly, if that game began its life with the
Lode Runner name attached to it, I'm the
Mad Hatter. I think Synapse got this game
from an independent game designer and
slapped the Lode Runner name on it.
It's a pretty nice game, a bit
frustrating, but in the way that many
successful videogames are. As far as Atari
800 graphics go, it's a masterpiece of
programming and visual effects--my hat's
off to the game's author, Josh Scholar. The
game has 46 screens and the capability to
make your own game screens.
During game play, you're looking down
on the screen, much as you do in Zaxxon
or Crystal Caverns. Your joystick controls
Alexandra, the Lode Runner's daughter,
who has to get billions and billions of keys

The worst is Mudpies, from MichTron
(313-334-4700). It's competently
programmed but as forgettable as dozens
of microcomputer arcade games; buy it
only if you have the money to burn. The
next is Flip Side, also from MichTron,
which is a competent implementation of
Othello for one or two players. It's also the
only game that works with both the color
and monochrome monitors; all the other
ST games mentioned here require the color
monitor. The Flip Side documentation
says it's not copy-protected; I didn't try,
but that's nice to know.
The best game of all--a good game by
any standards, perhaps even a classic--is
Hex, from Mark of the Unicorn (617-5762760); unfortunately, it's copy-protected.
(I don't copy software I don't own, but.
this game writes to disk regularly--I want
a backup!) Most of us love and revere
Electronic Arts' Archon, which broke new
ground as an arcade-oriented blend similar
to a mix of chess and shoot-em-up arcade
games. Hex is similar in that it is a
strategy-oriented blend similar to a mix of
(sort of) Othello and Q*bert.
Hex is played on a sloped landscape of
19 hexes that cycle through green, red,
purple, blue, green.... Your player (a
unicorn, naturally) tries to turn all the
hexes green, while your computer
opponents (no two-player option,
unfortunately) try to turn them to purple;
it's a tie if a round lasts more than 100
moves or if the field is turned totally red

Continued on pg. 40

"It's Moscow now behind us men!
Let's die defending Moscow then,
Like our brothers died before us!"
-Soviet poem

by Lew Fisher
In the summer of 1941, the German
Juggernaut easily rolled across Western
Russia, all but obliterating the Russian
army in its path. By the end of September,
Army Group Center stood poised less than
200 miles from the gates of Moscow. The
Germans pressed forward, but heavy rains,
an early but severe winter, and a constant
onslaught of Russian reinforcements
stopped the Germans just a few miles
short of their objective. The following
Russian Winter offensive pushed the Germans back to about 100 miles west of the
Russian capital. Even though the Germans
would again resume the offensive in the
Spring of 1942, they would never fully recover. In the Summer of 1943, the battle of
Kursk would seal the fate of Nazi Germany.
This battle, in the latter part of 1941,
for the Russian capital, is the subject of
SGP's At The Gates of Moscow
(ATGOM). It is an operational level simulation, with weekly turns, employing division and brigade sized units.
There are three scenarios. The first is
the final German assault on Moscow. The
second is the same but includes the Russian Winter counter-offensive. The third
scenario is the full campaign game.
The game can be played solo
(computer plays the Russian position), two
player, or even as a multiplayer game. The
full color graphics is the best that I've seen
for a wargame on the Apple.
ATGOM offers many features and innovations that not only enhance its realism but depth of play as well.
Not only must the Germans fight the
Russian Army, but they must build garrison units in cities and railroads in the rear
to ward off harassment from Russian partisan units.
When the rains come the German will
be required to allocate 6 infantry divisions
for mud duties (clearing roads, etc.).
Similarly, the first two turns of the
game, Russian units may surrender. If sufficient numbers do, the Germans must re-

move 2 divisions, one turn, to escort the
prisoners to the rear.
In most wargames, each player determines the total strategy for his forces. This
is not entirely the case in this game. Each
German turn Hitler will issue directives such as "take Kursk this turn". Failure to
comply can result in the removal from
command of a valuable leader. Other orders may be to hold a certain position or
not to retreat. The Russian player is burdened with Stalin directives that are similar in nature.

Most operational land games include
some sort of abstract tactical air rules.
ATGOM goes beyond that. Not only is
there offensive air support, defensive air
support and interdiction; but, there is interception of other air units, and for the
Germans, terror bombing. Terror bombing
affects Russian supply as well as attempts
to form militia units.

Another aspect that really adds depth
is leaders. Not only are they mandatory for
command control and activation of units,
but each leader is rated using eight different characteristics: offensive ability,
defensive ability, aggressiveness, organizational skills, political finesse, initiative, independence and ability to get reserve allocations from superiors. This means one
leader may be better able to coordinate an
attack; another may be more adept at defending; while yet another may fail a directive and still retain his command.
A real plus for the game is the artificial
intelligence. For most other computer
wargames, to increase the level of play of
the computer opponent, the computer is
given more replacements, allowed better
combat odds, or some other artificial
advantage. Not so with this game. There
are ten levels of play for the computer. At
higher levels it thinks ahead more moves.
Level ten plays one hell of a game!
Going back to the map, a feature that
really allows for coherent play is the
strategic map display. This feature allows
an overview of the entire map (including
major terrain and known unit positions).
By moving the cursor over a specific area,
then changing to the normal map, one can
easily find and move units; yet keep track
of the entire battle without need for endless scrolling.
All enemy units adjacent to friendly
units are seen on the map. Enemy units
behind the lines have about 35% chance of
being spotted. This percentage will decrease as the weather deteriorates (less
chance for aerial recon). Also, as a friendly
unit moves adjacent to a previously unknown enemy unit, the enemy unit will
immediately appear on the map.
ATGOM uses an alternating, sequential system for movement and combat prefaced with a mutual phase to perform
assorted tasks such as assigning air units,
receiving directives, and other assorted
general actions.
Initiative determines which player goes
first each turn. After the player with the
initiative expends all his supply points
(moving and fighting) or passes, it is the
other player's turn to do the same. This
process is repeated to complete a full turn.
The key to success is supply point management.

As in any good Eastern Front game,
weather is an important factor. During inclement weather air missions are decreased
or not flown at all. Also, as the weather
gets worse, movement gets slower, more
costly, and combat becomes less effective.
But, it becomes even more difficult for the
Germans, as the Russians were prepared
for a harsh winter. As the winter progresses, the Russians will gain the initiative and be able to resume the offensive.
This, to date, is the best land wargame
I've played. However, several things should
be considered before buying it. One, this is

a detailed simulation with each turn taking a long time to play. I recommend this
game to the serious gamer with time on his
hands. Second, although the documentation was well done and easy to digest,
there were many holes and inconsistencies.
The game can be played, but it takes several games to find out exactly what to do
or why certain things are happening.
ATGOM is an excellent effort for the
designer's first computer game. I hope to
see more scenarios using the same map.
Also, they have several other games in the
works. If they are anything like this game

they should prove interesting as well as
innovative.

Apple IIe, or IIc/Computer Version
$45.95, Board Version $20.95/ Author:
David Heath, Mark Korman, Todd
Hochwitz/Publisher: Strategic Games
Publications, Staten Island, NY.
[Ed Note: There are two versions of
ATGOM; a board and a computer version.
The computer game is a translation of the
board game into a computer game format].

steamer near Cairo with the nominal sum of $250
and an invaluable piece of information --the notes
of Primm's many ventures into the dark continent.
Invaluable, due to the many insights it provides
into the ways of the native tribes of Africa's
various regions. Careful attention to this document
will, without a doubt, much increase your chances
for success.

by Stewart McKames
Dear Reader:
This is to inform you that an opportunity of
unprecedented proportions has recently been made
available. Yes, you too can make a place for
yourself in archaeological history by taking up the
offer of the late Hiram Perkins Primm, as
administered by his solicitors, to carry on his search
for the fabled lost tomb of the Egyptian Pharaoh
Ahnk Ahnk into the Heart of Africa. Maps, travel
accommodations to Africa, and other initial meeds
have been provided by the clever and versatile
people at Electronic Arts; the very people through
whom many of you may have arranged expeditions
to the New World in search of the famed Seven
Cities of Gold. I am told by Mr.Winfrid Frump, a
member of the firm of solicitors (Flattery, Frump,
and Flaghorne) representing the estate of the late
Mr.Primm, that they are looking for and
"uncommon person" of "uncommon worthiness" in
order to fulfill the requirements of Mr. Pimm's Will
(which, by the way, leaves all of his rather
considerable fortune to the finder of Ahnk
Ahnk'Tomb, should the legends about the treasures
buried with him prove to be a bit exaggerated.)
What? Discouraged? Never fear, for while you
may think that you could never live up to the no
doubt stringent requirements to qualify as such an
"uncommon" and "uncommonly worthy" person, I
have been assured by another member of the
solicitor firm, Mr. Willoughby Flaghorne, that such
people are much more common than one would
suspect. He, in fact, definitely was heard to
mention something about one being born every
minute!
I must, however, warn you that the task which
lies before you is not an easy one. All that is
known about the tomb is that there exists a legend
of a ninth century BC Pharaoh who had his body
and his vast hoard of gold and jewels hidden
somewhere in Africa. You will be set off the

Two other factors will aid your quest for the
lost tomb. The first is that you will be awarded
cash for any discoveries made while exploring
Africa. Agents for the executors of the estate can
be found in each of the ports identified on the map
provided and will pay you for those noteworthy
discoveries (sources and mouths of rivers, major
mountains, major lakes, etc...) recorded in your
notebook and for general area covered. With careful
rationing, this source of funds should be enough to
keep you from starving. The second factor is that
somewhere out in the trackless waists or steamy
jungles or endless veldt are to be found deposits of
copper, silver, gold, and emeralds, not to mention
the ivory to be found in the legendary Elephant
Graveyard. Each of these commodities will prove
very useful with the natives of a particular region
and all can, of course, be sold in any of the port
cities or in the two interior cities of Timbuktu and
Khartoum.

This brings us to the key to your quest. Ancient
tribal stories may well have preserved some record
of Ahnk Ahnk's final journey. And, if the tribe
knows nothing of the tomb, it may know the
location of one of the above mentioned
commodities. There are three methods of obtaining
this information. You may give the chief a large
quantity of gifts which have been purchased in a
city. The number the chief demands may vary, so
that what one chief accepts may be insufficient for
another. The second method consists of giving the
chief the specific commodity which his tribe
particularly values. Do not, however, offer the

improper commodity, as this may well get you in
more trouble than you can handle. The third
method is the most direct and most dangerous. All
you have to do is pull the gun you bought in the
city on the chief. The chief will tell you the
information you desire but, as a result of your
felonious actions, you have a chance of being
sniped at and robbed of all of your possessions. The
least effect of this choice is to have yourself barred
from the tribe in the future.
Does any of this sound difficult? No? Well, what
if I told you that you had only five years in which
to complete your mission; to explore new regions,
new civilizations; to go where no man has gone
before...(Ah, sorry about that. I don't know what
got into me. But, to continue...) In any case, you
are indeed limited to just five years for your
search. Should you fail in your attempt, another
"uncommon" person will be dispatched in your
place. Oh, and if you hope to be aided by the
reports of your compatriots, you will sadly discover
a remarkable phenomenon: every person has been
told different stories and given different directions
by the many tribes questioned. Inexplicably, no two
journeys seem the same. How this strange situation
is achieved no one knows. The effect is that each
attempt is as if the first.
This brings us to one of the few areas in which
the powers of Ahnk Ahnk may be a bit weak. Due,
no doubt, to the limited number of instructions
able to be placed with those responsible for hiding

Continued on pg. 45

ATARI (Con.)
or blue. Each time you jump on a hex it
turns color, unless it has adjacent hexes of
the same color; then you must jump on
them all to change them to the next color.
You and the computer take turns moving
your pieces--deep thinking is more
important here than fast thinking.
The key to Hex's considerable success
is that, with each round you win, you can
buy a "spell" (or, if you will, "hex"--sorry,
but that's their pun, not mine) that allows
you to bend or break the rules. There are
about 25 spell components that combine to
make over 100 spells, ranging from a cheap
spell that flips a hex 2 or 3 colors to a
super-expensive one (I haven't seen it-this is from the rules) that gives you a
"clone" of yourself that you can control.
The computer sometimes throws more
than one opponent at you, so you
eventually need all the help you can get.
Hex has 120 rounds, and you can save
your player's status at the end of a round.
It's a finely balanced game (very rare, and
hard to do) that has the sense of delight
that I find so wonderful in a game. If I
have to quibble, I have to say that I don't
like the computer being able to pick any
spell it wants to get itself out of a tight
spot. You have only five spells, and it
would be nice to know what spells the
computer has access to--that way, your
move could take those contingencies into
account. As it is, you're arbitrarily at the
program's mercy. But it's a great game,
maybe a classic, and I hope that Mark of
the Unicorn translates it to other machines
(Atari 800 or Amiga, maybe?).
NEXT ISSUE

If all goes well, I should be talking
about the two new Lucasfilm games, The
Eidolon and The Koronis Rift. I've heard
good things about them.
And now, a scoop! When I say
"multiplayer game" or "graphics," who do
you think of? Epyx? Activision? What
about Infocom? No, I'm serious. This
project has been on the boards for over
two years, and it was started by Michael
Berlyn (who's no longer at Infocom) and
Marc Blank; I managed to see it at an
early stage.
"Fooblitzky" is for two to four players,
comes with a playing board and grease
pencil for each player, and is like,
according to Infocom, a cross between Clue
and Mastermind. To quote their ad,
"Fooblitzky combines logic, strategy, and
chance with some of the wackiest
animation on this planet to create a
computerized board game that we swear
on a stack of interactive fiction stories is
FUN."
"Why haven't I seen this ad?" you ask.
You may have, but only if you're on
Infocom's mailing list. They're testmarketing this game for six months, and it
will not be advertised or sold retail for a
while. If you absolutely must have this
game now, call Infocom at 800-262-6868,
and ask for the Atari version of
Fooblitzky; it's $39.95 plus shipping. If all
goes well, I'll have a report on it next
time.

RID #25 (use card at page 8)
[Note: We are skipping #24 in our RID
sequence in order that the RID numbers
will correspond to the new magazine numbering scheme mentioned elsewhere in this
issue.]
On this page a number of games are
listed for evaluation. When evaluating a
game consider such things as PRESENTATION (graphics, sound, packaging,
documentation); GAME DESIGN (design,
playability, interesting?); LIFE (does the
game wear well?).
For each game you rate, place a 1
(terrible) through 9 (outstanding) next to
the appropriate number. Leave blank any
game which you have not played enough
to have formed an opinion.
In addition to games, we have listed a
few items about the magazine itself that
we would like you to rate on the same
scale.

Continued from pg. 38
his Tomb (legend suggests this limit to have been
64K), there appears to be some favorite locations in
Africa for the Tomb or the various deposits to be
found. Granted that there are still a very large
number of locations available, it does give a bit of
a lift to ones learning curve.
But, enough grumbling. Electronic Arts have
given us an opportunity to experience something
which none of the participants will soon forget.
The ease with which we may perform any of the
actions or interactions needed with the aid of
nothing except a trusty Joystick (not included) adds
much to the appreciation of the high quality
graphics to be found in the Heart of Africa. In
fact, so interesting and enjoyable is the quest, that
some have made it a point of honor to seek out all
of the deposits before finding the Tomb and ending
the quest. Another stalwart explorer set himself the
additional goal of finding every mountain peak of
fame and the source of every great river. Any
number of such private quests are possible, which
only adds to the "worthiness" of this singular
opportunity. For those of you who enjoyed the
thrill of discovery as you found new territories to
the far west of Spain and for all others who long
for an adventure the like of which movies are made
(Where is Stewart Granger when you need him?),
this journey into the Heart Of Africa may be just
the thing.

UNDER FIRE!
Continued from pg. 11

even allows garners to choose between two different
scrolling systems to navigate around the maps! Let's
just say you'll love the view!

UF! automatically determines how far a particular unit may move in the time allotted and counts
off the number of time periods (24 per turn) a unit
will require to reach its assigned position. Movement may even extend into the next turn. Players
may choose either standard movement or
"Scounting", a movement option that simulates combat units carefully using cover and terrain to the
best advantage to avoid revealing themselves during
movement.
During the Execution Phase the computer determines Line of Sight between units. This "Double

Blind" system permits units to sight opposing forces
while remaining concealed themselves. In addition
terrain may create blind spots, such as reverse
slopes, and scenarios set in different season will in
turn offer different perspectives. Defoliated trees in
Fall for example offer less concealment to emplaced
troops and vehicles. Units, when sighted by enemy
forces will be revealed on the UF! map board.
Should, however, your units lose "sight" of the
enemy they will just as promptly disappear!
Combat control, or just what, where and when a
unit fires at the enemy, may be either "player"
controlled, "computer" controlled or "Leader Controlled." This last is a game option that neatly simulates command control limitations of small unit
combat. Only those units within 100 meters will be
directly under your control as combat leader, the
rest of your combat teams orders will come from
your trusty computer!
UF! brings a wealth of detail to game play.
Combat units may be either "Green", "Seasoned" or
"Crack". The more experienced a unit the more
accurate its fire, and the less likely it will break
under pressure and the more likely it will achieve
its objective. Units in UF! are "burdened" (Anyone
who ever labored under a full field pack knows
what that means!) by the weight of their supplies,
weapons and ammunition. Once at their objective
units may deploy for combat and even "dig in," improving their positions and making life generally
miserable for the units assigned to clear them out.
Squads with more than one weapons type can even
elect to use multiple weapons firing on different
targets. Should a tank or vehicle suffer damage its
surviving crew can "bail out" of the wrecked vehicle and slog along with the infantry. One very nice
touch is the concept of unit density. Especially at
the lower game scales squads can suffer greater
casualties if they're not sufficiently spread out.
"OK YOU GUYS, WHO'S GOING TO FALL ON
THE GRENADE?"
UF! is a superb simulation of WWII tactical
combat that is as playable as it is detailed. It
probably says something that the author researched
UF! at West Point, gathering a wealth of data and
statistics to insure that the game faithfully recreates
the "feel" of squad level combat. Indeed Ralph
Bosson has combined a superb gaming system, dazzling graphics, & sound, an innovative design and
finally a challenging solitaire opponent. As a game
design system UF! offers some of its greatest potential. Garners can design scenarios from scratch,
build their own combat teams, "buy" their equipment, weapons and vehicles, create their own maps
and finally determine the games objectives and
victory conditions. And all of this on an 8-bit Apple II! A must for Apple computer wargamers.

[Ed. Note: We agree with the reviewer. UF! is a
very good game (the best from AH yet!) and should
easily end up in the top 10 on our RID rating chart.
However, we feel the game is too slow. A speed-up
card like SPEED DEMON(tm) helps, but even then
it seems slow at times. This problem aside, we agree
that UF! is a must for Apple computer wargamers.]

The new year brings us yet another chapter in
the continuing saga of RID. The new items this issue are machine(s) and average response.
"Machines" is self-explanatory, with ALL denoting
the machines supported by CGW. It does not refer
to such wonderful machines as Adam, Osborne or

the T199. Average response is the average number
of readers rating a particular game. For example,
Kampfgruppe has been rated three times and generated an average of 139 responses per time rated.
Readers may use this figure to get a feel for the
statistical relevance of a particular rating.

