March 1992

Number 92

Features
20
The Prognosis on Computer Entertainment
Part I of a report on new trends in computer games.

33
No Quarter Asked
Villa Crespo's Stanford Wong's Video Poker.
by Michael S. Lasky

34
Where Is There?
Stanley Trevena unlocks EA's Are We There Yet?

44
Semanticizing on SimAnt
Maxwell Eden colonizes Maxis' SimAnt.

52
Tile a While
Brad Andrews solves Inline Design's Tesserae.

56
More than Lightspeed
Microprose's Hyperspeed expands the galaxy.
by Stanley Trevena

64
What Do the Simple Games Do?
Public domain role-playing games stick to basics.
by Gerald Graef

68
Design Your Own Train
Abracadata transforms a new design out of the old.
by Russell Sipe

More Features
72
Facing A Murder! Rap
David Wilson takes the stand for U.S. Gold's Murder!

74
"Singe" You Mention It
ReadySoft's Dragon's Lair II: Escape from Singe's castle.
by Allen Greenberg

78
Magical History Tour
Russell Sipe takes us back to "Once Upon A Time...."

86
Aces of the Pacific
CGWs editorial staff enlists in the new Dynamix air force.

90
Koei's L'Empereur
Will M. Evan Brooks meet his Waterloo?

Departments
8
Taking a Peek
16A (Margin of Insert)
Questions for the CGW Poll
18
Rumors
36
Scorpion's View (Elvira II)
40
Over There (European Games Report)
48
The CGW Poll
50
PC Research/SPA Top Games
60
Scorpion's Tale (The Legend of Robin Hood)
80
From the Cockpit
(Hardware for Flight Simulations)
84
Computer Wargaming World's
"Broadsides & Gripeshot"
96
Editorial (What does "virtual" really mean?)

I
I

Taking a Peek

Cineplay Interactive
Portland, OR
FREE D.C.!: In the distant future, the
robots have taken over and are studying
humans in the "natural habitat" around
the ruins of Washington, D.C. However,
one human wants to free D.C., and the
'bots are worried. Enter our hero, Avery
Zedd, a cryogenically-sealed private dick
from the early 21st century, who has
been thawed out to find the troublemakers. This adventure game stresses
relationships and attitudes more than puzzle-solving and item-collecting. Digitized
live actors and Claymation characters,
complete with stereo sound, work
together in this professionally scripted
story. $59.95 (IBM). Circle Reader Service #1.
Disney Software
Burbank, CA
BEAUTY AND THE BEAST PRINT KIT:
For children ages five and up, this is
another in the long line of Disney print
kits. Using their standard point-and-click/

keyboard interface, youngsters can use
the software to make the usual greeting
cards, bookmarks, invitations and more.
Carefully tested for a variety of printers,
the price is right at only $19.95 (IBM).
Circle Reader Service #2.
MICKEY'S MEMORY CHALLENGE: This
is a straightforward matching game for
children (ages five and up) which works
with Windows 3.0 and supports the
AdLib sound card. Children can play
alone, against friends or against Disney
characters (who have various levels of
ability at playing). Objects, words and Disney characters can be matched and the
optional timer might make for more of a
challenge to older kids. $29.95 (IBM).
Circle Reader Service #3.
THE ROCKETEER: As previewed in
issue /188, this arcade game features classic comic-book-style panels to segue into
the game's airplane races, shoot-outs, fistfighting and, of course, rocket pack
chases. $49.95, or $69.95 with the
Sound Source hardware included (IBM).
Circle Reader Service #4

Taking a Peek

Electronic Arts
San Mateo, CA
POWERMONGER WORLD WAR I EDITION: It is refreshing to see a fine
strategy game such as Powermonger
tackle history. There are 175 territories of
Europe, all of which must be conquered
to win. Sheep have been replaced by
deer, food with rations, and the inventions are all relevant to the era. This
means that there are no messenger
birds, since communication is instantaneous, and rifles, airplanes and tanks
are the new items of production which
are available to the player's civilizations.
This new variant is available for solitaire
play only. $24.95 (Amiga). Circle Reader
Service #5.
Epyx
Redwood City, CA
GETAWAY: Designed for the laptop
variety of computers, all of the games in
this entertainment 6-pack feature
black-and-white quick-playing (5-10 minute)
strategy games designed for monochrome LCDs. Games include Cascade,
Stuffin' the Briefcase, Word Salad (pictured), Solitaire and Dominoes. Mouse
and hard disk support are optional, but a
special mode provides correction for
"mouse blur," common on many laptops. There is also a system profile program used to compare laptops to each
other in a variety of performance areas.
There are no docs (the instructions are
printed on the disk label). $39.95 (IBM).
Circle Reader Service #6.
Higher-Order Thinking Company
1733 NE Patterson Drive
Lee's Summit, MO
(816) 534-2701
DYNAMICS IN SPACE: This educational
game teaches kinematics and dynamics
much like flying the spaceship in
Asteroids did, but in a very '90s fashion.
Using small retrorockets, players (students) control the acceleration, velocity
and relative position of their spaceship as
they dock in different space stations,
each of which presents its own challenges. Scoring is based on efficient fuel
use. $29.95 (Apple II family). Circle
Reader Service #7.
VECTOR ADVENTURE: Another lesson
in higher mathematics, Vector Adventure puts players in charge of various expeditions which attempt to recover a longlost pirate treasure. Calculating the correct ship velocity (both direction and
magnitude) and using kinematics, vectors and vector addition will help to avoid
crashing into shoreline rocks, compensate for currents and land near the trea-

sure. It isn't just "Yo Ho Ho," "Pass me
the glass" and "Fetch me a wench" in
this pirate adventure. $29.95 or $49.95
as a pair with Dynamics in Space (Apple II family). Circle Reader Service /18.
Interplay
Santa Ana, CA
CASTLES: THE NORTHERN CAMPAIGN: This is an expansion disk for
Castles which pits the player against new
and more cunning enemies, the Picts and
Vikings. These troublesome raiders are
bad news, but with the new combat features (enemy archers, wave attacks and
reserves), players who master the art of
warfare will be well-rewarded. A new
storyline and messengers are there to
challenge the king or queen, and a new
element of economics has been added
for players to buy and sell commodities.
Raise the walls once again, and fill the
breach, my friend! $29.95 (IBM). Circle
Reader Service 1/9.
Koei
Burbling, CA
UNCHARTED WATERS: This is almost
a role-playing version of Pirates!. The set-

ting is 1502 and the player is a 16-year
old swashbuckler from Lisbon whom the
king's only child, his 14-year-old
daughter, secretly admires. The
protagonist's experienced first mate
sailed with his father and is of great assistance in achieving the game's goals of attaining fame, fortune and privilege. With
the standard Koei game features of menudriven strategy and hexagon-grid combat, players will have to take copious
notes in order to keep track of all that
the world's ports have to offer in this fairly detailed world. Grand in scope, players
will be a while learning the ins and outs
of life in the early 16th century. $69.95
(IBM). Circle Reader Service /110.
Konami
Buffalo Grove, IL
DANGER ZONE: This new entry-level
flight simulator moves those polygons in
the usual variety of missions for air warfare in the desert. F-14 and F/A-18
fighters are available for Navy "Top Gun"
pilots to fly with or train against their
twelve classmates. Featuring a nose-cone
radar display and flight room such as
that in Wing Commander, one or two

Taking a Peek

players can play at the same monitor
using a split screen and keyboard. Interestingly, both players can play on the
keyboard simultaneously. Features include auto pilot, multiple camera views,
bit-mapped explosions, mouse, joystick
and sound support (AdLib, Roland and
Sound Blaster). $49.95 (IBM). Circle
Reader Service #11.
Legacy
8817 Reseda Boulevard, Suite B
Chatsworth, CA 91324
(818) 885-5773
THE MUTANOID MATH CHALLENGE:
Meet the mutanoids at the Cubix Cantina. These former appliances are out for
interstellar revenge and challenge
youngsters to create and complete mathematic equations on a Scrabble-like game
board by using straight addition, subtraction, multiplication and division. There
are even a few bonus word problems included. The mutanoids are very cute characters, bristling with bad puns that keep
play lively. The game also includes a bit
of obligatory arcade action for its
younger audience. $49.95 (IBM). Circle
Reader Service #12.
Lucasfilm Games
San Rafael, CA
P-38 LIGHTNING: The first of four
planned "Tour of Duty" disks for Secret
Weapons of the Luftwaffe, this one features the "forked-tailed devil" itself, the P38 Lightning. This disk adds sixteen new
missions and two tours of duty with the P38H and J series aircraft. As an added
extra, the 2.0 version of the original
SWOTL is included with the package,
along with the type of quality pictureand fact-filled documentation that this
series of games is famous for. Note:
"Tour of Duty" disks cannot be used
with the campaign game in SWOTL.
$29.95 (IBM). Circle Reader Service #13.
Masque Publishing
Englewood, CO
MASQUE BLACKJACK FOR WINDOWS: While the title is highly descriptive, players should be aware that four
complete strategies by Julian Braun are
included in the game. These encompass
basic and advanced techniques for both
single and multiple deck games. The
usual options are there also, including:
programmable house rules, odds calculations, strategy error warnings, statistical
analysis of play and other variable
parameters. The documentation presents
a very forward look at card-counting and
odds tabulations to keep players from
splitting 10s and failing to double down

with 11. $49.95 (IBM). Circle Reader Service #14.
Microprose
Hunt Valley, MD
SID MEIER'S CIVILIZATION: Imagine
Railroad Tycoon jumping the tracks,
and that will indicate the scope of a
game that takes players from 4000 BC
to AD 2100, as they advance society
through the ages. For a single human
player against 3-7 computer opponents
(who are led by the likes of Caesar, Genghis Khan and Napoleon), players found,
conquer and improve their cities, build
military units, discover the world (a la
Empire) and generally try to hold things
together while being the first to colonize
Alpha Centauri. A grand theme, properly
executed, Civilization looks like another
winner of the Railroad Tycoon ilk.
$69.95 (IBM). Circle Reader Service #15.
Micro Sports, Incorporated
Hixson, TN
ALL-AMERICAN COLLEGE FOOTBALL: The game mechanics are exactly
like those in NFL Pro League Football.

This game, naturally, provides for college
play (with over 80 schools represented),
while sharing all of the depth and richness of its brother game. Printouts,
reports, league play, auto-updates and
modem play features are all supported.
Players can take on the role of coach
and/or general manager in this highly
detailed exercise in gridiron conflict. Includes both. 5.25" and 3.5" disks. $59.95
(IBM). Circle Reader Service #16.
Ocean of America
San Jose, CA
DARK MAN: Based on the movie, this
arcade fest features six levels of kicking
and punching in an effort to avenge a
great evil. Our hero once had a normal
life. After being attacked by sadistic
criminals, his face and body burned
beyond recognition, the Dark Man walks
by night, searching for the woman he
loves. $39.95 (Amiga). Circle Reader Service #17.
ELF: Proving that it's not the size of the
man in the fight, it's the size of the fight
in the man (or elf, in this case), the

Taking a Peek

player takes on the role of the tiny wood
elf Cornelius. His girlfriend, Elisa, has
been kidnapped by Necrilous the Not
Very Nice. So, in the tradition of cartridge
games, he must set out through eight
levels of arcade action. Finding pets and
herbs along the way which can be saved
to purchase special items (extra lives, advice, better shots, etc.), the player will
also have to challenge the psuedo-Pythonesque humor rife (ripe?) within this
Japanese-style platform game. $49.95
(Amiga). Circle Reader Service #18.
Origin
Austin, TX
SPECIAL OPERATIONS 1: The first of
two planned expansion scenario disks for
the hit game Wing Commander II, this
one takes our dauntless hero through
some new perils as he prepares to join
the Special Operations Group. The
player will be fighting former Terran confederates who have mutinied and turned
pirate. In addition, the Kilrathi have many
worlds in rebellion which are about to be
ruthlessly crushed unless, of course, the
player's character can save them. And
that's not all — but let's not spoil all the
surprises! Players will enjoy their new
wingmen and the Crossbow bomber in
this 20-mission campaign. (IBM). Circle
Reader Service 1/19.
Paragon Software
Greensburg, PA
TWILIGHT: 2000: Paragon brings
another successful GDW "person and
paper" game to the computer. This time
it's Twilight: 2000, a journey across postWWIII Poland. Leading a band of up to
20 soldiers (while controlling only one)
isn't easy in this gritty, high-tech role-playing game in which one must stop the evil
Baron Czarny. Czarny, the UBG, has
seized northern Poland after the collapse
of all civil authority. Hardware freaks will
love the trek from Krakow north, since actual state-of-the-art firepower is realistically integrated into the game. The game
strives to incorporate the thrill of a simulation in combination with the characterization of role-playing games (i.e. the
player is not penalized for his/her coordination with keyboard or joystick, but
the game moves fast). (IBM). Circle
Reader Service #20.
Psygnosis
Brookline, MA
OH NO! MORE LEMMINGS: This one is
pure MOTS (More of the Same). A new
disk with 100 brand new Lemmings puzzles is pretty much all there is (the package includes the original Lemmings rules
manual), but that will be enough to

generate who knows how many more
lost hours at the computer. This is sold
as a complete "stand-alone" game for
$49.99 or as an add-on product requiring
the original Lemmings disk for $34.99.
(IBM). Circle Reader Service #21.
Sierra
Coarsegold, CA
HOYLE OFFICIAL BOOK OF GAMES:
VOLUME 3: Six classic family games are
done to the hilt in this third installment of
Sierra's Hoyle series. Featuring Backgammon, Pachisi, Dominoes, Checkers,
Snakes and Ladders plus Yacht (remember Yatzee?), this latest Hoyle game also
adds multi-human player options, as well
as eighteen computer opponents (including Mother Goose, Larry Laffer and a Terminator clone named "Arnold"). A full
stero soundtrack, lively, colorful graphics
and "chatting" with computer opponents
adds a wonderful aura to the game and
both 3.5" and 5.25" disks are included.
$49.95 (IBM) Circle Reader Service #22.
THE LAFFER UTILITIES: A wellplanned leap backward for office produc-

tivity, this package of highly entertaining
"time wasters" shows Leisure Suit Larry
at his best (er, worst). While the innocuous title will easily get past Purchasing, the creative fax cover sheets, office
betting pool manager, joke database and
more will have half the office huddled
around whatever computer has the unproductivity tool installed. Combine this
with the ultimate office utility "Where Do
You Want to Go for Lunch?" and one has
an idea of the goodies in this package.
With 18 total utilities, a hard disk is
definitely required. $34.95 (IBM). Circle
Reader Service #23.
CONQUESTS OF THE LONGBOW:
THE LEGEND OF ROBIN HOOD: From
designer Christy Marx (Conquests of
Camelot), this account of the Robin
Hood legend bears the type of attention
to intricate detail that she is known for.
While there is all the usual quality that
Sierra usually designs into their adventure games, The Legend of Robin Hood
is very rich with both history and characters. There are many tests of character in
the game and moral judgements, corn-

Taking a Peek

passion and wits tend to be what delivers
the player to the best of the five possible
endings. The artwork is worthy of special
note for its faithful backgrounds and
animated sequences that do much to
add to the flavor of the game. $59.95
(IBM). Circle Reader Service #24.
MIXED-UP FAIRY TALES: In this
animated storybook, the sequel to Mixedup Mother Goose, a character named
Bookwyrm invites your child into the
Land of Fairy Tales. Where Mother
Goose needed nursery rhymes to be put
right, the fairy tales need rectifying in this
game. Young ones must retrieve segments from Beauty and the Beast, Jack
and the Beanstalk, Cinderella and
more. While the kids are using the
simple "see and do" interface, classical
music from Mozart, Beethoven and that illustrious crowd plays in the background.
Not only is an illustrated storybook included in the package, but so is a coloring book (with crayons). $49.95 (IBM).
Circle Reader Service #25.
Spectrum HoloByte
Alameda, CA
FALCON 3.0: Easily one of the most
ambitious flight sims on the market to
date, the 3.0 version features three complete campaigns in Panama, Israel and
Kuwait. The "Red Flag" editor is an extremely powerful mission design feature.
While it still features modem and directconnect two-player action, players will
want to have a powerful computer
(25MHz 386, 4MB RAM, DOS 5.0, 9600baud modem, 11MB of hard drive space,
etc.) in order to enjoy all the features (including the incredible video replay feature). We anticipate some quick
upgrades for a few of the annoying little
bugs, but the game play is still there, in
spite of them. $79.95 (IBM). Circle
Reader Service /126.
SUPER TETRIS: Those who are worried
about all the extra time which will be
wasted while enraptured with this game
simply don't know the half of it. At least
as addicting as the original, the "super"
elements include a deeper pit which is
filled with rubble which hides seven different types of buried treasure. Removing
a line gives players a new "bomb" cluster
which can blow up extra pieces or activate treasures. The object is now to
remove the rubble in order to reveal the
picture underneath. This accomplishment
advances players to the next level. To
make things even more interesting, play
can be timed, cooperative, competitive or
head-to-head. The question now becomes, "When do I sleep?" $49.95 (IBM).
Circle Reader Service //27.

Strategic Simulations, Inc.
Sunnyvale, CA
EYE OF THE BEHOLDER II: Subtitled
The Legend of Dark Moon, this game
begins with the heroes from the first
game as renowned adventurers. With evil
on the rise to the north of the Waterdeep,
a huge temple not found on any map
must be investigated. With more splash
graphics at the beginning and end of the
game and a noticeably easier
point-and-click interface for spellcasting, Eye II is
pretty much more of the same
("MOTS"). Fortunately, the original Eye
was worth a "look," and "more so" is
Eye II. $59.95 (IBM). Circle Reader Service #28.
Technology Link, Inc.
1132 Tracy Lane
Libertyville, IL
(708) 918-9821
LOTTO LEVERAGE: Not only does this
software do all of the analyzing and
predicting that one would expect, but it
also offers a "Play Lotto" feature. The pro-

gram allows users to update their lotto
drawing history on a perpetual basis and
can handle either a full or abbreviated
wheeling system. Full of graphs and
charts, it is impressive to watch one's
computer "pick the winners" for any six
number lottery. Still, don't bet the farm
on your computer. If it were really as
easy as buying a piece of software,
everyone would be doing it. $39.95
(IBM). Circle Reader Service //29.
Ubi Soft
Sausalito, CA
BATTLE ISLE: As previewed in issue
#89 (p.84), this futuristic wargame
begins at an easy level with a simple
map and a few units. Like Powermonger, success in one campaign opens
up the doors to more and larger wars. Ultimately, 32 unique levels must be conquered. For one or two players (at the
same machine), the game suffers somewhat from a lack of a mouse interface
but is still a rousing good strategy game.
(Amiga). Circle Reader Service //30.

1

Industry News

Rumors
• Jeff Tunnell has resigned as
president of Dynamix, a subsidiary
of Sierra (NASDAQ: SIER), and has
formed his own design group within
the aegis of the Oregon-based subsidiary. Tunnell's desire is to return
to more hands-on work with individual products and to experiment
in product genres that do not require
the large design teams necessitated
by Tunnell's last three designs.
Longtime Dynamix executive and
Tunnell compatriot, Tony Reyneke,
will take over the subsidiary's
presidency, and former SPA awardwinning journalist/editor, Bob
Lindstrom, will assume over-all

management responsibilities with
regard to development.
• Microprose has become a Sega
licensee with the intent to publish F15 Strike Eagle, F-19 Stealth
Fighter and Railroad Tycoon as
Sega Genesis titles. In addition,
Sega is expected to license an as
yet unannounced title from
Microprose in order to publish it
under their label.
• It is rumored that, by 1993, more
than 2,000 computer pilots will be
able to participate in a campaign version of an "off-the-shelf" flight
simulator via a major telecommunications network.

• PC Globe and Intracorp have
agreed, in principle, to the acquisition of PC Globe by Intracorp. PC
Globe, maker of geographical
software (both computer atlases and
learning products), will continue to
publish its products under the PC
Globe label and Intracorp's
Capstone label will still function as
the company's primary entertainment software line.
• Dynamix and Sierra are alleged
to be the first third-party developers
licensed for Sega's CD-ROM technology. Virgin is expected to sign a
licensing agreement on CD-ROM
products with Sega at any time.

Industry News

Topical Trends in the Future of Computer Games
Part I of CGW's Consumer Electronics Show Coverage

T

he CD-ROM version of Computer

Gaming World would open this article with the voice of Rod Serling
saying:
For your consideration: we scrutinize
the entertainment software industry —
a gangly, gawky adolescent enterprise
which often finds itself torn between
the smooth pirouettes of a prima ballerina and the awkward trip over the
threshold of man-year-eating technological promises and vapor-spewing
scheduling nightmares. It is an industry which is entering a third dimension of object-oriented collision detection and digitized sound. Look, there's
a milestone we just missed ... the Consumer Electronics Show unveils "The
Megabyte Zone." (Celebrity voice impersonated.)

Submitted for Your
Approval
At January's Consumer Electronics
Show, held in Las Vegas, software publishers spotlighted the products that they
hope will garner the approval of computer gamers through the next six to
eight months. Tired scribes meet in the
halls and ask, "What's new and impressive at the show?" and foot-weary
wholesalers and chain store buyers try to
guess the reactions of their future customers. This year, the job of the former
was tougher and the task of the latter
was easier. Many of the high-profile
products on the show floor were
products which were originally unveiled
for Christmas '91 release (like Origin's
Strike Commander and Ultima VII;
Lucasfilm's Indiana Jones and the
Fate of Atlantis; New World's Planet's
Edge; Spectrum HoloByte's Crisis in
the Kremlin; Hero Software's Champions; Electronic Arts' Populous II;
Microprose's Darklands; interplay's
Star Trek: 25th Anniversary and
Mindcraft's The Magic Candle II,
among others. It is difficult to write about
an eagerly anticipated release that one
has already indicated, in print, that one is
impatiently awaiting. Conversely, it must

Industry News

and innovations. Then, this installment
will close with a discussion of design innovation in the role-playing field as the
first of the genre-by-genre summaries.
We will present the other five summaries
in Part II.

A Third Dimension of Sight
(3-D Technology)

be easy to stock titles for which customers are already clamoring.
CGW's editorial staff felt like they were
caught in a time warp when they saw
"Christmas '91" titles that were still under
construction. In many ways, the
Christmas products which ran later than
expected effectively demonstrates the current state of the industry. Eighteen
months ago, publishers were only spending the resources to render one or two titles in VGA (even MCGA) graphics and
sound support was still selected on a per
game basis. Currently, VGA graphics are
the rule rather than the exception. Yet,
the number of employees has not grown
proportionately to the amount of additional work required, just in graphics and
sound. The problem can only continue
as new products add the new innovations
in connectivity, three-dimensional object
technology, digitized sound and digitized
video to the previous qualitative efforts.
Yet, even considering the technological
advances only illuminates part of the
problem.
As the workload has multiplied, more
and more projects have required team efforts and project coordination. Yet the
modules of code developed by individual
teams have not always worked right (in
fact, more often they cause strange mutations in the modules they are being connected to) and entire new permutations
of work have been required in order to
successfully integrate these interrelated
portions of code. What this cries out for
is a commitment toward software engineering in entertainment publishing
such as that which is currently being
used in more "mundane" forms of
software development. What it also cries
out for is patience among anxious consumers who see either marketing conspiracies or managerial incompetence as
the reason for every embarrassing case
of product slippage.
The products are still worth waiting for;
it's just that the solutions are not coming
easily. This portion of CGW's coverage
of the Winter Consumer Electronics
Show will focus on technological trends

One reason for the industry-wide slippage is the fact that developers, as a
whole, are working on a new technological plane in three-dimensional object
programming and collision detection.
Where three-dimensional illusions were
the order of the day about eighteen to
twenty-four months ago (with polygonfilled simulations being the major exception), modern games are being
developed with three-dimensional
"worlds" represented on the flat screen,
"worlds" in which objects take up space
such that collision detection, path finding
and line of sight issues are becoming an
increasingly complex web of mathematical machinations.
Origin's Strike Commander, Ultima
VII and Ultima Underworld: Stygian
Abyss were three of last year's projects
which originally raised the ante in expectations for three-dimensional game
worlds. Chris Roberts is not only using
some of the same sophisticated terracing
techniques which he used successfully in
the Wing Commander series (and which
Dynamix' Damon Slye has also used in
Aces of the Pacific — see the sneak
preview in this issue), but he has
designed a full 3-D cockpit model so that
computer pilots can look from side to
side in the cockpit and get visual cues in
a faster and more realistic manner than
they could in previous simulations. His
"scanning" concept allows "pilots" to
make a quick circle of the joystick in
order to scan the horizon in a full circle.
Ultima VII defines objects in a threedimensional universe and presents the action from a top-down oblique perspective.
As described in CGW 1187's sneak
preview of the game, it utilizes elaborate
path-finding and combat Al which consider the impressive 3-D terrain in
making their respective "decisions." The
Ultima Underworld project offers fastframing three-dimensional interaction and
combat from a first-person perspective.
Although the interface itself is closer to
that used in Ultima VI than that used in
Ultima VII, the technology is extremely
impressive.
While these products were falling far
enough behind to "miss Christmas" and
cause Origin to proclaim a mea culpa

and stage a mock execution ceremony
at which CGWs Editor in Chief Russell
Sipe performed the honors on behalf of
our impatient readership, other publishers were striving to "see" Origin's technology and "raise" their efforts. Two such
first person point-of-view games were
shown to CGW in private showings and
they indicate that the technological leap
in three-dimensional role-playing games
is not only here to stay, but continuing to
mature in design and detail.
As public evidence of this maturation,
Virgin Games unveiled Guest, a ghost
story which takes place in a fully detailed
three-dimensional house, designed using
Autodesk's 3-D studio. This game offers
incredible SVGA graphics in 640x480
resolution with 256 colors and some of
the smoothest, fastest scrolling yet seen
on the IBM screen. Part of the advantage
held by this game over previous technology is the fact that it is designed for initial multimedia release on CD-ROM.
Closer to home in the floppy-disk-based
world, Paragon Software has invested
considerable capital into creating their
Paragon Studios hardware. Paragon's
digital studio allows the development
teams to build three-dimensional models,
videotape them and use software techniques to "clean up" the digitized images,
even before their artists need to do the
detail work. Their Mantis: XF5700 Experimental Space Fighter game, anticipated in late spring, will be the first
release to use the three-dimensional special effects package. It will be a Wing
Commander-style game which requires
more role-playing decision points along
with the joystick-driven combat.
Electronic Arts accomplished something similar to its upcoming arcade
game with the working title Michael Jordan Flight. Expected to be ready before
fall '92, Michael Jordan Flight is an arcade game (the traditional three-on-three

Industry News

risking death in the Heechee universe
(created by Pohl for the Gateway
series), the development team added a
new non-arcade interface for controlling
the space-faring ships. The latter, in turn,
are represented by three-dimensional
ships which were modeled, recreated in
wire-framed "objects" and then scaled
and rotated as needed for the sequences.

and one-on-one style with a three-point
competition and slam dunk contest
thrown in for good measure) that used actual videotape of Michael Jordan in action to create the digitized base images
used in the game. The base images are
then used as defined objects that can be
moved about the screen. Then the
design team builds collision detection so
that the images can perform realistic actions vital to basketball such as setting
picks, blocking out on rebounds and committing intentional fouls.
Accolade's Star Control II: The UrQuan Masters also introduces new technology. Now, three-dimensional planets
rotate in space throughout the hundreds
of star systems to be explored and the
planetary surfaces are fractally generated.
Interplay tried a different approach
with a three-dimensional product on a
platform that is not noted for three-dimensional perspective. The software publisher has taken Delphine Software's
European hit Another World, which was
developed on the Amiga, and transformed it into an SNES product called
Out of This World. The action/adventure
game features three-dimensional polygonfilled graphics and is expected to present
the same kind of smooth-flowing action
in its genre that EA's 4-D Boxing did in
its genre. In addition, Interplay's next
release of Battlechess will rely on clay
animation-style techniques to handle the
space opera combat represented in the
new game.
Legend's new Frederick Pohl's
Gateway is also an example of the new
emphasis on three-dimensional representation in computer games. Although
Legend is known for "text" adventures
which are generally enhanced by detailed
graphic settings and a simplified interface, this new adventure adds an additional interface to the already successful
Legend approach. To effectively capture
the experience of travelling in space and

Microprose announced a golf product
for the Amiga which uses 3-D technology
to create four complete courses with
each object fully defined. Developed in
the U.K., the product offers eleven different rules sets for different styles of
competition; replays from five different
camera angles with very intuitive userdirected sequences and a very user-friendly interface. Entitled Greens, the
Microprose product will immediately
compete with Links on the Amiga, which
Access just released.
Accolade's Jack Nicklaus' Golf &
Course Design: Signature Edition not
only improves the look of the popular
series of products, but adds the first
course design program that allows
players to create their own backgrounds
and three-dimensional objects in a 256color palette. The Course Design segment of the signature product will allow
players to design objects which already
exist in the program (extending fairways,
enlarging traps or hazards and increasing/decreasing slopes) or paint new
ones, pixel-by-pixel.

Resolved to the Proposition
(Graphics)
Whereas many of the products advertised as 256-color VGA are actually
presented in MCGA mode (lower resolution), many of this year's upcoming
products will feature higher resolution
VGA and some will feature SVGA resolution. Accolade's Jack Nicklaus' Signature Golf and Star Control II: The UrQuan Masters will move up to 256
colors in the improved resolution, as will
Legend's Frederick Pohl's Gateway
(Legend is now distributed by Accolade). Bethesda Softworks' Chris
Mate announced that Wayne Gretzky
Hockey 3 and Terminator 2029 would
be the company's entry into the highresolution VGA market. Electronic Arts'
Car and Driver will feature both 256
colors and twice the pixels of their earlier
products, what Ned Lerner calls Mode X.
Disney's new line, with the resurrected
name Buena Vista Software, is introducing Heaven and Earth, a "zen
strategy" game from the creators of
Shanghai and Ishido. Heaven and

Earth displays beautiful 256-color
graphics on both the IBM and color
Macintosh that use programming tricks
to cycle the palettes and essentially offer
many times more than 256 colors.
Both Virgin's previously mentioned
Guest and Three-Sixty Pacific's
Theatre of War use true SVGA graphics.
Garners who purchase the latter and do
not actually have SVGA boards will not
have to worry, however, since the program will be downward-compatible to all
VGA cards that support high resolution
and, on the few obscure chip sets which
do not, 320 x 200 MCGA quality resolution. In addition, the company's first CDROM product, Harpoon, will appear on
U.S. machines for the first time by the
summer. It will also be SVGA.

A Dimension of Familiar
Sights (Digitized
Film/Video)
In addition to the IBM conversion of
Broderbund's Patton Strikes Back
(previewed in CGW #90) and Interplay's
Buzz Aldrin's Race into Space
(previewed in CGW 1190), which both use
digitized film images captured from historical footage, and the previously mentioned Electronic Arts' Michael Jordan
Flight product, which digitized videotape
and enhanced the images, several upcoming products will use digitized film
footage to add to the presentation.
Three-Sixty Pacific's Victory at Sea,
Jim Dunnigan's design for a World War II
version of Harpoon, will use digitized
film footage from actual naval battles to
provide combat resolution. Spectrum
HoloByte's Crisis in the Kremlin, a
political and economic strategy game
based on the recently disintegrated
Soviet Union, features digitized news
footage to illustrate some of the events
which can occur in the game. British publisher Palace Software places digitized
film clips of various cinematic sequences
in order to advance the plot of their multi-

Industry News

player adventure game (see "An Added
Dimension"). Also, MicroLeague
Sports' four new products (MicroLeague Baseball: USA Today Edition,
MicroLeague Football: USA Today Edition, MicroLeague Basketball: USA
Today Edition and MicroLeague Hockey: USA Today Edition) will feature
digitized video footage of the actual athletic competitions being simulated and
some interesting connective features (see
"An Added Dimension").
Finally, Activision's Leather Goddesses of Phobos 2 offers a different video
impression. One scene in the product
has a '50s-era three-dimensional "movie"
that requires garners to wear the familiar
glasses (provided in the package).

A Dimension of Digitized
Sound (Sound Technology)
Activision's Leather Goddesses of
Phobos 2 uses a hardware device contained in the package so that even
garners who do not have sound cards
can experience digitized speech and
music. Like Disney's Sound Source, the

hardware device connects to the personal computer via the serial port.
Three-Sixty's Theatre of War allows
garners to improvise their own jazz riffs
on the fly. The computer game stores
musical data in wave tables and digital
audio fragments which are called up according to the actual moves supplied by
the players and evaluated (in terms of
strategic strength) by the computer. So,
players are literally improvising jazz
charts as they make their moves.

Lucasfilm's iMUSE system uses an approach which is philosophically similar,
but technologically dissimilar. In
Lucasfilm's system (patent applied for),
musical fragments are stored as data,
but the program will evaluate the current
mood or pace of the story as the player
inputs his/her moves. The program intelligently selects the instrumentation
(whether a hostile baritone saxophone
"blatting" nastily underneath a cranky
comment or a bluesy tenor sax wooing
characters in accompaniment to a tender
statement), the pace (whether a bouncy
reggae beat for Monkey Island 2 or a
rousing march for the heroics of an Indiana Jones adventure), dynamics (the
volume of the music as expressed from
the pianissimos of sunrises to the bombastic fortissimos of action scenes) and
the composed fragment (the measures of
music themselves).
Paragon Software is using their own
digitized speech technology to both store
and "clean up" speech. Their new fantasy game, Spellbound, features plenty
of cinematic sequences with complete
digitized voicetrack, as does their Mantis
adventure.

4

Industry News

Naturally, those software publishers
who have used digitized speech in earlier
products are still accomplishing the feat.
Access continues to develop (and
license) their RealSound technology,
while using it in their successful Links
line of golf games. Origin, who
developed their vocal soundtrack for the
Ultima VI CD-ROM game (soon to be
available in Japan), is using the technology for the ultimate bad guy in Ultima
VII. Park Place, developers of ABC Monday Night Football for Data East, as
well as John Madden Football and NHL
Hockey for Electronic Arts on the
Sega Genesis and Dvorak On Typing
for Interplay (all using digitized
speech/sounds), have just released an affordable drafting program for the consumer, complete with a digitized tutorial
which narrates the instructions for Draft
& Print. This product, like the
company's rumored football game (coming in the fall?), will be distributed by
Konami.

An Added Dimension
(Connectivity)
The capacity for players to compete

with each other through direct connection (serial cable) and modem support is
becoming more and more prominent.
Sierra's The Sierra Network allows
players to compete against human opponents at bridge, hearts, backgammon,
cribbage, chess and, now, miniature golf.
The latter is particularly fun as it is not
only a creative course with an intuitive interface, but it allows players to kibbitz
and/or insult each other via the
network's talk feature. Other projects are
also under construction, including multiplayer Stellar 7 and Red Baron.
Other upcoming titles will support network play, as well as direct connect and
modem play. Maxis' RoboSport for Windows supports network play via Novell
networks with the Netware bios installed.
The latest successor to the classic Robotwar tradition features a very intuitive interface with which two players "program"
their robot forces via point-and-click
menus and watch the battles unfold. In
addition, Microprose's Global Conquest, Dan Bunten's latest release for
their Microplay line, will allow up to four
players to compete in a game that involves diplomacy, as well as military

strategy, in the conquest of billions of ran
domly generated worlds.
British publisher Palace Software's
Jekyll and Hyde moves a step further in
human-oriented computer role-playing.
Their Victorian-era mystery can be
played solitaire (with the computer
operating the other three teams of charac
ters), but the beauty of the game occurs
when humans play all four teams of
three characters each. The teams include: Dr. Jekyll's team (trying to wean
the doctor from the formula and marry
the girl), Lanyan's team (attempting to
kill Jekyll and steal the formula), the
criminals (functioning as pure mercenaries in the plot line) and the police
(trying to solve the murders and stop the
problems). Palace Software is best
known for their recent text adventure,
Demoniak, but the new adventure will be
menu-driven with highlighted options
which will speed up the decision process
for all four players. The connective technology is solid enough that CGW saw
two Amigas and one IBM compatible connected and functioning together during a
demonstration game.
Other games will feature more traditional direct connect and modem connect options. These include: Three-Sixty's
Theatre of War, Psygnosis' Armourgeddon for the IBM and Electronic Arts'
Car and Driver and Rampart. The latter
is a very attractive conversion of the coinop action/strategy game in which one
player sets cannons for the defense of a
castle and the other sends wave upon
wave of ships against the castle.

A Dimension of Personality
(Role-Playing)
Several new design twists will enhance
the role-playing experience for computer
garners in 1992. As noted in previous
reports, Microprose's Darklands will
use: a map interface (featuring the entire
map of Germany) to provide for strategic

Industry News

locations in the basic "world" for the
game and seven additional worlds to explore, the game is primarily a duel between sorcerers. Almost every one of the
104 different spells (made alchemically
using a very intuitive interface) either
builds obstacles or conjures armies/monsters/etc. to perform the
player's wizard's bidding. According to
Ybarra, one playtest experience had as
many as forty spells functioning simultaneously. The game features real-time
battles and has up to 102 different "set
battles" to be experienced by the player.
movement between towns and establish
random encounters during travel; a menudriven interface (with "watercolor" backgrounds in styles imitative of the period)
which offers more options than players
are usually accustomed to having; a combat system that plays in real time when
the gamer wishes to advance its resolution and can be stopped at any time
when the gamer wishes to change tactical options; a magic system built upon
both alchemy and pre-Reformation
Catholic hagiolatry (invocation of the
saints in expectation of accomplishing
miraculous results) and a skill-based character development system that circumvents the necessity of character classes.
Also, as noted in previous reports,
Hero Software's Champions (distributed by Konami) will feature a menudriven character interaction to handle conversations. Rather than storing up
"textlets" of conversation, garners will
choose between emotional states and
emotive goals in the conversations which
advance the plots. Then, the non-player
characters (NPCs) respond according to
"textlets" that have specific information
that does advance the plotline. It also features great animation for the action sequences. The combat is based on each
character's skills and the player's tactical
decisions rather than an arcade sequence. Though the game has slipped in
terms of release date, the game has a far
superior graphic look than it would have
had if it had been released in its original
time frame.
Tsunami Software takes a different approach in terms of what the player is
trying to accomplish in Spellcraft:
Aspects of Valor. Designed by Joe Ybarra, formerly executive producer at
Electronic Arts and president of Infocom, the game is set to be released by
ASCllware. Ybarra estimates that
Spellcraft will take veteran garners about
50 hours to finish, but notes that it will
play differently for each type of magicuser selected by the player. Featuring 24

Origin's Ultima Underworld: The
Stygian Abyss, as noted earlier, offers a
first person perspective as in Eye of the
Beholder, but it scrolls so smoothly and
quickly in 360 degrees (rather than
giving the impression that characters had
to move step-by-step in discrete movements) that one receives an illusion of
freedom seldom achieved in a flat-screen
presentation. The combat is fluid and the
overall impression is that this is a fantasy
combat simulator (without having to
resort to polygon fills) rather than a
CRPG.
In addition to Spellbound, mentioned
earlier in this article, Paragon Software
unveiled new face technology in MegaTraveller 3: The Unknown World. The
CRPG also features the debut of the PAL
system, an artificial personality system
that allows NPCs and even members of
the player's party to volunteer for the
tasks they are best suited to perform.
Paragon also states that the randomly
generated worlds are so diverse that no
one ever plays the same game twice.
Konami's Lure of the Temptress takes
another approach to expanding the
genre. In this CRPG, the NPCs are continually interacting with each other independently of the player's character.
Players can influence certain events
within the game world, but not every
event. Developed by British publisher Mirrorsoft, the game strives to break up
many CRPG assumptions by combining
elements of a traditional adventure game
(with an improved interface that allows
stringing several commands together)
with elements of a role-playing game.
Konami also plans to release another
Mirrorsoft CRPG from the developers of
Bloodwych. Legend is the name of this
CRPG and it will feature four characters
in each party, journeying through a 3-D
isometric dungeon environment.
Capstone, known for its licensing
prowess, has purchased the rights to
Stephen King's The Dark Half. The
game has an Elvira-esque perspective

and a "typewriter" interface (which is logical, since the protagonist is a writer).
Another interesting license is Konami's
Plan 9 From Outer Space which, from
what CGW saw of it is: a) already better
than the movie and b) ideal for a group
gathering around the computer to play.
Long-term CRPG publisher New World
Computing has added an interesting
twist in Planet's Edge. The science fiction role-playing game allows the player
to win in two very different ways: violent
conquest or economic power.
Strategic Simulations, Inc. has become increasingly noted for their work in
the CRPG genre. In addition to their
latest AD&D product, Treasures of the
Savage Frontier (a sequel to Gateway
to the Savage Frontier featuring romantic interaction); Eye of the Beholder II:
Temple of Darkmoon (full 256 VGA and
bigger than its predecessor) and Buck
Rogers: Matrix Cubed (again, bigger
than its predecessor), SSI unveiled its
original CRPG story. Tales of Magic:
Prophecy of the Shadow places the
player in the role of an apprentice
magician whose master has been killed,
and sends him/her on a quest to find a
magical council that can continue his/her
training. The game unveils SSI's new
CRPG "engine" which integrates digitized
pictures and an overhead view into their
continually evolving story-telling approach.

Tell Us More
Of course, role-playing games are only
one strength in the marketplace and
there are five other genres to cover in
next month's installment. As Serling
might have said: So, for those who are
trapped in a technological time
(management?) warp which is not of
their making and experiencing a
rather annoying quark in the randomized universe we call the entertainment software industry, we urge
another visit to this appointment with
journalism — the Megabyte Zone.

Review

When Making a "Wong" Move Is Right
Villa Crespo's Stanford Wong Video Poker

S

lot machines rank as the most
popular games of chance in
Nevada and Atlantic City. Indeed,
in any place where there is legalized
gambling, slots certainly account for the
most acreage in a casino. Several years
ago, casinos introduced a new twist on
those "one-armed bandits" by entering
the video age. When the video slots
proved incredibly popular, video poker
and blackjack machines soon followed.

by Michael S. Lasky

Now, video poker machines rank as
the number one machines in most casinos. The reason is simple: the player
gets a chance to interact and determine
his or her fate by selecting the cards to
keep before the final deal determines
the winning hand. The mind calculates
a strategy instead of reducing the interaction to a mindless pull of the arm.
Stanford Wong Video Poker is a marvelous computer game for the video
poker player who has wondered, "What
if I'd played it holding another combination of cards?" Stanford Wong Video
Poker shows all the optimum possibilities and probabilities on the computer screen. Virtually every casino variation has been considered — there are
five different slot machines and two
card deck designs to choose from — as
well as some twists which are not actually found on current video slot machines.
Not only does one have fun playing a
believable simulation of the real
machines without losing money, but
one also becomes an expert video slots
player for that future casino showdown.
The game's graphics are remarkably
lifelike, even in CGA mode. The user-customized sound options make the games
sound almost exactly like the casino
machines, especially if the computer
gambler is using a sound card such as the
Sound Blaster or Sound Master. In fact,
it is annoyingly real, with the continuous
din of casino talk throughout the game.
Wisely, the sound default is set for blessed
silence for those who do not want their
simulated gambling experience to include
the discomforts as well as the pleasures of
an actual casino.
Players navigate about the game using
the function keys or with an optional
mouse. While the mouse is preferable for
select game modifications, the number
keypad is more comfortable during actual
play, in which the player selects which of the five cards dealt he
wishes to hold and then hits the Enter key for the final deal.
There are four different modes from which to choose. Computer bettors can opt for: Casino mode (which simulates actual casino
machine play); Tournament Two-Player Competition mode (which allows two players to compete against each other simultaneously,
using the same keyboard); Tournament One-Player Practice mode
(which involves playing against a pre-set clock, number of hands,
and amount of money) and Strategy One-Player mode (the ultimate
video poker tutorial). In the latter mode, the power of the computer
is exploited for the player's ultimate monetary gain. Here is where all

BILE:
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
PUBLISHER:

Stanford Wong Video Poker
IBM
$49.95
Villa Crespo Software
Highland Park, IL

those "What if" questions are
answered. Any hands one lost in Casino
mode will be included here in order to
allow the player to measure the
payback for any machine's payback
schedule.
Each of the five different video poker
machines have corresponding variable
odds that match those usually found on
similar casino machines. The best odds
of frequent payback is the Draw Poker
(pair of jacks or better). For the more
adventuresome there are the Deuces
Wild, Joker Wild (kings or better), Joker
Wild (two pair or better) and the
Deuces-and-Joker Wild machines. As in real life,
these machines are more stubborn with
payouts. Default payoff schedules are
displayed for each, but one can easily
modify them and save those new
payout schedules for later plays.
Actual play of a typical Casino mode
game requires a player to select the
number of coins to play (1 to 5). There
is even a built-in "Maximum" coin button, which saves about six to seven
keystrokes and speeds each round of
the game.
If a player is unsure about which cards
to play, a simple press of the "tutor"
key will show the best cards to hold.
The "tutor" key can be adjusted to automatically show the best cards without
asking, as well as to warn the player
that the cards he or she has selected
might not be the best possible play.

Most often, the advice is about the
best one can expect. Occasionally the
computer algorithm goofs, however. In
one game, the first five cards formed a
winning straight. Four of them offered a possibility of a flush, a higher payout hand. Advice suggested throwing in the winning
hand by trying for the flush — completely
blind to the winning hand on the screen.
An "analysis" key offers both quick reference and detailed breakdowns of possible
cards to play and the probability of their
paying out in a winning hand. In fact, there
are so many variables here and in each
part of the game package that one could
play every day of the year and it would not
be the same game it was the day before.
All games and user-set variables can be
saved to disk and reloaded at will. User
descriptions about each variable saved can
be included as well. One of the special unique twists added to the game and, unfortunately, not found in any
casino is the "double-down" option. With this turned on, an entirely
separate double-or-nothing bet can be made on winning hands. If a
player wins a hand, a new five-card deal is made on screen. The first
card is face up and the other four are down. If one selects a card
higher than the one face up, the bet is doubled. If it is lower, the
money from the previously won hand is forfeited. Each time a doubledown bet is won, the player is entitled to double down yet again.
Villa Crespo Software has done it again: found a way to make
better gamblers out of all of us, while we have fun learning just how
to accomplish this seeming impossible feat.

Review

Electronic Arts has built upon the foundations of these classic
programs with Are We There Yet? This new program contains the
standard puzzle types found in the earlier programs, but has been
fleshed out to offer a full musical soundtrack, attractive animation
and a storyline right off the big screen.

Are We There Yet?
by Stanley Trevena
TITLE:
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
PROTECTION:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

Are We There Yet?
IBM
$49.95
Documentation
Carol Manley
Electronic Arts
San Mateo, CA

Question: Have you ever felt like a Fool when going to the Gallery on an Errand for Puzzles?
Answer: If this question has any meaning to you, then stop reading, go to a software store near you and buy Are We There Yet?.

P

uzzle fans often have to glean their puzzles from the various

monthly magazines and the daily papers. They are experienced
prospectors and will latch onto any puzzle treasure they
stumble upon. A pencil is standard issue and only the brave use a
pen. A few years back, The Fool's Errand was released and puzzle
fans everywhere rejoiced. The printed puzzle had moved to the computer. Also, the computer allowed for puzzles which were not even
possible on paper. Soon to follow was The Puzzle Gallery. It was
cherished by puzzle fans everywhere, as well.

The Mallard family is your basic all-American dysfunctional family.
Drake, the father, loves to drive his car. Where he drives is of little
concern as long as he drives. Mom is so stereotyped that the rest of
the family has forgotten her name. So, as one can easily imagine,
Mom has an identity crisis. Tiffany, the daughter, blames her parents
for everything that intrudes on her life. Blip, the son, has a permanent link with his hand-held video game and nothing else in the
world seems to matter. As long as Blip is playing he is happy — like
father, like son.
The Mallards can't seem to do anything right. They entered the
Popped Clusters cereal company's Vacation Sweepstakes with
visions of great prizes and wealth beyond their wildest dreams. The
Mallards didn't win first prize, a tour of America's family fun capitals
and assorted other items. Nor did they win second prize, a library of
the world's greatest travel brochures and a Knobby the Wonder Slug
compass. They even lost out on the restraining order issued to the
third prize winner to never pester the cereal company again. Instead,
the Mallards came in fourth and won a coupon book for America's
most forsaken tourist traps, a year's supply of Sweet 'N' Gritty, and
a police escort to the county line.
As a result, the Mallards must visit each state in the nation and
solve two puzzles at each of their stops in order to be allowed to
come home. They will need the help of the player, since their combined brain power might power a dim lightbulb on a moonless night.
Along the way they will collect souvenirs from each of their stops
that will become clues in solving the final puzzle.
The user interface is identical to The Fool's Errand and Puzzle Gal
lery. Pull-down menus are utilized for access to the puzzles. Players
must complete sets of puzzles before additional ones are made available. The puzzles start out relatively easy and quickly escalate to
very difficult. As mentioned above, there are two puzzles per state,
making for a total of 100 puzzles. Most of these puzzles are multistage puzzles, extending the challenge even further. There are also
five bonus puzzles that are not required to complete the game but
bring back memories of the games played on long trips in the back
seat of the family wagon. Then, after all the puzzles have been
solved and the souvenirs are assembled, the player will tackle the
"Mother of all puzzles"..
Along the way the player will encounter a wide variety of puzzles.
Alphabet Soup puzzles present the player with 26 lines of letters. By
typing a letter into the box in the middle of a line, a five-letter (or
larger) word can be formed. Each letter can only be used once.
There are standard crossword puzzles in which the player must fill in
the blanks from clues. There is also a variation on this theme with
the Block Crossword Puzzle. Interlocking pieces must be placed in an
enclosed area to form sentences, and the pieces cannot overlap. Concatenation puzzles have a series of buttons that when pressed add or
delete letters and spaces from the screen. Pressing these buttons in
the correct sequence will reveal the hidden words.
Crosstic puzzles have a series of blank boxes on the screen and
clues are given to the player for single words. As the player types
the answers to the single-word puzzles, the letters in the series of
boxes are filled in and, if all goes well, the player will expose the hidden phrase. Cryptograms are of the standard "unscramble the letters
to solve the puzzle" variety. Find the Sentence requires the player to
eliminate words in a matrix in response to a series of directions (i.e.,
click on all words that are birds). A sentence will remain if all directions were followed to the letter.
Flat Tire puzzles are made up of a series of letter circles. There is
an outer ring and an inner ring that can be rotated in each circle. In
the middle of the tire the player types two letters and then rotates
the outside ring to form words. Follow the Path puzzles are maze-like
and require the player to get from point A to point B while avoiding
the traps. There are also several variations on the Hangman theme.
Two types of Jigsaws are included, the first being the standard jigsaw made up of square pieces. The second type is animated jigsaw

Review

which changes as the player assembles
the pieces. Word Jumbles are familiar to
most puzzle players, as are Mazes. Magic
Square puzzles require the player to rearrange letters in a matrix so that words
can be read both across and down.
Quotefall puzzles have a jumble of letters on the top of the screen and a
blanked out phrase below. The player
must type in the letters to fill in the
blanks. The letters fall from the top and
can only be used once each in the puzzle. Rebus puzzles are similar to the picture puzzles made famous on the TV
game show Concentration. Simon puzzles require the player to repeat actions
performed by the computer. Word searches are of the standard horizontal, vertical and diagonal variety. In later puzzles,
the angle word is introduced. This is a long word that will take a 90degree turn somewhere in the word. X-Ors use a series of buttons to
turn on and off sections of the screen. By pressing the right buttons,
a word will be exposed.
A clue book is included with the program. If the player has a weakness for overusing answer books, this reviewer strongly suggests that
the clue book be sent to a friend or relative's house or locked up in
a safe. The book gives exact answers and should only be consulted
as a last resort. Keeping it within reach of the computer can only
diminish the overall enjoyment of the game. However, there are
several errors in the cluebook that the player should make note of:
pg. 19: Maine Holy Mackerel Tournament. Piranha should be the
last word in the fourth group.

pg. 21: Minnesota Trout-o-Rama. The
across answer to Power or Influence
should be Clout and not Doubt.
pg. 25: Nebraska Toadstool Park.
Come far should be Come so far and
the last word is Sun not Run.
pg. 29: New Jersey Wild West
Museum. Add Jammers to the vertical
words list and Beamer to the Diagonal
words list.
pg. 35: Ohio Seaworld: Combine the
words Pearl and Nautilus to make a
single word PEARLYNAUTILUS.
Are We There, Yet? is a fun romp
across the familiar U.S.A. with stops in
all the strangest places not likely to appear on most road maps. These are all
actual places and, as a reward sequence, there is both a humorous dialog and a brief description of
the attraction provided upon the successful completion of each puzzle.
This reviewer actually saw the Busch Stadium National Bowling
Hall of Fame and Museum on a recent trip to St. Louis and can, at
least, vouch for its existence. [Ed. Note: We hope he was only driving past.] There are also humorous animated film clips of the Mallard family along the way that always end in a revealing snapshot for
the family album. Between the gingerbread that surrounds the puzzles and the puzzles themselves, hours tend to slip away as players
keep telling themselves, "Just one more and then I am going to stop
for the day." Are We There, Yet? is a puzzle bonanza that should be
sampled by all conundrum connoisseurs.

OPINION

Scorpion's View
Accolade's Elvira II:
Scorpia Critiques the "E"motion Pictures
as told by Scorpia

per casting, but it's much better than
nothing. Having a good supply of this
spell on hand could save your life.

Scorpia is an experienced and
respected adventure game expert.
CGW is pleased to be able to provide
this forum for her distinctive and
often controversial perspective.

Magic in this game is a bit different
from the previous one. Spells still have to
be mixed, but now you do it yourself. Instead of hunting for herbs, you look for a
variety of objects that are placed on a
page in your spell book and mixed to cre
ate the incantations you need.

Elvira

II: The Jaws of Cerberus requires garners to perform another
rescue mission. Last time, garners
had to save Elvira from an evil relative of
hers. This time, they have to save the big
E and what's left of her movie venture,
Black Widow Productions, from the
hands (jaws?) of a three-headed demon
called Cerberus.

So there are two goals here: freeing Elvira, and banishing Cerberus from this
plane of existence. Unfortunately, I won't
be able to tell you much about the end
portion (getting rid of the demon), since I
was unable to finish the game. The
reasons for this will become clear a little
later.
Elvira II begins just outside the gates of

the movie studio. Here, you choose
which of four characters you want to
play in the game: stuntman, comput er
programmer, private eye or knifethrower. The only difference among them
is the starting values of their attributes;
otherwise they all have pretty much the
same abilities.
Overall, the private eye is the bestbalanced of the four. While he isn't outstanding in anything, neither is he deficient in anything, and his beginning attributes are all above average. This is important, as you must use both fighting
skills and magic to get through the game.
Character stats do increase with level
gains, but they are not big increases and
you will be able to get no higher than
level ten. Magic points (necessary for
spellcasting) are equal to twice your intelligence, and these renew slowly after
spell use. Obviously, the better your intelligence rating, the more points you have,

and the more spells you can cast before
running out of "juice."
Strength, Weapon Skill and Weapon Accuracy are important for hand-to-hand
combat. This is how you will dispose of
most of the monsters you come across,
so
ittleyou can't neglect them. Life will be a
tle easier (not to mention longer) if
ratings in thes areas are good ones.

l

Unlike the earlier game, hit points are
,
no longer generic. While you have an
overall hit point rating, this is not as important as the values for individual body
parts: legs, arms, torso and head. Thus,
you might have 30 hit points total, but
each area itself has only five points.
An arm or leg brought down to zero becomes useless; it might even be cut/bitten off (in which case, you have a big
problem), A head brought to zero is an
even bigger problem: you're dead. It's important to keep an eye on the upper left
corner of the screen, which displays the
hit points for each body area, and heal injured parts as quickly as possible.
Healing can only be done with spells;
hit points do not renew over time the
way magic points do. There are several
healing spells in the game, of varying
potency and power cost. You begin only
with the minor Healing Hands, which restores just a small number of hit points

Some spells are virtually free: they require no ingredients at all. Healing Hands
and Ice Dart (a minor attack spell) are
two of them. You can mix up as many as
you want at almost any time. Other
spells have ingredients that are not easy
to find or come by, and it may be a long
time in the game before you're able to
whip up a few of them.
Fortunately, if you place an incorrect ingredient on the spell page, nothing happens to it. The game simply informs you
that the ingredients are incorrect, and
they stay in your inventory. So, you can
experiment with different objects as cornponents without fear of losing anything...
t I ast, up to a point. That point will be
&cussed a little further on.
Once a spell has been mixed up (you
may get more than one spell per mixing,
depending on the ingredients and your intelligence at the time of mixing), an icon
representing that spell appears in your inventory. You can click on this icon almost any time to recall what spell it is,
and how many you have left.
To cast a spell, you click on the
spellcasting icon on the right side of the
screen. Your regular inventory is replaced
with a display of all spells available, and
you simply click on the one you want to
cast. This special display can be called
up and left on the screen, which is handy
for those moments when you want your
spells ready for an important battle.
Melee combat is a little like before, but
not completely. When fighting, the cursor

OPINION
changes to a small sword icon (regardless of what weapon you're using), and
you click this icon on your opponent.
The damage you do when you hit is
shown by a small light-up bar graph on
the right side of the screen. A similar
graph on the left shows how much
damage the monster is doing to you.
Where you place that icon on a critter
is important, as it indicates the place
you're trying to hit. Different monsters
have different weak points. Skeletons, for
instance, are especially vulnerable in the
legs. One good shot (that hits) to a
skeleton's leg will put it down and out.
You can also try to retreat from combat
if you're taking a beating. Unless there is
a wall right behind, or the circumstances
are special, you can usually back away
from a fight, turn around and move as
quickly as possible to some safer location where you can heal up and restore
magic points (provided, of course, that
the monster on your tail doesn't get to
you first).

fices and dressing rooms, start with
sound stage #2 first.
There is an extremely important reason
for this. Unless you know exactly what
you're doing, you can easily shaft yourself and be unable to complete the
game. It is vital that you get past the
ghost blocking the doorway to the library
beyond and read all the books, as soon
as you can.
Why? Simple: some items that can be
used as spell components also have special uses in the game. Naturally, if you
use up those special items for spells, you
are out of luck. There is no warning of
this when you use these objects to mix
spells. The only way to know is to get
into that library and read the books.
Even that is not a guarantee you won't
go wrong. Consider what happened to
me. I found a secret passage that led to
an evil altar room. On the altar was a
chalice of blood and some black candles.

Once you start investigating the sound
stages, however, much of that atmosphere dissipates into pedestrian
hack-and-slash. The bug caverns behind door 111
and the catacombs under the chapel behind door //3 provide an almost endless
parade of critters to kill, and little else. In
these areas, it's mainly a matter of slogging and hacking through the tunnels
until you reach your goal, and then slogging and hacking your way back again.
Behind door //2 is the Haunted House
set, which is the puzzle part of the game.
There are few (but nasty) monsters to
kill; much of what needs to be done here
is more adventure-related than anything
else. Once you have investigated the of-

So there I was at the end game, with
nowhere to go. Elvira was free, the Indian
shaman in the basement had gotten all
his magic items back (you spend the
major portion of the game retrieving
these objects) and the priest was resurrected, but I was stopped.
One reason I found myself in this plight
was a problem with the save game function. You can have a lot of save game
positions. When you invoke this utility,
you get something like a page in a book,
where you can either type in a new save
name, or overwrite an earlier one.
When a page fills up with saves, you
can start on a new one. However, I could
not get beyond two pages of saves. The
program wrote out what would have
been the first save for page three (it was
there on disk), but was never able to find
it and restore it. So, I had only those first
two pages and eventually, had to overwrite earlier positions.

Copy protection in the game is worked
through a code wheel, and is needed in
several places, so don't lose it. You have
to punch in a number from the wheel to
enter the studio proper and again to get
into any of the three sound stages in the
studio itself. Without the wheel, you won't
get very far.
The beginning is the most effective part
of the game. There are few things more
eerie, more nerve-wracking, than walking
through a deserted building at night.
Especially when you already know that
there are all manner of monsters lurking
about. You hold your breath every time a
door opens, wondering if something is
going to leap out. Every so often, you
turn around to make sure nothing is following you. Each room, each passageway, is filled with an aura of unseen
menace.

It probably wouldn't have mattered
even if I had been able to get the
candles; after all, you need matches to
light them. Matches are a "combustible
substance" and make great fireballs. I
whipped up a batch early on, long before
I knew about the candles needed for the
ritual. That took care of the matches and
I couldn't find any others anywhere.

Thus my only option would be to restore to a very early save I still had, and
replay about 90% of the game. Even had
there been time for this, I am not that
dedicated; one expedition through the
bug caves and catacombs was enough.

After reading the books, I found out
that I'd need the black candles later (for
banishing the demon). No problem; I'd
pick them up when the time came. Unfortunately, when the time did come, I was
stuck. No matter what I did or tried, a
vampire always woke up and killed me
when I approached the altar for the
candles. Even using the Telekinesis spell
did not work to bring the candles to me.

This is an extremely typical European
design which shows a complete lack of
even the most elementary understanding
of the puzzle-solver's mindset. European
gamers do not seem to mind returning
through level upon level of
hack-and-slash in order to get slightly further in the
game. U.S. gamers, who tend to be
heavier on puzzle-solving, are more likely
to move on to a new game. The design
simply runs against the grain of the
domestic gamer. There are too many
places where a player can go wrong and
use up a vital item unknowingly. Everything appears to be set up around the
player getting into the library and reading
the books before doing anything else.

Eventually, I discovered that what had
kept me protected the first time was the
silver cross that is part of your beginning
inventory. However, I had used that cross
a long time ago for a spell. There is
another crucifix in the chapel with the
priest's body, but this has no power to
keep off the vampires.

That is an unwarranted assumption on
the part of the designers, especially as
the game is not obviously linear in
design. You can go almost anywhere at
any time. If a puzzle stumps you, you
can do something else, never realizing
until too late that you've painted yourself
into a corner.

Up above, a group of vampires were
sleeping in the belfry. Not wanting to
overstay my welcome, I nipped across
the room, grabbed the chalice, and beat
a hasty retreat. This was before I had got
ten to the library.

OPINION
At the very least, items needed for special purposes should not have been accepted as spell ingredients, except in
those cases where the item is necessary
to a special spell (as the inscribed prayerbook is needed for Resurrection), and
then, only for that particular spell.
It wouldn't have been hard to display a
message such as "You may need that
later on for something else" when the
player tried to mix a spell with a vital object. Instead, the program merrily accepts whatever fits the component
description, with no warning whatsoever.
You can also find yourself up a creek
by doing the wrong thing in the mad
scientist's lab below the kitchen. One
room has a typical Dr. Frankenstein
setup, complete with monster. If you
should happen to click near its head,
while carrying the wire cutters in your inventory, you automatically sever those
wires. Note that you are not asked if you
want to do this. It just happens. In fact, if
you don't look very carefully at the closeup of the monster's head, you may not
realize this has been done. Then, later

on, when you have to revive the monster
briefly, you may wonder why it's not coming to life when it should be.
When you finally do figure it out, the
only course is, naturally, to restore back
to some earlier save, before you cut the
wires, and replay however much is necessary to get back to where you were
before. This is not fun by any standard.
There are also some minor irritations
I'm not going to bother mentioning, except for the music. You can't turn it off.
There is no command in the game for
"no music/sound," nor is there such an
option when you install the game. You
have a choice of soundboards or PC
speaker, and that's it. If you play into the
early hours, all you can do is fiddle with
the volume control on your sound card (I
pulled the plug on mine; it was easier). I
don't know what people with only the
speaker could do about it.
Overall, Elvira II was a grave disappointment to this columnist and likely to
provide more frustration than fun to any
but the most dedicated player.
Copyright 1992 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

en Not Getting "Stung"
by the Save Problem
In Elvira II, the save game function will
allow the player to save 24 games on a
page. There are two pages available for
saving one's games, for a total of 48
save game "slots," from which previously
saved games may be restored. After one
has filled the 48 "slots," players are
presented with a blank page for both
saving and restoring. This means that
they will need to either rename the 48
previous save files (using the DOS
"RENAME" command) or move the files
to another directory or floppy in order to
restore any further saves.
All of the save games have the DOS suffix of .SAV and are located in the Elvira
directory. So, it is a simple matter to use
the "RENAME" command to change the
suffixes to anything other than .SAV
(one's initials?). If one prefers simply to
move the save files to floppies, 23 save
positions will fit onto a high density (1.2
meg) 5.25" floppy disk. If one performs a
COPY *.SAV A:\ or an XCOPY *.SAV
A:\, DOS will copy 23 files onto the disk.

Foreign Correspondence

Over There
POWERmonger to the POPULous
by Paul Rigby

W

hile many United States consumers may not recognize the
name of award-winning British
developer Bullfrog, the fact remains that
they are the creative minds behind both
Populous and Powermonger. In 1992,
they will unleash a number of new titles
to delight the Populous fans out there.
Currently out on the Amiga (with IBM
available soon) is Populous 2 (P2). So,
what's changed? Well, not a lot, really.
P2 is more of the same, only on a larger
and grander scale. Taking the role of a
Greek god this time, P2 once again asks
the player to make one's people the
most dominant race on the map. The
player races through the worlds attempting to outwit the opposing deity.
Comparisons between PI and P2? Well,
P2 does away with the "book"-look
presentation to offer a floating islands appearance. Graphics are faster and more
detailed. The scenario, based upon Ancient Greece, is more coherent. There are
more worlds (1,000), more varied enemy
gods and a lot more special effects.
However, if Populous 2's one thousand
worlds does not impress garners,
Bullfrog has yet another answer. Jaded
garners can construct a few more worlds
with the Populous: World Editor. With
this program, one can change the
people, places and terrain of the original
game. This means that the user could
produce his own architecture and
"theme." Other changes include altering
the birth/death rates of the people, their
intelligence and amount of Manna
provided by households. It is currently
available on the Amiga with other formats to follow.

To complete this "divine" trio is
Bullfrog's modern adaptation of their
Powermonger game. Called Powermonger: World War I, the player is
shown a map of Western Europe. There
are 175 territories to conquer and one
must bring two-thirds of these areas
under control to win the game. The play
is typically Powermonger-esque with no
real surprises. However, there are obvious WWI slants, including inventions
like tanks, rifles and biplanes. (Yes,
aircraft play a part in this game.) Food is
now called "rations," while communication is instantaneous via the powers of
radio and telegraph. Note: Currently available on the Amiga with other formats to
follow, players must have a copy of the
original Powermonger in order to play
the World War I edition.
On one of the UK's national television
channels, there is an interactive
children's television program known as
Knightmare (described in CGW /190, p.
68). The program utilizes advanced computer gadgetry (I believe there are even a
few turbocharged Amigas in there, somewhere) to generate computer images that
provide suitable puzzles for the kids to
solve in this adventurous role-playing
game. Now, the Mindscape (UK) team
who produced the massive first-person
perspective CRPG Captive, have purchased the Knightmare license in order
to bring the TV studio-based CRPG onto
a personal computer. Naturally,
Mindscape plans to make the games a
little deeper than the ones on broadcast
television, but the game is expected to
feature plenty of puzzles, logic problems
and riddles for the player to solve in the
home version. The player must complete
four scenarios before (dramatic chord)
Lord Fear can be vanquished!
Utilizing the now-classic mix of weaponry and magic, one must wade through a
wide range of monsters. Four characters
can be created, objects can be manipulated and skills can be increased via experience. Knightmare has just been
released for the Amiga and will soon be
available for the Atari ST. The IBM version has yet to be announced. However,
since Captive for the IBM is expected
within the next couple of months, one
would suspect that Knightmare cannot
be far behind.
Team Yankee 2: The Pacific Islands
(TY2), from the UK software house Empire, is due on all formats about the time
this column goes to press. Utilizing the
same 3-D real-time tank simulation
aspects of the original Team Yankee, but
offering bit-mapped graphic enhance-

Foreign Correspondence

ments, 7Y2 is set on a series of Pacific islands overrun by Russian forces. The
player must attempt to regain all of the islands in a series of tank battles (at least
45 such battles). One can decide where
to land on each island and, in fact, in
what order the islands are to be attacked.
Failure to hit crucial communication and
satellite centers will result in the enemy
gaining extra intelligence, thus providing
stiffer opposition. The player is also
responsible for the purchase and renewal
of weapons and men (even second-hand
tanks can be used in an emergency). As
"backers" supply important funds for the
action one's strategy must be accomplished to "impress" as well as be effective strategically.
Impressions has, yet again, gained its
semi-regular spot in this column with the
release of Great Napoleonic Battles
—nowshipgfrAmandtiST
(£29.99) with, as seems to be par for the
course, the IBM version to follow soon.
Three battles are provided along with a
Map Editor, Man Editor and War Editor.
Included battles (Waterloo, Quatre
Bras/Ligny and Marengo) can be
modified and new scenarios can be

generated with the included utilities.
Using a hex-based, turn-based system,
Great Napoleonic Battles includes a twoplayer option.
From Core Design, the UK software
house that delivered Thunderhawk,
comes Heimdall, an action/RPG hybrid
game with an isometric viewpoint. Basing
the plotline upon the previously untapped Norse legends, the player is the
Norse god Heimdall, out to find the lost
weapons hidden by godly mischief
maker Loki. The evil forces are out to
storm the walls of Asgard (the home of
the gods) and the weapons provide the
only real defense (e.g., sword of Odin,
etc.). The game is a fair size. The Amiga
version arrives on five disks, disk one
being a rather impressive graphic introduction. Before one can set off, though,
Heimdall has to take part in three subgames to select his attributes; a team
can be chosen after this section to accompany the hero on his quest. The
quest itself, by the way, takes part within
fifteen islands containing a large amount
of rooms. Heimdall is no Ultima — it is
far too lightweight and action-oriented —
but those who want a CRPG that offers

equal weight to reflexes and synapses
may be attracted to it.
Incidentally, anyone who would like to
contact CGW's foreign correspondent
can do so on CompuServe
(75300,1503) or by mail to 20 Malvern
Road, Liverpool, England, L6 6BW.
Please include a self-addressed stamped
envelope if you would like a reply.
Note: The above games, and any of the
other games mentioned in "Over There"
in past issues, can be obtained from:
Computer Adventure World, 318 Kensington, Liverpool, England, L7 OEY.
Telephone: 01144-51-263-6306.
Premier Mail Order, Trybridge Ltd., 8
Buckwins sq., Burnt Mills, Basildon,
Essex, England, SS13 1BJ. Telephone:
01 144-268-590-766; fax: 01 144-268-590076.
Software City, Unit 4, BDC, 21 Temple
Street, Wolverhampton, WV2 4AN.
Telephone: 01144 902 25304; 24-hour
credit card hotline: 01144 902 25304.
All of the above telephone numbers assume you can dial direct. If you have any
trouble contact the international operator.

Review

thought, and meticulous attention to detail that went into creating the artificial life-form (A-life) presented in the game, the
SimAnts. To faithfully replicate ant behavior, the designers of
SimAnt drew on the Pulitzer Prize-winning book, The Ants.
To be honest, SimAnt probably won't blast the socks off
game jockeys who are used to warping off on a mission to
save the galaxy from an evil empire. Nevertheless, garners
who are willing to come out of hyperspace and down to Earth
for a while won't be disappointed. Although patience and
resourcefulness is the substance of the game, there is enough
ant bloodshed to keep players on their toes, even if they're
bent on carnage. Also, there are a few other surprises. For example, no one should ignore the mystery button; the spider
may have a trick or two up its eight sleeves.
In fact, probing below the surface of the SimAnt game plot
might just reveal that an exciting space opera storyline, for example, and the life struggle of an ant colony have the same
dramatic elements in common. The horrible, nearly indestructible insect-like monster in the movie Alien was, after all, a
souped-up, acid-puking, survivalist ant from a mixed marriage
with a scorpion.

"Ant"ie Maim
The Yellow Ant, the player's alter ego, initiates all critical
decisions about colony life in SimAnt. For example, the Yellow Ant enlists fellow ants to forage, fight, dig nests and post
guards near food. The Yellow Ant can pick things up and put
them down, handy for building pebble barricades against the
red ants. When a particular action is completed, the Yellow
Ant can release all or some of the recruits to go about their
business.

The Game Is Afoot

Leading an ant army is dangerous duty. The Yellow Ant
meets death in a variety of ways: spider jaws, ant combat, being chewed to pieces by an ant lion or finding itself unceremoniously chopped up in the lawn mower, to
name a few. Fortunately for the squeamish, the yucky
sounds accompanying the superbly rendered and graphically gruesome mayhem can be toggled off.

Re"ant"carnation
by Maxwell Eden
TITLE:

SimAnt:
The Electronic Ant Colony
SYSTEMS:
Amiga, IBM, Macintosh
PRICE:
$59.95
PROTECTION: None
DESIGNER:
Will Wright
PUBLISHER:
Maxis Software
Orinda, CA

"Sir, there is a multi-legged creature crawling on your
shoulder." — Mr. Spock?

Mardi Grass
Deceptively simple and seductively intriguing, SimAnt is the
latest system simulation from Maxis. The game casts the player
in the role of the Yellow Ant, commander of a black ant colony.
By overcoming insect and human enemies, plus rival red ants
and other perils, the black ants can prevail as masters of the
universe in a suburban backyard.

Although the Yellow Ant dies often, the player is not
penalized for dying. The game continues in transcendental fashion out on six limbs and reincarnation too! Shirley
MacAnt, are you listening? When the Yellow Ant dies,
another Yellow Ant is born from the very next egg laid
by the black queen.
The cycle of dying and continual rebirth of the Yellow
Ant is a stroke of inspiration. Survival of the colony by
protecting the queen is the prime ant directive; the death
of a single ant has about the same significance as a larger, more
complex organism losing a few cells (no big deal!).
Because individual ants are expendable to the colony in real
life, the "reincarnation" convention creatively translates ant behavior into a logical A-life system that draws the player deeper
into the nuances of the SimAnt world. As long as there is a
black colony (meaning there is at least one black queen), there
will be a Yellow Ant for the player to control.

Invasion of a Body Snatcher
Who'll "Ant"e Up?
Fans of Maxis' earlier system simulations, SimCity and SimEarth, will most likely appreciate the research, innovative

The Yellow Ant also has the power to transfer its player-controllable persona to any other live adult black ant. Players will certainly opt for becoming a powerful Yellow soldier ant with its over-

Review

sized crushing mandibles whenever attacking enemies or defending the colony.

ing on circumstances, the player must strike a balance between
caste and behavior management for the colony to thrive.

Players can select from three levels of play with increasingly
faster speed modes for those in a hurry. Although SimAnt's
strength lies in free-form experimentation with the A-life system,
there are points for players inclined to keep score and games
can be saved for continued play at a later time.

While the default autopilot-type modes regulating caste and behavior do a fair job of supervising colony activities, they cannot
always correct for every predicament — that's why there is a Yellow Ant. The player, via a three-way joystick-style panel in the
control windows, can manually override the auto setting to adjust
caste and behavior ratios for unanticipated events such as: the
colony needs more food (increase foraging), the red ants are attacking (breed more soldiers), and so on. For quicker response,
the player can define up to three preset buttons in both the caste
and behavior control windows for strategic moves or emergencies.

Quick game: The Yellow Ant is in charge of one black colony
versus one red colony. The player must gather as much food (antipasto is no doubt an ant favorite) as possible — quickly, attack
the red ants and kill their queen. This game is usually a wrap in
under an hour, one way or the other, since the player loses if the
black queen dies first.
Full game: This game begins like a "Quick" game, but the
play is more complex. It is possibly closest to playing an indefinite game of ant checkers. The Yellow Ant's trail to victory
means taking over the backyard by overcoming the deadly perils
mentioned earlier, annihilating all the competing red ant colonies
(ants take no prisoners), breeding queens and males for nuptial
flights (ant elopes?) to found new colonies and, finally, driving
the human from the scene by infesting the home. Other hazards
include insecticides, ant-crushing human feet and rain (which can
flood nests and kill queens).
In addition to directing the colonization
of the backyard by controlling ant behavior, the player can send the Yellow
Ant to any area that has a black colony.
Choosing a patch that also has a red
colony allows the player to engage the
enemy in mortal combat over disputed
turf. If the Yellow Ant is not an aggressive planner, all the black queens will die
of starvation or be killed by the red ants
as they eventually overrun the yard and
win.
Experimental game: As ant god, the
player creates a custom playing arena
just to see what happens. From a special
experimental tools bar, point and click,
for example, to upset the balance of power by creating more red
ants than black; place scent trails, alarm trails, obstacles, food in
difficult to get at areas, and include mazes to see how the ants
respond. The player decides when the game is over or, once the
individual scenario is invented, a click into Quick game mode
produces the Yellow Ant.

Ants Do Windows
An on-screen tutorial provides the gamer with the basic understanding for controlling the Yellow Ant and the colony's behavior
patterns. Giving orders and getting around the playing field is unobtrusively accomplished through a combination of icon clicking
and speedy keyboard commands that activate actions and windows. A history window displays graphs of black and red ant
statistics, an information window supplies facts and strategic tips
about real ants and a status window provides feedback on the
player's efficiency as an ant. On-line help explaining windows
and icons is always available and helpful.
There are two special control windows. Caste control regulates
what type and percentage of ants are born as breeders, workers
and soldiers. Most ants in a colony are sterile females, including
the workers and soldiers. Behavior control oversees the energy
devoted to ant activities: foraging, digging and nursing. Depend-

To control the Yellow Ant and the behavior of the colony,
players can choose from a wide variety of perspectives: a closeup overhead view of the realistic terrain to a global picture of the
entire backyard, and other useful angles. From the Map Window,
the player can change views, access tools and get analytical data
on the health and growth of the black and red ant colonies. A
cross-section view of the underground shows what's going on inside a particular nest. While in surface view, players with larger
monitors can toggle on the caste and behavior windows (without
crowding the screen) and watch how automatic or manually set
ratios influence what's taking place
among the ants.
The yard level view displays all 192
square patches that make up the game
universe, including the house with the
animated human, dog and cat. Players
can toggle between a full or interior view
of the house. Yard level presents two
perspectives necessary in full games: the
strategic view shows which ant colony
rules a particular patch; the graphic view
displays the relative population of each
patch in bar charts. Also at this level is
the button to begin the mating cycle that
produces more queens, the key to
colonizing the yard.

Ant Misbehavin'
The Macintosh version has a few minor bugs which, while not
detrimental to play, are particularly annoying when compared to
an otherwise fluid design. Sounds are generally solid, but some effects (mostly music) collide and are choppy. Hitting the mystery
button a specific number of times can freeze things up (a minute
can feel like an hour) until a particular cycle has taken place. All
one has to do is toggle off the music and these bugs won't byte.
Also, if a player moves the Yellow Ant to a black colony inside
the house while it's raining, the screen looks like an ant hallucinating from insecticide. Maxis is aware of these bugs and
fixes are in order for the next release. IBM and Amiga versions
are not infested with these problems.

It's a Small World After All
Players seeking a non-linear, unconventional and provocative
strategy simulation will hit paydirt with SimAnt. The game is
easy to get into, stimulating, fun, and becomes increasingly challenging. The depth of game control, while complex, is well-integrated so as not to be a nuisance, plus the SimAnt concept offers fascinating science to boot. Indeed, SimAnt will surely invade and colonize classrooms from elementary school to university and students will love it.

The two Wing Commanders continue to blow
away all corners, according to our readers.
Sports continue a strong run on the Top Ten
with a ninth-place debut for Bethesda's
Wayne Gretzky Hockey II. WGHII is the third
sports game to break into the Top Ten in the
past two months.

Sierra's Police Quest 3 showed a dramatic
rise in CGW Poll #90. SSI's Western Front
showed an equally dramatic drop, but still held
onto third place in the Wargame category.
(However, Warlords is ready and waiting to get
back on the charts.) The Secret of Monkey
Island is showing a steady climb.

Bestseller List

Review

Mental Mosaics
Inline Design's Tesserae
by R. Bradley Andrews
TITLE:
Tesserae
SYSTEM:
Macintosh
PRICE:
$49.95
PROTECTION: None
DESIGNER:
Nicholas Schlott
PUBLISHER:
Inline Designs
5 West Mountain Road
Sharon, CT 06069

T

rue puzzle games have a small, but loyal, following. With

the playing board and has a geometric shape drawn on its surface: circle, plus or square, according to the colors shown.

products ranging from card games to more generic puzzles
like those in Cliff Johnson's 3 in Three or Carol Manley's
Are We There Yet?, a good computer interface can make these
even more accessible without all the bookkeeping required in
most board and paper versions.

The secondary pieces, naturally enough, represent one of the
possible pairs of primaries, combining both the color and shape
of the component pieces. Tertiaries are a combination of all
three primaries and are, therefore, presented as colored gray,
with all three shapes drawn on their surfaces.

Tesserae is yet another solid entry into this field. It appears to
be based on a shareware game released a while back, but is
greatly enhanced from there. Many new elements have been
added and it virtually looks like a brand new product.

Pieces are moved by jumping, in any of the eight grid directions, over other pieces in a manner similar to checkers. The
moves are a bit difficult to explain, but the on-line rules quickly
explain the various valid moves through interactive presentations
of them in action. Basically, primaries are easier to both jump
with and to clear off the board. In addition to the rules, selecting
a piece automatically lists all valid destinations and a "Show all
valid moves" option is available from the menu.

"Tessera" is the root word for the game's name (Tesserae is
plural) and refers to the colored stone or glass that forms a building block for mosaic patterns. As the alert reader has already surmised, these "tiles" serve as the fundamental pieces of the game.
The game's action is very simple. Each game begins with
pieces randomly arranged about the surface of the playing
board. The object is to clear off all but one final piece. The game
will end when this point is reached or when no further legal
moves are possible.
There are seven different varieties of tesserae to enhance the
player's challenge. Primaries are the basic building blocks and
are, in turn, represented by one of the three primary colors: red,
yellow or blue. Each piece is the size of a square grid element of

A Switch in Time, Plays Nine (Game Play)
Shortly after starting the game, players will be ready to attempt
one of the game's nine boards (which range in configuration
from the fairly easy eight-by-six rectangular board to the challenging eleven by seven X-shaped board). These are ordered according to difficulty and, as they get more difficult, contain more composite pieces in the initial layout. The game's three difficulty
levels also affect this initial layout and, of course, increase the difficulty of clearing the board. Players have the option of playing

Review

any individual board configurations as a single game, aiming for
the fewest remaining pieces in the fewest number of jumps.
Players may also compete in a tournament mode in which all
nine boards must be completed in sequence. In the tournament
mode, the goal is to complete all the boards with the lowest combined minimum.

Colorful Challenge (Graphics)
While the game, like any mosaic, is best in color and, like
many products with quality graphics, can use both 4-bit and 8-bit
color modes, it plays just fine in black and white. The only loss is
that all pieces are colored gray and must be differentiated solely
by the shape drawn on the tile. 8-bit color is, naturally, by far the
best and looks very nice. Nevertheless, the game uses a clever
routine that causes the program to automatically sense any changes in color depth during play and to immediately adjust the
artwork accordingly. This is a nice touch that many games skip.
Connoisseurs of computerized conundrums will also appreciate
the many options that the game provides for modifying the use
of sounds, music and the animation speed. While the sound and
music in the game are minimal, since it doesn't require much of
either, those included are well done and complement play. Watching the final piece cycle through a series of colors and shapes,
crumble apart and then blow away with the wind, complete with
sound effects, is a very satisfying climax to a successful game.

Follow the Flashing Dot (Mechanics)
The interface is simple, and moving a piece involves clicking

first on the jumping piece and then on a valid destination (highlighted with a flashing dot). Moves are cleared by clicking on any
place other than a valid destination. The game will notify the
player if no further moves are possible.
Experienced garners will quickly note that each beginning tile
layout is completely random. Therefore, some layouts are virtually impossible to clear on the more complicated boards. Fortunately, the game supports "Undo" and "Redo" commands which
enable players to try various different strategies to solve each individual board. Plus, the commands are most useful toward the
end of the puzzle when the iterations become geometrically more
complex.
Tesserae's only possible weakness seems to be that one can
lose interest in simply playing solitaire with the game after one
finally figures a strategy for clearing all twenty-seven of the different difficulty level/board type combinations. However, this will
take quite a while for most garners to accomplish and provided
several weeks of active play for this reviewer.
Fortunately, the inclusion of a high score list for each board/difficulty level combination and each type of tournament play featured in the game not only mitigates this problem, but also
provides a goal for further play.
Tesserae is a fine game from a very solid Macintosh game company and should be seriously considered by any Macintosh
owner. It provides many hours of challenge with a simple but
elegant design that is sure to please anyone who enjoys using
his or her head.

Review

"DOS"ed in Space
TITLE:
Hyperspeed
SYSTEM:
IBM
PROTECTION: Document Look-Up
PRICE:
$59.95
DESIGNERS:
Sandy Petersen
and Andy Hollis
PUBLISHER:
Microprose
Hunt Valley, MD

E

xploration and
colonization serve as
the foundation for
many science fiction
stories. In Hyperspeed,
players find themselves
seeking out alien life-forms
in something of the same
manner in which a certain
25-year-old televis-ion
show sought them out. Of course, Hyperspeed will not appear
alien to all gamers — many will recognize it as a direct descendent of Lightspeed.
In Hyperspeed, as in Lightspeed (since the latter is actually a
part of the former), the player is placed in the far future. Earth is
an ecological wasteland and the population must evacuate to
other worlds in order to give Earth time to recover from the
wounds of humanity. Huge Conestoga-class transport ships are
sent out to seed other clusters with human populations. The
player, in turn, pilots a Trailblazer-series dreadnought ahead of
the transports to explore new worlds, mine resources, make
treaties and rid the cluster of any aliens that are a threat to the
human colonies.
The player must interact with the aliens and decide how well
they will coexist with the human colonies. Hyperspeed's main
claim to fame over some space opera-style computer games is
this player-directed open-endedness. The player is left to choose
which direction to take, which aliens to make peace with and
which ones to destroy. There are moral decisions that must be
made with no "right" answers imposed by the game designers.
Every decision not only affects the way individual alien races interact with the player, but may also affect the way certain other
alien races deal with the player.
As noted earlier, Lightspeed is actually part of Hyperspeed.
That is, the two star clusters from Lightspeed are the first two of
four in Hyperspeed. The keystrokes and commands are also the
same. This may disappoint some who have been waiting for a
new add-on disk for Lightspeed or the much rumored
Lightspeed II, both of which have been speculated about on the
on-line services since Lightspeed first appeared.
Hyperspeed is both of these, an enhancement and a sequel.
Many more aliens have been added, as well as two very large
star clusters. The game has been given a Sierra-style game introduction in which the player is given the history and goal of the
game, a preview of some of the alien ships and is treated to a
boarding and launching sequence.
The game interface is easy to use and well conceived. The
player serves as a one-man crew, handling navigation, defenses
and maintenance of the engine room, as well as any piloting. All
of these jobs can be controlled with a combination of keyboard,

mouse and joystick. The status of ship systems can be
monitored from small icons positioned around the main
viewer, making it easy to assess damage during battle and
decide if a quick trip to the engine room is called for. "Buttons" are used extensively for most operations and flight
controls can be toggled between the traditional airplanestyle controls and directional control. Navigation is especially easy, since the player is given a 3-D rotating navigational screen and simply chooses a destination and
presses one of two "buttons" on the controls. Once the
destination is selected, the player uses the spindrive to
travel to that system.
Along the way, the player may be attacked or have a
ship enter into its space. Being attacked drops the
player to normal speed. Then, the player must either
meet the aliens' demands or defeat them in battle in
order to continue to a selected destination. The player
is given the option of attack in the case of another ship
crossing the player's path.

It is possible to escape from any combat by using the
escape pod. However, using this method of escape
destroys ten components from one's engine room.
Using an escape pod will return the player to his or her
home base and a new ship. Naturally, this maneuver
consumes valuable time and the player loses all inventory from the previous ship.

Orientation for Pilots (Game Play)
When entering a new system, the first order of business is to
launch a probe. If the system is unoccupied, an information
screen with the type, temperature, atmosphere and resources of
each planet will be displayed. Resources can be mined from
planets by launching mining complexes. The ship can only carry
three mining complexes, so some systems will require several
visits in order to claim all resources.
If alien ships are present and no probe is launched or any movement is made toward the aliens, combat will automatically result.
Therefore, communication with alien races is vital to the success
of any pilot. The communications interface may look simplistic
at first, but it offers plenty of information. One can get descriptions of aliens, initiate trading transactions and forge peace
treaties. The player must not only read between the lines of communication, but also watch the body language of the alien itself.
A clear example of this is found in the third cluster, Sassanid. In
this cluster there is an alien race of doglike creatures known as
the Halicot. Inquiries about either the Zeveult or Automata cause
the Halicots' ears to stand up, and they duck for cover. Obviously, these races strike fear into the Halicot but what that means to
the human race is for the player to discover.
Trade is the only means by which the player can enhance his
ship with new components and obtain rare planetary resources.
The trade screen is split in half, with the player's resources on
the left and the alien offerings on the right. The player selects
needed items while offering items from his stores in trade. A slide
bar indicates how well balanced the current trade is; acceptance
comes only when the trade is balanced. Once an equitable deal
is arranged, the player accepts the trade and can go directly to
the engine room to use the newly acquired parts or return to the
communications screen.
The engine room is a wonderful part of the game. All systems
in the engine room are constructed from components. Many components can be used in several different systems and extra components are kept in reserve for future use. To fill an empty space
or replace a damaged component, the player clicks on a component space and a new component is taken from reserves and

Review

inserted. The spindrive, thrusters, forward and rear screens,
blaster turret and main guns are all systems which can be accessed on this screen. At the start of the game, each system is
at some fraction of full power. So, to reach maximum efficiency,
the player must add to and enhance each system. For example,
the player will want to enhance the spindrive system early on,
since this will increase fuel efficiency. Players will soon learn that
shifting components between combat and drive systems can
help a player early on, as long as they are ready to make some
quick changes should combat be unexpectedly encountered.
Combat, while not the main focus, does become necessary.
The Trailblazer carries a ten-missile chassis that can carry either
guided missiles, fighters or kamikazes. Naturally, each type of
weapon has its particular strength. Guided missiles can be
launched in a "fire and forget" mode at moving targets; precision
runs at alien ship's defenses can be executed with a fighter and
defenses can be neutralized when a kamikaze delivers the maximum amount of damage. All of the alien ships are unique and
have different defenses, so each one is its own puzzle.
As for defense, the blaster turret is the player's primary
weapon, since it allows for fast 360-degree movement and is
good for attacking enemy fighters and incoming missiles. Because of the Trailblazer's size and speed, the main gun is relatively ineffective against agile fighters and is best used for long-range
attacks on large ships and star bases.
Time is of the essence in the protagonist's quest for a new
home for the colonists, since they can only survive so long in
transit. The colony status screen displays the number of claimed
resources; in each cluster the player will have to secure a set

amount of each resource. Also displayed are the races that have
been eliminated from the cluster, peace treaties secured and the
availability of a suitable planet for the player's colonists. A performance rating lets the player know how well he or she is doing in
the cluster.
New players will want to establish trade and fuel supply routes
early in the game. Most will find trade to be useful in accumulating parts and stocking extras. One should always use the component value screen in order to exploit differences in component
values between alien races (arbitraging); this will save trips back
to home base for additional data casings.
Also, one should always take the time to secure alien-specific
resources before attacking or eliminating an alien race. When access to specific components has been cut off, a last-ditch escape
pod trip can restore the needed components to your ship at a
heavy price in time and lost stores. The player is allowed a large
number of saves and can use them to explore what-if situations,
allowing the player to take a step back from a wrong decision.

Should We Get "Hyper?" (Conclusions)
With so many space-related games on the market, it's hard for
players to decide which ones to add to their collections of
software. Shoot-'em-up-style space arcade games and pure
strategy games are abundant on the software shelves. Hyperspeed offers a refreshing change of pace to this genre, a kinder,
gentler one that centers around exploration and communication,
with combat playing a secondary role. Hyperspeed will reward
players with smoothly animated graphics, excellent sound and a
well-developed, sometimes tongue-in-cheek, storyline.

Game Hints

Scorpion's Tale
Sierra's Robin Hood: Conquests of the Longbow

S

igh. They seem to be making the
winters shorter every year. Just
when I've gotten cozily settled in for
the cold months... poof! Spring rears its
ugly head again. Of course, you probably
don't mind; I bet you're the type that takes
off for warm spots when the chill winds
blow — someplace sunny and bright and
secluded, like the woods of Merrie Olde
England.
Robin Hood: Conquests of the Longbow
gives you the chance to lead the Merry Men
of Sherwood Forest, romance Maid Marian,
perform assorted rescues and outwit the
evil Sheriff of Nottingham. Most of this is
done in adventure game-style, although
there are a couple of places in the game
where a bit of arcade action is necessary.
Fortunately, you can adjust the arcade difficulty from really hard to pushover (practically an automatic win), so getting past
these sequences can be easy or difficult as
you choose. The downside is that your
score depends, in part, on the difficulty
level. The higher the difficulty, the better
your score will be. On the upside, you can
complete the game without garnering a perfect score.
In fact, you can finish this one without
doing a lot. Maid Marian and the Merry Men
will usually be able to pull off whatever
Robin doesn't manage. However, this will
be reflected in both the score and the everdiminishing number of outlaws throughout
the game. So, the more Robin does on his
own, the better.
Mapping isn't needed in this game, except
in one spot. Most travel is accomplished by
calling up the map of Sherwood and environs, and simply clicking on where you
want Robin to visit. In some indoor locations (such as the two monasteries), Robin
stands on a floor plan, rather like the one in
Conquests of Camelot, and you click on
the place you want him to go.
This is also a very linear adventure,
marked by days. Each day begins and
ends at Robin's hidden camp in Sherwood.
A day usually doesn't end until Robin has
done everything he's supposed to (the
famous Sierra "Must Do"s) but there are
exceptions. For instance, if Robin is unable
to rescue the Widow's sons, the day will
end with the Merry Men having performed
the operation in the meantime.
Day 1: A good time to visit the locations
on the map. Robin will have to find the outlook and the archery glade on his own.
(Neither are far away; watch to see which

bad guys, of course) and retrieve a special
scroll. He won't, however, get around to
that now, but as someone once said, tomorrow is another day (and if this day hasn't
ended yet, perhaps a visit to other locations
will help).
Day 5: Now, things begin to get interesting. Robin needs a way of getting into that
monastery, and a quarterstaff duel is the
only means of obtaining the necessary
items. I found it easier to use the mouse for
this sequence; it's simple, but be sure to
read the docs so you know what you're
doing.

ways Little John and Will Scarlet go.) After
that, the outlook will appear on the map,
but not the glade (for reasons I've never
determined). Robin can practice at the
glade for as long as you like and he can
come back for more practice most
anytime. At day's end, Robin overindulges
in ale and dreams of Maid Marian.
Day 2: Well well, perhaps it was more
than a mere dream. Robin wakes up, clutching half an emerald heart. Where could that
have come from? Even the Merry Men have
no good answers to this question. However,
mysteries must be set aside when Will tells
Robin that a cobbler in town wants to see
him on an urgent matter — and that Robin
must bring a woman's slipper as proof of
identity. Hmm, how might he get such an
item? The Widow isn't likely to oblige. Now,
what other women has Robin seen lately —
and where?
Day 3: Robin has the slipper. Now, he

has to get into Nottingham. Unfortunately,
he's become too famous to just stroll in
through the gates wearing that rather distinctive Lincoln green outfit. Looks like a little disguise is necessary here. Once Robin
has that, he can finally visit Lobb (the cobbler) and learn about the treachery of
Prince John, the Sheriff and a few other
not-so-nice people. Now Robin has a real mission in life: raising money for King
Richard's ransom. (Too bad there was no
TV in those days; a telethon would have
been much faster and easier — but possibly
not as much fun!)
Day 4: Time to have a real chat with
Marian at last. In this game, Marian is much
more than a mere love interest; she also
happens to be a Druid and very active in
the underground working for Richard's
release. She has a little request for Robin:
enter the Monastery of the Fens (run by

At the monastery, Robin will have to pass
a test to prove he's a member of the order.
This is part of the game's copy protection.
Open the manual to the pages with the
gem lore. Read the Guardian's clues carefully, then pick the proper gems. Since one
mistake here will be the end of Robin, it's a
good idea to save before talking to the
monk at the door.
Once inside, a little exploration will quickly bring Robin to the room that has
Marian's scroll. Make sure Robin reads the
others, most especially the one about the
monastery's history; this information will
come in handy later.
A further tour of the premises turns up
Fulk, King Richard's jester, who is being tortured by the Prior. (Like I said, this place is
run by bad guys.) Fulk, however, is suspicious and won't leave until Robin brings
him a scroll. So, it's back to the Scribe
Room for Robin.
This time, however, the Prior is there —
and guess what he's examining? Right,
Fulk's scroll. Somehow, Robin will have to
find a way to get the Prior out of the room
so he can snarf the scroll. This is likely to
be thirsty work.
Now, Robin and Fulk can leave this den
of iniquity. The front door is out of the question, but Fulk knows of a secret exit. Well,
he knows part of it, anyway. Getting the
grate open is something Robin has to figure
out on his own. Here's where that history
lesson can prove handy.
After a few tense minutes, Robin and Fulk
make it safely to shore. Fulk goes on his
way, but gives Robin the scroll and a special ring before he leaves. Both of these will
be useful later.
Day 6: Another day of full activity for
Robin. Much brings news that the Widow's
three sons were betrayed in town, and imprisoned in the Sheriff's castle. Unless

Game Hints

they're rescued soon, all three will hang.
Time for another rescue!
First, of course, Robin needs another disguise. This is a simple matter, and before
long, our hero is wandering around the
monastery in Nottingham. Now is a good
time to go out the back way and through
the maze to the door in the hedge. This is
the only time in the game you need to do
any mapping, and it's important to know
how to get to that door quickly later on.
After this little excursion, it's time for Robin
to have a chat with the Abbot (sorry, no
Costello), who sends him off for a refill of
ale.
At the tavern, Robin should play Nine
Men's Morris. Here, you will have to rely on
your own abilities; even with arcade set to
the bottom, you can't win automatically
(however, the difficulty setting determines
how smart your opponent will be).
Now, Robin needs to find out about the
shortcut back to the monastery. This is a
very interesting shortcut, with two tunnels.
One leads to the Abbot, the other to the
castle dungeon. It's best to return to the
Abbot first and hand over the ale.

randomly each time from a pool of riddles)
and you're on your own, here. There are no
clues anywhere to the answers; you must
figure them out yourself, based on the contents of the riddles alone.
Day 8: Actually, several uneventful days
have passed, and it's now time to visit the
Fair. Not only does Robin have to pass
along the scroll, there's that archery contest, with a gold arrow as first prize — a
prize that would certainly help toward filling
the pot for Richard's ransom.
Of course, this calls for yet another disguise. After a visit to the Costume Provision
Place, Robin is ready for the Fair. This part
is very simple. Handing off the scroll is
easy, and talking to the various fair-goers is
fun. (Although not necessary to completing
the game, you have time to chat around.)
Then it's time for the archery contest. You
have to be careful in the first two rounds
and shoot fairly well. The final round, one
arrow from each contestant, is a bit rigged
in Robin's favor. That's the only explanation
for my being able to pull off the famous
"split the arrow down the middle" stunt.

When the monastery portion is finished,
it's time to rescue the three boys. This
would not be difficult, except for the two
guards on duty. Hmmm. One of them sure
has a powerful thirst. (Wonder if he's related to the Abbot?) Too bad he's broke
and can't afford the ale he craves. I wonder
if Robin could do something about that?

Once Robin knows the word, he can open
the box and take the Ring of Fire. He won't
need it for awhile yet, though, so don't be
in too much of a rush to put it on.
Speaking of rushes (ahem), Robin still
has that hand scroll Marian wanted, and
now is as good a time as any to return it to
her. She teaches him the secret Druid hand
code (the hand and letters are printed in
the hard copy manual), then asks Robin to
pass the scroll along to the Queen's Spy at
Saturday's fair. She also warns Robin that
dark times are ahead, and he should gain
the protection of the Green Man, who lives
in the giant oak tree.
Robin can't wake or talk to the Green
Man on his own; he'll need a little (and I
mean little) help. Some careful thought on
this, however, should net you the solution.
Even more thought will be necessary
when Robin does talk to the Green Man. He
has three riddles to ask (these are chosen

Each of the five has a different rescue
plan. Robin must choose one of them; he
can't formulate his own. All of them will
work. Some, however, will work better than
others, and one (as you might suspect)
works the best. Which? Well, you didn't go
through that maze just to pass the time.
Think about it.
Day 11: Finally, the big treasure trove is
on its way from York. This is almost a
replay of yesterday's events. The only difference is that the plans relate to taking the
treasure train, rather than rescuing Marian.
As before, Robin must choose one of them,
and there is a "best plan" among them. I
wouldn't fool around with those soldiers, in
your place. The sooner they're eliminated,
the better.
Day 12: Once again, the Sheriff sends his
men to scour Sherwood (he was a trifle
peeved over losing the treasure). Robin can
avoid this the same way he did last time.
Then he can go talk to the Queen's Knight,
hand over all the money he's raised and,
maybe, take a little vacation.
Only there's something a bit suspicious
about this Knight. For one thing, he's pretty
rude. For another, he doesn't recognize the
special password. Uh, oh! Looks like the opposition got wind of the plan and sent in a
ringer. This is not good.

With the guards out of the way, bringing
the boys up from the pit is easy. Then, it's
just a matter of choosing the right way out
of the place, and before long, the widow is
reunited with her sons. She also gives
Robin a small golden net.
Day 7: First off, let's take a look now at
Fulk's scroll. This contains the secret word
that opens the Abbot's box. Naturally, it
isn't just spelled out in plain English. Then
again, maybe it is, kinda. Like I said, first
things first.

Robin can handle on his own; it's time to
call the Merry Men and see what they can
propose. Be sure to put on the Ring of Fire
first.

Day 13 (lucky number?): Time for
Robin's last act of "derring-do," namely rescuing the real knight. Disguise won't work
this time, but magic certainly will. Magic will
get Robin to the tower and up the tower, as
well. That's the easy part. Even convincing
the Knight to escape is easy.

You still need to aim carefully here, though
Day 9: Morning dawns with an ominous
warning from Will. The Sheriff was not
pleased about the events at the contest and
he's sent his men to scour the forest. This
would be a good time to protect oneself.
After the danger is past, Robin can indulge in a little fun (after all the heavy action of the previous days) and nothing
could be more fun than snookering the
Sheriff, while filling the ransom coffers at
the same time.
Once Robin is properly disguised (don't
overlook the rouge) and inside the castle,
much of what follows is automatic conversation and actions. There are a couple of
things Robin has to do, but they are fairly
obvious. On the other hand, this is the funniest part of the game, so sit back and
enjoy the dialogue (and its aftermath!).
Day 10: Robin's good mood is quickly dispelled when Little John comes running with
news of Marian's imminent immolation at
the hands of the Abbot, who has accused
her of witchcraft. This isn't something

The hard part is getting away safely.
Robin has to climb back down the tower
while dodging boulders. Yes, I'm afraid it's
true: the active portion of the game ends
on an arcade note. You have an opportunity to save the game just as Robin starts
down. I suggest you take it.
That pretty much wraps up the game.
Beyond this point, everything is automatic.
Just sit back and watch the events unfold.
If you've done it all correctly, Robin comes
out with honors and a bride. If you didn't —
well — let's not think about it.
And that, as I see by the old invisible
clock, is pretty much it for now. Remember
if you need help with an adventure game,
you can reach me in the following ways:
On Delphi: Visit the GameSIG (under the
Groups and Clubs menu). On GEnie: Stop
by the Games RoundTable (type: Scorpia
to reach the Games RT). By U.S. Mail
(enclose a self-addressed, stamped envelope if you live in the United States):
Scorpia, P.O. Box 338, Gracie Station, New
York, NY 10028.
Until next time, happy adventuring!
Copyright 1992 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

Survey

Public Domain Computer
Role-Playing Games
by Gerald Graef

C

omputer games have evolved
rapidly in the last decade. Ten
years ago, the market was
dominated by text adventures and games
with, at best, primitive character
graphics. For most players, these games
(e.g., Temple of Apshai, Telengard and
Scott Adams games) were quickly overshadowed by Wizardry and the Ultimas.
Yet, far from vanishing altogether, these
games moved from the commercial
market and now reside in the public
domain.
Today, there are several solid publicdomain CRPGs. In an era in which new
games can become overnight sensations,
only to be relegated to the old disk pile
once they have been solved or the next
game released, these venerable titles
maintain an almost uncanny lure. Perhaps other games' fancy graphics wear
thin. Or perhaps it is a difference in
design; these games present problems to
be solved, but do not specify any particular method by which this must be
done. The most popular of these games
are NetHack, Mona and Ultra-Lam. The
best news is that each has recently seen
a major new version.
Over the last decade of their existence,
beginning with Rogue, the public-domain
games have grown in size and complexity. Hack, one of the earliest games,
was ported to microcomputers, each port
introducing new features. Finally NetHack was created from the best elements of the ports along with a few new
ideas. NetHack is a game which can
now be found on virtually any computer,
usually with only minor cosmetic differences. The current version is NetHack
3.0.10 with 3.1 currently in the works.
Like its predecessors, the goal of NetHack is to wrest the Amulet of Yendor

from the Wizard of Yendor. On the way
to the Wizard, one must build up one's
character, as well as find tools (including
a large assortment of new ones) which
will help. (The warhammer named
Mjollnir — with apologies to Thor — and
the broadsword named Stormbringer —
with apologies to Elric — are especially
helpful.) A major new feature is the special levels — the Tower of Vlad the Impaler, the Castle buried deep in the Earth
and a special endgame level. Other helpful special levels — shops, beehives and
several others — also pop up from time
to time. The game also sports a much increased bestiary. Character generation
consists of simply choosing a character
class. This choice affects early play but
is less important as the character progresses. NetHack is not a completely serious
game, as is clearly seen when playing a
tourist....
Another popular game is Mona.
Named for the lands from J.R.R.
Tolkien's books, the goal of Moria is to
kill the nefarious Balrog. Moria is more
of a hack-and-slash game than NetHack
but sports the most in-depth character
generation of any of the PD games.
Mona has a wide variety of magic items
and effect, as well as a wide variety of
monsters (watch out for Evil Izzy — a
quite annoying thief encountered deep in
the dungeon). An interesting feature new
to version 4 of Mona is a memory connected to the "Look" command. Using
the "Look" command to assess a
monster's potential threat, one is
provided with both a basic description
and a recall of the capabilities of the creature as the protagonist has already encountered them. Like NetHack, the latest
versions have been written to allow easy
porting. With Moria, it is even possible to

transfer save files between some computers: start a character at home on an
IBM PC and take it to work, to play it (at
lunch, of course) on a Unix system.
The third game on our venue is UltraLarn. The original Larn is similar in
many respects to NetHack. The player's
daughter is dying and the only hope is
the Potion of Cure Dia. The problem, of
course, is getting the potion — reputed to
lie in the depths of a volcano inhabited
by dragons, naga and various other creatures. Ultra-Lam is very similar to the
original but features a deeper dungeon,
more monsters and new toys — some of
which are essentially required to win the
game. Whereas the original Lam had no
choices or random elements in character
creation, Ultra-Larn allows the player to
choose a character class. From Wizards
and Fighters to the esoteric "Rambo,"
each makes the opening game a little different, but the class becomes of less importance as one gains power. Believe it
or not, the Rambo class is the most challenging with regard to initial survival because, even though he starts the game
with a Lance of Death — a weapon that
kills any non-demon on a hit — he has
but one hit point. A final note to those
familiar with Lam: the goal and feel of
the game are much the same, but the required strategy is not.
Knowing where to get these public
domain games is either a simple task or
a nearly impossible one. If one has access to a modem, these games can be
found on virtually any moderate-sized network. If a player has access to Internet/Usenet, it is possible to get both the
games and their source code — check
the appropriate Usenet newsgroup for
the current list of archive sites.

Review

by Russell Sipe

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
REVIEWED:
PRICE:
DEVELOPER:
PUBLISHER:

Design Your Own Railroad
IBM, Apple II
IBM
$59.95
Jim Dill
Abracadata
Eugene, OR

obbyists

are curious creatures. Would you spend
hundreds of hard-earned
dollars buying a 3-cent stamp?
A stamp collector would. Would
you willingly subject your body
to freezing temperatures hiking
through slush and mud, muscles
aching, with the promise at the
end of the day of the freezedried food and the hard ground
for a bed? A mountain climber
would. Would you... well, you
get the idea.

H

What is mundane (or even
masochistic) to most people is
magnificent to the hobbyist.
Take trains and model railroading, for example. Most people
get irritated when caught at a
railroad crossing by a slow
freight train. The rail fan revels
in the experience. Most people
think model railroaders a bit daft
(as the British would say), for
spending years and sometimes
small fortunes building a miniature railroad. (By the way, never
refer to a model railroader's
layout as a train set, and never
say it's cute!)

Working on the Railroad
Design Your Own Railroad
(DYORR) is a product for the
railroad hobbyist. DYORR is the
latest in a series of railroad
software products from Abracadata. Earlier titles (Design Your
Own Train and Run Your Own Railroad) were sufficiently
unimpressive to me that DYORR was received with less than
eager anticipation. However, I was pleasantly surprised with what
I saw. Developer Jim Dill (Dill Software) has produced a nifty little product that will interest all model railroaders and rail fans.

DYORR allows the rail fan to
build the model railroad of his
dreams. Nearly every model railroader dreams of the basementsized layout that supports a full
schedule of train activity with
three to six trains operating at
any given time. What we don't
dream about is the years it
takes to build the layout, the
tedious hours of regular maintenance it takes to keep the
layout running, not to mention
the logistics and spousal
problems of setting aside
hundreds of square feet of living
space to support the dream.
DYORR wipes out these
problems. Now, when the little
voice says "If you build it, he
will come," go for your dream.
You always wanted to meet
Casey, right?
The three major elements of
model railroading are present:
track layout, scenery construction and operations. Sample
layouts that come with the program lead you through the
basics of model railroad construction and operations. A Windows-style drop-down menu system accesses all of the
program's features.
The track-drawing tools are a
simple CAD drawing program
that, while not as elegant as the
typical PC CAD program, does give you all the tools you need to
design your railroad as you see fit. Three-way switches, slip
switches and crossovers are all possible. The only feature lacking
in the version we saw was a turntable (although it is planned for
a future version). I had no difficulty in reproducing my own Golden Empire Western N Gauge 11' by 11' railroad in DYORR.

Review

The elementary paint program allows you not only to create
scenery but to draw your own engines, cars, and front view of
depots. It took less than 20 minutes to take an empty flatcar and
add trailers to make a TOFC (Trailer on Flat Car — see photo).

Bumpy Tracks (Problems)
Currently Abracadata is shipping Version 1.2 of DYORR. The
main difference between 1.2 and earlier versions is the addition
of screen scrolling. When following a train around a layout larger
than the screen, you need to redraw the screen to keep the train
visible. In older versions this requires several keystrokes and the
use of the mouse to accomplish. Depending on how tightly you
are zoomed into your layout, the train could pass through the
next screen before you maneuvered to it. This can be frustrating,
to say the least. Version 1.2 solves this problem to a large degree by allowing you to use the arrow and/or keypad to scroll to
adjoining screens. We are told that version 2.0 will make this
scrolling automatic. If you have version 1.0 or 1.1 of DYORR,
Abracadata will upgrade you to 1.2 at no cost. Contact them at
503-342-3030.

ries a cash value. Coupled with the economic elements, DYORR
has a clock feature which allows you to run a schedule against
the clock. Clock speed is set by the user. It is typical for model
railroaders to use "fast clocks" (e.g. a 10:1 fast clock clicks off
one hour every six minutes). DYORR lets you select your time
compression. You can also modify and/or add load types to the
program. (I added "Manufactured Goods" as a generic load that
several of my industries ship.)
These features allow you to construct a railroad that can serve
as a self-created game or puzzle generator. The key here is that
you have to create your own game or puzzle. Outside of the
small handful of sample railroads included in DYORR, it is up to
the user to create his own operating environment. If you enjoy
model railroading, you are probably predisposed to developing
your own "gaming environment." If you are a gamer (but not a
model railroader) be advised that DYORR is not like Sid Meier's
Railroad Tycoon. The "game" in DYORR is not in the box, it is
in your head. It's up to you to use DYORR to create a "game."

Working with Dispatch (Operations)

In summary, if you are a model railroader/rail fan you will find
this product a very enjoyable extension of your chosen hobby
(but be sure to get version 1.2 or later). Non-railroaders (even if
they enjoyed Railroad Tycoon) will either find themselves drawn
into the world of model railroading by DYORR, or find themselves bored stiff. As for me, I love it.

Speaking of operations, DYORR allows you to set up a
economic template on your railroad by giving you the ability to
customize each industry/depot as to the types of cargo they accept/ship. Each type of load (e.g,. coal, milk, lumber, etc.) car-

Dill Software is working on a Mac version of Design Your Own
Railroad. Following the release of the Mac version, they plan to
release DYORR Version 2.0 for the IBM. There may be a Windows version in the future. I hope so.

The cars and engines appear as wire-framed images. Although
solid objects would have been more pleasing to look at, the wireframe cars are functional, and should not detract from operations

Conversions Received

Battle Command (Ocean) IBM
Dragon's Lair: Escape from Singe's Castle
(ReadySoft) IBM
4-D Boxing (Electronic Arts) Amiga
Fireteam 2200 (Raw Entertainment) Amiga
Harpoon Battleset 4 (Three-Sixty) Macintosh
King's Quest V (Sierra) Macintosh
Leisure Suit Larry 5 (Sierra) Amiga
Shadow Sorcerer (SSI) Amiga

Review

Lightning flashes and thunder roars at the old
English mansion. Suddenly, the stormy night is
pierced by an ear-shattering (digitized) scream.
The master detective quickly clicks the computer's
mouse and moves beyond the title screen. Said gumshoe has already deduced that this is the path to the
screen on which the body will be discovered. The
game is, as another master detective once observed,
afoot, and there are gruesome murders
to be solved.
TITLE:

Life Can Be Murder!
U.S. Gold's Murder!
by David Wilson

Murder!
SYSTEM:
Amiga
PRICE:
$44.95
PROTECTION: Document Look-Up
DESIGNERS:
Grant Harrison
and Jason Kingsley
PUBLISHER:
U.S. Gold
San Jose, CA

Such an evening of sleuthing is readily available to gamers who discover
Murder!, a new offering from U.S.
Gold in which the player is challenged
with a number of mysteries as though
he or she was a master detective in
the fictional realm of that English high society made famous by
Virginia Sayers, Agatha Christie and the like. Players roam about
one of a variety of houses, performing the sorts of actions one
would expect to find in a parlor mystery (picking up clues and interviewing one's hosts, the household staff and guests).
Play begins from a screen fashioned after a newspaper. Players
are able to alter the date, the name of the home they will investigate, the type of home (whether it is a house, mansion, estate,
etc.), the difficulty level and even the appearance of their detective. Each alteration affects which mystery the player will have to
solve and the manual indicates that players who customize the
game will uncover over three million different cases to solve.
Once the case is chosen, players are able to move to the scene
of the crime. The object of the game is to discover the murderer,
weapon, motive, etc. as in the boardgame Clue, but much more
"detecting" is available to the Murder! player than the options
available to the classic boardgamer. Detectives can examine a
multitude of objects, interview witnesses and suspects, and check
for fingerprints.

If I Might Ask
Perhaps the most interesting aspect of the game is the interrogation interface. Witnesses can be interviewed about people,
relationships between people, locations and objects. Obviously, a
good detective learns to ask the right questions and there becomes a rhythm to the way an experienced player can "cut to
the chase" in Murder-Is various scenarios. Since the game gives
the player two hours of real time to solve each crime, players will
want to sharpen their technique in order to guarantee that they
can finish before the time deadline. Proper interrogation will go a
long way toward solving a crime and keep the player from
having to continuously click through the interview icons in a
boring, tiresome fashion.
Naturally, when interrogation reveals a pertinent fact, a good
detective makes notes. In Murder!, the interrogation menu allows
for this option, but instead of the player having to use actual pencil and paper to keep track of the evidence, one need only click
on the "note" icon and the facts will be recorded. Computer
game historians will note that this is almost the same basic feature which was available on the Accolade mystery game of
about five years ago, Killed Until Dead. Auto-notepads have
been used somewhat since those days, but not nearly enough.

That's Not What I Heard
The game program offers a variety of sound effects that keep
the game flowing gracefully. The grandfather clock ticks in the
background of certain rooms. Night birds call in the outdoor
areas. The clever and tactful use of these effects keep the player
from going bonkers in the silence that exists during a period of in-

tense problem-solving. The only sound which becomes annoying
is the digitized whispering which occurs whenever people are conversing in the background or whenever the interrogation menu is
summoned.

Ah, But I Have Evidence
No arrest can be made without first locating the murder
weapon. Nevertheless, the present writer thought it something of
a silly facet to this game that a proliferation of murder weapons
seems to be lying all over the house, no matter which residence
one visits. Guns, ropes, whips, skewers, logs, candlesticks, rolling
pins and other artifacts which would be well at home in Scotland
Yard's fabled "Black Museum" adorn nearly every nook and cranny of these grand old manses.
In the simpler levels, the murder weapon always seemed to
have fingerprints on it and was easily established as the murder
weapon. So, finding the weapon and getting prints from it is a
very important step in the investigative process. Players will discover that getting the suspect to pick up another object so that
prints can be obtained for comparison is tricky. This detective
chased one suspect around the house for what seemed like
hours in hopes that he would soon lay down an ashtray so that it
would be possible to compare prints. When this weary gumshoe

Review

finally tired of the chase, it
turned out to be enough
to simply accuse him. Perhaps the program counted
the ashtray he had in his
possession as being
proper evidence.
At any rate, once the
murder weapon and
enough evidence is
gathered, the detective
may make an arrest. Actually, an arrest can be made at any
time after finding the murder weapon, but a sleuth that arrests
the wrong person, or has the wrong evidence, will be dishonored
and humiliated. After losing a game at a point such as this, the
player can simply click back into the same mystery (as long as
he/she has not made any changes on the newspaper icon).
Since the gamer will already have an idea where to search and
who should be interviewed, it should be a snap to bring the case
to a successful and less ignominious conclusion.
The manual is short, but well written. Four of its pages are
devoted to gameplay, while the remaining thirteen pages detail
case histories of some of the most gruesome and notorious murders ever committed. The case histories serve primarily to provide words for copy protection, but also assist the player in getting into the mood of the game.

And The Murderer Was...
Those who only have playing sessions that last less than an
hour or so may resent the fact that there is no save game option. It is obvious why the designers left this option out. The
game is fairly simple and should not really take an hour to com
plete.
This game might have some similarities to the boardgame
Clue, but (as noted earlier) gamers should not be fooled by the
similarity. The program is much more complex and sophisticated
than that. Even so, the game is quickly learned and, after a short
period of time, the mysteries easily solved. This crimesolver
played all levels and discovered that the game is really not difficult at all for a half-way intuitive person. Game patterns are easily discerned, allowing nearly any mystery to be effortlessly
solved after a half dozen games or so.

Elementary, My Dear Reader
Warning: Readers who do not want gameplay simplified by
specific hints should avoid this section.
1. The best suspects are generally near the murder scene, often
with the murder weapon in their hands. Focus the investigation
on these individuals.
2. Play is less confusing in smaller houses because there are
fewer rooms to search for clues.
3. Don't overlook "simple dislike" as a motive for murder. This
seems to be as good a motive as any.
4. Don't be afraid to make an arrest. If the newspaper is not altered upon losing the game, the same mystery can be immediately replayed.
5. Once in awhile, if a player watches extremely closely, he will
notice that, as the screen changes from the newspaper screen to
the play screen, the identity of the true murderer and murder
weapon will blink in a right hand corner of the play screen. This
is a rare occurrence and, probably, just a program glitch. It happened twice for this detective (just when the weary pace of nonstop sleuthing was starting to set in).

Review

As the Worm Turns
by Allen L. Greenberg

T

here

is a moment in many great cartoons when the lead character
turns to his audience and becomes human. It generally happens at
the most implausible of times — the character has run several
yards beyond the edge of a cliff, has looked down to discover his mistake and suddenly understands that gravity is several seconds overdue in
fulfilling its function. Then again, the character may have reached blindly
into a hole to retrieve some valuable object which disappeared inside
mere seconds before, but instead, pulls out a lit firecracker. The character's animated eyes look to the viewer in despair and, for an instant, the
poor creature seems almost to gain a soul. "Dirk the Daring," hero of the
successful series of Dragon's Lair arcade games, is an animated, interactive-cartoon character who faces many such moments in the latest offering from ReadySoft — Escape From Singe's Castle.
Dirk was originally designed by one-time Disney animator Don Bluth,
who is now best known for such features as All Dogs Go to Heaven and
An American Tail. Dirk's adventures, in which Bluth's cinematic animations have replaced conventional computer graphics, are startling when
seen for the first time. However, whatever shock the gamer experiences
at first encountering Dirk is quickly mitigated by the discovery that his
control over the hero is very limited. As in the other Dragon's Lair
games, the screen shows Dirk resolutely striding along when he is interrupted by some life-threatening danger. The player must correctly choose
one of the four cardinal directions towards which the hero must leap or
have him draw his sword and attack. Should the player make the wrong

choice, or even the proper
choice at the wrong instant,
the display switches to an
animation depicting the hero's
death.
One of the most common
complaints with the series is
that these death sequences
fail to give the player any idea
how close his move was to
the proper one or what button
might reward him with
Dirk's survival on the
next attempt. Not quite a
TITLE:
Dragon's Lair:
Escape from Singe's Castle
test of reflexes and, cerSYSTEMS:
Apple IIGS, Atari ST
tainly, not a group of puzIBM with 640K
zles to be solved, the
PRICE:
$59.95
Dragon's Lair games
PROTECTION: Non-Repro Look-Up
can only be completed
PUBLISHER:
ReadySoft
after a long series of trial
Richmond Hill, Ontario, Canada
and error. To many, this
seems little more than a
Pavlovian device intended to train players in pushing buttons. However, the various interactive-cartoon games have earned a following
of players in the coin-op arcades as well as on all types of game
machines and personal computers. For them, Escape will provide a
generous serving of MOTS (More of the Same).
Having saved the ample-breasted Princess Daphne from the
dragon Singe in a previous game, Dirk the Daring now discovers
that she yet remains a captive, this time of the Shapeshifter. Fifteen
different scenes, which feature some two dozen new ways for Dirk
to die, separate him from his beloved — at least until the next sequel. Highlights of this adventure include: a flying horse with no
sense of direction; the Lizard King, whose treasure turns out to be
unexpectedly loyal to its master and a mirror with a very nasty
reflection. The game ends once Dirk uses up three lives or the princess is rescued.
Escape is an easier game to complete than the original Dragon's
Lair, although slightly less spectacular. Rather than dodging eightfoot cue-balls or navigating hostile rivers, Dirk simply skips out of
the way of most dangers and draws his sword in defiance of others.
Completing the game is also made easier by the ability to save a
game in progress on disk.
Graphically, the program contains the silky-smooth cartoon animation which has distinguished the Dragon's Lair and Space Ace
series of games. Only an easily-forgivable roughness around the
edges mars the illusion that the action presented is hand-drawn
rather than digitized. On the IBM, Dragon's Lair 11 supports VGA,
EGA, CGA and Tandy graphics. Sound-Blaster, AdLib, Tandy 1000
sound as well as Pro Audio Spectrum are also supported.
None of the images presented here could hope to compete with
the masterful graphics which have appeared lately in several adventure and role-playing games, yet the quirkiness of Don Bluth's creations have an engaging quality not found elsewhere in computer
entertainment. Dirk the Daring is really a likeable lantern-jawed idiot,
with whom one can easily sympathize for falling in love with the emptyheaded Daphne, who follows him like a five-year-old fixed on her favorite
Ninja Turtle.
It is still to be considered an impressive achievement that ReadySoft
has been able to transfer movie-style animation from the original laserdisc game to digitized media. Equally noteworthy is how quickly the
animations load from the disk into computer memory. Disappointingly,
the audio track which accompanies the program is far less impressive —
the sound of weapons clashing, mixed with the hero's grunts, are more
annoying than entertaining, while the fanfare that repeats each time Dirk
moves on to a new part of the castle might easily have been set aside.
Dragon's Lair II: Escape From Singe's Castle is an odd creature, an
exceptional program which suffers from uninteresting game-play. Rather
than continue to produce more products which resemble each other to
the extent that the sequel resembles the original, perhaps it is time for
ReadySoft to increase the value of their software by adding some "real"
games to their great cartoons. With CD-ROM ready to become part of
mainstream computer media, the gaming community can only welcome
programs which are able to use it well.
It is unfortunate that Dirk never turns to look at his audience before he
dies. Not once does he use his animated charm to exhort a player to try
just a bit harder to save him from yet another gut-rending fate. Perhaps
that is why his followers never seem to tire of watching him die.

Computer gaming in days gone by
They write songs about them. They publish books about them.
Movies and television exploit them. What are they? Memories!
"Memories..."; "Do You Remember..."; "Try to Remember, the
Kind of September..."; "Thanks for the Memories..."
Computer Gaming World has the unique perspective of being
able to document more than ten years of memories in its pages.
"Once Upon a Time" is our new column that will look back at
computer gaming both ten and five years ago. Through CGW's
pages we will be "taking a peek" [term first used in the Nov.-Dec.
1982 issue of CGW] at the history of the fascinating and rapidly
changing hobby which we all love.
So, fair reader, peruse and learn of days gone by. Once upon a
time...

Ten Years Ago
News: On March 10, President Ronald Reagan announced economic sanctions
against Libya as a protest
against its involvement in international terrorism.
Arts and Entertainment:

Chariots of Fire wins the
Oscar for Best Picture. • Top
box office hit of the year will
turn out to be E.T.: The Extraterrestrial. • Tracy Kidder
wins a Pulitzer prize for her
book The Soul of a New
Machine.
Computer Gaming World:

In CGW 2.2 (Mar-Apr 1982)
SSI's Southern Command,
Tigers In The Snow and
Napoleon's Campaign's
1813-1815 were covered.
There was a short fictional
piece based on Muse's Castle
Wolfenstein. The "big" technological breakthrough in Wolfenstein was speech! We were
all entranced when Wolfenstein made the little Apple
II speaker bark out "Halt!"
and "Schwein!" (At least
that's what it sounded like.)
A letter from Joel Billings of SSI ran in COW 2.2 in which he took
Chris Crawford to task over Crawford's article in CGW 1.1, "The Future of Computer Wargaming". In that article Crawford made the
statement that "even a 16K system with cassette only has enough
throughput to handle a good wargame" (remember, this is early
1982). Billings contended in 2.2 that "with only 16K a designer must
constantly simplify his game, taking away options until the game
generally follows the same course every time it is played.... On the
other hand, a 48K game can allow for different scenarios, more random events, and most importantly, more rules which cause each
game to be considerably different from the last one played". Boy,
have times changed!
Steve Rasnic Tern sounded downright prophetic in his article entitled "The Current State of Computer Game Documentation" when
he stated that, "I believe that in the future computer game manuals

will ultimately be part of a multi-media approach including software,
book, playing map and other artifacts — a packaged fantasy world".
Although this approach existed to a limited degree in 1982, it was
nothing like it is today. Some other games covered were Muse's
Robotwar (magazine-run tournament results); SubLogic's A2-FS1
Flight Simulator (Tips); and David's Midnight Magic (review).

Five Years Ago
Events: The "Rev." Jim Bakker resigned his ministry, admitting
that he had had an affair with his church secretary, Jessica Hahn,
seven years before. • AZT is approved by the FDA for treatment of
AIDS patients. • Platoon wins
the Oscar for best picture. •
Best Actor award goes to Paul
Newman in The Color of
Money. • Best Actress is Marlee Matlin for her role in
Children of a Lesser God.
Computer Gaming World:

The March 1987 (1135) issue
contained our coverage of the
Winter Consumer Electronics
Show. In the "Can You
Believe That?" department
was the announcement from
both Atari and Commodore
that they were going to
release MS-DOS computers.
Atari announced the Atari PC
($499-$699 retail, 8088
processor). They also announce plans to develop "an
AT workalike using the 286
processor and one using the
new 386." Commodore announced the PC10-1 and
PC 10-2. Both were to be 8088based computers.
A major theme in the computer game marketplace in
1987 was budget software.
The major software players instituted budget lines. These
games were a mixture of
older U.S. games ("classics")
and imports (typically British
arcade games). This marked
the beginning of the "British Invasion", computer game style.
Playing off of Electronic Arts' successful marketing quip "Simple,
hot and deep", Bing Gordon of EA referred to their budget lines
("Software Classics" and "Amazing") as "Simple, hot and cheap".
Some of the games covered in the issue were: Microprose's Gunship; SSI's Gemstone Healer and Fifty Mission Crush; Electronic
Arts' Starflight and Patton Versus Rommel; Final Frontier's
Space M+A+X; and Simon & Schuster's Star Trek: The
Promethean Prophecy (yes, they used to do software!). The toprated strategy game in the CGW Poll (until recently called "Reader
Input Device") was SSI's Kampfgruppe (now in CGW's Hall of
Fame). The top-rated Adventure game was another Hall of Fame
member, Ultima IV from Origin Systems.
[Ed. Note: Since COW was not a monthly magazine in days gone
by, this column will appear every other month, rather than monthly.]

Computer Flight

ckpit From the Co
by Timothy Trimble

W

ith the technological advancements in microcomputers and
flight simulation software, it
would only seem reasonable that "thirdparty" products supporting flight
simulators would also become more
sophisticated. A few products that are
helping to do this are the Flightmaster
yoke and pedals, MaxxTwo yoke, MaxxPedals, Thrustmaster and the
Thrustmaster joystick.

Flightmaster Products
I he Flightmaster yoke and pedals,
from the Flightmaster company in
Texas, is a good attempt at supporting
the true look and feel of a Cessna 182
airplane. The yoke has the same dimensions as the yoke in a Cessna 182 and in
eludes a throttle lever and a trim knob.
The Flightmaster is also designed with
the computer armchair pilot in mind,
since the case is built for supporting a
computer keyboard. One push button is
installed on the left handle of the yoke
and acts the same as the fire button on a
joystick. The yoke has a cable, which is
four feet long, that plugs into the joystick
port of the computer.
The rudder pedals give a very realistic
feel of the rudder movement that is normally found in a real aircraft, although
the spacing between the pedals is quite a
bit closer than what can be found in an
actual Cessna 182. Centering of the
pedals can sometimes be difficult, but
the smoothness of the rudder movement
helps in making those crosswind approaches. Switches are installed at the

top of the rudder pedals for toe brakes
A cable from the rudder pedals uses a
special connector that plugs into the
case of the yoke.

vide the same feel of the standard rudder
control of an aircraft, since they require
down pressure instead of a horizontal
push with the feet.

A nice addition to the Flightmaster system is a diskette with flight modes for all
of the Microsoft Flight Simulator
aircraft. The disk provides, then, the appropriate system settings for using the
Flightmaster yoke and rudder pedals.

Aside from the unrealistic feel, the
pedals work very well with Microsoft
Flight Simulator. The centering is very
accurate when pressure is released from
one side or the other and the brakes can
be applied by pressing down on both of
the pedals at the same time.

Overall, the Flightmaster is a good attempt at realistic flight controls for both
Microsoft Flight Simulator and
Sublogic's ATP. The yoke has a bit of a
"flimsy" feel to it and prevents tired
armchair pilots from resting their hands
on the handles, but works quite well at
controlling the aircraft. The rudder pedals
are the best part of the Flightmaster system and provide an interesting sense of
realism for those who try the hardware.

MaxxTwo and MaxxPedals
The Maxximum Company has had a
little more experience with making yoke
products for flight simulators. The MaxxTwo yoke is a re-engineered version of
the first Maxx yoke product and it addresses the requests of a lot of armchair
pilots for a more sturdy feel. The MaxxTwo yoke has a clamp that attaches to
the lip of a desk (or table) with two adjustable knobs. There are pushbuttons on
both handles of the yoke which function
as the normal joystick one and two pushbuttons, and a sliding throttle control is
mounted directly under the yoke. The
yoke has a good solid feel to it and
centers itself fairly well. Resistance can
be felt with forward and back pressure
on the yoke and this provides the realism
of air flow pressure against the control
surfaces of the simulated aircraft.
The MaxxPedals also appear to be well
constructed and durable for a lot of use.
They come with a long cable and a Yadapter for a joystick connection, which
allows the use of the MaxxPedals with
any other type of joystick control device.
The pedals resemble two automobile gas
pedals with a spacing of about two inches between them. Although the pedals
have a good solid feel and respond quite
well for rudder control, they do not pro-

Thrustmaster Products
Although the Thrustmaster products
are not directly designed for use with
Microsoft Flight Simulator, they do represent the best attempt yet at providing a
realistic feel for flight control. The Mark I
Weapons Control System (WCS) and
the Flight Control System (FCS) are,
together, the best way to pump perspiration into the palms of any armchair combat pilot.
The WCS is a push/pull throttle control,
similar to the throttle/weapon control
found in jet fighters, with six pushbutton
switches and one three-way toggle
switch, all within easy reach of the
fingers. Mainly designed for use with
products such as Falcon 3.0 (from
Spectrum HoloByte) and other combat
flight simulators, the WCS provides throttle (and afterburner) and weapons control. For example, with Falcon 3.0, the
WCS switches can control flare and chaff
release, target selection, target lock, air
brakes and clearing of target lock,
without requiring the armchair pilot to
touch the computer keyboard. Since
these are functions that are normally
handled through various keystrokes on
the computer keyboard, the WCS
replaces those keystrokes with the
switches and an internal ROM (Read
Only Memory) chip. The WCS plugs into
the keyboard plug on the computer and
the keyboard then plugs into the back of
the WCS. The system has a very sturdy
plastic base that is large enough to
prevent slippage on the desktop while in
the heat of battle.
The FCS provides what would normally
be handled by a joystick, but with a lot of
extras. First of all, the FCS does not

Computer Flight

resemble a standard joystick but, rather,
the flightstick of a combat fighter, complete with contoured grip and
switches/controls in the appropriate
places. With Falcon 3.0, the FCS is able
to control weapon selection, weapon
firing, airbrakes, weapon type selection
(air-to-air or air-to-ground weapons) and
the left/right up/down movement of the
flight stick.
The FCS itself looks like it could survive a direct bomb hit. The base of the
unit is made of metal and the grip is
molded around a metal stem. Resistance
pressure can be felt when moving the
stick, providing a realistic feel. The stick
is not perfect at self-centering but most
armchair pilots will find that they can
learn to manually center the stick, which
becomes a subconscious effort after one
becomes used to the control and feel of
the FCS. Together, the Weapon Control
System and the Flight Control System
represent the most satisfying hardware interface yet for armchair combat pilots.

Gravis Mouse Stick
With the recent release of the new ver-

sion of Microsoft Flight Simulator for
the Macintosh, the average armchair
pilot is reminded of the pain that is endured while trying to fly a simulated
aircraft with a mouse. To resolve this
situation, Gravis has just released the
MouseStick. The MouseStick is a combination of the Gravis SuperMouse Controller (a joystick by any other name)
and a new device called the Gravis
MouseStick Processing Unit (GMPU).
The GMPU allows both the MouseStick
controller and a standard mouse device
to be connected to the Macintosh at the
same time. The MouseStick controller is
very similar to the standard Gravis joystick for IBM compatibles, aside from the
special connector for the GMPU. With the
GMPU, the MouseStick can also be used
in place of the standard mouse.

user for either button one or button two
control. At last! A decent controller for
the Macintosh.

The feel and control of the MouseStick
with Microsoft Flight Simulator is a
great improvement over using the
mouse. The MouseStick does a great job
of self-centering and the resistance pressure can be adjusted to the preference of
the armchair pilot. Two standard joystick
buttons plus a button on the grip are
provided and can be configured by the

So, once again, strapping on my flight
suit, plugging in the twelve-inch bass
speakers into the Soundblaster (speaker
under the seat of course), gripping the
flight controller and shoving the throttle
to the wall, this is Timothy Trimble, From
the Cockpit, heading into the wild blue
yonder!

Summary
Finally, some great add-on products are
being offered for the growing multitude
of armchair pilots. Even though the
products for Microsoft Flight Simulator
are a good start, there is still room for improvement. A combination of the Maxximum yoke with the Flight Master rudder pedals would be effective but the custom connection on the pedals prevents
this from working.
As the flight simulations marketplace
continues to evolve, the armchair pilot
can be guaranteed that there will be
more great products yet to come.

COMPUTER WARGAMING WORLD

From the Front

put up on a computer
monitor, with all the
ease of storage that
presents.

Our "Bit" for the War Effort
by Alan Emrich
ith the 50th anniversary of World
War II still in full swing, we can
thank not only our parents or
grandparents for making the world safe
for democracy, but also for giving us so
many good wargames to play. Reader
response to Computer Wargaming
World and its
magazine-within-the-magazine look and feel has been highly
favorable. Computer wargamers are finding their media niche here among these
pages, even as computer wargame
coverage in traditional board wargame
magazines continues to rate poorly
among their readers.

W

Columbia Games is
considering marketing
this software "as is,"
without the AI, as a lowcost (under $20?) "connectivity" product.
In other words, players who already
enjoy the boardgame EastFront and
have a computer can now widen their opponent base through electronic connectivity, and computer wargamers who are
already connected to each other through
the networks and BBSs will have a new
title to play in Computer EastFront. With
a low production run and (probably)
direct mail-order only sales (to keep packaging and distribution costs down), only
a niche market like wargamers could support such a new endeavor.
But will they?

Welcome home!
We will be using this column to keep
our readers up to date on the latest computer wargaming news, trends and (dare
we say it?) rumors. While this is all fairly
well covered in our Consumer
Electronics Show coverage in this issue
and the next, watch this column in the future for "wargame specific" insider information.

Games Sans Brains

84
Editorial: Our "Bit" for
the War Effort

86
Sneak Preview: Aces of
the Pacific

90
Review: L'Empereur

Recently, Computer Gaming World
ran an editorial article on PRODIGY. It
concerned a trend we see beginning to
emerge in computer wargames and was
inspired by a piece of software that was
brought into our office to preview. The
software was based on the board wargame EastFront by Columbia Games
of Canada. This outstanding "wooden
block"-style boardgame released last summer at the Origins game convention was
put into a software format as almost a
direct translation of the boardgame, allowing for multi-system standardized savegame file transfers (i.e., ASCII save-game
files), modem and direct serial connect
play, plus two players at the same computer or one player manually playing
both sides. Thus, for wargamers who
have an opponent, "Computer EastFront" (for lack of an official title) is a
complete, ready to play computer wargame with one minor exception...
No artificial intelligence (Al).
The meager bit of artificial intelligence
which was included in the program largely concerned itself with the computer
making all the die rolls and making sure
that the game rules were not violated.
Other than that, it was the boardgame

Vox PRODIGY, Vox Dei
When asked of wargamers on the
PRODIGY network (Jump: COMPUTERGAMES, in the Other Games topic on the
bulletin boards where we can be reached
at EXPT40B), the response was effusive.
Here are a few of the comments we
received:
"Three cheers for the new trend in
gaming! ...the Al in most of the wargames around is anything but intelligent." —Bowden Russell
"...nowadays everyone expects Al in
sims, but which of them have really good
AI? We've all seen the myriad [of] wargames come out with Al that can be easily beaten, but there have been few
games that actually encourage twoplayer gaming." —David Grosskurth
"I don't agree that a 3' x 6' map is essential; it's fun, but a well-designed VGA
computer presentation works very well
(take Harpoon, Railroad Tycoon and
Civilization as examples of alternate approaches). Vacuum cleaners, cats and
kids could all fit [in the same place and
time as a wargame].
"If this idea of games without Al were
taken seriously, I think we could expand
the overall market. I do think that work
on improving Al is more important, but it
seems to me that we certainly need
both." —Edwin "Rip" Smith
Please, use the CGW Poll card in this
issue to hand write your opinions on the
subject of games without artificial intelligence. Is it an idea destined for a place
in the sun, or waste of programming
time and effort?

Sneak Preview

Corsairs and Crosshairs,
Damon Slye's Aces of the

earl Harbor, Black Sheep Squadron,
Jimmy Doolittle's raid on Tokyo,
"Tokyo Express" and "The Slot"
are all familiar names that lend a sense
of atmosphere to the United States' communal memories of World War II action
in the Pacific Theater. The image of
aviator as aerial gladiator, dueling with
his "samurai" opponent over the vast expanse of the Pacific, is indelible in the annals of heroism. The freedom to soar
above the bloody carnage of jungle ambushes and beach landings and to exercise the capacity of taking one's life in
one's hands and coming "face to face"
with the enemy forms the raw materials
from which legends are forged.

p

Damon Slye (designer of Stellar 7 and
Red Baron) has developed a simulation
in which garners can forge their own
legends. From the opening credits, in
which a beautifully rendered Corsair
slices across the computer screen,
chased by a menacing Zero, Aces of the
Pacific should accomplish for would-be
"Pappy" Boyingtons what Red Baron did
for would-be Browns and Richtofens.
Where Red Baron pilots could enlist in
the aerial corps of either side and participate in World War I missions, Aces of
the Pacific allows "pilots" to enlist in one
of three U.S. forces (Navy, Air Force or
Marines) or one of two Japanese forces
(Navy or Air Force). Where Red Baron
featured daylight missions (as one would
expect for a WWI simulation), Aces of

the Pacific adds night engagements.
Also, where the former sent pilots over
the trenches for air-to-air and
air-to-ground combat, the latter sends pilots
against both carrier and land-based targets, as well as into air-to-air dogfights.

Technologically Speaking
Naturally, the simple addition of night
missions and the carrier-launched versus
airstrip-launched missions caused
Dynamix to upgrade their technology.
Adding night missions was a necessity,
since most of the famed "Tokyo Express" provisioning that took place in the
South Pacific occurred at night. Designing for night missions meant more than
changing the color palette and reducing
the range of a pilot's vision, however.
The design team took seriously the placement of constellations and the phases of
the moon. Since the campaign mode
uses a calendar to monitor the progress
of the player's forces, the design team
elected to connect that information to a
star calendar. The star calendar insures
proper phases of the moon (a very impressive effect) and correct placement of
constellations.
Having carriers as targets also serves to
allow another special effect. As the
planes come in to strafe the targets,
there is a marvelous splash effect when
the bullets hit the water. Such touches
abound throughout Aces of the Pacific.
Taking off from a carrier deck in Aces of

the Pacific seems considerably different
to computer pilots than being launched
from the decks of carriers in modern
simulations. Players will have to watch
their angles of attack when taking off or
they may find themselves "in the drink."
Most of us are "spoiled" by the excess of
power available to modern jet fighters
and have not really faced the almost underpowered feel of vintage aircraft in previous World War II simulations.

Profiles in Fuselage
The graphic appearance of Red Baron
was one of the first items of comment for
many garners. Aces of the Pacific
should be no exception. The design team
continues to refine the idea of terraced
shading over the tops of polygons, but
the effect is even more impressive. Since
the use of terraced technology slows
down the frame rate (from its circa eight
frames per second, equivalent to the
six-to-eight frames per second in Red
Baron), the real details are to be found
in side views (the wings are very well executed) and outside the plane (chase)
views where speed is not important to
the suspension of disbelief. So, whereas
the game is primarily a polygon-filled
simulation experience, there are satisfying bits of chrome in the terraced details
which overlay the polygons in places
where such technology does not reduce
the performance of the flight model itself.
Yet the design team has accomplished

Sneak Preview

Pacific from Dynamix
military significance and names of
geographical locations.

The Sound of the Fury
While no one complained about sound
support in Red Baron, there is a new feature in Aces of the Pacific (at least, it
will be noticed by more people) which
did not get noticed in Red Baron. There
is a Doppler effect that really gives the
impression of enemy planes going past
and moving on. CGW's editorial staff was
also impressed with all of the sound effects associated with engine performance. As usual, Dynamix, like its
parent company, Sierra, is attempting
(successfully) to create a total entertainment package which impacts the computer gamer on many levels.

On the Fly (Game Play)
Game play functions in much the same
way as it did in Red Baron. Players can
fly single missions which run the gamut
from historical missions and fights
against great aces from history to
generic fighter sweeps and combat air
patrols that put player pilots right in the
thick of the action.
In campaign/career mode, the player
enlists in a service and is given a potential point at which to begin his campaign.
For example, a new Japanese pilot
might be offered service in support of the
invasion of the Philippines or an
American pilot might be thrust into the
fray immediately after the bombing of
Pearl Harbor. Once the player's "career"
has begun, individual missions are assigned and resolved (with debriefings and
medal award ceremonies) as they were
in Red Baron.
more than this. They have created
polygon-filled palm trees that do a considerable amount to "dress up" the Pacific islands being simulated. Although the buildings and bunkers (at least, in the early
alpha we were looking at) are clearly
polygon-filled "targets" (at some angles
dissipating into two-dimensional facades
as the player's plane flies by), they are,
nevertheless, state-of-the-art polygon-filled
targets. The carriers themselves feature
sufficient overlay that they assist in helping computer pilots suspend their disbelief.

The role-playing interface is, essentially,
that of Red Baron except that the art
deco look which was reminiscent of the
early twentieth century has given way to
the cold gray steel of the mid-twentieth
century. Again, digitized photographs
adorn many of the screens that narrate
mission assignments, results and evaluations. In addition, the theater (strategic)
map in Aces of the Pacific is extremely
impressive. Not only are the topographical maps of various continents and islands impressively detailed, but the map
scrolls smoothly with pop-up captions of

In Memory of the Valiant
Dead
Aces of the Pacific is a tremendously
advanced flight simulator that advances
the state of the art for both the Great
War Planes Series and the industry as a
whole. Even in this early look, it is obvious that Damon Slye's team has
refused to rest on their laurels (medals?)
from winning CGW's Simulation of the
Year for Red Baron and intends to be a
leading contender in that category from
now on.

Review

A Bullet Not Yet Cast
Koei's L'Empereur
by M. Evan Brooks

TITLE:

L'Empereur

n L'Empereur, the player's economic, political and military
decisions will determine whether the bullet has actually been
cast (to paraphrase Bonaparte himself) that will kill the great
French general. L'Empereur is Koei's first computer simulation
covering a Western scenario — the breadth of the Napoleonic
Campaigns. Having previously covered the East (e.g.
Nobunaga's Ambition, Romance of the Three Kingdoms and
Genghis Khan), Koei has now turned to the grognard's delight.

I

Using a similar system and format to its previous releases,
Koei's L'Empereur allows one to begin in four periods of
Napoleon's life: as a general (1796), as a commander-in-chief
(1798), as First Consul (1802), or as Emperor (1806). As each
scenario is successfully completed, the simulation automatically
continues to the next in order.

A Thousand Bayonets (Documentation)
The documentation is professionally produced. Actually, one
could stop there — the problem with the documentation is that it
covers the plethora of commands which may be utilized, but
does not bring them together into a cohesive gestalt. Thus, it is
left to the player to experiment with the command structures,
determine what is most effective, and employ the best means to
achieve European hegemony. However, many of the commands
have a "masked" effect, i.e. their full impact is not immediate,

and the player will not be able to understand
what he is or should be doing.
The political and economic interface simply is
an unknown entity. While intensive play will
reveal many facets to the user, there is simply
too much confusion in the initial play. Interestingly enough, L'Empereur is being released in
a game cartridge format and that documentation includes a tutorial — an omission sadly
missing in the disk version. The cartridge
scenario begins with Napoleon in charge of the
government, however, and allows more latitude
and opportunity for experimentation than most
of the computer game's scenarios. As a lowly
general, the player must act quickly and effectively while, in game terms, having little idea of
how to do either.
Insofar as historical background is concerned,
the documentation is sufficient for a novice.
However, the complexity of the game is more
likely to appeal to the intermediate and advanced gamer. Some interesting editorial comments have been made, and these are fascinating because they show a different perspective
than one would generally find in the works of
occidental historians. For example, in describing Napoleon, the introduction states that
"Some people still tremble at the memory of
his passionate yet dreadful deeds." Dreadful
deeds? In terms of would-be global conquerors,
Napoleon's deeds appear much tamer than
those of Genghis Khan, Adolf Hitler or the like
and the French conquests did bring about the
dissemination of the Napoleonic Code, as well
as the ideals of the French Revolution and
nationalism to Europe.

There are also some historical errors and omissions: in discussing the Egyptian Campaign,
the manual notes that "Napoleon turned his
troops back when the time was right;" actually, he abandoned
his army and returned to Paris. Similarly, in describing Marshal
Massena, the manual notes that "he lost the power to lead his
troops." This reviewer supposes that is true to a limited degree,
but what is more historically accurate is that the Marshal was a
world-class looter, and decided that a life of leisure was
preferable to campaigning against a rabble of Spanish guerillas
who did not have the common decency to fight in open order
and surrender like a "civilized" enemy. The manual describes
Napoleon's stepson Eugene as the King of Rome. Actually,
Napoleon's son (L'Aiglon ["The Eaglet"]) by Marie Louise was
crowned King of Rome.
Sadly, no bibliography is included. This reviewer would recommend David Chandler's Campaigns of Napoleon as the basic
and comprehensive text on the subject.

Gilded and Covered with Velvet
(Graphics/Sound)
Graphics include both macro-level maps of the European continent and specific portions thereof (delineated by a point-to-point
city system), as well as a detailed micro-level of hex warfare. The
hex warfare is used for resolution of battles and the terrain is well
rendered and detailed.
The graphics are more than sufficient for game purposes, and

Review

are easily recognizable. Outbreaks of disease in cities are portrayed by a hospital
bedside scene; labor unrest is depicted
by the laborers at the barricades. These
are welcome touches which add a different perspective.
Ad Lib sound support offers period
music, but this quickly becomes repetitive, if not annoying. Music can be
turned off. However, units moving to battle on the macro-level emit an internal
and aggravating beep from the internal
speaker which may not be turned off.

Victorious Troops Are the
Best (Game Mechanics)
Game mechanics use keyboard or mouse (with the latter highly
recommended). Commands are issued each month (at the officer level) and each season (at the government level). Each city
will have an opportunity to act in every month, but as Napoleon,
player inputs are limited to the player's particular level of command within the scenario. As a mere general, the player cannot
expect to have a major role in the strategic decision-making that
takes place on the national level. More importantly, until
Napoleon achieves some success, his options are limited. This
can mean that an early advance against the Austrians in Italy will
often fail due to an imbalance in numbers. In fact, one will be
hard pressed to emulate Napoleon's achievements.

Commands and inputs are very userfriendly as "pointing and clicking" will accomplish almost anything. When one has
to choose a quantitative number, a
choice may be made between "maximum available" or any number allowed
(by either bar point or calculator click).
Officer commands include training
troops, logistical collections and distributions, requests to higher authorities for assistance, movement, investment in the infrastructure, taxation and observation of
other areas. Government commands expand to include international trade and
diplomacy. Each and every officer (and
there are 254 of them!) includes rating in
politics, finance, logistics, construction, leadership, loyalty and experience — and not only military officers are included. Both
diplomats and civilian figures a re available (e.g. Joseph Fouche,
the "Himmler" of the Empire and head of Internal State Security,
is available). City aspects include economic wealth, foodstuffs,
materiel, industry, commerce and agriculture.

Impossible Is Not a French Word (Game
Play)
L'Empereur is a game with a long learning curve. If one starts
in the earliest scenario, there is relatively little to do until
Napoleon can amass some small successes. The later scenarios

Review

do not have this problem, since
Napoleon's previous successes allow
much more latitude.
The initial scenario does not really
reflect the chaos and anarchy that charac
terized post-Revolutionary France. While
victory is always dependent on seizing
cities, this does not reflect the early
Napoleonic goal of military success
coupled with political connections.
Later scenarios seem more historic, although it is difficult to determine the
proper mix of commands and their impact upon each other and the simulation.
When armies invade a city, the scale
drops to a hex-war, traditional among board garners and Koei
aficionados. Combat elements include infantry, cavalry and artillery. While artillery can be used for indirect fire (but often with
the range and accuracy of a Scud missile), the use of cavalry
and infantry rarely seems to reflect the realities of Napoleonic
warfare. At least, cavalry does have shock value and is more
than simply fast-moving infantry. However, Napoleon was known
for optimizing the "combined arms" of the nineteenth century.
Tactical warfare in the simulation does not seem to reflect the
proper application of mass and force against an enemy. Overall,
the "flavor" of Napoleonic warfare is internally bland. Sometimes
this reviewer felt that only the title and character names were
evocative of the period.

While Koei's prior releases covered
periods of conflict unfamiliar to most
American garners, the simulation seemed
"real" because of its uniqueness and
novelty. When the same system is applied to a more familiar system of warfare, its uniqueness is lost. Thus, one
knows it is Napoleonic because of the
title; otherwise, it would have been just
as "real" to guess that the conflict was occurring in 18th century China or Japan.

Our Hour Is Marked (Conclusions)
L'Empereur is the first computer simulation to attempt to cover the Napoleonic
Campaigns in a military and political/economic simulation. As
such, it may prove interesting to the truly dedicated player. However, even this grognard has his limits and L'Empereur has exceeded them.
As long as one is willing to accept that the game is not
Napoleonic, it may, in fact, be enjoyable. Nevertheless, the grognard seeking a computer version of the classic boardgame Empires in Arms or computerized approximation of a well-run miniatures campaign may well be disappointed. Those who will be
satisfied with a typical Koei game with a thin French veneer may
well be happy.

Editorial

tate of the Industry: Virtuality is
the essential or true nature of
something. As an adjective, "virtual" has come to mean "almost true" or
"true enough." In modern conversation,
to say that something is "virtually" identical is to say that it isn't identical, but no
one will be able to tell the difference.
"Hey," says the salesperson, "don't worry
about our being out of stock on Model E
because, frankly, Model D is virtually
identical. Most people don't even want
those extra features that the Model E has
and you'll save money, too!"
The computer game industry seems to
be virtually committing fraud toward
computer gamers about virtual reality.
Since there seems to be a genuine excitement about three-dimensional gaming environments with physical inputs that
register body movement and change
perspective as the player tilts his or her
head, marketing departments at many
software publishers are describing the
three-dimensional technology of their
traditional computer games as being virtual reality.
In the February issue of CGW, we took
issue with one company for touting a
traditional computer game as being virtual reality. Nonetheless, two
advertisements in the same issue called their traditional games — virtual — realities.
Another game arrived in the mail after
we went to press. It was a collection of
parlor games which was marketed as a
virtual vacation.

At CGW, we are disappointed in this
trend because we perceive that marketing departments are turning a useful
term into one that will be virtually meaningless by the time an authentic virtual
reality hardware reaches the market. It is
hard enough to try to describe the difference between a total immersion experience and a traditional computer
game without the waters being muddied
at this point in time. Virtual reality and
any use of the adjective virtual should
be restricted to those experiences which
use additional hardware to enhance the
gamer's perception of the alternate world
being simulated. No "flat screen" representations of these alternate worlds, no
matter how excellent their 3-D technology and collision detection may be,
should be marketed as virtual reality. It
just isn't honest.
State of the Magazine: Speaking of
virtual falsehoods, CGW was recently victimized by a marketing misjudgment
which occurred overseas. Shortly after
signing an agreement to allow Asia
Recording to publish a Chinese version
of CGW in Taiwan and Hong Kong, we
discovered that the company was also
publishing CGW games, complete with
our logo. Now, Computer Gaming
World does not publish games,
wholesale games, retail games, trade ad
space for games to sell or fill mail orders
for games. Indeed, staff members of
CGW and executives of Golden Empire
Publications are not even allowed to

own stock in publicly-held corporations
that publish computer games.
So, we were rather frustrated when we
discovered that the Chinese company
had taken the liberty of publishing CGW
games as part of their license to publish
a Chinese edition of the magazine. We immediately called Asia Recording and
asked why they were doing something in
our name that we would not think of
doing ourselves. Asia Recording stated
that they did not realize that anything
was wrong with putting our magazine's
title on another company's computer
game. They stated that they did so in
order "to spread the fame of Computer
Gaming World." We have instructed
Asia Recording to cease and desist
from the publication of games under the
CGW logo and we have been told that
this has occurred.
Although we are delighted with the
beautiful and professional job that Asia
Recording has been doing in publishing a
Chinese edition of our magazine, we are
horrified by this incident and the potential blight it could bring upon our established reputation as an independent critical review magazine. For the record,
neither Golden Empire Publications as
a corporation, its executives nor its
employees has/have authorized or accepted remuneration from the publication
of computer games under the logo CGW
or the title Computer Gaming World.

