Game Playing Aids from Computer Gaming World
COSMIC BALANCE SHIPYARD DISK
Contains over 20 ships that competed in the CGW COSMIC BALANCE SHIP
DESIGN CONTEST. Included are Avenger, the tournament winner; Blaze,
Mongoose, and MKVP6, the judge's ships. These ships are ideal for the gamer
who cannot find enough competition or wants to study the ship designs of
other garners around the country. SSI's The Cosmic Balance is required to use
the shipyard disk. PLEASE SPECIFY APPLE OR ATARI VERSION WHEN
ORDERING. $15.00

ROBOTWAR TOURNAMENT DISK
CGW's Robotwar Diskette contains the source code for the entrants to the
Second Annual CGW Robotwar Tournament (with the exception of NordenB)
including the winner, DRAGON. Also included is the winner of the First Annual
Tournament, NORDEN+. Twelve robots in all. Muse Software's ROBOTWAR'"
required to use tournament disk. $12.00.

CGW BASEBALL DISK
Contains the four teams of the All Star League reported on in 3.3 (AL West All
Stars, Al East, NL West, and NL East); the six teams of the 1982 Winter League
(see 3.3), the eight teams of the Greatest Baseball Team of All Time
Tournament, and a reprint of the results of The GBTOAT tournament from
issue 2.3. SSI's Computer Baseball Apple version required to use data disk.
Apple version only. $12.00.
Send check or money order to: Computer Gaming World, Disk Order Dept.,
P.O. Box 4566, Anaheim, CA 92803-4566. California residents please add 696
sales tax. Allow 3-4 weeks for delivery.

Vol. 4 No. 4

August 1984
Features
JUPITER MISSION
Avalon Hill's Four Disk Adventure Game

FIFTH ESKADRA
Modern Naval Warfare

EXCALIBUR
Review, Strategy and Tactics

EXCALIBUR DESIGNER'S NOTES
WAR IN RUSSIA
A View From a Playtester

PRESIDENT ELECT and 1984
Reagan Takes on Mondale, Hart and Jackson

LODE RUNNER CONTEST

9
Mark Bausman
11
William Highfield
12
David Townsend
13
Chris Crawford
14
Tom Cheche
16
Johnny Wilson
22

Your Design Could Be a Winner

FIGHTER COMMAND
A Review

GALACTIC GLADIATORS meet
the STAINLESS STEEL RAT
TWO FLIGHT SIMULATORS
Flight Simulator II & Solo Flight

CRYPT OF MEDEA
A Review

24
Tom Cheche
26
Johnny Wilson
28
Roy Wagner
35
Robert Reams

Departments
TAKING A PEEK

6

Screen Photos & Brief Comments

INSIDE THE INDUSTRY
Reader Survey Results

DISPATCHES
The State of the Industry

SCORPION'S TALE
Sorcerer Tips

ATARI PLAYFIELD
For the Atari Gamer

COMMODORE KEY
For the C-64 Gamer

THE SILICON CEREBRUM
Some Comments on Sundog

MICRO-REVIEW

10
Dana Lombardy
18
Dan Bunten
20
Scorpia
23
David Stone
30
Roy Wagner
34
Bruce Webster
38

(Expedition Amazon)

THE NAME OF THE GAME
Third Wave?

TELE-GAMING

42
Jon Freeman
43
Patricia Fitzgibbons

READER INPUT DEVICE

46

You Rate the Games

GAME RATINGS
Over 80 Games Rated

3

47

Broderbund Software
17 Paul Dr.
San Rafael, CA 94903
THE PRINT SHOP:Although not a
game, we want you to know about this
new product from Broderbund. With
The Print Shop your Apple II/III Computer (along with one of several popular
printers) can be used to create letterhead,
greeting cards, flyers, banners, signs,
and much more! If you have ANY reason
to communicate through the written
word (that's all of us) then you will find
The Print Shop valuable. Using the
graphics ability of your printer, The
Print Shop can use any of eight
typestyles, three typeformats, nine
border designs, and dozens of pictures
to create personalized stationary, etc.
There is a graphics editor which allows
you to modify any of the illustrations provided, create your own from scratch, or
load and use graphics created with other
graphics packages. We highly recommend it. $50.00.

Infocom
55 Wheeler St.
Cambridge, MA 02138
SEASTALKER: A new interactive fiction game written for the beginner. In the
tradition of Jules Verne's 20,000 Leagues
Under The Sea, Seastalker was written
by Jim Lawrence who has authored some
60 books of fiction (many of these were
ghosted for series like Tom Swift Jr., The
Hardy Boys, Nancy Drew and The Bobbsey Twins). Available for most systems
at $39.95.
MicroProse Software
10616 Beaver Dam Rd.
Hunt Valley, MD 21030
SPITFIRE ACE: Like their Hellcat Ace
and Mig Alley Ace games, Spitfire Ace
puts you into a fighter cockpit as you
fight for the skies. This particular game
has fourteen scenarios that range from
the Battle of Britain to a dogfight with

the historic ME-262, first production jet
fighter. MicroProse's whole "Ace"
series is certainly worth the price. In this
case, $29.95. Atari and C-64.

Penguin Software
830 4th Ave.
Geneva, IL 60134

ARCADE BOOT CAMP: OK, arcade
fans, here are all your favorites rolled up
into one game. Mazes, ladders, racers,
space invaders, etc. Work yourself up
from a lowly private to Sergeant Major.
Apple.
$29.95.
MAP PACK: Graphics source disk that
includes maps of all 50 states, the U.S.,
Canadian provinces, and the continents.
Must be used in conjunction with the
Complete Graphics System or other
graphics utilities (such as the Print Shop
mentioned above). Apple. $19.95.

Sierra On-Line
Sierra On-Line Building
Coarsegold, CA 93614
STORY MAKER: Although billed as "A
story construction kit for ages 7-14",
Story Maker will be of interest to many
adults. With Story Maker you can construct illustrated stories, draw cartoon
strips, write illustrated letters, keep a
diary or journal, etc. You can even use
the program to make up a party game in
which the guests each take turn writing
part of the story. Apple, C-64, Atari (3rd
quarter). $34.95.
Strategic Simulations
883 Stierlin Rd.
Bldg. A-200
Mountain View, CA 94043-1983
50 MISSION CRUSH: A role-playing
game that puts you in charge of a B-17
bomber. As part of the 8th Air Force 306
Bomber Group, you must try to survive
fifty raids over France and Germany. As
B-17 commander, you select your crew,

determine bomb/fuel ration, and cruising altitude. After each mission you will
be evaluated by the computer and awarded points based on difficulty of mission,
accuracy of bombing, number of enemy
planes shot down, etc. Apple, Atari,
C-64.
$39.95.
OBJECTIVE KURSK: Gary Grigsby's
game of grand-tactical tank warfare during the Eastern Front campaign of
WWII. A total of more than 4000 tanks
clash as the German player is given 11
days to take Kursk. Apple, Atari. $39.95.

That's right! We need your insights!
Thanks to the suggestion of some of you
readers, we will be adding a new column
on strategy game playing tips. But this
column will only get off the ground with
your help! So here are the details:
1. The column will be limited to printing
tips and strategies on strategy computer
games. This includes wargames, sports
games, economic and other "real life"
simulations, and certain "classic" style
computer games (such as Penguin's Pensate or SSI's Fortress).
2. The tips/strategies should be precise
and to the point (don't give a mini-review
of the game). While we want there to be
some substance to your tips (i.e. the tip,
"Never attack the Germans at less that
2-1 odds" won't do), we want you to keep
it under 250 words. Most strategies
should be no more than two or three
paragraphs in length.
3. Payment for tips and strategies used
in CGW will be two issues of CGW
(either in the form of a two issue extension to your current subscription or in
the form of a two issue "minisubscription".
4. Submissions should be typewritten or
neatly printed. Send your tips to:
Strategy Tips
c/o Computer Gaming World
P.O. Box 4566
Anaheim, CA 92803-4566

JUPITER MISSION
by Mark Bausman

Name:
Type:
System:
Format:
–Players:
Author:
Price:
Publisher:

Jupiter Mission 1999
Arcade/Adventure
Atari
Disk
One
Scott Lamb
$50.00
Avalon Hill,
Microcomputer
Games
Baltimore, MD

Jupiter Mission 1999 is the new, one
player, arcade/adventure game from Avalon
Hill. It consists of eleven different programs
spread over four disks and places you
aboard the USSN Space Ship Beagle on it's
journey to Jupiter. Actually, you are one of
a three man crew. You have been chosen
not because of any special abilities, but
because you are an average person and
therefore you give the mission a "random"
factor which the government felt was
necessary for a successful completion.
The premise here is that two strangers
have pulled you from your bed in the dead
of night and have asked you to come with
them. The journey takes you to the local
spaceport where you are whisked to an orbiting space station. From there, you are
taken to the space ship where you meet a
computer named Beagle. The game starts
six months into the journey when the ship

encounters an asteroid storm and the two
regular crew are killed. The computer, as
a result, turns over control of the ship to you.
The first program is a slow arcade game
which asks you to shoot the falling asteroids
before they hit the ship. They only fall one
at a time and they are usually on a predictable course but there are a lot of them and
sometimes you don't even get a chance to
shoot. Every one that hits the ship causes
some damage that may or may not be
repairable. A damaged ship can mean
disaster in later phases of the game, so it is
a good idea to play this section again and
again in order to get off to a good start. Of
course, some damage is repairable and
repairing the Beagle is the second program
you face. In this program, you are given a
schematic of the ship and are to move a large
cursor to various sections of the ship to
determine the sections status. If a section
has a damaged module, you may repair it

by playing a color matching game. Avalon
Hill refers to this program as a reaction time
game. You must wait for matching colors
to appear on the screen and then press the
trigger before they change. Of the parts I
have played, this one is by far the most boring. I suggest that once you get through here
with a relatively undamaged ship, you save
the game and never bother to replay the first
two programs. The end of the repair program brings you to the end of disk one.
The second disk gets a bit more difficult.
First, you must bring the Beagle back onto
the proper course for Jupiter. This involves
finding out how to navigate the ship and
then doing the course change. Once in the
Jupiter System, you must find out how to
launch a probe and gather data concerning
the moons. Some moons will be
uninteresting while others will provide information that takes you closer to the source
Continued on page 39

INSIDE THE INDUSTRY
by Dana Lombardy

Here are the results of the survey in the
April, 1984 issue of CGW (4.2) that asked the
readers what their favorite games are and
how they play them.
The different types of computer games
were grouped into five categories for the
purposes of the survey: Adventure games;

Again, the readers picked Adventure and
Wargames as the categories that they most
favored. Fully 80% of the readers of CGW
say that these two categories are their
favorite, with the remaining 20% split between Arcade, Abstract, and Sports/Other
games.

Wargames; Arcade games; Abstract games
which included such games as Sargon
Chess, Fortress, and other chess, checkers,
and backgammon type games; and, finally,
Sports/Other games which included such
games as Computer Baseball, Championship
Golf, Cartels & Cutthroats, and M.U.L.E.

PART III
The last two parts dealt with how the
readers played their computer games. The
first question asled them to check each type
of play that they were involved in at least
three times a month.

PART I
The readers were asked to check each
category of computer games that they
played at least five times a month. The total
for all five categories is greater than 10Q/
because a reader could check more than one
category.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Adventure
Wargame
Arcade
Abstract
Sports/Other

64%
73%
53%
12%
39%

Solitaire (player vs. computer)
Player vs. Player (using the same
computer)
Tele-Gaming (vs. human or computer via modem)
Spectator (watch a game or
demonstration)

98%
44%
6%
11%

Whether by choice of not, solitaire gaming is the largest form of computer play. It
was somewhat surprising that spectator
mode was almost double that of tele-gaming.

PART IV
It was no surprise that the readers of CGW
play mostly computer Adventure games and
Wargames. The strong showing of
Sports/Other games, as well as the very low
number for Abstract games, was
unexpected.

PART II

The readers were then asked to check the

one category of computer game they played

The last question asked the readers to
check the one type of play that they do each
month (their favorite).
Solitaire
Player vs. Player
Tele-Gaming
Spectator

84%
16%
0%
0%

Solitaire was expected to dominate the
results, but not by as great a margin as it
did. The very poor showing of telegaming was a surprise.

the most (their favorite).

SUMMARY
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Adventure
Wargame
Arcade
Abstract
Sports/Other

32%
48%
8%
3%
9%

The reader of CGW who responded to the
survey identified him or tier self as most interested in computer Wargames and Adventure games by a wide margin over other

types of computer games, although the
others were played.
Solitaire style play was almost the only
method used for play. Solitaire was preferred
over player vs. player by a factor of more
than 5 to 1.
Apparently, the readers of CGW are not
involved in tele-gaming in any significant
numbers yet. Despite the fact that telegaming cam provide another means of
solitaire play, there was zero responses to
this as a favorite form of gaming, and only
6% are currently involved in tele-gaming.
We'll have the results of the survey in
issue 4.3 in the next column. Thanks to all
those who participated in these surveys, and
good gaming!

FIFTH ESKADRA:
Modern Conflict in the Mediterranean
by William Highfield

Name:
Type:
System:
#Players:
Author:
Publisher:

Unlike most SSI wargames which
do not give you the choice of which
side to play in solitaire mode, FE lets
you play either side against the
computer.
The release of FE convinces me
that Simulations Canada will be climbing in importance in the computer
simulation field.

Fifth Eskadra
Wargame
Apple
1-2
W. J. Nichols
Simulations Canada

"Biiillll, telephone for you!"
Arrggghh! Interruptions, interruptions! How can you fight a war with
all these interruptions! It was probably just as well.... imitating Mr.
Spock's mind-meld with a computer
may be a bit extreme.... but that's
how Fifth Eskadra can affect you.

Fifth Eskadra (FE) is a strategiclevel game dealing with a fictional
modern naval war in the Mediterranean Sea. Fog of war is this game's
strongest suit, but not its only one.
Each turn represents eight hours
with phases for conflict level declaration, task force adjustment, movement, combat (submarine vs. surface), intelligence reports, and
airstrike and surface-to-surface
missile combat. Each player (NATO
and Soviet) begins with major surface
ships and significant submarine
forces. Surface ships act in task
forces (up to 10 per side) while submarines act alone. Each ship has
ratings for SOA (Speed Of Advance),
Commanding Officer's Reliability,
and Commanding Officer's Initiative. All the player does, is give a
destination, a type of mission, and
hope that the task force commander
will act accordingly. Of course, the

CO's initiative and reliability could
lead him to pick his own destination
and mission (which can either
frustrate a Theatre commander or
save a task force from an unexpected
peril).
Perhaps FE's most interesting
feature is the pre-turn phase which
allows the player to escalate or deescalate the conflict. Your choices
consist of Rising Tensions (peace),
Conventional Warfare, Tactical
Nuclear Warfare, Operational
Nuclear Warfare, and the unchoosable Global Nuclear Warfare.
Each turn both players choose a level,
with the highest choice winning. If,
for example, NATO picks "Rising
Tensions" and the Soviet picks "Conventional Warfare", then the level of
conflict for the turn would be conventional warfare. Each turn of
Operational Nuclear level conflict
gives a 50% chance of the game ending with no winner due to the spectre of a global nuclear holocaust.
Operational level is a last ditch attempt to win — ICBM's enter the atmosphere and automatically destroy
every, repeat EVERY aircraft carrier
in the game. Each escalation of the
conflict cost the instigator in victory
points, with the cost increasing as
does the level.

Ed. Note: Like Simulation Canada's
first two computer wargames, Grey
Seas, Grey Skies, and Fall Gelb, FE is
played with the aid of a traditional
fold-out map and cardboard
counters. Also, as in the first two
games, the program itself is unprotected so that the gamer can study
and/or modify the program as it suits
him. This is a laudable act on SimCan's part and we appeal to the gaming community to eschew pirated
copies of this, or any other computer
game. It would be marvelous to be
able to study the code on the wide
range of computer wargames.

Strategy Tips
Here are some tips on playing the
game well:
1. For the NATO player: Relax with
the knowledge that you will lose the
Kitty Hawk. Use that! Go for blood!
One good airstrike can wipe out an
entire Soviet Task Force.
2. For either side: Use power projection ashore to rack up points on shore
bombardment.
3. Try to sweep the seas of enemy
subs. Subs are deadly for surface
forces.... even those with an anti-sub
role!
Continued on page

38

EXCALIBUR:
Review, Strategy & Tactics
by David P. Townsend

Name:
Excalibur
Type:
Adventure/Wargame
System:
Atari
#Players:
1
Author: Chris Crawford
Larry Summers
Valerie Atkinson
Price:
$29.95
Publisher:
Atari Program
Exchange
A look at the authors should tell you that this game should
be a good one. In Excalibur, the player takes the role of King
Arthur, attempting to unite Britain through the use of battle, diplomacy, and magic. And while there is no provision
for more than one player, it is both a demanding and
fascinating game.
The game itself is divided into three modules, Camelot,
Britain, and Battle. The importance of this is that only one
can be in memory at a time, so that when you move from
one module to another you must wait for the computer to
swap the current module out to disk and bring the new
module into memory. Most of Arthur's time though, will
be spent in Camelot, which is further divided into five
"rooms".
Merlin's Room allows Arthur to use Merlin's magic to influence other kings, put a plague on their armies, a
pestilence on their crops, or to examine the state of their
kingdoms and armies. Magic must be used sparingly, as
each use of Merlin weakens him, compelling him to rest
for progressively longer periods of time, during which
periods he is unavailable.
The Treasury Room allows Arthur to manage the financial affairs of the kingdom and the army. He can raise or
lower taxes, expand or decrease the army, survey the
wealth of his kingdom, and see how much his vassals are
giving him in tithes.
The Throne Room is where Arthur conducts his foreign
policy. A map of Britain shows the status of each of the 15
other kings (tributaries, neutral, vassal, or enemy). Arthur
uses this map to declare war on or give tribute to another
king, see his current prestige, and to read the kingdom
news.

The Round Table Room allows Arthur to monitor the
relationships between his knights, Queen Gwynevere, and
himself. He can give gifts or bestow honors in effort to
maintain his knights loyalty, and banish those considered
beyond redemption. If all of the knights get too disloyal, Arthur will be overthrown and the game will end. This room
is also used to select which knights will accompany Arthur
on foreign campaigns.
The Trap Room is a special case, used only when another
king invades Arthur's kingdom and starts raiding crops.
Arthur has the choice of staying inside this room until the
enemy leaves, meaning the affairs of the kingdom get
neglected, or he can offer battle.
Moving out of Camelot, the Britain module allows Arthur
to raid other kingdoms and to visit the castles of his vassals
to get their tithes. The Battle module also allows Arthur and
his army to fight his enemies, in a manner reminiscent of
Legionnaire. Don't however, be surprised when you get
back to Camelot after a battle to discover that much has
gone on in your absence, for the game takes place in "real"
time, and other kings may take advantage of your absence
in order to raid Camelot. The game can be saved at any time
except during battle, and a pause control is also available.
In outline, a full game tends to go through five stages. At
the outset of the game, all sixteen kings begin building armies for the campaigns to come. Each of the kingdoms

begins with a small "peacetime" army, and generally this
period is spent building the armies' strength and
experience.
The second phase of the game is entered when the armies
have been built up, and is marked by a flurry of declaration
of war as the more aggressive kings begin to raid their
neighbors. Arthur most often seems to be the target of kings
Hengist and Penda, and it is against these two that Arthur
will most likely want to use Merlin's powers.
Phase three is entered when messages such as "King
Horsa is weakening" appear in the news. This means that
they soon will become someone's vassal if their fortunes
do not change rapidly. It helps to have defeated some
enemies in battle by this time, as this will increase your
prestige making you a more attractive candidate to be their
liege.
Phase four is marked by the battle for vassals among the
remaining kings in Britain. Additionally, some of the kings
with vassals may weaken and become vassals themselves.
This is important, since if a king becomes Arthur's vassal,
any vassals that king might have had also become Arthur's
vassals. A great victory over a powerful king may net Arthur three or more vassals.
The last phase is reached (if you survive) when only Arthur and one other king remain. Diplomacy lessens in importance as the kings fight to the finish to determine who
will rule all Britain.

Strategy and Tactics
A defensive/reactive strategy is an effective overall approach to the game. The first three phases and much of the
fourth are spent building a large, experienced army, while
the other kings fight amongst themselves. Arthur then steps
in and can defeat his weakened foes, especially if Merlin's
aid is still available. Of course, battles will have to be fought
against invaders, and vassals should be defended if nearby. Using the tactics below, most battles should be
victories.
Phase one offers the most opportunity to spend time in
the Round Table Room, free from the cares of foreign
events. The loyalties of the knights mostly shift little by little, but sometimes knights will jump fair distance around
the table. The manual implies that anyone who is too good
a friend to Gwynevere should be banished to maintain the
loyalties of the others. Watch closely if this situation occurs
— if no one is becoming disloyal, don't banish anyone since
you need all the knights you can get on the battlefield.
Remember also that when you honor a knight, you are increasing the percentage of troops he will command, so
don't overhonor your less battleworthy knights merely to
keep their loyalty. Incidentally, you can't honor
Gwynevere, although you can give her gifts and banish her.
If the knights get farther than one shield's width away
from the Round Table, don't leave them alone in Camelot
or there will be a coup. Begin working on their loyalties
right away!
It is best not to use Merlin's powers too extensively early in the game. You should be able to handle all but the
largest army without having to plague it. Not much of his
power is used in showing you other king's finances,

though, so don't hesitate to see if that incoming army is going to be too tough to handle. Remember, not all of a king's
army will accompany him on campaign, and the peasants
will usually knock off a few men-at-arms, particularly if the
invaders have little experience. Conversely, don't be afraid
to wait and let the enemy raid the crops if he looks too
tough.
A few simple tactics on the battlefield will increase your
chance of success. First, never be afraid to run away if the
Continued on page 40

Designer's Notes
on EXCALIBUR

by Chris Crawford
It is always a productive exercise to look back on a design
six months after it has been completed. Six months' worth
of hindsight allows one to see through the obsessions of the
concluding work and assess the strengths and weaknesses
of the design more clearly. I look back on EXCALIBUR with
very different feelings than I have had for any of my other
games. Each of my previous games in some way gave me cause
for regretting its release. Each had some flaw or blemish that
I wish I had corrected. EXCALIBUR is not without flaws,
but I do not feel the sense of regret that I felt with my other
games. Instead, I feel only deep pride in this game.
The primary source of my pride is the fine interweaving
of so many elements into a unified whole. This game has
diplomacy, economics, friendship, loyalty, treason, magic,
armies, campaigns, battles, pillage, and yes, even adultery.
These elements were not merely thrown in as part of some
laundry list; they are an integral part of the design. They all
fit together smoothly. The cleanliness of the fit is not so much
a matter of programming as design. And I am very proud of it.
I am also proud of the manual that comes with the game.
Everybody knows that a game should never require more than
a single sheet of rules, or perhaps a few pages, right? Well,
I violated that rule in a big way with my hundred-page
manual/novella. Maybe it is a mistake, but it is a glorious one.
Of course, there remain flaws that give me pain. The game
is still too "wargamy" for my taste; I wanted a game that would
emphasize the non-military aspects of leadership. In EXCALIBUR, lack of military prowess will doom you, but lack
of other skills (diplomatic, economic) will only cripple you.
That's too wargamy.
I was also disappointed with the very weak system for
alliances that we created with the TRIBUTE option. We had
once designed an option that allowed the player to create
alliances, but it was too ambiguous to enforce. I wish that I
had stuck with that idea and made it work.
The Round Table Room also failed to live up to my expectations. I really wanted Arthur to have a big job keeping the
loyalty of his knights, but the implementation of the Round
Table Room just doesn't support strong interaction between
Arthur and his knights. What I had in mind was something
like the newly-released game GOSSIP, which in fact was conceived as a study for the interpersonal game that would take
place in the Round Table Room. Unfortunately, kings don't
gossip with their knights, and I never could find a way to get
strong interaction between Arthur and his knights.
My greatest regret, though, is that EXCALIBUR has not won
the attention that I think it deserves. This game is my magnum
opus, much grander in scale than anything else I have done.
It is a shame that so few people are even aware of its existence.

WAR IN RUSSIA:
The View From a Playtester
by Tom Cheche

Name:
Type:
System
# Players
Author
Price:
Publisher:

War in Russia
Wargame
Apple, Atari
1-2
Gary Grigsby
$79.95
Strategic Simulations
Mountain View. CA

Tom Cheche was a playtester for War in Russia.
After more than a year of playtesting, Strategic Simulations has finally released its long awaited eastern front
"monster" game, War In Russia, (WIR) by Gary Grigsby.
An operational-level treatment of the Axis invasion of the
Soviet Union, WIR covers Operation Barbarossa, from
1941 through 1945, along with two "shorter" scenarios.
Case Blue covers the German summer offensive of 1942,
and Zitadelle deals with the final German offensive of 1943
at Kursk and the Soviet counterattack. Each scenario can
be played in a long or short version.
WIR is played in one-week turns on a 31 x 32, scrolling
hi-res map with each hex being 50-miles across. There is
also a strategic map display in the Apple version which
gives the players an idea of the "big picture". Up to two
corps-sized units may be stacked in a hex, with corps
capable of being broken down into divisional-sized
elements.
The format of WIR is distinctly that of a Gary Grigsby
design, with each turn comprised of a series of phases during which units are built, adjusted, and supplied. Units are
moved strategically or have tactical movement plotted,
airstrikes are plotted, and lastly, combat is resolved. But,
while WIR is of a format similar to previous Grigsby games,
it is not another variation on the Guadalcanal Campaign
game system, as were Bomb Alley and North Atlantic '86.
WIR employs a game system completely new to the SSI
line.
WIR is an example of what Gary Grigsby refers to when
he talks about "programming for effect". In a simulation
of something as sprawling as the Eastern Front in WWII
it is not possible to represent every small detail. Instead, as
many factors as possible are incorporated into the program
with the goal of recreating the "feel" that was felt at the

specific level that is being simulated. In WIR, Grigsby has
succeeded in recreating the feel of the problems and considerations at the Operational level.

Axis Strategy Notes:
Aircraft are initially deployed in six Luftflotten, but as the
Axis offensive moves to the east the Axis player will quickly
consolidate those aircraft into two large groups for ground
support. Air bases can be leap-frogged towards the everadvancing front in order to allow the greatest number of
aircraft possible in the air every turn.
Aircraft located near the northern edge of the map in
Norway can strike Allied convoys to Murmansk and Archangel, but the investment does not prove to be worth the
aircraft. Only occasionally are those convoys attacked,
when attacks to take place they are not terribly effective,
and the aircraft factors (1 factor = 0 aircraft) are sorely
needed for ground support in the drive towards Moscow.
Air bases are most effective when they are a maximum
of two hexes away from the target, since escorts can be
employed in strikes up to two hexes away. On the other
hand, nagging Soviet air strikes can be neutralized by attacking Soviet air bases, although the benefits don't last
very long. Soviet aircraft eliminated in ground attacks
return to the supply pipeline two turns later.
Supply is the key to any Axis success. It is critical that
the Axis advance units not outrun supply, and so the Axis
player must balance his desire to exploit any openings in
the Soviet front with the need to wait for supply to catch
up with the advance.
German armor is precious and should be treated as such.
Overextending armor can lead to disaster. The Soviet artillery capability can be awesome, and a counterattack
against an out-of-supply armor group can have disastrous
effects, especially if there is no avenue of retreat.
This is another argument in favor of moderation by the
attacking Axis, rather than a headlong charge eastward at
full speed. With a stacking limit of two per hex, the Axis
player can jam up his armor's escape routes with infantry.
If that happens, and his armor takes a beating, there will
be no escape and the entire armor unit will be lost.
Each turn the supply, vehicle, artillery, and manpower
pools are updated, and the judicious use of those
replacements can be pivotal.

New units can be created, or the available men and
machines can be sent directly to the front as replacements.
This second method has its advantages:
New units are created one division at a time, so it will
take more than a month to accumulate an entire new corps.
After a new division has been created, it enters the board
far to the rear. On its first turn it must make its way to the
front and so will enter "rail" mode. Because a unit may only be in one movement mode per turn, this new unit will

not be able to leave the railroad as it approaches the front
on this turn. Hence, it will usually take two turns or more
to get this new unit into position at the front.
The alternative is to pump those troops and vehicles into front line units as replacements. They show up at the
front immediately, and they can keep those armor
spearhead units operating at close to maximum strength.
Supply is maintained by rail, and the progress of the offensive is often governed by the speed with which German
gauge rail hexes are constructed. The deeper those rail
hexes extend into Russia, the more likely the rail lines will
be cut by partisans. Partisan activity can be suppressed by
20% for every 150 infantry points left in the pool, so in
order to totally suppress the partisans a total of 750 infantry points will have to be left permanently in the pool. This
is easier said than done.
Because Supply is at the heart of WIR, and because the
kinds of supplies that eventually get to the front are a function of the number of factories that have been built, the factory construction sequence is critical, somewhat complex,
and requires some explanation.
Each turn players have the opportunity to build factories
up to their available limit. There are four types of factories;
heavy industry, aircraft, artillery and vehicles. The
development of heavy industry increases the ability to build
factories, and so increases the factory building limit. But
increasing the factory building limit is a two step process;
first heavy industry must be built, then the specific factories. Factories may also be dismantled and rebuilt in different locations.
When factories are actually built, the phasing player can
choose the location from a list of available cities. But the
Axis player should know that there is no reason to build
factories anywhere but in Germany. Supplies get into the
supply pool just as quickly from factories in Germany as
they do from factories in cities closer to the front. They are
also not vulnerable to attack in Germany, and will

therefore, never have to be relocated should the Soviet
counterattacks move the front far to the west.
When playing the Barbarossa scenario, it is probably advisable for the Axis player to play for the long term and
build heavy industry. Barbarossa challenges the Axis
player to improve on the historical results of the 1941 summer offensive, and get into Moscow before winter sets in.
In Case Blue, the Axis player has his best chance of bringing about a preemptive victory. Ignoring Leningrad, the
Axis drive should concentrate on Moscow and Stalingrad.
A competent Axis player can take those two cities in the
first half of 1943. Gorki and Kubyshev, and with them, victory, can be had by Winter. Working under such a timetable
then Axis player should invest in vehicles, artillery, and aircraft rather than heavy industry.
The Zitadelle scenario purports to be the final German
offensive, but it is more a study in futility. No sooner do the
Germans attack than the Soviets counterattack with
devastating power. Their overwhelming artillery superiority has telling effect, and the Germans have little hope of
maintaining any momentum. Under these circumstances
there appears to be little value in building heavy industry
for the long term. The Axis is, at this point, on the defensive, and a long holding action-strategic withdrawal has
begun.
A simulation of the scope of WIR can teach as well as
entertain. The critical importance of supply to an offensive
is graphically depicted, as well as the importance of air support. In fact, the lesson which is made most clear from playing WIR is that Hitler never should have launched Barbarossa in the first place.

PRESIDENT ELECT and 1984
"Where have you gone, Joe DiMaggio?"

by Johnny Wilson

Name:
Type:
System:
# Players
Author:
Price
Publisher:

President Elect
Election Simulation
Apple
1-3
Nelson Hernandez
$39.95
Strategic Simulations
Mountain View, CA

It's been almost 20 years since Paul Simon
pictured Mrs. Robinson pouring over the
candidates on a Sunday afternoon; laughing,
shouting, choosing, and in the end, losing.
Simon's song hit a subconscious chord for
my generation. It asked where the heroes had
gone and where a clear-cut choice could be
possible.
If you're a conservative Republican, the
choice is clear-cut. In 1984, Ronald Wilson
Reagan will reprise his "good guy" roles from
the silver screen and win handily. As of the
writing of this article, the choice is not clear
for the Democrats. It seems that each time
Walter F. Mondale closes in on the nomination and looks like a certain victor, he loses
a major primary contest. This, in turn, casts
doubt about his "electability." I felt that the
"electability" angle needed to be explored,
so I tested it using SSI's PRESIDENT
ELECT. (Our editor, Russell Sipe, examined the demographics related to incumbency in CGW 1.1 and determined that within
this simulation, "....incumbency is probably
the single largest factor in voter popularity."
— p. 34) It was recognized from the outset
that any Democratic challenger would have
a difficult time shaking up Reagan's strength
in electoral votes, but the regularity of the
results was surprising to this writer.
Since Mondale lost handily when both the
candidates were handled by the computer,
I decided to try to use the human factors to
shake matters up. I recruited a campaign
manager for Reagan that had never seen

PRESIDENT ELECT before and I took on the
difficult task of trying to get something going with the Mondale campaign. The Labor
Day poll started out rather typically with
Reagan holding an estimated 59% to 41%
edge in popular votes and a projected 508 to
13 edge in electoral votes (only 17 were judged too close to call). There are actually only
two extremely variable ways to shake up
established positions: debates and foreign
trips. In attempting to breakup Reagan's invincibility, I tried both tactics.
The first tactic was a debate. According to
the news media, Mondale won the debate
held in week #2. He won in points by 34 to
29 and in intangibles by 19 to 13. Never-

theless, the gap only closed to 57% to 43% in
popular vote and to an extra 30 in the "too
close to call" column. By week #3, Reagan
was reasserting his strength. in week #4,
Mondale's campaign tried the second tactic.
This strategy, a trip to an unfriendly country, backfired. From that moment on, the
results were etched in concrete. By the time
the smoke cleared, Mondale had lost the
popular vote by a margin of 68% to 32% and
the electoral votes by a margin of 535 to 3.
Needless to say, the simulation proved exceedingly disappointing to a Democrat.
One very interesting facet of the debate,
however, was the apropos nature of the questions. Though the questions were written in
1981, it was extremely interesting to have

Mondale and Reagan debating on nuclear
arms control, Central America, NATO, the
role of the Federal Reserve Board, corporate
taxation, and believe it or not illegal immigration. The questions we were asked were so
topical that it was unbelievable. This was one
advantage of using the human campaign
managers, since the computer will rarely
allow Reagan to debate. Nevertheless, it
wasn't a great deal of fun to run Mondale
against Reagan under historical conditions
(I used parameters of 8.7% inflation and 9.2%
unemployment to offset game author Hernandez' view of 0% inflation and full employment. I also used a shaky world situation of
3 — relatively negative to try to offset the
economic stability of 1984: 2 — relatively
healthy in spite of ominous indicators of a
technical nature). I asked myself if the other
major candidates would be any more "electable." Gary Hart claimed that he was.
Using the Hart profile provided in the
sidebar to this article, the simulation was
much closer than the Mondale-Reagan
match-up, but Reagan began with enough
electoral votes to win in every simulation.
The computer didn't perform too poorly with
Hart vs. Reagan. In the strictly computer
managed simulation, the initial popular edge
was 54% to 45% (Reagan over Hart) and electoral votes were 345 to 36 with 157 too close
to call. Clearly, this campaign needed the
"human touch."
Once again, I attempted to put the Reagan
campaign at a disadvantage. This time, I
managed the Hart campaign and allowed the
computer to manage the President. On this
occasion, Hart took a trip to a friendly country and received good enough press to narrow the gap to 53% to 46% in popular vote
and 365 to 26 in electoral votes (with 147 "too
close to call"). Finally, on week #5 of the campaign, the digitized manager of the Reagan
campaign agreed to debate. At last, my
idealistic Democratic bias cried out, "I've got
the turkey now!" Indeed, Hart managed to
WIN the debate in points (29 to 25), but only
tied the President in intangibles (with 22
apiece). This turn of events narrowed the gap

to its most narrow point. Reagan held on to
a slight lead in popular vote (52% to 48%), but
for the first time, no longer held enough electoral votes to win (191 to 168 with 179 "too
close to call"). Those figures proved as illusory, as they faded to a typical 55% to 44%
and 370 7 (with 161 "too close to call") by the
next week. With no news, gaffes, or bad press
to explain it, Hart's miraculous campaign
turned sour and finished with a Reagan victory. Final results were 59% t 0 41% and 535-3.

-

It was certainly a closer race with Hart vs.
Reagan, but I still had not created the
playability of a GAME. Thus far, I had enjoyed some marginally interesting simulations, but not a GAME. Sipe, in the article
referenced earlier, had claimed that incumbency was the primary factor. I
wondered what would happen if I ran Hart
as the incumbent against Reagan as the
challenger with the exact same parameters
regarding the world situation and national
economy. Hart won handily! It is questionable whether he would have in a longer
campaign. In both computer managed and
human simulations, Reagan consistently
hammered away at Hart's strength. In the
computer campaign, with no debate occurring, Hart won 55% to 45% in popular votes,
but only managed a 362 176 victory in electoral votes. In the human managed campaign, Hart managed to pull off a slightly better 56% to 44% victory in popular votes, but
a significantly better 471 67 victory in elec-

-

-

toral votes. Question: Does the fact that
Reagan does better than Hart in challenging
an incumbent under the same circumstances
indicate 1) that Reagan is a better candidate
than Hart or 2) that there is a definite conservative bias in the demographics built into
PRESIDENT ELECT. As a player (with an
admitted tilt toward the left, personally), it

seems that there is a conservative bias in the
demographics. Otherwise, I find it hard to
explain the sudden erosion of Hart's support
in the friendly trip and winning debate game
and the much better showing by Reagan
against an incumbent. Please note that the
only different factor is the initial
randomization.
Whether or not such a right tilt is a delu-

SUGGESTED RATINGS FOR PRESIDENT ELECT
Hart Jackson
Strong Environmental Laws
Strong Consumer Protection
Gun Control
Equal Rights Amendment
Busing For Integration
Affirmative Action Programs
Legalized Abortion
National Health Insurance
Increased Unemployment Benefits
Increased Welfare Benefits
Tax Cuts For Business
Tax Cuts For Individuals
Reducing Regulation Of Business
Slash Budget To Balance
Raising Business Production #1
Decrease Defense Spending
Salt Treaty
Trade With Communist Nations
Increased Foreign Aid (3rd World)
Condemn South Africa
Recognize PLO
Non-interventionism In Foreign Pol.
Tight Congressional Control of CIA
Emphasis On Human Rights
Subtle Diplomacy In Foreign Policy
SPEAKING ABILITY
PERSONAL MAGNETISM
POISE
(Higher # = degree of support)

8
7
6
9
7
7
7
6
8
5
5
3
6
6
8
6
9
6
9
9
6
5
8
9
6
8
8
7

8
9
7
9
9
9
6
9
7
8
2
4
4
5
5
9
8
8
9
9
9
8
9
9
4
9
8
7

sion of this writer's paranoia, I was still looking for a strong Democratic challenger to
make a race out of the 1984 simulation. Out
of curiosity, I turned to Jesse Jackson.
I set up the computer as campaign manager
for both sides in the Reagan—Jackson race.
The Labor Day poll was ominous. Jackson
was already losing by a fatal 61% to 39% in
popular votes and Reagan already had 479
electoral votes to Jackson's 17 and the meagre
"too close to call" total of 42. It turned out
that this race, like the others, was not "too
close to call" and finished with the exact electoral vote count as the other simulations Reagan 535—Jackson 3. The big difference
here was that Reagan's popular vote margin
was even wider over Jackson than over Mondale (69% to 31%). With that kind of disparity, I didn't even try the human factor in that
race.
I think the only people who will want to
replay these simulations from a Democratic
perspective would be those with Alf Landon
Syndrome (Republican Presidential
nominee from Kansas who only won in
Maine and Vermont in 1936) or George
McGovern Complex (Democratic Presidential nominee from South Dakota who only
managed to pull in Massachusetts and the
District of Columbia in 1972). On the other
hand, if you are a Republican. . . happy
stumping!

❑

DISPATCHES
Insights From the
Strategy Game
Design Front

Dan Bunten
of Ozark Softscape

There is one constant in the world of computer games — the world is constantly
changing! This spring and summer I have
been to Softcon in New Orleans, a press tour
in New York, an Electronic Arts "Artist
Symposium" in Silicon Valley, the Consumer Electronics Show in Chicago, and the
Origins game conference in Dallas. At each
place there have been many discussions
about where this field is going. The prognostications have ranged from mildly optimistic to depressingly pessimistic. The
consensus, as much as it exists, is generally negative. "The game market is dead" was
proclaimed repeatedly.

To a certain extent I agree. The market
that was controlled and manipulated by a
few of the hardware manufacturers, software publishers and game developers is
gone forever. The days of "me too" arcade
games written by "whiz kid" programmers
in a couple of months of their spare time are
in the past. So too are the times when Atari,
Activision, Imagic and others could crank
out titles one after another and rake in the
cash. But my perception is that that the
market has not disappeared, it has matured.
The "arcade craze" was an intense but
short-lived phenomenon. The public has
satisfied their need to control little animated
objects on the screen. Their eye-hand coordination has been sufficiently challenged
and exhausted. They have blasted all the
aliens, eaten all the dots, navigated all the
mazes and rescued all the damsels!

It's no wonder that companies that rode
the crest of the "arcade craze" are now
floundering. It's equally not surprising that
"the game industry" should be seen as failing (at least to outsiders) since action/arcade
games represented the vase majority of the
revenues generated. However, I am very optimistic about games that fulfill the promise
of home computing and create a whole new
medium.
To me the outlook has never been better!
With the death of the single-focus type action/arcade games, the attention of consumers has shifted towards more "substantial" products. Best seller lists are now
populated by games that offer varied interaction and more cerebral elements.
Strategy games now far outnumber arcade
games in the lists. Just two years ago the opposite was true. Even the arcade games that
make the lists have more depth than ever
before. "Lode Runner" includes strategic
planing and puzzle solving along with its

fast action. "Julius Irving and Larry Bird Go
One On One" allows a player to really get
a feel for basketball and to experience pride
in the way you can do turn-around-jumpshots. (You can even shatter the backboard
with an over zealous slam dunk!)

Simple eye-hand action games are dead
but what else can we say about the future
of computer games? I feel certain there will
be other obituaries to write. "Computer
board games" seem to me to have a short
life expectancy. Although these games offer more potential interactions than arcades
do, they require too much from players and
often deliver too little. In general, any game
that was suitable as a board game will make
a bad computer game. This is because of the
differences in the two mediums. For instance a game like "Risk" is very easy to play
on a board because all a player does is point
and talk. ("I'm attacking there from here
with all these men.") However, the computer equivalent (no longer on the market)
required the player to specify the I.D.
numbers of the origin and destination countries as well as the number of units to be included. Even if the computer provided a
reasonably good opponent (which it didn't),
this type of game would not be as good as
an original design.

Games where the computer takes its turn
then you take your turn are also "computer
board games". Although there are situations
where this type of design is appropriate, it
is usually a "cop-out" by the designer. It's
a lot easier to write a game where only one
thing can happen at any moment. Another
aspect of "computer board games" is their
reliance on command languages. Single or
multiple key-strokes are used to communicate the wishes of the player. The
player must memorize the commands or
keep checking the "quick reference card".
He is constantly reminded he is interacting
with a computer program. If an easier interface were used instead, the player could
forget he is playing a computer game and
just go ahead and have fun. There was a time
before designers had much experience with
computers that board games were a logical
starting place for a design. However, those
days have passed. "Computer board games"
may never completely die (since wargame
designers are so enamored with them) but
thankfully they are fading away!

Another group of games that I see as eventually passing away are the word guessing
games. These go by another name in some
circles — text adventure games. With or
without the hi-res pictures, the main limitation of adventure games seems to be figuring out how to tell the computer what you
want to do rather than what to tell it. You
have to discover what words the parser (the

thing that tries to make sense of your words)
understands. Granted, adventure games
give you a sense of infinite possibilities. At
first it seems you can talk to the computer
like another person. Then you realize the
person is deaf and you must use a keyboard
to communicate. Before long you discover,
however, that you're dealing with a retarded deaf kid with a fourth grade vocabulary.
Still and all these games have such a following that they might survive. Maybe, they will
improve so much that rather than die they
will ascend into heaven!
The final group of games to disappear in
the next couple of years will be the linear
quest games. These games consist of solving a group of puzzles in a certain order that
only the programmer knows for sure. At
each crisis the player is rewarded for a
wrong decision with the death of his
character. Eventually you build up so many
"hit points", abilities and miscellaneous
paraphernalia that you can survive any
situation. However, you still have to
discover what the programmer had in mind
for you to do to finish the quest. Another element (although not strictly necessary) is the
fact that all interactions with other creatures
in the game will be stereotypical. In general,
if it moves kill it! Obviously, the idea of
"larger than life" heroic quests has great appeal. But do I really have to die so many
times (or buy cheat sheets and cheat programs) to enjoy them? I hope the future will
bring more reasonable minds into the

design of this type of game. I would love to
play one that didn't feel like the programmer was punishing me!
So what will be left after all these genres
have bitten the dust? The new and innovative products that will make this
medium what it can become. Products that
don't copy from other mediums but learn

from them to create something new. I am
reminded of the recent (July/August) cover
of "Science 84" which showed five billiard
balls that looked like a photograph shot at
a slow shutter speed. The caption said "this
picture is a fake". It was the result of 100
hours of graphics analysis of Lucasfilm's
Vax computer. Shadows, reflections and
even blurred motion were so realistic that

you would swear it was a photo. I understand why the Lucasfilm folks thought this
would be an achievement and I agree with
their logic. However, if after they perfect
this technology they continue to produce
only photographic type images of things that
could be photographed, they would be missing the point! Most people would agree that
the real potential of computer generated art
would be the creation of images that could
not be done any other way. So it is with computer games. We have a new medium to invent and we must break out of the old
patterns.
Arcade games were great for the graphics
and easy human interface they originated.
"Computer board games" taught us
something about the potential for cerebral
depth in game design. Text adventures
showed us how we would love flexible and
interactive communication in our games.
Finally, quest games told us how much fun
it is to pretend to be part of something bigger than life. Now it's time to bring those
elements together in products that use the
resources that are unique to our medium.
It's time to make something new!
Dan Bunten is the author of Computer
Quarterback, Cartels & Cutthroats, and
Cytron Masters all available from Strategic
Simulations. He is the lead designer of the
Ozark Softscape group that wrote M.U.L.E.
and Seven Cities of Gold both available from
Electronic Arts.

So, now that you can see what you're doing, it's time to get up and look around the
place. You'll soon notice you're quite alone
here, and you won't be able to leave; at least,
not by the front door. But we'll come to that
in a little while. In the meantime, do some
snooping in the various rooms. You'll find
a few helpful spells, and a few other interesting items, as well.
For instance, Belboz's room is worth looking into. While you're doing that, listen to
the birdie, and make sure you check out
everything! When you leave, you should
have Belboz's journal. If you don't, you
missed something, and you'll never get out
of the Guild Hall.
Another place you don't want to miss is
the storeroom. Pay special attention to that
matchbook, and what's written on it. The
ochre vial is also important, so make sure
you hang on to that, too (the calendar? Well,
you can't eat the dates, hehehe, so you can
leave it if you like). And that receptacle in
the lobby, now what could that be? ("Letters, I get letters. . .")

SORCERER

As told by Scorpia

Good to see you again! Step right in; I've
been expecting you, and your usual chair
is waiting. What's that? Oh, the dwarf
behind the bar? Fred is off this week; he's
attending the National Grue Convention being held in Colossal Cave (they've reserved
the Dark Room, of course!). Seems they're
trying to get up a petition to ban electric
lights this year. Ah, but that's not what
you're here for, is it? Settle in, and we'll talk
about the trials and tribulations awaiting
you as a Sorcerer.
Now, the first thing is, don't panic! Just
because you see a nasty, drooling, deadly
hellhound coming right at you, is no need
to be worried. This time, it's only a dream
(lucky you!). When you wake up, however,
it will be a different matter: you're in the
dark. But, if you've already been through
Enchanter, you should know how to shed
a little light on the subject.

Once you've found everything there is to
find on this level, and the mail has arrived,
it's time to go look in the cellar. Aha! There's
a mysterious trunk here, with some buttons
on it. I'll bet if you pushed the right buttons,
the trunk would open up (and I'll bet if you
push the wrong ones, you'll never get it
open!). So, how do we get it to open?

Well, notice the colors of the buttons? Do
they remind you of anything? No? Better
look over all the goodies that came with the
game, very carefully! (You might find
yourself going in circles here). Once you
realize what the colors relate to, and which
colors are important today, you should have
the trunk open in no time.
And what's inside? Looks like a scroll to
me. One of those un-Gnusto-able scrolls, in
fact. Read it carefully before using it; you
only get one chance, and you don't want to
blow it (of course, you saved the game first
anyway, right?). There really is only one
logical choice, so take some time to think
about it.
Ok, so now you're out of the Guild Hall....
and standing in the forest, just like in the
dream. And sure enough, there's the
hellhound bearing down on you! Better get
a move on (no, don't climb the tree!), it's for
real this time! Once you get to the forest
edge, you'll be safe.
From here, you have quite a few places
to explore and things to do. There's no way
past the magic minefield, so don't even
bother trying; instead, try climbing down
the snake hole (the snakes are hiding today),
and making your way to the Chasm Edge.

There seems to be something on the other
side, but the chasm is a bit too wide to jump.
However, there is a way across, and it
shouldn't take you too long to figure out how
(review your spells, if necessary).
Well, will you look at that? A tree full of
Zorkmids! Or.... is it? Surprise! It's just an
illusion, and all you end up with is, sigh, one
grubby little coin. But, it's better than
nothing, and you certainly will be needing
it! In fact, you'll be needing it twice, but we'll
talk about that a little later.
By the way, throughout the game, there
will be times when you start to feel sleepy.
Don't worry about that; most anyplace is
safe enough for you to stretch out and nap
awhile. However, I would not suggest using either the riverbank or the drawbridge
for a bed!
Speaking of the riverbank, let's trot on
over there now. Just looking at it, you'll probably get the idea that swimming isn't the
best thing to do here. You'd be right. Time
to check your list of spells, and see which
one might do some good. Just remember to
move fast (hopefully, you'll go in the right
direction); nothing lasts forever!
The fort is another interesting place to
visit. There are two items in this area that
you'll be needing later, so take a good look
around. The cannon, of course, is an obvious hiding place. However, getting to the
scrolls in the barrel seems impossible (hope
you have some bandaids handy!). What can
be done? Perhaps a look at your handy Infotater might help. Especially when you
think about what you found in the vicinity
of the river!
The other item is a little less obvious. But,
since there aren't many rooms or other objects in the fort, you shouldn't have too
much trouble finding what you need. Just
be careful not to overlook (or underlook!)
anything.
Now it's time to go underground. Of
course, you've been making a map as you
go along (haven't you?), and you've probably
spent some time down below already. If you
haven't, just poke around down there till
you come to the Toll Gate. Here you give up
your Zorkmid to get by, and, continuing further on after that, you'll come to the infamous Glass Maze.
Actually, the maze is not all that hard,
although trying to get through it could drive
you batty. When you make it out the exit to
the Hollow, you'll find a scroll there.
However, NOW you have a problem. Two,
in fact. For one thing, you can't take the
scroll back with you through the maze. For
another, the maze will change as soon as
you pick up the scroll (oops!).
Now what? Well, first, the answer to the
scroll problem is really pretty simple. The

solution is right there in the Hollow, practically staring you in the face. Think about
it. The maze is another matter. There are,
in fact, two ways out. One is quick and dirty, the other long and hard. The hard one
is finding your way out through the new
maze, which can be done, but it will take
awhile (if you do this, you'll have to learn
a certain spell several times before you enter
the maze).
The other way requires using one of the
spells you found in the Guild Hall. If you've
played around with that one at all, you know
that it will always take you back to the place
where you cast it, so if you're going to use
it here, best cast the spell before entering
the maze.
Ok, so now you're out of the Maze, and
you have the scroll. But, you need a
Zorkmid, so you can enter the Amusement
Park (don't ask me what an Amusement
Park is doing down here!). The tree is gone,
so you can't go there for one. However,
don't despair! There is a solution.... it just
requires a larcenous turn of mind, and quick
fingers.

Shaft Bottom. The rope is important, so take
that before you climb up to the mine.

The mine is a small (really small) maze of
sorts; what would an Infocom be without
one? It shouldn't take you long to map it out
(it better not; your potion won't last
forever!). Along the way, you'll find a
timber; take it with you, because you'll need
it soon.

Eventually, you'll come to the chute top.
This is the one your Older Self came down
a little while ago. However, before you can
slide down yourself, you must find the way
to the Slanted Room. You have the rope and
the timber, which is all you need. All you
have to do is figure out how to use them, so
experiment a little there (it's a good idea to
save the game, since it's likely you won't get
the solution the first time).
In the Slanted Room, you'll find a scroll
with a rather odd spell. It's meant to be used right there. Read room descriptions
carefully before and after you cast the spell.
You shouldn't leave empty-handed.

Once you have the coin, it's time to visit
that strange Amusement Park. Give your
Zorkmid to the gnome and enter. You'll find
some rides here, as well as a Haunted
House. What you really want, though, is that
arcade at the far end. If you could just hit
one of those cute little bunnies, I'll bet you
could win a prize. You can't do that on your
own, but you should have something with
you that will help.

When you do come down the chute, you'll
be back in the Coal Bin Room, and here you
will see your Younger Self (I said this was
the strangest part of the game!). This is a
critical moment. If you don't do exactly the
right thing here, you will cease to exist.
Think back to what happened when you
first entered this room, and do likewise.

When you get your prize, take a look in
the Carving Room (no, it's no? the place to
cut up turkeys!). One carving in particular
stands out. Look over your spells; you will
need TWO of them here. When you've used the right ones properly, you will be able
to progress into the Sooty Room.

Now it's time to go down the lower chute,
before you choke. Ah, air again! You've
made your way to a lagoon. In fact, you're
probably pretty dirty from all that messing
around in the mine, so why not take a swim
and wash up? You might even find
something of interest!

Now, you are about to embark on the
strangest part of this adventure. The Sooty
Room leads to the Coal Bin Room, and here
you will find breathing to be rather difficult.
You'll need a potion here; I sure hope you
did the right thing with the matchbook!

But the real surprise is when you meet....
yourself! Your Older Self, in fact, sliding into the room from a chute above. Listen
carefully to what your twin tells you, you'll
need that information. Also, remember that
you're dealing with yourself here, so act accordingly (remember the Golden Rule?).
After your twin dives down the lower
chute, you can proceed on to the Dial Room.
Opening the door in here should be no problem, and you will soon find yourself in the

Ok, you're just about ready to face Jeearr.
He's close by, as a matter of fact. You just
have to get past the nasty-looking vines
(should be easy), and into the cave. Ummm,
well, there's those grues, too. You'll have to
have a way of dealing with them. And in this
case, light won't work (uh oh!).
Once you pass the grues, you will come
to three doors. Two of them lead to very
unpleasant consequences; the third will
bring you to what you've been looking for:
your showdown with the demon. So, before
you open that door, you had best be
prepared. You will need to protect yourself
first; do that before you open the door.
When you see what's on the other side,
you'll know what other spell you need.
Don't waste time, do what you must, and
quickly! Congratulations, Sorcerer, you are
now the leader of the Circle!

❑ ❑ ❑
Whew! That's enough of magic for now.
Next time, we'll come back to more mundane matters (so to speak!), when we take
a look at solving a murder in Deadline. Until then, happy adventuring!
For those of you who need some extra
help, there are 3 ways to get in touch with
me:
By mail: send a self-addressed, stamped
envelope, along with your questions, to:
Scorpia, P.O. Box 338, Gracie Station, NY
NY 10028.
On the Source: SMAIL to ST1030.
On CompuServe: GO GAM-310.
This column is copyrighted 1984 by Scorpia. All rights reserved.

LODE RUNNER
Contest!

There is nothing quite like the thrill of a
LODE RUNNER level you've never seen
before. But by now, of course, You've played
all one hundred and fifty levels and the truth
is beginning to sink in; you may never see
another NEW level! Egad! Can 150 actually be not enough?
Computer Gaming World is glad to announce a new contest that will satisfy this
craving and give you a chance to
demonstrate your creative talents at the
same time. Just send in your own LODE
RUNNER designs and we'll share the best
with everybody. CGW will publish a disk of
the winners and runners-up so that we can
all join in the fun.
The most exciting thing about this contest is the large number of prizes. The best
overall design will win $50, courtesy of the
publishers of LODE RUNNER, Broderbund
Software. Second place prizes of new
Broderbund games will be awarded in three
categories: Most Artistic, Most Challenging
to Solve, and Most Challenging to Play.
Finally, everyone whose work is included
on the Computer Gaming World LODE
RUNNER disk can purchase a copy of that
disk as a special half price rate. The basis
for judging is described in the Contest Rules
below.

BEST OVERALL: The winner will be the
best combination of all of these elements.

So, get out that disk with all those levels
you've created, pick out the best and send
them in. All entries must be received by no
later than October 30, 1984. Winners will
be announced in the February 1985 issue.

3. No more than three (3) entries per person (they may all be on the one disk, in fact
we'd prefer them that way).
4. Each disk submitted should be clearly
labeled with:

CONTEST RULES

1. All entries must have a possible solution, that is, you must be able to get all the
gold and advance to the next level. If the solution to your puzzle is difficult, please include a description of how to beat it.
2. All entries will be judged on the basis
of originality and playability. Prizes will be
awarded in the following categories.
ARTISTIC: Visual appearance is what
counts here. Do you have a level that looks
like something? Does it contain a word or
message? Remember to be original.
CHALLENGING TO SOLVE: These are the
levels where it takes considerable time and
thought to figure out HOW to complete the
level. Maybe you can't get all the gold, or
maybe you've got the gold but can't see how
to get to the top of the screen.
CHALLENGING TO PLAY: So you know
how to win, but it still takes skill. Admittedly, the line between these two types of
challenge (logical vs. coordination) gets a little fuzzy, but who said judging was
objective?

Your name and address The format of
the disk (Apple, Atari, C64, IBM) The
number of levels contained on it.
5. Mail your entry to:
Lode Runner Contest
C/O Computer Gaming World
P.O. Box 4566
Anaheim, CA 92803-4566
6. All entries must be received no later
than October 30, 1984.
7. All entries become the property of Computer Gaming World.
8. Disks sent with a return address label
and postage will be returned after contest
is concluded.

Atari
Playfield
David Stone

A LAMENT
As you have probably heard or read by
now, much of Atari Inc. has been bought
by Jack Tramiel, former chairman of Commodore. And you may well have been
pondering, as have I, what does this portend? Some analysts speculate that Atari
will forge ahead with a new low cost
machine to compete with the Macintosh
and IBM-PC. Other feel that the Atari 7800,
the next generation dedicated game system
may now be abandoned.
Which ever way Mr. Tramiel takes Atari,
the outlook is not good for the world of
serious computer gaming. Isn't the market
already glutted with enough IBM lookalikes? Instead of spending more millions
to make Atari respectable to business people, I wondered, why not spend the same
amount to make simulations, adventures,
and strategy gaming respectable to business
people — to all people for that matter.
Only a relatively few people have a real
need for a personal computer in their work.
Everyone, on the other hand, needs entertainment and a way to enjoy time spent with
friends and family. So, instead of building
yet-another machine that has a degree of
IBM compatibility, instead of saying "hey,
look our computer is almost just like the
other guy's", why doesn't Atari move on to
the next generation of computer-gaming
machine?
It seems abundantly clear to me that all
Atari computers are HOME ENTERTAINMENT machines, not word processors, not
spreadsheet calculators, not scientific or
statistical analyzers. Yes, they can do these
things, but it's not what they do best. Who's
idea was it in the first place to sell something
positive, namely the home computer, by
advertising that it could be used to do
something negative, namely writing and

balancing the checkbook. As any programmer can tell you, a positive and a negative
do not make a positive.
Dumping the 7800 (the dedicated game
machine) would not appear to be a
catastrophe. There's little doubt that the arcade boom of the early 80's is on the
downside. This suggests that it's important
for game oriented companies to re-position
themselves in the market: away from arcade
gaming. Unfortunately, Commodore 64
commercials asking the rhetorical question
"I see you scored a million points on Whappo Invaders, but what do you know about
real computers?", as well as Coleco's slogan
that they ".... bring the arcade experience
home ...." have helped to instill in the
public's mind that all computer games are
arcade games (and are therefore frivolous).
Isn't it time the rest of America learned what
reader's of CGW have known all along: that
computer gaming can exercise your mind
as well as your reflexes, that simulations,
adventures, and strategy gaming is
challenging, entertaining, and an excellent
adult recreation.

A PLAN
I truly believe that a great demand for a
new generation of programmable gaming
machines (with "some degree of compatibility with the existing Atari computers") could be created and successfully
marketed by a three-pronged effort of: 1)
defocusing on the hardware (which has a
potentially negative connotation), 2) making it clear to targeted adult market
segments that computer gaming is much
more than arcade games, and most importantly, 3) selling the benefits of gaming: feeling good, competitiveness, relaxation,
personal-family-social interaction — even
business people gotta' unwind.
Instead of having just one spokesperson
(i.e. Alan Alda), show a variety of ADULT
"opinion leaders" enjoying the fellowship
and camaraderie that goes with a good game.
Let's get all those big, rugged guys from the
Miller-time crowd and show them having
a helluva' good time playing M.U.L.E. or
Eastern Front — any game! but NOT an "arcade" game. When's the last time you saw
a home computer commercial that didn't
have an eight year old kid in it? Computer
gaming is too fun and too important to
relegate to elementary and junior high
school aged kids. It's not that I'm against
arcade-type computer games, I love 'em. But
I suspect far too many adults equate computer gaming with games that can be played
only by engaging the lower brain centers.

JUST A DREAM
The problem with my fantasy of an adultoriented programmable gaming/simulation
computer is that it's not where the market
is today — and corporate planners tend to
go with the numbers. This is unfortunate,
especially since Atari was one of the handful computer companies that got the whole
personal computer market off the ground.
Companies like Atari (and, yes, Apple) were
led by men who were bold enough to cut

their own paths. Back in the mid-70's, they
didn't count heads to see where the pack
was, they looked ahead to see where the
market might be if they produced the right
machine. Apple is to be applauded for NOT
making the MacIntosh "IBM compatible"
— to have done so would have meant adding
circuitry to downgrade the MacIntosh's
capabilities. Wouldn't it have been great to
have heard that Atari announced fall '84
delivery of a new machine — a programmable gaming/simulation computer for
adults (of all ages) with advanced entertainment capabilities that no other computer on
the market today, including the IBM PC,
could touch.

MEANWHILE, BACK ON THE
PLAYFIELD
If you are constantly on the look-out for
an arcade game to match the excitement you
originally felt when piloting your ship in
Star Raiders, then both ENCOUNTER or
DIMENSION X are worth looking at. These
games, even though they are both from the
same company, Synapse, have very different implementations of very a similar
premise: wipe out enemy ships on a threedimensional plane before they wipe you out.
In both games you have a pilot's-eye view
of a planet's surface. You speed your ship
across a horizontal plane, encounter enemy,
and shoot at them (as they shoot back) with
photon-type torpedoes that appear smaller
as they recede. Wipe-out the enemy, then
proceed through a deadly gauntlet similar
to Star Raider's hyperwarp, to another
playfield. Both games tell you the number
of enemy remaining and both have "radar"
that reveals their whereabouts.
The visual effect of piloting your ship in
both games is quite good. The main screen
in DIMENSION X looks like a multi-colored
checkerboard. Depth is achieved by showing nearer squares larger and further ones
smaller. You get a true traveling effect as the
checkerboard smoothly scrolls in all directions in response to your joystick. ENCOUNTER provides 3-D by showing an
solid field scattered with pylons (reminiscent of the 2001 monolith) that increase in
size as you approach them. I prefer the ENCOUNTER 3-D effect mostly because the
enemy are easier to see on a solid field than
against a checkerboard background.
The enemy in ENCOUNTER are also
more interesting. Instead of just increasing
the number of enemy when you advance to
a higher level, ENCOUNTER enemies
change their fighting tactics. At different
levels the enemy photon torpedoes are fired
at you in different formations: one at time,
in a column barrage, in bursts of three
across, etc. This makes the game more fun
because at each level you must develop different offensive-defensive tactics and
strategies for defeating them. Plus, there are
three kinds of enemy at each level: two that
are firing at you and one that does a
Kamikaze number while taking evasive action. Lotsa' fun and well-worth the
encounter.

❑

FIGHTER COMMAND!

Tom Cheche has served as a playtester
on a number of SSI games.
September 1, 1940. Another day in the
Battle of Britain is about to unfold.
Cloud cover is heavy. Weather forecasts
call for 50% cloud cover over Britain today,
with German raids expected to strike secondary targets. British fighter squadrons bent
on interception may find it difficult to find
their prey. Intelligence warns that German
air raids are likely to be heavy. And ULTRA,
that wonderful box of wires and plugs that
mysteriously decodes German communications with amazing reliability, warns that
the sector airfield at Biggin Hill is a likely
target.
At 0600 hours every fighter squadron in
southern England goes on "hut alert". Two
fighter groups, 10 and 11, bear the burden
of protecting the British heartland from
Goering's Luftwaffe during the critical days
of August and September, when the Battle
of Britain will be decided.
Ten Group is entrusted with the
Southernmost area from the Isle of Wight
westward to Plymouth and beyond. Eleven
Group commands the area surrounding
London, the Thames estuary, and the Channel coast at its nearest proximity to France.
In the dispersal huts and tents of 10 and 11
Groups, as the Hurricane and Spitfire pilots
wile away the hours in card games and nervous chatter, the controllers await the word
to scramble fighters.
The word will come from Fighter Command, headquartered at a mansion outside
London called Bentley Priory. There, in a
command center designed to monitor all incoming German raids, waits Air ChiefMarshall Sir Hugh Dowding, the man on
whose shoulders rests the task of coordinating the air defense of Britain.
Scattered the length of the British coast is
a network of RDF (radar) stations. These are
Britain's secret weapons in this battle for
survival. Capable of identifying altitude,
direction and approximate size of incoming
enemy air raids, they are the long range eyes
of the RAF (Royal Air Force).
At Fighter Command, the radar contacts
are monitored and interceptions are coor-

Name:
Type:
System:
#Players:
Author:
Publisher:

Fighter Command
Wargame
Apple (C-64 in future)
1-2
Charles Merrow
Jack Avery
Strategic Simulations
Mountain View, CA

dinated. As raids are identified and
squadrons scrambled, the progress of all aircraft will be displayed on a huge map table.
Counters representing the various air
groups are pushed around the board by controllers, like croupiers at some huge roulette
table where the stakes are the very future of
a nation.
There is no activity picked up by British
radar until 0748. Then things begin to happen very quickly. Radar detects air activity
over the French coast. German bombing
raids are beginning to form. Still too soon to
be able to discern individual groups, the
bombers and their escorts are now only a
mass of aircraft on the radar screens. But it
will not be long before they are on their way
towards England.
At 0750 all squadrons in 10 and 11 Groups
not assigned to specific patrol stations are
ordered to "runway alert." With engines
running and pilots aboard, those aircraft
can, from "runway alert" statis, be airborne
within two minutes should they be needed.
At 0804 the first raid is identified; 100-plus
aircraft at an altitude of one thousand feet
over Dieppe. Uncertain of their destination,
there is little time to wait; at one thousand
feet, the raid is likely bound for a coastal
target.... perhaps an RDF station, or
possibly an airfield.
The order goes out: Scramble fighters at
Hawkinge and Lympne, two forward
fighter strips. Four minutes later four small
markers, British roundels, appear on the big
map at Bentley Priory, representing the four
Spitfire squadrons from Hawkinge and

Lympne. They are airborne and moving
towards the swastika that now lies over the
sector of the map that outlines the English
Channel just northwest of Dieppe where the
incoming German raid was first sighted.
The four Spitfire squadrons are still clawing for altitude when the second raid is
detected. It is a big one, 200-plus, also down
low at one thousand feet, and moving quickly. This second raid is picked up due south
of the RDF at Beachy Head, southwest of
Hastings. It looks like it may be headed for
the large fighter base at Tangmere.
No time to wait. Scramble all four
squadrons at Tangmere.
Scramble Westhampnett.
Operating at only about two-thirds
strength, the six squadrons that are ordered
to intercept this second raid will only pack
the punch of four full-sized squadrons, and
only if all six make a successful intercept.
The first raid, raid A, has turned west,
away from the pursuing interceptors. It is
0815 and the interceptors are now in a tail
chase. Could raid A be headed for the city
of Portsmouth? If so, the Spits may not get
to them in time.
On the big map at Bentley Priory the
roundels slowly make up ground on the raid
A swastika. It now seems certain that the
target is Plymouth, and interception before
the Germans reach the target is questionable. But, Fighter Command can afford
no more than six squadrons to be used on a
100 plane raid. This, surely, is only the
beginning of what promises to be a busy
day.

0816. Good news. On the big map the
markers representing the Tangmere
squadrons have been moved on top of the
second, raid B, swastika; indicating an intercept is close. Moments later there is radio
confirmation that the Tangmere squadrons
have "bounced" the incoming bombers, ambushing them from above.
A flurry of gunfire, broken reports of
HE-111s being hit, several quick claims of
bombers on the way down. One, two, three,
possibly a fourth. Then a fifth and a sixth.
A momentary silence, and then the report
that at least a part of the Heinkel group has
broken off and turned back. Good news.
Good news, too, that there are no reports of
losses from the Tangmere wing, at least
initially.
But the rest of raid B continues to work its
swastika westward across the board at
Bentley Priory, and ironically, the target
now appears to be Tangmere. Too late now
to scramble any other aircraft, only the
Westhampnett squadrons lie between the
bombers and their apparent target. On the
map at Fighter Command the marker
representing the Westhampnett squadrons
inches perceptibly closer to the swastika. It
is going to be close.
And it is still only 0828. It is going to be a
long day.

scrambling fighter squadrons can be
disastrous.
FC is played in two phases. During the
Orders Phase each side receives reports on
damage sustained and dished out during the
previous day's activities. In the case of
assessing damage to the enemy the information is predictably inaccurate. The British
never know exactly how badly shot up the
German bombing raids were, and the Germans never know exactly how much
damage, if any, was realized from their bombing missions.
During the Orders Phase each side also
receives reports on the numbers of available
aircraft and air crews, the morale status of
all squadrons, and weather forecasts. German forecasts of weather over Britain are
not as accurate as are the British forecasts,

What we are dealing with here is a classic,
a high point in the design of computer
wargames. Fighter Command (FC) by
Charlie Merrow and Jack Avery, SSI's
simulation of the Battle of Britain, is
arguably the finest example of computer
wargaming available for the home
computer.

It would not hurt for the prospective FC
player to do a little reading up on the Battle
of Britain before playing. Armed with some
knowledge of the circumstances, the player
will be able to more fully appreciate how
good FC really is as a simulation.
The pacing of FC is one of its strengths.
Radar contacts appear on the mapboard,
then move inexorably towards their targets.
No board-game slowness here; the computer updates activity in two-minute increments, and any indecisiveness in

The German player has nothing to do after
the orders are given. As in real life, he must
simply sit back and wait for the planes to
return, then try to assess the damage to the
British based on the often overly optimistic
reports from his aircrews.
But life for the British player is more complex. He must decide which raids should be
contested and which raids are only feints.
He must avoid squandering his resources in
interceptions of fighter sweeps. And he
must not use too many of his planes too early in the day, for fear that the Germans may
save their biggest raids until all of the frontline squadrons are on the ground refueling.
Although FC includes a one day scenario,
(Eagle Day), the beauty of the game is most
apparent in the campaign scenario, which
recreates the crucial period from midAugust to mid-September 1940. In the campaign game the real subtleties of FC come to
the fore. Every day is a new adventure as the
British player assesses damage to his airfields, RDF stations, and cities. Some industrial centers produce Hurricane or Spitfire aircraft. Sustain major damage to those
plants, and see your replacement aircraft
dwindle accordingly. Sustain damage to
your RDF stations and lose your "eyes", only to have German raids sneak in undetected
before you can scramble your fighters. Suffer serious damage to your fighter strips and
lose them as operational bases entirely until repairs are effected.
And what of the pilots, the "few" to whom
so many owed so much? Keep those pilots
at a high state of readiness too long, and
watch their morale drop so low as to render
them ineffective. But, use them judiciously
and watch the performances of individual
squadrons improve as they gain experience.

FC offers both solitaire and two-player
capability, with multiple scenarios. In the
solitaire mode the player becomes Sir Hugh
Dowding, in charge of the fighter defense of
Britain, while the computer, as Hermann
Goering, orders the Nazi missions. The
computer opponent is capable of playing at
five levels of difficulty.
Furthermore, the computer virtually
eliminates paperwork, and creates a "fog of
war" that elevates FC from simple wargame
to a faithful simulation that accurately
recreates the pressures which must have
been felt at Bentley Priory during the Battle
of Britain.

are identified, swastikas appear on the
screen, simulating the movement of those
markers on the map at Fighter Command.

and the British also have the advantage of
ULTRA reports, which frequently tip off at
least one of the key German targets.
During this phase the German plans his
raids, feints, and fighter sweeps, and
assigns covering fighters at various
altitudes. The British player can shift
squadrons from base to base, assigns target
priorities, and determines how aggressive
his interceptors should be in seeking
combat.
The program then shifts to the semi realtime Execution Phase that is the heart of FC.
Starting at 0600 and continuing until the
last German raid of the day has left the map,
or until 1800, whichever comes first, the
British player must wait for the German
raids to be picked up by radar. As the raids

See a squadron with considerable experience and high unit morale get bet up in
a dogfight and experience the frustration of
having to sit them out for several days
because even though there are plenty of
pilots available, only three aircraft may be
operational.
And finally, pray for foul weather. Knowing the prospect of German bombing operations declines proportionately as the
weather deteriorates, and that your exhausted pilots desperately need a day off to
improve morale and allow their crews a
chance to get some aircraft back in working
order, you greet each day with the same
question that Air Chief-Marshall Dowding
must surely have asked, "What's the
weather?"
And then, grit your teeth when Intelligence says, "10% cloud cover predicted
over Britain. Enemy air raids expected to be
very heavy."

GALACTIC GLADIATORS
meet the
STAINLESS STEEL RAT Johnny Wilson
Name:
Type:
System:
# Players:
Price:
Publisher:

Galactic Gladiators
Personal Combat
Apple, Atari, C-64
1-2
$39.95
Strategic Simulations
Mountain View, CA

Ever wanted to try your hand as Slippery
Jim DiGriz of Stainless Steel Rat fame? How
about putting yourself in Gordon Dickson's
Dorsal series? Fancy yourself as the next
John Carter? Want to save the universe by
destroying the robotic minions of Fred
Saberhagen's Berserker series? Then, boot
up your Galactic Gladiators (GG) disk and
get set for some scenarios from science fiction literature.

❑

❑ ❑

In Harry Harrison's Stainless Steel Rat For
President, there is a scene where Jorge, Slippery Jim's indigenous ally, and the DiGriz
family must rescue Flavia, another native
ally, from the Ultimados. Since GG only
allows one character on each side to have
the same initial letter, we had to change
Jorge to Ricardo. We also felt that the
scenario would have better balance if the
teams each had another member, so we added the previously non-existent Eduardo to
the scenario. Since Slippery Jim loves
regurgitant grenades, smoke bombs and
assorted pyrotechnics, we made the closest
choice available by choosing gemstones.
Further, there are no "needle guns" (the
DiGriz weapon of choice) in GG, so we settled for phasors.

RESCUE OF FLAVIA
In the book, the Ultimados were ambushed upon their arrival at a roadblock caused
by a tree which had been felled by our funloving good guys. In order to assure a
Slippery-Jim-type scenario, it is recommended that the Ultimados be given no
gemstones and that all but Bolivar of the
Steel team have them. Note that Bolivar is
given a heat ray gun. This is even more important in the second scenario.
Note, that in spite of the initial advantage
caused by the gemstones, the Steel team
must get advantage in a hurry as midway
through the scenario, the advantage turns
to the ultimados due to blade weapons
which may be used EVERY turn. It is

recommended that the experience rule be
used in all these scenarios because surprise
is an integral part of the "Slippery Jim"
modus operandi
Victory Conditions: Ultimados must
eliminateSteel. Steel must capture target
square with Ultimados defending.

CAUGHT AT CHECKPOINT
After the rescue of Flavia, Slippery Jim's
team of super spies run into an Ultimado
checkpoint. In the book, Slippery Jim
unveils a versatile laser to both mow down
the guards and blast the checkpoint open
for the team's escape. For the purpose of this
scenario, Bolivar has been given a heat ray
gun. The heat ray gun will do a nice job of
clearing out the checkpoint but, of course,
doesn't do a thing against Ultimados. My
strategy suggestion for this scenario is that
you have Bolivar blast the way clear at the
very beginning of the scenario as he is the
ONLY one with a heat ray gun. It is unlikely that you can successfully escape from the
checkpoint if you don't allow Bolivar to
clear the way initially. Once again, the team
led by "Slippery Jim" has the advantage in
gemstones, but don't get overconfident
because the scenario can even up in a hurry
if you don't use them effectively.
Victory Conditions: Ultimados must
eliminate Steel. Steel must enter and exit the
checkpoint structure.

ESCAPE FROM PRIMOROSO
The final scenario involves the scene
where Slippery Jim attempts to sign his candidate up as an official candidate in this
"banana republic" of outer space. Naturally, the ruling junta is not about to let a rival
candidate survive if they can help it, so they
ambush him and the Steel team. I recommend that you give the Ultimados at least
one extra soldier with blade weapons to
represent the "official" guard at the city hall
of Primoroso. The battlefield is the plaza at
Primoroso and is at long range to reflect the
distance the Steel team had to go to escape.
Note, however, that the team had an advantage in the book in the form of an available
helicopter. Alas, you have no such deus ex
machine in this scenario. You will need to
add a poorly armed native to be Harapo, the
indigenous candidate.
Victory Conditions: Ultimados must
eliminate Steel. Steel must eliminate
Ultimados.

❑

❑ ❑

These three scenarios should be enough
to get you started in the world of the
Stainless Steel Rat. It should also stimulate
your imagination for creating other
scenarios. If not, however, watch out for the
next article in this series which will offer
two scenarios from Fred Saberhagen's
Berserker stories.

Two Flight Simulators
by Roy Wagner

I am not a pilot and I have never taken a flying lesson,
but I am going to start up my trust C64. First I will takeoff
from a Southern California airport and fly to Catalina
Island. After that, a flight over New York City to view the
Statue of Liberty. What a day, beautiful weather, a great
day for flying! And I never left my computer.
If I want a different challenge, I could deliver air mail
in Kansas or go on a World War I bombing mission behind
enemy lines. These possibilities and more are now
available for the Commodore 64, Atari, Apple, and IBMPC computers. These programs include special options
that play like games, but you have to know how to fly the
airplane simulations before you can play them. Learning
to fly these plans will take a serious effort on your part if
you know knowing about flying a plane. Takeoff and flying around is fairly easy, but getting down safely is another
matter.
SOLO FLIGHT (SF) is available for the Commodore 64,
Atari and soon the IBM-PC and is a very good program.
The 15 pages of documentation are well written and will
teach you all you need to know to taxi, takeoff, fly about,
and land. It does not, however, help much in learning how
to get from one specific airport to another. There is
coverage explaining detailed instrument approaches, but
it is difficult to apply the material to flying with the computer. The 3-D visual ground references are minimal, the
other graphics are excellent, and the sound of the engine
is exceptionally well done.
The screen graphics are split into three visually distinct
areas. On the top half are the sky and ground (a quarter
of the screen each). The horizon stays constant, at the same
location and straight even though you may be turning the
plane (banking). On the bottom half of the screen are your
instruments.
In the middle of the flight area, is a fixed size image of
your plane, a 1930 vintage, single wing, single engine
airplane. All of your actions are reflected with this image.
Because of this, I found this program to be more like fly-

ing a model airplane, as opposed to a "real" airplane where
I only saw the view from the cockpit. The actions of this
plane are well done as it goes above or below the horizon.
SF provides a great deal of diversity. It includes for instance, three topologically different areas in which to fly.
First, there are the flat Kansas plains, where takeoffs and
landings at sea level are relatively easy. The area covers
about 20,000 square miles, including Wichita, Topeka, and
Kansas City. The view below is composed of some corn
fields and several airports.
The second area is Washington region where you have
a mixture of sea level and higher elevations. The basic flying area is centered about the famous Mount St. Helens,
where you can fly right over it (safely). The third area is
the Colorado ski area with lots of high altitude airports and
mountain passes to fly through. This area is tough! The
graphics for the airports are well done, but don't expect
to see the ski runs or lots of detailed scenery. The basic
object of this simulation is to get from one airport to
another. In fact, you can fly right through any visual object without crashing. This make sense because no one actually flying a plane would fly near any of these objects.
They represent visual points of reference to be flown
around.
The final flying option that this program offers is a game
of flying mail from one airport to on or more others. You
are scored on several factors, the most important ones being how fast you get from one point to another and the
amount of fuel you use. You can select any one of the three
areas and get more points for a more difficult area. You
also select your skill level. The higher the skill level the
tougher the flying conditions with high scores being saved to disk. My favorite feature of this option is that at the
end of each flight, your flight path is displayed on a map
of the area. (If you don't know what you're doing, this
display is really fun as you see yourself flying around in
circles and all about the map.)
For each flying area, you can select a flight condition:

CLEAR weather for easy flying, WINDY for greater control challenge, LANDING for final approach practice, and
IFR for practice using instruments only with low clouds.
Your instruments include an altimeter, air speed indicator,
horizon/attitude indicator, fuel gauge, digital display of
pitch, flaps, heading and climb rate; lights for temperature,
landing gear down and brakes on. You have two bearing
indicators (VOR) with digital value display only, an instrument landing signal (ILS) indicator, and an elapsed time
clock. The instruments are easy to read and use, but not
exactly what you would find in an FAA approved plane.
The joystick is used to control the movement of the plane
in a manner very similar to the control of an actual plane
(attitude, banking and slip turns). The keyboard is used for
additional controls: throttle, landing gear up/down, brakes,
flaps, view (left or right side, back, front), and to pause the
program. For excitement, you can even simulate a random
instrument failure for practicing emergency procedures.
One time, because of this, my altimeter went out. Fortunately, there is an excellent display of your plane's
shadow on the ground as you go down in altitude. I landed safely.
FLIGHT SIMULATOR II (SFII) is available for the Commodore 64, Apple, and Atari. (A similar program was written for the IBM-PC and is distributed by Microsoft. It does
not use joysticks, the instruments are slightly different, and
the plane is a Cessna 182 Skylane, rather than a Piper
PA28-181 Archer II). This program is outstanding and certainly one of the best examples of excellent programming,
documentation, and a full use of the capabilities of a
microcomputer.
The first of SSII's two manuals, the 91 page Pilot's
Operating Handbook and Airplane Flight Manual, is loaded with detailed illustrations and explanations on
everything you need to know. It also gives references for
additional information. The second manual, Flight Physics
& Aircraft Control with an Introduction to Aerobatics,
takes you well beyond normal flight considerations. The
material is clearly stated and can be easily applied when
running the program as both manuals are indexed for easy
referencing.
The screen graphics are split into two distinct display
areas. The top half gives a three-dimensional view out the

aircraft's forward windshield. Ground terrain and sky colors vary based upon flying conditions (time of day and
clear/cloudy). You can also look out from the plane in eight
other directions including down. Depending on which way
you look, parts of the plane will also block your vision.
Another different perspective of view is called "radar".
You are able to look down on the plane, from high above,
at the landscape below, which can be magnified or
diminished in size using keyboard keys. The horizon varies
based upon the attitude of the plane. It will slope if you
turn and will disappear if you climb or dive too steeply.
Each separate flying area has specific topological
features which can be seen, such as Sears' Tower in
Chicago, the Space Needle in Seattle, the Los Angeles
freeways, and the World Trade Center and the Statue of
Liberty in New York.
On the bottom half of the screen are displayed the flight
instruments. Included are all of the instruments and equipment required under FAA regulations for day and night
visual rules (VFR) and day and night instrument rules (IFR)
under non-icing conditions, including flight within terminal control areas. The 49 individual indicators are very
well represented on the screen and clearly explained in
the manual.
This program provides a great deal of flying diversity.
Eighty airports, in four areas (New York, Chicago, Seattle, and Los Angeles) are represented with several prominent land features in each area. Over thirty flight
parameters can be set to establish your flying condition.
These parameters include: starting location of plane (coordinates and altitude); settings for pitch, bank, heading,
airspeed, throttle, rudder, aileron, flap and elevator. You
can establish cloud layers, winds, and the reliability of your
instruments. Your choice of season (winter, spring, summer or fall) and the time of day are used to control when
dawn, day, dusk, and night occur.
There are two general modes of operation. The first
automatically handles many little things that one must normally take care. The other, reality mode, requires you to
do everything from starting the airplane engines to turning on the instrument lights when it gets dark. This is a
very thorough simulation realistically done.
Continued on page 39

THE
COMMODORE
KEY

SIMULATIONS

Roy Wagner

A favorite type of program is the simulation. This is a program that attempts to
represent something real through the use of
computer graphics and a set of formulas
(algorithms) which reduce very complex activities to something that can be realistically imitated on your computer. It must ideally, be able to get you so involved that you
get "lost in the program" and forget that you
are just sitting in front of a monitor pressing keys or moving a joystick. You ARE flying an airplane or managing a baseball team.
The plane or ball players REALLY EXIST!
All good simulations should provide you
with a "computer" opponent that responds
as your theorized opponent would, or as
would another human opponent. It is a difficult challenge to write a program which
carries out this function. Once written, such
a program takes a great deal of playtesting
to refine the formulas and code used. A program like this on a limited memory (64K)
micro is hard to please all players. At best,
the program has it's limits. An example of
this is One-On-One from Electronic Arts.
In this half-court, two-player basketball
simulation, the programmer has stated his
being unable to provide the hook shot. This
limit does not mean that this program is not
a fun game of basketball for two joystick
players. You have enough options available
to get involved in the action and to enjoy
playing.

There are many types of simulation
games; space, robot, airplane, financial, etc.
Among most popular currently available are
sport simulations. Most of these are all very
well done, making good use of C64 graphics
and sound (something we can now expect
from all new games for the C64). Some of
the sports simulations available for the C64
are: Auto Racing (Pole Position from Atari,
Pit Stop from Epyx, Motor Mania from
UMI), Baseball (Computer Baseball from
SSI, Star League Baseball from Gamestar),
Boxing (Ringside Seat from SSI), Basketball
(One-On-One from Electronic Arts), Football (Computer Football Strategy from
Avalon Hill), Golf (Professional Tour Golf
from SSI, Pro Golf from Canadian Micro),
Soccer (International Soccer from Commodore). And, due to the Olympics, we have
two new and excellent sport simulations:
SUMMER Games and HES Games.

Summer Games, from Epyx, offers competition for up to eight players representing
any one of eighteen countries complete with
that country's flag and national anthem.
One country available is EPYX, home of
those great athletic record holders, Jumpman and Jumpman Jr. The game begins with
the opening ceremony—the running in and
lighting of the Olympic torch, complete with
theme of release of doves. This introduction
displays the excellent graphics to be seen
throughout this game.

There are eight events. The pole vault requires the coordinated manipulation of the
joystick to plant the pole, flip over the bar,
and release the pole. You have three tries
at each height. The 4x100 meter relay has
two lanes running. You control the energy
expended for each runner and the passing
of the baton. The 100 meter dash has two
runners, with you frantically moving the
joystick left and right, or forward and back,
to keep the runner moving. The screen often
scrolls faster than the runners, in which
case you are running blind. (This event can
put extreme stress on a "cheap" joystick!)
High board diving and the gymnastic horse
vaulting both require well coordinated and
graceful movements of the joystick to be a
top rank scorer. The judges are tough, and
will rate you on a zero to ten point scale just
as in the actual events. The difficulty level
of your performance is weighted into the
final scores. The two swimming events,
4x100 meter freestyle relay and the 100
meter single freestyle, require perfect timing of swimming strokes and turns to score
well.
The final event is skeet shooting. This
event is handled very well. Your shotgun is
held with sight down. One press of the
joystick button signals to release the clay
pigeon, the next press fires the gun. With
the bird in the air you must sight the gun
and fire. It is best to follow the bird because,
if you try to hold the gun in any one position, muscle fatigue quickly affects that position. You have 25 birds from six different
firing stations.
For all of these events, I cannot say
enough about the good graphics and sound.
The joystick controls are easy and feel right
for each event, capturing the vicarious experience of the event. All option selections
and screen changes are quickly handled by
pressing the joystick button. (This game is
a real winner!)

HES Games from Human Engineered
Software offers competition for up to six
players. Each player enters his name/country and four initials, a color for shirt and
socks and the joystick port they want to use.
You then select an event from the menu
which also acts as a scoreboard for the
events. Scores are NOT saved to disk.

All menu selections and actions are performed using the joystick. You can compete
in all events, or specify only a single event.
Any current standing records can be beaten
with your name being added to the record
display and saved to disk. All events take
some practice, and for that reason, an option exists to practice a selected event.
Records broken with this option are not saved. And, if you complete all events, the score
board of final standing is displayed as the
top scorers national anthem is played.

There are seven events. The 100 meter
dash and the 110 meter hurdles both require
you to move the joystick quickly right-left
again and again to score best. I am not sure
how much effort is required because the
runners do pretty well if you don't move the
joystick. The long jump requires the same
joystick running on the ground and in the
air, and then a push to the right to land properly. A push of the joystick button sends
the runner into his jump. Low board diving
requires an extreme set of coordinated
movements to perform properly. The judges
here give you better scores if you call the
type of dive you will be performing. If you

events (except for archery). Each event loaded does a bad track and sector disk check
(that banging noise you hear from your drive
when many commercial games are loading).
This is one of the easiest protection techniques for game producers, but it can be harmful to your drive. Overused, it can cause
your drive to go out of alignment. I think this
game overuses it!

belly flop your tummy may glow red on your
next dive! Archery is very realistically done.
There are four targets at 30, 50, 70, and 90
meters, with wind and weather factors to
contend with in shooting accurately. You
fire six arrows at each target and must perform against the clock as you knock the bow,
pull the arrow back, aim and fire. Due to the
50 pound pull of the bow, muscle fatigue affects your aim. The flight of the arrow is very
well displayed. The final two events are
weight lifting; the two-hand snatch and the
clean and jerk. These two require perfect
timing for each movement. When you are
successful the weight is increased. For each
event you can display the current World and
Olympic records.
The graphics and sound for these games
are also very well done. The joystick controls move awkwardly and are not explained very well in the instruction booklet. I
found it harder to feel in control of these

The game contains a very positive feature.
It offers an instant replay of the last performance of all events except archery. This
gives you the chance to review your best and
worst performances. You can also save
these to disk with your own file name to be
called up at another time. The game disk
comes with a "classic replay" for each
event. I have heard that some new things
have been added to the game and a new
manual has been written that more clearly
explains the joystick movements, but I do
not know when this version will be
available.

wizard, and thief in play at the same time.
You can choose from eleven different professions, five races, and three sexes (male,
female, and other?), along with distribution
of attribute points. A party can now only see
that part of their surroundings which are
not obstructed from view. You must move
to see around things. Fighting is individually controlled for each of your party. The
great mystery of the game is figuring out
how the Moon Gates operate, for they provide hidden powers. This game was converted for the C64 by Origin Systems and
is priced at $60. A book of maps and clues
is available for $12.95.
Lord British, the "creator" of the Ultima
series, is also in part responsible for the concept behind QUESTRON from SSI. A version will be available for the C64 very soon.

SOME OTHER COMMENTS

If you have any questions or comments
pertaining to gaming on the C64, please
send me a letter at the Computer Gaming
World address listed in the front of the
magazine. Let me know what areas of gaming you would like to see discussed. If you
have a favorite game that I haven't mentioned and you think others should hear about
it, let me know.

Last issue I mentioned Ultima II. Well,
Ultima III is already available. It is different
in that you can have a party of four
characters. You can have a fighter, cleric,

Roy translated SSI's COMPUTER
BASEBALL for the C-64 and is now working
on translating FIGHTER COMMAND.

These two games are only available for the
Commodore 64 right now. They both show
excellent use of the C64 and are priced about
$35.

,
_

-

-

L

THE SILICON
CEREBRUM
range value until it reaches a certain limit,
then incrementing it again, the ship will run
in close to yours, then move away. Several
factors are used for determining when and
if to fire, or if the attacking ship should break
off and leave.

Ed. The Silicon Cerebrum deals with artificial
intelligence in computer games. Bruce
Webster's insights have been helpful to more
than a few game designers.
In this installment Bruce proudly tells us
about his new game, SUNDOG. We think it
is one of the best designs around.

O.K., after a year and a half of working
on it, I'm entitled to plug my game, right?
I mean, that's why this column has been so
erratic the last six months or so — the big
push to get the game out the door. And, of
course, the subsequent push to get the
debugged version out the door .... followed, naturally, by the current push to get version 2.0 out the door (which should have
happened by the time you read this).
The game is SunDog: Frozen Legacy, a
real-time science fiction adventure game,
designed by myself and Wayne Holder. It
represents our first attempt to squeeze a
small "universe" on to a floppy disk, an environment in which you could wander
around and do things. I plan to do a
"designer's notes" article, so I won't go into depth about the game itself. I would,
however, like to talk about the minor (and
they are minor) aspects of artificial intelligence in the game.
Two aspects of the game required some
sort of simulation of intelligence. The first
(and most common in computer games) was
in combat situations: ship-to-ship and manto-man. Because the game is real-time — i.e.,
time is always passing, you can always continue to act — we didn't have the luxury of
giving the attacker time to sit and think
about what to do. Instead, we had to make
small, quick decisions that would have the
cumulative effect of making the attacker
look intelligent (or, at least, something better than random). Ship-to-ship combat occurs in true 3-D; an attacking ship's location
is stored in terms of two angles (theta and
phi) and the range. The enemy's attack-runs
are made by choosing delta values for its
location; for example, by decrementing the

Man-to-man combat, especially when
several opponents are involved, presents a
trickier problem, and we're still looking for
ways to improve it. The biggest problem is
deciding where each attacker should move
to, and when, especially (again) because of
the real-time constraints. The current solutions involves keeping a trace of your
movements. Your attackers will tend to
move to (and fire at) where you were, rather
than where you currently are, which suggests one essential strategy for survival:
keep moving! Each attacker has his (her?)
own dexterity and strength values, which
affect how accurately they shoot at you and
how much damage they can take
themselves.
The second minor aspect of AI in SunDog
deals with the conversations that you have
with various non-player characters. We
wanted to give you more options than just
a gun dealing with other people, so we
designed an interaction scheme that would
generate comments from the people with
whom you were talking, then allow you to
make specific responses (yes, no, charm,
threaten, ignore, etc.). One important constraint is that SunDog is entirely joystick
controlled, so your replies had to be selected
from a menu (and a small one at that). An
additional twist is a degree of emotional
response from some of the characters.
Bartenders will get irritated (and even
abusive) if you waste their time, but become
friendly again as you spend money. What's
more, they will remember you (and what
they think of you) between trips to the
counter while you're in the bar.

by Bruce Webster

Version 1.1 of SunDog has a limited repertoire of interactions. However, some program redesign in version 2.0 has enabled us
to expand and enhance the interactions that
can occur. Our eventual goal is to model different personality aspects of non-player
characters and use those to drive complex
interactions throughout the course of the
game. In other words, we want to make you
think that those people out there are real and
distinct individuals.
If I've been vague in my description of
what we did, it's because Wayne (the company president) is leery about publishing
specifics on our techniques. He's not really worried about "giving away" secrets
(though we do closely guard certain
methods). Both he and I are more worried
about taking some of the mystique out of the
game. I've found that most other people enjoy SunDog far more than I do simply
because I know exactly what can and cannot happen and how everything is done.
That much knowledge removes the
"escape" aspect of the game; it's hard for
me to really think that I'm off roaming the
spacelanes. When others play, they're not
quite sure where the limits are, and their
minds fill in more details than are actually
there.
Anyway, I apologize again for the erratic
nature of these columns, but I hope it was
in a good cause. Yes, I will pick up where
I left off and finish the discussion of
heuristic search. If you have questions or
suggestions as to what you would like to see
in this column, please write me at the following address:
Bruce F. Webster
FTL Games, Inc.
7907 Ostrow, Suite F
San Diego, CA 92111
Thanks for your patience, both with the
sporadic columns and the "advertising".

CRYPT OF MEDEA

Robert Reams

Name:
Type:
Format:
System:
Author:
Price:
Publisher:

for using a "Mockingboard" speech synthesizer. When the Mockingboard is turned
on, the game can speak to you. The game
can be saved, thus preventing the feeling of
utter despair when you realize you must
start over from the beginning after being
killed. The hazardous nature of the game's
location, and strange situation makes it a
good idea (real vital) to save play at frequent
intervals (up to nine copies can be saved).
The game will be restored exactly as you
saved it.

Crypt of Medea
Fantasy and
Adventure
Disk
Apple
Arthur Britto
Allan Lamb
$39.95

Sir-tech Software
Ogdensburg, NY

As you drive along the narrow and tortuous road, you feel an eerie sense of
uneasiness. There is something about this
night that just does not seem right, but you
find it hard to put your finger on it. The sky
is clear and cloudless. Stars upon stars fill
the sky and the moon glows with a
mysterious aura. Yet strangely enough, it is
very, very dark.... Dampness permeates the
air and a haunting silence fills your mind.
You wonder where you are, but hesitate to
open your eyes. As your eyes finally open
you are stricken by an unfamiliar sight. Are
those tombstones on the wall? You find
yourself trapped in a mausoleum. Your goal
is to find the way out, as there is no door....
the dead have no need to escape.
You must escape this tomb, using trial and
error, logical deduction, and the many objects to be found during your chilling adventure in The Crypt of Medea (CM). The place
you find yourself in is not a friendly place.
Exercise caution when, and how you pick
up objects as the most innocent looking object should be treated with care. An incorrect move will lead to your sudden demise.
Use every protective device offered to you
in this foul and miserable place.

The documentation provided by Sir-tech
is clear and concise. Included is a list of key
or action words which may be used in the
game. The list does not, however contain
objects or nouns. These you must discover
for yourself in the course of surviving this
ordeal. A list of hints have been provided
which will, if used detract from the full enjoyment of the game. But, they may provide
the novice that extra little hint needed to
move to the next stage of the game. These
hints are encoded in cryptic messages. For
the player who becomes hopelessly stuck an
answer sheet has been provided, keyed so
that it is impossible to accidently read the
proper solution. But my suggestion is to
staple the hint sheets to the back cover to
reduce the evils of temptation. The list of
coded words reveals operational words
which may reduce the enjoyment for the expert player, but will save the novice from
destroying his computer in frustration.

The game features excellent control functions. It is possible to place the game on temporary hold for those moments that cannot
wait. The music can also be turned on or
off as desired. The game further provides

Finally, the game itself. Both the novice
and the expert gamer will enjoy the
challenge presented by CM. The problems
are varied and the solutions intricate. The
musical background provided at appropriate moments adds greatly to the enjoyment of playing this game. In at least one
case, it is very important to examine the picture carefully from top to bottom in order
to find what is needed. Examine each scene
carefully to discover the objects which you
will need to escape this damp dark place.
Like all Sir-tech products, the Crypt of
Medea is a finished, polished product. By
making backups at frequent intervals, the
"nasty" surprises will delight the player
rather than lead to gloom and despair. At
a certain place in the game, it is important
to remember to think light to keep from that
falling feeling. Some items must be used
more than once, so it is important to
remember where they were dropped.
The "Crypt of Medea" is an example of
a mature and excellent product. This adventure will challenge all who find themselves
trapped in this dark and evil place. Escape
is possible .... all the tools have been provided. Some of the path to freedom is not
obvious and must be searched for diligently. Accept the challenge presented by this
excellently designed game.

DRAGONRIDERS
OF PERN
by David Stone

Dragonriders of Pern
NAME:
TYPE:
Strategy-Arcade
SYSTEM: Atari
#PLAYERS: 1 to 4
PUBLISHER: Epyx
Sunnyvale, CA

Destructive Thread darken the
skies. Once again it is time for the
Dragonriders to take wing and do
battle with the deadly nemesis of
Pern. The touch of the burning
Thread means death and where they
fall crops will not grow. Your task as
Weyr leader has been to form the
strongest Weyr on Pern by
negotiating alliances with Lord
Holders and Craft Masters. Now that
Thread are falling you mount your
fire breathing Dragon to meet the
Thread in the skies over Pern.
THE BOOKS
Dragonriders of Pern, a unique
strategy/action game from Epyx, attempts to meld the excitement and
fantasy adventure of Anne McCaffrey's books with the action and
strategy of a role playing game. While
having read the fantasy novel
DRAGONRIDERS OF PERN, or for
that matter any of the books from
McCaffrey's "Dragon" series, will
certainly be helpful in understanding
the characters and premise of the
game, prior knowledge is not
essential.

OVERVIEW OF THE GAME
The game consists of two major
phases: the Negotiation-Intrigue
phase is strategy oriented and Thread
Fighting is "arcade" action oriented.
Together these two phases make for
an interesting game concept.
Up to four human players, called
Weyrleaders, can play the game;
plus, there are two Weyrleaders that
are always controlled by the computer. The two computer-controlled
players provide competition during
the Negotiation-Intrigue. Game
variations include a standard game
of both Negotiation-Intrigue and
Thread Fighting, a no Thread
Fighting game, and a Thread
Fighting practice game.
In playing the standard game you
can select the speed of play (slow,
average, or fast) to effect the speed of
your dragon, the Thread fall, the
passing of days, and the "read times"
on text displays. You can also select
the Depth level for Thread Fighting:
foreground only, foreground and

midground, and foreground,
midground, and distance. A nice
touch here is that each player can
select his own depth level.
The pace of the game is controlled
by the computer which is continuously counting the days and
years (called Turns). You can preselect the number of Turns (each
Turn equals between 10 and 15
minutes) up to 99. A save-game
feature makes the 99 turn game feasible although I'm not sure why anyone
would want to use it.
GAME PREMISE
The premise of the NegotiationIntrigue phase of the game is not
complex, actually applying what
you've learned to the play of the game
is. The idea is that during this phase
each player (including the two computer players) vie to form alliances
with as many major Holds and Craft
Halls as possible (total 24). These
potential allies depend on you to fight
Thread, for them to save their Holds.
However, as the premise goes,
because Thread haven't fallen in a
long time they fear they will lose their

political power to you. What this
means in terms of game play is that
you must woo them by doing things
like inviting them to weddings and
dragon hatchings (if they're the kind
that like dragons) and, if all else fails,
dueling with them.
NEGOTIATION-INTRIGUE
SCREENS
Five different types of screens
display information in the
Negotiation-Intrigue phase. All of the
Negotiation-Intrigue screens are
"text-oriented" (i.e., no graphics of
the kind found in M.U.L.E.). Some of
these screens are quite busy and may
take some time to get used to. For example, the event screen shows events
taking place, Weyrs' (players) status,
the Holds Weyrs are negotiation
with, the Day events will occur, the
current day, announcements of random or planned events, and the
results of those events., and the
number of Dragon Wings possessed
by each Weyr.
The game allows players to play in
any order, just press the stick button
your turn is next. When your turn
begins, the Action Menu / Status
Screen appears. Here you select one
of eight actions. One action is to read
a description of the personality of a
selected Lord Holder or Craft
Master. The personalities descriptions suggest who to invite to wedding and dragon hatchings, who to
negotiate with, etc. Memorizing their
dispositions is futile; they change
during the course of the game and the
change from game to game. This
leaves you, the player, to juggle the
personalities of 24 different entities.

will have a Dragon hatching soon, invite Lord Keroon. After the computer
has clocked off the days, and the Lord
has attended your Dragon Hatching,
attempt to negotiate individually
with him. If the negotiations are successful, on your next turn attempt an
alliance.
At the end of Negotiation-Intrigue
phase, the game awards victory
points: you earn 2 points for each
Hold you're allied with and 1 point
for each Craft Hall. The game ends
when there are 20 Thread infested
holds (holds that were not successfully defended in the Thread Fighting
phase) or when a Weyrleader had
earned 20 victory points. Or, the
game ends when the number of
Turns you pre-selected is up (plus or
minus two).
THREAD FIGHTING
After each Turn (240 days) Thread
Fighting occurs. The Thread
Fighting screen displays a typical
Pern landscape and a green dragon,
which represents one of your Wings
of dragons. Then, from the top of
screen, the Thread begin to fall
groundward. You maneuver your
dragon with the joystick, pressing the
stick button to breath fire and
disintegrate each Thread before it
hits ground.

So, the sequence for forming an
alliance may go something like this:

The Dragons of Pern are much
more talented than the mythical
beasts of Earth. Pern Dragons can
"go between", that is, occupy the
space between time and travel
through time and space. In AtariPern this means if you touch a
Thread, you can take advantage of
your Dragon's ability to "gobetween" by quickly hitting the space
bar. Your dragon disappears then
reappears elsewhere on the screen.
This action allows your Dragon's
wounds to cool. If your dragon dies,
the screen flashes red then another
dragon appears to finish the Thread
Fighting session.

Study the personality descriptions of
the Lords Holders and Craftsman to
see who may be easiest to make an
alliance with. For example, if Lord
Keroon is fond of Dragons, and if the
computer has informed you that you

After Thread Fighting, the screen
displays the results by listing each
Weyrleader, the number of dragons,
killed or wounded, and the number
of Thread that reached the ground
and are now infesting Holds in Pern.

The Action Menu / Status Screen
is helpful in that it provides a list of
your three strongest supporters — the
best prospects for a negotiation.

CONTROLLING THE DRAGON
The Thread Fighting practice
game is important for learning to
master the peculiar characteristics of
controlling the Dragon Flight —
especially at Depth 3. Depth 3 is most
difficult because Thread fall at three
depths simultaneously: foreground,
midground, and distance (unlike
Space Invaders, for example, where
the enemy attacks in only in the
foreground). At Depth 3 you must
turn your dragon and fly into the
distance to attack the Thread. Controlling this action takes practice.
The game attempts to overcome
the fact that the television screen is
two-dimensional but aerial fights in
the "real world" take place in three
dimensions. Unfortunately, there are
only two types of input from the Atari
joystick (the stick and the one trigger). Although the attempt to create
a three- dimensional experience is
noble, the results are not entirely
satisfactory. The programmer's solution requires moving the joystick to
Continued on page 39

EXPEDITION AMAZON

Name:
Type:
System:
Format:
Author:
Price:
Publisher:

Expedition Amazon
Adventure
Apple
Disk
Willard Phillips
$34.95
Penguin Software
Geneva, Il

Ohio Smith writhed and twisted like the serpent itself as he tried to escape the near-fatal
embrace of the anaconda. Dr. Spock quickly
opened the medical kit and prepared to give
him aid, if he could wriggle out of the reptile's clutches. At last, the anaconda recoiled, leaving a weakened and frustrated Ohio
Smith behind. Lt. Uherda cancelled her futile
attempt to radio a helicopter and Rocky
(Malibu) was unable to bash the snake with
the uprooted tree in his hand. The expedition
moved on and stumbled into a native camp.
There were all sorts of valuable artifacts in
the abandoned encampment: 1) un tarjeta de
beisbol - Luis Aparicio; 2) a Beatles' record;
3) a bottle of Perrier; and 4) the omnipresent
parchment reading
Suddenly,
"#$%&FRINK '#." a war party of
Amazons jumped from ambush at our
stalwart band of heroes. Rocky Malibu threw
a grenade which killed five of them. Ohio
Smith opened up with his automatic rifle and
dropped ten of them. Dr. Spock insisted that
the bad-tempered natives were simply the
result of poor toilet training and Lt. Uherda
vainly tried to reach civilization over the
static of the old fashioned radio.
The above was an attempt to characterize
the good-natured humor of Expedition
Amazon (EA). EA uses similar mechanics
to Sword of Fargoal in that you explore the
screen one step at a time. A major difference
is that while Fargoal randomly establishes
the dungeon levels, Amazon uses the same
ten screens, both above and below ground.
Each sector of Amazon (analogous to a
Fargoal level) is explored a square meter at
a time by pressing keys that reflect the four
major compass directions. In this way, the
map is filled in one block at a time. Further,
the process of mapping the sector as one explores reminds me of Seven Cities of Gold
(Electronic Arts). There are, however, some

major differences from the latter. In EA,
there is no animation involved in attacks until one actually enters the Lost City of Ka,
the elusive final goal of the game. Whereas
Seven Cities has animation throughout the
game. In EA, there are not randomly
generated sectors to explore (whereas SCG
has the possibility of creating entire new
worlds). Still, the feeling of exploration is
there. Further, don't get the idea that it's
easy to explore the ten screens. The frustration factor in my first few expeditions was
at least as great as during my first few tries
at Fargoal. There are some nasty little random encounters that can ruin an entire
hour's worth of adventuring. For example,
how are you going to explore the Amazon
River after the wily natives steal your boat?
What happens when you are just about
finished exploring a section of the river and
your boat hits a rock and sinks? Further,
what if you should happen to fall into a trap
which takes you underground, loosing you
your hard earned sector map and forcing
you start over? I know, as it happened to me
on at least three occasions before I wised
up and started making detailed notes on my
own paper (I defy that nasty program to steal
those!) One of the most satisfying features
of this adventure game was that by having
four player characters, I could have a group
over and play the game together. We had
great fun laughing at each other's misfortunes; harassing one another for inept
shooting; and generally suggesting mutiny
toward whoever happened to be piloting the
boat or leading the expedition. We would
name at least one of the characters for someone we didn't like and would absolutely
refuse to give medical aid to them,
regardless of what happened to them. This
is cruel and holds the group back some,
since that means that one of your party is
almost always going to be a first level
character. It doesn't really matter that
much, however, since all you have to do is
return to Flint University (the mobile home
in the midst of the Texas armadillo ranch
where all the fun begins) in order to get a
replacement.
This game is full of some sparkling
graphics and gags. The opening illustration
of Flint University with its hit and run havoc
should appeal to the "brutal" funny bone
of many of us civilized savages and sly
Pedro the Trader in Iquitos, Peru has a punfully complete file of vile jokes and comments that can really bring out the groans
from a group ("Joan of Arc didn't quit, she
was fired!" "Hitler's mother didn't realize
she was raising such a fuehrer."). These
features are only good for two or three
times, but they sure are fun to spring on new
gamers.
My biggest problem with the game involves its rather poor documentation. One
is not informed, for example, that the pistols
which are supplied all the expedition

members do not have any ammunition.
Bullets must be bought at the trading post
in order not to have useless guns. I realize
that this is largely common sense, but I have
seen novice gamers stumble over less. The
documentation suggests that the map sector can become a permanent part of the
team's map portfolio before the entire
number of square meters in a sector are explored. It doesn't make clear that one must
explore every square meter except the traps
in order to keep the map. Before the player
discovers this, the player can lose numerous
maps.
In spite of these minor difficulties, EA is
a very enjoyable game that doesn't take itself
too seriously. For me, it's much more satisfying to adventure in this manner than to
deal with a limited parser in a text only
game. It is especially interesting to play with
a group of three or four friends.
Johnny Wilson
FIFTH ESKADRA (cont.)

4. The CO of each carrier! airbase will
suggest possible targets for airstrikes.
However, you should make sure you
have aircraft massed before you attack. Launching a three plane attack
will only insure failure.
5. There is no need to request reinforcements from Washington or
Moscow on turn one, as you will be
turned down (it costs victory points
to request reinforcements). Wait until the war starts and you actually lose
some ships, then ask. In any case, the
NATO player has a task force
centered on the battleship New
Jersey and the carrier Nimitz which
will eventually arrive. The Soviet
player will receive the Kiev and
escorts.
6. There is also a chance of Italian
and French forces entering the game
for the NATO player. Use these aggressively, as they may be withdrawn
from the war at any time.
Editor's Note: Several of our early attempts to play Fifth Eskadra were
thwarted when the game crashed.
After a little investigation we
discovered that the game would crash
if our Mockingboard was in slot #4.
With the Mockingboard removed, we
had no problem with the game.

PERN (cont.)

control left/right, up/down, and
near/far movement. By pushing the
stick forward or back your dragon
climbs or dives. To change directions
you tap the joystick left or right. Your
dragon changes directions by 1/4 turn
(45 degrees). To make a full turn (180
degrees) you briefly hold your
joystick to the left or right. When
fighting Thread at Depth 2 or 3, you
tap the joystick, when the dragon is
facing away from you, you stop tapping, and it begins flying away from
you. You can tell you are at a different
depth by the size of the dragon and
the size of the Thread.
DOCUMENTATION
The documentation seems complete in that it discusses all screens,

JUPITER MISSION (cont.)
of the radio signals. When you find the right
moon, you must navigate the Beagle to the
moon and send down a lander. Here comes
your first major problem — how to get from
where you are to where you want to be. This
program is a more demanding version of the
first navigation program and may cause you
to pause for thought. Once you have figured
it out and gotten to the moon you want, you
then play a Lunar Lander game and get to
the surface. Once on the surface you will
discover an alien complex which must be
explored. You will have to land on more
than one moon and that you will have to explore more than one alien complex. Eventually, you will reach the last hazard to finding the secret of Jupiter Mission 1999, an
arcade game that ???, well, let's save it. One
hint, though. When you get this far, save the
game before you start the last part.
Jupiter Mission comes with a small in-

spells out rules for playing, and provides hints for playing. Plus, it contains a glossary of Pern terms and an
ample Prologue written by Anne
McCaffrey that gives you both a
background and a flavor of
characters and situation of Pern.
However, if a ever a game needed a
sample game description, this is it. It
took several reading of the manual,
plus several times playing to figure
out what was going on in the
Negotiation-Intrigue phase and what
I was supposed to be doing. Part of
the reason for this may be that the
computer continues to count days on
the event screen as you decide what
to do. This built in timer makes learning to play the game "intuitively"
(i.e., by not studying the manual intensively) virtually impossible.
struction manual, four disks, and four sets
of sealed orders. The manual asks you not
to open the orders unless you need help. The
orders are really a supplement to the instructions, and I suggest that you open them
as soon as you move to a new disk. The game
itself is played in a progressive manner so
that you do not need to switch game disks
in and out. Once you go to the next disk, you
will most likely not need to go back to the
previous disk unless you are killed. You may
save up to four games in progress, so that
even if you are killed you may not have to
restart from the beginning. The first screen
gives you the option of starting the game
from the very beginning (which gives you
a nice little story of the game setting) starting at a point after the story, or starting
from a saved game.
It is obvious that some very strong ATARI
programmers have worked on this game.
The graphics and display list routines are
among the best ever produced by AH.
Nothing flashy, gaudy, or too complicated.

FLIGHT SIMULATORS (cont.)

Once you are able to fly fairly well, there is an additional
option — playing World War I Ace. This involves bombing runs and dog-fights with the computer controlling six
different-style enemy flyers who are up there to stop you.
Your flying skills had better be good, as you will need to
refuel, re-engage, and out maneuver the enemy. Another
optional mode of flight is performing aerobatics, which
are explained in the second manual. These are not quite
like reality, with it's excessive g-forces or body unequilibrium, but certainly a lot safer.
The plane is controlled using either the keyboard only
or joystick(s) and keyboard. The keys used are all very well
selected to simulate the control yoke and special keys are

WHO'S IT FOR
As a game, Dragonriders of Pern is
unique. The Negotiation-Intrigue
phase is mostly a matter of monitoring computer-controlled events and
taking advantage of them to make
alliances. The Thread Fighting phase
is mostly a matter of mastering
joystick control to wipe out threadlike space invaders. So, who's the
game for? Well, if you are interested
only in an arcade action, then, as interesting as Thread Fighting is, it's
probably not worth the price the
game. If you're interested in playing
a somewhat complex strategy game
where diplomacy is the objective
(and not campaigning) then certainly the Negotiation-Intrigue phase will
appeal to you.

Just good down-to-earth programming. The
program makes good use of character scrolling and seems to have tapped all the hidden
Atari features that are usually reserved for
assembly language programs. All eleven
games have been tied together nicely to present a coherent adventure which should
provide many hours of solid enjoyment. I
have only two complaints with the game.
One, it is written in basic and does a lot of
program chaining so that you spend quite
a bit of time listening to your disk drive spinning. Two, a few of the individual games
could use some improvement. Disregarding
those minor problems and looking at it from
the standpoint of overall playability, I would
have to say that this is the best adventure
game I have seen in a long time. It offers arcade for the action fan and problem solving for the adventure fan. The two combine
to make a realistic role playing game. You
will definitely get a lot of bang for the buck
with this one.

selected with letters to simulate with letters that match their
function, eg. P for pause, L for lights, B for barometer, C
for COM radio, N for NAV radio, etc.) When using
joysticks, one can be used for throttle, and the other is used
similarly to a real plane's control yoke, to control the
ailerons and elevators. The keyboard is used for elevator
trim, flaps and rudder. When using the COM radio, the
messages are displayed above the instruments and scroll
at a rate you may set.
The manual contains an excellent section o the use of
navigational aids. It explains, in great detail, the use of
the very high frequency omnidirectional range (VOR) and
automatic direction finder (ADF) gauges. Another
outstanding feature, is a course plotting system which,

when activated, will leave a smoke trail superimposed over
the scenery you fly. This option has a 400 mile flying range
with a smoke mark left every five seconds for 75 minutes
of flight time. A precision recording option with a 25 mile
range, one second sampling for 15 minutes is also available.
This is a really nice feature when learning to use instruments only or for aerobatics. It is also helpful for a
beginner to use.
FSII is designed to use a flying area ("world") that is
10,000 miles by 10,000 miles with a screen resolution
equivalent to 2.5 inches. Additional airports in major areas,
and flying conditions are planned to be released. For now,
this program will more than keep anyone busy. You do not
have to know anything about flying a plane to use it, but

EXCALIBUR (cont.)

enemy looks too tough. You can ill afford the loss of too
many knights for a number of reasons. Each knight is as
effective as three men-at-arms; also, the fewer the knights
the more men-at-arms each knight will have, providing
compactness and ease of control but the expense of your
flexibility. Any knight with less than two men-at-arms
should be retreated off the battlefield immediately for his
own protection.
Note that knights lose combat strength as they move,
unless given periods of rest. For this reason, you should let
the enemy come to you, instead of meeting him halfway
across the field. It is not uncommon for a piece with an initial strength of 18 or so to be down to a four by the time
it reaches your line of battle, considerably weakening it. By
waiting, you also increase the chance that some of the
enemy pieces will lose heart and stop advancing, further
increasing the odds in your favor.
The most important pieces on either side are the royal
pieces. For, if Arthur dies, the game is lost. While if your
opponent dies, the battle ends and he becomes your vassal
(fancy trick thee, for a dead king). To protect Arthur, it is
best to advance the knights about a shield length ahead of
him. Then, if you decide to withdraw, you can easily retreat
Arthur off the bottom edge. A 'V' formation of knights, with
Arthur at the center, protects Arthur and allows for the entrapment of the enemy king, who seems to advance straight
towards Arthur. The more people attacking the enemy
king, the greater the change of killing him outright. And,
by keeping Arthur back, you may be able to attack him on
three sides.
Often, the whole enemy army will retreat before it
reaches your battle line. In that case, you should gradually push your knights forward, allowing them ample rest

you do need to be serious about learning a lot of new things.
An experienced pilot, though, can use this program to practice instrument flying and to fly in distant new areas
without the expense of actually being there.
In summary, I would consider both these products to
be excellent value for their price. SOLOFLIGHT is enjoyable and easy to use. It could be easily used by anyone
eight years or older. On the other hand FLIGHT
SIMULATOR II is serious fun. It is very close to reality
and as such requires you to know how to fly an airplane,
which can be learned with this program. If you already
know how to fly or want the most realistic flight simulator
available, buy FLIGHT SIMULATOR II. Got to go now,
I'm taking the "plane" up for a flight over Chicago
(Margaret — start up the C64!).

periods if needed. Do not give-in to the temptation to chase
them at top speed. Enemy knights regain strength even
while demoralized, so you may catch up to the foe only to
find that he is up to full strength while your knight is exhausted from the chase. In many cases, the disheartened
enemy regains his morale after a rest, and will come back
to you again. This process of advance and retreat plays
havoc with the enemy's line of battle. Further, retreating
units will sometimes bump into advancing units, causing
a standoff. The retreating unit should be attacked immediately, if feasible. As it is moving away from you (or attempting to do so), it will be unable to return your attacks.
Knights should be picked off like this whenever possible,
since enemy kings do not appear to get new knights. The
fewer knights a king has, the larger the percentage of menat-arms which are left to guard the castle, and the easier it
will be in the future to get knights around the flanks of his
army.
The documentation for this game is superb. There are
some "quick start" instructions for those who can't wait
to begin (and who can resist a new game?), but to really
understand what is going on, it is necessary to read the
63-page novella that is included. The novella is quite
readable and is even entertaining. In addition to telling the
story and showing how to play, it provides additional
strategy and tactics. Don't cheat yourself or the program
— read the manual!
All-in-all, Excalibur is a magnificent piece of software. I
have noticed only one bug — sometimes the computer
hangs up when attempting to restart a saved game.
Rebooting seems to solve the problem. I feel that in spite
of this minor setback, this game is worth the money. Games
of far lesser scope sell for more money than the $30 Excalibur costs. "A well-done" goes to the authors, and a question: "When will Chris Crawford's next game be released?"

THE NAME OF
THE GAME

THE THIRD WAVE?

Jon Freeman

Game software at summer CES (the Consumer Electronics Show) was a bit disappointing. Courtesy of Electronic Arts, Anne
Westfall and I were there to talk to editors
and demonstrate Free Fall's new game, Archon II: ADEPT. After two solid days of interviews, my throat had gone the way of all
flesh; my voice was on strike; and my body
was ready for retirement. All this may have
affected my informal show survey the next
day, but it's hard to get excited about bronzeage retreads of stone-age software.
If there was any trend other than resurrecting (un)dead software, it was converting
books into games. Three companies — Spinnaker, I magic, and Baen Software —
featured entire new lines of games based on
fairy tales, classics, and, especially, fantasy
and science fiction. The combination of Big
Name Authors, popular subjects, slick
packaging, and the promise of megabuck
advertising and promotion clearly had
many dealers salivating and some media
pundits convinced this was the wave of the
future. INFOWORLD even did a cover story
on the subject.
If you're thinking of rushing out to your
favorite software store to buy your favorite
book in game form, however, don't bother.
In the first place, it's not there yet. In the
second, you may not want it, anyway.

None of the books-into-games at CES were
finished. The earliest were promised for October, which in this business can be
translated as "someday.... maybe." An executive of Simon and Schuster, which is
distributing the Baen titles, was frankly
disappointed with the incomplete versions
they were displaying and admitted he had
no idea when — or whether — their first
game would appear.
While final judgements cannot be
rendered on unfinished products, the early returns are not favorable. While the three
companies' approaches differed somewhat,
with Spinnaker's Trillium line perhaps the
most promising and Baen the most questionable, all of the games were in a standard
adventure mode that mixed lots of text with
largely static graphics. The pictures were
pretty, but the text parsers were a joke compared with Infocom's; the player interaction
seemed as limited as that in Dragon's Lair;
and the "arcade" interludes boasted by
some weren't much more sophisticated
than Pong. From design to program, the
games were clearly state-of-the-art.... six
years ago.
I am not alone in this judgement. Various
computer magazines have refused to review
or mention the games because, according
to several sources, the editorial staff felt
sorry for the book authors involved and did
not want to be the ones to deliver the bad
news. One editor pleaded with a wellknown author to keep "his" game off the
market for fear it would do lasting damage
to the author's reputation.
How could this happen? How could so
much creative talent combine to so little
effect?
Easy. Actually, in retrospect, it seems
almost inevitable.

T.A.N.S.T.A.A.F.L.
In the first place, the economics of the
situation almost guarantee that the programmers involved, despite the hype, would
not be first-class. Big Name Authors and
Best-Selling Books don't come cheap.
Although the draw of author and book is
clearly a marketing advantage — and should
therefore be paid out of the
marketing/advertising budget — the cost is
normally borne by R&D. A big chunk of the
royalties that would otherwise go to the
developers of the game is paid, instead, to
the author of the book. What top-flight game
designer or programmer would take that
kind of a pay cut? Regardless of their deficiencies as game designers, most good programmers are still at work on their own
ideas. Those who can't come up with
original subjects for games are busy making a lucrative living converting popular
games to new computers. Therefore, the
majority of programmers available for these
book projects are either inexperienced or
inadequate or both.

THE PRACTICE EFFECT
Nor can the authors save these projects.
They don't know how.
INFOWORLD makes much of the

authors' involvement, but sheer interest and
creativity are not sufficient. Consider: If I
announced that I was designing and
building my own house, would you assume
that I could do as good a job as an architect
and a general contractor? It's not impossible; I'm a creative person, and I might have
a hidden aptitude for the job, but you
wouldn't bet odds on it, would you?
As you may know, many established
science-fiction writers — book authors —
submitted scripts for the Star Trek TV series
and, later, the first movie. You may also have
heard that most of those scripts were lousy.
This should not be surprising: books and
movies are very different media. Success in
one does not imply mastery of the other.
The difference between books and
movies, however, is minor compared to the
difference between books and computer
games. To cite only one key example, while
the action of a book should not be totally
predictable, events must build toward a particular end. In retrospect, the outcome
should seem not just logical but inevitable.
Games are just the opposite: any number of
endings must be possible, or why play? The
more open-ended a game is, the more options that are under the player's control, the
less it is like a book — and the better a game
it is.
The worst part is that the SF people involved don't know how little they know
about the subject. Few of the authors involved in all these projects play games: most lack
the time; many lack the inclination.
Technophobes like Ray Bradbury, who admits that he cannot use the computer he
owns, believes the apex of computer usage
is to enter the text of a book and read it on
the CRT. Would he know a good computer
game if he fell over one? When editorpublisher Jim Baen claims that one of his
projects is "the most ambitious game ever,"
should we laugh or cry? Has he even heard
of — much less played — Wizardry III,
Ultima III, Murder on the Zinderneuf, or
Seven Cities of Gold?

NOT THIS AUGUST
I would agree that SF writers are much
more likely game designers than the man
on the street. Numerically, that means that
a handful out of hundreds (rather than a
handful out of millions may succeed at it
eventually. But it will take time. To date, I
know of only two who have successfully
made the conversion from SF writers to
game designers: Michael Berlyn and your
crotchety columnist. Surely, there will be
others, but their first efforts are likely to be
embarrassing if they don't realize that the
sophistication of their audience is greater
than their own.
The games E.T. and Alien proved that it
takes more than a hot title to make a good
game, and they and the PC Jr showed that
there are things even the buying public
won't swallow. Games worthy of our
favorite books will be a terrific Christmas
present — but not this Christmas.

TELE-GAMING

Patricia Fitzgibbons

At the end of a long, winding road, atop
sheer, stone cliffs, looms a castle made entirely of crystal. Within its translucent walls
lie a myriad of rooms, filled to overflowing
with valuable and informative scrolls.
Though remote, the castle is easily found,
and an intrepid adventurer may spend
many fruitful hours exploring its labyrinthine halls.
The Crystal Castle is located in a town
near the Ohio- Michigan border, but its address is not on any street map. Rather, by
simply dialing the number 313-856-3804,
any caller may gain admittance to the Castle's anteroom. For, indeed, this castle is a
bulletin board system (BBS), and its
operators have dedicated their Apple computer and ten megabyte hard drive to
gaming.
Online 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, the
Crystal Castle BBS is one of the country's
newest — and best — gaming BBSs. From
the ingenious graphic depiction of a castle,
which greets you at logon, to the numerous
adventure game tutorials and growing
download library, this BBS is a gamer's
delight. The Castle also offers several
play-by-message games and eighteen separate
bulletin boards as well as electronic mail
and a list of other bulletin board systems.
Many callers visit the Castle in order to
access the adventure game tutorials that
reside in the "Lands of Adventure" area.
These helpful textfiles provide explicit instructions for solving all of the Infocom
games, many Sierra-Online Games, and fantasy role-playing games such as Wizardry
and Ultima. Hints, tips, and maps for the
most popular adventure games are found in
the "Game and Adventure Aids" section of
the Castle library. The rules for
play-by-electronic-mail (PBEM) games, such as

Diplomacy and AD&D, are available in the
"Games" hall.
Individual message boards are set up for
visitors who wish to exchange hardware
and software reviews, discuss different
brands of computers, or receive quick advice on a program problem. PBEM games
are played via their own boards as well —
the "Diplomacy Room" and the "AD&D
Campaign."
Much of the Castle's offerings are free.
However, callers who wish to read an
adventure tutorial, play an online game, or
download a program must raise their "access level" by contributing material or cash
to the BBS. Information on how to attain a
higher access level is available in the "Castle Blueprints" section. Callers are limited
to 20 minutes per online session.
Because the Castle is such an extraordinary BBS, I wanted to find out more about
how it began and who the system operators
are. The two SysOps — Pam Barnhart
("Lady Crystal") and Dave Oberheu ("The
Dungeon Master") — were most gracious
in granting me an interview in CompuServe's GameSIG conference area. Here
are some excerpts:
CGW: How did you two get together to
run the Castle?
Lady Crystal (LC): We're old friends and
computer buffs! Since we both have Apples,
that was the start of the computer
friendship.
CGW: But Pam is in Michigan and Dave's
in Ohio?
Dungeon Master (DM): Right, but the
system is at Pam's.
CGW: How old are each of you?
DM: I'm 16 and Pam is ?
LC: Well, let's just say I'm over 21!
DM: Pam is 158! (You can hit me for that
later.)
LC: Cute....hee hee.
CGW: Tell me about the system itself.
DM: An Apple II + with a 10 megabit hard
drive. It runs on the famous "NetWorks"
software, with many, many, modifications.
LC: Plus 2 floppies.
CGW: Did you two purchase all the equipment yourselves?
DM: Riiiight!
CGW: About how much did the whole
thing cost to set up and run?
LC: Around $4500-$5000. I have expensive hobbies!
CGW: What do you do to pay for all this?
DM: I'm a student, but I work in a music
store.
LC: I do painting and wallpapering. We
do charge a small fee on the Castle, but it
generally just pays the phone bill.
CGW: What made you decide to start the
Castle?
DM: Well, way back in '83, we were
discussing bulletin boards and I mentioned to Pam how neat it would be to run our
own system.
LC: When I first got my modem, I was intrigued by all of the BBSs around, and I

knew I'd have to start one up soon.
DM: The rest is history!
CGW: Why did you choose a fantasy/gaming theme for your BBS?
LC: Because we wanted to have games
and present the adventure tutorials, so we
thought an adventure theme would go well
with that.
CGW: Have you had any problems with
crackers or crashers?
LC: Not really.... knock on wood!
CGW: Do you enjoy sitting in front of the
screen, watching your users wander around
in the system?
DM: Yes! It gives me a feeling of power!
Hah!
LC: Up to a point. One gets bleary-eyed
after a while!
On the whole, it's fun to watch them and
see just what they choose to do on the
system.
CGW: Have you met any of your users?
DM: Oh, yes. No long-distance callers yet,
though.
LC: Several of them we converse with on
a regular basis through email.
CGW: How many callers do you get per
day?
LC: Lately, we've been getting between 30
and 35.
CGW: How about the number of longdistance callers?
DM: About 30-40% are long-distance. The
rest are from the Toledo area people. The
long-distance is increasing every Saturday,
though!
CGW: How successful is your download
area?
DM: We have some good games in there
now, and we're always looking for new
ones.
LC: We keep our eyes open for good
public domain games we can put up. We
would like to change some of the download
area every 3-4 months.
CGW: Did you write most of the adventure tutorials?
DM: No, we are really both too busy to
start such a laborious task.
LC: All of them are donated by callers.
CGW: How do you get the word out about
the Castle?
LC: We advertise on other boards and
CompuServe.
DM: The users do the rest!
If you enjoy adventure games, or would
just like to explore an outstanding bulletin
board system, be sure to visit the Crystal
Castle. The Dungeon Master and Lady
Crystal will make you feel at home!
I welcome comments about your telegaming experiences. You can contact me on
CompuServe at 76703,657 or via U.S. Mail
to:
Patricia Fitzgibbons
195 Claremont Avenue #115
Long Beach, CA 90803
Copyright Patricia Fitzgibbons, 1984.

I

I

There were 289 RIDs turned in by press
time for this issue.
Newly rated games and updated game
ratings are listed with bold type in the table
on page 47. The breakdown by machine
was: Atari — 48%; Apple — 35%; C-64
—16%.

GAME RATINGS
The table on page 47 includes games
evaluated by our readers. For a game to be
included in this listing it must first have
been offered for rating in our regular RID
rating system. Games offered for evaluation
are those covered in the magazine and/or
those having a good sales record during the
time of evaluation. Once offered for evaluation, the game must have been evaluated by
a sufficient number of readers to be included in the results. Any game not evaluated
by at least 10% of the respondents was not
included in the results.
Games were rated on a scale of 1 (terrible) to 9 (outstanding). Respondents were
asked to consider such things as PRESENTATION (graphics, sound, packaging,
documentation); GAME DESIGN (design,
playability, interesting?); LIFE (does the
game wear well?)
Several people have asked about games
that are offered for ratings more than once
over the course of several issues. We usually re-rate the top ten each time (and
sometimes other games as well). Please rate
the game each time we ask (not just the first
time you notice it in the R.I.D.).

RID #15 (Use card provided)
On this page a number of games and articles are listed for evaluation. Please take
time to evaluate these games and articles.
Use the guidelines above for game evaluation. Leave blank any game which you have
not played enough to have formed an
opinion.
Please rate articles on the basis of the article itself, not your opinion of the game being reviewed. Enter a zero for any article
that does not interest you.

R.I.D. was prepared with the help of SPEED STAT by SoftCorp International, Westerville, OH 800-543-1350

See page 46 for details on the Reader Input Device

