I

NOV. - DEC., 1981

VOL. 1 NO. 1

Features
THE FUTURE OF COMPUTER WARGAMING
by Chris Crawford

3

TORPEDO FIRE: REVIEW AND ANALYSIS
8

by Bob Proctor

ROBOTWAR: A WARGAME FOR ALL PROGRAMMERS

13
17

by William Edmunds

ROBOTWAR TOURNAMENT
B -1 NUCLEAR BOMBER: A STRATEGIC MAP

18

by Chris Cummings

AIR FORCE MISSION PLANNING BY COMPUTER

20

by Russell Sipe

CRUSH, CRUMBLE, & CH---!
by Stanley Greenlaw

,

22

THE POLITICAL APPLE
by Russell Sipe

THE GREATEST BASEBALL TEAM OF ALL TIME

23
26

Departments
From the Editor
Hobby and Industry News
Micro - Reviews (Dragon's Eye, Eastern Front,

Mind Thrust, Mission Escape, Odyssey, Reversal,
Time Traveler)

2
2
29

From the Editor...

WRITING FOR COMPUTER GAMING WORLD

In recent months I have been encouraged time
and again when I see the tremendous interest out
there for a magazine on computer gaming. Many
people have expressed the view that the time for a
magazine on computer gaming is OVERDUE.
Hopefully we have corrected that problem.
CGW is designed to meet your needs as a
computer gamer. Each issue will evaluate
computer games, give advice on strategy and
tactics, announce new products, and provide a
forum for you, the reader, to become active in the
rapid nationwide development of the computer
gaming hobby.
We hope to have a "Letters to the Editor"
column beginning with the second or third issue.
Please write us and express your thoughts on the
articles presented in these pages, and/or your
thoughts about the hobby in general. It is my hope
that CGW will become a forum for an intelligent
dialog between gamers, designers, manufacturers
and retailers.
The coming explosion in use of personal
computers has just begun, we at COMPUTER
GAMING WORLD are excited about being a part
of it, and are glad that you have joined with us.

If you would like to write for COMPUTER
GAMING WORLD, we'd like to hear from
you. Beginning with issue #2 CGW will pay 2
cents per word (base rate). We're looking for
micro-reviews (400 words or less), feature
articles on popular computer games, playing
aids, scenarios, etcetera. Feature articles (500
- 2000 words) will have a better chance of
being printed if you clear the subject with the
editor before submitting it. Micro-reviews
(500 words or less) are a good way to introduce yourself to our staff. Our biggest need is
for micro-reviews of TRS-80 games. The
following criteria play a part in selecting
articles for CGW: 1.) Does the article meet our
present needs?; 2.) Does the article reflect an
understanding of what makes a good game.
That is, does the writer understand game
design and theory?; 3.) Is it well written?
Some guidelines for reviews are: 1.) Try not
to spend too much time in describing the
fiction or setting of the game (readers can
read ad descriptions as well as you); 2.) Spend
the bulk of your time evaluating the strong
and weak points of the game (e.g. Does the
game succeed as a game? Was the human
engineering of the game well handled? How
does the game compare with other games of
similar type? etc.); 3.) Feel free to include
playing tips and strategy.
Send articles to COMPUTER GAMING
WORLD, 1919 E. Sycamore #203, Anaheim,
Ca. 92805.

HOBBY AND
INDUSTRY NEWS
Automated Simulations is working
on two new games; SORCERER OF
SIVA (FRP game with wizards and
magic); and JABBERTALKY (A programmable word game). Both run
on the Apple and TRS-80.
Strategic Simulations (SSI) has
released THE BATTLE OF SHILOH
and TIGERS IN THE SNOW. TIGERS
runs on the Apple. SHILOH runs on
both the Apple and TRS-80.
SSI has released the second edition
of COMPUTER QUARTERBACK.
Owners of the first edition can send
their old diskette in with $15.00
and get the new disk. A 1980 team
disk is now available at $15.00. The
1980 team disk for COMPUTER
BASEBALL is also available at $15.00.

Level-10 is offering a $5000 reward
for finding the ALKEMSTONE(tm).
The ALKEMSTONE is the subject
of a computer game of the same
name. Clues in the game will lead
some lucky gamer to the stone and
$5000. Alkemstone runs on the Apple
(48K). The game will be available by
Christmas.
Synergistic Software's newest release
is ESCAPE FROM ARTURUS, a
two mode hi-res arcade game. In
"Space Fortress" mode you defend
the fortress. In "Escape" mode you
pilot the evacuation ships. EFA will
run on the Apple II (48K disk). $35.00.
CE Software has released the fifth
chapter of the ongoing Swordthrust
series --THE GREEN PLAGUE. It
runs on the Apple (48K disk) and
costs $24.95.

SSI will be releasing SOUTHERN
COMMAND (Roger Keating's game
on the Arab-Israeli War of 1973) in
mid-November. Their NAPOLEON'S
CAMPAIGNS 1813 AND 1815 should
be out in December.
Avalon Hill Microcomputer
Division's latest projects are
COMPUTERFOOTBALLSTRATEGY
(based on the popular board game),
DRAW POKER, GUNS OF FORT
DEFIANCE (War of 1812), and
DNIEPER RIVER LINE (which will
include counters and a mapboard).
All should be available in 1981.
SSI has paid Task Force Games an
undisclosed amount of money in
settlement over the similarities
between SSI's WARP FACTOR and
TFG's STAR FLEET BATTLES board
game.

The Future
of Computer
Wargaming
By Chris Crawford
without really changing the game. Victims of this
delusion see the wargame as defined by its
incarnation in boardgames, and the computer as
merely a variation on the standard.
Personal computers have swept into society
with a suddenness that has taken many wargamers by surprise. Wargamers are curious about
the obvious possibilities of applying personal
computers to their hobby, but as yet most have
been reluctant to spend the one or two thousand
dollars necessary for a personal computer. Right
now there simply aren't enough wargames
available for personal computers to justify the
expense in the minds of most wargamers.
However, everybody agrees that the future holds
great promise of fabulous wargame experiences.
The questions bedeviling everybody in this
marketplace concern the future availability of
computer wargames. Will there be an adequate
quantity of wargames available for personal
computers? Will these wargames be of high
enough quality? What brands of computers will
have the best selection of wargames available for
them? This last is a particularly important
question for the consumer, for the buyer who picks
the wrong computer will find himself passed up by
the bandwagon, left with an expensive and
useless computer.
I will begin to answer these questions by
addressing an almost universal misconception
about computer wargames. Most wargamers feel
that a good computer wargame will be just like a
good boardgame, with the computer somehow
making it better. The computer is viewed as a
device for boosting the power of a wargame

A similar miasma impeded the development of
the automobile at the turn of this century. The
automobile was seen as a horse-driven carriage
with no horses and an engine attached to the
wheels. Indeed, it was called a "horseless
carriage". This insistence on seeing the new
technology in old terms resulted in its misapplication. The driver was seated on a high bench
so he could see over the heads of the non-existent
horses. The size of the wheels, the center of
gravity, and the lack of wind protection were not
suited for the higher speeds that the vehicle could
develop. It took years of use before people began to
think of the machine as an automobile instead of a
horseless carriage. As the new attitude took hold,
the vehicle began to change and show its true
utility. Now the automobile is very different and
quite indispensable.
Personal computers will follow a similar path.
They are now treated as extensions of or
variations on existing technologies. As time goes
by, we will see them used more and more in their
own right. Thus, wargames on personal
computers will not be just like boardgames. There
are of course attempts to produce boardgames on
computers, and these attempts are just as silly as
the early attempts to build mechanical horses. A
computer wargame must be optimized to take
advantage of all the strengths of the computer. At
the same time, it must avoid the weaknesses of the
technology. They will necessarily be very different
from boardgames.

Special Capabilities of Computers
Five special capabilities of personal computers
will distinguish computer wargames from their
boardgame cousins. First, the computational power
of the computer will allow it to replace the human
as game executor and permit the human to concentrate on his real role of game player. In the process,
combat results tables, terrain effects charts, and
other such impediments will be eliminated. The
computer will perform more extensive and more
realistic calculations to execute the same
functions without the human's intervention.
Second, the computer will allow us to have (at
long last) true limited intelligence wargames.
Many boardgamers have difficulty appreciating
the importance of this capability. Indeed, the full
intelligence required by boardgames is so taken
for granted that many boardgamers resent the
limited intelligence features of computer wargarners, feeling that they are being cheated out of
their birthright. Limited intelligence applies not
only to unit positions and strengths, but also to
terrain effects, movement speeds, logistics effects,
and the effects of weather. At present, applying
limited intelligence to such factors is regarded as
theoretical. Times will change.
Third, the computer will give us good solitaire
games. The difficulties of gathering acceptable
players for a game have long held back wargaming as a hobby. The computer will provide a
challenging and intelligent opponent at the time
of the human's choosing.
Fourth, the computer allows real-time play. At
present, most people associate real-time play with
arcade games. They therefore turn up their noses
at the concept. Real-time play is both more
realistic and more challenging than turnsequence play. It directly solves the problem of
simultaneous movement that has never been
adequately solved with boardgames. It also
provides a reasonable and realistic simulation of
tactical combat. Tactical combat does indeed
involve decision-making under time pressure.
Wargames that do not include this element fall far
short of simulating tactical combat.
Finally, computers allow telecommunications
links for playing games over the telephone lines.
At present there are not enough subscribers to the
computer telecommunications networks to make
such games practical, but within five years, it
should be economical and practical to play games
with far-away friends over the telephone lines.
What then will computer wargames of the future
look like? I will not make specific predictions for
the years ahead, the computer revolution is

evolving too rapidly to permit simple extrapolations. I will define the forces which in my
opinion will have the greatest influence on the
development of this industry. The reader must
draw his own conclusions from these pages.

Hardware: Is It Powerful Enough?
The first major factor in the evolution of
computer wargames is the hardware. Wargames
are complex systems. Are these little computers up
to the task of handling a real wargame? There are
two ways to answer this question.
The first way is to measure throughput, a
quantity which specifies the overall computational power of a computer. My judgement is that
the throughput of any of the four major machines
on the market (Apple, Atari, PET, and TRS-80) is
entirely adequate to the task of handling a regular
wargame. Even a 16K system with cassette only
has enough throughput to handle a good
wargame. My latest game, EASTERN FRONT
1941, is evidence of what can be done. The game
will run on a 16K ATARI 400 with only a cassette.
I daresay that it is the best wargame currently
available, better even than games requiring 48K
and a disk. (Please indulge me my vanity, but I
really think it's true.)
There is little difference in the throughputs of
competing machines. That is, two machines with
the same amount of RAM and similar peripherals
will have about the same throughputs. Thus,
throughput is not a limiting factor, nor is it a
factor that distinguishes between machines.
The second way to judge hardware power is to
look at input and output ("I/O"). A successful
computer must not only calculate the progress of a
wargame, it must also communicate the progress
of the game with the user. This applies to both the
input from the user and the output to the user. An
analogy might convey the importance of I/O.
Suppose you were invited to play a special
wargame, a wargame so special that you would
not be allowed to enter the room in which the
wargame would be played. Instead, you would be
required to wait outside a closed door. Referees
would pass slips of paper under the door
describing the progress of the game. You would
type your orders onto another slip of paper and
pass this under the door to the referees. You would
never be allowed to see the game itself. Sound
silly? Dull? This is precisely how a wargame on a
text-only machine like the PET or the TRS-80
would proceed. These machines would communicate
with the user with only two devices: a screen
capable of printing characters only, and a keyboard.
The Apple can go further. Using an Apple is like

having color snapshots of the game slipped under
the door. This helps a great deal. The Atari can go
the furthest. Its graphics allows you to see the
game's progress with the greatest clarity. Using
an Atari is vaguely like watching a color television
monitor showing the game's progress. It is still not
as good as being in the same room, but it is
certainly more than adequate.
Thus, while all the major machines have
enough throughput to handle wargames, only the
Apple and the Atari have the graphics capabilities
to adequately depict the game. This does not mean
that wargames cannot be done on PET and
TRS-80. I have written wargames on both machines.
The restrictions that these machines place on the
wargame designer are so prohibitive that few
designers will put up with the machines. Most will
concentrate on the machines that give them more
flexibility.

Programmers: Are They Good Enough?
Once we have found a powerful computer we
must have programmers to write wargame
programs for it. Do we have such people? In my job
I work with professional programmers working on
personal computers. I have met hundreds of such
programmers and have developed a good feeling
for their characteristics as a group. I can say with
sad certainty that the average programmer is not
sharp enough to write good wargame programs.
Very few programmers in this business are bright
enough to handle the task. Most programmers
work in BASIC, a language for beginners. Even
among programmers producing commercial
software for personal computers, fluency in
assembly language (the most powerful language)
is rare. It is impossible to fully realize the power of
a personal computer without using assembly
language. Very few programmers have any idea
what software human engineering is, much less

how to implement it. Very few know how to obtain
high-quality graphics on personal computers.
Finally, very few understand the principles of
algorithm creation. I have yet to meet a single
programmer who has fully solved the mathematics of a hexgrid for computer use. I know the
problem is soluble, for I solved it some years ago,
and I know that it really isn't very hard. Nobody
has put their mind to it. I can summarize my
characterization of computer wargame designers
with one sentence: almost all are amateurs. This
will be a major factor impeding the development of
computer wargames.

The world is not devoid of good programmers. I
know many good programmers personally. Few of
these programmers are writing software for
personal computers. In order to motivate these
people to write wargames, wargamers must
provide adequate financial returns. Can the
wargame marketplace do this? I think not. At the
moment, the wargame marketplace is too small to
attract good programmers. A good programmer
can earn $30,000 to $40,000 per year in industry.
The same programmer can work on a program for
6 months and earn perhaps $5,000 to $10,000
royalties with it. A salary from industry is certain
and immediate; royalties for wargames are uncertain and are paid about a year after the work is
finished. No matter how you look at it, the
computer wargame marketplace is not worth the
effort for talented people. There are, of course,
fools like myself who produce wargames anyway.
The monetary return is not a primary factor for
such people. Fools like this are rare.
The computer wargame marketplace will
improve in the coming years. More and more
wargamers are buying computers, and they are
willing to pay for good wargames. This will
improve the profitability of wargame programming. We should therefore see some improvement in the numbers and quality of wargame
programmers. The process will take several years.
Another factor is at work: piracy. Piracy is the
unauthorized duplication of a product. Software
piracy is easy to do and frequently committed.
Many computer users are quite righteous about
piracy, making up a wide variety of excuses to
rationalize their theft of an author's work. I will
not preach about the ethics of piracy, for honest
people don't need sermons and dishonest people
don't listen. I will not discuss the legality of
piracy, for the laws are impossible to enforce. I will
instead discuss simple cause and effect. If users
consistently rip off authors by using their

products without properly paying them for their
efforts, authors will stop writing software.
The effect is not black and white. One pirate will
not bring the industry crashing down. Even widespread piracy will not kill the industry. Widespread piracy will have four effects: First,
software will be more expensive because software
sellers will try to recover their costs on fewer sales
with higher prices. Second, software will be more
expensive because software sellers will burden it
with a variety of anti-piracy devices. You the
consumer will pay for these protection schemes.
Third, software will be less usable and enjoyable
because the protection schemes used will probably
interfere with the operation and use of the game.
Fourth, fewer games will be available because
fewer authors will be motivated to write programs
when they cannot earn a good return for their
efforts. As an author, I can accept the low royalties
I make on my programs because there is always
the satisfaction of knowing that I am making
people happy when they play my games. But when
I discover that people cheat me by stealing my
games, my anger cancels the satisfaction. Nobody
likes being ripped off.
You may not agree with this reasoning. Perhaps
you feel that programmers are overpaid prima
donnas. Perhaps you feel that wargame
companies rip you off so many times that a little
turnabout is fair play. Perhaps you feel that one
little copy won't hurt. Whatever your reasons, you
must agree that you as a wargamer want something from programmers: wargames. They won't
do it unless you motivate them. You must offer
them adequate money to motivate them. To make
matters worse, you are in competition with other
people who want the services of programmers:
small businessmen, educators, arcade game
freaks, and many more. These people are willing
to pay good money, lots of it, for the services of the
good programmers. Wargamers as a group can
provide a decent marketplace for programmers in
the future. If the group is poisoned by pirates,
programmers will shun it for more profitable
markets. It therefore behooves the wargaming
community to stamp out piracy before it takes
root.
A final aspect of the marketplace is the machinedependency of the market. Software written for
one computer will seldom if ever run on another.
Thus, availability of wargames for one machine in
no way helps the owner of another machine. There
is a good stock of wargames available for Apple
computers right now. The TRS-80 has a small
collection of wargames. The PET has very little.
The Atari has a small and rapidly growing collection.

Conclusions
Where is the computer wargame headed? Nobody
knows. The hardware we need for good wargames
is here. We don't have enough good programmers
to write good wargames, but market forces may
induce more good programmers to enter the arena
--- if piracy doesn't poison the market first.
Which machines will dominate the computer
wargame industry? The PET and TRS-80 are out
of the running. The Apple II dominates the market
at present. However, the greater power of the Atari
and its rapidly growing user base indicate that it
will challenge and probably pass the Apple within
a year or two. It is inevitable that the Atari will in
its turn be replaced by an even newer, even more
powerful machine. It takes about two or three
years from the introduction of a machine for the
cottage software industry to produce an adequate
stock of software. Thus, the next generation machine
will not be a significant market force for at least
two years, and more likely three.
This is as far as I will take you. Beyond this, you
must draw your own conclusions.

Torpedo Fire:
Review and Analysis
TORPEDO FIRE is a game of submarine
warfare for an Apple II with 48K and 1 disk drive.
The game is on a self-booting disk and requires
Applesoft BASIC in ROM. Although basically a
game for 2 players, it can also be played solitaire.
It might be more appropriate to call it a game of
anti-submarine warfare since a solitaire player
commands the surface forces and tries to prevent
the computer (as sub-commander) from sinking
ships in the convoy. TORPEDO FIRE is a
historical simulation, a wargame -- you won't need
fast reflexes to play. It's a battle of wits between
the commander of a submarine and the commander of the escort force guarding a convoy.
Like all SSI games, TORPEDO FIRE comes in
a box with a rulebook and playing aids --reference
cards, plastic coated plotting sheets and grease
pencils. Of these, the rulebook is the most
important; you have to read it to learn how to play.
The reference cards are very useful; the plotting
sheets can be a help but aren't needed to play. All
components are of high quality.
The game covers all of World War II, at least it
does if you are willing to create your own
scenarios. Specifications for subs and escorts from
Germany, England, the United States and Japan
are built into the game, but there is only one
ready-to-play scenario. You can create additional
scenarios and types of ships by using a program
called the "SSI Shipyards."
TORPEDO FIRE is strictly a tactical game.
Neither side is bothered with the possibility of

Bob Proctor

running out of fuel, torpedoes or depth charges.
There is no tomorrow; points are given only for
damage done today. Obviously, this leads both
sides to press the attack more than might be the
case in real life, but it also tends to ensure that
every game will have a definite conclusion.
Where boardgames use a single mapboard which
gives both players an identical view of the battle,
computer wargames can show each player something quite different. In TORPEDO FIRE, the
submarine commander gets a view "through the
periscope" while the escort commander sees a map
which is a composite of sonar, radar and visual
sightings. Although I will mention some faults
that keep this game from being perfect, I want to
make it clear at the start that TORPEDO FIRE
is an excellently conceived game. Fortunately, its
faults do not keep it from being fun and exciting,
nor do they keep it from being the best simulation
of a confrontation between submarine and destroyer presently available. However, there is
room for improvement.

THE GAME SYSTEM
Each turn of TORPEDO FIRE represents 60
seconds of "real" time. Before the turn starts, both
players must give orders to their ships. As with
other SSI games, each gets a turn in front of the
computer, the other moves away so that he cannot
see the monitor screen. It is during this order
phase that the players use their radar and/or
periscope to view the battle. They may call up a

status report for each ship to inspect damage,
confirm orders, check on the reloading of torpedoes, or whatever. Each side has a secret
password to prevent the enemy from peeking at
their status and orders.
Once all orders are entered, movement and
combat are conducted simultaneously during the
Computer Activity Phase. Every 3 seconds, the
computer recalculates ship positions and checks
for collisions between ships and orders to fire
weapons. Depth charges which have been dropped
explode as they reach the depth for which they've
been set and torpedoes may detonate as they hit or
pass close by a ship. At this point, both players
may watch the monitor while the computer prints
a list of messages that describe the action:
COLLISION CHECK AT TIME = 0

COLLISION CHECK AT TIME = 3
COLLISION CHECK AT TIME = 6
COLLISION CHECK AT TIME = 9
TORPEDO AWAY
TORPEDO AWAY
COLLISION CHECK AT TIME = 12
COLLISION CHECK AT TIME = 15
TORPEDO NARROWLY MISSED F3
F3 SUNK BY TORPEDO!
15 VP'S AWARDED TO UNDERWATER SIDE
COLLISION CHECK AT TIME = 18
and so forth .....
Other SSI games have been criticized for the
long time taken by the computer. In TORPEDO
FIRE this phase begins with the warning, "This
will take 1 - 5 minutes." This estimate is very
accurate; I've timed it from 40 seconds for 3 ships
to 7 minutes for 14 ships with 8 torpedoes running
and a dozen or so depth charges sinking. Usually
it takes a minute to a minute and a half. Waiting
doesn't seem tedious since there are messages
appearing on the screen constantly. When it does
take longer than 2 minutes, it's because an attack

is underway and then this phase becomes the most
exciting part of the game!
After the computer has simulated 60 seconds of
time, there is a brief search phase while the
computer determines who can see what and then
it's time for orders again.

GETTING STARTED
The first time you play, TORPEDO FIRE will
probably seem awkward. There is ample information available but the game makes you work for
it. This is quite deliberate. It would be very easy to
have the computer tell you the exact bearing and
range of every enemy ship you can see, but would
that be realistic? Judging these two factors
through a periscope, was one of the skills a new
submarine skipper had to learn. So it is here.
There is a "Torpedo Data Computer" to help
you calculate an intercepting course for your
torpedoes, but results depend entirely on your
estimation of the enemy's course, range and speed.
Likewise, the destroyer captain will have to learn
to visualize ship movements up to several minutes
ahead and to develop an effective technique for
dropping a pattern of depth charges.
Ship handling can be a real challenge and it's
not at all unusual for surface ships to run into each
other in the first few games. Unfortunately, such
collisions always result in both ships sinking with
full victory points awarded to the enemy. I
consider this an unrealistically heavy penalty, but
it does encourage good seamanship.
To help the escort commander, there is an
"execute" command which allows him to preview
his orders before they are actually carried out.
Each escort in turn can be made to move in slow
animation across the map. Depth charges are
marked with large black asterisks. If a mistake is

discovered, it's still possible to revise orders for
any or all ships. My only complaint is that you
can't preview the convoy's move unless you've
given it orders, which you can only do every 6
turns.
The use of sonar is another fine art. The slower
the escorts go, the better able they are to maintain
contact. But then, too, the more time the sub has to
put a fish into a tanker. A good tactic to use when
you have two or more escorts is to keep one almost
stationary to keep a fix on the sub while the orders
run in at high speed to attack. It is NOT a good
idea to attack at low speed. You'll know where
your enemy is, but you'll also get the stern blown
off your destroyer!

GRAPHICS
TORPEDO FIRE's use of graphics is well
thought out. Positional information is presented
with high-resolution graphics and status information is presented in text. This approach contributes much of the "feel" of the game.
Visually, the graphics are fields of blue with
white grid lines to help the viewer judge distance
and bearing. The escort player's maps view the
battle from overhead with each type of ship distinguishable by a different "deckplan". The view
through the periscope, on the other hand, has
perspective. The grid lines converge in the
distance and ships appear smaller as they get
further away. Again, each type has a distinct
profile, both from broadside and at an angle.
When seen bow on or stern on, it is harder to
distinguish ship types but it can be done at close
range. In order to make it easier to judge range and
direction the periscope does not give a water-level
view. This would put most ships on the horizon.
Instead, the 'scope appears to be 50 to 100 feet tall.
This sounds unusual, but I quickly got to where I
didn't notice it at all. A lower vantage point would
obviously be more realistic but wouldn't convey
enough information.
There is one aspect of the graphics which could
be improved. If you point the periscope north
(bearing 0 degrees) and see a ship coming directly
at you, you will see the ship bow on. So far, so good.
However, if you now pivot the 'scope so that it
points NE (bearing 45 degrees), the ship is still in
your field of view but it no longer appears to be
coming at you! Instead of bow on, the profile is
now seen at a 45 degree angle. This can be really
confusing and it offends my sense of realism; a
subjective matter, I admit. The problem could be
solved by comparing the ship's course to the
bearing from the ship to the periscope rather than
the direction the periscope is pointing.

WHAT'S A SIMULATION
According to Webster, a simulation is
something which has "a superficial resemblance" to something else. Almost every
computer game simulates something; we can
tell them apart by what they simulate and
judge them by how well they do it. An auto
racing game, for instance, may simulate
driving on a famous race track. A stock
market game, on the other hand, would simulate investing. They might both be good
simulations, but one would develop good
reflexes, the other good judgement.
A wargame is a kind of HISTORICAL
simulation and should therefore bear a
resemblance to historical events. Since a
good game requires some freedom of choice,
the ideal historical simulation drops you
back to a certain point in time and lets YOU
make the important decisions which determine events from there on.
Even though historical simulations in the
form of computer games are very new,
they've been around for years in other forms.
The last 10 years have seen tremendous
growth in the sales of board games and many
of these are historical simulations. Let's look
at some of the characteristics that can be
used to describe a game based on historical
events.
The SUBJECT may be military, political,
economical, sociological, or any combination
of these. Games on military history predominate, probably because they've been around
the longest. Professional soldiers have been
using them as a training tool since the 1820's.
As people in other fields discover their value,
games which model other aspects of history
will become more common.
The SCALE of the game is like the scale of
a map. Does it show the major features of a
large area or a small area in greater detail?
To use a military example, a game could
portray the conditions which face a private in
combat, those which face a general leading
an entire army, or the leader of a nation
conducting every aspect of the war. Generals
call these three levels; Tactics, Strategy, and
Grand Strategy, but gamers use many
different terms to describe each scale. To give
one example, if one turn in the game represents one minute of "real" time, it will be a
tactical game because it would take forever to
Continued on page 32

The sub-commander can also use radar to get
oriented. It gives a typical "scan", a circle with a
white "second hand" sweeping 'round and 'round.
The ships appear as blips -- you can judge range
and bearing but not type. Radar is particularly
useful at night because it then has greater range
than eyesight and so will reveal ships which will
not appear through the 'scope. On the other hand,
radar sometimes will not show a ship that you can
see quite clearly! Radar on both sides show false
blips about 10% of the time. I find it both amusing
and appropriate to be wargaming in an imperfect
world.

THE FEEL OF THE GAME
The great joy of a computer game is the absence
of what I call "bookkeeping". There are no pads
and pencils, no counters to move, and no dice to
roll! The processes of resolving combat and determining radar and sonar contacts are all hidden
within the computer. Experience with the game,
playing a variety of situations, is the only way to
learn how effective and dependable your weapons
are. Of course, it's unlikely that a person would be
given command without some knowledge and,
with this in mind, the rules contain several examples
of probabilities. For instance, an escort moving at
5 knots will, with the worst possible luck, still be
able to find a sub within 1000 yards. These
examples may not mean much to a first-time
reader but they do when you go back and study
them after you've played a couple games.

TORPEDO FIRE will reward a player who
plans ahead and who calculates relative ship
positions precisely. For instance, if a torpedo
comes within 150 yards of a ship there is a chance
it may detonate (due to magnetic exploders). The
closer it comes, the greater the likelihood of an
explosion. While I can't give you any percentages,
my experience indicates that accuracy pays big
dividends.
Depth charges always go off when they sink to
the depth for which they were set. The problem
here is that you have no idea how close they were
to the sub. To help players learn this, there is a
"Beginner's Option" which can be selected with
any game. If you choose it, the computer will tell
you by how much you missed every time a depth
charge explodes if it was within 250 yards of the
sub. The trick is to drop a pattern that guarantees
at least one will be close no matter how the sub
twists and turns.

THE INTRODUCTORY SCENARIO
When you boot TORPEDO FIRE, you are
presented with a menu of five choices. Until you

are ready to design your own scenarios, only one of
these choices will get you started on a game; the
Introductory Scenario.
In this game, a German U-boat attacks a
British convoy. The convoy has 3 ships -- a
freighter, a tanker, and a freighter in line -- and is
flanked by destroyer on each side. The sub has just
been detected directly astern of the starboard
escort. It is in a good position to close in and put
fish into the tanker or the rear freighter. If the sub
can sink both, it wins since they are worth 30 and
15 points respectively and the U-boat is only worth
40. The more patient sub commanders will use all 4
bow tubes to "make sure" of the freighter and then
go deep and wait out the depth charge attack for a
15 to 0 victory. This is a good training scenario for
both sides. Once you feel you've got it all down pat,
though, you're going to want variety.

THE SHIPYARDS
The Shipyard program is not of the same high
quality as the game program. While it does what it
was designed to do, it's not very forgiving if you
make a mistake. It begins by asking you what
period of the war this is, what nationality the
ships are, and how many ships there are. While it
usually checks to make sure you've given a valid
answer, there is no cross-checking. You can enter
the wrong combination of "valid" answers and
not discover it for some time. If you do, you may
have to start all over, which means re-booting the
disk. If you spent 10 minutes entering data for a
new scenario, you'll just have to do it again!
Next, you enter the starting position for each
ship and change any other data such as speed,
course, point value, or damage. Rather than ask
about each item individually, all of the ship's data
are displayed and you are allowed to make
whatever changes you want. This is a two-edged
sword and there is a warning in the program about
being careless. If you create an invalid field in the
ship's record, you probably won't discover it until
the game program "crashes"' because it can't
process the field. If this occurs, you'll have to go
back to the Shipyards and use the "modify
existing scenario" option.

Once you finish entering a scenario, you must
give it a name and write it on a disk. TORPEDO
FIRE has its own Disk Operating System which
would be fine if it were complete. It doesn't check
for duplicate names and if you give it one, it
doesn't erase the old file before it writes the new
one on top of it. Net result: unreadable file; enter
your scenario again and give it a unique name this
time. "Wait a minute," you say, "If I wanted to
change a scenario why don't I use the 'modify'
option?" Well, that works as long as you're
changing the data for one or more ships, however,
it won't let you add or delete ships. It sounds like
we have to delete the scenario and start all over if
we want to do that, right? Only half right. You can
start over again, but you can't delete a scenario!
Nor can you transfer scenarios from one disk to
another without re-entering them.
All of this would be forgivable if you could use
Apple DOS to delete or copy but, as I'm sure you've
guessed by now, the format used by the game isn't
readable by either 13 or 16 sector Apple DOS. As
an off-shoot of this, the disk you save your
scenarios on must be formatted by the game before
you attempt to save the scenario. If you try to write
a scenario on an unformatted disk, you will lose it!
One other piece of advice to those of you who will
be creating scenarios for TORPEDO FIRE: if
you want to start a ship with some damage
already done, be sure to reduce the Total Damage
Points field as well as Current Damage. The
reason for this is that victory points are based on
the difference between the two. Unless you want
points to be awarded for damage which occurred
before the scenario began, this difference must be
zero.

THE COMPUTER AS OPPONENT
A hallmark of SSI games is their sophistication in computer opponents and TORPEDO
FIRE is no exception. Otto Von Computer (him
again! I thought he went down with the Bismarck
... must have been rescued by a U-boat) is a skillful
and unpredictable enemy. He will launch torpedoes from varying ranges and angles, surface to
use the deck gun at night (if no escorts are close by)
and go ever so slowly to avoid sonar detection
when the hunters get near.
In all solitaire scenarios, the computer places
the submarines at random. Thus, you can't take
any unfair advantage because you know where
the sub will start in a 2 player version of the same
scenario. In one scenario I created, a tanker plays
the role of the carrier SHOKAKU returning to
Japan after being damaged in the Battle of the
Coral Sea. With the help of a single destroyer, it
must try to evade a single American sub which

stands between it and home. The computer does
not seem clever enough to always place the sub so
that it has a chance at the target. I don't know if
this is due to the 12 knot speed of the carrier or
lucky course changes, but twice the sub has
apparently never been able to get into firing
position. Of course, of the four times when contact
has been made, I've lost three.

CONCLUSIONS
TORPEDO FIRE represents the leading edge
in computer wargames as of early 1981. Although
extremely well conceived, the concepts could have
been better implemented. It's easy to think of
things that would be nice to add to TORPEDO
FIRE. There is no provision in the current game
for escorts which are too small to torpedo or have
wooden hulls (and thus won't set off a magnetic
exploder). For that matter, the submarine captain
should be able to set the torpedoes to run shallow
or deep and choose between contact and magnetic
exploders. Other possibilities would be to add the
ability for cargo ships to maneuver independently
and fire guns, to set a maximum depth (the
bottom) for submarines, or to allow for the effects
of choppy versus smooth seas.
More importantly, it would be interesting to
play the submarine side in a solitaire game. The
novelty and "you-are-there" feeling of the
graphics for the submarine player make it, in my
opinion, much more fun for the solitaire gamer.
The only justifiable reason to leave this out would
be the difficulty of programming good tactics for
the surface ships. Perhaps this is the reason; if not,
I think SSI missed a bet by leaving out this option.
I certainly wouldn't object to seeing it in an
improved release of TORPEDO FIRE.

ROBOTWAR from Muse Software is a computer
game for the Apple II which pits robots against
each other in a struggle to the death. All robots are
equipped with the same hardware. The only
difference between robot combatants is the program
you write which determines how your robot will
respond on the battlefield.
The software package includes a diskette and a
75 page manual which covers everything needed
to create your own robot. The diskette has five
robots with simple routines, ready to do battle
against each other or to challenge any robots
which you, your friends or family design.
The battles take place on a square field with
walls 260 meters on each side. You observe the
battle from directly above the battlefield where up
to five robots can compete at one time. The
computer keeps track of all damage sustained by
the contestants and displays it as a percentage on
the right side of the screen. When damage exceeds
100% robots are destroyed and removed from the
battlefield until only one robot remains.
The program you write runs in the robot's
on-board computer. This computer contains 34
registers, ten of which control or monitor specific
robot functions like speed and position. The robots
can move in any direction by inputing horizontal
and vertical speed to the appropriate speed
registers. Robots have a maximum speed of 25
meters per second and accelerate at four meters
per second.
The robots are equipped with a gun and radar
which can be turned in any direction. When a
direction is loaded to the radar register a radar
beam is emitted. The returned beam represents the

range and is stored back in the radar register. The
range can then be moved to the shot register to fire
the gun.
If a shell hits or explodes near a robot, the robot
will sustain damage. Damage, however, does not
degrade the performance of the robot. Damage
accumulates until the robot's limit is reached and
is then removed from the field. Robots can also
sustain damage by running into walls or other
robots.
The robot programs are written and entered into
the computer using a text editor. The robot
language is similar to a very limited BASIC which
makes it easy to learn. When you finish entering
and editing your program it is assembled and
translated into robot object code. The assembler
checks for errors and prints a message indicating
the type and location of any errors found. Once
assembled the robot can be put onto the
battlefield. There is also a test bench which is
useful for finding bugs. It allows you to step
through the program, an instruction at a time,
while displaying the robot's registers.
The game comes with five preprogrammed robots
of simple complexity. They are Target, Scanner,
Mover, Random, and Bottom.
Robot Target is just that. He does nothing.
Scanner is programmed to sit and scan for other
robots. When he spots one he will continue to fire
as long as the target remains in his radar sight.
Mover is like Scanner except when hit he
executes a movement routine which moves him to
another random place on the battlefield.

My next robot was designed to deal directly with
Bottom. I needed to knock Bottom out, take his
place, and improve his routine. And thereby was
born Bottom Killer or BK for short.
BK moves toward the bottom of the field,
searching below him for other robots. Once at the
bottom the SIDE routine looks left and right to see
if Bottom is down there. He then moves along the
lower wall like Bottom, but with his radar facing
forward twenty-five degrees. If a target is spotted
the FIRESCAN routine fires a shell and then
moves the gun to a new angle in an effort to keep
the radar and gun trained on the target.

Random moves in a random direction pointing
his radar and gun in the direction of travel.
Bottom is the most sophisticated of the supplied
robots. His program moves him straight down to
the bottom wall and then has him move back and
forth between the left and right edges. As he
moves his radar and gun are pointed straight up.
After watching the robots battle each other and
observing the pit falls of the designs, I started
forming a strategy for my first robot. Mover
scanned 360 degrees and sometimes missed targets
because he increments his radar in thirteen degree
steps. I figured, from a corner a robot would be out
of the way and only have to scan 90 degrees.
Hence, my first robot, Coward.
Coward heads for the upper left corner with his
radar scanning a narrow path in front of him to
avoid running into other robots. Once set in the
corner Coward didn't scan very fast because I had
to step the radar only four degrees in order to
assure spotting all targets. I tried two damage
routines and neither was very effective. By the
time Coward could accelerate he would take two
hits and usually took another before he got up into
the corner.
Despite these short comings, Coward could
usually defeat all but Bottom. Bottom would move
to the left side and hit Coward once. Coward would
exercise his damage routine and just get set when
Bottom would come over and hit him again. This
would continue with Coward seldom getting a
shot off.
Bottom could beat the other robots in a one-onone battle because he had a major advantage
which the other robots didn't. Because he moved
constantly, he didn't need a damage routine when
hit. Other robots seldom got more than one shot off
at him, and it usually missed.

The angle in the FIRESCAN routine is computed
using the speed of BK and the range to the target.
The actual speed is not really important. It is used
because it gives the direction BK is moving.
Direction is important for determining if the angle
is to be increased or decreased.
Angles can be computed with a linear function
because for small angles the cosine is fairly linear.
The angles don't become large unless the range is
small, but a close range accuracy is not as
important because the target occupies a larger
field of view.
BK proved very successful against the supplied
robots and Coward. Still, he is only an improved
Bottom which leaves him vulnerable for the same
reason. BK was quickly destroyed by a less
sophisticated robot built by a friend because he
knew where to find him.
I next wanted to create a robot which would
move continuously. In doing so he would follow a
circular pattern. George would be difficult to lock
onto since he would be moving and wouldn't
follow a straight line path.
The circular path is in reality an octagon,
turning 45 degrees every third time through the
SCAN routine. In order to compute the vertical
and horizontal speed I used the first ten memory
registers to store a sine function table. Dividing
the heading by 45 will produce a direction between
zero and seven. Putting this direction in the index
register and adding one will allow you to read the
appropriate register for vertical speed. The contents
of this register is then multiplied by the last
known range to a wall and stored in Speedy
(vertical speed control). The horizontal speed is
then found by adding two to the index register
which is the same as adding 90 degrees to the
heading.
The damage sensor in the SCAN routine ignores
near hits by adding five to the damage and
comparing it to the damage level stored during the
TURN routine. When a hit is detected a check is

made to determine if George is still moving. If so
he makes a premature 45 degree turn. If not, then
he has run into another robot and a close quarters
search is made. The heading and range of the
shortest radar range is stored and used at the end
of the search for the KILL routine.
Another new feature of George is in the FIRE
routine. When a target is spotted the gun is
brought to bear and a shot fired. Then the range is
stored in register P and a counter, Q, is set. These
are then used by SCAN routine to continue firing
blindly in the general direction of the target while
the radar continues to scan.
The defensive aspects of George are good, but
his offence is lacking. His fifteen degree increment
of the radar misses a lot of ground. I had to add a
section to the end of the TURN routine to direct the
radar at 90 degrees to the direction of travel or the
whole center would go unnoticed. BK will beat
George, but George will last a lot longer than any
other robot. If his radar scanning could be
improved he would be a tough robot to beat.
These are the robots I have developed thus far. I
will now cover some facts I have discovered about
the robot computer along with some new ideas I
may include in future robots.
The Robot Computer
It should be noted that floating point numbers
can be stored in most memory registers as
demonstrated by the trig table in robot George.
The memory registers will also hold numbers
greater than 1,024. I had the A register over
256,000 before terminating one experiment.
The index register will hold only integers between
0 and 25. Numbers outside this range will be
converted back into it. Contrary to the example
given on page 20 of the instruction manual, loading
27 to the index register will produce a one which
will then use the contents of the A register.
Loading 26 will produce a zero and use the
Z register. The index register can also be used for
finding the integer of a number if the number is
positive and less than 26. That is what I did at the
end of the SCAN routine of George.
The Aim register is similar to the index register.
You can load any number you like, positive or
negative, and it will be converted to a heading
between 0 and 359. This makes computing angles
simple since you won't have to worry about an
angle being out of range.
Scanning presents a major problem. Since the
robots have no way of detecting the direction from
which they are hit, they must scan everywhere to
find the enemy. For a 360 degree scan this can be

very time consuming. Bottom has one way of
overcoming this problem, but as a result he is
predictable and thus easy to find and destroy.
Coward demonstrated that a four degree
increment seemed to pick up all targets. This is
fine for ranges greater than 200 meters, but if you
are scanning a wall twenty meters away it is
wasteful. By using an inverse function of range,
similar to the BK FIRESCAN routine, you can
develop a scan which would increase its increment
as the distance to a wall decreases. This should
improve the time it takes to perform a thorough
scan.
My most recent robot Test is an experimental
robot which uses such a scan routine. He also has
a new fire routine. The fire routines used by
Scanner and Mover are short but too fast for the
delay required for the gun cooling period. If you
watch closely, when they are locked onto a target
their radar flashes twice for each shot fired.
Instead of running through the same code twice to
fire a shot I use the time to check for movement by
looking left and right of Aim. Aim is trained on the
last sitting of the target and is used as a reference
point to direct the radar in a search. Once spotted,
Aim is repositioned if necessary and a shot fired.
The routine looks long but Test fires as rapidly as
Mover and can follow, with his radar and gun,
targets that do not move too fast. Of course Test is
not yet a complete robot as he still needs a
movement and damage routine.
I hope I've stimulated your imagination since I
would like to see other robots, for it is through
competition that we will build better ones.
ROBOTWAR (Muse) requires an Apple II with
48K and Applesoft in ROM. The price is $39.95.

COMPUTER GAMING WORLD'S

ROBOTWAR
TOURNAMENT
We at COMPUTER GAMING WORLD are
impressed with Muse's ROBOTWAR and
want to thank Bill Edmunds for introducing
the game to us. Not only is it an excellent
game, it can also be played by two or more
persons geographically separated. This
makes it somewhat unique among games for
today's microcomputers. For these reasons
COMPUTER GAMING WORLD (in cooperation with Muse Software) announces the
FIRST COMPUTER GAMING WORLD
ROBOTWAR TOURNAMENT.
You are cordially invited to put your best
ROBOTWAR robot to the test. There is no
entry fee. There will be a trophy and official
ROBOTWAR T-shirt for the winner. T-shirts
will also be given to runners-up. The T-shirt is
to be worn by the designer, not the robot.

1) Send your robot program (source and
object codes) on a diskette to COMPUTER
GAMING WORLD, 1919 E. Sycamore #203,
Anaheim, Ca. 92805. Mark your package
"Attention Robotwar Tournament".
2) Include a brief description of the robot.
What is it designed to do?
3) Only one entry per person.
4) Be sure to include return postage if you
want your diskette returned.
5) Include T-shirt size (S, M, L, XL) and color
(Blue, Yellow, Tan) in case you are a winner.
6) Entries must be received by January 20,
1982.
7) Winners will be announced in Issue # 3
(Mar-Apr 1982).
The actual structure of the tournament will
be determined based on the number of
entries. If possible a round robin type tournament will be used. COMPUTER GAMING
WORLD assumes no responsibility for
damaged or lost diskettes.

B - 1 NUCLEAR BOMBER:
A Strategic Map

CHRIS
CUMMINGS

In Avalon Hill's B-1 NUCLEAR BOMBER, you
fly a B-1 bomber deep into Russian airspace, drop a
one megaton nuclear warhead on your target and
return to Greenland. Naturally the Russians will
try to stop you.
As the bomber gets deeper into Russia the radar
picks up MIG fighters and SAM anti-aircraft
missiles as they are launched from the defense
complexes at you. The radar gives a constant
update on the approaching interceptors as they
close in. They are armed with tactical nuclear
warheads.
B-1 NUCLEAR BOMBER is a fun game. It has
much of the intensity of flying the critical mission
into hostile airspace. The game has no graphics
and describes the action to you in words.
The game, however, is limited in both technical
correctness and uses some shallow gaming
techniques.
Minor details bothered me about the game. The
game bomber travels at 4500 KPH regardless of
altitude. The real B-1 can go Mach 2 only at high
altitude. At sea level it is subsonic. Also the SRAM
range is unaffected by altitude when the real
SRAM's range is reduced from 100 miles to 35
miles as you get closer to the ground.

requested but if you have no idea where you are or
what to expect you're in for a short and most likely
unsuccessful flight. To correct this flaw we
provide a strategic map for B-1 NUCLEAR
BOMBER. A quick study will show that there are
better routes to take than just flying straight at
your target. It also shows that Murmansk is the
easiest objective while Volgograd may be the
toughest.
You enter the map from the upper left. The
starting point is about 3000 KM out in a direction
along a line drawn through MOskva and
LEningrad.
KHar'kov shows up twice on the map. The game
program puts it at about 52N 52E when the city is
actually at 50.00N 36.15E. To fix the location
change program line 55 DATA ..., KHAR'KOV,
8850, 7450, ...to , KHAR'KOV, 7850, 7450,...(in
Apple II version). If you plot the cities from the
program data, this change moves the city of
KHar'kov much closer to its actual location.
B-1 NUCLEAR BOMBER is written in BASIC
and loads in a 16K machine. Since it is in BASIC it
executes slowly. Some autopilot turns can take a
minute or more to execute with no activity on the
screen.

These technical flaws are understandable in a
game program but because of them there is no
penalty for flying low. The entire game strategy is
reduced to flying on the deck until you get close
enough to a defense complex to blow it to bits with
a Phoenix air-to-ground nuclear strike.

The good thing about being in BASIC is that the
original program can be easily accessed and
modified to include more realistic action and flight
performance. It seems that the more improvements I make to the program the harder it is to
reach the target. The more "realistic" it gets the
"smarter" the Russians get and the more I get shot
down.

If you blow up five or six defense complexes on
your way in, you can waltz back after your strike
without incident.

Maybe flying a nuclear bomber into Russia at
treetop level is not as easy as it seems to be.

Also, once a missile/fighter is launched you get
constant updates such as "MIG-31 intercept in 326
seconds." If you alter course even 180 degrees and
fly right at him at 4500 KPH the intercept time
stays the same. There is no way to outrun a
pursuer or any penalty for flying right at him.

Regardless, B-1 NUCLEAR BOMBER from Microcomputer Games, Inc., a division of Avalon Hill
Game Co. will bring hours of fun, especially to the
war monger who has always wondered what it
would be like to sit in the cockpit of a sophisticated
flying machine and drop a nuclear load on the
"enemy".

The biggest flaw with the basic game seems to
be the lack of a map of Russia. Flying blind into
Russian airspace is foolish. The navigational
computer gives range and bearing to any place

Air Force
Mission Planning
by Computer
by Russell Sipe

It is 6:45 am, October 8, 1983. Captain Greg
Boyles stands next to Squadron 223's flight planning
station (FPS), selects a riverbend on the map and
presses the digitizer to it. CAMPS (Computer
Aided Mission Planning System) plots a flight
path from Captain Boyle's airfield (R-113 just
north of Seoul) to the riverbend. The color monitor
displays the plot, amount of fuel used, selected
altitude, and other necessary information. Boyles
shakes his head in slight annoyance when he sees
that his projected path takes him through a zone
of medium threat (projected on the monitor by a
yellow blotch). Looking to the west of the riverbend
he had intended using for a navigation point he
selects a nearby road intersection. Touching the
digitizer to the map Boyles watches CAMPS replot
his course. This time CAMPS tells him that his
new plot is completely in a safe zone. Satisfied
with this leg Boyles goes on to plot the next three
legs of his flight which brings him to the east end
of a lake. Just across the lake is his target - Koksan
airfield. There's no "safe" path now. Boyles thinks
to himself as he keys into the computer the path of
his bomb run. For the next three minutes his plane
will fly through red "high risk" and yellow
"medium risk" zones. Following his attack run,
during which he will drop 24 "500 lb." bombs from
his F-4, Boyles will fly to a road intersection
several kilometers north of the Koksan airfield.
Having plotted a course through the worst of the
danger zone Boyles plans his next four legs to
carry him through "safe" corridors back to R-113.
Selecting a new option from the CAMPS menu of
functions, Boyles thinks to himself how much
better the CAMPS system is (with it's terrain
effects features) than the old manual method
(which lacked any terrain masking effects). For
several days he had been flying within three

kilometers of a particular SAM (Surface to Air
Missile) site that, thanks to CAMPS, Greg knew
could never hit him if he flew at 500 feet or lower.
This was so because CAMPS showed him the
masking effect of a particular ridgeline north of
the SAM site, an effect which couldn't have been
seen by just looking at his navigation chart.
The monitor flashes a message that it is ready to
continue his flight plan. Now Boyles zeros in on
that three minute selection of his flight in which
he will be exposed to the greatest danger. Calling
up a series of charts Boyles asks the computer for
the specific locations of his threats during those
three minutes. CAMPS tells him that two SAM
sites, one 12 klicks southeast of his IP (initial
bomb run point), and one 8 klicks north of his IP,
will combine to give a 52% probability of kill on his
F-4. Since he will be too far from the range of the
stand-off jamming planes, he decides to see what
the effect of both his self protection jammer and an
escort jammer would be on the SAM sites. CAMPS
processes his request and returns a new kill probability figure - 28%. "That helps" thinks Boyles "but
a flight with a 28% kill probability will play hell
with my insurance rates and on what the Air
Force pays me..." -- jolted back to reality and the
problem at hand Boyles requests CAMPS to tell
him what would happen if ARMs (Anti-Radiation
Missiles) were fired at the SAM sites. The answer
-8% kill probability. "That's better", Boyles thinks
to himself and orders the computer to print out his
flight plan while he looks around the OPS room for
his squadron commander to request the escort
jammer and ARM attack.
What may sound like a computer game that we
will be playing in the near future is, in reality, a

computer based software package that the U.S.
Air Force is presently field testing. The system,
which is known as CAMPS (Computer Aided
Mission Planning System), is being developed by
Comarco Incorporated of Anaheim, California.
According to Woody Woodbury, Advanced Programs
Director at Comarco, CAMPS is in an advanced

development stage and is projected to be operational
in one to three years.
In 1977 several branches of the military conducted
a test, the EWJT (Electronic Warfare Joint Test),
at Nellis AFB outside of Las Vegas. EWJT showed
the need for a mission planning system which
could take into account known enemy sites as well
as the effects of terrain around those sites. The
offspring of the EWJT was EWTAP (Electronic
Warfare Tactics Analysis Program). In 1978, after
some involvement with the Navy, Comarco was
contracted by the Air Force to develop a system
similar to EWTAP know as EPASS (Experimental
Penetration Analysis Support System). Now
known as CAMPS, the system is designed to be
used by squadrons to assist in planning
air-to-ground missions. The entire operation (which
runs on a Convergent Technologies micro-computer using a digitizer and touch command menu),
was designed to be portable, rugged, and usable by
pilots without computer training (a pilot can learn
to use the system in minutes if necessary).
CAMPS is an improvement over manual mission
planning due to its consideration of the effects of
terrain on the performance of enemy weapon
systems. Presently only the radius of known installations is used by planners, with no consideration
for the effects of terrain. CAMPS utilizes the
terrain features around an enemy site to project a
true "radius". By flying at lower altitudes aircraft
not only can elude ground-based radar, they can
also make use of the natural lay of the ground to
mask themselves from enemy fire. This terrain
analysis can be crucial in dense enemy environments.
In the above example of fictionalized future warfare
between North and South Korea, Captain Boyles
used CAMPS to tell him where the safe corridors
were, based on the terrain around known enemy
weapon sites.
When the CAMPS system is initially set up,
terrain and other important features are entered
through the use of the digitizer board. Then all
known enemy weapon installations are entered
into memory making the system operational. As
new sites are discovered and old ones removed or
destroyed the data file is updated. CAMPS is
designed so that a pilot can plan his entire mission
in ten minutes or less.
The pilot enters basic information such as:
aircraft type; ordinance loaded on each "station"
of the aircraft; desired speed and altitude for each
leg of the mission; and the latitude/longitude
points (through the digitizer) of the various navigation points. Most of the data may be stored in
memory and can be "called up" rather than

Continued on page 34

by Stanley Greenlaw
Most wargamers are familiar with "The Playboy Winner's Guide to Board Games" (Playboy
Press) and "The Complete Book of Wargames"
(Fireside) by Jon Freeman. The author of these
two excellent surveys of the gaming hobby is also
very active in the computer gaming field. His
name can be found in the credits of many Automated Simulation Games. One of his latest
projects along with J. W. Connelly is CRUNCH,
CRUMBLE, AND CHOMP!, (The Movie Monster
Movie Game).
CRUNCH, CRUMBLE, AND CHOMP! lets you
be the alter ego for the movie monster of your
choice as you devastate one of four famous cities
by burning buildings, crushing bridges, as well as
eating people, cars, and other assorted moving
things. The "Feature Creatures" (pre-generated
monsters) are Goshilla, Kraken, Arachnis, The
Glob Mechismo, and Mantra. Each being similar
to well known movie monsters. Or if you prefer to
be monsterous in a different way than the feature
creatures you can create your own. To create your
own you choose a carcass such as "Sea Monster",
"Robot", "Brontosaur", or one of 6 other types.
Then you give to that carcass monsterous abilities
such as breathe fire, stomp, atomize, etc. Each
ability is payed for with "Crunch Points" of which
a limited number are permitted per carcass type.
With this "Create your own" feature you can
create anything from a dragon (brontosaurous
carcass with flight and fire breath) to a giant
tomato (to roll through the town crushing
buildings, rolling over and eating people as well as
leaving a web-like trail of tomato paste behind).
This is a game for your wildest fantasies.
Speaking of fantasies, which of us hasn't at one
time or another wanted to strike back at the
bureaucratic institutions that have mistreated us?
Remember the time the Post Office delivered your
copy of Time magazine and there were three
articles clipped out? Remember when the I.R.S.
told you that you had to pay a tax penalty because
you didn't report the $10.00 you were awarded by
the state disability board in consideration of your
career ending accident which occurred when the
phone company dropped a telephone pole on your
car? Now you can strike back to your heart's
delight. For with CRUSH, CRUMBLE, AND

CHOMP! you can take your monster into the heart
of Washington, D. C. and crush the I.R.S. to
rubble, or burn the Post Office to the ground, or
atomize the Justice Department. Not to mention
all the mean things you could do to the Pentagon,
White House or Capitol Building.
If you prefer you can take your destructive urges
to New York City and ravage Wall Street. Then
again you can terrorize San Francisco and
surrounding areas (how about eating everyone in
Marin County). Or you can try your oversized
talents in the legendary testing ground of the
great monsters, Tokyo. The fact that the game is
set in actual cities and most of us are familiar with
at least one of them makes the game more
interesting than if the game were set in an
abstract city or some lesser known city like
Sheboygan.
CRUSH, CRUMBLE, AND CHOMP! follows
the pattern of several other Automated Simulation games in that the game is played in semireal time. As the alter ego to the monster you enter
your command at the keyboard. Unlike arcade
games which have a perfect correlation between
player time and screen time, CRUSH, CRUMBLE,
AND CHOMP! regulates activity so that your
monster will only accept your orders when it has
finished executing it's previous orders. With this
type of design you must be careful what orders
you give. Nothing is more frustrating than commanding your monster to turn around and in the
several seconds that it spends executing that
command watch your intended victim run harmlessly away while a helicopter, tank, and national
guard unit come up on your blind side and
pulverize you.
The bottom line in CRUSH, CRUMBLE, AND
CHOMP! like so many games is your score. You
score points according to the objective you select
for your monster. You can choose to run a
balanced scenario in which you get points for just
about everything you do. Or you can choose to run
a killer monster which gives more points for
killing human units. Other objectives are
"Combat machine", "Destruction", and
"Survival".
Continued on page 34

That's what a broadcast style commentary on a
game of PRESIDENT ELECT might sound like.
Strategic Simulations has brought us another
winner in this exciting new political election game
by Nelson G. Hernandez Sr. With PRESIDENT
ELECT we all can be what Henry Major
Tomlinson called FDR, a "Happy Warrior of the
political battlefield".

Th e Po litical
Apple
by Russell Sipe
Walter: "So at 10:42 PM here on election night,
Nov. 5, 1984, Ronald Reagan has won his second
term of office in the most remarkable landslide
since Nixon beat McGovern in 1972. From our
computer projections, we anticipate that Ronald
Reagan will carry every state except Minnesota
and the District of Columbia. He will thus gather
525 electoral votes to 13 for Walter Mondale. The
popular vote is projected to be 55% for Reagan, 44%
for Mondale, and 1% for Libertarian candidate Ed
Clark. Dan, we've seen the landslide developing
all evening, beginning with the stunning victory
of Reagan in Massachusetts, what do you think this
election shows us?"
Dan: "Well, Walter, this election with very few
exceptions has given us little to be surprised about.
The computer predictions that our network did
back during the Democratic primaries showed
that Walter Mondale never stood a chance against
Ronald Reagan. Even with the stagnant economy,
a negative view of America abroad, a 10%
inflation rate and 10% unemployment, Reagan had
a pre-campaign lead of at least 4% over the closest
Democratic challenger, Henry "Scoop" Jackson.
Mondale was 7% behind. I think it is safe to say
that the demographics for 1984 have made it
extremely difficult for any Democratic candidate
to challenge the incumbent Ronald Reagan."
Walter: "Thank you Dan, and that's the way it
might be, November 5,1984, this is Walter saying,
Good Night."

PRESIDENT ELECT is SSI's simulation of the
campaign for the presidency. In PRESIDENT
ELECT you can replay any of the presidential
elections from the Kennedy-Nixon contest of 1960
to the Reagan victory of 1980. Or, if you prefer, you
can set up a fictional contest between candidates
for any of the elections including the 1984 contest.
The game has a data file for 21 Democrats, 22
Republicans, and 2 third party candidates.
The Republicans are represented by: John
Anderson, Howard Baker, James Buckley, George
Bush, John Connally, Phil Crane, Robert Dole,
Gerald Ford, Alexander Haig, Orrin Hatch, Jesse
Helms, Barry Goldwater, Jack Kemp, Paul
Laxalt, John Lindsay, Richard Lugar, Richard
Nixon, Ronald Reagan, Nelson Rockefeller,
William Scranton, Jim Thompson, and Lowell
Weicker.
The two third party candidates are Ed Clark
and Barry Commoner.
You are not limited to 1984 if you want to do an
a-historical campaign. You can take any election
from 1960 on and run any candidates in that
historical context; or you can run the historical
candidates in an election but change the historical
contexts; or you can run non-historical candidates
and change the historical contexts as well.
For example what would happen if Lyndon
Johnson had ended the Vietnam War and had
decided to "seek a second term as (our) president?"
What would happen if Robert Kennedy hadn't
been shot and had run against Richard Nixon in
the 1972 election? What would happen if two "big
winners" like Lyndon Johnson (`64) and Richard
Nixon (`72) were to go against each other?
You can also cross party lines and run candidates of the same party against each other. For
example, if you run Jimmy Carter (as an incumbent Republican) in 1980 against Ted Kennedy
you will get, in most replays, a game that has the
flavor of the 1980 quest for the Democratic
nomination.
When running candidates of the same party
against one another you should designate the
more conservative candidate as the "Republican"
and the more liberal candidate as the "Democratic" candidate. How can you tell which

candidate is the more liberal of the two? That's
easy. The candidates are rated for social,
economic, and foreign policy views. From the
ratings on these three views an overall rating is
assigned to each candidate. These ratings run
from 0 (extremely conservative) to 100 (extremely
liberal). Each candidate is also rated for speaking
ability, magnetism, and poise. Those candidates
that rate high in these latter three measurements
will tend to do better in debates and on the
campaign trail.
But what if you want to run a candidate not
contained in the computer's data file? A candidate
who, like Jimmy Carter before the start of the 1976
presidential campaign, is not well known
nationally but who you feel can solve the nation's
problems. Someone that has a tremendous vision
for our country, someone like yourself. What can
you do? Never fear for you can run ANY candidate
in PRESIDENT ELECT. For candidates not
contained in the program you can prepare a data
file. If you enter the name of a candidate for
President not in the game's stored memory files
you will be given the opportunity to answer a
battery of 20 questions based on 1980 issues to rate
that candidate's political views. Then the newly
rated candidate can, on the one hand, take on the
best the other party has to offer, or on the other
hand, take on your next door neighbor (assuming
he or she has been rated).
The game itself is made up of nine weekly turns
running from labor day to election day. The
players of the two major parties each begin with
the same amount of money (29.5 million dollars)
which must be used for the various campaign
activities such as advertising, campaign stops,
and overhead. Third party candidates begin with
considerably less funds. The format of the game
leaves room for multiple strategies. Do you spend
your money early in hopes of building early leads
that your opponent can't overcome? Do you save
most of it for a big push during the final weeks? Or
do you opt for a balanced spending strategy that
will stay about the same throughout? The answers
to these questions will often make the difference
between a narrow victory and a narrow defeat. In
one election replay John F. Kennedy won New
York by only 400 votes out of over seven million
votes cast. Would one more Nixon visit to the state
have thrown it to the Republican player? Who
knows.
One very interesting element in PRESIDENT
ELECT is the possibility of the candidates to
debate one another. If the candidates agree they
can debate as often as they wish. Once they decide
on the number of questions to be asked (2 to 6) the

computer will set up the debate, toss the coin to
select which candidate answers the first question
and ask the question. For example, the question
might be: "What measures do you propose to
prevent the social security system from bankrupting sometime in the future?" Rather than
answering the question directly, the player determines what percentage of the candidate's time
will be spent discussing the relevant considerations, stating his own position, contrasting his
position with his opponent's, attacking his
opponent's position, and killing time. After the
second candidate gives his or her responses to the
same question a series of rebuttals follow. These
are dealt with in the same manner as the main
question. In the rebuttals, time must be divided
between emphasizing his own position, criticizing
his opponent with witticisms and/or moral indignation, implying that the opponent is uninformed,
and killing time.
In replays in which only two questions were
asked, we found that in most cases the debate
could be won using the unorthodox procedure of
allocating 50% of the time allowed in one of the five
areas and 50% in another area. The debate could
often be won on intangibles by this method.
However, if you increase the number of questions
to 4, 5, or 6 this procedure will rarely work. So, if
you want a realistic simulation, use at least 4
questions in a debate. But, if you're strictly out to
win, and don't give a hoot about simulation, get
your opponent to agree to a two question debate
and try the 50/50 ploy on him. Remember that
your candidate's speaking ability, magnetism,
and poise are figured into a debate.
The rulebook does a reasonably good job of
suggesting possible strategies in your campaign
spending. One should not, however, be misled by
the rulebook's statement that national advertising is the least effective means of swaying votes
in individual states. While the statement is true, it
can mislead a player to spend very little on
national advertising, spending it instead on
regional and state advertising. Our replays have
shown this to be an ill-advised strategy. A healthy
national advertising budget will attack on all
fronts and create havoc for your opponent if he
isn't putting similar amounts into national advertising. In several replays of some of the closer
elections players who had healthy national advertising against opponents who tended to let
national advertising slide found a ground swell of
support developing for their candidates by the
sixth week that was often insurmountable.
From one viewpoint it's too bad that computer
game companies have been forced to use elaborate
DOS protection techniques on their games. With

that protection it becomes impossible, for the most
part, to dig into a game's design in order to see
what makes it "tick". Garners tend to not only
enjoy playing games but also enjoy analyzing the
game design. Did the designer succeed in his
game/simulation, how could it be improved?
There are over a dozen board games on the eastern
front of WWII alone. Why so many? Because game
player/designers have studied the old games and
feeling that the old games could be improved upon
have designed new games on the same subject. It
is through this means that the state of the art in
game design is advanced. We don't know the
internal rules and formulas for PRESIDENT
ELECT. Therefore the designer within us is
frustrated. Has Mr. Hernandez correctly factored
in the demographics of a particular election year?
What if my view of the political demographics of
1984 are different from his. It is very difficult to
look into this matter. However it is not impossible.
Although we cannot look into the internal
structure of the game, we're not prevented from
looking at the structure in a round about way.
Let's take the 1984 election fictionalized in our
introduction as an example.
A variety of campaign possibilities for 1984
were set, each surrounding Ronald Reagan as the
Republican candidate versus either Walter
Mondale or Henry "Scoop" Jackson. The contexts
were changed and the results are shown in the
table on this page.
THE 1984 LABOR DAY ELECTION POLL
INFL. UNEM. GNP WRLD. REPUBLICAN -%7
9
13
13
7
9
7
9
13
7
9
7
9
7
9
13

7
9
13
13
7
9
7
9
13
7
9
7
9
7
9
13

2
-2
-4
-4
2
-2
2
-2
-2
2
-2
2
-2
2
-2
-2

5
2
1
1
5
2
5
2
2
5
2
5
2
5
2
2

REAGAN
REAGAN
REAGAN
REAGAN
Reagan
Reagan
REAGAN
REAGAN
REAGAN
REAGAN
REAGAN
Reagan
Reagan
Reagan
Reagan
Reagan

61
56
54
51
56
53
57
52
51
55
51
46
50
44
48
49

DEMOCRAT -%Mondale 39
Mondale 44
Mondale 46
Mondale 49
Mondale 43
Mondale 47
Jackson 42
Jackson 47
Jackson 48
Jackson 45
Jackson 49
MONDALE 53
MONDALE 49
JACKSON 55
JACKSON 52
JACKSON 51

INFL=Inflation rate: UNEM.=Unemployment rate: GNP=Relative
strength of the GNP. "-4" is a recession. "-2" is stagnation. "2" is on the
border of a healthy economy: WRLD.=Relative evaluation of our world
situation. "1" is very negative: "2" is negative. "5" is neutral. World situation
is based on the assumption that the U.S. is at peace. Candidates whose names
are in all caps are incumbents.

In early attempts to run incumbent Reagan
against Mondale, Reagan had Mondale beat
before the campaign began. Only with a terrible
record (13% inflation and unemployment coupled
with a recession and a horrible world situation)
did Mondale even stand a chance. This might lead
one to think that Hernandez has programmed
VERY conservative demographics for 1984.
Henry Jackson (a more conservative Democrat
than Mondale) was next to run against Reagan.
Reagan again had the upper hand, but by a
smaller margin. Again the 1984 demographics are
shown to be conservative. However look what
happens when we begin to play with the question
of incumbency. In all but one situation in which
the Democrat is the incumbent in 1984, the Democrats have the Labor Day lead! So incumbency
would seem to be more important than conservative demographics. Both situations where the
economic and world situation is pretty good
(7,7,2,5) the conservative incumbent has a huge
lead, 61% - 39% for an incumbent Reagan and 55%
-44% for an incumbent Jackson. A less conser-

Continued on page 34

THE GREATEST BASEBALL TEAM
OF ALL TIME

Table-top statistical baseball games
are nothing new. "APBA Baseball",
"Strat-O-Matic Baseball" , and more
recently Avalon Hill's "Major League
Baseball" have provided thousands
of garners the opportunity to replay
great (and not so great) teams of the
past.
Now "Stat" baseball players can
enjoy the same realistic baseball
without having to shuffle through a
half dozen or more charts ("Where
did the'Stealing-home-when-the-pitcher-is-arguing-with-the-first-base-umpire'
chart get off to?); or flipping/
throwing a lot of the cards/dice to
determine the outcome; with the
touch of a key the result is given.
Strategic Simulation's COMPUTER BASEBALL and Avalon Hill's
MAJOR LEAGUE BASEBALL are
"Stat" baseball in the finest tradition (the latter being a compuversion of the popular board game
mentioned above). Both versions
will compile the box score for the
game and have the capability to
keep season statistics. For MAJOR
LEAGUE BASEBALL Apple users
can use the "G" command to store
the game results on a utility disk
and keep season stats. SSI will

release a "stat compiler" for COMPUTER BASEBALL sometime in
1982.
MAJOR LEAGUE BASEBALL contains the stats for all the players of
the preceding season. COMPUTER
BASEBALL contains 26 teams that
played in 13 great World Series of
the past. SSI should have a disk for
the 1980 teams for COMPUTER
BASEBALL available by the time
this issue of COMPUTER GAMING
WORLD comes out.
Both games have the capability of
entering your own teams (be they
Little League teams or famous
major league teams of the past).
COMPUTER BASEBALL has the
capability of entering the players
directly while MAJOR LEAGUE
BASEBALL required the use of the
board game version as well as the
ability of your computer to edit text
files.

Not long ago the staff at CGW came
across an interesting book entitled
COMPUTER SPORTS MATCHUPS
(by Julian E. Compton with Bruce
M. Nash; published in 1981 by

Tempo Books; $2.50 paperback).
The book contains the results of
computerized replays of the great
sports teams and individuals in a
variety of sports. Of special interest
to us is the eight team "All-Time
Baseball World Series". Eight
teams were selected as the greatest
teams in baseball history. A tournament was played to determine the
greatest team of all time. The 1927
Yankees won the tournament.
COMPUTER GAMING WORLD
would like to see what the results
would be if many people replayed
that same tournament using
COMPUTER BASEBALL or
MAJOR LEAGUE BASEBALL (computer version). We have included the
stats for the first four teams in this
issue. We will include the stats for
the second four teams in our second
issue (Jan-Feb 1982) and we will
print the results of the tournaments
in our third issue (Mar-Apr 1982). If
you want to replay the "Greatest
Baseball Team of All Time" Tournament follow the instructions
given on the next page.

THE GREATEST BASEBALL TEAM
OF ALL TIME TOURNAMENT
To participate in the GBTOAT tournament you
must replay seven complete World Series. The
stats for the first four teams are given in this issue.
The stats for the other four teams will be given in
issue #2. To guarantee that your results are included
in our tournament summary issue #3, the results
of your replay should be in our hands by February
10, 1982. Each series should be a best of seven with
pitchers being rested according to the following
formula: 1) Starters must have 4 days rest between
starts; figure in appropriate travel days. 2) Relievers
must rest according to the number of innings
pitched. Less than 2 innings = no rest. At least 2
but less than three = 1 day. At least 3 but less than
4 = 2 days. Any reliever who pitches 4 or more
innings requires 3 days rest.
Miscellaneous notes: 1) Do not use designated
hitters; 2) Line scores of each game are preferred
but not required. Final scores for each game are
acceptable; 3) If you wish, send Batting Avg.,
Home Run, and RBI leaders for the various series;
4) The teams in the second bracket are: 55 Dodgers,
36 Yankees, 34 Cardinals, and 76 Reds.

MICRO - REVIEWS
DRAGON'S EYE
Each computer gaming company has areas in
which they excel. One area in which Automated
Simulations excels is their satisfying portrayal of
individual combat. From the Temple of Apshai on
we have seen them develop software that gives us
exciting hi-res battles. In DRAGON'S EYE they
have carried this strength to new heights with the
striking eye level view of combat between your
character and a host of fantasy monsters. The
graphics are very nice and the battle actions are
pleasing. This is one of the few games that
graphically treats individual combat to the point
that you must combine combat moves into a
logical pattern to prevail over your opponent. For
example, a player with a scimitar might enter a
rapid sequence of orders that will cause his
character to leap forward 6 steps, bring a
smashing downward blow upon the monster's
head, parry, duck, then back away. If this tactic
doesn't work he may try the same sequence with a
chop (across the waist) as opposed to the smash
(head to toe). It is almost certain that a thrust
(straight into the monster) will not bring good
results because the scimitar is not made for
thrusting.
But let's not get ahead of ourselves. There are
some things that the player must do before he gets
into battle with all sorts of menacing monsters so
dastardly disdainful (get used to it, that's how the
rulebook is written). The Dragon's Eye is a magic
amulet that is the key to the power of evil in the
Seven Provinces. The player's task is to search
through the Provinces seeking treasures, dispatching monsters, and hopefully finding and
returning the Dragon's Eye to Fel City before 21
days have past. Although the exact point system
isn't given, you will receive points for killing
monsters, finding treasure, avoiding death (which
can occur more than once in an adventure), and
finding the Dragon's Eye.
The typical activity for a day might include
examining the immediate area in the morning,
moving to a new area, examining it, fighting a
monster, resting up from the battle, further examining the area again, and if the sun hasn't already
set for that day moving on to another region.
Sounds like typical fantasy role-playing right?
That's what DRAGON'S EYE is for the most part.
The strategic map that governs movement

between the several regions in each of the
provinces is similar to maps in other fantasy roleplaying (FRP) computer games. However, the
lines drawn between the regions are not becoming
to the visual effect of the map and look a little like
a schematic diagram.
In the final analysis it is the individual combat
system of DRAGON'S EYE that sets this game
apart from others of similar type. It is very well
done, challenging to play, and fun. If you like FRP
style combat this is the game for you.
DRAGON'S EYE, by Automated Simulations,
runs on the Apple II (48K with Applesoft in ROM)
or the PET (32K Cassette) computers.
Daniel Hockman

EASTERN FRONT
Before dawn on June 22, 1941, Hitler unleashed
what he called "the largest military assault in
history". Following the preliminary air bombardment, three million German and other Axis
soldiers crossed the Nazi-Soviet treaty line
beginning the now famous "Operation Barbarossa".
Hitler envisioned another blitzkrieg type campaign
which would knock Russia out in four or five
months. What he got was four years of very hard
fighting, the defeat of his armies, and the eventual
fall of his Thousand Year Reich.
The Barbarossa Campaign has always been a
very popular subject for traditional board wargames.
Now this incredible campaign can be played on
your Atari 400 or 800 computer. With EASTERN
FRONT Chris Crawford (see his article on "The
Future of Computer Wargaming" in this issue),
has designed what is, to this date, the most
impressive computer wargame on the market.
Atari has been telling us how advanced the
graphics on their personal computer are. Chris
has SHOWN us. EASTERN FRONT utilizes
human engineering elements to provide us with a
complex yet highly playable game (no mean feat
for a wargame). The entire Eastern Front of World
War II is represented by a map which covers about
ten screens of area. The player uses a joystick to
move the cursor in any of the four cardinal
directions. As the cursor reaches the edge of the
current map the entire map will scroll in the
direction of the cursor move until the cursor is
stopped or the edge of the whole map is reached.
Movement is equally simple. The joystick is used
to line the cursor up on a unit (infantry or armor).
The player then indicates (again using the
joystick) where the unit is to move and who to
attack. Keyboard interaction is limited to the
"Start", "Option", and "Space Bar" keys; the
"Start" key to start the game, the "Option" key to
play the game with a special beginners option,

and the "Space Bar" to execute orders after
movement is entered.
The rule book, while not as "slick" as those put
out by other computer game companies, is well
done. Following loading instructions, Chris gives
us an overview of the map and units. Traditional
wargamers will recognize sections such as
Movement, Zones of Control, Combat, Logistics,
Seasons, Hints on Strategy and Tactics, and
Designer notes. Most sections are divided into
"Historical background" and "Mechanics".
Chris mentions in the rulebook that the feature
of which he is the most proud, in EASTERN
FRONT, is the artificial intelligence. He has reason
to be proud. The computer plays the Russians and
plays them very well. The unique thing about the
artificial intelligence feature of the game is the
fact that the computer is thinking and planning
it's move while you are entering yours. When you
hit the space bar to end your order entering phase,
the computer immediately begins the execution of
the turn on the basis of the moves it's been
considering. Thus the longer you take to enter
your move the more "considered" the move by the
computer. Can you think of a more effective way to
speed up slow players?
If you own an Atari personal computer you owe
it to yourself to have this game. If you are
considering the purchase of a personal computer
but haven't decided on which one yet, take a look
at this game at your local computer store, it will
make you look twice at the Atari system.
EASTERN FRONT runs on the Atari 400 or 800
personal computer. The disk version requires
32K and costs $29.95. The cassette version requires
16K and costs $26.95.
Stanley Greenlaw

MIND THRUST
MIND THRUST is a game played between you
and the Computer. The goals are straightforward
1.) To remove all opposing playing pieces, or
2.) To be the first to create a continuous chain of
your pieces across the width of the board.
Play consists of alternate turns during which
one may add a piece or attack abutting opposing
pieces. The opponent may defend against an
attack. The contest arises from correctly choosing
which opposing pieces to attack or which of your
pieces to defend. A successful defense is as important as a successful attack but is made more
difficult by rules which make the allowable points
of defense fewer than the available points of
attack.
MIND THRUST gives you two options at the start
of the game. You may choose which side of the

board you prefer and whether you wish to begin
first or let the computer do so. The first option is of
little consequence. The second is much more significant. My experience was that if I started I almost
invariably won but it was a much different story
when the computer started the play. We were
pretty well matched when "She" started first. An
interesting feature, which permits a bail out if
going got tough, is the ability to switch sides at
any point in a game and as many times as you
wished. The rules called it 'Legalized Cheating'. It
may sound like a panacea but fortunately, it isn't.
The play for this article was done on a TRS-80
Mod III 16K unit. Compatibility with the tape was
good but you Mod III users will notice that the tape
loading signal of two asterisks is not two is
asterisks. While the one on the right does the
expected the left asterisk becomes a rapidly
changing run of characters. Also, on the board,
where an up arrow would appear on the screen of a
Mod I it becomes a beginning bracket symbol ([) on
your screen. This causes no problem.
The program in itself is very well done, it moves
nicely, says the right thing at the right time, and
gives a nice clean ending when you choose not to
continue play by returning you to a default start so
your machine is ready to go to something new. The
rules and plays of MIND THRUST are easily and
quickly learned making it an excellent home
demonstration game to make believers out of
those non-garners and non-computerists that may
drop in.
The information booklet is very well done and
the packaging is excellent. I look forward to
acquiring additional items from this manufacturer.
MIND THRUST runs on the TRS-80 (Levels I,
II, or III) computer.
Barbour Stokes

MISSION ESCAPE
In MISSION ESCAPE you play the role of a star
commando who has escaped the cell on an
Imperial security station. Like the legendary Luke
Skywalker and Hans Solo you flee from level to
level fighting imperial storm-troopers, robots, and
drones as you attempt to reach the tenth level and
escape.
Don't be fooled by the arcade type screen that
you see when you play the game. While reactions
and coordination are important in MISSION
ESCAPE the most important factor in the game is
strategy. You and your enemies are limited in
firing lasers and missiles only at certain angles.
Fire can only be made at angle increments of 45
degrees. Strategy in MISSION ESCAPE involves

lining up enemy units on 45's and 90's, blasting
them away, and still ending your turn not lined up
in a surviving enemy's 45's or 90's. This takes real
strategy especially at higher levels of the security
station where you will be facing more than two
dozen enemy units at a time. In addition to the
strategic element, MISSION ESCAPE forces you
to think fast. Your turn lasts until three orders are
entered or ten seconds pass, whichever comes
first. He who thinks or acts slowly will die.
Strategic tips are pretty well covered in the
rules. The most important thing to remember is
that the enemy will always shoot before it moves.
Therefore if you end your turn out of line with any
enemy unit you know you will not be hit that turn.
Another point to keep in mind is that while units
that are at 90's are easy to identify (i.e. directly N,
S, E, W of you) those on 45's are much more
difficult to spot. Developing your sense of angles
will lead to higher scores.
A nice feature of the game is that the five
highest scores are kept on file and displayed on the
screen after each game (just like the coin-operated
arcade games). If you want to clear the high scores
for any reason you can do so by hitting the "C" key
when the disk is booting. The only problem with
the game is that the units are so small that on a
small T.V. (which lacks the resolution of a
monitor) it is a slight strain to distinguish units
and calculate the 45's.
MISSION ESCAPE is one of a handful of games
to combine arcade features with what is in reality
a strategy game.
MISSION ESCAPE runs on the Apple II (48K)
computer.
Graham Masters Jr
ODYSSEY
ODYSSEY was the program that sold me on an
Apple computer. At that time, the graphics were
the best I had seen on a computer game. ODYSSEY
and its predecessors, "Wilderness Campaign" and
"Dungeon Campaign", are still very good programs, although ODYSSEY is undoubtedly the
best (as well as the most time consuming) of the
three. Neither ODYSSEY or "Wilderness
Campaign" can be mastered in a single setting,
and unless you get killed off quickly, both will take
a while to complete.
ODYSSEY requires careful tactics with money,
people and food. Food consumption depends on
party size. Enough people are needed to carry all
the goods, but too many people eat too much food.
If you have too many people, you will spend all
your time feeding them, rather than gathering

money and treasure. Usually, forty to fifty people
make a good party size throughout most of the
game. Before leaving the first island, it is best to
have between sixty and ninety. 
There is also strategy involved in bargaining.
Everything is negotiable, but if too low a price is
offered, the merchants get insulted and take the
item off the market. A good rule of thumb is to offer
half the asking price or half of the retail price,
whichever is lower. I am generally able to buy food
packs for 4 Quadroons . If you offer the same price
twice in a row, the merchant will often stop
bidding, so it is best to increase your bid by 1
Quadroon each time.
Another consideration is what should be carried.
I can say that everything has a use, although it
may not be apparent at first. Shovels are used for
avalanches and certain kinds of doors, for example.
As a hint, do not leave the first island without
enough helmets for everyone. A common myth I
have heard is that magical items have no use
except on the first island. In fact, several (at the
very least), do have uses later.
ODYSSEY is relatively bug-free, with two
notable exceptions: excess people and too many
kinds of possessions cause problems. If you have
over 127 people, you will find it impossible to enter
towns or die of starvation without stopping the
program. The possessions bug only occurs when
you have over 39 different kinds of possessions
and you finish the game.
ODYSSEY runs on the Apple II (48K diskette,
integer) computer. $30.00
Deirdre L. Maloy
REVERSAL
Dan and Kathe Spracklen, who wrote the
computer chess program Sargon, now introduce
Reversal, a computerized version of Othello. In
case you don't know how Othello is played,
the object of the game is to trap your
opponent's pieces between two of yours. Those
pieces are then turned over and become
yours. This goes on until all 64 squares of the
board are filled. The pieces are then counted and
the player with the most pieces wins. This, of
course, makes it a true strategy game as there are
no random factors.
When the program is loaded, it asks whether you
want to play against the computer, play against
another person with the computer as the monitor,
or custom set up the board. One flaw is that if you
reply incorrectly to this question, the program
aborts to machine language and you have to
reload. Next you choose the strategy level at which

the computer will play; beginner, intermediate, or
advanced. Then you choose the amount of time the
computer will take to decide on its move. This can
be anywhere between 2.5 seconds at level 1 to 30
minutes at level 9. It next asks you whether you
want to be black or white. (Black moves first.).
The program switches easily between text and
graphic displays. The Hi-Res graphic display
shows the current board, the number of pieces are
shown with faces. The expression on these faces
changes through the game to show the status of
that player. The leading player's pieces are
grinning; the losing player's are frowning. For
those who feel this is silly, the faces can be
eliminated. The cursor can be moved through all
the legal positions by using the right and left
arrow keys. When you find the position you want,
you press the return key which places your piece at
this position and flips the appropriate pieces. This
feature greatly speeds up the game as compared to
earlier computer versions.
In case you find the move you just made was
unwise, it can be taken back by pressing CRTL, B.
The last piece played is then removed and all the
flipped pieces restored to their position prior to the
move. If you wish, you may continue backing up
until a proper position is reached. If you are unsure
as to a good move, you can ask the computer for
help. The computer will suggest a move. If you
would like to see past moves, you can do so by
switching to text which shows the past moves in
standard chess notation.
Othello is a classic strategy game. This is an
accurate adaptation for the computer with various
features to enhance the game. Reversal plays
quickly and easily, the graphics are good, and the
computer can be hard to beat. It is excellent and I
recommend it.
Reversal , by Hayden, runs on the Apple II (32K
diskette-$34.95; 24K tape-$29.95).
Bob Boyd

TIME TRAVELER
TIME TRAVELER is a text oriented game in
which you are sent back in time to find 14 rings.
Each ring is hidden in a different time period from
1350 B.C. to 1942 A.D. and has a special power
that you may use once you possess that ring. There
is a limit to the number of rings you may carry at
one time; the others are dropped off at the Time
Lab for victory points.
The program begins by telling you where each
ring is by time era. You decide which ring you will
seek first, and you are sent to that era. On
arriving, the program will ask which of two
political factions you want to join. You may

change sides at any time, but doing so costs
points. Then it's off to find where the ring is
hidden. A text map of the area indicates houses,
fields, armory, treasury, and other possible
locations. Amidst the tasks of gathering allies,
weapons and gold, you may find yourself taxed,
chased by guards (regardless of whose side you're
on), and possibly even imprisoned or slain.
However this does not present a problem as the
time machine will send you off to another era at
full strength to seek out the next ring. As long as
you keep at the game, you should win out in the
end.
After several false starts, I began to understand
how to win the game. I fear that, after a person
develops a strategy, the game will quickly become
a series of stale replays. There are no differences
between eras other than the name of the era and
its political factions. A little flavor in the sayings,
or the signs might have helped. I soon tired of
seeing "KEEP OFF THE GRASS" everywhere.
Documentation is ample; five pages including
time periods, general rules, commands with
explanations, and descriptions of the rings with
their powers. One ring, "escape", was missing
from the list, and the 'booting' instructions for
Apple are inaccurate. Mine booted straight from
the disc. The disk is in all probability more up to
date than the booklet. I would recommend that
you try this game several times before deciding
whether to buy it or not.
TIME TRAVELER runs on the TRS-80, Pet, and
Apple II computers. $24.95
Terry Romine

SIMULATION Continued from page 10
play out a whole battle one minute at a time.
On the other hand, if a turn represents one
year then the game probably deals with
Grand Strategy over a fairly long time.
The SCOPE of a game is the way in which
the simulation is restricted to certain events.
Every game has limits because no game can
cover everything; the game designer usually
established them early on. The most obvious
limits are time and geography. Say you're
simulating the invasion of Europe in 1944,
you have a choice of beginning the game with
the Allies committed to a landing in
Normandy or you can start earlier and let the
player choose the site. Similarly, you can end
the game when the Allies are securely ashore
or continue until Germany has surrendered.

Continued on page 34

SIMULATION Continued from page 32
Geographically, you can show just the
beaches (even a single beach) or all of
western Europe. These choices are obviously
related. If you choose a time period of 18
hours on June 6, you needn't show more than
the region near the landing. If you choose to
show the rest of the war then you'll have to
have most of Europe on the map. Scope and
Scale are related in the same way.
Another characteristic is the EMPHASIS.
This is the designer's idea of what was
important about the events being portrayed.
The idea is to model the important things in
detail and make the less important factors
abstract. In this way, the players don't waste
too much time making decisions which will
not influence the outcome.
One final caution: when reading a review
of a game, stay alert as to whether the
simulation or the game system is being
evaluated. A good game system is fun while a
good simulation is realistic. Some games do
well in both areas while others emphasize
one area over the other. An astute reader
knows his or her own tastes.

AIR FORCE Continued from page 21
having to start from scratch each mission. For
example, if a pilot normally carries the same
ordinance, he can enter the information once and
store it, calling it up each time he flies a mission
needing that weapon configuration.
CAMPS' forte is its ability to pinpoint danger
and predict the results of attempting to surpass
the danger through ECM (Electronic Counter
Measures) or direct attack. CAMPS will give, upon
request, kill probabilities for any point along the
flightpath, at any altitude and at any speed. In
this manner the pilot can tailor his flight to follow
the course of least danger. Where he must fly
through danger, the pilot uses CAMPS to plan his
counter measures.
The Air Force isn't the only branch of the service
that is interested in CAMPS. The Army is looking
at CAMPS as a possible system to use with their
AH-64 Apache attack helicopters. The Marines (at
Quantico, Virginia) are using CAMPS as a training
device. The Marine version of the program has a
random number generator which interacts with
the kill probability numbers of the student's proposed
flight path. If the "die roll" calls for it, the student
is shot down, leaving him to answer to his
instructor.

It is interesting to note that while Comarco uses
Convergent Technologies hardware for the field
version of the system, CAMPS (in a modified
version) exists for the Apple II computer. Who
knows, next year we may see an Apple II version
of CAMPS available from Comarco, Incorporated.
How about it Comarco?

CRUSH Continued from page 22
Bob Boyd (Shattered Alliance and Reversal
reviews) has a strategy which he claims gives him
scores in the thousands although he admits the
strategy makes for a slow game. The Sea Monster
carcass is used. Of the 170 Crunch Credits allowed
to the carcass, 120 are used for very fast regeneration. Decrease the strength of the carcass and
you get back 15 points. Use 60 points on hard
armor. The objective is survival and the city is San
Francisco. Game strategy involves staying in the
water far enough away from shore that no landbased units can harm you. Grab helicopters as
they fly by and eat them. If you are famished, get
close to land, grab a meal or two and retreat back
to the bay. The only thing that can really hurt you
is the Mad Scientist. When he appears
immediately dive and come up off the screen in
another map portion. When you return he will be
gone.
If you have enjoyed other Automated Simulation games you will not be disappointed in this
one. It has the traditional Automated Simulation
game mechanics, improved graphics, and a
highly entertaining theme.
CRUSH, CRUMBLE, AND CHOMP! runs on
the Apple II (48K) or TRS-80 (32K diskette, 16K
tape) computers.

POLITICAL APPLE Continued from page 25
vative incumbent Mondale would also have a
comfortable lead of 53% - 46%. In all scenarios
where neither Reagan nor the Democratic
candidate has the advantage of incumbency
Reagan had the Labor Day lead.
What our polls reveal to us is that the 1984
demographics are fairly conservative but that
incumbency is probably the single largest factor
in voter popularity. We now can agree or disagree
with these findings and decide for ourselves if the
PRESIDENT ELECT is accurate as a gaming
simulation. On the other hand we can ignore the
accuracy question all together and simply enjoy
the game. After all, who knows how the voter's
mind really works, right?

SWORDTHRUST 2 --"The
Vampyre Caves"
SWORDTHRUST 3 --"The
Kidnappers Cove"
SWORDTHRUST 4 --"The
Case of the Sultan's Pearl"
In addition to games mentioned
elsewhere in this issue the following
games have been received by CGW.
Most but not all of these will receive
more detailed attention in future
issues.
Adventure International
Box 3435 Longwood, FL 32750
ADVENTURES 10-11-12: These
three adventures which come on
one diskette are part of a continuing unconnected series of text
adventures put out by Adventure
International. Adventures 10 and
11 together make up SAVAGE
ISLAND. Adventure 12 is
GOLDEN VOYAGE. Available on
the Apple II and TRS-80 computers. $39.95.
PLANETOIDS: Al's version of
the popular arcade game. Available on the Apple II and TRS-80
computers.
Avalon Hill Game Company
(Microcomputer Games Division)
Baltimore, MD 21214
EMPIRE OF THE OVERMIND:
EOM is a text fantasy adventure
game utilizing standard two word
commands. The game includes a
beautifully imprinted epic poem,
"Rhyme of the Over-Mind", which
gives clues for the adventurer.
Apple, Atari, TRS-80. $30.00
TANKTICS: Designed by Chris
Crawford (see his article in this
issue on the future of computer
wargaming). Tanktics is a computer game of armored combat
on the Eastern Front. The game
includes a playing board and
counters. TANKTICS runs on the
Apple, Atari, Pet, and TRS-80
computers.
C E Software
801 73rd St.
Des Moines, IA 50312
SWORDTHRUST 1: The beginning of a series of text adventures
in which characters develop and
can go from adventure to adventure. #1 is the master diskette
needed to generate fantasy characters. Disk #1 also includes adventure #1: "The King's Testing
Ground". Look for more detailed
treatment on the whole series in
issue #2 of CGW. The series runs
on the Apple II (48K with Applesoft in ROM) computer.

SWORDTHRUST 5 --"The
Green Plague"
WALL STREET: A game of
high finance in which players
play the stock market. Players
must try to gain inside market
information in order to best know
when to buy and sell. But the
information doesn't come free.
The daily stock prices can be output to a printer. Apple II (48K).
Hayden Book Company, Inc,
(Computer Software)
50 Essex St.
Rochelle Park, NJ 07662
BATTER UP!!: A microcomputer baseball game for the TRS80 (16K tape) computer. Three
levels of play.
BACKGAMMON: Hayden's
version of the ancient boardgame. "Brutus" is the preprogrammed player. TRS-80, $10.95.
BLACKJACK MASTER: A
Blackjack simulator/tutor/game
that teaches, evaluates, and tests,
betting strategies for blackjack.
BLACKJACK MASTER is not a
harmless little game to entertain
you. It is a serious program that
can help you develop and evaluate
a system for winning at Blackjack.
TRS-80, $29.95.
GRIDIRON: Subtitled "A Microfootball Game" GRIDIRON is a
real-time version of football. As
the play develops on the screen a
step-by-step description of the
play is printed at the bottom of the
screen. TRS-80, $12.95
ROYAL FLUSH: Competitive
poker solitaire. Played alone or
against any number of players,
ROYAL FLUSH uses 52 cards
and a 5x5 playing board. The
object of the game is to achieve
the highest possible score by
arranging 25 cards randomly
dealt. Pet and TRS-80
(tape). $14.95.
Hayden Book Company, Inc.(books)
ANDROID DESIGN: Written
by Martin Weinstein, ANDROID
DESIGN is a book on practical
approaches for robot builders. It
examines what an android is,
what you can expect it to do, and
how this will translate into the
design requirements. $11.95
(paperback), 248 pgs.

Muse Software
330 N. Charles St.
Baltimore, MD 21201
CASTLE WOLFENSTEIN: A
game of action-adventure that
attempts to bridge the gap between
arcade-type games and the more
complex adventure/fantasy games.
CASTLE WOLFENSTEIN puts
the player in the role of a captured
Allied soldier during WWII. You
must escape the castle (hopefully
with the war plans for Operation
Rheingold). Success means a promotion. Failure means recapture
or death. Apple II (48K), $29.95.
Programma International, Inc.
(A subsidiary of Hayden Book Co.)
AUTOCHECKERS: HIRES version
of "American" checkers. Apple II
$19.95 (disk).
CLOWNS AND BALLOONS: HIRES
arcade type game in which acrobatic
clowns leap and burst balloons.
The sound routines are a lot of
fun. Apple II (32K integer), $19.95
(disk).
GUIDED MISSILES: A real time
HIRES shooting gallery simulation
for two players. Each player mans
a missile turret, aims and fires
at the targets flying above. Apple
II (16K machine lang.), $19.95.
MICRO INVADERS: Programma's
version of the popular arcade game.
An exciting game. Apple II (48K
machine lang.), $19.95.
Strategic Simulations, Inc.
465 Fairchild Dr.
Mountain View, CA 94043
CARTELS AND CUTTHROATS:
A highly realistic business simulation in which you play the role
of a corporate president. Your job
is to guide your manufacturing
company in the direction that will
provide the highest profits. Not
only a good game but also an
excellent teacher. A nice feature
is that the game can be played at
the office (or wherever) with the
computer owner entering the moves
and giving the printed results to
the players the next day. Apple
II (48K), $39.95.

